A TREATISE CONTAINING THE TRVE CATHOLIC AND APOSTOLIC FAITH OF THE HOLY
SACRIFICE AND SACRAMENT ORDAINED by Christ at his last Supper: With a
declaration of the Berengarian heresy renewed in our age: and an Answer to
certain Sermons made by M. Robert Bruce Minister of Edinburgh concerning this
matter.

By William Reynolde Priest.

Joan. 6. 51. The bread which I vvil give, is my flesh* (the same) which I
vvil give for the life of the world. AT ANTVVERPE, Imprinted by Ioachim
Trognesius.

M. D. XCIII.

TO THE RIGHT EXCELLENT AND MIGHTY PRINCE JAMES THE SIXTH BY THE GRACE OF GOD
KING OF SCOTLAND.
HAVING of late perused, examined, and answered certain Sermons preached in
Edinburgh by one who entitleth him self Minister of Christ's Euangel there: for
sundry causes (most excellent and gracious Prince) I have been induced, of that
my small labor, to make a present unto your royal Majesty. First, for that
the Author of those Sermons published them under the name of your Highness; it
seemed to me convenient, that the Answer also should be offered unto the same
personage: by conference whereof he might be able, better and with indiffere^cy
to judge of both. Next, whereas those Sermons conteyne false doctrine against
the sacraments, against the eternal Testament of Christ ordained in his last
Supper, against the peculiar sacrifice and worship of God evermore and
universally practiced in the Gospel and new law since the first preaching
thereof by Christ and his Apostles: and not only this, but also they manifestly
imply the foundation and ground of plain infidelity, of discrediting all the
old and new Testment; of denying the chief and souerain articles of Christian
faith: who can blame me, if where I perceive so great danger intended, there I
study to repel the same: if where poison is addressed to infect the very heart
of religion, and head of the commonwealth, there I oppose a counterpoison
against that infection: if I covet to preserve sound that which others endeavor
to corrupt, and desire by right argument of true Theology to con^^rme and
establish that, which the adversary by sleight Sophistry and heretical cauils
labors to ruinate and ouerthr^w. And thus to do, as Christian duty
requires, for any article of our Christian belief for the benefit of any
Christian soul like otherwise to perish: so much greater is the obligation,
wherewith my self and al other English Catholics acknowledge our selu^s bound
to our Countrymen the inhabitants of England and Scotland: but especially and
in a singular degree unto your royal person. Unto whom as the laws of both
^e^lmes, descent of blud, custom and inheritance drawn from the ancient kings
of the one and other nation, in civil respect gives right to succeed in
government of both crowns with all their dependences: so is it the continual
prayer of Christian Catholics not only in both those nations, but also in all
provinces of Europe, that it will please God so to inspire and direct your Ma.
tus heart, that yew may govern them in such Christian sort touching faith and
matter of eternal salvation, as your most noble progenitors have done from the
first Christened Prince to the last; from Donaldus unto Queen Marie your Graces
most honorable, most renoumed, most constant and religious mother: who having
so many years sustained hard impri sonment and finally cruel death and
martyrdom for profession of that first, ancient and Apostolic faith, has
thereby left a glorious and immortal president to al her afterco^mers, who
claim temporal right from succession of her blud, to make the like or greater
account of that right which comes by succession to her in faith; for which,
she with Heroical fortitude, neglected her blud, her liberty, her crowns, and
what so ever is most dear to Princes in this world: and for which neglect her
name is more honorable before God and his Angels, her memory more famous among
Christians of this age, and so will be to al posterity, then if with refusal of
that faith, that is, with refusal of Christ and eternal bliss, she had gained
as many temporal crowns and realms, as they have lived days and hours, who
were occasioners of that so strange and wonderful execution.

Now if it shall please your Grace to bestow some void time in overrunning this
small book: I nothing doubt, but touching the argument here entreated that is
touching the external service and honor done to God by sacrifice and sacrament
in his church, your Grace shall easily see the manifest and clear euidece of
our Catholic cause: the truth thereof set down in the most plain scriptures
of God: the co^tinua^ce thereof testified by uniform consent of al Antiquity:
the first original and root of the contrary heresy which now bears
greatest sway in your realm of Scotland as also in England; from what
fountain it sprang, by what Apostles it was spread; by what Sophistry, malice
and dissimulatio^ it has increased, by what wickedness, ignorance, and
impiety, it is maynteyned: finally, to what plain Atheism or Paganism it
te^deth. For which cause, many potent kings and princes, although otherwise
circumuented by false ministers, or seduced by evil counsailers, upon some
humane reasons and colorable commodities craftily objected, they departed from
the unity of Christ's church, and entangled them selves with other heresies of
this time: yet could they never be induced to approve, or so much as to permit
within their realms this Zuinglia^ or Calvinia^ heresy, because they were
thoroughly resolved, that it was the very bane and pest of well ordered common
welthes; for that it breadeth in her Sectaries a licentious liberty to believe
what they fist against God and his church and to live how they please against
the magistrate and his civil laws, to which it preaches that no obedience is
due for conscience sake. Among which Princes, for examples sake to name one
(lest I seem to charge the^ unjustly) Christianus 3. king of Denmark, a
Prince of great wisdom and experience, grandfather to that virtuous Princess
whom your Highness has chosen for your spouse and Queen, when as the
congregation of such kind of Protestants expelled from England by ANNO 1553.
Queen Mary, sought and labored by all means possible to obtain harbor in
his realm, only for a few days (until the extremity of winter were somewhat
passed over) if not in regard of their religion, which they said was purely
Euangelical, yet in consideration of many feeble old men and women, many infants
and young children which were in the company, and unable without certain hazard
of their lives to abide any more trauail on the seas in that extreme season:
this notwithstanding, that king otherwise of nature clement and mercyful, and
professing the Gospel (as they call Narrati(...) de dissipa ta Belgan ecclesia.
and caet. Acta apu(...) rege^ Daniae. a pa. 24. vsque ad 110.
it) would by no means condescend that they should remain any time within his
dominions, except they forthwith without farther disputes, abandoned and
condemned their Sacramentarie heresy; which he judged to be directly against
the Gospel of Christ, against the Articles of the Christian belief, and against
the public quietness and tranquillity of his realm: as in the story hereof
set forth by them selves, at large appears. Which judgment of that king,
their notorious savage, and barbarous behavior in many countries of Europe,
has since that time continually more and more verified, and the writings of
the ministers for defense of their opinions, which daily they invent, has much
more abundantly justified: whereof this small book geveth also some proof and
demo^stration.

In publishing whereof under your Majesty's name, if any man shall reproove me
as bold and presumptuous, for my excuse, laying aside the examples of most
ancient fathers, whose footesteps herein I have followed; if former reasons
satisfy not, I appeal to your clemency for pardon: protesting before God,
that the cause which has moved me hereunto, next unto his honor, and defense
of the truth; is my faithful, dutyful and serviceable heart to your Majesty, to
whom I wish as large dominion and ample monarchy, as ever had any king of that
Island: for whom I pray, that with them and above them, you may be victorious in
war, fortunate in peace, amiable to your subjects and dreadful to your
enemies: that it may please our Lord to heap upon you and your posterity al
blessings spiritual and temporal: that finally, having governed your subjects
in such quietness, pretty, godliness, and rule of faith, in which your worthy
predecessors have lead you the way, you may at length with them to your eternal
joy and felicity, render unto God a comfortable account for the great charge
which he has committed to your hands. Which, that your Majesty may happily
persourme with all honor and prosperous success, according to my bounden duty
I shall not cease continually to pray.

Your Majesty's Most bounden Orator and humble servant William Reinolde.

A table of the chapiters.
Chap. I. The Catholic and Apostolic faith concerning the Sacrament. page 1.
Chap. II. Of Berengarius heresy renewed in this age. page 36. Chap. III. Of
Calvin and the Calvinists opinion concerning the Sacrament. page 67. Chap.
IIII. Of the word SACRAMENT, and the Calvinists definition thereof. page 117.
Chap. V. The Scottish Supper compared with Christ's Institution. page 145.
Chap. VI. Of Christ's body truly joined and delivered with the Sacrament. page
163. Chap. VII. Of Christ's body no vvayes joined, nor delivered with the
Sacrament. page 172. Chap. VIII. A further declaration of that which was
handled in the last chapter. page 191. Chap. IX. Comparison of the Sacramental
sign with the word. page ^07. Chap. X. Of the WORD necessarily required to
make a sacrament. page 215. Chap. XI. M. B. contradictions. The Scottish Supper
is no Sacrament of Christ. page 233. Chap. XII. Of names attributed to the
Sacrament. page 243. Chap. XIII. Of the ends, for which the sacrament was
ordained. page 259. Chap. XIIII. Of virtue remaining in the sacrament reserved:
and of private Communions. page 276. Chap. XV. That evil men receive Christ's
body. page 287. Chap. XVI. Of tuitching Christ corporally and spiritually. page
309. Chap. XVII. Manifest falsities and untruths against the Catholic faith.
page 333. Chap. XVIII. Arguments against the real presence, answered. pa. 342.
Chap. XIX. Other arguments against the real presence, answered. page 357. Chap.
XX. Answer to places of scripture alleged for proof that Christ's words
spoken at his last supper must be understood tropically. page 366. Chap. XXI.
Of contradictions: and the Zuinglians impiety in limiting Gods omnipotency.
page 379. Chap. XXII. A brief confutation of the last two Sermons concerning
preparation to receive the Sacrament. page 398. The Conclusion. The conclusion,
containing certain general reasons why the Calvinian Gospel now preached in
Scotland can not be accounted the Gospel of Christ. page 429.
This is the sum and effect of the chapiters in general. Each one of which,
in his place is divided in to several parts and branches: by considering
whereof the reader may forthwith perceive the particular discourse and matter
of the whole chapter ensuing.

A NOTE FOR THE READER.
WHEREAS M. Bruces Sermons are printed without any figures distinguishing either
page or leaf, which no book lightly omitteth: I have (good reader) for plain
dealing, and the more easy notifying to others that which I cite out of him,
added figures to each page, beginning the first, next after the Epistle
dedicatorie, and so continuing on by pages, 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. until the end of
his book, which is page 296. Thus much I thought good to warn thee of, that
if thou please to see his words in his own book, thou may with so much the
more facility find them.

THE CATHOLIC AND APOSTOLIC FAITH CONCERNING THE SACRAMENT.
The Argument.
Christ at his last supper instituted both a Sacrament, and also a sacrifice,
consisting in the true and real presence of his precious body and blud.

This is proved partly by grant of the adversaries, who confess Christ in
that supper to have made his new testament, partly by particular examining the
nature of a testament, and conferring the new testament with the old.

The same is proved by the Paschal lamb, which was a figure (as the adversaries
also grant) of Christ's Sacrament and finished in the same, and therefore this
must needs be a sacrifice as that was: according to the plain scriptures, and
al ancient fathers.

The same is most clearly proved by the sacrifice of Melchisedech, which albeit
most Protestants reject, and withal reject the whole primitive Church of
Christians, as also the ancient synagogue of the jews, both which church and
s^nagogue confessed the same; yet some acknowledge it, and thereof is the holy
sacrifice and real presence briefly inferred.

The same faith was reterned and practiced by the first primitive church in the
time of the Apostles.

The same faith was continued in all Christendom from the Apostles time without
any great trouble or contradiction the first thousand years, as appears by
consent of the fathers, general Councels, and stories of the church.

Berengarius the first notorious father of the sacrame^tarie heresy, convinced
by learning, and condemned in sundry Councels gathered out of al Christendom,
abiured his own wicked invention and died penitent therefore: from whose time
to this age the Catholic faith has been clearly acknowledged and mainteyned
by all Christians both in the Latin Church, and also in the Greek.

Berengarius when he was a sacramentarie, he was also a damnable heretic, even
by the Protestants judgment, for sundry other heresies besides this.

So were all they which since Berengarius have taught this heresy; as Peter de
Bruis the Albigenses, Almaricus and

Ihon VVi^lef a pernicious heretic, and flatterer; who yet recan^ed his
heresies twice or thrice, and is condemned for an heretic by the Protestants.

Out of the premisse; is gathered a general and sure rule and the same
confirmed by manifest scriptures, to know an heresy, and to prove, that
Berengarius his opinion (and all that follow him) is heretical. And the sum of
this chapter touching the principal contents thereof is concluded with the
authority of Erasmus, a man much extolled by the adversaries.

THE FIRST CHAPTER.
BEFORE I come to examine the particular points of error and false doctrine
contained in these sermons, I think it convenient first in a chapter or two to
declare the true Catholic faith concerning this sacrament as it has always
been received and acknowledged in the church of Christ; and withal historically
to note, when, an in what sort the Zuinglian heresy, that I (...) which at
this present bea^eth greatest sway among the Protestants of England and
Scotland (for the Protestant co^gregations and preachers of Germany from the
beginning of this schism in Martin Luthers time until this present day,
condemn it for heresy no less then do the Catholics) at some times endeavored
to put forth it self; but has evermore been repressed by the pastors of
Christ's church, until this present age: wherein faith decayng, and Christian
belief being in many men for many points measured by carnal reason, upon such
ground either of profane infidelity, or great decrease of faith, the true
belief of this sacrament has amongst many other necessary articles failed in
the hearts of a number.

Heb. 7. ^. 1^ 1 Cor. 10. 1^
Apostle Paul teaches us; in his last supper for a perpetual memory of that
high and infinite sacrifice offered on the cross, which was the persite and
absolute redemption, Christ in his last supper i^ stituted a true sacrifice.
and consummation of al, the full price and raunsom for all sins done or to be
done from the first creation of the world until the last ending of the same: to
continue I say a perpetual memory of that bluddy sacrifice, to ordeine the
true worship of god in the new law or testament Genes. 4. ^^^ et cap. ^. ^^^
Exodus 24. Mal^ch. 1^
(which worship in every law consists principally of sacrifice) to leave his
people a peculier mean, whereby that infinite virtue and grace procured by the
sacrifice on the cross might be in particular divided and applied to them: in
his last supper instituted this sacrifice and sacrament of the altar, as
commonly among Catholic Christians it is called: the sacrifice and sacrament
of his own most precious body and blud: a sacrifice, for that it is offered to
the honor of god for the benefit of christian people in co^memoration of
Christ his sacrifice, once done and now past; as all the old sacrifices of the
law of nature and Moses were offered for the benefit of that people in
prefiguration of the same sacrifice of Christ then to come: a sacrament, for
that it was also ordained to be received of Christians in particular, to feed
our bodies to resurrection and immortality, and to give grace, virtue and
sanctification to oursewles.

This to be the true sense and meaning of our Savior in this institution, and
that principally and especially concerning the sacrifice (for the sacrament is
more evident, Christ's body (...) in his supper.
and confessed by the more learned of our adversaries, and it shall be proved
plainly hereafter, is sufficiently expressed in the words of our Savior,
which according to the recital of all the Evangelists and S. Paul* yield plainly
(...). ^. Cor. 11. 1^. (...) ^^^. ^^. 20.
this sense. For when Christ names his body broken or given for us *which is
al one as if he termed it sacrificed for us) his blud of the new testament shed
there in the supper mystically for us, for remission of sins, these words as
truly import a sacrifice* as any words which the holy scripture uses to
express the sacrifice of Christ on the cross: Man. 26. 28 Man. 14. ^^ Gal. 1.
4. 1. Tim. 2. 6. Ti^. 2. 14. Joan. 19. 33. 36. Chrysostom. in 1. (...). ^^.
especially those words of S. Paul. Corpus quod frangitur, the body which is
broken most properly and directly are to be referred to the body of Christ as
in the sacrament, and under the form of bread, in which it now is, and then
was truly broken. and so it was not on the cross, as S. Iho^ specially
records. VVhe: ^of S. Chrysostom writes very liuinel^* expounding this same
word: Hoc in Eucharistia vi lere lice^, in cruce autem minime etc. This we see
done in the sacrament, but not on the cross. For there ye shall not break an^
bone of him* says the Evangelist John. ^^. But that which on the cross he
suffered not, that he suffers in the sacrifice, and for thy sake (o man) is
content to be broken. And so this word being by S. Pa^le incuitably verified of
Christ's body in the sacrament, draws by like necessity all the rest, both
touching the body and blud thereunto: although all the rest are also most truly
spoken of the same body of Christ as given for us on the cross, which no ways
impayreth but rather much stre^gtheneth the verity and real presence of the
same body in the sacrament.

Which sense is yet more clearly and necessarely confirmed, if we co^ferre
these words of Christ used in delyuering Christ's blud in the chal^c^.
the chalice of the new law with the words of Moses used in sprinkling the
blud of gotes and calves, which was appointed by gods ordinance to ratify and
establish the covenant between god and his people the synagoge of the Jews in
the old law. For as then Moses gathering that blud in to some standing piece
or cup sprinkled the Exodus 24. ^. Hebr. 9. ^^.
people therevvith, saying* This is the blud of this (old) testament, which god
has made with you: even to our Sa^iour ordayning this new testament, most
evidently making relation to those former words of Moses, and transferring
them to his new ordinance, when he delivered the chalice to his Apostles, and
in them to the universal Catholic Luc. 22. ^^
church, said: This is the blud of the new testament as that was of the old,
and this here contained in the chalice, is the self same, which is to be shed
for you, as that was sprinkled upon the Jews. Where S. Luke referring these
later words, shed for you, to that which was contained in the chalice,
me^utably convinces that which was in the chalice, to have been the very real
blud of Christ* as Leo ^^^m. 7. de passione Domini. August. ^pist* ^6. ^^ ^^^
l. Chrysostom. ^. ^^. ad N oplyto^ hom. 45. in Joan. ^^ ^^m. 61. ad ^o^ul.
A^tioch.
truly as that was his real blud which the next day was shed on the cross:
and as truly as that was real blud, with which the people were sprinkled in
the old testament, in steed of which blud this is succeeded, the truth in place
of the figure: as witnesses S. Leo, S. Austin, S. Chrysostom, and other most
ancient fathers. All which prove not only the real presence of Christ's most
precious body and blud, but also that it is present by way of a sacrifice, and
as in order to be sacrificed.

Magdeburg. C^^t. 4. in p^^s^t. Plane ^^^c^ant testamentum Domini.
of Christ's blud in the sacrament, the Lutheran Protestants the^ selves charge
the Caluinists with quit disanulling and making void the testament of our
Savior, I think it good to make some more stay herein and better examine the
circumstance of this testament, yet as nigh as I can eu^ing no new questions,
but resting on such certain verities, as are confessed by the adversaries them
selves, and clear by plain scripture: out of which I mean to deduce Muscul.
in ^o ^^ commun. cap. de can^ Domini. nu (...). 2. Page ^^2.
such reasons, as may justify our catholic cause, and disprove the contrary.
Wolf. Musculus in his common places entreating hereof, writes thus: S. Luke
and S. Paul attribute to the cup that it is the new testament. Whereby they
signify this to be the sacrament of the new testament in respect of the old
the Paschal sacrament, which Christ finished in this his last supper, and in
place thereof substituted this new. In the same supper being then nigh to his
death, he made his testament. Thus Musculus. In which fevv words he notes
two things very important concerning the truth whereof Christ's testa^^^t made
as ^^ last supper
I here entreat, both delivered in the scriptures, both urged by the
Catholics, both confessed not only by the Lutherans, but also by the
Sacrame^taries, as here we see. The first, that Christ in his last supper made
his new testament: the second, that Christ in the same his last supper ended
the sacrament of the Paschal lamb, and ordained in place thereof the sacrament
of his body. Concerning the f^^^t, what a Testament is, and how Christ made
his, the same writer expresses truly in this sort. A testament is the last
will What was required to ^he making thereof.
of one that is to dye, wherein he bestows his goods, and freely gives to
whom he pleases. To the making of a testament, and that it be auayleable, is
required, first the free liberty and power of the 1 ^^ber ac sui (...).
testator, that he be as his own commandment. For a slave, a servant, a
son under the power and regiment of an other, can not make a testament. So
Christ when he made his testament, was free, and had power and liberty to do
it. God his father gave Matthew. 11. 27. Hebr. 1. 2.
al in to his hands, made him heir of al in heaven and earth. God his father
willed him to make a testament, and sent him in to the world to that end, that
by his death he should confirm Hebr. 8. ^^^^^om. ^ 1. 2 3
this new testament, which he had promised. Next, it is required in a
testament, that the testator bequeath his own goods, and not other men's: so
did Christ. 3. A thing can not be given in a testament: which is due of right.
So that which Christ gave in his testament, was given only of grace and favor.
4. In a testament it is required, that certain executors of the testament be
assigned. 4
Those Christ made his Apostles, to whom he committed that office that they by
evangelizing, should ministerially dispense the 1. Cor. 4. v. ^. 5
grace of this testament. 5. Finally, to the confirmation and ratification of a
testament is required the death of the testator. So Christ the next day after
this testament was made, died on the cross, and there by his death and blud,
ratified, confirmed, and eternally established it. Thus far Musculus, adding
withal, Christ Ibi. page ^^^
says, this cup is the new testament in my blud; or according to Matthew and
Marc, this is my blud, which is of the new testament. The old testament
consisted in the tropical and figurative blud of beasts, the truth whereof was
to be fulfilled in the blud of Christ. The new testament consisted not in the
blud of any beast, but of Christ the true and immaculate lamb. For declaration
whereof he said* This cup is the new testament in my blud: (or) This cup is my
blud, which is of the new testament. Christ's blud delivered in his last supper.
Thus much being manifest, confessed, and granted; it must also be granted of
necessity, that this blud was delivered in the supper, and not only shed on
the cross, as Musculus and the Zuinglians suppose. First, because our Savior
Christ according to the report of all the Evangelists in precise terms so
avoucheth, This (in the cup or chalice) is my blud of the new testament.
Secondly, because to the making of the new testament, and fulfilling the figure
of the old, true and real blud of the sacrifice was required, as appears in
the figure, which here the adversaries confess to have been fulfilled. For in
that figure first of al Exodus 24.. 6. 7. ^. Hebr. 9. ^^
was the sacrifice offered, and the blud thereof taken in the cups, and then
the people sprinkled with the blud of the sacrifice, and these words used: This
is the blud of the testament etc. Nether is it possible, that the blud of the
sacrifice should be delivered, or taken, or any ways employed by man or to
man, before the sacrifice were offered to god. Therefore whereas Christ
assures this to be the blud of the new testament, as that was of the old: it
is as certain and sure, that the sacrifice, whereof this was the blud was
before offered, as we are sure of the same in the Christ offered sacrifice at
his last supper.
old testament. Briefly whereas in that figurative sacrifice, whereof this is
the accomplishme^t, and perfect on 3. things are specified by the holy ghost,
1. the publication of the law or testament to the people, 2. the offering of
the sacrifice ^ 3
whereof the blud was taken, 3. the eating of the sacrifice, sprinkling of the
people with the blud, and using of those words: This is the blud of the
testament: whereas for exact correspondence of the first, Christ at his last ^
supper* publishes his law and testament: A new commandment give I to you,
that you love one an other, as Joan. 13. 34. cap. 14. 16. cap. 15. 9. 10. ^^c.
I have loved you: promises the holy ghost to remain with them and his
church for ever; iterateth that commandment of mutual love and charity, as
the sum of his new law and perfection thereof, which was to be Cap. 16. 12.
wrought in the hearts of his Christians by the holy ghost then promised, who
also was ever to assist them, to teach them, to lead them and the whole
Church for ever in to al truth, and so fu^th: whereas thus in 5. whole
chapiters Cap. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17.
having expressed his new will and testament* and such graces as apperteyne
thereunto, he in fine for correspondence of the third, bids the executors of
his testament to eat his body and drink his blud with those same so
pregnant, so urgent words; This is my body, which is and shall be delivered for
you: This is my blud of the new testament, which is and shall be shed for you:
how can it otherwise be chosen, but for answering of the second part, as
that body and blud of beasts there was first offered to god in sacrifice, so
this body and blud here must be offered in like sort, to fulfill and accomplish
that figure? So that it suffiseth not to say, the blud of Christ was shed on
the cross where he dyed, though that also were necessary for the
confirmation and ratification of the testament, as we also grant* and common
reason teaches, and the Apostle proves (for testamentum in mortuis
confirmatur, a H^br. 9. 17.
testament takes his absolute and full perfection, strength and ratification by
the death of the testator) but we say further, that to make and perfect the
testament as it was at the last supper* blud also was by gods order
requisite; and that blud to be first offered to god in sacrifice; without
Christ offered him self at his ^^^t supper.
which oblation first made to god, it could not be received of men: and the
conference of Christ's actions with those of Moses, manifestly conuinceth the
same, as Greg. Nyssenus orat. 1. de `Resurrectione.
shall better appear in the next paragraph. For the present, the only
authority of Gregorious Nyssenus brother to S. Basil the great may serve, who
vvriteth very plainly, that our Savior after a secret and most divine manner of
sacrifice prevented the judgment and violence of the Jews, and offered him
self for us, being at one time the priest, and the lamb, that takes away the
sins of the world. And when was this done? then when he gave his body to be
eaten, and blud to be drunken of his friends (the Apostles.) For a man could not
eat the lamb, except the immolation went before. Quum igitur discipulis suis
dedit corpus ad comedendum, aperte demonstrat iam perfectam and absolutam esse
agni immolationem. Christ therefore who gave to his Disciples his body to be
eaten, evidently declares, that the oblation or immolation of that lamb was
now past and performed. Now already therefore by his almighty power was that
body, inuisibly and in wonderful manner sacrificed. The self same, but more
briefly, and therefore not so plainly, vvriteth Hesichius bishop of Jerusalem:
Hesi^hius (...) Leuit. lib. 1. cap. 4. ^^ lib. 6. cap. 23.
Christ preventing the sacrifice of his body upon the cross in violent manner
sacrificed him self in the supper of his Apostles which thing they know, who
understand the virtue of these mysteries.

paschal lamb which Christ also finished in his last supper, substituting or
placing this sacrament of his body and blud in steed thereof, as Musculus truly
avouches, yeldeth great force. For plainer declaration whereof we likewise
will accept that which our adversaries enforced by manifest scripture grant,
and thereof dravv a truer conclusion then they do. This figure thus the same
author expounds: Christ Muscul. vbi supra pa. 3 ^4
says, this bread is my body, the body of the true lamb, which ere long shall
be offered in sacrifice. This cup or (to speak more plainly* as Th. Beza
also teaches us* that which is contained Be^^ annot. ^ Matt^* ^^. 26. v. 28.
in this cup, is not the old, but the new testament in my blud, the true
lamb, whose blud shall be shed for you. Therefore as this figurative lamb has
been hitherto accounted the paschal sacrament of the old testament: so this
bread and cup shall hence forward be accounted in the new testament for the
sacrament of The sacrament, in steed of the Paschal lamb
my body sacrificed and my blud shed. This I take to be the meaning of Christ
in these words, that as Moses the mediator of the old testament Exodus 12. took
order about that paschal lamb, instituted of it a solemn yearly memorial
before it was sacrificed, that by the blud thereof ^e might turn away the
Angel, which killed all the first borne, and so he appointed that for a
sacrament of the old testament: in like manner Christ meaning now to make an end
of the old testament, and to begin the new, ordained this sacrament of the new
and true paschal, I mean of his own body and blud, before he was to be
offered on the cross for the redemption of mankind. Again in the same place.
Mus^^l. vbi. supra. 3 23.
Christ in his supper ends the old testament, and sacraments thereof by the
succession of the new testament. There he says. This is the new testament in
my blud, and so does substitute the new testament in place of the old, and
withal ordeyneth a sacrament consisting of two parts, which should correspond
to the sacrament of the old Pasch, which also consisted of two parts. In that
figurative Pasch was sacramental meat and drink, so is it here etc. Briefly
(for I will not stand upon every his particular circumstance) his conclusion is
that the plain text, and order used by Christ declares sufficiently, that
Christ's mystical supper succeeded in place of the old pasch, which was a
sacrament of the old law. So here we see accorded; that the plain te^t of
scripture, and Christ's own doing prove, Comparison of our sacrament with the
paschal lamb.
the paschal lamb to have been a prefiguration of this sacrament instituted by
Christ at his last supper, which (as before is confessed) was ordained by
Christ to succeed in place of that paschal lamb. And this to be so, appears
by every circumstance of Christ's action compared with that ancient ceremony.
That lamb was by Number. 9. 5. Exo. 1 2. v. 6 Matthew. 20. v 17. 20.
God appointed to be sacrificed precisely the 14. day of the first month in
the evening. Christ in the same day, and the same time of the day precisely
instituted this sacrament. That lamb was offered in memory of our lords Exo.
12. 11. est enim ph^se, 1. trans^tus Domini.
passe-ouer, and delivery of the Jews out of their Aegiptiacal bondage. The
Eucharist is offered in memory of Christ's passe-ouer, when by his passion he
passed out of this world to his father, and also in memory of Luc. ^2. 19.
Joan. 13. 1. Exodus 12. v. 6. 8. 11.
our deliverance from the power and bondage of Satan, which benefit is
procured us by Christ's death. That lamb was first offered as a sacrifice, and
then eaten as a sacrament, as the viage-prouision for pilgremes and trauailers*
for which cause they who did eat it, were then attired like trauailers with
their loins girded, shoes on their feet, staves in their hands, as men being
in their journey toward Iewrie their land of promise. So this (to omit the
sacrifice first due to god) is imparted to Christians as their proper viage
provision, their viaticum, by which they are strengthened and comforted in this
vale of misery and peregrination, wherein they travail toward heaven their
eternal country and promised land. Deuteron. 1^ v. 5. 6. Hieron. tom. 2. epist.
ad Damaiu^ Papam. Aug. sermo. 18 1. de te^pore. cap. 12. Number. 9. 5. Exodus 1^.
43 45. 1 Cor. 11. 28
That lamb could not be lavvfully eaten but in Jerusalem only, the place which
god had appointed peculiarly for his name to dwell in: nor this but in the
Catholic church, with out which who so* ever eats it, he is profane, he is
in the high way of damnation, as says S. Hierom. and S. Augustine. That was
appropriated to those only that were Hebrews; circumcided and clean: so this
to only Christians, baptized, of pure life and conscience, for which cause S.
Paul wills every one to prove and t^ie him self before he presume to this
table. Finally as Moses commanded the Israelites to keep the memory thereof
for ever: Exodus 12. 42.
so Christ willed his Christians to do this in memory of his passion and
death for ever until his second aduent. Where 1 Cor. 11. 25 26.
as this then so exact a prefiguration of the Christian Eucharist, and which
was ended and fulfilled in our Eucharist: before it was eaten, was by Gods
ordinance Exodus 12. 6.
commanded to be offered to him in sacrifice: how can it be denied, but that
the Eucharist was also sacrificed before it was eaten? How was the figure
fulfilled, if the principal part and ceremony most touching the honor of God,
were omitted? And how is it credible Christ sacrificed at his last supper.
that our Savior, who so diligently observed every lesser resemblance, should
neglect and omit that which was most notable and important? Wherefore as the
Protestants them selves confess one part, videlicet the sacrament of Christ's
body to have been foresignified in the pa^chal lamb, and that to have been
fulfilled in our sacrament and this our sacrament to have succeeded in place
their of: so we must dravv them one foot farther, and add upon like ground
and vvarrant, that that sacrifice of the lamb foresignified also our
Eucharistical sacrifice: that it was fulfilled and accomplished in this, and
that this Christian sacrifice has succeeded in place of that Iudaical. Which
conclusion the same comparison of the scriptures infers, the office of
Christ's priesthod and fulfilling of the law enforces, the Apostle
acknowledges, and the church of 1. Cor. 5. ^. Tertullian. Cyprian. Ambros.
Nazianz. Hi^r^n^m. Chrysostom. August. Leo. Hesichius. Beda.
Christ from the beginning has evermore believed, as we learn by Tertullian
lib 4. contra Marcionem, S. Cyprian de Caena Domini, S. Ambrose in Luc. 2. S.
Nazianzen oration. 2. de pascha. S. Hierom in Matthew 26. S. Chrysostom. homil. de
proditione Iudae, and homil. 23. in Matthew. S. August. contra literas Petiliani
lib. 2. cap. 37. S. Leo Sermon. 7. de passione Domini. Hesich. lib. 2. in ^euit.
cap. 8. and lib. 6. ca. 23. S. Beda in Luc. 22. The sum of al whose words
is briefly thus uttered by S. Chrysostom in the place before noted: At one
table both Paschal lamb^ Marc. 14. 12
were celebrated or offered, first the figure, then the truth. And S. Leo: The
old observation is taken away by the new sacrament: Hostia ^n ^^stiam transit.
one sacrifice passes into an other, one blud excludes and ends the other,
and the legal ceremony while it is changed, is fulfilled. Hesichius more
shortly: Christ at his last supper having first eaten the figurative lamb with
his Apostles, afterward offered his own sacrifice. And albeit (as says S.
Gaudentius) Gaud. tract. ^. in Exodus
in that shadow of the legal pasch, many lambs were offered, not one only, but
in every several house one, yet now through al churches idem in mysterio panis
and vini reficit immolatus, vi^ificat creditus, consecra^tes sanctifica^
consecratus Haec agni caro, hic sanguis est. One and the self same lamb in
the mystery of bread and wine being sacrificed does refresh us al, being
believed reviueth us al, and being consecrated sanctifies all the consecraters.
This is the flesh of the lamb Christ, this is his blud. Thus these two parcels
being true, and manifest, and for such granted by our aduersaties, the one,
that Christ in his last supper made the new testament: the other, that then he
fulfilled the ancient ceremony of the paschal lamb, and altered that in to
this our sacrament: these two being examined and conferred according to the
sense of evident scripture, and consent of the primitive church, manifestly
establish a true sacrifice and real presence of Christ's body and blud, in this
sacrament of the new law and testament.

M^l^^ised^^^ sacrifice.
clear and irre^utable, then either of these. Nether was there ever any
learned christian man, bishop, Father, Doctor, or how so ever he be called,
that vvrote since the beginning of the church, but he granted, and as occasion
of mentioning the same was offered, committed also to vvriting, that the
sacrifice of Melchisedech foreshevved Christ's sacrifice in his last supper; and
that there, Christ G^^^s. 14. Psalm. 109.
exactly and most properly offered sacrifice according to the order and ^ite of
Melchisedech, as was foreprophecied of him. This I say is the uniform and
universal consent of al ancient fathers, that ever vvrote commentaries upon
scripture since the Apostles time: and some few sacramentarie-protestans there
are, and more Luthera^s, Vide V^^^^ R^gium respon^^^^^^. E^^^ d^ Missa cap. 13.
F^^c^as M^d^^^. de ^^^^ si^ lib. 4. ca. 19.
which unawares and indirectly to an other purpose confe^^e so much. Of which
number, Andreas Fric^is sometime secretary to the king of Pole, and (for a
noble man) as learned as any that has written for the sacramentarie gospel:
Christ *says ^^* as a feas^maker distributed to his gheasts bread and wine, ^e
fulfilled the office of Melchisedech the priest of the most high god, him self
a most true priest. For as he offered to Abraham bread and wine, so Christ gave
bread and Ibid. lib. ^. ^e Eccl^si^ ^^act. 11. dialog. 1. pa. ^1^.
wine to his Apostles. And in an other place, somewhat more to the purpose:
Christ after the example of Melchisedech offering bread and wine, gave both to
his disciples. Therefore priests that sacrifice after the example of
Melchisedech and Christ, should give to Christ's disciples both bread and wine.
In which application, this man much abuses him self* in that he makes
Melchisedech a priest in offering bread and Christ in his ^^s^ supper offered
after Melchisede^^s order
wine to Abraham his inferior (whereas sacrifice is an office or duty
appointed to testify the obedience of an inferior to the superior, and
properly of man to god) which was no part of a priestly sacrifice, but only of
a regal or princely liberality and benevolence, as the Protestants commonly,
and therein truly, declare the matter. And much Cyprian libr. ^. epist. 3.
more theologically S. Cyprian expresses this figure, when he writes that
Christ in his last supper as the priest of the hiest god, offered sacrifice
(not to Abraham) but to god his father; and offered the same that Melchisedech
did, id est panem and vinum, suum scilicet corpus and sanguinem; that is to
say, bread and wine, I mean his own body and blud. And thus he being the
fulness and plenitude of all, accomplished and Melchisede^^ sacrifice in the
new Testament.
performed the verity of that figurative sacrifice, which was foreshewed in
the bread and wine offered by Melchisedech. Which sacrifice in the same
epistle S. Cyprian also deduceth to priests of the new testament: that for so
much as Christ being the priest of God his father, first of al so offered
sacrifice to god, and commanded the same to be done in co^memoration of him:
therefore priests ought in that same manner to offer true and persite sacrifice
to god almighty in the Catholic church, as they see Christ to have done
before them. This is the right application of that sacrifice offered to god by
Melchisedech, and that this should so be practiced in the Bibliander de summa
t^^n. lib. 2. pa, 89.
new testament, Theodorus Bibliander a famous man among the Sacramentaries
testifies to have been the general belief of all the ancient Hebrews. His
words are: Est apud Hebraeos veteres dogma receptissimum etc. It is among the
ancient Hebrews a doctrine most generally received, that at the coming of
the Messiah, al legal sacrifices shall have an end, and there shall be freque^ted
only the Eucharisti call sacrifice of praise and confession: and that shall be
done in bread and wine* as Melchisedech king of Salem and priest of the hiest
god in the time of Abraham brought forth bread and wine in sacrifice. Whereof
the Christian learned reader desirous of the truth, may see a very good
treatise out of sundry the old and most famous Rabbis before Christ, gathered
together by Petrus Galatinus in his tenth book De arcanis Galat. de arcanis
Cath. verita. lib. 10.
Catholicae veritatis: where he very well declares the three special points
here mentioned by S. Cyprian and Cap. 4.
Bibliander, 1. that in place of all the ancient legal sacrifices should
succeed in the new testament an eucharistical sacrifice in bread and wine: 2.
that that bread and wine Cap. 6. Cap. 5.
should be the true flesh and blud of the Messiah and 3. that in such sacrifice
should consist the priesthod according to the order of Melchisedech. Al which
might easelie and plainly enough be deduced out of the scriptures (for if
Melchisedech so offered in prefiguration of Christ, Christ must needs likewise
so offer to fulfill that figure: which being never by Christ accomplished but at
his last supper, most sure and certain it is that there he offered after the
order of Melchisedech) were it not that the Protestants, especially the
Sacramentaries, herein, chiefly in the first Genes. 14. 1^.
original and ground of all the rest, that is in the sacrifice of Melchisedech
mentioned in Genesis, show them selves (...) Contempt of the ancient fathers.
incredible wranglers and Sophisters in cauilling upon the Hebrew letter,
without al reason and ground, heretics beyond measure in trusting to them
selves alone, and condemning al others, who since the time of Melchisedech
Calvin d^ vera eccl^sia reformanda ratione. ^ps^ vanitat^ vanius. Idem ad
Hebra. ca. 7. v. 9.
both Hebrews and Christians have acknowledged in this place a sacrifice.
Amongst which heretics the chief both Calvin and Zuingli* very saucely and
impude^tly shame not to say, that in this matter all the ancient fathers and
writers wrote and spoke without judgment, more vainl^ then vanity it self,
and not content with Christ's institution, and the wisdom of god, invented the
oblatio^ of their own heads. They al erred in so bel^^^ing and writing and
devised to them selves a sacrifice, whereof Moses and the holy Ghost never
thought. They Zuing^. ^^. ^. Epichir. de canone M^^s^ ^ol. 183. Thyr gl^s^ i^
Hebra. ^7. v. 1.
followed there own inventions, and saw less in the scriptures then the rude
ignorant people. And Illy^icus: that they in so expounding the scriptures,
violently and naughtely hunted after allegories, as was always their fashion.
Although our English doctor, doctor Jewel whose Theology consisted upon words
and phrases, have a farther shift peculier to him self beyond al other, vz.
that the Hebrew word used by Moses is doubtful, and signifies as well a prince
as a Jew. Defense of the A 6. logic part. po^a. 11. pa. 650. (...) Psalm. 9^.
6. Genes. 14. 18. Psalm. 109. 4. Helra. 7. 1.
priest, and therefore nether priesthod nor sacrifice could necessarily be
inferred thereof. Which is a right way to check and reprove both the prophet
David, and Apostle Paul, who long sithence determined the Hebrew word to one
certain signification, which I suppose they knew somewhat better then M. Jewel
did. The declaration of which matter to make it plain to common capacities,
because it would require some longer time, then I think needeful to spend, for
that it is somewhat obscure and subtle and depends upon gramatical cauils of
the Hebrew tongue Luther. Vrban^ Reg. M(...)n Pomeranu^. Bi^^rus. Brentius.
K^mn^^^us. ^^^yr^cu^.
I will here omit, especially for that otherwise sufficient seems to have been
said of the words of Christ's supper; which are also so very manifest and
evident of them selves, that the more learned gospellers from the first
original of this new gospel, have stood in defense of the real presence, and do
at this present, against the tropical construction of the Caluinists.
Wherefore ceasing to speak any more hereof, I will proceed on as I intended,
to show the continuance of this belief, if yet first I shall note in a word or
two, that Christ's speech uttered in the institution of this sacrament, carry
such weight to induce and establish a sactifice, that so much in part is
confessed, and Calvin in 1. Cor. ca. 11. v. 24.
granted by Ihon Calvin him self, who in his co^mentarie upon the words of
the Apostle S. Paul, Corpus quod pro vobis frangitur, The body, which is
broken for you, writes Christ's body given as in Sacrifies.
thus: This is not lightly to be passed over. For Christ gives us not his body
slightly, or without any condition adjoined, but he gives it as sacrificed
for us. Where ore the first part of this sentence declares that the body of
Christ is delivered or exhibited to us: the second part expresses what fruit
comes to us thereby, to wit, that thereby we are made partakers of the
redemption wrought by Christ, and the benefit of his sacrificess applied to us.
Which words how soever he understand them, signify well and truly, that Christ
in that his last supper, delivered his blessed body to his disciples, and in
them to al Christians, not as borne of the virgin, not as conversant in this
world, not as risen from death, and ascending to heaven, or sitting there on
gods right hand; but as offered to god, and sacrificed for us, and to the end,
that by that co^memoratiue sacrifice, the fruit of Christ's redemption procured
universally to al mankind by his death on the cross, might be really and
effectually applied to al faithful Christians, members of Christ's catholic
church who have communication in that sacrifice.

And thus with this opinion, was this sacrament practiced by the Apostles in
the first Apostolical church immediately after Christ, as we learn by S. Luke,
and the Apostle S. Paul: by S. Luke, when he notes in the Sacrifice used by
the Apostles.
Acts of the Apostles, that the holy Ghost chose out certain of them, as they
were doing public service and ministry to our lord, ministrantibus illis
domino. Where Act. ^3. 2*
the word used by the Evangelist signifies a public ministry and service of
the church, such as properly the sacrifice Erasmus. (...)
is. And therefore Erasmus translateth it according to the proper signification
of the Greek word, sacrificantibus illis domino: while they were doing
sacrifice to our lord. Which Beza also could be content to admit, were Beza in
cur^ lo^um*
it not, it draws to nigh to the church sacrifice. But howsoever in that
respect he refuses it; sure it is, all the old fathers and Apostolic men, from
thence and in that (...) Mass.
sense, called the christian sacrifice or mass, the Liturgy, as the Liturgy
or mass of S. James, the Liturgy or mass of S. Basil, the Liturgy or mass
of S. Chrysostom. Lut. 1. v. 2^* hebra. ca. ^. 2. 6.
as also Erasmus does interpret it: and in this sense of a public sacrifice
does S. Luke otherwhere use the word: and S. Paul by this word properly
expresses our Saviors priesthod and his most public and general sacrifice.
Which Apostle also mentions this the Church sacrifice, 1. Covinth. 10 14. S.
Paul proves the sacuses.
when as writing to the christians of Corinth, he dehorteth them from
communicating with the Gentiles in their idolatrous sacrifices by an argument
taken from the nature of al sacrifices, and the excellency of this Christian
sacrifice. For the nature of al sacrifices is to join the co^municants with
him unto whom the sacrifice is offered, whether it be god or the devil. As
among the Ibi. v. 18. v. 20. v. 16. v. 21.
Jews (says the Apostle) they which did eat of the thing sacrificed, were
thereby made partakers of the sacrifice, and by such sacrifice did concrre to
the honor of the true god: in like sort, they which take part of things ofsered
to Idols, thereby are made partakers of the Idolatrous sacrifice, and so
together with idolaters honor the devil. Then how strange a thing is it, that
you who partake of the table and sacrifice of Christ, who there communicate and
receive his precious body and blud (for the chalice there blessed, is the
communication of his blud, the bread there broken is the participation of his
body) should also be partakers of the table and sacrifice of devils. In which
argument, albeit the Apostle being brief, and writing to Christians, whom he
accounts skilful and v. 15.
wei instructed in this thing, by mentioning little, signifies more, and
setting down one part, wills them to understand the whole, as Calvin also
truly notes, and Calvin. in 1. Cor. a. ^0. v. 17.
therefore uses not in every part of his comparison the term of altar and
sacrifice: yet as otherwhere he acknowledges the Christians to have a true
altar to sacrifice on, and consequently a sacrifice, from which the Hebra. 13. 1
Jews were debatred^ so here the very drift of his reason, and exact
correspondence of each part to other, require that as the Jews had an altar and
a sacrifice, so had the Gentiles, so had the Christians. As the Jews offered to
their god, so did the Gentiles to their (false) god, so did the Christians. As
the Jews by that service were partakers Sacrifice used among the first
Christians.
of the worship of the true god, so were the Gentiles by the like service
concluded and convinced to worship a false god, that is the devil, and
therefore could not have any part or communion in the worship of the true god*
which was performed by the dreadful sacritice of Christ's body and blud among
Christians. Which triple sacrifice, that of the Gentiles to the devil, and
these two of the Jews and Christians to the true god, S. Chrysostom Chrysostom.
in. 1 Co^. ^. 10. Homil. ^4.
ve^v we observes, writing upon the same place. His words are: In the old
testament Pagans and idolaters offered the blud of beasts to their idols. This
blud god took to him self, that so he might turn away his people from
committing idolatry: which was a great sign of infinite love. But here in the
new testament he provided a sacrifice far more wonderful Seipsum off^rendum
pr^cepit.
and excellent, both in that he changed the sacrifice, and withal in place of
beasts killed in sacrifice, he commanded him self to be offered. And this to
be the true sense of the place, Vib. Regius ioynt-Apostle with M. Luther in
preaching Prasatie operu Vib. R^g^^ de preplutij^ vi^^u Testame^t^ so. 164 and
operum part 3. s. 7^
this new gospel (and whom the Protestants of Germany acknowledge and call a
perfect and absolute Divine, of infinite learning, the Evangelist and cheef
Superintendent of the churthes of Christ in the Duchy of Luneburge, as Luther
was in the Duchy of Saxony) plainly grants. Many there are (says he)
which think a sacrifice to be proved by the Apostle 1. Cor. 10. where he
dehorteth from the society of such as sacrifice Urban. Regi^^ 1. part op^rum,
de miss^ negotio, and ^. sol. 6^.
to idols, by arguments taken from the faith of the sacrifice used by the Jews
and Gentiles. For he seems to compare sacrifice to sacrifice, as Chrysostom
teaches; and his comparison so to stand, that by it is gathered Christians in
the Lords supper to have a certain peculiar sacrifice, whereby they are made
partakers of our lord, as the idolaters by their abominable sacrifice are made
partakers of devils. Which if it be so, me seems it may be answered, that in
the supper of Christians are the body and blud of Christ, which are a holy
sacrifice, but co^memoratiue: sacrosanctum sunt sacrificium sed The mass ^
true sourifice, yet comme^^ratius.
memoriale. By which later word, albeit he thinks to have answered the
Catholics, and excluded the truth of the sacritice, yet is he much deceived
therein. For so far are Catholics from denying the sacrifice to be
commemoratiue, that of al other sacrifices, which ever were, or can be
imagined, we grant this to be most co^memoratiue, as which most nearly,
lively, and truly expresses the very condition, efficacy and nature of that
sacrifice, offered on the cross, with which being one in substance it
differs only in manner of offering and generality of Mat. 16. ^^ M^t. 17. ^.
^. Pet. 1. ^^.
redemption. And as Christ's transfiguration on the holy mount before his
passion, was the best and most persite sigure, examplar and representation of
that eternal glory, which the same person of Christ was to enjoy in heaven
after his resurrection and ascension: in like manner we are to judge of this
mistical and co^memoratiue sacrifice in respect of his sacrifice on the cross;
yet not excluding the verity of Christ's presence in one place more then the
other. Nether is there any reason, why Vrbanus Regius a Lutheran should
imagine the sacrifice to be disproued for that it is a memorial, or done in
co^memoration of Christ, more then the real presence is disproued and rejected,
because that also in the Lutheran religion must needs be done in co^memoration:
Christ's words being most plain, do this in co^memoration of me. Which ^^.
22. 19.
words doubtless have no more strength to overthrow and remove a sacrifice of
Christ's body as al Catholics urge, then a true presence of the same body,
which al Luthera^s grant. So that out of these words of the Apostle is
confirmed the mistical sacrifice, and that it was usually frequented in the
first Apostolical church, which rec a^ed directly from Christ and his Apostles
the order and administration thereof.

Joan. 6. 51.
him self in the ve^ie beginning when he first prom^se^ that the bread which
he would give, should be the same flesh, which he was to give for the life of
the world, signified Ibi v. 64.
obscurely that Judas the traitor and certain other for want of faith were
scandalized at his words, and rep^ne^ at them: so a fevv veres after, it may
be gathered that some there were of Judas folovvers, who likewise denied the
truth of this heavenly mystery, whereof S. Real presence
Ignatius scholar to the postles vvriteth thus as his T^^od. (...). 3. ^^ (...).
words are recorded by Theodoretus: Some sectaries there are who like not, nor
approve the obl^^ions and sacrifi^e^ (...) (...) (...). (...) for that they
acknowledge (...) (...) ^^^ (...) ^^ (...) c^rn^m salu^* toris nostr^. quae pro
pecc^t^ nostris passa est, ^t c.
not the Eucharist to be the flesh of our Savior Christ Jesus, the self same
flesh that suffered for our sinne^ and which the father of his merciful goodness
raised from death. But what these men were, and what sway they bare, and
what scholars they had, appears not by any ecclesiastical record, and
therefore belike were sone put to silence in that happy time of our primitive
and first faith, when the Apostles them selves, and many by them instructed
had the government of the church. Wherefore the belief first taught by
Christ and his Apostles proceeded on from hand to hand, from age to age,
without any notable resistance. Whereof (being a thing at large treated and
proved in sundry books both latin and english set forth of late) I vvil bring
only three or four testimonies, but the same most ancient. S. Ireneus bishop
of Lions in France and martyr, S. Cyprian bishop of Carthage in Africa, a
martyr likewise, and the first general Councels of Nice and Ephesus in Asia.
S. Ireneus vvriteth thus: Christ taking bread gave thanks and said, Ireneus
lib. ^^ ca. 32.
This is my body, and that which was in the chalice, he confessed to be his
blud, and so taught the new sacrifice of the True sacrifice of the new
testament.
new testament, which the church receiving from the Apostles, does offer to god
through the whole world. Of which sacrifice the prophet Malachie
foreprophecied thus: I have no liking in Malach. 10
you, says our lord almighty, nether will I take sacrifice of your hand (o ye
Jews) because from the rising of the Sun to the going down of the same, my
name is glorified among the Gentiles, and incense is offered to my name in
every place and a pure sacrifice. The same argument and dedustion Before pa. 14
I have noted before out of S. Cyprian^ First, that Christ Cypria. lib. 2.
^p^stola 3.
our lord and god him self was high priest of god the father, and he first of
al offered him self a sacrifice to his father (^^^^s last supper) and
commanded the same to be done in commemoration of him. Next, that such priests
occupy the place of Chist truly, who do that which Christ did: and then in the
church offer they to god the father true and full sacrifice, if they so offer as
they see Christ him self to have offered. About some 100. years after S.
Cyprian, was gathered the first general Council of Nice, and about a hundredth
years after that of Nice, was the first general Council of Ephesus, in which
the bishops there assembled thus utter their faith, that is, the faith of the
universal catholic church in this matter. The vvoids of that most ancient
Council. Nic^. 1. Real presence and real sacrifice.
and Apostolical Council of Nice are: On the divine table let us not basely
regard the bread and cup set there, but lifting up our mynde^ let us by faith
understand, that on that holy table is placed the lamb of god which takes away
the sins of the world, who there is without effusion of blud sacrificed by
the priests; and that we truly receive his preticus body and blud, believing
these to be the pledges of our Council. Eph^s. declaratio Anathem. 11. p^. 667.
and ^n epist. Conc. pa. 605.
resurrection. The words of the other general Council of Ephesus are to the
same effect, thus: We confessing the death of Christ according to his flesh,
his resurrection and ascension into heaven, confess withal and celebrate in
the church the holy li^e^^uing and vnbluddy sacrifice, believing that which is
set before us, not to be the body of a common quod propon^nitur. Joan. 6.
man like to us, as nether is that precious blud; but rather we receive that as
the proper body and blud of the word which gives life. For common flesh can
not give life, as him self witnesses, saying: flesh profits nothing, it is
the spirit that gives life. For because it is made the proper flesh of the
word for this reason it is lifegeuing, according to that our Ibi. v. ^7.
Savior him self ^aith; As my living father has sent me, and I live by the
father: and he that eats me, he shall live by me. This faith I say of
Sacrament and sacrifice in all sincerity and Leo epist. 23 ad ^l^rum and
popu^u^ Constantinop. August. lib. 3. de ciuitat. ^d. 10.
simplicity thus passed on, so universally known and believed, that as
vvriteth S. Leo in Italy, and S. Augustine in Africa, very children were
taught to acknovvledge the true flesh and blud of Christ to be offered in the
sacrifice of the mass.

Toward 800. years after Christ one Bertram and a little before him one Scot
^s vvrote darkly of the truth of this sacrament. Of the vvritings of the one of
these, nothing I think remains; of the other a little does, but the same
uttered so doubtfully, that as the Zuinglians use his authority against the
Catholics, so the Lutherans use him to the contrary: yea they in manner
reprove him, as favoring to much the faith of the Catholics. For of him
Illyricus with his brethren say, that he has in that his Centur. ^. ca. 4.
col. 312.
little book, semina transubstantiationis, the seeds and original ground of
transubstantiation. But what soever his private opinion were, his public
speeches and vvriting Paschas. lib. de ^^rpore and sanguine Domini in
Eucharistia.
^ounded so^il in the ears of the Catholics of that age, that Paschasius an
Abbat in France made a very learned book in refutation of him. And al
vvriters who about that age vvrote of this mystery, used more expressly to
den^e the sacrament to be a sign, trope, figure, image, symbol etc. in such
sort as whereby the verity of the real presence might be excluded: as
appears in the seventh Council. Nic^n. 2. Actio. 6. ^om. 3.
general Council, in Alcuinus scholemaister to Charles the great, in Raba^^^
archbishop of Ments lib. de diuinis officijs. Theophilact. in Matthew. 26. Marc.
14. Al^uinus. Rabanus Theophilact. etc.
Joan. 6. A^alarius Archbishop of ^reuirs lib. de mysterijs missae, cap. 24.
25. Haymo bishop of Halberstat in 1. ad Corinth. ca. 10. Remig^us bishop of
Antissiodorum. in Canonem missae, Fulbertus bishop of Chartres in epistola ad
Adelman. episcopum in lib. Paschasij. Stephanus bishop in high Bu^gundie, Tom.
4. biblioth^cae Sanctorum patr^m: and briefly al other that vvrote between
the time of Bertram and Berengarius.

the devil was let lose to Apoc. 20. ^.
trouble the church. This man (as witnesses our martyrmaker Fox. Act. and
monuments anno 1^7^. pa. 55.
M. Fox, like to those first heretics in the Apostles times took away the
verity of the body and blud of Christ) from the sacrament. For which cause he
commends him as a singular instrument whom the holy ghost raised up in (...).
an a^c^. h^^^tike against the sacrament.
the church to overthrow great errors. What instrument he was and whom he
served, shall best appear by his own behavior and confession. In the mean
season, this old heresy he published with greater industry and show of
learning, then his predecessors; and countenanced it with Gu^tmu^d. lib. 1. d^
s^^rame^to in (...).
more credit and assistance of many unstable sowles and sinful persons, (as is
noted by the godly and learned writer^ of that time) which only kind of men
joined them selves to him, and that because his doctrine seemed to yield them
some quietness and security in their sin, from which they were much
withdravven by a reverend fear and dread which they had of Christ's presence
in the sacrament, to the receiving whereof they were by order of the church
at certain times induced But as the heresy of this man spread farther, then
any of that kind in any age before; so the church used more diligence in
repressing the same, by sundry public disputations had VVriters and Councels
against Beren garius.
with the same Berengarius, by a number of most excellent vvriters against
him, among whom Lanf^ancus archbishop of Canterbury in England, Guitmundus
bishop of Auersa in the kingdom of Naples, Algerus a monk in France in that
very time excelled: and the supreme pastors of the church assembled sundry
great synodes and meetings of bishops and other doctors to discuss that
opinion and instruct those that erred after him: first at Tours in France,
next at Vercellis in Italy, then again at Tours, where Berengarius him self
being manifestly convicted, (...) a solemn oath never to maintain his former
heresy. Which oath when as yet he performed ^. Petr. 2. ^^
not, but returned to his former filth an other Council was gathered in Rome
of 113. bishops, in which he again was confuted, and yielded, so that with
his own hands he burnt the books which he had made in defense of his
heresy. But not persisting in his faith and oath given, after certain years he
was again persuaded to come to Rome there to defend his opinion by such
learning as he could, in a great synod of bishops gathered for that purpose:
where being convinced by all manner proof, which he desired; by scriptures, by
fathers, by Councels, by universal and uncontrolled tradition, and uniform
consent of al Christians and christian churches that ever were since Christ,
be being then an old man, and having some more feeling and fear of death, of
hell, of his own damnation then before, Berengarius (...).
acknowledged his impiety, requested pardon of the supreme Pastor and other
bishops there present, and Theue^ ^^^^ d^^ ^^m. illustres lib. 3. sol. 1 2 ^.
i^ vita Bereng. Guil^^^. Malme^^. lib. 3. ^^gestis Anglerum.
(as it may be credibly thought) without al fiction or hypocrisy abiured his
heresy in these words: Ego Berengarius cord credo and ore confiteor etc. I
Berengarius believe in heart and confess with mouth, that the bread and wine is
converted into the true propre, and life-geuing flesh and blud of Christ our
lord: and that after consecration there is the true body borne of the virgin,
which suffered on the cross, and sits at the right hand of the father, and
the true blud which issued out from his side, and that it is present not only
in sign or virtue* but also in propriety of nature and verity of substance.
As here in this writing is contained and as I read it, and as you understand
it, so I believe, and will never teach contrary. Berengarius repentance.
And afterward being at the point of death, which befell on the day of the
Epiphanie (which is as much to say as the Apparition) of our Savior,
remembering by his hererical preaching what numbers of poor ignorant sovvles he
had seduced, with great sorrow and repentance he uttered these words: This
day which is the day of Christ Jesus his Apparition* shall he also appear unto
me for my glory (as I hope) because of my repentance, or for my eternal
punishment (as I fear) because of so many as I have deceived. I verelie
believe, that after the consecration, those mysteries are the true body and blud
of our Savior. And I Vide ^ap^^^um M^sson^ in Annalib. Fracorum lib. 3. in
Philip. r^g^^ and Gerson. contra To meant.
am induced so to believe both by the authority of the primitive church, and by
many miracles showed of late. And ^o with great signs of sorovvfulnes and
repentance died a true Catholic man, as is recorded by good autentical
vvriters.

From Berengarius time until this present, albeit there have not been any such
great numbers, as were in Berengarius time, yet scarce any one age has missed
some notorious heretic, who among other heinous he resies, has vpholden also
the heresy of Bere^garius. As on the other side, there has not vvanted great
Clerks and Saints of excellent holiness and learning, who have maynteined the
Catholic and Apostolic faith delivered to them from their fathers. Such were
in the age of Berengarius, besides those before named, Adelman^us bishop of
Brixen, Hugo bishop of Langres, Iuo bishop of Chartres, Hildebertus first
bishop of Mantes, after archbishop of Tours, S. Bruno, and sundry others. ^ox
Act. and ^^^. Ann^ ^^ 15. p^. 70
After solovved S. Bernard, Petrus Clumacensis, Petrus Lombardus, Hugo and
Richardus de S. Victore, Euthymius, S. Thomas, S. Bonauenture, the general
Council of Laterane under Innocentius, in which were present as witnesses
M. Fox, 61. Archbishops and Primates, Consent of the Greek and latin church
touching the sacrofice. Council. Florenti^.
400. Bishops, 800. other men of great learning: an other general Council
holden at Vienna, item a third general Council holden at Florence: (besides
that of Constance) wherein the Greek church and Latin professed their consent
and uniform faith touching the verity of this divine sacrifice and sacrament;
as likewise many Greek Bishops vvrote sundry treatises in justification
thereof: Samonas Bishop of Gaza, Nicolaus of Methone, Marcus of Ephesus,
Nicolaus Cabasilas, Bessa^ion the Cardina': as likewise of late they have
testified the same in their answer to the Protestants of Germany, who sued
to enter in to some communion with them Censur^ Orientalis Ecclesia, art. 10.
against the Roman church. But the Greeks utterly refused them as condemned
heretics both for other their sundry heresies, and namely for this of the
sacrament whereof I speak, wherein the Greeks very constantly hold the same
faith, which al Christians Conciliu^ T^ident. ^^^^. ^^. cap. 1.
heretofore have, and ever ought, and which is deliuer^d in the late general
Council of Tient.

Berengar. con (...) the protestants.
with some very soul and grosie heresies beside, such as the Protestants
them selves hold for heresies, and count the defenders of them heretics. As
for example, to begin with Beregauus him self, when he maynteined this
sacramentarie heresy, he and his partakers denied Top Masster* in Ann^ lib.
Franc^^ ^^^. 3. in ^ug^ns and Roler^^.
withal the grace of baptism, denied that men committing mortal sin could
ever obtain pardon therefore Besides this, he was an enemy to marriage, and al
stained from meats which god had created, and from fat, as things unclean.
Whereby it appears, that he was not only a Sacramentarie, but also an
Anabaptist, a Jew, and (which in the Protestant gospel perhaps is greatest of
al) an enemy to marriage Occolamp. ^^ lib. 3. epistol. Zuingli^ ^^ Occolampad.
fol^ ^ ^^.
and good fare. For which cause Occolampadius though in the matter of the
sacrament a right Berengarian, yet judges him to be an heretic and vvorthely
condemned: Berengarium a Concilio Romano non unjust condemnatum arbitror etc.
I (says he) am of opinion, that Berengarius was justly condemned by the
Council holden at Rome. For besides the matter of the Eucharist, he defended
some things against marriage, and the baptism of children: and in the very
matter of the Eucharist, he seems ho^ely to have set him self a work rather
desirous of victory and vain glory, the^ of opening the truth.

Papir. Mass^* An^^l. Franco^. lib. 3. in Philip. Aug. Ser S. ^ernard. epistol.
14^. Crispi. in ^^^^ mart. fol. 9.
and these in many articles agreed just with the Sacramentaries of this time.
For which reason Ioannes Crispinus, him self a sacrame^tarie, and one that
has gathered together in to a story the french sacramentarie mar* ti^^, as M.
Fox has done the English (the like whereof every sect, especially the
Lutherans and Anabaptists have done for the Martirs of their peculiar Gospels)
this Crispinus of Geneua in his Martyrologe acknowledges them for brethren
of his congregation; and for martyrs, those that dyed in defense of their
opinions, as Fox Acts and monuments fol. 71.
also M. Fox in his Acts and monuments greatly aduaunceth them. And what men
were they? In matter of the Sacrament, so far forth as now it is ministered in
the church (for in an other point they differed) they were of Berengarius
faith, believing that the body of Christ Albigenses heretics.
was present there no otherwise then it was in any other bread. VVithal they
denied prayer for the dead and Purgatory, defaced Images, and brake down
crosses. And thus far they join with French, English, and Scottish
gospellers; as likewise in much sacrilegious spoil of churches, ouerthrovving
of altars, calling in the Mores and Mahometans Antonin. 3. part specu^s
^^stor. tit. 19. ca. 1. Vincentius lib. 30. El^nc^^. Aphabet. h^^e^u^ lib. 1.
cap. 23.
of Africa to assist them against the Christians. But vvithal they held many
articles, which the Protestants as yet condemn for wicked, and heretical, as
that with Manicheus they taught that there were two first creators and
beginnings of al creatures, a good and a bad, god and the devil, and that god
created some things, and the devil other some. 2. With the Sadduces they
denied the resurrection, believing the soul to dye with the body, never to
return again. 3. They B^lsorest in Annalib. lib. 3. ca. 80.
scorned at prayer for the dead, believing no purgatory, nor yet hell. 4. They
refused baptism, as altogether superfluous and unprofitable. These with some
fevv other of like quality were the faith of the Albigenses, in defense
whereof there were ouethrovven and slain in one battle a 100. thousand, in
an other 70. thousand: and many being taken and having free offer to abjure
their opinions and live, or else to be burnt to death, if they stood still in
them, made voluntary chose rather to suffer death by fire, then to forsake
their heresy.

At the same time rose Almaricus, whom M. Fox in his martyrologe calls a
worthy learned man, and of a Fox. Acts and monuments pa. 70. (...) h^r^t^^e.
simple doctor makes a great bishop* as though he had been some
Archp^otestant. This man in his opinion against altars, images, and especially
the Sacrament, wherein he acknowledged with the forenamed Albigenses the
body of Christ to be no otherwise, then it was in any other bread or creature,
may be and is justly challenged Bernard (...) 6. 1. (...). lib. ^. ca. 29.
o^ the Sacramentaries for a brother of theirs: but for some other bad heresies
they must (I think) needs abhor him as a detestable h^^^t^ke: as for that he
denied 1. the resurrection of our (...). 2. he denye^ both heaven and he^,
^aing that who so had in him the knowledge of god, he had in him heaven: and
on the other side who so co^mmitted mortal sin, he had in him Extr^ d^ sum^^
T^nit. c^. Fin^l^. N^n tam haereti^^ quam (...).
hell. 3. he said that god spoke in Ovid, as vvei as he did in S. Augustine. 4.
besides certain other most vile opinions against god. For all which, his
doctr^ne by solemn sentence of the church is adjudged not so much heretical,
as plain mad and frantike; and for which cause belike Jew. defen, ^ of the
Apology part. 1. c^. 7. diuis. 3.
our great prelate M. Ievvel, against M. Fox and Crispine the martyr-makers,
refuses both Almaticus and the Albigenses as no ^ight gospellers, saying
plainly: of them we have no skill, they are none of ours.

Jew. ibid.
perfect Protestant, whom M. Fox calls the valiant Champion of the truth,
and no less famous Divine, of whom Fox Acts and monuments pa. 85.
he vvriteth, that when all the world was in most desperate and vile estate,
and the lamentable ignorance and darkness of gods truth had ouershadowed the
whole earth, then this man stepped forth like a valiant champion, unto whom
that of Ecclesiasticus may be justly applied; Even as the morning star in the
midst of a cloud, and as the moon being full in her course, and as the bright
beam; of the sun, so does he shine and glister in the temple and church of
god: yet this notwithstanding, that he was both a vile heretic, and as a most
UUicles ^ heretic and a parasite.
pernicious flatterer and parasite, applied his whole learning and
gospellizing to please the humors of certain noble men his favorers, which
gaped for the spoil of the church; his own preaching and teaching does
abundantly convince. For to let pass other heresies against god him self
recorded by Catholics, and to make stay upon a fevv of the articles, which as
most plausible M. Fox recites; as I grant that he joins with them in Fox
vbi supra fol. 90.
many, namely in that he taught with M. Fox, the sacraments to have been
instituted by Christ only for memorials and that Christ is not in the Sacrament
truly and really; to omit these and some other agreing with our Caluinists,
who can deny but it is both gross heresy, and palpable flattery, when he
teaches 1. th^^ a prelate or bishop exco^municating any which has appealed to
the king, or to the UUicless articles.
kings Council is thereby him self a traitor to the king and the realm. 2.
That temporal lords may according to their own will and discretion, take away
the temporal goods from the church men, when so ever they offend. 3. That it is
against the scripture, ecclesiastical ministers to have any temporal
possessiens. 4. That tenthes are pure alms, and that parishioners may for the
offense of their Curates de^eyne and keep them back, and bestow them upon
others at their own will and pleasure. ^. That if a bishop or priest be in
deadly sin, he does not order, consecrate, or baptize. Yea that so long as he
is in deadly sin, he is nether bishop, nor prelate in the church of god. 6.
That who soever give alms to friars, are accursed. Do not these articles ^^evv
manifestly, that his gospel (^or so M. Fox vvil pa. 97.
needs have it) tended only to spoil the church and clergy, to spite his
adversaries, and to gratify the temporaltie; among whom by his seditions
preaching he had gotten a little estimation? Does not Calvin. Beza, the whole
VVicles an (...) in the Caluinist^.
consistory and church of Geneua detest and condemn as profane and
Antichristian the first article of suspe^ding the right of exco^municatio^ upon
the vvil of the temporal magistiate? Do the Ministers approve the second and
third, that the Lords temporal and parishioners may take away at their
discretion their livings, rents, services and tithes, and give to them as
alms, how much, when, and in what sort they please? Do they believe, that
it is against the word of god, that ministers and bishops enjoy ecclesiastical
livings? Or make they void al their baptilmes and suppers, and orderings, if he
that ministers the sacraments, be in mortal sin, in which they live every
hour and moment, and can not be without them, being of opinion, as is
Luther, Calvin, and all the crew of Protestants, that we sin perpetually; yea
the just man sins in every good work* and (as Beza says) every Beza
annot. ^^ 1. Joan. ca. ^. v. 16.
the least cogitation of the least sin is a mortal sin, and deserves hell
syer eternally* I omit other things specified by M. Fox, which in my opinion
should quit exclude VViclef from being a gospeller (save that every heresy
scemeth sufficient to make a gospelle^) some whereof are good and Catholic,
some most wicked and Satanical: but for a conclusion let this suffice, that
VViclef no less then Berengarius (save that VViclef dyed an heretic, twice
VVicless often (...).
or thrice relapsed and perjured) recanted al his gospelling novelty, at the
lest thrice, as M. Fox signifies. And therefore if these men vvil needs have
him a Protestant, because he some times, and in some things said as they say
surely they have no cause so extremely to brag of him, as M. Fox does, seeing he
so oftentimes revoked such sayings and condemned them: as appears by these
words Fox Act. and monument. pa. 91.
of his re^ocation set down in M. Fox: I desire my lord god of pardon and
forgeuenes. And now again ^s before also, I do revoke and make retractation,
most humbly submitting my self under the correction of our holy mother the
church etc. the year 1377. After which time he made yet again an other
reuocation, the year 138^. as in the same author appears. pa. 9^.
Albeit all this notvvithstanding, M. Fox recites as a very great argument of
the gospel, that VViclefs sect Ibid.
increased privily, and daily grew to greater force: truly so great, that they
made traitorous conspiracies against the king him self, as is recorded in the
Acts of Parliament Henry. 5. ^^ 2. cap. 7. ^. ^ol^^^. Virg^nstor. lib. 2^
and common stories, and in part ^auntingly noted by M. Fox, who vvriteth that
king Henry ^. decreed most cruel punishment against such as should hereafter
solow VViclef^ doctrine, against whom he held a Parliament at Le^ester: Fox vbi
supra pa. 173.
the which peradventure says the^ had no^ been so well holden at London,
because of the favorers of the Lord Cobham and other VViclefs solovvers.

But to return to my purpose of VViclef and to end his story, although most
Protestant vvriters (as I have said) reckon him for one of their chief and most
reverend Apostles, namely M. Fox who plac^th him in redd letters, (...) ^.
VViclef an heretic to the Ca^^^nistes.
first in his Calender, Ihon wiclef, preacher, martyr (though he dyed in his
bed searce an honest man) yet some other Protestant vvriters there are of a
more sincere and upright judgment, who for the reasons abo^e noted, Vadianus
d^ Eu (...) lib. 5. page 162.
reckon him (as he deserved) in the number of rank heretics. Amongst whom
Ioachimus Vadianus of Zurich a right Zuinglian, vvriteth of him, that albeit he
saw somewhat in matter of the gospel yet in nounull^s foe le lap^us est, in
sundry points of religion he was fowly ouerseen, and much Pantaleon (...). pa.
110.
more given to sco^fing and prating, then became a sober Diui^e. And Pantaleon
a sacramentarie likewise, in his Chronology accounts him for an heretic,
as he does also his scholar Ihon Husse though canonized by M Fox for Maij 2.
July 8.
a martyr, as likewise he is in the Scottish Calender, of whom he says
further, and that by vvarrant of that great Apostle Martin Luther, that
quibusdam bonis multa pestifera admiscuit, amongst a few good things he
mingled a number of wicked and pestiferous. And these are the principal which
since Berengarius time have been publishers of the Zuinglian faith touching
Christ not present in the sacrament.

A sure rule to discern an (...). Mayor.
by all Divines to prove any sect or opinion heretical: and the rule is; that
Whensoever there arises any preaching or doctrine in the church, to the
Christian people new and strange, and which the Pastors and Bishops of the
church reprove and disallovv as false: such preaching and doctrine certainly is
heretical. This proposition is justified by the universal tenor and drift of
the whole testament old and new, in all places where it entreats of the
Catholic church of the new Testament: for so The visible Church eternal.
much as of that church it was of old prophesied (and by Christ performed)
that it should be put in possession of al truth, and by the means of Bishops,
Prelates and Pastors, held in the same truth by virtue of the holy ghost, and
continued without error until the end of the world. The knowledge of truth
in this Church shall be Psalm. 11. 9. cap. 2. 3. cap. 54. 13
abundant as the waters of the sea: God shall be therein a perpetual teacher:
God shall make with that church such an eternal covenant, that the truth once
delivered to it, shall cap. 39. 21.
be continued from one to an other, from seed to seed, from generation to
generation for ever so long as the world endures: god shall set upon the walls
of this church, right, true Esa. cap. 60. 18. cap. 62. 6.
vigilant pastors and watchmen. which never at any time day nor night shall
cease from preaching the truth. Thus the prophets foretold. For performance of
which Christ promised to be with them for ever, al days until the end of
Matthew. 2^. ^^.
the world. He promised them the holy ghost, the spirit of truth, to abide with
them and their successors, for ever to Joan. 14. 17 Cap. 16, 13.
teach them and lead them in to al truth: which spirit he sent at the time
appointed in the day of Pentecost: and finally for this purpose, before his
departure out of this Act. 2.
world, he placed in his church, Apostles, prophets, pastors Ephesians. 4. 1^.
Act. 20. 28.
and doctors, to rule, govern, maynteine and preserve in truth that his church
(so dearly purchased with his blud) until his second coming to judgment.
Thus much for the proof of this first proposition. Join thereto for a second:
But the doctrine of Bere^garius was new Minor
and strange to Christian people, and condemned generally by all Bishops and
Pastors then living in unity of Christ's church over the whole face of
Christendom. The proof of this, is gathered out of al historiographers living
about those times, and out of the practice of the church. For as before is
noted, a number of Councels, some general, many particular were essembled
against it, and condemned it, at Rome, at Vercellis, at Tours, in Italy, in
France, in Germany, and other parts of Christendom: and as the Histories
record, Berengario, illiu^ temporis Papir. Mass^n vbi supra, in Henric^ rege.
Theologi bellum omnes indixere. The Divines of that time every one, bad war
and defiance to Berengarius, so soon as be durst publish his new opinion of
the Eucharist. Here of the conclusion follows plain, and most assured, that
Conclusion.
Berengarius opinion was heretical: and therefore the contrary, that is, the
Catholic opinion, which holds against Berengarius, is the true doctrine of
Christ and his Apostles, delivered by the^ to the church, and in the church
conserved and continued in all ages, in all times, in all Catholic countries and
realms until our age. Wherefore to end the argument of this chapter, and
vvithal to stop the wrangling of certain English Divines, who more like
Grammarians and sophisters, then wise or learned men, very childishly think
to avoid what so ever is alleged for Christ's presence in the Sacrament, by
con^erring together certain words and phrases, by which kind Calu.
Instructio. contra Libertin^s, ca. 1^
of Divinity they may (and some of their brethern do) infer Christ's presence
on the cross to be tropical and figurative no less then in the sacrament: to
prove I say, that the church and al ancient fathers according to the
scriptures, vvrote and meant as I have before declared, I vvil shut up this
matter with Erasmus words, wherein also I vvil comprise the sum in a manner
of all that hitherto has been declared; whose authority I use the rather, for
that the Protestants sometimes much extolle him as a great profound Divine,
deeply seen in the Fathers, and no enemy to their side, to whom among others
the Jew. defense of the Apology, part. 2. cap. 16. diuisio. 2.
chief proctor of the English church M. Ievvel yeldeth such high praise, as
that he calls him a man of famous memory, whose name for learning and
judgment has at al times among the learned been much esteemed: with whom the
Catholic writers (D. Allen Cardinal, D. Harding, D. Sanders, Erasmus faith of
the sacrament.
D. Stapleton etc. whom he terms the young Lou^nian Clergy) may not well
compare in the profound knowledge of the Doctors without blushing. Wherefore
this man so well esteemed among the learned, and of so profound knowledge in the
Doctors, concerning this matter vvriteth thus. Membra^im discerpi.
Protesting his own faith, vz that he had rather be drawn in pieces, then to
become of Berengarius opinion, and think of the sacrament, as the Zuinglians
do; and that he would rather sustain al misery, then to defile his conscience
The grounds of Erasmus faith. Erasmus l^^. 19. epist. ad Conrad. P^ll^c^num.
page 676.
with so foul a sin, and therein depart out of this life, the reasons of
this his constant persuasion thus he yeldeth: I could never be induced to
believe otherwise, then that the true body of Christ was in the sacrament, for
that the writings of the gospel and Apostles express so plainly, The body
which is given, and The blud which is shed: and for that, this thing so
wonderful well agrees with the infinite love of Plain scriptures.
God toward mankind, that whom he redeemed with the body and blud of his
son, those after an inexplicable manner he should also feed with the body and
blud of the same his son, Idem lib. 2^. (...) page ^17^.
and by this secret presence of him, at is were with a sure pawn or pledge
comfort them until he shall return manifest and glorious in the sight of al.
Thus for the scriptures, the gospels and S. Paul, and the clear evidence of
this faith touching the sacrament uttered by them: which was to him, as he
vvriteth, an immovable foundation to ground Immobile ^^^ damentum.
upon. Now for the ancient fathers and Councels of the church, thus he
proceeds: Seeing then we have so manifest warrant from Christ and S. Paul:
whereas besides it is most evidently proved, that the ancient writers, unto
whom not Consent of ancient fathers.
without cause the church yeldeth so great credit, believed with one consent,
that in the Eucharist is the true substance of Christ's body and blud: whereas
unto all this is joined the constant authority of Councels, and so great
consent of Christian people: 1. Cor. 13. 1^ Matthew. 26. 29.
let us also be of the same mind concerning this heavenly mystery; and let us
in a dark sort feed of that bread and cup of our lord, until we come to eat
and drink it after another sort, in the kingdom of God. And I wish with all my
heart, that they who have followed Berengarius in his error, would also follow him
in his repentance. Thus Erasmus, a man of profound knowledge in the ancient
Doctors, with whom if the young Doctors of the Catholic Clergy may not well
compare without blushing, much less may the young scholars and preachers of
the Scottish and English congregations, who for sound learning, and substance
of Divinity, so long as they live (I suppose) vvil not be worthy to carry the
books after those former. And therefore being content, that on both sides such
great and peerles authority be given to Erasmus as M. Ievvel chalengeth for
him, thereof I conclude, that the ancient fathers, according to the plain
scriptures, alvvaies thought and taught, that in the holy Eucharist is the
substance of Christ's body and blud and that a Christian man were better to
suffer any torment, and most cruel kind of death, then to be of an other
opinion. And with Erasmus I vvish, and our Lord of his mercy grant, that
those of our poor Island both English Ubi supra p^. 1178.
and Scottish, who have followed Berengarius in his impudent error (for so
Erasmus terms it) may also folo^ him in his repentance and execration of the
same impudent error, whereunto Erasmus persuadeth them.

OF BERENGARIVS HERESY RENEWED IN THIS AGE.
The Argument.
Luther is to be accounted in some sort, the very original, ground, and cause
of the Berengarian heresy renewed in our time.

But more precisely and directly Carolostadius, a wicked man and very familiar
with the devil, and altogether possessed of him.

To whom succeeded Zuinglius, and after him Oecolampadi agreing with
Carolostadius in substance of denying Christ's presence, but differing in
particular interpretation of Christ's words touching the institution of the
sacrament.

Diverse other interpretations of Christ's words one against an other: al which
are justified by Zuinglius, for that they al concur to remove from the
sacrament the real presence, and establish in steed thereof a mere privative
absence.

As the ancient fathers both Greek and Latin in the primitive church,
attribute the real presence of Christ in the sacrament, to the virtue and force
of Christ's words used in the consecration: so the Sacramentaries by a contrary
opinion account such consecration magical, and therefore remove the words of
Christ, teaching their Sacrament to be made as well without them, as with them.

Examples of the sacramentarie Communion practiced without the words of Christ
by the Protestants of England Scotland, Zuizzerland, and else where which they
both by their practice and writing justify as a very full and perfect
communion.

The resolution of the church of Geneua, that the supper may be ministered in
any kind of meat and drink, as well as in bread and wine. Whereof is inferred
(and that according to the Protestant doctrine) that 2. or 3. Euangelical
gossips meeting together to refresh them selves, and eating such vitails as
they bring with them, have as true and perfect a Communion, as the
Sacramentaries have any, both touching matter, and form, and also a lawful
Minister: which ministry or priesthod, even to preach and minister their
sacraments, the Protestant-gospel allows to women no less then to men.

CHAP. 2.
Having now declared the truth of the Catholic belief touching the blessed
sacrament, and how the faith thereof was continued from the first primitive
church of Christ and his Apostles (with very small gainsaying in the first
thousand years, and somvvhat more in the next 500) until the time of our
fathers, wherein Luther and certain other with him began that which now is
called the Gospel by the Protestants, but an universal gulf of heresy and
Apostasy by Catholics; it rests, that I plainly set forth, how that
heresy of Berengarius now maynteyned in England and Scotland, began first,
when Luther broched this new Gospel

Matthew. 18.
governors thereof, and so gave free liberty by his own cra^ple, by
vvriting, arguing, and disputing, to interpret the scripture as each man listed,
without regard to antiquity, universality, consent of al Christendom
besides, of al fathers, Bishops and ancient Councels (which example Luther
author of the sacrame^tarte heresy.
and behavior was in general the cause and founteyne of al heresy, Apostasy
and Atheism, which from such contempt and self liking arrogancy must needs
arise, as we see by experience) but also in special the first origin and
spring of this Berengarian heresy in our age is to be attributed to him:
partly because by his doctrine he abolished Genes. 4. 3. 4. Genesis 1. 20 3 Reg.
19. 14 ^ Paralip. 15. 3. Daniel 3. 38. Dan. 12. 11. Malach. 1. 11 Heb. 7. 11.
12 Cyprian. de ca ^a Domini. See after chap. ^2. number. 2. 4 5.
that which in this dreadful mystery is principal, that is to say, the
sacrifice and worship due to god performed therein, which is ever most
necessary in every religion, and by vvanting whereof, the prophets, Apostles,
and holy Doctors use to describe and express a godles and irreligious, a
profane, Atheistical or Antichristian state of people: partly because he
protested, that him self was marvelous desirous to have also denied the real
presence (thereby the more to spite and green the Pope) if so be he could
with any probability, either have framed the words of Christ spoken at his
last supper, to that part also of the Berengarian heresy; or have induced his
own conscience, to think such a symbolical presence and real absence of
Christ's flesh from the sacrament, ever to have been intended by Christ:
whereof thus him self vvriteth in the 7. Tome of his works (as they are set
out by Melanc^hon) in an epistle sent to certain of his scholars: Lutherus
Ecclesiastes and euangelista Luther Tom. ^. Wittenberg. sol. 502.
VVittembergensis, Christianis Argentinae etc. Hoc diffiteri nec possum, nec
volo etc. Luther the preacher and Evangelist of Wittenberg to the Christians
of Strasou g. Thus much I nether can, nor will deny, that if Carolostadius, or
any other man five years ago could have persuaded me, that in the sacrament was
nothing else but bread and wine (without Christ's real presence) he truly had
bound me unto him; and I would The Protestants rule to interpret scripture
have accepted that as a very great benefit. For in examining and debating
that matter I took marvelous pains, and streyned every vein of body and
soul to have rid and dispatched Probe perspi^u^am hae re Papatui cum primis
me val de incommodare poss. Textus Euangelij nimium apertus est and potens.
my self thereof because I saw full well, that thereby I might have done notable
harm and damage to the Papacy. But I see my self taken fast, and that there is
no way to escape. For the text of the gospel is to clear and forcible; which
can not easily be shaken, much less overthrown by words and gloses devised by
giddy brains. Thus Luther: after he had by sundry vvritings and persuasions,
where he bare any sway, taken away the sacrifice: shevving him selfs as
forvvard to have abolished in like manner the sacrament (which except it have
the true presence of Christ, is no sacrament of his institution, and
consequently no sacrament a^al) save that the words, whereby Christ ordained
the same, stood against him so strong and pregnant, that he could devise no
shift to avoid them.

Which conclusion and confession of Luther, albeit to mer of reason and
conscience it should more have confirmed and established the truth of Christ's
real presence in the sacrament, seeing Christ's words were so strong and
mighty, that they compelled and enforced as it were against his vvil, this
mortal enemy of Christ's church to grant that, which otherwise he most gladly
would have denied: yet in that lose and dissolute time, when every man by
Luthers example took liberty to devise upon the scripture as Luther had done;
these very words of Luther gave great occasion to his fellows and compartners
to invent some farther and sovvler shifts, and to put that in practice, which
Luther would full feign, but having as then some remorse of conscience and
regard to Christ's words, durst not.

Carclostad. father of the Caluinists.
Luther calls him self preacher and Evangelist) following Luthers example of
framing the sense of scripture after his own private spirit: and considering
better Luthers ground and rule of interpretation (which was so to interpret,
as he might most endamage the Papacy and church Catholic) went a little
farther, and devised a way, how to defeat those words uttered by our
Savior, which so hampered and entangled Luther, that he could no way rid him
self from the power and manifest clearnes of them. Carolostad. interpretation
of Christ's words
His way was, not to expound them of the sacrament which Christ delivered to
his Apostles but of his visible person sitting at the table, as though Christ
had said, Eat and drink, for I am he, that must dye for you al, and this my
body is it, which must suffer on the cross for your redemption. And this
iuterpretation Carolostadius instified by diverse reasons, which Zuinglius
reherseth, whereof these be the Zuingl. Tom. 2. ad Matthew. Rutling. de ca ^a.
fol. 155.
principal. First, for that the Prophets foretold that Christ's body was that,
which was to be crucified; so that look how many testimonies and places may
be gathered out of al scripture old and new to prove Christ's passion, so many
could Carolostadius heap to approve this his exposition. A second was, that
Christ here used a sudden Apostrophe, Ibid. in responsione ad Billicanum et
Regium so. 261
and turning away of the word (This) from the bread to his body, as he did
likewise in the words, Thou art Peter (a rock) and upon this rock I wild
buyld my church. Where the first rock (after the Protestants judgment) is
spoken of Peter, the second is suddenly turned away from Peter to One lie
built upon an other. The rock in both places has one relation to Peter.
Christ's person. His third reason more probable then all the other was, for
that whereas Christ took bread in to his hands, and before had spoken of the
bread in the masculin gendre, (...), suddenly he changes it in to the neuter
gendre, hoc, (...). Which reason as it somevvhat makes for Carolostadius bad
conceyte, so it quit overthrows the common Hoc, this, in Christ's words has
not relation to the bread.
and general exposition of al other Sacramentaries: who altogether take this
for their sure ground, that Christ said, This (bread) is my body. Which as it
is most false, so Carolostadius their great father and patriarch refelleth it
by Christ's manifest words, which possibly can not admit such construction, as
Carolostadius truly teaches them; whereof more shall be spoken hereafter. For
the present, Cap. 4. number. ^.
it may suffice us, that we know Carolostadius sentence and peruersion of
Christ's words, which consisted in this, that he changed and altered the
first syllable, hoc, This, in to Hic, here. Hoc est corpus meum. Here is my
body: or THIS. HERE.
as Sleidan the Protestant Historiographer reports the matter, his
interpretation was, Hic sedet corpus meum. Here Sleidan. Comme^t lib. 5. sol.
7^. Mus^ul. in locis communib. cap. de cana Domini. page ^^4.
sits my body. Certain brethren (says Musculus, meaning Carolosiadius
with his sectaries) refer the particle (...), This, not to the bread, but to
the very body of Christ, as though turning his finger to him self, Christ had
said, This body which here you see before you, shall be given for you.

Before I proceed farther to show, how this Berengarian infidelity
multiplied, I think it convenient, for that this man is the very root and
founder of it in this our A description of Carolostad.
age, to describe briefly out of autentical and assured vvitnesses, such as the
Protestants can no way refuse, what manner of man this Carolostadius was:
that as before I Cap. 1. number. 8. 9. 10.
shevved all the patrones of this heresy from Berengarius, to have been most
wicked men and detestable heretics: so we may note how this man perfectly
resembles those his forefathers, and was lead by the same spirit, by which
they were. Philip Melancthon, who lived in Wittenberg Melancthon in epistol.
ad Freder. Mic^niam.
with him, in his epistles vvriteth of him thus: Carolostadius primum
excitauit hunc tumultum etc. Carolostadiut first of al in our memory made this
stir about the sacrament: a rude savage man, without wit, without learning,
without common sense, who for ought we could perceive, never so much as
understood any office of civil humanity so far of is it that ever any token or
sign of the spirit of god appeared in him. Thus Luther Tom. 3. Ienens. sol
65. Kemnit. de cana Domin. pa. 214.
Melancthon. Luthet in the second part of his book contra caelestes prophetas,
against the heavenly prophets, and Martinus Kemnitius in his book de caens
Domini, with diuets others, testify of him, that he was instructed by the
devil, and that him self was wont to bost among his friends and scholars, that
there came to him a strange man, who taught him how to interpret the words
of the supper, This is my body, and especially that first syllable, This. This
Vel diabolus fuit, vel diaboli matter.
master, Carolostadius supposed to be a prophet sent from heaven: but says
Luther, it was certainly the devil, or the devils dame. Which devil
afterward, fully and perfectly (as they write) possessed Carolostadius. So
that Alberus a great Alber. contra Carolostadiano^ Z. 4. pa. 1. Y. 2. pa. 1.
Luther. in colloq. m^nsalib. so. 367. 373
doctor among the Protestants, in his book against the Carolostadia^s vvriteth
expressly, that the devil dwelt in him corporally: yea that he was possessed
with many legions of devils. In like sort Luther verily believed that the devil
spoke out of him. For which cause he calls him a devil incarnate, diabolum
incorporatu^, and usually, vvriting against him, so frames his words and
vvriting, as though he dealt with a devil, in the form of a man: That I call
him Devil (says Ego ad illum non respicio, sed ad cum* a quo obseus est qui
per ipsum etiam loquitur
Luther) let no man marueil thereat. For I make no rekning of Carolostadius, I
regard not him, but that other (devil) of whom he is possessed, who also
speaks by him or thorough him. To be short, three days before his death, the
same devil came to him in form of a man, cited him to appear, and in fine
took him away out of the world, as witnesses the sorenamed Lrasmus
Alberus, and other Protestant Alber. vbi supra, s. 1. pa. 1. Joan Soul. lib.
50. causatum cap. 50.
vvriters. This was that Carolostadius, who among many other singularities
vvherevvith he ado^ned the Protestant-gospel, especially brake the ise before
them, and was then first Apostle and guide in two chief points: in incestuous
marriage, and denying Christ's presence in the sacrament. For he being a vowed
priest, first of al, even before Luther, joined him self in pretended vvedlocke
to a sister, and vvithal with help of his familiar, devised that
interpretation of Christ's words, which before is noted. After whom came
diverse others, who though differing from him in particular circumstance and
manner of expounding that short text, yet al buylt upon his foundation, and
thereof raised one and the self same conclusion, that the sacrament was only a
sign, and Christ's true body and blud removed as far from it, as the highest
heaven is from the lowest earth, as Beza spoke in the assembly of Poissye, and
is commonly found in all the sacramentarie vvriters.

Zuinglius exgesition of Christ's words
sacrament, but to expound the second particle (Est, is) by the word
significat, does signify: so that the meaning of Christ's words according to
him is, This is my body, that is to say this being mere bread does signify my
body. And this, Zuinglius supposed to be the true sense and meaning Zuingl.
Tom. 2. comme^t. de vera and fal^a religione. cap. de Eucharistia fol. 209. 210
of the holy ghost, and usually arresteth him self upon that significatiue
exposition of the second word, is, as Carolostadius preferred the turning
away of the first word This: and therefore in diverse works and treatises
heapeth up together a number of places, where the word, est, must needs
stand for significat: and finally this interpretation Zuingl. Tom. 2. in epist.
ad Matthew. Rutling. fol. 158. See after cap. 20. number. 1. 4.
he accompteth so sure and sound, as that he boldly pronounces, it can never
be refelled by any scripture. Howbeit these two Commentaries thus made upon
Christ's words, that of Carolostadius, and this of Zuinglius, Luther who wrote
many books against them both) comparing Luther. Tom. 7. defensio verborum
caenae etc. fol. 386. Hoc enim nihil prorsus simile very habet.
together: If (quoth he) I should give sentence in the question between
Carolostadius and Zuinglius, I would boldly pronounce, that Carolostadius
exposition were the more probable for their heresy then this other of
Zuinglius. For in this, there is no color of truth.

Next followed Oecolampadius, first a friar, after an Apostata like those
other, who invented a third shift; which was to leave the first word This,
and the second Oecolampad. exposition of Christ's words
word is, in their proper and usual signification, but to alter the word
body, in to a figure, and so to yield the sense as though Christ should say,
This is a figure of my body. And yet (which still is to be marked) thus did
Oecola^padius, not disprouing that of Carolostadius, no more then did
Zuinglius, but preferring his own: marie with free liberty and license to his
gospelling reader to take which he listed, because both suffised utterly to
destroy Christ's real presence. Whereof thus vvriteth Balthazar Pacimo^tanus
head of the Anabaptists, in his letters to Oecolampadius. Zuingl. and
Oecolampad. epistol. lib. 2. fol 64.
I am very glad to understand, that you dislike not Carolostadius books of the
sacrament. This your judgment would I full feign have wrong out before. For I
knew right well, or at least I supposed, that your opinion and ours disagreed
nothing at al. But you always answered me in obscurity: and surely it was
wisdom so to do, and the time required it. But now the time is to preach on the
house top, that which before was whispered in corners. So that albeit Zuinglius
and Oecolampadius made choice and better esteemed (as has been said) each his
own imagination, yet they approved full well that of their first founder
Carolostadius, for that these three opinions were in substance al one, and al
tended to one scope and mark.

Other sacramentarie expositions of Christ's words
about the same time, one upon an other, who al building upon the foundation
of Carolostadius, and tending to one end, that is to remove the presence of
Christ from the holy mystery, yet by diverse sundry ways wrought the same;
e^h after his own peculiar fancy, perverting and wresting the words of the
Institution. whose several Luth. Tom. 7 VVittem defensie v. b^^u^ ^^n^ etc.
^ol. 387.
corruptions and manglings Luther in one place recites and refuteth to the
number of six, one whereof (to use Luthers words set as it were on the rack,
and clean inuerted and turned vpside down the whole text, transposing the
first word (This) from his first place to the last, thus expounding the
sentence, Take and eat my body, That which shall be delivered for you, is this.
An exposition much like to that which Musculus Muscul. in locu communi^. cap.
de ^a^a Dom^^. number. 2. pa. 324.
mentions given by certain his brethren in these words, Corpus meum quod
pro vobis dabitur, in ordine rerum spiritualium est hoc, etc. my body which
shall be given for you, in order of spiritual things, is this, to wit, a
mystery of spiritual food, this bread of life. After this and certain other
Luther vbi supra.
of like quality r^hersed by Luther, he adds, that besides those six, vt
septenarius numerus compleatur, sunt qui dicunt non esse articulos fidei etc.
to fill up the number of seven, other there are which say, this is no article of
faith, and therefore men should not strive for it, but every man be left to
his own opinion, to judge what he lists. These men tread under their feet
and destroy al. And yet (says he) the holy ghost is in every one of these: and
none will be reproved of his error in these so diverse and contrary expositions,
whereas the text can bear but one direct and true sense. So grossly the devil
mo^keth us. Howbeit al those diversities and contrarieties objected by Luther,
Zuinglius takes for no absurdities, but with great facility (as he thinks)
econcileth and justifies al as very good and Euangelical, specially that of
Simlerus in ^ita `Bullingers, fol. 18.
Carolostadius, whom the Sacramentaries acknovvledge for one of their first
and principal Doctors. Zuinglius words are: Carolostadius that good and godly
man does expound Zuingl. Tom. 2. ad Matthew. Rutling. de cana. sol. 155
the words of the supper, as though Christ had directed them not to the bread,
but to him self, Take, eat, for I must yield up this my body for you. And
answering some, who objected this diversity of opinions, which were among
his fellows and comparteners, he vvriteth thus: Apud nos de Ibid. in
r^sponsio. ad Bill. ^^ Regium ^^l. 261.
Eucharistia nihil vere est dissidij etc. Amongst us concerning the Eucharist
truly there is no discord. One thinks there is an Apostrophe and turning away
of the word Hoc, This. An other makes (...) of it, that is, thinks that to
be put in the first place, which should be in the last. Again, an other
supposes and avouches, that a trope and figure is in the word est, is: an
other will place the figure in the words body and blud. Al which have one
meaning, and their diversity ought not to offend any man. As when captains
entend to overthrow some adversary fortress, they ca^ not be said to
disagree, albeyt one be of mind to batter it with gunnes, an other would
undermine it, a third would get it by scaling: for they al agree in one, that
is, to overthrow the fortress. By Who is a right Z^inglian or Sacramentarie.
which conclusion, we may learn one good and sure rule to understand the
true mind and meaning of the Sacramentaries, as they now are commonly called,
or Caluinists, or Zuinglians, or Berengaria^s (for these words Name of
zuinglians, or Calvinists.
must I needs use, not only to express the difference between them and the
Catholics, but also between them and the Protestants of Germany commonly
named Lutherans) and who is rightly to be accounted of their side. The rule
is, that any sectarie if he so write, or preach, or believe in this matter,
that he gainsay the Catholic faith and deny the real presence of Christ, he is
a true gospeller of the Sacramentarie side, and has the right sense of their
gospelling faith, which labors only or principally to abolish that former
Catholic faith of Christ's real presence, and in place thereof to establish a
real absence. And so vvriteth Musculus very expressly: Omnes vt a me, Muscul. in
lo^^ commun. cap. de can^ (...). page 322.
vel inter se in hac causa dissideant etc Al men (^ith he how soever they
disagree from me, or among the^ selves, in this matter of the sacrament, so
they mainteyne not the Papistical impiety, embrace them as my loving brethern
in the lord. The reason is, for that they al, be they Berengarians old or new,
or Petrobrusians, or Albigenses, or Anabaptists, or Trinitarians: they entend
the overthrow and destruction of the Catholic faith of Christ's presence, and
labor to bring in the Zuinglian absence, which is the matter that these men
principally desire. And therefore so as they agree in this, al other errors are
venial and pardonable, what Si errarunt, errarunt in litera, non in spiritu.
Responsio, ad Bi^ic. and Regium vbi sup.
so ever they teach, and how so ever they err: and if they may be said at al
to err, yet at last they err in the letter, not in the spirit, in a
circumstance, not in the substance, as Zuinglius vvriteth in the place last
quoted. And in an other place, when Luther objected to him, that there were
among his folovvers diverse sects, he answers: Zuingl. Tom. 2. in Exe^^si ad
^uth^rum fol. 362.
It is stark false. There are no sects, no divisions amongst us. We al,
both I, and Oecolampadius, and Carolostadius, and the rest agree in this, that
there is in the sacrament only a figure and symbol. Mary we shift the words of
Christ diverse ways, as we can. Asserimus symbola tantum esse, sed verba
diuersimode expedimus. Whereof him self yeldeth a number of examples vvorth
the noting, of which many are gathered together out of diverse his books, by
loachimus VVestphalus a great gospeller but of an other stamp. Out of the
heap I vvil here recite 4. or 5. Thus are his VVestphal. Apologia confessio.
de cana domini pa. 62. 63. 64.
words: Zuinglius in his second treatise of the supper of the Lord, says that
in these words, This is my body, the word (body) must be taken for the passion
and death, which Christ sustained in his body. The like he has in his answer
to a friend 1
touching the words of Christ. The bread which I will give, is Joan. 6.
my flesh: Here says Zuinglius, by the word (flesh) is meant death, as
likewise when he says This is my body, which is delivered Strange expositions
of the word (body)
for vow, by the word (body) he understands his death and passion. How beit
in an other treatise of the supper, he says, the bread and flesh-which Christ
here mentions, is nothing else but faith. And yet in an other book he is of
an other judgment, 2
that the word (flesh) is to be taken for the deity. For 3
(says Zuinglius) Christ using the word flesh, understands the divine
nature, which took flesh, so by a certain figure speaking of his mortal nature,
whereas he means his nature immortal: he uses the word (flesh) but means
the spirit, that is his divinity, which gives life to the flesh. In his
epistle to Luther* he takes it for the memory of Christ. It is called the
body 4
says he, not for that this solemn meeting, or the bread which then is broken
is in deed Christ's body, but for that the memory of his body and death is
then recorded. In his second 5 Non est al^^^ quam divine qu^dam and v^r^ m^dest
a panegiris.
answer to Luthers Confession, he takes it for a thankesgeuing in these
words: The Sacrament is nothing else, but a certain divine and very manerly and
holy assembly of the people and congregation of god, when they meet together
to the body of Christ, that is, to the Eucharist, or thankesgeuing for Christ's
death, which is therefore called Christ's body, for that his death and passion
is then called to memory, and thanks are yielded for so great a benefit. Thus
VVestphalus: and much more to this purpose may the learned reader see in the
same place. Yet one other interpretation Zuinglius gives of this word (body)
which VVestphalus mentions not, vz. that the body of Christ in the Eucharist
signifies the 6
church. His words are: When as Paul 1. Cor. 10. says, Zuingl. Tom. 2. ad
Matthew. Rutling. fol. 157.
that the bread which we receive, is the communication of Christ's body: here it
stands for the communication of the church: for that by this means every man
approves him self to the church and ingraffeth him self therein as it were by
giving an oath. The same exposition he avouches in his Commentary Ibid
de vera and falsa religione, cap. de Eucharistia. Thus Zuinglius. VVestphalus
in the place before noted, alleges one more exposition, taken not from
Zuinglius, but Joan. a Lasco* whom our late king Edward the sixth created 7
Superintendent of the congregation of strangers in London. Which exposition
is so much the more to be regarded, because Calvin him self highly esteems
it. whereof VVestphalus* v^^ (...) 35. 36.
thus vvriteth VVestphalus. Albeit Calvin in his co^mentarie upon the first
epistle to the Corinthians puts it out of doubt, that THIS, HOC in Christ's
supper points the bread, yet that notwithstanding, here he defen leth the
contrary opiof Ioanne; a Lasco, who in his book of the sacraments of the
church assures, that it points not the bread, but the whole form and
ceremony, the very external action of the supper. This gloss of his reverend
brother, that HOC does not demonstrate bread, but the external action of the
supper, Calvin Caeleste ^racul^m.
honoreth as an Oracle from heaven. Where by the way VVestphalus gives us a
good example, how much we may esteem the conference of places of scripture
and interpretation there after, made by the Zuinglians and Sacramentaries. For
(says he) let this stand for good, Protestant conference of scripture how
sure ^^ ^^.
that the first particle HOC, this, according to Calui^* and Ioannes a Lasco
signifies the external action. Next, we must by like reason confess, that
Est, does stand for Significat, which Zuinglius proves by a number of textes
of scripture, as before has been shevved, and is after likewise proved by M.
B. Thirdly, we may not deny to Chap. 2^.
Occolampadius like grace, who says that scripture and al Antiquity
expounded the word Body, corpus, by a figure or sign of the body. Let us now
in fine conioyne al together, and thence will arise this prodigious proposition;
Haec form^ VVestphal. vbi supra* pa. 37.
seu actio c^nae significat figuram corporis Christi. This form, ceremony, or
action of the supper signifies a figure of Christ's body.. And if Christ's body
stand for the Church, as the same Zuinglius sometimes affirms, or his
Passion, or Conclusion of the Zuinglian doctrine touching the Sacrament.
his Deity, then the sense is. This action signifies a figure and sign of
the church, of Christ's passion or, Deity, and so forth. Al which draws to
this point; first, that from the sacrament, Christ's body is quit removed, and
no manner of Christ's presence least there at al, more then in any other common
action, place, or assembly of Christians. Next, that concerning any work,
effect, virtue or operation wrought in the elements of bread and wine by
force of Christ's words, there is nothing done at al. Only in the mind and
understanding of the comunicants, if they be well instructed, somvvhat there
may be perhaps. For they coming to receive, some perchance remember Christ,
other give thanks for his death, other think upon his Deity, other upon the
church his mystical body, and so ^orth, each has some imagination one or other,
according as the preacher either then at that instant warns them, or as every
man by some fore-conceiued opinion directs him self, and so the bread
becomes to them a symbol, a memory, a sign, a thankes-geuing etc.
according as every man is affected.

The Zuinglian opinion of Christ's words
word: so the Zuinglians or Sacramentaries, who deny that presence, *ache the
contrary course and flatly resolve, the words of Christ to work nothing,
but to be as idle and unprofitable, as if they were never uttered; and that
for any thing added to the supper by them, as good it were to read no chapter
at al, or any chapter of the bible; that (if ye please) of Christ's genealogy
in the first of S. Matthew, as the 26. and words of Christ's Institution.
Concerning the fathers and ancient church, their faith is sufficiently known
by their manifold and most plain confessions. For instruction of the simple, I
vvil recite the sayings of a fevv.

Justinius the martyr in his second Apology for the Christians made to the
Romain Emperor Antoninus, vvriteth thus: As by the word of god our Savior
Christ Jesus Justinius in Apologi^ ^.
was incarnate, and for our salvation took flesh and blud: even so by the word
of God with prayer we are taught, that of vsu il bread and wine is made the
flesh and blud of the same incarnate Christ Jesus. S. Ambrose in a long
chapter by many examples proves this force and power of Christ's word to
convert the elements of bread and wine in to his body and blud. His words
are: Thou will say perhaps, Ambros. ^^ ^^^ qui (...) tu^. cap 9.
how is this the body of Christ, whereas my eyes teach me the contrary? He
answers: How many examples do we bring to prove, that not to be in the
Sacrament which nature has framed, but that which benediction has
consecrated? And after a number of examples taken out of the old The force of
Christ's word in making the Sacrament.
Testament, wherein the nature of things has been altered, of Aarons rod
turned in to a serpent, of the rivers of Aegipt turned in to blud, of the red
sea divided, and standing steadfast like a wall* of the river Jordan turned back
to his fountain: of these he in^erreth If then the blessing or prayer made by
man were able to change nature, what shall we say of the Divine consecration,
where the very words (not of man but) of Christ our lord and Savior do work?
For the Sacrament, which thou receiuest, is made by the word of Christ. And if
Elias speech were of such force, that it caused fire to come from heaven* shall
not Christ's speech be of suficient force to alter the nature of these elements,
bread and wine? Thou have read in the works of all the world, He Genes. ^. Psalm.
^^. 9.
spoke the word, and they were made: he commanded and they were created. Then
the word of Christ which was able to make somewhat of nothing, can it not change
that which already Ambros. lib. 4 de sacramenta cap. 4. and 5.
is and has an essence, in to that which it is not? etc. And this self same
reason taken from the creation, he uses in an other place. In consecrating the
Sacrament, the priest (says he) uses not his own words, but he uses the
words of Christ. Therefore the word of Christ makes this Sacrament. What
word? Even the self same word by which al things were made. Our lord
commanded, and the heaven was made. He commanded, and the earth was made. He
commanded, and the Qua^^ opera^^^ius sit s^^-^^^ Christi.
seas were made. Thou see then, how puissant is the word of Christ. And in
this sort he continues a very long and pithi^ disputation grounded upon
manifold scriptures, to prove the infinite power of Christ's word in
consecration of the blessed Sacrament; whereof this is his conclusion. Now
therefore to answer thee, it was not the body Ibi. cap. 5*
but bread before consecration. But after, when Christ's words are joined
thereunto* then is it the body of Christ. Likewise before, the chalice had in
it wine and water; but when Christ's words have wrought thereon, there is made
present the blud which redeemed the people. Thou see then how many ways the
speech of Christ is able to change al things. An ignorant Cyril. lib. 1^. in
Joan. cap. ^^.
pu^as nobis esse virtu^em mysticae benedictionis? says S. Cy^illus Archbishop
of Alexandria. Think thou we know not the virtue or force of the mystical
benediction to work the real presence of Christ with us? Where he uses many
of the examples brought by S. Ambrose, namely Vide ibid. lib. 4. cap. ^^.
that of Moses rod, of the rivers of Aegipt made blud, of passing the red sea,
to prove that we should make no doubt touching the verity of this mystery,
nor Iewishly ask, how Christ can make his body present in so The force ^
Christ's word in making the sacrament.
many places at once. To like effect and purpose notable are the words of
Eusebius Emissenus, or (as some suppose) of Faustus bishop of Rhegium (touching
my purpose it is not material whether, for that each of them lived about 1200.
years since, and so are good witnesses of the faith of that ancient church)
which are Eusebius. Emissenus Sermo. d^ corpore D^^^ns.
these: When the creatures (bread and wine) are set on the holy altars to be
blessed, before they are consecrated with invocation of the high god there is
the substance of bread and wine: but after the words of Christ, it is the body
and blud of Christ. And what marvel is it, if be that with a word could
create, can now alter the things which he has created? Nay it seems a lesser
miracle if that which he is confessed to have made of nothing* the same now
being made he change in to a better substance. And what may be hard for him to
do, to whom it was easy by the commandment of his will, to make al things
both visible and invisible? These few in steed of a number may serve to declare
what says the ancient church and fathers had of the strength and efficacy of
Christ's words in the blessed Sacrament.

Now let us view on the other side the opinion of Zuinglius and the
Sacramentaries. This Zuinglius him self makes to be the very state of the
question between Zuing. Tom. ^. Respons. ad Con^^^^o^. ^^^ there sol. 431*
him and Luther: Controuersia qu^e nobis cum Luthero est in hoc versatur etc.
The controversy between us and Luther rests in this point, that we on our
side can never grant, that Christ's words in the supper should be pronounced to
this end* Vt ^o^um vertu^e quicqua^ ^^fi^^atur.
as though any thing were wrought by virtue of them. And albeit he can be
content to permit them to be read as other parts of the scripture, historically
for knowledge of the stone, as perhaps in the old Testament, when the Paschal
lamb was eaten, in the time thereof the Jews might read the 12. chapter of
Exodus (and yet that also he greatly likes not, and holds it not so
convenient, but admits it no wares necessary) yet The Zuinglian^ take al
sorce from Christ's (...). Zuinglius ibid. lib. ^^ baptistract. 1. ^ol. 64.
how so ever that be, very courageously he assures his reader, that Luther
can never yield any sound reason or authori tie, that commands the words of
the institution to be read in ministering the supper. The like he vvriteth of
the sacrament of baptism; Non damno vsitatam baptizandi formulam in nomine
patris etc. I condemn not the usual form of baptising in the name of the
father, of the son, and of the holy ghost: yet in the mean season I nether
may nor will omit to speak the truth, which is this, that Christ appointed not
in these words a form of baptism, which we should use, at the Divines
hitherto have falsely taught. And the meaning of A ^evv form of baptism.
these words is not, as if Christ would have said, When you baptize any,
pronounce these 3 names over them but rather he warns, that such as were
strangers from god and true religion, them should the Apostles bring to the
true god, dedicating and binding them to his service by some external sign.
And Calvin ca^leth it magical inchauntment, to think that the Call. Institut.
lib. 4. cap. 14. number. 4. ^^^^. ^^ ^p^^s cap. ^. v. 2^. Bullinge. de^ad. ^.
^erm^. 6.
words of Christ work any thing in the sacrament, for that sola explication ad
populum, facit vt mortuum elementu^ incipiat esse sacramentum. Only the
declaration of the m^sterie to the people, causes the dead element to become a
sacrament. The like vvriteth Bullinger Zuinglius his successor in the chair of
Zurick: The Papists superstitiously attribute force of sanctification to the
words uttered in administration of the sacrament. For not the words, but the
faith of the baptized* causes that baptism is of force and virtue. And in the
gospel when Christ instituted the supper, he commanded not to rehearse or
pronounce any thing, by virtue whereof the elements might be changed or the
things signified brough^ down from heaven, and joined, to the symboles. N^^
(...) in Christ's (...)
And therefore there is no virtue at al in rehearsing the words of the Lord in
the supper. As the figure or form of letters is of no value: so there is no
force in pronouncing the words, or in the sound of them. For Pliny says,
words as also Pliny a goodly Doctor.
charms or inchauntements, are of no power or efficacy. In which words the
Christian reader may first of al note, Protestant Doctors Pliny Hom. ^^.
what Doctors these men follow in matters of faith, when Pliny an heathen
and faithles man, is brought in as a great author to determine of the virtue of
our Saviors words in the sacrament. With like grace as Theodore Bez^
annotat. in Luc. ca. 22. v. 20.
Beza expounds the same words symbolically, by the grave authority forsooth
of Homer the poet, and (as he is commonly called) father of lies. Next, it may
be observed, whether Brentius the Lutheran had not lust Bullinger. in (...).
^irmo. part. 2. 3. cap. 1^.
occasion to write of Bullinger and his companions as by witness of
Bullinger him self he does: to wit, These Zuinglians (says he) are wont to
measure and limite as they please, the omnipotency of god. To which end they
use the very self same arguments, quibus Plinius ille Atheus Epicureus
omnipotentiam Dei oppugnauit: by which Pliny that godles Epicure fought
against the omnipotency of God. Then, by conference of the sayings of
Zuinglius, Calvin, and Bullinger, with those former of Justinius the martyr, S.
Ambrose, S. Cyril, and Eusebius Emissenus, as we may farther perceive an
infinite difference between that antiquity and this novelty, that faith and
this infidelity, that sacrifice and sacrament of Christ, and this sacrilegious
bread and wine, or perhaps some worse matter invented by Carolostadius and
his Sprite; so if we proceed on a little farther to the practice and
administration of this new devised Communion, we shall yet somvvhat more
thoroughly see in to the essence thereof, and have better help to judge
between the one and the other. For before I come to Caluins opinion, upon
which I must lest most of al, although in substance it be al one with these
precedent, I think it good for the better understanding of the reader to let
him see, how the Protestants use to administer this their supper without
superstition, and most nighly to this order prescribed by Carolostadius,
Zuinglius, Bullinger, and the Tigurine gospellers after Zuinglius fasshion.

A Germane Protestant of this time, in his book which he has made containing
50. reasons, why one Joan. S^^ut lib. 50. (...)* ^rum, cap. 13.
of his sect (a Lutheran) may not in any wise become a Caluinist; among other
things vvriteth, that the Caluinists or sacramentaries do so have the words of
Christ's Institution, that they can not abide either to see or to hear them, and
therefore administer their supper without them. Ioachimus Calu. 2. desens. d^
S^^^m^nt. page* 35. (...) min^^^r^d v^^^^out Christ's words
VVestphalus obiecteth to Calvin* that the Ministers of his s^^te in East
F^^^^land minister the Eucharist with these only words. Eat this bread*
believe and remember, that the body of Christ offered on the cross is the true
sacrifice for your sins. Which manner of administratio Calvin in his answer
justifies, and is (as al men may perceive) very conformable to the assertio^s
of Zuinglius, of Bullinger, of Oecolampadius, and those other before rehearsed.
The Anabaptists in this respect are perfect sacramentaries: and Calvin in his
book against them, where he severally recites their errors and refuteth
them, confesses In Germany.
that in the receiving and administration of the supper they say nothing which
we grant not unto them, yea Calu. Instructio. contra A^abaptist. arti. 3. pa.
54.
which we our selves teach not daily: Nihil dicunt (says he) quod ipsis non
concedamus, imo quod non quotidie doceamus. So that in seeing the communion of
the Anabaptists, we see the communion of Caluinists: and the form and fashion
of the one, is a true and exact pattern of the other. Now that the Anabaptists
usually leave out the words of Christ's institution, it is no less notorious
to any man that knovveth their ^aith, gospel, and Communions: whereof their
practice in Munster the chief city of Westphalia where they began their
kingdom the year 1534 may se^^e for a sufficient proof. One day Sleidan. lib.
10. ^ol 152.
(as Sleidan rehea^seth the story) the king commanded the brethern to meet
in a certain place. Being come thither some thousands in number, they found
their supper provided, beef, mutton tossed. sod. with such variety, as the
country and time velded. This supper being now almost exded, the king him self
reaches bread to each one, using withal these words. Take, eat, and show forth
the death of the Lord. His Queen immediately following, delivers in like sort
the cup, saying; drink. and show forth the death of the Lord. M. Fox our
English Martyr-maker writing the story of Fox Acts and monumet. pa. 666.
Anne Askew, John Lassels, and others in the end of king Henry the 8. his
reign, sets down a long epistle written by the said Lassels, in which is
contained their faith of the sacrament, which faith also M. Fox seems In
England
well to approve, for that he says, This martyr confuteth the error of the
Papists, which are not content with the spiritual receiving: and also he does
c^t o^ the sinister interpretation, which many make upon the words of the
institution. Thus are the words of this martyr. S. Paul 1. Cor. 11. says,
That Ibi page 667.
which I delivered unto you, I received of the Lord. For the lord Jesus the
same night in which he was betrayed, took bread thanked, and brake it, and
said; take ye, e^e ye, this is my body which is broken for you. Here me seems
S. Paul durst not take upon him his Lord and masters authority; he durst not
take upon him to say, This is my body. It was the Lord JESUS, that made the
supper, which also did finish it, and made an end of the only act of our
salvation, both here in this world, and also with his father in heaven. Now if
any man be able to finish the act of our Savior in breaking of his body and
shedding of his blud here, and also to finish it with his father in heaven,
then let him say it. But I think if men will look upon S. Paul's words well,
they shall be forced to say as S. Paul says, The Lord JESUS said it, and once
for all, which only was the fulfiller of it. For these words* HOC Note t^i^.
EST CORPUS MEVM. This is my body, were spoken of his natural presence, which
no man is able to deny. Thus these martyrs. By which discourse it appears
that they acknowledge, first, the words of Christ's supper to be spoken of
Christ's natural presence and body, which they say is so plain, that no man is
able to deny it. Next, that this so apperteyneth to Christ alone, that he only,
and no man ever after him could minister this supper. ^or so it follows: The
act was finished on the cross, as the story does plainly manifest it to them
that have eyes. Now this bluddy sacrifice is made an end of, the supper is
finished. This seems to agree in part with Carolostadius, in that it denies
the words spoken by Christ at his last supper, to perteyne to our Eucharist.
But it agrees much more with the sansie of Petrus de Bruis author of the sect
of the Albigenses. For he taught directly, that only once, to wit in the last
supper which Christ made with his Apostles, was his body truly given under the
form of P^^^^^ Clunia ^^nsis in Tractatu de sa^^^fi^^o M^^^a.
bread, but afterward never, as witnesses Petrus Cluniacensis, who then lived,
and re^uted this error of his. Whereas then these gospellers will have the
words of Christ's institution quit removed from the administration of the
supper, some perhaps would gladly know in what sort they would have it
ministered. Forsooth as before the Caluinsts of F^is^la^d, and Anabaptists in
Westphalia used. Which M. Fox declares thus. Here ^^x vbi supra
now follows the administration of the supper of the Lord, which I will take at
Christ's hands after the resurrection, although Communion with - out Christ's
words
other men will not be ashamed to bring their wicked Councels or foolish
inventions for them. And it came to pass, as Christ satte at meat with them,
he took bread, blessed it, and brake it, and gave it unto them, and their eyes
were opened, and they knew him, and he vanished out of their sight, and the
Apostles did know him in breaking of bread. Here we learn what is the supper,
not after the wicked Councels and foolish inventions of men (for so I think it
would be, although by error the p^^nter set it otherwise) but after the Lords
own order, as these men forsooth have taken it even at Christ's own hands; and
that is, that 3. or 4. of the brethren go together, take bread, bless it,
Objections against this communion.
and give it one to an other, without using any farther ceremony, or words of
Christ, or consecration. But here arise 3. or 4. great difficulties. One,
whether there 1
must necessarily be other meat and provision besides the bread of the
Eucharist, as was at this supper, whence these men take the pattern of their
communion. A second, how it will stand with the sincerity of their ^
gospel to bless the bread, which blessing they so generally detest, the
English and Scottish communion books refuse, and a late English Doctor in a
large treatise has Calls. against the Cros^^. art. 4. and per ^o^^ ^^bium.
condemned, as superstitious, wicked, and magical: which words truly must needs
proceed from a very profane and Paganical heart and mouth, considering that
Christ our Savior him self used it, as here these martyrs tell us. 3
Thirdly, which perhaps is greatest of al, how they can frame their communion
by this pattern, where is no mention of drink. And very probable conjecture
there is, that Christ used none, for that (as here the story is rehearsed)
after Christ had delivered them the bread, their eyes were opened, and Christ
forthwith vanished out of their sight. And join for a fourth, that if the
breaking of 4
this bread were but breaking of common bread, as our M. Jewel will have it, and
an act of hospitality; then follows Ievvel Reply against Doct. Harding. art.
^. Diuis. ^^.
it, that the pattern whereby they frame out their communion, teaches them a
communion of such common bread as is used at every hosterie, at every Inn
and alehouse, and therefore they can not with reason blame Catholics, if they
make no more esteem of it. But how soever this ^al out, M. Fox with his
Martyrs proceeds oh, and will needs prove, that as Christ in the Christ's
words and order ^e^^^^rom the supper.
place before noted, so his Apostles had no other communion, nor ministered it
in any otherwise. For it follows: Here also it seems to me the Apostles to
follow their master Christ, and to take the right use of the Sacrament, and
also to teach it to those that were converted to Christ, as mention is made in
the Acts of the Apostles, where it is said: They continued in the Apostles
doctrine and fellowship, in breaking of bread and prayer, and they did break
bread in every house etc. By all which, he laboreth to persuade, that the
Institution of Christ, as it is described by the Evangelists, Matthew. 26. Marc.
14. Luc. 22. should quit be removed from the administration of the supper, and
only bread broken by the minister. Which if he do, and withal tell and
pronounce to the co^municants the Lords death, he makes unto them a persite
and absolute supper, according as these men have received it at the Lords own
hands.

And the very same ministration of the supper, I find The Scottish (...).
practiced by the Scottish martyrs* as writes their friend and pat^^^^
Buc^a^an. About the year 1545. one George Buc^a^^^. Histo^. S^^t^^. lib. ^^.
(...)* ^^^.
Se^^^carde was a^ S. Andrews to be burnt. When the day of execution came,
the keeper of the castle and his servants ready to go to breakfast, asked
George whether it would please him to take part with them. He answered he would
with a very good will. But first (quoth he) I request you to sit down here at
the table with me, and give me leave to make you a short collation, and that I
may pray upon the bread, which as brethren in Christ (...) to eat, and so bid
you farewell. In the mean season the table was covered, and bread being set on
George began to entreat shortly and plainly of Christ's supper, his pains and
death, about half an hour. Then he exhorted them especially to mutual love,
and that they would become perfect members of Christ, who continually prays to
his father for us that our sacrifice may with him be auayleable to life
everlasting. When he had thus spoken and Scottish communion (...) ^^^ Christ's
words.
yielded thanks to god* he brake a l^fe of bread, and reached to every one a
piece of it, and likewise wine after him self had drunk a little, and prayed
them all that now with him in this Sacrament they would remember the death of
Christ. Afterward saying grace, he retired him self in to his chamber. By these
examples we learn, how the communion is rightly ministered: namely without al
words of Christ's Institution: only that bread be divided among the brethren
and sisterne, and they willed to love one an other, The ^^^zz^^ communion.
and remember the Lords death.

Which seems generally to be the form of the Zuingl. Tom. ^. Expositio.
^^d^^ Christiana fol. 563. 564. Bullin. in epi^^stol* ad Hebr^^^, cap. ^^.
Pa^^^ ^^^^uit^^rtur in ^^^^^^is.
communion among the Zuinglians in Suizzerland. For as Zuinglius him self, and
Bullinger his successor rehearse the manner of it: The people ^it al a long in
order upon forms, and give ^are to one who reads to them the 13. chapter of
S. John's gospel. In the mean season is bread carried about in ba^ke^s or
pa^ia^s, and wine in glasses. One man gives bread to an other, and likewise of
the wine. Thus ends this communion, or Sacrament of the supper, as Zuinglius
terms it. And Musculus earnestly disputing against S. Chrysostom, Musculus in
^^^^ c^^munibus. cap. de cana D^mi^^ pa. 336.
for that he attributed great force to the words of Christ, by which there is
made in the Sacrament a sanctification and alteration far surpassing the power
of man (as S. Chrysostom thought) among other things thus reproves him: It is
not needful that Christ should now again sanctify by a second repetition that
which once for all he has sanctified by the deed and word of his Institution.
For that Institution once done has sanctified the Sacramental signs for the
churches use even to the end of the world. And that being once done by him, is
of force through al churches to the worlds end without any other repetition or
iterat^on thereof. Once for all he said, This is my body This cup is the new
testament in my blud. Do this in remembrance of me: and by these words once for all he instituted and sanctified this ceremony, and turned the bread from a
natural use to a Sacramental. By which Communion without Christ's words
words, especially conferred with those of Bullinger and Zuinglius before
rehearsed, and the practice of that church, a man may perceive that al these
English, Scottish, Geneuian, and Suizzer Protestants agree in removing Christ's
words from the supper, and account the supper very sufficiently and gospellike
administered, if the brethern divide bread and drink amo^ng them selves in
memory of Christ, without any new mentioning of his institution, which being
once done by him self, serves for all, without any more a do or new repetition
See the. 5. chapter number. 4.
of the same. And this is the very exact form of the Scottish communion or
supper now in practice, as hereafter shall be declared.

Where there is no use of bread and wine, or no Beza epist. Theolog. ^. pa. 27.
store thereof, as it chances at some certain time; there the Lords supper is
orderly ministered, if in steed of bread and wine, that be taken which supplieth
the place of bread and wine, either by common use, or at such times. And he
observes rightly The supp^^ minist^^^ (...)^^^ In ^^ ^^ wine, and
enough Christ's meaning, who not for novelties sake, takes in steed of bread
and wine, such things as have though not equal, yet like proportion or analogy
of food. As in like m^^ner, if water be wanting, and yet the baptizing of some
child may not well be differred with edification, I truly would baptize with any
other liquor, as well as with water. By warrant Baptism vv^ ^ut water.
whereof, in many places of Christendom, where bread and wine is hand to come
by, and stockfish with single ale more common and in usual diet, there the
Protestant communion is well and orderly ministered, if the minister with 3. or
4. brethern go together into a tavern and eat a little stockfish, and drink a
draught of ale, and he bid them to remember the Lords death. For whereas the
words of Christ's institution are no waves necessary, but al depends on the
faith of the brethren which communicate: and here we learn, that bread and
wine are not so requisite, but that other meat and drink may supply the want
thereof: whereas in this communion which here I note, is both the matter and
also the form of a Protestant supper, who can deny but it is a ve^^e complete
and perfect communion? And that not only if a man use stockfish, but also by
like reason any other meat that nourishes though not in equal degree as bread
does, yet in some like sort. And then as any flesh, ^apon, p^g, goose, beef or
mutton may serve for the one kind, so match-beer, strong or small ale, good
water, metheglin, or any such used liquor may serve for the other. So that we
now draw somewhat nigh to the perfection and esse^t al form of that which ou^
gospellers call the supper of the Lord, which we see The (...) communion.
may be had at every breakefast, at every dinner, and supper, and beuer, where
there is bread and beer, or cheese and water, o^ flesh and wine, or any such
^. things, which nourish our bodies as bread and wine do, though not in so
large manner: yet with this sober caution, that the brethren which meet at
this communion, remember the death of Christ, and use these other kinds of
meat not for love of ^^eltie, but for love of Christian liberty and hatred of
Papistrie: because forsooth they will show, that they hate the Catholic church,
which uses superstitiously (as they suppose) those only 2. elements.

But now, let us go one step farther, and put the case, that 3. or 4. gossips
meet together at a drinking, and after much good how should talk, in sine they
remember them selves, and then one wills the other to remember the death of
the Lord, and so drink one to the other, and A Protestant communion.
eat some such gossiping meat, as they have brought, some applepie or flawne,
or so forth: why is not this as true a Protestant communion, as any yet
mentioned? Here is the matter of the communion, that is, some food that
nourishes the body: here is faith which is the form, here is remembrance of
Christ and his death: and then what wants to make up and perfect the
communion? Truly I can not imagine any default touching the substance and
essence, but that this is as full and complete a communion, as any at this day
ministered in England or Scotland. For that which perhaps some man may object to
be here wanting, vz. a minister, is an objection more ^it for a Papist or
Catholic, then a Protestant or heretic. Among whom very few there are, who
have written, especially books of common places, but they discourse at large,
women no less then men to be priests of the new testament, although for manners
sake they may not in all (...) may (...). and minister the supper.
places use and practice such their priesthod: and I in part agree with them,
that every woman is as ^it and lawful a minister, as any who ministers in the
Scottish and English congregations. Certainly Luther has made long treatises
and heapeth tegether a number of allegations out of the holy scriptures, to
prove all that are baptized, women no less then men to be priests, and by
virtue thereof to have power both to preach and minister sacraments. In the
second Tome of his works he particularly rehearses al ecclesiastical
functions, and proves as well as he can, that the execution of them al, is a
like common to all that are baptized. Among much other talk to that purpose
thus he writes: The first office of a Luther T^m. ^. lib. de Ministr^ ecclesia
institu^ndu. sol. 3^2.
priest is to preach the word, and of this depend all the rest. But this is
common to al. Next is to baptize: and this also may al do, even women; and when
they baptize, they execute a lawful priesthod and an ecclesiastical ministry,
which is proper to priests only. The third is to consecrate bread and wine. But
this also is common ^o al, no less then priests. And this I aduouch by the
authority of Christ him self saying do this in remembrance of me. This Christ
spoke to al there present and to come afterward, who so ever should eat that
bread, and drink that wine Ergo what so ever was there bestowed, was bestowed
on al. Nether can the Papists oppose any thing against this, besides their
Fathers Councels and custom This also is witnessed by S. Paul, who 1. Cor.
11. repeating this applies it to all the Corinthians, making them al as him
self was that is to say, consecrators etc. Omnes faci^n^ tales quali^ ips^
suit, ^. consecratores.
Forthwith after a few words he concludes: Igitur si quod maius est, collatum
est omnibus, etiam mulieribus etc. If then that which is greater be given
indifferently to al, men and women, I mean the word and baptism; then that
which is less I mean to consecrate the supper, is given also to them. Which
argument as a most principal, he urges again a few leaves after: When the
office of teaching the word is Ibi sol. 369. o^ ^urs^^ sol. 372.
granted to any, together therewith all that is used in the church, is granted
I mean to baptize, to consecrate, to bynd, to lose, to pray, to judge. For the
office of preaching the gospel is the chief, and a very Apostolical office,
which gives the foundation to al other offices, which al are built thereon.
The Ibi lib. ratio^^^ iudicij ecclesia etc. sol. 373.
like has he in sundry places and books. Only he requires, that whereas the
right and power thus to minister is common to all that are baptized, women no
less then men, yet that nether men nor women use this right of theirs, but
where there is want of better ministers, and then also, that they do it with
modesty. To which purpose and clearing of his assertion he makes an objection
to himself in an other book thus: But the Papists object the saying of the
Apostle, Let women hold there peace in the church. Ibid. lib. ^^ ^brogand^
^issa priuata.
Wherefore the ministry of the word is not common to them and al Christians.
Here unto he answers. I confess, that it is not permitted to women to
speak, as nether to men that be dumb. For I believe that albeit this right is
common VV^men^ pre^ching justified.
to al, yet no man can, nor ought to practice it, but only he who is fitter
then other: and to him other are bound to yield place, that order and comlynes
may be kept. And to speak (in public assembly) besides the spirit, there is
required a good voice, eloquence, memory, and other natural gifts, which who
so wants, he must yield his right to an other. So Paul forbids women to
speak, not altogether, but in the church, that is to say, where are men able
to speak; and that for order and honesties sake. For a man is more fit then a
woman, and the spirit does more inspire men then women: and this is the
meaning of Paul's place. Otherwise how should Paul alone withstand the holy
ghost, who says Joel 2. your daughters shall prophecy: and Act. 21. Philip had
4. daughters that prophesied. Out of al which and much more to like effect, he
draws this conclusion. Order therefore and honesty requires, that men
speaking, women should hold their peace. But where men speak not, there it is
necessary, that women speak. By all which we see, that the word of god
forbids not women to prophecy (that is in the new gospel to preach, no not
amongst men, much less amongst women) which is the highest office, and
consequently nether to minister the communion and baptism, which is a great
deal less, if so be that they have better learning and utterance then men
have, as often times it chances: or if the minister through negligence and
ignorance be not able to preach the word, which perhaps in Scotland and England
is very common. And of Martyr ^^ ^. Cor. cap. ^^. ^. 5. Z^^n. Tom. ^. in
^^plan^tio. artic. 17. so. 27. In the Harb^rough ^nn^ 155^. H. ^.
this same opinion with Luther, are Peter Martyr, and Huldrike Zuinglius. Of
the same opinion were the first reformers of our English church, M. Horn
bishop (so called) of Winchester, and others, who of this matter write thus:
There is so much required in a spiritual minister, that al men be not meet for
the office, and therefore with good reason women be debarred from it. Albeit at
some time it pleases god to use their Ministry. Wherefore me think even in
this point we must use a certain moderation, and not absolutely in every wise
to debar them herein, as it shall please god to serve Christ. I pray you what
more vehemence uses S. Paul in forbidding women to preach, then in forbidding
them to uncover their heads? And yet you know in the best reformed churches of
al Germany, all the maids be barehedded, which the preachers and learned men
make no great account of. As much to say, that it is a thing indifferent for
women to preach and minister the Sacraments, and may well be suffered, no less
then it is that maids go with their heads uncovered, which S. Paul forbids
with like vehemency as he does their preaching, and yet the best reformed
churches of al Germany with the learned men Al Ecclesiastical power derived
from a woman. Anno 1. Elizab. c. 1. and 3
and ministers there, make no great account of it. It were very easy to prove
this by a number of other Protestant writers and authorities, especially
English, where a woman being supreme head of the church, from whence al
ecclesiastical power and authority is derived to bishops and VVhitegift co^tra
T. C. Tract ^. cap. 3. diuis. 33.
ministers, who having in her (as writes my I. Archbishop of Canterbury) the
supreme government in all causes, and over al persons, as she does exercise the
one (apperteyning to matters civil and temporal) by the Lord Chauncellor, so
does she the other (concerning the church and religion) by the Archbishops;
what reasonable man can deny or doubt, but that a woman, in whom is the fulness
of al ecclesiastical government, may give unto a woman some inferior piece
thereof, no less then she gives the exercise of many parts unto the
Archbishop, who receives al his order and power from her. And whereas king
Harry imparted the exercise of his like supreme ecclesiastical regiment to my
L. Crumwel Earl of Essex his subhead in the church of England, and vicegerent
for and concerning ^a^ Act^ and monument^ pa. 52^.
al his jurisdiction ecclesiastical: who can with any probability of reason,
yea without incurring manifest treason deny, but that as K. Harry a man gave
unto my Lord of Essex; so the Queen a woman may give unto my Lady of Essex or
any other, al her jurisdiction ecclesiastical: especially Parliament. Elizab.
anno ^. cap. ^.
for that it is by supreme authority so precisely defined, that the Queen may
assign, name, and authorize whom so ever she shall think meet and convenient,
and for such and so long time, such persons being naturally borne subject (as
Ladies and women are) to use and execute under VVemens pre^ching iustifi^^
her, al manner of jurisdiction spiritual or ecclesiastical. And if the pattie
thus assigned, named and authorized, be also well spoken and learned, then not
only man's law, but also gods (as Luther and the English doctors have before
taught) justifies such wemens both preaching, and al other ministering. For if
they may have the greater authority to preach (and yet to be supreme head of
the church is much more) then al inferior offices belonging to the edification
of the church, a^ baptizing, ministering the communion, binding, losing, calling
Synodes etc. may much more be exercised by them, as Luther disputes, and
manifest reason convinces, and our English Jewel together Jew. Reply contra
Hard. a^^. 1. diuis. 30. pa. 69.
with the Q^ea ler of this new Divinity in Cambridge, teaches. Who by
authority of S. Fabianus an ancient Pope and Martyr 1400 years sithence, and
also of S. Bernard, vvil needs prove against D. Harding, The Z^^ngli^ supper.
that in the Primitive church, women no less then men made the sacrifice of
the altar, and that of bread and wine, after the order of Melchisedech.
Wherefore to return to our matter of making up an euangelical communion,
hereof it appears I suppose sufficiently, that 3. or 4. Euangelical gossips
meeting together, and eating and drinking in such ^o^t, as has been said, make
a very Fox Act^ ^ monum. page 70. Luther in orthodox. eccles. Tigurina
con^^^^^. tracta^ 3. sol. 111. exim^e stult^^.
true, real, perfect and absolute communion touching al substance required by
the Protestant doctrine. And therefore I vvish them selves to judge, whether
Martin Luther that reverend Father (as M. Fox calls him) understanding
thoroughly their meaning and sense, had not some cause to say, that Christ had
been very unwise he uses a more wicked term, which I vvil nor English) to
have instituted a peculier supper: whereas otherwise the Ib^ tractat. ^^ sol.
66.
world is full of such suppers, quum caenarum huiusmodi totus mundus alioqui
plenus sit: which after they have turned and tossed so many ways as they
can, vvil prove nothing, but (as Luther affirms it) a poor and vulgar
banquet, or rather a rustical compotation. For if 3. or 4. women Im^ rustica
commpotatio.
so meeting and gossiping, make such a communion, then 3. or 4. men and women,
and consequently as many men and boys may serve to do the like: and so there
is no rustical cortage where there is a man, his wise and a servant, no
farmar, no Inholder, no tavern or vittayling house, but the common tables
have ordinarely (if they be Christian men who eat there) as good and
substantial co^munions, as any are practiced in the most solemn meeting of the
brethren in any congregation through out al Scotland, England, Zurike, yea or
Geneua it self; whether ye regard the matter of the Sacrament, which is,
though not white bread and good wine, yet brown bread and small drink,
which suffiseth; or the form, which is nothing certain, but only privatiue,
that the presence of Christ be assuredly removed, and Christ in cogitation at
the most, thought upon; or the minister, for which the good man, or (if she be
better tongued) his wife may se^^e as well, as any minister in Scotland or
Geneua.

OF CALVIN AND THE CALVINISTS OPINION CONCERNING THE SACRAMENT.
The Argument.
Caluins high speeches and amplifications of his supper. Wherein is showed by
a number of plain testimonies, that he acknowlegeth (at the lest, as his
manifest words import) a true and real presence of Christ; body and blud in the
Sacrament, in as plain and clear manner as any Lutheran.

Calvin notwithstanding such high and counterfeit speeches, which he of purpose
affects to deceive his reader, yet still thinks of the Sacrament as a mere
Zuinglian: and by 5. diverse crafty special degrees, besides a sixth more
general, against the words and sentences before cited, induces his
Sacramentarie heresy. The first is, that he denies to the supper Christ's body
and blud, and in steed thereof puts some real virtue derived from his body
and blud by the holy ghost, which serves as a canduit-pipe to that effect:
wherein he many ways contradicts him self.

The next degree is, that he denies (as al old Sacramentaries commonly do)
even this deriuation of any such virtue, and allows no other communion of
Christ's body to the supper, then is had out of the supper by only believing. In
which sort Christ's flesh and blud is received as well or better in hearing a
sermon, then in receiving the supper. Only there is in the supper joined to
such receiving an external sign of bread and drink.

A third degree is, that Calvin and the Caluinists teach, not only that Christ's
body and blud is better received cut of the supper then in the supper, better
by a sermon or reading the scripture then by their Sacramental bread and wine,
but also acknowledge no manner communication of Christ's body either real or
spiritual as proper to the supper. Whereof because it would f^low, that their
supper were altogether superfluous, they used a new point of doctrine, that the
Sacramental bread and wine served for seals, and testimonies, or ratifications
of Christ's body and blud received before by the means of faith.

For that the doctrine of seals is dangerous, and in deed very false, Calvin
and the rest proceed on: and that their supper be not altogether frivolous, he
says it is ordained for to help weak memories. And this is the true
conclusion of the Sacramentarie doctrine generally, to make no more of the
Sacrament then a mere rude picture or sign of Christ's body and blud absent,
void of al grace and virtue.

Besides the former points, Calvin and the Caluinists the more to disgrace the
Sacraments of baptism and the supper, compare them and make them no better
then the Jewish ceremonies. Which doctrine besides that it is most directly
opposite to Caluins first preaching, wherein ^e so highly magnifieth the
supper, is also a^ directly opposite to the whole course of the new testament,
which every where denies al grace to the Sacraments of Moses law, and
attributes al grace to the Sacraments of Christ: gospel: and the contrary
doctrine unworthily confounds the gospel of Christ with the law of Moses.

The Caluinian communion is particularly conferred with a like ceremony used
of old among the Jews: and against Calvin and Beza it is by plain
demonstration out of their own doctrine and writings proved, that their supper
is nothing better then a mere graceles Jewish supper or ceremony.

Bezaes preferring of their supper before the Jewish, is declared to be vain
and Sophistical. Answer made to Calvin, who with other Protestant writers,
match the Christian Sacrament^ with the Jewish, upon a falsified sentence of S.
Paul. The definition of Caluins supper.

Because the Zuinglians and Caluinists stick not to grant the comparison
bandled in the last paragraph: it is here farther declared, that the Sacrament
after Caluins doctrine is much inferior to the like Sacrament (either the
Paschal supper, and especially Manna) of the Jews. Which thing is showed by
manifest reason and particular conference of those Sacraments together cut of
the writing and teaching of the Caluinists: which also prove both their
Sacraments (baptism and the supper) to apperteyne rather to the law of Moses,
then to the gospel of Christ.

CHAP. 3.
AGainst the premises it will be replied (I suppose) that how so ever I, either
upon pretense of Luthers authority, or of mine own conceit, disgrace and
abase the Zuinglian communion; yet it is well known, that their writers and
Doctors much amplify and advaunce the worthiness thereof: as in sundry their
books, Apologies, and Commentaries is manifest. Where unto I answer: that
true it is, some such places in some of their writers are sound; but in such
sort as little commends their co^munions. For as rebels, when they have
withdrawn them selves from their lawful How the Sacramentanes some times
magnify their Sacrament.
king appointed them by gods ordinance, and framed to them selves one of their
own crew; in the beginning, or so long as he please them, they much extolle
and magnify him; but upon the first displeasure and coffeehouse, he is
pulled down again, and brought to his old room, or perhaps served a worse
turn: and as tyrannes upon the sudden advaunce their minions and favorites,
heaping on them al riches and honors; whom afterward upon better consideration
of their small deserts, or some other light occasion they despoyle, abase,
despise, and perhaps hang out of the way: in like sort these gospellers having
rejected the Sacrament which Christ ordained, and in place of it invented a toy
of their own: for some time and in some place against their adversaries; or
for some other occasion, much praise and magnify it. But after when the heat
is past, and they by learning come to examine it, or by other force of truth
are driven thereunto, or without contention speak of it as it is, and as they
think; then are they constrained to put away al those former borrowed feathers,
and leave it as pild, as Aesopes daw: that is, they are then driven to confesle
it to be as poor and beggarly a bitte of bread and suppe of drink, as any
used at common tables. And this the reader shall find not only in the old
Sacramentaries, but also in the new.

(...) Ecclesi^ in d^^^^ne Com^tum Man^seldi^ etc. an. 1559 fol. 121. 121
Germany, in the Confession of their faith, put a great difference between the
old Sacramentaries and the new, saying, that the old Sacramentaries, that is,
the Carolostadians, the Zuinglians, the Anabaptists, and such like, always
taught the Sacrament of the altar to be nothing else but an external Nihil
aliud quam externu^ at otiosum signum.
and idle sign without the body and blud of Christ, and that it served only
for a token to distinguish Christians from Pagans, whereas the new teach
otherwise: and Calvin to continue and maintain such a conceit, of al other
seems to speak of this matter most divinely and mystically; and with
strange affectation of high speech may make unlearned and unstable sowles
believe, that he has a wonderful deep fetch in this case above the rest of
common ministers and writers, whom M. B. in these sermons much follows: yet
who so thoroughly fifteth and examineth Calvin, shall find in the end, that he
has no other opinion of their supper, then has Carolostadius, or Zuinglius,
or Occolampadius, or the Anabaptists, or the Scottish and English martyrs, or
who Caluins inconstancy.
else so ever thinks of it most basely and beggarly. For let us by articles
consider, how he runs up and down, praises and dispraiseth, makes and
marieth it at one time mounteth alost and flies in the air like a bird,
straight ways creeps on the ground like a beast: but in ^ine, falls
headlong in to the common dongeon with the rest of his brethren, and whether
in deed the very course and sway of their whole doctrine carries them.

At some times he speaks and writes so supernaturally as though he were a
very Lutheran, defending the real presence: as for example: I say (says
Calvin) Calvin Instit. lib. 4. ca. 17. number. 11. 10.
that in the mystery of the supper by the signs of bread and wine Christ is
truly delivered unto us: I mean his body and blud, to the end we may grow in
to one body with him, and he thereby refresh us with the eating of his flesh
and drinking of Christ's flesh wonderfully received in the Sacrament.
his blud. And although it may seem incredible, that in so great distance of
places (as is heaven from earth) he should pass down to us, and become our
food; yet let us remember, how far the power of the holy ghost excedeth our
sense, and how fond a thing it is for us to go about to measure his infinite
Beyond ^^ reason.
power, by our small capacity. Wherefore that cur mind or reason can not
comprehend, let our faith conceive. What Lutheran would require more then here
Calvin confesses? Or what more pregnant and effectual words can be desired to
declare the verity of Christ's real presence, not in figure, trope, or
signification, which wit and reason can castly comprehend, but truly and
verily, so as Christ, I say Christ's body and blud, notwithstanding so great
distance of place, as is between the highest heaven and this low vale, is here
truly delivered by the inexplicable force and strength of the holy ghost, which
only is able to work such a miraculous conjunction. Again. If any I^^. cap.
17. number. 32.
man demand of me how this is done, I am not ashamed to confess the mystery
to be higher, then that I can either comprehend it with my wit, or declare it
with my tongue: and Magis experior quam intelligo.
to speak the truth, I rather find it by experience, then understand it.
Therefore the truth of god, wherein I may safely rest, here I embrace without
scruple. He pronounces his flesh to be the meat of my soul, and his blud the
drink. To him I offer my soul to be nourished with such food. In his holy
supper he wills me under the symboles of bread and wine to Christ's flesh
truly received under the symbol of bread.
take, eat and drink his body and blud. I nothing dout, but he truly gives
it, and I receive it. And that his meaning is Christ's true body to be not
sig^^at^uely or tropically but most really and truly present with the bread,
he expresses Cal^. de^ana Domini.
in his little book De caena domini by an apt similitude: Exemplu^ valde
propriu^ in re simili habe^^u etc. We have a maruelou^ apt example in a like
matter. When the Lord would, that the holy ghost should appear in the baptism
of Christ, ^e represented him under the figure of a dove. I^^n Baptist
rehearing the story says, that he saw the holy ghost descending. If we
consider the matter well, we shall find that ^e saw nothing but a dou^. For the
essence of the holy ghost i^ invisible. Yet because he well knew that vision to
be to empty figure, but a most sure sign of be ^resence of the holy ghost, ^e
doubts not to affirm that ^e saw him, because he was represented or made
present in such sort as he could bear. So in the communion of Christ's body and
blud: the mystery is spiritual, which nether can be seen with eyes, nor
comprehended Christ^ (...) (...) to the Sacrament.
b^ man's wit. Therefore is it showed by signs and figures; yet so, that the
figure is not a simple and bare figure; but joined to his verity and ^^stance.
Justly therefore is the bread called the body of Christ, because it does not
only figure it, but also present or offer it unto us. This is a plain
declaration, that now Calvin vvil not separate Christ's body from the Sacrament
as far as heaven is from earth, but join it thereto as truly as the holy ghost
was to that dove, where he was without doubt present truly, really
substantially. And this being so, is it not a great shame (vv ^ some say to
charge Calvin and the Caluinists with contempt of the Sacrament, and to say,
that they have no other opinion of it, then Zuinglius, Carolostadius, Calu.
Institut. lib. 4 cap. 17 number. 14.
and those other forenamed Protestants? Doubtless so he complains: The
adversary slander ^e ^ ^aith Calvin) that I measure this mystery with the
squire of human reason, Ca^^^ for the real presence.
and gods power by the course of nature. But who so ever shall taste our doctrine
herein, shall be rapt into admiration of gods secret to ver. We teach that
Christ descends unto us as well by the external sign, as by the spirit: that
the flesh of christ enters in to us to be our food: that La chair ent^^
^^sg^es a (...)
Christ truly with the substance of his flesh and blud does give life to our
sowles. In the e few words who so perceives not many miracles to be ^onte^^ed
is more then a dolt ^lu^quam, ^^ (...) (...).
These words and other to the same effect are common with ^aluin, as, that the
symbol does not only signify r^ figure but truly also deliver the thing which
it figureth: that it bath the verity which it signifies, conio^ned with it:
vere Ibid. (...). 21.
exhibet quod figura^ adiunctam secum habet veritate^. Vbi signum est, ibi res
signata vere exbibetur. Where the sign is, Ibid. number. 10. ^^ m in Ha^^^^ia i^
Matt^ cap. 20. ^. 20.
there also the thing signified thereby, is truly delivered Nether must we
suppose the sign to be desti^u^e of the truth signified, except we will make
god a de^e^uer* ^or true it is, and we must needs confess, that the sacrament
compriseth the visible sign whereunto is joined the thing signified, which is
the verity of the same. In which kind of vein and manner of writing he runs
on so lustely, that in his last Admonition Calu^^. Adm^^ ^^ ^lti^a pa. ^3.
to Ioachimus VVestphalus, the principal minister and preacher of Hamburg, he
boldly avouches his doctrine in this point to agree with the Lutheran
Confession of ^uspurge, and also with Melanchthon penman thereof. In which
Confession, the Sacrame^taries no less then Anabaptists Sl^^dan lib. ^ (...).
and 109.
a^e expressly condemned: and the I egates of the 4. Sacramentarie Imperial
cities then present, were en ^o^ced to make and put up to the Emperor Charles
a separate Confession of their ^aith, because the Luthera^ an^o 1530.
then called Protestant-princes and Cities, for this special opinion, rejected
them* and would in no wise admit them to ^oyne with them in that Confession of
th^i^s commonly Zu^gl^^^ (...) a ^ ^^^ (...).
called Confessio Au^ust ina. As also the next year after, when certain cities
of the Suizzers, which were then sacrame^taries* sued to the Protestants of
Germany to be received in to league with them, which for some respect the
Germans much desired: yet in ^i^e the matter being thoroughly debated* the
Duke of Saxony chief Idem lib. ^. ^^. 119. ^^. 1531. Non (...) ^o^^ ta^^^^
cu^^^^^ ^ ^ll^^ (...).
of the Confession of Auspurg, made them answer, that for so much as they
followed an other doctrine concerning the Lords supper, it was not lawful to
enter any league with them. And albeit their society by reason of their power
and forces might stand the Germans in great steed, yet he could not so ^^ch
regard that, lest gods heavy hand should fall upon him, ^ the scripture
witnesses it has fallen on others who to for^^^^^ them silues, have used the
aid and succor of such heretics as they were. So that Calvin in saying he
agrees with the Confession of Augusta, consequently must needs say, that he
condemns the sacramentarie heresy, and acknowlegeth Christ truly and really
present in the sacrament, in such sort and sense* as the Confession of Augusta
and Protestant princes of that Confession did.

VVestphalus (...) (...) (...). 7^.
VVestphalus seems to make some doubt, whether Calu^n in this point of
controversy thought as a Zuinglian, or a Lutheran. His words are: Calvin uses
such art in handling this matter, he leaves his reader so doubtful and
uncertain, what to judge of him: he shadoweth his speech with such colors,
that sometime it yeldeth a consession of faith like ^^luin^ ^ug^^^g.
to our (Lutheran) churches: ^e seems to reject the doctrine of Zuinglius,
and to believe, that the very body and blud of Christ is truly present and
given in the supper with the bread and wine. But yet in fine having conferred a
number of Caluins words and writings to gether, he resolves V^^st. ^^^^. ^^.
71. 7^. 73. 74. 7^. 7^.
the contrary* that he is a ^anke Zuinglian, and uses this crastie ^^ueyance
of dark and obscu^e speeches only to abuse his readers and deceive them more
perniciousty, of which speeches having recited a number* he thus concludes of
them: Hinc ^uilibet fit manifestum (says he) Caluinum haerere in eodem caeno
etc. By view and consideration pa. 76. 71.
of ^^ese places, every man may see, that Calvin sticks in the same mire, in
which Zuinglius and other sacramentaries have walowed, and that he is stirred
up with their spirit; and that Calvin a mere zuinglian.
under this crafty iugling, he sings the old song of Zuinglius and
Oecolampadius, and iumbleth in his figures and significations, taking away the
true presence of Christ's body and blud. which as VVestphalus at large very well
proves by laying down a number of testimonies out of him, so I will make it
manifest by declaring 4. or 5. special means and degrees (besides a sixth which
is general) used by Calvin to that effect.

The first is, by removing away the true and real flesh of our Savior, and in
place thereof allowing us a true and real quality and virtue thereof, to be
sent down and imparted to us from Christ in heaven, by a new kind of conduit
pipe which he has invented. In des^^^ption whereof albeit he seem not well
stayed, for in one place of his commentaries upon S. John, when belike he was
Calvin in Joan. ^ap. 6. v. 5^.
of that opinion, he teaches that the flesh of Christ is the conduit -- pipe,
which traduceth and powers upon us life, which is intrinsecally resident in
the divine nature, the founteyne of life. Joan. 1. 4. but in his Harmony, as
also in his Calvin* Institut. lib. 4. ^a. 17. number. 1^.
Institutions, when belike he thought that opinion somewhat to true and to much
sauouring of a real presence (for if the flesh of Christ were the conduit pipe,
and brought to us the life, which is reside^t in the deity, then must the
flesh be communicated really unto us, for Caluins conduit-pipe.
otherwise it can no more serve for a conduit-pipe to convey in to us such
life, then a conduit-pipe distant a mile or 2. from a house serves to convey
water to the house, unto which it approaches nothing nigh) he resolves
otherwise, that the holy spirit is the conduitpipe, Calv. Harmoni^ in Matt.
cap. 26. ^. 26.
and the flesh of Christ gives life unto us for that the holy spirit causes
to flow down, and to be powered on us, life which is resident in the flesh
remaining in heaven: yet in fine he seems to choose rather this later sense,
and so not now joining the flesh and blud of Christ with the sign, by the
omnipotent power of god, but separating the one from the other as far as heaven
is from earth, of Christ's body communicated to us in the supper, thus he
vvriteth. I conclude and grant, that the body of Christ is given Calv. 1. C^r.
ca. 11. v. ^4.
us in the supper really (as they commonly speak) that is to say, truly, to
the end it may be wholesome food for our Note th^^ meaning.
sowles. I speak after the common fashion, but I mean, that our sowles are
fed with the substance of Christ's body to the intent we may be made one with
him: or (which is al one) that a V^ qu^dam (...) ex Christ^ ca^^^ ^^ not ^^ffusa
certain quickening virtue is peured on us cut of the flesh of Christ by the
holy ghost, although the flesh be far dista^t from us. Is not here a strange
kind of meaning? a strange declaration, so to declare his meaning, that his
meaning clean overthrows his words, whereof he pretends to give us the
meaning? For how match those words immediately Christ's body not ^n the sacrament
but some virtue thereof.
going before with this meaning: The body of Christ is given us in the supper
really, I mean the substance of his body, or (which is al one) a virtue
proceeding out of his body. Is this al one to say, the body, and a virtue of
the body; a substance, or (which is al one) no substance, but an accident, a
quality? Does not the scripture most evidently according to common sense and
reason, distinguish between Christ or the body of Christ, and virtue proceeding
from him? which at some times wrought so, that al men desired ^^^. 6. 19.
to touch him, because virtue proceeded from him, and healed all that were
present and desired so to touch him: at an other time, when his body was in
like manner present to al, the virtue thereof healed one only person amongst a
number. Luc. ^. 46.
At an other time, it wrought the like benefit to persons many miles distant
from the place where his body M^^^^. ^. ^3 and ^^. ^^. ^^a^. 4. ^3. Luc. 1. 45.
was: at some other time it did no such benefit to many that were not only
in one place with him, but also touched and pressed and throng him, who were
never a whit the better therefore, but perhaps the worse. And yet forsooth is
it al one, to say, the body of Christ, or a virtue issuing from his body? Or
does this man that thus speaks in these most serious and divine matters, care
what he speaks? In the same place* going about as it were to moderate his
former plain spea^^es, he repeateth Calvin. ^^^ sup. ^. 24.
that we receive Christ remaining in heaven. And this communication of Christ
which is offered us in the supper, requires nether local presence nether that
he descend unto us, nether that his body be infinitely extended, nor any such
matter; but we receive him though so far distant from us as heaven is, for that
he causes from heaven to descend on us presently and truly the virtue of his
flesh. Al which in his Institutions he expresses more plainly by the
similitude of the Sun, (a similitude very familiar with Peter Martyr and
Institut. lib. 4. ca. 17. number. 1^.
others) that as the Sun with his beams shining over the earth, does after a
sort communicate his substance with it to the engendring, cherishing and
refreshing of the fruits thereof: so the spirit of Christ by his illumination
traduceth unto us the communion of Christ's flesh and blud, albeit the flesh it
self Ibid. ^^^. ^2.
enter not into us, no more then the Sun leaves his place in the heaven to
descend down to the earth. In Caluin^ contra^^ctions.
which words and all this manner of discourse, there appears a very plain and
sensible contradiction to his former talk. There, we had in the mysteries of
bread and 1
wine Christ truly delivered, I mean (quoth Calvin) his true body and blud,
which verity is truly conjoined with the symbol: here we have only a
quickening virtue flowing thence. There, Christ bad us under the symboles of
bread 2
and wine to eat his body, and drink his blud; and I nothing doubt (says
Calvin very religiously) but he truly reaches it me, and quin ill^ were
p^^^^gat.
I truly receive it: now he not only doubts of it, but also plainly denies
any such either delivery on Christ's part, or receiving on ours, and in steed
thereof places an irradiation or illumination as from the sun, by which a
certain grace and virtue out of Christ's flesh, as heat from the sun is
conveyed unto us. There, Christ descends 3
unto us; the flesh of Christ enters in to us: and notwithstanding so great
distance of place, the flesh of Christ penetrateth Institut. vbi supra* number. 10.
and comes down unto us: in tanta distantia locorum penetrat ad nos Christi
caro: here, al such ^enetration and application or communication is utterly
refused and condemned; and Christ descends no more, then does the sun out
of his sphere* no more (as he other where vvriteth) See the ^^^^ Diuisi^n.
^^st^t. lib. 4. ^^ 17. number* ^^.
then we ascend up in to heaven to him: mary yet we draw life from Christ, and
Christ from the substance of his flesh remaining in heaven powers life in to
us, albeit his flesh enter not in to us, quamu^s no^ ingrediatur in nos car^
Christ^. There the matter was so incredible, so mystical, so miraculous, 4
and far exceeding al capacity of man, that Calvin him self so sing lar a
prophet and instrument of the holy ghost (as his scholars term him) could
nether comprehend it by his wit, nor declare it by his tongue: here, the matter
is made so familiar and vulgar, as for the sun to shine in a sommets day, and
therefore nothing so profound and hard to understand as Calvin with his
hipocritical retorike would make the case seem. For what plain and rural
Caluinist can not comprehend this? But the manifold and manifest contradictions
of Calvin to him self in this article vvil yet appear more sensibly if we
continue to declare, by what other degrees he falls from his first high and
divine description of Christ's real presence in the supper, to a plain Zuinglian
and Carolostadian absence from the saine. Let this stand for the first, where
in steed of a true and real presence of Christ's body and blud delivered us
with the figure or sacrament, we have not the true body, but only a certain
virtue derived thence in to our sovvles: which two are as far different as is
heaven and earth; as is the body and soul of Cicero, and his wit or
learning, as is Caluins person and his heretical Institutions* S. Peter's coat
and his shadovv, a good feast and the smell thereof.

Calu. in Iean. ^a. 6. v. 4^. Calu. Institut. lib. 4. ca. 17. number. 5.
then in any other good action of praying or preaching, when so ever a
Christian man steadfastly believes in Christ. So he vvriteth more commonly, and
that according to the vulgar manner of al sacramentaries; as for What it is to
^at^ Christ in Caluins supper
example: We confess, that we eat Christ no other way, the^ by believing.
Again: We eat truly the flesh and drink the blud of Christ in the supper:
but this eating and dri^king is only by faith sicut nulla alia fingi potest, as
no other kind of eating or drinking can be imagined. Which eating by faith and
believing what it is, and what he means thereby, he declares in Cat^chis.
Calvin. Dominica 51.
his Catechism, where he gives this definition of it. In believing that
Christ is dead for our redemption, and is risen for our justification, our
soul eats the body of Christ spiritually. Which being so, this manner of
eating gives no title of preeminence, nor makes any kind of difference
between the supper, and any other time, place, or action, when so ever we
believe in like sort. Nether if all the eating consist in believing that Christ
is dead for our redemption, and risen for our justification, is there any more
virtue, force or quickening power (as Calvin speaks) derived to us from
Christ's flesh, when we eat the Protestant supper, then when we eat our own
dinner, in case we believe Christ to be our redeemer and iustifier, which
Christ no other wise received in the protestant supper, then out of it.
is the whole and only way to eat Christ, and then which there can be no other
imagined. The Protestant at this supper has perhaps a draught of wine and a
bit of bread more then the stander by, or then we at our dynner, but our faith
being as good as his, we spiritually and effectually and (touching al
deriuation of virtue from his flesh) as profitably eat Christ* if so be at
least we believe his death and resurrection as fully and sufficiently as does
the Protestant, which is easy to do. Wherefore let this stand for a second
degree of retracting his first judgment, that here not only the true and real
presence of the body and blud, but also al true and real deriuation or
participation of any virtue or force to be obtained in the supper, is utterly
removed: for so much as the supper conteyneth nothing singular above usual
Christian belief: and then doubtless no more real virtue is traduced from
Christ's flesh unto us supping, then to a child saying his belief, to a
preacher preaching a good sermon, or his audience attending him: to a rich man
geving his alms, or a poor man saying his Pater noster, or (if that phrase be
better liked) the Lords prayer. Al which believing Christ to have dyed for
their redemption, and risen for their justification as well as does a Caluinist
(and so believe they or else they are no Christians) eat Christ as truly, and
effectually, and really, as does any Caluinist, Calu. in Joan. ca. 6. v. 53.
54. (...) lib. cont^^ VV^^^phal^^ pa^sim.
when he communicates after Caluins guise. And this manner of eating is most
frequent in the books of Calvin and al Caluinists: as when Calvin writes,
that we have perpetually a spiritual and ordinary communication and eating of
the flesh of Christ out of the supper (as well as in the supper) and this eating
is wrought only by faith. Mary in the supper there is a figure adjoined
besides. As when Beza with a whole troop of ministers Beza (...) (...). 65.
pa. 2^5.
defines in the synod of Rochel, that albeit the upper be particularly
appointed for our mystical and piritual communication of Christ, ^et Christ is
received as fully cum omnibus suis don^s, ^tiam in simplici verbo, with all his
gifts and blessings, yea in a simple word or sermon. As when our English Jewel
a true disciple of Calvin and Zuinglius writes, Ievv^^ ^eply cont^a Har. ^.
art 5. Diuis. ^. pa. 323.
that Christ 6. Joan. speaks of the spiritual eating by faith, by which his
very flesh and very blud in deed and verily is eaten and drunken.
Notwithstanding we say (says he) that Christ afterward in his last supper unto
the same piritual eating, added also an outward Sacrament or figure. In which
sentences John Calvin, Beza with his Synodical ministers and M. Jewel teach
according to the true opinion of al Caluinists and Zuinglians, that in the
supper, Christ's flesh or presence is no otherwise, then out of the supper, at
any other time, save that then there is a piece of bread in figure thereof
joined to the spiritual eating. Which as ^al. Harm^. in Matthew. ca 26. v. 26.
(...) M^t. ca. 26 v 26. Calu Institu^^^ lib 4. ca. ^7. number. 3^.
Calvin truly accompteth among Christians to be very ordinary because it is
nothing else but to believe ^o it is so far from re^uiring any miraculous
descent of Christ to us, that according to Calvin and his folowers, we rather
work the miracle in ascending up in to heaven to Christ. For the right way to
find Christ and receive him in the supper (say they) is that our minds stay not
in earth, but mount ab f^ in to the celestial glory, where Christ dwells,
there ^^ embrace him. For the body of Christ is not infinite, but in one
certain place above the heavens. And so we enio^ his presence as well* as if he
descended unto us. And generally, albeit Calvin after his manner affecting an
obscurity in uttering his mind (partly for that he would seem to attribute
much to the Sacrament because of the great force of Christ's words and all the
ancient church; partly for that he coueteth to blind and circumvent his
ignorant reader; partly also and perhaps principally, for that he knevv not
well, what was his own opinion, or was never settled steadfastly in any one,
and therefore wist nor not very well how to express the same, as him Before
pa. 7^^
self confesses) may seem somewhat to differ from Christ no other wise
received in the supper then out of it
other Sacramentaries; yet his doctrine in most places agreing with them,
makes no difference at al between eating of Christ's flesh in the supper and
out of the supper acknowlegeth no other eating but spiritually by only faith,
of which spiritual eating the Sacramental bread (as Calu. in Joan. ca. 6. v.
54. 56. Calu. Institut. lib. 4. ca. 14. number. 14.
he writes) in the supper, is a figure, a seal and confirmation. And he is
greatly deceived (says Calvin, what so ever magnificence and statelines in
words I use) who supposes, that in the Sacrament anything is bestowed on him
more, then is offered in the word of God (in hearing a sermon) and he receives
with true faith. So writes also Peter Martyr a right Caluinist: We attribute
no more to the words Martyr in desensio. Eucharist. contra Gard^ne^um. par. 2.
regul. 5. pa. 61^.
of god then to the sacraments: nor more to these then to them. I add withal,
that touching the delivery and obteyning of Christ's body and blud, if ye
respect the thing and substance it self, we have it no more by the sacraments,
then by words. Nihilo magis habetur ex sacramentis quam verbis. Which thing
also Calvin sets down as a sure rule and infallible. Calu. Institut. lib.
4. ca. 14. number. 17.
Fixum maneat, non alias esse sacramentorum parts quam verbi Dei etc. Let this
stand for a sure ground, that there is no other office or action of the
Sacraments (baptism and Calu. in Joan. 6. v. 54.
the supper) then is of the word of god, vz. to offer and set before us Christ,
and in Christ the treasures of grace. Again P. Martyr agreeing just with
Calvin before cited: That Martyr vhi supra. part 3. pa 644. ^47
which Christ promised in the sixth of S. John (where according to these men's
commentaries he spoke only of spiritual eating his flesh by faith) that he
performed in the last supper: but not only there. For now also he performs
it, when so ever we truly believe that he dyed for us. Mary in the supper be
joined thereunto bread and wine, as it were seals of his promise. And this he
has in a number of places besides, whereof I will note one more. because it may
serve for a farther points and fuller declaration of that which I have in hand*
and whereof I shall have cause to entreat more hereafter. The body of Christ
(says this ^^^. p^. 6^ 1.
martyr) is received as well in hearing faithfully the word of god* as it is in
the sacraments. But sacraments or symboles are joined thereto as it were
certain external seals, by which the promises of god are confirmed. For the
promise and grant of a prince is first to be obte^ned by word, before it be
confirmed with the seal. Let Gard^ner strive and writh him self so much as he
will, this has always been the nature of sacraments.

ratify, confirm, and se^le such spiritual eating: and herein* in this (...)
consists truly the essence of Cal^ins supper* and not in eating the flesh of
Christ and drinking his blud so much as spiritually. For such a supper
imparteth not unto us nether co^municat^th the body of Christ, nor is cause,
instrument, or mean thereof, otherwise then for that it stirs up ou^ ^^^^
mynds, and gives us occasion to believe in Before. p^. 7 8
Christ, by which belief only and no (...) Christ is eaten. So that if by
hearing a good sermon, or reading a good chapter of the old testament or new,
or talking with a good zealous brother or sister, a man's faith be better moved
(then by receiving the supper) to Beza ^^ ^* corin. ^a. ^ ^ v. 23.
believe, that Christ died and rose again (whereof many zealous Protestants
much doubt, and to reform their ^aith herein, have need of better helps then
is yielded to them by breaking of bread and drinking of wine) which thing may be
very common, and is very probably supposed: then by such a sermon, such a
chapter, such good Christ received better out of the supper then in it.
brotherly talk, Christ's flesh is eaten more properly, more truly, more really
and effectually, then it is in the supper. And therefore this is not the cause
why the supper was instituted. For so the word and preaching serves much
better, as Peter Martyr also convinced by manifest Martyr vb^ supra, part^ ^.
pa. 683.
reason and sequel of the Caluinian doctrine confesses. For being thus urged.
I deny not (says he) but this is our doctrine, that the body of Christ is
received no loss in words, then in the sacrament: or symboles. For this
receiving is wrought by faith. And to faith we are stirred up by word^, a^ well
as sacraments. Neque vereor dicere multo etiam ma^is etc. And I fear not to
affirm, that wecome to the receiving of Christ's body much more by words then
by sacraments. For sacraments have al their force from the words. Which is
most evident to any Christian man endued with common capacity. To whom if one
say these words: that Christ dyed for our s^nnes, and rose again for our
justification, by whose death we al look to be saved and obtain eternal
felicity; and an other bring him in to the Protestant congregation, and there
break before his e^es a loaf of bread, and ^il a goblet of wine; comparing
these two together* there can be no question, but the first words are ten
rymes more avayleable to make the h^^^er eat Christ by faith, then this later
dumb ceremony* which may have twenty other significations* as See after cap.
7. number. 2.
well as Christ's passion, death and resurrection, and our i^sti^ication; and
does not, nor can signify any such thing, except some body tell him that such a
signification is meant and intended thereby. Wherefore the body of Christ
being better received before supper by reading, talking, conferring with some
honest zealous brother, or (before the taking of the bread) by the preaching of
the minister, then by such symbolical receiving of bread and wine: and Christ
being in that sort, out of the supper both more commonly and ordinarily
received (as S^^^^ilus in Apolog. de con^^dia Lutheran. pa. 105.
Calvin confesses, and every man may see) then in the supper, which chances
to many scarce once in the year, to some scarce once in 10. year: the receiving
also out of the supper by words, being more effectual and profitable then in
the supper by bread and drink, as P. Martyr acknovvlegeth and by good reason
justifies: hereof Luthers objection against this Caluinian supper, albeit it
were very rude and rustical, yet lacked it not altogether ground, that Christ
had small occasion to institute such a supper, whereof all the Christian world
is full. For there Before pa. 65.
is never a Christian, but either does, or at least may make this supper every
hour of the day, and night also, if he wake, and think upon the passion and
death of Christ. Which objection of Luther, because it is though gross and
blunt, yet sure and evident; therefore to avoid that absurdity, and that this
supper of Carolostadius and Zuinglius invention and framing, but of Caluins
polishing and persiting, should not be altogether void of some use, this was
devised, that it should serve for a seal to confirm the ministers preaching
and the brethrens receiving, who either before the supper, or in the supper,
according as their mind was thinking of Christ, having eaten him by faith and
cogitation spiritually, afterward resorting together to their supper, there
receive the seals of bread and wine, or some other nutriment Before pa. 60.
to confirm and assure them, that before, they have received the Lords body
spiritually by faith. And this is the sealing and confirmation proper to the
supper, whereof in the places before noted P. Martyr and Calvin write, and
which Calvin most accompteth of, and therefore giving the definition of a
Sacrament as it is The sacrament only a seal.
common to the two, Baptism and the Supper, which only he admits for
sacraments, makes the very essence Calu. Institut. lib. 4. ^a. 14* number. ^.
and nature of them to consist in this sealing. A Sacrament (says he) is an
external sign, whereby the Lord seals to our consciences the promises of his
benevolence, thereby to proppe up our weak faith. And this sealing and
confirming is taught both by Calvin, and al other right Caluinists as a most
special and substantial propriety of their supper, and the other sacrament of
Baptism also: as that baptism seals to us remission of sins and election
to life eternal, the supper seals to us the manducation of Christ's body and
blud, which by faith we have received. For truly to speak, after these men's
doctrine, the Supper yeldeth no more the one, then baptism does the other: the
supper no more conferreth or imparteth Christ's body, then baptism conferreth
remission of sins, and election to life eternal. But (says Calvin) Calu. vbi
supra, ^um. 5.
a^ in public grauntes, the seals which are set to the writings and
instruments, are of them selves nothing (for if nothing were written, the
putting to of the seal were of no effect) but The 2. sacraments, (...) manner
of seals
when the writing is made and granted, then the seals confirm, and make the
same more autentical: and as among the ancient Greeks and Romans their
leagues and treaties of peace were confirmed by killing a sow, which sow so
killed had been to no purpose, had not the words and covenants of the treaty
been accorded before* for many a sow is killed, which signifies no such
mystery: and likewise in common contractes, Ibid. number. 6.
when matters have been by words of friendship and agreement before concluded
and arrested on, then is the contract ratified and confirmed by shaking of
hands: without which antecedent words of concord, the shaking of hands is
nothing, which may as well be done by an enemy to evil purpose, as by a friend
to good: even so fares it in the sacraments of baptism and the supper, which
are seals to ratify and confirm spiritual things, but not to give or confer
them, as has been said before.

So then now we are come so far of from our first divine Christ no vvayes
communicated in the sacrament
opinion of the Sacrament, that no manner communication of Christ's flesh is
properly attributed unto it: no more then the grant of a Lordship by the
prince to his subject, is to be attributed to the seal of wax; the articles of
peace between the Romans and their enemies to the sow or hog; the private
co^tracts between men in buying, selling, borowing* etc. is ascribed to the
snaking of hands which only succedeth in co(...)mation of bargains promised, as
the sacrament of the supper, succedeth for a scale and cotirmation of the body
of Christ, which the Protestat having eaten before, ^or a pledge and
^atification thereof afterward cateth and d^^keth this symbolical bread and
wine.

See chap 4. ^^^^. 3. 4
one sound argument to break al these seals, for that they thus v^ed are very
ly^^g and countersent seals, and therefore not to be thought in any case to
proceed from Calv. in Joan. ^^. 6. v. ^^.
god, but rather from his enemy the devil. For seeing as Calvin testifies sure
it is, that many which come to the Lords tables, have no participation of the
flesh and blud of Christ, they ^eede not on lam spiritually, but remain his
enemies, and receive that bread and wine to their condemnation: and yet this
notvvithstanding the minister gives indifferently to al, these seals, which
confirm and assure to them al, that they have received Christ marvelous
effectually; how ca^t be avoided, but the minister lies down ^ight, when
in fact he thus informs The communi(...) and coun^^^fait Word^^sait scale.
the communicants? as also he plaieth the traitor against god: in that he
puts his scale to a bla^ke, where in god never vvrote ought: that is to say,
he testifies by delivering this symbolical or scaling bread and wine that god
highly favors and loves such a protestant whom yet in verity god hates
and purposes eternally to damn. Nether does Calvin nether can he by any
probable color avoid this absurdity. Only somvvhat to mend the matter and to
proppe up his poor Supper, that it be not altogether void and ridiculous, he
continually runs on ^atther and saither, and at lenght allows it (for his
final conclusion) to be a memorial, or commemo ratiue sign, to recall to our
memories the death of Christ; mary yet with this sober caveat, that we
suppose in no The communion, a g^^^le^ image.
wise, there is in it any virtue or grace of sanctification, but only a bare
memorial, as it were a picture or image rudely fashioned to help our vveake
memories, and put us in remembrance of Christ. Both these parts I vvil join
together for brenities sake, and for that Calvin also teaches them both
together in very precise and plane terms. 1 ^^ v. Inst ^^. (...). 4. ca. 4.
number. 17.
^nocerning the one part* that it is void of al virtue, We must beware (says
he) that we fall not in to error by reason of such speeches, as the fa^hers
sometimes use, containing more honorable traise and commendation of the
sacraments then needs, as though there we eany hid virtue (...) or io^ned No
kind ^ (...) by the ^ (...) supp^^.
to the sacraments, as wine is offered to us in a ^oblet. For sacraments are
the same thing to us from god, as messengers that bring good news are from
men: or else we may well liken them to an earnest penny in confirming a bargain:
for that the, of them selves give no manner grace, but they declare* and show,
and confirm such things as by gods b^untisulnes are ceuen v^. Again in the
little book which he made containing Con^^s^^^ (...). and Geneu^^^. (...).
the consent of doctrine between his Geneuian church and the Tigurine of
Zuinglius forndation, thus is their consent expressed touching the sacrament.
Si quid boni nobis per sacramenta confertur etc. If a^ good be bessowed on us
by the sacraments, that is not wrought by the proper virtue of the sacraments,
no not if ye join to them the promise of god, with which they are adorned. For
it is only god that works by his spirit. And albeit he use the service of
sacraments; yet thereby he nether powers his grace in to them, nor withdraws
any thing from the force of his spirit, but for our rude and gross capacity
so uses thee helps, that yet al virtue of action or operation remains in
him self alone. As for the signs (says Beza after Calvin) there is in them no
Beza lib. de s(...) sa (...) ^^. qu sa. ^.
other force or virtue* but so far forth, a^ by those external objects of bread
and wine our internal senses are moved. In which words both the master and the
chol^r, both Calvin and Beza, the church of Geneua as also Zurick remove al
manner virtue of grace and sanctification from the sacraments, and make them
mere signs, and as it were painted tables to bring us being otherwise
forgetful, ^ude and gross, to remembrance sometimes of Christ: which is the
second part, and clearly set down by Calvin, who 2
writing upon S. Paul, and declaring what is the force of the Eucharist,
makes it to consist nether in delivering us the body and blud of Christ
present with the sign, nor yet in deriuing to us some real virtue from that
divine body remaining in one only place, nor in spiritual imparting the body or
virtue of it, nor in sealing that The supp^r only a tok^n or sign.
which was received before* nor any matter hitherto treated of, but only in
that it serves as a picture, or image to put us in remembrance of Christ: so
that if we were of good memory to remember Christ's death without this
breaking of bread and drinking of wine in the supper, by his judgment the
Supper might be spared well mough. Upon Christ's words; Do this in remembrance
(...) in ^. (...). ap. ^^. v. ^4.
of me, thus he argues. Ergo caena (...) est etc. Therefore the supper is a
token or memorial, appointed to help our infirmity. For if otherwise we were
myndful enough of Christ, death this help were superfluous. And this is common
to al sacraments* for they are helps of our infirmity. Which words
withdravv from the Supper al manner grace and virtue, and leave it a naked and
bare sign, Zum. Tom. ^ a^ V(...). 2^^. N(...). 2. (...) etc* (...). sol. 2^3.
ordained only to help vveake memories, and as Zuinglius defines it, to be
nothing else but a commemoration and thinks giving for the Lords death. And so
(says he) the old writers called it the body and blud of Christ, when as in
the mean season they meant it to be no other thing then a sign or figure,
which renewed the memory of Christ's body delivered for us: as if some good wife
receiving a ring of her husband when he goes out of the town, should call that
ring her husband. For which cause he uses to call the sacrament symbolical
bread and memoratiue bread, panis commemorialis: of like quality or propriety
to signify Christ's death, as is the ivy bush Ibi. Comment d(...). 213
to signify the sale of wine, or in some places a vvaze of straw to signify
where is good ale, or (as Zuinglius using more Capitaynelyke and honorable
comparison to the honor of his mysteries) as a noble man's arms or princes
scutchion signifies the noble man or prince to vvho^ Idem Tom. 2. responsio.
ad (...) Con^^^i^on. 477.
it apperteineth. For so vvriteth he, See and mark well: this is the acramental
presence of Christ's body in the supper as Charles the Emperor or the king of
France is said to be in the kingdom of Naples, because their banners or
scutchions are there, where as in in the mean season one of them remains in
Spain the other in France. So Christ also is here present in The supper ^
(...).
the hearts and minds of the faithful. As for the bread and wine, they are wont
to be called Christ's body and blud: but they are no more so, then those banners
or scutchions are the kings them selves* non magis eadem sunt, quam signa sunt
ipsissimi re^es. The self same in sundry other places he expresses by many
like similitudes, some times calling them tesseras militares soldyars marks;
at an other time comparing them to a white cross, or rod, whereby the buizzer
soldyar and the Burgundian are distinguished, which is his more usual
comparison. The sacrament (says he) is an Zuing. Tom. 2. (...) baptism. ^ol.
^^ 60.
external mark whereby we show whose men we are, and what is our duty, as one
that wears a white cross, thereby declares him self to be a Suizzer. And
this is Caluins resolute judgment of the supper, that it serves for nothing
else, but for a memorandum to refresh our memory: which I could show more at
large out of his vvritings, were not the thing evident enough of it self. For
although some Lutherans not so conversant in Caluins hipocritical style,
whereby he uses to set a grave and solemn countenance on the matter, which
otherwise is light and apish, make so great a difference between the old and
new Sacramentaries, pa. 70.
as before has been touched, as though Carolostadius, Zuinglius, and other of
that reverend antiquity thought one way; and Calvin and the later heretics
of this new creation were of an other belief: yet in truth if we desire to
hear and have his plain and simple explication, such as his folovvers must be
lead by, he then answers and so Beza in his behalf protests, that he
Calvin a m^re Z(...)an.
esteems of the supper no otherwise, nor any ways more divinely, then
those ancient and first sacramentaries did. And therefore to such Lutherans,
and other Ad^ersaries who objected that Calvin a late vpstart, in this matter
varyed from those more ancient Evangelists; Beza with great stomach
replieth: D^co impudentes esse calumniatores, Beza epistol. T^^^^^g. 1. pa. 7.
qui etc. I say, they are very impudent slaunderers that imagine there was ever
any co^trarietie between those most excellent men, Zuinglius, Oec^lampadius and
Calvin in their doctrine concerning the sacraments. So that ^^yng what is the
doctrine of one of these great and excellent men, the same is the doctrine of
the other: where as both by Calvin The supper a (...) sign.
and also Zuinglius the supper is nothing else, but a token and memorial, an
obscure and slender image of Christ's death pas^ed (which in bread and wine is
but poorly represented) it follows* that not only the true and real presence
of Christ's body as in the first place* nor only a real virtue derived and
flowing from the flesh of Christ as in the second; but also al other virtue,
grace and operation is quit excluded and removed from the supper, and that left
a bare and naked token, such as is a lion rampant set in the beginning of M. B.
his book to represent the king of Scotland, or 3. lions passant to represent
the Queen of England.

L^uit 1. 2 v. 1 24. ^. 6. etc.
or sheep* or la^b, or bread (minchah) usually adjoined to al their sacrifices.
For which of these they will make most properly answerable and correspondent to
ours, as they use the matter. I know not well; for that plain bakers bread
without sacrifice and real presence is not very aptly figured by the first: and
this being as graceles and empty bread, as bread may be, ca^ not be well
foresignified Sacraments of (...)* no better than the Jewish.
by the last: for that things performed in the new Testament should be of more
honor, grace, virtue and efficacy, then was the sign prefiguring it in the
old. But to omit this, in that the Sacramentaries, and namely Calvin make no
difference touching virtue and grace, between the sacraments of Christ's
gospel, and Moses law; hereof it is in^^rred yet more certainly and assuredly:
that al his first ^^^^re* pa. 7^ 72. ^^.
amplification of the divine presence of our Saviors body and blud in the
Eucharist is more verbal and fantastical. For in the sacraments of the old
law, nether he, nor any of his vvil grant I suppose, that either Christ's body
and blud was truly and really joined with the sign, or any quickening virtue
flowing from Christ's ^^esh was annexed to those sacraments. For in all this
discourse The state of this question
the reader must ever note and carry away the state of the question, which is,
no^ what those men believed then, or we believe now, or whether they did
eat Christ by faith spiritually as we do, or how they were sanctified or
justified by him* as we are: but what then sacraments and ours in them selves
and by them selves considered were: what virtue and grace they gave by then
owner at ^re, in that they were, and ours are* sacraments ordained by god,
se^nestred from al forain and external consideration. Now that th^s Calvin
matcheth the l^vvi^h sacraments of Moses law, with ours del^uered by ^^^^.
Institut ^^. 4. ^a 14. number. 23.
Christ in the Gospel* it is very manifest. That ^holistical opinion says he)
whereby the Papists put a great difference between the sacraments of the old
and the new law, as though they figured only the grace of god* and these gau^
it presently, is altogether to be abandoned. For the Apostle Pau^e speaks no
more divinely of the one, then of the other whereis ^e teaches that our
fathers of the old law d^d eat the some spiritual S. Paul^s ^^rd (...). ^.
meat that we do, 1. Cor. 10. v. 3. etc. And to the end no man (under the
gospel) should prefer him self as though he had some privilege, the Apostle
preuenteth this objection, making them altogether like to us. And especially he
shows this equality in the sacraments. Wherefore al what soever we have now
given us in our sacraments, the same the Iewe^ of old received in theirs* that
is, Christ with his spiritual riches. And the virtue which ours have, they also
found in theirs, to wit, that they should be seals of gods benevolence. Again
in the same book and chapter. Circumcision given to Abraham, ^b^. ^um. 20.
(...). 2. (...) 10. v. ^. 2. (...) v. 3.
the Jewish purifications and washings, the sacrifices, and such other rites of
Moses law, were then the Jews sacraments, in place whereof have succeeded in
the gospel, baptism and the supper. Both theirs and ours were referred to the
same end and scope, that is, to direct men to Christ, or rather as images to
represent him and make him known etc. The only difference between them, is
this, that the Jewish figured Christ as yet Vnu^ duntaxat (...) est.
to come, ours notify him already come and exhibited. The like he has in many
other places, and it is the general sense and commentary of al or most
Caluinists and sacramentaries writing upon the first epistle to the
Corinthians* cap. 10.

Which equality Musculus very exactly and better to the understanding of the
reader, explicateth in particular Mu^culus in (...)* (...) sacramental. pa 29^.
^unning thorough al cases and points, wherein these sacraments may be compared
one to the other: the sum of whose comparison in his own words is this. 1.
If we regard that which is more principal in the sacramental signs of the old
and new testament* so there is no difference between Christian and (...)
sacraments compared together.
them: one and the self same god, Christ Jesus the mediator of grace, was
author of both. 2. Both the one and the other, were given to be signs of
grace. 3. As in the old, so in the new, the sign and the thing signified
differ. For one thing is signified, an other understood. 4. Touching the thing
signified, it was al one in both* Circumcision was a sacrament of our nature to
be regenerate and purified in Christ, so is baptism. Circumcision was a
sealing of the justice of faith, R^m. 4. so is baptism. Circumcision was a
sign of gods covenant: so is baptism. The paschal lamb was a sacrament of
Christ the immaculate lamb, by whose blud we were to be redeemed: so our bread
and wine is a sacrament of the same. We have the same meat and drink, which
they had, 1 Cor* 10. So hitherto there is no difference between our sacraments
and theirs. But now comes the greatest difficulty* the efficacy or effectual
working and conferring of grace, whether in this also, those sacraments were
match with ours, which equality the whole course of scripture* and state of
the old and new testament seems to improve. Concerning this question, thus
proceeds this Evangelist: I confess that the ancient fathers Ibid. pa. 299.
(he might and should have added, and with them the Apostles and namely S.
Paul, as out of him shall hereafter ^e declared) in this point attribute more to
our sacraments, then to those other, and far extol ours, as though they did not
only signify, but also give and conserre grace and justice, even to The
ancient fathers (...) and ^^^^ndcred.
them that are in mortal sin, and lack faith* (where in he grossly belieth
the ancient fathers, as also al other Catholics) but this is an error utterly
to be rejected of al faithful. For it fights directly with the doctrine of
justifying faith which is so necessarily required, is that without it, the
sacraments are not only unprofitable to the receivers, but also hurtful. For
sacraments as they are signs of grace, so they signify grace (and give none)
as well in the new testament as the old. As they are seals of justice of faith,
so seal they and confirm it not only in the new testament, but also in the
old: and they confirm it, not as the spirit seals, but as signs do seal.
As they are figures, so by the external shape and similitude they figure and
represent the things signified, as in the old testament* so in they new. In
that they are memorials, so in the mynds of the faithful renew they the
benefits of heavenly grace, no less in the old testament, then in the new. If
besides this we attribute any force to our sacraments, that they work grace,
justice, health in those that use them, we give to them that which only is the
Sacraments Christian and Jewish al one.
work of the holy ghost. For our sacraments wash from sins, justify and
sanctify no otherwise then those did of the old testament etc. and therefore
in this respect we ought to put no difference between them. Out of al which so
diligent and exact Ibidem.
comparison he draws this conclusion. That sentence belike of Luther, whom
there he cites for proof of this doctrine) is ver^e true, that not the
sacrament, but faith of the sacrament justifies, and that as well in the old
sacraments, as in ours. Wherefore there is no other virtue or efficacy S.
(...) condemned.
in our sacraments, then was in theirs, and it was ras^y said by Austin in
psalm. 73. that the sacraments (Jewish and Christian) were not al one: because
other are the sacraments which give health or salvation, other that promise a
savior. The sacraments of the new Testament give salvation those of the old,
promised a Savior. This is very a^surdi^ spoken etc. Wherefore this being put
down as a ^a^e ground that the sacraments of Moses and Christ, of the law
and the Gospel, agreed and were al one, saving that they pointed to Christ as
afterward to be incarnate* ou^s point to him as being now incarnate already;
hereof the reader meanly skilled in divinity either Catholic of Protestant
may quickly gather and conclude, that al these first thetorical gloses of
Calvin touching the wonderful, supernatural incomprehensible. and inexplicable
worthiness of the Eucharist, of Christ's flesh truly joined with the bread, of
his blud truly and really delivered with the cup beyond al reason and
capacity of man by the only omnipotent operation of the holy ghost etc: are
nothing else but so many wonderful sensible palpable and impudent lies and
mockeries. For Ca^^in^ hyp^cris^^. ^^.
both Protestant must grant, and Catholic does con^e^^e and the scripture
convinces, that Christ was in no such wise conjoined with the bread or
wine, or oil, or vva^^ings and purifications* or as^hes of a heifer, or flesh
of a call in the old law. For is there any Christian, yea Caluinist or
Anabaptist, so meanly instructed in Christian says, that when the Jews did
eat some such bread or a piece of calves flesh, vvil say that under those
signs of bread or calves flesh, was delivered to the Jews Before page ^1. 72.
73.
the body and blud of Christ: that the verity of Christ's flesh was conjoined
with those signs? that Christ truly gave them his flesh and blud to the end
they might grow in to one body with him? that Christ descended unto them a^ well
by the external sign a^ by the spirit: that his flesh did penetrate unto them
which thing albeit it seem vncrelib^e in s^ great distance of pla^es (as is
heaven from earth, especially Christ being then not incarnate, and so having
nether flesh nor blud nether in heaven nor earth^ yet by the holy ghost and
omnipotent power of god, this was truly done, this flesh and ^l^d was truly and
^e^ly exhibited, as truly and really as the holy ghost was in the do eat
Christ's baptism. Which thing although our mind and reason can not comprehend
vet let our faith believe. For true it is, though most miraculous: and in these
sacramental earings of the Jews who so perceiue^h not many miracles to be
contained, is more then a do^t: were he not, if not in wit a very dolt and
ass, yet surely in divinity a very simple one, who would attribute such
miraculous excellency to the ceremonies of Moses law, which them selves
notvvithstanding al their hyperbol call and l^ing florishes, mean not to be
true no not in the gospel? And what so ever they mean, the universal scope
and drift of scripture denies and refuteth it in the old law most effectually?

For although the good men under the law, which understood their ceremonies and
sacraments to be shadows and dark presignifications of a Messiah, and by
using them were kept in an obedience and orderly subjection Galat. 3. ^ 23. 24.
and expectation of a Savior to come, by such obedience and faith pleased god*
and were therefore rewarded at his hands: yet that those ceremonies and
sacraments velded them any such grace as is here declared (much less the
participation of Christ's true flesh and blud No ^^^^ given ^y the sacraments of
the law.
which is the supreme and sovereign grace of all that ever was or ever shall be
in this world* the old testament it self and also the new in many places
denies, especially the Apostle S. Paul in whole chapirers of his epistle to
the Hebrews: where he most expressly treats and discourses of their
sacraments, and state of the old testament in comparison of ours, and state of
the gospel. For to omit sundry textes apperteyning to this purpose in the
Prophets and Evangelists, and to rest only upon S. Paul, when he says, that
circumcision, the principal sacrament Galat. 5. 6. Galat. 6. 1^. Romans 4. 11.
Romans 3. 30.
of the law, was nothing, of no effect to confer grace and that Abraham him
self unto whom singularly circumcision was a s^^^e of the justice of faith, was
not yet justified in circumcision nor by circumcision but otherwise: when he
disputes, that no work, no ceremony, Romans 4. ^. Gal. 1. 7.
no sacrament of the l^^ was (...) to justification, but only the faith and
grace exhibited in the new testament: when he calls al those Iudaical
sacraments infirma et egena elementa, weak and poor elements, or as the
Galat. 4. 9.
English bibles translate it, weak and beggarly ordinances: when he teaches,
the whole law, and all the ceremonies and sacraments thereof to have been
rejected and altered, because of their weakness and unprofitableness; that Hebr.
7. 1^.
those sacrifices, and baptismes, and meats, and drinks* and blud of oxen and
goats, were only justices of the flesh, and Hebr. 9. v. 9. 10. 13.
sanctified those that used them no otherwise, then in taking, away legal
pollutions, and so purified men only according to the flesh, and therefore were
instituted by god not to remain for ever, but only until the time of
correction or new testament, and then other manner sacrifice and Sacrament
should succeed in their place: briefly when he teaches the law to have had a
shadow of good Hebra. 10. 1.
things to come, not the very image of them, much less the body which is given
by Christ in the new testament; Coloss. 2. 17.
that it was impossible for the blud of those sacrifices to take Hebra. 10. 4.
^1.
away sin and purify the comscience: for which cause also god foretold by
his prophets, that he would reject those Ibi. v. ^.
hosts and oblations and sacrifices and that they pleased him not: when the
Apostle thus vvriteth, thus teaches, thus disputes against those legal
sacraments: what Christian man vvil say, that with them was exhibited and
conjoined the true flesh and divine blud of our god and Savior, as before
according to Caluins first preaching the same is conjoined with the sacraments
of the new law? If under those elements of bread and wine as now Plasphemie
of the Caluinist^.
in the supper, the body and blud of Christ, were not only figured, but also
truly delivered; if when they were eaten of the Jews, by the omnipotency
of god and miraculous operation of his holy spirit, Christ Jesus, I mean (as
Calvin teaches me) the flesh and blud of Christ, yea the very Beza episto.
Theolog. 65. pa. ^^3.
substance thereof, as Beza also with the consent of a whole Caluinian Synod
speaks, were received vvithal; then truly S. Paul in calling such a Sacrament
a weak and beggarly ordinance, had been a very vveake Apostle, an unfit
instrument to publish Christ's name before Act. 9. 5.
nations and Princes of the world, who of Christ's divine person, of his
precious flesh and blud, the price and ra^^^om of the world, and reconciliation
of al things in Coloss. ^. ^^.
heaven and earth, had had so mean and beggarly a^ opinion. But because most
sure it is, that b. Paul was ^^^nom any such beggarly, or rather beastly and
ethnical ^og (...) the Calum^^, who in this dete^^able and ^ a^ p^^mous
con^cite ^oloweth Cal^in, know that t^ him S. Paul speaks, and he shall once
to his eterna pain (unless ^e in time repent) ^^ele true that which S. Paul
threatens: in, eue^ for this particular blasphe ^^^s heresy of matching the
base Jewish ceremonies with Christ's most heavenly and divine Sacraments: A man
H^b^a. ^^. ^^.
making frustrate the law of Moses is adjudged to death therefore by the
verdite of 2 or ^. witnesse^. How much more deserves he more extreme
punishment^, which thus treads the son of god under foot, and esteems
the blud of the new testament polluted, by making it nothing superior to the
blud of beasts, and so has done contumel^e to the sp rite of grace, and beyond
al measure abased most vily and contemptuously the divine state and majesty of
the new testament! Let the discreet reader know that against this Iudaisme,
the Christians ever from the beg^nning of Christianity, have had touching
their sacraments, a more excellent faith and divine persuasion; as who upon
warrant of Christ's words, have ever believed T^^ (...) ^^ t^^ (...)^^st. Chap.
^.
that in the one sacrament was delivered the body and blud of Christ, the same
in verity and truth of substance that was sacrificed on the cros^e, as before
more largely has been deduced. And for the other sacrament (for I mention no
more, because th^se men acknowledge no more) the holy scriptures and writings
of the Apostles, and the church ensuing, have yielded unto it as to an
instrumental cause, higher grace and virtue then to any sacrament Grace
conse^^^d b^ baptism Matths. 19,
of the Jews law, or al their sacraments and sacrifices joined in one. For
proof whereof, when Christ was baptized, the heavens opened, and the holy
ghost descended, to signify that by baptism the way to heaven (shut before)
is made open to is, and the holy ghost powered in to us, as Christ him self by
word and Joan. 3. 5.
deed taught most manifestly: except a man be borne of water and the spirit,
he can not enter into the kingdom of god. And to testify that a^^u^^dly, and
that in baptism Christians Act. 2. ^^. ^t. 11. 1^. ^^p. 19. 6.
are made partakers of the holy ghost, in the begin ^^^g of the church, the
holy ghost ^^sibly deseended, and rested on them that were baptized by the
Apostles and first preachers of our faith. And the gospel and Apostolical
writings every where teach, that ^^bert the baptism of John, and by like
reason any baptism used in the law were but ^g^^^^ue* in wa^er alone; yet the
baptism of M^^t. 3. 11. M^^^. 1. 3. Luc ^. 16. Joan. ^. ^^. A^^* 2. 3^. M^^.
^^. 16 Act. 2. ^^. 33. ^^^ 22. 1^. T^^. 3. ^. ^ Pet. 3. 21.
Christ, brought with it the holy ghost, it gave remission of synne^: and
therefore to there that were otherwi^e faithful and believing, be^^ ^^s their
faith and belief, baptism was ne^e^^a^^ for remission of their s^nnes and
eternal life. For which cause, it is called the holy ghosts lauer or font of
regeneration and r^^^uation. By i^, and the word of, life we a^^cle ^n^ed from
sin and siued, as (...) and ^^uly as Ne^ and his ^a^^^l^e was sau^^ by the
Arc and water supporting it in the time of the universal deluge. Al which
promises and testimonies so plain and preguant, other to (...), as Cal^^^.
Zuinghus, Musculus and others do, with flat denial that by virtue of baptism
any such matter* as grace and remission, is bestowed on us, or to elude by
Cal^^^ Iustit* ^^^. 4. ^^. ^^. ^u^n. 14. 1^.
interpreting al th^^ to be spoken only for that baptism is a sign or mark
to ^estife the Lords will unto us; is to make a ^est of al sc^^pture* nothing
being so clear, but in this ^ort, and with this audacitie may be shifted of*
or else to expound al these te^ts so, that nothing be leaft singular to the new
testament above the old, this is plainly to disgrace and deface Christ with his
new testament. This is to match Moses with Christ, the serva^t with his Hebr.
3. 5.
ma^ster and quit to destroy this new testament, whose essence (...) of in
(...) (...) (...) (...) ^^ I^^^. ^. 17. G^^^^. 4. 25 Romans ^. 20. ^ci^, 4. 1^*
co^^isteth in this and differs from that, for that the old law contained
shodowes, signs and prefigurations the grace and verity whereof was fulfilled
in Christ Jesus. That was a law of secuitude, because it found me^ sinners and
left the in then sin; occasionally increased and heaped sin upon sin, and
by no means of the lavy delivered men 2. Corinthians. ^. v. 6. 7. 9.
from the burden of sin* and therefore is called a Testament in the letter
which kills, not in the spirit which gives ^^fe: the ministry* of death
and damnation, because for the ^^^son a sore said, it was a greater cause of
death and dam^^ion: Galat. 4. 31. ^^^ch* 1. 25. ^^^. 1. 74. Romans 1. 2. G^^^.
31. (...). 20. 23. Romans ^. 15. ^^. 2. Cor. 3. 6. 9.
where as this, is the law of freedom and l^l ertie, especialy for that it
sets men free from their sins, and has old na^^e means to abolish sins
when they are committed, and to pouregrace into men, whereby they may absteyne
from committing sin: and therefore is called a new Testament in the spirit
which gives life not in the letter which kills, the ministry of the
Spirit and justice, because it makes men just and holy by conferring grace in
her sacrifice and sacraments, whereas in those other of the law, was nothing
else but a perpetual commemeratio^ Hebr. 10. 3. Hebr. 9. 15.
of sin once committed, without forgeuing, putting away or abolishing the
same. Al which difference the Apostle sammatilie compriseth, when as comparing
these two Testaments together, he concludes, that the new Testament stands,
and is grounded on better promises then the Hebr. ^. 6.
old; which out of the prophet Jeremy he notes to be these: In the new
testament, I will give my laws into theirs Ierem. 3^. 3^
mynds, and in their heart will I write them, and not in tables of stone as
before, and I will be mercyful to their iniquities; (...). ^. ^. ^^ 12. Hebr.
10. ^*
and their sins I will not new remember, which in the old testament were
never forgotten, but by the very sorme of then service remembered perpetually.

amongst them: have taken their Supper from the Jews, from a Jewish
ceremony used amongst the Jews Vide Pap^^^u^ Massonu^ de Ep^* cop. vrb^^
lib. 4. ^n N^^ ^^^ ^.
before Christ's coming. It is recorded by good historiographers, that
Berengarius was thought to have been instructed in this point of his
insideliti^, ^y a certain Jew: and that al his argument; which he made against
the truth of Christ's presence in the sacrament, were borrowed and taken from
Josephus Albo a Jew, a capital enemy of Christian name and religion. For that
Jew, chap. 2^. of his 3 oration which he wrote concerning the points of Moses
law, v^^ere^h the self same arguments against the Eucharist, which afterward,
Berengarius and his sectaries cast forth: Eadem omnino dicit, que Bere^garius
and se tatores e^u^ p^stea vomueru^t. Beza out of Emanuel Tremell: us the Jew,
tells that among the Jews it was a custom yearly when they did ^ate Beza
in Luc. ^^. 22. v. 20.
their paschal lamb, vvithal to join a ceremonial eating of bread, and
drinking of wine in this sort. The good ma^n of the house, in the beginning of
supper takes an unleavened loaf, which he diui^eth in two parts, and blesses
the one with these words: Blessed art thou O lord our god, king of al things,
The Jewish ^^mmunion.
which out of the earth do bring forth bread. The other part of the loaf ^e
^^uereth with a napkin and reserueth. Then ^al they to their supper merrily;
which being ended, the good man takes out that part of bread which was
covered, and sitting down eats so much as is the quantity of an olive, and
distributeth the like to all that sit with him, in memory of their pass over.
Then sitting still, in like order he drinks, and says the ordinary grace
etc. This Jewish ceremony I make choice of to compare with the Caluinian
Supper, principally for that both in matter and form, and al circumstances it
resembles the Cal^inian devise most aptly; but partly also, that vvithal I may
show to the reader the incredible ^rovvardnes and peruersitie of Calvin and
Beza, who when they have equalled al sacraments and ceremonies of the law
with those of the gospel, yet forsooth for honor of their own invention,
can not C^^^^n. Har^^^^^ in Matthew* ^a. ^^ ^. v. 26.
abide to have their peevish supper called a Jewish ceremouie, or compared
with any such: vvherea^ Calvin sto^meth maruelously: and Beza in the place
before quoted, when he has likened the one to the other very diligently, in
fine as though he bare some special reverence to his own Beza in L^^^ 22. v.
2^.
supper, adds by way of correction, Long ^amen aliter iudicandum est de hac
sancta and solemni etc. yet must we judge f^^ other wise of this holy and
solemn institution of the supper (as it is set forth by Ihon Calvin and the
church of Geneua) whereby we are put in possession of Christ, then of The
^r^vv^^^ n^^ of Calvin and Beza*
th^^ external rite and humane tradition. Thus Beza, most fo^dly and
frovvardly. For what more peevish frovvardnes can be imagined, then that they
who against Christ, his Apostles, and al scripture, have altogether made equal
our Testament with the Jewish, our sacraments with theirs, ou^ Eucharist with
their Manna, and water issuing out of the rock, our baptism with their red
sea and other their ceremonial purifications; now for sooth can in no case
abide, that we should say their tropical bread is nothing better then those
figurative and tropical breads of proposition, or those cakes, or unleavened
bread eaten with their paschal lamb? What strange logike? what mad Theology
is this? Are al and every Jewish sacrament a^ good, as any of the gospel, and
is this one not so? Is the rule true in all universally (which al conteynes yet
but two) and is it false in this particular, which is one of the two? For by
the way to stop the cauilling of some ignorant minister, and withal to reform
Caluins and Bezaes wrong judgment, who term this, man's invention Calu^nu^ ^^
Matt^. ca. 2^ v. 26
(as though in that respect theirs were any better) it is to be noted, that
Emanuel Tremellius the Jew, and Theodorus Bibliander the Suizzer, both of
Caluins religion, and therefore of sufficient authority in this case; and
either of them better seen in the Rabbines and Jewish ceremonies then Calvin
or Beza; out of the Rabbines and Hebrew Vb^ supra i^ Beza.
Talmud write some what otherwise of it, then Calvin does: of which two,
the one signifies obscurely, and Th^odo^. Bib. lib. ^. de p^schate Isr^^^^*
page 25. 26.
the other vvriteth plainly, in a treatise which he makes hereof, that it
was a most ancient custom delivered by the ^^terpreters of the law, amongst
whom Esdras was chief, and instituted by god. He describes out of the Talmud,
in what sort it was ministered, something otherwise then Bibland. vbi sup
^^p^. 30
Beza does. His words are: He that blesses and consecrateth those symboles,
uses this kind of prayer. Blessed art thou o lord our god, king of the world,
who have sanctified us with the precepts, and (...) us commandment to
celebrate this communion: dedidi nobis mandata Communionis. After, he declares
The Jewish Communion.
how the good men (who is the minister) taking out the bread, which he had
laid up in a secret place, distributeth summa cum (...) one sum (...) cauentes.
it, and every man ea^eth his porti^^, very religiously with marvelous care
taking heed that no part thereof fall on the ground, or stick in their heard,
or be any ways profaned, no otherwise then the Christ ans use the Lords
bread. Finally this Regius in 2. pa^^ operum respons^^^ 2. li^ros Ecc^^^^e
Missa, ca. 7.
bread they name aphiki^o^: or as Vrbanus Regius (the coapostle with Luther in
Germany, who also calls this ritum antiquissi^^m, a most ancient ceremony
of the Jews) in his book against Eccius vvil rather have it, aphigman; and
they suppose the Messiah to be signified thereby whose coming should be secre:
and hid from the knowledge of the Jews. This Jewish communion and supper I
would gladly learn of Calvin or any Caluinist, why and wherein it is
inferior to their supper and communion? Remove from thence the words of our
Savior, remove al virtue and sanctification, let the bread be only symbolical
and tokening bread; what has Calvin in his supper above this Iudaical
ceremony? Very much. For that (says Calvin ^^l^. in Mat. ^^. 26. v. 26.
if this ceremony were then in use among the Jew, Christ so solowed the
accustomed manner, that yet he lead the minds of his disciple; to another
consideration, changing the use of the bread to an other end. That Christ did
so, we grant, and have before out of the gospels and other holy scripture
Chap. ^.
shevved at large. Christ both lead the minds of his disciples to an other
^^n^id ration, and changed the use of the bread and nature also, we confess,
and the church ever has believed. Comparison of (...) Jewish.
But in your supper there is nether an other consideration of the bread and
wine, no^ yet use. For why: that bread was deputed to signify the Messiah,
and so it did as effectually as any bread used on the table or communion of
Calniu. Here is bread broken: so was it there. Here for a sigue and memory:
so was it there. There was as much grace given as here. For less there could
not be then nothing: and we must wonderfully take heed (as Calain Before pa. ^^
teaches us, that we suppose not any secret virtue to be hid in or a^nexed to
the signs. Here it is urged as a point The Scottis ^ communi^^ books.
very essential, that the communicants kneel not, nor stand, but sit, so ^ate
they there. That many should be present to make up a communion: so was it
there. This is done with prayers and praises of god: so was that. That figured
and represented Christ to come; this is nothing else but a sign and
representation of Christ now past. This is a symbol and sign of love and
charity; so was that. The Caluinists use their bread and drink with much
reverence. The Jews used theirs with much more; where of I think the
ministers them selves will bear me witness. For they make small account, if
pieces of the communion bread falling under the table be eaten of dogs: and
many present eyewitnesses there are, who have seen that when the cup was
now in the hand of the communicant ready to be received; the wine has been
cast on the ground by very zealous and chief Protestants, because they espied
some more or straw in the wine, whereas these Jews shevved far greater
regard toward the bread and wine of their Communion, as Bibliander tells
us. Brieflly let an indifferent Caluinist examine this rite diligently, and
point by point compare it according to the true rules of Caluins discipline
with Caluins The G(...) communion, nothing bet - - ter ^^^n this l(...).
supper and he shall not possibly find any reason, degree, article, or any
circumstance, why this Jewish communion is not equal to the communion of
Calvin, save that as Calvin teaches, this bread figured Christ to come
afterward, his bread figureth the same Christ come already. Which
circumstance albeit it make somvvhat in the mind of man, unto whom things past
are more plain and evident then things to come; yet in the communion and bread
thereof, it makes nodifference at al: no more then it makes a difference in
the singer of an horologe, that at one time it shows the ^ovvre of 12. in
the night, anon after it shows the same hour of 12. in the day: no more
difference then there is in a man's finger, if in the morning he point with it
to the Sin rising, and at night point with the same singer to the Sun
setting and going to glade. And thus much does Bibliander plainly giaunt and
confess. For thus he vv(...) in the book and place Bibliand. v^^ supra. pa.
^^.
before cited: The ^e^e is the holy paschal feast did eat bread which
represented the Me^^^^s. That therefore both Christians and Jews may clearly
see, that the self same mystery and sacrament was hid in the paschal supper of
the ^l^ church ^^^e Jews, and in the ^^per of the Lord and Eu^^^r^st (...),
cap. (...) de fer (...) and ^z^ ^^^. Musc. (...) commun^^^, ^^p^d ^^ana ^^^^
pa^. ^^^.
^f the Christian church I will declare that ceremony ^ut of the Jews Ti^^^ul.
In like manner Wolf. Musculus in his common places vvriteth expressly, Christ
^ra^^^eth no new matter, but things v^^^^l and vulgar in that paschal ^erer^^e
he a^pled to a sacrament of the new ^est ^ment. Wherefore he ^^^e vn^eauened
bread, the bread of the I wish p^^^, and the (...) also thereof, both which the
Jews v^^d n^their solemn paschal ceremony. And this bread and drink without
any consecration, or sanctification, or alteration other then was vse^ among
the Jews (save only that it should* e^^e for a sign of a thing now passed,
as before it signified the same to come he made according to these men's
doctrine, the sacramental bread of the new testament. So that if no ^vve can
orderly as has been declared, The (...) doctrine (...) the supper.
procced by legrec^, first to remove from the sacrament the true body and blud
of Christ, and leave yet a real quality and virtue derived thenge, then to
take away that real quality and descend to a spiritual eating only by faith,
and make no other presence of Christ in the supper then in hearing a sermon, or
reading a chapter of some good book, after to take a^^a^ that also and make
the supper to serve only for a seal and testimony, that we have received
Christ by faith; in the next place to make the supper a bare sign of Christ's
body; and finally a mere ^^vvi^h ceremony causing us to remember (...) Supper
a (...)
the Messiah ^ovv fistene hundred years since incarnate ^^ the Jews communion
put them in mind of the same Messiah who was to be incarnate many years after:
it besides, specially and principally we have a singular rega^ (...) with the
Scholemen and Catholics we imagine not any secret virtue to be hid or annexed
to this (...) bread, no more then was in that brea^ of the Jews, or is now
in other common bread vse^ at the vulgar suppers of religious Caluinists, who
in their suppers and dinners think of Christ's death: then come we nigh to
have a right apprehension and concene of (...) communion.

And to this very conclusion, as the whole doctrine of Cal^m and the right
sacramentaties tends so Z(...)us Prince of the sacramentaries (which
excellent man's doctrine Be^or pa. ^ 90.
was ever agreeable to Caluins concerning the sacraments) expresses the same
in most plain and ^lat terms. For speaking of the first sacrament of baptism,
which ^e (...). Idem ibid. lib. de baptism. ^^. 67.
cal^^t^ the chief and principal sign of the new testament, VVha^ is ^aith he^
the condition and virtue thereof John declares Matthew. 3. I baptize you in
water to repentance. John taught them to amend their lives and to repent. And
wh^^r^^e^ued his preaching, these he marked with the external element of water:
nec tamen i^circo aliqua ex part mel^^res era^^^: (...) ^ut a sign ^r
ceremony.
and yet for their baptism they were never a whit the better. For what let was
there, but that they might have repented as well without baptism? Therefore
baptism is only a ceremony and sign etc. And in the next lea^e: The baptism
of the Ibid. sol. 6^.
Apostles was al one with that of John. For they also as well as Ihon, gave
nothing els^bu^ the external sign of baptism. ^uapropter illorum quoque
baptismis: non ^^ u^fuit quam signa^ pur^da^ initta e and extern^ ^remonia.
Wherefore their baptism also wa^ nothing else, but a certain entering sign and
external ceremony. And a little after: It was a great error of Ibid. sol. ^^:
the old Doctors, that they supposed the external water of baptism to be of
any value toward the purging of sin. For it is most assured that the
external baptism in water is of no force (...) conser read (...) purifi(...).
or v^e^ to the cleansing of our sowles. And therefore this ve^^ baptism
whereof the Doctors make ^o great a matter is nothing else but a ceremony: I
mean an external sign, whereby a man professes, that he will now follow
Christ. Al which in his answer to Luthers confession, he applies in like
manner indifferently to the Eucharist and to the sacraments of the old law. For
this (says he) is the office (...) 477.
of every sacrament that it signifies only etc. So did circu^cifio^: so ^^^
the pa^ch^l lamb. So baptism makes not men the sons of god* but these which
before were the sons of god, receive by baptism a testimony, a sign or
badge thereof and the like i^ d^ne in ^he supper of Christ. Yea this he
reckeneth for so su^e a principle that of the two, he thinks the sacraments
of Christ's gospel more void of al spiritual grace Zuin^l. (...) sup^^, (...)
quanto minus
and virtue to sanctify then those of the old law. For so he disputes: I^ in
the old Testament, the carnal and external sacrament could not bring any
purity or cleanesse to sin^ul and de^iled consciences* how much less can such
sacraments do v^ any like profit in Christ in the new testament, where only
the spirit gives life, and works al?

(...) page 101.
force and pith to advance his supper above those other; because his ^upper he
terms a solemn and holy institution whereby we are put in possession of
Christ, or else in Caluins pa. 91.
objection taken from the Apostle: let the reader be warned* that this of Beza
is nothing else, but a solemn kind o^ lying and hipocritical feyning, usual to
him and the rest Bezaes hypocrisy.
of his brethren as before bath been said. For he means nothing more, but
that by their holy and solemn bread, our faith is stirred up to believe
Christ, by which faith we feed on Christ, and so apprehend and possess him,
even as did the Jews in their communion. And the very self same holy and
solemn apprehension and possession Beza in like manner attributes to the
Jewish ceremonies. and thereby discovers his cou^terfeit and solemn
hypocrisy used here. For expounding that word of S. Paul where he calls
circumcision signaculum iustitiae, Beza falls out in to a wondering and
exclamatio^, Quid Beza ad Rom^. ca. 4. v. 11.
magnificentius de vllo sacramento dici possit* What can be spoken more highly
or amply of any sacrament what so ever either old or new! Before, the Apostle
called it a sign, which is Christ poss^ssed as vv(...)y the lev^^ ^^ supp^r as
by the Calu^^^^^
the common nature of al sacraments, for that they are external signs and
ceremonies. N^^ he expresses the substance and effect thereof, that it is
ordained not only to signify, but also to s^ale the justice of faith, by which
we are put in possession of Christ him self, quatenus s^ilicet spiritus
sanctu^ reipsa id intu^^rae^^a^, quod externa c^remonia praelicationi verbi
coniuncta oculis repraesentat: I mean so far forth, as the holy ghost ^^th
perform that within, which the external ceremony joined to the preaching,
outwardly represents to the eyes. This is the precise and true form by which
he means that we are put in possession of Christ by his holy and solemn
S(...) pa* ^7. 8^. ^^^
supper; for that by the breaking of bread and preaching of the minister, our
external senses (if we well atte^d the breaking and preaching are moved and
consequently by means thereof, our faith and mind erected to believe, and so
the holy ghost working in our hearts, we possess Christ, which possession (as
he grants) was in like sort and as largely given in the Jewish sacraments,
as in the Christian.

As for the objection taken from the Apostle, and used by Calvin, Beza, Martyr
Musculus, and lightly every other sacramentarie, that the Jewish Manna, water
out of the rock:, their passing over the sea, and baptism in the cloud was
as good and effectual, as our sacraments of (...) ^ ^^ the Apostle.
baptism and the Eucharist; and that the Jews in those figures received the
self same food in the one, and spiritual benefit in the other as we do in
these sacraments of ours: Before p^. ^^.
the answer is, that they al sovvly corrupt and pervert the Apostles words
and sense. The Apostle says not that the Jews had the self same spiritual
food which Christians ba^^, as though he compared Jews and Christians
together but that the Jews among them selves good and bad, just and unjust,
received those benefits there mentioned. Exodus 14. 22 ^^^^. ^^. ^^ Num^^. 18
Exodus 10. 15 17. 18.
For the Jews al alike, passed the red sea^ they were al directed alike by
the cloud, they al alike did eat of Manna, wherein the evil men had as great
preeminence as the good; they did al alike (and so did their beasts) drink^
Exodus 17. ^. Number. 20. ^0. 11. ^. Cor. 10. 5.
of the water, which issued out of the rock; albeit most of them were wicked
men in whom god was not pleased. This is all that the Apostle says. These were
temporal benefits bestowed upon the Jews, which in no place of the Scripture
have annexed unto them spiritual grace or remission of sins, as have the
Christian sacraments whereunto they are impiously opposed. And therefore S.
Basil with great zeal mue^gheth against them which make such odious
comparison, as men who utterly disgrace and extenuate the majesty of the new
testament. ^assius lib. de Spiritis sancto. cap. 14.
For (says he) what remission of sins, what regeneration or renouation of
life was given by the sea? what spiritual gift was given by Moses? what
mortificatio^ of sin was wrought by his ceremonies or sacraments? As for the
word ( spiritual) applied by S. Paul to Manna and the water, he calls it
spiritual, partly because it proceeded from a spiritual, divine, and miraculous
cause, as in the story is noted, partly because it signified, (as did almost
al things in the ^. Corinth. 10 11. ^. Reg. 6. 7. ^. P^^. ^. 5.
old law, even the very stones and timber of Salomons temple) spiritual
things, which were to be exhibited in the new testament in Christ and his
church. For, that of it self it was not ordained for a spiritual food but for
a corporal, the very text proves (which assigns the use of it to al
indifferently, no less to evil men, then to good, yea no less to beasts, then
to men) and our ^o^. ^. ^^. 49.
Savior him self; who plainly separateth it from the divine Manna of the
new testament, and directly affirms it to have been given for a corporal
food, and to differ as much from his divine body given in the sacrament of
Ambros de ijs qu^ initian^ur ca. 8. 9. Cyril. lib. 3. in Joan. ca. 34. and lib.
4. cap. 11. Chrysostom. in (...). (...). 44
the new testament, as does any vulgar bread or flesh. And thus do the
ancient fathers agreably to Christ's words* expound it, acknovvleging it for
his proper and peculiar use to have been an earthly food; though besides it
were a sign a figure, an image, a shadovv and signification of Christ the
spiritual Manna and heavenly bread, which in deed came from heaven: in which
first word of the definition of our sacraments (for every sacrament is a
sign) that Manna and water of the rock August. ^^ psalm. 72. 77. Idem Tract.
1^. in Joan. et lib. 50. Homil. Hom. ^^
agree with our sacraments; and therefore some times, so far forth they are by
S. Austin compared together, but touching the effect of grace, never made equal.

And now if it shall please the reader to confer these last 6. rules or
obseruatons gathered out of the doctrine of Calvin and the Caluinists with that
his first magnifiing of Christ's real presence in the Sacrament of the Supper;
he shall very easily discover him to be a wicked hipocrite, and also find
every parcel and point of that whole paragraph gainsayd and refuted by each one
of these 6. observations ensuing: which if a man would gather in to a table
after the example before shevved, he should fill a pa. 77.
great deal of paper; and find at the lest so many contradictions in these
later against that first, as be sentences (perhaps lines) in that first. He
shall vvithal be able to frame to him self some certain and sure knowledge
(to sure at l^st, as may be gathered out of the vvritings of such
vvethercockes; who according to the Apostles Ephesians. 4. 14. lu. ^. 12.
words, are tossed up and down with every new conceit, as a light
clovvde is carried here and there with every puff of vvind) what the
Caluinian supper is; to wit Th^^ definition of Caluins supper.
(after his own description) bread and wine, or some like nutriment, void of
Christ's body and blud, or any virtue thereof, or any other grace; instituted
for this only purpose, to put us in remembrance of Christ, in no respect or
comparison, better then the significatiue bread or sheeps flesh used by the
Jews in their Paschal suppers.

Before pa. 40. 41. 4^.
thens: not only for that the Jewish had their Institution from god and his
holy prophets, whereas this supper proceeds directly from the devil and his
Ministers; The Jewish Sacrament much b^tter th^n the C^l^i^i^^.
but also for that comparing the sacraments thus by them described, in them
selves, the Jewish much excelled. Whereof this only reason in their divinity
is a most sure demonstration. The preper use, institution and end of the
sacrament is this, and in this confuteth (...) page ^^. ^^. ^7.
the benefit thereof, that it stiri^th up our ^aith, and moves ou^ external
and internal (...) to consideration of the thing signified, that is, Christ and
his death. Whereof ^^ ^^l^vv^th, that where this (...) is most ^ound, where a
sign is most l^^^^y, (...) and (...) to move ou^ senses, and (...)iy to
quicken ou^ ^aith and excite our mynds to the consideration of Christ and his
death, that ^g^e has in it so much the more singularly and in a more high and
excellent degree, the nature of a sacrament. But this was sa^ better and more
eff^^^^ally wrought by (...)ng a lamb, by p^w^^g out the ^lud thereof, then by
(...) bread, and drinking bear, (...), or wine. I or both the lamb is a more
noble c^eatu^e,, then is bread, and therefore more apt to ^g^^^^c Christ's body
the noblest creature that ever was, and the innocence of a lamb to signify
Christ's innocence; that lamb killed, that flesh, that blud was a more l^^^ly
sign or this lamb of god killed for ^s, of his body, John. 1. 29. 30.
of his blud given for ^s, then breaking of bread and drinking of any wine or
bear, be it never so strong. Therefore in that wherein consi^^e^^ the proper
nature of a sacrament the ^ew^^h excelled ours. Again, an other sa^^^mental
signification, and the same very principal S^ a^t^^ ^ap. ^^. ^um. ^^.
(...) they in this, that as the bread and wine nourishes our bodies
corporally, so Christ ca^e by faith nourishes our s^w^es spiritually. But that
Jewish supper having in it, young, tender, and nourishing flesh of a lamb,
together with bread and wine, nourished corporally, and so signified Christ
body nourishing spiritually, far better then only bread and (...): much better
then their water and (...). o^ such other le^^er nourishing food, in which
the (...) a^ supper may be ministered.

If (...) to take some one other or the Jewish sacraments, ^^lv. in 1. Cor ^^.
1^. (...) 2. (...) 1. ^^^ ^. ca. 1^. v. ^.
Ma^^^ for example, this excellency vvil yet appear much more. That was a
sacrament of theirs, (says Calvin, and also Beza) correspondent to our holy
Supper; and the one e^u^l to the other say they; but far surpassing, ay I, if
these men's doctrine of sacraments hold for good. P. Martyr in 1. Cor. 1. 10. ^.
1. 2.
Martyr vvriting upon the same place of the Apostle, gathers out of A^^n ^^^a
and other Rabbines, certain miraculous qualities and proprieties apperteyning
to that sacrament of Manna, whereof I vvil note some fevv, ^^^ Jewish (...)
sup p. ^.
(...)ing vvithal the present comparison which I ^^ue in hand. That Manna
(says Peter Martyr) had many proprieties whereby it did most ap^ly represent
and fo^^shew Christ: as first, in that it was given them without al labor and
pa^ne of the Jews. Wherein it signified Christ given and sent 1
from god the father to men not for their works and deserts, Sacramental (...)
^f Manna.
but of his mere goodness and mercy. The bread of ^alu^^ being procured by
ordinary labor and traualle of plovving, ^o^ving, reaping, baking, can
signify no such thing with Manna, but rather the clean contrary. 2. That 2
ra^ned down from heaven after a very miraculous sort. So Christ also had a
celestial and divine nature as god, and as man framed to him else a body of his
mother a virgin without the seed of man by the divine operation of the holy
ghost. In respect of which his d^^ine and celestial incarnation, for that in
this sort he took flesh, the Apostle Paul opposes him to the terrestrial and
earthly Adam. and terms 1. Cor. 15. 1^. 47. 44. 45.
him the second Adam celestial and heavenly from heaven, and his body a
spiritual body, whose generation of a virgin (...) 3. 9. ^^ 10.
quis enarrabit, who is able to declare^ says the prophet I say. All this
being signified by the Jewish Manna miraculously coming from heaven, no one
jot is signified by the bread of this new Genenian Supper, but the contrary;
as which has a contrary nature proceeding out of the earth, not from heaven:
by man's labor and toil, not by any miraculous operation, and therefore more
fitly leads the co^municants to think that Christ was begotten as other men
are, ba^ely and carnally according to the old her^^s^e of the (...)tes, then by
the divine operation of the holy ghost, as is the Christian 3
belief. 3. The Jews wondered at Manna, and therefore (...) 16. 16 (...).
exclamed, (...) What thing is this? whence also Manna had his name. They
vvendered, partly because they knevv not the original of ^t, pa^^y because they
sa^^ wonderful effects in it. In like mane^ Christ was designed so to come
that al^^^ in general all the jews kn^^^ that he was to come from the s^ocke
of Abraham and (...); yet in special from what li^e, in what ma^^^^e, by
what means, what person he should be the was unknown to them, and therefore
they ^y Christ the Me^st^^ (...). 7. 27.
when he shall come n^ man sh^l know whence he is. (...), Exodus 1^. 1^. 1.
(...). ^. ^. ^5.
as the ^evves wondered at Manna for the st^a^^ge effects thereof, whereof
one was, that he who gathered most, had no more then ^e t^^^ gathered le^^^,
and contra^ vv^se he who gathered le^t, was as abundaantly satisfied as he
that gathered most (which is also d^^^^ly ful^^led in the blessed Sacrament)
so Christ did show ^orth many vvenderful effects and miraculous works, for
which all the people continually wondered at him ^eth in his words, and in
his works as the ^^o^e of the ^osp^l M^rt^ 2. 27 ^^ 9. 33. ^^. (...) ^. ^^^ 9.
43. c^p 4. 22 ^2. ^^p. 20. 2^.
every where records. Al which being so aptly represented by Manna what
one title or point of like signification is found in this bakerly Communion of
the Calu^^^is, where at none of the brethren them selves vvonder and say; MAN
HV, What ^^ this? because they ^novv it to be nothing but ordinatie common,
and vulgar bread ^^ their own doctors charge them to make n^ divine The (...)
bas. (...)
or ^^g^^^ esteem of ^t. Whereof Muscul' vvriting* (...)eth S. Chrysostom. for
that upon Mat. how. ^3. ^^ sa^t^. It is not man's power to make these ^iuine
mysteries. Christ ^e^u that ma^^ them ^n that first, upper, he also makes them
at this present. We o^^u* ^e the place of servants, Mus^ ^^ l(...) pa. 3^0.
but he ^^s qui sanctificat et immutat, that sanctifies and ch^un^e^h the*
^hese words of Chrysostom. (sa ^^. Muscul') are spoken rather r^etorically then
truly, ^at^er as became a (...) then a^ honest plain man, and as the truth of
the ma^ter required: and if he respect Christ's c^m^^^(...) H^^ fac^^e do this
i^ i^ altogether false. For Christ ^^^^us (...) ^.
bad us nether ancti^e, nor chance bread and wine, but to ^^ea^^ bread and
part it amongst us, and with thankesgeuing, to eat and drink it as a
sacrament or sign of his body and blud in memory of him; quae sacramentalis
c^remoni^ humanam virtutem non superat: which sacramental ceremony exceeds
not the power of man. Which is most true. For every man can make such a
ceremony: and every tankardbearer and good wife can as well minister such a
Communion of breaking bread and drinking wine with thankes-geuing in memory of
Christ, by virtue of their vocation, as the minister by virtue of his. So then
this Caluinian bread and drink is nothing like to Manna: here is no
admiration, no wondering at it, and therefore nothing co^parable is it to that
Jewish bread for representing Christ most glorious and wonderful in all his
doings from his first conception to the last hour of his 4. 9.
being here in earth and ascension to heaven. 4. 5. Manna nourished abundantly,
it had diverse very sweet and wonderful kinds of taste, sua^es et admirandos
sapores; to signify, that Christ should suffice to nourish all the world, and
that the fruition of him was most joyful and delectable, of whom it Psalm. 33. ^.
is written, Taste and see how sweet the Lord is. This Geneua bread nourishes
no more then other does, it has no better taste then other bread (if it have so
good) and so in this it nothing figureth Christ, like to the Jews Manna. 6.
Finally, omitting a number, and every one very 6
sufficient to prefer that sacrament of the Jews before this of the
Caluinists, that Manna of the Jews was Exodus 1^. ^. 3^.
very white, and the scripture specially mentions that color not without
mystery; for thereby was signified (says P. Martyr) Christ's immaculate
purity and innocence, who never committed sin, nether was there found guile
in his mouth according to the prophet. This purity can not Esai. ^3. ^. In
fine Comn^^i^^^^ Latina impress^ Londin^. ^^. 1572.
be signified by the Caluinian bread, which as by the English order should be
taken of such common bread as men use ordinarily at their tables, so my self
and diverse other have some times seen it so brown, or rather black, that as
Clebitius the chief Zuinglian minister of Heidelberge writes of Heshusius
their Lutheran Superintendent, that when the silver pixes there were molten and
made Anno. 156^
away, he caused others to be made of vvood, and reserved Clebitius in lib.
Victoria v (...)na Pepatus S^^* ^^s. a^g^^. ^4.
his Eucharistical bread in a wooden one, and the same so sl^^tish, as was not
good enough for a cowheard to put his butter in it: sord^da, at non digna in
qua bubulcus suum reconda^ butyrum: so such Communion bread has been (and I
believe is) used in some churches of England, and also Scotland; and that
according to the rule of their gospel and Communion books, that a good
householder would allow better and fayrer to his catters; sure I am many do
allow better to their ordinary servants; and so nether in this respect can the
bread of Calvin compare with that Jewish sacrament: but rather clean
contrary, as that signified by his color, purity and cleanes; so this
signifies sin and filthiness, and therefore has no resemblance with Christ,
as that sacrament had. Thus resting upon the signification common to both
sacraments of the old: law and the new, and removing al grace and virtue (as
do the Caluinists) proper to the new above the old, most clear and sensibly
apparent it is, that amongst other, that sacrament of the old law far
surpassed this of the new, because (as P. Martyr vvriteth) that sacrament had
such a number of properties, by which it did very aptly design to us and
represent the thing signified, that is Christ JESUS (by which signification
these men define their sacraments) whereof this Caluinian sacrament has
scarce any one: and for very many of these properties, it rather conteyneth a
contrary and false signification, and consequently leads the co^municants to
a vvrong, false, and wicked opinion of Christ the thing signified.

A man might add to the premises for a surcharge, The Calvinia^ supper and
baptism, no sacraments of the new testament. Me^an^^. in locis com. cap. ^^
sacrament.
and the same more general, that this doctrine of our adversaries quit
abolisheth and takes away al sacraments of the new testament. For whereas
the Catholics confess, and some Protestants also, (namely Philip Melanethon
and Martinus Kemnitius, who has written most exactly of the sacraments) that
to the nature and definition of a sacrament of the gospel, is necessarily
required that it be, as Melanethon calls it* a ceremony, as Kemnitius,
Kemnitius in 2. part* examinis* cap. d^ effica^ia sacrament.
a sign, instituted by Christ in the new testament: by this definition, nether
can baptism nor yet the supper be duly called sacraments of the gospel. For
our baptism the Protestants, especially Zuinglians and Caluinists universally
Zuing^. Tom. 2 lib de baptism. for. 73. 74. certis^imu^^ ^st. Calvin. Insti^
lib 4. ca. 15. number. 15.
teach us to have been instituted by John and not by Christ. So writes
Zuinglius expressly in a number of places: John Baptist instituted our baptism:
and the baptism of Christ and John was the self same: and this says Calvin)
is most certain. The same is the judgment of Bullinger, Musculus, Beza,
Gualterus Tigurinus, and al other for ought I have read. So that baptism is
not of Christ's institution, but of John's, and so not of the gospel, but of the
law. And the very like is to be said of this supper. For according to these
men, as Christ borrowed his baptism thence, so did he this supper or
sacramental bread, Before, p^* 104.
which being in use and practice among the Jews, Christ him self took from
them, and with their baptism least also this supper to his disciples as he
found it, without adding any new form, fashion, grace; virtue or
sanctification, as haith been said. And therefore properly and truly to speak,
both these are ceremonies or signs of the old law, not of the new; received
thence not invented or ordained here, and therefore can not properly be called
sacraments of Christ and his gospel, but ceremonies of Moses and the old
testament, where is the first institution, nature, fulness and perfection of
them.

But to omit this and return where I left, to our Protestant The Jews ^a
(...) Supper mu^^ better then Calvin's.
supper and that Jewish; I will end this chapter with the Protestants own
comparison, only stretching that, one joint farther then they do, yet no ^o^e
farther then manifest reason (such as them selves yield and allow) Before, pa.
92. 93.
permits, in this sort: If we regard the paschal supper of the Jews, and
the gospelling supper of the Caluinists as they are signs of grace, so is that
Jewish supper a more noble sign, and signifies better then this, as now has
been the ^ed. If we regard them as memorial^, so that in page 110.
faithful mynds renewed the benefits of heavenly grace better and more
effectually then this, as being a memorial more lively and evident then is
this. If we respect them as they are seals of the justice of faith* so that
sealed and confirmed it more strongly and durably then this; both for that blud
is a more durable seal, then wine; and here being only bread and wine, whereas
there was bread and wine, and besides, flesh and blud; those many must needs
seal more strongly then these fewer. For both reason, and scripture teaches,
that a triple or quadruple bond is (...) ca 4. 1^.
of more strength, then a duble or single. If we weigh them by their external
shape and similitude as they figure and represent the things signified, so
there is no comparison between this and that, because the paschal lamb and blud
thereof was a more lively representation and figure of Christ Before pa. 92.
the immaculate lamb, by whose blud we were to be redeemed, then is the
Caluinian bread and wine. Wherefore if touching any other matter there can be
put no difference between the one and the other, as them selves confess: and
then in these so many points, manifest reason taken from the very nature and
intrinsecal propriety of the sacraments according to their own de^cription,
convinces the Jewish so far to excel theirs; let the Christian reader hereof
conceive, what a gospel they have: what a communion out of it they have drawn
and invented; how base, how simple, how contemptible, and beggarly! For if
they make the Apostle so to speak of the Before pa. 96
Jewish sacraments: much more justly may we be bold so to term theirs,
which we see to be so many degrees Caluins gospel ^ead ^ot^ Iudaisme.
baser and more beggarly then the Jewish. And can it sink into the head of
any Christian man, that Christ our God and Savior was incarnate, and came
into the world, so to alter the law, the sacraments and ceremonies thereof,
that he would make exchange for the worse? That he would abrogate and take
away sacraments more lively, more beneficial, more effectual and gracious; and
substitute in place thereof, sacraments more dead, more fruitles* more vn^to
itable, yea altogether vveake, impotent and graceles? If this be not only
improbable, but also impossible, then is the Caluinists doctrine, which thus
teaches, not only heretical, but also Apostatical: as which tends to the
overthrow of al Christian religion, of Christ's gospel and incarnation; and by
these crafty and mis^hevous sleights, labors in steed of Christianisme B^^^
epistol^ 1. 5. 65. ^ut^e^ ^^^. 4. p^asa^^^ in ^^* ^^^^^. ^ol. ^2^.
to plant Iudaisme, from Christ's gospel to bring us back to Moses, and of
Christians to make us Jews: at which rock many of the purest and most
zealous Calvinists have made shipwreck already, as in their own vvritings
we find it recorded.

OF THE Word SACRAMENT; and the Calvinists definition thereof.
The Argument.


(sacrament) disliked and condemned by M. B. and the sacramentarie doctors:
which yet because it is doubtful and ambiguous, and fit to deceive simple
Christians, them selves use most. Which thing is exemplified by their wicked
and corrupt expounding the words of Christ spoken at his last Supper upon the
abu^e of that only word. Their great falshod and craft in speaking like
Catholics, when yet they mean altogether as heretics.

seal to confirm gods promises. Which definition is improued by manifest
demonstration, that the sacraments have no such office to confirm ^r seal
gods promise, ^ether in respect of the promise it self, nor yet of Christian^,
whether they be strong in faith or weak in faith; or infants without faith;
nor yet of the minister that preaches the promi^es. This definition and
doctrine of the Caluinists tends directly to Anabaptisme.



CHAP. 4.
Carolostadians or Sacramentaries; afterward Zuinglians or Caluinists, I come
now to examine these Sermons: wherein I shall have occasion to be the shorter,
for that much they conteyne not whereon a man should make any great stay. Many
things are in them indifferent, The sum of these (...).
with which I will not meddle: many things very false and slanderous which I
vvil in a word note and so pass over: many heresies there are, and the same
very soul and gross (especially in the last 2. Sermons) touching
justification, faith good works and security in sin, which for that they are
not incident to this argument, I s^al shortly dispatch in a fevv lines. Most of
the stuff of these Sermons is drawn out of Calvin, whom this man chiefly
follows (as lightly does all the Scottish and for a great part the English
ministry) both in form of doctrine, and also in manner of utterance. Here
shall the reader find the self ^ame diversity, inco^stancie, and contradiction
as has been noted in Calvin before. Ho s^ald find the same affectation of much
mystical and supercelestial speech, when as the meaning and conclusion is base,
earthly, and contemptible. Yet is he not always a follower of Calvin. Some
points there are, wherein this preacher dissenteth both from Calvin, and also
Zuinglius, from Geneua, Zurick, and other reformed congregations, and follows
a proper and peculiar fancy of his own. And which the reader is always to
note, here shall he find every thing boldly avouched, but never proved, nor any
authority almost of scripture, gospel, prophet, reason Theological, or any
sufficient ground brought for confirmation of things most doubtful and resting
in controversy; but al such things justified by bare words, and proved by his
own authority; save that more like a Physician then a Divine, in some places
he See the chap. 18. and 2^.
much urges physical arguments, and rules of Physike. And this is the general
sum and form of these Sermons.

page 4.
fault with the use of this word sacrament, because it is ambiguous, and there
are risen many tragedies about the ambiguitie of this word, which are not yet
ceased, nor will cease The word, sacrament, much disliked by M. B.
while the world lusts; where otherwise (says he) if men had kept the
Apostles words, and called them Signs and Seals; all this digladiation,
strife, and contention apparently had not fallen out. But where men will be
wiser then god, and give names to things beside god upon the wit of man (which
is but mere folly) all this cummer falls out. This afterward in his 3. Sermon
he repeateth: and much inueigheth against pa. 1^6*
men, who not content to call it a holy seal* which is the Apostles word, who
calls it so Romans 4. 11. would needs go about to be wiser then god; and go beyond
god, and are not (...) with the names, which god has given by his Apostle, and
which Christ him self has given. Which if they had done* I am sure (says
he) none of these great storms, and tragedies, and debates had fallen out. Out
of al which, he draws a very so ber instruction: A lesson by the way (says
M. B.) Let no flesh presume to be wiser then god: but let them stoop, and keep
the names which god has given to this sacrament. In which words and
discourse, to omit some other things very well worth the noting, a lesson the
reader may learn much better then that which M. B. gives him: that is, our
adversaries great frowardnes and blindness in their manner of vvriting, disputing
and preaching. The which because it is by M. B. made the very ground and
foundation of his Sermons: and is common to him with the rest of his fellows
and comministers both in Scotland and out of Scotland, I will open somewhat more
at large. The word sacrament (says M. B.) is not used in the scripture: it is
inverted not by the holy ghost, but by the wit of man, which is mere folly: it
has been and is the cause of much strife, contention and digladiation; of
great storms, tragedy; and debates, which yet continue. The scripture
appoints other names, as signs or seals. Hereof this Euangelical lesson is
to be learned, Let no flesh presume to be wiser then god: but let them stoop,
and keep the names, which god has given to this sacrament. M. B. notably
contradicts him self.
and yet forsooth both him self in these self same Sermons, continually every
where: and al other the principal vvriters of his side, omitting the names of
signs and seals given by god; forgetting their own lesson that al flesh
should stoop, and use such names of signs and seals as god had geven, in
steed thereof will needs use the name of sacrament, inverted by the wit of man
which is mere folly (and then they not very wise that use it) and by so doing,
maynteine this contention and digladiation, these great storms, tragedies and
debates, which is the part of wicked men and ministers of sedition. If god
give you variety and choice of other so apt names, so good and profitable,
whereas this is so harmeful and mischevous; why refuse you god and follow
man? Why in every leaf of these your Sermons, is there set forth in great
capital letters this wicked word Sacrament, invented by man, and not rather
the word Sign or Seal appointed by god? As you have altered the Mass in to
the Communion, Bishop in to superintendent, priest in to minister, church in
to congregation etc. so why in like manner change you not sacraments in to
signs and seals? and then inscribe these your sermons, Sermons not upon the
sacraments, but upon the signs and seals? But this fault were less and more
pardonable, if these men upon the self same word The wicked s^phistry of
Caluinists.
which they condemn, did not buyld the whole frame of their cauilling and
sophistical Theology, when they either write against their adversaries, be
they Catholics or Lutherans, or in sermons preach to the people: because the
word being in deed ambiguous, ministers them more occasion to multiply words,
to shuffle from one sense to an other, to abuse their simple auditors, and to
save them selves from plain and direct expressing of that, which in deed they
still entend, although at some times they are loath to utter. Ioachimus
VVestphalus the Lutheran, in his last answer to Calvin vvriteth, that
Carolostadius (the first father of the sacramentaries in our VVestphalus in
Apology* pa. 5.
days) in his disputations and books of the supper of the lord, utterly
rejected the word sacrament, as new and not found in scripture. But our
adversaries the Caluinists (says he) because they find the word apt for them
to shift and lurk under, very greedely embrace it, and make it their chief
ground and ankerhold. So Calvin braggeth, that this is to him a wall of The
word sacrament, magnified by Calvin.
brass, that Christ's words are to be expounded sacramentally. This one word,
he bosteth, is sufficient to overthrow all the arguments of the Magdeburgenses.
Hereon he frames his rules: hereupon he brings in his tropes. If a man mark
him, he shall find, that ever he makes his retreat to this one word (sacrament)
and as a sure bu^kler he ever opposes a sacramental manner of speech, when he
has nothing else to say. In one place he writes, that all this controversy
might forthwith be ended, if we could be content to admit a sacramental speech
etc. Thus he: where we perceive, that although no man be more fierce and
eager then is Calvin against words invented by man out of the compass of holy
write; yet him self is content to make his most advantage and chief buckler
thereof. And this one word he not only uses and urges continually, (which
in him is a great fault) but also makes it to signify what him self best
pleases, which is intolerable. But VVestphalus answers Ibi pa. 6.
him rightly, that he and his (Lutheran) brethren are not so simple, nor so
careless of their faith, and salvation, as The ^^erd, sacram^^t, disliked by
Musculus. Musculus in (...). ^^p. de sig^^ sacrameatal. pa. 292.
that they can or will hazard their cause upon a word obscure, ambiguous etc.
and withal stand to rules deduced thence at the pleasure of the Zuinglians.
VVol^. Musculus in his common places, where he entreats of the sacraments,
because he refu^eth that name and calls them ( sacramental) signs, for his
defense in so doing, that good men be not offended, very religiously lays for
his discharge ^^o principal doctors, Luther and Melanethon, of which Luther
writes thus* If we will speak as the scripture teaches Luth. de ^^^tiu. (...).
us, then have we but one sacrament (Christ) and three sacramental signs, the
supper, baptism, and penance. Melanothon thus: That which the common people
calls a sacrament* Melaneth. in ^. (...). 11 at in ^^* ^^ com(...).
we will call a sacramental sign: because Paul calls Christ him self a
sacrament. So that their proper name it signs: and sacramental, which
Musculus joins, is no more, then holy, or Christian, or appointed by Christ,
whom the scripture acknovvlegeth only for a sacrament What the Protesta^^^
mean by sacrament and sacramental.
and only calls a sacrament: and so these fignes are called sacramental,
because they were ordained by him, and signify him who is the sacrament: as
also a chapter of S. Matthew, or S. Paul may be called a sacrame^tal
chapter, because it entreats of Christ the only sacrament: in which sense al
figutes and sacrifices and many chapiters of the old testament were likewise
sacramental figures and chapiters. Whereas then the scripture calls not the
supper by the name sacrament, but applies this word only to Christ, is it not
strange, that the same man* almost in the same place, debating this very
question (of Christ's presence in the supper) between his fellows the
Zuinglians, the Lutherans and the Catholics, when as he should speak most
plainly, most distinctly* and intelligibly, would yet ^un, against his own
knowledge and conscience to cover him self, to obscure, and confound, and
trouble both the matter whereof he treats, and his auditors or readers, by
such ambiguous and dark words, which him self with such religion disliketh*
and condemns, as not agreeable to the word of god? Yet this man forsooth,
when he comes to expound the words of Christ concerning this sacrament, not
by the way, or accidentally* but fully and directly, and of purpose; places
the entier sum and Musculus ^^^ supra. cap. de ^^^^ Demini number. 2. page 32^.
(...)
substance of his resolution upon this term sacrament and sacrame^tal. For
pretending great reuetence to the words of Christ* and protesting that his
desire is most religiously to hold fast the words of Christ, and not to alter
any one jot of them; that he may thus do, he refelleth a number of his
brethren (as he calls them) Carolostadius, Occola^^padius, Zuinglius,
Luther, and the Lutherans, for their expositions of Christ's words, This is my
body: for that Ibi pa. 326.
they al depart from the precise letter and text of the gospel. And I (says
he) can not say as they do, that Christ's Much religion pretended vv^^te most
(...) is practiced.
body is with the bread* quia ab ipsis verbis domini discedere ne^u^^: because,
I may not depart from the very words of Christ: and if I should think as they
do, haec cogitatio me ab ipso (...) abduceret such thinking would withdraw me
from following the plain and precise letter. After this, and much more to like
effect, in fine coming to his own exposition, Let is now consider (says this
doctor) how bread may be the true body of Christ, that same which was delivered
for us on the cross, so that nether the bread leefe his own nature and
substance, and yet rece^ue in it the substance of Christ's body, which also
remains immutable. Nam omn^no sunt haec omniu^ verissima. For (...): both
these are most true* that the bread which our lord gives, is his own body,
and yet as verily bread, as it was before the communion etc. Where by the way
the reader may see the wicked and feared conscience of these profane
heretics, whom not without great reason S. Paul te^meth damned in 1. T^^^t.
4. ^ T^t. 3. 11.
their own judgment, who feyning a great regard and religious dread to
depart from Christ's words, in the self (...) words (...) corrupted.
same instant* pervert his words most maliciously. For where said Christ ever*
This bread is my body? o^* This wine is my blud? what Apostle does witnes^e it*
what Eua^gela^ records it? Certainly Christ never s^ake (...) contrativvise
by his divine wisdom so tempered his words: that it is not possible to frame
that proposition of them, which in all the Evangelists are uttered so, that the
very construction of them both in greek and latin utterly refuses that sense.
For in this proposition, Hi^ est sanguis meus, and, Hoc est corpus meum, Hic in
the first, and Hoc in the last can no more signify bread and wine nether in
the Greek text, nor the latin, then in the sentence. Hic est minister, this is
a minister, or hic est haereticus, this is an heretic* the article hic, this*
must or can signify the ministers wife. For even so in all the Evangelists the
article ^^^ pani^. ^^c corput. ^^^ sang^^. ^oc (...).
( this) is so placed and circumscribed by our savior, that it can not stand
for bread and wine, being of pla^ne contrary gender: and Christ's words This
is my body, plainly and literally (which this man with counterfeit gravity
seems to seek after) can have no other sense in ^^c est corpus (...)* al one
with, ^oc est (...). Cyprian de ^^ ^^ Domius.
the Evangelists, then if he had said, This is my flesh, which in effect is al
one: and these later words does S. Cyprian use in steed of the other, and as
the proper words of consecration. But let this pass for good, that Christ
said, this bread is my body, which if it were spoken by a Christian man might
have a good meaning, although it be not the word of Christ, that word which
originally made the sacrament: what interpretation yeldeth this doctor to make
good literally this proposition, as he gives it: This bread remaining bread
still is my true body delivered for mankind. Forsooth he keeps a long
disputation to prove, that the bread is not the body personally not naturally;
yea Luther him self that man of blessed Ib^ pa. ^^7.
memory denies it. Well, what then? Nether can it be really the body. I
grant. Nor yet can the bread be the body Much labor and rearch resolved in
(...)
corporally. Let that pass to. Yet must we needs confess the bread to be the
body of Christ; the truth of Christ's word enforcing us thereunt* Wherefore
some other way is to be found In gods name* Others will have the bread to be the
body spiritually, others (...); which exposition many brethren gainsay, and
^^^ them shamefully figurists, which so think, as though with (...) denied the
verity of Christ's body. Then if nether this vvil serve, let us have the
exposition of other gospellers, which come nearer to the point, and may better
satisfy you. Some there be, who expound the word, This is my body, by, This
signifies my body, and they will have the bread to be the body,
significatiuely, or as in a sign. And this is somewhat tolerable; and I can not
like, that this word (Sign) which some fathers use, is condemned as wicked by
some of the brethren. Here is much a do, and much diligence pretended to find
out the true sense of these fevv words. Let us at length have that. Thus it
is. Sophist^^^^ (...).
In sum, whereas the bread is the body of Christ nether naturally, nor
personally, nor really, nor corporally, nor yet spiritually, nor figuratively,
nor significatiuely; restat post baec omnia, vt dicamus panem esse corpus
domini sacramentaliter, it rests after al these, that we say, the bread is
the body of Christ sacramentally. Which conclusion he proteth by very grave
authority. For (says he) the reformed (gospelling) churches use thus to
speak: and Luther (who for this heretical exposition perpetually to his dying
day abhorred Musculus and his Sectaries as damnable heretics) after he has
rehearsed certain wa^es, how the body of Christ may be united to the bread, at
length rests in this, and appoints a Sacramental union. Upon this
worshipful ground; he repeateth again and again, that Christ's speeth is a
sacramental speech: his words of the supper are to be expounded sacramentally:
and no fitter way can be found, then thus sacramentally to interpret those
words spoken of the sacrament. Si enim panis est sacramentum corporis Christi,
relinqu^^ur Ib^ pa. 10^.
sacramentalem esse locutionem etc. For if the bread be a sacrament of Christ's
body, it remains that the speech be sacramental, and that the words, of
Christ be expounded sacramentally: and so sacramentally the bread is Christ's
body. By which manner of speech, he being a Zuinglia^ can not mean as Luther
did, and nether can nor does mean Wicked Sophist^^^.
otherwise as al his books show, then did Zuinglius, that the bread of their
Supper is Christ's body signifi^^tiuely, or as in a sign, because it is the
sign thereof. Which yet to express plainly and roundly as this man
conceived it, and as Zuinglius taught it, because it was then odious in the
cares of most Christians* even of many Protestants, who had some more reverend
opinion of the Sacrament then Zuingl^us after his plain and blunt manner
uttered; therefore somvvhat to cover and hide him self* and bleare the eyes of
the simple, he is content to lay holdfast like a man of most vile conscience,
and ambitiously to inculcate this word sacrament and sacramenta^; and reject
the word sign and signification* albeit him self before had approved this
later, and disproved the former, as proper to Christ. And the only reason, why
he thus preseneth and rather likes to use sacrament, sacramental, and
sacramentally* then sign figure, or significatiuely, is because the word
sacrament and sacramental derived thence, is ambiguous, general, and common to
Catholic and heretic, and so fitter for him to lurk in and deceive, then the
other, which is proper to his only sect of Sacramentaries, and condemned by
both Catholics Diverse signifi^^ti^ns of the vv^^d sacrament.
and Protestants. For in speaking or vvriting of this sacrament, this word is
in his true and right sense used only by the Catholics as it was of old,
before any of these se^taries were hatched. After, in this confusion of al
things, it was first abused by the Lutherans to express their false opinion;
then was it made common an^ s^atched alike by Calvinists, Zuinglians,
Anabaptists and al other Sacramentaries, and applied to their conceits and
fancies, which differ as much from the former says of Catholics, and opinion
of Lutherans, as heaven from hell. For to the Catholic, the word (Sacrament)
signifies (and so did evermore) the true body of christ with the external
sign. To the Lutheran, it signifies the true real body of Christ in the
bread, or joined with the bread. To the Zuinglian* Calvinist, or Anabaptist,
and namely to Musculus, ^t signifies only the external sign of bread
separated from the word of god Mus^. v^i supra, pa. 29^.
and from the body of Christ, and from al grace. For so him self expressly
desineth it. And ^et for^o^th because of the ambiguitie and generality of the
word, he thus plays and dalieth with it, and tediously repeateth it, only
to deceive, as has been said; whereas otherwise he utterly dislyketh and
condemns it: as also diverse other learned Sacramentaries have resolved it
should never be used in talking of the Eucharist. For so testifies Clebitius
some time chief minister of the Calvinists in The word sacrament r^^t^^ ^oy
the Ca^a^n^st^.
Heidelberge, alleging for him self his master a public reader there, whom
he ^^^neth a singular o^^a^e^^ of that University; who (says he) by good
reason proved that the word (Sacrament and Sacramen^ally) were not to be used
in treating (...) in (...) ^ r^^^t^^ ^^ (...) Pap^ius S^^ (...). (...)* 1^.
of the Eucharist, because of their diverse and doubtful signification. This may
serve for a very notable example to the Christian reader, to teach him, with
what impretie, wicked conscience, and iugling, al bent to circumvent and
coosen their poor folovvers, these ministers handle the sacred word of god.
They confess the word Sacrament not to be used of their supper, nether by
Christ, nor his Apostles: they dislike it them selves; they acknovvledge it to
be ambiguous and doubtful, they protest to reverence the words of Christ, the
true sease whereof they solemnly protest to give to their scholars: and in
^ine after al these preambles, like most detestable hipocrites, mockers of god
and man, they make their resolution upon the same word Sacrament, which they
have so improved, which they can not be ignorant, that to Luther is as much as
bread and the real body of Christ present with the bread: to Calvin in some
places, bread with a virtue of Christ's body, in others, a sign, in others a
s^ale. But generally to the Zuinglians and Calvinists and this self same
expositor, is nothing but bread with a tropical signification of the body of
Christ, which in truth and really they account no more joined unto it, then
heaven is joined to earth, or the North pole to the South. And this self ^ame
is M. B. his determination and behavior. For so he preaches: Come on. How is
the body of Christ co^ioyned pa. ^4.
with the bread? He answers. We can not crau^ any other sort of conjunction,
nor may stand with the nature of the sacrament. Again, There can not be here
any other sort of con^uncti^^ pa. ^^.
then the nature of the sacrament will suffer. Again, The nature of the
sacrament will not suffer but a sacrament^^ conjunction. Thus M. B. after the
example of Calvin and M. B. manifestly gainsay^^^ him self.
Musculus: forgetting his manifold sober admonitions given before: forgetting
him self and his own teaching that this word (sacrament) was not used in
scripture: forgetting that it was invented by the wit of man, which is mere
folly: forgetting that it was and is the cause of much strife, contention and
digladiatio^: forgetting the Apostolical word of signs and seals, which
should be used in steed thereof: briefly neglecting his own Euangelical rule,
that n^ flesh should presume to be wiser then god, but should stoop, and keep
the names appointed by god, him self vvil now pr^sume to be wiser then god,
and leaving the names which gods vvisdome appointed, and resting upon the word
which man's folly inverted, teaches his auditors to believe sacramental
conjunctions: and where as he should be plain and preach to us that Christ's
body being as far from us as heaven is from earth, is conjoined with the bread
and wine in the supper, as with a sign significatiuely, o^ as with a figure
sign^atiuely, or as with a rude image imaginarily, he still does inculcate his
sacramental conjunction, and that Christ's body is in the sacrament, and
conjoined therewith sacramentally, and we can have no other conjunction then
the nature of a sacrament will suffer. Al which as I grant it is very true,
and the Catholic ever has confessed the same: so these men very shamefully
abuse such speeches (as I have said) to blind the eyes and understanding of the
poor sovvles that trust them, and others that read them: so as nether we nor
they can lightly tell where ^o find them. For if a man go no farther then to
these words, the words may seem to be uttered by a Catholic man. Again
they may well be the words of a Lutheran; although in deed they be spoken in
the sense of a sacramentarie, or Caluinist, whom both Lutheran and Catholic
detesteth. I omit here to speak of this coni^nction, whereof somvvhat has
been said already, and more shall be hereafter. For the present, the Christian^
reader careful of his salvation, is to be warned, that he have diligent regard
to these men's words and manner of speeches; for that never (as I suppose) any
other heretics used more craft and false meaning in their words ^^hen these
do. They for the most part will not stick in speech, in preaching, in writing to
use the very same words and manner of utterance, as the Catholic church does,
when as yet they being heretics have no part of the meaning. But as some man
that inte^deth to poison an other, tempereth his cup with pleasant suckets, or
sweetneth the brim of it, whence it must be drunken, with some delitious
confiture: in like manner these impoisoners of men's sovvles, because their
heresies proposed Catholic words used with heret^cal meaning.
in their own rude terms, would not so soon be swalovved of their hearers;
therefore they commend and set them forth with the sacred and holy words used
by the Catholic church, as we have had some examples Jew. Reply Artic. 5.
diu^s 10. pa. ^41.
in Calvin before, and a number we have in our English Ievvel a perfect
Zuinglian: who yet vvil not let to say and write, that by this sacrament
Christ's body dwells in ours; and that not by way of imagination, or by
figure, or fantasy* but really, naturally, substa^tially, fleshly, and in
deed. Which his Cambridge interpreter rendereth in latin very Catholikely:
page 41 10
Christus per sacramentum corporis sui habitat in corporibus nostris: idque non
tantum imaginatione, figura, aut cogitatione; sed realiter, naturaliter,
substantialiter, carnaliter, e^ reipsa. Whereas yet M. Ievvel, as likewise
his interpreter means, that Christ's body by the bread and wine of their
worshipful Supper, is communicated to us and received in to our bodies, nether
in deed, ^or substantially, Before. pa. ^^ ^7. Orthod. Con^^^^ ecclesia
Tigu^ina. Tract. 2. ^ol. 66. Fidelis imaginatio re^^v^t negoti^^^ s^me^ peract^^
nor naturally, nor really; but only figuratively, and by imagination: for that
forsooth by their broken bread, our mind is moved to remember Christ crucified;
and so, as the church of Zurick declares the matter in their Confession,
albeit the thing signified be corporally absent, ye^ a faithful imagination and
sure faith renews or remembers that work once done.

Sacrament, because it is not in scripture, prefers the word seals and
signs, for that so the Apostle calls them. Where? In what Epistle? In
what chapter? The devise being so new and strange, why is not the place
quoted? Truly I know no such place in* any Epistle of those that be extant in
our Catholic church. And therefore except the Scottish Seignone have some
secret Apoc^phal Epistles and chapiters of the Apostle, I verily believe, that
he finds no one place or sentence in the Apostle Paul, or any Apostle,
where the sacraments of baptism or the supper are called signs and seals.
No ^aith M. B* Look in the Apostle ^om. 4. 11.
to the Romans. chap. 4. v. 11. and there shall you find both sign and seal.
True it is: there I find them, and in that only place of the Apostle; where he
vvriteth, that Abraham by his good and fruitful faith being justified before ^e
was circumcised, afterward received the sign of circumcision a seal of the
justice of faith, which he had being yet uncircumcised, that he should be the
father of them tha^ Sacraments of the gospel fondly called seals.
believe etc. And what makes this for the sacrament of the Supper* what to
our purpose here? Certainly as much as circumcision resembles the supper. For
first, it vv^l not follow in any reason either humane or divine, that 1
which is spoken of one particular, straight vvays to be extended to al. The
argument on the contra^ie side is good, from al to some, or any one. But from
one to al is as wise, as if I should say: M. B. is minister: e^go al, men are
ministers. For questionles, not al sacraments of the old law were such signs
and seals of justice. For so, all that were vvashed or purified Iudaically, all that eat the Paschal lamb, or unleavened bread: yea by the Protestant
doctrine, all that passed the red sea and eat of Manna, or drunk of the water
issuing out of the rock (which the Protestants make as good sacraments as
Before* pa. 9^.
are the Christian) should have been justified (which i^ flat against the
Apostle) and should from god him self, 1. Cor. ^0. v. ^. 6. 7. and^*
have received the seal and testification, that they were just before him.
Next, if a man deny the sacraments of 2
the old and new law to be of one quality (as al Catholics do, and ever did)
then again the collection, from circumcision to the supper, is fond and
foolish. Thirdly, 3
it will not follow from this of Abraham, to any sacrament, that it is a seal of
justice to the receiver. For albeit it were Genes. 15. 6. Genes. 17, 1^
so in Abraham, of whom the scripture testifies, that before this time he was
justified, and afterward receiving the sign of circumcision, that was to him
a seal and confirmation Circumcision a seal to Abraham singularly.
of justice, as the plain story and sequel of the Scripture shows, and S.
Chrysostom expounds; yet this sign can be no such seal to al others, except
they have the like warrant and testimony of their justice from god out of his
word, as Abraham had: which to affirm, fights directly against the
Protestants doctrine who teach that many were as then circumcised, so now
baptized, who are not just before god, but remain still in their sins. So
nether baptism now, nor circumcision then could be to such men a seal and
confirmation of justice, which they then had not, nor now have.

Fourthly, this was to Abraham a seal, not of justice only, 4 Romans 4* ^^.
but also of an other promise, as witnesses S. Paul, ^^ fiere^ pater
multarum gentium, that he should become the father of many nations, both of
Jews and Gentilessuch as believed. For as before his circumcision he was
justified by his faith, to testify that the Gentiles might be justified *if
they believed and did as he did) without circumcision: so after was he
circumcised, to testify that in like ^ort the circumcised Jew should be
justified, as he was. And as to him his circumcision was a seal of his
justice by ^aith, so was it also a seal and assurance, that he should be the
father of many nations which believed, were they Romans 4. 11^
circumcised or no. Which both parts the Apostle in one brief sentence for this
cause coupleth together. And nether this Apostle, nor any other, nether
Evangelist no^ prophet, ever calls circumcision a seal, but in this special
place, and that no doubt for this special reason. So that this being a proper
privilege and prerogative ge^e^ in singular sort to Abraham in testimony of
his obedience and faith, as Beza also in part confesses ( pec^liari ratione
hoc convenit Abrahamo, cui vni dictum est, in ^ebenedi^entur B^z^ ad Rom ^^* 4.
v* 11.
omnes gentes: this says Beza, agrees to Abraham after a very special and
peculiar sort, unto whom only it was said, in thee shall al nations be blessed)
M. B. must learn as the la^v and common reason teaches him, that priuilegia
paucorum non faciunt legem communem: The privileges of a few (much less of
one) make no common'law for all. And therefore al sacraments can not be called
seals, although the sacrament of circumcision was so to Abraham. Fifthly, which
is the principal in this place, how 5
soever that were to Abraham a seal of justice, whether Origin ad Romans ca. 4.
as Origin interprets it, because it shut up the justice of faith, which
was in the time of the gospel to be plainly opened, so that this carnal
circumcision, was a secret feale and presignification of the internal
circumcision, which was to be wrought spiritually after: or as S.
Chrysostoni interprets, it was a kind of bond and obligation, Chrysostom.
^^mil. 39. in Genes.
which God took^ of Abraham, to bynd him and his posterity the more deeply to
gods service (for as when we distrust men's words, we take some pledge of
them, so god knovving the inconstancy of men's mynds, would have this sign
and assurance from them says S. Chrysostom) or (as some other vvil) a sign
and seal to put men in memory of their duty to god; in which so^t also our
sacraments of baptism and the Eucharist are signs and seals of Christ's
death, his pa^sio^ and resurrection; to the cogitation and remembrance whereof
we are induced by the use of them: or what so ever good sense of this word is
given by good men: No sacramit ^^^^ (...) a seal ^n the (...) sense.
no good man ever expounded it to signify* that it is, o^ wa^ a seal to
confirm the promises of god, or gods wo^d preached, which is the point of our
question here entreated. Finally of this place amongst other, let the Christian
reader still n^^^ the frowardnes of our ad^ersaries* who in all the new
Testament having this only t^^t, where a sacrament of the old law is called a
seal* and that peculiarly in one man, upon that one place being so doubtful
(and in deed not applicable to other sacraments) will needs reprove the usual
speech of the church, The word Sacrament most ancient.
which though not found in scripture as they suppose, yet can they not deny,
but it was used in the primitive church from the beginning. For so M. B.
confesses as a thing certain and out of question, that the Latin Theologes,
who Page 3.
were most ancient, did interpret the Greek word (...) by the word,
sacrament, and applied it to baptism and the Supper: 1. Cor. 4. ^. ^p^es. ^.
^^.
and with a little study and humility, he might find the word thus taken in
the scripture it self.

Upon this so vveake and pitiful a foundation, that is, upon this one word of
seals, once used by the Apostle, in one only place, applied to one only man by
special privilege, never attributed to baptism, never to the supper; that is
to say, upon his own mere fancy, or at lest upon the fancy of Calvin, a
wicked and proud heretic, condemned not only by Catholics, but also by most
of his fellow heretics of this age, M. B. builds his entier definition of
sacraments. Which therefore if in this discourse I refute with any
contemptible words or comparisons, let the Reader well understand me, that In
ever intend any such word or comparison against any sacrament of A necessary
^o^evva^ning.
the church of Christ, mentioned in the gospel, and practiced among Christians,
but only against the inventions of that pernicious Apostata; which how soever
he term by the honorable name of the church sacraments, as likewise he and
every other heretic calls his proper devised heresy by the name of Christ's
gospel, yet I esteem them no otherwise then the devises of the poorest carter
in Scotland: then the devises of Robin Hood and little John ancient rank riders
in the borders of Scotland and England; yea much worse: for that their devises
ended only in robbing men's purses, and at the farthest in killing temporally
their bodies: whereas these Sacrame^tarie devises tend to rob men of their
Christian faith, and to kill eternally with their bodies their souls also. And
therefore whereas I esteem them such, as such also vvil I speak of them, and
with gods assistance, by the gospel of Christ, and doctrine of Christ's
Catholic church refel them. And for distinction sake, and to separate their
toys from the true sacraments, I vvil so far as commodiously I can, call them
by the names, which M. B. and the Sacramentaries better allow, that is,
signs and seals, and not sacraments, which is the churches word, and not so
meet to be applied to the signs and seals of their congregations: albeit
oftentimes, especially in this Definition of the Geneus sacrament. Page 5. See
before. pa. 85.
first Sermon, I shall be constreyned to call them sacraments, as they do. His
definition of sacraments taken from Calvin is this: The sacrament is a holy
sign and seal, that is annexed to the preached word of god, to seal and
confirm the truth contained in the same word. This definition thus he more at
large declares. I call not only the seal separated from Page ^.
the word, a sacrament. For as there can not be a seal but that which is the
seal of an evidence and if the seal be separated from the evidence, it is not
a seal, but what it is by nature and no more: so there can not be a sacrament,
except it be hung to the This same is repeated Serm^ 3. pa. 126. 127.
evidence of the word. But look what the sacrament was by nature, it is no
more. Was it a common piece of bread? it remains a common piece of bread.
except it be hung to the evidence of the word. Therefore the word only ca^ not
be a sacrament, nor the eleme^t only can not be a sacrament, but the word and
the element coniunctly. That to the making of a sacrament is required the What
word i^ required to make a sacrament.
word, is out of controversy among al Catholics. But what mean you by the
word? not that (word) of god, which the Catholics do. For that is in these
men's Theology, magical; but they mean by the word, the word of a Before pa*
52.
minister, a sermon preached by him. For so it solovveth. By the word, I mean
the word preached. For the word preached distinctly, and all the parts of it
opened up, must go before the hanging to of the sacrament: and the sacrament as
a seal must follow and be appended there after. Then I call a sacrament the word
and seal coniunctly, the one hung to the other. But here, some vvil perhaps
object: what need such hanging of seals to the word, whereas the word of
god is by it self of sufficient authority, and needs no such seals for
confirmation thereof. To this M. B. answers Page 49. 50 Calvin. ^nsti^ lib.
4. ca. 14 number. 1.
with Calvin, that the seals be annexed to the word for our cause. For there
is no necessity on gods part, but the necessity comes of us. There is sick
a great weakness in us and inhabilitie to believe: that to help this wonderful
weakness, whereby we are ready to mistrust god in every word, he has hung to
his sacraments. Thus much for the general nature of sacraments, as they are
used in the Scottish congregation: wherein there is scarce any one word,
which carries not with it very soul absurdity, even against the first
principles of Christian faith. For to examine a little the definition, vvhereon
depends al, I demand hovvamong Christians can bread, or wine, or water
(which be the signs of baptism and the Supper) confirm the faith of the
preached word? Is it in respect of the word it self, or of Christians to
whom the word is sent? Not of the word it self. For that were injury to
god, whose word it is, and therefore of sufficient credit without such
confirmation, as Calvin first, and next M. B. here grants. Then it remains
to be in respect of Christians. and here again I must demand, in respect of
what sort of Christians? strong or vveake? perfect or imperfect? ^^r Rom, 1^. ^.
1. Corin. 2. 5. Philip. 3. 15. Hebra. 5. 14.
so we find them in scripture, and in the church generally divided. Truly of
nether sort, if they be right Christians, and settled in their Christian faith.
For is there any true Christian, a Christian I say, rightly brought up
Sacraments confirm not gods word to perfect Christians.
in the faith of Christ, that believes in one god almighty, maker of heaven
and earth, a god whom every piece and parcel of his faith teaches to be most
just, most potent, most true, yea truth it self, who possibly can not utter
any salsitie: is there any Christian thus believing (and thus he believes, or
else he is no Christian, for whom only the sacraments are appointed) who
believes the word of god any thing the more, for that he sees bread and
wine and water in the ministers hands? The Apostles, and first disciples, and
Martyrs of the Primitive church replenished with the holy ghost, who being
most assured Act. ^^
of every word and syllable, that Christ had taught them, upon confidence and
warrant of such invincible ^. Cor. 11. ^5.
and immovable faith ventered them selves in a thousand dangers and perils of
death, perils on the land, perils on the sea, perils among Jews, perils among
Gentiles etc. C^stanci^ of the first Christians.
who 300. years space together suffered al kind of prisons, of miseries, of
banishments, of torments, of rackings, of fire, of being torn in pieces, cast
to beasts, devoured of Lions etc. of whom it is written, that some thus
wished and prayed: Come fire, come gallows, come Hiero. de scrip ^oribus
ecclesiast. Ignatius. Ignatius epist. ^^. ad Romans
wild and savage beasts, breaking of my bones, renting in sunder of my
quarters, come on me all the torments of the devil, so that at length I may
enjoy Christ: they who being condemned to be devoured of beasts, when they
heard the Lions and Tigres roaring for greedines of their pray, exclamed: We
are gods wheat: let us willingly be grinded with the teeth of these beasts,
that we may be made clean flower: these men who (as S. Paul speaks) died
every day ^. Cor. 1^. ^1.
for Christ's gospel and the truth thereof; when they resorted to the
sacrament, resorted they for this end, that whereas otherwise they mistrusted
god, by receiving these seals of bread and wine, they might confirm their
faith toward him, which was already a thousand times better confirmed, then
it could be by any such vveake seals? Doubtless as Calvin says of them, that
they Before pa. ^^
are signs and memorials, to help weak memories, and if a man were otherwise
myndful enough of Christ's death, this help (of the supper) were superfluous:
so upon this his reason and ground may we confide^tly say in this place, that
howsoever they are helps for weak Christians who mistrust Act. 1. 5. ca. 2.
4. ca. 4. 31. Luc. 17. 6. Gregor. Nyss. in orat. de ^^^a Greg. T^^u matu^g^.
Ruffin. hist. li. ^. ca. ^. Act. ^. 42.
god; doubtless to these Apostles and Apostolical men full of the holy ghost; to
these Martyrs and Confessors, these seals were altogether superfluous, and
served to no purpose, for that otherwise they were as strong in faith, as
they could be by any such poor helps. And yet those most blessed, most
faithful, and constant Saints, who by their strong faith were able, and did
remove rocks and mountains, stayed the rage of fluds, and commanded the sea,
frequented this sacrament no men more. Ergo there is an other use and nature of
this sacrament, then to serve for seals to confirm wavering and weak
Christians. It will be replied perhaps, that the greatest multitude of
Christians are not such, and for them Objection.
principally serve these signs. If so, yet then we see, Answer.
that to the best Christians this sacrament is unnecessary. And yet the holy
scripture calls the figure of this sacrament principally in respect of this
sacrament it self, and Psalm. 77. 24. psalm. 104. 40
the perfection thereof, panem caeli, celestial and heavenly bread, and
therefore most convenient for divine and heavenly persons, such as the best men
are. It calls it for psalm. 77. 25. (...)
like reason bread of Angels, or as the Protestants commonly translate it,
pane^ fortium; or as their translation printed in London anno 1572. with the Q.
Privilege has, panem magnificorum, the bread of heroical and glorious men,
strong in faith, and radicated therein. And without doubt by Christ's
institution, it was appointed as well for the one as for the other. But come
we to vveake Christians. Sacraments confirm not gods word to vveake
Christians.
How does it confirm and strengthen their feeble faith? As for example sake.
Some vveake brother there is, who believing all this new gospel (which
consists more of infidelity then faith) believes not yet the first article
of his Creed, that God is omnipotent, namely that he is able to make his own
body, or any body, to be* at one time in two places. And that this supposition
be not In the 3. Sermon. pa. 158. See after. cap. 21. number. 1.
counted fond or slanderous (to omit M. B. who thus preaches hereafter) I
produce a man of an indifferent good faith (as the Sacramentaries measure
faith) P. Martyr the lose Monk, one of our first Apostles in Oxford, who
vvriteth in sundry places most expressly, Dei potentia Martyr defensio. contra
Gardener. par. 1. object. 147.
fieri non potest, vt humanum corpus codem tempore sit in multis locis etc.
Gods power is not of sufficient ability to make, that the body of a man be at
one time in diverse places. For this is to take from a body his limits and
lineaments: nether of which (in this man's conceit) is god able to do. Deus
Ibid. part. 1. object. 7.
humanum corpus absque suis finibus et terminis facere non potest. God (says
he) is not able to make a man's body to lack his bounds and limits. The like
he has in sundry Infidilitie of Calvinists.
(...) for their to manifest assistance and support yielded to the M. B.
doctrine Anabaptistical.
Anabaptists in their furious madness, as Zuinglius calls their gospel.
Whereunto he adds an Appendix which I could vvish M. B. well to weigh and
consider of, for his own good: Quapropter ipse quoque ingen^e Zuing. vbi
supra.
fat^or etc. Wherefore I my self also confess frankly (says he) that a few
years sithence I being deceived with this error, thought it better to differ
the baptism of young children, until they came to perfect age. As much as if he
had confessed in plain terms, that him self also, as great a clarke as me^
esteemed him, so long as he thought the sacraments to be instituted for seals
and confirmation of faith, so long Zuinglius some time an Anabaptist.
was he in mind a very Anabaptist; so long was he an enemy to the baptism of
infants: nether had he any other way to shake of that Anabaptistical heresy,
but first of al to leave and forsake that wicked opinion which here M. B. so
seriously teaches: which so long as he holds, so long can he not blame men,
if they suspect him to be an Anabaptist, whose heresy does so directly follow
of this his doctrine.

Whereas then we find these* seals to confirm the word preached or faith
of the word, nether in respect of the word it self, nor of strong Christians,
nor of vveake nor of young infants, to whom principally these seals of
baptism and the supper apperteyne: how can they in any sort be applied to
confirm the word preached? It remains only to say, that they confirm the
word to the Sacraments confirm not the ministers prea^^^ng.
hearers in respect of the minister; that whereas otherwise the minister
should want credit, now forsooth when he exhibiteth these seals of bread,
wine, and water, forthwith the brethren may be confirmed in the word
preached by the minister, and be warranted that he has preached the word
rightly, and rightly opened all the parts of it. But nether can this hold. For
when we know that the ministers, in that they are ministers, are by the
nature of their ministry, liars, and therefore seldom, yea never, when they
speak out of their chair, that is, when they speak as ministers, and teach
any doctrine of their new gospel, speak any truth, as the holy ^. Reg. ^^.
2^. Ierem. 14. 14 and 27. ^0. (...). ^3. 7. ^. Ti^^th. 4. 2. 2. Pat. 2. 4.
ghost assures us of al heretics and new preachers which lack lavvful
vocation, both in the old testament and the new; we must look for better
seals, and they must show better and stronger then these, before we believe
the word preached by them: to the confirmation whereof, seals of bread and
butter are as fit as these their seals of bread and wine: and all the seals
of the world can not give a Christian man sufficient ground and assurance to
trust them.

He that eats my flesh, shall live Joan 6. Man. ^6.
for ever: He that believes and is baptized, shall be saved, being taken of
Christians for the word of god, is forthwith to them, sure, certain and
manifest, whereof they never doubt. But when they see water sprinkled on a
child, o^ three or four brethren eating and drinking their symbolical bread
and wine, how can either that confirm to us the child to be saved: or this,
that such eaters and drinkers eat spiritually Christ's flesh, and thereby shall
have eternal life? Certainly if the minister out of the word did not tell them
so much before, the bread and wine would never confirm, nor scarce signify
such spiritual eating, much less eternal life ensuyng thereof. So that
whereas ordinarily in common practice, whence these men take their Theology
in this point, seals confirm words and vvritings among men; and without a
scale the word and vvriting is of no great force or value in law to make a
bond and obligation, the seal giving al strength and force thereto: here it is
clean contrary. For all depends of the word, and the word gives strength,
virtue and force to the seal, not the seal to the word; and the word
without the seal is altogether sufficient, and carries with it, full, entier,
and perfect authority, whereas the seal without the word is nothing at al,
but as M. B. truly says, a common piece of bread: so that truly to speak, the
word is rather to be accounted a seal to the bread, then the bread a seal to
the word. Again these men in making such comparison, vvaigh not Use of seals
among men.
the true nature and difference of words and seals, as they are used in
things divine and humane. In humane, because men are mortal, and mutable, and
false, so that we can not take hold of their word; we are enforced to use
other means for our assurance and certification, as first to put their words
in vvriting, and then to ratify both word and vvriting by sealing. But in God
and things divine, it is not so. But for so much as God is immortal, immutable
and constant, whose word is vvorking, and whose word once uttered is as
sure, certain, infallible and irreuocable, as if it were written in fair
velem, in a thousand exemplars, and confirmed by as many seals: here can be no
use of any such seals, as is among men, because no such seal can add any more
authority or certainty to his word, as it does to ours. How beit it pleases
him some times to use some kind of confirmation, which may not unfitly be
compared to a kind of sealing: as where the Evangelist says, that when
Christ Seals divine.
was ascended, his Apostles preached every where, our lord working with them,
and confirming their dostrine and Marc. ^6. 2.
preaching, with signs and miracles, of which kind of confirmation, the
story of the Acts of the Apostles is full. But these were miraculous no^
sacrame^tal seals, applied (truly and properly to speak) not to confirm gods
word or promises, but to confirm unto the hea^ers, the authority and credit
of the preachers, the prophets, Apostles, and disciples of Christ; as every
where appears both in the old testament and new. And therefore (as S. Paul
teaches) such miraculous signs and seals, properly are not for 1. Corint.
14. 22. (...) sacram^^^^ are called (...) by the (...) Doct^r^.
faithful men and Christians, but for faithles and infidels, to dravv them to
faith and Christianity. And this is a far different kind of seals from the
sacraments, whereof we here entreat, which never any learned father or
writer called seal in the Protestant sense. For albeit sometime S. Augustine
uses the word, and applies it to August. contra ^aust lib. 19. ^a. 11.
Nazianzen. oration 39. d^ baptis. Augustine. d^ catechi^^nd. ^udib. ca. 26.
Apocalyp. 5. ^ Ambros lib. ^ d^ sacrament. cap. 2.
the sacraments, as also do some other Doctors, yet they never mean, nor
apply them as do the Protestants: but call them seals, either because they
sign the faithful with such a mark, whereby they are distinguished from the
unfaithful; or because they conteyne in them a secret holy thing (that is
invisible grace) in which sense the book of the Apocalypse is said to be
signed with 7. seals, and in both which senses S. Austin and S. Gregory
Nazianzene call them seals: or because they give perfect and absolute grace,
whereby a Christian being vvashed from his sins, and made the child of god
in baptism receives farther strength to persist and stand fast in his
Christian prosession, and fight constantly against the enemies of Christ and
his church, the devil and his ministers, is confirmed in hope, and has as it
were a pledge of eternal Sacrament of confirmation.
life: in which sense S. Cornelius an ancient Pope and martyr, and after him
S. Leo the Great, call the sacrament of confirmation a seal. The words of
the first Eusebius. hist, lib. 6. ca. 35.
are: Whereas Nouatus the heretic was only baptized, but afterward took not
such other things, as by order of the church Se^ S. Ambro^^. (...) qu(...)tur.
cap. 7.
he ought; neque Domini sigillo ab Episcopo obsignatus suit, nether was signed
with the seal of our lord by the bishop in the sacrament of confirmation, how
(I pray ^ow) received he the holy ghost to strengthen him in his Christian
says S. Leo in his. 4. Sermon de natiuitate Domini: Stand fast Leo Sermo. 4.
de natiuitate Domini. Signaculum ^^^^ aterna.
in that faith, in which after you were baptized by water and the holy ghost,
you received the Chrisme of salvation, the seal or pledge of eternal life. In
these senses, and perhaps some other tending to like effect, the ancient godly
fathers call the sacraments, seals: as questionles every sacrament and
especially that of the most blessed Eucharist is a most admirable sign, and
seal, and confirmation, and demonstration of gods infinite mercy, and Christ's
infinite love toward mankind. But the sense of the Protestants as it is
foolish, fond, new, without al wit and reason; and not only so, but also
wicked, impious, heretical, and Anabaptistical, as has been shevved, never
taught by the holy scriptures of god, by any Apostle, Evangelist, ancient
father or Council: so I can not greatly envy at Bezaes glorious triumph, which
he makes to him self Bezaes glorious bosting of him self.
and his masters, for the first invention thereof; wherein he so flattereth
and pleases him self, that having expressed the same in such sort, as here M.
B. does, and I before Before, page 106, 107.
out of Beza have alleged; he suddenly from explication of the scripture,
breaks out in to admiration of him self and his companions in these words:
This my exposition Beza ad Romans ca. 4. v. 11.
(concerning circumcision, a seal of justice, and al other sacraments seals
in like manner) if a man compare with such things, as not only Origenes, but
also sundry other of the ancient fathers, albeit for godliness and learning
most famous, have written upon this place: he shall doubtless find what gre^^
abundant light of truth, the lord in this time has powered out upon us of al
other men most unworthy thereof. No doubt a worthy doctrine for such Doctors,
and in deed to be wondered at: which being so necessary for the church as
these men make it (for it conteyneth the true faith of the sacraments) whereas
Origin, S. Cypria^, S. Austin S. Ambrose. S. Leo. S. Basil. S Gregory
Nazianzene, and sundry other for holiness and learning most famous (as he
confesses) could never find it out; and yet these men, Calvin, Beza and John
Cnox, for learning not very famous, and for horrible filthiness and abomination
of life not See their live^ 1. Cor. 5. 1. Genes. 19.
to be named, and not heard of among the Paganes most infamous, have found it:
we may assuredly conclude, that this invention came not from the holy ghost,
who according Joan. 14. v. 16. 17. 26. and^. 16. 1^. Mat. 28.
to Christ's promise ever assisted his church, and lead the pastors thereof into
al truth, convenient and necessary for the perfect instruction thereof; but from
the enemy of mankind, from Satan the adversary of Christ, into whom such
detestable Apostataes of so soul and filthy life served for fit instruments;
and with whom Before, pa. 4^ 42. See after* cap. 20. number. 4.
the first princes of this new gospel were most familiar as has been noted
before of one, and of others is commonly known by their own testimony and
vvritings.

The Scottish Supper compared with Christ's institution
The Argument.
M. B. his doctrine of signs elemental and ceremonial used by Christ, and al
necessary to the essence of the Supper.

Thereof is inferred and proved, that no Supper ministered after the Scottish
order, or Calvin: institution car, be a sacrament of Christ: for that it
wants diverse things done by Christ, and therefore necessary to the essence
and nature thereof.

To make this more plain, and to prevent al cauils, is it in particular
declared out of the Sacramentaries, and according to their doctrine, what were
those actions either in word or deed which Christ used at his last supper, and
most apperteyned to the nature and essence thereof. Of mingling the wine with
water, and blessing the sacramental bread and cup.

The manner of ministering the Scottish Supper or communion. It ^ is compared
particularly with Christ's institution, and plainly showed, that the Scottish
supper lacks 5. or 6. essential points used by Christ (whose chalice was
mingled with wine and water) for want whereof, especially the words of Christ's
Institution, which are clean omitted, that communion is no more to be
accounted Christ's supper, then any vulgar dinner or breakfast used by Christian
men.

Chap. 5.
pa. ^. 9.
both subject to the eye: the one he cal^^th elemental signs, as bread and
wine: the other, ceremonial as the breaking, distribution, and giving of the
same bread and wine. Where unto he adds, lest any man shoud What is
essential and necessary to the Supper.
mistake him, that he means not these to be ceremonial, as though they were
vain. For (says he) there is never a ceremony, which Christ instituted in
this supper, but it is as essential as the bread and the wine are: and ye can
not lea^^ a jot of them, except ye pervert the whole institution. In what ever
Christ commanded to be done, what ever he spoke or did in that whole action,
it is essential and must be done, and ye can not leave a jot thereof, but ye
pervert the whole institution. These words might seem to proceed from M. B.
somvvhat vnconsideratly, upon to much zeal, were it not that afterward he in
precise and exact manner repeateth them again and again. For (says he) Christ's
institution Serm^. ^. pa. ^^1.
mon be kept: look what he said, look what he did, lo^^^ what he commanded
to do, all that mon be said, done, and obered. There is nothing left in the
register of the Institution, but it is essential. Again. In the celebration of
Christ's institution, ^^ mon take tent to what so ever he said, did, or
commanded to be done. Thou mon first say what so ever he said; and then do wh^
so ever he did. Finally he concludes: If we leave any kind of pa. 1^^.
circumstance or ceremony of this institution undone, we pervert the whole
action.

what so ever Christ spoke or did in that whole actio^, is as essential as the
bread and wine, and can not be omitted, but withal ye pervert the whole action,
we learn many things. First The Gineua ministers dispense against Christ.
the sacrilegious boldness of the Geneuian ministers, and that they are
peruerters and corrupters of Christ's whole institution. For first, concerning
the bread and wine, which (rightly) he makes most essential, we have shevved
before, that those ministers have taken to them Before, pa. 59 60.
selves authority to dispense there with, and give free liberty to minister
the Communion not only in bread and wine, but also in ale and roots, or
water and stockfish: or any like nutriment, when bread and wine are not
easily to be gotten. Whereof it follows, that most arrogantly they alter the
essence, and so pervert the whole ordinance and institution of Christ. Next,
if what ever Christ commanded to be done; and not only that, but also what
ever he spoke or did in that whole action, be essential, and no jot can be
omitted with out perverting, the whole; then also the co^munions of Zurick,
of Geneua, of Svizzerland and Scotland, are al corruptions and depravations
Actions of Christ. at hi^ last supper.
of Christ's ordinance. For Christ in that whole action did many things, which
al these good brethren omit: as that first of al, after the eating of the
paschal la^b, which went immediately before the institution of this holy
sacrament, Christ rising from that supper, and addressing Joan. 1^. ^. 12.
him self to this, holy institution, laid aside his garments, and taking a
towel, therewith girded himself. He put water in to a basen, he washed his
disciples feet, and wiped Calvin in Ioa^ cap. 13. v. 1^. Cyprian. s^^^^ de
ablutione pedum. Ambros. de sacrament. lib. 3. cap. 1. Bernard. d^ cana Domini.
Sermon. 1. Io^n. 13. v. 13. 14. and^.
them with the towel wherewith he was girded. That being finished toward al
his Apostles, unto this eremonie (which served not only for example of
humility and charity, as Calvin supposes, but also for mystery and
signification of the great purity which is required in the^ that come to
receive the blessed sacrament, as S. Cyprian, S. Ambrose, and S. Bernard
declare) our Savior joined divine learning and instruction. For having taken
his garments, and being set down at the table with them, he said ^^ them:
know you what I have done to you? you call me master and Lord; and you say well,
for I am so. If then I your lord and master have washed your feet, you also
ought to wash one an other; feet. For I have given you as example that as I
have done to you, so you do also. Amen Amen I say to you, a servant is not
greater then his lord, nether is an Apostle greater then he that sent him. If
you know these things you shall be blessed, if you also do them. Thus The
Scottish ministry condemned by M B
Christ did, thus Christ spoke, and this Christ commanded to be done. If then
what so ever Christ commanded to be done, what so ever he spoke or did in that
whole action be essential, and must be done, so necessarily, that one jot
thereof (...) can not be left, but ye pervert the whole action, it follows
that the Scottish ministers, who of all this which Christ spoke and did,
practice not so much as one jot, but leave out every jot, omit every part and
parcel more and less, pervert the whole action of Christ, deface his
institution and so have a communion not of Christ's Institution be^ of their
own invention. Nether vvil it serve for their Objection of
defense, to lie with Calvin and rail at the Catholics for observing the like
ceremony once in the year: nether Calv. in Joan. ca. 13. v. 14.
yet to say, that Christ hereby gave an instruction, that we should humble our
selves not once a year, but every hour, which the Catholics knevv both in
speculation Ansvvered.
and practice, before he or his gospel were engendered. For albeit true it is,
that this action signifies a brotherly charity, and mutual benevolence and
humility to be continued so long as we live ever; yet this sets not
Christians free from using the ceremony never: no more then the bread and wine
of the supper which by these men's doctrine signifies their perpetual
nourishement which they have from Christ's flesh and blud continually; quitteth
and sets them free from receiving their Supper (as is the Scottish order)
once a ^^neth. And lest of al can M. B. thus argue, who accompteth all that
Christ did, all that he spike in the whole action, (...) be so essential, that
it must necessarily be done, as doubtless Calvin did not.

After our Savior had thus spoken and done, he s(...) down again with the
twelve, al men and no women, so that in to this company he admitted not the
most pure and immaculate virgin, his dearest mother: and with these 12. kept
the celebration of this sacrament at night, which time also the Apostle
specifieth: 1. Cer. 11. ^ 23.
which two observations of number and time, our English Ievvel seems to hold
for matters of Ievvel Reply contra Hard. artic. 2. ^ iuis. 10. page 31
some weight. For of the first he writes, that Saint Basil reports an
Ecclesiastical decree or Canon, that at the receiving of the holy communion
there ought to be 12. persons at the lest, and never under. Of the second, in
the same place he says, that it appears Ibi. Diuis. 11. page 31.
by S. Austin, and certain old Canons, that in the primitive church the
Communion some times was ministered after supper: as though he would gladly have
it brought to such a time again. And in this, follows M. B. and his Scottish
ministry the example of Christ? Do they as he did? minister they their
communion not in the morning, but at night; to twelve, and no more, nor less?
al men and no women? I suppose not. Only I find in their communion, The
Scottish communion book.
special and precise order taken, that the minister si^t at the table, and that
every man and woman in like wise take their place (to sit) as occasion best
serves. This one circumstance among so many, and this as little needful as the
lest of al other, the book carefully observes: but of the rest not one. Let
us then proceed in examining Christ's institution, and conferring it with the
Scottish supper, that so we may see how well it observes that which M. B. him
self accounts in it so necessary and essential.

M. Ievvel.
institution which is nothing s^: and this our English Superintendent goes as
far wide, for that commonly by a froward and perverse judgment he takes
together he cares not what, rather telling what other men say, then declaring
what him self thinks; and that more to trouble his adversary, then to
justify his own cause (for nether did him self minister his communion at
night (notwithstanding S. Austin and those certain old Canons) nether had he
present at his communion 12 persons at the lest, and never under (albeit S.
Basil report an ecclesiastical The English communion book.
decree or Canon so requiring, except he lie, as in deed he does) and our
English communion book approves it for a very lavvful and sufficient
communion where there be 4. or 3. yea sometime the minister with one alone
suffices) to avoid al quarelling and partial dealing, I vvil take the parcels
of Christ's institution out of one, who seems Muscul. loc. co^. cap de ^ana
pa. 32*
most of others to agree with the Scottish religion and with M. B. very order
and division, making this as it were a preface and entrance to his
explication. For so much In Christ's supper are to be marked.
as the Lord Institution consists not in words only, but in words and deeds,
we must consider both the one and the other. For it was not done without great
wisdom, that be instituted this Actions, and
sacrament nether by doing without words, nether by words with out doing: but
so joined both together, that his disciples might Words.
see in his doing, and hear in his words, that whereby they might be
instructed in this matter, and so kept from error afterward.

Thus much in general. Come we now to the particulars, first concerning
Christ's action and doing, and after Christ's actions.
concerning his words. Concerning the action and doing of Christ (says he) so
much as perteyneth to the Institution of this sacrament; first, he took bread
into his hands. 2. He gave 1 2 3 4
thanks unto his father. 3. He brake the bread. 4. He gave the same to his
disciples, which were with him at the Supper, 5. He likewise took into his
hands the cup of wine. 6. As 5 6
before at the bread, so here at the cup he again gave thanks to his father.
7. He gave also the cup to his disciples. In these 7
parcels is contained the doing of Christ, and external form of this
sacrament. These actions of Christ, especially some which he counts most
important, he more at large declares thus: That he took bread into his hands,
gave thanks, brake, and gave it to his disciples, might have seemed to been
done as a thing of custom: but the tenor of the words which be adds in way of
exposition, admonished them sufficiently, that this doing of his was not to be
accounted among Hal^it rationem er insti^tionem sacramenti.
things usual and ordinary, but that it contained the order and institution of
a sacrament. Concerning the cup of wine ^^us he vvriteth. I nothing doubt, but
in those East parts of 5 Ibid pa. 32^.
the world, where the wines are must strong, it was an universal custom to
delay their wine with water: which universal custom was also authorized by
the law of God. For so Hieron. qu^stion. Hebrai^ in Paralip. lib. 1.
S. Hierom affirms, and wills to be observed, that the wine which was
offered to God in sacrifice in the old law, was mingled with water. Whereby
that manner of mingling the wine became so universal in all cases whether divine
or humane, that as Musculus grants, the Hebrew (...)
word which signifies to mingle, is used also, for pouring out, Proverb 9. 23.
Esai. 5. And hereof I think it came to pass (says Of mingling the ^^^lice
with water
he) that the Bishops of the East, and after them the Italians, began to mingle
their wine with water, as in their vulgar use, so also in the mystical. Al
which he applies to declare that it is most probable, Christ to have done so
likewise. Howbeit because it is not expressed in the gospel, he would not have
the church bound thereto. And yet this may farther be added, somewhat more
strongly to confirm Musculus judgment, that in the special figurative Exodus
24. v. 6. ^.
cup of the legal sacrifice foreshewing this of Christ, there was water mingled
with the blud of the sacrifice (and therefore more then probable it is that
Christ made correspondence Heb. 9. v. 19.
thereunto) as we find recorded by S. Paul: albeit water be not mentioned in
the text of the law, in that cup of Moses, as nether it is mentioned in the
text of the gospel, in this cup of our Savior. Concerning 6
the geving of thanks; this did Christ (says Musculus) twi^e, first at the
bread, then at the cup. Which thing albeit he did commonly, yet in this
present case doutles he did it with singular zeal, according as S. Luke
witnesses ca. 22. With great desire have I desired to eat this Pasch with
you before I suffer. That which Musculus mentions of thankes-geving to god,
and omitteth al other blessing of the bread or wine, we must a little supply
out of other men of as good credit and authority as Musculus. For that Christ
not only gave thanks to his father, but also blessed and sanctified the
elements of bread and wine, it is plain by the story of the gospel. For so
signifies the Matthew. 26. 26. cap. 14. 19. Luc. 9. 16. Marc. 10. 16 ^. Cor. 10.
16
word (...) used by S. Matthew, and the same by the Evangelist S. Luke, and
S. Paul is determined and referred directly to the bread and wine. Which is
so clear and manis^^, that Beza expounding that word in S. Paul, The cup of
blessing which we bless, though in other places he avoid such blessing, as
much as possibly Beza in 1. Corinthians. 10. v. 16.
he may, yet here he confesses it. Puto (...) idem hic declarare atque in
insinitis locis veteris testamenti (...), id est (...), seu consecrare and
sanctificate. I think (says Beza) that here (...) Christ sanctified and
blessed the bread.
signifies (as does the like word in innumerable places of the old testiment)
to sanctify, or to consecrate, This S. Paul means by that greek word.
Which thing besides those innumerable places of the old testament justifying
this interpretation, he approves by many of the new, namely Matthew. ca. 5. 44.
ca. 25. 34. Luc. 9. 16. Matthew. 26. 26. where that word, blessing, is used in
like construction and signification, and imports as much as sanctifiyng and
consecrating, and is referred to the bread which Christ took in his hands,
and whereof he made the Sacrament. And our English Jew. cont. Hand. a^ti^. 1
diuis. 9. pa. 23
Ievvel expounding these words of Christ: Hoc facite do this, says, that
their sense and meaning is, Take ye bread, bless it (and not only thank God)
break it, and give it in my remembrance. Whereunto he adds, This is not a
ceremonial accident, but the very end, purpose and substance of Christ's
institution. With Beza and M. Ievvel herein agrees John Calvin, and vvithal
refelleth both Call. in 1. Cor. ca. 10. v. 16.
Erasmus and al other, who in this place expound blessing by thankes-geving;
and to bless, make nothing else, but to Blessing and geving thanks differ much.
give thanks. Which three so singular doctors, especially armed with
innumerable places of scripture both in the old testament and new, may suffice
against Musculus and M. B. also. Against Musculus, for that he finding the (...)
word to bless and to give thanks used by the Evangelists in some places to
one effect, thereof concludes ^ondly and directly against the scripture in
other places innumerable, Muscul. Com meant. in Mat. cap. 14. page 425. Et in
locis communibus c^. de ^ana pa. 321.
that to bless in this place of consecrating the sacrament is nothing else, but
to give thanks, to praise and glorify god, and that Christ used no other
blessing then geving thanks and that blessing he referred not to the bread,
but to his father. Against M. B. for that albeit he confess in word blessing
to signify sanctification and consecration of the elements and not only
praising of god, or geving him thanks: yet after his manner in the same place
contradicting him self, he tells us, that to bless and give thanks have al
one Pa. 14^.
signification: and in a solemn marginal note advises his reader, that the
word blessing and thankes-geving, are used indifferently, and each one is
expressed by the other. Which in this case, and as he utters it, is most
false, and impossible to be true. For among the places quoted by Beza to note
one example; as here Christ blessed the bread, Luke 9. 16.
so in S. Luke he blessed the fisnes, a^b thereby multiplied and increased them
to feed thousands. And will M. B. say that Christ there gave thanks to the
fishes, and here to the bread? that the words are indifferent, and one
expresses the other? But much more by argument he labors to disprove al
blessing of the elements, which in words he approves. For thus he disputes
substantially from Page 144. M. ^. agument against (...) t^^ bread. ^^
the very definition of blessing. God is said to bless when he geveth good
things to his creatures. For gods blessing is ever effectual. Man is said to
bless^, when he craves blessing at the hands of god to any man: when he blesses
in the name and at the command of god any person or people. In either of which
significations, we may not ascribe blessing to the bread or cup. For we use
nether to crave blessing to insensible elements, nor vet to bless them in the
name of god: and god uses to give good things to the sons of men, and not to
insensible creatures. Thus he: to prove, that never god nor man blessed, that
is, wrought any good effect, or prayed for any good effect to insensible
creatures, and therefore nether Wicked and unchristian.
did Christ. By which argument the discret reader may see how far the Scottish
ministry is gone from al sense of Christianity, and Christian Theology. For
they never use to crave blessing to insensible creatures, nor yet God bless^^
al ^^^ ^^^atu^es.
to ^ less them in the name of god. But the Apostolic church from the
beginning, by these examples of Christ, ever used so to bless in the name of
god, as in the Apostle 1. T^^^t. 4. 4
and most ancient fathers every where appears. And God him self from the
beginning thus blessed insensible creatures, and not only the sons of men, but
also the Marc 6. 41. ^^ ca. ^. 7. Genes. 1. 2^. 2^. ^^^. 2. ^ ^^ut^^o^. 2^ v.
^. Psu. 64. 12. Genes. 3. 14. 17. and ^. ^. ^9. Marc. 11. 21
sons of beasts (if so I may use the word) ^ovvles of the air, fishes of
the sea, and al other living creatures, as we see in the first chapter of
Genesis. which blessing of God brought some good to those creatures. And as on
the contrary, when God cursed the serpent, when he cursed the earth, when
Christ cursed the fruitles figuee, this curse was an impay^ng of the condition
of the setpent, of the earth, of the figtree: so when God by him sel^, or the
ministry of his servants blesses his creatures What is blessing.
this is a bettering of their condition. And albeit it end or be referred to
the benefit of man, yet it is a true blessing and good wrought also in the
creatures. And this is principa^ly so in the^e sacraments of the new
Testament, where both that of baptism. and this of the Eucharist, and al
other, have special blessing and sanctification bestovved die Christ to the
commodity and benefit of his church. Which thing seeing M. B. upon no other
ground then his own simple and sinful conceit, and authority of the
Scottish practice, most ignorantly against al scripture denies, I vvil take as
sure and certain^ Christ (...) a and sanctified ^^^ (...).
vz. that Christ not only gave thanks to his father, but also blessed,
sanctified, and consecrated the bread: because we are taught so to believe
both by the plain words of the Evangelists, by S. Paul, by consent of al
fathers, o^ al ancient I ^^u^gies or so^mes of Mass in all churches of
Christendom (whereof some example shall be given hereafter, and also by v^^^^t
of M. Ievvel, Calvin, and E^^ a who so effectually by innumerable places of,
cripture p^oue it and refel Musculus, and consequently M. B. in th^^ point vv^o
against al scripture will have blessing of these elements to be al one with
giving thanks to God. Wherefore according to this most sufficient authority,
as Musculus truly tells us, that Christ at two several times, first over the
bread, next over the cup, gave thanks to God; so must we also assure our
selves, the scripture and these Protestans leading us thereunto, that Christ at
two several times blessed, sanctified, and consecrated those 2. several
elements of bread and wine, which he took in his hands.

Concerning the breaking and deliverie of the bread, 7 page ^^^.
Musculus words are: Christ brake it with his own hands, and gave it to his
disciples. He gave not the bread whole to Christ's breaking of bread what it
signifies.
them which they afterward should break, but him self brake it. He gave it
not them to distribute, but him self did distribute it, and willed them to take
and eat it. He delivered with his own hands this sacrament of grace,
signifying withal that it was not possible for any man to have participation of
his grace, except himself gave it by the virtue of his spirit. Of which point
I warn the reader not without cause. Thus much (says Musculus) concerning the
external fact and doing of Chrisi, so far forth, as agrees to the institution
of the mystical Ibi. pa. ^^^. 8
Supper. After al which, finally for declaration, that they might understand
what he meant by the premises, he adds, This is my body, which is given and
broken for Christ's words.
you. Do this in commemoration of me. Again. This cup is the new Testament in
my blud, which is shed for you, and for many, to remission of sins. Do this
so often as ye shall drink it, in commemoration of me. This is the sum of that
which Christ did, and which he spoke about the sacrament, which (as the same
author witnesses) Christ first of al did in the eyes of his disciples, both
that they afterward page ^^^.
should do the same them selves, and also deliver the same order to his church.

he did and spoke as things apperteyning to the Sacrament, and which he would
not have omitted by his Apostles, disciples, and aftercome^^, to return to M.
B, who affirms all the action^ and speeches which Christ did and uttered, to
be so essential to the Supper: that if any one, yea any jot be omitted, the
whole Supper is marred, and perverted, let us conserre these doings of Christ
with the Scottish Supper ministered after their order, which is this. Commonly
once in a month, the minister T(...)me o(...).
when the supper is to be ministered, first of al out of the pulpit reherseth
briefly to the people a piece of the 11. chapter of S. Paul touching the
Institution of this sacrament. Afterward he makes some Sermon against either
the Pope and Catholic religion (which is their common argument) or in praise
of their own, which is more seldom: or as seems good to the minister. The
Sermon or exhortation ended, the minister comes The vvo^as of the communion
^o^ke. ^^^^^. 22. ^. ^^^^^. 14. ^. ^^^. 22 b. ^. ^or. 11. c.
down from the pulpit, and sits at the table (now begins the communion)
every man and woman likewise taking their place, as occasion best serves. Then
he takes bread and gives thanks either in these words following, or like in
effect. The thankes-geuing set down for a pattern for all ministers to follow,
as in sevv words it rendereth thanks to God for his benefits of creation,
sanctification and redemption by Christ (as is ordinary in many good prayers)
so it makes no mention of the Supper or any thing which Christ spoke or did
therein, save that in one place they mention a table and remembrance of Christ's
death in these words: Although we be sinners, nevertheless at the commandment
Matthew. 16. ^ 2. Cor. 2. d. ^^^, 11, c. (...). 10. Matthew, 2^, b (...). 22. b, ^
^or. 11. c.
of Jesus Christ our lord, we present our selves to this his table, (which he
has left to be used in remembrance of his death until his coming again) to
declare and witness before the world, that by him alone we have received
liberty and life etc. and that by him alone we are possessed in our spiritual
kingdom to eat and drink at his table, with whom we have our conversation
presently in heaven. This is all that approaches any thing nigh to the words
and Institution of Christ. Immediately after this thankes-geuing, the minist^r
Matthew. 26. ^. Mar. ^ ^^. ^. Luc. 22. c. ^. Cor. 10. d.
breaks the bread, and delivers i^ to the poeple, who distribute and divide
the same among them selves, according to our Savior Christ, commandment.
Likewise he gives the ^^p. Here is the entier form and essence of the
Scottish communion. For that during the time of eating and drinking, some place
of the scripture concerning Christ's death, is read, this is a sequel and
fashion following after, and not included in the nature and substance of the
communion which al goes before.

Let us now severally confer Christ's supper with this Many diffrences (...)*
i^ ^^ Supper and the Scottish communion. 1
communion, and consider how many, and the same most substantial and essential
points after their own grant used there, are wanting here. Christ first of
al took bread in to his hands, and afterward gave thanks, and blessed, which
albeit it may seem usual and ordinary; yet (says Musculus) it is not so, and
the very words of scripture shevve, that it apperteyned to the order and
institution of a sacrament. Here the minister clean contrariwise, inuerting
the order of Christ, first gives at large a thanks, and after takes the
bread, the which without any thanks, 2
or any word at al, he delivers to the people. Secondarily, Christ made a
special and several thanksgiving, and blessing, and sanctification or
consecration, first of the bread and next of the cup, and this also he did as a
thing perteyning to the very order and institution of his sacrament. Here is
no such matter, but a confuse thankes-geuing without relation to either, and
which conteyneth a blessing, sanctification, or consecration of nether. Christ
did not only 3
break the bread once, and afterward bid them break and distribute it among
them selves, but him self brake, and distributed and delivered it to them each
one with his own hand: signifying thereby, that it was not possible for them
to have any participation of grace except he gave it them by the virtue of his
spirit. Of which point Musculus gives the reader a special warning and
prouiso. Here the minister loath belike to take so much pains, leaves that
office to the people to distribute and divide the bread among them selves (as
though al grace came to them, from them selves without Christ and his spirit,
of whom they had no need) and vvithal he makes a gross lie upon Christ
(which may stand for a fourth difference between 4
their Communion and Christ's Supper) that Christ commanded them so to do.
Whereas in the quotations, with which they most foolishly paint their margent,
there is no such thing, but the clean contrary, as before out of the Gospel,
and the very places which they quote, by Musculus has beneshevved. Christ
mingled the 5
cup which he consecrated: which thing albeit Musculus directly affirms
not, yet he supposes it most likely and probable, yea he nothing doubts of
it, being the universal custom of the country. Whereunto if he would add,
that the text of the Evangelists is indifferent, as Matthew. 26. 27. Marc. 14. 23
Luc. 22. 20. 2. Cor. 11. 25
expressing nether clean wine, nor wine mingled with water, but only the cup
or chalice, in every place which undoubtedly speaks of the Sacrament (for
the place of S. Matthew, whom S. Mark follows, where is mentioned Matthew.
26. 29. Marc. 14. 25
the fruit of the vine, is doubtful, and by ancient fathers expounded diverse
ways: albeit being exactly co^ferred with S. Luke, and the Jews manner of
eating their Paschal lamb, it seems most probably to apperteyne Luke 22. 1^.
Before, cap. 3. ^um. 7.
not to the cup of Christ's Supper, but to the cup of that Paschal lamb: and
being applied to the supper of Christ, though it include the one, it excludes
not the other) and then lay unto the Gospel being indifferent, the general
manner of the country, of the law, of the Jewish Synagoge, of the sacrifices,
especially of that singular Before. pa. 5.
sacrifice which most expressly foreshevved this, al making for the mixtion of
water with it, and the universal consent of the Christian church, and al
antiquity Christ's chalice ^^d in it water and wine.
besides; he should not deny, but Christ^o tempered the chalice whereof he
made the sacrament. So testifies S. James the Apostle (who was present) in
his Liturgy: Likewise after supper Christ took the chalice, and mingling it
Liturg, Jacob. Clement Constituti^. Apostolic. lib. ^. cap. 17. Philip. 4. 3.
^^^. lib. 4. ca. 57. and lib. 5. cap. 1.
with wine and water, giving thanks, sanctifying and blessing it, gave it to
us his disciples etc. So writes the most auncict Christian doctor S. Clement a
man of the Apostolical age, mentioned and commended by S. Paul. S. Ireneus
names it temperamentum calicis, and calicem mistum the chalice mingled or
tempered. S. Cyprian a number of times epaeteth that Christ so delivered, that
Christ offered Cyprian lib. a epist. 3.
his chalice mingled with wine and water. So witnesses S. Basile in his
Liturgy. And finally to omit al other (because Basil, in Lit* gia.
it is a thing well known, that the whole primitive church consents
herein) so witnesses the 6. Council Anno domi^ 6^0. Concilia^ Constantinop.
ca. 32.
of Constantinople, and proves it by great authority* The words are. The use
of mingling water and wine in the chalice, in all churches is kept, as delivered
from god him self. For S. James the brother of Christ and first bishop of
Jerusalem, likewise S. Basil that most glorious archbisshop of Caesarea, having
put in writing this mystical sacrifice, declare that the holy chalice should
have in it water and wine. And the fathers of the Council of Carthage (in
which Council was S. Austin) plainly and precisely decree, that in the
Council. Corth^ g^^. 3. ca. 24. Con^^^. African. ca. 4.
sacrament of Christ's body and blud, nothing be offered more, then Christ him
self delivered, that is to say, bread, and wine mingled with water. Out of al
which, the fathers of this Council of Constantinople conclude: If therefore
any bishop or priest follow not this order delivered by the Apostles, but offer
the immaculate sacrifice, not mingling water with wine (in the chalice) let him
be deposed from his office. This general, or rather universal consent and
custom of al Christendom, coming thus directly from the Apostles, might
suffice to overpeise for our side, especially the word of the Gospel being
indifferent, or rather (compared with the old law) more bending to the same
side. But because I vvil charge M. B. and his felovv-ministers no farther then
they charge them selves; and they plainly confess not Christ's chalice to have
been tempered with water; or at lest think not the^ selves bound to follow
Christ's example herein, because it is not evidently specified in the Gospel:
nether vvil I urge them farther with breach of Christ's ordinance in this
behalf. But the last, and the same most pregnant, and principal of 6
al, that which gives light to all the precedent actions Christ's words clean
omitted in the Scottish Supper.
of Christ, the words which Christ adjoined to declare and express the
meaning of the ^est; the words which (as Musculus truly avouches) Christ by
his divine wisdom joined to his doing, and so bound the one with the other,
that his disciples might see in his doing, and hear in his speaking that
whereby they might be instructed in this sacrament, and thereby al occasion cut
of from man's rasbnes to invent any new thing, or corrupt any part of this
sacrament: these words I say, so vvisely disposed, so necessarily ordained, so
significantly declaring our saviors meaning and intention: these words so
divine, so mystical, and effectual, where are they? How chances it, that
they appear no where? Are Christ's words not vvorth the rehersing: Or
challenge you to your selves a souerain vvisdome above the eternal vvisdome of
God? If not, why disioyne you most sacrilegiously, that which he conjoined?
Why separate you and pull a sunder that which Christ bound and coupled
together? After these precedent signs and actions, why here we not, This is
my body geven and broken for you: This cup is my blud of the new testament,
which is shed for you to remission of sins? Why is this inexplicable
benefit omitted, which was principally intended, and by all the Evangelists
so specially remembered? If you list not to rehearse them with the opinion of
Catholics or Papists (as you call true Christians) as though there were some
force, virtue, effect and operation in them, which was the faith of all the
ancient and primitive church, as has been shevved: yet at lest rehearse them
historically Before pa. 49, 50. 51. The English communion.
by way of narration (as is the guise of the English comunion) for that in the
story of the gospel so they stand, and there ought to have their place. M. B.
vvil perhaps reply; O Sir, we omit them not. For in the beginning, Objection.
before our Sermon, the minister reherseth such words out of S. Paul. But
what makes that to your Communion? Answers.
what makes the ministers talking out of the pulpit before the Sermon, to his
communion which he ministers sitting at the table, long after the Sermon is
ended? Sacrilegious corruption.
What if the minister before he came to the church read the whole chapter in
his own house? what if over night? Christ's order is that they should be
used and joined with those other doings and actions in the administration of
his supper. You thrust them away from that place. Christ took bread, gave
thanks, blessed, divided, distributed to his disciples; and then telling them
what it was, used those words. You first take bread, and then divide it, as
perhaps you do at your own domestical table: but for ought else that should
separate Christ's table from your profane table, Christ's spiritual supper, from
your fleshly and belly supper, you do nothing at al in such order as Christ
required, and in such order as is requisite to make a sacrament, to make
Christ's table, to make a spiritual Supper.

If the Minister at eight of the clock say to the child which is to be
baptized: I baptize thee in the name of the father, the son, and the holy
ghost: or according to Zuinglius guise, I baptize thee in the name of the lord:
and after having told a tale of 2. or 3, hours long, at ten of the clock
sprinkle a little water on the child; will any Christian call this baptism? No,
it is a mere profanation of baptism, and contempt of Christ and his
ordinance. `The like is to be deemed of this your most arrogant and damnable
tearing and renting in sunder of Christ's divine mystery; or rather clean
removing and taking quit away of that which Christ appointed for the chief and
principal: I say clean removing away, because that forerunning talk out of
the pulpit, being separated from the communion by so long tract of time and
interposing of a Sermon, can be no more accounted any parcel of the communion,
then the words of baptism uttered at eight of the clock, are to be esteemed a
part of baptising or sprinkling of the water, which ensues 2. hours after.
Wherefore, of this example and manner of communion, Caluinists offended with
Christ's words
I wish the godly and Christian reader to consider, how just occasion the
Caluinists give to their brethren the Lutherans, to write of them, that they
hate the Before p. ^. ^^.
^ords of Christ's institution, that they can not abide nether ^o set, nor to
hear them, and therefore administer their supper without them, that not
without good reason Luther wrote of them, that when they are enforced to talk
of this matter, and examine the words of Christ, they Luther Tom. 7 defensio
verso ^um cana, sol. ^^3. ad^^ racite ac lenit^r gress^^ figunt, ^^si super
^vi^ ambula^ent. ac si diabolus ^ll^^ a ^^rgo in ^^ar^t.
make such a do, before they can be brought unto it, they use such a number of
preambles, such vaunts and bragger; they speak so many things from the matter,
and so little to the purpose as is incredible. And when at length they come to
the point it self, then lo, they tread so nicely and gingerly, as though they
walked upon eggs and feared they breaking of them, and a man can scarce turn
his hand, but away they fly with such extreme have, as though the devil were
at their heels, and they feared lest they should stumble and break their
neck at every syllable which Christ pronounced. A very lively image and
representation of this, may a man see in the Scottish communion book: where,
in the beginning of their Communion, in the margent, very curiously they note
Matthew. 26. Marc. 14. Luc. 22. 1. Cor. 11. In the end, they again daube the
margent with printing the same quotations of Matthew, Mark, Luke, The
Scottish Supper is no sacrament of Christ, by M. ^. grant.
Paul; as they do also a thirdtime in their formal Thankesgeuing. But if ye
enter in to the text, and look for Christ's words, erlier as they are uttered
by S. Matthew, or S. Mark, or S. Luke, or S. Paul; ye find no part o^ piece
of them; ve find no body of Christ given or broken: ye find no blud shed in
remission of sins: ye find no blud of the new testament: ve find nothing but
bread from the bakers shop, and wine from the vintners seller. For if the
missing of any ceremony, any thing or jot that Christ did suffice to take
from it al nature of a sacrament, pa. ^.
and leave it common and vulgar bread, as M. B. peremptorily affirms: whereas
here are wanting so many matters practiced by Christ, so many points, and they
each one essential according to his own confession; yea whereas the very
principal of Christ's ordinance and institution is left out among so many other
things which Christ did which Christ spoke, and which Christ required to be
sp^k^^ and done; how can it be denied, but this Scottish communion, according
to the sentence set down by M. B. him pa. 9. 10.
self, and most clear reason, and inevitable sequel drawn thence, is a
manifest corrupting and perverting of Christ's holy Supper: is mereprophane,
wicked, and Anabaptistical, many degrees worse then the Jewish paschal supper,
or any Christian and good man's dinner or breakefast (as Luther also truly
vvriteth) in which, bread Before pa. ^^
is taken as well as in their communion; god honored Any vulgar dinner as good
as the scottis^^ Supper.
and Christ remembered, and thanks given to him for his inestimable benefits,
as well as in their communion: Christ believed, that is to say, eaten by faith,
as well as in their Communion; bread and drink blessed and sanctified by the
word of god, prayer, and thankes-geuing better then in their communion; as much
love and charity 1. Timoth. ^^ 4. 5.
found amongst honest neighbors, as is among their communica^ts: and finally
what so ever is good and religious in their communion (if any such thing be
there) is found as truly and plentifully in such a dinner, as in that their
Supper. Whereas their Supper is besides desiled and polluted with schism and
heresier with deuelish contempt of Christ's church, of omitting, altering,
mangling and perverting Christ's own doing, of corrupting his holy sacrament:
of which profane and sacrilegious wickedness no piece is found in such a
breakfast or dinner.

Of Christ's body truly joined and delivered with the Sacrament.
The Argument.
M. B. declaration, why the sacrament is called asigne, vz. for that there is
truly joined to it, and it exhibiteth to the faithful communicants the thing
signified; that is, the very substance of Christ's body and blud. Al which he
utters so plainly, in so significant terms, and with such comparisons, that
he seems to be a very Catholic, or at lest a Lutheran in that point.

Especially for that he requires true and real joining of Christ's body to ours
by the sacrament, that so our bodies may be made partakers of life immortal and
resurrection, which is the doctrine of the ancient fathers, and most strongly
confirms the real presence.

CHAP. 6.
THat which the Scottish communion book in the last chapter, by refusing and
abandoning Christ's order, and consequently bringing their Supper to mere bakers
bread, and tauerners wine, has mar^ed; that in this next place M. B. with
very honorable words goes about to mend and repair again. For thus he
declares why their bread and wine are called signs. The reason why I call
them signs (says page 10.
he) is this: I call them not signs because they signify or represent How the
sacrament is a sign.
only the body and blud of Christ. But I call them signs, because they have the
body and blud of Christ conjoined with them: yea truly is the body of Christ
conjoined with th^^ Christ's body conjoined with the sacrament.
bread, and the blud of Christ conjoined with that wine etc. Again. In respect
of this exhibition chiefly, that they are instruments to deliver and exhibit
the thing that they signify, and not in respect only of their representation,
they are called signs. This is very good and sound doctrine. For in deed such
grace and virtue have sacraments of the new Testament (namely and especially
these two principal, baptism and the Supper, which as yet the Protestants
accept for sacraments) that they are signs exhibiting and conser^ing, and have
conjoined with them the thing which they signify, as is the general doctrine
of al Catholic w^ters; yet so (which also M. B. very wisely marketh) that pa.
1^.
we always put a distinction between the principal efficient deliverer, which
is God; and the instrumental efficient, which are the sacraments: which not of
them selves, but by God, are made p tent instruments to deliver that same thing
which they signify.

Al which being true, M. B. proceeds very well against such Zuinglians and
Calvinists, as make the sacrament only pa. 1^.
a figure representing or signifying a thing absent. For if that were so, then
any picture or dead image should be a sacrament. For there is no picture, as
the picture of the king, but at the Christ's body delivered in the sacrament
sight thereof, the king will come to your mind. So if the sacrament did no
further, al pictures should be sacraments. But the Lord has appointed the
sacraments, as hands to deliver and exhibit the thing signified: and for this
deliverie and exhibition chiefly they are called* signs. This doctrine I much
commend in M. B. And would to god he could continue in it, especially if as he
very directly, plainly, and Catholikely describes the nature of these
sacramental signs; so he can give us as true and sincere a description of the
things signified which by these signs are Beza epist. Theolog. 65. Before pa.
75 76.
delivered. And that also he performs very well. For against Calvin and some
Calvinists, that vvil have the thing signified and received, to be a virtue and
grace flowing from the flesh of Christ, and not Christ's true real substance, he
sets down in plain and sincere manner, that the things signified and
received by the bread and pa. 13. the same is repeated sermon 2. pa. 65. 66.
wine are not the benefits of Christ, or the virtue that flows out of Christ
only, but the very substance of Christ him self: the substance with the
virtues, gifts and graces that flow from the substance: whole Christ god and
man without separation of his natures, are the things signified. For it is not
possible pa. 14.
that I be partaker of the juice, which flows out of any substance, except I
be partaker of the substance it self. It is not possible that my stomak can be
refreshed with that meat, the substance whereof comes not to my mouth. So it
is impossble, that I can get the juice and virtue, that flows from Christ
Christ's flesh truly delivered in the sacrament.
except I first get the substance, that is Christ him self. And is it true
then, that with the sacramental signs is truly joined (not only in figure)
whole Christ god and man? yea his very substance? Is this the special reason,
why the pa. 11.
sacrament is called a sign, because it exhibites and delivers the thing that
it signifies to the soul and heart, so s^ore as the sign is delivered to the
mouth? To what end should this Objections.
be? and what need is there of such miraculous con^unetion? ^
whereas otherwise if Christ's body be as far dista^t from our bodies, as is
heaven from earth, we seeing the bread broken, and wine povvred out, may
remember Christ's body and blud, and so by faith eat him? Again, 2
to use Zuinglius common argument, which afterward S^^ after cap. ^9.
M. B. him self urges to the same purpose: whereas the soul is a spirit,
and Christ's flesh and blud things corporal, how can these corporal things
work any benefit to that which is altogether spiritual? If they do not,
why then are they conjoined with the signs, by which coiunction there
comes no good at al? To the first M. B. answers, and yeldeth great reason
hereof: To the Answer of M. B. to the first. pa. 15.
end (says he) that this sacrament may nourish thee to life everlasting, thou
must get in it thy whole Savior, whole Christ god and man, with his whole
graces and benefits, without separation of his substance from his graces, or
one nature from the other. Touching the second objection; though To the second.
pa. ^6.
(says he) Christ's body, flesh and blud be in it self true flesh and true
substance, as it was in the womb of the virgin, yet in the supper it is called
spiritual, a spiritual thing, spiritual pa. ^7.
food, in respect of the spiritual end, where unto it serves to my body and
soul: because the flesh and blud of Christ serves to nurish me not to a
temporal but to a spiritual and heavenly life, and to a heavenly, celestial,
and spiritual end. In respect of this end, the flesh of Christ, and Christ in
respect of his flesh is called the spiritual thing in the sacrament: and also
for that the flesh of Christ which is geven in the sacrament, is rece^^ed pa.
^8.
by a spiritual and secret manner, which is not seen to the eyes of men.

Cat^^^ike veri^ies taught by M. B.
this place geven him by M. B. First, that in the sacrament, the sign has the
thing signified, truly conjoined with it, so that the one is not present in
Edinburgh, the 1
other absent in London; much less the one present in Christ present in the
sacrament.
Edinburgh, the other as far absent and distant, as the highest heaven is from
Edinburgh; but the thing signified is truly conjoined with the sign. The next
is, that the 2
thing signified is not Christ's divinity, not the merits of in substance of
his flesh.
his death and passion, but his very flesh and blud, the true and natural
substance thereof: and therefore the true and natural substance of Christ's body
and blud being the thing signified, is also truly conjoined with the sign and
therefore present where the sign is, and exhibited and delivered by the sign
and with the sign: which is called a sign especially for this reason,
because it exhibits and delivers the thing which it signifies. Thirdly, that
this conjunction of 3 pa. ^5. Christ's presence in the sacrament is wonderful.
Christ with the sacrament for our use, is hard to conceive, because it is a
high and divine mystery, it is a mystical, secret, divine and spiritual
conjunction, as the conjunction betwixt us and Christ is full of mystery, which
is not possible to tell and express by c^ular demonstration. But who ever would
pa. 26.
understand that conjunction, his mind must be enlightened with an heavenly eye
to see this mystical and secret conjunction, that is betwixt the son of God
and us in the sacrament. And except ye have this heavenly illumination, ye can
never understand nether your own conjunction with Christ, nor yet that
conjunction betwixt the sign and the thing signified in the sacrament.
Fourthly, albeit both the conjunction 4
betwixt the sign, and the thing signified in the sacrament be mystical and
spiritual, as likewise the very body and flesh of Christ, which is exhibited
and ministered to us in the sacrament and with the sacrament, is called
spiritual, both Spiritual and mystical.
because of the spiritual life and spiritual end of life everlasting and
immortality, where unto it nourishes our body and soul, as also because it
is received by a secret and spiritual manner not apparent to the eye of man: yet
therefore yet true.
we must not deny, nor doubt, but that the true flesh and blud, the true
substance of Christ god and man is there geven us in the sacrament. Fifthly, the
reason why it is thus given 5
^s in the sacrament, vz. to nourish us both in soul and body, not to a
temporal life, but to a spiritual and heavenly life, to nourish I say body and
soul to a heavenly, celestial and spiritual Joan. ^.
end, that is to life eternal, to eternal joy and resur^ection, as Christ him
self declares, this is a w^ightie motive besides all the premises, to
establish a true, real and Real presence.
corporal presence of Christ in the sacrament, which also M. B. very well
declares thus. What availes it to see pa. 18.
my health in a box standing in the Apothecaries booth? what can it work
toward me, if it be not applied? So it is not enough to see Christ (in heaven
by faith) but he must be geven us, o^ ^e^m. 2. pa. ^5.
else he can not work health and salvation in us etc. Which similitude joined
to two other going before in this sermon, and formally repeated again in the
next, have this plain and direct meaning, if we regard the plain direct
words, and stand to them. As it is not possible that my pa. 14.
stomach should be refreshed with that meat, the substance where The real
presence expressly taught by M. B.
of I receive not into my mouth; nether possibly can my drouth be slaked with
drink, which never comes within my body: nether can the medicine in the
Apothecaries shop do me any good, or help my disease, if I regard it only
standing in the shop, and apply it not unto me: in like manner, if we vvil
have benefit by Christ's flesh and blud, if we vvil cure our spiritual
diseases, purific our soul, comfort both body and soul, and make them
capable of resurrection and immortal life, we must not think it sufficient to
regard him by faith in heaven, having besides, means to receive him really in
earth. But seeing, for our good and to work us such benefits, he has truly
conjoined his body with the holy sacrament, and made that a potent instrument
to deliver and exhibit his divine body unto us, as the Apothecaries box does
deliver and exhibit us the composition or medicine; we must truly and really
receive the one, as we do the other, if we look for help to our body and
soul to come by the one, as we hope to recover health of body by the other.
Otherwise look how impossible it is unto thee to be fed with that f^od, that
never comes into thy mouth; or to recover pa. 67.
health of that dr^ge, which was never applied, nor came never out of the
Apothecaries booth; it is as impossible for thee to get thy health, of the body
of Christ, except thou first eat his body, and drink his blud. Thus M. B. And
to this very end and purpose did the most ancient fathers apply these and the
like similitudes, shevving most excellently that as in humanity many good
thing; were wrought for the body by the soul, and many things for the
soul by the body: so in divinity many good virtues and graces of God proceed
from the soul to the sanctification and glorification of the body, as faith,
hope, charity, patience etc. many also, as consession of Christ's name, Romans 10
10.
suffering of afflictions, alms geving, fasting, praying, baptism,
confirmation etc. were wrought by the body Christ's body to ally received
causes resurrection to our bodies.
to the beautifying and more sanctification of the soul. Among which, the
receiving of Christ's divine body in the sacrament, was one, whereby the body
fust, and consequently the soul is endued with grace of resurrection of life
eternal. So writes that most ancient martyr Ireneus lib. ^ ca. 2.
S. Ireneus. As a grain of corn falling in to the earth and dying, ryseth in
his time by the power and spirit of God: so our bodies nourished by the
Eucharist, which is the body and blud of Christ; though they be buried in the
earth and resolved into dust, yet shall rise in their time, the word of god
(that is Christ) geving them resurrection to the glory of god the father. Idem
lib. 4. ca. 34.
Again: with what face say the heretics that our flesh perishes (never to
rise again) quae a corpore et sanguine Domini alitur: which is nourished to
eternal life by the body and blud of Christ? Which is the argument also of
Tertullian in his book Tertul. lib. do resurrection^ carnis. Gregor. Nysse nus
oration. Ca te^he^. cap. 36 37. Vide Euthymium in pamplia. part^ 2. tit. 21.
de resurrectione carnis. Gregotius Nyssenus brother to S. Basil the great,
disputes altogether in like so^me. As a little leaven (says he) makes the
whole mass of dow like to it, even so the immortal body of Christ entering into
our body, alters and changes it. And as a poison mingled with that which is
wholesome, marreth and corrupts it: so the immortal body of Christ, makes
that where in to it is received, like to an immortal nature. And a little after
in the same place. The body of Christ is joined to the bodies of the faithful,
to the Cyril. in Joan lib. 4. ca. 15. 22. 23. Vide eundem lib. 10. ^^ loan. ca.
13. and lib. 11. ca. 2^
end that by such a contunction with an immortal body, man also maybe made
partaker of immortality. The very like comparison uses S. Cyril archbisshop
of Alexandria. A^ asparkle of her put in straw or hey, seueth al on fire; so
Christ JESUS the word of God (by means of the Eucharist) joined to our
corruptible nature, causes it wholly to rise immortal. Much to like purpose
writes S. Chrysostom, alluding yet rather to M. B. similitude of the
Apothecaries shop and receipt. Let us all that are sick (says he) go for
remedy Chrysostom. in Matthew. homil. ^1.
to Christ with great faith. For if they which only touched the hem of his
garment, were forthwith healed; how much more shall we be strengthened, if we
receive him wholly in to us? And to be brief, nothing is more usual in the
ancient fathers, then to argue and prove the resurrection of the body to life
eternal by this reason, for that we receive Christ's immortal and glorious body
in the blessed Sacrament. For this cause the ancient and general Council
Before, pa. 22 Athanas. in tractat. super illa verba. Q^^ unque dixent verbu^
contra etc. Optat. lib. 6. contra Ta^m. Hilar. lib. ^. de Trinitate. Joan. 6.
of Nice calls the sacrament a pledge or symbol of our resurrection: S.
Athanasius, a defense and preservatiue to the resurrection of eternal life: S.
Optatus, a pledge of eternal life and hope of resurrection. The like whereof is
found in many other fathers, namely S. Hilarious. Al which reasons, speeches
and comparisons, are grounded upon that sentence of our Savior: He that eats
my flesh and drinks my blud, has life eternal, and I will raise him up in the
last day. Which place the fathers interpret of receiving Christ in the
blessed Sacrament. Namely (to allege one in steed of many) S. Cyril writes,
that not only our sowles were to be elevated by the holy ghost to life
everlasting; Cyril. in Joan. lib. 4. ca. 14.
but also this rude gr^sse terrestrial body of ours is to be reduced to
immortality, by eating the agreeable food of Christ's body. And when Christ
says, I will raise him up, he means, Corpus meum quod comedetur, my body
which shall be eaten (in the Sacrament) shall raise him Al which sayings of
Christ and those blessed Martyrs and bishops, An objection
the reader must not so interpret (as our adversaries cavil most peevishly) as
though we or they taught, that no man could be saved, or rise to life
everlasting, but such as received Christ in the sacrament. For nether they
^^svvered.
nor we doubt, but the Pa(...)s and good men in the old testament, as like wise
children and diverse others in the new shall be saved, who yet never came to the
actual participation of this divine mystery. But as our Savior and all the
church makes marryrdom a sovereign and principal mean to attain eternal
life, not excluding for all that other good virtues, as preaching, praying,
fasting, alms geving etc. and on the contrary, by like assured ground of
Christ and al scripture, heresy and infidelity is the high and broad way to
hell, albeit vicious life, covetousnes, usury, railing, and lying, and such
other qualities let men thither fast enough: in like manner this communication
of Christ's immortal and glorious body in the sacrament, is a special grace and
singular prerogative in the new testament, whereby our bodies and sovvles are
set in possession of life eternal, although gods infinite goodness has provided
us other means besides. Which singular and excellent grace whereas we see
attributed not to the eating of the Paschal lamb, nor to Manna, not to the
Jews bread, not to reading the scripture, not to preaching, not to believing
Christ's presence in the sacrament.
that Christ dyed and rose again for our justification (in all which yet we
being faithful men eat the flesh of Christ spiritually and also drink his
blud) but only to the eating of this dreadful mystery; hereof it follows
singular.
invincibly that both Christ in thus speaking, and the church in thus
believing, and the ancient fathers, martyrs, bishops, and Councels in thus
expounding; understood Christ's body to be truly, really, and in deed receiyed
in this Sacrament; far otherwise then by only faith, by which he was eaten
in the old figures and ceremonies of the law, as well as in the new
testament, or any sacrament hereof according to the Protestants opinion.

Of Christ's body no vvays joined, nor delivered with the sacrament.
The Argument.
M. B. hereticalls in words magnifieth the sacrament, whereas in truth he most
abaseth it* making Christ's body to be joined therewith as s^enderly as with any
creature in the world; more slenderly then it is joined with a word spoken.

Christ is more ^ighly joined to a picture or image, then to the (...) or
Scottish sacrament.

Two properties appointed by M. B. to their sign; the first, that it
re^embleth Christ, which it does no more then any other creature.

The ^^^^^* that with the bread Christ's body is jointly offered to the
communicants, in such sort at the minister offers bread. This is confuted,
first, as wicked and profane.

It is further confuted by order of the Scottish Communion b^^ke, by the
doctrine of the Protestant writers, and al ^^^^nists..

Christ is no otherwise joined to the Geneua Supper, or eaten therein, then in
any vulgar meat, or in beholding any creature ^^der heaven.

By the Ca^u nists own doctrine, and M. B. also, Christ is not as al received
in their Supper.

CHAP. 7.
THat M. B. were of the self same judgment with those ancient fathers
touching Christ's real presence in the sacrament, I should gather out of these
his words now r^h^arsed, and very ^^p. 6. number. 1
plainly do they import so much: and his speeches, comparisons and similitudes
vvaighed in them selves implie and conclude the same: nether could a man make
any doubt thereof, were it not that he being an heretic, the nature of heresy
makes us suspect that he speaks not plainly, roundly, and sincerely, in
simple faith as did those old good fathers. And our Savior teaches The cr^^t
of heretics.
that the manner of heretics is to cloth them selves, with sheep clothing, to
pretend simplicity, to speak Catholikely, to cover and color their impiety
with the phrase, words, and speech of the church, of Catholics and Catholic
Matt. 7. 15.
pastors: whereas inwardly they are ravening wolves, they mean da^nably, they
mean as heretics and Apostataes, and by such pleasant and sweet speeches and
benedictions inte^d Romans 16. 18.
nothing else but to seduce the hearts of innocents, and simple plain meaning
Christians: and as S. Peter teaches, they being lying masters, first work
their own destruction, 2. Pet. 2. 1. ^.
after by seyned and counterfeit words make merchandise of other men, seeking
to draw them also to like damnation: whereof before, I have showed very evident
example in Calvin a chief father of this heresy, and here M. B. ensues his
steps as like him, as one Protestant may Before pa. 69 71. 72. 73.
be like an other. For having by thus many arguments persuaded his auditorie,
that he had a marvelous high and reverend opinion of the Sacrament; immediately
as Esai. 19. 14. 3. Reg. ^^. 22. 1. Timot. 4. ^
being possessed with that spirit of giddines, which guides al men of his
stamp, he gives forth as many arguments to the contrary. The first, which is
the around and foundation of the rest, is this. Ye may perceive (...) pa. 23.
24.
by your own eyes, that the sign and the thing signified are not locally
conjoined: that is* they are not both in one place. Ye may perceive also by
your outward senses, that the holy of Christ and the signs are not conjoined
corporally* Their bodies touch not one the other. Ye may perceive also they are
not visibly conjoined. All this hitherto if a Jew or Pagan be present at the
supper, he sees as well as the minister, and therefore thus far forth their
faith is much alike. But this is a negative and privative disioyning and
separation of the sign and thing signified: let us hear of their union and
conjunction. We can crave no other conjunction then may stand and agree with
the nature of a sacrament, ^ pa. ^^
therefore here is no other then a sacramental conjunction. I grant: nether
does any Catholic require any other. But what mean you by a sacramental
conjunction? any thing else besides a tropical, figurative, or significatiue
representation? speak plainly, that the reader may know where to find you;
what you believe, and what you would have him to take unto. The conjunction
(says he) betwixt Christ's body and the sacrament is a pa. 2^. 27.
relative conjunction. Look what conjunction is betwixt the word which ye
hear, and the thing signified which comes to your mind, the like conjunction
is bewixt the sign which you see, How Christ's body is joined to the sacrament.
and the thing signified in the sacrament. Ye hear not the word so soon
spoken, but incontinent the thing signified comes to your mind. Speak I of
things past, to come, or never so far absent, I can not so soon speak of them
in this language, but the things signified comes in your mind: no doubt,
because pa. 2^.
there is a conjunction betwixt the word and the thing signified. Having
explicated this at large, in fine thus he draws to his conclusion. Always
look what conjunction is betwixt Ibidem.
the simple word, and the thing signified by the word; that same sort of
conjunction is betwixt the sacrament and the thing signified by the sacrament.
For the sacrament is no other thing but a visible word. Why a visible word?
Because as the audible pa. 29.
word conueyes the signification of a thing spoken, by the ear to the mind, so
the sacrament conveyes the signification by the eye to the mind. Here is the
right and entier description of all that which he calls a conjunction, which
in deed is no conjunction, but only a relation, and a relation voluntary
depending as al words do, be they visible or audible, upon the vvil of man
(who has authority to alter and change them) and therefore ioynes things
absent no more then the power of man is able to join them, which is nothing at
al. For let us a little better examine and consider these words, because in them
lies the pith and substance of these men's newly invented sacramental sign:
and M. B. after again precisely, diligently, and at large repeateth them as
very important and excellent well describing the conjunction of Christ's body In
the 2. Sermon pa. 77. 78.
with their sign. Even (says he) as when we hear named Paris, France,
Calecut, the king, north, south, things past and done in the beginning of the
world, things to come and to be done in the end of the world; such words
cause me^ if they mark them well, to conceive and in mind to imagine the thing
signified, which could not be except there were a conjunction between the word
and the thing signified: even so the bread and wine cause us to conceive and
imagine of Christ's body: and so they are conjoined to Christ's body, and Christ's
body to them. But by what reason is this called a conjunction? A conjunction of
things imports the things first, to be: next, to be joined and coupled
together. But things which were done in the beginning of the world, are not:
things which shall Christ's body no vvays joined to the sacrament.
be done in the end of the world, are not, they have no essence, no being,
they are nothing: and therefore can not be conjoined with any thing. And though
Paris, France, Jerusalem and Calecut be some things, and extant in the world,
yet when M. B. spoke of them in his Sermon, they were no more co^ioyned with
his word, then those other things past and to come, which are not, because the
word spoken is still of one nature, and represents al things signified a
like. So that in truth, this is no conjunction at al. And what can be more
absurd, then when Iud. 9. Genes. 3. 14. Matthew. 4. 1^.
an angel reproves the devil* or a good man blesses him self from him; when
God cursed the serpent, when Christ rebuked Satan, and bad him avoid: to say,
that angels and the devil, good men and the devil are conjoined; God was
conjoined with the Serpent, Christ was conjoined with Satan when he
mentioned him. Al which notvvithsta^ding of M. B. or some froward minister for
honor of their Supper, vvil needs have it called a conjunction; any Christian
man may sensibly tell him, that it is the pitifullest conjunction in the world,
as which allows no other conjunction between their sign or supper, and
Christ* body, then is between Christ Jesus god most glorious, and his immortal
enemy Satan the great devil of hell. Which point I vvish the reader Movv Christ
is conjoined with the Geneua Supper.
careful of the truth, diligently to mark, and carry in remembrance, vz. that
these men find no other conjunction between Christ and their Sign or Supper,
then is between things most contrary and opposite, then is between God and
the devil, light and darkness, heaven and hell, Christianity and Turkerie,
white and black. For as we read of Iulianus the Apostata, that being once
among Nazianz in Julian. oration. ^.
his co^iurers, who had raised up the devil, he suddenly affrighted by the
sight remembered god, and thereupon signed him self with the sign of the
cross: so very naturally one contrary induces the memory of an other:
blindness makes us remember sight, sickness health, ignorance learning, light
darkness* and so forth: and consequently according to this man's preaching and
doctrine doubtless these are conjoined one with an other, the devil is pa. 27.
28. 77. 78.
conjoined with God, hell with heaven, sickness with health, black is conjoined
with white, Catholic doctrine with heresy, and wit with folly: and even
such is the conjunction of their sign or supper with Christ's body. Which
how worthy a conjunction it is, and fit for a sacramental sign of Geneua, or
rather of Gehenna; I leave to the Christian readers judgment.

And yet furthermore against this conjunction rises a harder objection, and
which utterly refelleth even such coniunctio^; I mean so much as is between
words signifying and things signified; so much as is between nothing the
word, and nothing in deed. For albeit M. B. vvil needs have them like, and
that as by the word Paris pa. 78.
or king pronounced, by and by I remember the things signified, so as soon as
we see thebread in the ministers Christ's body less joined to the Scottish
sacrament then to a word. pa. 27. 28.
hand, incontinent the body of Christ comes to our mynds, yet I can not allow
thus much. For as before has been said, words spoken in some certain
language, as Scottish or English (which clause M. B. adds for good reason)
signify one thing by the consent of that nation, as M. B. exemplifieth by the
name of Paris, of a king etc. so that so soon as I hear Paris named, if I be
an English or Scottish man, I streightvvay think upon the city of Paris in
France, and likewise of a king or Queen. But so is it not in your bread of the
Supper. For that signifies not any certain thing by consent of any one nation,
but his signification depends of the ministers sermon, without Page 6. Page
1^.
which it is naught else but common bread. For so M. B. teaches. Ye shall not
so soon see the wine, but after the preaching and opening up of: he parts of
the sacrament, the blud of Christ shall come to your mind. And again more P^ag.
4.
plainly. The word that is preached, whereto the elements are annexed, is the
thing which quickens the whole action, which serves as it were a soul, and
gives life to the whole action. So that without the ministers sermon, your
bread and wine is without soul, without life, like to a dead stock The
Scottish sign signifies uncertainly.
or carrion: it is no sacrament, and so signifies nothing. Mary after the
sermon, it puts you in remembrance of Christ, and then lo when then
minister has preached and opened all the parts, Christ shall come to our mind,
not by virtue of the bread, but by reason of the minister who before has told
us so much. So that if the Minister make his sermon (as commonly) against the
Pope and Catholics, that they in executing heretics, Anabaptists, Zuinglians,
Trinitarians, and such other Gospellers, have powered out the blud of the Lords
martyrs, the^ the wine will as aptly make the Communicants remember such martyrs
blud. If a Catholic in mind, though schismatike in external behavior, or some
Lutheran be present who thinks with Luther and the Lutherans, that al such
creatures are martyrs of the Devil; the drinking of the wine vvil rather put
them in mind of other martyrs blud. If a right Zuinglian preach, unto whom the
Sacrament Before page 88. 89.
is nothing else but as a soldiers colors, or a serving man's badge (as
Zuinglius usually taught and vvrote) he after the sermon ended, when he sees
bread and wine, must needs conceive thereof according as he has hard the
minister preach, and open up the parts thereof: and so forth a number of such
significations, and as proper, apt and convenient one as the other must needs
rise, according to the difference of ministers sermons, of men's conceits and
fantalies. So that between the bread and wine, and Christ's body and blud;
there is no such conjunction, as is between words signifying and the things
signified: for that the words in every several nation at lest, have usually
one certain signification; whereas the bread and wine has diverse, according
to the diverse conditions and opinions both of ministers and of co^municants.

Any picture a better sacrament then the Scottish supper.
M. B. that a picture is a better and more divine sacrament, and has a more
near conjunction with Christ, then has the bread and wine of their supper.
And this I prove by M. B. his own words, and prefer a picture before his
bread and wine by the same reason, by which he goes about to prove the
contrary. The bread and Page 11
wine (says he) does not only represent or signify a thing absent. For so
any picture or dead image should be a sacrament, for there is no picture, as
the picture of a king, but at the sight of the picture the king will come in to
your mind. Is it true? Has a picture such force and virtue to cause us at the
sight thereof to remember the thing represented? Ergo a picture is a far better
sacrament then is your bread and wine in the supper. For a picture (let it be
for example sake the picture of Christ crucified) at the first sight of it,
brings to the memory of a Christian, the death and passion of Christ; and so
does not your bread and wine without farther declaration, as your self write.
In the Supper, ye shall not so soon see that bread with Page ^9.
your eye, ye shall not so soon see that wine, but after the preaching and
opening up of the parts of the sacrament, the body and blud of Christ shall come
in your mind. So then the bread and wine can not signify thus much, but there
is required vvithal a preaching and opening of the parts of One signification
of a picturs.
the sacrament. But a fair and well made picture, without preaching or so
much a do, forthwith at the first sight thereof vvil bring the passion of
Christ to my mind* Again, what man endued with common reason and wit, will not
grant, that a picture which signifies naturally; and naturally ca^ieth by
the eye to the memory one only thing, to the signification whereof it is
determined; is more potent, and fit, and profitable to cause Diverse
significations of bread and wine.
such remembrance, then a thing signifying not naturally, but by ordinance of
man, and which of it self is not determined to one kind of representation, as
the picture is. For bread and wine eaten and drunken by men 1. Reg. 20. 24.
Ezech. 16. 49.
^^^^ing together at a table, may signify good cheer; may signify how
Sodom and Gomorrha perished through abundance and delicate fare: may signify
temperate diet, how many good men have lived a long ^^^e with bread and
drink without any other kind of 3. Reg. ^^. 27.
sustenance: may signify, that al things are gotten by travail and labor, as
the bread is gotten out of the earth: Genes. ^. 1^.
may signify a Catholic unity of mind and faith, as the bread is made one of
many corns: may signify a Protestant and schismatical division of minds and
hearts from the unity of faith, as the bread is broken and divided. Briefly,
if the bread be fair and white, it may signify Before, page 11^. 114.
cleanes and purity; if foul and black, it may signify filthiness and
iniquity: being used with some form of religion in a temple, as among the
Caluinists, may signify honor done to Bacchus and Ceres as in time of the old
Paganes: and so forth, a number of like things may the bread signify, and as
many mo the wine, which the picture of Christ crucified can not. Again, The
Scottish sign, superstuous.
whereas the bread and wine does signify as these men appoint it in special,
only by reason of the preaching annexed and opening up the parts of the
sacrament, seeing this signification and declaration has been made fully,
perfitely, and absolutely by the preaching and opening up the parts of the
sacrament; who can deny, but it is mere superstuous to add the breaking of
the bread, and drinking of wine? an obscure, dark, and secret figure, after a
clear, manifest and public declaration? This is in deed when And ridiculous.
the Sun shines, to light a candle; to dig a well by the main river; to
cast a quatrine in to Cre^us treasures. This is like, as if an orator or
preacher having made a plain, evident and sensible narration of the Hugon^^
tragical histories in France, how they overthrevv churches, monasteries,
tovvres and castles, burnt whole cities, made desolate most fair and
flourishing Provinces, in fine after a long sermon or oration to such effect,
should before his audience pull out of his bosom a stick, or a piece of paper;
and break the one, or tear the other to signify those former vvasts and
desolations. This is to childish, and ridiculous: and yet this is all the grace
of the Scottish and Geneua sign.

This conjunction Page ^9.
betwixt the sign or sacrament, and thing signified in the sacrament, stands
chiefly in two points. The first part of the conjunction stands in a relation,
which rises upon a certain similitude, likeness, proportion and analogy, which
is between the one and the other. Which likeness may be easily perceived. For
look how able the bread is to nurish the body to this life Page ^0.
earthly and temporal, the flesh of Christ signified by the bread is as able to
nurish both body and soul to life everlasting. This is the first, which as I
say, nothing justifies, but rather quit overthrows and destroys his
sacramental Many things signify Christ a^ well as the Scottish sign
conjunction. For this signification and relation the bread and wine have
either by the sermon preached, or without the sermon, being considered in them
selves apart in their own nature. If the first; so they no more signify this,
then any other thing, whereunto it shall please the minister to apply his
sermon, and refer the proportion, analogy, and similitude of his bread and
wine, which may very diverse, as has been shevved. If the second* so is there
no more conjunction between Christ and the sacrament, then is between Christ
and every creature under the Sun. For that every creature natural or
artificial (much more living, much more reasonable, and yet much more spiritual
and Angelical) in some good sort resembles S^o^^ish sacraments.
and shows forth the grace, goodness, power and majesty of God his creator.
Such conjunction as here is spoken of, there is between God or Christ and a
cap, a govvne or coat, a svvord, a dish, any beast, much more my man, etc. For
as a cap keeps the head from rain and foul weather, so God protecteth his
from hell and damnation: as a good govvne keeps the body vvarme and in health,
so God preserves both body and soul in grace to life everlasting: as by the
svvord we conquer our enemy, so by Christ we vanquish the devil: as the dish
brings our meat to the table, so Christ brought in to the world the true
food and meat of immortality. Much more such similitudes may be sound in
beasts, in which (as al Divines confess) there is vestigium dei, a more
lively footestep and mark of God. For which cause especially and
particularly, for that I say, they in some special manner represented and
figured the Messiah to come, our blessed Savior: in the sacrifices of the old
testament there was appointed both of the one sort and the other; as oxen,
kine, calves, goats, kids, sheep, lambs, doves, pigeons etc. and also bread,
Levitie. ca. ^ ^. ^. 4. and^
cakes, flovver, fruits of the earth, wheat, oil, and a number of other
things, burnt, roasted, sod, fried, as we read in Levitieus. Al which were
not taken at randon by chance but by great and special choice, for special
signification and relation, which in some point they had with the Messiah to
come the Savior of the world. I need not to make comparison of man, though
the vvorst that ever was, be it Judas or Calvin, or Arrius or John Knox, who
being created to the image and similitude of God, have a thousand times more
likeness, resembla^ce proportion and analogy to God and Christ, then all the
bread and wine, that is eaten and drunken at all the communions in Scotland and
England. So that this first part of Christ's conjunction with their sign and
Supper brings small credit unto it, and makes it a very pitiful sign,
betwixt which and Christ, the conjunction is not only less, the^ between
Christ and Arrius, ^^ Christ's conjunction with the Scottish sign.
Calvin, or Judas, less the^ between Christ and any living beast, be it dog or
cat, but also as little as between Christ and a cap, or any the least sensses
creature of Gods creation.

The second point of the conjunction stands in a continual and mu^^d Page 30.
co^curring of the one with the other, in such sort, that the sign and the
thing signified are offered both together at one time, and in one action: the
one outwardly, the other inwardly, if so be thou have faith to receive it.
Then* the second point of this coniunctio^ stands in a joint offering, and in
a joint receiving, and this I call the concurrence. The same he afterward
expresses Page 43. b
again thus. If ye be a faithful man Christ is as bissie in working inwardly in
your soul, as the minister outwardly toward your body. Look ^ow bissie the
minister is in breaking c
that bread, in pouring out that wine, in giving that bread and d Christ
break^s his body in heaven.
wine to thee: as bissie is Christ in breaking his own body to thee and in
giving thee the juice of his own body after a spiritual and invisible manner.
These words may seem to make some conjunction between the bread in their
Supper and Christ's body but being truly vvayghed according to these men's
doctrine, they conteyne nothing but a mockery and coosinage of the poor
people, besides much wickedness, profane conceits, and manifest contradiction
to their own preaching and vvriting. For to d
begin with the later; what a prophanitie is it and irreligious impiety, to
flame Christ in heaven by their ministers paltring in earth? and to tell the
communicants, that he does there in his body, as the minister does here in the
bread? to inculcate in to their minds, and to will them especially to consider
and think when they are a^ Page ^3.
the table and in sight of that Action, that look what thou leest the minister
doing outwardly, what ever it be (a large word) Christ is as bissie doing al
those things spiritually to thy soul: be is a^ bissie giving to thee his own
body as the minister is breaking and dealing bread: he is as bissie giving thee
his own blud with the virtue and efficacy of it, ^ the minister is pouring
out the wine and distributing it. Why sir? As you break your bread in your
Supper, does Christ so break Profane impretie.
his body in heaven? As the minister povvreth out the wine, does Christ so
power out and communicate his blud, though after an invisible and spiritual
manner, yet truly as you have told us sundry times? And does not Christ
communicate his body and blud jointly and wholy, but thus parted and divided?
and not with facility but with labor and bissines? for that you vvil the
people to believe, and mark, and consider, that Christ is as bissie (which
word you so tediously inculcate) in heaven, as your minister is in earth? What
a vile resemblance and comparison is this, to make the rude people imagine, that
Christ is not in heaven, glorious, immortal, and impassible, but after an
earthly manner working, laboring, toyling, and bissying him self to answer
your Ministers breaking of bread, povvring out wine, dealing and dividing it
in earth? True it is, Christ in heaven does ratify and concur with the
doings of his officers and servants Matthew. ^^.
in earth, whether they baptize, consume, consecrate, bynd or lose, or do any
thing else, which he has appointed. For how so ever they instrumentally do
their parts, Christ is he qui baptizat in spiritu, that baptizeth and does
Iean. 1. 33.
all the rest in the holy ghost, and by authority, as S. John says. But to
speak as this man does, that Christ keeps such a s^^^re and coil, and is as
bissie as the minister, and breaks his body, and vvringeth out juice to give
to the good brethren, after example of the minister, whom Christ resembles
and imitateth in every thing what so ever: this is no divinity, nor yet
humanity, but little differing from plain scurrilitie* especially to men that
know how bissilie and troublesomly often times you Devout Communions.
minister your comunions. Whereof Clebitius a prelate of your order brawling
with his cominister Heshusius about this ministering, gives us some taste,
amongst a (...) in (...) veritatis etc. ^^^^^ 4. argument. 5.
number of other faults charging him with these: Did rot their in making
ministers allow a public communion of one only person, and that before the
whole congregation? Did dest not thou command me superstitiously to number the
breads of the Eucharist? When the Communion was ended, Nonne vinum vesiduum
in ^anth. ^^m reinsund^re pr^^^buiste?
and the Co^municants had drunk their parts, did not thou forbid me to power
back again in to the tankard, the wine that remained? When the breads
appointed for the Eucharist were spent and new were to be taken, and delivered
out, did not thou repeat again the institution of Christ, and that in
solemn music? When as in the congregation^ Stri^e for the Communion cup
would not willingly permit to thee the administration of the cup, did not
thou command thy colleag, that in the face of the congregation he should take
the cup from me by force* Nonne calui^ vtraque manu ^ortiter ^^nus?
And for that cause did not I hold it fast, and with both my hands? So bissie
was this good minister to hold fast the cup, lest he should leese his drink:
and (to omit all the former vvranglings, bravlings and quarellings) by your
Divinity so bissie was Christ in heaven also to make corresponde^ce, and (as
you call it) concurrence and joint effering with him, and to resemble the action
of this minister.

the people, and not the minister, distribute Before pa. ^56.
and divide the bread among themselves: and so this your sacramental
signification of Christ as bissie as the minister (when as the minister sits
still and does nothing) is clean lost, and Christ left as quiet and void of
such bissines in heaven (who in deed medleth nothing with your communions) as
he was before. Thirdly, which is the chief, I marvel you perceive not your
own vvrong and false application of your communicating when you so express
eating of Christ's flesh and drinking c. d.
his blud, by the ministers action and delivering the bread, as though the only
instrument of deliuering^ were the minister and the broad: and as though with
the bread it were still delivered: when as you make such a ioynt-offering and
concurrence as here you describe that the sign and thing signified are
offered both together Pap. 10.
one time, and in one action; and say other where, that so (...) is the body
and blud of Christ conjoined with that bread (...) wine, that as soon as thou
receiuest that bread in to thy mouth (if thou be a faithful man or woman) so
soon thou receiuest the body of Christ in to thy soul, and that by faith.
Know you M. B. contra (...) other Calusnests.
not that this doctrine is refuted by every Sacrame^tarie Protestant (I
suppose) that ever wrote of the sacraments? Who is there among them all that
ever wrote a book of common places, but he has one railing invectiue against
the Papists, because they taught, that Gratia dei est alligata sacramentis;
Gods grace, his body and his blud, remission of sins is joined or annexed to
the sacraments. For by alligata, they mean not tied or bound, as a thief is
with ropes; but as by gods creation, phisical virtue is joined to causes
natural, moral virtues to causes moral, and theological graces to sacraments,
which are like causes efficient and instruments theological by Christ ordained
to such effects and ends. Read with a little more diligence Calvin's
Institutions, and whereas you vvil have the body and blud of Christ truly
conjoined with your bread and wine, and likewise grace of regeneration with
the water of baptism, you shall synd, that Calvin charge you in any case
not to say so, nor to think See before pa. ^7.
that any virtue at al (much less that fountain and headspring of al virtues)
is conjoined with any sacrament. Read his commentaries upon S. Paul to the
Ephesians, and you shall see him most strongly (after the principles of your
gospel) to beat down all this joint offering and joint receiving. The
liberty of gods spirit and grace of god Calvin. ad ^ph^s. ca. ^. v. 20.
is not tied to the signs says he: and many receive the sign that are not
partakers of the grace: not only through their fault, because they refuse it,
but even by the very nature of the sacrament, and ordinance of God therein. For
that the sign is common to al good and bad: but the spirit, which delivers
the thing signified, is ^euen only to the elect and chosen. Read Zuinglius,
and he vvil teach you, that Zuingl. Tom. 2. Comment. de vera et falsa religio.
ca. de sacramentis.
herein you err notably. Some there are (says Zuinglius) which suppose the
sacraments to be such signs, as when we use them, that is inwardly done in our
hearts, which outwardly is signified by the sacrament. But this is false. For so
the liberty of gods spirit should be bound, if he were driven to wor^^
inwardly upon those, whom we mark with the sacraments outwardly. Read
Musculus, and you shall find that be upon the like ground condemns your
opinion as unreasonable according to the Protestant theology. When Musculus
in l(...) communi^us ^a. de baptism. pa. ^0^.
Christians are baptized (says Musculus) the things signified by the external
sacrament are wrought in the elect as pleased the spirit of Christ, either
before, or after, or in the very act of baptizing. And therefore let no man
think, that the spirit is so tied to the external sacrament, that he works
spiritually and effectually either in the hearts of all that be baptized, or ever
in the very act of baptism. He is a mad man, that so thinks etc. And it is
very absurd to tie the operation of the holy ghost which is most free, to the
external act of baptism. Read Bullinger, and he vvil teach you, that
faithful Bullinger De ^^^. 5. Sermo. 7.
Christians do not then first receive gods grace and beauenly gifts when they
receive the sacramental signs. But first they have the things signified; after
at leisure they take the signs etc. So when we baptize children, we protest
clearly, See the sa(...) Calvin inst^^ut^^. lib. 4. ^^. ^^. (...). ^^.
that we do not then first in baptism give them the grace of god which before
they wanted; but by baptism we seal and confirm that which they had received
before. and in like maneris it in the supper: eodem modo fit in caena. Finally,
read Peter Martyr, Bucer, Beza, Occolampadius, any Zuinghan, Caluinist, or
Anabaptist, and you shall find them to reprove this your opinion as Papistical.

And what need I to object particular doctors, whereas the universal scope
and preaching of al Caluinists and M. B. contrary to al Protestant Theology.
Caluinisme, is plain contrary? So soon (says this man) as thou receiuest
the bread into thy mouth, if thou be faithful thou receiuest the body of Christ
by faith in to thy soul. So soon say you, and no sooner? not before? When
at your supper there be 2 or 3. hundred, does not the last man ^ate Christ by
faith, before his turn come to receive the bread into his mouth? All the time
of the Sermon, all the time of the thanks giving all the time of the communion
when he sees the bread br^ker, and wine powered cut and he by occasion thereof
thinks on Christ's passion, does he not spiritually by faith eat Christ? Do
not you defend this to be the proper spiritual eating of your supper* It is
evident, and manifestly declared before. Wherefore Before pa. ^0. ^1.
this is a very jest and plain mockety, to say, that so soon as thou
receiuest the bread into thy mouth, so soon thou receiuest Christ's body by
faith, whereas it is received as well before, as well after, and no more nor no
sooner with that bread, then without it.

Before pa. 11. ^9. ^25. etc
joint offering is only sacramental, that is after your sense, tropical,
significatiue, as in a sign: and so the minister delivers Christ's body and
blud, and with the bread and wine the body and blud is truly conjoined, for
that (as pa. 48.
afterward you say) that sign wakeneth all the outward senses, and puts
us in remembrance of Christ's body and blud, which is the only conjunction that
you or Before pa. ^5.
your masters can stand to. See now whereunto this your great and wonderful
conjunction (as treacherously you pa. ^1.
call it) is come to. Christ is conjoined unto it, because when we see bread
broken, and wine povvred out, this wakeneth our senses, and causes us to
remember Christ. Christ no other wise received in the S^^^tish supper.
As much does bread eaten, and wine povvred out of the flagon in the feast of
every good Christian man: or if it do not, at lest the wine and bread is as
apt to signify so much at every Christian man's breakefast, dinner, be^uer, and
supper, as in your communion; the nature of ^^em in any vulgar din^^r
the bread being al one, and Christian men having ever s^ue faith (as we must
presuppose) which is nothing bettered by the breaking of the bread in one
place more then in an other. As much does the cutting up of a capon, of a hen,
eating of a good piece of beef, or mutton, or what so ever soode besides. For
any one of these or the like vvakeneth al our outvvard senses, as well as your
bread and wine. And then supposing this to be Ephesians. 5. 20.
eaten of good Christians who (as the Apostle teaches) whether they eat or
drink, or work or play, give thanks to god for all things in the name of
Christ Jesus, and so questionles have a faith, by which only and no other
Before pa. 7^ 79.
ways Christ is eaten in the communion, as M. B. teaches, and is the
universal doctrine of the sacramentaries and Caluinists, hereof it follows
clearly and plainly, that the second part of his conjunction of Christ with the
sacramental bread, all this joint offering and joint receiving, all this
concurrence, this secret and mystical conjunction (for by these many words and
laborious affectatio^ of diverse phrases he would make his auditory imagine some
great matter in their bread and wine) is as well and truly found and performed
when Christian me^ together eat any kind of meat, or drink any kind of.
drink. What need I to stand upon Christ bett^^ received with ^ut the supper
then with ^^.
the terms of meat and drink, whereas Christ is as truly eaten without al
meat and drink, yea better a great deal, when we fast and eat nothing?
For the eating of Christ by faith, which only they acknovvledge, Before pa. 78
79. ^0. etc.
and the same no less out of the supper then in it, is, when by any occasion
we think on Christ. Which we may do far better when we fast, then when
we feast; when we absteyne from breakefast, dinner and supper, then when
we supper as also by considering any creature of God we have cause to think
of Christ, that is, thus to eat Christ, as well as when we see the bread of
their communion broken, or the wine povvred out. When we see the Sun or
Moon shine, and think that Christ is the light sent in to the world; by
faith we ^u^. 2. 3^* Joan. 1* ^.
eat Christ as well, as in this communion bread. When we look upon a river
or founteyne, and think that his Joan. 4. 14. ca. 7. 39. Before pa. 1^^.
spirit is the founteyne of living water, we truly eat Christ. When we
see a lamb, a covv, a calf, or any thing which has any resemblance of Christ,
and by it remember Christ* we eat Christ, by faith: yea when we see an
heretic, or think on them, and bless our selves, and desire God to keep us
from them, as S. John (...). lib. ^. cap. ^.
did when he savv Cerinthus, we eat Christ: and in all these and a thousand
like, yea (as has been said) in all creatures of the world, when they occu^re
to the remembrance of a good Christian, and put him in mind of Christ, he
eats Christ; and Christ is as truly offered to his soul, and there is the
very self same joint. offering, and ioynt-receiuing, and concurrence, and
secret mystical conjunction, with, and in every stick, stone, tree, and
universally every creature, to every good Christian and faithful man, as is
with their bread and in their bread: and every one of these creatures as much
wakeneth the outward senses (wherein consists the virtue and efficacy of
their sign) as does the bread and wine in their Scottish or Geneuian supper,
how so ever they set a face and floorish on the matter, to make it seem
somvvhat else.

Christ not received a^ al i^ the Gen^^^ Supper
flesh and blud at al, but only a sealing and ratification of the same flesh
and blud before eaten by faith. For as the ^eale of the evidence (to use his
own explication, sense, similitude, and words) gives not the right of any
thing, but the consent of the parties, and bargain or contract between them
made before, whereunto being drawn in to an autentical form and instrument,
the seal is joined for confirmation and ratification of such antecedent
contract: even so these men in their communion having first seen the bread
broken, whereby their sight informed Page ^^.
did conuoy to the mind the remembrance of Christ, which is the eating of his
flesh: or having heard the word preached distinctly, and all the parts opened,
which also Page ^
is eating of Christ by faith, thereafter receive the sacramental bread and
wine, as seals appended to that former Calv. Institu. lib. 4. ca. 17. number. 4.
See before, pa. ^5. Ievvel Reply contra Hard. artic. ^. Di^i^i^, ^^. pa* ^^
eating, whereby they are assured that they have eaten rightly. This is also
our English theology in this case, and the same most agreeable to John Calvin.
Although (says M. Ievvel) we use to say, that the sacrament joins us to
God, and God to us: yet in plain speech it is not the receiving of the
sacrament, that works our joining to God, and consequently by like reason,
nether the joining of god or Christ to us. For who so ever is not joined to god
before be receive the sacraments, he eats and drinks his ^^^^ judgment. The
sacraments be seals and witnesses, and n^^ properly the causes of this
conjunction. And M. B. him self within a few pages after, utterly destroys
this ioynteffering of Christ's body with the bread, and in very precise terms
flatly denies that which here he affirms: whereof forth with I shall
entreat. One thing first of all the reader may note, that whereas this man so
magnifieth M. B. doctrine ^ot uvel sra^^ed. Page ^5.
the work of our renovation from the state of sin to gods grace, and says,
that this work of our new creation is ten thousand times greater then the
work of our first creation: and then to work this our new creation,
appoints Page ^1.
for a means this wonderful conjunction of Christ with the sacramental sign:
and adds farther, that except he be not only received, but also both devoured
(for so he speaks) Page ^^.
and digested, he can do us no good: and yet in fine, to procure and work our
second creation ten thousand times greater then our first creation, assigns
for the mean, such a graceles bit of bread; ten thousand times, yea ten
thousand millions of times of less force then was the worker of our first
creation; to speak the lest, a man may justly deem of him, that he very
negligently considers the greatness of these creations, either the first or
second: and that he utters these words rather like a merry iester or player
on a stage, then a sober preacher of gods word from the pulpit.

A further declaration of that which was handled in the last chapter.
The Argument.
M. B. to the more disgrace and abasing of their supper, proposes certain
questions with their answers: which as they are partly true in the Scottish or
Geneua supper; so are they false in the Sacrament of Christ's church. The first
two are. 1. Whether one man give the sign and the thing signified, that is,
Christ's body, 2. in one action: which he denies land therein manifestly
contradicts him self) because (says he) no man has such power: no more then
he has to remit sins. Against which it is proved, that man has pover to
remit sins, and therefore may have that other power also. VVithal is showed
the great difference between Christ's baptism and S. John's, which M. B.
ignorantly and wickedly confounds.

M. B. his first question is plainly answered and resolved by S. Chrysostom
against him: and therein is contained an answer to his second question.

The third assertion, that Christ's body is not promised, nor given to be
received corporally, is likewise refuted by plain scriptures, which teach a
real and corporal eating, and not only by faith.

Such corporal receiving of Christ M. B. can not avoid but by foolish and
shameful perverting of Christ's words: whereof he gives in this place a fair
example, to the manifest abasing of the Scottish Communion.

CHAP. 8.
M. B. 4. questions.
enough for the ministry of John Calvin, and John Knox, and their
congregations. 4. questions he proposes and answers* the first: Whether
the sign and Page 37.
thing signified be delivered to the communicants by one man 1
or no? He answers No. Next, Whether the sign and 2
thing signified be delivered to them in one action? He answers No. Thirdly,
Whether it be given to one instrument? 3
The answer is No. Fourthly, Whether the sign and thing 4
signified be offered and received after one manner? The answer likewise is
No. Al th^se he wills his auditors to mark Page ^^
diligently, and then (says he) little difficulty shall ^e find i^ the
sacrament* which I confess. For all these negative answers standing for
true, there is no more difficulty in their sacrament then in any other mo^sel
of bread or meat, which we eat every day. And these answers being
restrained to their Scottish and Geneua signs I admit for good, and so let
them pass. But that the Christian reader be not deceived, and think likewise
of the sacraments of Christ's church in that respect I will severally show the
vanity and falsitie of them, especially the first three; and examine his
reasons, if he bring any to justify these negative answers. For the first
thus he Page ^^.
argues. The sign and thing signified are not both geven The first question.
by one man: and this ye see clearly. For the bread and wine ye see your self
that the ministers offers: he geues you the sacrament. As that sign is an
earthly and corporal thing, so an earthly and corporal man geues it. Now the
thing signified, i^ spiritual, and heavenly, and incorruptible; the geving
whereof Christ has reserved to him self only. Therefore there are two geve^^
in this sacrament. This first reason, how strong so ever it seem in the
Caluinian Synagoge, and touching their sign, yet is it but weak anb slender
in the catholic church, where the verity of the sacraments is not tried by
the clearenes of the eye sight (for so sometimes the ministers dog that
stands by him, sees perhaps more in the sacrament then he: and young men that
have good eyes, more then old, whose eye sight is dim, and therefore need
spectacles) but by Christ's ordinance and the cleare^es of faith. And this being
with us more sure and certain; M. B. his Therefore, follows not very well,
that Therefore there be two gevers of this sacrament. To this phisical reason,
which yet is the very ground of all the rest *^or from physic and philosophy,
and sense, and their ^iesight, proceeds al their ^aith, or rather infidelity
against this divine mystery) he joins certain theological, as: The minister
geues the earthly thing, Christ keeps Page ^^.
the ministry of the heavenly to him self, and he dispenses his own body and
blud to whom, and when he pleases. For why? ^f any man in the world had power
to give Christ's body and ^lud, no question that man should have power to cleanse
the heart and conscience (for the blud of Christ has that power with it) and
consequently should have power to forgive sins. Now it is only God, who may
forgive sins: and therefore it is not possible, that the ministry of the
heavenly thing can be in the ^over of any man. In these words the reader may
first ^^cal to memory M. B. contradiction to his former ^^ords, where he
taught, how the sacrament signifing, and the thing signified (that is Christ's
body) were co^*ioyned. ^^^^r^ page ^^^.
For the second part of that conjunction he there made to consist in a
continual and m^^^al concurring of the one with the other in such sort, that
the sign and thing signified were both offered together, and received together
at ^^^ time and in one action etc. And immediately after: The second point of
this conjunction stands in a ioynt-offering and ioynt-receiuing: and this I call
a concurrence. Here he affirms Manifest contradiction.
the quit contrary, and in precise terms de^^ieth the si^ne and thing
signified to be delivered in one action: and most directly rejects al such
ioynt-offering and ioynt-receiving and concurrence, and teaches that Christ
dispenses the thing signified, that is, his body and blud not to whom the
minister geveth the sacrament, not when he ministers the communion, but to
whom in respect of the persons, and when in respect of the time be pleases. The
very like whereof he writes afterward concerning the sacrament of baptism,
that the minister washes the child in water and baptizeth externally: bo^ as
for the virtue of regeneration, that Christ has to ge^e ^^ Page ^^.
whom, and when he ple^^es, and not when it pleases M. minister. And why so?
For that otherwise a marvelous great absurdity will follow. What is that? If a
m^^ might give Christ's body, he might also cleanse the heart and forgive sins.
But only God forgeveth sins. Therefore it is not possible for man to give
Christ's body. Granting the sequel of the first proposition, how proves he
the second that only God forgeveth sins, and not man? By John Baptist, Matthew.
3. 11. For Says he not; the ministry that I ^^^e, Page 4^.
is of the element? I am commanded to minister the element of water only: but
as to the ministry of the fire and spirit, that Christ has reserved to him
self. Thus he for his first negative. Sinn^^ remitted by man.
For answer whereof, let us take the affirmative on the contrary side thus:
If* man have power to cleanse the ^art by remitting of sins, he has or may
have power also to give Christ's body, the thing signified in the sacrament.
These two M. B. makes in like ^ort possible or impossible. But (say we) a man
has po^^^^ to remit sins, and so to cleanse the heart; which we prove
clearly by Christ's words to his apostles: Whose Joan. ^^, ^^
sins ye remit, they are remitted. And here I vvish again the reader to
mark the rude ignorance, and gross barbarousnes, whereunto this Calvinisme
grows, who reckon that for a strange absurdity, and object it as a matter
irre^utable, which in the catholic church is so certain a verity, so
universally known and believed, Cre^^ ^^^les^ Catholica^^.
as any article of our Creed: in which, as the church Catholic has a
principal and notorious place next after God him self, so jointly with the
Catholic church we are bound to believe Remission of sins, which men truly
(...) peccat^r^^.
^s Gods ministers, and by authority from him give to Christians in the unity
of the same church; as every ancient father Greek and Latin, that ever vvrote
upon the Gospels, or of remission of sins in the church, acknovvlegeth.
Which the Christian learned reader may see, if he please to pervse S. Cyprian,
S. Austin, S. Hierom, S. Ambrose, S. Chrysostom, S. Athanasius. S. Basil, S.
Hilarious, S. Pacianus, al most ancient doctors, in the Cyprian. Augustine.
places here noted. Cyprian. de l^psis, sermo. 5. Augustine. Epistola 180. De
doctrina Christiana lib. 1. cap. 18. In E^chirid. ad Laurent. cap. 64. 65. 66.
In Psalm. 101. Concio. 2. In Joan. cap. 11. ^o^. 49. Contra adversarium legis et
prophet. lib. 1. cap. 17. Tom. 10. Hom* 23. et 50. cap. 10. 11. Hieron. Hieron.
Ambros. Chrysostom. Athanas^ Basil. ^^lar. Pa^ia^^^.
in Ecclesiast. ca. 10. et in Matthew. cap. 16. Ambros. in psalm. 38. Chrylostom.
de sacerdotio, lib. 3. Athanafius Sermo. in illud: I^e in vicum qui contra vos
est, in fine. Basil. in regulis brevioribus, reg. 229. Hilarious in Matthew. ca.
18. Pa^ianus ^ar^inon. in Par^n^^^ ad paenitentiam. Leo magnus epistola 80.
With ^ehersing the several sentences of these Saints I vvil not trouble the
reader, because I desire to be brief. Only for satisfaction of M. B. who
makes it so strange and absurd to suppose, that a man may remit sins; and
if he could so do, he might also give to the Christian people Christ's true
body, I vvil say, that herein he is not altogether deceived; and in part I yield
unto him in such sort ^^ S. Ambrose does to the Novatians, heretics of his
time, who in this matter were just of M. B. his opinion Sins remitted by
priest, in the church.
and for defense of it, argued much like as M. B. do^^ and therefore he may be
contented with that answer which S. Ambrose so long since allowed to his
betters and elders. No minister, no man can remit sins, not yet give Christ's
body says M. B. I answer with S. Ambros. de panitentia lib. 1. ca. ^.
Ambrose. Both of these* the one and the other is lawfully ^^^ in the church.
Nether of both is done in heresy cut of the church. For this is a right given
only to priests. Duly therefore does the church challenge it, which has true
priests: heresy and heretical congregations can challenge nether, which have
not the true priests of god. Non vendicar do autem, it^^ de se pronunciat, quod
cum sacerdotes non habeat, ius sibi ve^dicare non debeat sacerdotale. And
whereas heresy (the Scottish ministry) challenges not this right, it geveth
sentence against it self, that whereas it has no lawful priests; it may in
take and usurp that right (of remitting sins) which by Christ is geven to
priests. And forth with he infers with a sounder kind of consequence, then
is this of M. B. that such heretical synagoges, for this self same reason a^
quite void of the holy ghost. For that, the holy ghosts resident in the church
to the end, that by the ministry of priests he may remit sins to Christians
being penitent, according to the articles of our Creed. To which purpose he
alleges the words of our Savior before ^ted, Whose sins you remit they
are remitted. And alter Joan. ^0.
it seem absurd and impossible to M. B. yet it is not abs^^ (says the
ancient learned archbishop S. Cyril) that they Cyril. in Joan. lib. 12 ^a. 56.
forgive sins, which have the holy ghost. For when they ^^mit sins either in
baptism or in penance, the holy ghost remitteth in them. Against which,
whereas M. B. seems Objection of M. B.
to stand by challenging this preeminence to the Diuie majesty, who only
forgeueth sins; he must learn, t^^ as ^^is conceit is stale and Jewish, and
perhaps proceeds Ansvve^ed.
from some counterfeit hypocrisy which prete^de^ great jealousy of Gods
honor, where it is lest meet so our Savior having of old detected this
hypocrisy ^ error in the Jews, I could wish, that M. B. would be^ disciple of
Christ and his church, rather then of those other Christ's adversaries and
crucisiers. For when Christ forgave sins in the gospel; they upon M. B. his
ground said within them selves: He blasphemeth. Who can forgive sins, but
only God? But Christ proved unto them, that ^^: only God in heaven, but al^o
the son of man in earth Matthew. 9. ^. ^ Marc. 2. 7. 10. Matthew. 2^. 1^. Matthew.
16. 19. ca. 18. 18. Joan. 20. 2^.
had power to forgive sins: and he proved it so, that the multitude, seeing
it glorified god, who had given such power to men, and not reserved it
peculiarly to him self. Which power being in Christ as man, he in most
plain and effectual words imparted to his Apostles and their successors, as in
the Gospel sundry times we read. And this is no derogation to Christ, but
rather glory: as S. Ambrose very well teaches. For our Lords will is that
Ambros. lib. 1. de pan^ti^. cap. 7.
his servants have great power. His will is; that they s^^uld in his name do
such things, as him self did when he was here on earth. Yea in S. Joan. 14. he
says, that they shall It is to Gods honor, that man forgeueth sins.
^^ greater things then he did. Act. 9. when he could have restored to Saul his
sight, yet he sent him to A^anias. And to be short, having with sundry
scriptures justified this, in fine he opposes his adversaries the Novatian
heretics, as I do M. B: Why presume you to deliver and cleanse any Ibid.
from the foul and stinking service of the devil? Cur baptizatis, si per
honimem peccata dimitti non licet? Why baptize you, if by man sins can not
be forgeuen? For in baptism is forgeuenes of al sins. Et quid interest,
vtrum per paenitentiam an per la vacrum hoc ius sibi datum sacerdotes
vendicent? And what skilleth it, whether in Baptism, or Penance, Priests
exercise this right which (by Christ) is given to them. Thus S. Ambrose. And
therefore if this be all the difficulty, why a man may not in the sacrament
give Christ's body, we see the case is not so hard.

As for that M. B. obiecteth of S. John Baptist; proceeds M. B. bad argument.
first of ignorance, then of heresy. Of ignorance, for that from S. John's
ministry and baptism which apperteyning to the old law, and so without
question not being of force to remit sin, he draws his argument Ignorance.
to prove, that the ministry and baptism of Christ's gospel can not remit
sin. Which argument holds as blindly and ignorantly, as if he said; Moses
could not forgete sin: ergo Christ can not; whereof has been spoken before.
And for his better instruction herein, he may and must learn, that not S. John
Baptist, but Christ is the mal^^ and ordeyner of the new testament, and al
sacraments ^sa^. 11. ^. Hebr 9. 11. 15. cap 12. ^4. cap. 10. 16.
apperteyning thereto, as the prophet Esaias, the Apostle Paul, and whole
frame of the new testament declares. Wherefore if he will prove, that the
ministry of the new testament consists only in the external element, let
him show it in some one sacrament of this Heresy.
state, and so he speaks to the purpose. Of heresy his reason proceeds,
because he assumeth as certain, that Difference between Christ's baptisine and
S. John's.
our baptism is not in the fire, and spirit, but in water only, as that of S.
John Baptist was. Which doctrine stinketh of heresy, as being not only
condemned for such by the late general Council of Trent, but also earnestly
reproved Council. T^ide^t Se^s. 7. ca. 1. Origin. Athanas. Basil. Nazianzen.
Chrysostom. Cyril. lib. 2. in Joan. ca. 57.
by all the ancient fathers who by occasion wrote of those two baptismes,
were they Greek or latin: as Origin. in epist. ad Romanos ca. 6. Athanas.
quaest. 133. ad Antioch. Basil. lib. 1. de Baptismo. ca. 2. Nazianz. orat. 39.
in lumina. S. Chrysest. him. 10. and 12. in Matthew. and 16. in Joan. S. Cyril.
lib. 2. in Joan. ca. 57. where he of purpose handeleth this matter, and says,
that the holy ghost foresaw, that afterward would rise ignorant fellows, who
would not distinguish Christ's baptism from John's; and that therefore the holy
ghost moved John baptist him self to speak most plainly, that it baptized in
water only. Of the latin doctors, Tertul. in li^. Tertullian. Cyprian. Optatus.
Hilarious. Ambros. Leo. Gregor. Hierony^.
de baptismo. S. Cyprian in his sermon de baptismo Christ^. ^. Optatus lib. 5
S. Hilarie in Matthew. ca. 3. S. Ambros. lib. 2. cap. ^. in Luc. and prae^^^io.
in psalm. 37. S. Leo epistola 4. ca. 6. S. Greg^r Homil. 20. in Euangel. S.
Austin and S. Hierom in a numbe^ of places: S. Hierom. epist 83. ad Occanum. in
2. cap. ^oelis. i^ dialogo contra Luciferianos. S. Austin epist. 48 prope finem
and 163. Enchirid. ca. 19. and 49. Lib. 2. contra literas Pe^iliani, ca.
Augustine.
37. and lib. 3. ca 76. lib. 4. de baptis. co^tra Donatist. ca. 26. lib. 5.
cap. 9. 10. 11. 12. 14. 15. de vnico baptismo ca. 7. de vnit^r ecclesiae ca.
18. Of which two fathers, S. Hierom earnestly reproves them, who with M. B.
and the Caluinists Hieron dialog contra lucife ri^n^s. August lib. ^ contra
literas P^tilians. ca. 37.
think that Christ's baptism and John's was al one, and says that they
mainteyne a froward opinion and by yelding to much to the baptism of the
servant, destroy the baptism of his and our master: S. Austin, that they
defend a wicked and sacrilegious opinion. And what need I to allege ancient
fathers to this purpose, whereas Calvin confesses it as a clear and known
case, that they in deed thus taught Calv. Institu^ lib 4. ca. 1^. number. 7.
and much labored to distinguish the baptism of Christ and John: whose
authority yet most arrogantly he contemns. But therefore to break his
insolent spirit, and supporte the fathers authority; let it be added, that
this sacrilegious opinion of Calvin, and the Caluinists was long before these
fathers lived, condemned by the Gospel it self: in which we find the ministry
of Christ's baptism Grace given by the baptism of Christ.
to have been done not in water only, but in water and the spirit, or (as it is
expressed sometimes) in fire and the spirit, that is, in the spirit of god,
who as he descended visibly upon the Apostles in form of fire in the day of
Pentecost: so often times visibly in the primitive church he Act. ca. 2. and 10
and ^^. and 19.
powered his grace on the new Christians, especially when they received the
sacrament of baptism and confirmation; thereby to testify, that his presence
and grace was ever infallibly given in all the baptismes which were ministered
in Christ's name, and by his order since the first institution thereof: as S.
John Baptist him self in the place quoted by M. B. plainly told, distinguishing
Matthew. 3. 1^ Marc. 1. v. 5. ^uc. 3. 16, Joan. 3. 5. Act. 11. 16 and ca. 19. 4.
See before. p^. 97. 98.
most evidently as between his person and the person of Christ, so between his
ministry and baptism, which was in water, and that which Christ was to
ordeyne in water and the spirit; as it is noted in every of the Evangelists,
and in the Apostles, which spoke thereof afterward.

one person or two deliver the sacrament. And alb eit his Page 41.
answer be, that there are two propiners, two perons which offer and give the
sacrament, Christ and the minister, of which two, the minister gives the
sign, Christ the thing signified^ the minister the earthly matter, that is
bread, Christ the heavenly matter, that is, his body: and co^paring pa. 4^.
these two ministeries together, he so abaseth the one, that he says, he will
not give a straa for it: so that by this description, their communion so far
forth as by their ministers Before pa. 193.
it is given, is nothing else but an earthly sign, a common piece of bread not
worth a straa; al which I grant in such sort as has been said before: yet
referring this to The true answer to M. B^s^^st question
the sacrament of the church, which not John Calvin, but Christ ordained, we
must answer clean contrary; that there is but one propiner, one person that
offers the sacraments and he exhibiteth not only the earthly matter, but also
the heavenly: not only the sign, but also the thing signified, even Christ's
own body. The difference between M. B. and me* his answer to the question
and mine being so contrary, ^iseth of this, that M. B. takes his sacrament,
or rather sign* I mean his tropical bread and wine, from the ministry and
institution of John Calvin: whom he must of necessity separate and disioyne
from Christ, the ministry of the one from the ministry of the other: and so
must needs have two different and divided propiners, at lest. The church
taking her sacrament directly and simply from Christ, can make no difference
between this ministry and that of Christ's, this offering Christ's body given
by man in the church sacrament.
and that; between this sacrament and that, this body and that: because as
there it was done personally by Christ, so now it is by the order*
appointment, and in the person of Christ. And therefore although their eye
sight tell them clearly, that then minister geues them nothing but bread and
drink, the earthly sign not worth a straa; a sign bare and barren without
the thing signified, yet faith tells us* that the minister of the church
gives to the Catholic co^municant altogether as much as Christ gave to his
Apostles* that was, beside the sign, the thing signified, his divine and most
precious body, which there in a sacrament, and after in sight of Jews and
Gentiles was offered to God for us. And thus S. Chrysostom many hundred years
since, taught us to Chrysostom in ^. ad Timoth. ^^ mil. ^.
answer M. B. his question. The holy sacrifice (says he) whether it be
offered by Peter or Paul, or any other simple priest, of what so ever merit he
be* it is the self same which Christ gave to his Apostles. Nihil habet ista
quam illa minus. The sacrifice of the church* is the sa^^ which Christ offered.
This has nothing less then that How so? Because it is not man that
sanctifies this, but Christ who sanctified that. For as the words which
priests now pronounce* are the same which Christ uttered: so the sacrifice is
al one. And so it is likewise in baptism. And after somvvhat more spoken to
this effect he concludes: Qui autem hoc illo minus aliquid habere putat,
ignorant Christum esse, qui nunc etiam adest and operatur. If any man suppose
that this our (sacrament and sacrifice) has less then that (as M. B. does,
making so much difference between them, almost as is between heaven and hell ^he
is ignorant, and knows not that it is Christ, who now also is present, and
works the consecration and sanctification of sacraments no less then he did
then.

And so this first error being thus disproued, the second Answer to M. B.
second question.
which depends thereon, is by the same reason corrected. For as it is one
propiner, so that which is given, is given in one action; which albeit M. B.
stay not on, but with a simple negative passes away; yet for the readers
better information, I must tell him somewhat more at large, that the sign, and
the thing signified is by the same Minister of the church, at one and in the
same action and moment, exhibited and offered. The reason is, for that albeit
Christ in heaven, and the Ecclesiastical minister in earth do differ; yet when
he in earth forgeueth sin, baptizeth, or consecrateth the sacrament, he does
it not as of him self, but as by power, and virtue, and authority committed
to him from Christ, and also (as has been said) he does it in the person of
Christ: and so the action of Christ and his officer the priest, is the self
same in number, and no way to be accounted two ecclesiastical or rather
sacramental actions, how soever morally or physically the actions are
distinguished. As in like manner when the king sends a noble man or judge
with his commission into some part of his realm, in matters of law, or
otherwise to take order for quiet government of his realm: that which the
king does by such a judge and deputy, or this noble man or judge does by the
kings warrant and authority, is not in civil wisdom and truth to be
accounted two several actions, but one: and much-more is that other of Christ
and the priest, one and the self same in Theology.

signified is never offered to the mouth Page 41.
of the body: the blud of Christ, the flesh of Christ, whole Christ is not
offered nor in the word, nor in the sacrament to the mouth of my body: to
which negative he adds very confidently: get me that in any part of the
bible, that there is any other manner of receiving of Christ but by faith, and
take it to them: I ask him only this question, whether S. Matthew. Answer to
the third question.
Gosp. ^ Marks Gospel, S. Luke and S. John's Gospel with S. Paul's epistles be
any part of his bible? If they be, then let him answer him self, whether
Christ, when in his last supper he said to his Apostles; Take, eat, this is my
Matthew. ^6. ^6. Marc. 14. 22 Luc. ^2. 19. ^. Cor. 11. ^4.
body, according to S. Matthew and S. Mark: this is my body which is given
and broken for you, according to S. Luke and S. Paul: when thus he performed
that which he promised in the sixth of S. John, The bread which I will give, to
eat, is my flesh, the same flesh which I will give, that is, which I vvil
offer in sacrifice for the life and salvation Joan. 6. ^^.
of the world: when after this promise and this performance thus mentioned by all the Evangelists, the Christians were taught to believe as a thing most
plain and clear, that in the dreadful sacrifice the bread which was there
broken, was the communication of Christ's body received really and corporally.
Christ's body, according to Christ's own express word: let him self I say
answer him self, whether in these so manifest and evident speeches the body
and flesh of Christ ^. Cor. 10. 16
be not offered to the mouth of Christian men? For the other part which M. B*
mentions, the blud of Christ; when of Matthew. ^6. 27. ^3. Marc. 14. ^^ ^4.
Luc. 22. 20. 1. Cor. 11. ^^
that, Christ reaching the chalice to his Apostles said to them* drink ye al
of this: for this is my blud of the new testament, which is shed for many to
remission of sins, according to the same Evangelists and S. Paul: when the
first Christians were likewise instructed in particular of this, to believe
without al question of casting doubt, Real presence.
that the cup or chalice of benediction, which by the priests ^. Cor. 10. 1^
ministry was blessed in the church, was the communication of Christ's blud:
when upon this most assured, evident and infallible warrant, the fathers of
the primitive: Chrysostom* in ^. ^er. 10. hom. ^4.
church with one voice and consent taught that self same blud of Christ to be
as truly in the chalice, as it truly gus^hed out from Christ's side when he
hung on the: cross: the same body and sacrifice to be received from the:
August. Confessio lib. ^* ^^. 10.
altar in the church, which was offered on the altar of the cross, and
blotted out the offenses of the world: finally the: same thing to be received
outwardly with our mouth, which Leo Sermo. 6. de ^eiun^^ ^^ptim^ (...).
inwardly we believe in heart: id ore sumitur* quod ^ide creditur: do not these
speeches declare, that the body and blud of Christ is offered to the mouth of
Christians? Or when Christ bad his disciples to take and eat that body: in the
chalice to drink that blud of the new testament, meant he* that they should
eat and drink only by faith? Do his words import, not that they should eat
with their mouth but only with their eyes and ears, which only two
instruments M. B. allows for eating Christ's body by Before pa. 174.
faith, the ear serving for conueyance of the audible word preached to our
soul; and the eye for conveyance Marc. 14. ^^
of the visible word, that is, the bread when it is broken in their Communion,
by which two means only we eat Christ spiritually by faith as he teaches
us? If he thus say, yet S. Mark will somewhat gainsay him, and if he have any
conscience, make him gainsay him self, and revoke his saying. For that as
Christ delivered them his chalice, and bad them drink it so S. Mark
testifies, that they al drank of it, which drinking could no more be done
without their mouth, with their only eyes and ^ares, then with their heels.
And therefore in the bible Real presence.
we find, that Christ's blud both in the word, and in the sacrament is offered
to the mouth of Christians. And therefore to join and ^un on with M. B. a
little, whereas he denies that there is in the Bible any receiving of Christ
but by faith, whereas he biddes us find that in any part of the bible, and he
is then content to turn Christ over to us; we accept his offer. And if he can
so interpret these places of the Evangelists (whose vvritings are part of the
Bible) that lie dravv them al ^o a mere spiritual eating by only faith without
corporal and real communion, as the church teaches; I vvil confess he has as
good a grace in interpreting scripture, as ever had Carolostadi* the first
soun^^yne of this sacramentarie heresy; yea or the heavenly Before pa. 41
prophet (whether it were the devil or the devils dame ^s Luther says) that
instructed him.

Christ's words vvon (...) y expounded.
that he is of one spirit with them that have already geven us wonderful
constructions of these fevv words* This is my body, which body Christ willed
his disciples to receive and ea^e; as that by it (according to (...)) Christ
meant his passion and death, or else he Before pa. 46. 47.
meant faith, or his deity, or a memory, or at lest a thanks giving, or l^st
of all the church^ or if all this serve not, he meant thereby an action, as
Ioannes a Lasco rather thin^^eth, and then the sense must needs be spiritual:
for ^^oubtles we can not take and eat nether Christ's passion and d^^^h nor
faith, nor yet his deity* nor a memory, no^ a thankesgeuing nor the church
(whether Zuingli* mean (...) walls and stones of the church or the people)
no^ a^ action but after a mere spiritual or rather spiritish ma^^^: besides
th^^e I say, of al which he may choose any one which he pleases with as good
^ight as they did; he gives an other of him self as wonderful as any of al
these. For (says he) we find in Christ's institution a promise Page 45.
and a command. The command is this; Take, eat: which obliges us to obey
and craves obedience. The promise is contained in these words, This is my body.
The promise craves faith and belief, as the command craves obedience. Which
M. B. exposition of Christ's words.
exposition seems to me as strange as any of the precedent: and as strange
it is to call these words of Christ a promise, as to call it a promise, if one
say to a poor man, Take, receive, here is a penn^; or a piece of bread. and if
this be a promise, I vvonder how we shall define the performance! But let it
stand for good: for these men have power to make al things sound as they list,
especially in church matters and articles of ^aith: with which the Eldership,
or (as the phrase is in the Scottish communion book) the Assembly of the
ministers, Elders and deacons may dispense, vary, and alter at their good
pleasure. But what shall become now of these words? what sense shall we give
them? forsooth this: Take, eat a promise: or, take eat: here is a promise,
which is delivered for you. And if he thus mean, then in deed he is far from
any corporal eating. And if he mean otherwise: as Calvin does, whom perhaps
he follows (for he uttering no more the^ I have set down leaves me in
doubt, and I can but gheasse his true meaning) that the words of Christ are a
promise annexed to a condition, and so not fulfilled, except the condition be
accomplished, which goes before, as Calvin teaches: even so his meaning is
as strange, and will dravv after it as strange and wonderful a communion.
Calv. Instit^. lib. 4. ca. 17. number. ^7.
For says Calvin, these words, Take eat, is a commandment. This is my body,
is a promise: like as the lord commanded, Call on me, and immediately adioyneth
the promise, Psalm. 50. 15.
I will hear thee. If now any man would bost of this promise, That God vvil
hear him, and not perform the commandment Caluins mad exposition of Christ's
words
annexed, To call upon god, might be not be counted a mad soole? Even so here,
this promise, This is my body, is made and given to them, who observe that
which Christ commanded. Out of which this we may and must directly gather,
that if, This is my body, be a promise depending of that condition and
command, Take eat, which goes before, then when soever man on his part
fulfilleth the condition and command, God on the other side questionles
performs that he has promised. And it were blasphemous impiety to think or
say otherwise, that men doing as God appointed, God fails in performing that
which he promised. This therefore being a most sure and vnremoveable ground;
if these words* This is my body, be a promise depending upon that command,
Take, eat: then by like assured consequence and conclusion when so ever
Christian men take and eat, especially if Christ as present in every repast of
Christians, as ^^ ^^e Geneua supper.
they do it in remembrance of Christ (which albeit it be not in the command,
and Calvin requires it not, yet I am content to add it for more suertie) then
such bread to such eaters is the body of Christ; and so when soever Christian
men with such remembrance eat, they eat Christ's body, when soever they
drink, they drink his blud. For like as he is a mad fool in Caluins
judgment who thinks he can enjoy the promise of Christ's body, except he
first obey the command of taking and eating* so if a man first obey and
execute the command, that is to take and eat, if after any would deny him
the promise, surely he must by Calvin's own judgment and conclusion little
differ from a mad fool, yea an Apostata and plain enemy of God, who could
so foolishly and madly, and Apostatically, make God false in performing his
promise. And therefore it must needs be inferred, that in every breakefast,
every dinner, every beuer, every supper, every banquet, feast and collation,
Christian men receive the body of Christ as truly and really, as in the
Scottish, or any such like Geneuian communion. Which, as for mine own part I
nothing doubt to be true, so yet that these men's Theology and preaching should
tend to the same end, should infer the same conclusion; that M. B. after such
high magnifying and vaunting Before cap. 6. (...). 1.
their sacramental bread and drink, should ^al to such base and contemptible
esteem of it, as in these two Chap. 7. and ^.
last chapters appears, this might seem incredible, were it not, that herein
also as in the rest, he resembles his master Calvin, who used the same manner
and vein. Before cap. ^0
And both the one and the other, in mind inwardly making Luc. 6. 45.
no more account of this their supper, then of their ordinary dinner; from the
abundance of their heart, their mouth and pen utters that which is
conformable to their inward cogitations: and (which is the principal) God
who suffers not his people to be tempted above their ability, causes these
false teachers, among many foolish, absurd, counterfeite and affected figures
of their Caluinian preachers enemies of Christ.
lying Theology, whereby they circumvent unskillful persons, thus sometimes to
express in plain and blunt sort their direct meaning; that his people seeing
vvhereto their preaching is bent, that is to a manifest contempt of Christ, his
gospel, sacraments, and all that holy is, may be warned to yield no more credit
to them, then they Matthew. ^4. 11. 2. P^t^^. ^. 3. 2. Timoth. ^. 5. Philip. ^.
1^.
deserve; that is, no more then is due to heretics, to false teachers, to
scorne^s, who pretend piety and religion, but deny the virtue thereof, to
enemies of Christ's cross, the figure, sign and memory whereof as they can
not abide, so can they not this principal and divine sacrament, whereby the
redemption wrought on the cross, is more universally and plentifully then by
other sacraments, derived to the benefit and salvation of Christians.

Comparison of the Sacramental Sign with the word.
The Argument.
M. B. his variable and inconstant manner of preaching and writing. His absurd
Paradox, that we possess Christ better by their sacramental ^igne then by the
word of god, is refuted. VVithal it is showed probably, what was the first
original cause of this fond doctrine of the Protestants, which makes the
sacraments, seals to confirm Gods word and promises.

CHAP. 9.
THE variable manner of M. B. his preaching and writing in these his Sermons, M.
B. very unconstant in his doctrine.
declares him to be in the number of such persons, whom for their inconstancy
and mobilitie the wise man in holy Ecclesiast^^s ^7. v. 1^ Esai. ^7. 2^.
scripture compares to the Moon, the prophet to the Sea, which is never in
one stay. For as the moon from wane increases to the full, from fulness
decreaseth to the wane, and then back again; and so does the Sea from full Sea
to low, from low to full, and never keeps at one: even so after the fashion of
other Protestant writers (especially John Calvin) plaieth M. B. Before chap. 3
in these his Sermons. At one time we have Christ his Chap. 6.
true substance, his very body and blud conjoined with the sign in the supper,
so firmly and effectually, that no Lutheran could speak more for the real
presence. Here is as it were the full Sea, and full Moon, replenished with all
light so much as a man needs. By and by he falls Chap. 7.
to the wane, to the low water mark, that Christ's body is no more joined with
the sign, then it is with any word uttered by any man: nay less then it is
joined with a word, which is in effect, nothing at al. In the Chap. ^.
last chapter, the sacrament or sign was a mere human ceremony, an earthly
sign and corruptible, a piece of bread not worth a straa. Here in this
chapter from that low sea and wane of the moon, he begins to fill again.
And because those his manifold contemptuous speeches and comparisons used
against their Sign, to any wise auditor gave sufficient cause to deem it
naught worth and altogether superfluous: especially if to his discourse a man
join the common and vulgar practice of the Protestants, who presuming of their
daily and howerly eating Christ by faith, sometimes in ten years together
care not to receive him in the Supper: and the true issue of their doctrine
Before, pa. 14.
is such, that the spiritual commodity, which the communicant has by eating
that bread, considered in it self, is in deed not vvorth the labor for a man
to go to the church to receive it, although the church were the next door to
his house: M. B. somvvhat to salve this soar, takes a little pains to
show, that his bread and wine has some use in it. To which purpose he
frames Page 45. 4^^
to him self this objection: What need is there that these sacraments and
seals should be annexed to the word? Wherefore are they annexed? Seeing we get
no more in the sacrament th^^ in the word, and we get as much in the very
simple word as in the sacrament, wherefore then is the sacrament appointed to
be hung to the word? He answers: It is true: certainly we get no other thing
in the sacrament then in the word. But the sacrament is appointed to get the
same thing better then in the ^^^d. The sacrament is appointed, that we may
have a better grip of Christ then in the simple word: that we may possess
Christ in our hearts and minds more fully and largely, then we did in the simple
word. This is his answer; which attributes great prerogative and commodity
to their supper. For no: only to compare and match it with the word of god,
but also to prefer and advance it so much above the word of god, that it
puts the brethren in fuller, better, more ample and sure possession of
Christ, then does the word of god, it can not be denied, but this is a very
singular, high, and divine benefit, and much makes for the honor and
excellency of their supper. But when vvd come to trial hereof, all this is but
words: al is counterfeit, and being a little examined, falls out to be like
to the apples growing by the lake of Sodom, which make Tertul. ^^ Apologe^,
ca. ^^
to the eye of the passinger an appearance of fayer green fruit but when he
comes to handle and taste them, they ^esolve in to dust and asnes. Even so this
answer carries ^vith it some craft, iugling and false show: which being a
little considered, proves nothing but empty ^vords without substance, mere
forgerie and hypocrisy ^vithout al plain meaning and honesty. For how can*
you explicate your self, that we receive Christ better by M. B. Paradox
eating the bread, or seeing the bread broken, then by hearing the word
preached? You confess, that by the word we get possession of the son of
god: you confess we Page 46.
possess him by the word fully and perfitly. This possession is the work of
faith, and the body of Christ is not otherwise gripped, possessed, or eaten in
the supper, but by faith, when as we believe that Christ died for out
redemption and rose again for our justification. Which Before, page 7^. 79.
being al your own doctrine, how can you explicate to the intelligence of
any man, that we better grip, possess Christ not possess d^ett ^ by the
bread, then by the word.
and eat Christ in bread and wine, then in the word? It a true honest man
whose words I trust, before vvitnesses give me a book, and I take it of him;
and being possessed of it, use it as mine own, never a whit doubting of my
right: if the same person after come to me, and vvil persuade me by an
external sign and say, Sir, see, here is M. B. paradox refuted by all
Cal^i^^sts.
a piece of bread, as truly as I break and eat this bread, I give you that
book; have I by this external act any better possession, right, interest, or
grip in the book then I had before? certainly not. In like sort, Christ
dwells in our hearts by faith, and his word assures us after these men's
doctrine, that so often as we trust to be saved by his passion, we eat his
flesh and drink his blud, and Before. pa. 78 79. 80.
that, fully, truly, verily, really and substantially. Whereas then we make
no doubt of present possession, which we already fully and perfitely enjoy,
how can this possession be better any ways, because we see bread broken
before our eyes? Again, let him remember the resolution of his principal
Doctors, who have taught us the clean contrary to that he preaches here,
vz: that Christ is received ^ possessed as fully by the word, as by their
sacramental Page ^1. 32.
bread. Let him remember his own preaching in this same Sermon, where he has
so diligently told us that Before. pa. ^74.
Christ is delivered and received in the bread no otherwise then in the word.
Let him remember that P. Mattyr goes one step farther, assuring us that Christ
is better Before, pa. ^3
received and possessed by the word then by their signs o^ bread and wine:
which assertion does plainly follow, and is rightly deduced out of the very
principles of their doctrine in this point. For whereas the possession of
Christ which we have either by the sign or by the word, depends only of
faith, and so the possessing of Christ more or less, better or worse, in
greater degree or smaler, is to be measured by our faith only* if he vvil say,
that we possess Christ better by their sign of bread then by the word, he
must consequently say, that such bread more then the word stirs up our
faith toward Christ, by which faith only we possess and take hold of him.

And what man of common reason and understanding vvil not be asnamed to say,
that he is more moved to believe Christ's death and resurrection by seeing a
piece of bread broken, which is a dumb and dead ceremony, and of it self
signifies nothing, but is a like indifferent to signify a number of things,
as well Christ's life as his death, his ascension as his resurrection, his
incarnation and circ^^neisio^ as well as any of the former; which bread
therefore M. B. calls truly a corruptible, earthly, dead element Before. page
177. ^^^. 200.
void of life and soul: what reasonable man I say vvil grant, that by such a
dumb ceremonic he is more stirred up to believe Christ's passion, then when he
hears the same plainly and clearly preached out of the holy Evangelists, out
of the word of god? which (as S. Paul Romans ^. ^^*
calls it) is the power of god working salvation to all that believe? which
word is lively, and forcible, and more persing Hebr. 4. 1^*
then a two-edged sword, able to divide even the soul and the spirit, the
joints and the marow, and to discern the intrinsecal M. B. without al reason
prefers the Geneus sign before Gods word.
cogitations and intents of the heart. Is that blunt bread able to stir up our
faith comparably to this tvvo-edged sword? that dull, earthly, and dead element
more then this divine creature, so lively, and forcible, and persing, as here
by S. Paul it is described? If (to follow M. B. own reason and comparison)
the bread without the word be nothing but a common piece of bread, and the
word serves as it Before, page* ^^4.
^ere a soul to quicken the whole action, without which the bread is nothing
else but a dead element: how can a common piece of bread broken by the minister
though never M. B. re^uted by him self.
so artificially give us a better holdfast, a better grip, a more ample
possession of Christ, the^ the word of Christ which is omnipotent and able to
work al? and which without diminution of his own life imparteth to the
bread all the life which it has? Is bread the dead eleme^t more effectual then
the word, which is the soul, that puts life in to that dead element? Can
the body separated from the soul, or opposed to the soul, be said to have
more life and spirit, then the soul which is the only founteyne of life and
spirit to the body, and without which, the body remains as void of al life
and spirit, as does any stock or stone? Now surely this is a^^ry dead
imagination, not to be conceived of a man that has life, and sense, and a
little wit in him. I omit, that Zuingl. Tom. ^. responsio. ad Confes^io.
Lutheri. fol. 477
Calvin, P. Martyr, and Zuinglius commonly write, that never was there nor is
there any sacrament, which exhibited or delivered to us Christ: but al
sacraments serve ^ther to signify and figure Christ absent, as Zuinglius will
have it; or to seal the communication of Christ and his promises received
before, as is the more usual opinion of Calvin, Beza, Martyr, and those that be
right Caluinists* And therefore what speaks M. B. of better gripping Christ
by the sacrament, then by the word; of possessing him more fully and largely by
the sacraments, then by the word Before page 105. 106. 87. 88. 185. 186. 189.
whereas they teach that by the sacraments we posse^^^ him not, nor grip him
at al^as out of Calvin, Musculus Bullinger, and Zuinglius has been s^evved.

Wherefore M. B. perceiving belike of him self, that t^^^ his riddle or
oracle, of possessing Christ better by (...) sign of bread and drink (by
which we possess him (...) thing at al^then by the word (which works some
possession of Christ within us) could very hardly sink in ^^ the minds of his
auditorie: he therefore from this, (...) ^^th to the first old ancient grace
of his sacramen^ bread, lest it should seem altogether frivolous and ^^^
profitable. For the sacraments serve also (says he) ^^ (...) Page 47.
up and confirm the truth that is in the word. For ^^ ^^ office of the seal
hung to the evidence is not to confirm any other truth, but that which is in
the evidence: and suppose ye believed the evidence before, yet by the seals ye
believe it the better, even so the sacrament assures me of no other truth then
is contained in the word: Yet because it is a seal annexed to the word, it
persuades me better of the same. Whereof having Before cap. 4 number ^.
said before sufficiently, I vvil not stand to repeat or make any new
discourse here. Only thus much will I vvarne the reader, that this new found
doctrine of seals to confirm The doctrine of seals borovved fron the corrupt
manners of me^
gods word and promises, which these extraordinary ministers so much
inculcate, never before heard of in the word of god of the old testament or
new, never in the Gospels, or Epistles Canonical, no^ yet in general Councels,
or ancient fathers, or practice of Christ's Catholic church; seems to have
had his first original and root from the corrupt manners of these ministers and
their scholars. Who continually boasting of their only faith without works,
and having as false a faith as ever had any Carthaginian or Greek; because
they commonly lie, dissemble and circumuent, and when they look most simply,
mean most traiteiously; when they counterfeite much gravity, ^obrietie, and
religion, then are full Calvin pr^lecti^ in Daniel cap. 11. fol. 1^^. P^^^ sunt
per fidia, ^^l^^ c^ fra^d^^^s.
of craft, guilefulnes, and falsitie, as also Calvin truly witnesses of them:
they finding this in them selves, and that they can not trust one an other upon
words and promises, but must have seals and obligations besides: from their
own corrupt behavior dravv this to the church of Christ: and make like
reckening of Gods word and sacraments, as they do of their own words,
vvritings and obligations: and as they apply seals and bonds to confirm
their own graunts and promises, because otherwise no man vvil trust them;
they induce like opinion upon God and his word, as though the credit thereof
depended in like manner upon seals and obligations. But as at this present,
there is many a simple people in the world, that has not the use of seals,
but trust one an other as well upon their ^^^e word or vvriting without farther
assurance: and many a good plain and honest man I know, upon whose word a
man might ve^ture as much as upon his seal, and as truly and infallibly would
he perform it; so much more do al true Christians make like account of gods
word, which as it infinitely overpeiseth the word of the best man, so
infinitely is it less helped by these fantastical seals of bread and wine.
Which word of God albeit M. B. tell us, that his brethren Faith nothing
bettered by ^h^se Seals.
believe the better by the seals of bread and drink, yet shall he be hardly
able to persuade that to any wise man. For first, it is a very bad and
miserable faith (to say no more) that fully, perfitly, absolutely, believes
not God upon his only word, that word which he knows questionles to be
gods, and to proceed from him. Again, it is as vveake and miserable a faith*
and (to speak plainly) little differing from vvitles folly and infidelity,
which casting any doubt of the word which he acknovvlegeth to be gods, is
any whit, any jot confirmed therein, or moved to believe it the more for
these sophistical signs and seals, as sure and certain as vvethercocks: for
that as they turn here and there, north, south, east, and west, in to every
quarter and corner of the world with the turning of every vvind, even so these
seals having al their strength, grace, and authority from the ministers
sermon, which gives life and soul to them, may be applied by the minister to
signify, that is, to seal things as contrary, as the east is to the Before.
page 176. 177. 178. 179.
west, or north to the south; as has been in part touched before, and here
comes somvvhat more to be spoken of in this place.

Of the WORD necessarily required to make a sacrament.
The Argument.
Of the word which M. B. and the Calvinists require to be joined to their
bread, and wine, and water, to make them sacraments. By the word* they mean a
Sermon. Which opinion is refelled as wicked and utterly false.

The nature of this word is farther examined, and refelled by the example of
Christ, and manifest reason drawn thence, joined with the authority of the
English congregation, which in this part of faith reproves the Scottish
ministry, as plainly Anabaptistical.

This opinion concludes most of the communions and baptismes used thorough out
England and Scotland to be no sacraments, as is declared by 4. sensible
demonstrations. 5, It is the high way to abolish al use both of Sermons and
also of Sacraments.

CHAP. 10.
HAving hitherto spoken of the general consideration of the elements (says M.
B.) it restes, that we say somewhat concerning the word Page 44.
which I call the other part of the sacrament. I understand and take the word
for that thing, which quickens this whole action, which serves as it were a
soul, and geve^ life to the whole action. For by the word and the appointement
of Christ in the word, the minister knows what is his part, the hearer what is
his part, and every one is prepared, the minister how to deliver and the hearer
how to receive. Of this word, which is principally to be attended in the
sacrament, and which (as M. B. truly speaks, if he rightly understood his
own words, and applied them as he ought) is the life of the sacrament, and
geveth al force and grace unto it, he afterward somewhat more at large
discou^seth Sermo 3. page 132.
^hus. As the Papists and we agree, that the word man concur to the nature
and constitution of a sacrament; so when we come to know what is meant by the
word, we differ much. What word ^^ necessary to to make the Sacrament.
Let the Papists opinion (whereof you sceme to have little skil-as shall
appear hereafter in place convenient) ^est for this present: and help us to
understand your own opinion concerning this word, with which you are
better acquainted. By the Word necessarily required to make Ibid. pa. 133.
this sacrament, we mean (says M. B.) the whole institution of Christ Jesus:
what so ever he said, what so ever he did, or commanded to be done. And this
whole institution ought to be entreated after this manner. First there ought a
lawful pastor, Ibi pa. 136. 137.
who has his calling from god to entreat it. And this lawful pastor ought to
entreat it lawfully. What is that? He ought to preach it, to proclaim it, and
publicly with a clear voice to denounce it. He ought to open up and declare
the ^ail parts of it; what is the peoples part, and what is his own part, ^ow
^e How the minister must preach this word.
ought to deliver and distribute that bread and wine, and how the people ought
to receive it, and how they ought to receive the body and blud of Christ
signified by it. This ^e ought to do in a familiar and homely language, that
the people may understand him. For except ye hear Christ in such a language,
ye can ^^^ understand. Except ye understand, it is not possible for ^o^ i^
believe: and without belief there is no application of Christ. This is the
s^mme of M. B. preaching touching this point: and the effect of al comes to
this, that the Sermon of the minister (to whom yet he prescribes somvvhat like
a Superintendent, of what matter, and in what sort he must preach) is that
word which is so necessary, and which makes the sacrament. In which
discourse, first The ministers good opinion of their own words.
of all the Christian reader may note the good opinion that these Ministers have
of them selves and their own words. These signs and seals albeit they be
ordained by Christ to signify and seal: as has been often times said, yet
are they dead: the bread is common bread, the wine is common wine,
notvvithstanding Christ's ordinance and institution. Many times the Protestant
vvriters vvil bear us in hand, that the ancient fathers, when they speak of
Consec^ation, mean thereby nothing else but the application of the bread and
wine from profane use to holy, from serving common tables, to ^^^^ the I^vv.
R^pli^ centra Hard. Artic. 1, Di^is^o 1. page 19. Bul^inger dec^^^^ ^. Sermo ^.
Calvin Institutio lib. 4. ^^ 17. number. 15.
table of the Lord. The bread water and wine when in baptism and the supper
they are applied to holy uses, then are they consecrated, says M. Ievvel and
Bullinger. This is their Consecration (says Calvin) when they are applied to
spiritual uses. And so commonly write Peter Martyr, Zuinglius, ^^^a, and the
rest. But now albeit the bread and wine be brought from the tavern to the
church, and there remain upon the table, and all the brethren and sisters
attend* ready to receive it in memory of the Lords death (which is from
profane use to apply it to marvelous holy) yet notvvithstanding still it
remains common bread, common wine, a dead eleme^t, without life and soul,
like a dead carcas. If a Catholic priest take such bread and wine, and having
with him a sufficient company to make a communion, after their prayers either
private or public, purpose farther to consecrate this common bread by
rehearsing all the words of Christ, either after S. Ma^thevv, S. Mark. S. Luke,
or S. Paul; all this works nothing: thus to recite Christ's words is magical
inchauntment: and Colv. Institutio ^^^. ^. ca. ^ 7 number. 15. Before, page 51. 52.
it is gross beastlines and doltishnes to suppose, that they are of any effect
to work any thing, say Calvin and Zuinglius. The Papists do perversely and
superstitiously ascribe force of sanctification to recital of such words.
Nulla est vis in recitatione verberum Domini: there is no virtue at al in No
virtue in the word of Christ.
reciting the words of the Lord either in baptism, or in the supper, says
Bullinger. But yet after all this, if a minister of Calvin's creation, who has
as much authority to make this sacrament, as has his wise: and nether of ^ut
much in ^^e word of a minister.
them more then they have to create a new Sun or Moon, if such a minister
come and tell a tale of his own, spend perhaps an hou^e o^ more in railing at
the church discipline, at the Pope, at Papists, or in some such other argument,
which is the common subject of their sermons (for fevv ministers follow M. B.
order of preaching prescribed here) then forsooth the whole action is
quickened, then the bread and wine receive life and soul, and from common
bread become sacramental bread, significatiue bread, sealing bread, whereby it
is sealed and confirmed to all the brethren and sisterne, that they have
spiritually eaten the flesh of Christ by faith. Is not the blindness of these
men wonderful, that can thus iustle our Christ, to thrust in them selves? can
reject his words, and so magnify their own? And where find they in any part
of A Sermen no vvays necessary to make a Sacrament.
the scripture old or new, that a Sermon is required as a necessary part of
the sacrament? What Apostle or Evangelist vvriteth so? what Doctor or Council
ever so expounded the scripture, or gathered any such rule or conclusion
thence? We find in the Evangelists the whole entier form used by Christ,
when first of al he instituted Chap. 5. number. 3.
this sacrament, which before we have in particular declared; and that
according to the judgment of a learned and sieve Caluinist. Nether in the text
of the Evangel, no^ yet in the exposition of this Evangelist, is any such
preaching mentioned, much less is it made a necessary part of the sacrament,
vvhereon the life of it depends. Our savior after the delivery of it, in S.
John makes Joan. ca. 14. 15. 16. 17.
a long sermon. I grant: but nether is that adjoined as a part of the Supper,
nether touches it the sacrament, the institution, o^ administration, or
explication, or declaration there of to the people; which only declaration of
the Before, pa. 5^.
mystery to the people (says Calvin) makes the dead eleme^t to become a
sacrament. In the other sacrament of baptism this ^^oward perversitie shows
it self much more. For to whom will they preach there? To whose use frame they
their sermon? To the infants? or to the people present if any be? If to the
infant, this in deed were very magical not preaching, but inchauntement, to
preach to the infant, who understands never a word. To the people? How so?
whereas the sacrament is not for them, the baptism is not to be applied to
them: and the sign or element must be joined to make a sacrament, not for the
standers by, but for the receivers.

word preached, which is of so great authority and operation in geving life
and spirit to the Scottish and Geneua sacraments, otherwise Of the word
preached, which is the use of the Sco^tish Sign. ^.
very dead and deadly. Wherefore I desire a little more particularly to be
resolved and ansvvered, what word preached this is, whereof depends the life
and soul of their sacrament? Has every sermon this grace? Does every idle
preaching of a minister give life and soul to the sacrament, and with common
bread make such a wonderful conjunction of Christ's body, as M. B. tells us?
What if out of the pulpit he tell a tale of Robin hood and little Ihon? What if
he do naught else, but inveigh against the Pope, the Cardinals, Purgatory,
praying to Saints, and so forth? What if he fall in commendation (a common
argument among the ministers) of love matters and chamber-worke; as VVigandus
an Archprotestant, VVigandus d^ bo^^s et mal^ Germania. mal. 6. Vide Surium in
Chronico. Anno. 1566 Arch. Hamilto^ in Demonstrat. Calviniara Confusio. lib. 2.
ca. ^ ^^.
one of the framers of the Magdeburge Centuries writes, that once him self
was present, when a gospelling minister in his sermon, to that effect cited
above 20. verses out of Ovid d^ art amandi; which also to be a common vein of
preaching in Scotland, it is well known and testified. Does every such pulpit
talk give soul to your sacrament? You will say, no. For albeit both in
Scotland and England, a number of Co^munions are current and pass well with
such Sermons, and both the Co^munions and Sermons are compted perfect enough,
and the multitude both of ministers and Protestants like this kind of preaching
best; yet when they come to M. B. scanning, he (as we may here perceive) vvil
dislike them and find the^ deficient. Wherefore let us put the case somewhat
more indifferent. What if the Minister make his sermon of the creation of the
world, of the fall of Adam of the patriarchs marriages, of the deluge, of the
children of Isreal's captivity, of the old law? What if he talk of the new
testament, of persecutions, of S. Paul's vocation, his coming to Rome, his
travails there to plant the gospel? What if he exhort the people (which yet
I suppose is a rare argument in the ministry) to chastity, to alms, to
fasting, to prayer, and such other good virtues, without any relation o^
explication of the Supper of Christ? Nether is this the word, which gives
life to the sacraments. For so you decide the matter both here, and in the
beginning, that the word, which you mean, and Page 6. Page 136.
is so necessary, is the word preached distinctly, and opening all the parts of
the element. There must be preached and proclaimed and publicly denounced with
a clear voice, what is the ministers part, what is the peoples part, how he
ought to deliver and distribute that bread and that wine, how they ought to
receive it: what is signified by it, and a number of such matters, and all this
must be done in a familiar and homely language. This word must go before and
the sacrament as a seal* follow and be appended thereafter. And according to
Calvin, when Calv. Institutio. lib. 4. ^a. 14. number. 4.
we hear mention made of the sacrame^tal word (which joined to the sign
makes it a sacrament) we must thereby understand the promise, which being
preached by the minister with a clear Clara v^ce.
voice, may guide and lead the people thither, where the sign tends and
directs us: that is, as before M. B. has declared Page 1^^.
it, how able the bread is to nurish the body to life earthly and temporal* so
able is the flesh of Christ signified by the bread to nurish both body and
soul to life everlasting. Well, no^*vve know, what kind of word it is,
which thus gives life and soul to their sacrament, we shall be better able
to judge what manner of thing the Scottish and Geneva sacrament is. And first
of al, it must needs be clean separate^ The Scottish Sup^ ^^^ sacrament of ^
Christ.
from the sacrament of Christ's last supper. For it is man^est by the gospel,
that the sacrament of Christ had ^^ such life and soul. For, 1. nether did
Christ make a Serm^ 2. nether did he with a clear voice proclaim and
denounce, whereunto the sign did lead and direct the^^ 3. nether taught he
his disciples, that as the bread and vv^^^ nourished their bodies to life
temporal, so his flesh (...) able to nourish both body and soul to life
euerlastin^ 4. nether declared he what was the Ministers pa^^ (...) duty, 5.
nor yet what was the peoples: 6. he made (...) mention how the one should
deliver the bread and wine 7. nor how reverently the other should receive it:
and so forth in all the rest we find no piece or parcel of such a word, that is
of such a life and soul in any Evangelist; of whom yet doubtless we learn
what Christ did very sufficiently; so far as is necessary to the making of
the sacrament. Wherefore by these so many essential parts required to their
Scottish or Geneua sign, and not used or practiced by Christ in his sacrament,
we may assuredly conclude, that Christ's sacrament and their sign are of
clean different natures. Besides al which, M. B. him self Before, page 200.
teaches us, that in their Scottish Supper there are t^a propiners or geuers
which deal their sacrament, whereas in Christ's supper there was but one. In
the Scottish supper the minister exhibiteth only the sign of the bread: he
delivers only an earthly creature not worth a straa, whereas in Christ's
supper it war far otherwise: as M. B. be he never so profane, vvil (I
suppose) grant. But to omit this, and return to the word, and stay thereon.
Although this be most evident and most sufficient (especially that of the word
not preached by Christ, and yet required of necessity by them) to make an
essential separation between Christ's sacrament and their sign or sealing
bread; yet for the better justification of that which I have said, The English
clergy against the Scottish.
I vvil produce for me against M. B. and the Scottish ministry, the authority
of my lord Archbisshop of Canterbury and our English Congregations, who
condemn this opinion of mere Anabaptisme, and that by scripture and authority
of their chief Apostle of our age H^lderike Zuinglius. For says my L. of
Canterbury against the VVhitegist do sense of the answer tracta. ^. pa. 565.
Puritanes; It is manifest Matthew. 3. v. 13. 14. 15. that John did baptize
without preaching. Nether read we, that Christ preached immediately before the
distribution of the sacrament of his body to his disciples. Yet h^d it been so
necessary a matter as you make it, and of the substance of the sacraments: the
Evangelists would have expressed it by one means or other. And whereas this
notvvithstanding the Puritanes proceed, and say with M. B. that the life of
the sacraments depen death of the preaching of the word, this as a foul error
and most untrue, he refuteth somewhat more at large with very good reasons:
part of which, for M. B. better instruction or satisfaction I vvil set down.
Thus he disputes: If this doctrine be true, then be the sacraments dead
sacraments, Ibi. pa. ^66.
and without effect, except the word be preached, when they be ministered. And
so some of your adherents in plain terms affirm* saying that they are seals
without writing, and M. B. preaching, (...) ^nabaptistical.
plain blanks. Which doctrine savoureth very strongly of Anabaptisme, and
depriueth those of the effects and fruits of the sacraments, which have been
partakers of them without the word preached, when they were ministered: and so
consequently even your self (M. B.) for it as not very like that there was a
sermon at your christening. And therefore this doctrine must of necessity
bring in rebaptization, and condemn the baptism of infants, which is flat
Anabaptistical. For if that baptism be without life, at which the word of God
is not preached, then can it not be effectual, and regenerate those that were
therewith baptized, and therefore it must of necessity be iterated, that it
may be livelie. Here is one reason, and the same very strong, whereby M. B.
him self probably is proved no Christian, as being not at al baptized (^^r
water without the word is nothing but mere and de^^ water, as likewise the
bread is nothing but common bread: and such baptism lacking the life of a
sermon, is not able to give life or regeneration to others, more then a dead
man is able to give life or generation to any) and al baptismes heretofore
practiced in the catholic church and most Protestant churches, are no
baptismes, and consequently al or most of the Scottish nobility, people, and
ministry must be rebaptised, if they will be accounted Christians.

Which is one invincible argument for the Anabaptists concerning al Christians
of times past. Now let us hear an other for those that come hereafter. If
baptism Ibi. pa. ^^6.
be dead, at which the word is not preached; then can it do no good to infants,
who understand not the word preached. For if the preaching of the word be so
necessarily adjoined to the administration of the sacraments, it is in respect
of those that are to receive the sacraments. And then must it needs follow, that
the sacraments may be ministered to those only, which are able to hear the
word, whereby infants are secluded from baptism^ And in deed this is one of the
strongest arguments, that the Anabaptists have. This for all Christians to come:
so M. B. preaching. Anabaptistical.
that hence forward by M. B. Theology, baptism must no more be ministered to
children or infants, but we must expect with the Anabaptists, until they come
to years of discretion, that then they hearing the minister preach, may have
the right sacrament endued with life and soul and perfect essence, which now
for want of such preaching, is to them mere water without the spirit, a dead
body without life or soul, and (as our Puritanes speak, just according to
Calvin and M. B.) nothing but seals without writing and plain blanks. After,
follows an authority of Zuinglius to prove his purpose, which because it is
very long, and would fill up a leaf at lest, I willingly omit. The sum of
Zuinglius allegation, and my L. application is, that the word preached is not
the life and perfection of the sacrament, but that the sacraments are perfect
without it, and that M. B. and al other in teaching this doctrine, plainly
join hands with the Anabaptists. Thus Ibi. pa. 568.
my Lord of Canterbury. Unto whose reasons, one more I will add, which M. B.
his preaching before, and the general doctrine of the sacramentaries yeldeth
against this toy, or rather madness. It is agreed among them very generally,
Before, page 115. 197. 198.
that the baptism of S. John was the self same, that Christ and his Apostles
after delivered to the church and we now enjoy. Which being so, then must it
needs follow, that it had the same matter and form, the same eleme^t and word
that ours has. This is evident, and can not be denied. Let us then proceed,
and because of the matter and element, Christ's Sacrament had no such word as
has the Scottish.
which was water in both, there is no controversy; let us consider the form,
that is, the life and soul, the word preached, without which, baptism is
nothing but water, as their other sign of the supper conteyneth nothing but
common bread. When S. John ministered baptism to Christ, did he preach the
word, as here we have it defined? did he with a clear voice denounce and
proclaim to Christ all the parts of baptism? Did he tell Christ what was his
own part and duty, as likewise what was Christ's part and duty? How Christ
ought to come and receive the baptism? and so forth, as here we have the
word defined and explicated? Let M. B. make choice of which part he vvil, and
answer yea, or no; and I suppose he shall perceive his own error and folly;
and that as in answering truly, he must deny al his preaching hitherto about
this Word, so if he vvil stand to maynteine his word, and say that S. John
used in his sacrament such a word, such preaching and opening al parts of the
sacrament, this affirmation in the judgment of sober men will convince him not
so much of folly, as fury* not of heresy, as of phrenesie: the particular
consideration whereof I leave to him self.

1
(and I think the like of Scotland) baptismes and communions Many baptismes
void. for want of Sermons.
are ministered without Sermons; in many* some poor homily is read in steed
of a Sermon; in all these churches the sacraments are dead things, the communion
bread is naught else but common bread, the water of baptism is common profane
water, and nether of these any sacrament. And that the reader think not my
asseveratio^ bold or strange, where I say, that in England in many churches
are so fevv Sermons, let him understand, that albeit there be in deed order
prescribed, that in every parish church there should be 4. sermons in the year,
every quarter one, (whereas in the year there are baptismes and communions
perhaps 2. or 3. hundred) yet this is soil observed, that notvvithstanding such
order taken, the Ca^bridge doctors them selves testify, that they know
parishes not far from Cambridge so principal an University The. C^^t. i^ his
2. R^pli^ pa. 164.
for preachers, where one of these sermons was not in 4. years together: which
if it be so, so nere to Cambridge (say they) what is to be thought of other
places of the realm? And else where the same parties affirm, that in most
churches of England, Idem in his first Reply pa 110.
there is none that either can or will preach: so that this one clause makes
void thousands of baptismes, and thousands of Communions in England and
Scotland. For this must be observed by the way, that such reading of Homilies
in the church, is not (according to this definition, not these men's opinion)
preaching of the word with a T. Cart* vbis^ pra. pa. 127.
clear voice; no more (say they) then a men's pen or hand is his tongue and
voice: who furthermore utterly deny Apud White gift pa. 57^.
such reading to be comprised in the name of preaching, despise it altogether,
and say that it is as il as playing on a stage, and worse to.

Next (to omit Homilies and come to sermons) whereas 2
this word is appointed by Calvin to be preached after one certain form, vz,
that the minister preach the promise, and lead the people thither where the
sign directs, how many thousand ministers fail in preaching this promise?
who doubtless in all the Gospels, where after the Protestant-Theologie mention is
made of the sacrament can not possibly find any such promise as Calvin
surmiseth, for that assuredly there is none such. For to tell us, Before, page
205.
that these words This is my body, is a promise, is as blunt and ridiculons a
toy, as if a man would make the articles of our Creed promises: as if some
wise minister would Most Scottish sacraments void, for vv^^ of the Word*
tell us, that these verities, Christ was borne of the virgin: he suffered death
under Pilate: be rose again, and ascended, were promises: which are of like
quality with that promise of John Calvin. And if in Christ's words where he
instituteth this sacrament, there be no promise, how then shall the minister
preach with a loud and clear voice upon this promise which is not? If to help
forward the matter, we shall take M. B. his exposition, that the minister must
tell the people, whereto the sign tends and directs them, that is, look
how able the bread is to nurish them corporally, so able is Christ to nurish
them spiritually to eternal life: which spiritual nurriture is sealed and
confirmed in them by these reverend seale^ of bread and wine; first this
similitude is taken not from the scripture, but from the doctors and f^thers,
and therefore a Minister is iniuried, and it is against his profession, out of
the pulpit, whence the only word of the Lord should sound, to preach such
inventions of men. Next, who can doubt but thus to prescribe one certain rule
as necessarily to be observed, is the right way quit to disanul as many mo
thousand^ of their baptismes and communions. For who can imagine, that the
unruly ministers follow any one certain rule? Or who knovveth not that it is
in a manner against their profession, to admit any such vn^^^i^ie? And yet this
very order, intended (I suppose) by Calvin, and exactly and particularly thus
defined by M. B. is most essential. For seeing the bread and wine are material
p^^^s, and by their condition apt to signify in general a hundred things, as
has been declared; whereas the determination and reducing of it from general
to special, from signifying things profane, to signify things sacred, and
among a number of things sacred one several and singular, vz. the eating of
Christ's flesh by ^^^ before. pa. 178. 179. 280.
faith, depends upon the word of the minister thus determining it: assuredly
this word bringing with it this determination, and so separating and
abstracting the To^ right word
bread from al other things, is most necessary, most essential. For as a piece
of wax, which is to receive the kings seal or image, is indifferent before
the sta^pe, to receive the image of a serpent, of a dog, of a tree, of any
living creature man or beast, but after by the sta^p is limited to one certain
form and representation: even so the bread being the matter, and as it were
the wax which is to be sealed, is of it self indifferent to as many stampes
and images. But when the minister comes, and according to M. B. and Caluins
direction tells them, that as the bread feeds their body to life temporal,
so the flesh of Christ feeds both body and sovvleto life eternal etc. ^ow
this word puts a certain print, a certain image, a certain stamp and sign
on the bread, whereby it receives this one sacramental signification. This is
it which puts life in to the dead element: and this word is the life and
soul of the communion. Which being so, thereof I conclude plainly and
directly, that thorough out al Scotland and England are very fevv true
communions, very Wants i^ most Scottis^ Sacraments.
fevv sacraments of Christ's body. For if there be a Sermon made, and not an
homily read; yea, if the sermon entreat of the sacrament, and not of other
matters: yet if the minister preach not as here M. B. and Calvin appoint, either
for frowardnes because he will not be commanded, or else of very conscience,
because he is no Calvinist, but a mere Zuinglian, who defines the sacrament
Before. pa. ^^ 19. ^^
to be nothing but a badge, a token, a memorial, and that it has no such
virtue of sealing and confirming, which the Zuinglian condemns as
Anabaptistical: this sermon is not the word which gives life to the
sacrament, but page 139*
leaves it as blockish, dull, and dead an element, as it was before. Because
although the minister unto this wax of bread and wine put a seal, a sta^p, a
signification; yet he puts not the right seal, the right stamp, the right
signification: although he preach the word, yet he preaches not that word,
which should quicken and give life to this action, he preaches not that word,
unto which this seal is to be appended for confirmation. Much more may I
conclude, that al English ministers, if they be not Puritanes, but follow their
Archbisshop my lord of Canterbury, who condemns for Anabaptistical no less
then Zuinglius (though for an other reason) this opinion of geving life to the
sacraments by preaching the word; ^l they can never possibly have any right
communion, any right sacrament: they can have nothing but common bread, but a
dead element, because they admit not, but contrariwise (o great sacrilege)
impugn that which is the very soul, and should give life to the sacramet.n

I conclude thirdly, that if a Scottish and perfect Calvinian 3
minister make the sermon, except he humble him self to preach not only this
former word of the promise inve^ted by Calvin, and found no where in the
Gospels; nor only the word of the mystical similitude between the bread and
What be the essential parts of the Word, necessary to make the sacrament.
Christ's body required by M. B. and borrowed out of the doctors, but also
besides, with a clear voice, preach distinctly, and open all the parts of the
sacrament, which thing here M. B. in general requires and in special reherseth
and explicareth; nether is such a Communion the right sacrament, to the essence
and co^plement whereof it is necessary, not that one or two, or a fevv, but
that al parts of the sacrament and sacrame^tal 1
receiving be opened and declared, vz. 1. that a lawful 2 3
minister, 2. with a clear voice, 3. in a familiar and homely language, 4.
publicly proclaim and denounce, 5. the b^il 4 5
parts of the Supper or Communion. 6. what is the peoples part. 7. 6 7
8
what is his own part. 8. how he ought to deliver that bread and wine. 9. how
the people ought to receive it. 10. how they 9 10
11
ought to receive the body and blud of Christ signified by it. 11. 12
how they should come with great reverence to the table. Besides al which he
must also speak 12. what soever Christ spoke in that whole action of his
supper, without omitting Before. page 146.
any one jot. All this is comprised in the name of the Word, and all this must
be preached by the minister before it can be a sacrame^tal sign or supper, and
omitting any of these, quite marreth and destroys the whole supper: as where
many parts are required to the nature and substance or essence of some certain
body or creature, the missing of any one destroys the whole: as in man or
beast, the loss of any one essential part as heart lungs etc. brings certain
death to al. So then if the minister do not in particular prosecute each one of
these parts in his sermon if he follow not precisely and religiously this M. B.
his appointment: if he play the Minister, and sting out in to other matter,
against Pope and Catholic church, and perhaps inveigh against this formal
prescription of M. B. for that the spirit of the Lord in them is not to be
bridled by men, that they know their duty herein, and how the sacrament is to
be ministered as well as John Calvin, John Knox, or M. B. him self: that they
will stand in defense of their liberty, and not become servants of men 1. Corinthians. 7. 2^.
etc. if he thus preach, or in any other sort, so that he omit any part of that
word, which is before declared: the bread and wine distributed to the people
after that kind of No Scottish communion is the Sacrament of Christ.
preaching, is not a sacrament, but still remains common bread, not worth a
straa, for want of the right and perfect word. And so there was never a
communion ministered according to the Scottish communion book since these
ministers got rule in Scotland, which had ought in it besides common bread:
because (to pass over the former 11. points prescribed by M. B. of which very
probable it is, that in most Co^munions many of them were omitted) 12. by very
order of their communion book some See before, ca* 5. number. 4.
words which Christ spoke (and in deed were most importa^t concerning the
sacrament) are purposely least out.

Fourthly I conclude, that in most of the Caluinian 4
Communions, the communicants do more commonly according to their own
doctrine, eat the flesh of their lavvful Superiors, to whom God has
subjected them, then the flesh of Christ, and so consequently their table 1.
Corint. ^0. 21.
is rather the table of Devils, then of god, and they at that table communicate
ten times more with the Devil, then with God. For whereas among that railing
generation no one argument is more common then to rail at the Pastors of
Christ's Church, and at the Catholic doctrine; whereas nothing is more usual
and frequent with them then to slander Popes* Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, the
Catholic church of al ages, unto whose obedience Christ has bound the^ under
pain of damnation: when Matthew. 11. Hebr. 13. The flesh of Popes and bishops
eaten in the Geneva supper.
after such raylings and slanders they eat their tropical bread and wine,
they eat as truly (to speak the lest) the flesh of Popes, bishops, Catholic
Princes and people, as they ever do the flesh of Christ and after such a
raylative sermon, the breaking of their bread, and povvring out of their wine
signifies as directly and autentically the flesh and blud of the Popes and
bishops* which they not spiritually, but spitefully, not by right faith, but by
gross and froward infidelity and detraction tear, rent, pull in pieces and
spil^as at an other more sober sermon (if At truly as the flesh of Christ.
any such be) it signifies the flesh and blud of Christ. And the bread and
wine being appended afterward, serve as aptly in the one sermon, time and,
place, to seal and confirm the malicious and slanderous eating of the flesh
of Bishops and Christian people, as in the other sermon time and place, it
serves to seal and confirm the spiritual eating of Christ's flesh: and the
word of the one sermon determines and limiteth as well and perfitely the
general signification of the bread and wine to the one sense, as the word of
the other sermon restrayneth it to the other sense.

Finally I conclude, that this doctrine is the high way 5
to remove from the Communion, al word of God, one or other, either preached or
not preached. For let us suppose, which may be very easily, that half a dosen
Euangelical The Geneua Sacrament perfect without the word.
brethren know as well as the minister, vvhereto the sign of bread and wine
is referred, that the one signifies Christ's flesh, the other his blud: that as
by bread they are nourished temporally, so by the other they are nourished
eternally: item, that by often frequenting the communion they know their own
duty, they know the ministers duty, and so forth; if such brethren come to
supper, what need is there of a sermon* Nether let M. B. deny my supposition.
For it is a thing most easy and facile, and no doubt many there are, which by
reading his book, and perhaps this, or by hearing it so often told them out of
pulpits; without any ^ers sermon, have it still fresh, and deeply imprinted in
their memory. Here in this case, what need a sermon* To give life to the
action? The life is given already. To quicken it? It is quickened already. To put
them in remembrance of their duty? I presuppose they remember it well enough.
To keep the fashion and custom of the church? That is not spoken like a
Minister. And if I grant that order is good: and so not to be neglected for
regard of other ignorant men, yet hereof it followed that the word preached
after your own fashion often times geveth not life to the action; but the
action, the sacrament is as lively, as quick, as full of soul without it, as
with it. And to this conclusion, M. B. him self brings the whole effect and
drift of the word preached and his so diligent explication thereof. Al which
(says he) must be done in a familiar language, that the people may Before.
page 216.
understand; that understanding they may believe; that believing they may
apply Christ to them, which is to eat him by faith. Then, if these
communicants of whom I speak, without such a sermon understand (as I
presuppose) already, and believe, and so apply Christ to them, which is to
eat him spiritually; what necessity is there The Word sup^^s^uous in many
co^munions.
of the word and preaching at al, which serves only for novices or infidels,
to make them understand and believe in Christ, and not for faithful, and such
as understand Christ already So that M. B. word, and preaching thereof so
necessarily required to make their supper or sign; presupposes in deed all the
brethren and sisterne which come to receive, to lack faith and understanding
of Christ; to be faithles and without belief of Christ, until the minister by
the word preached engender faith in them. Which defects being not in these
communicants of whom I speak (for I hope al Caluinists be not in so short
space of a few years, by the preaching of the word become plain infidels,
though they may be in a good degree toward it) what use, or at lest what
necessity is there of the word to be preached, when that effect is present
before hand, to the vvorking whereof the preaching serves? What needs a
candle when the Sun shines? What folly it is to water a well grown tree,
which having deep root in the earth is able to nourish it self? What nurse
uses to feed the child* which is 10. or 12. years old, and able to feed it
self? If these fevv brethren being of good memory, and having zeal to the
word, remember these points of the word, which makes the bread to have
life, and become a sign, if they understand Christ, and believe in him by
virtue of old sermons, which they have heard of this matter before, what
needs this Battologie? this idle repetition of one and the self same thing,
this casting of water in to the sea, this bringing of a sevv sticks in to the
maine vvood? This is the islue of this new devised word, to induce contempt
and neglect of both word and sacrament, and to make every profane eating and
drinking as good as the Sacrament. Which thing as before ^ have shevved by
other arguments of theirs, so here the very word (whereof they vaunt most and
glory in) ten death to the same scope, and induces the same conclusion. For it
can not be denied, but according to this theology and explication of the
word, 3. or 4. such brethern as I require, without preaching of the word, at
any common table, at any common breakfast, have a communion, a sacramental
sign and seal, as good and effectual, as they should have, and others have
with the minister in the The Geneva communions rather to be called breakefasta
then suppers.
church. Which being very true, that their breakefasts at home be as good and
sacramental, as their suppers in the church, it were well done me seems, if
partly to avoid superstition, partly to correct their own error, principally
for truths sake, they would from hence forth call their co^mumons rather
breakefasts then Suppers. For so should men think of them as divinely as they
deserve: and whereas the Protestants call it a supper, imitating that word in
the Apostle (where certainly he calls not ^. Corinth 11 ^. ^0.
the sacrament, but other feasts, by the name of our lords Supper) they should
amend that oversight, and vvithal speak more soundly, and according to truth:
as P. Martyr Martyr in 1. Corint ca. 11. pa. 293. 294. Videtur d^^e^^^ prand^um.
has very discreetly noted, vvriting upon that same place of the Apostle. For
in respect of the time and our empty stomach, it were (says he) more reason
to call it a breakfast or dinner, then a supper. And this is the true and right
issue of the new word devised by John Calvin, and approved by M. B. of that
word, which they require to the essence of their sacrament: a word which
makes al and singular their communions and sacraments to be of a clean
different nature from that sacrament which Christ instituted, for that their
sacrament is framed in an other mould, has though not always an other matter,
yet ever an other form (which geveth the essence to Forma dat esse ^es.
every thing) then that of Christ's institution: theirs receiving al life,
soul, perfection and integrity from the ministers clear voice and sermon,
or the receivers faith, The Geneva Sign no sacrament of Christ.
whereas Christ's sacrament received his integrity and perfection other ways
and not by such means.

Again, this word of theirs makes not only their sacrament no sacrament, being
compared with Christ's Institution, but makes it also nothing else but common
bread for the most part, being examined even by this very word which them
selves have invented, as has been now declared, and the learned reader shall
doubtless find most true, if he examine the communions and suppers used in
England, France, Geneua, Zurick, Zuizzerla^d etc. by this word here appointed
as necessary to separate their sacramental supper from vulgar and profane.
And if their supper be no sacrament of Christ according to Christ's order, nor
yet according to their own rules and Theology; what regard would they have
us to make of it? How shall we esteem of it as divine, sacred and celestial,
when as them selves conclude and prove, that it is nothing but a common piece
of bread, an earthly creature, void of al grace and spirit, a dead element,
not worth ^ straa, fitter for Pagans then Christians, more meet for dogs then
men?

M. B. contradictions. The Scottish Supper is no sacrament of Christ.
The Argument.


word, which is the formal part of the sacrament: so here by a brief repetition
of sundry things wanting in the material part (which things M. B. consesseth to
be of the substance of the sacrament) it is manifestly concluded, that their
supper is no sacrament of Christ's institution, in respect of the matter, no
less then of the form.

CHP. 11.
the word, the formal part of the sacrament, by which as the more principal
we see proved, that their Scottish Supper is no sacrament of Christ. Now for
a conclusion of this first Sermon, I vvil gather and prove as much by the other
part, which is the matter of the supper according to M. B. his own division:
out of both which, the Christian reader shall be able to gather a most strong
and sure resolution, that it possibly can not be any sacrament, which saulteth
both in the one part, and in the other, which nether has right matter, nor
right form. Only first of al, I vvil in fevv words put the reader in
remembrance of M. B. notorious contradictions used in this short sermon, which
I vvisn the rather to be marked, partly for that they show this man to be a
right scholar of John Calvin, whom he so narowly follows* eve^ Before. c^p.
3. ^^m. 2.
in this blind kind of vvriting and preaching: partly for that the original
cause of this such opposite doctrine in them both is one, that is to say, an
ambitious affectation with high, ample, and maiestical words to vvin some
good opinion to their single bread and drink among their simple auditors,
whom by such glorious speech, as it were by a bait and pleasant allurement
they would gladly dravv to some honest opinion of their late devised fantasy.
These contradictions albeit they be scattered thorough out this whole
treatise; yet the 7. chapter, and 8. and 9. yield better store of them, as for
example. The The first contradiction Before, page ^64. ^65.
bread not only signifies the body of Christ, but has it also truly conjoined
with it. For if it signified only, a picture were as good. And yet the bread is
so far from having this conjunction, that it wants the signification of a
picture. I say, it signifies not so much as does the picture, which
repre'enteth Christ unto our remembrance of it self and Page 177. 178. 179.
by it self; and so does not the bread and wine, without a sermon: yea and
then also it represents him very doubtfully. Again, the bread and wine truly
and really deliver The second. Before, page 164. 165*166.
the substance of Christ unto us* For except first we receive the substance, we
can have no participation of the fruit and merits. And therefore the bread and
wine are a very hand which delivers us that substance, and with that hand is
Page 165. 168.
Christ's fiesh verily conjoined, as a medicine in the bo^e of the Apotecaries
shop. And yet the bread does no ways deliver or exhibit the body of Christ,
but only signify the same. For it is a sacrament, and ye must look for no
other conjunction Page 126. 127. 128.
then sacramental, that is, for no other conjunction then significatiue and
figurative. For that is al, that a sacrament valueth with these men. Again*
that which The third. Before, page 1^^.
we receive in the sacrament, and is signified by the bread and wine, is not
the benefits of Christ, or virtue which fleweth from him only, but the very
substance of Christ him self. For it is not possible that I be partaker of the
juice which flows out of any substance, except I first get the substance it
self. And yet the blud of Christ which we receive, is not the substance of
Christ, nor any part of his substance. For In his 3. Sermon. p^. 117.
it is no other thing, but the quickening virtue and power that f^wes from
Christ; and the merits of his death. And we drink of that blud, when we
drink of the lively power and virtue that flows cut of that blud. Again:
there is a wonderful, The fourth. Before. page 1^5. 1^7.
high, and mystical, yet very true and real conjunction between the bread and
Christ's body: and yet for all that the bread is no more co^iovned there with,
then Christ is ^oyned with the devil. For there is no other conjunction, then
is between the word spoken, and the thing which the word signifies, and so
when Christ commanded the devils out of possessed bodies, when he spoke of
Satan, of Beelzebub, of Lucifer; Christ and Satan, Christ and Beelzebub, Christ
and Lucifer the prince of devils were as nighly conjoined, as the Protestant
co^munion-bread and Christ's body. For as M. B. has diligently told us before,
so as though it were a principal high matter, he in the same terms repeateth
it twice or thrice in the next sermon, that look what sort of coniunctio^ is
betwixt the word Page 7^.
and the thing signified by the word, that sort of conjunction is betwixt the
sacrament, and the thing signified by the sacrament. And in the same place: So
soon as thou see the bread taken in the hand of the minister, thou see it
not so soon, but incontinent the body of Christ comes in to thy mind, these
two are so conjoined together: even as Christ never named the devil, nor any
Christian man blesses him self from the devil, but straight ways the devil
comes to his mind; which makes nether very wonderful, nor very true
conjunction. The fist.
Again. The conjunction of Christ's body with the bread is wonderful, high,
secret, mystical: and except thou Before, page 1^7.
be illuminated with the spirit, and except thou have a heavenly illumination,
thou can never conceive, never understand it: and yet it is as vulgar and
ordinary, as the conjunction of words with the things which they signify,
which is the most usual and base conjunction in the world: the conjunction is
no higher, nor more secret, the^ is every most popular sign hanged at every
tavern door at the door of every hosterie, cabaret, or tippling house to
signify meat, or drink, or lodging to be had there: no more then is an ivy
bush to signify wine, a vvad of straw to signify beer or ale, a lion or
flovver de lyce to signify the king of Scots and king of France: which Before,
pa. ^9.
self same examples of signs and significations, Zuingli* Before, page 174.
and the Zuinglians, Calvin and the Caluinists expressly give, and M. B.
justifies, saying, that the sacrament is nothing else but a visible word: for
that as the audible word, the word which is spoken and heard, brings the
thing spoken of to memory by the ^are, so the visible word, that is a sign
such as I have mentioned, brings the thing signified to memory, by the eye:
and such a sign is the bread and wine, and no other, for that it is no other
thing but a visible word. Again. We get Christ better in the sacrament, then
in the word of God. We get there a better grip of Christ then in the word. We
possess him in our hearts more fully and largely then by Gods word. and yet we
get him no more in the sacrament, then we get him without the sacrament,
when we hear him named, that is, then we get him by the word. For the
sacrament is nothing but a visible word, and so by the sacrament we get and
grip him no more, then by a word, and then we get grip and possess him no
more, then we get, grip, and possess the Devil, as has been said. For him
we no less remember, as soon as we hear him named. And therefore by this
plain and evident deduction, the sacrament gives the Caluinists no better
grip, no fuller possession of Christ* then it does of the Devil. And if they
confes^e, that they possess Christ no better by the word of God (M. B.
says, not so well) as I vvil not stand much against them herein, so long as
they talk of them selves, so if it were applied and spoken of true Christians,
the sentence were not so false and contradictorie to true Theology, as plainly
wicked, blasphemous and develish. Once The se^^^th.
again. One point of ^h^s conjunction between Christ's body and the sacrament
stands in a continual and mutual concurrence Before, page 1^2.
of the one with the other, that the sign and thing signified are offered both
together, at one time, and in one action; Page 19^.
there is a ioynt-offering, and ioynt-receiuing etc. and yet they are not
offered in one action, nether is there any such mutual concurring, or
ioynt-offering, and ioynt-receiving. And that doctrine of ioynt-offering and
ioynt-receiuing is altogether Papistical. For albeit the minister give the
sign, Ibid.
that is the earthly thing, yet he geves not the heavenly, b^t Christ keeps
that ministry to him self, and dispenses his body and blud, not when or to
whom the minister dispenses the sign, but to whom and when him self
pleases. For otherwise we should tie Christ and his holy spirit to the
ministers action, who must not be so tied, and who therefore sometimes gives
the thing signified before the sacrament be given, sometimes after. Nay
properly and plainly to speak, the sacrament is not ordained for any such
ioynt-offering or ioynt-receiving, or co^currence, but Pa, 11^.
only to be a seal and confirm the eating of Christ, or grace of the
sacrament, which is given before. To make short (for if a man would rehearse
al, he might fill many leaves, and my mind is only by a few examples to direct
the reader to confer and mark the rest by him self, to which end these fevv
may serve for a sufficient introduction) if it please the reader diligently to
mark and pervse these 2. or. 3. chapiters, he shall find a number of such either
most sensible contradictions, or most foolish hipocritical affectations, used
by one, who desires to adorn a base, beggarly, and contemptible bit of bread
and sippe of wine, with high, ample, and divine similitudes, words and
comparisons, as it were to cloth an ape with purple, or to put Hercules club
in the hand of an infant: as when he calls their bread and drink a high
mystery and Page ^64. ^67.
potent instrument to convey Christ's body unto us, being as base and vveake an
instrument, as any word that proceeds from Turk or Jew, which is no great
high mystery, nor instrument very potent. And this being noted by the way
concerning M. B. his contradictions, I vvil end this answer to his first
Sermon with a summarie note, how many vvayes their Scottish supper is no
sacrament of Christ according to M. B. his own doctrine, for cause of defects
and wants, which are found in the material part of that their supper.
Wherein yet I must crave pardon of the reader, if I keep not an exact
distinction between al material and formal parts required Matter and form ^
distinguished by M. B.
to these men's sacramental sign: because as herein I can go no further then
they teach me; so M. B. joining Christ's words sometimes with the ministers
sermon, and making them part of the form, at other times placing them among
the elemental, ceremonial, and material parts, draws me necessarily after,
where he goes on a fore: and on whether side he resolves to place them, the
effect comes to one, because always they are essential, and so of necessity
to be used, if we look to have a sacrament made.

signs elemental as bread and wine, and signs ceremonial. He told us
vvithal, that there was never a ceremony, which Christ instituted, but Before,
page 146.
it was as essential, as the bread and wine. What ever Christ commanded to be
done, what ever he spoke, or did in that whole action, it is essential, it must
be done, and no io^e can be omitted but ye pervert the whole institution. Here
for a conclusion he says* When the sacrament is spoiled of the essential
form, it is no sacrament. There is an essential form in baptism: and there
is an essential form in the supper: which if they be taken away, ye tyne the
use of the sacrament. The essential form of baptism is, I baptize thee in the
name of the father, of the son, and of the holy ghost. Leave out any of these
3. or do it in the name of any one of the three persons only, ye tyne the
essential form of baptism. In the supper, if ye leave ^u^ the least
ceremonye, ye tine the essential form, and so it is no sacrament. This being
true, that every ceremony that Christ did, every word that Christ spoke, every
action of his was so essential, that no jot thereof may be omitted, but ^fany
defect^ in the Scottish Supper.
we destroy the sacrament, hereof I conclude, that their Scottish sacrament is
no sacrament of Christ, for that it lacks many of these so necessary signs,
and essential ceremonies. First, because Christ before the delivering of
Before, page 147. 14^.
his sacrament, used a ceremony signifying the lovvlines of heart, the purity
and cleanes of conscience required in them, which come to receive the
sacrament. After, he gave them a very divine instruction, and commanded them
in most effectual words to do the like: which commandment according to the
tenor and manner of speech carries with it as precise and severe an obligation,
a^ any words of Christ's supper: and to a Protestant it should weigh as
deeply and bind as much. For that precept, Do this in remembrance of me,
examined in common judgment, and according to the sound and poise of the
word, binds no more, nor so much, as being uttered with less circumstance
and fewer words importing a necessary commandment, then when Christ says
after that vvasshing I have geven you an example, that as I have done to you,
so you do also. Amen Amen I say to you, a servant is not greater then his lord,
nether is an Apostle greater then be that sent him. If you know these things,
you shall be blessed, if 1
you also do them. Here is one ceremony which Christ did, 2
The Scottish supper no Sacrament of Christ.
and many words which he spoke at the Institution of the sacrament. Nether
this ceremony use the Scottish ministers at their supper, nor speak they
these words: ergo they omit somvvhat, which Christ did and spoke. Al whose
doings and speeches being essential, so essential, that in omitting any one, ye
tyne and destroy the sacrament, hereof it follows, Before, pa. ^50, 151,
that their Scottish Supper is no Sacrament of 3
Christ. Next, Christ 3. taking the bread in to his hands 4
gave thanks to his father, and vvithal 4. blessed and sanctified 5
the bread: after, he 5. took the cup in like manner, 6
and geving thanks to his father 6. vvithal blessed and sanctified the cup,
as both the Evangelists, S. Paul, Calvin, Ievvel and Beza confess. The
Scottish supper has no such blessing, no such sanctification of the bread and
wine but purposely omitteth it: and therefore here are 2. more essential
ceremonies twice used by Christ, and yet never at any time used, but neglected
and contemned by them in their ministration, and therefore their supper
wants somvvhat perteyning to his essence, and so is no sacrament. Further
more, 7. Christ did not once only break the bread, and took to him self a
portion, willing them to break the rest and distribute among them, but him
self did distribute Before, page 155. ^
and break it to them, and delivered it with his own hands, signifying by
that action, that it was not possible for any man to have participation of his
grace, except him self gave it. In the Scottish supper, the minister breaks
not the bread to every communicant, he delivers it not with his own hand,
as Christ did, and so he leaves out a very important ceremonye, and therefore
their supper can not be accounted Christ's Sacrament. After Christ had taken the
bread, geven thanks, blessed, broken, and so forth. finally for declaration
that they might understand 8
where unto all the premises tended, he spoke these words which were most
essential and concerned the substance of the sacrament: This is my body, which
is geven and broken Vbi sup.
for you: This is the new testament in my blud, which is shed for you. These
words of Christ, used by Christ in the Institution of his sacrament, the
Scottish ministry Before. page 156. 160.
uses not in the ministration of their supper. Ergo their supper is no
Sacrament of Christ. To M. B. his supposed reply, that the words of Christ are
not omitted, for that before the sermon, the minister historically out of the
pulpit mentions Christ's institution; answer is already made, that this
nothing helps them, but much more shows their infinite pride, and
contemptuous breach of Christ's order. For Christ first of al took the bread in
to his hands, blessed it, brake it, and after pronounced those words; they
clean contrary, first of al rehearse those words out of the pulpit, where
there is no bread high them, much less have they the bread in their hands as
Christ had. I answer furthermore that such historical narration (being told
an hour or 2. before the communion, and the entier Sermon coming between)
can have no relation to the blessing or sanctifying of their Supper. For as M.
B. here tells us, there is an essential form in baptism: there is an
essential Page 11.
form in the supper: which if they be taken away, ye tyne the sacrament. The
essential form of baptism is (says he) I baptize thee in the name of the
father, of the son, and of the holy ghost. And according to the order of the
communion The Scottish communion book.
book, the minister as he speaks these words, takes water in his hand, and
lays it upon the child's forehead. Whereby we see that the essential form
is to have the words joined with the element: and if the minister speak the
words at one hour, and lay on water the next without the words, he tyneth
and destroys the essential form of baptism, and so it is no sacrament. Ergo
by like reason whereas the sacrament of Christ's body has a like essential
form as baptism has; the Minister making a narration of Christ's words
before the sermon as it were at 9. of the clock, and after an hour, at ten
delivering bread and wine without the words of Christ, tyneth and destroys
the sacrament of the supper, and so the Scottish supper is no sacrament of
Christ.

These fevv instances and exceptions for example sake I give to the Christian
reader, who may find a number of this sort, if he please advisedly to consider
that which bath been said of this matter heretofore. And if now according to
M. B. his resolution a man leaving out the least ceremony used by Christ in
his supper, perverteth the Page 51. The Scottish Supper wicked and
sacrilegious.
whole institution and marreth the sacrament, so as it becomes no sacrament:
what horrible prophaners, perverters and destroyers of gods sacraments are
these, who leave out so many, and those not the least, but the greatest and
vveightiest ceremonies? And if they have no sacrament, who lack in the
administration, any sign elemental or ceremonial, any material part, because
they be al substa^tial; how far are these men from having any show, color,
pretense or similitude of Christ's Sacrament, who lack so many signs ceremonial
and substantial! and besides (which is the head and top) leave out clean, all the words of Christ, which in deed is the formal, and therefore the chief,
sovereign, and principal part of the sacrament; how soever it please these
proud ministers to take that honor from the Before, page 217. 216. 218.
word of Christ, and attribute it to their own word. Truly as the Catholic,
for sundry other reasons, has just cause to abhor their bread and wine, as
polluted, as schismatical, as heretical, as leading the high way to Gods
wrath and indignation, to hell and damnation: so these arguments and reasons
geven and published by them selves suffice to prove as much, to prove their
communion a schismatical communion, clean divided from Christ's communion: a
perverting, a corrupting and destroying of his holy sacrament, with which it
has no more resemblance by this their own confession, then has an ape with
a man, copper with gold, heresy with religion, and an angel of darkness with
an angel of light. Yea many times spiritually sprites of hell doubtless
counterfeit Saints and Angels, and many apes or munkeys sensibly counterfeit
the actions of men with more likelihood, color and probability, then these
men's apish and spritish communion resembles the Divine Sacrament ordained by
our blessed Savior.

Of names attributed to the Sacrament.
The Argument.
the Lords supper, as M. B. falsely supposes, nor yet the Communion.

mensa domini, our Lords table, makes nothing against the sacrifice, but
rather for it.

public action, as by any proper name, nor yet a banquet of love. Why it is
called the Eucharist.

Mass in the Primitive church, when that church generally, and especially the
church of Rome was most pure; and therefore that name savoureth nothing of
Idolatry, as M. B. ignorantly concludes.

the sacrifice of Christ's body, and as a true and real sacrifice was offered
unto God in the church, ever since Christ's time and first institution of it. M.
B. argument made to the contrary answered.

CHAP. 12
lessons and exercises, are by him particularly uttered and entreated of (so
far Pa. 55. 56.
forth as concerns the Sacrament) in the first sermon or lesson: and likewise
so much has been said of them by me, as I think convenient either for proof
of the truth, or confutation of error. For which cause, I shall when they
occur hereafter, pass them over in silence, or touch them more slightly.
The first new matter mentioned in this lesson, is about names geven to the
Sacrament in holy scripture and ancient fathers; wherein he speaks some
truth, which therefore I gladly embrace, as that it is called in the book of
god, The body and blud of Christ (and never Pa. 56.
the figure, trope, sign or seal of that body and blud) and therefore belike
that being the proper name, conteyneth also in propriety of speech what it is.
Also it is called the communion and participation of Christ's body and blud,
which implies the former truth. It is also called Page 57.
(says M. B.) the supper of the lord: not a profane supper, not a supper
appointed for the belly: for Christ had ended the supper that was appointed for
the belly, or ever he began this supper which was appointed for the soul. In
this M. B. is somewhat deceived, as likewise in his explication of the next,
vz, that it is called also in the bible, The table of the Lord. It is not
called the altar of the lord, but the Apostle cal^ it a table to sit at, and
not an altar to stand at: a table to take and receive, and not an altar to
offer and propine. That M. B. supposes S. Paul to name the sacrament
dominic^^ 1. Corinthians. 11
caenam, our lords supper, it is his error, and not S. Paul's meaning. For
albeit at the same time, and in the same place whereof S. Paul speaks,
Christ's sacrament was also communicated unto the faithful; for which cause, and
also in regard of the time, when Christ first instituted it, some ancient
fathers sometimes inscribe their The Sacr^ni^^ not called the Lord supper by
S. Paul.
treatises of the Sacrament, De caena domini: yet that the book of god, that
is, the bible and scriptures of god give not this appellation to it, it is
plain enough by that place of S. Paul, where only in all the scriptures of god
that word is used. For S. Paul mentioning that at these suppers of our lord,
some devoured al and had to much, some could get nothing and rose a hungered,
some were drunk 1. Cor. 11. 20. 21.
etc. declares thereby, that this place can not directly be understood of
Christ's sacrament; except M. B. be of the opinion with some Puritans, whom my
self have Dominica cana, what is means in S. Paul.
heard upon this place to argue, that at their Lords supper there should be not
only bread and drink, but also variety of other meat, flesh, fish, roast and
baked, wine and beer, according as it is in other suppers and feasts. Unto
which conceit M. B. by his discourse after ensuing seems somewhat to
incline. But the common opinion of learned men is otherwise, that this place
means the church-feasts of old time termed (...), which were called dominicae
caen^, our lords feasts or suppers, Tertull. i^ Apologet. ^^. 3^.
because they were kept at night in churches, which were in the primitive
church, and also after, called Dominicae, (...), our lords howses (whence I
suppose our name kirk comes) to which feasts the rich sort contributed
liberally for the benefit and relief of the poor. Before which as S.
Chrysostom supposes, though others think after, the Sacrament was also
received. Chrysostom. in 1. Cor. homil. ^7 in initio. Sedulius in 1 Cor. cap. 11.
But that the words of S. Paul mean not the sacrament, S. Chrysostom is very
plain, and the circumstance of the place proves sufficiently. This supper
(says S. Chrysostom) might rather be called human, then divine, potius
humana quam dominica, rather private then public, of private misery rather
then public charity, because every man devoured up his own supper, and
gave no part to his poor neighbor who had brought nothing. But Dominica
caena, the supper of our Lord, who is charity it self, the supper of charity
should be common to al. In an other place he called this supper common
praudiu^, a common feast. For examining the coherence of the Apostles words,
he obiecteth to him self, how, to what purpose the Apostle brings in the
story of Christ's Institution Chrysostom. hom. in hac verba Oportet ^ a^^. se^
esse 1. Cor ^1. v. 19.
of the b. sacrament. v. 23. Qualis est haec consequentia? what manner of
sequel is this? says S. Chrysostom. Thou have hitherto disputed of a common
feast or banquet: and do thou new come in with Christ's sacraments? Which
question he answers very well, as also does the learned Greek doctor
Theodoretus in his commentaries upon this same Theodoret. in ^. Corint. cap. ^1.
place: that he brought in the story of Christ's sacrament for examples sake,
docens eos facere communes mensas in ecclesi^s, ad sacram illam mensam
respicientes, teaching that it well became them to make their church feasts
common to the poor, by regard and consideration of Christ's holy table; that
seeing he without respect or choice, or such distinguishing between rich and
poor, indifferently gave to al, his own most pictious body and blud, it
might well become them with like equality and indifferency ^o communicate
their earthly and fleshly bankets. And thus much is after a sort confessed both
by Calvin and Beza, though they yet call the sacrament by the name of the Lords
supper. For Calvin grants, that as among the Jews and also Gentiles, it was
a custom to accompany their sacrifices Calv. in 1. Cor cap. 10. v. 7.
made in the honor of god with frindly banquets among themselves, so the first
Christians brought the same fashion of banqueting in to the church, and called
them agapas; charities, or feasts of charity, and used them with the Ibi
cap. 11. v ^1.
administration of this sacrament. Which after growing to an abuse, the
Apostle seeks here to amend. And Beza vvriteth, that the first Christians
were wont to minister the Beza in. Acta. Apost. cap 2. v. 42.
holy supper of the Lord, among these feasts which were called agapae: which
in an other place he calls sacra co^vi^is, sacra ecclesiae conviuia. and
fraterna ecclesiastici caetus c^nvivia: Beza in 2. Pet. 2. 11. Idem in Iud. ^^.
holy feasts, holy church feasts, and brotherly banquets of the ecclesiastical
congregation; among which feasts that the supper of the lord was also
ministered, it may appear (says Beza) by S. Paul 1 Cor. 11. where he goes al
out to correct that custom, which was many ways corrupted. Which being so,
that S. Paul here goes about to correct that abuse, then must needs those
words which go before the institution of Christ (beginning after versu. 23)
be understood of such church feasts so abused, and then dominicae caena can not
apperteyne to the sacrament, which after is brought in thereby to correct that
custom and abuse of our Lords supper, which is expressed before as sovvly
corrupted. And the words of them selves if they be taken 1. Cor. 11. v. 20. 21.
as S. Paul vvrote them and the old Translation expresses them (and not as
they are perverted in the Geneva translation) and examined with indifferent
judgment, can bear no other sense. For these words, When you meet
together, this is not to eat our lords supper, for that every one preventeth
and falls to his own private supper, and one is a hungered, another is
drunk, can have no other proper and natural resolution then this: when you
meet together, that which you eat, is not that public ecclesiastical and
brotherly supper of charity, of god, of Christ and his church, which should
be common to all the society of Christians, but it is a private and peculiar
supper void of al charity and brotherly love, where one devoureth al, an
other has nothing, one has to much and is drunk with abundance, when many
other poor Christians stand by and get never a morsel of bread, or draught of
drink. This is the true sense of the place of S. Paul, and of this word used
in that only place, and no where else in the scriptures: and this sense both
Beza and Calvin geve after those ancient doctors. And therefore M. B. has
little reason to call the sacrament the lords supper by this authority. And if
the compilers of the Scottish Public prayer book had no other reason but
this, they might as well have called their sacrament, as our Enghish do, by the
name of Communion, which comes somewhat nearer to S. Paul's phrase, then this
of the Lords supper, which is not so probable to be S. Paul's meaning. Albeit
nether is The sacrament not called Communion in the scripture.
that word Communion (truly to speak) given to the sacrament either by Apostle
or Evangelist in all the scripture. For as the lords supper, so the Communion,
in the scripture never signifies (as Beza also notes) communion in the
sacrament, but in civil offices of love and charity, in imparting Beza in Ac^a
ca. 2. v. 42
our goods and substance, as money, cloth, meat and drink to our brethern
which need: and so is it taken Romans 1^ 26. 2. Cor. 9. 13. Hebr. 13. 16. Pro
sacris vero mysterijs, nusqua^ legi in novo testamento absolute positum hoc
nomen (Co^munionis. (But ^^ne ver read in the new testament, that the word
(Communion) put absolutely signified the holy mysteries, says Beza. And if it
be not found in the new testament, I suppose it is not found in the old: and
so nether the English, in calling their sign a Communion, nor the Scottish in
terming theirs the Lords supper, follow the word of the Lord; but either their
own word, or the word of some man, whom they make less account of then of
them selves.

our lords table, is in deed referred to this sacrament. But whereas M. B.
after Calvin, argues from that word, that because it is a table, not an
altar, Calv. Iustit. lib. 4. cap. 18. ^u^. 12.
therefore we should sit at it, and not stand; we should take and receive, not
offer and propine, these arguments are such, as become ministers to make. For
first of al, the word (table) in the scripture is indifferent for a table and
an altar Exodus ca. 37. ca. 39. ca. 40. ^. Reg. 7. Proverb. 9. ^.
as appears continually in the old testament, in description of the
tabernacle first, and Salomous temple after: where there were tables, mensae,
not for the priests and their wives to sit at, but for the priests alone to
stand at, and to do things apperteyning to sacrifice. And the prophet Malachie
in one verse, both according to the Malach. 1. 7. (...) (...) Altar, Mensa.
Isas. 65. 11.
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, calls it mensam Domini, and also altar Domini,
the table of god, and the altar of god, signifying an altar or place to offer
sacrifice on, by either word indifferently. And the Prophet Esaias rebukes the
Jews, for that they forsaking our lord, erected a table, mensam, to fortune,
and offered sacrifice on it. Which the English Bibles both of king. Edwards
time, and this present time translate, ye have set up an altar unto the false
Ann^. 1552 Ann^. 1560
goddess, the word ( Mensa) according to the most common use of al languages,
and al Ecclesiastical and holy vvriters, bearing equally both senses: and most
assured it is, that it signifies so in that place of S. Paul, as has 1. Cor.
11. ^^ Before, pa. 1^ 19.
been proved. And from this use of scripture, al holy fathers both Greek and
Latin, al ancient Liturgies, and our common Masse-booke, without any such
imaginary In the church an Altar and a Table.
scruple of sitting, name the place of our Christian sacrifice, at some times
an altar, at some other times a table: albeit for each name the church can yield
a more special and several reason; for that it is first an altar to offer A
Sacrifice and a Sacrament.
and propine to god, and afterward a table to take and receive for our own
benefit. Both which S. Austin very divinely conioyneth together thus. Mensa
quam sacerdos August. d^ Civitate. lib. 17. ca. 20.
noui testamenti exhibet de corpore and sanguine suo etc. The table which our
savior the high priest of the new testament provides of his body and blud, is
that sacrifice which has succeeded in place of al sacrifices, which in the old
testament were offered in shadow and figure of this to come: for that in place
of al those manifold sacrifices and offerings, his body is now first offered to
god, and then delivered to the communicants. Where we see S. Austin, an other
manner of Theologe then M. B. not to oppose an altar and a table, offering and
receiving, as though one destroyed the other: but to couple and conioyne them
as coherent one to the other, declaring plainly, that in the church Catholic
there is an altar for the honor of god, there is also a table for the
commodity and consolation of Christians, first to do sacrifice Altars in the
primitive church.
to god, next for Christians to participate of the same sacrifice. And that
from the Apostolical age and usage the first primitive Christians evermore used
altars Martial in ^^ epistola ad Bur^^gal. ca. 3. Dionys. Ecclesiast. Hierare.
ca 3. Origin in Leo^^^c. homil. 4 Tertull. lib. de pamtentia. Cyprian lib. ^
epist. ^.
to sacrifice on, we find recorded by the most ancient Christian vvriters,
whose momuments are yet extant, as namely S. Martialis, S. Denis Areopagita,
Origin, Tertullian, and S. Cyprian, to omit al later fathers, as Eusebius,
Optatus, S. Hierom, S. Ambrose, S. Gregory Nazianzene, S. Chrysostom, S.
Austin, by all which it is most clear that then altars were every where
buylt in Christian churches to this very use of offering sacrifice to God. So
that M. B. collection, from a table to infer denial of sacrifice, to improve
standing and justify sitting, is very vveake (to say the least) and profane;
as which proceeds from one, who seems to measure and define the table of
gods church, by the order which him self, his wife and domesticals use at
their own table: and besides it conteyneth a certain scorn and disgrace of
the English Comunion, in which although they have naught else but a bourd or
table as it is there called; yet al sitting The English communion.
is quit barred, and the brethren which communicate, are commanded to kneel
humbly on their knees; and the minister him self some time to stand, some time
to kneel but never to sit.

called it (says he) a public action: and this was a very general name. 2.
Sometimes they called pa. 57. 5^.
it a thankesgeuing: 3. sometimes a banquet of love: and 4. at the last in the
declining estate of the Latin kirk, and in the falling estate of the Roman
kirk it began to be perverted: and with this decay there comes in a perverse
name, and they called it the Mass. This last word he most of al dislikes: and
why? for that by process of time, corruption has prevailed pa. 58.
so far, that it has turned over our sacrament in to a sacrifice: and where we
should take fro the hand of god in Christ, they make us to give. This is plain
idolatry. And therefore where the word was tolerable before, now it is no ways
tolerable. To speak a little of these 4. names, although the sacrifice be a
public action, yet where the fathers used to call it so as by a particular
name, is hard to find. In the church of Christ, catechizing before baptism,
baptism it self, is and has been used as a public action; so has the geving
of orders, and making priests, confirmation, preaching, and diverse other
sacraments, and ecclesiastical offices: yea in some respect these have been far
more public actions then the sacrament; for that many unchristened were
publicly admitted to catechismes and preachings, which were carefully
excluded from being present at the celebration of the sacrifice or sacrament,
both in the Chrysest. ad Ephesians. hom. 3. See chap. 13. number. 1.
Greek and also Latin church. And therefore this name is il applied by M. B.
In deed the Greeks called it (...) which word among profane vvritiers
signifying any public ministry or office, by the Apostles and ancient
fathers was restreyned to the public Christian sacrifice, Before, page 17.
that is, to the mass, as has been more at large declared before. Priests of
the new testament celebrate the mystical liturgy Theodoret. ad Hebrae. ca. ^.
or sacrifice: mysticam liturgiam vel sacrificium peragunt, says Theodoretus.
And the Greek fathers in this sort made the word liturgy, as proper to the
sacrifice in the Greek church, as the very word mass signifies the same
sacrifice in the latin church: when as in the mean season, al those forenamed
sacraments, and other functions, were public actions, and yet not liturgies.
The term, banquet of love, is somvvhat more strange, and as I think, more
seldom used. True it is, the sacrament is a banquet of love, as whereby we
are moved, first to love god, and then one an other; as likewise it is a
banquet of faith, of peace of mildnes, of patience, of modesty, Galat. 5. 22.
of sobriety, of chastity, of al virtues, which gods holy spirit especially
by means of this blessed sacrifice works in the receivers. But yet to say,
it was so named by the ancient fathers, is somvvhat avvry. And I suppose (...)
M. B. by his banquet of love (so to speak like a Protestant) or rather after
the old fashion, the banquet of charity, means the church feasts called
charities, (...) whereof I have spoken before. Which banquets of charity
Before, page 245. 246.
albeit they were charitably made for relief of the poor, and that about the
time of ministering the holy sacrament; yet the fathers use not by that name to
expresle this sacrament. The name of Eucharist, Thankesgeving, is far more
common. Mary M. B. must note, what the fathers meant thereby: not as the
Zuinglian Why the Sacrament is called the Eucharist.
Protestants would persuade the simple, as though it were nothing but a verbal
thankes-geuing to the Lord for Christ's passion and resurrection, with a
remembrance thereof by eating bread, and drinking wine or beer: but they
called it so, for that in the church sacrifice, principally and most
effectually thanks are geve^ to god for his infinite benefits, according as
S. Austin vvriteth: What is a more holy sacrifice of praise, the^ is geving
thanks to god? And August. lib. contra adversar. legis et prophet. ca. 1^.
wherefore are more thanks to be geve^, then for his grace which we have
received by Christ Jesus our lord. Quod totu^ fideles is ecclesiae sacrificio
sciunt: al which the faithful know how it is performed in the sacrifice of the
church, of which (church sacrifice) all the sacrifices of the old testament were
shadows. Which Ibid. ca. 20. Vide ^und^m d^ ^iuitate dei^^^. 1^. ca. ^5. ^^
lib. 19 cap. 23.
sacrifice of praise and thankes-geuing he in a number of places expressly
calls the sacrifice of Christ's body: and that it was offered, not by all
Christians a like, but by a certain order of priesthod, as he plainly
declares in the same book, and proves out of the scriptures.

Mass came in when the sacrament began to be perverted, the Latin kirk to
decay, and the Roman kirk to fall, by this we learn when according to M. B.
censure the Roman church fell. For every Protestant allows it a time of
purity and integrity, according to his own humor and fancy; some 300.
years, some 400. some 500. And thus far our English Ievvel extended the purity
and flourishing estate of the Latin, especially the Roman church: and some
allow it 200. years more. But for the first 400 or 500. years, Praise of the
Roman ^^^rch.
fevv of the learned Protestant; make any doubt, but that the Roman church
was pure and sincere in all parts of religion. So taught one of our English
P^otomarty^s Ridley prelate of London in these words: The patriarch of Fox
Act. and monuments page 1^59.
R^me in the Apostles time and long after, was a great maynteiner and setter
forth of Christ's glory, and above al other countries and regions, there
especially was preached the true gospel, the sacraments were most duly
ministered. And as before Christ's coming it was a city so valiant, that all the
world was subject to it, and after Christ's passion diverse of the Apostles there
suffered persecution for Christ's gospel: so after that the Emperors became
Christians, the Gospel there flourished most. Jew. repli^ cont'^ Harding. a^t.
4. Diuis. 14. ^^ ^1. pa. 24^. 2^^.
S. Austin (says our M. Ievvel) and other godly fathers, rightly and well in
old time yielded great reverence to the sea of Rome, as for diverse other
reasons, so also for the purity of religion, which was there preserved a long
time (600. years after Christ) without spot. For which purity and constancy
in the same, that church was most famous above al others, and might be a
standard unto them. And John Calvin vvriteth; Because Calv. Institut. lib. 4.
ca. 2. number. 2. ^.
it was a thing notoriously known, and true without al question that from the
Apostles age until theirs, there was no alteration of doctrine, nether in the
church of Rome, nor in other places; the fathers took this for a principle and
sure ground, able to overthrow al errors, which newly sprung up, that they
gainsayd the truth which had been constantly preserved and maynteined by
common consent from the time of the Apostles. Which judgment of Calvin and
those other learned Zuinglians I note, to control M. B. rash sentence in
deputing the fall and decay of the Roman church to that time, when by these
men's more sound and more learned verdit, that church was most pure and perfect:
and withal hereby I can plainly convince him of falshod and heresy in
preaching as he does. Touching the first, the sacrament (says he) began to be
perverted and turned in to a sacrifice with the falling estate of the Romans
kirk, and them comes in this perverse name of the Mass. When was this? About
400. years after Christ. For then we find this Name of Mass, in the (...)
church.
name (mass) in the Councels and Doctors vvritings applied more commonly to
such signification, as we now use it. S. Ambrose in Milan testifies of him
self, that he said Mass, missam facere caepi. Ambros. lib. 5. epist. 33. ^.
Leo makes mention of the same, epist. 81. ad Dioscorum, and 88. ad Episcopos
Germaniae and Galliae. S. Austin sermo. 91. de tempore, and 237. and 251.
Cassian. lib. 2. Canon. orat. noctur. ca. 7 and lib. 3. canon. diurn. oral.
cap. 5. 6. 11. lib. 11. ca. 15. Yea some bishops and martyrs of the Roman see,
far more ancient then any of these vvriters, use the word, (though seeldo^)
as appears by S. Damasus in Pontificali, in Alexandro 1. and by Papirius
Massonus de Episcop. vrbis, lib. 1. fol. 11. in Pio. 1. As for Councels, in
sundry very ancient, as in Concilio. Romans sub Sil vestro 1. Council. Carthag.
2. can. 3. Carthag. 4. ca. 84. Council. Agathensi, ca. 21. and 47. Council. 3.
Arelaten. cap. 3. Council. ^ A^^^lianen^. ca. 28. Council. Milevit. cap. 12. both
the mass is plainly named, and the distinction of masses used in the primitive
church is described, the one called missa catechumenorum, the other missa
fidelium, the mass of learners or novices in the faith, to which al
indifferently were admitted, Heretics, Jews, Paganes: and the mass of
pe^^^^e baptized Christians, from the presence and sight of which mass, not
only the forenamed Heretics, Jews, and Pagans: but also the unchristened
Catec^^eni.
though otherwise favoring Christianity, yet for reverence of these dreadful
mysteries were excluded. Thus we find, that long within 500. years after
Christ, the name of Mass was very frequent in the Roman and Latin church,
when as yet that church was far from decay and fa^: nay when according to
Calvin, and those other famous Superintendents, the church of Rome was most
pure, and had altered nothing of the doctrine received from the Apostles, but
for her constancy in reteyning the ^a^e, might serve for a Standard and light
to al other churches of Christendom.

when the sacrament was turned in to a sacrifice, it was idolatry: and that
forsooth began Sacrifice used before the name of Mass (...) knovve^
with the name of Mass. For with this perverse name Mass, the sacrament
began to be perverted. This collection I say is very foolish, wicked, and
heretical. For if in collecting the 4. names which out of the ancient fathers
he attributes to the sacrament, he had faithfully told his auditorie what he
had found, he could not have so blindly stumbled, as to wring idolatry out of
a sacrifice, or preach that the sacrifice began with the name of Mass,
whereas the more ancient fathers call the sacrament a true sacrifice, some
hundreds of years before the decaying and falling time of the church which he
signifies, that is, before the name of Mass was practiced. And when the
name Mass began to grow in use, even then they still retained that other more
ancient term; and caled it still sacrifice both in preaching and vvriting,
ten, yea twenty times for one, more often then Mass. And therefore to make the
name Mass any occasion of the sacrifice, which name and belief of sacrifice
was universal, at lest 200. or 300. years before the name of Mass grevv in
use, is as poor and peevish a devise, as lightly might fall in to a sick man's
brain. This is to set the cart before the horse, to make the river cause of
his fountain, to make the child beget his father; as much as to charge
Sacrifice in the church, ever believed and professed.
M. B. with the invention of heresies published by his father John Calvin, or
his great grandfather John VViclef. For in S. Ireneus, Tertullian. S. Cyprian,
which were 200. years before S. Ambrose, S. Austin, and S. Leo, we find in a
number of places mentioned no less the sacrifice then the sacrament of the
Eucharist, and as properly a sacrifice as a sacrament: a sacrifice not
metaphorical or general for all Christians to offer in faith and spirit, but
peculiarly and specially to be offered in the church by a certain order of
priests. And where M. B. found the sacrament called a banquet of love, or a
public action (if ever he found it) he might have found it a hundred times
more commonly called a sacrifice, if his eyes or vvil had been as indifferent
to have seen and marked the one as the other. S. Ignatius scholar to the
Before pa. 20. ^1.
Apostles, calls our Eucharist or Sacrament, a true sacrifice, even the flesh
of our Savior: S. Ireneus, the new oblation Dionys. ecclesiast. Hierarch cap.
3. Tertull. lib de veland virginib. and lib, (...) exhortatio. castitati^.
Epipha^. hares. 79. Hippolit. oration. de Antichristo. apud* Ambros lib. 1.
Officiorum ca. 41.
or sacrifice of the new testament: S. Cyprian, a true, perfect and full
sacrifice, which Christ commanded to be offered; Dionysius Areopagita, the
healthful sacrifice, offered by a priest according to Christ's ordinance:
Tertullian, the sacrifice which only men offer and no women: as also after
Tertulli an, Epiphanius teaches more at large: S. Hippolitus martyr who lived
in Tertullians time, the precious body and blud of Christ, which sacrifice
bishops purely offered to God, and which sacrifice should be taken away and
suppressed by Antichrist: S. Laurence that most glorious martyr, the sacrifice
which the blessed pope Sixtus was wont to offer, S. Laurence serving him as his
deacon. Finally, the most ancient and Apostolical Council of Nice, the
sacrifice and host which takes Concilium Nicen., cap 1^
away the sins of the world, offered to god by priests, who only, and not
deacons, have power to offer the same. Now, if from these, who al lived before
S. Ambrose and S. Austin Sacrifice of the church over believed and professed.
we should show the like of the doctors and writers of that age, it were easy
to fill a book with most clear testimonies proving this undoubted verity. For
every where in every famous Catholic writer, this sacrifice is in word and
deed with such evident and pregnant circumstances described, as no sophistry
and cavillation of out adversaries, no not of M. Jew. him self the veriest
vvrangler of al, can serve, but they must needs acknovvledge, that such was
the faith of that pure and primitive church. The general council of Ephesus
calls it, the holy, lyfe-geving, Before, pa. 22 Council, Chalcedon. Act. 3.
pa. 112. Council Tol^ta. ^. cap. 5.
and vnbluddy sacrifice. The great general council of Chalcedon of 630.
bisshops, the vnbluddy host offered in the church, the vnbluddy and dreadful
sacrifice. The first council of Toledo, the daily sacrifice. S. Hierom, the
daily sacrifice of Christ's body, which Priests have power to offer. Hieron
Hieron.
Tom. 2. lib. 3. contra Pelagia. pa. 305. and lib. contra Luciferiano^. pa.
136. Eusebius Caesariensis, the full, most holy, and Eusebius.
dreadful sacrifice, the pure host sacrificed after a new fashion according to
the order of the new testament. Eusebius. lib. 1. demonstratio. Chrysostom.
Evangel. ca.. 10. S. Chrysostom, the cleansing sacrifice, the same which
Christ our high bishop first offered. Chrysostom. ad Hebraeos, ca. 10. Homil.
17. Theodoretus, Theodoret.
the immaculate lamb, not such a one as the Jews offered void of reason, but
that helthful lamb which takes away the sins of the world. Theod. question.
24. in Exodus and in psalm. 97. Augustine.
S. Austin in a number of places* The true, only, and singular sacrifice of the
new testament. lib. 3. de baptismo contra Denatist. cap vltimo. De spiritu and
litera ca. 11. Contra Cresconium lib. 1. ca. 25. The sacrifice which Christ
ordained of his own body and blud according to the order of Melchisedech. Tom.
8. in psalm. 33. pa. 157. A true sacrifice and clean, offered according to
Melchisedechs order from the east to the west. psalm. 39. pa. 238. psalm. 106.
pa. 863. As true and real a sacrifice as any was in the old testament. Tom. 2.
epist. 49. quasti^. 3. and which has succeeded and was appointed by Christ in
steed of those ancient legal and Iudaical sacrifices. De Civitate dei lib. 6.
cap. 20. lib. 16. ca. 22. Contra adversar. legi^ and prophetarum ca. 20. S.
Ambrose. We priests offer sacrifice Ambros.
for the people. We offer, albeit weak in respect of our private life, yet
honorable in* respect of our sacrifice: because our sacrifice is the body of
Christ him self. Ambros. psalm. 38. pa. 527. Of which sacrifice S. Ambrose had
so reverend a regard, that he durst not offer it, if Theodo^ius the Emperor
being excommunicate, were present. lib. 5. epist 28. And so forth, in every
Doctor and writer of that age. With more rehearsal of whose sentences I vvil
not trouble the reader, the thing being known and manifest, and confessed by
our more learned and less impudent adversaries. For thus much Calvin him self
grants* and unto al these and such like authorities of the most ancient,
pure and Calv. lib. d^ vera ecclesi^ reforma^da ratione.
primitive church he makes this rude and blunt answer: Whereas the Papists
object, that the anncient fathers according to the scriptures profess, that in
the church there is an vnbluddy sacrifice: in the one part they err, in the
other they lie. For scriptures they have none. As for the authority of the
fathers, it skilleth not; nether is it reason that we depart from Contempt of
the ancient fathers and primitive church
gods eternal truth for their sake. And therefore that vnbluddy sacrifice which
men have devised, let them hardly reserve and take to them selves. And in his
Institutions he confesses, that the very manner of ministering the supper as it
was Calv. Institutio. lib. 4. cap. 1^. ^um. 11.
used by the ancient fathers, had nescio quam faciem renovatae immolationis, I
know not what form and fashion of a sacrifice reiterated. And else where he
says, he can not excuse Idem lib. d^ cana Donu^^
the custom of the ancient primitive church, for that in their very behavior
and church manner, they expressed a certain form of sacrifice, using almost
the very same ceremonies, which were used in the old testament. Wherein al be
it he go somvvhat to far; yet this makes a plain demonstration, Sacrifice
offered in the primitive church.
that the ancient fathers never doubted of a true and real sacrifice, which
they uttered in most plain and significant terms, when they vvrote or
preached, and expressed by the very form, rite and manner of sacrificing, when
in the church they ministered it. And thus much being true and for true
confessed, we see the vanity of M. B. his deduction, that the sacrament was
perverted to a sacrifice, when it began to be called mass: whereas it was
called and used as a sacrifice both among the Greeks (who until this day
never called it mass) and also among the Latins, so long before the name of
Mass came in use; in deed ever since Christ and his Apostles time, as has
been declared. And therefore whereas M. B. makes Chap. 1.
it idolatry to use the sacrament as a sacrifice, he thereby very heretically
condemns as idolatrous, the first, the most ancient and Apostolic primitive
church, yea consequently the Apostles them selves; for that he condemns that
church of idolatry, which nether in this point, nor in any other, had
departed from the Apostles doctrine, but still retained most consta^tly that,
which by Christ's Apostles was delivered unto them, as Ievvel, Ridley, and
Calvin, to their own eternal condemnation (according Ti^. 3. 11.
to S. Paul's most true sentence) confess.

If M. B. think any great force to be in these his words, Objection of M. B.
and Luther Tom. ^. lib. de Captiv Babylon. Robur meum principal* ^^ argumentum
capitale.
that whereas we should take the sacrament from the hands of Christ, we
contrariwise offer it to him, which Luther counts vnansvvereable; and in his
railing libel against king Henry the 8. calls it his principal strength and
capital argument; let him know, that in vulgar Theology it is so childish, as
nothing can be more. For if we may not offer to god that which god mercifully
geveth to us; we must offer to him nothing at al, not the sacrifice of
thankes-geuing, Ansvvered.
not of praise, not of an humble spirit, not of speaking a good word, or
thinking a good thought: for every good thought proceeds from him, and is
raised in us by 2. Corinthians. 3. 5.
his holy spinte; and then doubtless the English communion is very idolatrous,
in which the minister in the behalf The English communion.
of all the brethren does offer and present unto the lord, him self, his and
their sowles and bodies, to be a reasonable, holy and lively sacrifice, which
can no ways stand for Evangelical Theology, if that we have taken from the
hand of god, we may not geve to him. And perhaps for fear of such idolatry,
the Scottish communion takes so diligent heed that it does not so much as
mention any such offering. But if this be most peevish and sensles: if the
prophet David speak far more divinely, Tua sunt omnia, and quae de manu 1.
Para^^p* ^^. 14.
tua accepimus, dedimus tibi: al things are thine o lord, and that we have
received of thy hand, that render we, and offer to thee in sacrifice; if it be
most true that which has been sufficiently declared, that this is not only a
sacrament for the use of men, but also a sacrifice to the honor of God: if
this have been alvvayes the faith of Christ's Catholic church; then to use the
sacrament as a sacrifice, which Christ at the first made a sacrifice, and
Christians ever used as a sacrifice; this is no idolatry on the churches part,
but rather atheism, and impiety, and blockishnes on the heretics part, to
suppose that that which we take from the hand of God in Christ, may not be
given to god Genes. 1. ^^. cap. 4. 3.
again; seeing that which we received from god in our first creation, that
is, tight and power over al beasts and creatures of the earth, was yet
rendered back to god in sacrifice, in the whole course of the old testament,
both in the law of nature, and also in the law of Moses.

Of the ends, for which the sacrament was ordained.
The Argument.
The 4. ends appointed by M. B. why this sacrament was first instituted, are
for the most part, false. The sacrament was not ordained for mutual been
volence among men: much less to testify to the Pagans, in what sort we
worship god. Which conceit is against the general practice of the primitive
church, which kept this sacrament secret and hid from the knowledge of Pagans.

The chief end of the sacrament is not to figure or represent our spiritual
nurriture which we have in Christ. The Scottish ^^ Geneus sign signifies
vnperfitly such nurriture, and the scripture yeldeth many other signs as good
and effectual to signify, as that: and therefore as good sacraments. It is in
the power of man to institute signs as good as this: and every vulgar repast
used among Christians, is as good a sacrament.

M. B. his preaching joins Christ's body as nighly, effectually, and
sacramentally to every meat and drink used in common howses, as to the bread
and wine used in their communions. His resolution, how long the holiness (such
as it is) of their communion bread, endures.

CHAP. 13.
This hitherto containing those few appellations of the sacrament, M. B.
calls the first head general of this his second sermon. The next head general
is, why the sacraments were appointed. Which ends he makes ^. ^nd^. 1 pa. 60.
to be 4. The first, which is the principal, he decl^reth thus: This sacrament
was instituted in the signs of bread and wine, and was appointed chiefly for
this end, to represent our spiritual nurriture, the full and perfect nurriture of
our soul. That as he who has bread and wine, lacks nothing to the full
nurriture of his body, so he who has the participation of the body and blud of
Christ, lacks nothing to the full and perfect nurriture of his soul. To
represent this full and perfect nurriture, the signs of bread and wine in the
sacrament were set down and instituted. Thus much for the first. The second
end, wherefore this sacrament was instituted is, that to the world 2 ^a. 6^.
and to the princes of the world who are enemies of our profession, we might
testify our religion and manner of worshipping god: and that we might also
testify our love toward our brethren. Because I mean not to make any great
stay upon these in several, I vvil therefore join them al together, and after
in fevv words show what is amiss in any of them. The third end is to serve
for our special comfort and consolation: 3
to serve as a souerain medicine for all our spiritual diseases. And when we
find our selves ready to fall, or that we have fallen, by the world, the flesh,
or devil, and would feign flee away from god; god of his infinite mercy has set
up this sacrament as a sign on a high hill, to call them again, that have run
shamefully 4 pa. 61.
away. The fourth and last end, is that we might render him thanks for his
benefits. These are the ends, for which M. B. teaches us this sacrament was
ordained, which as they conteyne some truth, so yet are they very imperfect
and omit that, which in this sacrament, and every sacrament The fourth.
Before, pa. 251. 252. The second.
of the new testament, is principal. Of the fourth end has been spoken before
in the name of the Eucharist, and therefore I vvil pass it over here. The
second is in part true, in part false, but no way proper or peculiar to this
sacrament, as he affirms. True it is (as S. Austin August. To^^ 6. contra ^a^
stu^. lib. 19* ^^ 11. 12.
writes) that men can not be gathered together in to any fashion of religion
either true or false, except they be united with some society of visible signs
or sacraments. And therefore both among the faithful and faithles, Jews and
Pagans, as likewise Jews and Christians, the sacraments are some signs of
mutual love and benevolence, and by them we testify our religion, as
Christians toward the true god, so infidels to the false. But as this is a
propriety or quality incident to sacraments of al sorts be they Pagan, or
Jewish, or Christian: so to make it one special end, why this sacrament was
ordained, is clean wrong and without al appearance of truth: and there is no
sentence or word in the whole scripture which insinuates any such matter:
whereof more shall be said when I come to talk of the first and principal end.
The Jews for that they were circumcised, loved doubtless one an other the
better, and this was some cause of mutual love; yet was not this the reason
why circumcision was ordained. Like wise the eating of their paschal lamb
together, was one good occasion to mainteyne love and unity: yet was it no
cause or end, why that sacrament was instituted: much less why the sacraments
of the new testament were ordained, which have more divine causes of their
institution, and work more divine and celestial effects, then did those carnal
and Jewish sacraments. The like is to be said of that other A manifest falsitie.
part, vz, This sacrament was instituted to the end that to the princes of the
world* who are enemies of our religion; we might of enly ^vow and testify our
religion. For which opinion, there is never a word or syllable in all the new
testament: and it is spoken without al learning, sense, or reason. Doubtless in
the primitive church, when the Saints, and martyrs, and Apostolical men were
most abunda^tly endued with gods holy spirit, and most perfectly knevv the use
of this sacrament, if this The Sacrament kept from the sight or knowledge of
Infidels.
had been any end, why Christ ordained it, that by the use of it they should
testify and openly avow their religion to Christ's enemies; they would not so
diligently have excluded al Pagans and infidels from the presence of this
sacrament, as before is noted. It should not have Page 254.
been so carefully provided against not only Pagans and infidels, but even the
very Christians in mind, yet unbaptized, that al such should be debarred from
seeing this sacrament, as we find they were by the order of all the ancient
Masses or Liturgies: amongst which that of S. James the most ancient, has
this precise rule, when after certain general prayers they approached to the
celebration of this dreadful mystery, Nullus Catechumenorum Missa D. Jacobs.
etc. let none of the learners or novices in Christian faith, let none of them
which are yet unbaptized (to which number the other Apostles adjoined, by
witness of S. Clement Clement Constitut^^. Apostolic. lib. ^. ^^. 15.
nullu^ infidelis, nullus haretic^s: let no Pagan or infidel, let us heretic)
let none of them, which may not lawfully pray with us, enter in. Recognoscite
vos invicem: have regard and consider well one an other. The like whereof we
find practiced 400. years after in the mass of S. Chrysostom. Where after
Chrys^^. ^n M^^. cap. 7. ^^^. ^^.
the gospel, when began that mass which was called missa fidelium, the Deacon
speak as before in S. James mass: Quicunque Catechumeni recedite: Al you that
be novices or learners in the faith, depart. Let no novice, but only the
faithful remain. If this had been one end, why this sacrament was instituted,
what meant the most ancient fathers, bishops and doctors, both in the first
church, when al was full of Pagans and enemies of Christ, and also many years
after, even in the time of S. Austin, when Christians were far more
multiplied, and the government of the world was in their hands, yet so long as
Pagans lived among Christians, still to conceal the knowledge of this sacrament
from the eye and understanding of the enemies of Christ's religion? which they
did Reverence of the ^^^^^en^ father* toward the Sacrament.
so diligently and so generally; that in S. Athanasius, it is objected as a
great impiety and strange act to his adversaries the Arrians, that they
talked of such matters in the audience of infidels. For thus he charge them.
Thorough the iniquity of these Arrians, inquiry and examination Athanas^^^:
in 2. Apolog. pa. 296* 297.
was made of church matters, of the chalice and table of our lord, in the
presence of the civil governor and his troop of soldiars, in the audience of
Jews and Pagans; quod nobis incredibile atque admirable visum est: which to vt
seemed a strange case, and very incredible. For what man will not count it
detestable, before a foreyne judge, in the presence of novices and green
Christians, and (that worse is) of Pagans and Jews, to make disputes of the
body and blud of Christ? Did these blessed saints think one end of this
sacrament to be, that they might openly testify their religion and manner of
worshipping to the Infidels enemies of Christ, who would not speak of their
manner of worshipping, of this sacrament, of the chalice, of the altar, in the
hearing of infidels and enemies of Christ? And this same closenes we find
continually in the fathers writings; in such sort, that commonly when they
wrote and preached, they used secret speeches, as it were watch words to
signify their meaning, to the end they might conceal this sacrament from
Pagans and infidels, and make the knowledge of it proper and peculiar to
Christians; whereof to omit the more ancient writers, whose vvritings every
where show faith such their vvarines and circumspection, even in S. Austin, we
find that the same secret manner of speaking and preaching was yet continued.
As for example, to note a fevv places out of one of his books. Then (says
^gust. ^om. ^. in psalm. 33
he) that sacrifice of Christ's body and blud was not, quod nor^^^ fideles:
which the faithful know well enough. Which sacrifice is Ibid.
now in practice thorough the whole world. Again. Christ ^coke in to his hands
quod fideles norunt: that which the faithful know. Again It is a true
sacrifice: quod fideles norunt as the faithful Ibid. in psalm. 39. Ibid. in
psalm. ^03.
know. Again. What is that, which in the church is secret and not public? The
sacrament of baptism, and the sacrament of the Eucharist. Opera nostra bona
vident and Pagani, sacraments vero illis occultantur. The Pagans them selves
see our good works: but as for our sacraments they are ^id from them. Again.
Ibid. in psalm. ^09.
Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec: fideli. bus loquor;
I speak to the faithful. If the no vices* Cat^chumeni* understand me not, let
them shake of their sloth, let the^ make have to knowledge. It is not
convenient to utter our mysteries to them. And so ^^^th in a number of like
places. Whereby we see the old Christians did not account this to be one end,
why this sacrament was ordained. For doubtless if they had, the first primitive
Christians and most constant mattyrs in the city of Rome would never have
sought out those cryp^a, those hid secret g^ottes and vaultes under the earth,
those desert and solitary places: they would never so studiously have met in
the nights, in out-corners, far of from the sight, concourse and presence of
the Pagans* notwithstanding never so many proclamations made by the persecuting
Emperors. If Christ's ordinance had been to the contrary, the Apostles would
not have ministered the Act. ^. 46. Act. 3. 11. ca. 4. ^. etc.
sacrament in private houses, but in the open streets. And as in the temple
of Solomon and places of most resort, in synagoges, and public consistories
they preached Christ in the face of Christ's enemies, and enemies of Christian
profession; so there also would they have ministered the sacrament. Which
although M. B. and his wise ministers in quiet times can speak of, and say,
so they should have done: yet I vv^^ne both he and they would have been better
advised before they did it, if them selves, were put to the trial.

His third end is true, if it were spoken and applied to Christ's holy
sacrament: but being applied to the Scottish sign or Geneuian seal, is very
fond and ridiculous: which because it depends on the first end, which is
(...).
the principal, therefore by showing the vanity of the first I shall
consequently with one labor declare the baldnes of the third. In the first he
says, that this sacrament was appointed chiefly for this end to represent our
spiritual nurriture. Where we learn, that the chief grace of these men's
sacraments is, to figure and represent: which end M. B. proves with no other
reason, then his own only bare word and authority. And therefore as before,
so here and every where perpetually, let the reader mark, how these men
having of them selves invented and coined us a definition of sacraments, and
^iamed the nature and use of this sacrament especially, in their own forge
and brain, still confirm it by their own only word: never mentioning S.
Paul, or S. Peter, or Gospel, or Epistle, or any sacred authority of god or
man. For in what chapter of Sacrame^t^ not ^rdeyned chiefly to signify.
all the gospel, or al S. Paul's epistles, find they that this sacrament was
chiefly instituted to represent, to signify, to figure our spiritual
nurriture? being in deed instituted for this end, to nourish, to feed, and
actually to preserve us to life spiritual and eternal: as Christ came in to
this world not chiefly to signify, to represent, to figure, to teach our
redemption and reconciliation, but truly to work it and perform it. Not that
I deny the sacraments, and this namely, to figure, to represent, and signify;
for that is the first word in every sacrament both old and new, both Jewish
and Christian, that it be a sign and signify; but this is Sacrame^tu^ est
signu^.
not the chief, but meanest, not highest and supreme, but lowest and lest
accountable virtue incident to this sacrament, and which if it be made chief,
quit de^aceth and destroys the nature of a sacrament in the new testament.
For this signification not only adds nothing to these sacraments above the
Jewish, but also it adds to them nothing above the force and ability of
man: and any good man may make many a sacrament as good as this, and better to,
if such signification be the chief and best part of it. But that we deceive not
ourselves and misconster M. B. his meaning, let us hear him more at large
declare this chief end of his sacrament: which he does in this manner. Nothing
is so fit as bread and wine for this sacrament; as nothing is so fit for
baptism as water. Why so? for Pa. 68.
that as nothing is meeter to wash with then water, so nothing is meeter to
wash the soul, then the blud of Christ. And the reason why in baptism is but
one sign, that is water alone, is this, because water is sufficient enough to
do the whole turn. But in the other sacrament it is not so; there must be two.
Wine Page 69.
can not be sufficient alone, nor yet bread. For he that has bread only, and
wine only, has not a persit nurriture corporal. Therefore that they might
represent a persit nurriture, Christ has given us both bread and wine (for the
persit nurriture corporal stands in meat and drink) to represent the full and
persit nurriture of the foul. Here is the chief and supreme sacramental grace
of the Scottish and Geneua sign. Hereof he concludes thus: Look how full and
persite a nurriture he has to his body that has store of bread and wine, so
he that has Christ, has a full and persite nurriture of his soul. This is M.
B. discourse touching that which he accompteth the chief end of this sacrament.
Wherein let the Christian reader first of al note the true ground of the
Geneva resolution for altering Before. p^g. 59. 60.
the matter of this sacrament. For when they conclude that it may be very well
ministered not only in bread and wine, but also in bread and beer: in ale,
flesh, fish, or any thing else which bodily nourishes, for that such bodily
food aptly represeteth the food of the soul: this resolution has his ground
hence, that to signify and figure, is the chief end, why the sacrament was
instituted and; therefore where this significati^ is retained, there is the
substance of the sacramenn sufficiently co^served, as our M. Jewel also
expressly I^vv. defense of t^^ (...) pa^ ^* ^^. 10. page 205.
affirms. And n^w to come to M. B. Theology, who upon this simple g(...)
bulldeth his sacrament, what if a man deny al his ground both in the one sign
and in the other? what if a man deny, that as Christ's blud washes away the
spots and staynes of sin, so this is best represented by water? as Christ is
the persit nurriture of our soul, so this is best represented by bread and
wine? For touching both the one and the other, both washing and feeding, not
only his laundresse or wife if she be demanded the question (and women having
by the gospel such power and sway geven to them in ecclesiastical matters as
has Before. page 61. 62. 63. 64.
been declared, doubtless their sentence in such cases is greatly to be
esteemed) will answer in both negatively, that nether only water washes and
cleanses best; nor only bread and drink, be it wine or ale, is full and persit
Scottish sacrament vnpers^^
nurriture: but also reason, common experience, and the scripture it self will
justify this their negative. For every one that uses to wash and scour
clean, knows that water alone is not of best force so to do. And the
scripture when it will signify persite and best washing, requires somewhat
else: as where the prophet says, If Ierem. 2. 22.
thou wash thy self with nitre, and multiply the herb Borith, or (after
Malachie) the fullers herb, yet thou art still Malach. 3. 2.
vncle^^e. Which Nitre, as likewise many other natural liquours or herbs, to
be of greater power to scour out spots and steynes then is running water,
daily practice and Vid. Plinium natutal^ have. lib. 31. ca. 10. lib 20. ca. ^.
^^ 13.
philosophy teaches us. And on the other part, the common diet thorough out
Scotland and England, assures us the contrary of that M. B. so confidently
affirms: every man and woman I say, will deny that whosoever has bread and
drink, has by and by full and persit nurriture: as on the contrary side, some
times, and in some places and countries, full and persit nurriture has been
without either of them, either bread or wine. In the first age before the deluge,
when men lived 700. 800. yea 900. years, they had persite and full nurriture;
yet never knew what wine meant, and perhaps nether bread. For albeit the
scripture Genes. 3. 1^
use once that word bread in our vulgar translations, yet it is well known to
al which know ought, that the (...)
hebrew word (especially in that place) signifies any food in general whereby
man lives* as well herbs, roots, apples, yea flesh and fish, as our kind of
bread: without which as then doubtless men might live well, so at this Perfect
nurriture without wine.
present it is sure and certain, that both in Africa, and in America, there are
whole nations, who live far longer then we do, who until this time never
knevv nor savv, either bread or wine; and now they know both, yet prefer
they their roots and siuit, which they of old used i^ Maiz.
steed of bread and wine, before either the one or the other. And since the
Christian faith was published in the world, how many good men of longest life
(as for example. ^. Antonie and S. Paul the first Eremites, of which the one
Athanas. in vita Antony ^icion. in vita Paul's.
lived 105* the other 113. year) have perpetually absteyned from wine? yet
vvanted not for all that, full and perfect nurriture, or else they could never
have lived so long. And the holy scripture when it vvil describe sufficiency
and fulness requisite for man's sustenance, sometimes, yea commonly expresses it
not by bread and wine, but otherwise: sometimes uses those 2. but joins
other things unto them. When God promised to the Hebrews a land, where they
should find no want, but have plentic of such nurriture as M. B. tells us
os; generally it names a land not abounding with bread and wine, but with
Exodus 3. 8. 17. and 33. 3. Levit. 20. 24 Numer. 13. 28. and 14. 3 Deutero. 6.
3. and 11. 9. etc Ierem. 11. 5. and 32. 22. Ezechiel. 20. 6. 15.
milk and honey, as appears in the old testament every where. Sometime it
mentions Genes. 3. 19 ca. 28. 20. ca 31. 54. cap. 37. 25. 2. Reg. 9. 7.
bread alone: sometime with bread joins Deuteronomy. 9. 9. 18. and. 23. 4 3. Reg.
13. 8. 9. 16. 17. 18. 19. 22.
not wine, but water, and that was to thovvsands as full and perfect nurriture
as wine, Leuit. 10. 9 Numer. 6 3. Iudic. 13. 7. Ierem. 35 6.
from which among the Jews, many for very religion absteyned, and yet had
their full and perfect sustenance. At other times, it rehearses, Psalm. 4. 8.
Ierem. 31. 12
corn, wine, and oil. And yet after al these, full and perfect sustenance and
nutriment is made by flesh and fish, and other such commodities no less then
by the premises, which therefore God in like sort gave to the hand of man,
saying, Genes. 9. 2. 3.
al birds of the air, al fishes of the sea, al beasts of the earth shall be to
you for food and nurriture. Wherefore if M. B. in saying that bread and wine
is full and perfect nurriture, and therefore may signify Christ, which
nourishes us persitely, speak of bread and wine in such sense as the
scripture does; which under the name of bread and wine compriseth al food; as
I confess he speaks truly, so in that sense bread by it self, or bread and
water, or milk and honey, or flesh, or fish, is a full and perfect nurriture,
and may signify Christ as well, and so serve as well for a sacrament. If he
speak (as he seems) after the vulgar sense of men, namely of our countrymen
in Scotland and England, where bread signifies one special and particular
kind of food, and wine an other: then is his word false, and then does not
his sacramental bread and wine represent Christ as a perfect and full nurriture
of our sovvles; for that only bread and wine are not full and perfect nurriture
of our bodies according to our speech, fashion, and diet: and so is his
sacramental sign a false sign and seal, which seals a false doctrine, as
not having a perfect representation of full and perfect nurriture. And albeit
against the right sacrament of the church, Note.
where the principal part of the sacrament is an other manner of grace, virtue,
and sanctification, whereof this significative quality depends, as an
accident of the substance, as an accessorie of the principal, this argument be
vveake and concludes nothing: yet against them who make not any spiritual
effect and operation, but such tropical figuring and representation, the chief
effect, and substance of the sacrament, the argument stands strong and
forcible, sufficient to destroy the whole entier sacrament, because it
destroys the perfect signification, wherein the sacrament principally and
chiefly consists. Furthermore, if the chief point and part of this sacrament
is to be Many better sacrament^ then that of Geneva.
drawn from that which geveth full and perfect nurriture to our body, then
that meat which best and fullest nourishes our body, is the best sacrament,
as fittest to signify our full nurriture which we have in Christ; and so if
to bread and wine we join a good piece of mutton and a fat capon (which
questionles nourishes better then bread and wine alone) this because it
nourishes the body best, shall be fittest to signify, and so to make the
Scottish sacrament. For this sequel can not be denied nor avoided, that if we
measure and define the sacrament, as he does, by feeding the body, and so
consequently representing spiritual food; if it be true, as with M. B. our
English Jew. defense of the Apol. ^. par. ca 10. pa^. 20^.
Jewel vvriteth, that the substance of the sacrament i^ to show us, that like
as material bread feeds our body, so the body of Christ crucified, eaten by
faith feeds the soul then that which in this kind excels, the same is
most significatiue, most sacramental: and so we shall be everyday varying our
sacraments, according as the Phisicians ^nforme us which meat is most
nourishing. And thus in fine we shall proceed to take our sacraments from the
kitchen, or from Galen and Hippocrates rules of fatting the body, not from
Christ's gospel and his Apostles order of feeding the soul. And breefely,
hereof it ensues, that every man and woman can make as good a sacrament as
this. For what man or woman that has a little skill in phisike or cookery, can
not give to every dish of meat, sod, baked, roast, fried: to every banqueting
dish, every good restoratiue, every good wine, beer, ale, or what so ever is
nutritive, this signification? and say to her ghests, that as this capon, this
veniso^ nourishes your body, so Christ in heaven or crucified nourishes your
soul. Which being so, that truly such meat nourishes the body as well as
bread and wine, it consequently may represent the nurriture of the soul as
well as the bread and wine, which is, to be as good a sacrament as is their
bread and wine. If he reply, that Obi^ction.
Christ ordained the one, not the other, and therefore the one is so much to be
preferred before the other, because it is appointed by Christ to signify and
represent: and so that is holy bread, it is holy wine, a holy sign and seal,
for that it signifies by Christ's institution: I answer first, that it is
more agreeable to the Protestant doctrine that Christ instituted it not, but
only used it being in practice long before Before, page 103. 104. ^^5.
among the Jews. And as he first instituted not baptism, but took it from
S. John, so did he not first ordeyne or appoint this, but left it as he found
it a mere Jewish ceremony, with this only difference which the course of
time gave unto it, that it should thence forvvard signify a thing past, as of
old it had signified a thing to come. I answer next: supposing that Christ
The point of this qu^stion.
did institute it, that albeit in deed between Christ and man there is
infinite difference; so yet between this sign of Christ's institution (if it
have no more then this) and that other, there is no difference at al. For
herein stands the point of this controversy, which the reader is to mark
diligently, not what Christ is being compared with man, but what this sign
is according to M. B. his description compared with any other like sign
instituted The definition of the Geneus sacrament. Page ^4.
by man. And herein I say is no difference at al, but that admitting for
sufficient his definition, that this sacrament i^ no other thing but the image
of our spiritual nurriture, god testifying how our sowles are fed and nurrished
to life everlasting by the image of a corporal nurriture, this standing for
true; any man may make as good, as holy, as perfect, and divine a sign or
sacrament as this. And herein Christ's divine name and person adds no manner
excellency or prerogative. For as in the old testament when god spoke and
said. There is but one god: when in Exed. ^0. Matthew. ^.
the new, Christ said, Do penance, for the kingdom of God is at hand: if
afterward Moses or any good man, Apostle or disciple of Christ spoke the
same, there was no difference in the nature or signification of the words,
though the one proceeded from God, the other from man: when God gave the
Jews water out of the rock, that had Numer. 20.
the self same nature that other water had: when he appointed 2. silver
trompets to be made to blovv at Numer. 10.
certain times to signify necessary order, or call the people together, other
silver trompets of like fashion would have had the like power when he
extraordinarily gave Genes. 17. ^ud^^. 13. ^. Reg. ^.
Isaac to Abraham, Samson to Man^e, Samuel to Elcana, these 3. children borne
into the world, and after growing to man's estate, had no part of humane
nature differing or above any other ^. children, as Ruben, Simeon, and Leui in
ordinatie sort begotten by their father Jacob: the water Exodus ^^.
with which god appointed the priests to vvash their hands and feet in the
temple, did but vvash as other water did: the twelve stones which by his
order were ^ ^s^^. 4.
erected when they passed Jordan in memory of their miraculous passage,
signified the same no otherwise then any other 12. stones taken out of that
river would have done: and so forth in every like matter, so long as we keep
within the bounds of such natural and human ac^^s or significations, and
proceed not to supernatural and divine grace or vvorking: even so bread and
wine applied by Christ to signify spiritual nurrishment, does signify it no
otherwise, then does any other like creature of such quality, as is for
example, bread and good flesh, or bread and good fish. And therefore putting it
to be true, that this was Christ's principal intent and end, and that the
sacrament is nothing else but an image of spiritual nurriture, I would yield and
confess, that when they geve license to minister the sacrament in good drink
and fish, or flesh, which nurrishing corporally is apt to signify our
nurrishment Things equal in their ^^^ne nature,
spiritually, they had erected as good a sacrament as that other of bread and
wine. I am not ignorant, nether deny, but that the person adds an estimation
and prerogative to any thing in humane opinion. As if a ring of forty
shillings be given us by a mean man, and a^ other of like value given by the
king, we prefer that of the kings, for honor of the person. If a book be sent
to a scholar by his friend: if a house or piece of land be geven Differ in our
estimation.
to a child by his father; this book is more esteemed then an other of the
same sort bought of a common libraire; this house or land is deerer, and more
regarded of a good and loving child, then if the like possession came to him by
some other means. But yet as this bettereth nothing the nature or value of the
ring in it self and by it self, nether of the book, house, or land; so is it
in this present case of significations, images, and sacraments. And therefore
to conclude this, I say, that if the principal and chief matter of the Scottish
sacrament stand in signification ^ number of sacraments, as good as that of
Calvin.
only of such spiritual nurriture, and the sacrament be no other thing but an
image thereof, then not only most figures of Moses law, as the Paschal lamb,
the bread and wine received there, the bread and wine offered in many other
sacrifices; the flesh of al beasts, goats, sheep, ore, kid, lamb, so used and
eaten by the offerers, was as good a sacrament, because it signified alike; not
only a common preacher can make twenty as good sacraments in one sermon,
because he can tell his audience of a number of creatures, that signify, as
other benefits which we receive of God, so this very spiritual nurriture; but
even every honest householder, every honest bost and hostess, can minister to
their ghests such sacraments, because to al meat which they serve to the
table, they can join such significations, which is the principal and chief
part of the sacrament. And if the chief end be found in them; the inferior and
less worthy ends, as Before* page 260.
thankes-geving, and notification of what religion they are which use such
sacraments, vz. that they are Protestants, will doubtless follow after. As for
that other end which rests, I mean, that it serves for our special comfort ^
and consolation, and that God of his infinite mercy has set it up as a sign
on a high hill to call men to him etc. this is nothing but a ridiculous
ostentation of great mighty words in a matter of nothing. Christ's true
Sacrament is in deed to Christians a great comfort and consolation; but the
Protestant sacrament, being as M. B. makes it, but a word when it is at the
best, and that, signifying nothing Before, page 174. 178, 179.
at al, but as the minister geveth life unto it, without whose sermon it is
nothing but a common piece of bread, and with whose sermon it is nothing more,
because it signifies nothing more then does a piece of beef at a common table;
this is far from geving any special comfort or consolation: which in his
highest perfectio has nothing in it but a signification of good nurriture, in
which kind, a good capon comfort much better.

because it serves well to explicate that which I have here declared, that
every bread and meat used in a common hosterie by a Christian host or
hostess, is as good a sacrament as that which the Scottish minister delivers
in the congregation; I will trouble the reader with view of M. B. his words,
which he here in this place rehearses again. Of which I will only make the
application Conjunction of Christ and the Geneus sacrament. Page 77.
without any further discourse. He therefore expressing what manner of
conjunction there is between Christ's body and their sacramental bread, says:
To make this matter plain and this conjunction clear, mark the conjunction
betwixt the word which I speak, and the thing signified by the word. Speak I
of things to you in a language that ye understand as by gods grace ye
understand this language now: speak I of things past, were it never so long
time: speak I of things to come, and they were never so far of, speak I of
things absent be they never so far distant; yet so soon as I speak the word,
the thing it self will come to your mind. What difference is between a word
signifying by consent of al men of Before, page 176. 177. 178. 179.
such a language, and signs which signify not in such son, nor so surely,
has been declared already: where unto I remit the reader. M. B. proceeds
thus: Take heed to this conjunction between the word and the thing signified,
and ye shall get the nature of the conjunction and coupling of the sign with
the thing signified in the sacrament. For look what sort of conjunction is
betwixt the word, and the thing signified by the word, that same sort of
conjunction is between the sacrament and the thing signified by the sacrament.
Al which to make very clear: As for example (says ^e) speak I of the king,
who is now a good piece distant from us Pa. 7^.
(I pray god save him) ye will not so soon hear the word, ^^^ Amen.
the king comes to your mind. And in like manner so s(...) as thou see that
bread ^ane in the hand of the minister, incontinent the body of Christ man come
to thy mind. These t^^ are so conjoined, that they come both together, one to
the outward senses, the other to the inward senses. You forget to add the
ministers words and sermon, without which the breaking of bread may signify
twenty other things as well as Christ's body. Nay it may signify unto us an
Joan. ^^. ^6*
heretical conceit of Christ. For when we see the bread broken in 3. or 4.
pieces, we may think that Christ's body was so broken on the cross, which is
impiety, and against the gospel. Therefore the comparison of the word spoken,
with the bread broken, is very vnap^* which Pa. 71. 7^.
therefore M. B. salveth thus: The breaking of the bread, which is an essential
ceremony, representes to thee the breaking of Christ's body: not that his body
was broken in bone or ^^^h, but this it was broken with dolor, with anguish
and distress of heart. Well, then ye see that the bread can not signify as the
word does, that is to say, it can have no such conjunction Christ joined to
the Geneua sacrament.
with the thing signified, as the word has; but there must come some speech
to help the bread to this conjunction and signification. This is true: and
therefore so soon as the minister has told them thus much, incouinent as your
hand takes the one, so your hearts takes the Pa. 79.
other, that is, remembers the other: as your teeth eats the one, so the
teeth of your soul, which is faith, eats the other. I vvil not compare this
with a picture, which questionles has a more lively signification, a
representation much better and more effectual: but to persist in my former
example of meat offered us in an alchovvse: even No more th^^ to any kind of
common ^^^^^.
thus, so soon as meat be it beef or mutton, is set on the table and grace
said, if they be Christian men, and have heard a little such talk as here has
passed between M. B. and me, so soon as they see that bread and beef set on
the table by the hostess, incontinent the body of Christ comes to their mind:
these two are so conjoined, that they come both together: as their hand takes a
piece of the beef, so the heart takes the other: as their teeth eats the one,
so a good soul eats the other; as truly, and with as much fruit as in these
men's communion, and as sacramentally touching the nature of the Scottish
sacrament, yea somvvhat more, because bread, flesh, and good drink, is a more
full and perfect nurriture, and so more apt to signify Christ, and to reduce
him to our memory, then bread and drink alone, be it ae or wine, and
consequently there is a more nigh conjunction between this bread, beef, and
ale in the tavern, then between the bare bread and drink in M. B. his
communion: and therefore this is the better sacrament. And even to this dinner
may as fitly be applied How long the Scottish sign rer^aynetu holy. Page 71.
M B. his resolution which he makes touching the continuance of holiness in
the bread of their supper. For he proposes this doubt: How long continues this
power to signify Christ's body with that bread? He answers: In a word I say,
this power sticks with that bread* during the time of the action, during the
service of the table, so long a that action continues, and the service of the
table lasts. ^^^ look how soon the action is ended, look how soon the
service of the table is ended, so soon ends the holiness: that bread becomes
common again, and the holiness of it ceases. Th^^ it is in M. B. his communion
table: and thus it is at the common table in an alchovvse. For so soon as the
d^^ner is ended, and men by that meat and drink are no longer admonished to
remember Christ, who feede^^ al: so soon as the service of the table and that
action (to (...) M. B. his words) ends, and the hostess has taken (...)
the cloth, all the holiness is ended: and in the Scottis^ Communion it ends
somvvhat before.

Of virtue remaining in the Sacrament reserved: and of private Communions.
The Argument.
The primitive church thought otherwise touching conti(...) of virtue and grace
in the sacrament being reserved after (...) Mass or Sacrifice was ended, then
do the Ministers of t(...) Supper and Communion.

M. B. his reasons against private communions and rece^ving the Sacrament by
one man alone. They are pla(...) answered, and his opinion therein condemned
and refuted by his own Evangelical brethren.

CHAP. 14.
no holiness remains in the bread of their communion, longer then the action
or service of their table endures: yet that the Christian reader think not
the like of Christ's sacrament, which he left to his Catholic church; he must
understand, that as here is an other kind of presence of Christ, then that
which is found in the Scottish sign, and is common to it with every vulgar
dinner and supper: so is there an other kind of holiness, and an other
continuation of the same. The Catholic church resting upon Christ's word
assuring her, that it was his body before the disciples received it; upon
confidence and assurance of the same word, doubts not but that it is his
body, as between the pronouncing of Christ's words and the receiving, if there
come the space of an hour between, so if there come the space of ten hours or
a hundred between: because the verity thereof hangs not upon men's e^ting or
not eating the sacrament, not upon any man's action or table service, as M. B.
thinks; but upon the power of Christ and his word it self, which is
eternal, omnipotent, and insallible. And therefore what have so ever the
minister makes home, to see his wise, or to his own dinner and table
service, and for such cause makes perhaps quick dispatch of the table service
in the church; the sacrament of Christ leeseth not his holiness sooner or later
upon any such occasion. This is a question between the Catholics and
Caluinists, as also between the Caluinists and Lutherans. Calvin, and the
Caluinists, and such as are of that side, supposing as here M. B. teaches us;
thereupon bar al sending of the sacrament out of the church to sick perso^^,
and improve al private communions in church o^ house: the Lutherans being of
contrary opinion, and allowing both the one and the other. The resolution
whereof, depends principally upon a former question of the real presence,
whereof I vvil enter no new dispute here. Only for contentation of the
Christian reader I vvil say thus much, that the most ancient, and primitive
church, of Christ, thought as the Catholics do touching continuance of holiness
in the sacrament against M. B. and therefore belike had such opinion of the
real presence thereof, as the Catholics have. That the primitive church The
sacrament sent to private ^^^.
thought as we do, and condemned M. B. for the first, it is known and proved
by a number of plain testimonies taken out of the most ancient vvriters. S
I(...) the martyr. Apologia 2. prope finem. S. Ireneus apud E^^^. Histor. lib.
5. ca. 24. Dionys. Alexandrinus ibid. lib. 6. ^^. 36. Tertul. lib. 2. ad
vxorem: and S Cyprian, sermo. 5. de l^^sis etc. By all which it is evident,
that after the solemn sacrifice and participation of the sacrament in the
church, the same was privately sent to those that were absent In the
Primitive church.
or reserved and communicated by several persons in private houses, in the
first and most pure age of Christ's church: and the grace or holiness of the
sacrament not vvithstanding was believed to continue still, and the sacrament
still to remain a full and perfect sacrament. Which custom afterward was in
like manner retained, with ^^probation of the most learned fathers, as
appears by the practice of the church many vvayes: in the first general
Council of Nice* cap. 14. in S. Basil. epistola ad Casaram Patrit^am: in S.
Ambrose, oration. de obitu Satyri frat^^ cap 7. in S. Gregory Nazianzene,
oration. de Gorgonia sor(...) and others, with whose authorities though clear
a(...) manifest for this purpose, I vvil not charge this place because I vvil
not stand long on that, which is but b(...)ly resolved by M. B. Yet for
example, and assurance to hi^ that such was the faith and practice of that
most aun^en^ and Apostolic church, I vvil write down the ^^^fession of a
learned Calvinist, our first false Apostle (...) Oxford, touching this matter*
Bishop Gardener obi^^^^th to Peter Martyr, that S. Cyril bishop of Alexandria
acknowledged, first, the true presence of Christ in the sacrament, and thereon
inferred, that the sacrament being reserved after the communion in the church
was ended, remained still a sacrament endued with Christ's presence, as in the
time of the sacrifice or communion. S. Cyrils words P. Martyr contra Gardener.
part ^ obiectio. 213 page 524.
as I find them rehearsed by Martyr are these: Cast no doubt whether that which
I affirm of Christ's real presence in the sacrament be true, whereas Christ him
self speaks very plainly This is my body: but rather receive thou and embrace
our Saviors words with faith. For he being truth it self lies not. Hereof
thus he infers: Insaniunt ergo qui dicunt mysticam benedictionem a
sanctificatione cessare etc. Therefore they are mad men out of their wits, who
say (as M. B. does) that the mystical blessing (that is the sacrament) leeseth
his sanctification, or is vnavailable to sanctify, if any portion of it
remain (...). ^^colampad. Epistol. Zuingly et OEcolampad. lib. 3 fol, 149.
until the day after. For Christ's holy body is nothing changed thereby, but
the virtue of benediction and lyfegeving grace, vivificatiua gratia, continues
still in it. For better understanding of which place, that may be noted by the
way, which I find in OEcolampadius concerning the cause why S. Cyril vvrote
thus. The cause was as OEcolamp. tells it, for that even then* some Reliquia
ad sanctificatione visae sunt invtiles Anthropomorphitis. Hos argui^ Cyrillus.
began to cast doubt whether the sacrament or any portion of it, if it were
reserved until the next day after, remained as true a sacrament, and had like
virtue of sanctification, as when it was first consecrated. For certain
gross heretics named Anthropomorphitae, thought the contrary, and were just
of M. B. and the Calvinists opinion, whom S. Cyril reproves. And here upon in
his epistle to Calosirius bishop of Arsinoe in Aegipt, writes as before is
Martyr contra Gardin* vbi supra.
cited. Unto whom P. Martyr frames this answer: Whereas Cyril says, that
a portion of the Eucharist reserved until a day after, leeseth not his
sanctification: he as I suppose speaks therein, according to a certain
custom received among the ancient fathers. For as we may easily gather out of
S. Cyprian, Tertullian, and Ambrose men were then wont, when in the church the
Lords supper was ended, to carry home with them some portion of the Symboles,
and receive it the next day before their meats* thinking thereby to get some
sanctification e^her to them selves, or the sick persons, to whom they gave
it. This custom all ^i^ it was somewhat superstitious, yet Cyril and The old
^^^^. ^^ ^^^. ^^. d.
other fathers approved it. For even streightwayes from the Apostles time, men
began to degenerate from the old simplicity of worshipping god. Here is a
plain confession, that in the most ancient church (for Tertullian and S.
Cyprian are of the most ancient) it was received and approved as a verity,
that the holiness of the sacrament continued somewhat l^nger then the time of the
table service^ and therefore that M. B. is much deceived when he resolves the
contratie.

M. B. arguments against private communions.
private persons, M. B. has certain objections, which ^e seems to account
of as very strong, and therefore I may not omit them. The first is. If the
sacrament be ministered I.
to one privately, it is not a sacrament. And why! pa. 1^^.
Because the Apostle calls the sacrament a communion of Christ's body and
therefore if ye minister it to one, ye tyne the communion: if ye minister it
privately, ye tyne the sacrament. The second is (for they are al of one
quality and form, 2.
and therefore they shall iun al together* This sacrament me^ be publicly
ministered* why? Because Christ JESUS, who is the thing signified in the
sacrament, perteynes not to any man alone, but is a common thing apperteyning
to every faithful pa. 129.
man and woman. Thirdly (which is the last) this sacrament 3.
is counted a thank gering to God. Now it apperteines not to one or two to
thank god only, but as we are al partaken of his temporal and spiritual
benefits, so we ought al publicly to give thanks therefore. These are al his
reasons against private receiving of the sacrament by several persons: which
reasons a man of common judgment and sense might suppose to have been uttered
in mocke^ic and derision of these men's learning and Theology, were it not that
M. B. does preach them to his audience so formally, and thus sets them
sorth, without any other assistance, help, or authority to commend or
support the^. Ansvv^^^ ^^ the
For to begin with the last, what profane blindness, and witles impiety is it
to say, that we may not make a private 3.
thanks geving for a public benefit, in which we privately have as great an
interest as any? Is it against Proph^^^ i^^p^etis.
the preaching and teaching of the Scottish ministry, for the brethrene
privately in their chambers, at morning or evening, to give god thanks for the
public benefits which they receive either spititual or temporal? for their
creation, for their sanctification, for their rest by night or day, for the
goods of the earth, for their peace by sea and land, and so forth? If because
Christ is a common 2.
thing not private, therefore the sacrament may not be received of one, but all the brothers and sisters must meet together; why baptize they any one
severally, seeing Before p^. 266.
Christ signified by that sacrament is a common thing, and the same thing
which is signified by the bread and drink of their supper? Why say they ever
in private the Lords prayer, seeing god is a common thing, not private, and the
very first word is not my father, but our father? Why does M. B. severally
enjoy the light of the sun, the benefit of the air, water, land etc.
which be al public and general benefits, not restrained or limited to him,
or to any one in particular? Are these men (Christian reader) in their right
wits, who with such mad and braynsick devises dare oppose them selves to the
most ancient, pure, Apostolic church? the Catholic ^
church of al times and ages? But S. Paul calls the Sacrament a Communion or
C^munication of Christ's body. True. And what makes this against private
communion? which it rather confirms. For why may not one man alone as well
communicate and receive Christ's body in this sacrament, as one alone may
communicate and receive remission of his sins in the sacrament of baptism?
By what reason or show of reason does the co^municatio^ of Christ embarre any
private man from the sacrament* May a private man evermore, and every where,
by faith communicate Christ truly, really and perfitely, which is the greater
matter; and may he not at the ministers hand privately receive bread and wine,
which is by many Calv. against M. B.
degrees the less? May he commendably enjoy the principal, the body, and must
he be excluded from the accesso^e, from the shadow? How vehemently does Cal^
Institu^^^. lib* 4. ^^. ^^. number. 5.
Calvin refute this, in his disputation against the Anabaptists, when he
argues in this very sort: Si pueri rei sig^^tae sunt participes, cu^ a signo
arcebuntur? etc. If children before baptism, and without baptism be
partakers of the thing signified by baptism, why should they be debarred from
the sign? If already they pessesse the verity, why should they be kept from
the figure? And how rashly is it Page 1^8. ^^9.
avouched by him, that this seal man be ministered publicly; otherwise it is
no sacrament: and the definition of it requires, that the seal be ministered
publicly not privately, in a society and congregation of the faithful:
otherwise ye ^^^^ The English congregation against M. B.
the communion: whereas the next reformed congregation of his Genevian
brethren preach and practice the contrary? Knovveth he not the manner of the
English Church? is not there allowed communion of the sick in their private
houses? Is it not there expreslely declared and defined against his
definition, that in the time of plague, In the co^mu^^^^ of the sick.
sweat, or such other contagious sicknesses, the minister alone may
communicate with the sick person? Do the English ministers tyne and destroy
the sacrament, and so abuse and mock the poor sick brother, who is now to
depart the world? Do they pervert Christ's Institution, for that they minister
the seal not publicly in the congregation, in a society of faithful ^^^
privately in a chamber to one alone where to such society of the faithful
brethren is assembled? ^^^s i^ M. B. and John Calvin's wisdom and Theology,
wherein they resemble one the other very aptly: that is, not to ca^^ what
they say, nor upon how ^nvolo^^ and (...) (...) in they speak, nor whom they
condemn* so that like wise and grave Theologes they may (...) and (...) their
own inventions. For even upon these most vvitles and childish sophismes, did
Calvin condemn in the Lutherans, such private receiving and ministration of
the sacrament, as not agreing Private communions approved by the Germans ^^^
^^siants.
with the rule of Christ, and disallowed by the nature and definition of a
communion. Unto whom, and i^ him to M. B. thus answers VVestphalus, setting
vvithal against his three trifling cavils, twice as many substa^tial reasons.
The sum and effect of vhich, in his Their reas^^^
own words I vvil briefly comprehend, because they serve also against a
number of our English preachings Jew. Reply contra ^^^^^^^* art. 1.
and pamphlets, Whereas Calvin objected Christ's rule, which requires a
multitude, VVestphal* demands: Where is any such rule? any such law made by
Christ! Christ ^ VV^stphal. in Apolog c^t^^ Cal^in page 363. 364.
(says he) never made any such law concerning time, place, or number. He never
commanded, that the whole congregation should meet together, and in one time
and place, receive the sacrament. You (Calvinists) are ^^vv. v^i sup Divis. 9.
they, who make such a law at your pleasure. Christ never forbad, that a few,
three, two, or one, should participate this helthful food. He promised to be
present in the midst Mat. 1^. ^0
of two or three gathered together in his name, signifying that the church was
where two or three godly disciples were. And will he not stand to his promise?
VVil he not be present to two or three, or one, when ^^ receives 2
the holy Eucharist? Thus much for that first argument. For the second, taken
from the nature of communion, I^^^. ^^^ s^^^a Divis. ^^
which M. B. also much grateth on, vz. that it is a common supper and banquet,
and therefore not to be received privately, this learned Protestant upon
VVestphal. ^^^ sup. page 364. 365.
that they ground makes an argument clean contrary. Quid audio? c^n^ non
erit? contra communicationis etc. What say you? shall it not be accounted a The
word (^ommun*) implies single receiving.
supper? Is it against the nature of a supper, of a communion, or
communication, if one alone, or with a few, be refreshed at i^? CHRIST
mercifully ordained his supper to refresh hungry sowles. He ordained a
communion. By order of his institution no man that desires it, is Qua^^vis
v^^^, admi^titur (...) (...)co^^^^^^ ^^n^.
to be excluded; but by right of this common supper, is to be admitt^^ though
he be alone. And the very law of Communion requires, that no man be debarred
from participation of this supper, except by his impenitence he debar him
self, or commit some fault, which deserves excommunication. And whereas
Calvin, (as also many Calvinists) much press the word Communion, as though it
required 3. I^vv vbi supra^ Div. 13
a number present in one place one at an others elbow to receive together, he
answers this erroneous conceit very well: that albeit one man at home
receive the sacrament VVestphal* pa. 3^4. 36^.
privately, yet he communicates with many in that holy supper, from whom he is
separated in place, not in faith, not in right, and fruition of that common
good. He is by infirmity, by necessity of business, or other occasion, severed
after a sort externally from the public congregation; whereas yet be remains
a member of the church: and by one faith and spirit he is in the congregation
and communion of saints. Which is as much to say, as that such a man better
observes that which in this communion is principal, who communicating with
other Christians in faith, in spirit, in charity and ecclesiastical
conjunction, for some just occasion receives yet this sacrament of unity
alone: Private communions proved by the Caluinists own doctrine.
then the Calvinists, who being divided and distracted both among them selves,
and from other Christians touthing al spiritual communion or communication; yet
forsooth care their signs and seals in great companies. An other argument he
takes from Calvin him self, which is of like force against M. B. because he
uses 4.
the self same. M. B. after John Calvin, says: the sacrament is nothing else
but a visible word, as the sermon Before pa. 174.
preached is an audible word. Hereof VVestphalus stameth this argument. If you
allow to private men the audible Ibi. pa. 366.
word, why should you deny them the visible word* You count it lawful with the
word of god privately to comfort the stike, to strengthen their minds with
promises of grace, of remission of sin and salvation purchased by Christ.
Christ comforted the man sick of the palsy, lying in his bed, with Matthew. 9.
most sweet consolation, he absolved him from his sins; he Joan. 3. Joan. 4.
^u^. 23.
preached privately to Nicodemus, to the woman of Samaria at Jacobs well, to the
thee^ on the cross. Why then may we not comfort the weak (though several and
alone) by geving to them the sacrament of Christ's body and blud? This is of it
self a most sufficient and firm demonstration against M. B. And his whole
doctrine and preaching so many Before* page 134.
times repeated, that the sacrament is a seal hunge to the evidence of Gods
word etc. proves invincibly (if there be any coherence in these men's doctrine)
that where the Pri^ate communions approved by the ancient fathers.
word, that is, the evidence goes before, there the seal may follow after:
where the minister may preach the covenant of mercy and grace, there this
sign confirming and ratifying such covenant, may be annexed and appe^ded as M.
B. speaks. Finally, this to be lawful, VVestphalus proves by practice of the
primitive church, thus: 5. Cyprian.
S. Cyprian counted them lawfully baptized, who for cause of necessity or
infirmity were baptized in their bed. Why then should we be so preposterous
and cruel, as to deny in like case the most effectual medicine of Christ's body
and blud? 6. Ibi pa. 167. August.
S. Austin was of an other judgment, lib. 2. de visitatio* infirmoru^: who
wishes and counsels the sick most carefully to receive that lifegeving
sacrament, for that it is a most wholesome vyage provision. Whereby appears,
that the ancient Viaticum. 7. Dio^. A^^^.
bishops condemned not pri^ate communions. The like witnesses Eusebius. histor.
Eccles. lib. 6. cap. 34. where Dionysius bishop of Alexandria sends the
sacrament to Serapion being alone and sick in his bed. Which story after he
has rehearsed at large, he infers: Audis Calvine, Dionysium page 368.
iam olim sic iudicasse etc. Hear thou (frind Calvin, that Dionysius of old
judged, that the sick were defrauded of a great benefit by those who denied
them the communion of page 37^* 37^. A practice of the devil to deny private
co(...)*
the Eucharist? And thereof he concludes, that it is not the ^il of God (as
Calvin and M. B. say) but a policy of the devil to deny the communion
priv^tly, which is ordained by Christ to strengthen the faith of every private
man, for every private man to apply to him self the benefit of Christ, and
comfort him self with remission of his sins. Thus then by this Protestants
doctrine, confirmed by so many textes of scripture, so many good reasons, with
approbatio^ of the primitive church, one man alone may as well receive the
sacrament, as he alone may be preached unto, as h^ alone may be comforted, or
look to have remission of his sins by the death of Christ. So that for these
two points, the first, that holiness and sanctification remains in the
sacrament longer then the action or table service endures: the second, that
the same sacrament may be communicated to one man alone, M. B. is controlled by
manifest reason, by plain and manifold scripture, by the ancient fathers and
primitive Catholic church, and also by the late fathers of the primitive
Protestant church. And doubtless M. B. and Caluins opinion is herein most blunt,
wicked, and void of al wit or Christian sense. Only in excuse of them it may
be answered, that those ancient fathers S. Dionysius, S. Austin, S. Cyprian,
Tertullian, etc. speak of sacrament, which according to Christ's word has in
it Christ's body; whereas M. B. and Calvin speak of a Scottish and Geneva
seal, of a late invention, to which Christ's body is no more joined, then the
Sphere of Saturn is joined to the earth: no otherwise then the body of Christ
is joined to any other vulgar bread or meat, sign or seal. And therefore the
fathers speech, that the sacrament continues with his grace and
sanctification after the communion or sacrifice* and may be ministered to any
Christian privately* is true as the fathers meant of the Christian sacrament:
and M. B. speaking of his Geneva ^oy, which has only for some time a poor
signification with it, but never for any time, any grace or power of
sanctification in it, is likewise true: vz* that after the table service is
ended, there continues no holiness in that, vvherof it had in deed no dram or
jot before; and therefore being ministered to one alone absent can do no good,
which does rather harm then good to the society and congregation present.

That evil men receive Christ's body.
The Argument.






special justifying faith, by which last refuge as al Catholics be excluded
from their spiritual communicatio^ of Christ, so yet other most detestable
heretics thereby receive Christ as well as the Calvinists. And their doctrine
of special faith (the very root of dissolute life) plainly and directly
concludes against M. B. that in their supper the worst Calvinists receive
Christ as well as the best.

CHAP. 15.
THe next matter not handled before, is a couple of arguments which M. B.
obiecteth 1
as in the behalf of Catholics for the real presence. The first is this. The
Page ^ (...)
Apostle says, He that eats of this bread unworthily, is guilty of the body
and blud of Christ. There i^ their ground. Whereof they frame this argument.

No man can be guilty of that thing which be ^^^ not received.
Evil men receive not the body of Christ.
Therefore they can not be guilty of it.
This is the argument as he makes it. His answer to Calv Institutio. lib. 4.
ca. 17. number. 33 ^^ in ^. Cor. ^^. 11. v. 26
this, as likewise to the next, is out of Calvin, thus: First I say, the first
proposition is very false. For they may be guilty of that same body, and that
same blud, suppose they never received it. But take heed to the text. The text
says not, that: hey eat the body of Christ, but that they eat that bread and
drink that wine unworthily. And yet because they eat that The text corrupted.
bread and drink that wine unworthily, they are counted before God guilty of
the body and blud of Christ: not because they received him (for Christ can not
be received of any man b^^ worthily) but because they refused him. For when
they did Pa. 88.
eat that bread and drink that wine, they might if they ^ad had faith, eaten
and drunken the flesh and blud of Christ. N^^ because thou refusest the body of
Christ offered unto thee, th^^ contemnes it, and so art guilty of it In this
answer, whereas M. B. wishes the reader or hearer to take heed to the text,
so do I to, and so shall he find M. B. to be as right a minister, that is to say
as right a falsifyer of the text, as are commonly his fellow ministers. For
where finds he in the text (except it be a false corrupted text) that such
men eat that bread, and drink that wine vnvvorthely* Certainly, not in any
text of S. Paul. For thus stand the words, even as I find them translated by
Beza and Calvin. Therefore who so ever shall eat of this bread, and 1. Corin.
11. v. 27. 28.
drink of this cup unworthily, shall be guilty of the Lords body and blud. But
let every one prove him self, and so eat of that bread, and drink of that
cup. For who so eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation
to him self, for that he discerns not the Lords body. These are the words of
the Apostle: and thus are they translated by Calvin and Beza. And now take as
good heed as you can to the text. Where find ye, that evil men eat bread and
Fo^^l^ corruption.
drink wine? What godles dealing is this, to will your auditour to take heed
to the text, and then your self to abuse the holy scripture, to corrupt the
text, and coosen your auditor or reader most, when most you pretend honesty
and simplicity, and vvil him to take heed to the text? And let not the reader
suppose, that the corruption is small, or of no great moment. For it is vile
and gross: and in this place so heretical, that he had been as good to have
made a text of his own, as to have made the Apostle thus to speak. For the
Apostles words are divinely and This breed. (...) Joan. 6. v. ^^ ^li. v. ^^.
^^ 58.
exactly set down, and Apostolically express the real presence. For in naming
this bread, in urging and repeating that bread, which in greek is
significantly put, and declares a singular bread; he means that bread of God
which came from heaven, that bread which gives life, that body which in the
old testament sometimes, and in Ierem. 11. 19. Joan. 6. 32. 35. 48. ^^. Ibi. v.
51.
the Gospels often times, and in one chapter of S. John a doso^ times at lest is
called bread, which bread our savior him self assures us to be his flesh,
which was to be geven for the life and salvation of the world. In naming the
cup, or that cup, which is Christ's own word, and which word (...) The cup:
what it signifies in S. Paul.
being common to any thing contained in the cup, be it the blud of the new
testament, which was shed for us, be it wine, be it water, be it ale, or beer,
or any manner drink (to al which the word cup may well agree) our savior
restreyneth to the blud of the new testament shed for remission of sins, and
so restreyneth, that it can not be referred See before p^^ 5. ^24.
to wine, or any other thing; S. Paul most assuredly means the same: and so
in the one and other, truly describes the Catholic faith of the church.
Against which, M. B. telling us, that the Apostle says, such evil men eat
that bread and drink that wine, most wickedly by thrusting in his wine,
redueeth the word bread to a vulgar base signification; because talking of
bread and wine, no man can conceive otherwise: whereas the word bread being
in scripture common to al food whereby man lives, and the word cup being
in his kind as large and general, does not signify, nether that, our vulgar
kind of bread, nor this, wine, more then it signifies flesh and ale, or fish
and water: and being o(...) self indifferent, other places of the scripture
necessarily determine it to one certain, more high, and divine signification,
as has been declared.

Now whereas M. B. makes a discourse, that a man may be guilty of a thing
which he receives not, which no wise man doubts of: and so a man may be
guilty of Christ's body and blud, which yet is not eaten o^ drunken either
corporally or spiritually, which is a plain case (for Pagans and persecutors
are guilty of Christian blud, which unjustly they shed, though ye^ they drink
it not; and Pilate, Herod, Caiphas and the Jews which crucified Christ,
were guilty of his death and of ^ath body, which they eat nether way,
nether as Catholics nor as Protestants) all this is labor spent in vain, and
talk to no purpose. We argue not upon words of condemnation or guiltines in
general, but upon the words as they are put in the Apostle, and joined with
other words of his: and so they clearly prove a real M. B. (...).
presence, and M. B. his interpretation is maledicta gl^ssa, a cursed gloss and
exposition, because it is clean not besides, but against the text. For (says
M. B.) the fault of these men whom S. Paul reproves, is because they eat
not that divine bread, nor drink that divine cup: S. Paul says, their fault
is, because they do eat it, and drink it. M. B. puts the indignity and
unworthiness in refusing and not receiving it; S. Paul in receiving it and not
refusing. For they do receive and eat it, but unworthily. S. Paul makes
their sin to be, that they make no difference between the body and blud of
our lord and other meats and therefore are guilty of that body and blud,
which they so desp^se. M. B. admits not that they proceed so far, but
co^de^n^th them before hand, before they eat: which is ^^^ against S. Paul's
co^patison, which stands in this, that as those men came to other tables, to
those ecclesiastical feasts of charity and there did eat and drink without
any pr^c^dent(...)al of them selves or examination of their consciences; so
came they and received the body and blud of Christ at this divine table, not
distinguishing this food from that, but without any convenient preparation,
honor, regard, or separation of one from the other, eating and drinking this
divine sacrament, as they would common meats and drinks. Which words of
necessity implie an eating and drinking on both sides, or else there is no
comparison, and consequently no condemnation of the one side: which
condemnation remains and rests in the want of reverence, regard, and
distinction made between those vulgar tables, and this body and blud of our
savior, both which they received, but alike, and with like honor and
reverence, wherein they sinned and dishonored Christ, whose body they
discerned not, and therefore received it unworthily. And thus the ancient
fathers understood this text, and Evil m^n receive Christ's body.
out of it concluded the real presence and real receiving of Christ's body,
though to the condemnation of the receivers. So for example S. Austin: He that
unworthily receives Aug. li. 5. ^^ bapti^. 4^. ^^
our lords sacrament, albeit him self be naught, yet that which he receives,
is good. Corpus enim domini, and sanguis domini, nihilominus erat illis etc.
For as to good men, so was it the body of our lord, and the blud of our lord,
no less unto them, of whom the Apostle said, he that eats unworthily, eats
his own judgment. The same Doctor intending to show, that the evil use of
good things harmeth greatly; Idem contra ^rescon, lib. ^^ ca. 25.
what shall I speak (says he) of the very body and blud of our lord the only
sacrifice of our salvation? Of which albeit our lord him self say, that it
geveth life; yet does not his Apostle teach us; even that to be pernicious to
them which use it no^ well, when he says, whosoever shall eat that bread and
drink that chalice (not wine) of our lord unworthily, he shall be gilty of our
lords body and blud? In which place, whereas ^e names it ipsum corpus and
sanguinem Domini, the very body and blud of our Lord, and the only sacrifice of
our salvation, ^e most certainly notes not bread and wine, but Real pro(...)
an other thing; except bread and wine be the very body of Christ and the only
sacrifice of our redemption. So in his Ide^ epis. 162 post medium.
epistles he vvriteth, that our Lord suffered Judas that traitor among his
innocent disciples to receive that which the faithful know our raunsom or
redemption: quod fideles nor^^t, Confessio. lib. ^. ca. 12.
pretium nostrum. In an other place, he calls it sacrifici^ pretij nostri,
the sacrifice of our redemption: which words of sacrifice, raunsom, price,
redemption etc. quit exclude M. B. his tropical bread and wine, and prove that
Judas with the other disciples, received the same body which Matthew. 26. Luc.
22.
was delivered for us the same blud which was shed for us according to the
plain text of all the Evangelists. This same verity and exposition of S. Paul's
words is geven by the other ancient and learned fathers Greek and Latin, as
namely S. Basil. lib. de baptis. cap. 3. S. Chrysostom* in sundry places, in 1. Corinthians. cap. 11. homil. 24. and hom. 27. ^omil. ^3. in Matthew. hom. 45. in
Joan. S. Cyper. sermo. de coena. Hieron. in ^. cap. Malach. Treophilact. S.
Ambros. and Theodoret. expounding this place* of which the later, upon those
Theodoret. in ^. Corinth. ca. ^^.
very words, vvhereon M. B. makes his cavilling, he shall be gilty of our lords
body and blud, vvriteth expressly thus: By these words the Apostle signifies
thus much, that a^ the Jews dishonored Christ, and shamefully abused him; so
they also dishonor and shamefully abuse him, who receive his most holy body
with their impure hands, and take it in to their defiled and vilanous mouth:
in pollutum and incestum ^^. So that M. B. his conclusion, or rather strange
paradox that no man can receive Christ unworthily (which out of the sacrament,
Herod^, Annas, and many other publicanes, Jews, and Gentiles other did or
might have done, and in the sacrament many evil Christians continually do) is
quit opposite to the Apostles scope and discourse in this place: which against
al drift of the text* and sense of the words, and exposition of ancient
fathers, he peevishely labors to pervert. For albeit sometimes some fathers,
and namely S. Austin in one or two places Cal^in* Institutio. ^ib. 4. ^^. 17.
nu^. ^4*
which Calvin cites, deny to the wicked rem sacramenti, the thing of the
sacrament; yet thereby he means not Christ's true body as S. Austin declares
his own meaning, but the justifying grace, the fruit and commodity thereof,
the virtue and sanctification, which by Gods ordinance redou^deth thence to al
worthy receivers.

Nether does it greatly help M. B. that he labors ^a. ^^.
to approve his saying by the example of wordly princes, who will not suffer
their majesty to be interessed in the M. B. comparison.
smallest thing. But if thou disdainfully use their seal, which is but wax,
and contemn it, and stamp it under thy sect, thou art compted as gilty of his
body and blud, as if thou put thy hands on him: much more, if thou so handle
the seals of the body and blud of Christ: this I say little helps the matter.
For first the comparison is nothing like. For S. nothing like.
Paul speaks not of stamping under feet, of such disdainful abuse and
contempt, but of vnreuerent receiving, which differs much: and therefore if
M. B. would speak to the purpose, and apply his talk to the subject here
handled, he should take such examples for the one side, wherein is like
conjunction of things signified with the sign, as he ^^ineth to be in his
Geneva sign or supper; and for the other side, where men show such
vnteverence toward them* as is here likewise presupposed Christ (says he, and
so say the Protestants of his sect) is joined with the bread, as, as he is
with a word spoken, as he is with a sermon, as he is with an image, as a
king is represented in his picture, in his seal, in a piece of wax. Suppose
then, that some man, stamp not under foot the Testament in despite and
disdain of Christ, for so S. Paul speaks not nor means, but that he read
some chapter of the Testament, not discerning it from a chapter of S. Hierom or
S. Austin: is he gilty of our lords body? If he hear a sermon preached, and
perhaps sleep at the sermon time, and so receive not Christ inte^nally, as by
the word he is offered no less then in the Supper; is he gilty of the body of
the blud, of the death of Christ* If he look upon a picture of Christ Before,
page 178. 179.
not reverently, which (as has been proved) offers Christ spiritually to
the soul better then any bread and wine ministered at the best communion,
where soever they break their bread most bissilie; if with the external Page
180.
sight of the picture he internally receive not Christ, is he guilty of so
great sacrilege, as these words import ^ Before pa. 18^. 187. 188.
doubtless not. For so should we multiply sins, and make men to commit
sacrileges almost in every thing they do: for that every creature (as has been
showed) is as nighly joined to Christ's body, as is their signs and seals of
bread and wine, and represent Christ as perfitly, and offer him to the faith,
mind, and remembrance of every Christian as presently. And albeit oftentimes
Christian m^n in deed offend in not taking and using such occasions to remember
Christ (and so by faith to eat Christ) as God offers them; yet such omission
and negligence is not to be condemned as sacrilege against Christ's body and
blud, which here is spoken of. The self same may be conceived of a number of
like examples. If the minister ready to baptize a child, and perceiving his
hands soul, take a handful of water out of the font* and first vvash his
hands: albeit he plays a sluttish part and offends, yet no wise man vvil
say, he is gilty of Christ's body and blud: no more then he is gilty of the
kings body and blud who (to use M. B. his example) having the kings image and
seal in wax by him, and vvanting wax to scale his own letter, breaks the
kings seal and applies it to his own use. These similitudes are of like
condition and quality: and therefore whereas for not discerning the body and
blud of Christ in the sacrament, a man is condemned as gilty of Christ's body,
and he is not so in any of these matters; hereof it is plainly inferred, that
Christ's body is otherwise in the sacrament, whereof S. Paul speaks, then in
any of the rest. ^.


The other argument which M. B. allows to the Catholic, is this.

The bread which the wicked eat, is not naked bread, b^^ the sacrament.
The sacrament has ever coinoyned with it the thing signified.
Therefore the thing signified is given to al.
To this argument M. B. pretends a double answer but geveth a single, and
the some very single and simple ^ag. ^^.
^^ deed. What (says he) if I grant them all this argument there should no
inconvenience follow. For the thing signified ^ay be geven to al, that is,
offered to al, and yet not received of al. A man would think, that when he
thus begins with what if, this were but a flourish before hand, pa. 92. 93.
being in deed al his answer, vz, that the wicked get the body and blud of
Christ offered to them conioyntly with the word and sacraments; but wanting
faith, they receive the bread but not the body This is the argument, and this
is his answer. And although the argument be not very strong, The wicked
receive not the whole sacrament after M. B.
yet by the weakness of his answer it is much bettered. For if the entier
sacrament consist of not bread alone, but bread with the body, that is, the
thing signified, how can it be truly said, that the wicked receive the whole
entier sacrament, who receive the one only more base and corruptible part? For
whereas M. B. makes his foolish and childish evasion in saying, To the
wicked pa. 91.
is given, that is to say, is offered, this is to play the boy in matters most
grave and serious. The sacrament is geven and received, and not offered only.
The sacrament consists of two parts, bread, and the thing signified. The
bread alone is not the sacrament, no more then a body alone is a man, wales
alone are a house, paper is a book, cloth is a gown, or wheat is a loaf of
bread. Wherefore who so receives bread alone, receives the sacrament no
more, then he has a house, who has the only wales without either
foundation or roose: then he has a gown who has only a piece of cloth as it
came from the draper, without stitch or cut. So that the argument as M. B.
makes it, stands still in force, notwithstanding that childish sophistry;
yea notvvithstanding ought Martyr contra Ga^din^r. part. 1. ^biecti^. 220. pa.
535.
that he can say against it by the rules of his Theology. And thus much Pet.
Martyr frankly grants. Whereas* says he) there are two parts of the
sacrament, the sign, and the thing signified; if a men will speak of these
matters exactly, he must say, that the wicked receive not the whole sacrament,
Ibi. ^bi^cti^. 235.
but one only part, that is the bread. And a little after: The wicked in the
holy supper receive nothing else, but bread and wine, and consequently they
receive not the sacrament, nor any sacrament at al.

Contradiction in the Calvinists doctrine
help this poor beggarly bread of theirs; or to show the vanity and
inconstancy of their doctrine, I well briefly by their own Theology prove
that the evil Protestants (except they be plain Apostataes and Atheists as
many are) receive not only the bread, but also the thing signified, as well as
M. B. him self: and therefore that al his talk against S. Paul's words, is
mere s^ivolous cavilling without any ground of learning, not only Catholic,
but also Scottish or Genevical. For what is there that ba^^eth a common
Protestant, though in life Wicked Calvinists receive Christ in their supper,
as well as the good. Page 216. 217. etc.
he be never so bad and impure, from receiving by faith the body of Christ as
well as the minister? He eats the bread as well as the minister* there is the
body of the sacrament. The life and soul is put in to it by the ministers
sermon, as before we are taught. Now when that evil Protestant after the
sermon receives it, why receives he not their perfect, full, and entier sign,
whereas he receives that which has both matter and form, both body and
soul? If M. B. reply, that he lacks faith, which is most necessary: I
answer, first, that his faith is altogether impertinent to this purpose: for
that the sacrament has before, his total nature and complement, which can not
be taken away by his faith: which as being very good, makes not the
sacrament, not is required as essential thereto; so nether being very ba^, can
it mar the sacrament, from whose essential perfection it vvithdraweth
nothing. I say further, that such a Calvinist, be he wicked in the highest
degree, so that he be not an Apostata, has faith good enough to receive
besides the bread, the thing signified, that is Christ's body. For how is that
received and eaten? by faith. In what Before, page 174. 17^. 177.
sort? thus: that as his eye sees the bread broken, so his mind remembers
Christ's death and passion. And what hinderance I pray you, is evil life to
this imagination, Can not this remembrance stand with evil life? Can not he,
if his wit and memory be but very indifferent, especially when he is first
warned by the minister, and What it is to ^ate Christ after the Calvinists.
after sees the bread and wine, conceive thus much as well as the most honest
man in the congregation? For let M. B. mark well, what it is to eat Christ
spiritually in their sacrament? By his own definition, and the common consent
of his masters, this eating has no relation or dependence of charity, of
honesty, of virtue, of good life* but only of faith. Bring with you to the
table Page ^^*
(says M. B.) not one mouth only of your body, but also the mouth of the
sawle. What is that? A constant persuasion in the death of Christ, and al goes
well. This persuasion my Protestant of whom I speak, wants not. For I
presuppose him to be no apostata (though I grant him to be an heretic) and
therefore he doubtless has this mouth of his sawle, and therefore eats Christ,
and so al goes well. Again. As the mouth of thy body takes the bread so them*
^^^ Page 74.
of thy ^awle takes the body and blud of Christ by faith. For by faith and a
constant persuasion, is the only way to eat the body and drink the blud of
Christ ^nwardly. Then inwardly does this evil Protestant eat Christ's body, and
inwardly does he drink his blud. For being a Christian* though a bad one* he
must needs have a faith and constant persuasion of Christ's death. Christ (says
Peter Martyr) in the 6. Pet. Martyr vbi su^ a part 3. pa. 644. 647.
of S. thou. promised to g^ve his flesh to be eaten. And that which he then
promised, he performed in his l^st supper. But not then only. He also
performs it now, so often as we truly believe, that he has dyed for us.
What need I repeat^ that which is most evident, that the wicked have this
faith of believing Christ's death, and therefore ea^e spiritually the flesh of
Christ. Calvin goes one point further, requiring that they believe Christ not
only to have died (which only M. B. and Peter Martyr v^ge) but also that he
believe Christ to have risen again. VVh^^ ^as I sin^ in Beza, is a Beza in ^.
Corinth. cap. 1^. v. 23.
question of great (...), and not believed of many Protestants. But yet I
presuppose ^^^ Protestant not to be proceeded so far, but ^esting in the vulgar
heresies of Calvin's Institutions, or the Scottish confession of faith, not to
deny Christ's death or resurrection: and then nothing yet is said, but that he
eats Christ truly by faith, be his life never so detestable. And thus
whereas M. B. says, that no evil receive Christ, I must conclude rather, that
al evil receive him, after their doctrine, as now appears. But yet remains
one farther subtilitie, which M. B. afterward touches and greatly
magnifieth. Learn me Pa. 95.
(says he) to apply Christ rightly to thy soul, and th^w h^^ won al, thou
art a great Theologe. Let us in the name of God learn this high and mystical
point. Is there any other application of Christ, then by faith, by believing
his death and rejurrection? No doubtless, as Calvin, Beza, Martyr, and Before,
page 7^. 79.
M. B. him self have often told us. Then this is not so mystical a point, nor
able to make so great a Theologe; except every ^inker and cobbler that believes
his Creed, be among the Protestants a great Theologe, because perhaps most of
their chief Ministers and preachers believe not so much. Na says M. B. there
is yet a farther degree and M. B. definition, what it i^ to ^ate Christ.
deeper mystery in this eating and application. Let us once have a plain
description thereof, that we may know where to rest, and whereunto we shall
trust. That. M. B. geveth in these words: The eating and drinking of the soul
Page 94.
is no other thing, but the applying of Christ to my soul the applying of his
death and passion to my soul. Yet this must be made somewhat more plain and
intelligible. For as M. B. obiecteth afterward; Christ him self, his body and
blud can not be given or applied to thee, seeing that look how great Page 9^.
distance is betwixt heaven and earth* as great distance is there between the
body of Christ, and thy body or soul: even so touching Christ's death and
passion, that is now long sithence past* and as the Apostle teaches, he being
risen ^^m. 6.
from death dies no more, but lives at the right hand of God ^^^nally and how
then appl^e you his death and passion to ^^^^ soul* Thus; and this must we
take for the chief and last resolution, which this man here geveth us, and
which (...) learned* makes us great and profound ^^i. pa. 94.
Theologes. The eating of the sawle is no other thing but ^^e applying of
Christ to the sawle, that is, to believe, that he has shed his blud for me,
that he has purchased remission of sins for me. This as being the very key
and sum of that he preaches concerning this matter, in his next Page 109.
sermon he enlarges thus. We eat the flesh of Christ by faith, and drink
his blud chiefly in doing two things; first in 2. points required to the eating
of Christ.
calling to remembrance Christ's death and passion, how he dyed for us. The
second point of this spiritual eating stands in this, that I and every one of
you believe firmly that he died for me in particular, that his blud was shed
on the cross for a full remission and redemption of me and my sins. In this
sta^ds the chief and principal point of eating Christ's flesh. Well then now we
know a thorough and per^ite definition and explication of this spiritual eating
and drinking, to wit, that every man in particular is bound to believe, that
Christ died for him (for so I interpret M. B. his meaning, and not that every
man is bound to believe that Christ died for M. B. shed his blud for M. B. and
purchased remission of sins for him, as his words sound) to conclude my
purpose I say, what Protestant, if he be a Christian, does Both are sound in
the vvorst Protestants as vv^l as in the best.
not thus apply Christ unto him self, does not thus eat the body of Christ,
and drink his blud, except he be in desperatio^, or (as has been said) be an
Apostata, and so no Christian. For no man can have the name of a Christian
^^cept he believe the death of Christ, which was suffered according to
Christ's own teaching and his Apostles, both for the sins of every particular
Christian, and also of the whole world. He is the lamb of God, which takes
Joan ^. 19.
away the sins of the world. He came in to the world and was incarnate to
save his people from their sins. To Matthew. 1. 2^ Act. 10. 43
Christ al ^he prophets geve testimony that al receive remission of sins by
his name which believe in him. He is the 1. Joan. ^. ^.
raunsom and propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only, but also for
the whole world, and so forth in every Gospel, and Epistle, and almost in every
chapter of either Gospel or Epistle, so plainly, that no creature having the
name of a Christian can doubt, but Christ died for him* and by his death
purchased remission of his sins: and therefore every Christian be he never so
evil, applies Christ unto him in the supper, yea and out of the supper also,
^^ well as M. B. him self does in the supper. Every Chastian I say, of what
condition, faith or quality so ever, not only Catholic, but also heretic or
Protestant of any sect, Lutheran, Zuinglian, Calvinist, Anabaptist, Arrian,
Trinitarian, and whom ye vvil besides. For all and every one of these believe
that Christ shed his blud for him, and that Christ has purchased remission
Calvin's Thelogie a mockery of Christians.
of sins for him. And is not these men's religion and Theology, a very
profession of deceit, and mockery of the world? who keep such a do, and
make such a stir about the application and conjunction which they have with
CHRIST in their supper, and tell us, that it so far surmounteth the vvitte and
capacity of man, that except the spirit of God reveile it, except the spirit
of God illuminate our minds, and be bissie Page ^^.
in our hearts, it can not be conceived, and therefore the poole Papists can not
get this understood. It so far surpasses the conjunction and possession
which we have of Christ by his word, that whereas in the Page ^5.
word we get but a little grip of Christ, as it were betwixt my finger and my
thumb, here in the supper I get him in my whole hand and more to: who extolle
this eating and drinking as a work so divine, supernatural, and
supercelestial, that no evil man may eat Christ, as they eat him spiritually
in their supper; and yet in fine, when they come to the issue of their apis^
doctrine, and are driven to express plainly what they mean by this their
spiritual eating, they can make no other thing of it, but that which not only
evil Christians may have, but also the vvorst Christians actually have, and
must have; and without having which, and in that manner eating Christ, they
are no Christians at al? And which eating is so far of from being peculiar to
the supper, that perpetually in all suppers and dinners, al Christians do thus
eat Christ (for every Christian ever at al (...), believes that Christ died
for him, for remission of his sins, or else he is a Jew, or a Turk, and no
Christian) and can not be without this spiritual conjunction and application.
Is not (I say) these men's preaching and teaching, a mere jest, a very scorning
and deluding of their folovvers? Let the reader vvaigh well this point, and he
shall be justly moved to abhor and execrate these coosening companions, these
wicked ministers, as the very Angels of Satan, who under pretense and color
of a fevv high, lofty, affected words, as S. Peter long ago prophesied of
them, superba vanitatis ^. P^^. ^. ^^.
loquentes, by speaking proud vain words, without pith or substance, lead
their miserable disciples to hell, even like beasts to the slaughter.

The Profsta^^ faith whereby they eat Christ.
the word faith, and consequently in eating by faith, then have the
Catholics, and whereby in deed they exclude the Catholics from their eating,
and make it proper to them selves. What mystery is this? or what can they
understand by their faith more then other men, more then has been said already?
M. Fox declaring the very first original of their Gospel in Fox Acts and
monuments page 4^^.
Martin Luther, expresses it thus. Though Laurenti^^ Valla and Erasmus had
somewhat broken the way before Martin Luther came etc. yet Luther gave the
stroke and pluck^ down the foundation of error; and al by opening one vein
long hid before, wherein ^eth the ^^^^stone of al truth and doctrine, as the
only principal origin of our salvation which is our free justification by (...)
in Christ. Why? was that doctrine so strange, and never heard of before? No,
not in Luthers sense. For the meaning of it is* not that we must generally
believe only th^^ Ibid.
sins are or have been remitted to some: but that Gods express commandment
is* that every man should believe particularly his sins are forgeuen. This is
the testimony that the holy ghost geveth thee in thy heart, saying, Thy sins
are forgeven thee and this is the faith by which we are justified* and the same
is the right faith, by which the Protestants peculiarly above al other
Christians old or new, eat the flesh of Christ For albe it Catholics have the
sacraments of Christ more in number and more effectual for grace and spiritual
operation then have the Protestants: and they are learned by the evident word
of God, that the sacraments as instruments ordained by Christ, infallibly bring
with them remission of sins, or other justifying grace; yet because they
know vvithal, that the hait of man is inscrutable, and every man knows not
his own ^. Cor. 4. 4. Psalm. 1^. 1^. Ierem. 17. 9. Proverb. 14. ^^. ca. ^0. 24.
vvayes; and many seem repentant for their life past, who yet have not a full
purpose to amend the same: and so by reason of our own imperfection and
indisposition, the sacraments some times work not in us that good* which
otherwise by Christ's institution they could and assuredly would: for these
causes as on the one side we have occasion of confidence, so on the other side
we may well fear, and in fear and trembling work out Philip. 2. 1^
own salvation: although we have great and certain hope, yet have we not
sure and certain faith of our justification, or favor with God: nor make we
but private and peculiar justification an article of our faith, as do the
Protestants: who be they never so great sinners and blasphemers, yet by virtue
of their faith are ever so sure as possibly may be, that their sins are not
imputed to them, but they are most clean, pure and sanctified: and so
continually feed on Christ by this apprehensiue faith. And this, as the
Protestant writers define, is the essential difference between a Catholic and
a Protestant. For (says Calvin) the very definition of the Protestant faith
Calv. Instit^^ lib. 3. ca. ^. number. 7. ^^ number. 15. 1^
it a sure and certain knowledge of Gods benevolence toward us. And he is not
to be accounted a faithful (Protestant) except he be thoroughly persuaded, that
God is to him a loving and merciful father: whereof he must have fixed in his
mind Certitud^ plena ^^ ^^^^, q^^^^ ^^ re(...) et probat is esse (...). La vit
d^^ Calv. c^. 1^.
such an assurance, as we have of things which we know and find true by
experience. And as Bucer (whom for honors sake Calvin used to term his
Master) our first Apostle of this new Gospel in Cambridge, in the disputation
of Ratisbon (after published by him self) expresses it: Nostra confessio est,
Christianum hominem non esse, qui non eadem fidei certitudine credit, and
Dominum Iesum esse filium Dei, and Disputatio Ratisbon. pa. 463. Vide Sleda^*
lib. 16.
se per eum esse percepturum vitam aeternam. We profess (^aith Bucer,
Brentius, Georgius Mayor, with other Lutheran Divines, disputers against the
Catholics in that conference) that he is not to be taken for a Christian man,
who believes not with the same certitude or assurance of faith, both that
Christ our lord is the son of God, and that him self in particular, by Christ
shall possess life eternal. This is that which M. B. means, when he says,
that the applying of Christ* and eating of Christ by faith, is to believe, Page
^^
that he has shed his blud for me, that he has purchased remission of sins
to me. Which justification and remission of sins being in particular
believed of the Protestant in such sort as is any article of his ^aith, thereby
geveth a The Protestants iustifiing faith.
spiritual manducation to him, which the Catholic has not. Thus writes M.
B. afterward, where he spends many pages in magnifying this ^aith. This
faith (^aith he) S^^^^. ^. pa. ^61. ^
works a wonderful assurance and persuasion, that God loves me, that he will
save me, that me^^^, life and salvation at perteynes to me. This works the
seeling of mercy in our heart, and Page 26^*
a particular application, whereby we claim Christ and God as proper to us, as
if no man b^^ title to him and his promises but we. Again. This particular
application, is (...) difference, the chief mark and note, whereby our ^^ith
who are justified in the blud of Christ, is discerned (...) faith of the
Papists. etc. For the Papist (...) Page ^6^. (...).
promise of mercy to his ownesowle. He countes it pre^^^tion (as in truth it
is, and for presumption counted and condemned by the Apostle, Romans 11. 20. 21.
^^. Corint. 9. ^7. Philip. 3. 11. 12. Hebr. 4. 1. 2. etc.) to say, I am an
elect, I ^^ saue^ and justified. This is the wonderful faith of the
Protestants, which to them is al in all. This M. B. calls their Page 264.
justifying* faith. By this thy eat Christ so, as no man does (...), the^^. By
this they are sure of heaven: and in heaven, Infinite pride
to be fellows equal with S. Peter and S. Paul: yea with the blessed virgin
mother of God. For so Luther founde^ Luther Tom. ^. E^^rratio in 1. P^tr. ca.
^. fol. 44^.
and first inventor of this faith writes expressly. Qu^^ hac side renati
sumus, pares sumus in dignitate and honor D. Paulo, Petro, S. Deiparae
virgini, ac divis omnibus. VV^^, now that at last vv^ know exactly, what faith
it is, which geveth the Protestants so deep holdfast in their spiritual
ma^^ucatio^ let us retou^^^ to our principal purpose. And as by this which
has been said of this special Protestant faith, I confess M. B. has a
sufficient ground to challenge such kind of eating (by this faith I mean) to
him self and his companions Protestants, and to exclude out al Catholics, be
they as holy, as S. Pe^er or S. Paul, who never had such a special faith, and
therefore could never thus ^a^e Christ: so yet the block lies still in M. B.
way, and the rest of his cons^aternitie, that by this T^^ vv^^st Protestants
(...) Christ as ^^ ^^l as the b^st.
says evil Protestants receive Christ no less then good. For among the
Protestants the most detestable and most blasphemous heretics have this
assurance of their justification and remission of sins no less then M. B. or
John Calvin, or Luther him self, who by the help of For (...) supra ^^g. 401.
an old man whose name Luther expresses not, says M. Fox, (but belike it was
the same man, who in an other Before, page ^. ^, ^^.
form freque^ted Carolostad^us, and instructed him) first of al inve^ted this
special justifying faith. For as after Luther al Lutherans have it most
assuredly, and after Zuinglius al Zuinglians, and after Cal^in al Calvinists:
so the Anabaptists more then any of those former sects, and Libertines and
Family of love, by word and deed, by life and death, most confidently
challenge to them selves this assurance, The strong (...) the ^nabaptists.
that they in Christ have remission of their sins, that Christ died for them,
that he shed his blud for them, that they are spiritually united to Christ,
they are inwardly Prateolus ^^ Elench^ Alphabet, lib. ^. ca. ^. See For Act.
and monument. page 25^.
so fed by him, and outwardly so clothed with him, that (as it is testified by
sundry stories) many such Protestants, both men, women, and maidens, long
sithence in Bohemia, and of late in Holland, at none days in the sight of
thousands, would walk naked thorough the streets preaching the word of the
Lord: and could not be vvithdrawen from that furious and unnatural madness by
the terror of present death; continually even to death, Lambe^t. Ho^ tens. de
(...) tibus Anabaptist. page 57. etc.
and in death, some crying, Praise the Lord: others, Open your eyes ye blind
Papists: others, Revenge O Lord the blud of thy servants: and thus not by
words, as M. B. does, but by deeds and facts, by patient suffering of death,
approved they their confidence and assurance of such special faith, as M. B.
teaches, and Luther and the Calvinists describe. If then the Anabaptists (to
make stay and exe^plifie this matter by them) whom Calvin condemns Calv.
Instru^^io. contra Anabapt. page 120. 121.
for heretics, and whose martyrs though in show marvelous holy, and in number
never so many, he accounts and calls martyrs diaboli, the devils martyrs,
(by which name likewise the Lutherans call the martyrs of Vide Lav^ther. in
histor. Sacrament. ^ol 45. (...). 25. 57.
Calvin's sect) have this sure faith, that Christ dyed for them in special, and
that Christ shed his blud for them in particular, and they in this sort
spiritually eat Christ; how, with what prohabilitie can M. B. deny such
eating to al Protestants of his own sect, though evil livers, who much more
certainly have this faith, and therefore much more spiritually eat Christ? If
an heretic can Before page 297.
have a constant persuasion in the death of Christ, and then al goes well, and
he therefore truly receives Christ by faith according to M. B. definition, how
much more may a wicked Calvinist, whom M. B. accounts no heretic, reteyne
this constant persuasion? Has an Anabaptist a ^^^th of the soul, apt for such
receiving, and has not a Ibid.
Calvinist? Is evil life a greater bar to such receiving then naughty faith,
whereas this receiving is wrought only by faith, not by life*

And what need I to rest and exemplify this by Libertines or Anabaptists,
whereas the best and surest ground to refute M. B. in this point, is the
general doctrine of M. B. ^^fu^ed by ^^ (...) doctrine.
Calvin and Calvinists, and the same preached at large by M. B. him self in
these Sermons. For as M. B. is sure, that he is justified, he is elect he is
saved, he has this special faith which applies Christ to him so properly and
peculiarly* as though no man had interest in Christ but him self alone; so this
faith, which is the right perfect justifying ^ermo. 5. p^. ^7^.
faith, and proper to the elect, being once obtained, is never after lost, nor
never can possibly depart from them commit thy sins never so greavous and
horible. Thus teaches Beza in the Confession of his Christian Beza in
Confes^a. 4. ^om. ^0. Co^^^. Institu. ^^b. ^. ca. 2. ^^m. 1^. 15. ^^. page ^7^.
Geneva faith most plainly. This Calvin in his Institutions labors to prove
very earnestly and diligently. This M. B. out of Calvin and Beza preaches very
directly, and expressly; and by scripture wickedly perverted seeks to
establish. It is sure (says he) and certain, that the faith of Gods children
is never wholly extinguisted. Though it be never so weak, it shall never utterly
decay ^ perish out of the heart, Howsoever it be weak, yet a weak faith is
faith, and such a faith, that the lest parcel or drop of ^ssureth us that God
is favorable, frindly, and merciful ^^^ vt. Minima fidei g^^ta facit was certo
in^ui^^ contemplari f^ciem Cal^ vbi s^p. (...). 19.
Dei p^acidam, sere^em, nobiso^e pr^pitia^, as writes Calvin. M. B. having run
a good while in this vein, concludes: For conformation of my argument
howsoever (...) page ^^^.
bodies ^e (...) ^o al dissolution, ^et after our effectual calling within our
sewles, supp^^e the fire be covered with ^shes yet it it ^ier; ther^ will no man
say, the fire is put out, suppose it ^e covered. No more is faith put out of
the soul* sup^ose it ^^ so covered* that it show nether how nor light
outwardl^. Finally, he repeateth as a most sure principle: It is certain, that
page ^8^.
the faithful have never the spirit of God ta^e from th^^ wholly in their
greatest dissolutions, though they (...) (...) th^rers, adulterers* etc.
Whereas then every Calvinist, who once has tasted of Calvin's justifying
faith, as has M. B. can never possibly leese that faith, but must of
necess^^^^ reteyne it perpetually, though he fall into never so The (...)
Caluinists (...) Christ ^^ vv^l ^^ the (...).
great dissolution and filthiness of life, become he a murderer, an adulterer,
a robber of churches, a sink of iniquity (as many such justified and elect
Calvinists are) whereas I say, all that notwithstanding he is not forsaken of
the spirit of God, nor deprived of this special and singular faith, which M.
B. so often has told us, is the only mouth of the soul, the only mean to eat
and f^^d o^ Christ: how can he possibly with any face or modesty, with any
learning or reason, deny that wicked men receive Christ's body, whereas he
allows, and that infallibly to the most detestable men, the spirit of God and
this special faith, this month of the soul, by which most truly, effectually,
and spiritually the body of Christ is eaten? Manifest (...) tradiction in the
Caluinists doctrine.
let him with better advise mark this his own preaching, and doctrine of
John Calvin and his Geneva church, and confer it diligently with his other
fancy of evil men not receiving Christ's body in their sign* and he shall find
this opinion to be altogether false, improbable, and impossible to be conceived
or believed, and ^^^ against their own preaching and teaching. And doubtless
besides this special point of Calvinisme, which is so pregnant and direct to
prove against M. B* the general sway of their doctrine, induces the same;
which The protest (...) faith a r^^te* of dissolute (...)
is it provokes men to licentious and dissolute life, in that it preaches
only faith to serve for Christian justice, so the very issue of that
solifidian justification is this: when men in life are become most beastly and
vicious, Luther T^^. ^. ^^ de Capti^^t. (...) ca. d^ Baptismo. Zuing^ Th^^. ^.
^^ Act i^. disput. Tig^^r. fol. 6^8. N^^ ^i^^^ (...) i^^is (...) Christ^ (...)
suo (...).
then to make them most vaunting and glorious for this ^^stant persuasion, that
by only faith in Christ they are saved and justified: for that (as Luther
taught) nothing but only infidelity could (...) such faithful Protestants of
his sect: as Zuinglius wrote; al such, if they believe as he preached, they
forth with were in as great favor with God ^^ Christ Jesus him self; and God
would no less deliver them from ^el, no less open heaven to them, then to his
only begot^^ so^^e: as our first English Apostles and martyrs taught and ^ealed
with their blud, wh^^ we labor in good works to come to heaven, we do shame
to Christ's blud. For having For Act. and monument pa. ^335.
that particular persuasion, whereof is spoken, if we believe that God has
promised us everlasting life, it is impossible that we should perish. We can
not be damned, except Christ Ib. pa. 1338. ^339.
be damned: nor Christ saved except we be saved. We have as much right and as
great to heaven, as Christ, what soever our life or works be. For all they
err that think they shall be saved, when they have done many good works. For
it is not good life, but alonely, a steadfast faith and trust in God, that may
bring us to heaven, be our sins never so great, and that it seem impossible
for us to be saved etc. This is the very pith and substance of the Lutheran,
Zuinglian, Calvinian, English and Scottish Theology touching only faith, and
this infers clean contrary to M. B. that wicked and instructed in the
Protestant school, may have, and by common reason and discourse have, as
constant persua(...) to be justified in Christ, as men of more honest life. And
therefore whereas M. B. says, that such bad Protestants lack a mouth of the
soul, that is, lack a constant per(...) in Christ's death, whereby Christ is
eaten: he speaks l(...) man that lacks a face, that lacks a forhead, or
(...) that lacks wit, that lacks knowledge, that has no skill in his own
Theology, in his own religion, which by plain and manifest reason and
proof, yea by expectence and ocular demonstration assures us the contrary.

The rest of this Sermon, which is principally in commending and magnifying
the virtue of faith, that by Pa. 99. 100. ^^^.
faith we have an interest, title and right in Christ, by faith we possess
Christ: that true faith is a strange ladder, t^^^ will climb betwixt the heaven
and the earth: a^cord that g^^^ between heaven and earth, that couples Christ
and us together etc. all this and much more, as it is well spoken of ^^^
Christian and Catholic faith, so being applied to the Catholic faith.
Lutheran, Calvinian, Anabaptistical, and Scottish presumption, that rash, and
brainsick imagination (...) described, which the Protestants call faith; never
I word of it is true. By that we have no right, title, o^ ^^terest in Christ;
but the devil has a right, title, (...) in us. By it we possess not Christ,
but are possessed of his enemy. It is no ladder reaching to heaven, no cord
that goes thither, but it is a steep breakeneck downefal, sending to hel^a rope
or cable of pride* by which as the first ^. P^^ir, ^. 40
Apostata Angels were pulled down from heaven to hell, and there tied up in
eternal darkness, so by the same pride, arrogancy, and presumption (albeit
these men baptize it by the name of faith) al proud schismatiks and heretics,
Apostataes from Christ's Catholic church, despisers of that their mother, and
therefore true children Job. 41. ^^.
of that first Apostata Lucifer their father, must look to have such part and
portion, as their father has, whose example, and as it were footesteps, in
this arrogant and Satanical presumption and solifidian confidence they follow.

Of tuitching Christ corporally and spiritually.
The Argument.






Christ's flesh is unprofitable, is directly against Christ's own preaching, and
our faith of the incarnation. He in taking from the body al real conjunction
with Christ, infinuateth a denial of the resurrection of the body, as Luther
and the Lutherans prove plainly against the Calvinists.

of Christ is unprofitable. Why Christ required faith, and what manner of faith
in them whom he cured from diseases. The place of scripture which M. B.
obiecteth (as likewise many other) proves the clean contrary of that, for
which be pretends it, vz, that corporal tuitching was a ^^re immediate cause
of health, then tuitching by only faith. May had benefit of Christ by only
corporal tuitching of hi^ much more by both corporal and also spiritual
receiving him in the B. Sacrament.

CHAP. 16.
sacrament, what word is necessarily required to make the sacrament, the
doctrine of seals, and confirmation of men's right and title by seals etc.
which being already drawn in to their several places, and answered before, I
vvil therefore omit here) consists either in refelling the Catholic doctrine
t^^ching Christ's real presence, or in confirming a vulgar opinion, that Christ
is eaten by faith: wherein he bestows many words, which of them selves are
not amiss, but that they are applied to an evil end: as, that the spirit of
God unites Christians to Christ: that Christ is conjoined pa. ^^^.
to us with a spiritual band: that this is wrought by the power and virtue of
the holy spirit, as the Apostle says 1. Cor 12. 13. that al faithful men and
women are baptized in ^ne body of Christ, that is, are conjoined and fastened
with pa. 117.
Christ by the moyen of one spirit etc. that faith is a spiritual thing: that
it is the gift of God powered down in to the ^^^ of pa. ^0^.
men and women, wrought in the soul of every one, and ^^^ by the mighty
operation of the holy spirit: that we ^^^ Christ spiritually by remembering his
bitter death and pa(...), page ^0^
etc. These and a number such other sentences, in which he spends many pages
of this sermon, are in them selves good, true, Christian, and Catholic. But
when ^e applies all this conjunction of the spirit to exclude the conjunction
which is wrought by Gods spirit to, but (...)raf^.
yet not only spiritually, but also corporally: when he acknowlegeth no other
receiving of Christ in the sacrament then that which is wrought as well
without the sacrament, when soever we remember his death and passion; when
he so advaunceth this manducation by faith, as though there were not only no
manducation so profitable, but also besides that, no true manducation of
Christ's body at al: in this he plaieth the sophister in undermining one verity
by commending an other: he plaieth the part of a crafty enemy, who shows
bread in the one hand, and while we behold that, strikes us on the head with
a stone, which he holds in the other: Spiritual (...)tion (...) corporal.
in one word, he plaieth the very heretic, who either thinks him self, or
would his audience to think, that one part of Catholic faith gaynsaith an
other; that the spirit of God uniting Christians with Christ their head
spiritually, excludes al corporal participatio^, which most of al, confirms
and increases that spiritual conjunction: that spiritual eating by faith or
remembering Christ's death and passion, is an enemy and opposite to the real
conjunction of his body, which Christ him self appointed for that special end
among other, that it might stre^ghthen our faith and spiritual ma^ducation
both in the sacrament and out of the sacrament, and make us perpetually more
mindful of his death and passion. Unto which mindfulnes and careful
meditation, we are a thousand times more stirred by one thought, when we
conceive the same his most precious body here truly and really present, and
though glorious, eternal, invisible, and indivisible in it ^ell, yet visible,
divided, and broken in the sacrament for our benefit and nurriture; we are I
say more stirred to remembrance of Christ's death and passion by one such
cogitation, then by all the bread broken, and all the ^^nkardes of wine, that are
in a whole year filled out and emp^ied by the brethren and sisterne in all the
suppers and communions of Scotland and England.

Objection. Page 110. ^^^.
this. If (say they) Christ's flesh and blud be not received but by faith in the
spirit, then we receive him but by an imagination, by a conceit and fantasy.
This is the objection, as he frames it; which albeit it be none of ours, if
it be taken generally, as though al manducation of Christ out of the sacrament
were imaginary or fantastical, which is wicked to speak or think; yet being
applied to the Protestants Answers.
receiving by their ^aith, it is good, and for such I acknowledge it. For their
receiving by their ^aith, is mere imaginary and fantastical, to speak the
best. And let us Page ^^^.
see, how M. B. can answer this objection. So (says he) they count faith an
imagination of the mind, a fantasy and opinion. But if they had tasted and
felt in their sowles, what ^aith bringes with it, alas they would not call that
spiritual jewel, and only jewel of the soul, an imagination. That we account
faith an imagination or fancy, is ^alse; though one of the founders of your
faith, that is Zuinglius, and Before. page ^^^.
his Tigurine church call it so. Howbeit we call it not so, nor think of it so,
but esteem it as a very jewel of the soul, though not the only jewel, as you
falsely term it. Faith not the only ^^ well of the soul.
For that besides the cardinal virtues which also an jewels of the soul, and a
number of graces of the ho^ ghost reckened up by the Apostle: every man that
ha^^ Gala^. ^. ^^.
a little skill in his Christian Catechism, knows that among the 3.
Theological virtues, hope is a jewel of the soul as well as faith; and charity
a jewel of the soul more precious and better then ^aith, as the Apostle
expressly teaches, ^. Cor. 13. 13. and by the one and the other is ^. Timoth.
^. ^^. ^. Joan. ^. 2^* Hebr. 4. 16. Romans ^. 15. Gal^^. 4. ^. Romans ^. 16. ^.
Joan. ^. ^^ cap. 4. ^^.
engendered in good Christian Catholic men a great confidence, joy, and
consolation of mind: and by the one and the other they feel in their hearts the
holy ghost making them to cry Abba, pater; they hope confidently by the
testimony of that spirit, that they are the children of God and his ^eyr^s.
And by this firm hope, which the Apostle significantly calls the confidence
and glory of hope (not of Hebr. ^. 6. Romans ^. ^^.
^aith) they patiently expect and attend that which yet they see not. Thus we
speak and think of Christian and Catholic faith, and never call this,
imagi^ation or fancy. But if you ask, whether we make so light account of
the Protestant ^aith, that which was invented by Luther with the help of his
old man, after received by Zuinglius Before. page 304. etc.
and set forth by John Calvin; this in deed we account a very imagination and
fantasy, or rather a most wicked presumption and damnable arrogancy. And
what can you say to the contrary, or reprove us for thus thinking, and thus
saying? Mary say you, the Apostle Page ^^^.
describing it, Hebr. 11. 1. calls it a substance and a substantial ground.
Look how well these 2. agrees, an imagination, and a substantial ground. They
call it an uncertain opinion fleeting in the brain and fantasy of man: he
calls it an evidency and demonstration in the same definition. Hereof M. B.
concludes: See how plat contrary the Apostle and they are ^^^ the nature of
faith. If a man should ask you, in what Apostle you find this definition of
^aith, I suppose your answer would be, in the Apostle S. Paul, whom by the
name of the Apostle we commonly mean, and who is universally of Catholics
esteemed the author of that epistle. If you answer so, as of necessity you
must; S. Paul's epistle to the H^bre^^^^ denied by the Calvinists.
then by the way you may note and hate the rashness of your felow-ministers of
England, who in their late editions of the new testament, have taken away S.
Faule, or the Apostles name from that epistle. You may note and condemn the
wickedness and impiety of Beza, who in Calvin's life making a register of
Calvin's Comments Beza in the end of Calvi^^ life.
upon the new Testament, ^aith that he has written Upon the Acts of the
Apostles. Upon all the Epistles of S. Paul. Item Upon the Epistle to the
Hebrews.
as though this were none of S. Paul's: and so both Calvin Calv^^^ Beza in
argument* ^uiu^ epistola* ^^ in cap. ^. v. ^^
and Beza labor to persuade both in the argument, and also in their comments
upon the same Epistle. But let this pass. Come we to the Apostles definition,
which is this, Faith is the substance, or substantial ground of things which
^^ to be hoped for, an argument or sound and firm probation The nature and
description of (...).
and persuasion, (not as M. B. will have it, an evidence and demonstration, for
evidence and demonstration is against the nature of faith) of things which
appear not, no^ are comprehended by reason, and therefore are not evident, as
demonstrations are to reason and understanding: and yet for obedience to God
and his word, which passes al human evidence and philosophical
demonstration, we frame our will to obey it, and by the same, make out
understanding to geve firm assent and belief unto it, how so ever human
reason or argument suggest the contrary. As for example: in the Catholic
Church upon Christ's word, assuring, that in the sacrament is his true natural
body, the same which was delivered and crucified for us: to al Catholics how
so ever they live well or il* faith is a substance, ground, and foundation of
this verity; a ^ound, firm and vnremoveable probation and persuasion that
thus it is, although it appear not evident to them, nether can they prove it
by any demonstration or manifest reason, if they be once removed from the word
of God and authority of ^aith. By such faith (^aith the Apostle) we believe
the creation of the world, and al things which are therein. By such faith
Abraham and Sara old and barren, received power to have a child, because they
believed he was faithful who had promised: upon which promise and word of God
they so rested, that they hoped against hop. For which cause of one man even
dead by common estimation, there rose thousands in multitude like Romans 4.
the sand of the sea. This faith was the right cause, why Abraham at Gods
word was fully resolved to have offered in sacrifice his only begotten son
Isaac, in whom the promise of such infinite posterity and the Messiah to come
was made. And though he could not see by ordinary reason or discourse, how the
performance of that promise could stand with the death of that his only son,
in whose life and by whose life the promise was to be fulfilled; yet thorough
this substantial ground of ^aith he persuaded him self, that albeit he could
not reconcile those two points which seemed to him contrary, yet God was able
to do it, who could raise him up after death, and so after death make him to
beget children, and multiply as he had promised. To this end the Apostle Paul
refers his examples and discourse of faith, that by it, as by a sure,
certain and infallible rock, ground work, or foundation, in all adversities we
are sustained, borne up, and confirmed in assured belief of what soever God
has said and promised, either touching this life or the life to come. And what
makes this for the Lutherish or Scottish special faith, whereby every
Protestant, Lutheran, Zuinglian, Anabaptist, or Caluinist No similitude
between S. Paul's ^aith and the Cal^in^sts.
vvarranteth him self, that his sins are remitted, that he is an elect, he is
justified, he is the son of God, and as sure of heaven as Christ him self?
What one sentence, word, or piece of word finds he either here in this
place of S. Paul, or in the whole corpse of scripture to confirm this special
faith? S. Paul a 100. times speaks of faith, and of diverse fruits and
effects of ^aith: but among the^ al, what one place is there, where faith
signifies, that every particular man is bound thus to believe? that such
belief is necessary as an article of his Creed, without which he can not be
justified, nor communicate with Christ? Let any such text of Apostle or
Evangelist be showed, and I yield. If there be no such place, as questio^les
there is none, and this kind of faith being but lately invented by Luther and
his old man, and never heard of Before* page ^^4.
before (and lest of al among the Apostles) therefore can not be mentioned in
any part of the Apostles vvritings; it is as unfit to apply the Apostles
speeches of the Catholic faith, to this Lutherish and Calvinia^ ^aith, as it
is to apply the Eua^gelists words spoken of Simon Peter prince of the
Apostles, to Simon Mag prince of al heretics* or to interpret of Beelzebub
the god of Accaron, the duties, 4. Reg. ^. ^.
honors, and sacrifices appointed for the God of the Hebrews, the creator of
heaven and earth. And this place which M. B. me^tioneth, is so far of from
approving that Lutherish faith or presumption, that it clean overthrows and
destroys it, not only in the judgment and verdite of a Catholic man, but
even of M. B. him self. For the faith The C^^oinist^ faith resuted by S. Paul. ^
whereof the Apostle speaks, is a sure and substantial ground, for that it is
built upon gods word, which is most certain and infallible, and so with that
there can not possibly be joined any falsitie, as is manifest, no more then god
can be false in his word or promise. But that Luther, Calvin, Beza, M. B. and
every Protestant is elect, has remission ^l Catholics.
of his sins, and is justified; this is not only false in the judgment of
every Catholic, but also of the most learned Protestants. Of every Catholic,
because No salvation out of the Catholic church
he knows by gods word, that out of the Catholic church and ministry of
the same, is no remission of sins, as the form of our Creed teaches us, and
Calvin him self grants. By the very order of the Apostolical Creed Ca^^.
Institut ^^^ 4. ^^. 1. ^^^. 17.
we learn (faith Calvin) that perpetual rentission of sins rests in the
Church: because in the Creed, so soon as the church is named, by and by
ensues remission of sins. And this benefit ^^^. number. ^ ^.
is so proper to the church, that we can not otherwise enjoy it, ^^^. number. 4.
except we remain in unity of the church: out of whose lap no man may hope
for remission of sins or salvation, as witnesses Esai, 37. 32. Joel. 2. 32.
Exech^el. 13. 9. Psalm. 106. 4. Whereas then no kind of Protestaut remains
in the Catholic Church, but is departed thence unto several and particular
congregations, some after Luther, some after Calvin, some after Rotman, and
some after other Sectmasters: therefore in the judgment of al Catholics
(confirmed also by the testimony of Calvin, and authority of scriptures) it
is very salse and impossible, that any Protestant remaining in his sect, should
have remission of his sins, and be justified. It is false also (for a great
The C^l^^ sor faith resi^^d by many ^^^ ^^s^^^ti.
part) in the opinion of M. B. of Calvin, and the Calvinists: item of Luther
and the Lutherans them selves. For albeit Luther the first father and inuentor
of this faith reckeneth it perhaps as sure as any article of his faith, that he
and al his scholars the Lutherans have remission of their sins: yet he
believes not so, nor can believe so of Zuinglius and the Zuinglians, nor yet
of Calvin and the Calvinists, al which hea^ ^ounteth for de^^stable heretics,
as i^, or worse then Turks. For so ^^ is well known, that he evermore ^^^l
his dying day wrote and exclamed against them. And the like thought Zuinglius
and Calvin with their brood, of Luther and his Cap. ^. number. 1. ^. etc.
sectaries, as in part has been signified before. Wherefore this special
faith and persuasion being common to every sect of Protestants, Trinitarians,
Arrians, Anabaptists, Zuinglians, especially to the Lutherans, who were first
possessed of it: whereas yet M. B. if he follow Calvin, must needs grant, that
these sectaries divided from his Calvinia^ church, notwithstanding their
special faith have not remission of their sins, are not justified, are not
elect: hereof he may learn most certainly, that this false faith containing
certain and manifest falsitie, is not the faith which S. Paul calls a
substance or substancial ground, as which has in deed no substance, or ground,
or firmenes in it, but is a mere fancy, a mere toy and imagination taken up by
every lightbrayned heretic, common to al alike, and by which al alike have
remission of their sins in particular, one as much as an other, that is,
never a whit at al. And therefore if the chief and principal eating of Before,
page 298. 2^^.
Christ's flesh and drinking his blud, stand in this special faith, ^ he tells
us, then his chief and principal eating of Christ's flesh is nothing. For in
thus eating, he eats nothing but lies and heresies, and feeds on them,
which is not very good nurriture for his soul: and ^udas when he sold
Christ, did eat Christ's flesh as spiritually, as any such believing
Protestants, when they eat Christ's flesh by such a false faith.

it) that he wholy overthrows the mystery of Christ^ incarnation, and
living, and doing here in the world. For see how he goes on: The carnal band,
whether it be the page ^^^.
band of blud running thorough a race, or the catrnal tuitchin^ of flesh with
flesh, that carnal band was never esteemed of Christ in the time be ^^^
conversant here in earth, he made nothing of that band. What wicked speech is
this? Does God by the very singer of nature, (besides his written M^^^^, 1^. 4.
^^^. 18. ^^. S^^d. ^^. 12
vvo^d, wherein we are willed to honor our father and mother) imprint in the
heart of every good child, a reverence, honor, regard and estimation of his
parents; and had our Savior Christ Jesus no reverence of that carnal band,
which him self specially commended ^ What scripture reaches thus* Where
learneth M. B. this doctrine? A^ ^^iction ^^s^^red. Ma^^^. ^^. ^^. ^^^. ^. 4^.
^^^^. ^^. ^
Doubtless no where. For albeit in the gospel, when some maliciously went about
to interrupt Christ's preaching by mentioning his mother and brethren, he
preferred the doing of his office, and service of his father, and preaching of
his word, and saving of sowles, before carnal kindred then importunely and to
evil purpose objected, showing that we should ever preser^e gods service before
humain respect; and divine, spiritual, and heavenly blessings before worldly
and fleshly courtesy or civilities yet to infer thereof that Christ esteemed
not the carnal ^^. 11^.
band, that he reverenced not carnal conjunction, that ^^^ manner ^e denied that
band, this is a wicked illation out of Christ's word: and as well might he have
inferred with Marcion and Manicheus out of this same place, (...) ^^ ^^^^ ^^^
^^^.
that Christ was not carnally borne of the virgin his mother, but
phantastically; and as the English Protestants of the family of Love teach,
that Christ was borne of the virgin Marie, no otherwise then he is borne of
their flesh: and Articles of the Fa^^^^^ of Love, p^^^^^d ^^ London An. ^^78.
^^^. 43.
such illatio^ or consequence drawn from those words by Marcion, Manicheus*
and these English gospellers, is as right as his. If M. B. had done, as some
times the good ancient fathers do; that is, preferred the spiritual cognation
before the carnal, because the one is universal, the other particular; the one
good and availeable of it self, the other not so, except it be joined with the
spiritual; the one, the right way to salvation ordained by Christ, who living
and preaching tended to plant in all men such spititual conjunction, whereas
the carnal cognation was not ordained as a mean to justify any, though in
it, and by carnal cognation Christ was made man, whereby justification,
redemption, and salvation is wrought in all: if thus M. B. had compared them,
and preferred the one, his preaching had not been amiss. But simply and rudely
to disgrace and disanul the one, as though it were of no moment or
commendation in the scriptures, this is wicked, heretical, and inexcusable.
Christ as Christ ^^^^ r^d ^^^ (...)
the gospel treacheth, lived with the virgin his mother and Joseph his
supposed father, and erat subditus illis, and was ^^^. ^. ^^.
^^edient to them, and therefore somewhat esteemed them. Before he took flesh
of his mother, he replenished her with al grace, and made her blessed among al
women, ^^^. ^. ^^.
with this prerogative, that al Christian nations and generations Ibid. 1. 4^.
which were to be borne. should ever honor her and account her for blessed
in a singular sort. Here was some esteem of carnal cognation. When the Angel
from God said to her, T^ow have ^ound grace with God, Ecce Ibid. ^. ^^.
^^ncipies in vtero and paries fili^^: beh^ld thou shall conceive in thy wo^^^
and bear a son, accounting this very conception and childbearing a great
grace, here was some reverence and regard of carnal band. When Christ Joan.
^^. ^^.
hanging on the cross, in the extreme anguishes of death commended his mother
to S. John, it was a sign, he had some esteem of her. Briefly, whereas he
said in his (...) ^7. ^^.
law which he gave to Moses: Maledictu^ qui non honora^ patrem su^^^ and
matrem sua^^: Cursed is he shall esteeme^^ and ^^^^reth not his father and
mother, we may assure our selves, that this is a cursed collection, whereby
this propnane minister gathers out of Christ's words, that he honored not,
no^ reverenced, not esteemed his mother or the carnal band which he had with
her: which if he had done, or had been ashamed of her, he would Chr^^^^^. ^^
Marth. ^^^^. 4^.
sever have been borne of her, as notes S. Chrysostom upon that place of S.
Matthew.

Says not Christ him self Ihon 6. to draw them from that finister confidence,
that they Page ^^9.
had in his flesh only, My flesh profits nothing, it is only the spirit that
quickens? In these few words M. B. shows 2. or 3. very heretical tricks.
First, in perverting the sense of this question like a Capernaite or Nestorian,
and drawing it to the flesh only: as though we reasoned of The meaning of
Christ's words. John ^. The flesh profits nothing.
Christ's flesh only to be geven in vulgar and gross manner, as the Capernaites
imagined; or as though we conceived it to be the only flesh of a man separated
from the spirit and Jivinitie (the founteyne of life) and so unable to geve
life: which was the sense and meaning of the Nestorians. Next, he plaieth an
heretical part, in geving to Christ's words what interpretation and meaning him
self pleases, expounding that of Christ's only flesh, which the very drift and
circumstance of the place proves not to be meant of Christ's flesh, or any
flesh at al, but only of fleshly and carnal understanding of Christ's spiritual
words, according to a common phrase of scripture. For after these words, The
flesh profits Romans ^. God. ^.
nothing, it follows immediately, The words that I have spoken to you, are not
flesh, but spirit and life. But there Joan. 6. 63. 64. 65.
are certain of you which believe not. Therefore did I say to you, that no man
can come to me, unless it be geven him of my father. Which words have this
plain and necessary coherence: My words are spirit and spiritually to be
understood, and so geve they life. They are not flesh, nor to be understood
after a fleshly sort, as do these Capernaites. For so they are not life. They
are to be understood and comprehended by faith, not by sense or reason: which
faith because you want, and follow your sense and carnal conceits, therefore
you are offended at them. So true that is which I said to you, that no man
can come to me, and in this sort eat my flesh, except it be geven him of my
father* except my father draw him, and illuminate Matthew. ^^.
his understanding. For flesh and blud, hurnain^ wit, discourse, and
intelligence can not reveal these matters, but only my father which is in
heaven. This is a plain, evident and true sense of Christ's words, and thus
every part aptly joins and justifies one another: whereas if in the first,
ye take flesh for Christ's flesh, and the spirit for Christ's spirit, there
vvil be made either no Basil. lib. do bapts, ^ca. ^. August. d^ doctri. Christ.
lib. 3. ca. ^3. Theophilact. in 6. Joan, Chrysostom. ^^ Joan (...). 46.
sense, or a very hard sense of the words following, as the Christian reader by
diligent conference of the place may perceive. And thus the ancient fathers
interpret the place: S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, S. Austin. Theophilact, and
others, of which S. Chrysostom (to allege one in steed of many) as it were
of purpose writing against M. B. The flesh profits nothing (says he) Christ
speaks not this of his flesh. Absit. God defend we should so think, but he
speaks of those who understand his words carnally. The flesh profits
nothing, is not meant of the flesh it self, but of the fleshly understanding.
And in the same place: flesh and fleshlynes here is spoken of them, who make
doubt and move question, Quomodo possit carnem su on nobis dare mand^candam,
Ho^ Christ cangeve us his flesh to eaten But Christ^ words are spirit and
life, that is, are spiritual, containing no carnali ie or natural consequence
in the manner of geving his flesh: but are free from al earthly necissitie, and
the laws of this life, as declaring the true geving and receiving of his flesh
to be after a divine, mystical. and supernatural way. The su^marie 1. Corinthians.
^. 14.
sense of it is geven in these words of S. Paul: Animalis homo non percipit
ea quae sunt spiritus: the sensual and carnal man perceives not those things
that are of the spirit of God. for it is foolishnes to him, and he can not
understand Ibi. ^. ^^. ^2. 13.
them. But the spirit of God it is which reveals them. A third heretical
part and the same worse then either of Christ's words corrupted sacralegious^y.
these two, is that he adds to Christ's words, and thereby most wickedly
corrupts them. Christ's words are as he tells us: It is the spirit only
that quickens, and my flesh profits nothing. But where has Christ these
words? Where makes Christ any such opposition between his flesh and the
spirit? Where says he, that it is the spirit only that quickens? What
impudent sawcines and wickedness is this, to thrust in of your own this
particle only, and to join it to the spirit, thereby to take from Christ's
flesh al force and virtue of quickening, which Christ in this same chapter
ascribes to his f^esh most expressly? Again. Where says Christ my f^e^^
profits nothing? what a wicked, and execrable, and double iniquity is
this? First to say, that Christ's flesh is vnprosirable* and then to father this
blasphemous ^^ truth upon Christ him self? Says not Christ him ^^^ again and
again the clean contrary? Says he not a the chapter by you noted: I am the
living bread which Joan. 6. ^1.
came down from heaven. If any man eat of this bread, he ^^^ live for ever,
and the bread which I will give, is my flesh ^^^ I will give for the life of the
world? Says he not in the same place: He that eats my flesh, and drinks my
blud, ha^bl^ Ibi v. 54.
everlasting, and I will raise him up in* the last day? Are ^^ these Christ's
own words, my flesh is meat in deed, ^^ Ibid.
my blud is drink in deed. He that eats my flesh and ^^keth my blud, abides
in me, and I in him? If these be Christ own words, and if to have life
everlasting to be raised that life in the last day* if to abide in Christ, and
Christ ^^ abide in us, be some profit, and all this Christ him ^^ ascribes
directly to his flesh, which is the chief and principal See S. Cyril ^n ^oa^
^i. 4. a. 15. 16.
instrument conjoined with the divinity whereby God works these effects:
what Jewish impudency ^ infidelity is it to say, that Christ's flesh
profits nothing Christ's flesh sav. to the vvo^d.
which flesh geveth life to the whole world? Doubtless ^^ Christ's flesh had
profited nothing. Christ would ne^^ have taken flesh nor come in to the world,
which he di^ Romans ^. ^. Ephesians. 2. ^^.
to this end that in his flesh, and by his flesh, he mi^h^ co^d^^^ sin^e: that
by his flesh he might make an end of that ^^ ^^^ which was either between Jew
and Gentil. or ^^^ and man: and in the body of his flesh ^ as the Apostle
speaks Co^o^. 1. 22.
^^^ght reconcile man to God, and by the some (...) oven for us the way to
heaven. And therefore M. ^. Hebr. ^^. 20
denying Christ's flesh to be profitable, were as good^ ^^^ with our
Familianes, that Christ never came in (...) but only in spirit and mystically:
and so al Christi(...) may say to him and of him, with S. John, that he in not
2. Joan. ^.
confessing that Christ came in slesh (which by plain consequence he flatly
denies) is ro^ of God but of the devil, he 1. Joan. 4. ^.
is a very sedu^er, and an Antichrist.

A third collectio^ ^e makes of like quality with the ^ormer, Page 11^. 116.
in these words: Suppose Christ's body be not ^u^ in the band ^^ mouth of thy
body. And wherefore should it? H^th he M. B. obiecti^.
not appointed bread and wine for the nurriture of thy body? and may not they
content ^ow? Are they not sufficient to ^u^rish ye^ to this earthly and
temporal life? God ^ath appointed Christ to be delivered to the inward m^uth of
the soul. The flesh of Christ is not appointed to nurrish thy body, but to
nurrish thy soul in the hope and in the grows of that immortal life. And
therefore I say, suppose the flesh of Christ be not delivered to the land of
thy body; ^et is it delivered to that part this is should nurrish. Here a man
might demand of M. B. how he ca^ match (...)
these words with the last. If Christ's flesh profit nothing, how nurrisheth
it the soul to life immortal? If it may nurrish the soul, why not the body?
or ^ow is Christ potent to profit the one, and impotent to benefit the other?
Nay if it profit nothing, how can it be beneficial either to body or soul?
Next, the reader may mark how directly his words tend to denial of the
rosurrectio^ of our bodies, which in deed is an opinion already much spread
among these brethren; and this denial of our corporal communication with
Christ, helps it forward excedingly. For as though there were no difference
between the body of a man and of a beast, both which once dying should lie and
rotte eternally, what need Christ's flesh (says he) for the nurriture of our
body? May not bread and wine, and flesh and fish, and such other good cheer as
we have in Scotland, content you? Are not the sufficient to nurrish you to
this earthly and temporal life? Yes truly. And if we had no more to look for
but The flesh of Christ ^^ed^t^ ^^ eternal ^if^.
this earthly and temporal li^e, which belike is all that M. B. and his ^elow
ministers care for, then earthly and temporal vitailes would serve and suffice
us abundantly. But whereas Christians have an other life which they expect
besides this earthly and temporal: whereas they hope, that not only their
soul, but their body also shall enjoy life immortal; they can not content them
selves with bread and wine, and flesh and fish, and such other belly cheer,
with which these Sadduces and Epicures can nurrish their bodies to an earthly
and temporal life, and there with well content them selves looking no farther;
but they require such food, such meat, as feeds both body and soul to life
eternal. Which seeing Christ promised, and promised that to that end he would
geve his own body Joan. 6.
the bread of life, we therefore in respect hereof contemn this Geneva bakers
bread and tapsters wine, and tell M. B. that in thus preaching, he preaches
like an ^picure, like Marcion, like Cerdon, like a number of his fellow
ministers and Gospellers of this age, who upon pretense of the immortality of
the soul, deny the immortality and resurrection of the body* both which our
faviour by imparting his precious body to both, nurrisheth to life immortal:
and these wicked and profane Sadduces by denving that grace unto the one,
take from it so great a help and instrument of eternity and immortality,
which in time also they vvil doubtless deny and take from the other. Hereof
has been spoken before, where was showed, that the ancient fathers drevv
Pe^^re, paz. 169. 170.
from this communication of Christ's body with our body, a very common and very
effectual argument to prove the resurrection and immortality of our bodies.
Here let it suffice to vvarne the reader thus much, that as of old in the
primitive church, Cerdon* Marcion, Basilides, Carpocrates, and such other
Archheretikes denied the resurrection of our bodies; and the Catholic fathers,
S. Ireneus, S. Gregorius Nyssenus, Tertullian, S. Hilarie, and others argued
against them out of this Catholic verity, that our bodies being made
partakers of Christ's body in this B. sacrament, were thereby assured of
resurrection The Calvinists, condemned for S(...) by (...) ^^lovv Protestant^.
and life eternal: so in our days not only Catholic vvriters and bisshops,
but even Luther also and the Lutherans accuse and condemn the Calvinists and
Sacramentarie^ as gilty of those damnable heresies, because against the general
faith of all the ancient fathers they deny Zuingl. Tom. a in Respon. ^^
Lutheri lib. a^ sacramento. ^ol. 415.
to Christian men the corporal and real participation of Christ's body. When as
Zuinglius had reproved Luther for vvriting, that Christ's body cate^ corporally
nurrisheth and preserves our bodies to the resurrection, Luther at large
defending this proposition both by the authority of Christ and of the ancient
fathers, in fine concludes thus: According to the old fathers, our bodies are
nurrished Luther. Tom. 7. VV^^^mb. Defensio v^rborum Can^* fol. 408. 409.
with Christ's body and blud to the end our faith and hope may rest upon a more
sound foundation, that our body naturally receiving the sacrament of Christ's
body, shall also in the resurrection become incorruptible and immortal. And for
that cause, Christ will be naturally in us (says Hilarie) both in our soul,
and also in our body, according to his word Ioannis. 6. Which thing because
Zuinglius and OF colampadius denied, he therefore pronounces sentence against
them as plain infidels. These gentil Sacramentaries (says Luther) Ibi. fol.
390. The Calvinists. A^ir^ist^.
make a fair way to deny God, Christ, and all the articles of our Creed* and
for a great part of them, they have begone already to believe nothing. And
certain it is, that they tend to a very Apostasy in this article of the
resurrection: Certum est They deny the resurrection.
eos spectare ad manifestam in hoc articulo Apostastam. And as it is croni^led
by those that were present eye-vvitnesses, Richerus (whom Calvin sent from
Geneva as an Villagagnon de (...)is it. contra M^(...) Call. in p(...). lib. ^. et
in Epistola ad Magistratum Gene ^^n^em.
Apostle to preach his gospel in the new France joining to America) among his
Calvinists there, preached the eating of Christ's body to be peculiar and proper
to the soul, as here M. B. teaches, for that* hope of resurrection was only
for the soul, and not for the body. And being after convented and examined,
what he meant to preach so, he ansvvered that he would stand to his preaching
and justify it; repeating again this reason, quia spes vitae non Ibid. ^^
cap. 71.
est corporum, sed animarum: for that the hope of eternal life apperteyneth not
to the bodies, but to the fowls. Briefly, one Pappus a Lutheran Doctor of
Strasburg, a dosen years since vvriting against Sturmius a Caluinist, Rhetorike
reader in the same city, rehearsing in fine the Caluinists Creed with this
preface, I will (says he) frind Starmius, ^^ Defen^i^ 3. Joan. P^pp^ co^tra D.
Ioa^. St^rmiu^. pa. ^04. anno. ^580.
cite to thee the Creed of these Calvinists whom thou do defend, not as they
protest openly in words, but as their mind is and intention which also they
utter in their writing, and ^^ not able to conceal in their familiar talk And
beginning with Credo in Deum patrem multipotentem etc. I beleev is The
Calvinists Creed.
God the father, who can do many things etc. when he comes to this article of
the resurrection, thus he utters it: Credo noncarnis quae ad vitam non alitur
nec sustintatur in sacra Eucharistia s^d animae tantum resurrectionem, and
vitam aeternam. I believe the resurrection and life eternal only of the soul
not of the flesh, which is not ^ed and nourished i^ the holy Eucharist to
eternal life. Whereunto immediately he adioyneth these words, which I vvish
M. B. to consider. Here tho^r (Sturmius) wilt use (I doubt not) al manner of ^bi
pa. 105.
exclamations and crying^ out against me. But that skilleth ^^. For thou have
taught in thy Rhetorike, that al such Rhetorical exclamations and
amplifications are nothing but repetatio pri^cipi^, id^e repeating of that
which is in question, words and wind without matter Oste^de si po^es. and si
bonus es, quicquam i^ isto abominando and blasph^mo S^mbolo falso imputari ijs
^^^u^ ^u causam (...) defendenda^ suscepisti: show me if thou be able, and if
thou be a honest man, anything in t^^ abominable and blasphemous Creed, which
is falsely attributed to these (Calvinists) who^e cause thou a wicked r^etor
ci^^ have taken upon thee to defend. These words touch M. B. to the quick.
For his preaching as directly tends to denial of the Creed, and namely this
article, as lightly may be ^ound in any other of his false brethren, be they
Calvinists never so pure and zealous.

So it is, that never no m^n was better for carnal tuitching i^ Page 119.
Christ. As the woman troubled with the bluddy issue, upon th^^ persua^^on that
Christ may cure both body and soul, she co^es Page ^^^.
to him, and as the text sais, she preases through the multitude til she come
to him: and when she comes to him, it is not said, that she tuitched his flesh
with her hand; in case the Papists would ascribe the virtue which came out of
him to her carnal tuitching (O how careful this man is to withdraw al virtue
M. B. streyneth the tex^ against Christ
from the flesh of Christ and real tuitching thereof) but it is said, she
tuitched only the hem of his garment, and with faith, which is the hand of the
soul, she tuitched Christ. Hereof he concludes. To let you understand, that
she tuitched Page ^^^.
him by faith, he says to her: Go thy way, thy faith has saved thee. She
tuitched him not so soon by faith, but incontinent there comes a power out of
him. So that this tuitching of him has ever been, is, and shall be profitable:
as the corporal Page 128.
tuitching of Christ never was profitable, is not, nor never shall be
profitable. These words as the Christian reader may easily see, tend to
evacuate and disanul most of Christ and his Apostles actions here in this
world. If he had said, that faith was requisite in those that songht to
Christ for help, as Christ him self teaches, like as the physician of his
patient requires credit and obedience, that he trust him and obey him, before
he vvil undertake to cure him; he had spoken like a Christian, and like a true
preacher, and one that had a little marked the scriptures, whereof they talk
so much, and (for ought may appear) understand so little. But to attribute al
to the faith of the party, and to withdraw it from al other actions, unto
which it is as properly, yea more properly due; this is dishonorable to Christ,
and quit besides, yea against the whole story of the Gospel. Christ coming in
to the world and preaching among the Jews for this end, that he might plant
his faith amongst them, ever urged them to this faith, required of them this
faith, without this faith seeldom did any miracles, and sometimes (as the
Eua^gelists expresle Marc. ^a. ^. 5. 6.
the matter) could not do miracles in some places, because the people were so
full of unbelief and incrudelitie: for that it was against Gods ordinary
providence and Christ's vvisdome to show his miraculous power, where men were
bent to contemn, mock, and laugh at him rather then take benefit by him:
among which people to have shevved forth any such divine operation, had been
nothing else, then to have watered a dead tree, and sowed corn in the sand, or
upon a rock. For this reason Christ so commenly required faith, as being a
quality necessary to make men capable of his grace and benediction other
temporal or spiritual. Yet the v^ne story of the gospel in the same place
noted by M. B. and sundry the like, prove other things, as coming to Christ,
praying, requesting, perseverance, charity etc. to have been as requisite as
such credulity, and to have co^. curred as effectually to the obteyning of
such graces, as did this faith or good opinion of Christ's person. F^^ that by
the way let the reader mark, that the faith here, What faith was in t^^m
whom Christ healed.
and in like places commended, is not the Catholic faith of Christians, which
we universally profess in Christ's Church, much less the Protestant faith, or
solisidian co^ ceit, or rash presumption of their particular iustificatico and
remission of sins, but only a reverend opinion and persuasion, that Christ as
a blessed man and prophet was of ability to do such things. And thus Christ
him self describes this faith in diverse places, namely and most expressly in
S. Matthew. Where two blind men crying Matthew. 9. ^^.
on him to have their sight, Christ called them unto him and said to them: Do
you believe, that I can do this unto you* They answer, yea lord. Then he
touched their eyes saying* according to your faith be it done unto you. The
like is mother Matthew. ^. 2. ^. 3. Marc. 1. 40. Ibi. 9. ^^.
places. Now if we well consider the manner of such histories, we shall easily
find, that other actions, and namely corporal touching of Christ, was as
requisite to obtain such benefits, as was this persuasion; and that even in
such places, where this faith and persuasion is most highly commended.
Whereof this very story mentioned by M. B. is a plain demonstration. For as
the 3. Evangelists Matthew. 9. 2 ^ Marc. ^. ^^.
which al write this story, describe it, the faith of the woman was as
good before she touched Christ's garment as after, and in the Protestants
conceit much better: for that before she touched his garment with her hand,
she touched Christ by faith, that is, she had full confidence and assurance,
that he was able to cure her, and perhaps that he would also do it; whereas
after the touching when Christ called her, she came trembling, and with great
^u^. 8. 47. ^^sore. page 303. 304. etc.
scare sell down at his feet, which is clean contrary to the Protestants
secure confidence and courageous persuasion. Yet this her great faith or
confidence notwithstanding, she had not of Christ that she sought for, so long
as she touched him by faith only, though it were never so strong. But so soon
as she had joined thereto corporal touching, forthwith her disease left her.
Whereby we see, that in this very story, which M. B. has made choice of,
the corporal action was a more direct and immediate cause of health, then was
her faith or good persuasion of Christ, though that were requisite also. And
whereas M. B. like a right scholar of Calvin, that is like a right Saracene
rather then a Christian, carefully sorevvameth his reader against the Papists,
that this woman touched Impious collictio against Christ.
only the hemme of Christ's garment, not his flesh, or any part of his holy
person, left the Papists should ascribe this virtue to the carnal tuitching, if
he had but one dram of like honesty and faith, as this simple woman had, he
would never have made such a brutish and sensles note: whereas any man, not
of Christian faith, but of human wit and discourse may easily see, that if
the touching of his only garment, or hemme thereof, had such force and virtue,
by many more degrees his holy body and person had it. For this virtue was in
the garment or hemme thereof, nether by virtue of the matter or form, nether
Corporal touching of Christ profteth.
of the sheep that bare the vvolle, or vvever that made the cloth etc. but only
of the person who wore it. And this the woman could have taught him, if he
had so well marked her words, by them to learn a truth, as he maliciously
expounds them to the dishonor of Christ thereby to feed his heresy. For
according to the Evangelist, she said within herself: Si tetigero vel
vestimen. Marc. 5. ^^.
tum eius. If I shall touch yea so much as his garment, I shall be whole. which
is in effect, as if she had said: I vvil not presume to touch his divine
person, his sacred flesh for that I am unworthy of, and I know that it is of
infinite grace and efficacy: it may suffice me, if I may come to touch any
piece or part of his shoe, of his coat, of the left thing that is apperteyning
to him. So that she with the Papists would much more ascribe this, or a
greater matter ^o his carnal tuitching, that is to the tuitching of his holy
person, who was persuaded that it would serve hertu^ne, if she might tuitch
but his garment. And whereas our savior by that tuitching did immediately ^u^e
Marc. 5. ^^.
her, he thereby declared, that to receive him not only spiritually as she
after a sort did, but also corporally, must needs conteyne great and incredible
benefit, when as the only tuitching of the hemme of his coat or gown was so
beneficial. The like is to be judged of al other, who being persuaded that
Christ was of ability to do Corporal touching of Christ proiteth.
them good, and requesting it of him, yet obtained not that good by their
tuitching of Christ by faith, but only then when besides, other they tuitched
Christ, or Christ them actually and corporally. Which thing the Evangelists
against such profane and Antichristian collectors do precisely note: as when
the leprous man ca^^^ Marc. ^. 40. Matthew. 8. 3. Lu^. 5. ^3.
to Christ, besought him, kneeled down to him, and said to him, If thou wilt,
thou carst make me clean: although here he had already tuitched Christ by
faith, yet thereby he was not cleansed: but it soloweth in the Evangelists;
Christ having compassion on him, stretched forth his hand and tuitched him. and
so cleansed him. When certain blind men Mat, 20. 30.
cried after him as he passed by the way, Lord have mercy upon us, thew son
of David; and although the multitude rebuked them for their crying and
importunity, they for all that held not their peace, lu^ cried so much the
more, Lord have mercy upon us, son of David: here was tuitching by faith.
Yet remained they blind notwithstanding, until our savior with his hand
tuitched their eyes, and Ibi. v. 34.
then immediately they saw. And so was it in the other story Page 328.
of the (...) men rehearsed before. And generally, albeit such as came to
Christ for ^elpe, had faith in him: yet the Evangelists make Christ's tuitching
to be the more immediate and ^^e efficient cause of such help as they received.
For which reason, as S. Mark and S. Luke vvnte, multitudes of people both in
the fildes, and villages, Marc. ^. ^0. Luc. 6. 1^. Marc. 6. 56.
and cities where he passed by, as many as had any burtes or diseases pressed
upon him to touch him: and they laid forth their sick in the streates, and
besought Christ, that they might touch but the hemme of his garment. And as
many as touched him were made whole, whereas many other who had as good a
faith as these, and yet came not to tuitch him corporally, went without such
comfort, as these which tuitched him, obtained. For so much the words of the
Evangelists necessarily import.

And therefore whereas M. B. out of this faith of the good woman, makes a
general rule that tuitching of Page 2^^.
Christ by faith was ever profitable, but the corporal tuitching of Christ
never was. Item, Corporal tuitching of Christ Page 12^.
has never been, is not, nor shall never be profitable, although I defend not
nor approve in our que(...) the one without the other: and the corporal
receiving of Christ in the Sacrament without faith, and charity also, is not
only not profitable, but also damnable: yet because this assertio of his
tends to Christ's dishonor and Christ corporal ^^^^^ing (...) profitable: yea
without ^aith.
is a manifest ^alsitie against the truth of the Evangelists, I can not omit
it, but must needs tell him of it. For Christ's corporal tuitching was
profitable to many, who when Christ ^o tuitched them, nether had, nor could
have any power to tuitch him by faith. When Christ by tuitching Peter's mother
in law healed her, it appears not by any Mat. 8. ^5.
word of the text, that she had any great faith in Christ. And whether she
had or no, the man deaf and dumb Romans ^0. ^7.
could not have faith (for faith comes by hearing) and yet Christ's carnal
tuitching of him was profitable to him: for that Christ by tuitching his tongue
and ears, opened his Marc. 7. ^^. ^5.
ears, and losed the strings of his tongue, so as he both heard well and spoke
well, which was some profit. What faith of Christ could be either in the dead
son of the vvidow Luc. 7. 14. Matthew. 6. 2^ Luc. 8. 54.
of Naim, or in the dead daughter of Iayrus? when as yet Christ by tuitching
the coffin wherein the first ^ay carried toward his grave, raised him; and by
holding the band of the other, restored life to her. Briefly, albeit M^ chus
servant to the high priest, might have faith bec^^^ he was a man, yet it is
very unlike he had any, when he carried the lanteine to help them and to show
them their way that apprehended Christ and after crucified him. And yet when
S. Peter had vvounded him, and ^^ of his care, and Christ, by tuitching the
vvound restord Loc. 2^. 51.
him his care again, although he vvanted fait^, this ^^nal tuitching of Christ
was some what profitable: except M. B. count it not unprofitable, for a man to
leesets ears. For if he count that vnprositable, then doui^^^ he must needs
count it profitable for a man to recover them when he has lost them. And
therefore to conclude this against M. B. whatsoever the corporal tuitching of
Christ is now, or hereafter shall be, whereof he pronounces so co^sidently;
surely heretofore some times^ Real presenc^ of Christ in ^^^^ B. ^^cra^unt.
has been profitable, even to those which had no faith Much more, and
incomparably more may it avail them* that having faith and so receiving him
spiritually, corporally also receive him in the dreadful mystery. And so ^.
Chrysostom and S. Cyril apply these stories mentioned Chrysostom. in Matt^,
homil 51.
here out of the Gospels: If (faith S. Chrysostom) al th^^^ who tuitched only
the hemme of Christ's garment, recovered their health, how much more shall we be
strengthened and c^^forted, if we shall receive him altogether with in us! In ^^
Cyril* in Joan ^^b. 40 ca. 14.
manner S. Cyril. Christ by tuitching the Governors daught^ ^^^^^. ^. and the
cessin wherein was the widows son, Luca. ^a^sed them both: pr^^i^g thereby
that hi^ body was ab^e to ge^e ^^e (...) solo actu suo ^o^^upta redinte^rantur,
^^. modo non vt(...) q^i ^arnem illam and gust^^^ and marcicamus^ If then by
his (...) vitching, things perished ^e restored (...) (...) who (...) (...)
al(...)e who lost and ^a^e that ^^me ^^e^^ (...) (...) (...) will reform to
immortality, those that are made ^^^^a^er^ of him.

Manifest falsities and untruths against the Catholic faith.
The Argument.
Six gross ignorant untruths (besides many lesser) uttered by M. B. about the
miss. Concerning the sa ramental words prenounced openly, as is the fashion in
the East church, and was so used from the beginning. It clearly proves the
real presen^e, which is truly made, when the words be pronounced by a lawful
priest e^her secretly or openly.

Aseuenth foul untruth (accompanied with many folowers) touching the words of
Consecration which he accounts magical, is answered and refu^ed most plainly
by himself. Christ is really present in heaven, and in the sacrament at once.

CHAP. 17.
Untruths gross and manifest.
speak: but in declaration thereof, povvreth out such gross vntruiths* and
ignorant assertions, as the vvorst minister in Scotland perhaps would be
ashamed of. Truly the simplest vvaterbearer in Edinburgh can hardly talk of
the mass more ignorantly. Of which I vvil geve experiment by vvriting down
some ^ among a great numbers of his more sensible false assertions and
ignorances. 1
And let this stand for the first* The Papists make the whole ver^^e of Christ
irstitu ion to stand in 4. or 5. words. ^^^ Page 114.
skilled not if they con^ented them with those words, bec^^^^ they are the
words of the institu^ion; but they e^ke to the words they pare from the words,
and al^er the meaning of the said weras which they keep as they th^se. Here
are sh^fled together a heap of untruth S. For nether make we the whole virtue
of Christ's institu^ion to stand in sou^e or f^^ words, although for the
consecration of one part ^^ the sacrament four^ or five words serve^ for
evident its that Christ him self used no m^re) and f^r consecrati^^ of the
other part we use above tvvises. words tvvisere. peared and those words
the church observes, and commands to be observed so religiously that no
Catholic Priest either ad^eth to them, or par^^h from them, ^^ al^ereth any
syllable in them: much less alters the m^^nine, which we co^n^ so
necessary and essential, that ^ any alteration be made thereof, it is no
sacrament, nether in baptism. nor yet in the Eucharist. Next because ^s
audience should think he has some skill in the Ma^^, he pre^endeth
artificially to divide the mass (vvhi^h ^t call the suppe^ says he; which
might be n^ted for an ret^uth by the way* for although in a good sense the
sacrament may be termed the supter of our Lord, yet we use not that manner of
speech; much less use we to call it the supper, which is a term profane,
and contemptible: and we call it no more a supper then a dinner) in to
su^st^mid Page 1^4.
thines and accidental. Among the substantial, there must be a Priest, that is
such a ^re (after this man's construction) a takes v^on him ^e off^ce of our
mediator Christ Jesus ^o i^ercede 2
betwixt God and men: which is an untruth joined with ignorance. For what
soever office priests have by order of Christ and his church, it is nothing
like the office ^^l. 1. 4. 2. Cor* 1. 1^. Coloss. 1. ^0.
of Christ's mediation: except he think that every priest suff^reth dea^^ for
the sin^^^ of the world* and by h^^ blu^ recon^^le^^ ^od to m^n, and pa^^^e^h
al ^^i^^^ in ^e^ven and (...). A great absirditie but proceeding of ignorance, 3
he obie^^eth, ^^at to he ul storce ^^ themasse is required, that the priest
^ff^r the body and blud of Christ. Which absurdity he proves by this sage
reason. We come here Ignorance.
(in the Scottish supper) to receive these things. There (in the mass) the
priest offers them to God the father. Which is to great foolishnes and
ignorance, either to measure the sacrament of Christ's church by their Scottish
devise: or to say, we can not offer to God that which we receive of him. By
which wise reason they in their supper can not offer them selves to him in a
spiritual sacrifice, no nor offer to him so much as the sacrifice of
thankesoeving, or praise, Before. page 258. 259.*
which vet they tell us they do still. But hereof has been spoken already, to
which place I remit the reader. Concerning 4 Page 135.
the priest, who only can say the mass, one thing required in him, and that so
necessary, as without it he can not be a priest; is that he have power geven
by the bishop to consecrate, which power is justified by the unction and
shaving of his crown; as truly, as the ministers power geven him by the
Superintendent (as in England) or by the assembly of ministers and Elders (as
in Scotland) is justified by having a fair long beard, and a sister in the
lord, to keep him company at bed and at bourd. I omit a number of other
falsities uttered in this place by him for that they are not particular, but
general, agreing to him with the rest of Page 138.
the ministry: as that a priest has no calling nor office now in the church
of God: that he ^ffereth sacrifice without a command: that he should speak
out clearly in ^knowe^ language Page 139.
and so forth, these are common lies and therefore I vvil not he^e lay the^ to
M. B. his charge. Albeit he may take 5
that to him self, which is an untruth joined with ignorance* and I think
not avouched by any of the more Page 1^6.
learned Calvinists* that sorsooth we make two things necessa^i^ to the
acti^n, without which the action can not be. VV^^h u^ the lor ^^ ^^^ver it can
not be; without the ^ive words of the institution it can ^^^ le. For if he
understood what is meant by the action in the mass, he should find, that
without the lords prayer (if by it he mean the P^^^r noster) the action m^
le; and t^erof ^re that he falsely and ignorantly couple^h together as things
of like necessity, the words of the I^stitu^ion, and the Lords pra^^r.
Touching the form of consecration, so far as I understand of 6 Page 14^.
it (says he) it stands in these 5. words, Hoc est enim corp^^ ^eum, and in
the whispering of them. For if ye whisper the^ not, ye tine the fashion of
incantation. For the thing that we c^^ sanctifying, they call whispering. Here
is again untruth upon Of pronouncing ^^^ words of consecration.
untruth, only somewhat excusable for that he pleads ignorance, adjoining to
his assertion, so far as I understand, which is almost as little as nothing.
For nether do they sanctify the bread and wine, nor can they by their
doctrine join any sanctification unto it, and M. B. him self See before pa.
151. 152. 153. 154.
albeit he use the term of sanctification, yet in this very place refuteth al
true sanctification of the bread and wine: and we call not sanctifying
whispering, no more then they call it g^pling, or halowing, as hunters do a fox,
because after Page 137. See before pa. ^16. 22^. ^^^.
Calvin, M. B. requires and urges very carefully that the minister preach and
proclaim his sermon publicly, and with ^ clear loud voice. As for the words
of consecration, whether by a lawful priest they be pronounced a loud with an
audible voice, as from the beginning until this present has been the use of
the Greek church, and of old it seems to have been so likewise in the Latin
church: or whether the words be pronounced, as now the universal custom is
with us in a lovv voice and in silence, the effect The real presen^^ ever
believed in all Christ^nd^^.
is al one: and no Christian of any wit ever doubted, but as of old in both
churches, so now in the Greek where the words are uttered alovvd, as well
as in the Latin church, where they are pronounced otherwise, the effect of
consecration follows in both alike. That in the Clemen^ Constitutio.
Apostolic. lib. ^ cap. 17.
ancient church the priest spoke the words alovvd, we find in S. Clement the
Apostles fellow, in S. Ambrose, ^^ others, and that the people were then
accustomed to say Amen, and by open confession to acknovvlege for true,
Ambros^^e sacram. lib. 4. ca. 5. ^^ De ^^ qu^ (...) mist. cap. 9. L^^ de (...)
7. mensis Sermo. 6.
the priests words. Whereof vvriteth S. Ambrose thu^* The priest says, it is
the body of Christ: and thou answere^ Amen, as much to say as, truly so it is.
That thou confesse^^ with they tongue, reteyne and hold fast in thy heart and
mind. For in vain (says Leo the great) do they answer Amen to the priests
words, who dispute and make arguments against that which is there received. The
like usage of answering Amen by the people, appears in the most ancient Vide
bib^^^^^ ca^^ sanctorum Patrum. Tom. 4. ^^ initio.
Masses or Liturgies of S. James, S. Basil, S. Chrysostom, and others. And that
at this present, the same order still continues in the East churches, it is
testified by Bessarion Patriarch of Constantinople in his book of the
sacrament, etc. The priest (says he) pronounces the words of consecration
with a loud voice, iuxta orient ^is Ecclesiae ritu^, Bessarion l^b. de
Eucharistia ^^ ve^^^ consecrati^.
according to the manner of the East church: and the people severally, first at
the consecration of the body, then again of the blud answer Amen, truly so it
is. And by answering Amen to those words, verily say they, these gifts are the
body and blud of Christ. So we believe* so we confess. Thus Bessarion. And to
join hereto one (...) example which may serve in steed of many, as being
taken out of the Liturgy or Mass called VNIVERSALIS CANON used universally by all Christians in a manner over al Africa, especially M^ss^. ^^^^ Canon
vniversal^. Tom. 4. Bibliothec^. page 1^1.
in the most large and ample kingdoms of Aethiopia: at the consecration of
either part of the sacrifice, the people likewise geve assent and approbation to
the priest in this sort. The priest speaks; Christ the night in which he was
be^rayed, took bread in to his holy and immaculate hands; and Christ g^^^
thanks, blessed, and sanctified the bread.
looking up to heaven to thee O God his father, geve thanks, blessed, and
sanctified it, saying: take and eat ye al of this: This is my body which shall
be delivered for you to remission of sins. The people answer; Amen, Amen,
Amen. truly, truly, truly so it is. We believe, and trust, and praise thee O
our God. Hoc vere tuum corpus est. This here is truly thy body. The R^^l
pres^^^^
priest proceeds: Christ likewise taking the chalice and giving thanks,
blessed, and sanctified it, and said to them; Drink ye al of this. This is the
chalice of my blud, which shall be shed for you, and for the redemption of many.
The people answer: we believe, and trust, and praise thee O Lord our God. Hic
vere Real pres^^^^
^^us sanguis est: this truly is thy blud. This is the order of the Christian
churches in the East and South, in Asia and Africa: and this was sometimes the
custom in the West in Europe. And if it were now retained, it would not
^arme, tyne, or hinder the verity of consecration, or Christ's real presence:
but it would harm, hinder, and discover perhaps many faithles, godles, and
Christles Calvinists, who now sometimes like hipocrites are present at the
church sacrifice, because they are not driven to make such Christian confession
of their faith in this behalf, as was the ancient custom in both churches
East and West, and at this present continues in all churches of the East. And
therefore when M. B. speaks as here he does, every word he speaks, is a
foul untruth. It Untruths no(...).
is a foul untruth to say, that we call whispering that which they call
sanctifying. It is a foul untruth to s^, that without whispering we account
the words of Christ to lack their force. And when he calls consecration
incantation, that is an untruth S^^^^ical and blasphemous, because it reaches
not only to a^ the ancient primiti^e church, as has been showed, but also to
Christ him self. Before. page 49, 50. 51.
For we use the words of Christ, as Christ did, and we use them no
otherwise, to no other end, with no other intention or effect, then Christ
did, and commanded to be done, and the church of Christ, first and last, old
and new, in the East and West, in Europa, Asia, and Africa used universally
without control, until these wicked and profane mockers of Christ and al
religion, set a work by Satan, brake lose in to the world. Besides al which
Before, page 41. 42.
falsitie, impiety, heresy, blasphemy, and ignorance ^ true religion, this
man seems to be ignorant of common learning and philosophy, for that he
supposes ^^ magike and incantatio^ to depend of whispering; where Pl^nius
nature. ^^st^r. lib. 2^. ca. ^.
as such inchanters and impostors play their parts no more by whispering, then
by speaking with a clear voice, as M. B. byndeth his ministers to speak
when they eat their supper.

7
almost containing naught else but such gross and palpable falsities and the
same accompanied with a number of folowers, is where he preaches thus. After
the Page 145.
words of consecration are this way whispered, they pres^p^^^^ such a hid and
monstrous virtue to be enclosed in the sillables (one blasphemous untruth)
that the virtue and Vntruthe^ ^^torious.
power which flows from the words, (there is two) are able to chase away wholly
the substance of bread (there is a third) and that the power which flows from
these words, is able to rug and pull down the flesh and blud of Christ that
sits at the right hand of his father (there is 4. at lest.) This ministerlike
kind of speech, that is to say, this vvitles and frantike kind of railing, and
blaspheming, and lying, that we suppo^e such hid virtue to be enclosed in the
sillables, and flow from the words, he continues and thus repeateth, to make
good his former raylative speech of incantation, against which he disputes
very gravelie; and the more gravely, M. B. argument.
the more ridiculously* because he disputes against the false conceit of his
own fancy, and not against any faith of ours. His argument is this: We deny,
that any virtue is Page 146.
enclosed in the sillables. For if there were such a virtue and power enclosed
in the sillables; by that reason there should be a virtue in the figure and
shape of the letter, that makes up the word. Now there is no man will think,
that there is any virtue in the figure or shape of the letter. ergo etc.
Doubtless a profound argument, which if M. B. could have used well toward John
Knox (that famous and incestuous adulterer, Arc. Ham^^^. C^lv. Co^su^i^.
Demonstrati^ ^^. 2. ^^. 34. page ^5^.
and Apostata, M. B. his predecessor, and the chief Scottish Apostle of this
age) and the Scottish ministers which now rule, he might perhaps have much
refrayned and vvithdrawen both him and them from their usual magic and
familiar coniuratio^ of spirits. For of Knox it is testified, that even in
Geneva where he was to pretend a little honesty, Arch. Ha^^. v^i supra. lib.
2. cap. 4^. page ^^^.
he was much geven to such kind of study: and of the Scottish ministers it is
publicly witnessed by one who speaks of his certain knowledge, that no
other science (and so belike not the Iustitutions of John Calvin (...)
nor yet the word of the Lord) is more ordinarle and (...)liar there, or more
diligently studied, or had in more (...) and esteem, then magic and
witchera^^. As for the (...)liks, any creature that is not bereft of common
(...) may soon perceive, that this point of incancatio^, ^pos^ pose any virtue
or power to lie enclosed in the sillables, no more touches them then the man
in the moon. For they know and profess, that who soever pronounces these
words or sillables; be he man, woman, or child, be he King or Keisar, or of
what degree and state soever; if he be not lawfully called in the church of
Christ to the office of priesthod, the words and sillables pronounced by any
such, have no more virtue and power, then if they were pronounced by a
minister of the Scottish or Geneva creation. Again they know and prosesse,
that if a lawful priest or bishop pronounce them, as many do both in their
studies, when they read S. Paul's Epistles or the Gospels; and in the church
when privately they say their service, and among other parts of scripture
rehearse these words; there is no more power or virtue in them, then in any
other words, or sillables, or sentences of the Gospel^ and yet if there were
any power or virtue included in the sillables, the sillables being still one,
like power and virtue should ensue of the^. And therefore M. B. may soon
perceive, that we have no such magical imagination of these or any like
words. Mary when a lawful priest or bishop pronounces them as the
substitute of Christ, to that end and with that intention and meaning to do as
Christ appointed: now in this case, that these words or any other of like
effect and substance have power and virtue to work that which Christ
ordained to be wroug^^ by them* what should I go about to prove, whereas M.
M. B. orgument ansvvered by him self
B. him self in the next page immediately confesses it! For I vvil not trouble
the reader with any distinctions usual in Catholic vvriters: because the
simplicity of this man is such, that him self in this very page yeldeth as
much to consute him self, as I desire, or the reader needs to require. For
thus he vvriteth: We deny there is ^^y ^. 147.
virtue enclosed in the sillables, or resident in the word. But we say there is
a power conjoined with the word (and we say no more) but al power is resident
in the eternal word, whereof tobe (...) mention in the first of his Euangel.
Let that stand for (...) that yet you remember your own words in your first
sermon, that as the Euangel is a mighty and p^tent instrument Page 11.
to our everlasting salvation; so the sacrament is a potent instrument
appointed by God to deliver and exhibit to vt the thing signified, that is
Christ Jesus. And therefore Page 147.
whereas you say, There is not a drams weight of this virtue and power
resident in any creature, but it is only in Christ Jesus, which no wise man
denies, so long as you speak of this virtue, to wit, such and in such sort
as it is resident in our Savior, the fonteine, origin and author of al grace
and virtue both in word and sacrament: so yet if you What virtue is in the
words of c^^ secration.
consider the word and sacrament as mighty and potent instruments ordained by
Christ instrumentally to deliver us Christ, you must allow unto them some
drams, and some ounces to of virtue and power, or else they can not prove
instruments mighty and potent to deliver us so great a matter as Christ comes
unto. And so you do in your conclusion of this point, wherein I vvil rest, as
likewise will any Catholic: who never will demand more then Page 147.
you liberally yield. Therefore (say you) there flows no virtue from the
sillables, nor from the words that are spoken; but from Christ and his
spirit, who geues the virtue to the words. Again in the same page. We say
there is no virtue resident in the syllables, but we say that the virtue is
resident in the person of the son of God: and he works by his own word
uttered by a lawful priest as in the Catholic church, not by the sermon of a
seditious minister, whose sermon can not be called the own word of Christ.
And thus much for that. The other untruths of chasing away the bread, and
pulling down Christ's flesh from heaven I pretermit: because if he thus speak
in scorn and derision, I vvil not lose time nor spend words so vainly, as to
talk of them. If he utter them in sadness, they are to gross and sensible
falsities, and carry their refutation with them as proceeding from shameful and
intolerable ignorance of the Catholic faith, which he goes about to refute.
If by such odious and slanderous manner of speech he mean to disgrace the
Catholic belief; enough has been said in defense thereof already, so as I
need not to make any farther discourse. Only against this light, scurtile, and
ethnical Luth. Defensio v^r^orum cana. se. 397
kind of talking, which in deed were fitter for a Pag^^ then a Christian, as
Luther also affirms of such vvritings preachings, and ^aylings of the
Zuinglians; I vvil oppose the grave and reverend authority of S. Chrysostom,
Christ's body at one time present in heaven and in the Sacrament
who preached to the old Christians of Constantinople touching Christ's real
presence at one and the same time in the sacrament and in heaven at the right
hand of his father, after an other manner of sort and gravitie, then does M. B
to his new formed Christians and Gospellers of Edinburgh O miracle (says S.
Chrysostom) O the great Chrysostom. de Sacerdot^^. l^. ^.
goodness of God! Christ who sits above with his father: at the same moment
of time is (in the sacrament) handled with the hands of al* and geveth him self
to those that will receive and embrace him. To like effect are S. Basils words
in his Liturgy* Basil^ in Liturgia.
where thus he prays: Look down upon us O lord Christ Jesus our God, from
thy holy tabernacle, and from the throne of thy glorious kingdom. Come to
sanctify us, which sit above with thy father; and art conversant here in
visibly: and vouchsafe to impart unto us thy undefiled body and precious blud:
and by us to al thy people. Much to like Ambros. in Psalm. ^8. Aug. apud Pe^^^
in 1. Corint. ca. 10
purpose might he alleged out of S. Ambrose, S. Austin, and many other both
Greek and Latin. But against M. B. his words, and nothing but bare, light,
profane, and minister like words, these two may suffice.

Arguments against the real presence ansvvered.
The Argument.
Phisical arguments taken from the proprieties of an humain^ body (wherein M.
B. commits many faults) and commended with certain places of S. Austin, are
refelled: with answers out of the Protestants to those places of S. Austin.

S. Peter's words in the Acts, corruptely cited, to bynd Christ t^ a certain
place* are answered: and the Protestants corrupti^g of that place, plainly
manifested.

Christ's words Luke 24. 39. where to his disciples he proves the truth of his
body by seeing and feeling, make nothing against his presence in the sacrament.

The article of Christ's Ascension and sitting at the right hand of God, being
rightly understood, impayreth not, but more establishes the real presence.
Caluins exposition thereof refelleth M. B. his argument taken thence; as also
his former objection taken from S. Peter's words.

Other sacramentarie arguments more probable taken from Christ's leaving the
world and departing hence, answered.

CHAP. 18.
Calv. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 17
found, and particularly urged in one chapter of Calvin's Institutions, in his
2. short libels against Ioachimus VVestphalus, and in diverse others, and
therefore have been so many times answered, not only by Catholics, but also by
Protestants; namely by Luther him self against Zuinglius, that they can not now
carry any weight Luther. Zuinglius.
in the judgment of a mean Christian, albeit in the beginning when Zuinglius
and Carolosladius (with their familia^s) invented them; to simple and wavering
people they might perhaps seem somewhat. Since which time they have been much
more tossed to and fro, especially Protestants. Martyr. Bullinger. Beza.
Calvin. against
by Martyr and Bullinger against Brentius, by Beza in his dialoges against
Heshusius, but most of al by Calvin in the places before noted, where they are
every one that is ought vvorth: from whence M. B. seems to have taken them,
and therefore from the adversary part, that is VVestphalus, vvil I also take
my answer as heretofore, if the arguments of them selves do not (as often they
do) answer them selves sufficienly. For a mean Christian that is a little
grounded in his Catechismo and Creed* may casilie see, that very weak they are
in Theology, though some strength they have in philosophy. And albeit these
later sacramentaries, Beza, Calvin, Bullinger, Martyr, have set some new
flourish and varnish on them, whereby they seem more gay and flesh in the eye,
yet the substance of them is al one, and remains still as rotten and britle;
as when they were first by Carolostadius and Protestants Brentius, Heshusius,
Illyricus. VVestphalus.
Zuinglius objected against Luther, as the replies of the adversatie
Protestants, Brentius, Heshusius, Illyricus and VVestphalus have made manifest.
Three general hea^^ he makes of his arguments, by which he vvil disprove
Christ's true presence in the sacrament. First, by the verity Page 148.
of the flesh of Christ. 2. By the articles of our belief. 3. By the true end
of the institution of the sacrament. The first two albeit he commend and
beautify with the name of S. Austin, and a text or two of scripture, yet the
whole weight rests upon a text of Aristotle and natural reason. For thus he
disputes: The first principle that I lay, is Ibid.
this. Christ had a true human body. So of necessity it must M. B.
obicetions.
follow, that the definition of a true body, and the inseparable properties
thereof be competent to him. But the inseparable properties of a true body are
to be in a certain place: to be finite, circumscribed, visible and palpable.
For all these agree quarto needs (as the Logicians say) to a body, so that they
can not be separ^t from the subject without the destruction thereof. Then I
reason in this manner. Every true humane body is in a certain place. Therefore
Christ's body is in a certain place. I mean so, that where ever the body be, it
is limitate within that place: and while it is there, it can not be else where.
This is M. B. his first general principle and ground, wherein are contained al
his first kind of arguments, in number 3. of which one is here proposed
already. For out of this philosophical principle: Every human body must have
these in separable qualities, he argues, 1. that Christ's body must be in a
certain place. 2. that it must be finit and circumscribed, which as he uses
it, is al one with the former, and therefore I vvil join them together. The
3. that it must ^e visible and palpable. Let us now first a little examine this
his principle or philosophical rule, and after descend Ans^^^^.
to the particulars. These 3. properties are inseparable to every body says
he. If he mean of al bodies universally, it is not true. For nether the
element of air, which is a true body, is palpable and visible, much less the
element of fire above the air: nor the whole world it self, nor the first
heaven, which conteyneth in it al thing, is in a certain place, as common
philosophy and Aristotle defines a place, and as al other bodies are in a
certain place. If he mean of human bodies, as he seems, and his discourse
and application pretends, then is it most false that these properties agree
to the body of man quarto modo, as the Logicians say. For they agree to the
body of a horse and an ox, of every stone and tree, as well, as to the body of
a man. And therefore in so speaking, he speaks not like a Logicia^, nor like
a reasonable man. If he say, at lest these are properties necessary to every
man's body and inseperable: and so they are proper to it some way, at lest
secu^do modo, as the Logicians say: as now he speaks more truly, and by
ordinary course of nature they are in deed necessary and inseperable; so yet
they are no more Qualities necessary to human bodies.
necessary to the body of man, then it is to the same body of man to eat, to
drink, to take rest, to sleep, to increase, to decrease, to tend to
corruption, to take the nature and frame of his body from a father and mother.
And the philosophers who knew nothing of faith, nor the resurrection of humane
bodies to life eternal; and by humane reason and wit assigned to humane bodies
according to the drift of humane reason, of the course of nature and this
world, those 3. properties which M. B. notes; would never have denied these
other which I adioyne, to be as necessary, and inseparable as those. For
albeit Adam and Eve were made without father and mother, which both after
were as other bodies, finite, in a certain place and so forth; yet that
creation is a matter of faith, not of philosophy: and that very creation both
of man and beast was a greater miracle, and is more repugnant to nature, then
a body to be invisible, or without a certain place. or one body to be in two
places: and so, that creation or production may stand with the rest for an
example able to control all that M. B. says. And if by these Bind not Christ's
body.
properties as necessary to humane bodies, or more, then those of M. B. we
may not measure the divine and glorious body of our Savior now sitting at the
right hand of his father in heaven (for there it nether eats, nor drinks,
nor sleeps, nor increases, nor decreaseth, nor tends to corruption, nor
when it was framed in this world, took it any part from a father, which no
humane perfect body ever vvanted) much less may we subject that body to those
other philosophical qualities. And M. B. can never prove to me out of any
probable writer, that any man in this world lived without those qualities,
Plato de Re^ub. dialog. 2. Cicero d^ o^^icij^ lib. ^. ^rassmu^ in Ad^gij^.
Victoria in ^^^ct. 1^. de (...). 6. Vid. N^^ia^^^^. in Monod^a ^^ Orat^^.
2(...)ij.
which I specify, whereas if he vvil credit Plato and Cicero, and some other
both ancient and late vvriters, he shall find, that one Gyges of Lydia in Asia
Minor, lived there a long time, as true a man as M. B. and yet when he
pleased, invisible, by virtue only of a precious stone, which he had in a
ring: whereof came the proverb Annulus Gygis, well known among the learned.
Which whether it be true or no, as I vvil not dispute (and yet precious
stones, and perfect magicians, and naturalists can do perhaps as great a
vvonder as this) so hereof may be conceived, that wise and sober men thought
not that to be a matter so impossible, as now these great sacramentarie
Theologes bear us in hand.

And thus much being forewarned of the truncke of M. B. his phil. sophical
tree: let us come to take a better view of the 3. branches, which spring
thence. The first is. Christ's body being the body of a man, is so of necessity
limited to the ^e^^en place, that while it is there, it can not be else where.
^^w prove ^ow this necessity to follow the body of Christ by any Theological
argument? Read Austin (say you) writing to Dardanus and speaking of the same
body Page 149.
of Christ. Take away a certain rome from the bodies, and they bal he in no
place: and if they be a
in no place, they are not. ^he same Austin writing upon John in his 30.
treatise, The body (says he) in which the lord rose, c
of necessity must be in one place, but his divine efficacy and nature is
every where. And in his third epistle he sais* ^
how ever a body be great or small, he must occupy the bounds of a place. And
besides, the history of the Acts proves most evidently Christ's body to be in a
certain place. Act. 3. 21. The words are: Whom the heaven must m
conteyne until the time that al things be restored. Thus much for proof of
the first, that Christ's body is Page 150.
bound to a certain place. For the second, that Christ's body being an human
body is circumscribed; leaving many doctors purposely I take me to Austin
(quoth M. B.) who writing to Dardanus, says Christ to he every where as he is
God, but n only in heaven according to the nature of a true body. And in his
146. epistle: Believe Christ's body to be in heaven o as it was in earth, and
when he ascended in to heaven. Whereof M. B. inserreth: But it was
circumscribed in the earth: Ergo it is so in heaven: and consequently, it can
not be in the mass, both at one time. This is all that M. B. alleges out of
Theology for proof of his first principle: which albeit Ansvver^ to the
places of S. Austin.
most sufficiently may be answered with one word, that none of these places
touch the purpose: none of them speaks of the matter here handled: S. Austin
in none of these places disputes of Christ's body in the sacrament, which
every where he acknowlegeth, but either of common bodies in general, as in his
third epistle: or of the conditions of Christ's body according to the ordinary
course of nature, not of this divine mystery: according to the rules of
natural creation and propriety, not of Christ's vvil and omnipotency; yet
because there is somvvhat more to be considered in these places: and M. B. his
dealing in them is very corrupt and heretical: and the VVhetaker against
^ayn^l. cap. 3. Calvin in vltima Admo^^tio. ^^ Institutio. lib. 4. ca 17 number.
24. 2^.
sacramentaries, who usually care not for a thousand Austins, nor a thousand
Cyprians, when they make against them, here make much of one Austin, when he
seems to speak for them: especially for that these places are in a manner the
only, which these men have, and as very important are objected by P. Martyr,
by Bullinger, by Beza, by John Calvin; I vvil briefly set down in particular,
what answer Calvin's adversary the Luther^^ Protestant makes to them. Thus
vv^iteth he. The place of S. Austin to Dardanus, I expound by very many plain
places a n VVostphalus in Apologia contra Calv. page ^15.
of S. Austin, wherein he declares, that the body and blud of Christ are geven
and received in the sacrament. And both those many places of S. Austin, and
this one to Darda^^. I examine and try by the rule and touchestone of Christ's
word: and therefore I hope, the indifferent reader will judge that I expound S.
Austin a right. Next he answers, that S. Austin in that epistle to Dardanus,
as likewise in his third ad Volus^. c ^
axum, and in his 30 treatise upon S. John, talks not nor entreats of the
sacrament: and therefore his words are perversely applied against the real
presence therein. Against which answer ^^y^hica (...) de^ac chat^^.
because Calvin stormed; and (as Ioachimus writes) rayled most barbarously, he
justifies it by the authority of Philip Melanchton Calvin's special frind, and
a frind of the sacramentaries, and so a close favourer, at lest no Martyr
con^ra Gardener. d^ Eucharis^^^ part^ 4. page 70^.
great enemy of M. B. his opinion, and whom therefore Peter Martyr calls a
fingular and incomparable man, adorned with all kind of learning and virtue.
VVestphalus words are these. Before me, even thus wrote that most famous man
VVestphalut ^^^ supra. pa. ^^^.
Philip Melancthon, in one little book geving thrice warning to the reader,
that Austin in that 30. treatise upon S. Ithe (where he says, the body of our
Lord may be in one place, corpus Domini in vno loco esse potest) makes no
mention of the Lords Supper. It is a great matter and imports much to mark,
in what place, upon what occasion, a thing is spoken. For we speak otherwise,
when we talk of any thing by chan^e, by the way, accidentally; then when we
entreat of it directly and of purpose: and our words carry with them one sense
in the one place, which they do not in the other. Where by the way, 8. Austin
corrupted by the Calvini^^^
let the reader note the intolerable co^^uptio^ of S. Austins words made by M.
B. and the Calvinists. For where S. Austin says, Christ's body may well be in
one place: M. B. makes Potest. Oportet.
him to say, the body of Christ must of necessity be in out place. Which
differ as much as these two propositions; M. B. an heretic, a corrupter and
falsif^er of the fathers (and scriptures to, as shall appear) may become a
Catholik^^ and M. B. such an heretic etc. must of necessity be a Catholic.
Again, Where S. Austin to Dardanus vvriteth, that Christ as man, is in heaven,
and not every where, as he is according to his deity: M. B. for his better
advantage makes S. Austin to say, that Christ it only in heaven, and that,
according to the nature of a true body, as though otherwise it were no true
body: which is far from S. Austins words: and being referred to the
sacrament, V^i supra pa. 217. Melan^thou condemns the C^lvini^^^
much farther from his meaning. And now to return to Melanchton; he says
further, that he can never be persutded, that Austin in that place here cited
meant so to tie Christ to one place, that he could not be in another;
especially for that the scripture never so teaches: and nothing can be brought
to bind Christ to one place, besides the judgment of humane reason. In an
other place he affirms that he had rather suffer present death, then say with
the Zuinglians, that Christ's body can be but in one place. And the self same is
the effect of my answer to the place of Dardanus. For Calvin (or M. B.)
sindeth not in all that Epistle, or any place of S. Austin, that the Ibi. pa.
^^^. ^^ ^^5.
truth of Christ's body or nature is denied, if the verity of Christ's words be
credited, and his body believed to be received in the sacrament. S. Austin
never says, as Calvin does, that Christ's body is only in heaven, and not in
the sacrament. He never denies the presence of Christ's body there. Let Calvin
(or M. B.) bring furth^ so much as one place, where S. Austin affirms Christ's
body to be absent from the sacrament; whereas we show many, in which S. Austin
clearly teaches and assures us, that the body and blud of Christ is present,
is given and received there.

Concerning the last place taken out of S. Austin, Epistola 146: that Christ is
in heaven as he was in earth, and as he ascended: whereof Calvin concludes as
does M. B. But in e^rth, and when he ascended, he was circumscribed: Ergo he i^
likewise in heaven: albeit the right answer be short and plain, that these
words must needs be understood in respect of the substance only, not of other
properties and qualities (for here he did ^a^e, drink, sleep, as in heaven he
does not) yet VVestphalus enlarges it some what, and justifies it by the
words of S. Austin in the same place and sentence next eusuing, and therefore
tells Calvin, as I do M. B. that these words are nothing against us. For ^^
page 2^9.
we teach not that Christ is in the Eucharist visibly and localy, of which
form S. Austin speaks, as appears by th^^ be cites the words of the
Angel: As you have seen him go in is heaven, so sh^l he come. And S. Austin
him self interprets that particle of similitude, sie, so, of the substance
and form of Sic in visibilt forma. Ib^. S. Austin fo^^^ly corrupted by the
Cavinists. Luther Tom. 7. Definsio Verbo^um Cana etc. fol. 405. Pro sua
vene^^ta har ^.
Christ; affirming that the same Christ which then ascended i^ to heaven, shall
in the end of the world come to judge in visible form. And this is a true,
plain, and very sufficient answer to these places of S. Austin: and S. Austin
never speaks otherwise* if we take his sentence according to the general
tenor and form of his writings* agreably also to Christ's own words, as this
Protestant truly testifies, and not by pieces, and quillets, and snatches, as
do the sacrameutaries, and therein so filthely and shamefully (as Luther
writes) m^^gle him for defense of their venomous heresy, as nothing c^^ be
more: tam foede and contumeliose deformant v^^ihil supra.

which (as he tells us) proves most evidently, that Christ's body can be but
in one place. And what are those words which prove m
this so evidently? These of S. Peter, that heaven must conteyne Christ, until
al things be restored. This perhaps proves that Christ must be in heaven until
that time: but that he can be no where else, how is this proved by these words,
save only in the blind and reprobate sense of a sacramentarie, who evermore
stumbleth upon this condusion, that when Christ is said to be in oue place, he
can not be in an other: which is their only fantastical imagination, not S.
Peter's, or any good man's asse^tion. And what if I deny, that S. Peter ever
spoke these words, ot S. Peter's words corrupted by the Calv^n^^^^.
S. Luke ever wrote them? but that they are words spo^en and written by M. B.
or some fan^^ical brother of his sect. T^uly in our Testament I find them not,
nether in the English, Latin, no^ Greek. In the English Testament auto^ized in
the English Church under king Edward, (...). 155^.
S. Peter's words are these* Jesus Christ: which must receive he^ven until the
time that al things be restored. In the Testament printed with special
privilege, and appointed to be read in the churches in the beginning of the
Queens ^^^. 1561.
M. that now reigns, it is even so, Christ Jesus: which must receive heaven
until the time that al things be restored. If you reply, that Beza translateth
it otherwise, you must understand, that Beza has no authority to make
scripture. For this is no translating, but a new forging and making. And Bezaes
rashness is so much the more reproveable, for that Bezaes master John Calvin
distiketh Calv. against M. B.
it. Who al^eit as favoring your opinion say, that the word of S. Peter may
bear such a sense, as you after Beza give; yet he confesses the word to be
indifferent to the other sense, which those English testaments render. The
manner of speech here used (says Calvin) is doubtful. Calvin in Act. ca. 3. v.
^^
For we may understand it, that Christ is contained in heaven: or else, that he
conteyneth and holds the heaven. Wherefore he wills his scholars not to
make stay sorupulously upon one word which may be taken in a double
signification. And therefore you are the more to blame, who make so great
stay, and artest upon it, and say that it proves most evidently Christ's body to
be in a certain place; and that with such restraint, as being in that one
certain place, it can not be in any other. For so your self describe and
define your certain place. And if you vvil take the pains to read the gloss
of M. Flacius Illy^icus (who for advauncing this new gospel has vv^^tren as
much as lightly any Protestant of this age) upon this place, he vvil tell you
that the words and sense which you and Beza geve, are quit opposite and
contrary to S. Peter's meaning. For whereas S. Peter's purpose is to preach to
the Jews the glory and power, the majesty and omnipotency of Christ; thus
to fasten him to one place, that he may not be in an other, is rather to note
in him a weakness and imbecillitie. So writes ^llyricus: To say, Illyric. in
A^. Apost. ^a. ^. 2^.
Christ is contained of the heaven (in such sort as after Beza, M. B. does) is
against the s^^pe of the Apostle, and should ^et fo^^b (...) the insirmitie
then the power and glory of Christ. For so of Angels, yea of devils it may be
s^^d* that they ^^^ r^^eived and contained in heaven; because the word Culum,
heaven* sometime in the scripture signifies the ^yer. So that this place of the
Acts, being in deed not so much taken o^^ of the Acts of the Apostles, as out
of the acts and co^^^ptions of Theodore Beza an Apostata, or some such lo^^
companion* proves no vvav^s Christ's body to be contained in one on^y place: so
far of is it from proving i^ most evidently* as M. B. oue^reacheth.

The last reason (^aith M. B) is this. Every humane b^ly is Page ^^^.
visible and palpable. Therefore Christ's is so. This proposition I prove by
Christ's own words Luc. 24. 39. Where to prove the verity of his body he
uses this argument taken from these two qualities, visible and palpable: as if
he would say; If I be visible and palpable, ye may be out of doubt, that I ^^^e
a true body. For as the Poet says, which Tertullian cites to this purpose:
Tangere enim and t^ngi nisi corpus nulla potestres. Of this he concludes that
this doctrine of Christ's real presence in the sacrament* may no ways stand
with the verity of Christ's body. This last argument albeit as the rest, so
this Calv. ^^^^itu. ^^b. 4. ca. 17. (...). ^9.
also be made by Calvin, yet is it much v^eaker then the rest. Our saviors
reason to prove the verity of his body and that he was not a spirit, is good
and forcible. For that, what soever is visible and palpable, is questionles a
body: and therefore this was a very sufficient probation, able to put the
Apostles out of doubt, that he had a true body, and a true body it was,
which he showed them. But whereas M. B. argues not as our savior did
affi^^^tively A^ argument of M. B* ^^ ^r^* (...).
to prove a body, but negatively to deny a body, his argument is vveake, and
our saviors words do no vvayes iustisie it, nor yet Tertullian, nor any wise
man either. For to exemplify in the like: If I make this argument: Such a one
(A. B.) is a Minister, and preaches heresy: ergo without al doubt he is an
heretic. This argument is good, taken from 2. qualities of a right heretic to
be a Minister, and to preach heresy. But yet if M. B. vvil turn it to the
negative, and say, such a one is no minister nether preaches heresy* ergo he
is no heretic: this argument is false, and M. B. him self vvil disprove it:
for that I am sure he vvil confess, many lay men and women are heretics,
who yet are no Ministers, nor have Cap. of the ministers.
their lawful vocation by the congregation (as in the Scottish communion book)
to preach heresy.

it repug^es directly against the articles of our belief. How so? Page ^^^.
For in our belief we profess that Christ ascended out of this earth into
heaven, where he fits at the right hand of the father, whence he shall come in
the last day to judge the world. This in deed is our beloef. But how repug^es
this directly to the presence of Christ in the sacrament? For that here page
^^^.
we see, that Christ has ^^eeted his dwelling which he had among us here in
the (...). He is ascended in to the heavens, where he ^^ts at the right hand of
god, and shall remain there according to the testimony of S. Peter, which I
cited out of the Acts, unto the last day. Let this stand for good, as we deny
it not, that Christ is ascended, that he sits in glory, that there he shall
remain, and thence he shall come to judge: what is the argument taken from any
of these parcels, which is able so directly to overthrow an other Ma^^^. ^^.
Ma^^* ^^. L^^. ^^. I^^^. ^. ^. C^^. ^^.
article of Christian faith (the true presence of Christ in the sacrament)
though not specially expressed in the Creed* yet in the new Testament expressed
more specially, then some principal articles of the Creed. The argument is
this: If he sit at the fathers right hand, and be to remain M. B. argument*
in heaven til the last day, as S. Peter sa is that he is contained in the
heavens unto the last day, then is he not corporally in the bread. And
therefore this opinion of real presence ^^ghts directly against the articles of
our belief, and the manifest place of scripture. And is this al? Then those
articles of the Creed make not any other new argument, but in effect and
substance are the self same with the words of the Acts: and therefore M. B.
might have spared this, but that he loves to multiply words, and make a show
of some new thing* of a second ^ort of argument, when the Page ^^^.
thing is stale, and differs nothing at al from his first sort of argument*
and both first and second is founded nether Ansvvered
upon any place of scripture, as has been declared, no^ article of belief, as
shall now appear, nor any authority of the church, or general Council, yea or
consent of the Protestants* but only upon a fantasy of Zuinglius and
Carolostadius and their sectaries framed to them selves, that Christ's body
being in heaven, can not possibly be in the sacrament, because forsooth a body
of man such as is Ihon Calvin, or Theodore Beza, can not be in two places at
once. As for this article of our belief of Christ's ascension, and sitting at
the right hand of god his father, it is so far from disprouing the real
presence in the sacrament, By Luther.
that it much more establishes it to any Christian, yea Luther. Tom. 7.
Defensio Verb^ru^^ ^a^a etc. ^ol. ^94.
to many Protestants. And Luther writes very flatly, though upon a wrong
ground, that we are bound to believe Christ's real presence in the sacrament:
cum scripturae and articali fidei constantissime id asseuerent: for that both
the scripture and articles of our faith (speaking of the self same which here
M. B. does) assure us thereof most constantly. And th^^ M. B. and those of his
sect think otherwise, it proceeds only hence (as writes Luther answering
this argument in Zuinglius and Occolampadius) for that they ^a^e a folish
Luther* ^bid. ^ol. ^^^.
and childish imagination of Christ sitting at his fathers right hand: as
though hard by God his fathers throne, Chr^^^ sat in a golden chair with a
goodly crown on his ^ead etc. For (says Luther) unless they thought thus
ignorantly and childishly of Gods right hand, they would never hereupon d^^y
the body of Christ to be present in the supper. For let us take Calv. against
M. B.
the meaning and explication of this article from Calvin him self, and see
what argument can be deduced thence to M. B. purpose. That Christ sits at
the right hand of ^i^ father (says Calvin) thereby we must understand, that he
is Calv. Ins^^^. l^^. ^. ^^. 16. number. ^^.
made Lord of heaven and earth, and that by his ascension ^^ took solemn
possession thereof, which he shall keep and continue until the last day. For so
the Apostle declares it* wh^^as he says, that the father has placed him at
his right hand Eph^s. ^. 2^. Philip. ^. ^.
above al principality* and power, and virtue, and domination, and al thing
not only in this world, but also in the ^ther: and that God the father has
subjected al things under his ^eet. We Ephesians. 4. ^^*
see then what is the meaning of these words* to wit, that al creatures both
celestial and terrestrial ho^o^ his divine majesty, are governed by his hand,
obey his will, and are subject to his Act. ^. ^^* and ^. ^^. H^br. ^. ^^.
power* And the Apostles have no other meaning, when they make so common
mention hereof* then that al things are at his commandment. This now being
the true sense of this article, let us draw thence M. B. his conclusion, which
M. B. argument.
must stand thus.

Christ sits at the right hand of his father, that is to say, he is made
lord of heaven and earth: God has placed him in supreme government over al*
and al things in heaven and earth he has subjected under him, so that there is
no creature, but is obedient to his commandment: that is in one word: He is
omnipotent.

Ergo he can not make his body present at once in two places, in heaven and in
the sacrament.

This is M. B. his argument: and this is that article of our belief, which so
directly destroys Christ's real presence with us. But vvil the reader see,
how M. B. while he labors to multiply his arguments, and disgrace the
Catholic faith, as contrary both to scripture, and the articles of our belief;
disgraceth him self, diminishes and quit marreth his own arguments, and
nothing impay^^th the Catholic faith, but rather establishes and confirms
it? Let the reader take once again a revew of that former text* Act. 3. 21.
which (as he says) proves Before page ^47.
most evidently Christ to be locally so bound to one place in heaven* that he
can not be present in the sacrament. For if we shall geve credit to Calvin
(who in this Ansvvered by Calvin.
^ase deserves more credit then M. B. both for the rare qualities and singular
excellency of the man, as also for that he justifies his exposition by many
places of scripture, al truly alleged, against M. B. his one corrupted and
falsified piece of a sentence, expounded by no authority besides his own)
those words of S. Peter, which M. B. so ^oast^th of, have no other meaning and
sense, then has Christ's sitting at his fathers right hand. Which being al
one, then must that dreadful argument, which he so magnified ( as most
evidently binding Christ to a certain place, so that he could not be in an
other) be framed as the former, thus:

S. Peter Act. 3. 21. says, Christ is omnipotent, and M. B. argument.
has al power in heaven and earth geven unto him. Therefore being in heaven,
he can not be present in the sacrament.

Calv. Instit^. lib. 4. ca. 17. number. 26. and in Admonitio. vltima ad
VVestphalum.
his later writings, either not at al, or seeldom and slightly urged that
article, when he disputed against his fellow. Protestants of this matter: but
rested cheeflly upon such texts of scripture (which in deed were a little more
to the purpose) as declare Christ's absence from the world and leaving it, as in
S. John, once or twice. But Christ in the Joan. 16. ^8. Other arguments
ansvvered. Joan. 14. ^6. Joan. 17. 11.
same places and cls where makes his meaning plain enough, when he
declares, that by the world he means the state, condition, quality and
conversation usual in this world: in which sort he denied him self to be of
the world, when yet he remained in the world: and after his resurrection
when yet he talked with his disciples, signified he was not then in the
world: for that he Luc. 24. 44.
was not with his disciples in such vvorldly manner as he was before his
passion: and so nether such places albeit they carry some more face and
probability then this article of Christ's sitting at his fathers right hand,
any wh^^ impair the Catholic faith touching this sacrament. And thus
VVestphalus answers Calvin rightly. It is to VV^stphalus vbi supra. pa. 27^.
27^ Matthew. 2^. Joan. 14. How Christ is not in the world.
be marked (says he) that Christ tells his disciples, he will leave the
world, not that he will leave his church. For how could he leave the church, who
promised to be present with the faithful for ever? Therefore the meaning of
these and such like places is, that Christ is not so in the world, as for ^^^
sake he was in the world 33. years, poor, afflicted, mortal. In this sense we
truly understand Christ's words: Me your shall not Mat. 26. 11.
have always with you. For we have not Christ as in the time of his
dispensation be lived with his disciples, and as they desired to have Christ
always present in the external conversation of this life Visibly as then he
conuerseth not with us, he eats not, he drinks not, he sleeps not, he
needs not to be enterteyned in our house or table, or to be anointed, as
Simon and Mat. 26. Luc. 7. Joan. 1^.
Lazarus enterteyned him, and a certain woman anointed him. The Apostles
desired to have in Christ carnal comforts and earthly benefits. So Christ was
not to remain with them in the world. So it was convenient for them, that he
should depart, should forsake the world, and not be in the world. In this sense
the Apostle Paul says that he knows no 2. Cor. ^. ^6.
man, no not Christ, according to the flesh. But these places and al other of
like effect, conclude no more then we grant, that Christ is not in the
Eucharist after a wordly manner, VVestphalus vbi supr. page 274.
according to philosophical and earthly properties of a body, as is to be
circumscribed and shut up in a place, and such like qualities of this mortal
and worldly life. But yet truly he is with us in his power and majesty; and
most specially in the boly supper, and that in his flesh and blud according to
his own word.

Other arguments against the real presence ansvvered.
The Argument.
Five other arguments made against the real presence, are answered. It is not
necessary, that al such things be present in the sacrament, or administration
of the sacrament, as are signified by bread and wine the material parts
thereof.

How it is horrible wickedness to eat Christ's flesh: and how therefore such
speech is understood mystically and spiritually, yet without hindering the real
presence, but rather confirming it.

CHAP. 19.
The effect of the sacrament is spiritual. ^. Argument. pa. 153.
But of a corporal presence no spiritual effect can ever ^^^^. So this corporal
presence must ay tend to a corporal end, which is directly contrary to the end
why the sacrament was instituted. This argument is more meet for a Jew then a
Christian. Answer.
It is as good against Christ's real incarnation, death and passion, as against
the sacrament. For if a corporal presence of Christ can work no spiritual
effect, then nether did his incarnation any good, nor death, nor passion. The
next. If the bread ^e changed in to the body of Christ, th^^ ^. Argument.
this sacrament wants a sign which is to nurrish vscorporally, as the body
of Christ does spiritually. But the accidents cannot nurrish vscorporally. This
argument is false in even^ Answers many.
part and parcel, and flat repugnant to the last. For(...) Christ's corporal
presence can not work any spiritual effect, what need we to have bread to
signify that? And if Before, page 264. 165. ^6^, etc.
Christ's body being present can not nurrish spiritually, much less can it
absent, as by M. B. his diverse reasons and similitudes we have been before
instructed. Secondarily, ^
the sign in the sacrament which he and his fellows most urge, which is to
move the external senses, more properly is found in the external accidents then
Substance of bread not necessary to the sacrament.
the internal substance, which no man can see, and therefore can not be moved
with the sight thereof by his eye to inform his mind of Christ the spiritual
bread. Wherefore as to a sacrament is required only, that there be an external
sign representing the internal gift, so this is fully don by the external
figure alone: as the brazen Number. 21. 9. Joan. 3. 14.
serpent in the old testament was a sacrament of Christ, and very fully and
sufficiently represented him, albeit in that were no true substance and nature
of a serpent, but only the external shape. Thirdly I demand, where finds 3
M. B. in all the Evangelists, in S. Paul, in Christ's words, that this
sacrament was appointed to signify spiritual nurriture? which was in deed
appointed to nurrish spiritually to life eternal. Again, it is false that the
accidents 4
in the sacrament do not nurrish* and true it is, that even in ordinary food,
meat and drink does nurrish by reason and mean of the accidents. Furthermore,
as the fathers 5
teach us, that to the sacrament is required bread for this signification of
spiritual nurriture, so the same fathers tell us, and so does S. Paul him self,
though not so plainly, 1. Cor. 10. 17.
that the sacramental bread signifies our mystical union and conjunction one
with an other. Our Lord (says August. in Ioa^. tract. 26
S. Austin) commended to us his body in those things which of many are made
one. Of many wheat corns is made the bread, of many grapes is made the
wine: which is also Cypr. lib. 1. epist. 6.
the similitude of S. Cyprian, and very largely prosecuted in the English and
Scottish communion, where thus the brothers and sisters singe.

And that we should not yet forget.
What good he to us wrought
A sign Christ left our eyes to tell
that he our bodies bought:
in bread and wine here visible etc.
Which signification is there artificially and Rhetorically thus dilated,

As once the corn did live and grow,
and was cut down with since;
And thresshed out with many stripes,
out from his husk to drive: ^^^ ^^^^.

And as the mil with violence
did tear it out so small etc.
And as the oven with fire hot
did close it up in heat etc.
So was the Lord in his ripe age
cut down by cruel death.
Again.

And as the grapes in pleasant time
are pressed very sore: (a pitiful case)
And plucked down, when they be ripe,
And let to grow no more:
So Christ his blud out pressed was etc.
Thus much for each part in several: now for conclusic^ what both these parts
jointly signify:

And as the corns by unity
in to one loaf is knit;
So is the Lord and his whole Church
Though he in heaven sit.
As many grapes make but one wine,
So should we be but one
In faith and love etc.
These significations and more be in the sacramental bread and wine of the
English and Scottish Communion. And yet as I suppose nether the English not the
Scottish ministers think it necessary, that when they minister the
communion, there be present in the congregation, reaping, and thresshing, and
grinding, and baking, and so forth: nether yet that in their cup being made of
wine or ale, there be many ale corns or many grapes; or in the bread, many
wheat corns, to signify the unity of the lord with the congregation, as also
the unity of the brethren and sisterne one with an other in faith and love:
but it is counted sufficient, that to the matter of the sacrament these things
were requisite, before it could be made bread or wine. If he thus think and
answer (as he must of necessity) then he answers him self, that it
suffiseth this sacrament in the Catholic church to be made of bread and wine,
which signify spiritual nurriture, though after consecration the substance of
nether remain, which yet nurrish even then sufficiently, to perform that
which his argument requires.

Finally, this argument is condemned by John Calvin 6
him self, and the whole consistory of Geneva. For M B^^rg^me^t ansvvered by
the co^sistorie of Geneva.
whereas this man argues, that we have no sacrament, because we want a
sign, if the substance of the bread be changed, although that notwithstanding
we reteyne al properties, qualities, effects and operations of bread: Calvin
with his consistory (as before is noted) holds the Before* page ^9. 60.
sacrament to be perfect and absolute, though there be no bread at al, though
there want both substance and qualities of bread; al shape, form and nature
of bread and Geneva communions without bread ^^ wine.
wine both internal and external. And whereas against that opinion or
licentious dispensation, there was objected (belike by some minister of M. B.
his conceit) this argument which here he opposes: the Consistory answers
very gravely, This analogy or signification Beza in epist. Theolog. ^^.
of bread made of many graynes, and wine of many grapes to declare our mutual
conjunction, although it be not to be contemned, yet nether is it so precisely
to be urged, but that it may suffice us to testify that conjunction and faith
by like signs in general, by other meat and drink. If then the Geneva
brethren may have a very perfect sacrament without any kind of bread and
wine, ^ther in substance or accident; M. B. his reason proceeds of small wit
in denying us a sacrament, who reteyne the formet and al necessary properties
of bread, su^ficie^t fully to signify: although according to Christ's express
word, we believe the substance of bread to be changed in to the substance of
a more celestial and ^^^^. ^.
divine bread which came from heaven.

Thirdly (says M. B.) if there were such a wonderful 3. Argument. page 154.
thing as they speak of, in this sacrament, there would have been plain
mention made of it in the scripture. What playner mention can you require,
then This is my body, the Sea before, ca. 1. ^^ ca. ^. number. ^.
self same which shall be delivered for you? This is my blud of the new
testament, the same which shall be shed for the remission of sins, for the
redemption of the world. Can M. B. with al his study devise words more
plain, more effectual, more significant?

Fourthly, he much troubles him self to find the verity 4 page 155.
of this proposition, This bread is my body, whether it be true before the
words spoken, or after etc. I answer, first let him set down a truth, and not
a falsitie, and after propose his difficulty; and then either it shall be
satisfied, or we will acknowledge his deep and unanswerable subtilitie. But for
ought appears in our testaments, English Latin, or Greek, Christ never used
any such speech; Christ never said, This bread is my body, but (as Before* page
40. ^^^. ^34.
has been declared before) Christ so uttered his words, as possibly they can
not yield that proposition. Let M. B. mark well the words in the Evangelists,
and conferte them with his grammar rules either in Greek or Latin: and if he
can make Hoc to agree with panis, or Hic with vinum, then he may chance to
trouble us. Otherwise, except he and his vvil take upon them to make us a new
Grammar, a new Latin and Greek language (which they may better do and with
more reason then make us a new faith, new sacraments, new Theology as they
have done) he shall not find in all the testament* that ^^^^ Christ said, This
bread is my body: This wine is my blud.

Austin says lib. 3. de doctrina Christiana, cap. 16. To eat Christ's flesh
and drink his blud* seems to command a wickedness or mischief. Therefore it
is a figurative speech, 3
whereby we are commanded to communicate with Christ's sufferings, and with
gladness to lock up in perpetual memory, that the flesh of our Lord was
crucified and wounded for us. For otherwise (as the same Austin makes mention)
it were more Lib. ^. contra aduersd^g^. and prop^^^.
horrible to eat the flesh of Christ really, then to murder him; to drink
his blud then to shed his blud. S. Austins words answer them selves, and so
does S. Austin in other places: and even here the second place answers the
first, because it notifieth, how far forth this speech is figurative. Only this
may be added to the first, that when S. Austin says, that to eat Christ's
flesh is to communicate with Christ's sufferings and to lock up in perpetual
memory, that Christ's flesh was crucisied and wounded for us, he means no
other thing then S. Paul does, and the church also, 1. Cor. 11.
when they vvil al Christians, which either offer the mystical sacrifice, or
receive it, to do it in remembrance of Memory of Christ's death si^^^^th vvil
vvit^ his r^al presence.
Christ's bitter passion, wherein his flesh was truly wounded and crucified
for us, as here it is not. And that S. Austin thus meant, and never meant by
locking up Christ's death in perpetual memory, to shut out this real sacrifice
and sacrament, which most directly and perfitly continues that death and
bluddy sacrifice in perpetual memory, let S. Austin him self be judge in a
number af other places, whereof some heretofore have been, other hereafter
shall be cited. For this present this one may serve: The Jews Aug. contra
Faus^^^ Manich. lib. 20 ca. 1^.
(says he) in their sacrifices of beasts, which they offered after diverse
sorts and fashions, as was connenient for so great a matter; practiced a fore
signification or representation of that sacrifice which Christ offered on the
cross. Wherefore now the Christians also celebrate and keep the memory of
the same sacrifice past. How? by words only or cogitations? or eating bread
and drinking wine, as in the Scottish, and Real sacrifice of the church.
Geneua, and English supper? No: but by a holy oblation and communication or
receiving of the same body and blud of Christ; Peracti eiusdem sacrificij
memoriam celebrant sacrosanct^ oblatione and participatione corporis and
sanguinis etc. This S. Austin thought the best way to lock up Christ's
sacrifice and death in perpetual memory. And this perpetual memory of that
bluddy sacrifice stands well, and is best preserved by the churches mystical
sacrifice and real presence of Christ therein according to S. Austins teaching,
and the Christian faith of S. Austins time. Now concerning the horriblenes of
eating Christ's flesh How it is ^^^^ible to ^ate Christ's flesh.
which S. Austin mentions in the other place; True it is, the vulgar and
usual understanding of eating Christ's flesh and drinking his blud, is horrible.
For it is in deed th^^ which the Caph^ nai^es were scandalized at: that is to
^ate it cut out in sundry portio^s, and after sod or roasted, ^li^^ vel assa* et
secta me^bratim, as says S. Cypria^. They understood Cyp^* d^ cana. August.
tractat. ^7. in ^^an. in psalm. 9^. and de ver bis Apostols. S^rmo. 2.
Christ's words (says S. Austin) of his flesh cut in to pieces and joints,
sicut in cadavere dilaniatur, aut in macello vendi^^^, as in the butcherie a
quarter of beef or mutton is cut out from the whole sheep or ox, and so sold
to be dressed and eaten. and so far forth Christ's words are mystical and
figurative, and not to be taken as they lie. For so according to vulgar speech
and the proper use of eating and drinking, to ^ate Christ's divine flesh and
drink his blud, were horrible impiety. But to ^ate Christ's flesh, as the
Catholic church has ever taught and practiced it, is no more horrible for
true Christians, then for M. B. and his fellow ministers to ^ate their bread and
drink their wine. And if he had with him but a little consideration, he might
remember, that at this present in the Catholic church over al Christendom, and
so likewise for these thousand years at lest, (al which time he will graun^ ^
suppose that the real presence has been believed) there have been in Christian
realms, men and women of as tender stomakes as is him self or his wise
either, who yet had never any horror in eating sacramentally the true body of
our savior, for that (as vvriteth S. Cyril the Cy^il. mystag^g. oration. 4.
ancient bi^^hop of Jerusalem) it is not eaten in his own sorme: but Christ
most mercifully in specie panis dat nobis corpus, in specie vini d^t nobis
sanguinem: in the form of bread geveth us his body, in the form of wine
geveth us his Real pres^^^^
blud: and that to this very end, as write the same S. Cyril, S. Ambrose,
Theophilact and others, because we should not account it horrible; because I
say it should be no horror to us, in such di vine, sweet and mystical sort to
eat the body of our Lord and god. S. Cyrils words are: Cy^^^. apud S. Them. ^^
L^^. ^^.
That we should not abhor the flesh and blud set on the holy altar; God
yelding to our infirmity, converteth the bread and wine in to the verity of
his own body and blud, which yet reteyne still the form of bread and wine.
Thus it is done by Christ's merciful dispensation says S. Ambrose, Ambros. d^
sacr^m. lib. 4. ca. 4. T^eophila. in Ma^^. 14 and in Matt. 26.
ne horror cruoris sit. Christ condescending to our infirmity (says
Theophilact) turns the bread and wine, in to his own body and blud: but yet
reteyneth the form of bread and wine still. And thus much does S. Austin him
self signify in the place corruptly cited by M. B. For thus stand S. August.
^^. 2. ca. 9. contra aduersa^. legis and prophet. Fid^li cord ^^ ^re.
Austins words. The mediator of God and man Christ Jesus geveth us his flesh
to eat, and his blud to drink, which we receive with faithful heart and mouth:
albeit it may seem (to profane men, in which number M. B. puts him self
by this very objection) a more loathsome or horrible thing to ^ate man's flesh
then to kill a man, and drink man's blud then to spil it. In which words S.
Austin no vvayes improveth the real communicating of CHRIST'S flesh, but in
plain terms avoweth it, confessing that we receive it both with heart and
mouth, both spiritually and corporally. And albeit this seem absurd to gross
fleshly ministers, and brutish Capharnaites, who when they hear us speak of
eating Christ's flesh, conceive straight way that we eat it as the
Anthropophagi and Canibals ^ate man's flesh: yet because Christ has a divine,
secret, hid, and spiritual way to communicate it, other then such earthly
gospellers and flesh-wormes can imagine, whereby truly and really, yet not
bluddily and butcherly Christ imparteth that his flesh: we confess frankly
says S. Christ ^^^^^ved corpor^^^*
Austin, that we receive that flesh, even with our mouth and corporally,
albeit to men that understand it not, it may seem a more lothsom and horrible
thing to eat a man then to kill a man. Where, vvithal M. B. may remember him
sel^ answered even by S. Austin (whom he so busely allegeth against the
Catholic faith) for one false assertion which he so confidently avouched, vz,
that the body of Christ was never promised to be received corporally, or as he
expresses it, was never promised to our mouth. For Before page ^^2. Fideli
cord and ^re. Aug. ^p^st. ^^^. ^^. 6.
by this very place which him self so much esteems, it is plain, that
Christians then believed, that they received Christ's body not only by faith in
their heart, but also etternally by their mouth. As also in other places he
says that it was ordained by the holy ghost, that the body of our lord should
be received in the mouth of a Christian man before any other meats: Vt corpus
dominicu^ intraret in os Christiani etc. that Christian me^ should receive with
their mouth that blud with which they were redeemed, the same which issued
^orth of Christ's ^ide: and therefore doubtless Christ so promised, o^ Aug.
contra ^ austum, lib. ^3. ^^. ^^. and ^^.
else they could never have so received, nether would the holy Ghost ever so
have ordained.

Answer to places of scripture alleged for proof that Christ's words spoken
at his last supper must be understood tropically.
The Argument.
Five places of scripture cited by M. B. by comparison of which with Christ's
words used at his last supper, he would prove these to be figurative. The
difference between Christ's words, and those other.

Those places are examined in particular, especially that of ^. Paul, The
rock was Christ: and withal is showed how falsely or unfitly they are compared
with Christ's words.

If it were granted, that these 5. were al figurative, yet from them to
infer the like of Christ's words, is most absurd and ridiculous.

The principal of these places, suggested to Zuinglius by a sprite in the
night, is answered effectually by Luther: in whose words is implied also an
answer to all the rest.

CHAP. 20.
All this notwithstanding page 156*
they hold on still and say, the words of the supper ought to be taken properly.
So that it appears that of very malice to the end only they may gainsta^d the
truth, they will not acknowledge this (hoc est corpus meu^) to be a sacrame^tal
speech. What worthy reasons you have brought, for which you so triumph, let
the reader judge by that which has been alleged. Verily, except peevish
assertions of your own authority, bare words without any matter, manifest
falsities without al face or show of truth, even against your own principal
doctors and masters, must stand for Theological arguments and demonstrations;
we have yet heard little stuff able to withdraw a mean Catholic from his
faith to Zuinglianisme or Caluinisme. And here to the untruths before told ye
add one other, that we acknowledge not this speech of Christ ( hoc est corpus
meum) to be a sacramental speech. For so we acknowledge it now, and so did in
the church, before you A sacrame^tal speech.
or any of your sectmaisters were borne, as by which words the sacrament
was first made and instituted, and by which it is at this present made and
conseciated: and there is no Catholic writer, scholema^ or other* but he
co^sesseth D. Thom. part. ^. quest. 60. artic. 7.
these words to be properly sacramental, as which import the nature of this
sacrament most essentially. If by the vvoid sacramental, you mean tropical,
figurative* significative, as appears by that which after ensues, then as I
vvish the reader still to remember your double dealing and iugling, who as
ashamed of your own doctrine still hide and cover your self with this
ambiguo^s Before* page page 120. M. B. il argument to prove Christ's words
tropical. Page 1^6. ^57.
phrase, which in the beginning, and after, you condemn as invented by the
folly of man against the wisd^^ of God: so we utterly deny that these words of
Christ are to be taken tropically or figuratively, and require you once to geve
us a Theological proof thereof. And th^^ you undertake here, and perform it
in this sort.

For they are compelled (say you) will they nil they, in ot^^ speeches of like
sort to acknowledge a figure, as a
Genes. 17. 10. Circumcision is called the covenant, that is* a figure of the
covenant: and c
Exodus 12. 11. the lamb is called the passeo^er* and l
Matthew. 20. 28. the cup is called his blud: and m
Luc. 11. 20. the cup is called the new testament: and n
1. Cor. 10. 4. the rock is called Christ. Al these speeches are sacramental
(that is figurative and tropical) and receives a kind of interpretation* yet
they maliciously deny it in these words Hoc est corpus mea^, which they are
compelled to grant in the rest: especially where S. Paul calls Christ the
rock. This argument is to the purpose. For if you can prove these words of
Christ to be taken tropically, then you directly refel that which the
Catholics believe, both in general touching the sacrament, and in special
touching these words: which as we believe to be sacramental, as has been
said, so we utterly deny to be figurative ortropical, and affirm them to be
taken literally, as the words signify; and therefore this your argument to
the contrary is to be examined a little more diligently. And first of al I must
tell you, that where you say these speeches which here you recite, are of like
sort with that of Christ, this is one gross falsitie to begin vvithal. Then
where you say, we are compelled to acknowledge a figure in them, as one way
it is true, so in the sense which you mean, it is false. That al these are
not of one sort with Christ's words, nor any one of Difference between
Christ. words and those other.
them (as you take them) it is evident to the eye. For when we say;
circumcision is the covenant: a lamb is the passover: the cup, that is (as you
mean it) the material c^p, which Christ held in his hand, is Christ's blud:
the same cup is the new testament: the rock, that is a hard stone is Christ: in all these propositions, one diverse and clean different nature is attributed to
an other, which if we take literally, as the words lie, includes a
contradiction, and the later distroyeth the former: as much as if a man would
say, black is white. for in so saying, he says black is not black. For in
like manner, the material rock can not be Christ, because a creature can not be
the creator: the cup, of earth, ^in, silver, or gold, can not be the blud of
God or man, for so could it not be a material cup, whose nature, substance and
essence is so clean different* that who so says, this is blud, he denies it
to be gold or silver, and who affirms it to be silver, of nece^si^ie in that
affirmation includes the contrary negation, that it is not blud. And therefore
al such parabolical speeches, whereof the scripture is full (and M. B. might
have found many more as good as these) by the very force of the words, and
meaning of the first speaker, and consent of al hearers, conteyne a figure, and
require so to be expounded: a number whereof, Zuinglius and Oecolampadius
heaped together in the beginning of this heresy, to prove that which M. B.
entendeth. If Christ had said of material bread or wine. This wine is my blud:
This bread is my body, then I confess the speeches of Christ, and those pa.
40. 1^^. 124.
alleged by M. B. had been of like sort. But Christ spoke far otherwise, as is
manifest by that which has been declared before. And the plain sense of
Christ's speech ca^ not be better conceived, then if we confer them to his
doing at the mariage-feast in Cana of Galilee, if when Joan ^.
he had caused the water pots to be filled and presented to the steward he had
said, h^c est vinum, this is wine.

Which example I allege the rather, for that S. Cyril Cyril. Ca^t^^, 4.
mys^ag^g. de Eu^harist.
the ancient bishop of Jerusalem, applies it to like purpose: In Can^ of
Galilee (says he, Christ turned water in to wine. And ha^ not we think him
worthy of credit that he ^^^u^geth wine in to his blud, cum ipse t^m
asseuer^^^r diuerit, Real pros^^^
when as he so ^r^cisely and peremptorily has said, that it is his blu^* As
likewise when he has pronounced of that bread (being consecrate) This is my
body, who can ever doubt of it? So that these speeches be of like sort, This
vvate^ turned and altered, is wine: This bread consecrated is my body: This
wine consecrated is my blud. Or else of the first, This is wine: of the second,
This is my body: of the third, This is my blud, which are Christ's own words,
though the sense of that ^i^st and this second be al one.

Examination of M. B. examples in particular. a
minister, and note the infinite inequality between most of these speeches,
and that of Christ's. That circumcision was a figure of the covenant, we
interpret so, both for the reason now given, and also because the scripture
expressly so teaches. But the scripture nether ^aith, bread or Genesis 17. 11.
wine is Christ's body and blud, nor yet that bread is the sign of the one, or
wine a sign of the other. That the lamb is called the passover, is a text of
Zuinglius wicked making, and M. B. his foolish imitating. For in the place
quoted, there is no such matter, whereof I shall more conveniently speak by
and by. Nether find I that in S. Matthew. 20. 28. the cup is called Christ's blud.
All that I find Mat. 20. 27. ^. ^^.
in that place, is this: He that will be first among you, shall be your servant:
even as the son of man is not come to be ministered unto, but to minister, and
to geve his life a redemption for many. In the same chapter Christ utters
his death and suffering by a parabolical phrase of drinking Matthew. 20. ^ 2^.
his cup (which is the only cup mentioned there) but this is nothing to the
purpose. In S. Matthew, cap. 26. v. 2^. (which I think M. B. means) as Beza
translateth the text, the cup is called Christ's blud. But that text is a wicked
Christ's words corrupted by the Caluinists.
text of Bezaes making, and not of S. Matthews putting: and Beza as gilty in
conscience, vvarneth the reader before hand, that men vvil cry out upon his
sacrilegious boldness for so corrupting the text. Which although Beza in Matthew.
ca. ^^. v. ^^.
he go about to excuse, but straungely and Protestantlike, by heaping one
s^crilege upon an other, yet (to omit that for brevities sake) both Beza
plays the part of a horrible corrupter in so translating, and M. B. of either
a bold and wicked heretic, or (at lest) of an ignorant heretic in following
Beza, and in telling us, that S. Matthew calls the cup Christ's blud, though
in a good sense that is true, in Bezaes sense it is stark false: but how
soever it be, it was never in one sense or other so uttered by S. Matthew. For
S. Matthews words, (...), Hic est sanguis meus, This is my blud, in the second
place, can no more import the material cup to be called blud, then (...), Hoc
est corpus me^, This is my body in the first place, import, that Christ called
the material table his body. That S. Luke calls the cup the new Testament, m
is a figure I grant, but little to M. B. his help, or justifying his figure.
For in what sense can he make the cup to signify the new testame^t*VVhat
resemblance or representation is there between the one and the other? Therefore
questionles by the cup S. Luke means not Christ's blud in the (...).
the material cup, but the thing contained in the cup. And herein I grant is a
figure; but a figure so vulgar, usual and common to al tongues and nations,
vulgata and trita omnibus linguis consuetudire loquendi, as Beza also Beza ibid.
confesses, that it little differs from a very proper and literal speech.
Which thing contained in the cup whereas S. Luke determines and restreyneth
by words most Luc. ^^. (...) v^p. Hic est calix qui pro v^bi^ e^^^nditur.
pregnant, and effectual, and irre^utable, to Christ's own blud, then this is
the proposition, which M. B. vvil have to stand for one of his figures: This
contained in the chalice, that is, This blud of Christ is the new testament.
And now what figure finds he here to serve his turn? That the cup is placed
for the thing contained in the cup? This is nothing to his purpose. Nether has
it any resembla^ce with the rest of his examples, and his words in this place
intend it not. That the cup, vz, Christ's blud contained in the cup, is the new
testament, is this his figurative and tropical speech? VVil he thus expound it,
that the blud of Christ figureth, signifies* or represents the new
testament? Christ^ blud the new (...).
This in deed he must say. But in so sayng he speaks wickedly, heretically,
and damnably: and quit disanulleth, makes void, and disgraceth the blud of
Christ, the blud of the new testament. And the blud of an ox, of a goat, of a
calf in the old law, may serve M. B. for his figurative and tropical speech.
For so that was tropically in deed the new testament, which it signified and
figured. But the blud of Christ is more truly and properly, and after a more
divine sort called the new testament, either for that it is the special and
principal legacy and gift bestowed on us by Christ in his new testament: or
because it is the very founteyne of grace, which is likewise given properly in
the new Testament, and whereby we have right to glory and life eternal,
which is the consequent of grace and effect thereof in the new testament. For
this and such like cause, is Christ's blud (as in the chalice) called the new
testament: the confirmation of which testament consisted in the death of
Christ, and effusion of the same blud on the cross. As for figuring, and
signifying, that is no cause of this appellation. And therefore to say, This is
the new testament, that is, This signifies or figureth the new testament, is
to make the blud of Christ no better then the blud of a beast: which is a
proposition fitter for a beast or a minister (who in so speaking little
dissereth from a beast) then for a Christian man. If against this M. B. vvil
still cavil to find out here a figure; let him take this for a final answer,
that this speech of S. Luke most effectual and significant, though not so
proper or common, is properly expressed by S. Matthew and S. Mark, This is my
blud of the new testament; which is a sufficient commentary to expound S.
Matthew. 26. Marc. 14.
Luke, and quite excludes al his tropes and figures: except he allege as
plain and sufficient authority to make those words of Christ (This is my
body) tropical, whereunto he reserreth al these his examples. The last example
of S. Paul calling Christ a rock, is a figure like n
to this former. A figure there is one way, but not as M. B. means. That the
word rock is applied to Christ, is How the rock was Christ.
a metaphore and figure: as when he is called a lion, a lamb* a door, a vine,
etc. But where he says, that we are specially compelled here to grant his
sacramental, that is, his tropical and significative speech more then in the
rest, surely herein he is very specially deceived. For when S. Paul says,
the rock was Christ, we are not compelled to expound him thus: the rock
signified Christ, but the true sense may be the literal, that the rock was
Christ. S. 1. Cor. 10. 4.
Paul's words are: They drunk of the spiritual rock, which followed them: and
the rock was Christ. That rock which followed the Hebrews in the desert,
which guided, directed and sustained them, can not probably be expounded of a
material rock (although some of the Hebrew Rabbines have such an imagination)
but of the spiritual rock, which spiritual rock did not signify Christ, but
was Christ. And thus S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, Theodoretus and others expound
it: and the rock in S. Paul referred to the word spiritual, which goes
next before, justifies this plain and literal interpretation. And so nether
this special place, which M. B. makes such account of, compels us to his
trope and figure.

And yet I must tell him besides for an overplus, that The Caluinists know not
what i^ m^ant by the rock literally.
he is to rash so specially and peremptorily to charge us with this place, as
though the case were plain and clear, and we must needs confess, that here
the rock signifies Christ spiritually: whereas them selves are not yet
agreed, what the rock here is literally, nor what it means or signifies
historically. Which literal and historical sense must first be resolved upon,
before he can so specially press and bear us down with his spiritual sense
and figuring. The common exposition, namely of Zuinglius, Oecolampadius, Peter
Martyr etc. is, that the word rock here signifies the material stony rock:
and so Calvin in his Institutions and Commentary of this Calv Institu^^. 4.
ca. 17. number. ^1. 2^. Calv. in 1. Corinthians. ca. 10 v. 4. Bez: in ^^^de^^ lecum.
place affirms. Howbeit in the same place within ten lines after,
considering better the Apostles word that this rock f^lowed them thorough
the desert (which can not be expounded of a material stone) he goes an other
way to work (and so does Beza after him) and t^keth it for a thing evident
and notorious; that by the word ro^ke is understood the course of the water,
which never forsook that people so long as they were in the vvilderne^*
which is a notorius lie, and refuted by the story in the chapter immediately
following. For there again the people Number. ca. ^1. v. 5. 16. 17.
want water, and for supply thereof, have by Gods ordinance not a rock, but
a well provided for them. And therefore VVestphalus justly names Calvin a most
vain Insulsissimus blatero. Martyr Comment in 1. Cor. ca. 10. VVestphalus in
Apologia etc. pa. 55.
pratler, for that in his last book against him, he uses this so false an
exposition, which also P. Martyr though a Caluinist and a great frind of
Calvin, disproueth and condemns. Insulsissimus blatero (says VVestphalus)
blaterat Paulum vocare petram, non duriciem saxi, sed profluentem inde potum.
Whereof so much the more appears the vanity of M. B. who so specially and
hastily requires us to yield to his spiritual and tropical sense; when his
masters as yet can not agree upon the ground and foundation: which must be
first laid, before they can frame any necessary argument thence to compel or
move others.

Now for a little more manifestation of the truth, and to discover the weakness
of this man, let us resolve backvvards and undo all this, and grant as much as
M. B. requires, that in these 5. examples there is a figurative speech; and
that the verb est, is, must be expounded tropically for significat, does
signify: Circumcision signifies M. B. fond argument.
the old testament, or is a figure of the old testament: the rock is a figure
of Christ: the cup is a figure of the new testament, and so in the rest. What
vvil M. B. conclude hereof? Ergo in Christ's words we must use like figurative
and tropical exposition? and they do maliciously who deny it? Is this his
argument? Has he thus learned to assault his adversaries? Then let him geve us
leave to make the like argument thus* The name of ministers The name of
Ministers.
in the scripture signifies ministers of the devil, or such ministers as put
their helping hand to the crucifying of Christ. For so the word minister
signifies in S. Paul, 2. Corinthians. 11. 15. in S. John, ca. 18. v. 12. 18. 22.
ca. 19. 6. in S. Mark. 14. 54. 65. and S. Matthew. 26. 58. Ergo when M. B.
speaks of the minister, who breaking bread and dividing wine in the
Scottish congregation; the word minister must be taken for a minister of the
devil, one who joins with Pilate, Caiphas, and the adversaries of Christ to
crucify him: and it is of very Before. page 367.
malice, and for mere contradictio^, to the end only that they may gainstand
the truth, if M. B. and his felow-ministers deny this consequent: especially
whereas they are compelled to grant this to be the signification of the word
minister, not in one only place of S. Paul, 2. Cor. 11. (whereas with one
only place of his 5. M. B. can necessarily by his own judgment charge us) but
in every one of 5. places and more to quoted here. For nether he nor his are
able to deny, but the term minister has this only and precise signification
in every one of these places. By this argument which is of the same mould and
form with his (and much better for the matter, because he can take exception
against no one of my examples, as I have against most of his) let him guess
what pith is in his own argument. For albeit I make no doubt, but that he and
his fellow* ministers are in deed the very ministers of Satan, and professed
enemies of Christ for their only schism (to omit their sundry detestable
heresies) as S. Aug. epist. 153. ^^ 16^ Contra epist. Parmenian. lib. 1. ca. 4.
and lib. 2. ca. 11. lib. 3. ca* 1. 2. and c.
Austin in whole chapters and treatises shows: yet upon this argument so to
conclude, were foolish and ridiculous, because an other by the like argument
might conclude them to be honest men: for that in diverse other places, the
term minister (though never in such sense as the word is used in the Scottish
and English co^gregations, that is, for an Ecclesiastical office and degree
above a Note.
Deacon) signifies an honest ministry both in the men and in the office.

the lamb is called the passover c
Exodus 12. 11. I have hitherto differred, because the lies much in it, and it
deserves both special examination and special remembrance: and the ground of
that objection comes not from M. B but from a more profound doctor: and
therefore I vvil also borow my answer from a doctor his equal. Zuinglius
vvriteth of him self, that when he labored to plant his Zuinglian heresy
(that which M. B. defends) in Zurich* and to that end disputed ^^in^l. Tom.
^. in subsidi^ de ^^^^ ar^st. so. ^49.
as M. B. does, that est, is, in Christ's words This is my body, must needs
stand for significat, does signify, which he went about to prove by M. B.
his argument, for that in sundry places of scripture, as The sild is the world
Matthew. ij. Matthew. ^^.
The seed is the word of God: Tie envious man is the devil etc. the verb est,
is must thus be expounded; and reply was made by the common ^otarie (for the
disputation was in the Senate ^^wse) that the case was nothing like, for ^^
Sena^^^ ^^^^tor^^ns.
that in parables, words are not taken properly: but it is otherwise in
sacrements: this answer to ^^^bled Zuinglius, that (as he vvriteth of him
self) t^^^^h ^e much beat his brain hereupon, yet he knew ^o^^^^ Zuinglius in
^^i^st. d by a ^igh^-sprite.
to lose this I not: Multum capi voluere and cogitare, and ri^^l simile poteram
reperi^e says he. Being thus vexed and pe^plexed, ^e went to bed. At
midnight, as he was last a sleep, there came to him a helper, a pion^pter
(whether Monitor. Albus an ^^er sucrit, nihal m^mi^^.
he were a Saint or a devil, black or white, when he wrote the story, he
remembered not) who thus spoke to him: quin ign^ue res^ondes qued est Exodus 12.
11. est enim ph^se, id est, transitus de^i^s: Why thou lazy lorrel answer^st
^how not (by this text of M. B.) the lamb is the passe^^er. Exodus 12. 11. It
follows in Zuinglius. Protinus ^^perge^^^, ^ lecto exili^, lo^^m circun^sticio
etc. Forthwith I a^ ^^^d ^^^ of my sleep* I leapt out of my bed, I looked out
the place, I ^isputed thereof according to my ability before all the multitude,
and that sati^fied them al. Albeit the vani^ie of Zuinglius argum^t suggested
by this sprite of darkness, draw ^^^m Ephesians. ^. 1^.
this one place, may easily appear by that which has been said (for if siem
the sense of a word so used in ^ or 6. places we can not necessarily conclude
the like sense in a seventh place, much less can we conclude so from the
sense of a word in one only place) yet because this special place suggested by
such a night-doctor, was so joyfully accepted by this patriarch of the
Sacramentarie heresy: and by this place especially, the city of Zurick
(which first of al, long before Geneva, openly received and professed this
heresy) was confirmed therein: let us learn of Martin Luther that reverend
father (as M. Fox Act. and monument. ^0. 70.
Fox terms him) Zuinglius his coa^os^le (but of greater learning far, and for
labor and vvriting to ^et forth this gospel triple o^ quad^^ple more famous
then Zuinglius) how deeply this argument is to be vvaiphed. Luther Luthers
answer to M. B. argument. 1 Luther. To^. 7. D s^nsio ^^r^^^um ^^^^. so. 38^.
answers it many vvays. 2. ^^ 3. of which I vvil briefly note, that if one
serve not for this so doughly an ob^ection, which M. B. so much accounts of
an other may. First, I may answer (says Luther) that Zuinglius M. B.)
pe^^erteth the scripture. For M^ses says not, Eat hastily: for it signifies
Phase, the Lords posseouer, but he says thus, Eat hastily. for it is the
Lords posseouer. If Zuinglius (M. B.) reply that this is the meaning: I bid him
prove that. For it is not plain, that Moses so means. And therefore now he
must take a new labor to prove this interpretation of this place in Moyse, no
less then before he was required to prove his like inter^retatio^ of the words
of the Supper. Children in schools are taught to answer such Sophistical
objections* with Nego c^^ equentiam, quia est petitio principij. His second
answer is to An other ans^vere. 2
the same effect. which I gave before. But because it co^teyneth also a
re^u^ation of M. B. his whole argument, and carries with it more gravity and
authority, when it comes from the mouth or pen of that reverend father, ^^
at man of God, that fist Evangelis^, sent from God to illuminate the whole
world, as our English congregation profes^eth, I vvil note it also. This it is.
Let us learn (says Ibi. so. ^^6.
Luther) to frame the like argument. I much doubt I am not able. it is so ^^l
of art and cunning. How be it for once I will geve the venture. And I will
undertake to prove that Sara or Lia the great mother of many children
(mat^ia^cha) rema^ned still a The pith of M. B. argument.
virgin after her child bearing. Which I prove thus. Luke writes that Marie
brought forth her son, and remained a virgin. Then necessary it is, that Sara
and Lia did so is. Take an other. I will prove that Pilate was an Apostle of
Christ, and thus I argue for it. Matthew tes^ifieth, that Peter was an Apostle
of Christ. Then doubtless Pilate was an Apostle to. etc. If any ^il answer me,
that I must prove by plain scripture the virginity of Sara, and Apostleship
of Pilate, as I do the like of Marie and Peter: is not Zuinglius as well bound
to prove th^^ A third Answer 3 Exodus 1^. 11
in the words of the Supper, est, is as much as, significat? Finally, the
sense of the place alleged he geveth thus: When Moses says, Eat hastily,
for it is Phase, the lords passover, Zuinglius (nor M. B.) can never prove
that Moses in that place means the lamb to be the passover. For the phrase
^^ like to our ordinary speech, when we say; Eat flesh, for it is sunday:
drink water, for it is friday. Hereof no man can wring out that flesh
signifies sunday, or water friday. And even so it is here: Eat hastily, for
it is the Pascha, the paschal dry wherein God wrought those benefits for our
delivery and passing The Calvi^^^^ ^ ^an ne^^r prov^ ^ (...) Christ's words are
(...).
out of Egypt. Thus Luther, and a great deal more in that place. In the end of
which discourse after he has constantly assured us, that the Sacramentaries
can never justify their tropical exposition of Christ's words by any ^ound
argument, and that they bring nothing for them selves in that point praeter
frigida commenta, and monstros^ somnia deliran^ium, but bald devises and
monstrous dreams of doting men, he with indignation breaks out and
exclameth against the devil, who in the night time with so light a toy could
seduce Zuinglius and his folowers of Zurick, as he does at this day M. B. and
our Scottish and English Sacramentaries: Increpet te Deus O Luther. ^b^ sup^^.
Satan. Quim acerbe nobis illudis! The lord rebuke thee, and put thee to
silence O Satan. How bitterly and scornefully do thou ride us, who with
such patched and beggarly Sophisines can dravv innumerable sowles to damnation?

Of contradictions: and the Zuinglians impiety in limiting gods omnipotency.
The Argument.




So does the fiery furnace of Nabuchodonosor, which M. B. ignorantly alleges
for example of a contradiction.

M. B. shameful and true contradiction to him self about the article of Christ's
presence: That Christ can, and can not make his body really present in the
Sacrament.





CHAP. 21.
AFTER this, to show a little subtilitie. he falls in to a dispute which him
self understands not about contradictio^s: taking the ground from a gross
untruth of his own, thus. Now when they ^
(Papists) are dung out of this ^ortresse (that Christ's words are to be taken
properly, from whence M. B. thinks he has dung us by such sweet and
mighty arguments as now we have heard) they fly (says pa. 157.
he) to Gods omnipotency, and say; God may make the body of Christ in heaven
and in the bread both at one time. Ergo it is so. This is the first untruth,
and ground of his wicked Untruth.
disputation which ensues, consisting altogether of falshod and ignorance.
Catholics make no such scald arguments: which prove as well, every rakehel
heretic to be as good as the best Catholic, every Turk as good as any
Christian, black white, dirt gold, fish flesh, and what not? For God can make
of an heretic a Catholic, of a Turk a Christian, of dirt gold, and so forth.
The Catholics sometimes against the heretics which deny (as does M. B.) Gods
omnipetencie to extend thus far, prove that God can do it. Which is not to
make arguments, that because he can do it, therefore he does it but to refute
such blasphemous speeches, which detract from God, and deny the first article
of their Creed, that God is omnipotent. In answering of this argument, which
he fathereth on us, albeit he show him self to ignorant, so that in deed he
seems not to know what a contradiction means; yet he so behaveth him self,
as that he may plainly learn it by his own answer to this supposed argument.
For unto it he geveth 3. answers, two of which are directly contradictorie
one to the other: the third hangs in the midst between both, Page 1^7.
and may take part of either. If (says he) I denied their consequent (which
they never made) they would be well fasshed to prove it. But the question
stands no: here, whether God may do it or not, but whether God will it, or may
will it. And we say reverently, that his maiesti^ m^^ not will it. This is his
first answer, which I account as a middle between two extremes, not directly
denying, nor yet plainly granting that God can do it but by a thoritie as it
were of the Scottish (...) which, commands in matters Ecclesiastical god
is in manerly and reverent terms charged not to vvil it. For his majesty may
not will it, says M. B. But good Sir, that we may understand your further
resolution, let us put the case, as the church ever has, that God may will it,
for that Christ who is true God, did will it, as not only al Catholics that
ever were, but also most Protestants, and those the first founders of this new
gospel believed. Answer now directly and plainly Gods omnipotency most
wickedly denied.
yea or no, can he perform it? M. B. answers no: and that so Turkishly and
absurdely, as vvithal he overthrows the whole body of scripture, from the
beginning of Genesis to the end of the Reuclation. For (says he) many things
God may not will (and then most assuredly he nether may nor can do them) and
they are reduced to two sorts. First, he may not will things contrary to his
nature, as to Page 158.
be changeable, to decay. Secondly, he may not will some things by reason of a
presupponed condition: as such things, whereof he has concluded the contrary
before: of which sort this is. For seeing God has concluded, that al humane
bodies, and therefore the body of Christ, should consist of organical parts,
and therefore be comprehended and circumscribed within one proper place,
therefore God may not will the contrary now, and consequently can not make it
without quantity, without place, without circumscription; for this were to
make it no body. And to will these things which are plain co^tradice^t in them
selves god may not, no more then it is possible for him to will a lie. Here is
the conclusion: that God can no more make Christ's body remaining a body, to be
in 2. places, then he can lie, then he can be changed, th^n he can decay and
be corruptible. But to lie, to be changed, to decay, are simply and flatly
impossible for God. Ergo it is simply beyond Gods power and ability, to make
the body of Christ in the sacrament. This is his conclusion, which if we let
to rest for a while, and examine the ground thereof, a man shall quickly see,
that it is the very foundation of al Atheism and Barbarism. For if God may
not, nor can alter the conditions and qualities of his creatures, which
conditions he has framed in them, and so by such prosupponed condition
concluded the contrary before; whereas he has thus concluded the water to
be liquid or fluent, the fire to be hot and burn, the S(...) to move
perpetually and geve light, creatures which The whole body of scripture
defaced by M. B.
we eat or use, in eating or using to consume and diminish, waters not to
flow out of thy and hard rocks and flints, but to have other original, beasts
by nature dumb not to speak, and so forth in a number of like, incident every
where in the old and new Testament: what follows hereof, but that by
sentence of the Scottish co^fistory and Seignorie, God may not will, and God can
not vvil, nor do these things: and therefore the red sea stood Exodus 14. 22
Iosu^ 3. 16.
not still and firm as a wal; nor yet the river Jordan, to yield passage to the
children of Israel: the fire in the furnace of Nabuchodonosor, which so
furiously burnt the Chaldeans, could not be to Daniel and his 3. fellows
Daniel. 3. 48. 50. 94.
(according to the English translations) as a cold wyel blowing, so that one
hear of their head was not burn the Sun in the element at Iosuas
commandment Iosu^ 10. 13 ^u^. 23. 45.
did not stand still, nor was clean destitute of light a^ Christ's passion: the
oil of the vvidow of Sarephta was ^. Reg. 17. ^6.
not every day eaten by Elias, the vvidow, and her son without diminishing:
as nether for 40. years together in the wilderness could the Israelites wear
their apparel Number 20. 21.
without vvasting and consuming it: it could not possibly be, that a hard
rock in the wilderness should yield such Exodus 17. and 20.
abundance of water* as satisfied many hundred thousands, that Balaams ass
spoke etc. For these be such things, whereof Number. 22. ^^.
God has concluded the contrary before in his general creation, determining
and binding them to other certain natural conditions and qualities as he has
the body of man to be visible, local, and circumscribed in one certain place.
And therefore God may no more will these things which are plain contradicent in
them selves (one as much as the other) then it is possible for him to will a
lie: and then the scripture must lie down right, which tells us al these
lies (by M. B. his conclusion) for undoubted verities. What shall I speak of
the new Testament, where this appears infinitely more? Where every one of
Christ and his Apostles miracles, are things done against the general order,
condition and quality, which God has limited to his creatures. Let the
Christian reader carry away this only, that this Satanical rule, so vile and
horrible, that a Turk would never have put The(...), principles of
Christianity denied by M. B.
it down, quit destroys the two very fou^dations, heads and principal
articles of the new Testament, the incarnation of Christ, and general
resurrection, which Mahomet in his Alcoran confesleth most constantly. For
that every man consisting of body and soul, should to his humane nature have
joined a particular, a singular The incarnation of Christ.
or individual subsistence, which Theology calls a person or personalitie,
is far more necessary, more nigh, more intrinsecal, and by gods special
ordinance and general creation more required to man, then any thing that this
ignorant Calvinist obiecteth; be it the condition of place, or localitie, or
circumscriptio^, or any other quality mentioned hitherto. And yet our
christian faith teaches us, that Christ assumed the true nature of man, a true
soul and body, without the person of man. And if M. B. know ought he knows
it to be Nestorianisme, that is, a denial of Christ's incarnation, and of the
redemption wrought by Christ God and man in one person, to say that with the
nature of man, he assumed and took the person of man. The general
resurrection.
Again, that one and the self same man, who died and was resolved in to
ashes 100. or 1000. years since, shall in the end of the world return and
receive his perfect body and the self same in number which he had* is an other
manner difficulty and impossibility, if we go by reason, by philosophy, by
natural and inseparable property, then is to be local or not local, visible or
not visible. Wherefore M. B. with his co^ministers in denying to gods
omnipote^cie that which is the lesser, that God can make a body without place
and circumscription; questionles in his ^are by very drift of reason and
necessary consequence must be judged to deny these 2. which are far higher
and more beyond reason: that is to say, he must deny the grounds and principles
of al Christianity; yea of al show of faith not only Christian, but also
Mohammedan.

They say (says this wise man) th^^ Page 15^.
the lord may will a contradiction* and make both parts to Ignorance.
be true at one time. This is an untruth to p^lp^ble. For of the two parts of a
contradictio^ of necessi^^e one must be false: both can not be true. For then
there is no co^tradiction. And yet forsooth we prove by 3. examples, as this
man vvil bear us in hand, that God may work a contradiction. The first is God
ma^e a virgin to bear ^ Page 159.
son. T^ bear a son say they is one part of the contradiction: and to be a
virgin* is the other part of the contradiction. That we call this a
contradiction* is his dream. How* beit it serves the turn here as well as a
contradiction, and God can not do it by his resolution, if God can not do
anything against the natural condition and property which he has joined to
his creatures: and it is a more contradiction to natural reason for a virgin to
be a mother, then: or a body to be without a place. Their other Page 160.
example is, Christ's entering the doors being closed and shut, Of Christ^
entrance the doors being shut.
But (says he) what appearance of contradiction has it? I grant it has
none: but sufficient argument it conteyneth to disprove all that you have said
hither to for binding Christ necessarily to a certain place, without which in
your Theology, his body is no body. And whereas you demand, whether we can
prove that Christ entered thorough the doors, we tell yo^, that we can prove
it, and Ibid.
that his body at that time could not be local in a certain place, and was a
true perfect body notwithstanding: and that therefore al your long phisical, or
rather ph^hisical talk about the necessity of a place, is wicked, false and
heretical. For albeit your grave Theologes being much vexed with this place,
inue^t a number of pretty quiddities to ^lude it, some, that Christ knocked
first at C^lv. in Joan. ^^. ^0. v. 19.
the door as Peter did, and then one opening the door to him he entered, as al
men commonly do, others that without knocking he opened the door of him self
by his divine Idem Institutio. lib. 4. ca. 17. number. 29. et in Harmonia. Luc.
^4. v. 36. Martyr. in dialog. de loco corporis Christi sol. 94. 95 (...) in
narrations do ecclesia Belgica dispersa. pa 185. 186. Horn of (...).
power; others, that he came in by the window, or chimney tunnel, or top of the
house; others, that the words of the Evangelists signify no miracle or
miraculous entrance in Christ al al, but only the Apostles fear, that they for
their own safeguard had bolted fast the doors; others, that the words note
only the time of the day, which was toward night, at what time men use
commonly to shut their doors (which exposition once my self heard given by a
great Superintendent in England) these and many mo such pretty conceits,
although your Sacramentarie companio^s to avoid this place have invented; yet
that Christ entered thorough the doors shut, we prove both by the plain
words of the Evangelists in 2. several places, by the circumstance of the
story, and by consent of al Antiquity. The Evangelists words are plain,
that he entered Joan. ^0. ^9. ^6. (...)
and stood among them the doors being shut: which so astonished them, that
they thought him rather a spirit then a man, rather a ghost then a body,
because he entered not as a man, as a body, but as a spirit. And in that
opinion of his miraculous entrance, Christ confirms them Luc. 24. ^7. ^8.
when he tells them, not that he entered by the window, or by opening the
door etc. but that howsoever they like men by their humane reason supposed him
to be a spirit, for that perchance they might have some of these phisical and
philosophical cogitations, that a body must needs have a place: and the door
being fast shut, Christ's body could not come thorough it, and they both (the
door and Christ's body) could not be in one Luc. ^4. 19.
place, and so forth; yet (says Christ) Let not such cogitations trouble you.
See my hands and feet, my flesh and bones, and know thereby, that not a
spirit, but a true real organical body it is, which thus has entered and here
stands, in the midst of you. And this is the faith of the primitive church,
and interpretation of this place geven by all Antiquity. S. Justin the martyr
proposing this question Justin. question 117. ^d Christi^^^^.
of Christ's entrance, answers it thus. As he walked upon the sea, not by
changing his body in to a spirit, but by his divine power* so by the same
divine power he rose one of the grave the grave remaining covered with a great
stone and so he entered to his disciples the gates being shut. He adds. Christ
entered thus to his disciples, not by changing his body in to a spirit, but
with his true organical body. And this he did by his divine power, which
works al, and is above nature. S. Cyril writes, that when the doors were
shut, he entered Cyril in Joan. lib. ^^. ca. 53 Ibid. ca. ^9. Mi^a^ulosu^ per
ianuas ^^au^as ingressus. Aug. Ser. de Tempore ^56. 15^. 260. in ^oa^* ^ract.
121. De Agone Christia. cap ^1. in epist ^. ad Volus. and de cru^^. Dei. lib.
22. ca. ^. H^^artus lib. ^. de Trini^^^^.
suddenly, overruling the nature of things by his omnipotency. And to stop al
curious questions how this might be done, he wills his reader to consider,
that thus it is written by the Evangelist: and that not of a simple man, as we
are, but of the omnipotent son of God, who is not subject to the nature of
things. In the same book he calls it a miraculous entrance thorough the
doors shut: and so does S. Austin sundry times. S. Hilarie expounding this, as
it were of purpose before hand refuteth M. B. and his fellow* Sacramentaries.
Al things (says he) are whole and fast bolted: and yet Christ to whom al
things are open, stande^^ in the midst. The door, the stones, and wood leese
nothing of their nature, nether does the body of Christ change from it self:
and how then is he in the midst? Our sense and speech yeldeth, and the truth
of this fact is above the reason of m^n: and so forth, very excellently
disputing directly against the Sacramentaries of our time no less then the
Arrians of that age. The self same exposition with Justin the martyr* S.
Cyril, S. Austin, and S. Hilarie, vz. that Christ with his true* natural,
organical body passed thorough the doors* as being not bound to the necessity
of a place, shall the reader find in S. Chrysostom and Thophilacte vvriting
Chrysostom. in Joan. hom^l. ^5. Theophil. in Joan. ca. 20.
upon this text: likewise in S. Ambrose in Lucam capvltimo: in Amphilochius
apud Theodoretum dialog. 2. Epiphan* here is. 64. Gregor. Nazianzen. in Christo
patiente. S. Hierom. ad Pamm^chium de erroribus Ioannis Hierosolymit ini, and
contra Iovini^nu^ ca. 21. in S. Leo epist. 10. ad Fl^rianu^, cap. 5. in S.
Gregory homil. 26. in Euangelia: in Hildefonsus Sermo* de partur. B. Marie.
And albeit the fathers had great occasion otherwise to have shifted this place
with some of these men's evasions, if they had been of their irreligion, because
hereupon the Marcionites, Valentinians, and such other Protestants or heretics
argued that Christ's body was fantastical, and no true real organical body: yet
because the Catholic and universal faith was then as now, that Christ entered
thorough the doors shut, they confessing that truth, defended vvithal, that
notwithstanding such supernatural and miraculous entrance, Christ's body became
not a spirit, but still remained a true body, though not bound to phisical
limits and circumscriptions of place as other bodies are. Thus speak and
write they to the confusion of Calvin and his adherents, who with those old
damnable heretics Marcion and Valentinus, say that the Catholics affirming
(with the Calv. in (...) ca. ^0. v. ^^.
Evangelists and all the ancient fathers and primitive church) Christ to have
entered thorough the doors shut, there by make his body like to a spirit,
infinite, etc. whereof as the one is true and most sure, that Christ thus
entering was not locally bounded and circumscribed: so the other is a maynelye.
For we hold the body of Christ to be not a spirit, but a true body this
notwithstanding, as has been said.

Nabuchodonosort Page 1^0.
ove^: vvhereto he answers: If they ca^ prove Page 16^.
the fire was both hot and cold, then they say some thing to the purpose. In
deed much to the purpose it is to prove your gross and shameful ignorance
double and treble: but to Ignorance*
prove a contradiction it is not much to the purpose, as sorth with shall be
declared. Your ignorance it notably discovers: first, because you see not
that which is plainly set dovne in the story, vz. that at one time this fire
Daniel. 3. ^. ^^. 50. 94.
was ho^e, and cold. For the 3. children felt it as a cold blowing vvynd: the
Chaldeans found it exceeding hot and burning, Nabugo. (...) ^ornace.
says the text. Secondarily, because you consider not that this example is
altogether like to that which you object of Christ's body circu^scribed, and not
circu^scribed. For as this ^s an accide^t to the body, so was that to the fire:
and as well may one body be compassed with a place, and not compassed, as the
self same fire may be hot and cold, that is hot and not hot. Thirdly,
because you forget your own former resolution that God can not do any thing,
whereof he has by a presupponed condition concluded the Before page ^^^.
contrary before in the first origin and creation: and god has no more
concluded, that al organical bodies shall be bound to a certain place, then that
al fire shall be ho^^. And therefore this is a very sufficient example to
disprove al your not natural philosophy, but natural soke, and heretical
incredulity uttered against Gods omnipotency, that God can not make his body
to remain a body, and yet be without circumscriptio^ of place, which M. D.
heresi^ overthrovveth al Christianity.
is evide^tly refuted by this miracle. Which blasphemous and damnable
assertion takes clean away Christ's incarnation; is directly opposite to
Christ's pure nativitie of his mother, she remaining still a virgin: is directly
opposite to Christ's resurrection, and his entrance to his disciples. Which 3.
miraculous acts, and 2. of them chief principles, and greatest keys of
Christianity, require that we believe the clean contrary; and that God no^
only can, but also de facto has brought Christ, body both out of his mothers
womb, then in that very moment a virgin, and also out of the sepulcher, being
then a most true, most perfect, most absolute and organical body, when yet it
was not phisically circumscribed with the limits and bounds of a place.

What is a contradiction.
understand, that a right contradiction such as here is spoken of, requires
the negation of the self same thing ^^ one and the same precise respect, as to
say that one m^^ is learned and unlearned, false and not false but true, ric^
and not rich but poor, in one particular respect, relation and consideration.
For otherwise* a man may say of M. B. that he is learned and unlearned, true
and false, rich and poor, without any contradiction or gainsaying of him
self, for that both parts shall still be true. For he is learned in respect of
common ministers, unlearned in respect of John Calvin, Theodore Beza and such
other Rabbines: false, because he utters many untruths and corrupts many
places of the scripture and fathers; true, because he speaks many truths and
lies nothing so often, nor corrupts scriptures and fathers so notoriously as
our M. Jew. of Salisbury in preaching and vvriting Ievvel.
used to do: rich, if he be compared with many inferior beggarly ministers;
yet poor if he be compared with some Superintendents of England. Thus the
fire in Nabuchodonosors oven though it were at the same time, and moment of
time, hot and cold, yet that is no contradiction, because it was not so, in
one and the same respect or relation, but hot and burning to the Chaldeans,
cold and myld to the Hebrews. And therefore to draw this Page 160. 161.
to some conclusion, albeit Christ's body be at one time visible and not
visible, local and not local, compast and not compast, as you say, as the fire
was hot and not hot, cold and not cold at the self same time and place; yet
except it be so in one and the self same respect and relation or consideration,
it is a miracle of God, it is no contradiction. And though they be applied and
referred to one and the self same singular body, yet do they nothing impair,
hinder, or destroy the nature or substance, because they are accidental
conditions which come after the nature, and without which the nature is
perfect, full, and absolute.

And now to exemplify this which I say of a contradiction A fair example of
contradiction i^ M. B.
by a plain example, which M. B perhaps vvil better conceive of and carry it
away; I geve him the conclusion and sum of this his long discourse; which is
this and in these words: So my second ^round holds fast God may Page 16^.
not will that thing which implies a contradiction. But he real presence of
Christ's body in the sacrament implies a contradiction, making the body of
Christ visible and invisible, local and not local at one time. Therefore God
may not will such a thing, and it is impossible to be true. Let this then stand
for one part God can not make of bread his body.
of my example: that god can not will, nor make Christ's body really present in
the sacrament: it is a flat contradictio^, it is impossible to be true, and (as
before he has told us) God can no more will this, nor do this, then he can lie,
be changed, decay, and become corruptible. Next, to come to the other part of
my example and contradiction; M. B. forgetting him self, that he had fathered
this false argument Page 157.
on us before, here repeateth it as new in these words: Last of al, they are
not yet content; but say, Christ can make the Page 170.
bread his body: and therefore his body is really present. VV^^ be it granted
that thus we say now last of al, which you made us say a good while
sithence, and so geve a Before, page ^80.
great sign that you have a very vveake memory, who much need a better ( for
mendacem oportet esse memore^, suppose v. e last of al say thus: what is your
answer? Is it as before, when very reverently you told his majesty Before,
page ^80.
that he could not will it, and could not make it present, no more then he could
will and make a lie? No, but of a clean contrary guise, in these words. That
Christ can make the Page 170. God can make of bread his body.
bread his body, we grant. For Christ being God, can do what so ever he will.
Only let them show, that Christ of bread ^^^ make his real flesh, and then this
controversy is brought is an end. And is it so? Is the controversy brought
now to this end? Surely then have you spent much time, paper and vvynd in
vvast. For hitherto al your speech and preaching has been to prove, that God
could not vvil, nether could he do it. And how chau^ceth it that so sudde^ly
you geve over your invincible argument, which eve^ now you held so fast, and
so much extolled, saing: So this Page 160. 161.
second ground holds fast. The real presence implies a contradiction, and there
fore it is impossible for God to work it. But to omit this, here you may
learn, and so may the reader, a right contradiction, and thereby measure
other: God A sensible contradiction.
can no more make Christ's body present in the sacrament, then he can lie, then
he can be changed: it is impossible; it implies a contradiction. Again, for
the other side: We grant Christ can make of bread his body: and so he can
make his body really present: and this is not impossible: and then assuredly it
implies no contradiction. Here is a right and perfect contradiction. For it is
yea and nay, denying and affirming of one and the self same thing, in one and
the self same respect: which contradiction when he finds in us, in the
Catholic vvriters touching this sacrament, then let him hardly cry out, that
they persist in their opinion of very malice, for mere co^tradiction, to the
end only they may Page 116.
gainstand the truth found out of late by these Apostataes, whereof no one
agrees with an other, and scarce any one with him self. But in the mean
time it is far more apparent, that these words touch M. B. and his companions,
who against the faith of al Christendom, against the first article of their
Creed, against al divine and The perverst^^^ of Calviniste.
humane learning, maliciously gainstand the truth, deny that to Gods
omnipotency, being enforced so to do by the very drift of their wicked,
spritish, and Satanical doctrine; which them selves again grant to Gods
omnipotency, being driven so to confess (as may be thought) by the very
instinct, work and operation of nature and natural reason: which in that it
acknowlegeth a God, acknowlegeth him to be omnipotent, even in that which
these men's brutish and sensles, Theology (if so I may call it) takes away and
vvithdraweth from him. As for that he says, the question is not here, whether
Christ can make his body present, but whether he will: and if we can show that
he will so, then this controversy is brought to an end* Real presence.
for probation hereof I vvil say no more then I have already. Cap. 1. number. 1.
2. 3.
For if Christ's most evident and pregnant words set down in the Evangelists
and S. Paul, This is my body, the same which shall be offered and delivered for
^^^. page 17. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. ^8
you: This is my blud which shall be shed for remission of your sins: if the
sense and meaning of these words testified by the practice of al Christian
people that ever lived since Christ's time in all places of the world, in
Europe, 255 256. 257 336. 337. 365. 366.
Asie, and Africa: if the uniform consent of al Fathers and general Councels
from Christ's time unto our age: if in this miserable harvest of heretical
corruption, the authority of the most learned, the most earnest and principal
Gospellers, who upon the invincible clearnes Before pa. ^^. ^44. See the next
devision* number ^.
and force of Christ's words were in a manner against their wills compelled to
mainteyne the real presence of Christ in the sacrament, may serve to prove
what Christ's meaning was; then have we showed, and if we be required, vvil
more amply show that this was Christ's will. And if this serve not, then I know
not what may serve. And I vvil not labor to find any demonstration more
clear, until I may learn what clearer demonstration M. B. desires. And yet
I think more clear th^^ this him self can not devise.

Christ's will, he then is content to yield, and this controversy is at end; yet
his discourse and preaching here shows the clean contrary. For again he
falls in to his common place, that Christ's body must needs be bound to the
rules of physic and nature. A man may justly suppose, that he is scarce well
advised: he so commonly gainsayeth him self, and runs up and down, backward
and forward, and forgets in one leaf, what he vvrote in the next before.
Two points yet remain in this Sermon, which I vvil shortly dispatch, because
I have been somewhat long in the former, and these 2. depend altogether, or very
much of that which Page 1^^.
has been now said. When (says M. B.) they are dung ^^^ of this (that Christ
by his omnipotency can make his body present, from whence he has dunged us
out by granting and confessing it him self) they make their la^^ See before
pa. ^^^. Th^^^c^l (...) (...) not always in Theology. Page ^^^.
refuge (and yet we were at our last refuge before, where our last refuge
was Christ's omnipotency) to say that Christ's body is exemed from phisical
rules. His answer to this is much like the former, that is, yea and nay,
granting and denying. For first he grants that Theology is not subject to
physic: and yet Christ's body the principal part of Theology is subject to
physic. For by and by h^ infers, that if ye exeme Christ's body from the
law of physic, ^^^. ^^ ^^^.
which is the law of nature, ye shall exeme it from the law of God and if we
deny the one, the law of nature in Christ's actions, we must also deny the
other, that is the law of God. This he urges; this he makes his conclusion
and resolution, that if we exeme Christ from the rules of physic, we pervert
both true Theology and physic, both Gods law and the law of nature: which
how true it is, I refer the reader to that which has been said already of
Christ's divine person, incarnation, nativitie, resurrection, entrance to his
disciples ianuis clausis, and the general resurrection: in all which, we find
the law and ordinance of God to be strong and inviolable, although the law of
nature and physic have no place. The other point he utters thus. But to make
an end with you, we shall answer Page 1^^.
to your last subterfuge. So yet here is an other last subterfuge. And what is
this? That Christ's body is glorified: and that this glorification geveth it
supernatural preeminence etc. Well, suppose that this be our last refuge or
subterfuge, to rest upon the glorification of Christ's body: How do you drive us
from this subterfuge? By ministering still your physic. For (say you) the very
glorified bodies of Page 165.
men are subject to physic. And therefore it clearly folowes, that in respect
the glory of Christ's body has wrought no change in his nature and substance,
and consequently in his natural dimensions, nor yet in any other essential
property, therefore the glorification of Christ's body exemes it not from the
rules of Physic. It should seem, that this man either has great need of
physic, his wits and arguments are ^o vveake: or else he is a great friend of
physic, who so tediously beats upon the rules of physic* in the supreme
points of Theology, where physic had no more to do, the^ has surge^ie,
law, or Geometry. This argument is of like quality with the last, and
therefore may pass with like answer* and so it shall. Only I vvil join The
Protestants iudgm^^ of M. B. phisical argument.
unto it the authority of a Protestant or two, whereby the reader shall
understand, that these are no new arguments, but old and rotten, and long
sithence so answered: as it is needles pains to shape them new answers*
Brentius for this kind of disputing, accounts the Zuinglians Brentius.
Before* pa. ^^
little better then Ethniks and Pagans. Luther for the same cause, at large,
partly in ^est, partly in earnest so revileth and refuteth Zuinglius and
Occolampadius, as is wonderful. In ^ine he thus concludes. If these be the
Luth. Tom. 7. D^^^^sio ver^^rum Can^. ^^. 3^^. 39^ 39^. ^^2. etc. ^^ ibid. ^^7.
grounds and reasons of these men to confirm us in the tr^^^* and quiet our
consciences, truly then are we in pi^i^ul case. If some body bad showed me such
writings and arguments without the name of the author, I should have thought,
that s^^^ stage player, or Turkish loy^^rer had made them in ^est and i^
derision of Christians. Surely I see not how these men ^^^ have pretense or
excuse before God, as many other bere^^^^^ have had. For it seems that of set
malice and stubbor^^ they play and mock with Gods word. And I think that such
bald toys can not move any man, if he be in his right wi^^^^ be Turk or ^ew*
much less a Christian. Thus Luther of these M. B. his phisical arguments in
general. These two last ^^^v. in Ad(...). ^^t.
in special when Calvin objected to VVestphalus, ^e more directly and
severally made answer thus. To the first taken from philosophy and physic,
wherein Calvin varied and stammered even as M. B. does, sometimes denying that
he would bynd Christ to philosophical or phisical rules: and yet by and by
taking his argument thence, to shut Christ out of the sacrament, he answers
(...). in Apolog co^tra C^l^^a^. Page 194.
in these words* Th^^ Geometrical argument borrowed from E^clide, that Christ's
body ^^ circumscribed, and therefore ^^^ be at once but in one place, and so
not in the Eucharist, is the very pillar and foundation of the sacramentary
learning. Th^^ sus^^yneth: he whole weight of their Syllogismes* whereby they
corrupt a number of places of scripture. Most ap^ly of the sacramentaries (...)
^^^o^ (...) (...).
is verified that famous saying, Take from heret^kes that which they ^orow from
the philosophers, and they can not defend them ^elves* Take from the Zuinglians
their philosophical reas^ns* quantulum remanebi^ de magnis volumin^b^^ omnium
Sacramentariorum? How small a portion (...) remay^e of the huge volumes of all the Sacramentaries? Which is to say in few words: that this argument is
Ethnical not Christian, it holds in Geometry not in Theology, and therefore
may bind the scholars of Euclide, but not the disciples of Christ and his
Apostles. Ibi. pa. 19^. 192.
Here is one answer: an other is this. Whereas Calvin and his Sectaries so
much brag of humane reason and phisical arguments taken from the phisical
proprieties of humane bodies and prefer such reasoning before faith* and
shufle philosophy Faith to be urged above reason.
with Theology: and to establish their absence of Christ's body from the
sacrament, rather lean to the persuasible reasons of philosophy, then to
arguments deduced from holy scripture, let us (says this Protestant) on the
contrary side magnify faith and attribute least of al to such phisical
speculations. For the simplicity of faith it is, which Christ commends when
he says, To you it is geven to know the Mat. 13. 11. Mat. 11. 25
mysteries of Gods kingdom. Thou O father have hid these things from the wise,
and revealed them to the little ones. Thus Basil. Hexan^ hom. 1. et 1^
S. Paul preaches. Thus S. Basile prefers faith before all the
demonstrations of philosophers. And why are matters of Christian profession
called mysteries and matters of faith, but because faith, and only faith
comprehends them, which are far beyond and without the reach and capacity of
reason? Here is an other answer, grounded upon right Christianity and
Theology, and therefore one line of it able to overpeise and bear down a
thousand of M. B. and John Ibi. pa. 192. 193. Philosophica argumenta. Diabolica
sophismata. The Caluinian faith framed by physic.
Calvin's phisical folies. And by the way, whereas Calvin faltring in his
speech like one uncertain vvhereon to rest, said he did not a
so much urge his philosophical arguments, as he did c
places of scripture: we must expect Christ from heaven to come in judgment:
he is ascended: he sits at his fathers right hand: To the one VVestphalus a
answers, that he might do well to geve them over altogether, and to
acknowledge them as they are, to be not philosophical arguments, but diabolical
sophismes. And if he would so do, and not examine this matter of faith by
reason, he should find Christ's word, This is my body, to have more weight and
strength in it, then any demonstration, either phisical, c
philosophical, or Geometrical. To the other: that Ibid. pa. 195 196.
albeit these propositions be in deed scripture, and there are found, yet the
consequent and conclusion is not dr^^ from S Paul or any scripture; but from
the rules of ph^^d^ and philosophy, which tells them that Christ can not ^^
i^ heaven and earth at one time. And therefore if Calvin and the Caluinists
would have their argument granted; they c^^g^^ ^^ bring scripture to prove
that Christ can not be at one time i^ heaven and with his church in earth.
Which if he co^^ Mat. 2^. 20. Mat. ^6. ^6.
not, he would never so have promised. So long as they bring sorth no such
scripture, to prove this sequel or consequent: their impertinent allegation of
pieces of the holy scripture proving the antecedent, nothing excuses them, but
that they ground their faith altogether upon Aristotle's philosophy and Galenes
physic, says this Ib^. pa. 195.
Protestant. The Arians, the Donatists, the Pelagians ci^^l many sentences of
scripture: yet can any man deny but they drew their arguments from the dregs of
philosophy? The Anabaptists in like ^o^t against Christ's incarnation of his
mother a virgin ^uddle up many places of scripture: yet shall ^^ grant that
they fetch their doting opinion from the oracles of holy scripture and not from
the aid of profane philosophi^ And thus much for M. B his physic or
philosophy.

pa. 163. 164. 165. 166. 167. Calv. Instit. lib. 4. ca. 17. number. 29 ^t in
Ad^^nitio. vltima.
pages: That to be in many places at once, is not by S. Paul assigned as any
quality of a glorified body, and therefore ^t may not challenge it to Christi,
albeit glorified. This argument Calvin in many places urges, and much better:
especially for that he concludes by conference of S. Paul in an other place,
that Christ's body can not have such prerogative more then the glorified bodies
of other Objection. Philip ^. ^^.
Saints, for that (as the Apostle vvriteth) Christ shall make our bodies like to
his own: and therefore if ours can not be in many places, nether can Christ's.
To this objection Answer.
although many answers may be made, and al true; as that God if it so plealed
him, might make any glorified body in many places at once; That Catholics put
not the glorification of Christ's body to be the only cause, why Christ's body
is in the sacrament (for so the blessed virgin his mothers body should be there
also, which we believe to be in heaven most glorious and glorified: and Christ
before he was glorified, gave the disciples his true body yet not immortal nor
glorified, though he gave it after an immortal and impassible manner:) only
Catholics show by the supernatural excellences of a glorified body that Christ's
body is not subject to the base rules of this corruptible life, of humane
reason, and phisical prescription etc. yet for brevities sake, I vvil content
myself VVestphalus vbi supra page 197.
with that one plain answer which is made to Calvin obiecting the same
argument, which is this. This argument taken from the qualities of a glorified
body in Christ and us, proves nothing less then that Christ's body can not be
given in many places. Only it proves that our bodies shall be Difference
between the glorified body of Christ and other Saints.
conformed or made like to the body of Christ in glory, but not in equal
glory. That likeness or conformity is not the cause, why our bodies must after
the resurrection be in diverse places, because Christ's body is dispensed in
diverse places at the ministration of the holy Supper. Christ has prima^ie in all things: Coloss. 1. 1^. Heb. 1. 9. Joan. 6.
he has more excellent glory beyond his fellows. His flesh has this glory
which we want, that it is meat geving life (eternal). Likewise this
prerogative of glory agrees to his flesh that whereas it is geven for food
of life to the members of his church which are dispersed over the whole world
he is present in many places, which glory our flesh lacks. Christ's body
sits advaunced and exalted at Gods right hand. The conformity of our bodies
with Christ reaches not so far, that our bodies also should obtain such place
at the right hand of God. Wherefore the true answer to his argument is, that
we shall be like to Christ in conformity of ^l^r^, but not in equality. Which
answer a mean Christian might learn of him self, were he endued with a
little faith; which teaches that the body of Christ is the body of God and man
a body assumpted in to unity of person with God: which albeit it take
nothing from the nature of a true body, yet puts it an infinite difference
between the excellency of such a body, and the body of any other creature, be
it never so much glorified.

A brief confutation of the last two Sermons concerning preparation to receive
the sacrament.
The Argument.


the sacrament and the word in this respect of preparation for receiving
either. Under pretense of preparing his auditors to worthy receiving by holy
life, he frames them to most unworthy receiving: and with manifest and direct
opposition to the Apostle S. Paul, sets them headlong to all filthiness,
iniquity, and security in finne, giving t^^m assurance and warrant before
hand, that they shall never be damned, but be saved i^^allibly, whatsoever their
life be.

CHAP. 22.
reasons, so partly because the argument is different, and for some part such
as a Christian man may well approve. Only thus much I think good to vvarne the
reader of, that whether it be the weakness of the man, as perhaps, or course
and sway of his doctrine, which is probable enough, he here as in other parts
of these sermons, pulls down with one hand, as fast as he builds up with
the other. He gainsaieth him self as fully and directly, as possibly any his
adversary can; and while he pretends to f^ame in his auditory upright
conscience and sincere life, that they may vvorthely receive the sacrament, he
sets them in the broad way to al iniquity, al losenes of life, and
presumptuous continuance therein. For, to prosecute these points a little, how
can these instructions stand together: pa. 205. 20^
Thy affection and action must be examined and tried by the square of Gods law,
you must see how far they agree with his law, or how they dissent from it. This
is the rule to know Page 256. 210. Fsai. 59. 2. Sapient. 1. v. 4. 5. 2. Cor. 6.
14*
sin, which severs thee from God. The God of heaven, he can have no society,
nor can keep company with the soul, which is always unclean. This is true
Catholic doctrine, delivered every where in the scripture. And hereof it
follows, that good men in whom God dwells, are Some man without gross
sins.
void of gross and mortal sins, which sever from God, and with which so
long as a man remains desiled, so long remains he deprived of gods holy
spirit: which thing M. B. by many propositions proves hereafter. But how
matcheth this with that which immediately ensues: Page 211. Page 207. No man
without gross sins.
In this life there is wonderful iniquities, gross sins, and great faults,
wherewith even the righteous are defiled. And when we study to do best; and the
just man, that is the ^^aist hal^man, falls seven times in the day, yea rather
seventy times seven times. If the righteous and just man Calv. Instit^. lib. ^.
c. ^. ^. number. 5^. 59. and lib. ^. cap. 4. number. 28. See before ^a, ^^.
when he studieth to do best, sins, and that grossly: if every ^owre of
the day he commit so many gross and mortal sins as these words import (for
in these men's divinity al sins are mortal, none venial) and every mortal
sin sever a man from God, as M. B. teaches agreably to the scriptures; what
follows of these two parcels, but that the God of heaven dwells in no man be
he never so just* for that in every his action he sins, and offends God
grossly, and mortally? And how calls he such a man holy, just, and
righteous, who thus offending, and that continually, so many hundred times in
the day, is doubtless wicked, unjust, and unrighteous: for that so perpetually
he transgresses the law of God, the true and infallible square of justice and
injustice, as M. B. has truly declared!

With like constancy he commends says to his audience in these words:
faith is the moyen and hand; ^^^. ^^^.
whereby we apprehend our salvation and apply it unto v^. And as it avayles
not a sick man to see a dr^ge in the Apothecaries booth, except a way be
found, how it may be applied to his sick body; so faith is the moyen and hand
whereby we take hold on Christ* and apply his redemption to cur sowles. This
is good, if he meant of the right faith, and stayed here, and proceeded no
farther to exclude al other graces of God and his holy spirit. But he adds:
There is ^^^.
not a way, nor an instrument in the scriptures of God, whereby Only ^aith.
any man or woman may apply Christ to their sowles, but only the instrument of
faith. Hereof it follows, that faith is not only, the first, and principal,
but also the sole and only mean of our justification and salvation, as by
which only instrument according to the scriptures, the redemption wrought by
Christ is applied unto our sowles And thus the Protestants teach commonly, and
M. B. has oftentimes told us before. Yet within a few pages after, he falls
^^^ only ^aith.
in to a clean contrary discourse, removing faith from this office, and
attributing it altogether to love and charity. For thus he preaches. In
corporal food we have two sorts of apprehensions, one by the eye: the other by
the taist. ^^^* 233. ^^4.
Your eye takes a view of the meat and makes a choice of it. This is the first
apprehension. If your eye like it, yet if thy taist like it not also, and so it
enter not in to thy stomach, it can never be converted in to thy nurriture. For
it is only the second apprehension of the meat, that is cause of nurrishing
our body. Even so in spiritual things: the first apprehension of Christ Jesus
is by the eye of the mind, that is page ^
by our knowledge and understanding, that is to say, by our faith. The next
apprehension is, when we cast our hearts on him, we have good will of him. For all
our affection proceeds from our will. And if we love Christ; we take hold on
him, we eat him and digest him, that is, we apply him to our sawles. Then is
not faith the only instrument to apply Christ, but also love and charity: and
this much more then faith; so much more, as a man's body is more nurrished by
his taste, then by his eye; by that food which he eats: then that meat
which he sees standing on the table, but never touches. For so your self
apply, urge, and reiterate this comparison. Look in what place the eye serves
pa. ^^^.
to the body, in that same rome serves knowledge and understanding to thy soul.
And look in what place thy hand and thy mouth, the taist and the stomach
serves to thy body, in the same rome serves thy heart and affection to thy
soul. So that as our bodies can not be nurrished, except our hand take, and
our mouth eat the meat, where thorough the second apprehension may follow:
likewise our sowles can not feed on Christ, except we grip him and embrace him
heartily by our Erg^ ^^^ faith (...) eth ^^^.
will and affection, and not by only faith. This is true doctrine, and this
directly overthrows the former, that faith is the only instrument of applying
Christ to us, that only faith justifies us, and cleanses the soul. For here
we learn, that by charity we apply Christ to our sowles, as well as by
faith: yea much better as our bodies are better nurrished with the 2.
apprehension of meat made by our taist, then by the first made by our eye.
Before* page 302. 30^


Following the opinion of John Calvin and the Lutherans before noted touching
Christian faith, that it is a sure and infallible persuasion of Gods
benevolence toward us, he exhorts his auditors to hold fast such persuasio^,
pa. 204.
in these words: Art thou persuaded of mercy? Assure thy self, thy conscience
is at a good point, thou have health in thy sawle. For by keeping of (this)
faith, thy conscience is preserved. Keep this persuasion, bald it ^ail and
sound, hurt it not, Presumption
bring not thy sawle in doubting so far as thou may, nor hinder not thy
persuasion. For if thou doubt, or in any wise diminish thy persuasio^ thou do
diminish the health of thy soul, thou leesest thy faith, and becomest an
infidel, as Calvin (whom in this M. B. follows) avoweth. For he is not a
faithful man (says Calvin) who assures not him self of Gods fa^^ur: and Call.
Institut. lib. 3. cap. 2. number. 16.
who resting upon the security of his own salvation, cat not say with the
Apostle Paul, I am sure that nothing can separate me from Christ: which
words also M. B. very luslely applies to him self, saying expressly: Our
faith and assurance grows page 262.
so great* and our persuasio^ so strong, that we dare come out with the
Apostle, and say as he said. Hereof we may gather, that after this doctrine,
the best Christian and most faithful is he, which has the greatest confidence
in gods favor and mercy, and fears lest his judgments. Whereunto tends
also a great part of his last sermon: which besides that it preseneth a number
of desperate ruffians, execrable See before. pa. 304. 305. Esai. 66. 2. 5
miscreants and heretics before meek hearted and humble spirited saints, upon
whom the holy ghost specially rest^^h can hardly stand with that him self
after preaches, that the dearest servants of God are cast in to terrible
doubtings and wonderful pits of desperatio^. The best servants of God are
exercised page 275.
with terrible doubtings in their sowles, with wonderful Desperation.
stammerings: and they will be brought sometimes, as appears in their own
judgment, to the very brinke of desperation. For this is as much to say, as
that the most faithful servants of God are most faithles, the best are vvorst,
his dearest are to him most odious and hateful as they who want a right faith
and confidence in him, vvhereon intierly depends the health of their soul,
their quietness of page 211
conscience and peace with God. True it is, that the best and faithfullest
servants of god, have just occasion to fear Gods judgment, as whom they must
attend for not Romans 2. 6. ^. Pet^ 1. 17 and 4, 1^. Melach. 1. Psalm. 118. v.
120. Matthew. 10. ^^. ^^^. 1^.
only a mercyful father* but also a just judge, one that judges every man not
according to this solifidian persuasion and presumption, but according to his
work: and that so severely, that the just man shall scarce be saved: and
therefore the prophets, Apostles, S. Paul, S. Peter, and Christ him self ever
taught their scholars, as to hope well, so to fear, and in fear and trembling
to work their own salvation. Romans 11. 2^ Hebra. 4. 1* Apoc. 15. 4. Philip.
2. 1^.
But great, or rather infinite is the difference between fear, dread,
reverence and trembling, which the scripture commends, and these terrible
doubtings, wonderful stammerings, and wonderful pits of desteration, in to
which these men thrust the best servants of God. And yet this preaching were
more tolerable, if he spared our Savior him self, and set not him farther out
of Gods favor (as these men measure it according to this their presumptuous
confidence) then the vvorst servant of God that ever was. For whereas of such
servants M. B. says, that the Lord never sussereth them to despair: though
they be brought to the very brinke of desperation, yet are they not page 276.
swallowed up of it; Christ our blessed Savior he thrusts farther in to the
very bottomless pit of desperation. For says he; To what end does the lord cast
his servants so Ibidem.
low: He answers: To the end, they may fe^le in their hearts Christ in
desperation.
and consciences, what Christ suffered for them in the yard and on the cross,
in soul and body: that we feel in our sowles in some measure, the hell which
he sustained in full measure. Where attributing to Christ the full measure of
that, whereof he allows to his servants but a portion, whom yet he draws
to the very brinke of desteration, he manifestly teaches, that Christ
despayred fully and absolutely: according to the doctrine of that monstrous
caytive Calvin (who vvriteth expressly, that Christ not only internally in
mind despayred, but also externally Calvin. ^armen. in Ma^ca. 26. v. 46.
brast out in to a speech of desperation: vne voix de desespoir luy est
eschappee, in his french Harmonic upon the Gospel) and the gehennical church of
Geneva, in whose Catechism Christ is subjected to the same torment of
conscience and pains of hell, as are the damned and reprobate, S^^tr^sh
ca^^chisme, the 10 Sunday.
the impenitent sinners, whom God does punish in his terrible wrath: save that
Christ sustained that for a time, only a day or two, in the yard and on the
cross [saith M. B.] which they must endure continually. Which doctrine
invented or published by Calvin and Beza, taught in the Geneva Catechism, and
here briefly uttered by M. B. besides that it takes away one article of our
faith (Christ's descent in to hell) in effect marreth and destroys al articles
Christ's redemption denied by the Caluinists
of our Christian Creed, so far as they apperteyne to the redemption wrought
by Christ. For if the perfection of Christian justice be measured by firm
persuasion of Gods mercy and favor, and as M. B. vvriteth, he pa. ^1^.
that has no measure of this faith, has no measure of peace with God: and
Christ of al gods servants that ever were, was farthest from this measure, as
being plunged in desperation in full measure; then was Christ farthest of all
other from being at peace with god: and therefore was most unfit to be a
peacemaker for others, and to reconcile Coloss. 1. 20. Ephesians. 2. 14.
man to God, pacifying things in heaven and earth, whereas him self was not
at peace with God, nether had that peace of conscience, which every
Protestant has.

A form of piety (the virtue whereof he denies) his ^ Timoth. 3. 5.
words carry when as he preaches, that this faith and persuasion, which he
so magnifieth, and baptizeth by the name of their justifying faith, dependes
upon the quiet state pa. 230. pa. 164. pa. 204.
of a good conscience. This quiet state is troubled by nothing in the world but
by sin. Hereupon, he falls in to a common place, which conteynes much good
moral talk, that we page 212. 213. 214.
must glorify god by doing good works: there man be an agreement between the
heart and the hand: thy conversation man of necessity be changed with thy heart,
and be holy, honest and godly as thy page 215. 247. 24^.
heart is. We must love our neighbor, else we can not love God. Faith is tried
by his fruits: and except thou glorify God by thy deeds, and make thy life
holy to testify thy holy faith, al is but vain, al is but mere hypocrisy
etc. If thy conversation be good, it is a sure token, that thou (have a true
faith and) art one with God. But if thy conversation be not good, let men say
what they will, thy heart is defiled: true and lively faith is not Faith lost by
evil life.
in thee. Al which and much more of like effect, in fine he plainly refers
to this conclusion. So this ground holds fast. A doubting conscience makes a
weak faith. The more page 265. 266.
doubting is the conscience, the weaker is the faith. A good conscience makes a
strong faith. Hurt your conscience, and you hurt Item pa. 278
your faith. For how can I be persuaded of gods mercy, whose anger I feel
kindled against me, and against whom my conscience shows me to be gilty of
many offenses? Once again. Ibid.
Every of you take tent to your conscience. For keep a good conscience, and
thou shall keep faith. The better thy conscience is, the starker thy faith is.
Loosing it (a good conscience) ye loose Faith lost by evil life.
faith: and loosing faith ye loose salvation. The hail exhortation that we
gather on this point, depends upon this. To omit his false ground, that strong
persuasion and confidence of Gods mercy can not stand with sinful life or evil
conscience, whereas presumption (which is a degree beyond confidence) may so
be coupled, and often times is: and sure reason, certain experience, and manifest
scripture tells us, that to to many there are, who in the depth of their
Ecclesiasti^. 5. 6.
iniquity say, The mercy of the lord is great, he will be merciful to my sins
be they never so many: to omit this, and mark only the il coherence of these
men's fantastical gospel, here faith of neces^itie requires good conscience;
good conscience depends of holy life. So where holy life is abandoned and
sin reigns, good conscience is lost, and that being perished, faith also
perishes. Upon which gradatio^ he inveigheth against certain great men, whose
oppressions of the poor, whose deadly feids with their pa. 267.
own companions would not burst out in so high a measure, if they had advised
well with their consciences. But the Lord seeing Faith lost.
them take so little tent to their consciences, he spoils them of faith and of
the hope of mercy. Out of al which we may and must conclude (and so M. B. him
self teaches us) that pa. 27^.
faith in these men may be easily lost, which being altogether fastened and
tied to good conscience, and this to good life* by necessary sequel faith
decaieth with good life and conscience. But how matcheth this with his former
preaching, that the best and most sincere Christians fall every day seven times,
yea seventy times seven times, and that in to gross sins? Is not this as
much as if he said* that the best Christians every hour of the day become
infidels, and can not have faith in the mercy of god, to whom their conscience
witnesses, that daily and hovvrely Gods wrath is kindled against them, for
that their conscience shows then to be guilty of many offenses against God;
and al those offenses, gross, deadly, and damnable, after the Calvinists
Theology? Much more this doctrine repugneth Before* page ^69.
to that which Calvin, Beza, the whole church of Geneva, and M. B. him self
preaches afterward in this self same sermon in these words. It is sure and
certain, that page ^79.
faith is never wholly extinguished in the children of God. Be it never so
weak, yet shall it never utterly decay and perish Faith ca^ never be lost.
out of the heart* where once it makes residence. A weak faith, is a faith and
where that faith is, there man ever be mercy. Again. Faith once geven by God,
can not be revoked again. Faith when it is geven by God, is constantly geven,
never to be cha^nged nor utterly taken from them. Again. This page 27^.
gift of faith where ever it be and in what heart so ever it be, it is never
idle but perpetually working; and working well by love and charity: Where ever
it be, it is not dead but lively. How oppo^ite and most evidently repugnant is
this to Faith ev^^ works well
the former preaching? If says where ever it be, be never idle but
perpetually working well by love and charity, how says he that they have faith
which oppress the poor, keep Faith sometime works ^^.
deadly feid, and so forth, which are no works of Christian charity, how
soever they be esteemed among the Calvinists, as works perhaps of their sole
justifying faith and hot love. If when ^aith is once geven, it can never be
lost, never revoked by God, never utterly taken from them who are once
possessed of it; how says he, that it is lost by evil life, and that God
spoils them of faith and hope of mercy which commit such mortal sins? But a
most wicked, barbarous, and sensibly false paradox it is, to say that faith
once had can not be lost, the contrary Faith may be lost.
whereof we see by lamentable experience of thowsands, who depart daily not
only from Catholic faith to heretic, and in heresy from one to an other,
from Lutheran to Zuinglian or Calvinian, from Caluinian to Anabaptistical, from
that to Triuitarian, Antitrinitarian, etc. but also from the general name and
pretense of Christian faith to plain Apostasy, to Iudaisine, to Maho^^ctisine,
to Atheism, With professors of which gospel, as by witness of my L^ of
Canterbury, the English VVhi^^ c^^^^^ C. Tract. ^. ^^ 6 page 7^.
church is well replenished: so M. B. him self signifies the like of his
Scottish congregation, of which he vvriteth thus. Alas, we are come to sic a
loath, disdain, and of^asting pa. ^3^. 24^
of this heavenly food (he means Gods word) in this country, that where men
in the beginning would have gane. some, 20. miles, some, 40. miles to the
hearing of this word: they will searcely now come fra their house to the kirk
and remain one hour to hear the word, but b^des at home. This being true, if
(as he in this same place teaches) faith formed in our hearts by the holy
spirit, vvil decay except it be nurrished: and if to the n^^ris^ing of this
faith it be requisite that we hear the word of God preached, and preached not
by every man, but preached by a lawful pastor, by pa. ^^^. ^^^
him that is sent, which point he does inculcate diligently, and without which
preaching it is not possible (says he) that a man continue in the ^aith: how
can it be avoided, but where this word is not thus preached, as it is not in
a Before* page 224. 225.
number of places of England, nor perhaps of Scotland, there the faith among
the brethe^^e, not only may, but also must of necessity decay, which without
this kind of preaching can not possibly continue? And if there be no such
preaching preaching I mean by pastors lawfully No lavvful vocation of pastors
in England, nor
sent (as in truth there is no^e nether in England nor yet in Scotland amongst
all the ministers, as of the English ministry is best proved by the Puritanes,
by Ca^twight, by Calvin* by Beza, by Knox by the Scottish communion book and
election of ministers appointed Scotland.
there: and for the Scottish ministry, to let pass my L. of Canterbury and
the English Pontifical, it is very clearly proved by Buchan^^ in his story,
and the first original Buchan. hi^^. Scotic. lib. 16 mexim^ page 5^^. 556. 558.
559. 561. 56^*
and foundation of this new Scottish kirk in our age, laid by that seditions
and infamous man John Knox and his comparteners in despite and against the vvil
of both magistrates, as well temporal as spiritual, that I mention not
Catholic vvriters, who have made demonstration of this, against both Scottish
and English in sundry writings) how can there be remaining any faith among
them, where is no orderly preaching of the word by ^aith may be ^ost.
any such lawful pastor orderly sent, who is so necesiarie to preserve this
faith? And how plentifully is this most barbarous fancy refelled in the holy
scripture by a number of examples, facts, and sentences? where we find that
Simon Magus believed Christ's gospel as other Christians Act. 8. 13.
did, who yet after became an Arch-heretike or Apostata, as likewise did
Hymeneus and Alexander: where ^. Timoth. 1. 19. 20. Ibid. ca. 4. 1.
the Apostle forewarneth, that in the later days, many Christians shall depart
from the faith, whereof we see daily experience: where he reproves the
Galathians, for that they receiving the spirit, and for a while continuing
Galat. 3. 2. 3
in the spirit, afterward gave over the spirit, and ended in the flesh;
where is declared that some who were sanctified by the blud of the new
testament, afterward despised and trod Hebr. 10. v. 29.
under their feet the son of God, and the same blud by which they had been
sanctified: being washed from their sin, ^. Pet. 2. 20 21. 22.
afterward as unclean swine, returned and wallowed in their former filth:
where the Evangelist vvriteth plainly, and our Savior him self teaches us,
that some there are Luc. 8. 13.
who gladly receive the word of God and believe for a time, but when trial
and persecution comes, then they depart and geve over their faith. And to
what purpose is it, that the Apostles exhort Christians to stand fast in their
faith, Act. 14. 22 1. Co 16. 13 Coloss 1. 23. 1. Timoth. 2. 15. Romans 11. ^1.
that S. Paul threatningly vvarneth some Christians to become humble and
think lowly of them selves: and to fear lest God who spared not the natural
branches (the Jews) spare not them, but cut them of also, and reject the^ as
he rejected the Jews. If it were then an article of faith, that faith once
had can never be lost, that God vvil never take faith from them, on whom he
has once bestowed it, what wit or wisdom were there in these either
exhortations or threats? As much as if M. B. should exhort his ministers to
continue men, and not become women: or threaten them that except they stood
fast in their new gospel, they should never be able to pass from Scotland to
Denmark either on foot or horseback, or walk in one day from Edinburgh to
Jerusalem. This is to foolish and impious: and yet this is the very form and
tenor of the scriptures, by M. B. and Calvin's doctrine. And as foolish and
impious is Calvin's answer to these and the like Cal^. Instit^^ lib 3 cap. ^.
number. 9. 10. 11. 1^. 13.
places, that the Apostles, Evangelists, Christ, and al scripture speak
improperly: and therefore their speeches are now to be corrected by this
worshipful squire and Evangelist of Gebenna, or rather Gehenna. And what can
be devised more pregnant and forcible against this, then that which the
Apostle Paul vvriteth to the Hebrews? that some who were endued with faith,
and that in the most high and excellent degree, who were once illuminated
Hebr. 6. 4. 5.
and after their illumination had tasted the heavenly gift, were made partakers
of the holy ghost, had moreover tasted the good word of God, and powers of the
world to come, which is to yield them all the prerogatives and tastings of Gods
grace, which M. B. sometime talks of and chalengeth to his elect: yet these
men so amply illuminated, after all this, fell from the faith; yea fell in so
desperate sort, that as much as in them lay, they crucified again the son of
God, Ibidem v. 6.
and made a mock of him. If true faith once had can never be lost, what
commentary vvil M. B. make of these words? I omit to produce fathers of the
primitive Church, of whom no one from the first to the last ever dreamed of
this Caluinia^ frenzy. Yet if M. B. have mind to see this in them refelled
generally by scripture, let him August. de corr^p. et gra^^^^a. 13 ^^^m de bono
perseuera^t. ^a. 8. 13. De Ciuit lib. 1. ca. 12. lu psalm. 50. ^1.
read S. Austin (who most of al other was by reason of the heresies of his
time concerning grace, exercised in this kind of argument) and he shall find
enough to satis^^e a reasonable man. Certainly, to geve men in this world
security and assurance, assurance (I say) not of hope but of faith, that they
shall not, nor can perish eternally, is to turn vpside down and clean invert
the nature of humanity and divinity, of heaven and earth, of man and Angels:
it is to geve the crown to one, who yet is fighting, 1. Cor. 9. ^4. Philip.
3. 14 Psalm. 9^.
and has not obtained the victory; to geve him the garland who yet is
running his race, and uncertain how to hold his course: to put him in the sure
port, who yet is rowing on the sea, and tossed with the waves thereof: to
geve mortal man in this life that; reward for which in this life we labor,
and is proper to the next, and by gods ordinance appointed for the blessed
sowles Prosper de vi ^a ^^^^mplat. lib. 1. ca. 3. and De vocati^. g^nt^n^n,
lib. ^. cap. 2^.
and angels confirmed in grace: that is in one word, to make men believe they
are already sure of heaven and salvation, who by this very presumption are in
the broad and most certain way to hell and eternal damnation. But because if I
should proceed in this sort with the rest of these two last sermons, I
perceive I should fall in to that tedious prolivitie, which I most covet to
avoid, I vvil therefore only write down shortly M. B. his strange assertions
concerning faith and works; adding for confutation no other authority then
his own: which I will likewise put down so nigh as may be in his own words,
but always in his own sense. And let this stand for the first.

The first.
Faith lost with good ^^e.
Faith depends on good life and conscience: and so with the loss thereof,
faith and salvation is lost.

Contra
Faith once had can never be lost, whatsoever a man^ page 279. Faith not lost
with good lose. See before pa. ^06. Before page 400. Only faith.
life is. For God never reuokes or takes away the gift of faith, which once he
has geven. Faith shall never utterly decay and perish out of the heart, wherein
it makes once residence.

II.
Faith is the onl^ moven and instrument, whereby we apply Christ unto our
sowles. And there is in the scripture no other instrument of applying Christ to
us but this.

Contra.
Ibid. page 400. 401. Not only faith.
Love of Christ, is an instrument, whereby we apprehend and grip Christ better
then by faith, even as the meat which we eat and taste better nurrisheth our
body then that we only feed our eye vvithal.

III.
Where the conversation is not holy, let men speak pa. 213. 214 No true faith
without good life.
what they will: there the h^r^ is defiled, there this true and lively faith hes
no place.

Contra.
Be our conversation never so wicked, howsoever ^^^ pa. 281. 282
bodies be losed to al dissolution, faith ever remains, the True faith
without good life.
fire of true faith is never put out, suppose it be covered.

IIII.
The gift of faith where ever it be, and in what heart soever, Page 271. Faith
ever vvorking well
is never idle, but perpetually working: and working well by love and charity.
Where ever it be, it is not dead but lively: that is, Al men which have
faith, are perpetually vvorking well by love and charity.

Contra.
In some of our great men, their oppressions of the poor, page 267. Faith some
times vvorking il.
their deadly feids with their own companions burst out in sick an high
measure as show that they advise not well with their consciences, wherein
depends faith. And therefore the Lord seeing them take so little tent to their
consciences, spoils them of faith. Then, some men which have faith, work
not perpetually well by love and charity.

V.
Sin severeth a man from God, and God can not dwell in a Before. page 399.
Sin seuereth God from man.
man, that always commits sins.

Contra.
The best men every day and hour commit gross sins. Yet the faithful in
their greatest dissolutions, fall they to page 282. Sin severeth not God from
man.
murder and adultery as David did, they never leese the spirit of God. So
then God dwells in them, notwithstanding their continual sins.

VI.
A Christian man living dissolutely in sin, can not page 268. A brother
sinning can not have confidence in Gods mercy. page 265.
have faith and confidence in the mercy of God. For how may be have faith in
the mercy of God, whose conscience witnesses to him daily, that for his
manifold sins Gods wrath is kindled against him? A hurt conscience man ever
doubt: and the more we doubt, the less is our persuasion. Na question so long
as the sense of gods anger and feeling of my offenses bides, I can not have a
stark persuasion that he will be merciful to me: and so you can not have a
right faith, which with you is a stark and strong persuasion of gods mercy.

Contra.
A Christian man living never so dissolutely, can never pa. ^^^. ^^^ 278.
leese faith. The spoonks whereof work in him continual morse, and makes him
call to God for mercy every day. And ^^^^ prayer is a certain argument of the
right faith and belief page 272. (...)sin (...) 2^4. (...) page 300.
in God For I can not speak to him, nor pray to him, in whom I trust not. Ergo
a brother sinning never so much, not only may have, but also actually has
faith and cofidece in the mercy of God. For else he could not pray unto him.
Again. In despite of the devil, and the corruption which is in us (and M. B.
who teaches the contrary) this faith shall never perish: and then necessarily
such a man has a stark and strong persuasion of gods mercy. For else he has
not faith, that being by M. B. and Calvin defined, a stark and strong Before.
page ^0^.
persuasion in Gods mercy.

VII.
It is true and certain that the spoonkes of faith, which are pa. ^79. 2^0. To
spoonk(...) sometimes smored.
kindled in the har^ by the spirit of God, certain it is they may be smored for
a long time: they may be covered with the ashes of our own corruption, our
evil deeds and wickedness in which we fall. The effects of a lively faith will be
so interrupted, thy lusts and affection, will so preuail for a long time that in
the a long tym^.
mind and heart and conscience of him, who has so oppressed and smored his
faith, it will come to pass that in his own page 2^0. ^^1.
judgment he will think him self an outcast and reprobate.

Contra.
The spirit of God in ma^s heart can not be idle, but the spoonkes page 282. 283.
in the mean time that the body is cast lose to dissolutions, these spoonkes
are accusing thy dissolutions: these spoonkes The spoonkes o(...)mored, not
suffer thee not to take pleasure of thy body without great bitterness and
continual remorse And these spoonks where they are will make: he sawle to utter
these words ains in 24. hours: Alas I offend God etc. Then a man that feels
these ^ short time.
motions ever once in 24. hours (which is no very long time) yea seeles them
vvorking a continual remorse (which is a great deal shorter) and is a right
Protestant endued with the faith here declared (proper to the elect) how vile
soever his life be, can never think him self a reprobate, ^eeling in his heart
once in 24. hours, yea feeling continually these spoonkes of faith, and
motions of the holy spirit, which assure him the contrary.

VIII.
The children of God (such as right Caluinists are know assuredly by faith,
that they are the elect of God And this is the difference between the Catholic
or Papist, and them, that the Papist dare not apply the promise of page 26^.
222. Every Caluinist sure of ^^^ salvation.
mercy to his own soul; he countes it presumption to say, I am an elect, I am
saved and justified. The miserable men contents them with a general faith, that
leanes only on the truth of God (whereas the Calvinists have a special faith,
which See before pa. 303. 307.
leanes upon the lying fancy of man whereby I know that the promises of God
are true. But the Papist dare not come and say, they are true in me. Why?
because he hes not felt it and pa. 261.
the heart of him is not opened. But our justifying faith woorks 262.
in us particularly a marvelous assurance and persuasion that God loves me. It
works a certain assurance and persuasion that he will save me. And this
particular application is the specifike difference, the chief mark and proper
note, whereby our faith is discerned from all the pretended faiths of all the
sects of the world. So then this is a special article of the Scottish
Calvinists special faith, that they and they only know by faith, which is most
certain, assured, and void of al doubt (for what Christian doubts of any
article, any part or parcel of his faith: and if he believe with doubting,
then plain it is he has not faith but opinion that they are elect and shall
assuredly be saved. And this is the specifike difference between them and al
other, not only Catholics but even Protestants, Lutherans, Zuinglians,
Anabaptists, Trinitarians, Parliament Protestants or Princifidia^s of England
etc. that al and singular Calvinists (after the Scottish order) and with them
perhaps out English Puritans, know most certainly even by faith, that they be
elect, and so infallibly shall al be saved.

Contra.
The elect and dearest servants of God are cost in to terrible page 275. 278.
doubtings, and wonderful ^its of desperation: The best servants of God are
exercised with wonderful sta^merings in their The best Caluinists doubt of
their salvation.
soul. Every sin which they commit, hurts the conscience: that impaires the
persuasion, and so comes in doubting. There is ^^^ a sin which we commit, but
it banishes light, and casts a slough over the eye of our faith, whereby we
doubt and stammer in our sight etc. It comes to pass that in our own
judgment we page ^^1.
think our selves of casts and reprobats. For so offending we can not have a
stark persuasion that God will be merciful to us. Ergo the elect know not by
faith, that they are of the number of Gods chosen. For so should they never
want a stark and strong persua^sion and marvelous assurance: they could never
doubt of that, which to the^ is as sure as an article of faith. Which
doubting, yea wonderful and marvelous doubting, so far forth that in their
judgment they think the contrary, they think them selves reprobates, seeing
it often times chances to the best* Protestants, yea those of the Scottish and
Genevian persection: hereof this specifike difference between them and al
others, is made a very general communion to them with al other sectaries,
Other Sects surer of their salvation then the Caluinists
and they left no surer of their salvation, then are other their good brethren
of what sect or heresy soever.

Nay farther, whereas the Scottish Protestants have such terrible doubtings of
their election and salvation as here M. B. confesses, which the Lutherans and
Anabaptists have not, as before has been declared, who without Before page
^01. ^02. ^05.
al such doubt are most assured of their election and salvation: hereof it
follows that this specifike difference rather apperteyneth to them then to
these; and that it discerns the faith of those Lutherans and Anabaptists from
the faith of al sects in the world, be they Calvinists Scottish, Genevian,
Puritan or other, rather then of M. B. and the Scottish Calvinists, who of
their election and salvation doubt so terribly, as in deed they have just cause.

IX.
To make the later contradiction more plain, let it be remembered, that before
in his third sermon, he inveigheth against the Catholics, for that they call
this Protestant faith, an imagination or fancy: and he refuteth them as
Before, page ^1^. ^1^.
plat contrary to the Apostle touching the nature of faith, for that the
Apostle (if we believe M. B. exposition, or if it be credible that S. Paul
ever dreamed of this Lutheran devise) calls it a substantial ground, an evidence
and page 111.
demonstration: whereas they (Papists) call it an uncertain opinion fleeting in
the brain and fancy of man. So there it is Faith never doubts.
Papistical and against the Apostle, to call this faith vvavering, uncertain,
and doubting, whose nature is to be a substantial ground, to conteyne
evidence, assurance, firm persuasion and demonstration, as also Calvin, and
Calvin's See before pa. ^03.
master Bucer strongly confirms.

Contra.
Yet here M. B. makes a long discourse to the contrary. For (says he)
doubtings, as I have often spoken, may ludge page 277.
in a saul with faith. For doubting and faith are not extremely Faith ev^^
doubts.
opponed, but only faith and despair. Doubting man ludge, it will ludge, and
hes ludged in the saules of the best servants of God. If then your faith man
be, and will be still doubting, stammering, wavering, and uncertain; then is not
your faith, such a faith as the Apostle describes: it is no substantial ground,
no evidence or demonstration: and it was no offense of the Catholics, to call
it an uncertain opinion fleeting in the brain, which now your self confess
to be the very nature of your Genevian faith, saying that ever it hes be, it
will be, and man be doubting.

X.
Faith is the gift of the holy spirit. And this gift is not given page ^71.
None have faith but the elect.
to al men and women. Al hes not faith This gift is not geven unto al: but it
is only geven to the elect; that is, to so many as the Lord hes appointed to
life everlasting.

Contra.
Who soever has a desire to pray, to crave mercy for his page 272. Many have
faith besides the elect. 1 At that pray.
sins, suppose the greatest part of thy heart repine and would draw thee from
prayer, yet assuredly that desire which thou have in any measure to pray, is
the true effect of the right faith. Prayer is a certain argument of a
justifying faith. Ergo all that pray to God, have faith.



Item. If thou be content to forgave thy neighbor as freely as pa. 273. 274 2
All that forgave.
God forgave thee, assuredly that is the effect of the right spirit. Item.

A third effect of faith is compassion. Thou man bow thy heart, and extend thy
pity upon the pure members of Christ. Ibidem.
3 All that have compassion. Note.
For except ye have compassion, ye have no faith. Examine your selves by these
3. effects, prayer, forgeving wrongs, and compassion: and if ye find them in
any measure, be it never so small; you have the right faith in your heart, you
have the true and lively faith, and assuredly god will be merciful unto you Ergo
all that pray though never so little, or forgeve injuries and wrongs done to
them freely, though never so seldom, or be pitifully affected toward a
Christian in misery, and geve an alms though never so small, one denier al
his life time, assuredly al these men have the right faith.

Fourthly, if thy conversation be good, it is a sure token, that page 213. 248.
249.
4 All that live honestly.
thou art at one with god. No doubt that heart that breaks forth in to good
fruits of doing well and speaking well, is coupled with god. And consequently it
is sure, and there is no doubt, but in such a person is faith. For no man is
coupled with god, but by the band of faith. Item. pa. ^14.


When thy conversation, thy heart and mouth sais al one Ibidem.
5 All that sp^^ke as they think.
thing: then no question thou have the work of faith wrought by the holy
spirit in thy heart. Ergo all that live honestly, that do well and speak well,
doubtless have faith: as likewise all that are not dissemblers, but speak as
they mean, and mean as they speak, without question have faith wrought in
them by the holy spirit.

Sixthly* ye men also try whether ye be in love and charity page 214. 215. 6 All that love their neighbors.
with your neighbor. Love is the only mark whereby the children of Christ and
members of his body are known from the rest of the world. And the more we grow
in love, the more god by his spirit dwells in us. Always this love flows from
the root of faith. Ergo al men that live quietly in love and peace with their
neighbors, have faith.

Seventhly and last, to talk and consider this faith more 7 All that believe in
Christi death. page 211. 212.
properly and specially in it self; by her more intrinsecal effect and
operation; by faith we have peace with god. To try whether ye have faith or
not, ye must try whether ye believe in the blud of Christ or not: whether ye
believe to get mercy by his merits, and sanctification by his blud. For if ye
have no measure of this faith, ye have no measure of peace with God. This is
the faith which purges the heart and purisieth the soul. Ergo al kind of
Christians, al I say Calv* Insti^^. lib. 3. ca. 15. number. 2. ^t lib. 2. cap. 17.
number. 6. and ad Philippen. cap. 2. v 9.
without exception (save only perhaps Calvin and some Calvinists, who deny
the merit of Christ's passion, and can not abide to hear of any merit in
Christians or Christ him self) which believe that Christ by his passion
merited our redemption, sanctification, and salvation, have faith. Wherefore
to conclude this with his own page 249.
words: The whole weight (says he) of our trial stands chiefly upon this
point, to see whether we be in faith or not, to examine whether Christ dwells in
us by faith or not. For without faith, there can be no coupling nor conioyning
betwixt us and Christ: without faith our heart can not be sanctified: without
faith we can not work by charity. So al depends on this only. For which
trial and examination he geveth us so many sure, certain, and doubtless marks,
marks whereby without question we may know where this faith is found: and
these ma^kes are, prayer at some time, though but coldly, forgevenes of
injuries, and compassion of the poor, though once in ten year, honest
conversation, plain dealing, love of our neighbor (to which by like right and
reason he may add al other civil and moral virtues) belief in Christ's death
and passion. Where these marks be found, he puts it for sure and certain,
without doubt and question, that al such men have the right, true, and
justifying faith. Whereof I conclude, that according to this his doctrine, not
only al Christians good and bad (excepting the Calvinists) have faith, but also
many Turks and Ethnikes, who in number of the foresaid virtues far surpass
many kind of Protestants. For as S. Austin August. d^ spiritu and lit. ca. ^^.
*Pro^^er in libro sentent. number. 46.
and S. Prosper write, and we find it true by all learning, plain reason, and
certain experience, sine quibusdam operibus bonis, difficillime vita cuiuslibet
pessimi hominis inu^nitur. The most wicked man under the Sun (be he Jew or
Gentile) hardly passes the course of his life without some good works. And
therefore either al these are elect, which is impossible; or al which he
puts down for such, are not sure and certain marks of faith, which is
true; or true it is not, that only the elect have faith; which to affirm, is
most false, absurd, and execrable; as which everteth al Christianity, and al
sense and meaning of scriptures.

And these few so palpable contradictions found in so small a compass, may
suffice to declare with what substance of divinity and constancy of
doctrine these men feed their miserable auditors. I omit many other as fond and
contrary assertions (of which these last two sermons seem in manner wholy
patched up, as a beggars cloak of diverse pieces and colors) especially if I
should compare them also with his former sermons: as for example: in his third
sermon; faith is the gift of God and only jewel Page 111. See before pa. 312.
Page 272.
of the soul: in his fifth sermon, prayer is a jewel of the soul as well as
faith, yea better then faith, as being the best jewel and gift that ever God
gave man: in the fourth Sermon love is a jewel of the soul to, and that better
then Page 235. ^36. See before pa. 400. 401.
either faith or prayer, as by which we best of al grip Christ and apply him
to our sowles, better then by faith etc. These and many more must be omitted,
both for brevities sake, and also because in this and such like it may be
answered in his behalf, that to require of him or any other of ^^costancie in
^^e protestant Gospel.
his profession, to make their doctrine each part agreeable to other in places so
far distant, is unreasonable and against the tenor and quality of their
gospel, which evermore varieth and alters. Which liberty also M. B.
closely insinuates and chalengeth to him self in these Sermons, vvilling his
auditors in the second of them, to take this for the present, until he have
more insight in these Page 102.
matters: and it appears his insight was more in the 4. and 5. Se^mons, then
it was in the third. I omit also, Scripture applud to prove contrary
assertions.
which yet is very markable, and diligently to be noted, that for all these
blind contrary assertions he still alleges scripture as well for one part as
the other. That faith is lost by evil life, he proves by scripture. That faith
is never Page ^^^. pa. ^^ 9. 2^0. ^^1. 252. page 111.
lost by any means, he proves at large and more abundantly by scripture. That
faith is a substantial ground, an assurance and certain p^rsuasion without al
doubting, he proves by S. Paul. That faith may stand with doubting, look to
the Apostle says M. B. and the Apostle says, we page ^^^.
always are in doubt, but we despair not. For which text (refeiring it to
faith as he does) that we always are in doubt of our faith or any part thereof,
we may look for it in the Apostle til our eyes be out, and never find it.
That the holy ghost can not abide and remain in a sinful soul, is proved by
scripture. That the holy ghost never departs from the elect, commit they
sins never so foul and filthy; for this also he alleges scripture. and
Page ^^^.
so forth for the rest: that faith is ever vvorking well by charity, and
sometimes not vvorking well etc. scriptures, especially S. Paul is ever at hand
to justify al.

More general c^ntradiction.
he makes the very frame and body of his discourse plain repuguant to his
beginning and ending: he sets as it were the head and feet of a horse to
the body of a man, as though he would protest him self to be of the number of
those of vvho^ the Apostle speaks: They covet to 1. Ti^^^. 1. ^
be taken for doctors of the law, and preachers of the gospel, whereas they
understand nether what things they speak, nor whereof they affirm. For what
is his discourse ^or preparation to recceiu^
in these 2. Sermons touching preparation? Forsooth that to the worthy
receiving of the Lords supper, is required preparation, which conteynes many
parts, that the communicant have true faith in Christ, love God, love his
neighbor, pray, be merciful, bring forth good fruits, glorisie God in word
and deed, be sorry for sin committed ^heretofore, and diligently eschew it
for the time to come, hate sin and also have sorrow for it. For it is not Page
^5
enough to hate it, if thou lament not the committing of it, and with a godly
sorrow deplore it: (wherein he speaks like a Papist or Catholic not like a
Gospelling Protestant, this being flat against the common vvriting of his
masters, Luther, Calvin, Musculus, Melanchton, Beza etc. yea against his own
Scottish communion book. For it was one of Luthers capital articles condemned
by the Roman See, and after stubbornely maintained by him and his sectaries as
an article most true, Christian, and godly, Art. 6. Luth. t^m. ^. vvittemb. ^o.
^9. Fox Act. and Monum. v^t. adi^. p. 1459 1460. In the supper of the lord.
plane and manifest Christianissimus, that such contrition and lamenting for
sin, as here M. B. commends, makes one an hipocrite, yea a greater and
more grevous sinner before God facit hypocritam, imo magis peccatorem: and the
Scottish communion book speaking of this very point, says that the Lord
requires no other worthiness on our part, lut that we vrfaynedly ackowlege our
naughtines and imperfection) briefly and in sum, the person that would
vvorthely receive the supper, must try his conscience in page ^47.
these 2. points; first to know whether it beat peace with God: secondly,
whether it be in love, charity, and amity with his neighbor. This
preparation which thus in these last Sermons he most prosequuteth, may seem
both to incite his auditors to great holiness, and to make others suppose that
he has a very divine and high opinion of their supper, to the receiving
whereof such great preparation is required But vvilt thou see good reader all this overthrowen Against preparation to recesue.
in one sentence? Mark his first proposition, in the first page of these last
Sermons, wherein he avoweth preparation to be always at al times as well
necessary for hearing page 185.
the siwple word, as for receiving the visible sacrament: and like preparation
requisite for the one as for the other. For so he follows on with his
discourse: The Apostle in page ^^6.
the words that we have read, 1. Cor. 11. v. 28. gives his command, that we
should not come to the table of the Lord, we should not come to the hearing of
the word rashly, but with reverence: we should prepare and sanctify our selves
in some measure. With the same conclusion he shuts up both these sermons,
thus speaking in the last leaf: Thus ye see, in what points every of y^w ought
to be prepared. Ye man be ind^ed page 2^5. Not^
with love, and ^aith: and if ye have these in any small measure, go baldly to
the hearing of the word, and receiving of the sacrament. Why Si^is this the
way to make your auditors to amend them selves, their life and manners, or to
engender i^ them reverence toward the supper, to tell them that like
preparation is required for hearing the simple word, as for receiving the
sacrament? To le^ rest for a while the gross absurdity and vile consequence
which depends hereon, l^^ us first learn where you S. Paul sovvly
misreported
find this kind of Theology? You answer: The Apostle in the words which you
have read to your auditors. 1. Cor. 11. ver. 28. interpones his counsel and
geves advise, and not only that, but also geves his admonition and command,
that we should not come to the table of the lord, we should not come to the
hearing of the word rashly* but with reverence etc. Let us consider the text in
the Apostle. The place by you quoted is this according to the translation of
Calvin 1. Cor. ^1. v. ^^.
and Beza: Let every one try him self, and so eat of that bread and drink of
that cup. For who so eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks to
himself damnation, for that he discerns not the lords body. Where find you
here, that a man must come with such reverence, as you tell us of, to hear the
word? Yea where find you the word mentioned at al, either in that verse, or in
the whole chapter? What gross impiety and corruption is this, to publish so
wicked, unreasonable and pestilent doctrine: and then to father it on the
blessed Apostle, and namely in this place where it is most repugnant to the
whole drift of the Apostles atgume^t? What one, I vvil not say of the
Apostles, or primitive fathers and ancient Doctors, but what man endued with
any mean learning, mean wit, or sense of Christianity, ever wrote or
affirmed, that Gods word could not be heard fruitfully but of such men as
were first endued with the love of god, and then with the love of their
neighbor, in and for god, and had Other preparation required to receive the
Sacrament,
such other virtuous dispositions, as here you require in your communicants?
Does not the whole course and scope of the new testament show infinite
dissimilitude between the word of God, and this sacrament of God in this
respect? and vvithal resel this your to gross folly? Whereas the sacrament in
the very place by you read to your auditors (if ye read truly) is peculiarly
appointed 1. Cor. 11. 28
for the good and holy, those that have tried and examined Then to receive the
word.
well them selves: contrariwise is not the word of God by Gods like ordinance,
indifferent as well to the unholy as holy, to the bad as to the good, as well
to correct the one, as to preserve the other; to illuminate the faithles, as to
continue the light kindled in the faithful? Do not the vvritings and preachings
of Christ and ^^ Evang. et Act^^ Apost^l^ ^^^^ pass^^^.
his Apostles confirm this ^ Preached they not alike to Jew and Gentil, to
Idolaters, to Pagans, to sacrilegious persons of al sorts, blind for their
faith, and abominable for their life, whereof many knew not God, much less
loved him, and so could not love their neighbor for him? And yet this
preaching doubtless was without al sin, either in the Apostles who thus
preached indifferently to al, or in the disciples were they Jews or Gentiles
who heard them. In the first primitive church, which was immediately planted
by the Apostles, preaching ^ Cor. 14. ^^.
of the word was still public and universal to Heathen no less them
Christi^* and after, for the space of 400. years the same manner of preaching
the word continued, with express order taken by the church, by hundreds
C^cil. Carthag. 4. ca. ^4.
of bis^hops in very general Synodes, that nether Pagan nor Jew, nor heretic,
should be excluded from the presence and communication thereof, from hearing
the word of god; when as by precise order both of the Apostles and their
successors, pastors, and rulers of the church, al not only heathen, Jews and
heretics, but also novices in the Christian faith, so long as they were
unbaptized, were diligently excluded from being present at, or seeing the
administration See before pa. ^6^. ^63. ^64.
of the holy sacrament. So that most salse it is, like preparation to be
required for receiving the word and the sacrament; and so to say, clean
dasheth and destroys both these last sermons, and induces the plain opposite
of that this man would seem to persuade. For if no other preparation be
necessary for the sacrament then for the simple word; it being most clear
and certain, that Christ, his Apostles, al ancient Bisshops, without any
sin or offense of any part either of the preacher or of the heater, preached
the word to Jews, Gentiles, idolaters, usurers* adulterers, publicans, men
and women living in all sin of body and soul* hereof the deduction is
manifest, that by like reason the sacrament without sin of either part, may
be delivered and received of Jews, of Gentiles, of Idolaters, of adulterers, of
usurers, of slannderers, of men never so sinful and wicked. With which
qualities albeit perhaps the elect brethren of Calvin's institution be commonly
endued, who usually as M. B. witnesses, fall in to such gross sins not
only seven times but even seventie times seven times, that is almost five
hundred times every day; yet thus to instruct and teach them, and namely at
such time and place, was a very unfit way of preparation to worthy receiving
of the sacrament; for which, by this doctrine any preparation suffiseth: to
which they can never come unworthily, nor receive it to their condemnation, no
more then Luc. 7. f. and cap. 11. Matthew. 9. a. b. Ma^^. ^. b. Lu^. 6. c. and
cap. ^. a. b. ^^an. 6. d. ^. f. g.
Marie Magdalen, the sinful woman, or other publicans, usurers and sinners
received the word of Christ or his Apostles to their condemnation. And this
may stand for an evide^t example of a more general repugna^ce, wherein
pretending honor to the sacrament, he most dishonoreth it, and while at large
he persuadeth great care of preparation, he shortly but pithily dissuadeth the
same, and causes his auditors to neglect and castavvay al such care. General
preaching against preparation.


Now to end this matter, let us consider one other like general example,
wherein he universally both gainsaieth him self, marreth al his devout
preaching, and sets his auditors in the high way to al audacitie, license,
liberty, and fleshly security. Toward the end of his second sermon, thus he
armeth them against al tentatio^s and teaches them how they shall find repose
in their page ^^6.
conscience, be their sins never so great, their contempt of God and
despising of his commandments never so notorious and horrible, and their own
conscience never so vehemently accusing them thereof. When (says page ^^7.
he) the devil, thy own life and conscience accuses thee, and bears witness
against thee: go back over again to thy bygane experience, cast over thy
memory, and remember if god at any time, in any sort has loved thee: if ever
thou felt the love and favor of god in thy heart etc. Remember on this, and
repose thy assurance on this, that as he loved thee ains, he will love the ay,
and will assuredly restore thee to that love or thou dye. The heart that felt
ains the love of god shall feel it again. And look what gift or grace, or what
taist of the power of the world to come, that ever the lord gave to his
creatures in this life, to that same degree of mercy he shall restore his
creature, or ever it depart this life. This lesson he wills his audience
page ^^^.
to lock up in their hearts and remember on it faithfully, as a most worthy
comfort and me ^icament for their conscience. I vvil not spend time in re^uting
this strange doctrine, nether how it contrarieth the scripture of the Apostles
and Evangelists in a number of places. And yet I may no: let pass briefly to
vvarne the ^eader, that not only in the thing and substance of the matter, but
also in the very form of words and manner of phrase, most wickedly, yea like
a flat Apostata and enemy of the Apostles and al Apostolical doctrine, he
directly opposes him self to the Apostle. For whereas S. Paul says, that
such Christians* as have once been made partakers of gods graces Hebr. 6. 4.
and gifts* and have taisted the word of god and power of the world ^^ come,
when such men become Apostataes, and fall from God, it is impossible for them
to recover their former estate and grace: M. B. running full but against M. B.
fully opposi^e to S. Paul.
the Apostle, says in the same words and phrase, that such as have once
received the grace and gift of the holy ghost, or taisted the power of the
world to come, fall they never so desperately, in to what dissolution of body
and soul soever, most certain and sure it is, that before their death they
shall recover and be restored to the same grace and degree of mercy again. Yea
which is far more wonderful, and far more opposite to S. Paul, he assures
us that such bad Christians can never fall to such Apostasy as S. Paul
speaks of, they can never utterly leese faith, never leese the spirit: and
then it is no matter of impossibility as S. Paul thought, but rather a matter
of great facility, for a man to recover or keep fast that which he never
lost. And this being spoken by the way, return we unto our former lesson,
which he willed us to lock up in our hearts as a most worthy comfort, and let
us consider whether it be not such a rule of desperate losenes and al
iniquity, as Epicu^e him self if he were living, or Luther, or Lucian could
never have devised a more pernicious. If thou at any one time in thy life
(says M. B.) have loved God, or God loved thee, in what soever dissolution of
life thou fall after, assure thy self, before thou dye god vvil*restore thee to
that former grace. This is to say, if a man once in all his life have ^ad a good
thought, a good motion in A Gospel of Epicure and Venus.
his heart to serve god and love him; live he how he please, commit he what
sin and iniquity he list, he is sure never to be damned: he is sure
eternally to be saved. For let us join together the parts of his doctrine,
here by Before* page 415. 416. 1
him dispersed in 2. or 3. places. First, Who soever has faith or ever had
faith* is surely elect, and certain of his salvation. For faith is the gift of
God; and it is geven only to the elect. Item, whosoever at any time has had 2
a desire to pray, that desire was wrought by the holy spirit, and is a sure
argument of faith. So is it if a man have been true of his word: if he be, or
some times was no hipocrite, but spoke as he meant: if in heart he be, or have
been pitifully affected toward the afflicted: if he love his neighbor: if his
conversation be honest: if he can be content to forgive injuries, or at any
time have been thus qualified etc. al and every of these be sure and certain
arguments of a right faith, and consequently of 3 page 279. Before, page 306.
one that is elect, and sure of salvation. I ^ay to this one more lesson of
this preacher, that faith on^e had is never lost. The gifts and callings of god
(says he) ar^ without repentance. Therefore faith on^e geven can not be
revoked again. The Lord will not repent him of his gift, but the sawle which he
has loved ains, he will love perpetually. This is able to send thowsands of
Protestants to the devil, such Protestants I mean, as think to be justified by
only faith. For with faith this man geveth them sure vvarrant, that they shall
reteyne it eternally, if ever they had it, or by any of these marks perceived
it in any measure though never Before* page 415. 416.
so small, to have lodged in their hearts. Now for other Protestants, such as
dare not venture so far upon on^y faith, but think charity necessary also,
such as are the civil Lutherans, Adiaphorists, Melancthonists, and many cold
Catholics, that come perhaps to M. B. his sermons: to set them to helward after
the rest, he geveth like assurance, that if since they were borne, they ever
felt in their hearts any grace of God, any love, any charity, any such
operation of his holy spirit: to those also god shall restore the same
assuredly before their dying day, and hold them in it. For as he loved them
ains, so will he love them ay. For the gifts page ^7^.
of the lord are without repentance, and the sawle which he loved ains, he will
love perpetually. Which good and wholesome evangelical doctrine, because we
are willed to lock up in our hearts and remember it faithfully, I vvil for my
page ^^^. Mayor. The sum of M. B. S^r^^s of preparation
better memory bring it to a sillogisme, of which let this stand for the
first or mayor proposition:

What soever man God ever loved and endued with faith at any time in all his
life, that man is elect: him god will love perpetually, and so he is sure of
heaven, and out of al danger of hell, what soever his life be. This proposition
is plainly, evidently, and at large avowed and justified by M. B. Whereunto
let us add for the second proposition or minor, this:

But whosoever once in his life, either loved God or Minor
his neighbor, or trusted in Christ's passion, or lived honestly, or spoke as
he thought, or ^orgaue an injury done to him, or was mercifully affected to
the poor etc. or by like reason had any other such virtuous inclination, was
quiet and peaceable, or patient, mild, modest, continent, chaste, or wise and
prudent, or valiant, or fearing God, Galat. 5. 22. Esa^. 11. 2. ^. Cor. 3. 5.
yea or had ^t any time but one good thought (which doubtless does proceed from
God, and is sign of his love in some degree as well as the premises) this man
was at such time beloved of God, and had faith: whereof these were s^re and
certain arguments. This proposition is also at large, and in very plain
terms avowed by M. B. Conclusion.
Hereof it follows, that every man who once in 40. years has felt any good
motion in any of these graces or the like, how soever he bestow his life
afterward, he is sure of salvation, he is sure and certain that he can never
be damned. The like argument may be made for the having of charity: and if it
be perhaps lost (as by this man's doctrine it can not be, charity being a gift
of God no less then faith, and therefore once geve^ is given irre^^cably as
well as faith, for that gods gifts are without repentance) for recovery of it
again: and the party who once had it, shall surely dye possessed of it, gods
love being toward his creature perpetual, as well in the one as in the other.

And what Christian, or perhaps Turk or Tartar, by M. B. assur^^^ heaven to
Pagans no less^ the^. Christians
this Theology may not assure him self of heaven? For who lives under the
Sun, but some times in his life has some one or other of these good motions?
Some of See before* page 417.
which, the very light of nature and natural conscience stirs up in all men
at one time or other. For this also (to go no farther) is part of M. B. his
preaching. Our conscience page 1^^.
is borne with us, is natural to us, is left in the soul of every man and
woman. And as there are some spoonkes of light left in nature, so there is a
conscience left in it. And if there were no more: that same light that is left
in thy nature, shall be an^ugh to condemn thee: because this very light of
nature teaches us, that God is to be loved, and our neighbor: that we should
not play the hipocrites, but speak as we mean* we should live honestly,
succor the afflicted, etc. For neglect whereof, our conscience condemns us
before the judgment seat of God, whether Romans 1. ^ pa. 189. 19^*
we be Christians or not Christians, as M. B. truly confesses. And many of the
forenamed duties are not only known* but also practiced and done of many men
by the very light of nature and natural conscience, though out of grace (and
therefore not availeable Romans 2. v. 14 Plato in Apolog. Sociat* Cicero
delegibus. Plutarch. in mora^^b. vbi ^*
to glory) as the Apostle, and true Theology assures. And therefore whereas
M. B. against al reason, against ^l Theology, against the Apostle, and al
Apostles and Evangelists of Christ that ever were, tells his auditors, and
bids them lock up this as a sure conclusion* that if they once had any of
these virtues, they before they dye shall have them again; if ever they had any
one of them, then had they faith, whereof that was a suie and certain
argument, which faith is proper to the elect, and therefore they are Gods
elect perpetually, and then they can not possibly perish: whereas he makes
thus far such linking together and co^nexio^ of his Theological or rather
diabological propositions; what one of his auditors or disciples is so simple,
but he can deduce one farther conclusion The conclusion of M. B preaching.
out of these premises, that he may live how he vvil, he may do what he
please: he may freely follow the lusts of his flesh in all catnalitie and
sensuality, having assurance before hand from this preacher, that he shall
never be damned for it: that if ever he were inclined to any good since his
infancy, he shall be surely as good again before he die: and if once he felt
any grace of God any good effect of his grace al his life time, he shall find
God gracious and merciful to him for ever; for that his gifts and favor are
irrevocable, and whom he once loved, him vvil he love eternally. This is the
conclusion and consequence of that former preaching: and this is not to preach
God, but Epicure, not Christ, but Antichrist, not civil and moral honesty as
becomes an honest civil man, much less as becomes an Evangelist and preacher
of Christian piety and religion. but rather this is to set open the schole of
Sardanapalus, of Lucian and Diagoras, to make a mock of religion; to
extinguish and eradicare honest life and al virtue other civil or Christian:
and briefly in ^^eed of making preparation to the worthy receiving of their
lords supper (except Satan be their lord) this is to prepare men to celebrate
the Supper and feasts of Bacchus and Venus, of Lupercalia and Bacchanalia, to
set a man headlong in to al filthiness and villainy, al dissolution both bodily
and ghostly.

The conclusion, containing certain general reasons why the Calvinian Gospel
now preached in Scotland can not be accounted the Gospel of Christ.
The Argument.
only and special faith: and therefore their gospel has no show or face of any
religion. These 2. parts are proved severally; first touching good life: next,
touching necessary points of Christian says. For which cause, ever since the
beginning, this Calvinian gospel has been abherred and condemned not only by all Catholics, but also by very many Protestants, and those of most same and
learning.



and English detest it: so al Christians have just cause^ hate it, and return
from it to Christ's Catholic church and Gospel.

The Conclusion.
Matthew. ^^. ga^t. 5. Hebr. 11. Ioc. 1, 2. pillars of al religion*
way of excellency is called religion) is built upon 2. universal pillars,
faith and charity, to believe well, and to live well, as Christ and his
Apostles every where teach. And leaving to thy private remembrance and
knowledge, if thou be of age; if not, to thy information by books or other
better learned, how our Catholic religion (...), ^
has evermore framed her children to both these, to right faith and godly
charitable life, whereof the daily discipline good (...).
and practice of the church is the best proof: and the very face of our
realms Scotland and England adorned with such a number of goodly hospitals,
of colleges, of monasteries, built first to the honor of God, next to the
benefit of the realm, of the poor, of impotent, of orphans, of al sorts of
men in the realm, each in their degree and order, ruinated now by these
caterpillars and false ministers, yeldeth abundant confirmation: to leave this,
and to behold a little the other part, the religion brought in by these
ministers, which they entitle by the name of their Gospel; consider, which
thou may do without any great learning, as being a thing evident to the eye,
whether it pluck not up even by the roots as it were, al faith and good
life. For demonstration Caluins gospel enemy to both
whereof, I vvil not trouble thee with any new discourse, but only (...) upon
that which touching either of these has been said already in the last chapter,
or at the farthest, in this present treatise.

And concerning good life: when men are taught, 1 To good works. Before,
page 399.
that what so ever they do, is sin, and that mortal, deserving damnation:
that thus they sin when they study to do best, who vvil labor, who vvil
study to avoid sin; which he believes to be a thing impossible? When men
are taught, that if ever they had a good Before, page 415. 416.
motion to god ward, if ever they did any good, then had they faith: and then
are they surely elect, they are sure to be saved: what man vvil take needles
toil to procure by painful and unprofitable works that whereof he is sure
already? Where it is preached for right Euangelical, Before, page 406. 41^.
that a man once endued with faith, is afterward by no sin, by no filthiness
of life, never utterly forsaken of Gods holy spirit (a most filthy and
blasphemous doctrine) is never out of Gods love and favor ( for whom God
Before, page 4^4. 4^5.
^ins loved, he loves perpetually) will scholars thus instructed stand in fear
and horror of sin, with which they may satisfy their carnal delites, and
yet hold fast still Gods favor to, and remain endued with his holy spirit?
Where only faith is commended as sufficient to instification, Only faith.
were it not madness to suppose, that the vulgar multitude vvil do works of
supererogation? vvil by superfluous and unnecessary works do shame to the
blud Before* page ^^^.
of Christ? vvil do that, which no v^ayes profi^eth them without which they
are assured of heav^, and of which if they did as many as did S. Peter and S.
Paul, yet they are persuaded, that such works though never so many and never
so excellent, are nothing regarded before God* but rather in them they offend
his divine majesty, against whom they sin, even when they study to do best?
Briefly* Before, page ^99.
where men are persuaded in that one point, that having once had faith, or any
sign thereof, that is to say, any good motion in their hearts, they are surely
elect, and surely possessed of the holy ghost, and so, that they shall never be
altogether forsaken of him: sal they to murder, to adultery, range they in
any kind of sin never so long* they shall finally die the servants of God, and
without fail inherit eternal joy; who is so blunt and blind as not to see that
infinite presumption to commit sin, infinite security to wallow and tumble in
sin, perpetual neglect to leave sin or satisfy for sin, must necessarily
ensue of such meret^icious doctrine, more fit for a common bordel then for an
honest house: though this man bring at forth as a special ievvel and perle of
his Eua^gelical doctrine to honor his new kirk and congregation withal.

If we proceed from works to faith (which among ^
Christians is first to be waighed, as being the ground ^^^uin^ gospel ^^^my to
faith.
and foundation of al good works) this faith is so wasted by these men's new
gospellizing, that scarce any piece of it remains ^ound in his integrity.
For let us put for true that one article, which being by Luther and Calvin, by
Lutherans and Calvinists advaunced as the heart and life of their Gospel; M. B.
also magnifieth as the specifike Before, page 413.
difference between his Scottish Gospellers, and al Papists, yea al ^ects of
the world, vz. that he with his brethren by means of their firm and fast
pe^suasion (which is their definition of faith) have their sins certainly
remitted ^o^ ^em Before* page 303. ^^^. 41^. Special faith destroys ^^
Christi^^ faith. ^ Remission of sins in the church. Before* page 316. 317.
they are in the number of Gods elect, and still endued with his spirit. This
one opinion, what a garboile, what a spoil and vvast makes it in Christian
religion? For first, to many heretics and schismatikes out of the church, not
only Catholic, but also Calvinian; to Lutherans, Zuinglians, Anabaptists,
Trinitarians, Suenkfeldia^s, Memnonists etc. al and singular endued with this
persuasion or presumption, no less then are the Caluinists; to these and a
number of like, it gives remission of sins and eternal life: which is
against the articles of our C^eed, and general principles of Christianity.
Secondly 2
it abolisheth the use of the keys, which Christ so expressly gave to his
church, to S. Peter and the Apostles: Keye^ of the ^^^^ch. Man. ^^. ^^ ^oan.
^^. ^3. Ma^th. ^^. ^^.
Whose sins you remit, they are remitted: and to S. Peter: What thou losest
in earth, shall be losed in hearen. Against which, these good fellows by that
specisike difference of their only faith justifying them, can and do remit
their own sins, though never so gross and damnable which they howrely
commit, without help of the Apostles; and open heaven gates to them selves
whether S. Peter vvil or no. Of seven sacraments, which hitherto 3 Sacra^e^^s
of the church.
the church has enjoyed, five being already by this new gospel abolished both
in name and use, and two only remaining in name, baptism and the Eucharist, to
what purpose serve they? Are they not in like sort made altogether void and
frustrate by this solifidian persuasion? For, does baptism remit sins,
which is his office* Nothing less. But sins are remitted by this
persuasion, as the Caluinists teach us, not by the sacrament of baptism.
Before, pa. ^^ 105. 106
The Eucharist does it give unto Christians the communion of Christ's body and
blud? No. We eat that only by this appprehension, by this solifidian conceit
Before, ^^. ^^
and persuasio^: besides which, the sacram^nt yeldeth nothing but the
communion of a bit of bread, and a sip of wine or ale: twenty of which
communions altogether as good and spiritual a man may buy in the market 4
^rayer to god
for 2, or 3. half pence. But the scripture every where teaches men to pray
to God continually night and day* Psalm. 50. 4. (...) 4. ^4 ^on^ ^. ^. 9. Io^^.
^. ^3. 14. Act. ^. 22. ^. (...). ^. ^^
to geve alms, to vvatch, to fast, to do al good works that they may
purchase more grace of God, and obtain from him fuller remission of their
sins, and confirm their election to life eternal: and this pi^^ie perhaps is
much amplified by this wonderful faith? Nay, it is utterly destroyed with the
rest. For before any such prayer may be made* there is presupposed faith in the
brethren; and faith infallibly includes remission of sins: and therefore to
pray for that, of which by faith they are assured already, is like as if we
should pray for the incarnation of Christ, which is already past and
accomplished. Besides that it is against the doctrine of their gospel, to
think, that either Gods* favor and grace depends on man's works (which are
never good, but alvvaies sinful and impu^e) or that works ca^ any way better or
make more perfect and absolute remission of sins, which is altogether annexed
and fastened only to a strong persuasion and constant faith. And how can that
person fear 5 of God
God, who is taught evermore to believe as an article of his faith, that God
is loving, friendly, and most benevolent to him? that whatsoever he does, God
never hates him, never takes his holy spirit from him, but loves him
perpetually, and therefore before hand has set him free and secure from al
danger of hell, has geven him a sure placard and vvarrant of his salvation?
For these Col^^^^ Gosp^l condemned by the best Protestants.
and a number of like absurdities both against faith and good life, issuing out
of this Lutheran and Caluinian doctrine, Melancthon that peerles and
imcomparable man and most flourishing in all kind of virtue and learning (as the
Before, page ^4^.
Protestants account him) a chief author of this new gospel; albeit in his
youth he much help forward this special faith with the dependences thereof;
yet in his age he wonderfully abhorred and detested it: and refuting it in
sundry (...). i^ (...) ^^^^. ^l^^^^ ^ ^i^. Ho^^^^ilis ^r^^^ Sect^ A^^baptistic^.
his vvritings by a number of places and examples of scripture, calls it an
horrible error of the Anabaptistical sect^ a S^oical and exe^rable disputation:
Stoica est and execrand^ disputatio: he names it furorem Antinomorum, ^
^^rious opinion of the Antinomians (a sect of Protestants who rejected Cap. de
pea^^^^is actualib. and cap. de p^^^^^. and cap. de (...) Anabaptist.
and contemned the law) by which the whole law of God is made frustrate.
Finally he co^de^neth it as a most filthy heresy, and repugnant to the whole
body of scripture from the very beginning (for beginning at Adam and Eva who
had the spirit of God and lost it by sin, he runs thorough all the old and
new testam^t, and by both, at large disproveth it) to the ending, as nothing
can be more. Thus it sensibly may appear, that this doctrine of M. B. of
Calvin and the Calvinists, is the very bane and poison as before of good life,
so here of true faith; namely and especially such articles of faith, vvhereon
good life and holy conversation is principally builded.

If leaving these 2. later sermons of preparation, we shall Calvin's Gospel
destroys the Articles of our Creed.
a little look back and revew 1, or 2. chapters of the former Se^mo^s, namely
such as more directly apperteyne to faith alone, and concern the pri^cipal
heads of our belief, Christ's incarnation, his divinity, his omnipotency; it
has been plainly declared, that this ma^s preaching (nether mean I as it is
his properly and alone, but according as he draws it from Calvin and the
Caluinia^ schole) disanulleth his in carnati^, denies any* benefit to have
come thereby, denies the omnipotency of god, most Antichristianly disproveth
al miracles wrought by God in the old or new Testament* and by in^vitable
co^seque^ce destroys the faith of Christ's pure nativitie, and resurrection,
destroys the unity of his divine person in two natures. Al which depe^de
upon such verities, as these wicked, profane and godles me^ reject and
condemn, as being in their new Theology Before, page 381. 382 383.
impossible, beyond gods reach and ability: impossible I say for him in all his
majesty and omnipotency to effect and perform. And what Christian is there,
be he not to far gone in the lice^tious course of this new Gospel, that is to
say, be he not in manner a plain Apostata, if he reteyne any sparks or
spoonkes of his old Christianity; when he considers these issues and
sequeles of the Calv^nian doctrine, what Christian is there I say, but he may
and ought justly to stand in horror of such a Gospel and such Gospellers, who
by so plain and evident conclusion pull from him al form and show of old
Christianity, and under a grosle and impudent pretext of a reformed Gospel,
wrap him in a Jewish Talmud, or Turkish Alcoran, I mean such a gulf of
Paganism and infidelity, as has less resemblance and affinity with the
old ancient Catholic Christian and Apostolic faith, then has an ape with a
man, then copper with gold, or Mahomets prophets Homar and Halis, with S.
Peter and S. Paul the Apostles of our Savior! Certainly as for that former
Calvinian article of faith in the elect never lost, and the holy ghost never
departing from them in all their sins, Melancthon with many Lutheran
Gospellers condemns the Calvinian Gospel of extreme impiety, as has been
said: so two or three of these other articles defended likewise by the
Calvinists and M. B. seem to other Protestant preachers and vvriters so gross
and inexcusable, that Lucas Osiander (son to Andreas Osiander the first
Protestant-Apostle of Prussia) in his answer Lucas Osiender in Antisturmio.
pa. 22 an. 1579.
to Sturmius the Caluinist, alleges them for great reasons why every
Christian ought to abhor the Zuinglian doctrine, as erring in principal
matters of the Christian faith. For so are his words: Nos Zuinglianu^ dogma
merito damnamus etc. We Protestants of the Germane faith and Calvin's Gospel
Antichristian.
profession justly condemn the Zuinglian religion, for that it erreth in
maximis rebus ad verae religionis conseruatione^ and aeterna^ Ecclesiae salute^
pertinentibus; in most weighty matters, such as concern the preservation of
true religion and eternal salvation of the church. And forthwith, among most
Articles there of.
weighty errors of the Sacrame^taries, he reckeneth these. 1. The Zuinglian
or Caluinian doctrine gainsayeth the 1
words of Christ's testament. For whereas Christ says expressly, This is my
body, This is my blud: the Zuinglians reprove Before, cap. ^. 7. 8.
Christ God and man of a lie, affirming the body of Christ to be as far distant
from the Supper, as is the highest heaven from the earth. 2. The Zuinglian
doctrine takes from Christ his 2 Before, page ^^7. ^^^. ^^^.
omnipotency, and affirms that it is impossible for God to make a true body
to be in many places. 3. The Zuinglian doctrine leaves us in the Supper
nothing but bread and wine, ^ Before, cap. ^. 4. and pa. 21^ 214. Horrendas
blasphemi^s.
bare tokens without the body and blud of Christ, and with those bids us
confirm our faith. For these wicked assertions, or rather horrible
blasphemies (for so he terms them) this famous Gospeller together with a
number of Protestant congregations and pastors joining with him, al endued
Before, page 303. 304.
with the right Protestant faith, and therefore elect as well as M. B. and so
as sure of Gods favor and assistance of the holy spirit as he, do vvil and
couseil al men to detest the Calvinian sect, for that it maynteyneth so foul
heresies, so opposite to Christianity. And if thus they judge and persuade in
respect of 3. or 4. articles (maynteyned also in these Sermons by M. B.) how
much more ought we to detest the same Calvinian doctrine, being able to lay to
these few, many other as wicked and execrable: so many, as that we can make
manifest demonstration, that a man embracing Caluinisme, renounceth in a manner
the whole body of Christian faith, the intier symbol or Creed of the
Apostles; for that believing the Calvinists, or this preacher, he can not
possibly believe rightly nether See before page 137. 381. 382.
in God omnipotent: nor in Christ Jesus his page 383. 317. 318. 321. 322. 329.
page 388.
incarnate son God and man in one person: nor his pure nativity of his
mother a virgin: nor the p. 321. 322 403. 404.
redemption wrought by him in his flesh, nor his page 403. 404.
descension in to hell nor pa. 49. 50 51. and alibi passim.
the Catholic church, nor page 194. 195. 196. 197.
remission of sins obtained in the same, nor the page 323. 324. 325. 326. 383.
resurrection of our bodies to life eternal: page 381. 382.
nor generally any piece of scripture old or new, as has heretofore been noted
incidently, and shall hereafter upon more occasion be laid open and confirmed
more abundantly. If Protestants upon so good grounds abhor Caluinisme, as a
poison of Christian faith: can Catholics be blamed if they follow the conseil
of Protestants, and upon the same, and other as substantial grounds, detest
Caluinisme, from which their own brethren so earnestly dissuade? If Luther
that man of God and first father of this Gospel, canonized for a Confessor in
the English and Scottish Kalenders, and sent by God to illuminate the whole
world (as witnesses the English congregation) profess and protest, Defense
of the Apolog. ca. 4. par. 4. p. 39. Cent^^s laniari vel^ign^ co^ burt ma^^em.
Confessio orthodox ecclesiae Tigur. fol. ^0. ^ Before, page 341.
that he had rather be torn in pieces, or burnt to death a hundred several
times, then to agree in that one article of the sacrament with Zuinglius,
Oecolampadius, and others of that miserable and fanatical sect, (so he
speaks) if Philip Melancthon (*that peerles* man) be of the same judgment
and geve the same counseil: if Osiander do the like, and infinite others: how
much more ought we following herein not only Luther, not only Melancthon, not
only Osiander, not only such a number of gospelling Doctors and congregatio^s;
but which is a thousand times more, following the true sense of the holy
scripture, the Apostolic and Catholic Church, following the direction of Gods
holy spirit infallibly resident therein, and ever leading in to al truth,
contemn life and prefer death, ^ather then to communicate with those
Zuinglians and Caluinists; whereas besides that one heretical article objected
by Luther, we can as truly charge them with a number of other, each one as
heretical, as execrable and Satanical, as that of Luthers is.

to beware of wolves that come in Matthew. 7.
sheep clothing, because they resemble sheep: to beware of false prophets,
which come adorned with the signs Sheep clothing used by old heretics.
and marks of Christian religion, of holiness, of piety, because they nighly
represent and counterfeit true Christians. And such were many of the old
heretics, as the Manichees, the Apostolikes, the Tatians or Encratitae, the
Messalians or Euchitae, the Novatians, and some other: who for rare severitie,
which appeared in their living, for their long prayer, for their marvelous
fasting, great abstinence, and chastity, seemed to excel. Besides which, as
many of the Archheretikes erred not in many articles of their faith, so their
preaching had much show of holiness, of consent with religion in general, and
Christ's gospel in special, which every where commends such holy actions, as
they (though with false meaning) exercised. So that needful it was men to be
specially warned against such crafty deceivers. And much it was not to be
wondered if false Apostles covered with such sheep clothing, adorned with
such commendable virtues, good in them selves, and right fruits of Christian
faith, only faulty in this, that they were not applied to a right end, and
practiced with a right intention and meaning; it was (I say) no marueil, if
such false masters were followed and honored by many unstable Christians,
especially of the simpler sort, who are usually moved with such rare works,
and can not easily distinguish between pure colors and counterfeit, sincere
piety and dissembled hypocrisy, between purity of faith in right religion,
and that which has the external shape, face, resemblance and countenance
thereof, whereas it wants the internal substance and virtue. But what one
such probable or No such clothing used by the Caluinists
affected mark, what figure or imitation of such sheep clothing find
thou in this Calvinisme? If thou look in it for articles of faith, thou
find in effect, none. If thou look for works of charity and piety;
their solifidian justification takes away al color thereof. If thou respect
external monuments built in the honor of Christ, in memory of his Apostles, of
the first plante^s of Christian faith, and to the relief of Christians,
wherewith in the time of our graund-fathers, the Christian world did abound:
as partly thou may see by view and experience of our Island at home, so more
evidently ^brode in those parts of France, of Savoy, of Flandres and
Germany, where Calvinists have usurped rule, and the Zuinglian Gospel has
for any time got footing: there has been made much more vvast and desolation
of al such Christian monuments (I speak of certain knowledge) then in Hungary,
in Greece, in Jury, in Constantinople it self, where the great Turk with
his Alcoran, with his Bassa^s and Ianissaires commands. If thou consider
the first Apostles of it, Carolostadius, Before, page 41. 4^. 37^ Vide la v^^
d^ Calvin, ca. 1. and 11.
Zuinglius, Calvin: they were men notoriously known for so filthy and
abominable livers, as the earth never sustained worse, set a work by the
devil, instructed by the devil, very familiar with the devil in their life,
and altogether possessed of him in life and death. If thou respect their manner
of preaching, it is so unjointed, so thwart and contradictorie to it self, that
one thing they preach to thee for the gospel out of the pulpit, an other thing
they write for the gospel in their studies: not only that, but one thing they
tell thee in their sermons of Sunday, the clean contrary they teach in the
sermon which they make the next monday: nor only that, but in the beginning of
one and the self same sermon they vvil assure thee of this point to be right
Euangelical, and in the same sermon before the middle, and again before the
end, they vvil as assuredly tell thee the contrary. For demonstration whereof,
I refer thee to that which Before, page 77. 78. 234 235. 236. ^^7. 389. 390.
^^ ^^^^ ^ap. ^^.
has been declared out of Calvin and M. B. in some places of this treatise.
And can that man have any pretense of excuse before God or the world, who
departs from the Catholic church of Christ, and uniform consent of al
fathers, times, and ages, to these scattered sects and Apostataes? And not
content therewith, believes them in such heretical impieties, as them selves
disprove and condemn? If we believe, that Luther was a man of God endued
with his holy spirit, and sent to so Joan. 1. 9.
great a work, as to illuminate the whole world (which is to make him an
other not Elias or John Baptist, as the Germans call him, but an other Christ,
an other Messiah) why believe we not the same Elias, when he preaches that
it* were better for us to sustain any torment, many Protest^^t^ co^ dem^^
their ^vvne Protest^^ Gospel.
death^, then to communicate with the Calvinists and Zuinglians, or to be of
their opinion? If Calvin be such a prophet of God as Beza and the Calvinists
vvil make us suppose; why believe we not Calvin so many vvayes and so
effectually persuading us Christ's real presence in the Sacrament? If M. B. be a
true preacher of the word; if (as he tells us) he be an elect, have the
right faith, and be sure of Gods holy spirit: why credit we not Before,
page 164. 165. 166. 167. 168.
M. B. when as following so precisely the steps of Calvin, he with so many
good words and apt similitudes avovveth in like manner the real presence? when
against their solisidian justice he teaches that love and charity applies
Christ to us, that is to say, justifies us as well, yea better In the la^^
chapter.
then faith: that our salvation depends on good life and good conscience, and
not on faith alone: that it is not sufficient for a man to leave sin and
lead a new life, but he must vvithal lament for that which he has committed,
and with a godly sorrow deplore it, and so forth in a number of the like
Ipecified before. What wisdom or probability of reason can move a
Christian to believe such preachers in other their assertions, and discredit
them in these? If reply be made, that because they be contradictorie, it is
impossible to follow them in both, is not this very reply a most sufficient and
abundant cause clean to shake them of? to esteem them for men unsettled in any
one faith, and therefore very unfit to be guides and lights, ditectors and
Apostles to others, who as yet have no stayed faith of their own?

And what misery is it, what grief of heart to a Christian of any zeal, to
see men whom God has abundantly blessed with so rare gifts of nature both in
body and mind, as al strange nations of Europe acknowledge to appear eminently
in the inhabitants of our Island, such me^ to be mislead by so rude, so savage,
so barbarous an heresy: by so fond, brutish and unreasonable ministers; who
either vvriting, with one pen; or preaching, in a manner with one breath, at
one time and place, inform them with such contradictorie instructions* S.
Greg^^^^ that glorious Saint and bishop of Rome, when he saw in Rome certain
of our countrymen (of Yorkshire or the Deirenses
bisshoprick of Du^^ha^) vewing their comely countenance and good proportion of
body, and understanding that the Bed^ ^is^ E^cl^s^ast. lib. 2. ^^. 1.
country whence they came, was then not* Christened, sighing from the botto^
of his heart: Alas quoth he, what a pitiful case is it, that the author of
darkness should possess so beautiful a people: and men of so fair a face*
should inwardly carry so foul a soul! But how much more pitiful and lamentable
is the case now, that the same people endued by Gods providence with those
gifts as largely as ever heretofore, having by means of that blessed Pope or
other Apostolical bisshops been established and rooted in the Christian faith
1400. years continually, as the Scottish, or almost a thousand as the English,
should upon I know not what weak pretense, upon frivolous and light
persuasion, upon the word of ministers most unstable, ignorant, and ungrounded,
fall from the Christian faith to an heresy so wicked and soul as is the
Caluinian or Zuinglian, condemned not only by all Christendo^ besides, but also
by those very schismatikes and Arch-heretikes them selves, who were the first
authors of this schism and heresy! Much better had it ben^ 2. Pet. 2. ^1.
for us never to have known the way of justice and Christian faith then when
once we were put in possession thereof, so car^lesly to neglecte it, and so
shamefully reiecte it, Matt. 12. 4^ August. de ciu^t. lib. ^1. cap. 25.
C^^yso^^. ^p^re (...). in Mat. him. 30
embrasing in steed thereof the uncertain sansies of 2. or ^. ^o^e ^editious
Apostataes: which is to put our selves in more damnable estate before God, then
we were in that our first infidolitie; as after Christ our Savior; S. Peter
the Apostle, and the ancient fathers teach.

argument, which for many veres has been used there) for only religion,
though they call it treason, makes thousands doubtless of civil and honest
natured men for saving of their lives, liberty, and goods, to them, their
vviues and posterity, to frequent the Protestant churches, whose hearts yet
can not possibly be induced by such bluddy and butcherly argument to believe
that their private Parliament religion is the public faith of Christ and his
Apostles: so in Scotland not only reason persuadeth the like; the religion of
Scotland though it come from Calvin and Beza, yet being as vveakely grounded,
as the English, devised by as mean instruments in the nonage of K. Edward the
sixth: but also M. B. makes a plain and M. R. good opinion of the Sc^ttish
Nobility and youth* p. 209
comfortable confession to the same purpose. For (says he) I see our hail
youth for the most part given to Papist^ie: as likewise our noble men for the
greatest part, travails utterly to banish the Gospel, of Luther, John Calvin
and Bezaes invention. And what ma^ueil is it if the youth and noble men be
thus affected (n^ther of which ever perhaps liked your gospel, the one because
even by moral wisdom and human discourse they see it to be nothing else but
a vvild irreligious heresy: the other because being free from gross sin and
iniquity, gods merciful hand vvithholdeth them from crediting such
infidelity, in to which blindness he commonly permits men to fall for
punishment of sin and naughty life) whereas the hot and The Calvinia^
Gospel ever ^ha^nging.
zealous brethren them selves, who were the first stickle^s and earnest
promote^s thereof* are now so far altered, that they also make as light account
of it, as other the Nobility or the youth. I or even so M. B. testifies, page
219. 240.
saying, that such also loath, disdain, and ofcast the Gospel: and whereas in
the beginning they would have gone, some, 20. some 40. miles to the hearing of
this word: they will scarcely come now fra their house to the ^irk and remain
there one hour, but bides at home. This is the very form and essential
propriety of this new gospel (Christian reader) to please the eye or taste for
a while, but in short space to lease both beauty and sweetenes, and dislike
both eye and taste. It glittereth at the first like a painted puppet; but a very
few years or months take from it the counterfeit shape, and leave it to be
seen in his natural deformity. When Carolostadius first began it, and had
made a treatise or Before, page ^9. 40.
two in defense of his opinion, the brethren were so fervent in setting it
forward, that (as vvriteth Zuinglius) Zuing. ^om, ^ Subsid. de Eu charisti^.
sol. ^44.
they came flocking in great numbers to Basile, where his books were
printed, and carrying them away on their shoulders, dispersed them, yea filled
with them, almost every city, town, village and hamlet, non modo vrbes,
oppida and pagos, verum etiam villas ferme omnes oppleusru^t; and were so
earnest in setting up that opinion, that (as Vrbanus Regius a principal new
Evangelist complains) they accounted him not a right Christian (though
otherwise a right Protestant) that was not a Carolostadian: and refused to be
present at a sermon, or hear the Gospel and word of the Lord preached by any
that was not of that sect: A verbo per nos pr^dicato abhorrent vvriteth Regius
in ^. part. open. ^^ ^p^st. ^^ ^^llican. sol. 3.
Vib. Regius, hoc vno nomine, quod Carolostadianus non sum. Quasi vero
Carolostadiani soli mysticu^ Christi corpus absoluant pro quo Christus sit
mortuus. A few years after came Zuinglius on the stage, and played his part,
though not Before, page 4^. 45.
condemning Carolostadius, yet bringing a new kind of faith in that behalf; and
forthwith, al or the greatest number (as Zuinglius him self vvriteth) even of
those qui vehementer Zuinglius ^ol. 244. ^^i supra.
^rant Carolostadiani, who of late were marvelous eager Carolostadians,
forsook Carolostadius, and joined them selves to Zuinglius. After, how
Zuinglius was put out of countenance by Calvin, and at this present how Clauin
is in Germany disgraced by the Anabaptists, in England by the Puritanes, and
Martinistes and brethren of love, and other fresh ^ects, which bud up every
day, and control Differene^s be (...) ^^ t^ (...) Gospel of Christ.
Calvin, and draw multitudes after them, for that they bring a g^eene^, and
newer, and more fined gospel; this is so pu^^^^^^ly known, that I need not to
make ^l^, herein. and what is the reason hereof, but because and this ^^^^ of
Calvin.
this Gospel, be ^ of Carolosiadius, or Zuinglius, or Calvin, or Puritans, or
Anabaptisis, or Family of love, is a Gospel of me^, a Gospel devised by light
brains, which go about Gal. ^. ^^
to pervert the true and Apostolic Gospel. It is not that Gospel of Christ,
which Christ by him self first, and after by his Apostles preached, to
continue in all ages. It is not ^ 1. Pet. 1. ^^
that word of God which remains one and the same for ever; but it is the
word of a few light, lecherous, and infamous Before. po. 4^ 4^. ^76.
Apostataes, invented by them selves (with assistance of the devil) to serve
their own vvanton lusts and appetites: and for this reason, having his ground
and foundation upon the fancy of such men, can not have other consta^cie then
have the first founders and coyners of it. But the Gospel of Christ, the
Catholic and universal faith which he planted, as it came from heaven, so
has it that eternity, Matthew. ^^. ^5. ^
that heaven and earth shall pass and perish, before any piece or parcel
thereof. As the author of it was god, and the preachers thereof being
principally twelve, though divided and scattered throughout the whole world,
were always guided by the same God which is one and indivisible; so the
Gospel which these many preachers sowed, was one and the same in all quarters
and corners of the world, in Jury, in Asia, in Greece, in Macedonia, in
Italy, in Africa, in Spain, in France, and where ever they set their foot,
planted churches, and left successors: and so has it been preserved by the
grace, direction and internal guiding of the same God; far otherwise then we
see in this new Lutherish Gospel, whereof Prateolus ^^ ^nit^^ Elench^ Alphab.
anto anno^ 24. s^ctas enumerat plusquam 170. G^nebrardus a^^quot post ann^s in
Chronol. initi^ lib. 4. pa 526. dicit esse plus quam 2^^. Spong^e in defens.
pat. Societ. impressa ^n^olstad. anno 1591. dicit excreuisse ad numeru^ fere
^50. page 100. Bedinus in Method historiarum, cap. 5. dicit Sectas Ge^^^^^ ^^^
p^^^ innumerabil^^.
the author being but one, as many vvil have it, that is Luther; or at the most
two, Luther and Zuinglius, as our English in their Apology like better
(although some loyne a third) yet within a short time, in some one province,
has multiplied in to not only twelve different and contrary gospels, but more
then twelve times twelve, as by faithful calculation of learned men is
^ccorded, and by plain reason and historical demonstration may be proved.
Christ in that his Church ordained a peculiar worship of God his father
consisting in sacrifice, according as god had taught al nations either by the
very law 3 Before, chap. 1. and pa. ^^. 258. 259.
of nature written in their hearts, as in the old Patriarchs, in the Greeks
and Romans etc. or by the written law delivered to Moses, as in the polity
of the Jews. In this, there is no worshipping or acknowleging of one God by
sacrifice, but a profane contempt of al such worship, wherein this new
congregation is far more irreligious and godles, then ever was any known
estate of Gentiles and Pagans. In that, Christ left divine sacraments 4 Before,
page 97. 98. 99.
as fountaynes and conduits of his heavenly grace: of which the rest being
altogether rejected by these reformed brethren, 2. are only in name retained,
but in effect Before, page 90. 91. 92. 93. and page ^03. ^06.
made no jot better then the old Jewish vvasihings, rites and ceremonies: that
is, are not retained and ^o^de^ at al for sacraments of the new law. In that,
Christ appointed ordinary means, whereby his people 5 Before, page 194. 195.
falling, might procure remission of their sin, which in this new
congregation is counted a matter strange and impossible: as though they had
never heard of Christ the son of man in earth ^orgeuing sins to men, and
imparting Matthew. ^.
the same puissance to his Apostles and disciples whom he made governors of
his church. Briefly to that, 6
the Apostles committed and left a short epitome of Christian says to be
particularly believed in every parcel and syllable of al Christians, as most
sure and infallible: and so has the faith thereof been preserved from the
Apostles preaching to this age, and shall be for ever: whereas in this new ki^k
and gospelling congregation, scarce any Before, page 437.
one of them is believed a right, very many are expressly denied, as in this
treatise has been particularly declared. I omit a number of foul cankered
heresies condemned 7
with the authors by that primitive Church of Christ, which now are embraced
and extolled as Gospellike by these new Euangelical brethren. I omit the
gracious 7
discipline, regiment and order set down in that church by Christ and his
Apostles: contrary to which, in this Synagogue is nothing but a Babylonical
mis^^der and confusion, where either the sheep command and rule their pastors,
as in England, and some territories of Suizzerland and Germany: or an
equality of Ministers without superiority of bisshops and prelates,
destroys the very face of al orderly regiment, obedience, and discipline, as
in Scotland and Geneva; these with a number of such dissimilitudes between
that church of Christ, and this of John Knox or Calvin, I voluntarily let
pass, because they are without the compass of this discourse, and whereof
there has not been much mention made heretofore. These few may suffice to
justify both the nobility and the whole youth, and every other man, woman,
and child of any degree or calling, who soever forsakes this new Gospel, and
joins him self to the old: which fault is no greater (how so ever M. B. be
grieved at it) then it is for one that is blind, to desue sight, for a man that
lies in extreme danger of death, to use the means of procuring life; one that
is tossed amiddest the waves and rocks of the raging seas, to desire a quiet
port and harbor: in plain terms, then it is for a Christian to forsake
heresy and embrace truth, to forsake schismatical conuenticles, to leave
fantastical, vain, and discordant opinions of men, and betake him self to the
one only Apostolic and Catholic Church and faith of Christ Jesus, who is God
blessed for ever.

Laus Deo.
A TABLE OF THE SPECIAL POINTS HERE ENTREATED, concerning the Catholic faith
and Sacramentarie heresy.
A
A Gap^, feasts of charity in the primitive Church, what they were, pa. 245.
246. 251. Altar and Table, used for one in scripture, page 249. both are
referred to sacrifice, pa. 248. 249. Altars in the primitive church. page 249.
Anabaptist Martyrs, page 305. called Martyrs of the devil by Calvin. Ibi. The
like judges Luther of the Caluinian Martyrs. 305. ^. Austin vily corrupted by
the Calvinists, page 348. 350.
B
Baptism of Christ and S. John Baptist, differ. page 198. 199. Baptism
conferreth grace and remission of sins, page 97. 98. Baptism of the
Calvinists, by their doctrine, is no sacrament of Christ's Gospel, page 114.
115. as nether is their Supper. Ibid. Nether of them conferreth any grace. 185.
186. Baptism is to them only a ceremony, pa. 105. Only a sign, 106.
Remitteth no sin, nor does any good to the soul. 105. 106. 186. Baptism by
the Caluinists ministered without water, page 60. see Sacrament. Berengarius
the first notorious heretic against the sacrament* pa. 23. General Councels
against him, 24. 26. His recantation, 25. He is condemned by the Protestants,
27. His doctrine, as likewise al other that is new, proved heretical, 32. 33.
He learned his sacrame^tarie heresy of a Jew, 100. Bertrams doubtful vvriting
of the sacrament. page 22. 23. Bezaes frowardnes and hypocrisy, 101. 106. His
vain bosti^g of him self, 144. 145. Blessing of creatures, wickedly denied by
M. B. page 153. 154. Christ blessed creatures. pa. 153. Especially the bread
and wine at his last supper, 152. 154. 158. 337 Blessing etc geving thanks
differ much; page 152. 153. M. Bruces Sermons what they conteyne, page 118.
119. 426. M. B. very unconstant in his preaching, 208. M. B. his
co^tradictions, pa. 120 128. 194. 234. 235. 236. 237. 238. 389. 390. 399. 400.
and per totum cap. 22. M B. his had arguments. against remission of sins
imparted by man, page 197. 198. Against sacrifice to be offered to God, 258.
259. Against private co^munions, pa 2^0. ^81. Against Christ's presence in the
sacrament, 253. 254. 255. 256. 368. 374. 375. M. B. co^trane to al other
Calvinists, pa. 185. 186. 187. 210. 212. 419. 420. To the English church, pa.
212. 222. 282. To the Scottish church, pa. 419. 420. His arguments answered by
Calvin. 351. 355. 356. By the Consistory of Geneva, 358. 361. By Luther, 377.
378. 394. By VVestphalus, 394. 395. M. B. corrupts the Gospel against Christ,
320. 321. 322. He corrupts S. Paul, 288. 289. 421. unto whom he is fully
opposite 424. He applies Scripture to prove contrarieties, 418. 4^^. M. B.
measures Divinity by physic, page 392. 393. M. B. assures heaven to Pagans
no less then Christians, page 427. This bread and this cup what it signifies
in S. Paul. page 289.
C.
CAluins inconstancy in treating of the Sacrament. pa. 70. His double dealing
and hypocrisy therein. 74. 75. 76. 94. His manifold plain testimonies for the
real presence. 71. 72. 73. He protests him self a Lutheran in that point. 73.
74. His doctri^^ a mockery of Chistians. 300. He corrupts the scriptures.
91. 107. 108. Calvin's cundit-pipe for receiving the sacrament. pa. 75. Calvin's
contradictions touching the Sacrament. pa. 77. 78. Calvin's sacramentarie Gospel
leads to Iudaisme. pa. 116. 117 where it began. ^00. Calvin a mere Zuinglian.
89. 90. Calvinists, Zuinglian, Berengarians, Sacramentaries, al one. pa. 45.
70. 90. Who is a right calvinist or Sacramentarie. 45. Calvinists make void
the Tes^ament of Christ. pa. 5. Enemies of Christ. 207. They make Christ to
have despayred. 403. They deny his redemption. 403. 404. Calvinists, Atheists.
pa. 53. 325. they hate the words of Christ. pa. 54. 162. How sometimes they
magnify their sacrament. 69. They corrupt the scriptures. 350. 351. 370. 371.
394. and Fathers. 348. 349 Calvinists practice their Co^munions without the
words of Christ's Institution. pa. 54. in Germany. Ibi. in England. 55. 56. 57.
in Scotland. 58. 156. 159. 160. 161. 162. in Suizzerland. 58. 59. Calvinists
communion may be ministered without either bread or wine. pa. 59. 60. 361. By
weme^ 61. 65. and boys. 66. The Calvinists Creed. pa. 325. 326. By what
Doctors they use to confirm their Gospel. 53. 394. Their Gospel denies almost
al Articles of the Apostolic Creed. 437. Their Gospel, a Gospel of Epicure and
Venus. 425. 426. 428 Calvinists condemned by the Protestants of Germany. 73.
74. 394. 395. Their manner of writing and disputing. 162. 394. Their faith
framed by physic. 394. 395 396. They apply scriptures to prove any thing.
418. The Calvinian Gospel destroys al religion. pa. 430. 436. 437. Good
works. 431. 432. Faith 432. 433. It erreth in matters of great weight. 436. It
is less covered with sheep clothing then old heresies. 438. 439. A more
enemy to memories and momuments of Christianity then is the Aleoran. 439.
440. It is condemned by them selves. 441. 43. Ever unconstant and altering. 444
Many differences between the Gospel of Christ, and this of Calvin. 444. 445.
446. Carnal cognation esteemed by Christ. 318. 319. Carolostadius in our time
the first father of the sacramentaries. pa. 39. His interpretation of Christ's
words. 39. 40. approved by Zuinglius. 44. A description of him. 41. He was very
familiar with the devil. 41. 42. Catholic words used with heretical meaning.
pa. 129. 173. Difference betwne Catholics and Protestants touching the
assurance of salvation. pa. 302. 303. No salvation out of the Catholic church.
316. The Catholic visible church eternal, and ever directed by the Spirit of
truth. 32. 33 Chalice or cup in S. Paul what it signifies. 289. chalice of
Christ mingled with water. 151. 158. 159 Christ honored his mother. 318. 319.
Christ made ^^^s Testament a^ his last supper^ba. 6. He sacrificed him self
therei^. 8. 9. See more hereof in Testament, and Sacrament. Christ's flesh
profits. pa. 322. It feeds us to eternal life. 32^. 234. It is at one time
in heaven and in the sacrament 342. How it is horrible to eat Christ's flesh.
363. 364. It is received really 202. 203. 204. 365. 366. Corporal touching of
Christ profitable. 327. 329. 330. 331. sometimes without faith of the party
profited. 331. 332. much more corporal and spiritual touching, as in receiving
the sacrament. 332. Christ's words of the Sacrament diversely and straungely
interpreted by Carolostadius. pa. 39. 40. By Zuinglius. 42. By Oecola^padius
and the Anabaptists. 43. Many other contrary interpretatio^s of those words.
44. 45. Al approved by Zuinglius and Musculus. 45. 46. 47. 48. Calvin's and M.
B. exposition of those words. 204. 205. 206. The true sense of those words.
3. 4. 5. 124. 362. 369. 370. Confessed by a sacramentarie Martyr. pa. 55.
Christ's body in the sacrament received of evil men. pa. 290. 291. 292. Christ
not received of evil men in their supper says M. B. and other Calvinists. 288.
293. 295. The contrary is proved by the whole course of his and their
doctrine. 296. 297. 298. What it is to eat Christ 7 by their, Theology, 78.
79. 29. 298. The worst men eat him so. 299. 300. See Special faith. Christ no
otherwise received in the Sacramentarie communion then out of it. pa. 79. 80.
81. 82. Better out of it. 83. Christ's miraculous entrance to his disciples the
doors being shut. pa. 384. 385. 386. Many ways cluded by the Calvinists. 384.
385. Christ's Ascension and sitting at Gods right hand what it means. pa.
354. 355. It rather proves the real presence then hinders it. 354. 355.
Christ is absent from the world, not from his church. 356. 357. Christ
concurreth with his Ministers in conferring grace by his sacraments. pa. 183.
201. 202. Christ's body glorified has preemine^ce above al others. pa. 397.
Circumcision a seal of justice to Abraham peculiarly. pa. 131. 132. The Jews
Communion. pa. 100. 101. 102. Compared with Calvin's. 102. 103. They are after
the Calvinists doctrine, al one. 103. 104. 105. In truth, the Jewish much
better. proved at large* pa. 109. 110. 111. 112. 113. 115. 116. The Calvinian
Communion no sacrament of Christ's gospel. pa. 104. 115. The definition thereof
104. 109. Private Communions improved by the Calvinists. pa. 277. 278. 280.
Approved by all the primitive church. page 278. 279. 285. Item, approved by the
Lutheran Protestants. 283. 284. 285. M. B. reasons to the contrary. 280.
Answered, 281. by them. 283. A policy of the Devil to deny private communions.
285. 286. Confid^ce engendered by Catholic faith. pa. 312. Presumption by the
protestant faith. 303. 304. Fear as necessary to be taught as confidence.
402. Sacrament of Confirmation. pa. 143. 144. Words of Consecration
religiously observed in the church. 334. They are pronounced in the East church
alowd. 337. And of old in the West. 336. It was and is an evident
testification of the real presence. 336. 337. 338. What power or virtue is in
the words. 339. 340. 341. Christ's words of consecration believed to be of great
force in the primitive church. pa. 49. 50. 51. To be of no force in the
Protestant church. 51. 52. 53. 217. 218. See Word. What is a Contradiction.
pa. 388. 389.
D
Dominica coena, our lords supper. pa. 245. See Sacrament.
E
English clergy against the Scottish touching the necessity of preaching to
make sacraments. page 221. 222. 223. S. Paul's Epistle to the Hebrews denied
by the Calvinists. pa. 313. Erasmus faith touching the real presence. pa. 34.
His grounds and reasons thereof. 34. 35.
F
What faith Christ required in them whom he healed. page 328. Faith defined by
S. Paul. pa. 314. 315. No similitude between S. Paul's faith and the
Caluinists. 315. 316. Their faith is no faith. 308. But arrogant presumption.
303. 304. 409. 410. Faith not the only jewel of the soul. pa. 312. How it
works confidence in the heart. 312. 313. Once had it may be lost. 408. 409
Faith to be urged before reason in matters of Divinity. 391. Only faith
justifies not. pa. 401 Fathers of the primitive church condemned by the
Calvinists for their belief of the church sacrifice. 15. 257. For preferring
the sacraments of Christ's Gospel before those of Moses law. 93. For preferring
Christ's baptism before S. Ihon Baptists. 199.
G
Geneua consistory dispenses against Christ. pa. 59. 60. 147. 361. Gospel.
See Protestant. S Gregory's compassion of the English. page 442. Gyges ring.
346.
H
Heretical craft to disprove one truth by commending an other pa. 311.
Heretics deceive by fair speeches. 17^.
I
Jewel a eaviller upon words. pa. 15. 16. A notorious liar and corrupter of
fathers. 389. A shufler together of sentences out of the fathers to no end.
149, 150.
L
Liturgia with the Greeks, the same that Mass in the Latin church. pa. 17.
250. 251. Luther author in general, of the sacramentarie heresy. pa. 37. 38.
His rule to interpret scriptures by ^^*
M
Manna and his properties. page 111. 112. 113. Martyrs of the primitive church
most zealous. pa. 136. The word Mass used in the primitive church. pa. 253.
254. But sacrifice much more. 254. 255. Of private Mass, See private
communion. Scottish Ministers much geven to sorcerie and witchcraft. pa. 3^^.
They condemn them selves for heretics. 196. Very inconstant in their
preaching. 440. 441. Ministers in their sermons what they handle most. 219. The
name Ministers. 374. 375. Never found in scripture in the Calvinists sense.
375.
N
Nabugodonosors fiery furnace hot and cold at one instant. 387. 388.
O
Gods omnipotency denied by M. B. and the Calvinists. pa. 137. 381. And withal,
the whole body of scripture. 381. 382. and principles* of Christianity. 383.
P
Phisical qualities necessary to human bodies, bind not the body of Christ.
344. 345. 346. 383. 384. Priests remit sins in the church. pa. 194. 195. 196.
197. God is honored thereby. 197. They communicate Christ's body to the
faithful. 201. 202. Protestant Gospel suggested by the devil to Carolostadius.
pa. 41. 42. To Luther. 304. To Zuinglius 376. 378. It overthrovveth al
Christianity. 388. Protestants once endued with their special faith can never
after leese it. pa. 306. Nor yet the holy ghost, howsoever they live. Ibidem.
As sure of their election and salvation as of any article of their faith. 303.
307. 308. 413. 414 See special faith. The Protestants rule whereby they
interpret scripture. pa. 38. 39
R
Real presence of Christ in the sacrament. pa. 20. 21. 22. 49. 50. 51
Acknovvleged by the old fathers for a cause of our resurrection. 169. 170. 171.
325. Real presence proved by scripture. 202. 371. by fathers. 203 204 291. 292.
364. 365. 366. 369. 391. 392. By protestant Doctors. 349 354. It stands well
with the memory of Christ's death. 363. Al religion grounded on two pillars.
pa. 430. Resurrection of our bodies denied by the Calvi^ists. pa. 323. 324.
325. 326. 383. Rock, what it signifies in S. Paul 1. Cor. 10. 4. eagerly
debated between the protestant Doctors. pa. 373. 374. Romain church for 500.
or 600. years after Christ, pure in faith, by grant of many Protestant
Doctors. 252. 253.
S
The word Sacrament most ancient, pa. 132. Much disliked and condemned by M.
B. and other Calvinists. pa. 119. 1^2. 127. Yet most used by him and them. 120.
121. 125. Their wicked sophistry in abusing that word. 125. Exemplified by
their expounding of Christ's words touching the Sacrament, pa. 122. 123. 124.
125. 174 Diverse signification of the word Sacrament. 126. Sacraments of the new
Testament never called selves in the scripture. pa. 130. 132. In the Calvinists
sense they are lying seals. ^6. They are fondly and falsely so called. 141.
142. 144. Definition of the Geneua or Scottish sacrament, that it is a seal,
of the word preached. pa. 134. Refuted. 135. 136. 137. 138. 140. 214. It is
plainly Anabaptistical. 138. 139. 140. The word is rather a seal to the
sacrament, then contrariwise 141. 142. Whence probably this doctrine of seals
proceeded. 213. 214. Sacraments in what sense called seals by the ancient
fathers 143. 144. The Sacrament to the Calviniste nothing but a seal. (...).
84. 85. A lying seal. 86. A sign without al grace or virtue. 87. 105. A bare
sign. 70. 88. 89. 90. 106. No better then a Jewish ceremony. 90. 91. 92.. 93.
94. 104. 106. 107. See Supper, and Communion. The principal end and substance
of the Geneua sacrament is to signify. pa. 265. 266. It signifies vnperfitly.
267. Many other things signify as well or better: and therefore are as good
sacraments. 268. 269. 270. The Calvinists base esteem of it. 112. 113. It is
in the power of man to make as good a sacrament. 270. 271. 272. 273. Actions of
Christ in the Institution of the Sacrament. pa. 147. 148. 150. 151. 155. He
mingled his chalice vvth water. 151. 158. 159. He blessed the bread and
chalice. 152. 153. 154. 155. The Sacrament why called Eucharist pa. 251. 252.
Carefully co^ceiled from knowledge of Jews and Pagans in the primitive church.
262. 263. 264. No heretic could be present at the administration thereof. 254.
262. The Sacrament reserved and sent abroad to private men in the primitive
church. pa. 278. 279. Yet believed to sanctify and confer grace. 279. Only
heretics thought contrary. 279. To receiving the Sacrament other preparation
required then to receiving the word. pa. 421. 422. 423. Sacraments of the Law
and Gospel, much differ in conferring grace. pa. 95. 96. 97. 98. 99. 108. The
material parts of the Sacrament signify many things not necessarily present.
pa. 359. 360. substance of bread not necessary to it. 359. 361. The Sacrament
not called Dominica coena, the lords supper in scripture. pa. 245. What that
word means in S. Paul. 245. 246. 247. Nether is it called communion in all
scripture. 247. 248. A Sermon not necessary to the essence of any Sacrament.
p. 218. that opinion is refuted by the English church. 221. It is plainly
Anabaptistical. 222. 223. It makes void most baptismes in England and
Scotland. 224. 225. and also co^munions. 226. 227. 228. 229. 235. It makes the
word or sermon it self superfluous and of no effect. 230. 231. A Sacramental
speech. pa. 367. Sacramentaries condemned by Erasmus. pa. 34. 35. By Luther.
325. 354. 438. By Melancthon. 348 349. By Pappus. 326. VVestphalus. 121. 283.
284. 285. Hosiander, and many other protestant Doctors 344. 436. Every heretic
against the Sacrament, an heretic for other matters besides: as Berengarius.
pa. 26. 27. Petrus Brusius, Henricus, and the Albigenses. 27. 28. Almaricus.
28. VViclef. 29. Christ at his last supper instituted a sacrifice. pa. 3.
proved by words of the Institution. 4. 16. and conference of them with the
words of the legal sacrifice of Moses law. 4. 5. Christ's sacrifice ordained
in steed of the Paschal sacrifice of the law. pa. 9. 10. The exact comparison
of them proves ours to be a true sacrifice. 10. 11. So all the ancient fathers
teach. pa. 12. 51. 252. 255. 256. 257. 258. 363. It is the same sacrifice which
Christ offered. 201. A true sacrifice, though commemoratiue. 19. 20. Sacrifice
of Melchisedec a figure of Christ's sacrifice. pa. 13. 14. 15. 363. Sacrifice
used by the Apostles. pa. 17. Proved by S. Paul. 17. 18. 19. Granted by some
chief Protestants. 19. Believed in the primitive church. 20. 21. 22. 257. 358.
Confessed by both churches Greek and Latin. 26. as Calvin grants. 257.
Sacrifice of the church testified by the ancient fathers. 201. 249. 251. 252.
255. 256. 257. Seals divine, miracles. pa. 142. 143. Protestant Sects of this
age to what number they are grown. pa. 445. Sin separateth man from God.
pa. 399. Al sin mortal, none venial with the Calvinists. pa. 30. 399.
Remission of Sins. See priests. The Protestants special faith invented by
Luther. pa. 301. 302. puts them in assurance of their election and
salvation. 303. 304. Cause of infinite pride and presumption. 304. 307. 308.
402. Of vile and dissolute life. 306. 307. Common to al kind of heretics,
especially Anabaptists. 304. 305. 4^4. By this faith the vvorst Protestants
eat Christ spiritually in their supper as well as the best. 304. 307. 308. It
leads to hell 308. 309. Se^ Protestants. Special faith destroys al Christian
faith, 433. Remission of sins in the church: Keys of the church: Sacraments
of the church. pa. 433. prayer to God, and fear of God. 433. 434. This special
faith refuted by S. Paul. pa. 316. By Caluinists the^^ selves. 316. 317. By
Melancthon. 434. 435. This special faith once had can never be lost. pa. 306.
What is necessary and essential to the Sco^tish or Geneva Supper. pa. 146.
239. How it is ministered. 156. It is nothing like to Christ's sacrament for a
number of defects. 157. 158. 159. 160. 162. 200. 201. 239. 240. 241. 242. and
superfluities. 220. 223. 224. Any vulgar dinner or repast as good as that
Supper. 65. 163. It is ministered as well by women and boys ^^ by their
Ministers. 65. How Christ's body is joined to the Geneua or Scottish Supper. pa.
174. 175. 274. As to a word spoken. 176. 177. 27^. Less then to a picture.
178. No more then God is joined to the devil. 175. 176. Nothing at al. 175.
176. It is altogether superfluous and ridiculous. 179. 180. Wickedly by M. B.
preferred before gods word. 210. 211. 212. The Supper described by M. B. pa.
182. profanely. 182. 183. 184. Striving for the communion drink. 184. It is
not vvorth a straa. 193. 200. 229. rather to be called a breakfast then a
supper. 332. It is wicked and sacrilegious. 242. 243. No sacrament of Christ.
229. 233. Christ no otherwise received in the Scottish supper, then in any
common dinner. pa. 187. 206. 275. 276. Then in seeing any creature. 189. Christ
received no vvayes in their Supper. 189. 190. The flesh of priests and
Catholics more eaten in the Geneva suppers then the flesh of Christ. pa. 229.
230. Diverse and uncertain significations of the Geneua supper. pa. 177. 178.
179. Many things signify Christ as well as that. 180. 181. 182. How long it
remains holy. 276. 277.
T
Table. See Altar. Christ's Testament made at his last Supper. 6 8. What was
required to the making thereof. 6. 7. 8. The real presence and sacrifice is
thereof inferred. 7. 8. 9. How his blud in the chalice is called the new
testament. 371. 372. Difference of the old Testament and new. pa. 98. 99.
V
No lawful Vocation of preachers in Scotland or England. pa. 407.
VV
Women may preach and minister the Protestants communion. pa. 61. 62. 63. 64.
65. Women have in them al power ecclesiastical. 64. VViclef an heretic, and a
parasite. pa. 29. 30. An heretic to the Calvinists. 30. His often Recantation.
30. 31. He is condemned by the Protestants. 31. 32. The Word required to make
the Calvinists sacrament, is a sermon. pa. 134. 216. 220. 228. The Ministers
prefer their own words before Christ's. 216. 217. 218. The right word wants
in most Scottish sacraments pa. 226. 227. 228. No such word found in scripture
as they require. 225. Christ used no such word. pa. 220. 221. 233. See more in
Sermon.
Z
Zuinglius an Anabaptist. pa. 140. His interpretation of Christ's words more
fond then that of Carolostadius. 43. He learned it of a sprite in the night
376. 378.
FINIS
A TABLE OF PLACES OF SCRIPTVRE EXPLICATED IN THIS TREATISE, ESPECIALLY SVCH AS
APPERTEINING TO THE SACRAMENT, ARE CORRVPTELY expounded and perverted by the
Sacramentaries.
Genes. 3. 15. In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat thy bread. pa. 267.
Exodus 12. 6. The children of Israel shall offer a lamb. p. 10. 11. 12 Exodus 12.
11. It is phase, that is, the passover of our lord. pa. 375. 376. 377. 378.
Exodus 16. 15. Mauha: what thing is this? pa. 111. 112. Exodus 24. 8. This is the
blud of the covenant or Testament which God has made with you. pa. 5. Psalm.
109. 4. Thou art a priest forever after the order of Melchisedec. pa. 13. 14.
15. Daniel. 3. 22. 50. The fiery furnace, burning to the Chaldea^s cold to the.
3. children. 387. 388. Mat. 3. 11. I baptize you in water; but he shall baptize
you in the holy ghost and fire. pa. 198. 199. Mat. 9. 6. The son of man in
earth has power to forgeve sins. pa. 196. 197. Mat. 12. 48. Who is my
mother? and who are my brethren? 318 Mat. 26. 26. Christ blessed the bread. pa.
152. 153. 154. 159. 337. Ibidem. This is my body. page 123. 124. 369. 370.
Ibidem v. 29. I will not drink of this fruit of the vine. pa. 158. Marc. 2. 7.
He blasphemeth. Who can forgeve sins but God? pa. 196. 197. Mar. 6. 5. 6. He
could not do any miracle there, because of their incredulity. pa. 327. 328.
Mar. 5. 28. If I shall touch but the hem of his garment, I shall be safe Pa. 327.
328. 329. 330. 332. Mar. 16. 19. Christ assumpted in to heaven, and sits at
the right hand of God. pa. 353. 354. 355. Luc. 22. 20. This chalice the new
testament in my blud which shall be shed for you. pa. 5. 6. 7. 8. 371. 372.
Luc. 24. 39. Handle and see. For a spirit has not flesh and bones. pa. 352.
Ihon. 6. 14. And I will raise him up in the last day. pa. 170. Ihon. 6. 63. It
is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing et c. pa. 320. 321.
322. Ihon. 13. 5. Christ vvashed his disciples feet. pa. 147. 148. Ihon. 14. et
16. 28. I leave the world. 356. 357. Ihon. 20. 19. The doors being shut
Christ stood in the midst of his disciples. pa. 384. 385. Ihon. 20. 23.
Whose sins you forgive, they are forgeuen. pa. 195 196. 197. Act. 3. 21.
Whom heaven must receive until et c. pa. 350. 35^. Act. 13. 2. As they were
ministering to our lord. pa. 17. Romans 4. 11. He received circumcision a seal of
justice. pa. 130. 131. 1. Cor. 10. 3. 4. Al did eat of the same spiritual
food: and al drank of the same spiritual drink page 107. 108. 1. Cor. 10. 4.
The rock was Christ. 372. 373. 1. Cor. 10. 21 You can not be partakers of the
table of our lord, and of devils. pa. 17. 18. 19. 1. Cor. 11. 20. This is not
to eat our lords supper. page 244. 245. 246. 1. Cor. 11. 27. Who soever shall
eat this bread, or drink the chalice of our lord unworthily, shall be guilty of
the body and blud of our lord. pa. 288. 289. 290. 294 Hebrew. 9. 20. This is
the blud of the Testament. et c. pa. 5. Hebrew. 11. 1. Faith is the substance
of things hoped for ^t c. page 314. 315.
FINIS.
Errors, some in all copies, some in certain only, are thus to be corrected.
Page 17. Lin. 9. Deest in margin 5 Page 42. Lin. 1. in margin. obseus
obsessus Page 31. Lin. 11. 138r. 1381. Page 57. in marg. remo- removed Page ^1.
in marg. 710. 71. Page 150. Lin. 4. 21. 12. Page 236. Lin. 19. in marg. deest
The fifth. Before. p. 167 Page 237. Lin. 4. in marg. deest The sixth. Page 265.
Lin. 4. in marg. deest The third and first end Page 327. Lin. 31. in marg.
Marc. 5. 5. 6. 6. 5. 6.

Laus Deo.

