A Corosyfe TO BE LAID HARD unto the hearts of all faithful Professors of
Christ's Gospel. Gathered out of the scriptures by John Ra^sey.

*

Matthew. vi. First seek the Kingdom of God and al things shall be mynistred unto
you,

Acts. iii^. There is no health in none other but only in Jesus Christ.

Matthew. ix. The whole needs no Physician.

A Corisyffe to be Laid, hard unto the hearts of al faythefull Professors of
Christ's Gospel. Gathered out of the Scriptures by John Ramsey.
Brethren ye know we be all baptized in Christ Jesus And have Professed to
be, Roma. vi. Gala. iii.
his souldyers, and he for to be but Capytayne, Psalm. i. Ephe. i. Pet. ii.
and has left us and ensample, both in word and living, spreadynge abroad
the banner of his precious body upon the mount of Caluary, John. i^ Collo, ^^
proclaimynge his ^ictorye against all his enemies saying Consummatum est, all
is Performed or ended, Luke. xi^
and there brough to subjection to be his prisoners both sin death and Hell,
with all their powers, mat. xxvii.
tryumphyng as a valiente conqueror, so that the powers of heaven did quake,
the Sun and Move lost their lyghtes, (...), 1
affirmynge it was he and none other (but Jesus Christ (able to pacify the
fathers wrath. They ^ndes of the Garthe al^o moved stones did break, Mat. xvii
the b^dyes that were buried did rise out of their graves, acknoweleginge he was
the victorious Prince that should redeem all the flesh of the world from
eternal damnacyon and to bring them to his everlasting kyndome, (...)
there for to rainge with God his father eternally. i. Cor. i. John,
And in this valiant and tryumphaunt conquest he gave over his life, to be
known unto us for evermore to be our chief Lord, our chief redemer, our
chief Advocate, and that for ever more, Ephe. i. 1. Pet. 1.
Ande for that we would count him just not forsakyng us, Acts. iii.
on the third day he rose from death to life to conforte us in ye ^itle over
ye which he had made us Lords. John. ^vi


Concludi^g with us, it was expedt not for him to go his way, Acts. ii^
(and that unto his father) se^dyng us the holy Ghost f^^ be our conductoure
in every skirme or conflict. And so accordi^gly performed the same. Philip. ii,
And at the time of his departing both God and man did assend up into heaven,
Hebre. x Psalm. c. lxc
until those (which yet remayn his enemies) be made his fotestole, geuyng us
a commendacione that he would come again and judge ^ll me^, Acts. x*
who had been a faithful soldier in his absens. i. Cor xii
And to reward both them and other accordyng^lye. In the godly, song qui
cunque
Eythere everlasting joy, or else perpetual Dampnacyon. Now dear brethren
lay this Corisyffe hard home to your consciences. Philip. ii.
And feel whether ye be true soldiers to your master Christ or no, Mat. xiii.
think whether ye faint or no, Luke xxii.
when any man does invade your Kingdom contrary to your chief captayns
commandment. Mark. xiii
Feel whether ye be strong when Satan does assault you with sharp
temptacion, Luke. xiii
look whether ye be sick or feeble to endure the storms of trybulacyon, Ephe.
vi. Math. x,
prove and taste your manlynes, whether it be not turned to cowardenes, and
daily ru^ne away do ye not leave in time of need ye cross of Christ (your
battle axe) behind you for fear. John. xi
Do ye not se your armoure roust, covered with the vain things of worldly
desire? Expo. xvi.
stand not your stomakes against Christ's Gospel? and would gladly have ye
flesh pottes of Egypt again? Luke. xii,
And do ye perceive your selves to be vygila^t in prayer night and day, lest
your ennemies fall sodei^ly upon you? Are ye circunspect in your livings to
honor your Lord god aryght? deuteronomy. xviii
Do ye not for get your duty to your neyghebour, as ye would be done to?
Psalm. i. Deute. xii
Have ye mercy and pite on the pore and nedye, Math. vii. Roma. xii Esaias. i.
James. i. Math, v.
the wydowe and orphane in the time of their necessite? Can ye find in your
hearts to love your enemies, and pray for them yt do you wrong? Stand ye
right up in judgment lokynge nether to ye right hand nor to the left?
Leui. xix. Iere. xrii. Roma. vi
Keep ye still the professyon of your baptyme, forsakynge the devil with all
his works? Luke. xii
Do ye rise when your captain does call and are ye not in the sleep of
vnryghtousnes, and so fell into temptacion? Are ye obedient to gods ministers,
1. Pet. ii.
the high magistrates which do supply here in earth his mighty rome? And
do ye walk always in the fear of the Lord, Psalm. ii.
is his word a lantern to your fete, and a light unto your doings?

Now let this corosiffe work and take hold, Ephe. iij.
and think whether these thinge^s shall be found within you. And thus too awayte
on your Captain Jesus Christ as his faithful souldyours. But it is to be
feared if we search the bottom of our consciences, Luke. xii.
there shall be found packes full of iniquities wretchedness and myserye, Psalm.
v.
and all that leadethe us to the open, mouth of Hell, Men naked without
armoure overcome, Math. vii. Apoca. ii
with every larome, we may be well callede fresh water soldiers, Mark. iiii
not able to, to abide one storm for our lords sake, ii. Cor. vi. Luke xiiii
psa. cxxvii
we fall away with every tempest, when he bydeth us for to abide, our
manlines is turned i^to cowardnes, and thus for sake we our Lord God but let
us remember what the holy prophet David says, Lord, psalm. xxvii
(says he) if you do for sake me, unto whom shall I flee? ii. Cor. iii.
If ye Lord do not keep the cite in vain do they watch yt keep it. psalm. lxix
Lord be thou our tower, our castle and our defense, look down from heaven
and comfort thin ac^ flicte. What at we without thy grace? Let us look round
about us within and without, and we be compassed with sin. i. Cor. iii
Math. xxi
Thus in all Goodness GOD gyuethe the^ encrese, but on out part wen there plant
nor water, we be the witheren fygge tree. Luke. viij
We be the stony ground, no good fruit can fructify, Mark. vi.
we are baren void of all heavenly grace, dispersed as people without order.

O Christenllyfe, which at the dreadful day should be our trustes before our
Lord God, Romans viii
where shall we find the? for the multitude of sins shall cover us, we may not
for our iniquities behold the high judge to receive his Kingdom, Sapion. v.
but openly to condemn our selves, and receive his terryble judgment. psalm.
cxlv.
Who shall then stand forth to be justified by his own works, or merytes?
ii. Pet. iii.
What shall we do, or what shall we say in that terryble day of vengeance,
when heaven and earth shall be altered? Who shall be able to stand forth to
plead his cause? Esaias. liii.
And who shall be able to stand by himself all alone? Math. xi.
Thus are we pressed down under the burden of sin, that scarcely we can
taste of God how pleasant he is.

But for so much (good brethren) that ye Lord is merciful, i. Petri. ii.
and that his mercy passethe all his works, Psa. cxvii
for them that does believe and repent, wyllyng to lay aside the clogge of
sin, let us with honor and glory magnyfy with soul and body our immortal
God and everlasting lord, i. Petri. ii.
acknowledginge him to be the redemer and stole of grace, for all the sins of
the world. Roma. iii.
And besides at all times where soever it be in Church field or Town merry and
sad, to carry him with us in the spyrytuall parts of our hearts, who has
promised to be with us unto thend of the world. mat xxviii
Further in all our worldly doings to stand right up, Math. vii.
and to do as we would be done reverence to magnyfie hi^ night and day, for
that the laws of the Lord does appear, Collo. iiii
having their Consciences pure in all their procedynges, permittynge us (the
pore subjects) the liberty of Christ's Gospel, Math. vi.
and the Heavenly word of his Godhead. For the which long life with the
increase of great honor may be unto him Deutrono. xxvii Let us say heartily.

Amen.

