THE GREAT TVRKES DEFIANCE:

Or his Letter DENVNTIATORIE to SIGISMOND the Third, now King of Polonia, as it
has been truly advertised out of Germany, this present year, 1613.

WITH THE KING OF POLAND his reply, Englished according to the French Copy,

By M. S.

M B
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Melchisedech Bradwood, for William Aspley. 1613.

THE COPPIE OF A DENVNCIATION sent by the great Emperor of the Turks, Unto
Sigismond the third, King of Poland and Lituania, the seventh of Iulie, 1612.
ACMETH SULTAN, Son of the most puissant and highest, Emperor of the Turks,
King of Macedonia, Arabia, Samaria, Grecia, and little Egypt, King above all
the Kings that dwell upon the earth, a King that dwells on the earthly
Paradise, an anointed Prince and son of Mahomet, Keeper of the Lower
Hungary, Prior of the Earthly Paradise, and Keeper of the Grave of thy God,
Lord of the tree of life, and of the River Flisky, Conqueror of the
Macedonians, borders of Hungaria, and of the city Bettune, a great persecutor
of his enemies, and of all their evil vices, a most perfect Jewel of the
blessed Tree, the chiefest keeper of the crucified God, a Prince and Lord in
whom the Pagans trust, and a great persecutor of all Christians.
To SIGISMOND the Third, King of Poland our greeting,
if thou do desire our welfare, and art friend to us and our Officer and
Lieutenant General of our forces which we will send. But thou have long since
broken and falsified our friendship, and yet art neither ready nor fit to wage
war or fight battle against us. But thou have some secret advise and
intelligence with other confederate Kings, and their Counselors, to deliver
thee out of our hands and our vicegerents power, wherein thou have done very
unadvisedly and indiscreetly. If therefore thou thus persevere to oppose thy
self against us, then fear, for thy death and the death of all thy people is
determined. We tell thee we will overcome thee from the rising of the Sun, to
the going down thereof, and we will show our Majesty in our own person and
sight unto the uttermost parts of the earth. Our very thoughts shall be a terror
unto thee, that we will perform all that which we have herein denounced. And
we will make known unto thee the powerfulness of our dominions. And thou, o
King, which put thy trust in strong forts and Castles shall have experience
of my might and power. I will root out all together, and thou shall behold this
with thine own eyes. Wherefore expect now no more friendship at my hands; put
not thy hope in the strength of thy walls, with thy own forces and people. J
will ruinate thee without any resistance. J will destroy thy Craccawe in sign
of triumph. J will leave there my bloody sword, that every one shall take
notice thereof, and my belief shall be spread abroad thorowout all thy
Dominions, and I will utterly root out the very remembrance of thy crucified
God. Let thy God be angry, J care not, he may then help thee. Thy anointed
(the Priests) I will surely put to the plague. Wild beasts and wolves shall
suck the breasts of thy women. Thou shall leave and forsake thy Religion which
thou have. That which remains of all things shall be consumed with fire.
Heerewith rest thou satisfied. I do not tell thee now what I will do, or
mean to do with thee, understand it if thou will or can.

From our residence Constantinople most strongly guarded.
AN ANSWER TO THE MENACING and VVarre-denouncing Letter of the Great Turk.
By SIGISMOND King of Polonia and Sweden: great Duke of Lituania, Russia, and
Podolia.
SIGISMOND by the grace of God King of Polonia and Sweden, Great Duke of
Lituania, Russia, and Podolia, one of the most humble servants of the great
God, and of his son Jesus Christ crucified.
To ACMETH chief Prince of Turks and Infidels souls health.
We have received thy Letter fraught with threats, and swolen with impieties
against the Majesty of the high GOD, whereunto we had not vouchsafed answer,
but that we were persuaded, that our silence would have been a means, to
cause thee flatter thy self so much the more, else had we neglected thee like
an arch-enemie of God as thou art. We have therefore thought fit in some sort,
to regard the salvation of thy soul, letting thee know, that thou art no other
but a mere man, in thy person more weak than many of thy followers, which
should cause thee to remember, that if it had not pleased God, to engraue in
the front of such as rule a kind of awful Majesty whereby their subjects are
kept in obedience, the good by reward, the evil and perverse by rigorous
laws, and both the one and the other by authority, it were impossible they
should continue eminent above others. Thou then, who in thy self art but as
other men, must know, that there is a supreme power of more might than thine,
which does uphold thine estate, causing thee to be respected of thy followers.
This power proceeds from God most good, most just, most strong, preserving it
so long as Princes humble themselves before him, but being once transported
with presumption and pride, it easily abateth their fury. I will offer no
other example to thy consideration than that of Baiaseth the Second, one of thy
predecessors, who thinking to scale heaven with his army, (which in the
judgment of man was irresistable, but in Gods sight most contemptible) lived
to see himself vanquished, taken, and imprisoned, coopt up in an iron cage
(wherein he was in triumph drawn after the victorious Conqueror) serving him
for no better than a footstool, and having no other food than such as was cast
him (like a dog) from his Table A just guerdon for his pride.
. Think then with thy self, that he that was so great, so puissant, and so
fearful may happily by right of succession have left unto thee (as being
descended from him) the like, or a worse fortune, if thou do dare to
continue thy blasphemies against God, and his beloved son Jesus Christ
crucified. Thou do mistake in thinking to lay an aspersion upon us, by
reproching unto us the Cross: for we account it our chiefest honor and
glory; by virtue whereof as the Emperor Constantine quelled his enemies, we
hope and assure our selves to be defended against thy fury. Thy proud and
thundering words dismay us not, our courage is more masculine and generous than
so to be outbraued: For know that we regard not thy threats, but with all
scorn trample upon thy pride, and deride thy terrors. And in stead of thanking
thee for aduertising us before thy coming, we bid thee come when thou will:
Thou shall be received contrary to thy expectation. We have steep mountains
and impregnable rocks, that shall bar thee from entering into our lands. Thou
shall find our Cities and Castles well furnished with munition, our Canon
mouths breathing furious fires, our courages invincible, our blades eager and
sharp, our arms impenetrable, our bodies apt to sustain the violence of all
seasons, our minds promising nothing but victory. And to dazell thine eyes,
the royal Standard of the blessed Cross shall go before us. But above all,
the crucified Son of the great God shall cause his Angels to conduct us and
give us the victory. He it is that shall be our Leader, under whose
protection we will not fear to brave thee at thy gates. Thy miscreant troops
shall be trodden under foot, and their bellies trampled on, and by a happy
victory (if thou chance to escape our conquering arm) thou shall find thy
self pursued unto the most secret dens of thy abominable Seraglio. Thou
shall see thy Mosquees laid leuel with the ground, thy Mophti and other the
execrable Priests of thy perfidious Mahomet made Galley-slaues, all those
traitorous runnagates whom thou do harbor, shall thou see put to exquisite
torments: of all which be most assured. And then shall be set free all those
poor and miserable Christians, who now lie groaning under the burden of thy
tyrannous yoke, whose woeful cries being mounted to heaven, have justly excited
the vengeance of God upon thee, who has permitted thee to rise to this height
of pride, that thy ruin and destruction may be the more exemplar unto after
ages. To conclude, thou shall see the service of God reestablished in Grecia
and Asia, which thou do now unjustly usurp. But if it happen thee to end
thy miserable life in battle (as we hope that God will grant) be confident
that all the aforesaid vengeance shall ensue upon thy death, and whilst thy
wretched soul shall lie broiling in the quenchlesse flames of hell, we will
lift up our cheerful voices, and for the victory obtained over thee and
thine, sing praises unto our God, to whom be glory for ever.

Know then, O Infidel, that we fear thee not at all: and if thou be not
bent to run headlong unto thine own destruction, be advised. Content and
contain thy self within those bounds thou do at this present usurp. And
if thou have any belief at all, that thy thrice reverenced Prophet Mahomet
could tell a truth, or foretell future events, then call to mind that of those
1000. years which he prescribed for the continuing of thy Sect, there remains
not above 6. or 7. years. This then is the time that the yet unsheathed swords
of the Christians affoords for thy amendment, that thou may come to the
knowledge of the most true God, to worship him in his Son Jesus Christ.
Whereunto we once more exhort thee, omitting all other salutation and
recommendation.

Given at our Castle of Posnwich, the twelfth of February, the year of the
Incarnation of our Lord Jesus 1613. Sigismond.


