THE FAMOVS AND WONDERFVLL RECOVERIE of a Ship of Bristoll, called the
Exchange, from the Turkish Pirates of ARGIER. WITH THE UNMATCHABLE attempts and
good success of John Rawlins, Pilot in her, and other slaves; who in the end
with the slaughter of about 40. of the Turks and Moors, brought the Ship into
Plymouth the 13. of February last; with the Captain a Renegado, and 5. Turks
more, besides the redemption of 24. men, and one boy, from Turkish slavery.

LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter, dwelling at the Pide Bull at Saint
Austins Gate. 1622.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, GEORGE, Marquisse of Buckingham, Vicount Villiers,
Baron of Whaddon, Lord high Admiral of England, Justice in Air of all his
Majesty's Forests, Parkes, and Chases beyond Trent, Master of the Horse to his
Majesty, and one of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Bedchamber; Knight of the
most noble Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy
Council of England and Scotland.
Right Honorable:

SEeing it has pleased God by so weak means, as my poor self, to have his
power and goodness made manifest to the world, as by this following Relation
may appear, I thought it my duty to present the same unto you, whom the
Majesty of England has presented unto us, as our Patron and chief Commander
of our Sea-affaires: Accept it then, I humbly beseech you, as an unpolished
work of a poor Sailer; and the rather for that it exemplifies the glory of
God: for by such men, as my self, your Honor must be served, and England made
the happiest of all Nations. For though you have greater persons, and more
brauing spirits to lie over our heads, and hold inferiors in subjection; yet
are we the men that must pull the ropes, weigh up the anchors, toil in the
night, endure the storms, sweat at the Helm, watch the Biticle, attend the
Compass, guard the Ordnance, keep the night hours, and be ready for all
impositions: If then you vouchsafe to entertain it, I have my desire. For
according to the oath of Jurors, it is the truth, and the very truth: If
otherwise you suppose it triuiall, it is only the prostitution of my service,
and wisdom is not bought in the market.

Your Honors humbly to be commanded,

John Rawlins.

THE FAMOVS and wonderful recovery of the Exchange of BRISTOVV, from the
Turkish Pirates of ARGIER.
THe Psalmist says, that he that goes to sea, shall see the wonders of God:
and I may well say, that he that conuerseth with Mariners and Sailors, shall
hear of the wonders of men, as by this following discourse shall appear: not
that I am willing to be the author of nouelty, or amaze you with incredible
reports; but because I would not let slip so remarkable an accident, and so
profitable a relation: remarkable, as extending to manifest the power and glory
of God, who has variety of supportation in store to sweeten affliction, and
make all endurances subject to fortitude and patience: profitable, as being
thus far exemplary, to teach all men of action, and employment, not to
despair in distress, and to know thus much, that brave attempts are compassed
by resolution, and industrious employment, and whether they thrive or no, yet
shall the enterprise be Charactered with a worthy exploit, and if it end with
success, oh how shall the Actors be remembered to posterity! and make their
fame immortal, that either purchased their liberty even out of fire, or
delivered themselves, though by death it self, from slavish captivity, or the
thraldom of barbarous Infidels, who glory in nothing more then the perdition
of our souls, and derision of our Christ: Hearken then I pray you to this
following relation, and learn hereby, as I said, both to give God the praise
of all deliverances, and to instruct one another in the absolute duties of
Christianity. By the one, the power and providence with all the attributes
belonging to so immense a deity, shall be made manifest: by the other, the
weak brother shall be comforted, the strong confirmed, the wavering reduced,
the faint hearted erected, and the presumptuous moderated: By both religion
shall have a sweet passage in the consciences of men, and men made the happy
instruments of Gods glory, and their own increases of good example, and
imitation. And thus much for preamble or introduction: now to the matter it
self.

In the year 1621. the first of November there was one John Rawlins borne in
Rochester, and dwelling 23. year in Plimmoth, employed to the strait of
Gibralter by Mr. Richard and Steven Treuiles, merchants of Plimmoth, and
fraighted in a bark called the Nicholas of Plimmoth, of the burden of 40.
Tun, which had also in her company another ship of Plimmoth called the George
Bonauenture of 70. Tun burden, or thereabout; which by reason of her
greatness beyond the other, I will name the Admiral; and John Rawlins bark
shall if you please be the Viceadmirall. These two according to the time of
year, had a fair passage, and by the 18. of the same month came to a place at
the entering of the straites named Trafflegar: but the next morning, being in
sight of Gibralter, at the very mouth of the straites, the watch descried 5.
sail of ships, who as it seemed used all the means they could to come near
us, and we as we had cause, used the same means to go as far from them: yet
did their Admiral take in both his top sails, that either we might not
suspect them, or that his own company might come up the closer together. At
last perceiving us Christians, they fell from devices to apparent discovery of
hostility, and making out against us: we again suspecting them Pirates, took
our course to escape from them, and made all the sails we possibly could for
Terriff, or Gibralter: but all we could do, could not prevent their approach.
For suddenly one of them came right over against us to wind ward, and so fell
upon our quarter: another came upon our luffe, and so threatened us there, and
at last all five chased us, making great speed to surprise us.

Their Admiral was called Callfater, having upon her maine top-saile, two
top-gallant sails, one above another. But whereas we thought them all five to
be Turkish ships of war, we afterward understood, that two of them were
their prises, the one a small ship of London, the other of the West country,
that came out of the Quactath laden with figs, and other merchandise, but now
subject to the Fortune of the sea, and the captivity of Pirates. But to our
business. Three of these ships got much upon us, and so much that ere half
the day was spent, the Admiral who was the best sayler, fetched up the George
Bonauenture, and made booty of it. The Vice Admiral again being nearest unto
the lesser bark, whereof John Rawlins was Master, showed him the force of a
stronger arm, and by his Turkish name called Villa-Rise commanded him in like
sort to strike his sails, and submit to his mercy, which not to be gainesaied
nor prevented, was quickly done: and so Rawlins with his bark was as quickly
taken, although the Rear Admiral being the worst sailer of the three, called
Riggiprise, came not in, till all was done.

The same day before night, the Admiral either loath to pester himself with
too much company, or ignorant of the commodity was to be made by the sale of
English prisoners, or daring not to trust them in his company, for fear of
mutinies, and exciting others to rebellion; set 12. persons who were in the
George Bonauenture on the land, and diverse other English, whom he had taken
before, to try their fortunes in an unknown country. But Villa-Rise, the
Vice Admiral that had taken John Rawlins, would not so dispense with his men,
but commanded him and five more of his company to be brought aboard his ship,
leaving in his bark three men and his boy, with thirteen Turks and Mores,
who were questionless sufficient to ouer-master the other, and direct the
Bark to harbor. Thus they sailed directly for Argier; but the night
following, followed them with great tempest and soul weather, which ended not
without some effect of a storm: for they lost the sight of Rawlins Bark,
called the Nicolas, and in a manner lost themselves, though they seemed safe a
shipbord, by fearful coniecturing what should become of us: at last by the
22. of the same month, they, or we, choose you whether (for I would not be
mistaken in altering the persons, by either naming the first for the third, or
the third for the first, but only make the discourse equal, by setting down
the business honestly and truly, as it chanced) arrived at Argier, and came in
safety within the Mould, but found not our other Bark there; nay though we
earnestly inquired after the same, yet heard we nothing to our satisfaction;
but much matter was ministered to our discomfort and amazement. For although the
Captain and our ouer-seers, were loath we should have any conference with our
Countrymen; yet did we adventure to inform our selves of the present affairs
both of the Town, and the shipping: so that finding many English at work in
other ships, they spared not to tell us the danger we were in, and the
mischiefs we must needs incur, as being sure if we were not used like
slaves, to be sold as slaves: for there had been 500. brought into the market
for the same purpose, and above a 100. hansome youths compelled to turn
Turks, or made subject to more vilder prostitution, and all English: yet like
good Christians, they bade us be of good cheer, and comfort our selves in
this, that Gods trials were gentle purgations, and these crosses were but to
cleanse the dross from the gold, and bring us out of the fire again more
clear and lovely. Yet I must needs confess, that they afforded us reason for
this cruelty, as if they determined to be revenged of our last attempt to fire
their ships in the Mould, and therefore protested to spare none, whom they
could surprise, and take alive, but either to sell them for money, or torment
them to serve their own turns. Now their customs and vsages in both these
was in this manner.

First, concerning the first. The Bashaw had the ouer-seeing of all prisoners,
who were presented unto him at their first coming into the harbor, and so
chose one out of every eight for a present or fee to himself: the rest were
rated by the Captains, and so sent to the market to be sold; whereat if either
there were repining, or any drawing back, then certain Mores and officers
attended either to beat you forward, or thrust you into the sides with goades,
and this was the manner of the selling of slaves.

Secondly, concerning their enforcing them, either to turn Turk, or to attend
their filthiness and impieties, although it would make a Christians heart
bleed to hear of the same, yet must the truth not be hid, nor the terror left
untold. They commonly lay them on their naked backs, or bellies, beating them
so long, till they bleed at the nose and mouth, and if yet they continue
constant, then they strike the teeth out of their heads, pinch them by their
tongues, and use many other sorts of tortures to convert them; nay many times
they lay them their whole length in the ground like a grave, and so cover them
with boords, threatening to starve them, if they will not turn, and so many
even for fear of torment, and death, make their tongues betray their hearts to
a most fearful wickedness, and so are circumcised with new names, and
brought to confess a new religion. Others again, I must confess, who never
knew any God, but their own sensual lusts, and pleasures, thought that any
religion would serve their turns, and so for preferment or wealth very
voluntarily renounced their faith, and became Renegadoes in despite of any
counsel which seemed to intercept them: and this was the first news we
encountered with at our coming first to Argier.

The 26. of the same month, John Rawlins his Bark, with his other three men
and a boy, came safe into the Mould, and so were put all together to be carried
before the Bashaw, but that they took the Owners servant, and Rawlins boy, and
by force and torture compelled them to turn Turks: then were they in all 7.
English, besides John Rawlins, of whom the Bashaw took one, and sent the rest
to their Captains, who set a valuation upon them, and so the soldiers hurried
us like dogs into the market, whereas men sell Hackneies in England; we were
tossed up and down to see who would give most for us; and although we had
heavy hearts, and looked with sad countenances, yet many came to behold us,
sometimes taking us by the hand, sometime turning us round about, sometimes
feeling our brawnes, and naked arms, and so beholding our prices written in
our breasts, they bargained for us accordingly, and at last we were all sold,
and the soldiers returned with the money to their Captains.

John Rawlins was the last, who was sold, by reason of his lame hand, and
bought by the Captain that took him, even that dog Villa Rise, who better
informing himself of his skill fit to be a Pilot, and his experience to be an
ouer-seer, bought him and his Carpenter at very easy rates. For as we
afterward understood by diverse English Renegadoes, he paid for Rawlins but
150. dooblets, which make of English money seven pound ten shilling. Thus was
he and his Carpenter with diverse other slaves sent into his ship to work, and
employed about such affairs, as belonged to the well rigging and preparing the
same. But the villainous Turks perceiving his lame hand, and that he could not
perform so much as other slaves, quickly complained to their Patron, who as
quickly apprehended the inconvenience; whereupon he sent for him the next day,
and told him he was unserviceable for his present purpose, and therefore
unless he could procure fifteen pound of the English there, for his ransom,
he would send him up into the country, where he should never see Christendom
again, and endure the extremity of a miserable banishment.

But see how God works all for the best for his servants, and confounds the
presumption of Tyrants, frustrating their purposes, to make his wonders known
to the sons of men, and releeues his people, when they least think of
succor and releasement. Whilst John Rawlins was thus terrified with the
dogged answer of Villa Rise, the Exchange of Bristow, a ship formerly surprised
by the Pirates, lay all vnrigged in the harbor, till at last one John Goodale
an English Turk, with his confederates, understanding she was a good sailer,
and might be made a proper man of war, bought her from the Turks that took
her, and prepared her for their own purpose: now the Captain that set them on
work, was also an English Renegado, by the name of Rammetham Rise, but by his
christen name Henry Chandler, who resolved to make Goodale Master over her, and
because they were both English Turks, having the command notwithstanding of
many Turks and Mores, they concluded to have all English slaves to go in her,
and for their Gunners English and Dutch Renegadoes, and so they agreed with the
Patrons of nine English, and one French slave for their ransoms, who were
presently employed to rig and furnish the ship for a man of war, and while
they were thus busied, two of John Rawlins men, who were taken with him, were
also taken up to serve in this man of war, their names James Roe, and John
Dauies, the one dwelling in Plimmoth, and the other in Foy, where the Commander
of this ship was also borne, by which occasion they came acquainted, so that
both the Captain, and the Master promised them good usage upon the good
service they should perform in the voyage, and withal demanded of him, if he
knew of any Englishman to be bought, that could serve them as a Pilot, both to
direct them out of harbor, and conduct them in their voyage. For in truth
neither was the Captain a Mariner, nor any Turk in her of sufficiency to
dispose of her through the straites in security, nor oppose any enemy, that
should hold it out bravely against them. Dauies quickly replied, that as far
as he understood, Villa Rise would sell John Rawlins his Master, and Commander
of the Bark which was taken: A man every way sufficient for sea affairs,
being of great resolution and good experience, and for all he had a lame hand,
yet had he a sound heart and noble courage for any attempt or adventure.

When the Captain understood thus much, he employed Dauies to search for
Rawlins, who at last lighting upon him, asked him if the Turk would sell him:
Rawlins suddenly answered, that by reason of his lame hand he was willing to
part with him, but because he had disbursed money for him, he would gain
something by him, and so prized me at three hundred dooblets, which amounts
to fifteen pound English: which I must procure or incur sorer indurances.
When Dauies had certified thus much, the Turks a shipboord conferred about the
matter, and the Master whose christen name was John Goodale joined with two
Turks, who were consorted with him, and disbursed 100. dooblets apeece, and so
bought him of Villa Rise, sending him into the said ship, called the Exchange
of Bristow, as well to superuise what had been done, as to order what was left
undone, but especially to fit the sails, and to accommodate the ship, all
which Rawlins was very careful and indulgent in, not yet thinking of any
peculiar plot of deliverance, more then a general desire to be freed from
this Turkish slavery, and inhumane abuses.

By the seventh of January the ship was prepared with 12. good cast pieces, and
all manner of munition and provision, which belonged to such a purpose, and the
same day haled out of the Mould of Argier, with this company and in this manner.

There were in her 63. Turks and Mores, 9. English slaves, and one French:
four Hollanders, that were free men, to whom the Turks promised one prise or
other, and so to return to Holland, or if they were disposed to go back
again for Argier, they should have great reward and no enforcement offered,
but continue as they would both their religion and their customs: and for
their Gunners they had two of our soldiers, one English and one Dutch Renegado;
and thus much for the company. For the manner of setting out, it was as usual
as in other ships, but that the Turks delighted in the ostentous bravery of
their streamers, banners, and top-sailes: the ship being a hansome ship, and
well built for any purpose: the slaves and English were employed under hatches
about the Ordnance and other works of order, and accommodating themselves: all
which John Rawlins marked, as supposing it an intolerable slavery to take such
pains, and be subject to such dangers, and still to enrich other men, and
maintain their voluptuous filthiness and lives, returning themselves as
slaves, and living worse then their dogs amongst them.

Whereupon after he had conceited upon the indignity, and reproach of their
baseness, and the glory of an exploit, that could deliver himself and the
rest, from this slavish captivity, being very busy among the English in
pulling of ropes, and placing of Ordnance, he burst out into these, or such
like abrupt speeches: Oh hellish slavery to be thus subject to dogs! to labor
thus to enrich infidels, and maintain their pleasures, to be our selves
slaves, and worse then the outcast of the world: is there no way of
releasement? no devise to free us from this bondage? no exploit, no action of
worth to be put in execution, to make us renowned in the world, and famous to
posterity? Oh God strengthen my heart and hand, and something shall be done to
ease us of these mischiefs, and deliver us from these cruel Mahumetan dogs.
The other slaves pitying his distraction (as they thought) bade him speak
softly, lest they should all fare the worse for his distemperature. The worse,
(quoth Rawlins) what can be worse? death is the determiner of all misery, and
torture can last but a while: but to be continually a dying, and suffer all
indignity and reproach, and in the end to have no welcome but into the house of
slaughter or bondage, is insufferable, and more then flesh and blood can
endure: and therefore by that salvation which Christ has brought, I will
either attempt my deliverance at one time, or another, or perish in the
enterprise: but if you would be contented to hearken after a release and join
with me in the action, I would not doubt of facilitating the same, and show you
a way to make your credits thrive by some work of amazement, and augment your
glory in purchasing your liberty. I prithee be quiet (said they again) and
think not of impossibilities: yet if you can but open such a door of reason,
and probability, that we be not condemned for desperate and distracted
persons, in pulling the Sunn^ as it were out of the firmament, we can but
sacrifice our lives, and you may be sure of secrecy and taciturnitie. Now
blessed be my Genius, said Rawlins, that ever this motive was so opportunely
preferred, and therefore we will be quiet a while, till the iron be hotter, that
we may not strike in vain.

The 15. of January the morning water brought us near Cape de Gatt, hard by
the shore, we having in our company a small Turkish ship of war, that
followed us out of Argier the next day, and now joining with us, gave us notice
of seven small vessels, six of them being Sattees, and one Pollack, who very
quickly appeared in sight, and so we made toward them; but having more
advantage of the Pollack, then the rest, and loath to lose all, we both fercht
her up, and brought her past hope of recovery, which when she perceived,
rather then she would voluntarily come into the slavery of these Mahumetans,
she ran her self a shore, and so all the men forsook her; we still
followed as near as we durst, and for fear of splitting, let fall our
anchors, making out both our boats, wherein were many Musketeers, and some
English and Dutch Renegadoes, who came aboard home at their Conge, and found
three pieces of Ordnance, and four Murderers, but they straight way threw
them all ouer-boord to lighten the ship, and so they got her off, being laden
with Hides, and Logwood for dying, and presently sent her to Argier, taking
nine Turks, and one English slave, out of one ship, and six out of the less,
which we thought sufficient to man her.

But see the chance, or if you will, how fortune smiled on us: In the rifling
of this Catelaynia, our Turks fell at variance one with another, and in such a
manner, that we divided our selves, the lesser ship returned to Argier, and our
Exchange took the opportunity of the wind, and plied out of the Straights,
which rejoiced John Rawlins very much, as resolving on some Stratagem, when
opportunity should serve: In the mean while, the Turks began to murmr, and
would not willingly go into the Mar Granda, as the phrase is amongst them:
notwithstanding the Mores, being very superstitious, were contented to be
directed by their Hoshea, who with us signifies a witch, and is of great
account and reputation amongst them, as not going in any great vessel to Sea
without one, and observing whatsoever he concludes out of his divination: the
ceremonies he uses are many, and when they come into the Ocean, every second
or third night he makes his coniuration; he begins and ends with prayer,
using many Characters, and calling upon God by diverse names: yet at this time,
all that he did consisted in these particulars.

Upon the sight of two great ships, and as we were afraid the chasing, being
supposed to be Spanish men of war, a great silence is commanded in the ship,
and when all is done, the company gives as great a skrich; the Captain still
coming to John Rawlins, and sometimes making him take in all his sails, and
sometimes causing him to hoise them all out, as the Witch finds by his book,
and presages; then have they two arrows, and a curtleaxe, lying upon a pillow
naked; the arrows are one for the Turks, and the other for the Christians;
then the Witch reads, and the Captain or some other takes the arrows in
their hand by the heads, and if the arrow for the Christians comes over the
head of the arrow for the Turks, then do they advance their sails, and will
not endure the fight, whatsoever they see: but if the arrow of the Turks is
found in the opening of the hand upon the arrow of the Christians, then will
they stay and encounter with any ship whatsoever: the Curtleaxe is taken up by
some child, that is innocent, or rather ignorant of the ceremony, and so laid
down again; then do they observe, whether the same side is uppermost, which
lay before, and so proceed accordingly. They also observe Lunaticks and
changelings, and the Coniurer writes down their sayings in a book, groueling
on the ground, as if he whisperd to the Devil to tell him the truth, and so
expounds the letter, as it were by inspiration. Many other foolish rites they
have, whereon they do dote as foolishly, and whereof I could entreat more at
large, but this shall suffice at this time.

Whilst he was thus busied, and made demonstration that all was finished, the
people in the ship gave a great shout, and cried out, a sail, a sail, which
at last was discovered to be another man of war of Turks: for he made toward
us, and sent his boat aboard us, to whom our Captain complained, that being
becalmed by the Southern Cape, and having made no voyage, the Turks denied to
go any further Northward: but the Captain resolved not to return to Argier,
except he could obtain some prize worthy his endurances, but rather to go to
Salle, and sell his Christians to victual his ship; which the other Captain
apprehended for his honor, and so persuaded the Turks to be obedient unto
him; whereupon followed a pacification amongst us, and so that Turk took his
course for the Streights, and we put up Northward, expecting the good hour of
some beneficial booty.

All this while our slavery continued, and the Turks with insulting tyranny
set us still on work in all base and servile actions, adding stripes and
inhumane reuilings, even in our greatest labor, whereupon John Rawlins
resolved to obtain his liberty, and surprise the ship; providing ropes with
broad specks of iron, and all the iron crows, with which he knew a way, upon
consent of the rest, to ram up or tie fast their scuttels, gratings, and
Cabbins, yea to shut up the Captain himself with all his consorts, and so to
handle the matter, that upon the watchword given, the English being masters of
the Gunner room, Ordnance, and powder, they would either blow them into the
air, or kill them as they adventured to come down one by one, if they should
by any chance open their Cabbins. But because he would proceed the better in
his enterprise, as he had somewhat abruptly discovered himself to the nine
English slaves, so he kept the same distance with the 4. Hollanders, that were
free men, til finding them coming somewhat toward them, he acquainted them
with the whole conspiracy, and they affecting the plot, offered the adventure
of their lives in the business. Then very warily he undermined the English
Renegado, which was the Gunner, and three more his associats, who at first
seemed to retract. Last of all were brought in the Dutch Renegadoes, who were
also in the Gunner room, for always there lay 12. there, five Christians, and
7. English and Dutch Turks: so that when another motion had settled their
resolutions, and John Rawlins his constancy had put new life as it were in the
matter, the 4. Hollanders very honestly according to their promise sownded the
Dutch Renegadoes, who with easy persuasion gave their consent to so brave an
enterprise; whereupon John Rawlins not caring whether the English Gunners would
yield or no, resolved in the Captains morning watch, to make the attempt: But
you must understand that where the English slaves lay, there hung up always
four or five crows of Iron, being still under the carriages of the pieces,
and when the time approached being very dark, because John Rawlins would have
his crow of iron ready as other things were, and other men prepared in their
several places, in taking it out of the carriage by chance it hit on the side
of the piece, making such a noise, that the soldiers hearing it awaked the
Turks, and bad them come down: whereupon the Botesane of the Turks descended
with a candle, and presently searched all the slaves places, making much ado
of the matter, but finding neither hatchet nor hammer nor any thing else to
move suspicion of the enterprise, more then the crow of iron, which lay slipped
down under the cariages of the pieces, they went quietly up again, and
certified the Captain what had chanced, who satisfied himself, that it was a
common thing to have a crow of iron slip from his place.

But by this occasion we made stay of our attempt, yet were resolved to take
another or a better opportunity: only I must tell you, what John Rawlins would
have done, if this accident had not happened: he was fully minded with some
others with their naked knives in their hands, to press upon the Gunners
breast, and the other English Renegadoes, and either force them to consent to
their designs, or cut their throats, first telling them plainly, that they
had vowed to surprise the ship, and by Gods assistance to obtain their
liberty, and therefore either die or consent, that when you hear the watchword
given, for God, and King James, and St. George for England, you presently keep
your places and advise to execute what you are commanded.

But as you have heard, God was the best Physician to our wounded hearts, and
used a kind of preventing physic, rather then to cure us so suddenly: so
that out of his providence perceiving some danger in this enterprise, he both
caused us to desist, and at last brought our business to a better period, and
fortunate end. For we sailed still more Northward, and Rawlins had more time to
tamper with his Gunners, and the rest of the English Renegadoes, who very
willingly, when they considered the matter, and perpended the reasons, gave way
unto the project, and with a kind of joy seemed to entertain the motives:
only they made a stop at the first onset, who should begin the enterprise,
which was no way fit for them to do, because they were no slaves, but
Renegadoes, and so had always beneficial entertainment amongst them. But
when it is once put in practice, they would be sure not to fail them, but
venture their lives for God and their country. When Rawlins had heard them out,
he much liked their contradiction, and told them plainly, he did require no
such thing at their hands, but the slaves and himself would first sound the
channel, and then adventure the water, and so after reciprocal oaths taken,
and hands given, Rawlins once again lay in wait for the fittest opportunity,
but once again he is disappointed, and a suspicious accident brought him to
recollect his spirits anew, and study on the danger of the enterprise, and thus
it was.

After the Renegado Gunner had protested secrecy by all that might induce a man
to bestow some belief upon him, he presently went up the scottle, but stayed
not aloft a quarter of an hour, nay he came sooner down, and in the Gunner
room sat by Rawlins, who tarried for him where he left him: he was no sooner
placed, and entered into some conference, but there entered into the place a
furious Turk with his knife drawn, and presented it to Rawlins his body, who
verily supposed, he intended to kill him, as suspicious that the Gunner had
discovered something, whereat Rawlins was much moved, and so hastily asked what
the matter meant, or whether he would kill him or no, observing his
countenance, and according to the nature of jealousy, conceiting that his
color had a passage of change, whereby his suspicious heart, condemned him for
a Traitor: but that at more leisure he swear the contrary, and afterward proved
faithful and industrious in the enterprise. And for the present he answered
Rawlins in this manner, no Master be not afraid, I think he does but jest.
With that John Rawlins gave back a little and drew out kis knife, stepping
also to the Gunners sheath and taking out his, whereby he had two knives to
one, which when the Turk perceived, he threw down his knife, saying he did
but jest with him. But (as I said) when the Gunner perceived Rawlins took it
so ill, he whispered something in his ear, that at last satisfied him, calling
heaven to witness, that he never spoke word of the enterprise, nor ever
would, either to the prejudice of the business, or danger of his person:
Notwithstanding Rawlins kept the knives in his sleeue all night, and was
somewhat troubled, for that he had made so many acquainted with an action of
such importance: but the next day when he perceived the coast clear, and that
there was no cause of further fear, he somewhat comforted himself, and grew
bolder and bolder in disposing the affairs of the ship, only it grieved him,
that his enterprises were thus procrastinated, whereby the Mahumetane tyranny
increased, and the poor slaves even groned again under the burden of their
bondage, and thought every day a year till some thing were put in execution
for their deliverance: for it was now full five weeks, since Rawlins first
proiected the matter.

All this while Rawlins drew the Captain to lie for the Northern Cape,
assuring him, that thereby he should not miss purchase, which accordingly fell
out, as a wish would have it: but his drift was in truth to draw him from any
supply, or second of Turks, if God should give way to their enterprise, or
success to the victory: yet for the present the 6. of February being 12.
leagues from the Cape, we descried a sail, and presently took the advantage
of the wind in chasing her, and at last fetched her up, making her strike all
her sails, whereby we knew her to be a Bark belonging to Torbay near
Dartmouth, that came from Auerare laden with salt: ere we had fully dispatched,
it chanced to be foul weather, so that we could not, or at least would not
make out our boat, but caused the Master of the Bark to let down his, and
come aboard with his company, being in the Bark but 9. men, and one boy; and
so the Master leaving his Mate with two men in the same, came himself with 5.
men, and the boy unto us, whereupon our Turkish Captain sent 10. Turks to man
her, amongst whom were two Dutch, and one English Renegado, who were of our
confederacy, and acquainted with the business.

But when Rawlins saw this partition of his friends, before they could hoise
out their boat for the Bark, he made means to speak with them, and told them
plainly, that he would prosecute the matter either that night, or the next, and
therefore whatsoever came of it they should acquaint the English with his
resolution, and make toward England, bearing up the helm, whiles the Turks
slept, and suspected no such matter: for by Gods grace in his first watch about
midnight, he would show them a light, by which they might understand, that the
enterprise was begun, or at least in a good forwardness for the execution: and
so the boat was let down, and they came to the Bark of Torbay, where the
Masters Mate being left (as before you have heard) apprehended quickly the
matter, and heard the discourse with amazement. But time was precious, and not
to be spent in disputing, or casting of doubts, whether the Turks that were
with them, were able to master them, or no, being seven to six, considering
they had the helm of the ship, and the Turks being soldiers, and ignorant of
Sea affairs, could not discover, whether they went to Argier, or no; or if
they did, they resolved by Rawlins example to cut their throats, or cast them
over board: and so I leave them to make use of the Renegadoes instructions, and
return to Rawlins again.

The Master of the Bark of Torbay, and his company were quickly searched, and
as quickly pillaged, and dismissed to the liberty of the ship, whereby Rawlins
had leisure to entertain him with the lamentable news of their extremities,
and the adventure of their voyages, whereby he understood of his first setting
out from the West country, of his taking and surprising at Sea by Villa Rise,
of his twice being sold as a slave, and so continuing to his heart-burning and
excruciation; of the making the Exchange of Bristow a man of war, which they
were now in; of the Captain and Master, who were both English Renegadoes; of
the cruelty of the Turks in general, and his own fortunes in particular; of
his admission into the ship as a Pilot; of the friendship which passed between
him and the Hollanders; of the imparting the secret of surprising the ship both
to the slaves and Christian Renegadoes; of their consent and courageous
apprehension of the matter; of the first attempt, and their twice
disappointing; of his still resolution presently to put it in practice; of his
last acquainting the Dutch Renegadoes, who went aboard his Bark; and in a
word, of every particular which was befitting to the purpose: yea he told him,
that that night he should lose the sight of them, for they would make the helm
for England, and he would that night and evermore pray for their good success,
and safe deliverance.

When the Master of the Bark of Torbay had heard him out, and that his
company were partakers of his story, they became all silent, not either
diffident of his discourse, or afraid of the attempt, but as wondering at the
goodness of God, and his mercy, in choosing out such weak instruments to set
forth his glory. True, quoth Rawlins, when he found them coming toward him, it
is so: For mark but the circumstances of the matter, and you shall see the
very finger of God to point us out our deliverance. When we came into the maine
Ocean to hunt after prizes, according to the nature of Pirates, and that I
resolved on the enterprise, there were 65. Turks in our ship, and only 17. of
our confederacy; then it pleased God to abate us 10. of the Turks, who were
sent to Argier with the Pollaker before recited; and when we were disappointed
again of our purposes, you see now what has chanced, we are rid of more
Turks, and welcome you as a new supply; so that if you please, we shall be 24.
strong, and they in all are but 45: Be therefore courageous, and let us join
heart, hand, and foot together, that we may execute this brave attempt, for
Gods glory, our Countries honor, the good example of other, our own
deliverance, and if we may not be counted vainglorious, our everlasting
memory.

By that time he had finished this discourse also, the Master of the Bark and
his company resolved to assist him, as proiecting the misery and
wretchedness they should endure by being slaves to the Turks, and the
happiness of their liberty, besides the reputation of the enterprise; as for
death, it was in community to all men, and so in the hands of God to dispose
at his pleasure, and either could not happen before the hour of limitation, or
could not be prevented: for humane policy must submit to Divine providence:
yet to show himself an understanding man, he demanded of Rawlins, what weapons
he had: and in what manner he would execute the business, to which he
answered, that he had ropes, and iron hooks to make fast the scottels,
gratings, and cabbines, he had also in the Gunner room two Curtleaxes, and the
slaves had five crows of iron before them: Besides, in the scuffling they made
no question of some of the soldiers weapons: then for the manner, he told them,
they were sure of the Ordnance, the Gunner room, and the Powder, and so
blocking them up, would either kill them as they came down, or turn the
Ordnance against their Cabbins, or blow them into the air by one stratagem or
other, and thus were they contented on all sides, and resolved to the
enterprise.

The next morning being the seventh day of February the prise of Torbay was not
to be seen or found, whereat the Captain began to storm and swear,
commanding Rawlins to search the seas up and down for her, who bestowed all
that day in the business, but to little purpose: whereupon when the humor was
spent, the Captain pacified himself, as conceiting he should sure find her
at Argier: but by the permission of the ruler of all actions, that Argier was
England, and all his wickedness frustrated: for Rawlins being now startled,
lest he should return in this humor for the straits, the 8. of February went
down into the hold, and finding a great deal of water below, told the
Captain of the same, adding, that it did not come to the Pumpe, which he did
very politickly, that he might remove the Ordnance: For when the Captain asked
him the reason, he told him the ship was too far after the head: then he
commanded to use the best means he could to bring her in order: sure then
quoth Rawlins we must quit our Cables, and bring 4, pieces of Ordnance after,
and that would bring the water to the Pumpe, which was presently put in
practice, so the pieces being usually made fast thwart the ship, we brought two
of them with their mouths right before the byticle, and because the Renegadoe
Flemings would not begin, it was thus concluded: that the ship having three
decks, we that did belong to the Gunner room should be all there, and break
up the lower deck. The English slaves, who always lay in the middle deck,
should do the like, and watch the scuttels: Rawlins himself prevailed with
the Gunner, for so much powder, as should prime the pieces, and so told them
all there was no better watchword, nor means to begin, then upon the report of
the piece to make a cry and skrich, for God, and King James, and Saint George
for England.

When all things were prepared, and every man resolved, as knowing what he had
to do, and the hour when it should happen, to be two in the after noone,
Rawlins advised the Master Gunner to speak to the Captain, that the soldiers
might attend on the Poope, which would bring the ship after: to which the
Captain was very willing, and upon the Gunners information, the soldiers gat
themselves to the Poope, to the number of twenty, and 5. or 6. went into the
Captains Cabin, where always lay diverse Curtleaxes, and some targets, and so
we fell to work to pumpe the water, and carried the matter fairly till the
next day, which was spent as the former, being the ninth of February, and as
God must have the praise, the triumph of our victory.

For by that time all things were prepared, and the soldiers got upon the Poope
as the day before: to avoid suspicion, all that did belong to the Gunner room
went down, and the slaves in the middle deck attended their business, so
that we may cast up our account in this manner. First, nine English slaves,
besides John Rawlins: five of the Torbay men, and one boy, four English
Renegadoes, and two Dutch, four Hollanders: in all 24. and a boy: so that
lifting up our hearts and hands to God for the success of the business, we
were wonderfully encouraged, and settled our selves, till the report of the
piece gave us warning of the enterprise. Now you must consider, that in this
company were two of Rawlins men, James Roe and John Dauies, whom he brought
out of England, and whom the fortune of the sea brought into the same
predicament with their Master. These were employed about noone (being as I said
the ninth of February) to prepare their matches, while all the Turks or at
least most of them stood on the Poope to weigh down the ship as it were, to
bring the water forward to the Pumpe: the one brought his match lighted
between 2. spoones the other brought his in a little piece of a Can: and so in
the name of God, the Turks and Moors being placed as you have heard, and 45
in number, and Rawlins having proined the Tuch-holes, James Roe gave fire to
one of the pieces, about two of the clock in the after noone, and the
confederates upon the warning, shouted most cheerfully: the report of the
piece did tear and break down all the Bitickell, and compasses, and the
noise of the slaves made all the soldiers amassed at the matter, till seeing the
quarter of the ship rent, and feeling the whole body to shake under them: till
understanding the ship was surprised, and the attempt tended to their utter
destruction, never Bear robbed of her whelps was so fell and mad: For they
not only called us dogs, and cried out, Vsance de Lamair, which is as much as to
say, the Fortune of the wars: but attempted to tear up the planckes, setting a
work hammers, hatchets, knives, the oars of the Boat, the Boat hook, their
curtleaxes, and what else came to hand, besides stones and brickes in the Cook
room; all which they threw amongst us, attempting still and still to break
and rip up the hatches, and boordes of the steering, not desisting from their
former execrations, and horrible blasphemies and reuilings.

When John Rawlins perceived them so violent, and understood how the slaves had
cleared the decks of all the Turks and Moors beneath, he set a guard upon the
Powder, and charged their own Muskets against them, killing them from diverse
scoutholes, both before and behind, and so lessned their number, to the joy of
all our hearts, whereupon they cried out and called for the Pilot, and so
Rawlins, with some to guard him, went to them, and understood them by their
kneeling, that they cried for mercy, and to have their lives saved, and they
would come down, which he bad them do, and so they were taken one by one, and
bound, yea killed with their own Curtleaxes; which when the rest perceived,
they called us English dogs, and reviled us with many opprobrious terms, some
leaping ouerboord, crying it was the chance of war, some were manacled, and
so thrown ouerboord, and some were slain and mangled with the Curtlaxes, till
the ship was well cleared, and our selves assured of the victory.

At the first report of our piece, and hurliburly in the decks, the Captain
was a writing in his Cabin, and hearing the noise, thought it some strange
accident, and so came out with his Curtleaxe in his hand, presuming by his
authority to pacify the mischief: But when he cast his eyes upon us, and saw
that we were like to surprise the ship, he threw down his Curtleaxe, and
begged us to save his life, intimating unto Rawlins, how he had redeemed him
from Villa Rise, and ever since admitted him to place of command in the ship,
beside honest usage in the whole course of the voyage. All which Rawlins
confessed, but withal added, the fearfulness of his Apostasy from
Christianity, the unjustifiable course of Piracy, the extreme cruelty of the
Turks in general, the fearful proceedings of Argier against us in
particular, the horrible abuses of the Moors to Christians, and the execrable
blasphemies they use both against God and men. I will not dwell on his reply,
nor on the circumstances of atonement, only I am sure Rawlins at last
condescended to mercy, and brought the Captain and five more into England. The
Captain was called Ramtham Rise, but his Christen name Henry Chandler, and as
they say, a Chandlers son in Southwarck. John Goodale was also an English
Turk. Richard Clarke, in Turkish, Iafar; George Cook, Ramdam; John Brown,
Mamme; William Winter, Mustapha; besides all the slaves and Hollanders, with
other Renegadoes, who were willing to be reconciled to their true Savior, as
being formerly seduced with the hope of riches, honor, preferment, and such
like deuillish baits, to catch the souls of mortal men, and entangle frailty
in the tarriers of horrible abuses, and imposturing deceit.

When all was done, and the ship cleared of the dead bodies, John Rawlins
assembled his men together, and with one consent gave the praise unto God,
using the accustomed service on shipboord, and for want of books lifted up
their voices to God, as he put into their hearts, or renewed their memories:
then did they sing a Psalm, and last of all embraced one another for playing
the men in such a deliverance, whereby our fear was turned into joy, and
trembling hearts exhillirated, that we had escaped such inevitable dangers,
and especially the slavery and terror of bondage, worse then death it self:
The same night we washed our ship, put every thing in as good order as we
could, repaired the broken quarter, set up the Biticle, and bore up the Helm
for England, where by Gods grace and good guiding, we arrived at Plimmouth, the
13. of February, and were welcomed like the recovery of the lost sheep, or
as you read of a loving mother, that runs with embraces to entertain her
son from a long voyage, and escape of many dangers.

Not long after we understood of our confederats, that returned home in the
bark of Torbay, that they arrived in Pensance in Cornwall the 11. of February:
and if any ask after their deliverance, considering there were ten Turks sent
to man her, I will tell you that too: the next day after they lost us, as you
have heard, and that the three Renegadoes had acquainted the Masters mate, and
the two English in her with Rawlins determination, and that they themselves
would be true to them, and assist them in any enterprise: then if the worst
came, there were but 7. to 6. but as it fell out, they had a more easy
passage, then turmoile, or manslaughter. For they made the Turks believe, the
wind was come fair, and that they were sailing to Argier, till they came
within sight of England, which one of them amongst the rest discovered, saying
plainly, that that land was not like Cape Vincent; yes says he that was at
the helm, and you will be contented, and go down into the hold, and trim the
salt over to winde-ward, whereby the ship may bear full sail, you shall know
and see more to morrow: Whereupon five of them went down very orderly, the
Renegadoes faining themselves asleep, who presently start up, and with the
help of the two English, nailed down the hatches, whereat the principal
amongst them much repined, and began to grow into choler and rage, had it not
quickly been ouerpassed. For one of them stepped to him, and dashed out his
brains, and threw him ouer-boord: the rest were brought to Exceter, and either
to be arraigned, according to the punishment of delinquents in such a kind, or
disposed of, as the King and Council shall think meet: and this is the story
of this deliverance, and end of John Rawlins voyage.

Now gentle Reader, I hope you will not call in question the power and
goodness of God, who from time to time has extended his mercy to the
miraculous preservation of his servants, nor make any doubt that he has still
the same arm and vigor, as he had in times past, when Gedeons 300. men
overcame the Midianites: and many ancient stratagems are recorded to have had a
passage of success, even within our memories, to execute as great a wonder as
this: nor do I think you will be startled at any thing in the discourse,
touching the cruelty and inhumanitie of Turks, and Moors themselves, who
from a native barbarousnesse do hate all Christians and Christianity,
especially if they grow into the violent rages of Piracie, or fall into that
exorbitant course of selling of slaves, or enforcing men to be Mahumetanes. Nor
can I imagine, you will call in question our natural desire of liberty, and
saving of our lives, when you see from instinct of nature all the creatures of
the world come to the law of preservation; and our Savior himself allows
the flying out of one City into another in the time of persecution; and Paul
by saying he was a Roman procured his delivery. Well then: It is only the
truth of the story you are amazed at, making doubt, whether your belief of
the same may be bestowed to your own credit: I can say no more; the actors in
this Comic Tragedy are most of them alive; the Turks are in prison; the ship
is to be seen, and Rawlins himself dare justify the matter. For he has
presented it to the Marquisse, a man not to be dallied withal in these things,
nor any way to be made partaker of deceit. Nay, I protest, I think, he durst
not for his ears (concerning the substance) publish such a discourse to open
ouerlooking, if it were not true. As for illustration, or cementing the broken
pieces with well tempred mortar, blame him not in that: for precious stones are
worn enameled, and wrought in gold, which otherwise would be still of value
and estimation; but pollished, and receiving the addition of Art and cunning,
who does not account the better, and esteems himself the richer for their
possession? So then; entertain it for a true and certain discourse: apply it,
make use of it, and put it to thy heart for thy comfort. It teaches the
acknowledgment of a powerful, provident, and merciful God, who will be known
in his wonders, and make weak things the instruments of his glory. It
instructs us in the practice of thanksgiving, when a benefit is bestowed, a
mercy showen, and a deliverance perfected. It makes us strong and courageous
in adversity, like cordial restoratiues to a sick heart, and our patience
shall stand as a rock against the impetuous assaults of affliction. It is a
glorious Sun to dissipate the clouds of desperation, and cheer us thus
far, that God can restore us, when we are under the pressure of discomfort
and tribulation: for preferment comes neither from the East, nor the West, but
from him that holds the winds in his hands, and puts a hook in the nostrils
of Leuiathan: so that if he do not give way to our contentment, it is because
he will supply us with better graces, or keep us from the Adders hole of
temptation, whereat if we tarry, we shall be sure to be stung unto the death.
In a word, it is a mirror to look virtue in the face, and teach men the way to
industry and noble performances, that a brave spirit and honest man shall say
with Nehemiah, Shall such a man as I fly? Shall I fear death, or some petty
trial, when God is to be honored, my Country to be served, my King to be
obeyed, Religion to be defended, the Commonwealth supported, honor and
renown obtained, and in the end the crown of immortality purchased?

The names of those English Renegadoes, as consented, and joined with the
Slaves in the Recovery of the Ship, were these.
Richard Clarke, the Gunner, called in Turkish Iafar.

George Cook, Gunners-mate, called in Turkish Ramedam.

William Winter, Carpenter, in Turkish, Mustapha.

John Brown, in Turkish, Memme.

One Dutch Renegado.

Four Dutch Slaves.

One French Slave.

Five Englishmen and one boy, taken but three days before.

Nine English slaves which they took with them from Argier. In all 24. men and
a boy. Which were all safely landed at Plimmoth, the 13. of February 1621.

They saved alive of the 45. Turks and Moors, the Captain, one Henry
Chandler, borne in Southwarke, an English Renegado; and five Turks more, who
are at this present in Plimmoth Iaile. etc.


