AN EXPOSITION OF Certain difficult and obscure words, and terms of the Laws
of this Realm, newly set forth and augmented, both in French and English, for
the help of such young Students, as are desirous to attain to the knowledge of
the same.

AT LONDON Printed by th'Assignee of Charles Yetsweirt Esquire. deceased.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

1595.

The Table.
A.
ABatement de brief ^n plaint fol. 1. a Abatement en terres fol. 1. b Abbot
fol. 2. a Abbettors fol. 2. b Abeyance fol. 3. a Abishersing fol. 4. a
Abiuration fol. 4. a Abridgement de plaint ou demand fol. 5. b Accedas ad
Curiam fol. 6. a Acceptance fol. 6. a Accessories fol. 6. b Action fol. 7. b
Action personals fol. 7. b Action reals fol. 7. b Action populer fol. 8. a
Action mixed fol. 8. b Action del brief fol. 9. a Action sur le case fol. 9. a
Action sur le statute fol. 9. b Account fol. 10. a Accord fol. 10. b Acquital
fol. 10. b Acquitance fol. 11. b Acts fol. 12. a Additions fol. 12. a
Adiournement fol. 12. a Admeas. de dower fol. 12. a Admeas. de pasture fol. 12.
b Administrator fol. 14. a Admiral fol. 15. a Ad quod dampnum fol. 15. a
Aduowson fol. 15. b Age prier fol. 15. b Agreement fol. 16. b Aid fol. 18. a
Aid de Roy fol. 18. b Aiel fol. 19. a Alien fol. 19. b Alienation fol. 19. b
Ambidexter fol. 19. b Amendment fol. 20. a Amercement fol. 20. a Amercement
roial fol. 20. b An, iour, and wast fol. 20. b Annuitie fol. 21. a Appeal fol.
21. a Appellant fol. 21. b Appellor fol. 21. b Appendant and appurtenant fol.
21. b Apportionment fol. 22. a Appropriations fol. 22. b Approuements fol. 24.
a Arbitrament fol. 24. a Arrest fol. 24. b Arrerages fol. 25. a Assets fol. 25.
a Assignee fol. 26. a Assise fol. 26. ^ Assise de darrain pres. fol. 27. b Ass.
de Mortdancest. fol. 27. b Attainder fol. 27. b Attaint fol. 28. a Atturnement
fol. 28. b Audita querela fol. 28. b Auerrement fol. 29. a Auerpeme fol. 29. a
Ancient demesne fol. 29. a Auowrie fol. 29. b
B.
Bail fol. 30. a Bailement fol. 30. b Bailife fol. 30. b Ba^berind thief fol.
31. a Bargain and sale fol. 31. a Bar fol. 31. b Base fee fol. 31. b Bastard
fol. 32. a Battle fol. 32. b Bigamie fol. 32. b Blodwit fol. 33. b Boot fol.
33. b Broodhalfpenie fol. 34. a Burgage fol. 34. a Burghbote fol. 34. a
Burghbrech fol. 34. b Burghenglish fol. 34. b Burglarie fol. 34. b
C
Capias fol. 35. a Caruage fol. 35. a Certification in ass. fol. 35. a
Certiorary fol. 35. b Cession fol. 36. a Cessauit fol. 36. a Challenge fol. 37.
a Champertie fol. 37. b Champertors fol. 38. a Charge fol. 38. a Charters fol.
38. a Chattels fol. 38. b Childwit fol. 38. b Chimin fol. 38. b Chose in action
fol. 39. a Cinque Ports fol. 39. b Circuit de action fol. 39. b Claim fol.
40. a Clergy fol. 40. b Clerk attaint fol. 40 b Clerk convict fol. 41. a
Color fol. 41. a Color de office fol. 42. a Collusion fol. 42. b Common ley
fol. 43. a Common fol. 43. b Condition fol. 45. a Confirmation fol. 46. b
Confiscate biens fol. 47. b Conspiracy fol. 47. a Custom fol. 47. a
Consultation fol. 47. b Continual claim fol. 47. b Counterplee fol. 48. a
Contract fol. 48. b Contra formam collationis fol. 49. a Contra formam
feoffamenti fol. 49. b Contributione fac. fol. 50. a Conusance fol. 50. a
Corodie fol. 50. b Coroner fol. 51. b Corporation fol. 52. b Corpse politic
fol. 53. a Corruption de sank fol. 53. a Co^ooage fol. 53. b Covenant fol. 54.
a Couerture fol. 54. a Couin fol. 54. b Cui in vita fol. 54. b Cui ante
diuortium fol. 55. a Courtesy dengleterre fol. 55. a
D.
Damage fesant fol. 55. a Danegeld fol. 55. b Darrem presentment fol. 56. a
Deane and Chapter fol. 56. a Decies tantum fol. 56. a Declaration fol. 56 b
Dedimus potestatem fol. 57. b Defendant fol. 57. b Defense fol. 57. b Demandant
fol. 58. a Demeanes fol. 58. b Demi sank fol. 59. a Demurrer fol. 59. a Denizen
fol. 59. b Deodand fol. 59. b Departure de son plee ou matter fol. 60. a
Departure in dispite del Court fol. 60. a Deputy fol. 60. b Debt fol. 60. b
Deuastauerunt bona resta^oris fol. 61. a Devise fol. 61. b Diem clausit extrem^
fol. 65, a Descent fol. 65. b Disclaimer fol. 66. a Discontinuance fol. 66. a
Dismes fol. 66. b Disparagement fol. 67. a Disseisin fol. 67. b Disseisin sur
disseisin fol. 68. a Disse^sor and disseisee fol. 68. a Disceit fol. 68. a
Distres fol. 68. b Divorce fol. 70. b Donor and Donee fol. 70. b Double plee
fol. 70. b Dower fol. 71. a Droit fol. 72. a Droit dentrie fol. 72. a Dum non
fuit compos me^tis fol. 72. a Dum fuit infra etat^ fol. 72. b Dures fol. 72. b
E.
Eiectione firm. fol. 73. a Eiectment de Guard fol. 73. a Eire Justices fol.
73. a Elegit fol. 73. a Embraceor fol. 75. b Encrochment fol. 75. b Enheritance
fol. 76. a Enter fol. 76. b Entrusion fol. 79. b Equity fol. 79. b Error fol.
81. a Escape fol. 81, b Escheat fol. 82. b Escuage fol. 83. a Esplees fol. 83.
b Essoine fol. 84. a Estoppel fol. 84. b Estrangers fol. 85. b Estray fol. 86.
a Estrepement fol. 86. a Etate probanda fol. 86, b Excommen gem^t fol. 86. b
Exchange fol. 87. a Execution fol. 87. b Executor fol. 88. a Exigent fol. 88. b
Ex part talis fol. 89. a Ex graui querela fol. 89. a Extinguishment fol. 89. a
Extortion fol. 89. b
F.
Failer de record fol. 90. a Fait fol. 90. b Farm fol. 94. b Faux imprisonment
fol. 95. a Fee ferme fol. 95. a Fee simple fol. 95. a Feoffement fol. 95. b
Feoffor and Feoffee fol. 95. b Fealty fol. 96. a Felony fol. 96. a Firebote
fol. 96. b Fledwit fol. 96. b Flemeswite fol. 97. a Fletwit fol. 97. a Forstal
fol. 97. a Forstaller fol. 97. a Franchise roial fol. 97. b Frankalmoigne fol.
97. b Frank fee fol. 98. a Fieri facias fol. 98. b Fine fol. 99. a Formedon
fol. 98. b Frankmariage fol. 100. a Franktenement fol. 101. a Freshsuit fol.
101. b
G.
Gager deliuerans fol. 102. a Garra^tie des ch^es fol. 102. b Garrantie fol.
103. a Garrantie fol. 105. a Guard fol. 105. b Gardein fol. 106. a Garnishment
fol. 107. a Gauelet fol. 107. a Gauelkind fol. 108, b Geld fol. 109, b Graund
Cape fol. 109, b Grand Serieantie fol. 109, b Girthbrech fol. 110, b
H
Habere fac^ sei^ fol. 110, b Hangwit fol. 111, a Hariot fol. 111, a Heybote ou
Hedgebote fol. 111, b Hidage fol. 112, a Hotchpot fol. 112, a Homage fol. 113,
a Homage an^cestrel fol. 113, a Homesoken fol. 113, b Homicide fol. 114, a
Hornegeld fol. 114, a Housebote fol. 114, a Hundred fol. 114, b Hundredum fol.
115, a
I
Idiot fol. 115, a Idemptitatenom^ fol. 115, b Ieofaile fol. 116, a Illoial
assembly fol. 116, b Imparlance fol. 116, b Imprisonment fol. 117, a
Infangtheefe fol. 117, a Information fol. 117, b Iointenants fol. 117, a
Indicauit fol. 119, a Ioynture fol. 119, a
L
Larcenie fol. 120, a Lastage fol. 120, b Leases fol. 120, b Lessor and Lessee
fol. 121, a Leua^t and touchant fol. 121, a Ley fol. 121, b Liberate probanda
fol. 122, b Liuerie de seisin fol. 122, b Lotherwit fol. 124, a
M.
Maihem fol. 124, a Mainprise fol. 125, a Manor fol. 125, a Mamunission fol.
125, b Maxims fol. 126, a Mainour fol. 126, b Maintenance fol. 127, a Mesne
fol. 127, a Misprision fol. 127. b Monstrans de faits ou Records. fol. 128. a
Mortdauncester fol. 128. b Monstrauerunt fol. 128. b Mortgage fol. 129. b
Moderata miserie^ fol. 130. b Mortmaine fol. 130. b Mulier fol. 131. a Murder
fol. 132. a
N.
Natiuo habendo fol. 132. a Ne admittas fol. 132. b No^ omittas etc. fol. 132.
b Negatiua preigna^s fol. 133. a Neiniuste vexes fol. 134. a Niefe fol. 134. a
Nihil dicit fol. 135. a Nisi prius fol. 135. a Nomination fol. 135. a
Nonabilitie fol. 135. b Nude contratt fol. 135. b Nusans fol. 136. a Nuper
obiit fol. 136. b
O.
Oredelf fol. 136. a Outfangtheefe fol. 136. b Oweltie fol. 137. a Oyer de
Records and faits fol. 137. a Oier and terminer fol. 137. b
P.
Pape fol. 138. a Per que seruitia fol. 138. b Parceners fol. 138. b Partition
fol. 139. b Parties fol. 141. a Patron fol. 141. b Perquisites fol. 142. a
Perambula^^ fa. fol. 142. a Petit Cape fol. 142. b Petit Serieantie fol. 143. a
Plaintiff fol. 143. a Pleading fol. 143. a Post disseisin fol. 143. b
Possession fol. 143. b Pound fol. 144. a Preamble fol. 144, a Praemunire fol.
144, b Precipe in capite fol. 145, a Prescription fol. 145, b Presentment fol.
146, a Prete^sed droit etc. fol. 146, a Priuities etc. fol. 146, b Privileges
fol. 147, b Process fol. 148, a Prochein Amy fol. 149, a Procedendo fol. 150, a
Prohibition fol. 150, a Protection fol. 150, b Protestation fol. 151, b
Purchase fol. 152, b
Q.
Quale ius fol. 152, b Quare eiecit infra terminum fol. 153, a Quare impedit
fol. 153, a Quare incumbrauit fol. 153, b Q. intrusit matrimonio no^ satisfacto
fol. 154, a Quare non admisit fol. 154, a Quarentine fol. 154, b Quid iuris
clamat fol. 154, b Quinzime fol. 155, a Quod ei deforceat fol. 155, b Q.
permittat fol. 156, a Quo iure fol. 156, a Quo minus fol. 156, a Quo warranto
fol. 156, b
R.
Rationabil diui^ fol. 156, b Reddissseisin fol. 157, a Regrator fol. 157, a
Reioynder fol. 157, a Release fol. 157, b Relief fol. 158, a Remainder fol.
158, b Remitter fol. 159, a Rents fol. 160, a Repleuin fol. 165, a Replication
fol. 165, b Reprises fol. 166, a Receipt fol. 166, a Rescous fol. 166, a
Reservation fol. 166, b Retraxit fol. 167. a Reeue fol. 167, b Reuersion fol.
168, a Riot fol. 168, b Robbery fol. 168, b Rout fol. 168, b
S.
Sake fol. 169, a Scire facias fol. 169, a Scot fol. 170, a Service de chiualer
fol. 170, a Showing fol. 170, a Soke fol. 170, b Sokmains fol. 170, b Socage
fol. 172, a Summons ad warrantizandum fol. 173, a Spoliation fol. 173, a
Stallage fol. 174, a Suit Covenant fol. 174, a Suit custom fol. 174, b Suit
real fol. 174, b Suit service fol. 175, a Statute merchant fol. 175. a
T.
Tail fol. 176, a Tail ap^s poss* etc. fol. 177, a Tax and Tallage fol. 177,
b Tenure in capite fol. 177, b Term dans fol. 177, a Testament fol. 178, a
Them fol. 179, a The^tbote fol. 179, a Title fol. 179, b Title dentrie fol.
179, b Toss fol. 180, a Treason fol. 181, a Treasure troue fol. 181, a Turn
del V^t^nt fol. 181, ^
V.
View fol. 181, b Vi laica remoue^da fol. 182, a Villenage fol. 182, b Viscont
fol. 185, a Volunt fol. 186, a Voucher fol. 187, a Uses fol. 187, b Usury fol.
188, a Vtlagarie fol. 188, b Vtrum fol. 189, ^
W.
Wai^e fol. 190, a Wa^^e fol. 190, b Warwit fol. 191, a Wast^ fol. 191, a Wreck
fol. 191, b Withernam fol. 192, a Warren fol. 192, a
FINIS.
Terms of the Law.
1 Abatement of a writ or plaint.
ABateme^t of a writ or plaint, is when an actio^ is brought by writ or plaint,
wherein is lack of sufficient and good matter, or else the matter alleged is
not certainly set down, or if the plaintiff or defendant, or place are
misnamed, or if there appear variance between the writ and the specialtie or
record, or that the writ or the declaration be uncertain, or for death of the
plaintiff or defendant and for diverse other like causes, then upon those
defaults, the defendant may pray, yt the writ or plaint may abate, that is to
say, that the plaintifs suit against him, may cease for that time, and that he
shall begin again his suit, and bring a new writ or plaint if he be so disposed
to do. But if the defendant in any action plede a matter in bar, for to
adnull the action for ever, he shall not come afterward to plede in abatement
of the writ, but if after it appear in ye record, that there is some matter
apparent, for the which ye writ ought to be abated, then ye def. or any person
as a frind to ye court may well plede and show yt in arrest of judgment.

See the titles of writ, Misnosmer and Variance in the Abridgements, and the
book called the Digests of writs, in which it is very well entreated,
especially of these matters.

Abatement in lands.
ABatement in lands or teneme^ts is when a man dies seized of lands or
tenements, and one yt has no right enters into ye same lands or teneme^ts
before y^ heir makes his entry, this entry of him is called an abatement, and
he an Abator. But if the heir enter first after ye death of his auncestor, and
the other enter upon y^ possession of y^ heir, this entry of him is a
disseisin to the heir. Look in ye book of entries ^o. 63. c. and 205. d. and
519. c. where this word Abatement is called in latin, Intrusio, And I think it
better to call it in latin Interpositio, or Intratio per interpositionem, to
make a difference between this word and intrusion after y^ death of the
tenant for life.

3 Abbot.
ABbot was y^ sovereign head, or chief of those houses, which when they stood
were called Abbeys, and this Abbot together with ye monks of ye same house, who
were called y^ covent made a corporation: such a sovereign of any such house
shall not be charged by y^ act of his predecessor, if it be not by common seal
or for such things which comes to the use of his house. Also an abbot shall
not be charged for the det of his Monk before his enter in religion, though
the creditor hanc an especialtie thereof, except that it have come to the use
of his house, but the executors of the Monk shall be charged therewith.

Look for this in the Abridgments the same title under which you shall see that
some of the^ were elective, some prese^tatiue, And how they were made
governors, and their authority, and in this title are also comprehended all
other corporations spiritual, as Prior and his covent friars and Canons, Deane
and Chapter.

Abbettors.
ABbettors are in diverse cases diversely taken one kind of abbettors are they y^
maliciously without just cause or desert do procure other to sue false appeals of
murder or felony against men to the intent to trouble and grieve them, and to
bring them to infamy and slander. Abbetiours in murders, are those that
command, procure, counsel or comfort others to murder. And in some cas such
abbettors shall be taken as principals, and in some case but as accessories. So
in other felomes. And their presence at the deed doing, and their abse^ce
makes a difference in the case. There are abbettors also in treason, but they
are in case as principals, for in treason there are no accessories.

Look more in the book called the Plees of the Crown made by the right
worshipful Judge Sir W. Stamford in the titles of Accessories and damages in
appeal.

5 Abeiance.
ABeiance is when a lease is made for term of life, the remainder to the right
heirs of I. S. which I. S. is living at the time of the grant, Now by this
grant the remainder passes from the grauntor present^e, yet it vesteth not
presently, nor takes hold in the grantee, that is to fay, the right heir of
I. S. but is said to be in abeyance or else as the Logiciens term it in power,
or in understanding, and as we say in the clouds, that is to wit, in the
consideration of the law, That if I. S. dye having a right heir, and living the
lessee for life, then this is a good remainder, and now vesteth and comes
into the right heir in such sort, as that he may grant, forfait or otherwise
dispose y^ same, and cease to be any more in Abeia^ce, for that there is one
now of ability to take it because that I. S. is dead, and has left a right
heir in life, which could not be living I. S. for y^ during his life none
could properly be said his heir. Also if a man be Patron of a Church, and
presents one to y^ same. Now is the fee of the lands and tenementes
perteyninge to the rectorie in the parson, but if the parson die and the Church
is become void, then is the fee in abeyaunce, until there be a new Parson
presented, for the patron has not the fee, but only the right to present, and
the fee is in the incumbe^t that is presented, and after his death, it is in no
body but in abeyance, till there be a new incumbent as is aforesaid.

See Lit. his 3. book cap. 11. fol. 145. And Park. fol. 12.

6 Abishersing.
ABishersing (and in some copies Mishersing) yt is to be quit of amerciame^ts
before who^ soever of transgression proved.

7* Abiuration.
ABiuration is an oath that a man or woman shall take w^e^ they have committed
felony, and fly to the Church or churchyard, or to any other place privileged
for safegarde of their lives, choosing rather perpetual banishment out of the
realm, the^ to stand to the law and to be tried of the felony, in which case
before the Coroner he shalmake such confession, which may make a sufficient
indictment of felony, then the coroner at the common law shall make him to
forswere the Realm, and shall assign him to what Port he shall go, and shall
swear him y^ he go not out of the high way, and yt he should not abide at the
port (if he may have good passage) but one flood and one ebb, and if he cannot
have passage, then he shall go every day during xl. days in the se^ to the
knees, but if such a felon as abiureth go out of the hie way and flies to
another place, if he be taken he shall be brought before the judge and there shall
have judgment to be hanged. But if he which so prays the privilege will not
abjure, then he shall have the privilege for xl. days, and every man may give
him meat and drink. But if any give him sustenance after xl. days although
it be his wife* such giving is felony. Also he that does abjure shall be
delivered from one Constable to another, and from one fra^ches to another, til
that he come to his port, and if the Constable will not receive him, he shall be
grievously amerced. Look the oath in the Treatise de Abiuratione Latronu^.

And this law was instituted by S. Edward the Confessor, a king of this Realm
before the Conquest, and was grounded upon the law of mercy, and for the love
and reverence no doubt that he and other his successors did bear unto the
house of God, or place of prayer and administration of his word and
sacraments, which we call the Church. Note this law is now changed by the
statutes 21. H 8. ca. 2 22. H. 8. ca. 14. and 32. H. 8. cap. 12. by which it
appears, that he at this day shall not abjure the Realm, but al his liberty
of this Realm, and al his liberal and free habitations, resorts and passages
from all places of this Realm, to one certain place in this realm thereto
limited by 32. H. 8. ca. 13 and 33. H. 8. ca. 15. Look more in Stamf. li. 2.
ca. 10.

Abridgement of a plaint or demand.
ABridgement of a plaint or demand is where one brings an ass. writ of
dower, writ of ward or such like where ye writ of Assise is, De libero ten^to,
as in a writ of dower, the writ is, Rationabile^ dote^ quae ea^ contingit de
libero tenemento w. her husband And in a writ of ward the writ is Custod'
terraru^ and heredis etc. and the plaintiff or demaundant, demands diverse
acres or parcels of land, and the tenant pleads Nontenure, or iointenancy or
some other such like plee, to parcel of the land demanded in abatement of the
writ, then the plaintiff or dema^dant may abridge his plaint or demand to that
parcel, y^ is to say, he may leave out that part and pray that the tenant
shall answer the rest to which he has not yet pleaded any thing. The cause is
for y^ in such writs, the certainty is not set down, but the dema^d runs
generally, de libero tenemento, and notwithstanding the demandant has abridged
his plaint or demand in part; yet the writ remains good still de libero
tenemento for y^ rest.

9 Accedas ad Curiam.
ACcedas ad Curiam is a writ directed to the shirife, commanding him to go to
such a court of some lord or franchise where a plaint is sued, for taking of
beasts as a distress, or any false judgment is supposed to be made in any
suite which has been in such a court which is not a court of record, and that
the shirife shall there make record of the said suite in presence of the
suitors of the same Court, and of four other knights of the County, and
certify into the kings court, and at that day that is limited in the writ.

10 Acceptance.
Accepta^ce is a taking in good part, and as it were an agreeing unto some act
done before, which might have bin undone and avoided (if such acceptance had not
bin) by him or them that so accepted, As for example: if a Bishop before primo
Eliz. lease part of the possessions of his Bishopric for term of years
reserving rent and dies, and after an other is made Bishop, who accepts,
that is to say, takes or receives the rent when it is due and ought to be
paid, now by this acceptaunce the lease is made perfect and good, which else
the new bishop might very well have avoided and made frustrate.

The like law is, if a man and his wife seized of land in the right of the wife
^oine or make lease by ^effment in deed reserving rent, and the husband dies,
she accepts or receives the rent, by this the feoffement or lease is made
perfect and good, and shall bar her to bring her writ called Cui in vita.

Accessories.
ACcessories are in two sorts, theone before the offense, the other after the
offense is done, Accessorie before the fact or offense is he that commands or
procures an other to do felony, and is not there present himself when the
other does it, but if he be present then he is also principal. Accessorie
after the offense is he that receives, favors, a^^eth, ^ssisteth or
comfort any man that has don any murder or felony whereof he has
knowledge, such an accessorie shall be punished, and shall have judgment of life
and member as well as the principal which did the felony: but such an
accessorie shall never be put to that till the principal be attaint or
convict, or be outlawed thereupon. But a women in such case shall not be
accessorie for helping her husband: in great or high Treason as well the
comma^ders as the assisters and receivers after be alwais principals.

Also one may be accessorie to an accessorie, as if one feloniously receive an
other that is accessorie to felony, there the receiver is an accessorie.

See more of accessorie in the said Book of Plees of the Crown the first
book, cap. 44. 45. 46. 47. 98. 49. and 50.

Action.
ACtion is the form of a suit given by the law to recover a thing, as an
action of debt and such like.

See the Lexicon of the law for action.

Actions personals.
Actions personals be such actions whereby a man claims debt or other goods
and chattels, or damage for them, or damages for wrong don to his person, and
it is properly that which in the Civil law is called Actio in personam, which
is brought against him, who is bound by covenant or default to give or grant
any thing.

Actions reals.
Actions reals be such actions whereby the demandant claims title to any
lands or tomments, rents or commons, in fee simple, fee tail, or for term of
life.

15 Action popular.
ACtion populer is an action which is given upon the breach of some penal
statute, the which action every man that will may sue for himself and the
Queen, by information or otherwise, as y^ statute allows, and the case
requires. And of these actions there be an infinite number, but one for
example is: when any of the Jury that are impanelled and sworn to pass
between party and party indifferently, do take any thing of the one side or
other, or of both parties to say their verdicts on that side, then any man that
will within the year next following the offense made, may sue a writ called
Decies tantum, against him or them that so did take to give his verdict, and
because yt this action is not given to one specially, but generally to any of
the Q. people as will sue, it is called an Action populer, but in this case
when one has begun to pursue an actio^, no other may sue it, and in this as it
seems this does vary from an action populer by the Civil law.

Action mixed.
Action mixed is a suit given by the law to recover the thing demanded, and also
damages for the wrong done, as in Assise of Nouel disses. the which writ (if
the disseisor make a feoffement* to an other) the disseisee shall have against
the disseisor and the feffee or other land tenant, and thereby shall recover his
seisin of the land and his damages for the mean profits, and for the wrong done
unto him. And so is an actio^ of wast and Quare imp. But an action of Detinu is
not called an actio^ mixed although by it the thing withheld is demanded, and
shall be recovered if it may be found, and damages for y^ withholding, and i^ it
cannot be found, then damages for the thing and the reteyning. But that is
called only an action personal, because that it should be brought only for
goods and chattels.

17 Action of a writ.
ACtion of the writ, is a phrase of speech used when one pleads some matter*
by which he shows that the plaintiff had no cause to have the writ which he
brought, and yet it may be, that he may have another writ or action for the
same matter: such a plee is called a plee to the action of the writ, whereas if
by the plee it should appear, that the plaintiff has no cause to have any
action, for the thing demanded, then it shall be called a plee to the action.

18 Action upon the case.
ACtion upon the case, is a writ brought against one for an offense done without
force, as for not per forming promise made by the defendant to the plaintiff or
for speaking of words, by which the plaintiff is defamed, or for other
misdemeanor or disceit, where the whole case shall be contained in the writ.

Action upon the statute.
ACtion upon the statute is a writfou^ded upon any statute, where by any
statute an action is given to one in any case where no action was before: As
where one commits perjury to the prejudice of another, he which is
indamaged shall have a writ upon the statute and his case, And the difference
between action upon the statute and action Populer is, that where the statute
gives the suite or action, to the party grieved, or otherwise to one person
certain, that is called action upon the Statute: But where by the statute
authority is given to every one that will to sue, that is termed action
Populer.

Account.
Account is a writ and it lies where a Bailife or a Receiver to any Lord or
other man, which ought to render account, will not give his account, then he
to whom the account ought to be given, shall have this writ. And by the
Statute of westminster 2. Chapter 10. if the Accomptant be found in arrerages,
the Auditors which be assigned to him, have power to award him to prison
there to abide till he have made agreement to the party, But if the Auditors
will not allow reasonable expense and costs, or if they charge him with mo^
receites then they ought, then his next friend that will sue for him, shall sue
a writ of Ex part talis out of the Chancery directed to the Shirife to take
four mainpernors to bring his body before the Barons of the Exchequer at a
certain day* and to warn the Lord to appear there at a certain day.

Accord.
ACcord is agreement between two at the least to satisfy an offense that the
one has made to the other, when a man has done a trespass, or such like unto
another, for the which he has agreed with him, to satisfy and content him
with some recompense, which if it be executed and performed, then because that
this recompense, is a full satisfaction for the offense, it shall be a good
bar in the law, if the other after y^ accord performed should sue again any
action for the same trespass.

Note that the first is properly called an accord, the other a contract.

Acquitall.
ACquital is where there is a Lord, me^ne, and tenant, and the tenant holds
of the me^^e certain lands or tenements in frankalmoigne, fra^kmariage or
such like, and the mesne holds over also of the lord paramount, or about him.
Now ought the mesne to acquit or discharge the tenant of all and every manner
of service, that any other would have or demand o^ him concerning the same
lands or tenements, for that the tenant must do his service to the mesne
only, and not to diverse Lords for one tenement or parcel of land. The same law
is where there is one Lord, mesne, and tenant as aforesaid, and the mesne
grants to the tenant (upon the tenure made between them) to acquit and
discharge him of all rents, services, and such like, This discharge is called
acquitall.

Like law is if the tenant holds of his mesne by like services, as the mesne
holds over of the lord, and the tenant does or paieth his services to the
mesne, but the mesne does not his services to y^ chief lord, wherefore he
distreineth the beasts of the tenant* In this case the mesne for the equalnes
of the services ought to acquit the tenant of the service due unto the Lord.

Acquitance.
ACquita^ce, is a discharg in writing of a sum of money, or other duty
which ought to be paid or done: As if one be bound to pay money upon an
obligation, or rent reserved upon a lease or such like, and the party to whom
the money or duty should be paid or done, upon the receite thereof, or upon
other agreement between them had, makes a writing or bill of his hand, in
discharge thereof, witnessing that he is paid, or otherwise contented, and
therefore does acquit and discharge him of the same, which acquitance is such a
discharge and bar in the law, that he cannot demand and recover that sum or
duty again contrary thereunto if he show the acquitance.

This word differs from those which in the civil law be called Acceptitatio,
or Apocha, because Acceptitatio may be by word without writing, and is nothing
but a feigned payment and discharge, though no paime^t be had, And Apocha is a
writing witnessing the payment or delivery of money which discharges not
unless the money be paid.

24 Acts.
Acts of parliament, are positive Laws which consist of two parts, that is
to say of the words of the Act, and of the sense thereof and they both joined
together make the law.

Additions.
ADdition, is that which is given unto a man over and besides his proper name
and surname, that is to say, to show of what estate or degree or mystery he
is, and of what Town or Hamlett or County.

Additions of estate are these, yeoman, gentleman, Esquire and such like.

Additions of degree are those that we call names of dignitye as Knight, Er^e,
Marquis and Duke.

Additions of mystery are such, scriuener, painter, mason, carpenter, tailor,
smith, and so all other of like nature, for mystery is the craft or occupation
whereby a man gets his living.

Additions of towns as Sale, Dale, and such others, and so of the rest.

And where a man has household in two places he shall be said to dwell in both of
them so that his addition in one of them does suffice.

By the statute the first year of H. the 5. and Chapter the 5. it was ordained
that in suits or in actions where process of v^lagary lies, such addityons
should be to the name of the def. to show his estate mystery and place where
he dwells, and that such writs shall abate, if they have not such additions,
if the defendant take exception thereto, but they shall not abate by the office
of the Court.

Also Duke, Marquis, Earl, or Knight, be none of that addition but names of
dignity, which should have bin given before the Statute.

And this was ordained by the said Statute made in the first year of king H.
the 5. Cap. 5. to the intent, that one man might not be grieved nor troubled
by the v^larie of an other: but that by reason of the certain addition, every
man might be certainly known and bear his own burden.

26 Adiournement.
ADiournement is when any Court is dissolved and determined and assigned to be
kept again at another place or time, and me thinks is compounded of two
words (ad) or (al) and iour.

27 Admeasurement de Dower.
ADmesureme^t de dower is a writ, and it lies where a woman is endowed by an
infaunt, or by a gardein of more then she ought to have, the heir in such
case shall have this writ, by the which y^ woman shall be admeasured, and the
heir restored to the overplus. But if one abate, y^ is to say, one which has
right enters after the death of the husband, and endowe the wife of him which
is dead, of more then she ought to have, the heir shall not have this writ,
but assise of mortdaficester against the woman, and if she plede that she was
endowed of the land as of the freeholde of her husband, the heir shall show how
she was endowed by the abator and that she had more then she ought to have,
and shall pray that he may be restored to the surplusage, and if it be found he
shall be restored.

Admeasurement de pasture.
ADmeasurement de pasture is a writ and it lies where many tena^ts have common
appendant in an other ground and one ouerchargeth the common with many beasts:
The^ the other co^moners may have this writ against him, and also it may be
brought by one commoner only, but then it behooves to be brought against all
the other co^moners, and against him that surcharged, for y^ all the commoners
shall be admeasured.

And this writ lies not against him, nor for him y^ has common appurtenant or
common ingrosse, but the^ which have common appe^dant, or common by cause of
visinage.

See the diversity of all these commons afterward

Also this writ lies not for the Lord, nor against the lord, but the lord may
distrain the beasts of the tenant that be surplusage. But if y^ lord ouercharge
the common* the commoner has no remedy by the common law, but an Assise of
his common.

29 Administrator.
ADminist. is he to whom the ordinary commits the administration of the
goods of a dead man for default of an executor, and an action shall lie against
him and for him as for an executor, and he shall be charged to the value of the
goods of the dead man and no further, if it be nor by his own false plee, or
for that that he has wasted the goods of the dead: but if* the administrator
die, his executors be not administrators, but it behooves the Ordinary to
commit a new administration: but if a stranger that is not administrator nor
executor take the goods of the dead, and administer of his own wrong, he shall be
charged and sued as an executor, and not as administrator in any action that is
brought against him by any creditor. But if the ordinary make a letter ad
Collige^du^ bona defuncti, he that has such a letter is not administrator, but
the action lies against the Ordinary as well as if he took the goods to his own
hand, or by the hand of any of his servants by any other commandment.

30 Admiral.
Admiral is an officer under the Queen, yt has authority upon the Sea only
to see the navy prepared and maintained to suppress and chase away robbers and
rouers, and to judge of contracts, between party and party, concerning
things done upon and beyond the seas, and for that purpose has his court
called the Admiraltie. He may cause his Citation to be served upon the land
and take the parties body or goods in execution upon the land.

And also he has cognizance of the death or maihem of a man committed in any
great ship fleeting in great rivers in the realm, beneath ye bridges of the
same next the sea.

Also to arrest ships in the great streams for the voyages of the Queen and
Realm, and has jurisdiction in the said stremes during the same viages.

31 Ad quod dampnu^.
AD quod dampnum is a writ which ought to be sued before the K. grant
certain liberties: As a fair, market, or such like which may be prejudicial
to others. And by it shall be inquired if it should be a prejudice to grant
the^, and to whom it shall be prejudicial, and what prejudice shall come
thereby.

Aduowson.
ADuovvson is where a man and his heirs have right to present their clerk to
the Ordinary to a parsonage, or other spiritual benefice when it becomes
void. And he which has such right to present is called Patron.

Age prier.
AGe prier is when an actio^ is brought against an infant of lands which he
has by descent, there he shall show the matter to the court, and shall pray that
the action may stay til his full age of xxi. years, and so by award of the
Court the suit shall surcease.

But in a writ of dovver and in Assise, and also in such actions where the
infant is supposed to come to the land demanded by his own wrong, he shall not
have his age.

Also note well that there be many diversities of ages, for the Lord shall have
aid of his tenant in Socage for to marie his daughter, when ye daughter of the
Lord is of the age of seven years. And also aid for to make his son and
heir knight, when he is of the age of seven years. Also a woman which is
married at the age of ix. years, if her husband die seized shall have Dower,
and not before nine years.

Also xiiii. years is the age of a woman that she shall not be in ward if she
were of such age at yt time of the death of her auncestor, but if she were
within the age of xiiii. years, and in ward of the Lord, then she shall be in
ward till the age of xvi. years. And also xxi. years is the age of the heir
male to be in ward, and after y^ out of ward. And also it is y^ age of male and
female to sue and to be sued of lands which they have or claim by descent, and
to make al manner of co^tracts and bargains, and not before: but if such an
infant within ye age of 21. years give his goods and the donee take them, the
infaunt may have action of trespass; but otherwise it is if he deliver them
himself.

Agreement.
Agreement, is after this sort defined or expounded in Master Plovvdens
commentaries. Aggreamentum is a word compounded of two words, namely, of
Aggregatio and Mentium, that is to say, agreement of minds, so that agreement
is a consent of minds in some things done or to be done, and by drawing
together of the two words, Aggregatio and mentium, and by the hastic and
short pronouncing of the^ they be made one word, to wit, Aggreamentum,
which is no other thing then a joining, putting, cupling and knitting together
of two or more minds in ani^ thing done or to be done. (See after in
testament) And this agreement is in three manners.

The first is an agreement executed already at the beginning.

The second is an agreement after an act done by another, and is an agreement
executed also.

The third is an agreement executory or to be don in time yet to come.

The first which is an agreement executed already at the beginning is such*
whereof mention is made in the statute of 25. Edw. 3. cap. 3. of clothes in the
4. statute, which says That the goods and things bought by forestallers, being
thereof attainted shall be forfaire to the Queen, if the buyer thereof have made
gree with the seller. In which case y^ word (Gree) which is otherwise called
agreement, shall be understood agreement executed, that is, payment for the
things.

The second manner of agreement is where one does a thing, or act; and another
agrees or assents thereto afterward as if one do a disseisin to my use, and
afterward I agree to it, now I shall be a disseisor from the beginning, and
such agreement is an agreement after an act done.

The third agreement is when both parties at one time are agreed that such a
thing shall be done in time to come, and this agreement is executorie in as much
as the thing shall be done after, and yet there, their minds agreed at one
time. But because the performance shall be afterward and the thing upon which the
agreement was made remains to be done, that agreement shall be said executorie.
And that the statute of 26. H. 8. cap. 3. does prove where it says, that every
vicar, parson and such like etc. before their actual possession, or meddling with
the profits of their benefices shall satisfy, content etc. or agree to pay
to the Q. the first fruits etc. and if any such parson or vicar, etc. enter in
actual possession, etc. this agreement is to be understood executory as the
common use proves, for it is used that he with one or two with him do make
two or three obligations for it to be paid at certain days after, and this
agreement executorie is divided into two points. One is an agreement executorie
which is certain at the beginning, as is said last before of the first fruits.

The other is where the certainty does not appear at the first, and the
parties are agreed that the thing shall be performed or paid upon the
certainty known as if one sell to another all his wheat in such a tasse in
his barn vnthreshed, and it is agreed between them that he shall pay for
every bushel xii* d. when it is threshed, cleaned and measured.

35 Aid.
Aid, is when tenant for term of life* tenant in dower, tenant by courtesy,
or tenant in tail after possibility of issue extinct is impleaded then for
that they have no estate but for term of life, they shall pray in aid of him
in the reuersion and process shall be made by writ against him, to come and
plead with the tenant in the defense of the land if he will, but it behooves
that they agree in the plee, for if they vary, the plee of the tenant shall be
taken and then the aid prayer is void, but if he come not at the second writ,
then the tenant shall answer sole.

Also tenant for term of years, tenant at will, tenant by Elegit, and tenant
by statute merchant, shall have aid of him in the reuersion, and the servant
and bailey of their master, when they have done any thing lawfully in ye right
of their master, shall have aid.

Aid de Roy.
Aid of the king, is in like case as it is said before of a common person,
and also in many other cases where the king may have loss, although that the
tenant be tenant in fee simple he shall have aid, As if a rent be
demanded against the kings tenant, which holds in chief, he shall have aid
and so he shall not of a common person.

And where a City or Borough has a fee farm of the king, and any thing be
demanded against the^ which belongs to the fee farm, they shall have aid
for the loss of the king.

Also a man shall have aid of the King in the steed of voucher. Also the
Kings Bailife, the Collector, and Purueyour shall have aid of the King, as
well as the officers of other persons.

Ayle.
AYle is a writ which lies where land discendeth from the graundfather to his
nephews* s. the son or daughter of the son of the graundfather, the father
being dead before the entry by him, and one abateth, the heir shall have
against the abator this writ.

Alien.
ALien is he whose father and himself were both borne out of the Queens
legeance, and if such an alien being none of the Q. enemies, but an alie^
friend come and dwell here in England and have issue, this issue is not alien
but English. So if an English man go over the seas with the Queens license and
there has issue, this issue is no alien.

Alienation.
ALienation, is as much to say, as to make a thing another man's, or to alter
or put the possession of lands or other thing from one man to another.

Ambidexter.
AMbidexter, is he that when a matter is in suit between men, takes money of
the one side and of the other, either to labor the suit or such like, or if he
be of the Jury, to say his verdict.

Amendment.
Amendment, is when error is in the Process, the Justices may amend it after
judgment. But if there be error in giving of judgment, they may not amend
it, but the party is put to his writ of error. And in many cases where the
default appears in the clarke that writ the Record it shall be amended: But
such things as come by information of the party as the town, mystery, and such
like, shall not be amended, for he must inform true upon his peril.

42 Amercement.
AMercement, most properly is a penalty assessed by the piers or equales of
the party amerced, for an offense done, as for lack of suit of Court, or for
not amending of some thing that he was appointed to redress by a certain time
before, or for such like cause, in which case, the party which offe^deth
puts himself in the mercy of the king or Lord, and thereupon this penalty
is called Amercement.

Amercement royal.
AMercement royal, is when a Shirife, Coroner or other such Officer of the
Queen is amerced by the Justices for his abuse in the office, seek if it
shall not be said a fine.

An, iour and wast.
AN, iour and wast, is a forfaiture when a man has committed petit treason, or
felony, and has lands which he holds of some common person, which shall be
seized for the Queen, and remain in her hands by the space of one year and a
day next after the attainder, and then the trees shall be dug up, the houses
shall be rased and pulled down, and the pastures and meadows ^yred and plowed
up, so yt he to whom the land should come by eschete or forfaiture do not
redeem it of the King, a thing the more to grieve the offenders and terrify
others to fall into the like, in showing how the law does detest their offense
so far forth as that it does execute judgment and punishment even upon
their dumme and dead things.

45 Annuitie.
ANnuitie, is a certain sum of money granted to another in fee simple, fee
tail, for term of life, or for term of years, to receive of the grauntor or
of his heirs, so that no freeholde is charged therewith, whereof a man shall
never have assise nor other action, but a writ of Annuitie, and it is none
assets to the heir of the grauntee to whom it shall descend.

46 Apppeale.
Appeal, is where one has done murder, robbery or mayhem, then the wife of
him that is slain shall have an action of appeal against the murderer, but if
he have no wife then his next heir male shall have the appeal at any time
within a year and a day after the deed, And also he that is so robbed or
mayhemed shall have his appeal, and if the defendant be acquitted, he shall
recover damages against the appellor and thabbettors, and they shall have the
imprisonment of a year and shall make fine to the King. An appeal of maihem
is in manner but a trespass, for he shall recover but damages.

Appellant.
Appellant, is the plaintiff in the appeal.

Appellour.
APpellour or Approuer, is he who has committed some felony which he
confesses and now appealeth or approves, that is to say, accuses others
which were coadiutors or helpers with him in doing the same or other felonies,
which thing he will approve and therefore is called in latin probator.

Appendant and appurtenant.
Appendant and appurtena^t, are things that by time of prescription have
belonged, appertained, and are joined to another principal thing, by which
they pass and go as accessarie to the same principal thing, by virtue of these
words Pertinentijs: as lands, aduowsons, commons, piscaries, ways, courts,
and diverse such like, to a manor, house, office, or such others.

50 Apporcionment.
APporcionment is a dividing into parts of a rent (which is deuidable and not
intier or whole) and forasmuch as the thing out of which it was to be paid is
separated and divided, the rent also shall be divided having respect to the
parts. As if a man have a rent service issuing out of lands, and he
purchases parcel of the land, the rent shall be apportioned, according to the
value of the land.

So if a man hold his land of an other by homage, fealty, escuage, and
certain rent, if the Lord of whom the land is holden purchase parcel of the
land the re^t shall be apportioned.

Also if a man let lands for years reserving rent, and after a Stranger
recovereth part of the land, then the rent shall be apportioned, that is to say
divided, and the lessee shall pay having respect to that which is recovered, and
to that which yet remains in his hands according to the value.

But a rent charge cannot be apportioned, nor things that are entier: As if one
hold land by service to pay to his Lord yearly at such a feast, a Horse, a
Hawk, a Rose, a cherie, or such like, there if the Lord purchase parcel of
the land, this service is gone altogether, because a Horse, a Hawk, a Rose, a
cherie, and such other cannot be divided, severed, or apportioned without hurt
to the whole.

Appropriations.
APpropriatio^s were when those houses of the Romish Religion, and those
Religious persons, as Abbots, Priors, and such like, had the aduowson of any
parsonage to them and to their successors, and obtained license of their holy
father the Pope, and of the Ordinary and King, that they themselves, and their
successors from thence forth should be parsons there, and that it shall be
from thence forth a vicarage, and that the Vicar shall serve the cure. And so
at the beginning Appropriations were made only to those persons spiritual
that could minister the Sacraments, and say divine service, as Abbots, Priors,
Deanes, and such like. After by a little and little they were enlarged and made
to other, as namely to a Deane and Chapter, which is a body corporate
consisting of many, which body together could not say divine service, and that
more was to Nuns that were Prioresses of some Nunrie, which was a wicked
thing, insomuch as they could neither minister Sacraments nor preach, nor say
divine service to the parishioners.

And all this was upon pretense of hospitality and maintenance thereof. And to
supply these defectes a vicar was devised, who should be Deputy to the
Priores, or to the Deane and Chapter, and also at the last to the said Abbots
and others to say divine service, and should have for his labor but a little
portion, and they to whom the appropriations were made should retain the
great revenues, and they did nothing for it, by means whereof hospitality
decayed in the place where it ought to have been chiefly maintained, namely in
the parish where the benefice was, and where the profits did grow, and so it
continues to this day, to the great hinderance of learning, to the
impouerishment of the ministry, and to the infamy of the Gospel and
professors thereof.

The Vicar shall have certain portion of the benefice, and the Abbot and the
Covent shall be parsons and shall have the other profits: This is called
Appropriation, and then the Abbot and Covent shall be parsons imparsonees. But
such Appropriation may not be made to begin in the life of the parson without
his assent.

But if such aduowsons of the parsonage be recovered by ancient title, then
the Appropriation is adnulled. And it is called appropriation, for that they
hold the profits to their own proper use.

52 Approuement.
APprouement is where a man has common in the Lords wast ground, and the Lord
incloseth part of the wast for himself, leaving nevertheless sufficient
common with egresse and regresse for the commoners: This enclosing is called
approuement.

53 Arbitrament.
Arbitrament is an award, determination or judgment, which one or more makes
at the request of two parties at the least, for, and upon some debt, trespass,
or other controversy had between the said parties. And this is called in
Latin Arbitratus and Arbitrium, and they that make the award or arbitrament are
called Arbitri, in English Arbitrators.

Arrest.
ARrest is when one is taken and restrained from his liberty. None shall be
arrested for debt, trespass, detinue, or other cause of action, but by virtue
of a precept or commandment out of some Court. But for Treason, Felony, or
breaking of the peace, every man has authority to arrest without warrant or
precept. And where one shall be arrested for felony, it behooves that some
felony be done, and that he be suspected of the same Felony, or otherwise
he may have against him that so did arrest him, a writ of false
imprisonment. And when any man shall be arrested for Felony, he shall be
brought to the Gayle, there to abide until the next Sessions for to be
indicted, or for to be delivered by Proclamation.

55 Arrerages.
ARrerages are duties behind unpaid after the days and times in which they
were due, and ought to have been paid whether they be rent of a manor or any
other thing reserved.

56 Assets.
ASsets is in two sorts, the one called (assets per descent) the other (assets
enter maines.) Assets per descent is where a man is bound in an obligation, and
dies seysed of lands in fee simple, which desce^d to his heir, then his land
shall be called assets, that is to say, enough or sufficient to pay the same
debt, and by that means the heir shall be charged as far as the land so to
him descended will stretch. But if he have aliened before the Obligation be put
in suite he is discharged.

Also when a man seysed of lands in tail, or in the right of his wife
alieneth the same with warrantie, and has in value as much lands in fee
simple, which discendeth to his heir, who is also heir in tail or heir to
the woman. Now if the heir after the decease of his ancestor bring a writ of
Formedon, or sur cui in vita, for the la^d so aliened, then he shall be barred
by reason of the warrantie and the land so descended, which is as much in value
as that was sold, and so thereby he has received no prejudice, and therefore
this land is called Assets per descent.

Assets enter maines is when a man indebted, as before is said, makes
executors, and leaves to them sufficient to pay, or some commodity or profit
is come unto them in right of their testatour, this is said assets in their
hands.

Assignee.
ASsignee is he to whom a thing is appointed or assigned to be occupied,
paid or done, and is always such a person, which occupies or has the thing
so assigned in his own right and for himself, and of assigns there be two
sorts, namely, Assignee in deed and Assignee in law. Assignee in deed is when
a leas is granted to a man, or to his assigns or without those words,
assigns, and the grauntee gives grants or sells the same lease to an
other, he is his assignee in deed. Assignee in ^awe is every executor named by
the testator in his testament, As if a lease be made to a man and to his
assigns (as is aforesaid) and he makes his executors and dies without
assignement of the leas to any other, Now the executors shall have the same
lease, because they are his assigns in law. And so it is in other cases.

58 Assise.
ASsise is a writ and it lies where any m^n is put out of his lands, or
tenementes, or of any profit to be taken in a certain place and so
disseised of his freehold. Freeholde to any manne is where he is seized o^
lands and tenementes or profit to be taken in fee simple, fee tail, for
term of his own life or for term of an other man's life. But the tenant by
Elegit, tenant by statute merchant and Statute staple may have assise, howbeit
that they have no freehold and this is ordained by diverse statutes.

Also in an assise it is needful always that there be one disseysor and one
tenant or otherwise the writ shall abate.

Also where a man is disseysed and recouereth by assise of nouel disseisin and
afterward is again disseised by the same disseisor, he shall have against
him a writ of redisseisin directed to the Sheriff to make inquisition, and if
the redisseisin be found he shall be sent to prison. Also if one recover by
assise of Mortd. or by other jury or default or by reddition, and if he be an
other time disseysed, then he shall have a writ of Post disseisin, and he
which is taken and imprisoned for redisseisin shall not be delivered without
special commandment of the King. See the Statutes thereof Merton cap. 3.
Marlebridge cap. 8. And westminster 2. Chapter 26. There is also an other
Assise called Assise of Fresh force, and lies where a man is disseysed of
tenementes which are diuisible, as in the City of London or other Boroughs or
Towns that be Fraunchises, then the defendaunt shall come into the Court of
the said Town and enter his playnt, and shall have a writ directed to the
Mayor or Baylifes etc. and thereupo^ shall pass a Jury in manner of assise of
nouel disseisin. But it behooves that he do enter his plaint within forty
days as it is said or otherwise he shall be sent to the common law. And if the
Officers delay the execution, then the plaintiff shall have an other writ to
have execution, And a Sicut alias, and a Pluries etc. See Litt* cap. Rents,
Assise is a word of two significations.

Assise de darraine presentment.
ASsise de darraine presentment, look thereof after in y^ title Quare impedit

Assise de Mortdancester.
ASsise de Mortdancester, look thereof in the title Cosinage.

Attainder.
ATtainder, is a conuictio^ of any person of a crime, or fault whereof he was
not convict before, as if a man have committed felony, treason, or such like,
and thereof is indicted, arraigned and found guilty and has judgment, then
he is said to be attainted, and this may be two ways, the one upon
appara^ce, the other upon default, the attainder upon appearance is by
confession battle or verdict, the attainder upon default is by process
until he be outlawed.

Attaint.
ATtaint, is a writ and lies where false verdict is given by twelve men, and
judgment given thereon, that the party against whom they have passed, shall
have a writ against the twelve men, and when they be at issue it shall be
tried by xxiiii. Jurors, and if the false verdict be found, the twelve men be
attaint, and then the judgment shall be, that their meddowes shall be ayred,
their houses broken down, their woods turned up, and all their lands and
teneme^ts forfaited to the king, but if it pass against him that brought that
attaint, he shall be imprisoned and grievously raunsomed at the kings will.
See the statute 23. H. 8. cap. 3. Attaint also is when judgment is given in
Treason or Felony.

63 Attournement.
ATtournement, is when one is tenant for term of life, and he in reuersion or
remainder grants his right or estate to another, then it behooves the tenant
for term of life to agree thereto, and this agreement is called an
Attournment, for if he in the reuersion grant his estate and his right to
another, if the tenant for term of life atturne not, nothing passes by the
grant.

But if it be granted by fine in Court of record he shall be compelled to
atturne, And look thereof after in the title Quid iuris clamat, look more of
this in Littleton Lib. 3. chap. 10.

Audita quaerela.
AVdita quaerela, is a writ and it lies where one is bound in a Statute
merchant, statute Staple or Recognisance, or where judgment is given against
him for debt and his body in execution thereupon, the^ if he have a release
or other matter sufficient to be discharged of execution but has no day in
Court there to plead it, then he shall have this writ against him which
has recovered, or against his executors.

Auerment.
AVerment, is where a man pleads a plee in abatment of the writ or bar of y^
action, which he says he is ready to prove as the court will awarde, this
offer to prove his plee is called an Auerment.

66 Auerpeny.
AVerpenie, that is to be quit of diverse sums of money for the kings
Auerages.

67 Auncien demesne.
Auncien demesne are certain tenures holden of those Manors that were in the
hands of Saint Edward the confessor, and the which he made to be written in a
Book called Domes day, Sub titulo Regis, and all the lands holden of the
said Manors be auncien demesne, and the tenaunts shall not be impleaded out
of the said Manors, and if they be, they may show the matter and abate the
writ, but if they answer to the writ, and judgment be given, then the lands
become frank fee for ever. Also the tenaunts in ancient demesne, be free of
toll for all things concerning their sustenance and husbandry in auncien
demesne, and for such lands they shall not be put or impanelled upon any
inquest. But all the lands in auncien demesne, that are in y^ kings hands, be
frank fee and pleadable at the Common law. See more after in the title
Sokemans.

Auowrie.
AVowrie, is where one takes a distress for re^t or other thing, and the
other sueth repleuin, then he that has taken it shall justify in his plee,
for what cause he took it, and if he took it in his own right he ought to
show that, and so auowe the taking, and that is called his auowry: but if he
took y^ in or for the right of another, then when he has showed the cause,
he shall make conusance of the taking, as bailie or servant to him in whose
right he did take it.

B.
69 Bail.
Bail, is when a man is taken or arrested for felony, suspicion of felony,
indicted of felony, or any such case, so that he is restrained of his
liberty. And being by law baylable, offers surety to those which have
authority to ba^le him, which suerties are bound for him to the Queens use in
a certain sum of money, or body for body, that he shall appear before
the Justices of Jail delivery at the next Sessions etc. Then upon the bonds
of these suerties, as is aforesaid, he is bailed, that is to say, set at
liberty until the day appointed for his appearance.

Bailement.
BAilement, is a delivery of things whether it be of writings, goods or stuff
to another, sometimes to be delivered back to the bailor, that is to say to
him that so delivered it, sometimes to the use of the bailife, that is to say,
of him to whom it is delivered, and sometimes also it is delivered to a third
person, this delivery is called a bailement.

Bailife.
BAilife is an officer that belongs to a manor, to order the husbandrye, and
has authority to pay quite rents issuing out of the manor, fell trees,
repair houses, make pales, hedges, distraine beasts doing hurt upon the
ground, and diverse such like.

This officer is he whom the ancient Saxons called a Reeue, for the name
Bailife was not yet known amongst them, but came in with the Normans, and is
called in Latin Villicus.

Back berind thief.
BAck berinde thief is a thief that is taken with the manner, that is to say,
having that found upon him (being followed with the hue and cry) which he
has stolen, whether it be money, lynnen, woollen, or other stuff, but it is
most properly said, when he is taken carrying those things that he has stolen
in a bundell or fardel on his back.

73 Bargain and sale.
Bargain and sale is when a recompense is given by both the parties to the
bargain: as if one bargain and sell his land to an other for money, here the
land is a recompense to him for the money, and the money is a recompense to the
other for the land, and this is a good contract and bargain, and fee simple
passes notwithstanding he does not say to have and to hold the land to him
and to his heirs. And by such a bargain and sale lands may pass without
liuerie of seisin, if the bargain and sale be by deed indented, sealed and
enrolled, either in the county where the land lies, or in one of the Q.
courts of record at westminster wtin vi. months next after the date of the
same writing indented, according to the statute in that behalf made in the 27
peer of H. 8. ca 16.

Bar.
Bar, is when the defendant in any action pleads a plee which is a
sufficient answer, and that destroys the action of the plaintiff for ever.

Base fee.
TO hold in Fee base, is to hold at the will of the Lord.

Bastardie.
BAstardie, is he that is borne of any woman not married, so that his father
is not known by the order of the law, and therefore he is called the child
of the people.

But by the law of the Romish Church, if one get a child upon a woman which
child is borne out of wedlock, and after he marry the same woman, then such
a child shall be said Mulier, and not bastard.

But by the law of England he is a bastard, and for that cause when such
special bastardie is alleged, it shall be tried by the country, and not by the
Bishop. But generally bastardie alleged shall be tried by the certificate of
the Bishop.

And if a woman be great with child by her husband who dies, and she takes
an other husband, and after the child is borne, this child shall be said the
child of the first husband. But if she were privily with child at the time
of the death of her first husband, then it shall be said the child of the second
husband. But inquire farther and see the opinion of Thorp 21. E. 3. 39

Also if a man take a wi^e which is great with child by another that was not
her husband, and after the child is borne within the espousels, then it shall
be said the child of the husband, though it were borne but one day after the
espousels solemnised.

Battle.
Battle is an ancient trial in our law, which the defendant in an appeal of
murder, robbery, or felony may choose, that is to say, to fight with the
appellant, for proof whether he be culpable of the felony or not: which
combat, if it fall out so well on the part of the defendant that he does
vanquish the appellant, he shall go quit and bar him of his appeal for ever.
But if one be indicted of felony, and an appeal is brought upon y^ same
indictment, there the defendant shall not wage battle: battle also may be
in a writ of right.

Bigamy.
BIgamy, was a counterplea (devised at y^ council of Lions, upon mislike of
second marriage) to be objected when the prisoner demands the benefit of the
clergy, to wit his book, as namely to say, that he which demands the
privilege of the clergy, was married to such a woman, at such a place, within
such a diocese, and that she is dead, and that he has married another woman
within the same dioces or within some other dioces, and so is Bigamus. Or if he
have been but once married, then to say, that she whom he has married, is
or was a widow, that is to say, the left woman of such a one etc. which thing
shall be tried by the Bishop of the Dioces where the marriages are alleged.
And being so certified by the Bishop, the prisoner shall loose the benefit of
the clergy. But at this day by force of the act made in An. 1. E. 6. ca. 12.
this is no plea, but that he may have his clergy that notwithstanding.

So is Brook titulo clergy placito 20* to the same purpose. And hereupon if
you be desirous to see what reasons they have that persuade against second
marriages, read among many others Frances Petrarche of remedies for both
fortunes, the first book and lxxvi. Dialogue, entitled of second marriage,
which Book now of late Master Thomas Twyne, has very well* and with good
grace (as they that can judge do say) translated out of Latin into English, and
most aptly called it Physic against fortune.

Bloodwit.
BLoodwit, that is, to be quit of amercementes for bloudshedding, and what
pleas are holden in your court, you shall have the amercementes thereof
coming, because (wit) in English is misericordia in Latin.

Boot.
Boot, is an old word, and signifies help, succor, ay^t or advantage, and
is commonly joined with an other word, whose signification it does augment, as
these, bridgboot, burghboot, fireboote, hedgeboot, plowboote and diverse others
such like, for whose significations look in their proper titles.

81 Broodhalpeny.
BRoodhalpeny, in some copies, broodhalbeny, that is to be quit of a certain
custom exacted for setting up of tables.

82 Burgage.
TO hold in Burgage, is to hold as if ye Burgeis hold of the King, or of
another lord lands or tenements, yielding to him a certain rent by ye year, or
else there, where an other man then burgeis holds of any lord lands or
teneme^ts in burgage yielding to him a certain rent by year.

83 Brugbote.
BRugbote (and in some copies Bridgbote) that is to be quit of giving aid to
the repayring of bridges.

84 Burghbote.
BVrghbote, that is to be quite of giving aid to make a Borough, cattle,
city, or walls thrown down.

Burghbrech.
BVrghbrech, that is to be quit of trespasses done in City or Borough against
the peace.

Burgh English:
BVrgh English, or Borough English, is a custom in some ancient borough, that
if a man have issue diverse sons and dies, yet the youngest son only shall
inherit and have all the lands and tenements that were his fathers, whereo^
he dyed seized within the same burgh by descent, as heir to his father by
force of the custom of the same borough.

Burglarie.
BVrglarie, is when one breaks and enters into the house of another in the
night with felonious intent to rob or kill, or to do some other felony, in
which cases although he carry away nothing, yet is it felony* for which he
shall suffer death. Otherwise it is, if it be in the day time, or that he
break the house in the night, and enter not therein at that time.

But if a servant will conspire with other men to rob his Master, and to
that intent he opens his Masters doors and windows in y^ night for them,
that they come into the house by that way, this is Burglarie in the strangers,
and the servant is a thee^e but no Burglar. And this was the opinion of the
right worshipful sir R. Manwood knight, most worthy Lord chief Baron of the
Eschequer, at the quarter Sessions holden at Canterbury in January 1579. 21.
Eliz.

88 Capias.
CApias, look for that after in the title Process.

89 Caruage.
CAruage, that is, to be quite if the king shall tax al his land by carues.
Note that a Carue of land is a Plow land.

90 Certification of assise.
CErtification of Assise of nouel disseisin, is a writ, and lies where the
Batlife of the tenant pleads no wrong, etc. and loses by the Assise, then if
the tenant have a release or other writing to plead he shall have this writ,
and the first Jurors shall be warned to appear before the Justices and the
parties also, then if it may be found that the release or writings are true and
good, he that recovered in the Assise shall yield double damages, and shall
lose the land.

Cerciorari.
CErciorari, is a writ and it lies where one is impleaded in a base court,
that is of record, and he supposes that he may not have equal Justice there,
then upon a bill in the Chancery comprising some matter of conscience he shall
have this writ to remove all the Record in the Chancery and there to be
determined by conscience, but if he prove not his bill, then the other party
shall have a writ of Procedendo, to send again the Record into the base court,
and there to be determined. And it lies in many other cases, for to remove
records for the king as indictments and other.

92 Cession.
CEssion is when an Ecclesiastical person is created Bishop, or when a parson
of a parsonage takes another benefice without dispensation or otherwise not
qualified etc. In both cases their first benefices are become void, and be said
to become void by cession, and to those that he had who was created bishop,
The king shall present for the time whosoever be patron of the^. And in y^
other case the patro^ may present.

93 Cessauit.
CEssauit, is a writ, and it lies where my very tenant which holds of me
certain lands and tenements, yielding certain rent by the year, and the rent
is behind not paid by two years, and no sufficient distress may be found upon
the land, then I shall recover the land, but if the tenant come into the
court before judgment given, and tender the arrerages and damages, and find
suertie, that he shall cesse no more in payment of the said rent, I shall be
compelled to take the arrerages and the damages, and then the tenant shall not
loose the land. Also the heir may not maintain this writ for the cesser
made in the time of his ancestor, Also this writ lies not but for Annuei^
service as rent and such other and not for homage and fealty.

Also there is an other writ called Cessauit de ca^taria, and it lies where a
man gives land to a house of religion to find for his soul and his
ancestors, and his heirs, yearly a Lamp in the Church, or to say divine
service or to feed the poor, or other alms, or some other thing to do, then
if the said charge be not done in two years, then the donor or his heirs shall
have this writ against whosoever holds the things given alter such cessure.
See the Statute w. 2. cap. 41.

94 Challenge.
CHallenge, is where Iutors appear to try an issue, then if any of the
parties suppose that they are not indifferent they may there challenge and
refuse them.

There be diverse challenges, one is challenge to the array, yt other to the
polls.

Challenge to tharray, is when the panell is favorably made by the Shirife or
other officer.

Challenge by polies are some principal and some by cause as they call it.

Principal, is when one of the Jurors is the son, brother or cousin, to the
plaintiff or defenda^t, or tenant to him or that he has espoused the daughter
of the plaintiff, and for those causes he shall be wtdrawen.

Also in a plee of the death of the man and in every action real and in
actions personal, if the debt or damages amount to forty marks it is a good
challenge, that he cannot dispend xl. s. by the year of freehold.

Challenge by cause, is where the party does allege a matter which is no
principal challenge, as that the Son of one of the Jurors has espoused the
daughter of the plaintiff, and then he does conclude, and therefore he is
favorable, which shall be tried by others of thenquest, whether he be
favorable or indifferent, and if they say, y^ he is favorable and not
indifferent, then he shall be drawn out, otherwise he shall be sworn.

Also a felon that is arraigned may challenge xx. Jurors peremptory without any
case, and that is in favor of life, and as many as he will with cause, but
then it shall be tried if for such cause he be indifferent or not.

Champertie.
CHampertie is a writ and lies where two men be impleading, and one gives
the half or part of the thing in plee to a Stranger for to maintain him
against the other, then the party grieved shall have this writ against the
stranger. See the Statute Articuli super Chartas cap. 11.

96 Champertors.
CHampertors be they that move plees and suites, or cause to be moved by their
own or others procurement, and sue them at their own costs, to have part of
the lands, or gains in variance.

97 Charge.
CHarge is where a man grants a rent issuing out of his ground, and that if
the rent be behind, it shall be lawful for him, his heirs and assigns to
distrayne till the rent be paid, this is called a rent charge. But if one
grant a 'rent charge out of the land of an other, and after purchase the la^d,
the grant is void.

98 Charters.
CHarters of lands are writings, deeds, euide^ces, and instruments, made from
one man to an other, upon some estate co^ueied or passed between them of lands
or tenements she wing the names, place and quantity of the land, the estate,
time and manner o^ the doing thereof, the parties to the estate delivered and
taken, the witnesses present at the same, with other circumstances.

Chattels.
CHattels, are in two sorts that is to say, chattels reals and chattels
personels, Chattels reals are leases for years, wards, and to hold at will.

Chattels personels are all moveable goods, as money, plate, household stuff,
horses, kyne, corn, and such like.

Childwit.
CHildwit, that is, that you may take a fine of your bondwoman, defiled and
begotten with child without your license.

Chimin.
CHimin, is the high way where every man goes which is called via Regia, and
yet the King has no other thing there but the passage for him and his people,
for the freeholde is in the Lords of the soil, and all the profit growing
there, as trees and other things.

102 Thing in action.
THing in action, is when a man has cause, or may bring an action for some
duty due to him, as an action of debt upon an obligation, annuitie, rent,
covenant, ward, goods, trespass or such like, and because that they are things
whereof a man is not possessed, but for recovery of them is driven to his
action, they are called Things in action. And those things in action that are
certain, the Queen may grant, and the grantee may use an action for them in
his own name on^lie. But a common person cannot grant his thing in action,
nor the Queen her self cannot grant her thing in action which is uncertain,
as trespass and such like.

Cinque ports.
CInque ports, be certain haven towns, five in number, to which have been
granted long time since many liberties (that other port towns have not) and
that first in the time of King Edward called the Confessor (who was before the
conquest) and has been increased since, and that chiefly in the days of the
three Edwards, the first, the second, and third (since the Conquest) as
appears in the book of Domesday, and other old Monuments, which in this
work should be too long to recite.

Circuitie of action.
CIrcuitie of action, is when an action is rightfully brought for a duty, but
yet about the bushe, as it were, for that it might as well been otherwise
answered and determined, and the suite saved, and because that the same action
was more then needful, it is called circuitie of action: As if a man grant a
rent charge of x. pound out of his manor of Dale, and after the Grauntee
disseiseth the grauntor of the same manor of Dale, and he brings an Assise
and recouereth the land, and xx. pound damages, the which xx. pound being
paid, the grauntee of the rent sueth his action for x. pound of his rent due
during the time of the disseisin, which if no disseisin had bin he must have
had, This is called circuitie of action, because it might have been more
shortly answered, for whereas the grantor should receive xx. pound damages, and
pay x. pound rent, he might have received but the x. li. only for the damages*
and the grauntee might have cut^e off and kept back the other x. li. in his
hands by way of detainer for his rent, and so thereby might have saved his
action.

105 Claim.
Claim, is a challenge by any man of the property or ownership of a thing
which he has not in possession, but that which is withholden from him
wrongfully.

Clergy.
Clergy, is an ancient liberty confirmed in diverse parliaments, And it is
when a man is arraigned of felony or such like before a temporal Judge etc.
and the prisoner prays his Clergy, that is to say, to have his Book, which
in ancient time was as much as if he desired to be dismissed from the
temporal judge, and to be delivered to the Ordinary to purge himself of the
same offense. And then the Iuoge shall command the Ordinary to try if he can
read as a Clerk in such a Book and place as the Judge shall appoint. And if
the Ordinary certify the Judge that he can, then the prisoner shall not have
judgment to loose his life. See Stamford. lib. 2. cap. 41. and seek the
statute 18. Eliz. cap. 7.

Clerk Attaint.
Clerk Attaint, is he which prays his clergy after judgment given upon
him of the Felony, and has his clergy allowed, such a clerk might not make
his purgation.

108 Clerk Convict.
Clerk convict, is he which prays his clergy before judgment given upon
him of the felony, and has his Clergy to him granted, such a clerk might
have his purgation. Note that this purgation was made, when he was dismissed
to the ordinary, there to be tried of the enquest of clerks. And therefore
now by the stat. of 18 El. c. 7. no such is put to the Ordinary.

109 Color.
Color, is a fained matter, which the defendant or tenant uses in his bar
when an action of trespass or an assise is brought against him, in which he
gives the demaundant or plaintiff a show at the first sight, that he has
good cause of action, where in trothe it is no just cause, but only a color
and face of a cause: and it is used to the intent that y^ determination of the
action should be by the Judges, and not by an ignorant Jury of xii. men. And
therefore a color ought to be a matter in law or doubtful to y^ common
people: as for example, A. brings an assise of land against B. and B. says
that he himself did let the same land to one C. for term of life, and
afterward did grant the reuersion to A. the demandant and after C. the tenant
for term of life died, after whose decease, A. the demandant claiming the
reuersion by force of y^ grant (whereto C. the tenant for life, did never
atturne) entered, upon whom B. entered, against whom A. for that enter, brings
this assise etc. This is a good color because the common people, think that
the land will pass by the grant without Atturnement, where inde^^r it will
not pass, etc.

Also in an action of trespass, color must be given, and of them are an
infinite number, one for example: in an action of trespass for taking away the
plantifes beasts the defendant says, that before the plaintiff had any thing
in them* he himself was posses^ed of the^ as of his proper goods, and
delivered them to A. B. to deliver them to him again, when etc. And A. B. gave
the^ unto the plaintiff, and the plaintiff supposing the property to be in A.
B. at the time of the gift, took them, and the defendant took them from the
plaintiff, whereupon the plaintiff brings an action, this is a good color
and a good plea. See more hereof in the Dialogues between the Doct. and stud.
lib. 2. cap. 13.

110 Color of office.
Color of office, is always taken in the worst part, and signifies an act
evil done by the countenance of an office, and it bears a dissembling face
of the right office, whereas the office is but a veil to the falsehood, and
the thing is grounded upon vice, and the office is as a shadow to it. But by
reason of the office, and by virtue of the office are taken always in the best
part, and where the office is the just cause of the thing and the thing is
pursuing y^ office.

Collusion.
COllusion, is where an action is brought against another, by his own agreement
if the plaintiff recover, th^n such recovery is called by Collusion, and in
some cases the collusion shall be inquired of as in Qu^re impedit, and Assise
and such like, which any corporation or body politic brings against an
other to the intent to have the land or aduowson, whereof the writ is brought
into Mortmaine. But in auowrie nor in an^e action personal, the collusion shall
not be enquired. See the Statute w. 2. chapt. 32. which gives the quale ius
and inquiry in such cases.

Common ley.
COmmon law, is for the most part taken three wa^e^s, First, for the laws of
this Realm simply, without any other, as customarie law, civil law,
spiritual law, or wha^soeuer else law joined unto it, as when it is d^spu^ed
in our laws of England, what ought of right ^o be determined by the common
law, and what by the spiritual Law, or Admiral^ Court, or such like.

Secondarily it is taken for the kings Courts* as the Kings Bench or common
place, on^lie to show a difference between them and the base Courts, as
customarie courts, Court Barons, County courts, p^powders and such like, as
when a plee of land is removed out of ancient demesne, because the land is
frank fee and pledable at the Common Law, that is to say, at the Kings
Court, and not in Ancient demesne, or in any other base Court.

Thirdly, and most usually by the common law is understood, such laws as were
generally taken and holden for law before any Statute was made to alter the
same, as for example, Tenant for l^^e nor for years, were not to be punished
for doing wast at the common law, til the statute of Gloucester, ca. 5. was
made which does give an actio^ of wast against them. But tenant by the courtesy
and tenant in dower were punishable for wast at the common law* that is to
say, by the usual and common received laws of the Realm before the said
statute of Gloc. was made.

Common.
COmmon, is the right, that a man has to put his beasts to pasture, or to use
and occupy the ground, that is not his own.

And note that there be diverse commons, that is to say, common in gross,
common appendant, common appurtenant, and common because of neighborhood.

Common in gross is where I by my deed grant to another that he shall have
common in my land.

Common appendant is where a man is seized o^ certain land, to the which he
has common in another ground, and all they that shall be seized of the land
have y^ said common only for those beasts which compast that land to which it
is appendant, excepting geese, goats and hogs.

And always this common is by prescription and of common right, and it is
appendaunt to erable land only, and not to any other land or house.

Common appurtenant is in the same manner, as common appendant. But it is with
all manner of beasts, as well hogs, goats and such like as horses, kine,
oxen, sheep, and such as compast the ground. And this common may be made at
this day, and may be severed from the la^d to which it is appurtenant, but so
can not Common, appendant.

Common because of neighborhood is where y^ tenants o^^. Lords which be seized
of two towns, where one lies nigh another, and every of them have used from
the time whereof no mind runs, to have common in the other town with all
manner of beasts comminable.

But the one may not put his cattle in the others ground, for so they of the
other town may distraine them Damage fesant, or may have an actio^ of trespass,
but they may not put the^ into their own fields, and if so they straye into
the fields of the other town, they there ought to suffer them, And the
inhabitants of the one town ought not to put in as many beasts as they will,
but having regard to the inhabitants of the other town, for otherwise it were
no good neighborhood, upon which all this matter does depend.

114 Condition.
COndition, is a restraint or bridle annexed and joined to a thing, so that by
the not performance or not doing thereof the party to the condition shall
receive prejudice and loss, and by the perfourmance and doing of the same
commodity and advantage.

And all conditions are either Conditions actual and expressed, which be
called conditions in deed, or else they be conditions employed or covert, and
not expressed, which are called Conditions in Law.

Also all conditions are either Conditions precedent and going before the
estate, and are executed, or else subsequent and following after the estate and
executorie.

The Condition precedent does get and gain the the thing or estate made upon
condition by the performence of the same.

The Condition subsequent does keep and continue the thing or estate made
upon condition by the performance or y^ same.

Actual and express condition, which is called a condition in deed, is a
condition knit and annexed by express words to the feoffement, lease or grant,
either in writing or without writing. As if I infeoffe a man in lands
reserving rent, to be paid at such a feast, upon condition, that if the feoffee
fail of payment at the day, that then it shall be lawful for me to reenter.

Condition implied or covert and not expressed, which is called a condition in
law, is when a man grants to an other the office to be keeper of a Park,
Steward, Beadle, Baylife, or such like for term of life, and though there be
no condition at all expressed in the grant, yet the law speaks covertly of a
condition, which is, that if the grauntee do not execute all points
appertayning to his office, by himself or his sufficient deputy, then it
shall be lawful to the grauntor to enter and discharge him of his off^ce.

Condition precedent and going before is, when a lease is made to one for life
upon condition, that if the lessee for life will pay to the lessor xx. li. at
such a day, that then he shall have fee simple, here the condition preceedes
and goes before the estate in fee simple, and upon the performance of the
condition does get and gain the fee simple.

Condition subsequent and coming after, is when one grants to I. S. his
manor of Dale in fee simple upon condition, that the grauntee shall pay to him
at such a day xx. pound or else that his estate shall cease, here the
condition is subsequent and following the estate in fee simple, and upon the
performance thereof deoth keep and continue the estate.

See more of this in Littleton lib. 3. ca. 5. And Perkins in the last title of
Conditions.

Confirmation.
COnfirmation is when one which has right to any lands or tenements makes a
deed to an other which has thereof the possession or some estate with these
words, Ratificalle, approbasse, confirmasse, with intent to enlarge his
estate, or make his possess^on perfect and not defesible by him that makes the
confirmation, nor by any other that may have his right.

Whereof see more in Littleton lib. 3. cap. 9. of Confirmations.

Confiscate goods.
COnfiscate goods are goods to which the law entitleth the Queen when they
are not claymed by any other. As if a man be indicted that he feloniouslie
stole the goods of I. S. where in truth they are his own goods, and they
are brought into the Court against him as a maineur, and then he is demanded
what he says to those goods, and he denies them, now by this denying of
them, he shall loose those goods, although that afterward he be acquitted of the
felony, and so mother like cases.

117 Conspiracy.
Conspiracy is a writ and it lies where two or more knit themselves together
by oath, covenant, or other manner of alia^ce, that every one shall help other
for to indict or appe^le any man of felony, then he which is by such manner
indicted or appealed shall have this writ, But this writ lies not against the
indictors.

See more hereof in Stamford lib. 3. cap. 12.

118 Custom.
Customs and services is a writ, and lies where I or my ancestors after the
limitatio^ of assise, were not seysed of the customs or services of my tenant
before, then I shall have this writ to recover those services.

Also the tenant may have this writ against his Lord, but after that the
tenant has declared, the Lord shall defend the words of the declaration and
replying shall say, that he distrayned not for the customs whereof the
declaration is, and then he shall declare all the declaration of the customs
and services, and then the tenant who was plaintiff shall become defendant, and
shall defend by battle or great assise.

Consultation.
COnsultatio^, Look therefore after in the title of Prohibition.

Continual claim.
COntinual claim is where a man ha^h right to enter into certain lands where
of an other is seized in fee simple or fee tail, and he dare not enter for
fear of death or beating, but approaches as nigh as he dare, and makes claim
thereto within the year and day before the death of him that has the lands,
if after he which has the land die seiseo, and his heir is in by descent,
yet he that makes such claim may enter upon the h^ire notwithstanding such
descent, for that that he has made such continual claim: But it behooves
that such claim always be made within the year and the day before the death
of the tenant, for if such a tenant do not die seysed within a year and a day
after such claim made, and yet he that has right dare not enter, then it
behooves him that has such right to make an other claim within the year and
day after the first claim, and after such second claim to make ye third
claim within the year and day, if he will be sure to save his enter. But if
the disseisor die seysed within the year and day after the disseisin, and no
claim ma^e, then the enter of the disse: see is taken away, for the year and
day shall not be taken from the time of the title of the enter to him growe^,
but only from the time of y^ last claim by him made as is aforesaid. See more
hereof in Littleton ^ib. 3 cap. 7.

Counterplee.
COu^terplee is where one brings an action, and the tenant in his answer and
plee voucheth or calls for any man to warrant his title, or prays in aid of
an other, which has better estate then he, as of him that is in the reuersion,
or if one that is a stranger to the action, come and pray to be received, to
save his estate, if the demaundant reply thereto, and show cause that he ought
not such a one to vouch, or that he ought not of such a one to have aid, or
that such a one ought not to be received, this plee is called a counterplee to
the voucher, aid, or resceit, as the case is, but if the voucher be allowed,
and when vouche comes in, and dema^deth what cause the tenant has, and the
tenant shows his cause and the vouche pleed to any thing to avoid the
warra^tie, that is called a counterplee to the warrantie.

Contract.
COntract, is a bargain, or covenant between two parties, where one thing is
given for another which is called, Quid pro quo, as if I sell my house for
money, or if I covenant to make you a lease of my manor of Dale in
consideration of twenty pound that you shall give me, these are good
contractes, because there is one thing for an other, but if a man make promise
to me, that I shall have twenty shillinges, and that he will be debtor to me
thereof, and after I ask the twenty shillings, and he will not deliver it,
yet I shall never have any action to recover this twenty shillinges, for that
that this promise was no contract but a bare promise. And ex nudo pacto non
oritur actio, but if any thing were given for the twenty shillinges though it
were not but to the value of a penny, then it had been a good contract.

123 Contra formam collationis.
COntra formam collationis, is a writ, and it lies where a man had given
lands in perpetual alms to any of the late houses of Religion, as to an
Abbot, and to the covent or other Sovereign, or to the war^en or Master of any
Hospital, and his covent to find certain poor men, and to do other divine
service, if they alien the lands, then the donour or his heirs, shall have
the said writ for to recover the land, but this writ shall be alwaie
brought against the Abbot or his successor, and not against the alien,
although that he be tenant, but in all other actions where a man demands
freeholde, the writ shall be brought against the tenant of the land. See the
Statute w. 2. cap. 41.

Contra formam feoffamenti.
COntra forma^ feoffame^ti, is a writ, and it lies where a man before the
Statute of, Quia emptores terrarum, which was made Anno 18. Edw. infeoffeth an
other by deed to do certain service if the feoffour or his heirs distraine
him to do other service then is comprised in the deed, then the tenant shall
have this writ, commanding him that he distraine not him to do other service,
that is not comprised within the deed, but this writ lies not for the
plaintiff which claymeth by purchase from the first feffee: but for such
plaintiff as cloymeth as heir to the first feffee.

125 Contributione facienda.
COntributione facienda, is a writ, and it lies where there are diverse
Parceners, and he which has the part of the eldest does make all the suite to
the Lord, the other ought to make contribution to him, and if they will not, he
shall have against them the said writ.

126 Conusance.
COnusance of Plee, is a Privilege that a City or Town has of the Kings
grant t^ hold plee of all contractes, and of lands within the precinct of
the Franches, and that when any man is impleaded for any such thing in the
Court of the King at Westminster, the Mayor and Baylifes of such fra^chises or
their Attorney may ask Conusance of the plee, that is to say, that the plee
and the matter shall be pleaded and determined before them. But if the Court
at Westminster be lawfully seysed of the plee, before Conusance be demanded,
then they shall not have Conusance for that suite, because they have
negligently surceased their time of demand thereof, but this shall be no
bar to them to have Conusance in an other action, for they may demand
Conusance in one action, and omit it in an other action at their pleasure.

And note that Conusaunce lies not in prescription, but it behooves to show
the Kings letters patents for it.

Corodie.
COrodie is an allowance of meat, bread, drink, money, clothing, lodging, and
such like things necessary for sustenance, It is sometimes certain where the
certeinty of things is set down, sometimes uncertain where the certeintie of
things is not set down which he shall have, And some of them began by grant
made by one man to another, and it may be for life, years, in tail, or in
fee, and some Corodies are of common right as every founder of Abbeys,
Priories, nunries and other houses of religion, had authority to assign such
in the same house, when they were standing for father, brother Cousin or other
man that he would appoint, should take it, if it were a house of Monks, and
^^he were founder of a house of nuns or women, then for his Mother, Sister,
cousin or other woman that he would direct thither, and always this was
provided for, that he that had Corodie in a house of Monks might not send a
woman to take it. Nor where Corodie was due in a Nunrie, there it was not
lawful to appoint a man to receive the same, for in both cases such
presentation was to be rejected, And this corodie was due as well to a common
person that was fou^der, as where the King himself was founder, but where the
house was holden in frankalmoigne, there the tenure it self was a discharge of
corodie against all men, excent it were afterward charged voluntarily, as when
the king would send his writ to the abbot for a corodie, for such a one who^
they admit, there the house should be thereby char^ged for ever, whether the
king were founder or not, See the writ of Corod. hab. in Fitz Natura br. fol.
230.

Crowner.
CRowner, is an ancient officer of trust and of great aucthority ordained to be
a principal co^seruator, or keeper of the peace to bear record of the Plces of
y^ Crown and of his own sight and of diverse other things many in number etc.
and therefore in King Edward the first days this Statute following was made
forasmuch as mean men and indiscreet now of late are commonly chosen to the
office of the Coroner, where it is requisite that wise men lawful and able
should occupy such offices, It is provided that through al shires sufficient
men should be chosen to be Coroners, out of the most wise and discreetest
Knights which best kn^w could and would attend this Office, and which
faithfully made and represented the Plees of the Crown.

And although the Letter of this statute be not precisely observed, yet at the
least the intent should be followed as ^^ghe as ^^ought be, that for the
default of Knights, Gentlemen furnished with such qualities as the Statute
sets down (of which sort there be many) might be chosen with this addition
that they be virtuous and good known Christians. See hereof in the writ de
Coronatore eligendo in Fits Natura breuiu^ fol. 1^3.

Corporation.
COrporation, is a permanent thing that may have succession. And it is an
assembly and ioinyng together of many into one fellowship, brotherhoode and
mind, whereof one is head and chief, the rest are the bod^e, and this head
and body knitte together make the Corporation. And of Corporations some are
called spiritual and some Temporal, and of those that are Spiritual, some
are corporations of dead persons in Law, and some otherwise, and some ar^ by
the authority of the King only, and some have been of a mixte authority.
And of those that are te^porall some are by the authority of the King also, And
some by the Common Law of the Realm.

Corporation Spiritual and of dead persons in the Law, is where the
corporation consists of an Abbot and covent, and these had beginning of the
king, and the man of Rome when he had to do here.

Corporation spiritual, and of able persons in law is where the Corporation
consists of a Dean, Chapter, Master of a College or Hospital, and this
corporation had beginning of the king only.

Corporation temporal by the king is where there is a Mayor and Comminaltie.

Corporation temporal by authority of the Common Law is the assembly in
Parliament, which consists of the Queen the head of the corporation, and of
the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons of the realm, the badie of
the corporation.

130 Bodies politic.
BOdies politic, are Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Deanes, Parsons of churches and
such like which have succession in one person only.

131 Corruption of blood.
COrruption of blood, is when any is attaynted of Felony or Treason, then his
blood is said to be corrupt, by means whereof his children nor any of his
blood cannot be heirs to him or to any other auncestor, for which they ought to
claim by him. And if he were a noble or gentleman before, he and all his
children thereby are made unnoble and vnge^tle, having regard to the nobility or
gentry they claim by their father, which cannot be made whole again without
authority of Parliament.

Cosinage.
COsinage, is a writ, and it lies where my great Grandfather, my
Grandfathers Graundfather, or other cousin dies seized in fee simple, and a
stranger abateth, that is to say, enters into the lands, then I shall have
against him this writ, or against his heir, or his alienee, or against
whomsoever that comes after to the seide lands. But if my Grandfather die
seized and a stranger abateth, then I shall have a writ of Aiel, But if my
father, mother, brother, sister, uncle or au^t, die seized, and a stranger
abateth; then I shall have an Assise of Mortdancester.

133 Covenant.
Covenant, is an agreement made by deed in writing and sealed between two
persons, where every of them is bounden to the other to perform certain
covenants for his part, The one of them holds not his covenant but breaks
it, then he which thereof feels himself grieved, shall have thereupon a writ
of Covenant.

And note well that no writ of Covenant shall be maintenable without
especialtie, but in the City of London, or in some other such place priuileged
by custom and use.

134 Couerture.
COuerture, is when a man and a woman are married together, now whatsoever is
done concerning the wife in the time of the continuance of this marriage
between them is said to be done during the couerture, and the wife is called a
woman covert.

COuin, is a secret assent determined in the hearts of two or more, to the
prejudice of any other: As if a tenant for term of life, or tenant in ^aile
will secretly conspire with another, that the other shall recover against the
tenant for life the land which he holds etc. in prejudice of him in the
reuersion.

Cui in vita.
CVi in vita, is a writ, and it lies where a man is seized of lands in fee
simple, or fee tail, or for terr^e of life in the right of his wife, and
alieneth the same land and dies, then she shall have the said writ for to
recover the land.

And note well that in this writ her title must be showed whether it be of y^
purchase of the woman, or of the heritage of y^ woman. But if the husband alien
the right of his wife, and the husband and the wife dye, the wives heir may
have a writ of sur Cui iu vita.

137 Cui ante diuortium.
CVi ante diuortium is a writ, and it lies in like manner, when such
alienation is made by the husband of the wives land and after deuorce is had
between them, then the woman shall have this writ, and the write shall say, to
who^ she before the deuorce might not gainsay.

138 Courtesy of England.
CVrtesie of England, is where a man takes a wife seized in fee simple or fee
tail general, or seized as heir of the tail especial, and has issue by
the wife male or female, be the issue dead or in life, if the wife dye, the
husband shall hold the land during his life by the law of England: And it is
called tenant by the Courtesy of England, because that this is not used in no
other realm but only in England.

D.
139 Damage fesant.
DAmage fesant, is when a strangers beasts are in another man's ground without
lawful authority or license of the tenant of the ground, and there do feed,
tread, and otherwise spoil y^ corn, grass, woods, or such like: In which
case the tenant whom they hurt may therefore take, distraine, and impound them,
as well in the night as in the day. But in other cases, as for rent and services
and such like, none may distraine in the night season.

Danegelde.
DAnegelde, that is to be quite of a certain custom which has runn some times,
which the Danes did levy in England.

This began first in the time of King Etheldred, who being sore distressed by
the continual invasion of the Danes, to purchase peace, was compelled to
charge his country and people with importable payments, for he first gave
them at five several payments 113000. li. and afterward granted them 48000
pounds yearly.

141 Darr presentment.
DArrein presentm^t, Look therefore after in the title Quare impedit.

142 Dean and Chapter.
DEane and Chapter, is a body corporate spiritual consisting of many able
persons in law, as namely the Deane (who is chief) and his Prebendes, and
they together make the corporation. And as this corporation may jointly
purchase lands and tenements to the use of their church and successors. So
likewise every of them severally may purchase to the use of himself and his
heirs.

143 Decies tantum.
DEcies tantum, is a writ, and lies where a iurour in any inquest, takes
money of the one part or other to give his verdict, then he shall pay ten
times as much as he has received, and every one that will sue may have an
action, and shall have the one half, and the king the other half. But if the
king in such case release by his pardon to such a iurour, yet that shall be no
bar against him that brings the action, but that he shall recover the other
half, if his action be commenced before the pardon of the King, but if the
pardone be before any action, it is a bar against all men, And the same law
is of all other actions populer, where one party is to the king, and the other
to the party that sueth. Also the embr^cers which procure such inquestes
shall be punished in the same manner. And they shall have the imprisonment of a
year, but no justice shall inquire thereof of office, but only at the suite
of the party.

Declaration.
DEclaration, is a showing in writing of the grief and complaint of the
demaundant or pleintife against the tenant or defendaunt, wherein he supposes
to have received wrong, and this declaration ought to be plain and certain,
both because it impeacheth the defendant or tenant and also compels him to
make answer thereto. But note that such declaration made by the demaundaunt
against the tenant in an action Real, is properly called a Count.

Note that y^ Count or declaration ought to contain demonstration,
declaration, and conclusion. And in demonstration are contained ii^. things,
(that is to say) who him complains and against whom, ^ for what matter, and
in the declaration what ought to be comprised, how and in what manner the
action rose between the parties, and when and what day, year and place, and
to whom the action shall be given.

And in the conclusion he ought to auerre and profer to prove his suit, and
show the damage which he has sustained by the wrong done unto him.

Dedimus potestatem*
DEdimus potestatem* is a writ, and it lies where a man su^th in the kings
Court, or is sue (...) may not well trauell^ then he shall have thi^ writ
directed to some Justice o^ other discreet person in the country to g(...)
him power to admit ^ome ^a^ for his Attorney, or to seiue a (...)e, or to
take his confession or his answer, or other examination as the matter
requires.

Defendant.
DEfendant, is he that is sued in action personal, and he is called tenant in
an action Real.

Defen^e.
Defense, is that which the defendant ought to make immediately after the count
or declaration made, that is to say, that he defe^deth all the wrong, force, and
damage, where and when he ought, and then to proceed farther to his plee, or
to unparie.

And note, that in so much that he desendeth the force and wrong he does
excuse himself of the wrong against him surmised, and makes him party to the
plee, and in so much that he defends the damage, he affirms the party
plaintif^ able to be answered unto.

And for the residue of the defense, he accepts the power of the Court to
hear and determine their plees of this matter. For if he will plead to the
Jurisdiction, he ought to omit in his defense these words (ou and quant il
deuera.) And if he will show any dishabilitie* in the plaintiff, and demand
judgment, if the party* shall be answered unto, then he ought to omit the
defense of the damage.

Demaundant.
DEmaundant* is he that sueth or complayneth in an Action Real^ for title of
land, and he is called plaintiff in an assise, and in ^n action personal as in
an action of debt, trespass, deceit, det^^^^ and such like.

Demaines,
DEmaines, or demesnes generallye speakinge according to the law, be all the
parts of any manor which be not in the hands of ^^^^holders of estate of
enheritance, though they be occupied by copyholders, lesse^s for years, or
for life, as well as tenant at will: But especially to speak, demaines
according to the common speech be only understood the Lords chief manor
place, which he and his ancestors have from time out of mind, kept in their
own hands, and have occupied the same, together with all buildinges and houses
whatsoever, also the meadows, pastures, woods, errable land, and such like,
therewith occupied.

150 Half Blood
Half Blood is when a man marieth a wife* and has issue by her a son or
daughter, and she dies and then he takes an other woman and has by her also
a Son or daughter, Now these two Sons are after a sort brothers, or as
they are termed half brothers, or brother of the half blood, that is to say,
brother by the fathers side, because they had both one father and are both of
his blood, and not brothers at all by the mothers side, nor of blood ne kin
that way, and therefore the one of them cannot be heir to other, for he that
will clayne as heir to one by ^^s^^^ must be of whole blood to him from whom
he claymeth, In the same manner it is ^^ a woman have diverse issues by diverse
husbands* who are called brothers by one mother.

151 Demurrer.
DEmurrer is when any action is brought and the defendent pleads a plee, to
which the plaintiff answers, that he will not answer, for that it is not a
sufficient plee in the law, ^ she defendant says to the contrary, that it is
a sufficient plee, and thereupon both parties do submit the ^^^se to the
judgment of the court; then that is called a Demurrer.

Denizen.
DEnizen, is where an a^^en borne becomes the Kings subject, and ob^^^neth
the Kings letters Pat^n^^s for to enjoy all privileges as an English man, but
if one be made Denizen he shall pay customs and diverse other ^ing^ as aliens,
as it app^^^^^^ by diverse statutes thereof (...).

Deodande.
DEodande, is when any man by misfortune is slain by a Horse or by a cart, or
by any other thing that moves, then this thing that is cause of his death,
and which at the time of his misfortune did move, shall be forfait to the king,
and that is called Deodande, and that pert^meth to the kings Almener for to
dispos^^^ alms and deeds of charity.

154 Departure from a plee or matter.
DEparture from his plee or matter, is where a man pleads a plee in bar,
and the plaintiff replieth thereto, and he after in his reioynder, pleads or
shows an other matter, contrary, to his first plee that is called a
^eparture from his darre etc.

155 Departure in dispite of the Court.
DEparture in dispite of the Court, is when the tenant or defendant appeateth
to the action brought against him, and has a day over in the same Term* or is
called after, though he had no day given him* so that it ^ee in the same term
if he do not appear but makes default, it ^s a Departure in disp^^e of the
Court, and therefore he shall be condemned.

Deputy.
Deputy is he that occupies in an other m^ns right, whether it ^e office or
any other thing ^ls, and his forfaiture or misdemeanor shall cause the officer
or him whose deputy ^e is to loose hi^ office o^ thing. But a m^n cannot make
his deputy in all cases except the grant so be: as if it be with these or
such like words to exercise or use by himself or his sufficient deputy, or
i^ the words go further to himself or his deputy, or the deputy of his
deputy, then he may make a deputy, and his deputy also may make a deputy,
or ^ls not.

Debte.
DEbte is a writ, and it lies where any sum of money is due to a man by
reason of account, bargain, contract, obligation* or other especialtie, to be
paid at a certain day, at which day be ^^y^th not, then ^e shall have this
writ. But if any sum of money be due to ^^^ Lord by his tenant for any rent
service, the Lord shall never have action of debte, but it behooves alwaie to
distraine. Also for rent charge or rent secke, which any man has for life, in
tail, or in ^ee, he shall not have any action of debt as long as the rent
continues, but his executors may have an action of debt for the arrerages of
any of the said rentes due in the life of their testator, by the statute 32. H.
8. cap. 37.

But for the arrerages of rent reserved upon a lease for term of years, the
lessor is at his election to have an action of debt, or for to distraine: But
if the lease be determined, then he shall not distraine after for that rent.

But ^ee must have an action of debt for the arrerages.

158 Deuastauerunt bona testatoris.
DEuastauerunt bona testatoris is when the executors will deliver the legacies
that their testator has given, or make restitution for wrong^^ done by him, or
pay his de^^^s due upon contractes, or other debtes upon specialties, whose
days of payment are not yet come etc. And keep not sufficient in their hands
to discharge those debts upon records or specialties, that they are
compeliable formerly by the law to satisfy, then they shall be constrained to
pay of their own goods those duties, which at the first by the law they* were
compelled to pay, according to the value of that which they delivered or paid
by compulsion, for such payments of debts, or delivery of legacies, as is
aforesaid, before debtes paid upon specialties* or records, whose days o^
payment ar^ already come* are accounted in the law a wasting of the goods of
the testator, as much as if they had given them awa^^* without cause, or sold
them and converted them to their own use.

Devise.
Devise is where a man in his testament, gives or b^^ ^^^theth his goods or
his lands to another after his decease. And where such devise is made of
goods, i^ the executors will not deliver the goods to the deuisee, the d^^^see
has no remedy by the co^mon-law* But i^ behooves h^^ to have a Citation
against the executors o^ the testator to appear before the ordinary, to show
wh^ he performs not the will of the testator, for the deuisee may not take
the lega^^e and serve himself, but it must be delivered to him by the
executors.

But by the common law if a man be sole seises of lands in his demesne as of
^ee, and demseth the lands by testament, this deuis^ was void, unless the lands
were in a City or borough where lands ^^ deuisable by custom: But if any man
were en^^o^^ed to the use of another and his heirs, and he to whose use he
was so seized did make (...) of his lands, this devise was good, though it be
not in a Town where lands are deuisable.

Also if any man devise lands in City Town, or Borough deuisable, and the
deuisor dies, if his heir or any other abate in the lands, then the deu^s^^
shall have a writ of Ex graui querela: But this writ shall never he pleded
before the Kings Justice, but always before the Mayor or Bailifes in the same
town.

And here to the end to show how much the laws of this Realm, and the wise
discr^^te Judges of the same, who are the interpreters of the law, do ^auor
wills and testaments, and so devises in yielding to there such a reasonable
construction, as they think might best agree with the minds of the dead,
considering that wills and testaments are for the most part, and by common
intendement made when the testator is now very sick, weak, and pasts all
hope of recovery, for it is a received opinion in the Country among most,
that if a man should chance to be so wise as to make his will in his good
health, when he is strong of good memory, and has tune and leisure, and might
ask counsel if any doubt were of the learned that then he should not live
long after, and therefore they defer it, to such time, when as it were more
convenient to apply themselves to the dispositions of their souls, then of
their lands or goods except it were that by the fresh memory, and recital of
them at that time, it might be a cause to put them in mind of some of their
goods or Lands falsely gotten, and so move them to restitution etc. And at
that time the penning of such wills are commonly committed to the Minister of
the Parish, or to some other more ignorant then he who knows not what words
are necessary to make an estate in fee simple, fee tail* for term of life or
such like besides many other mischiefs: I will therefore here set down
some of those cases, that are most common in ignorant men's mouths, and do
carry by the wise interpretations of the Judges, as is aforesaid a larger and
more favorable sense in wills then in deeds.

First therefore if one devise to I. S. by his will al his lands and
tenements, here not only al those lands that he has in possession do pass,
but also those that he has the reuersion of by virtue of these words
tenements.

And if lands be devised to a man to have to him for ever, or to have to him
and his assigns, in these two cases the devise shall have a fee simple. But if
it be given by feoffement in such manner* he has but an estate for term of
life. Also if a man devise his lands to other, to give, sell or do therewith
at his pleasure or will, this is fee simple.

A devise made to one ^ to his heirs malas does make* an estate tail* but i^
such words be put in a deed of feoffeme^t it shall b^ taken a fee simple,
because it does not appear of what body the heirs males shall be begotten. If
lands be given by deed to I. S. and to the heirs males of his body etc. who
has issue a daughter, who has issue a son, and dies, there the land shall
return to the donour, and ^he son of the daughter shall not have it, because
he cannot conuei^ himself by heirs males, for his mother is a let thereto,
but otherwise it is of such a devise, for there the son of the daughter shall
have it rather then the will shall be void.

If one devise to an infant in his mothers belly, it is a good devise,
otherwise it is by feoffement, grant, or gift, for in those cases there ought
to be one of ability to take presently or otherwise it is void.

A devise made in fee simple without express words of heirs, is good in fee
simple.

But if a devise be made to I. N. he shall have the land but for term of
life, for those words will carry no greater estate.

If one will that his son I. shall have his land, after the death of his wife,
here the wife of the deuisor shall have the land first for term of life. So
likewise if a man devise his goods to his wife, and that after the decease of
his wife, his son and heir shall have the house, where the goods are, there the
son shall not have the house during the life of the wife, for it does
appear that his intent was, y^ his wife should have the house also for term
of her life, notwithstanding it were not devised to her by express words.

If a devise be to I. N. and to the heirs females of his body begotten,
after the devises has issue a son and daughter, and dies, here the daughter
shall have the land and not the son, and yet he is the most worthy person, and
heir to his father, but because the will of the dead is, y^ the daughter should
have it, law and conscience will so also.

And herein the very heathens were precise as appears by those verses of
Octauius Augustus, which Donatus reports he made after y^ Virgil at his
death, gave commandment, that his books should be burnt, because they were
imperfect, and yet some persuaded that they should be saved, as indeed they
happily were, to who^ he answered thus: but faith of law must needs be kept
and what last will does say, And what it does command be done, that needs we
must obey.

160 Diem clausit extremum.
DIem clausit extremum, is a writ, and it lies where the Kings tenant, that
holds in chief, dies, this writ shall be directed to the eschetour to
enquire of what estate he was seized, and who is next heir, and his age and
of the certainty of the land, and of what value the land is, and of whom it
is holden, and that inquisition shall be returned into the Chancerie, which is
commonly called: The office after the death of that person.

Descent.
Descent, is in 2. sorts, either lineal or collateral.

Lineal descent is when a descent is conveyed in the same line of the whole
blood, as grandfather, father, son, sons son, and so downward.

Collateral descent, is out in another branch from above of the whole blood,
as grandfathers brother, fathers brother, and so downward.

Note that if one die seized in fee, or in tail of land in which another has
right to enter, and that discendeth to his heir, such descent shall take away
the entry of him which has right to enter, for that that the heir has them
by descent from his father, and so came unto those teneme^ts by the doing of
the law, and he that had right can not put him out by entering upon him, but
is put to sue his writ to demand the land according to; the nature of the
title. See hereof in Littleton, lib. 3. cap. 6. and statute, 32. H. 8. cap. 33.

162 Disclaymer.
DIsclaimer, is where the Lord distraineth his tenant; and he sueth a
repleuin, and the lord anoweth the taking by reason that he holds of him, if
the tenant say that he disclaimeth to hold of him, this is called a
disclaimer, and if the lord thereupon bring a writ of right sur disclaymer, and
it be found against the tenant he shall lose his land. Also if one brings a
precipe against two other for the land, and the tenant disclaimeth and says,
that he is not thereof tenant, neither claymeth any thing therein, then the
other shall have y^ whole land. But if the Precipe be brought against one alone,
and he disclaimeth as is aforesaid, the writ shall abate, and yet the
demaundant may enter unto the land and hold it in his rightful estate;
although his entry was not lawful.

163 Discontinuance.
Discontinuance, is when a man alienateth to an other, Lands or tenements, and
dies, and another has right to y^ same land, and may not enter into the^
because of this alienation, as if an Abbot alien the lands of his house to
another in fee, or fee tail, or for term of life, or if a man alien the
lands that he has in the right of his wife, or if tenant in the tail alien
the lands given to him and to the heirs of his body, then such alienations be
called Discontinuance, for such estates pass alwaie by liuerie and seisin, and
in these cases the successor of the Abbot or the woman after the death of her
husband or the issue in the tail after the death of the tenant in tail may
not enter, but every of them is put to his action. See more hereof in
Littleto^ lib. 3. cap. 11. and 32. H. 8. cap. 28. which takes away
discontinuaunces by the husband seized in right of his wife.

Tithes.
TIthes, are the tenthe parts of any thing, but properly of those things which
do increase, which for the most part do belong to ministers of the church for
their maintenance, and they be in three sorts divided, to wit Predial tithes,
Personal tithes, and Mixte tithes, Prediall tithes are tithes that be paid
of things that come of the ground only, as corn, hay, fruits of Trees and
such like.

Personal Tithes are Tithes to be paid of such profits as come by the labor
and industry of man's person, as by buying, selling, gains of Merchandise, and
of handicraftes men, laborers and such as work for hire, as carpenters,
Masons and such like.

Mixed tithes are tithes of calves, lambs, pigs, and such like, y^ increase
partly of the ground that they be fed upon and partly of the keeping industry
and diligence of the owner.

165 Disperagement.
DIsperageme^t, is a shame disgrace or villainy done by the gardeine in
Chivalry to his ward in Chivalry being within age by reason of his marriage.

As when the gardeine does marry his ward within age of xiiii. years, and
within such time as he cannot consent to marriage, to a bond woman, or to the
daughter of one that dwelt in a borough (which is to be understood, such whose
fathers profess handicrafts, and those baser arts of buying and selling, to
get their living by) or to one that has but one foot, or one hand, or is
lain or deformed; or has some horrible disease, as the leprosy, french
pockes, falling sickness or such like, or maryeth him* to a woman that is past
childebearing, and diverse such other, then upon the complaint made by the
frinds of such heir, the Lord or gardeine shall loose the wardship, and the
profits during the nonage of the heir for the shame done unto him. See Littlet
lib. 2. cap. 4.

Disseisin.
DIsseisin, is when a man enters into any lands or tenementes where his entry
is not lawful, and puts him out, that has the freehold.

167 Disseisin upon disseisin.
DIsseisin upon disseisin, is when the disseisour is disseised by another.

168 Disseisor and disseisee.
DIsseisor, is which puts any man out of his land without order of the law,
and disseisee is he that is so put out.

169 Disceit.
DIsceit, is a writ, and it is sometime original, and sometime judicial, but
when it is original, it lies where any disce^t is d^n to a man by another, so
y^ he has not sufficiently performed his bargain or not performed his
promise, then b^e that is in such manor disceiued shall have this writ.

Also when this writ is judicial, it lies where a Scire fac. is sued out of
any Record against a man, and the Shirife returns, that he is warned where
he was not warned, or where a Praecipe quod reddat of a plee of lands, or a
Q^impedit of the presenting to a church, is sued against one, and the shirife
returns that he is summoned, where he was not su^moned, by which disceit and
false return the demaunda^t recouereth in y^ plaint, then the party grieved
shall have this writ against him that recovered, and against the summoners, and
against the shirife, then the writ shall be directed to the Coroners of the
same county, if he continue shirife that made the return.

Distress.
Distress, is the thing which is taken and distrained upon any land for rent
behind, or other duty, or for hurt done although that the property of the
thing belongs to a stranger: But if they be beasts that belong to a
stranger, it behooves y^ they were leuant or couchant upon y^ same ground, y^
is to say, that the beasts have been upon the ground certain space, that
they have them self well rested there, or else they be not distrainable for
rent or service.

And if one distraine for rent or other thing without cause lawful, then the
party grieved shall have a repleuin and upon suretye found to pursue his
action shall have the distress to him delivered again. But there be diverse
things which be not distrainable, viz. another man's gown in the house of a
tailor, or cloth in the house of a fuller, sheereman or weauer, for that they
be common artificers, and that the common presumption is, that such things
belong not to the artificer, but to other persons which put them there to be
wrought,

Also vitail is not distreinable nor corn in sheues, but if they be in cart,
for y^ that a distress ought to be always of such things where of the shirife
may make repleuin, and deliver again in as good case as it was at the time of
the taking.

A man may distraine for homage and fealty, and escuage, and other services
and for ^ines and amerciamentes which be assessed in a Leete, but not in a
Court baron. And also for damage feasant, that is to say, when he syndeth the
beasts or goods of any other doing hurt or cumbring his ground. But a man may
not distraine for any rent or thing due for any land, but upon the same land
that is charged therewith: But in case where I come to distrain, and the other
seeing my purpose chaseth y^ beasts, and bears the thing out, to the intent
that I shall not take it for a distress upon the ground, then I may well
pursue, and if I take it presently in y^ high way, or in another ground, the
taking is lawful as well there as upon the land charged, to whom soever the
property of the goods be.

Also for fines and amerciaments which be assessed in a leete, one may always
take the goods of him that is so amerced, in whose ground soever they be within
the jurisdiction of the Court as it is said. And when one has taken a
distress, it behooves him to bring it to the common pound, or else he may
keep it in an open place, so that he give notice to the party, that he (if
the distres be a quick beast) may give to it food, and then if the beast die
for default of food, he that was distrayned shall be at the loss, and then the
other might distraine again for the same rent or duitie. But if he carry the
distres to a hold, or out of the County, that the Shirife may not make
deliverance upon the repleuin, then the par^y upon the return of the Shirife,
shall have a writ of Withernam dyrected to the Shirife, that he take as many
of his beasts, or as much goods of the other in his keeping, till he has
made deliverance of the first distres. And also if they be in a forslet or
Castle, the shirife may take with him the power of the County, and beat down
the castle. As it appears by the statute West. 1. cap. 17. therefore look
the statute.

Divorce.
Divorce so called of Diuortium, coming of the verb Diuerto, which signifies
to return back, it is used in law when a man is divorced from his wife, he
retorneth her back home to her Father or other Friends, or to the place from
whence he had her, and by such divorce the marriage is defeated and undone.

Donor and Donee.
DOnor is he which gives lands and teneme^ts to an other in tail, and he to
whom the same is given is called Donee.

Double plee.
DOuble plee is where the defendant or tenant in any action pledeth a plee, in
the which two matters be comprehended, and every one by himself is a
sufficient bar or answer to the action, then such a double plee shall not
be admitted for a plee, except one depend upon an other, and in such case if he
may not have the last plee without y^ first plee, then such a double plee
shall be well suffered.

174 Dower.
DOwer is a writ and it lies where a man is sole seysed during the couerture
between him and his wife, of lands or teneme^ts in fee simple or fee tail,
where by possibility the issue between them may inherit, if such a man die
his wife shall recover the third part of all the lands whereof the husband was
sole seysed any time during the couerture by a writ of Dovver vnde nihil habet,
though he died not seysed, and though that he made alienation thereof in his
life. But if a man before the statute of Vsis 27. H. 8. had lands, in the
which an other man, or other men were seysed to his use always during the
couerture, and he to whose use they were seized dies before the said Statute,
his wife shall not be endowed.

And also if before the says statute two men be seized of lands to the use of
one of them, and he to whose use etc. dies before the said statute, his wife
shall not be endowed. Also if a woman bring a writ of dower, she shall
recover damages, for the profit ru^ after the death of her husband if he dies
thereof seysed, but if any alienation or estate were made during ye couerture,
so that the husband died not seysed, then though she shall recover the land,
yet she shall recover no damages. Also there is an other writ of dower
called a writ of Right of dower, and ^^ lies where a woman has recovered
part of her dower in one town, and the other part she is to recover. Also in
diverse cases a woman shall not have dower, as if the husband commit treason for
the which he is attainted, then his wife shall have no dower. Also if she go
away from her husband with an other man in aduowtry, and if she be not
reconciled by her husband of his own will without cohersion of the Church, she
shall not be endowed.

175 Right.
RIght, is where one has a thing that was taken from another wrongfully as by
disseisin, discontinuance, or putting out or such like, and the challenge or
claim that he has, who should have the thing, is called Right.

176 Right of entry.
RIght of entry, is when one seized of land in fee, is thereof disseised: Now
the disseisee has right to enter into the land, and may so do when he will,
or else he may have a writ of right against the disseisor.

177 Dum non fuit compos mentis.
DVm non fuit compos mentis, is a writ and it lies where a man that is out of
his wits, that is to say, mad or lunatike alieneth the lands that he has in
fee simple, and dies, then his heir after his decease shall have this writ,
but he himself shall not have this writ for that, that a man shall not be
received to disable himself. Also this writ may be made in the per, cui, and
post.

Dum fuit infra aetatem.
DVm fuit infra aetatem, is a writ, and it lies where an infaunt within age
alieneth his land which he has in fee simple or for term of life, when he
comes to his full age he shall have this writ or he may enter if he will,
but it behooves that he be of full age the day of his writ brought. Also if an
infant alien his land, and die, his issue at his full age shall have this writ
or he may enter, but the issue shall not have this writ within his age.

Dures.
DVres, is where one is kept in prison or restreined from his liberty
contrary to the order of the law, and if such a person so being in dures, make
any especialtie or oblig* by reason of such imprisonment such a deed is void
in the law, and in an action brought upon such an especialtie he may say that
it was made by dures of imprisonment, but if a man be arrested upon an action
at the suite of another though the cause of the action be not good nor true,
if he make an obligation to a stranger being in prison by such arrest, yet it
shall not be said by dures, but if he make an obligation to him at whose suite
he was arrested to be discharged of such imprisonment, then it shall be said
dures, as it is said.

E.
180 Eiectione firm.
EIectione firm, look for that in the title Guard.

181 Eiectment de guard.
EIectment de guard, look for that in the Title of Gardes.

182 Eire Justices.
EIre justices, or Itinera^t, as we call them, were Just ces that use to ride
from place to place through out the Realm to administer Justice.

183 Elegit.
TO hold by Elegit, is where a man has reconered debt or damage by a writ
against another by co^lessio^ or in other manner, he shall have within the
year against him a writ judicial called Elegit to have execution of the
half of all his lands and chattels (except exen and beasts of the plow) till
the debt and damages be wholly levied and paid to him, and during the term he
is tenant by Elegit, And note well that if he be put out within the term he
shall have Assise of Nouel disseisin, and after a redisseisin if need be, and
this is given by the statute of westminster second Chap. 18.

And also by the equity of the same statute he that has his estate if he be
put out shall have Assise and redisseisin if need be. And also if he make his
executors and die, and his executors enter and after be put out, they shall
have by the equity of the same statute, such action as he himself before
said. But if he be put out, and after make his executors and die, his executors
may enter, and if they be stopped of their entry, they shall have a writ of
trespass upon their matter and case.

And note well if he do waste in all the land or parcel, the other shall have
against him immediately a writ judicial out of the first record called Venire
facias ad Computa^dum, by which it shall be inquired if he have levied all the
money or parcel, and if he have not levied the money, then it shall be
inquired to how much the waste amounts, and if the wast amount but to parcel,
then as much of the money as the waste amounts unto, shall be abridged of the
foresaid money which was to be levied. But if he have done more waste then the
foresaid sum of money which was to be levied, amounts, the other shall be
discharged by and by of all the said money and shall recover the land. And for
the superfluity of the waste made about that, that amounts to the said sum
he shall recover his damages single, And the same law is of his executors, and
also of him that has his estate.

And note y^ if he alien in fee, for term of life or in tail al or parcel of
the la^d which he holds by Elegit, if the alienation be made, within the
term or after, he which has right, shall have against him an Assise of Nouel
disseisin, And they both must be put in the Assise, the alienor and the
alienee, and notwithstanding that the alienor die presently, yet he which has
right, shall have Assise against the alienee alone, as if the alienee had bin a
plain tenant for term of years, and that is by the equity of the statute of
westminster. 2. Cap. 25. for that that he has not but a chattell in effect, And the
same law is of his executours and of him which has his estate as is aforesaid.

And note well that in Elegit if the shirif return that he had nothing the
day of the Recognisance made but that he purchased lands after y^ time then the
party playntife shall have a new writ to have execution thereof, the same law
is of a statut marcha^t. And note well that after a Fieri facias a man may have
the Elegit, but not contrary wise, for that the Elegit is of more higher
nature then the Fieri facias, And note well that if a man recover by a writ of
debt and sueth a Fieri facias, and the shirife return that the defenda^t has
nothing whereof he may satisfy the debt to the party, the^ the plaintiff shall
have Elegit or Capias sicut alias and a Pluries, And if the Shirife return at
the Capias mitto vobis corpus, and he have nothing whereof he may make
satisfaction to the party he shall be sent to the prison of the fleet, and
there shall abide until he have made agreement with the party, and if the
Shirife return Non est inuentus, the^ there shall go forth an Exigent against
him. And note well y^ in a writ of debt brought against a Parson of holy Church
which has nothing of lay ^ee, and the shirife returns that he has naught
by which he may be summoned, then shall the playntife sue a writ to the
Bishop that he make his Clerk to come, and the Bishop shall make him to come
by sequestration of the Church. And note well that if a man bring a writ of debt
and recover, and make his executors and dies, they shall not have execution
notwithstanding, y^ it be within the year, by a Fieri facias.

Embrasour ou Embraceour.
EMbrasour or Embraceour is he that when a matter is in trial between party
and party comes to the bar with one of y^ parties (having received some
reward so to do) and speaks in y^ case or privily laboreth the jury, or
stands there to survey or ouerlooke the^, thereby to put them in fear and
doubt of the matter. But men that are learned in the law, may speak in the
case for their Clients.

Encrochment.
ENcrochme^t, is said when the Lord has gotten seisin of more rent or
services of his tenant the^ of right is due or ought to be paid or done unto
him, as if ^he tenant hold his land of the Lord by fealty, and ii. s. rent
yearly. And now of late time he has got seisin of iii. s. rent or of homage
or escuage, or such like. Then this is called an incrochment of that rent or
service.

186 Enheritance.
ENheritance, is such estate in lands or tenements, or other things, as may
be enherited by the heir, whether it be in estate of fee simple, or tail, by
descent from any of his ancestors or by his own purchase.

And inheritance is divided into two sorts, that is to say, enheritance
corporate, and enheritance incorporate.

Enheritance corporate are mesuages, lands, meadows, pastures, rents and such
like, that have substance in themselves and may continue always. And these are
called corporal things.

Enheritance incorporat are aduowsons, villains, ways, commons, courts,
fishings, and such like that are, or may be appendaunt, or appurtenant to
enheritances corporate.

Enter.
Enter, is where a man enters into any lands or tenements in his proper
person, or any other ^y ^is commandment.

Also there be diverse writs of Enter which be in diverse manners, One is a
writ of Enter sur disseisin, and this writie lies where a men is disseised,
he or his heir shall have this writ against the disseisor or any other after
tenant or the Ian^. And if the disseisor alien and die s^ise^ then the writ of
Enter shall be against the heir with the alienee in the Per, that is to say* in
which the tenant has no Enter but by such a one naming the disseisor, which
him has disseised etc.

And if the heir or alienee die seized, or alieneth to another* then the
writ shall be in the Per and Cui, that is to say, into which the tenant has
no entry but by such a one naming the heir or alienee of the disseisor to
whom such a one (naming the disseisor) did let it, which by force disseised
him etc.

And if land be co^^eid over to many, or if the first disseisor be
disseised, then the writ of Enter shall be in the Post, that is to say that
the tenant has no entry but after the disseisin which the first disseisour
made to the demandant or his auncestor. See after Enter en le per.

A writ of Enter in the Per lies where a man is disseised of his freeholde,
and the Disseisour alieneth or dies seized, and his Heir enters, then the
disseisee or his heir shall have the said writ against the Heir of the
Disseisour, or against the alienee of the Disseisour, but living the disseisour
he ma^e have an Assise if he will, and the writ of Enter shall say, in quod
A. non habet ingressum nisi per B. qui illud ei dimisit, qui inde eum unjust
disseisiuit etc. But if the disseisor alien and the alienee dies seized, or
alieneth over to another, or if the disseisor die, and his heir enter, and
that heir alieneth or dies, and his heir enters, then the disseisee or his
heir shall have a writ of Enter sur disseisin in y^ Per and Cui, And the
writ shall say, in quod idem A non habet ingressu^ nisi per B. cui C. illud
ei dimisit, qui inde unjust etc.

And note well, that no writ of Enter in the Per and Cui shall be
maintenable against none, but where he that is tenant be in by purchase or
descent: But if the alienation or descent be put out of the degrees, upon
which no writ may be made in the Per, nor in the Per and Cui, then it shall
be made in the Post, and the writ shall say, in quod A. non habet ingressum
nisi post disseisinam, quam B. inde unjust and sine iuditio fecit praef. N.
vel M. proauo N. cuius haeres ipse est.

Also there are v. things which put the writ of Enter out of the degrees, that
is to say, Entrusion, Succession, disseisin upon disseisin, Judgment, and
Escheat.

1 Entrusion is when the disseisor dies seized, and an estranger abateth.

2 Disseisin upon disseisin, is when the disseisor is disseised by another.

3 Succession, is where the disseisor is a man of religion, and dies, or is
deposed, and his successor enters.

4 Judgment is when one recouereth against the disseisour.

5 Escheat, is when the disseisor dies without heir, or does felony whereby
he is attamted, by which the lord enters as in his Escheat.

In all those cases the disseisie or his heir shall not have a writ of Enter
within the degrees in the Per, but in the Post, for that that in those said
cases they are not in by descent nor by purchase.

Also there is a writ of enter Ad communem lege^, and lies where tenant for
term of life, tenant for term of another life, tenant by y^ courtesy, or
tenant in dower alieneth and dies, then he in the reuersio^ shall have the
foresaid writ against whomsoever is in after in y^ said tenements.

Also a writ of Enter in casu prouiso ^yeth, if tenant in dower alien in fee,
or for term of life, or for another life, living the tenant in dower, he in
the reuersion shall have the writ called a writ of Enter in casu prouiso.

Also a writ of Enter In casu consimili lies, if tenant for term of life, or
tenant by courtesy alien in fee living them, he in the reuersion shall have a
writ called a writ of Enter in casu consimili.

Also a writ of Enter Ad terminum qui preteriit lies, if a man lease land to
another for term of years, and the tenant ho^d over his term, then the
lessor shall have a writ which is called a writ of Enter Ad terminum qui
preteriit.

And also if lands be leased to a man for term of another life, and he for
whose life the lands are leased dies, and the lessee holds over, then the
lessor shall have this writ.

Also a writ of Enter sine assensu capituli lies, where an Abbot, Prior, or
such as has Covent or common seal, alieneth lands or tenements of the right of
his Church, without the assent of the Covent or Chapter and dies, then his
successor shall have this writ.

Also a writ of Enter Causa matrimonii prelocuti lies, wherelandes or
tenements are given to a man upon such condition, that he shall take her to his
wife within a certain time, and he do not espouse her within the said term,
or espouse another woman, or make himself Priest, or enter in Religion, or him
disable, so that he cannot take her according to the said condition, th^n the
donour and his heirs shall have the said writ against him or against
whomsoever is in the said land. And also it behooves that this condition be
made by Indenture, or otherwise this writ does noth lie, and all these and
other writs of entry may be made in the Per, Cui, and post.

Entrusion.
ENtrusion, is a writ and it lies where a tenant for term of life dies
seized of certain lands or tenements, and a stranger enters, he in the
reuersion shall have the said writ against the abator, or against whosoever
that is in after their entrusion.

Also a write of Entrusion shall be maintenable by the successor of an Abbot
against the abator which shall enter in any lands or tenements in the time of
vacation that belongs to the Church by the statute of Marlebridge, the last
Chapter.

Equity.
Equity, is in two sorts differing much the one from the other, and are of
contrary effects, for y^ one does abridge, diminish and take from y^ letter of
the law, The other does enlarge, add and amplify thereunto.

The first is thus defined, Equity is the correction of a law generally made
in that part, wherein it fails, which correction of the general words, is
much used in our law. As if for example when an act of parliament is made that
whosoever does such a thing, shall be a felon, and shall suffer death, yet if a
mad man, or an infant of young years that has no discresion do the same, they
shall be no felons nor suffer death therefore.

Also if a Statute were made that al persons that shall receive or give meat
or drink, or other succor to any y^ shall do such a thing, shall be accessory to
his offense, and shall suffer death if they did know of the fact, yet
notwithstanding one does such an act, and comes to his wife, who knowing
thereof does receive him and gives him meat and drink, she shall not be
accessory nor felon, for in the generalty of the said words of the law, he
that is mad, nor y^ infa^t nor y^ wife, were not included in meaning.

And thus equity does correct the generalite of ye law in those cases, and
the general words are by equity abridged.

The other equity is defined after this sort, Equity is when the words of
the law are effectually directed, and one thing only provided by the words of
the law to the end that all things of ye like kind may be provided by the
same, and so when the words enact one thing they enact all other things that
are of like degree, as the statut which ordeines that in an action of debt
against executors, he that does appear by distress shall answer, does
extend by equity to administrators, for such of them as does appear first by
distress, shall answer by equity of the said act, because they are of like
kind.

So likewise the statute of Gloucester gives the action of wast, and the pain
thereof against him that holds for life or years, and by the equity of the
same, a man shall have an action of wast against him that holds but for one
year or half year, and yet that is without the words of the sta^^^^* for he
that holds but for half a year, for one year, does not hold for years*
but that is the meaning and the words that enact the one, by equity enact the
other.

190 Error.
ERror* i^ a writ and it lies where judgment is given in the Common place or
before the Justice in Assise or Oyer and terminer, or before the Mayor and
Sh^^ifes of L^^^d^^, or in other Court of Re^^rde, against the (...) or upon
undue and wrong proceeding* then by this were the party grieved against whom
the judgment is given shall have his writ ^ and there^pon cause the Record and
Process to be removed before the Justice of the kings be^ch. And if the error be
found, it shall be reuersed: but if an erroneous judgment be given in the kings
bench, then it cannot be (...) but by Parliament* (...) the Statute (...) of
Elizabeth.

Also if a false judgment be given in Court that is not of record, as in
county, hundred or in to ^rt baron, then the party shall have a writ of false
judgment for to make the record to come before Justice of the common place.
Also if error be found in the Eschequer, it shall be redressed by the
Chancellor and Treasorer* is it appears by the statute of Ed. 3. An. 31. c^.
12.

Escape.
Escape, is where (...) that is arrested c^^^eth to (...) before y^ ^e be (...)
by ^word of any Justice or by order of law.

Escape is in two sorts* that is to say, (...) and negligent.

^oluntary escape* is when one does arrest another for felony* or other crime,
and after he in whose custody he is* lets him go where he will* this
letting him go is a voluntary escape.

And if the arrest of him that escaped were for felony, then that shall be felony
in him that did suffer y^ escape, and if for treason, then it shall be treason in
(...) and if for trespass, then trespass, and so in all other.

Negligent escape is when one is arrested, and (...) escapes against the will
of him that did so arrest him, and is not freshly pursued and taken before the
pursuer loses the sight of (...) this shall be said a negligent escape,
notwithstanding that he out of whose possession he escaped do take him after
he lost sight of him* Also if one ^e arrested, and after escape* and is at his
liberty* and he in whose ward he was, take him (...) and bring him to the
prison, yet it ^^ an escape in him.

Also if a felon be arrested by the Constable and brought to the ga^le in the
county* and the gailor will not receive him and the Constable lets him go*
and the gailor also* and so he escapes, this is an escape in the gailor, for
that in such case the gaylor is bound to receive him by the bond of the
Constable without any precept of the Justice of peace. But otherwise it is if a
common person arrest another upon suspicion of felony, there the ga^^er is not
bound to receive him, without a precept of some Justice of peace. There is an
escape also without arrest, as if murder be made in the day, and the murderer
be not taken, then it is an escape, for the which the town where the murder
was don shall be amerced.

Eschete.
ESchete, is where a tenant in fee simple does felony for the which he is
hanged or a^iured the realm, or be outlawed of felony, murder, or petie
treason, or if the: tenant dies without heir general or especial, then the
Lord of whom the tenant held the land, may enter by way of Eschete, or if
any other enter* the Lord shall have against him one writ called a writ of
Eschete, which as I think is derived of the french word Eschien.

193 Escuage.
EScuage, is called in latin Scutagium, that is to say service of the shield,
and he that holds by escuage, holds by knights service, and to that
belonge^th ward, marriage and relief, but that shall be intended of escuage not
certain, when the Escuage runs through England. when it is ordained by all
y^ counsel of England that after the war, every lord shall have a certain
sum of his tenant which was not in the said war. But if the tenant which
holds of any Lord by escuage, be with the king in his wars in Scotland, this
Lord will distraine him for Escuage, it shall be a good plee to say, that he
was with the king in Scotland in his wars and that shall be tried by y^ kings
Marshal.

And note well that a man may not hold by escuage, unless he hold by homage,
for that Escuage of common right draws to him homage, as it was judged in
Term^ H. 21. Edw. 3. cap. 42. folio 52. Auowrie 115. and note well that Escuage
is a certain sum of money and it ought to be levied ^y the Lord of his tenant
after the quantity of his tenure when Escuage runs through all England. And
it is ordained by all the Counsel of England how much every tenant shall give
to his Lord, and that is properly to maintain the wars between. England and
them of Scotland, or of wales, and not between other lands for that y^ those
foresaid lands should be of right belonging to the realm of England. See Lit.
lib. 2. chap. 3.

Esplees.
ESplees, is as it were the seisin or possession of a thing, profit, or
commodity that is to be taken, As of a common the Esplees is the taking of the
grass or common by the mouths of the beasts that common there. Of an aduowson
the taking of gross tithes by the parson presented thereunto. Of wood, the
selling of wood, of an orchard the selling of appels and other fruit growing
there, of a mill, the taking of toll, is the Esplees and of such like. And note
that in a writ of right of land or aduowson or such like the demaundant
ought to allege in his count, that he or his ancestors took the Esplees of
the thing in demand, or otherwise the pleading is not good.

195 Essoine.
ESsoine, is where an actio^ is brought and the plaintiff or defendant may not
well appear at the day in court for one of the v. causes under expressed, the^
he shall be essoined to save his default, note well yt there be v. manner of
essoins, that is to say, Essoine de ouster le mere, and that is the defe^dant
shall have a day by xl. days. The second Essoin is De terra sancta, and upon
this the defendant shall have a day by a year and a day* and these twain
shall be laid in the beginning of the plee. The third Essoin is De male vener,
and that shall be adiorned to a common day a^ the action requires and this is
called the common Essoin, and when and how this Essoin shall be, look the
statutes and the Abridgment of statutes, where it is well declared, And the 4.
Essoine is De malo lecti, and that is only in a writ of right, and thereupon
there shall a writ go out of the Chauncerie, direct to the Shirife, that he
shall send iiij. Knights to the tenant to see the tenant, and if he be sick to
give a day after a year and a day. Also the ^i^^e Essoine is de service le
Roy, and it lies in all actions except in Assise of Nouel disseisin* ^ writ of
Dower, Darrein presentment, and in appeal of Murder, but in this essoyne it
behooves at the day to show his warrant or else it shall torn unto a default,
if it be in a plee real, or else he shall lose xx. shillinges for the journey
or more, by the discretion of the Justice, if it be in a plee personal, as it
appears by the statut o^ Gloucest. cap. 8.

Estoppel.
EStoppel is when one is concluded and forbidden in law to speak against his
own act or decree, yea although it be to say the truth.

And of Estoppels there are a great many, one for example is, when I. S. is
bound in au obligation by the name of T. S. or any other name, and is sued
afterward according to the name in the obligation, that is to say T. S. now he
shall not be received to say, that he is misnamed, but shall be driven to
answer according to the name put in the obligation, that is to say, T. S. for
peradventure the obligee did not know his name, but by the report of the
obligor himself, and in as much as he is y^ same man that was bound, he shall be
estopped and forbidden in law to say contrary to his own deed, for
otherwise he might take advantage of his own wrong, which the law will not
suffer a man to do.

Also if the daughter y^ is an heir to her ^ather will sue liuerie with her
sister y^ is a bastard she shall not afterward be received t^ say that her
sister is a bastard, in so much that if her bastard sister take half the land
with her, there is no remedy* by the law.

Also i^ a man seized of lands in fee simplee will take a lease for years of the
same land of a stranger by deed indented, this is an estoppel during the term
of years, and the lessee is thereby barred to say the truth* for the truth
is, that he that leased the la^d had nothing in it at the time of y^ leas
made, and that the fee simple was in him that did take the lease: But this he
shall not be received to say till after the years are determined, because it
appears that he has an estate for years, and it was his folly to take a
lease of his own lands, and therefore shall thus be punished for his folly.

Estraungers.
EStrau^gers are sometimes taken they y^ are not parties or priuies to y^ ^^^ing
of a sine* or making of ^ deed, sometimes then that be borne beyond the seas.

198 Estraie.
EStraie, is where any beast or cattle is in a^^ Lordshippe* and none knows
the owner thereof, then it shall be seized to the use of the King, or of the
Lord that has such Estray by the Kings grant, or by prescription: And if the
owner come and claim thereto within a year and a day, then he shall have it
again, or else after the year the property thereof shall be to the Lord,
so that the Lord make proclamation thereof according to the Law.

199 Estrepment.
EStrepment, is a writ, and it lies where one is impleaded by a Precipe quod
reddar, for certain land, if the demaundant suppose that the tenant will do
waste hanging the plee, he shall have against him this writ which is a
prohibition, commanding him that he do no waste hanging the plee.

And this lies properly where a man demands lands by Formedon, or writ
of Right, or such writs where he shall not recover damages, for in such writs
where he shall recover damages, he shall have his damages, having regard to
the wast done.

Etate probanda.
ETate probanda, is a writ of office, and it lies for the Heir of the tenant
that held of the King in chief, for to prove that he is of full age,
directed to the Shirife to enquire of his age, and then he shall become tenant
to the king by the same services that his ancestors made to the King: But it
is said that every one that shall pass in this enquest shall be of the age of
xlii. years at least, so that he was of full age when he that sueth the writ was
borne.

Excommengement.
Excommengement, is to say in Latin Excommunicatio, and it is where a man in
Court Christian is excommenged, then he is disabled to sue any action in the
Kings Court, and if he remain excommunicate xl. days, and will not be
justified by his Ordinary, then the Bishop shall send his Letter patent to
the Chauncelour to certify this Excommunication or contempt and thereupon it
shall be commanded to the Shiri^e to take the body of him that is accursed by
a writ called de exco^municato capiendo, ^ill he has made agreement to holy
Church, for the contempt and wrong, and when he is justified and has made
agreement, the^ the Bishop shall send his letters to the King certifiing the
same, and then it shall be commanded to the shirife to deliver him by a writ
called Excommunito deliberando

202 Exchange.
Exchange, is where a man is seized of certain land, and another man is
seized of other land, if they by a deed indented, or without deed, if the
lands be in one county, exchange their lands so that every of them shall have
others lands to him so exchaunged, in fee, fee tail, or for term of life,
that is called an exchange, and is good without livery or seisin.

Also in exchange it behou^th that the estates ^^ them limited by thexcha^ge
be egal for if one have an estate in f^e in his land, and the other has estate
in the other land but for term of life, or in tail, then such exchange is
void, but if the estates be egall, and the lands be not of egall value, yet
the exchange is good. Also an exchange of rent for land is good. Also an
exchange between rent and common is good, and that ought to be by deed. Also
^t behooves always, that this word exchange ^e in the deed, or else nothing
passes by the deed except that he have liuerie and seisin.

Execution.
Execution, is where judgment is given in any action that the plaintiff shall
recover the land, debt or damages* ^^ the case is, and when any writ is
awarded to put him in possession, that is called a writ of execution, and when
he has the p^ssession of the land, or is paid of the debt or damages, or
has the body of the defendaunt awarded to prison* then he has execution and
if the plee be in the County, or Court Baron, or hundred and they defer the
execution of the judgment in ^^^our of the party, or for (...)her cause, then:
the demanda^t shall have a writ of Executione iudicii. Note that in a writ of
debt, a man shall not have recovery of any lands, but of the^ which the
defendant has y^ day of y^ judgment yielded. And of cattels a man shall hau^
execution only of the cattels, which he has day of the execution sued.

^^^ Executor.
Executor, is when a man (...) makes his test^ment and ^^^t will, and therein
names the person that shall execute his testament, the^ h^^ that is so named:
is his executor, and is as much as in the civil law, (here is designatus or
testame^ tarius) as to debts, goods and cattels of his testator, and such an
executor, shall hau^ an action against every debtor of his testator, and if the
executors have assets, eueryone to whom y^ testator was in debt, shall have an
action against the executor, if he have an obligation, or specialtie, but in
every case where the testator might wage his law, (...)tio^ lies against y^
exe(...). Look more thereof before ^^ the ti^^e Administrators*

Exigent.
Exigent, is a writ and it ly^^eth^ where a man s^^^h an action personal, and
the defendant cannot be s^^d, nor has nothing win the county whereby he may:
be attached nor di^^rai(...), their this writ shall go forth to the shirife
to make proclamation at 5. counties every one after another, y^ he appear, or
else that he shall be ^^tlawed: and if ^^ be outlawed, then all his g^^ds and
^^^^els ^e for^ to the King* Also in an i^dictment^ of Felony, the Exigent
shall go forth after the first Capias. And also in a Capias ad computandu^, or
ad satisfacien^^* And in every Capias that goes forth after judgment the
exige^t shall go forth after the first Capias. And also in appeal of death,
but not in appeal of robbery or appeal of maime.

206 Ex part talis.
Ex part talis, Look therefore before in the title, Account.

207 Ex graui querela.
Ex graui querela, Look therefore before in the title Devise.

208 Extinguishment.
Extinguishment, is where any Lord, or any other, has any rent or service
going out of any land and he purchases the same land, so that he has such
estate in the land as he has in the rent, then the rent is extincte, for
that one may not have rent going out of his own land. Also when any rent
shall be extinct, it behooves that the land and the rent be in one han^, and
also that the estate y^ he has be not defeasible: and also y^ he have as
good estate in the land as in the rent, for if he have estate in the land but
for term of l^fe or years, and has fee simple in the rent, then the rent is
no^ extinct, but the rent is in suspense for that time, and then after the
term, the rent is revived. And if there be Lord, mesne, and tenant, and the
Lord purchase the ^enancy, then the mena^tie is extinct, but the mesne shall
have the surplusage of the rent, if there be any, as rent secke. Also if a
man have a hie wai^ appendant and after purchase the land wherein the h^e way
is, then the way is extinct: and so it is of a common appendant.

Extortion.
Extortio^, is a wrong done by an officer, Ordinary, Archdeaco^, Official,
Mayor, Bailife, Shirif, Eschetor, Coroner, vndershirife, gailer or other
Officer, by color of his Office, in taking excessive reward or fee, for
execution of his said Office or otherwise, and is no other thing in deed then
plain robbery, or rather more odious then robbery, for robbery is
apparaunt, and always has with it the countenance of vice, but extortion
being as great a ^see as robbery is, carries (...) it a countenance of
ve(...): By means whereof it is the more hard to be tried, or discerned, and
therefore the more o^ious, and yet some there be that will not stick to stretch
their office, credit and conscience, to purchase money as well by extortion as
otherwise according to the saying of the Poet Virgil, what is that that hunger
sweet of gold does not constrain men mortal to attempt?

F.
210 Failin^ of Record.
FAiling of Record, is when an action is brought against one and the defendant
pleads any matter y^ is of record in another sort, and does auerre to prove
it by Record, And the plaintiff says there is no such Record, whereupon the
defendant has day given him to bring in the record, at which day he fails,
or brought in such a one, as is no barr^ to this action, then h^e is said to
fail of his Record, and thereupon the plaintiff shall have judgment to
recover etc.

Deed.
Deed, is a writing sealed and delivered to prove and testify of the
agreement of y^ party whose deed it is, to the thing contained in the deed,
as a deed of feoffement is a proof of the liuerie of seisin, for the land
passes by the liuerie of seisin, but when the deed and the delivery are
joined together that is a proof of the liuerie, and that the feoffour is
contented, that the feoffee shall have the land. And note that all deeds are
either indented, whereof there be two, three, or more parts, as the case
requires, of which the feoffour, grantour, or lessour has on, the feoffee,
grauntee, or lessee another. And peradventure some other body also another
etc. or else they are poll Deeds or single, and but one, which the feoffee,
grauntee, or ^es^e^ has etc. And ^u^rie Deed consists* of three principal
points, (and if these three be not joined together, it is no perfect deed to
bind the parties) namely, writing, sealing, and delivery.

The first point ts writing, whereby is showed the parties names to the Deed,
their dwelling places, their degrees, the thing granted, upon what
considerations, the estate limited, the time when it was granted, and whether
simply, or upon condition with other such like circumstances. But whether the
par^yes unto the Deed, writ in the end their own names, or set to their
marks (as it is commonly used) it makes no matter at all (as I think) for
that it is not meant where it is said, that every deed ought to have writing.

The second point is sealing, which is a further testimony o^ their consents to
that contained in the deed^, as it appears by these words. In witness
whereof etc. or to such effect always put in the later end of deeds, without
which words the deed ^^ insufficient* And because we are about sealing and
signing of deeds it shall not be^ much amiss here to show you, for
antiquities sake, the manner of signing and subscribing of ^e^des, in our
ancestors the Saxons times, a fashion different from that we use in these our
de(...)es, in this that they to their deeds subcribed their names (commonly
adding the sign of the Cross,) and ^n the end did set down a great number of
witnesses, not using at that time any kind of Seal. And we ^t this day for
more surety, both subscrib^ our names (although that b^e not very necessary^,
^s I have aforesaid) and put to our Seals, and use the help of testimony
bes^des: That former fashion continued throughout* until the time of the
Conquest by the Normans* whose manners by little and little at the length
p^^ua^led amongst us, for the first sealed ch^rter in England is thought to b^e
shall of King Edward the Confessor to the Abbey of West. who being brought up
in Norman^y, brought into this Realm that and some other of their ^uyses with
him* And after the coming of William the conqueror, the Normans l^king their
own country customs (as naturally all nation^ do) rejected the manner that
they found here, and retained their own, as Ingulp. the Abbot of Croiland, who
came in with the conquest witnesses saying: The Normans do change the making
of writings which were wont to be firmed in England with crosses of gold and
other holy signs, into the printing war, and they re^ect also the manner of
the English writing. Howd^^t this was not done all at once, but it increased
and came forward by certain steps and degrees, so that first and for a season
the king only, or a few other of the Nobility besides him used to seal.
Then the Noble men for the most^ part, and none other, which thing a man may
see in the History of Battle Abbey, where Richard Lucy chief Justice of
England, in the time of King Henrye the second, is reported to have blamed a
mean subject, for that he used a priua^e Seal, when as that pertayned (as
he said) to the king and Nobilit^e only.

At which time also (as I. Rosse notes it) they used to ingraue in their
seals, their own pictures and counterfaites, covered with a long coat over
their Armors. But of^er this the Gentlemen of the better sort took up the
fashion, and because they were not all warriors, they made Seals engraven with
their several coats or shields of arms, for difference sake, as the same
aucthour reports. At the length about the time of king Edward the third,
Seals became very common, so that not only such as bore arms used to seal*
but other men also fashioned to themselves signets of their own devise, some
taking the letters of their own names, some flowers, some knots and florishes,
some birds or beasts, and some other things, as we now yet daily behold in
use.

Some other manner of sealing besides these have bin heard of among us, as
namely that of king Edward the third, by which he gave to Norman the hunter:
The hop and the hop town, with all the bounds vpside down, and in witness
that it was sooth, he bit the wax with his fore tooth.

The like to this was showed to me by one of my friends in a loose paper, but
not very aunciently written, and therefore he willed me to esteem of it as
I thought good: It was as follows.

I willyam King* give to thee Powlen Royden, my hop and my hoplandes, with all
the bounds up and down* from heaven to earth, from earth to hell, for thee
and thine to dwell, from ^u^ and mine, to thee and thine, for a Bow and a
broad arrow, when I come to hunt upon yarrow. In witness that this is sooth, I
bite this wax with my tooth, in the presence of Magg, Maude, and Margerie, and
my third son Henry.

Also that of Alberic de Veer, containing the donation of Hatfie^d, to the
which he affixed a short black hafted knife, like unto an old half^peny
whittle, in steed of a seal, with diverse such like.

But some peradventure will think that these were received in common use and
custom, and that they were not rather the deuyfes and pleasures of a few
singular persons, such as are no less deceived, then they that deem eu^ry
charter and writing that has no seal ann^xed, to be as ancient as the
Conquest, whereas in deed sealing was not commonly used till the time of King
Edw. the third, as has ^m already said.

The third point is delivery, which although ^t be set la^t, is not the least,
for after that a deed is written and sealed, i^ i^ be not delivered, all the
rest is to no purpose.

And this delivery ought to be done* by the party himself, or his sufficient
warrant, and so it shall bind him, whosoever wrote or sealed the same, and by
this ^aste act the deed is made perfect, according to the intent and effect
thereof, and therefore in deeds the delivery is to be proved etc.

So thus you see that writing and sealing without de^iuerie is nothing to
purpose. That sealing and delivery where there is no writing works nothing,
Nor writing and delivery without sealing also make no deed. And therefore
they all ought jointly to concur to make ^ per^ect deed, as is before said.

Farm or Ferme.
Farm or Ferme is specially the chief m^suage in a Village or Town whereto
belongs great demeanes of all sorts, and has been used to be let for term
of life, years or at will.

Also the rent that is reserved upon such a lease or the like, is called farm
or ferme.

And farmor or fermor, is he that occupies the farm or ferme, or is lessee
thereof.

Also generally every lessee, for life, years, or at will, although it be of
never so small a cottage or house, is called farmor or fermor.

And note, that they are called farms, or fermes, of the Saxon word Feormian,
which signifies to feed, or yield* victual. For in the ancient time, their
reseruatio^s were as well (or for the more part) in victuals, as money, until
at the last, and that chiefly in the time of King Henry the first (by
agreement) the res^ruation of victuals, was turned into ready money and so
hitherto has continued amongst most men.

213 Faux imprisonment.
FAux imprisonment, is a writ, and it lies where a man is arrested and
restr^ined from his liberty by an other against the order of the law, then he
shall have against him this writ whereby he shall recover damages. Look more
thereof before in the title arrest.

Faux judgment look therefore before in y^ title error.

214 Fee farm.
FEe farm, is when a tenant holds of his lord in fee simple, paying to him
the value of half, or of the third or of the iii. part, or of other part of
the land, by the year. And he that holds by fee ferme, ought not to pay
relief or do any other thing then is contained in the feoffment but fealty,
for that belongs to all kind of tenures.

215 Fee simple.
FEe simple, is when any person holds lands or rent or other thing
inheri^able to him and to his heirs for evermore and these words his heirs
make the estate of inheritance, for if land be given to a man for ever yet he
has but an estate for term of life Also if tenant in fee simple die, his
first son shall be his heir, but if he have no son, then al his daughters,
that he has shall be his heirs, and every one shall have her part, by
partition, but if he have no son nor daughter then his next cousin collateral
of the whole blood shall be his heir.

Feoffment.
FEoffement is where a man gives lands, houses, or other corporal things
which be hered^table to an other in fee simple, and thereof delivers livery
and seisin and possession of the la^d, that is a feoffment. Also if one make a
g^^t in the tail, or a leas for term of life* or of an other man's li^e, it
behooves also to give l^uery and seisin, or else nothing shall pass by the
grant.

Fe^^or and Feffee.
FE^for is he that (...)effeth or makes a feof^ment to another of lands, or
tenements in fee simple. And feoffee is he, who is infef^ed, or to whom the
feoffment i^ so made.

218 Fealty.
FEalty, is a service called in latin fidelitas, and shall be done in such
manner, that is to say, the tenant shall hold his right hand upon a book, and
shall say to his lord. I shall be to you faithful and true, I shall b^are to you
faith for the lands and teneme^ts, which I claim to hold of you, and truly
shall ^o to you the customs and services that I ought to do to you at the
terms assigned, so help me God. And shall kiss the book, but he shall not
kneel as in doing homage* And thereof look after in the title homage. Also
fe^l^ie is incident to al manner tenures.

219 Felony.
FElony, is a general term, which comprehends diverse heinous offenses, for
which the off^ndour ought to suffer death, and loose their lands: And it
seems y^ they are called f^lonies, of the Latin word Fell, which is in
English gall, infre^ch Fiel: or of the ancient English word fell or fierce,
or because that they are intended to be done with a cruel, bitter, fell,
fierce or mischievous mind. And some of them are, when a man without any color
of law, steals the goods of an other amounting to the value of xij. pence or
more, that is Larceny: But if any approaches the person of another in the high
way, and robs him of his goods, although it be to the value but of one
penie, it is felony, and that is called robbery, and therefore he shall be
hanged.

Fireboote.
FIreboote, is necessary wood to burn, which by the common law, lessee for
years, or for life, may take in his ground, although it be not expressed in
his lease: and although it be a lease by word only without writing: But if he
take more then is needful, he shall be punished in wast.

Fledwite.
FLedwite, that is, to be quite from amercements when an outlawed fugitive
comes to the kings peace of his own will, or being licenced.

222 Flemeswite.
FLemeswite, that is, that you may have the cattle, or amerceme^ts of your man
or fugitive.

223 Fletwit.
FLetwit (or Flitwit) that is to be quite from contention and conuicts, and
that you may have plee thereof in your Court and the amerciame^ts, for (flit)
in English is Tensone in French.

224 Forstall.
FOrstall, that is to be quite of amercementes and cattels arrested within
your land, and the amercements thereof coming.

225 Forstallers.
FOrstaller is he that buyeth Corn, Cattle, or other merchandise whatsoever
is salable, by the way as it comes to markets, faires, or such like places
to be sold to the intent that he may sell the same again at a more high and
dear price in prejudice and hurt of the common wealth and people etc.

The pain for such as are conuicte is for the first time imprisonment for two
Months, and loss of the value of the thing sold.

The second time imprisonment by the space of half a year, and shall lose the
double value of the goods etc. The iij. time imprisonment during the Kings
pleasure, and judgment of the pillorie, and shall forfait all his goods. See
the statute 5. Edw. 6. cap. 14.

Franches Royal.
FRanches royal, is where the Queen graunts to one and his heirs, that they
shall be quite of toll, or such like.

Free alms.
FRee alms, is where in ancient times lands were given to an Abbot and his
Covent, or to a Deane and the Chapter, and to their successors, in pure and
perpetual alms, without expressing any service certain, this is
frankealmoigne, and such are bound before God to make Orasons and prayers for
the donour and his heirs, and for that they do no fealty, and if such that
have lands in frankealmoigne do make no prayer nor divine service for the
souls of the donors, they shall not be compelled by the donours to do it, but
for that they may complain to the Ordinary, praying him that such negligence
be no more after, and the Ordinary of right ought to do it.

But if an Abbot etc. holds lands of his Lord for certain divine service
to be done, as to sing every Friday a Mass, or do some other thing, if such
divine service be not done, the Lord may distrayne, and in such case the Abbot
ought to do fealty to the Lord, and therefore it is not said tenure in frank
almoigne, but tenure by divine service, for none can hold by frank almoigne,
if any certain service be expressed.

228 Frank fee.
TO hold in Frank fee, is to hold in fee simple lands pleadable at the
common law, not in ancient demesne.

Formedone.
FOrmedone, is a writ and it lies where the tenant in the tail enfeffeth a
stranger or is disseised, and dies, the heir shall have a writ of Formdon to
recover the land: but there be three manner of Formedones, One is in the
discender, and that is in the case before said. Also if one give lands in the
tail, and for default of issue the remainder to an other in the tail, and
that for default of such issue the land shall reuert to the donour, if the
first tenant in tail die without issue he in the remainder shall hau^ a
formdone in the remainder, but if the ten^nt in the tail die without issue,
and he in the remainder also die without issue, then the donour or his heirs
shall have a Formedone in the reuerter.

Fieri facias.
FIeri facias, is a writ judicial, and it lies where a man recouereth debte or
damages in the Kings Court, then he shall have this writ to the shirife,
commanding him that he leuy the debt and damages of the goods of him that has
lost, and it lies always within a year and a day, and after the year he must
sue a scire facias, and if he be warned, and does not come at the day etc. or
if he come, and can say nothing, then he which recouereth shall have a writ of
fieri facias directed to the Sheriff, that he make him have execution of
judgment.

But if a man recover against a woman and she take a husband within the year
and the day, then he that shall recover must have a scire facias against the
husband.

So it is if an Abbot or Prior recover and dies his successor within the year
shall have scire facias. See thereof more in the title scire facias, and title
Execution.

231 Fine.
FIne sometimes is taken for a sum of money which one is to pay to the King
for any contempt or offense done by him: which fine every one that commits
any trespass, or that he is co^uicted, that he falsely denies his own deed, or
d^d any thing in contempt of law, shall pay to the king: which is called fine
to the King. Sometime a Fine is taken for a final agreement which is had between
any persons concerning any land or re^t, or other thing whereof any suit or
writ is between the^ ha^ging in any court which may be diverse ways. One is
when one party reknowledgeth y^ to be the right of the other, as that y^ he
has of the gu^ft of him y^ made that recognisance, which always supposes a
feoffeme^t going before, and is called a fine executed. Or if he acknowledges
that to be the right of another omitting these words (come ceo que il eit de
so^ done) which being a fine upon acknowledging of right only, if it be
levied to him which has the freehold of y^ land, is a Fine upon a release. And
if he that acknowledged it, is seized, and he to whom it is levied has not
the freehold of the land, the^ it is called a fine executory, which he to whom
the land is acknowledged may execute by Enter or Scire fac.

And sometime such a fine sur conus^s de droit only is to make a surre^der:
Therein is rehearsed that the reconusor has an estate for life, and the other a
reuersion.

And sometime it is taken to pass a reuersion, where a particular estate is
recited to be in another, and that the reconusor will that the other shall have
y^ reuersion, or that y^ land shall remain to another, after the particular
estate spent.

And sometime he to who^ y^ right is acknowledged, as that that he has of the
gift of the reconusor, shall yield the land, or a rent out thereof to y^
reconusor. And sometime for the whole fee: Sometime for the particular estate
with remainder or remainders over: and sometime with reseruatio^ of rents with
distress and grant thereof over by the said fine.

And it is called a fine because thereby the suite is ended and if it be
recorded with proclamation it barreth strangers.

Free marriage.
FRee marriage, is when a man seized of lands in fee simple, gives it to an
other man, and to his wife (who is the daughter, Sister or otherwise of kin
to the donour) in free marriage, by virtue of which words they have an estate in
special tail, and shall hold the land of the donour quite of al manner of
services until the fourth degree be past accompting themselves in the first
degree, except fealty, which they shall do because it is incident to all
tenures saving free alms. And such gift may be made as well after marriage
solemnized as before. And a man may give lands to his Son in free marriage,
as well as to his Daughter by the opin^o^ of Master Fitzherbert in his writ of
Champerty H.

But it appears otherwise in Master Littl. and in Mast. Brook titulo
Fra^kmarriage Placito decimo. And so it is holden clear in Graies Inn in Le^t,
An. 1576. 18. Eliz. by the worshipful Master Rhodes, then reader there.

233 Freehold.
FReeholde, is an Estate that a man has in lands or tenements, or profit to
be taken in fee simple, tail, for term of his own life, or for term of
another life in dower or by the courtesy of England. And under that, there is
^o freeholde, for he that has estate for years or holds at will has no
freeholde, but they are called chattels.

And of Freeholds there are two sorts, that is to say, freeholde indeed, and
freehold in law.

Freeholde in deed, is when a man has entered into lands or tenementes, and is
seized thereof reallie, actuallie, and in deed: As if the father seized of
lands or tenements in fee simple dies, and his son enters into the same,
as heir to his father, then he has a freeholde in deed by his entry.

Freehold in Law, is when lands or tenemetnes are descended to a man, and he
may enter into them when he will, but has not yet made his entry indeed, as
in the case aforesaid, if the father being seized of lands in fee simple die
seized, and they descend to his son, but the son has not yet entered into
them indeed, now before his entry he has a freehold in law.

Freshsuit.
FReshsuit, is when a man is robbed, and the party so robbed, follows the
felon immediately, and takes him with the manner, or otherwise, and then
brings an appeal against him, and does convince him of the felony by
verdict, which thing being inquired of for the Queen and found, the party
robbed shall have restitution of his goods again.

Also it may be said, that the party made freshsuite, although he take not
the thief presently, but that it be half a year, or a year after the
robbery done, before he be taken, if so be that the party robbed do what
lies in him, by diligent inquiry and search to take him, yea although he be
taken by some other body, yet this shall be said fresh suit.

And so fresh suit is when the Lord comes to distraine for rent or service,
^ the owner of the beasts does make rescous, and drineth them into others
ground that is not holden of the lord, and the Lord follows presently and
takes them, this is called fresh suit. And so in other like cases.

G.
235 Gager de deliverance.
GAger de deliverance, is where one sueth a repleuine of goods taken, but he
has not the delivery of the goods, and the other auoweth, and the plaintiff
shows that the defendant is yet possessed of the goods etc. and prays that
the defendant may gage the deliverance, then he shall put in suertie or pledges
for the deliverance, and a writ shall go forth to the Shirife for to redeliuer
the goods etc. But if a man claim property, he shall not gage deliverance.

Also if he say that the beasts be dead in ye pound, he shall not gage etc.

Also a man shall never gage the deliverance before that they be at issue, or
demurrer in the law, as it is said.

Garrantie of Charters.
GArrantie of charters, is a writ, and it lies where any deed is made yt
co^prehe^deth a clause of warranntie, yt is to say, dedi or co^cessi, or this
word warrantizabo, and if ye tenant be impleaded by a stranger, if it be in
assise or such action where he may not vouch to warrantie, then he shall have
this writ against his feffor or his heir, and if ye la^d be recovered against
him* he shall recover as much land in value against him that made the
warrantie. But this writ ought to be sued hanging ye first writ against him, or
else he has lost his advantage.

Also upon a warra^tie in the law, as upon homage auncestrel, or upon rent
reserved upon a lease for term of life, or a gift in the tail, a man shall
have a writ of warrantie of charters, but not upon eschange.

237 Garrantie.
GArrantie, is in two manners, that is to say, garrantie lineall and garrantie
collateral.

Garrantie lineal is where a man seized in fee, makes a feffement by his deed
to another, and byndeth him and his heirs to warrantie, and has issue a son
and dies, and the warrantie discendeth to his son, that is lineall
warrantie, for y^ that if no deed with warrantie had bin made, then the right
of the lands should have descended to ye son, and he shall convey the descent
from the father to the son. But if the tenant in ye tail discontinue the
tail, and has issue and dies, and the uncle of the issue releaseth to the
discontinuee with warrantie etc. and dies without issue, that is a collateral
warrantie to the issue in the tail, for that, that the warrantie discendeth
upon the issue, the which may not convey him to the tail by mean of his
uncle. And in every case where a man demands lands in fee tail by writ of
Formedon, if any of the issue in the tail which has possession, or which has
not possession makes a warrantie, and he that sueth the writ of Formedon may
by possibility by matter that may be in that deed convey to him title by force
of the gift by him that made the warrantie etc. that is then a lineall
warrantie, and by such a lineall warrantie, the issue in the tail shall not be
barred, except that he have assets to him descended: But if he may not by no
possibility that may be convey to him title by force of ye gift by him that
made the warrantie, then that is a collateral warrantie, and by such a
collateral warrantie, the issue in the tail shall be barred without any assets.
And the cause that such a collateral warrantie is a bar to the issu in the
tail, is for that, that al warranties before the statute of Gloucester, which
descended to them which he heirs to them yt made the warranties were bars to
the same heirs to demand any lands, except the warranties that began by
disseisin, and for that, that the said statute has ordained that the warrantie
of the father shall be no bar to his son for the lands which come of the
heritage of the mother, nor the warrantie of the mother shall be no bar to the
son for the lands which come of the heritage of the father, and the statute
has not made nor ordained remedy against the warrantie that is collateral,
to the issue in the tail, and therefore the warrantie that is collateral to
the issue in the tail, is yet in his force, and shall be a bar to the issue in
the tail, as it was before the statute. Also it behooves yt all warra^ties
whereby any heir shall be barred, that the warrantie descend by ye course of ye
common law, to him which is heir to him that made the warrantie, or else it
shall be no bar, for if the tenant in the tail, of lands in borow English,
where the youngest son shall inheririte by the custom discontinueth y^ tail,
and has issue ii. sons, and y^ uncle releaseth to y^ disco^tinuee with
warrantie and dies, and the younger son brings a Formdon, yet he shall not
be barred by such warra^ty causa qua supra. Also if any man make any deed with
warrantie whereby his heir should be barred, and after he that made the
warrantie be attaint of felony, then his heir shall not be barred by such
warranty, for y^ that such warrantie might not descend upon him, for y^ that
the blood is corrupt. Also if the son purchase lands, and after let the lands
to his father for term of years, and y^ father by his deed enfeffeth a
stranger, and byndeth him and his heirs to warrantie, and the father dies,
whereby the warra^ty descends to ye son, yet this warranty shall not bar
the son, but ye son may well enter notwithstanding his warranty, for that
that this warranty began by disseisin when the father made the feoffeme^t which
was a disseisin to the son, and as it is said of the father, so it may be
said of every other ancestour. And the same law is, if the auncestour be
tenant by Elegit, or by statute merchant, and make a feoffement with
warrantie, such warranties shall be no bars, because they begin by disseisin.

238 Garrantie.
GArrantie, is when one is bound to another which has land, to warrant ye
land to him, which may begin two waies*s* by deed of law, As if one and his
ancestors has held land of another and his ancestors time out of mind by
homage, which is called Homage Auncestrel: Or by deed of y^ party which
grants by deed or fine to the tenant of the land to warrant it to him: upon
which warrantie if the tenant be impleaded by him which ought to warrant, or
his heirs, the tenant shall bar the demandant by pleading of the warrantie
against him, which is called Rebutter: Or if he be impleaded by another in an
actio^, wherein he may vouch* he shall *vouch him which warranted, or his
heirs, and if the plaintiff recover, the tenant shall recover in value against
ye vouchee.

Guard.
Ward* is when an infant whose auncestor held by knights service, is in the
ward or keeping of the Lord, of whom those lands were holden: And if the
tenant hold of diverse Lords diverse lands, the Lord of whom the land is
holden by prioritie, that is to say, by the more elder tenure, shall have the
wardship of the infant: but if one tenure be as old as the other, then he
that first happeth to have the ward of the body shall keep it: But in that
case every Lord shall have the ward of the land that is holden of him. But if
the tenant hold any land of the Q. in chief, then she by her Prerogative shall
have ye ward of the body, and of all ye land that is holden of her, and of
every other Lord.

Also there be diverse writs of ward, one is a writ of right of ward, and
that lies where the tenant dies, his heir within age, and a stranger enters
into the land, and happens to have the ward of the body of the infant.

A writ of eiectment of ward lies where a man is put out of the ward of the
land without the body of the infant.

A writ of rauishment of ward lies where the body is taken from him only and
not the land.

140 Wardeine.
WArdeine, or gardeine most properly is he that has the wardship or keeping
of an heir, and of his la^d holden by knights service, or of one of them to
his own use, during the nona^^ of the heir, and within that time has the
b^stowing of the body of the heir, in marriage at his pleasure, without
disparagement.

And of wardens there be two sorts, namely gardeine in right, and gardeine in
deed.

Gardeine in right is he that by reason of his seigniory is seized of the
wardship or keeping of the land, and of the heir, during the nonage of the
heir.

Gardein in deed, is where the lord after his seisin, as aforesaid, grants
by deed or without deed, the wardship of the land, or of the heir, or of
both to an other, by force of which grant the grauntee is in possession, then
is the grauntee called gardeine in deed.

And this gardein in deed may grant the heir to an other also, but that other
is not properly called gardeine in deed for that is the grantee of the Garden
in right only, but the garden in socage has the profit only to the use of the
heir, until he accomplish the age of xiiii. years, and must yield therefore
an account to the heir. See more hereof Lit. lib. 2. cap. 4. and 5. and Stamf.
upon the statute of Prerogative, cap. 1. 2. and 6.

241 Garnishment.
GArnishment is, if an action of detinue of charters be brought against one,
and the defendant says, that the charters were delivered to him by the
plaintiff and by another upon certain conditions and prays that the other
may be warned to plede with y^ plaintiff if the conditions b^e performed or no,
and thereupon a writ of Scire facias shall go forth against him, and that is
called Garnishment, and the other when he comes shall plede with the
plaintiff, and that is called enterpleder.

242 Gauelet.
GAuelet, is a special and ancient kind of Cessauit used in Kent where the
custom of Gauelkind continues: whereby the tenant shall forfaite his lands
and tenements, to the Lord of whom they are holden if he withdraw from ^^s Lord
his due rents and services, after this manner as follows.

If any tenant in Gauelkind, withhold his rent and his services of the
tenement which he holds of his Lord, let the Lord seek by the award of
his Court from three weeks to three weeks, to find some distres upon the
tenements until the iiij. Court, always with witnesses. And if within that
tune, he can find no distres in that tenement* whereby he may have Justice of
his tenant, Then at the iiij. Court let it be awarded, that he shall take that
tenement into his hand, in the name of a distress, as if it were an ox or a
cow, and let him keep it a year and a day in his hand without manuringe
it: within which term if the tenant come and pay his arrerages, and make
reasonable ameno^s for the withholding, then let him have an^ enjoy his
tenement as his ancestors, and he before held it: and if he do not come
before the year and the day past, then let the Lord go to the next County
Court with his witnesses of his own Court, and pronounce there this process
to have further witnesses, and by the awa^de of his Court, (after the County
Court holden) he shall enter and manure in those lands and tenements as in his
own. And if the tenant come afterward, and will rehaue his tenements, and
hold them as he did before, let him make agreement with the Lord, according as
it is aunciently said.

Has he not since any thing given, nor has he not since any thing paid:
Then let him pay v. li. for his were ^r before he become tenant or holder
again. See hereof 10. H. 3. Fitz Cessauit ^0. and statute 10. E. 2. of Gauelet
in London, In the Collection of statutes London 2. matter much tending to this
purpose, that by this word Gauelet the Lord shall have the land for the
ceasing of the tenant. And see W. 2. cap. 21. which gives Cessauit.

There be some copies that have the first Verse thus written.

Nisith yield, and nisith gelde.

And others thus.

Nighesith yield, and nighesith geld.

But these differ not in signification, other copies have it after this sort.

Nigondsith seld, and nigondsith geld.

That is to say, let him ix. times pay, and ix. times repay.

Gauelkinde.
GAuelkinde is a custom annexed, and going with lands in Kent called
Gauelkinde lands holden by ancient Socage tenure. And is thought by the
skillful in Antiquities, to be called Gauelkinde of Give al kin, that is to
say, to all the kindred in one line according as it is used among the Germa^s,
from whom we Englishmen, and chiefly of Kent come. Or else it is called
Gauelkinde of Give all kind, that is to say, to all y^ male children, for kind
in Dutch signifies a male child. And diverse other like conjectures are made
by the^ of the name (Gauelkind) which I omit of purpose for shortness sake.

The most usual customs of them are, That the land is diuidable between the
heirs males, and that the heir at the age of fifteen years may give and
sell his land, and shall inherit although his father be attainted and hanged
for felony, and his wife shall be endowed of half the land, whereof her husband
died seysed, and the husband shall be tenant by the courtesy of y^ half although
he have no issue by his wife, but the estate of the husband and wife cease by
their second marriage. And diverse other customs are used in Kent of lands in
Gauelkind, for which see y^ Perambulation of Kent, made by M. Lambert. For
which cause the residue I will omit as unnecessary for this book, and
entreated of largely in the said Perambulation.

Gelde.
GElde. y^ is to be quite of servile customs which were wont to be given, and
are yet given, as hornegeld and such like,

Graund Cape.
GRaund Cape, look therefore after in y^ title Petit Cape.

Graund Seriantie.
GRaunde Seriantie is, where a man holds of the king certain land by the
service of carrying his banner or lance, or to lead his host, or to be his
caruer, or butler at his Coronation, and that is most honorable service and
most worthy that a tenant may do, and for that it is called graund serianty.
But petit seriantie is when one holds of the King, paying to him yearly a
bow, a sword, a spear, and such like, and that is but Socage in effect, but
a man cannot hold in grand Serieantie or by petit serieantie but of the King.
Also if a tenant by grand serieantie dies his heir being of full age the
heir shall pay to the King for relief the value of the lands over the charges
that he paieth to the king by grand Serieantie: but he that holds by Escuage
shall pay for his relief but C. s.

Also those that be in the Marches of Scotland, that holds of the king by
Cornage, that is to blow an horn when the Scotts enter into England, are
tenants in grand Serieantie.

Also where a man holds of the King for to find a man in his wars within
the Realm, that is called graund Serieauntie, for that, that it is done by a
Man's badic: And if the tenant cannot find a man to do it, then he is bound
to do it him self. And he that holds by graunde Serieauntie holds by
Knights service, and the King shall have, ward, marriage and relief, but not
of them that holds by petit serieantie, but the king shall not have of them
that hold by graund serieantie escuage, except that they hold by escuage. So
they that hold by graund Serieantie or Escuage hold by Knights service. But one
may hold by graund Serieantie and not by escuage, and by Escuage and not by
graund Serieantie: And the Knights service always draws to him ward,
marriage and relief.

Grithbrech.
GRithbrech, that is the kings peace broken, because (Grith) in English is pax
in Latin.

H
Habere facias seisinam.
HAbere facias seisinam, is a writ judicial, and it lies where one has
recovered certain lands in the Kings court, then he shall have that writ
directed to the Shirife, commanding him to give him seisin of that land, and
it shall not be returnable.

249 Hangvvit.
HAngvvit, that is to be quite of a thief or felon hanged without judgment,
or escaped out of your custody.

250 Hariot.
HAriot, is in two sorts, the one Hariot custom, the other Hariot service.

Hariot service (some say) is always expressed in a man's grant or deed that
he holds by such service to pay Hariot at the time of his death, and this
hariot is payable after the death of the tenant in fee simple.

Hariot custom, is where Hariots have been paid time out of mind by custom.
And this may be after the death of tenant for life etc. but to speak thereof
generally.

Hariot is the best beast (whether it be Horse, Ox or Cow) that the tenant
had at y^ time of his death. And the Lord may either seize, or take a
distress for it, whether it be Hariot service, or Hariot custom, to the
Lords use of whom the tenant held by his Bailife or other officer belonging
to his manor. But of right, the Lord nor his officer should not take Hariot
before it be presented at the next court holden after the tenant is dead, and
that such a beast is due to the Lord for his hariot.

Haybote or hedgebote.
HAybote or hedgbote, is necessary stuff to make and amend hedges, which the
lessee for years, or for life of common right may take upon the ground, to
him leased, although it be not expressed in his lease, and although it be a
lease by words without writing.

Haybote also may be taken for necessary stuff to make rakes, forkes, and such
like instruments wherewith men use in summer to tedde and make hay. And so a
Lessee for years took it, and it was allowed him by his Lessour, the rather
as I suppose for that such instruments are commonly made of slender under
wood, which by the common law the lssee for years may cut and take as is
aforesaid.

252 Hidage.
Hidage, that is to be quit, if the king shall tax all the land by hides.

Note that a hide of land is a whole ploughlande. And this kind of tax^ng by
hides was much used in old time, as well for provision of Armor, as paymentes
of Money, and that chiefly in king Etheldreds days (a king in this Country
before the Conquest) who in the year of Christ 1006. when as the Danes landed
at Sandwich in Kent, taxed al his land by hides thus, That every three hundred
and ten hides of land, should find one ship furnished, and every eight hides
should find one Jack and one sallet, for the defense of the Realm.

253 Hotchpot.
HOtchpot, is a meddling, ^or mixing together, and a partition of Lands given
in frankmarriage, with other lands in fee simple descended, As for example, a
man seized of 30. acres of land in fee simple has issue 2. daughters, and
gives with one of his daughters to a man that marries her ten acres of the
same land in frankemariage, and dies seized of the other twenty acres: Now
if she that is thus married will have any part of the twenty acres whereof
her father died seized: She must put her lands given in frankmarriage in
Hotchpot, that is to say, she must refuse to take the sole profits of the
land given in frankemarriage, and suffer the land to be commixt and mingled
together with the other land whereof her Father died seized, so that an equal
division may be made of the whole between her and her sister: and thus for
her ten acres she shall have fifteen, else her Sister will have the twenty
acres of which their father died seized.

254 Homage.
HOmage, is a service which shall be made in such manner, that is to say, the
tenant in fee simple or fee tail that holds by homage shall kne^le upon
both his knees vngirded, and the Lord shall sit and shall hold the hands of
his tenant between his hands, and the tenant shall say. I become your man
from this day forward of life and member and of earthly honor, and to you
shall be faithful and true, and shall bear to you faith for the lands that I
claim to hold of you, saving that faith that I owe to our Lord the king, and
then the Lord so sitting shall kiss him.

But how fealty shall be done look before in fealty.

And the steward of the Lord may take fealty but not homage.

255 Homage auncestrel.
HOmage auncestrell, is where a man and his ancestors of time out of mind, did
hold their land of their lord by homage. And if such Lord has received homage,
he is bound to acquit the tenant against al other Lords above him of every
manner service. And if the tenant has done homage to his Lord, and be
impleded and voucheth the Lord to warrantie, the Lord is bound to warrant him,
and if the tenant loose, he shall recover in value against the Lord so much of
the lands as he had at y^ time of y^ voucher or any time after. Also if a man
that holds his land by homage auncestrell alien the land in fee, then the
alienee shall do homage to his Lord, but he shall not hold by homage
auncestrel, for that the continuance of the tenauncie in the blood of the first
tenant is discontinued.

Homesoken.
HOmesoken, (or hamesoken) that is to be quit of amerciaments for entering into
houses violently and without license, and contrary to the peace of the King.
And that you hold plea of such trespass done in your Court and in your land.

257 Homicide or Manslaughter.
HOmicide or manslaughter, is the killing of a man feloniously without malice
forethought. It is also defined thus, Homicide is the killing of a man by a
man, and if such killing be done by a dog, ox, or other thing, it is not
properly called homicide: for it is called homicide of a man, and to kill as
the killing of a man.

258 Hornegelde.
HOrnegelde, that is to be quit of a certain custom exacted by tallage
through all the land, as of whatsoever horn beast.

259 Housebote.
HOusebote, is necessary timber, that the lessee for years, or for life, of
common right may take upon the ground, to repa^re the houses upon y^ same
ground to him leased, although it be not expressed in the lease, and although
it be a lease by words without deed. But if he take more the^ is needful, he
may be punished by ^n action of waste.

Hundred.
HVndredes, were devised by Alfred the king, after that he had divided the
whole realm into certain parts or Sections, which of the Saxon word Scynan
signifying to cuite, he termed Shires, or (as we yet speak) Shares, and
Portions. These Shires he also divided into smaller parts, whereof some were
called Laths of the word Ielapian, which is to assemble together, others
Tythings, so named, because there were in each of them to the number of ten
persons, whereof each one was Suertie and pledge for others good ob^aring:
others hundreds, because they contained jurisdiction over an hundred men or
pledges dwelling peradventure in two or three, or more Parishes, Boroughs, or
Towns, lying and adjoining nevertheless somewhat near together, in which he
appointed administration of Justice to be exercised severally among them of
the same hundred, and not that one should run out disorderly into an others
hundred, lath, or tithing, wherein he dwells not. These hundredes continue
to this day in force, although not altogether to the same purpose, whereunto
at the first they were appointed, yet still very needful both in time of
peace for good order of government diverse wa^es and also in war for
certeintie of leuying of men: as else for the more ready collections of
paymentes granted in Parliament to the Kings and Queens of this Realm.

261 Hundredum.
HVndredum, that is to be quite of money or customs to be done to the
governors and hundredors.

I.
Idiot.
Idiot, is he that is a fool naturally from his birthe, and knows not how
to account or number twenty pence, nor cannot name his father or mother, nor
of what age himself is, or such like easy and common matters: so that it
appears he has no manner of understanding of reason, nor government of
himself, what is for his profit or disprofit etc. But if he have so much
knowledge that he can read or learn to read by instruction and information of
others, or can measure an Ell of cloth, or name the days in the week, or
beget a child, son or daughter, or such like, whereby it may appear that he
has some light of reason: then such a one is no Idiot naturally.

Idemptitate nominis.
IDemptitate nominis, is a writ, and it lies where a writ of debt, covenant,
or account, or such other writ is brought against a man, and another that has
the same name as the defendant has is taken for him, then he shall have this
writ, by the which the Shirife shall make inquiry before the Justice assigned
in the same county, if he be the same person or not* and if he be not found
to be y^ party, then he shall go without day in peace.

264 Ieofaile.
IEofaile, is when the parties to any s^ite in pleading have proceeded so far
that they have joined issue, which shall be tried or is tried by a Jury or
enquest. And this pleading or issue is so badly pleaded or joined, that it
will be error if they proceed: Then some of the said parties may by their
Counsel show it to the Court as well after verdict given and before judgment,
as before the Jury be charged. The showing of which defectes before the Jury
charged was often when the Jury came into the Court to try the issu: then the
Counsel which will show it, shall say, This enquest ye ought not to take; And
if it be after verdict, then he may say, to judgment you ought not to go. And
because such many delays were in suits, diverse statutes are made to redress
them, as well in the time of king H. 8. in the 32 year ca. 30. as in the time of
the Queen that now is: whereof a man may say as the Ciuilians say, that
although Constantine the Emperor commanded the forms of the law to be cut off,
yet the daily use of pleading does seem again to recall them, or rather, some
of them increase as y^ heds of Hidra.

Unlawful assembly.
Unlawful assembly, is where people assemble themselves together to do some
unlawful thing against the peace, although that they execute not their purpose
in deed.

Imparlance.
IMparlance, is when an action of debt, trespass, or such like is brought
against a man, and after that the plainlife has counted or declared, the
defendant prays the Court, that he may have time to put in his answer to
another day in the same term, or in the next term following, this stay of
answer is called imparlance.

267 Imprisonment.
IMprisonment, is no other thing, but the restraint of a man's liberty, whether
it be in the open field or in the stocks, or cage in the streates, or in a
man's own house as well as in the common jail. And in all these places the
party so restrained is said to be a prisoner, solong as he has not his
liberty freely to go at all times whether he will, without Bail, Mainprise,
or other authority.

268 Infangthefe.
INfangthefe, that is, that thieves taken within your demesne or ^ee convicted
of theftes, shall be judged in your Court.

269 Information.
INformation, for y^ Queen is that, which for a common person ^s called a
declaration, and is not always done directly by the Queen, or her Attorney,
but rather by some other man, who sueth or informs as well for himself upon
the breach of some penal law or Statute, wherein a penalty is given to the
party that will sue for the same, but no action of debt to re^ouer it, then it
must be had by information.

Ioyntenants.
IOintenants be where two men come to any lands and tenements by one joint
title: As if a man give lands to two men and to their heirs.

But Tenants in common be where two men have lands by several titles, or by
feoffement to ii. to have and to hold the one half to one and his heirs, and
the other half to another and his heirs, in all these cases none of them
knows his several, as it shall be said after.

And note well, if there be two or three ioyntenants, and one has issue and
dies, then he and those ioyntenaunts that ouerline shall have the whole by
the suruiuor.

But if two iointenants make partito^ between the^ by deed by agreement, then
they be several tenants.

But if one ioyntenaunt grant that that belongs to him to a stranger, then
the other ioyntenaunt and the stranger be tenants in common.

And though two tenants in common be seized throghlie and of the whole, and
none knows his several, yet if one die the other shall not have the whole by
the suruiuor, but his heir shall have the half.

And so if there be three Iointenaunts, and one of them makes feoffement of
his part to another, and the feoffee dies, then his heir shall have the third
part, and the other two be ioyntenants as they were, because that they two be
seysed by one joint title.

Also if lands be given to the Baron and to his wife, and the husband
alieneth and dies, the wife shall recover the whole: but if they were
iointenants before the couerture, then in such case she shall recover but the
half.

Also if land be given to the husband and to his wife, and a third person, if
the third person grant that that belongs to him, the one half passes by
this grant, for that, that the baron and his wife be but one person in the
law, and in this case they have nothing in right but ye half.

Also if two Iointenants be of lands in a Town which is borough English,
where land is deuisable, and one by his testament deuiseth that, that
belongs to him to a stranger and dies, this devise is void, and the other
shall have the whole by suruinor, for that the devise may not take effect till
after the death of the deuisor, and immediate after the death of the deuisor,
the right comes to the other ioyntenant suruiuor, the which claymeth nothing
by the deuisor but in his own right by the suruinor: But otherwise it is of
Parceners seized of lands deuisable, causa qua supra.

271 Indicauit.
INdicauit is a writ, and lies where debate is between ij. Clerks in court
Christian of one Church, or part of a Church, for dismes which amounts at the
least to the value of the iiij part of the Church, and for that that the patron
of the Clerk of the defendant shall leese his aduowson if the clerk of the
plaintiff shall recover it, he shall have a writ directed to the clerk of the
plaintiff, or to the officers of the Court christian, them commanding to cease
their plee, until it is discust in the Kings court to whom the aduowson
belongs, And the writ shall be between four persons, two shall be patrons,
and two shall be clerks. But this writ is not returnable: but if they cease not
their suit, he shall have an Attachment.

272 Iointure.
IOinture is an estate and assurance made to a woman in consideration of
marriage for term of her life* or otherwise, as is mentioned in the statute 27.
H. 8. cap. 10. whether it be before or after the marriage. And if it be after
the marriage, then she may at her liberty after the death of her husband
refuse to take or have the lands so assured for her iointure, and demand her
dower at the common law: But if it be made before marriage, then she may not
refuse such ioynture, nor have dower according to the common law, unless that
when she brings her writ of dower, the defendant pledeth such a plee that
will not bar her of her dower, the^ she shall be endowed: As if he say in
bar, that her husband was not seysed of such estate whereof she might be
endowed, or any such plee, and does not show that she has a ioynture made
etc. and therefore dema^deth judgment of that action, or judgment if she
shall be also endowed, or any such like plee etc. And this was the opinion of
the right worshipful Master Brograue, at his Reading in Grayes Inn in summer
An. 1567. 18. El. upon a branch of the statute made An. 27. H. 8. ca. 10.
concerning iointures and dowers.

And by him of those things whereof a woman may be endowed, she may have
iointure as of mines, vesturam terre, woods, Towns, Isles, Meadows, and such
like. Also of an aduow on, of a reuersion depending upon an estate for life,
of a windmill, a high Chamber, a rectorie and such other, and they are called
Tenementes. Also of a villen, for he is an hereditament. And of all these
profit may come to the woman. But of those things whereof no profit will
come, but rather a charge, a iointure cannot be made.

L.
283 Theft.
THeft, is a wrongful taking away of an other man's goods, but not from his
person, with a minte to steal them, against his will whose goods they were.

And thefie is in two sorts, the one so called simply, and the other pety or
little theft.

The first is where the thing stole^ exceeds ye value of xij. d. and that is
felony.

The other (which is called little or petite theft) is where the thing stolen
does not exceed the value of xij. d. and that is no felony.

Lastage.
LAstage, that is to be quit of a certain custom exacted in faires and
markets for carrying of things where a man will.

Leases.
LEases be graunts or demises by one which has any estate in any
hereditaments of those hereditaments to on other for a lesser time, and they be
in diverse manners, that is to say for term of life, for term of years, for
term of an others life, and at will.

Also a lease of land is as good without deed as with deed.

But in a lease for term of life, it behooves to give liuerte and seisin upon
the land, or else nothing shall pass by the grant, because that they be
called freeholdes.

Also a lease of a common or rent, may not be good without deed.

But of a Parsonage, it is good without deed, for that that the Church which
is the principal, may pass well enough without deed, and so the dismes and
offeringes which be as accessarie to the Church.

But dismes and offringes by the^ self may not be let without deed as it is
said.

286 Lessor and Lessee.
LEssor, is he that lesseth lands or tenements to an other for term of life,
years, or at will and he to whom the leaf is made, is called lessee.

287 Leuant and Couchant.
LEuant and Couchant is said, whch the beasts or Cattle of a Stranger are
come into an other man's ground, and there have remained a certain good space
of time.

Ley.
LEy, is when an action of debt is brought against one upon some secret
judgment or contract had between the parties without especialty showed, or
other matter of Record: as in an action of Detinue for some goods or chattels
lent or left with the defendant, then the defendant may wage his law, that is
to say, to swear upon a book and certain persons with him that he deteyneth
not ye goods or owes nothing to the plaintiff in manner and form as he has
declared.

And it is allowed only in cases of secrecy where the plaintiff cannot prove
the surmise of his suit by any deed or open act: or the defendant might
discharge it privily between them without any writing of acquita^ce or public
act, and therefore in an actio^ of debt upon a leas for term of years or upon
arrerages of account before Auditors assigned a man shall not wage his Law.

But when one shall wage his law he shall bring with him vj. viij. or xij. of his
neighbors as the Court shall assign him, to swear with him, much like unto
the oath which they make which are used in the common law to purge others of
any crime laid against them, which are called co^purgators.

Note that the making of the oath is called wager of law, And when it is
accomplished, then is it called, the doing of your law.

And also if the Sheriff in any action return that he has summoned the
defendaunt to appear in Court at any day, to answer the plaintiff, at
which day he makes default, procese shall be awarded against him to come
and save or excuse his default: which is as much to say, as to excuse the deley,
or otherwise to loose the thing demanded, And then the def. comes and will
swear that he was not summoned, which is called waging of law, The^ he ought
to do it at the day assigned with twelve others, And in doing of his law he
ought upon his ^the affirm directly the contrary of that which is imputed to
him* but the others shall not say, but that they think that he faith the
truth.

Liberate probanda.
Liberate probanda, look for that in the title de Natiuo habendo.

Livery of seisin.
LIuerie of seisin, is a ceremony used in conueyance of lands or tenements
where an estate in fee simple, fee tail, or a freeholde shall pass: and it is
a testimonial of the willing departinge by him: who makes the livery from the
thing whereof liuerie is made: And the receiving of the livery, is a willing
acceptance by the other party, of all that whereof the other has dismissed
himself: And was invented as an open and notorious thing, by means whereof
the common people might have knowledge of the passing or alteration of estates
from man to man, that thereby they might be the better able to try in whom
the right and possession of lands and tenementes were, if they should be
impanelled in Iuries, or otherwise have to do concerning the same.

The common manner of delivery of ^eysin is after this sort (...)e: If it be
in the open field where is no building or house, then one that can read takes
the writing in his hand, if the estate shall pass by deed, and declares to
the standers by the cause of their meeting there together etc. and then openly
reads the deed, or declare the effect thereof in English, and after that it
is Sealed, the party who is to depart from the ground, takes the deed in
his hands together with a clodde of the earth* and a twigge or bow if any be
there, and all this he delivers to the other party in the name of
possession or seysin; according to the form and effect of the deed which
before them was there rea^d or declared, But if there be ^ dwelling house or
building upon the land, then this is done there at the door of the same; none
being left at that time within the house, and the party delivers all the
aforesaid together with the ring of the door in the name of seisin or
possession, and he that receives the liuerie enters in first alone and
shuts too the door, and presently opens it again, and lets them in
etc. If it be of a house whereto is no land or ground, the liuerie is made
and possession taken by the delivery of the ring of the door and deed only.
And where it is without deed either of lands or tenementes, there the party
declares by word of mouth before witness, the estate that he means to
depart with, and then delivers seisin or possession in manner as is
beforesaid: and ^o the land or tenement does pass as well where there is no
deed as by deed, and that by force of the livery of seisin: It was agreed in
Grayes Inn by the right worshipful Master Snagge, at his reading there in
summer Anno 1574. that if a feoffor deliver the deed in view of the land, in
name of seisin that it is good, because that he has a possession in himself.
But otherwise it is of an Attorney, for he must go to the land, and take
possession himself, before that he can give possession to another, according
to y^ words of his warrant etc. And where liuerie of seisin is by view, if the
feoffee do not enter after etc. nothing posseth, for he ought to enter indeed.

291 Lotherwite.
LOtherwite, that is that you may take amends of him which does defile your
bondwoman without your license.

M.
292 Mahim or Maime.
MAhim, is where by the wrongful ^cte of another, any member is hurt or token
away, whereby the party so hurt is made imperfect to fight: As if a bone be
taken out of the head: or a bone be broken in any other part of the body: or
a foot, or hand, or finger, or ioynte of a foot, or any member be cut: or
by some wound the sinews be made to shrink, or other ^e^ber, or the fingers
made cr^^ked, or if any eye be put out, or the foreteeth broken, or any
other* thing hurt in a man's body by means whereof he is made the les^e ^bte
^idefend himself or offend his enemy.

But the cutting off of an ear, or nose, or breaking of the hinder teeth, or
such lik^, is no ^a^him* because it is rather a deformity of the^ body* then
diminishing of strength; and that is comma^l^e tried by beholding the party by
the Justices. And if the Justices stand in doubt whether the hurt be a ma^^^m
or not, they use, and will of their great discretion take the help and opinion
of son skilful Surgeon^* to consider thereof, before they determine upon the
case.

293 Mainprise*
MAinprise, is when a men is arrested by Capias, then the Judges may deliver
his body to certain men for to keep and to bring him before them, at a
certain day, and these b^e called mainp^^nors, and if the party appear not
at y^ day assigned, the main pernors shall be amer^^^.

254 Manor*
Manor, is a thing compounde of diverse things, as of a house, land arrable,
Pasture, Meadowe, wood, rent* (...)son, court Baron* and such like make a
Man^^r. And this ought to be^ by long continuance of (...) to the co^trarso
whereof (...) memor^e cannot discern: for at this days a Manor cannot be
made, because a Court Baron cannot now be made, and a Manor cannot b^^
without a Court Baron, and suitors or freeholders, two at the least, for if all
the freeholdes except one e^cheat to the Lord, or if he purchase all except
one, there his manor is gone, for that it cannot ^e a manor without a court
Baron (as is aforesaid.) And ^ Court Baron cannot be holden but before
suitors, and not before ^ne suter, and therefore where but one freeholde or
freeholderis* there cannot be a manor properly, although in common speech it
may be called a manor.

Manumission.
MAnumission, is in two sorts, the one is a manumission expressed, the other a
manumission implied or secret.

Manumission expressed is when the Lord makes a deed to his villeine to
infranchise him by this word (manumittere) which is as much to say, as to le^
one go out of another ma^s hands or power.

The manner of Manumitting or infranchising in old time most usually was
thus: The Lord (in presence of his neighbors) took the bondsman by the head
saying, I will that this man be free, and therewith shoued them forward out of
his hands, and by this he was free without more ado^.

Manumission ^^plyed without this ward (Manumittere) is when the Lord makes*
an obligation to his villeine to pay him money at a certain day, or sueth him
where he might enter without suit, or grants unto his villeine an annuitie,
or leaseth land to him by deed for years, or for life, and in diverse such
like cases, the villeine thereby is made free.

296 Maxims.
Maxims be the foundations of the law, and the conclusions of reason, and are
causes efficient, and certain uniuersall propositions so sure and perfect,
that they may not be at any time impeached or impugned, but ought always to
be observed and holden as strong principles and auctorities of them selves,
although they cannot be proved by force, of argument or demonstrations
logical, but are known by induction by the way of sense and memoris: As for
example, it is a Maxim that i^ a man have is^^ two sons by diverse women, and
the one of them purchase lands in fee and dies without: issue, the other
brother shall never be his heir and^.

Also it is another maxim, that lands shall disce^d from the father to y^
son, but not from the son to the father, for that is an ascension etc. And
diverse like there be.

Maynour.
MAynour, is when a thief has stolen, and is followed with hue and crie^ and
taken, having that sound about him which he stole, that is called y^ maynour*
And s^ w^ commonly vs^ to ^^ye* when we find (...) doing of an unlawful
ac^^* that we took him with the may^our, or manner.

298 Maintenance.
MAintenance, is where any man gives or delivers to another that is
plaintiff or defendant in any action, any sum of money or other thing for to
maintain his plee, or else makes extreme labor for him when he has nothing
therewith to do, then the party grieved shall have against him a writ called a
writ of Maintenance.

299 Mesne.
MEsne, is where the owner of lands or tenements holds of one by certain
seruice^, and he holds them of an other by like or other services, then he
which holds the lands is called tenant perauaile, and he of whom it is held
is called Mesne, and he of whom the Mesne holds, is called chief lord. And
in this case if the lord above distraineth the tenant for the service of the
Mesne, which ought to acquit him to the lord above, then the tenant shall have a
writ against the Mesne, which is called a writ of Mesne, and if he come not to
acquit the tenant, then the mesne shall lose the service of the tenant and
shall be foreiudged of his seigniory, and the tenant shall be tenant immediate to
the chief lord, and shall do the same service and suits as the Mesne did to the
Lord.

Misprision.
MIsprision, is when one knows that another has committed treason or felony,
and will not discover him to the Queen or to the Council, or to any
Magistrate, but does concea^e the same. Diverse other offenses be called
misprision, as when a Chapleine had fixed an old seal of a Patent to a new
Patent of Non residence, and this was holden to be Misprision of Treason
only, and no counterfaytinge of the Queens scale.

Also if a man know money to be counterfeit, and bring the same out of
Irelande hither into England, and utter it in payment, this is but Misprision
of Treason, and no Treason, and so it is in diverse such like cases.

And in all cases of misprision of Treason, y^ party offendour shall forfaite
his goods for ever, and the profits of his lands for term of his life, and
his body to prison at the Queens pleasure.

And for Misprision of felony or trespass, the offender shall be committed to
prison until he have found sureties or pledges for his fine, which shall be
assessed by the discretion of the Justices before whom he was convict.

And note that in every Treason or felony is included Misprisio^, and where any
has committed treason or felony, the Queen may cause the same to be indicted
and arraigned but of Misprision only if she will. See more hereof Stamford his
first book.

301 Showing of deeds or Records.
Showing of deeds or Records, is, as if for example, an action of debt be
brought against one upon an obligation by one or by executors etc. there after
that the plaintiff has declared, he ought to show his obligation, and the
executor y^ testament to y^ Court, and so it is of Record.

And the diversity between showing of deeds or Records, and hearing of
deeds or Records, is thus: he that pleades the deeds or record, or declares
upon it, to him it does appertain to show the same. And the other against
whom such deed or record is pleaded or declared, and is thereby to be
charged, may demand hearing of the same deed or record, which his aduersatie
brings or pleads against him.

Mortdauncester.
MOrtdauncester, Look therefore in the title Cosinage.

Monstrauerunt.
MOnstrauerunt, is a writ and it lies for the tena^ts in auncien demesne, and
is directed unto the lord, him commanding that he distrain not his tenant for
to do other service that he ought not to do, and they may have this writ
directed to the shirife that he suffer not the lord to distraine the said
tenants for to do other service. Also if the tenants cannot be in quiet they
may have an attachment against the lord to appear before the Justice, and all
the names of the tena^ts shall be put in that writ, though but one of them be
grieved only.

Also if any lands in ancient demesne be in variance between the tenants,
then the tenant so grieved shall have against the other a writ which is called
of Right close after the custom of the manor, and that shall be always brought
in the lords court and there he shall declare in the nature of what writ he
will, as his case lies, and this writ shall not be removed but for a great
cause or no power of the Court.

Also if the Lord in another place out of ancient demesne distraine his
tenant to do other service then he ought, he shall have a writ of right, called
Ne unjust vexes, and it is a writ of right patent which shall be tried by
battle or Grand assise.

Mortgage or Morgage.
MOrtgage or Morgage is when a man makes a feoffement to another on such
condition, that if the feoffour pay to the feoffee at a certain day xl. li.
of money, that then the feoffour may reenter etc. in this case the feoffee is
called tenant in Morgage. And as a man may make a feoffement in fee in
Morgage, so he may make a gift in tail, or a lease for term of life, or for
term of years in morgage. And it seems that the cause why it is called
Mortgage, is for that it stands in doubt, whether the feoffour will pay the
money at the day appointed or not, and if he fail to pay, then the land
which he laid in gage upon condition of payment of the money, is gone from
him for ever and so dead to him upon condition: but if he pay the money, then
is the gage dead as to the tenant, that is to say, the feoffee, and for this
cause it is called in Latin Mortuum vadium, as Master Littleton says, or
rather mortuum vas, as I think.

Also if a feoffement be made in morgage upon condition that if the feoffour
pay such a sum at such a day etc. And the feoffour dye before the day, then
if the heir of the feoffour pay the same sum at the same day to the feoffee
and the feoffee refuses it, then the heir of the feoffour may enter, but in
such a case, if there be no day of payment expressed, then such tender of the
heir is void, for that that when the feoffour dies, the time of tender is
past, or otherwise the heirs of the feoffor shall have time of the tender for
ever, which shall be inconvenient, that one shall have a fee simple to him and
to his heirs which shall be defesible always at the pleasure and will of
others, but in the first case the time of tender was not expired by ye death of
the feoffor.

Moderata misericordia.
MOderata misericordia, is a writ, and it lies where a man is amerced in court
Baron or county more then he ought to be, then he shall have this writ directed
to the shirif if it be in the county or to the bailife: fit be in the court
baron comanding them that he amerce him not, but having regard to the quantity
of the trespass, and if they do not upon this writ, then shall go forth against
them, a sicut alias, and Causam nobis significes and after that an attachement.

Mortmaine.
MOrtmaine, is where lands be given to a house of religion, or to another
company which be corporate by the kings grant, then the land is come into
mortmaine, that is to say in English, a dead hand, and then the king or the
Lord of whom the land is holden, may enter as it appears by the Statute de
Religiosis, Therefore see the statute. Also if one make a feoffement upon trust
to certain persons to the use of a house of Religion, or to the use of any
guyld or fraternity corporate, then it shall be said mortmaine, and then he
shall run in the same pain, as it appears by the statute Anno. 15. R. 2.

307 Mulier.
MVlier, is a word used in our law, but how aptly I cannot well learn: For
according to the proper signification, Mulier is a defiled woman, like as it is
used by Vlpianus in a certain place after this sort. If I thought that I had
bought a Virgin when she was a defiled woman, the bargain was not good. Hereby
you may see, that Mulier is a woman y^ has had the company of a man. But to
leave the right signification, Mulier is taken in our law for one that is
lawfully begotten and borne: and is always used in comparison with a bastard,
only to show a difference between them, as thus for example. A man has a
son of a woman before marriage, that is called a bastard, and unlawful. And
after he marries, the Mother of the bastard, and they have another son, this
second son is called Mulier, that is to say lawful, and shall be heir to
his father: but that other cannot be heir to any man, because it is not
known nor certain in the judgment of the law, who was his father, and for
that cause is said to be no ma^s son, or the son of the people, and so
without father, according to these old verses.

To whom the people father is, to him is father none and all.

To whom the people father is, well fatherless we may him call.

And always you shall find this addition to them (Bastard eldest, and mulier
youngest) when they be compared together.

308 Murder.
MVrder, is a wilful killing of a man upon malice forethought, and seems to
come of the Saxon word Mordren which so signifies: And Mordridus, is the
murdered even until this day among them in Saxony, from whence we have most
of our words as has bin often said. Or it may be derived of Mort and dire, as
mors dira: See Stamford Plees of the Coron lib. 1.

N.
309 Natiuo habendo.
NAtiuo habendo, is a writ, and it lies where the villein or niefe of the
Lord is gone from him, then the Lord shall have this writ directed to the
Shirife that he make his Lord to have his villeine or niefewith al his goods.
Also in this writ more villeins or niefes may not be demanded then twain, but
as many villeynes or niefes as will, jointly may bring a writ De liberate
probanda. Also if a villeyne or niefe bring his writ De liberate probanda,
before that the Lord bring his writ, then the villeine pl' shall be in peace
till the coming of the Justice, or else his writ shall not help him.

Also if a villeine have tarried in auncien demesne one year and a day without
claim of the Lord, the^ he cannot seize him in the said fraunchise.

Ne admittas.
NE admittas is a writ directed to the Bishop at the suite of one which is
patron of any Church, and he doubts that the Bishop will collate one his
Clerk, or admit an other Clerk presented by an other man to the same
benefice: then he that doubts it shall have this writ to forbid the Shirife
to collate or admit any to that Church.

Non omittas propter libertatem.
NOn omittas propter libertatem is a writ, and it lies where the Shirife
returns upon a writ to him directed, that he has sent to the Baylife of
such a franchise which has return of writs, and he has not served the writ,
then the plaintiff shall have this writ directed to the Shirife, that he
himself enter into the franchise and execute the kings writ.

Also the Shirife shall warn the Baylife that he be before the Justice at the
day contained in the writ, and if he come not and excuse himself, then all
the writtes judicials which shall pass out of the Kings court during the same
plee, shall be writs De non admittas etc. and the Shirife shall make execution of
them hanging that plee.

312 Negatiua pregnans.
NEgatiua pregnans, is when an action or information, or such like is brought
against one, and the defendant pleads in bar of the action, or otherwise, a
negative plee, which is not so special an answer to the action, but that it
includes also an affirmative: As for example: If in a writ of Enter in casu
prouiso, brought by him in the reuersion upon alienation by the tenant for
life, supposing that he has aliened in fee (which is a forfaiture of his
estate) and the tenant to the writ says that he has not aliened in fee,
this is a negative, wherein is included an affirmative: for although it be
true, that he has not aliened in fee, yet it may be that he has made an
estate in tail (which is also a forfaiture) and then the entry of him in the
reuersion is lawful etc.

Also in a Quare impedit the Queen makes title to present to a Prebend, for
that the temporalties of the Bishopric we^e in her hands by the death of w.
late Bishop* etc. The defendant says that it was not void being the
Temporalties in the Queens hands by the death of w. this is a Negative
preignans, for it may be in y^ Queens hands otherwise then by the death of w.
and it suffices the Queen if it be in her hands by any means etc.

So it is where an Information was brought in the Eschequer against I. S. for
that he bought wool between shering time and the Assumptio^ such a year of I.
N. The defendant says that he did not buy any of I. N. as it is alleged
etc. this is called a Negative preignans, for it he bought it o^ any other,
yet he is culpable for the buying.

313 Ne unjust vexes.
NE unjust vexes, Look therefore before in the title Monstrauerunt.

314 Niefe.
NIefe, is a woman that is bound, or a villeine woman, but if she marry a
free man, she is thereby made free, because that she and her husband are but
one person in law, and she ought to be of the same nature and condition in
law to all intents that her husband is. But her husband is free to all
intents without any condition in law or otherwise: and so by consequens the
wife ought to be, and is free according to the nature of her free husband, and
then if she were once free and clearly discharged of bondage to al intents,
she can not be niefe after without especial act done by her, as divorce, or
confession in court of record, and that is in favor of liberty, and therefore a
free woman shall not be bound by taking of a villeine to her husband: But
their issue shall be villeins as their father was, which is contrary to the Civil
law, for there it is said, the birth follows the belly.

Bondage or Villenage had beginning among the Hebrews, and his original
proceeding of Chanaan the Son of Cham, who because that he had mocked his
Father Noe to scorn, lying dissolutelie when he was drunk, was punished in
his Son Chanaan with penalty of bondage.

315 Nihil dicit.
NIhil dicit, is when an action is brought against a man, and the defe^dant
appears, the plaintiff declares, and the defendaunt will not answer, or pledes
to the action, and does not maintain his plee, but makes default, now upon
this default, he shall be condemned, because he says nothing.

316 Nisi prius.
NIsi prius, is a writ judicial, and it lies when an inquest is empanelled
and returned before the Justices in the bench, then the plaintiff or defendante
may have this writ directed to the Shirife, him commanding that he cause the
Country to come before the Justices in the same county, at their coming to
be determined, and that for the easing of the enquest.

317 Nomination,
NOmination, is where one may in right of his Manor or otherwise, nominate
and appointe a worthy Clerk or men to a Parsonage, Vicarage, or such like
spiritual promotion. And note that this nomination ought to be to another
then the ordinary, which other shall present him to the Ordinary.

Nonabilitie.
NOnabilitie, is where an actio^ is brought against one, and the defenda^t
says that the plaintiff is not able to sue a^ie action, and demands judgment
if he shall be answered. There are six causes of nonabilitie in the plaintiff,
as if he be an outlawe, or an alien borne, but that disability is in actions
reals and mixed only, and not in actions personals, except he be an alien
enemy, or condemned in praemunire, or professed into an Abbey, Priorie or
Fryarie, or excommunicate, or a villeine, and sueth his Lord, but this last is
no plee for another that is not Lord to the villain. See more hereof in
Littleton. lib. 2. cap. 11.

Bare, or naked Contract.
BAre Contract, or naked promise, is where a man bargaineth or sells his
lands or goods, or promises to give to one money, or a horse, or to build a
house, or do such a thing at such a day, and there is no recompense appointed
to him for the doing thereof. As if one say to another, I sell or give to you
all my lands or goods. And there is nothing appointed, assigned, or agreed
upon what the other shall give or pay for it, so that there is not one thing
for another, this is a naked Contract, and void in law, and for not
performance thereof no action lies, for of a naked Contract comes no action.

320 Nusaunce.
NVsaunce, is where any man leuieth any wall or stops any water, or does any
thing upon his own ground to the unlawful hurt and annoyance of his
neighbor, he that is grieved may have thereof an assise of Nuisance. Also if he
that make the Nuisance alien ye land to another, the^ this writ shallbee brought
against them both as it appears by ye statute westminster 2. chap 24.

Nuper obiit.

NVper obiit, is a writ and it lies where one has many heirs, that is to
say, many Daughters or many Sons, if it be in gauell kind in Kent, and
dies seized, and one heir enters into all the land, then the other that be
holden out, shall have this writ against the coheire that is in. But a writ
de Rationabili part lies in such case where the auncestor was once seized,
and died not seized of the possession, but in reuersion.

O.
Oredelfe.
ORedelfe, is where one claiymes to have the ore that is found in his soil or
ground.

Outfangthiefe.
OVtfangthiefe, that is, that thieves or felons of your land, or fee, out of
your land or fee taken with felony or stealing, shall be brought back to your
court and there judged.

324 Oweltie.
OWeltie, is when there is Lord, Mesne, and tenant, and the tenant holds
of the Mesne by the same services, that the mesne holds over of the Lord
above him. As if the tenant hold of the mesne by homage, fealty, and xx. s. of
rent yearly, and the mesne holds over of the Lord above by homage, fealty,
and xx. shillings rent also, this is called Oweltie of services.

325 Hearing of records and deeds etc.
HEaring of records and deeds, is as for example, an action of debte be
brought against a man upon an obligation, and the defendant appears to the
action, and the^ prays that he may hear the obligation wherewith the
plaintiff charge him.

So it is when as executors bring an action of debt, and the defendant
demands to hear the testament, upon this demand it shall be read unto the
defendant. But if it be in another term or after that the defendant has
imparled, then he shall not hear it. And so asis said of deeds, is to be
understood of Records that are alleged against him.

Oier and Terminer.
OIer and Terminer, is a writ called in latin de Audiendo and terminando, and
it lies where any great or sudden insurrection is made or any other sudden
trespass which requires hasty reformation, the^ the King shall direct a
Commission to certain men and Justices to hear and to determine the same.

Note that every Justices of Assise have also one Commission of Oier and
determiner, directed to the^ and diverse other inhabitants within the shires,
whereunto their circuit extends, whereof each one of the Justices of Assise
are of the Quorum, for the hearing and determining of diverse offenses, which
may h^ppen in their circuit, which without yt commission they could not.

P.
Pape.
PApe, is an ancient name falsely arrrogated, or proudly usurped by the Bishop
of the only City of Rome in Italy, and is commonly Englished the Pope, a
name truly much frequented in our ancient year Books, specially in the
times of those kings, who too much abandoning their Imperial authority, and
abasing themselves far beneathe their estate, were not ashamed to suffer an
alien and outlandish Bishop, that dwelt above fifteen hundred miles from
them, to be Soueraign over them in their own dominions, and to take from them
not only the disposition of certain small trifles of none account, but also
the nomination of Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Deanes, Prouosts, appropriation
of benefices, presentations to Parsonages, Vicarages, and generally of all
Spiritual persons to their preferments sometimes by lapse, and sometimes by
provision or otherwise, whereby the Kings Princely Prerogative was very much
abridged within their own Realms. For the repression whereof diverse statutes
were made, but no sufficient remedy until King Henry the 8. did cast off their
yoke for him and his subjects.

Per que seruitia.
Look therefore afterward in the title, Quid iuris clamat.

Parceners.
PArceners, are according to the course of the common law, and according to
the custom. Parceners according to the common law are where an inheritor has
no issue but daughters, and dies, and the tenements discende to the daughters,
the^ they be called Parceners, and are but as one heir, The same law is, if he
have not any issue, and that his sisters should be his heirs. But if a man has
but one daughter, she is not called parcener, but she is called the daughter
and heir. And if there be no daughters nor sisters, the land shall descend to
the aunts, and they be called parceners. Also when lands descend to diverse
parceners, they may make partition between themselves by agreement, but if any
of them will not make partition, then the other or the others shall have a writ
de Participatione facienda direct to the shirife, who shall make partition
between them by the oath of xii. lawful men of the bailiwike. Also partitio^
by agreement may be made by the law, as well by word without deed, as by deed.
And if they be of full age the partition shall remain for ever, and shall not
at any time be defeated. But if the lands be to them in the tail, and though
that they are concluded during their lives, yet the issue of him which has the
lesser part in value, may disagree from the partition, and enter and occupy in
common with the other part. And also if the husbands of the parceners make
partition, when the husband dies, the wife may disagree from the partition.
Also if the parcener which is within age make partitio^, when she comes to
full age she may disagree. But she must take good heed when she comes to her
sui age that she take not all the profits to her own use of ye lands which were
to her allotted, for then she agreeeth to the partition, and ye age shall always
extend to the age of xxi. years.

Also if there be diverse Parceners that have made partition between them, and
one of their parts be recovered by lawful title, then she shall compel the
other to make a new partition.

Also they are parceners according to custom, where a man is scises of lands
in Gauelkinde, as in Kent and in other places franchised, and has issue diverse
sons and die, then the sons are parceners by custom.

Partition.
PArtition, is a dividing of lands descended by y^ common Law, or by custom
among coheires or parceners where there be ii. at the least, whether they be
sons, daughters, sisters, auntes, or otherwise of kin to the auncestor from
whom the land descended to them.

And this partition is made four ways for the most part, whereof three are
at pleasure and by agreement among them, the fourth is by compulsion.

One partition by agreement is when they themselves divide the land equally
into so many parts, as there be of them coparceners, and each to choose one
share or part, the eldest first, and so the one after another, as they be of
age, except that the eldest by consent made the partition, then the choice
belongs to the next, and so to the eldest last, according as it is said: who
so makes the partition, the other must have the choice.

Another partition by agreement is when they choose certain of their friends
to make division for them.

The third partition by agreement is by drawing of lottes thus: First, to
divide the land into so many parts as there be parceners, then to writ every
part severally in a little scroll or piece of paper or parchment, and to put
the same scrols up close into a hat, cap, or other such like thing, and then
each parcener, one after another as they be of age, to draw out thereof one
piece or scroll wherein is written a part of the land which by this drawing is
now severally allotted unto them in fee simple.

The fourth partition which is by compulsion, is when one or some of the
coparceners would have partition, and other some will not agree thereto, then
they that so would have partition may bring a writ De partitione facienda
against the others that would not make partition, by virtue whereof they shall
be compelled to depart etc.

In Kent where the lands are of Gauelkinde nature, we call at this day our
partition Shifting, even the very same word that the Saxons used, namely
Shiftan, which signifies to make partition between coheires, and to assign
to each of them their portion, In Latin it is called Herciscere.

Partition also may be made by Ioyntenants or tenants in common by their assent,
by deed between them, or by writ by the statutes of 31. H. 8. cap. 1. and 32.
H. 8. cap. 32.

331 Parties.
PArties to a fine or deed are those which are named in deeds or fines as
parties to it, as those that levy the same fine, and also they to whom the
fine is leuyed. And they that make a deed of feoffement and they to whom it
is made are called parties to the deed, and so in any other like cases.

Note that i^ an Indenture be made between ii. as parties thereto in the
beginning, and in the deed one of them grants or lets a thing to
another, and one that is not named in the beginning, he is not party to the
deed, nor shall get nothing thereby.

Patron.
PAtron is he that has the aduowson of a parsonage, vicarage, free chapel,
or such like spiritual promotio^ belonging to his manor, or otherwise in
gross, and thereby may or ought to give the same benefice, or present thereto,
when and as often as it falls void. And this being patron or patronage had
beginning for the most part by one of these three ways, namely either by
reason of the foundation, for that the Patron or his ancestors, or those from
whom he claims were founders or buylders of the Church, or by reason of
dotation, for that they did endow or give lands to the same for maintenance
thereof, or else by reason of y^ ground, because y^ Church was set or builded
upon their soil or ground: And many times by reason of them all three.

333 Perquisites.
PErquisites are advantages and profits that come to a manor by casualtie,
and not yearly, as Escheates, Hariots, Reliefes, waifes, straies, Forfaitures,
Amerciaments in courts, wards, Marriages, goods and lands purchased by
villeynes of the same manor, fines of copyholdes, and diverse such like things
that are not certain but happen by chance, sometimes more often then at other
times. See Perkins fol. 20. and. 21.

334 Perambulatione facienda.
PErambulatione facienda is a writ, and it lies where two Lordships lie one
nigh another, and some encrochment is made by long time, then by assent of both
Lords the Shirife shall take with him the parties and the neighbors, and
shall make perambulation and shall make the bounds as they were before, but if
a lord incroch upon another, and he will not make perambulation, then the Lord
so grieved shall have a writ against the other, which is called de
rationabilibus diuisis.

Petit Cape.
PEtit Cape is a writ, and it lies when any action real, that is to say of
plee of land is brought, and the tenant appears, and afterward makes
default, then this writ of Petite cape shall go forth to seize the lands into
the Kings hands, but if he appear not, but makes default at the first
summons, then a graund cape shall go forth and for such default the tenant shall
lose the land, but if he wage his law of non summons, he shall save his
default, and then he may plede with the dema^dant. And in greu^d cape the
tenant shall be summoned to answer to the default, and farther to the demaundant,
but in petit cape he shall be summoned to answer to the default only, and not
to the demaundant, and it is called Petit cape, for that that there is less in
this writ.

336 Petit serieantie.
TO hold by petite serieantie is as if a man hold of the king lands or
tenementes, yielding to him a knife, a buckler, an arrow, a bow without
string, or other like service at the will of the first feoffor, and there
belongs not ward, marriage ne relief. And mark well that a man may not
hold by graunde nor petite serieantie, but of the King.

337 Plaintiff.
Plaintiff is he that sueth or complains in an assise or in an action
personal, as in an action of debt, trespass, disceit, detinue, and such other.

338 Pleading.
PLeadings, be called all the sayings of the parties to suits after the count
or declaration, namely that which is contained in the bar, replication, and
reioinder, and not that contained in the count it self, and therefore
defaultes in the matter of the count are not comprised within mispleading, or
insufficient pleading, nor are remedied by the statute of Ieofailes, 32. H. 8.
But only that mispleading, or insufficient pleading, committed in the bar,
replicatio^, and reioinder, are there provided for.

Post disseisin.
POst disseisin, Look for that before in the title Assise.

Possession.
POssession, is said two ways, either actual possession, or possession in
law.

Actual possession, is when a man enters in deed into lands or tenementes
to him descended, or otherwise. Possession in law is when lands or tenementes
are descended to a man, and he has not as yet really, actually, and in deed
entered into them. And it is called possession in law, because that in the e^e,
and consideration of the law, he is deemed to be in possession, for as much as
he is tenant to every man's action that will sue cencerning the same lands, or
tenementes.

341 Pounds.
Pounds are in ij. sorts, the one pounds open, the other pounds close.

Pound open, is every place wherein a distress is put, whether it be common
pound such as are in every Town or Lordship, or whether it be backeside,
court, yard, pasture, or else whatsoever, whether the owner of the distress
may come to give them meat and drink without offense for their being there,
or his coming thither.

Pound close, is such a place, where the owner of the distress may not come to
give them meat and drink, without offense, as in a close house, or whatsoever
else place.

342 Preamble.
PReamble takes his name of the preposition (Pre) before, and the verb
(Ambulo) to go, so joined together, they make a compound verb of the first
conjugation (Preambulo) to go before, and hereof the first part or beginning
of an act, is called the preamble of the act, which preamble is a key to open
the minds of the makers of the act, and the mischiefs that they intend to
remedy by the same, as for example the statute made at westminster the first,
the 37. chap. which gives an attaint, the preamble of which is thus. Forasmuch
as certain people of the realm, doubt very little to give false verdicts or
oaths, which they ought not to do, whereby many people are disherited and lose
their right, it is provided etc.

Praemunire.
Praemunire, is a writ and it lies where any man sueth any other in the
spiritual court, for any thing that is determinable in the Kings court, and
that is ordained by certain statutes, and great punishment therefore ordained,
as it appears by the same statutes, viz. that he shall be out of the Kings
protection, and that he be put in prison without bail or mainprise till that
he have made fine at the Kings will, and that his lands and goods shall be
forfait if he come not within ij. months. Also y^ prouisors, procurators,
atturneis, executors, notaries and mainteinors, shall be punished in the same
manner, therefore look the statutes. Also some men say, that if a clarke sue an
other man in the court of Rome for a thing spiritual where he may have
remedy within the realm in the court of his Ordinary that he shall be within
the case of the statute.

And upon diverse other offenses is imposed by Statutes lately made the penalty
that they incur which are attainted in praemunire. As by 13. Elizab. cap. 8.
they which are, ayding to make a corrupt bargain whereupon vsu^y is reserved
above the x. pounds in the hundred in the year etc.

344 Precipe in capite.
PRecipe in capite is a writ and it lies where the tenant holds of his Lord
in chief as of his crown, and he is deforsed, that is to say* put out of his
land, the^ he shall have this writ, and this writ shall be close and shall be
pleded in the common place. Also if any tenant which holds of any Lord be
deforsed it behooves him to sue a writ of right patent which shall be determined
in the Lords court, but if the la^d be holden of the king, the writ of right
pate^t shall be brought to the kings Coure and this writ may be removed from the
Lords court unto the county by a ^oit, and from the county into the common
place by a pone, Look therefore before in the title Droit.

Prescription.
PRescription. is when a man claims any thing for that he, his ancestors, or
predecessors, or they whose estate he has, have had or used any thing all the
time whereof no mind is to the contrary.

But one may not prescribe against a statute except he have an other statute
that serves for him.

346 Presentment.
PResentment, is of two significatio^s: one is presentme^t to a church, which
when any man which has right to give any benefice spiritual, and names the
person to the Bishop to whom he will give it, and makes a writing to the
Bishop for him, that is a presentatio^ or presentme^t, But if diverse coheires
may not accord in presentment, the presentment of the eldest shall be admitted,
but of iointenants and tenants in common, if they ^^^orde not within six
months the Bishop shall present by laps.

The other is a presentment or Information by any Jury in a Court, before
(...) Officer which has authority to punish any offense done contrary to
the law.

347 Pretensed tight or Title.
PRetensed tight or Title, is where one is in possession of lands or teneme^ts,
and ^n other who is out of possession, claims ^t, or sueth for it. Now the
pretensed right or title is said in him, who so does sue or claim. And if he
afterward come to the possession of the same lands, or tenements, his right or
title is annexed to the land and possession, and no^ then called right.

Privy or Priuities.
Privy or Priuities, is where a lease, is made to hold at will* for years,
for life, or a feoffement in fee, and in diverse other cases, now because of
this that has passed between these parties, they are called priuies in
respect of strangers between whom no such dealinges, or conueyances has bin.

Also if there be Lord and tenant, and the tenant holds of the Lord by
certain service, there is a priuity between them because of the tenure, and
if the tenant be disseised by a Stranger, there is no priuitie between the
disseysor and the Lord, but the priuitie still remains between the Lord and
the tenant that is disseised, and the Lord shall auowe upon him, for that
he is his tenant in right and in the Judgment of the law. Priuies are in
diverse sorts, as namely privy in estate, priuies in deed, priuies in law,
priuies in right, and priuies in blood.

Priuies in estate is where a lease is made of the manor of Dale to A. for
life, the remainder to B. in fee, there both A. and B. are priuies in estate,
for their estates were both made at one time.

And so it is in the first case here, where a lease is made at will, for life
or years, or a feoffement in fee, the lessees or feffees are called priuies in
estate, and so are their heirs etc.

Priuies in dee^e is where a lease is made for life, and afterward by an other
deed the reuersion is granted to a Stranger in fee, this grauntee of the
reuersion is called privy in deed, because that he has the reuersion by
deed.

Privy in law is where there is Lord and tenant, the tenant lesseth the
tenauncie for life and dies without heir, and the reuersio^ es^heats to the
lord, he is said privy in law, because that he has his estate only by the
l^w, that is to say, by escheate.

Privy in right is where one possessed of a term for years, graunts his
estate to another upon condition, and makes his executors and dies, now
these executors are priuies in right, for if the condition be broken, and they
enter into the land, they shall have it in the right of their testator, and to
his use.

Pri^ie of blood is the heir of the feoffour or donour etc.

Also if a fine be levied, the heirs of him that leuyeth the fine are called
priuies.

Privileges.
Privileges, are liberties and franchises granted to an Office, place, town,
or Manor, by the Queens great charter, letters Patentes, or act of
Parliamente, as Toll, Sake, Socke, Infangtheefe* ^ Outfangthiefe, Turn toll,
Oredelfe, and diverse such like, for which look in their proper titles and
places.

350 Process.
Process, are the writs and precepts that go upon the original: and in actions
reals and personels there be sundry sorts of process, for in actions reals
the process is Graund Cape, before apperance: therefore see of that in the title
Petite Cape.

But in actions personals, as in debt, trespass, or detinue, the process is a
distress, and if the Shirife return Nihil habet in ballina etc. then the
process is alias Capias, and Piuries, and an Exigent, and they are called Capias
ad responde^dum. Also the Exigent shall be proclaimed 5. times, and if the party
does not appear he shall be outlawed: But in diverse actions there are diverse
manner of process, which at large is declared in Natura brenium.

Also there are diverse other process after appearance when the parties be at
issue to make the enquest appear, as a writ o^ Venire facias. and if they do
not appear at the day, then a writ of Habeas corpora ^urat, and after a writ
of Distringas Jurat.

Also there are diverse other process after judgment, as Capias ad
satisfaciendum, Capias vtlagatu^, and Capias ad valentiam etc.

But Capias ad satisfaciendum lies where a man is condemned in any debt or
damage, then he shall be arrested by this writ and put in prison without
bail or maineprise, till he has pa^ed the debt and the damages.

But Capias vtlagatum, lies where one is outlawed, then he shall be taken by
this writie, and put in prison without bail or mainprise, for that he had the
law in contempt.

Capias ad valentiam lies where I am impleaded of certain lands, and I vouch
to warrantie another, and cannot bar the demaundant, so that the demaundant
recover against me, then I shall recover so much in value against the vouchee,
and then shall go forth this writ.

Also there beeother process and writs judicials, as Fieri facias, Scire
facias, and many other: and therefore look for them in their titles.

351 Next friend.
NExt friend, is commonly taken for Guardian in socage, and is where a man
seized of lands holden in socage dies, his issue within age of xiiii. years,
then the next friend, or next of kin to whom the lands cannot come or
descend shall have the keeping of the heir, and of the land, to the only use
of the heir, until he come to the age of xiiii. years: And then at that
years ^e may enter and put been out, and bring him to account: But in that
account be shall be allowed for all reasonable costs and expenses bestowed
either upon the heir or his land.

And the next friend or next of kin to whom the inheritance cannot
discende, is thus to be understood: If the Lands discende to the heir from
his Father, or any of the kin of his Fathers side, then the Mother or other
of the Mothers side are called the next of kin to whom the enheritaunce
cannot discende, for before that it shall so descend, it shall rather Escheate
to the Lord of whom it is holden.

And so it is to be understood where the lands come to the heir from his
Mother, or any of the kin of his Mothers side, then the Father or other of
the Fathers side are called the next of kin to whom the inheritance can not
discende, but shall rather escheate to the Lord of whom it is holden.

Otherwise, Procheine amy is he which appears in any Court for an enfante
which su^th ani^ action, and aideth the enfant ^o pursue his suite* where* of,
see the Statutes of w. 1. cap. 47. and w. 2. cap. 15. that an enfant* may not
make an Attorney, but the Court may admit the next friend for the plaintiff, and
a guardian for the enfant defendant as his Attorney.

352 Procedendo.
PRocedendo, is a writ, and it lies where any action is sued in one Court
which is removed to a Court more high, as to the Chauncerye, the kings bench,
or Common place by a writ of Privilege or Cerciorare, and if the defendant
upon the matter showed, have no cause of privilege, or if the matter in the
bill whereupon the cerciorare issued be not well proved, then the plaintiff shall
have this writ of procedendo, for ^o send again the matter unto the first basse
Court, and there to be determined.

353 Prohibition.
PRohibition, is a writ and it lies where a man is impleded in y^ spir^tual
court of y^ thing y^ touches not matrimony nor testament, nor merely tuhes,
but that touches the kings crown, and this writ shall be directed as well to
the party as to the Judge or his official, to prohibit them that they pursue
no further. But if it appear afterward to the Judges temporal, that the
matter is to be determined in the spiritual Court, and not in the Court
temporal, then the party shall have a writ of Consultation, commanding the
Judges of the Court spiritual to proceed in the first plee.

Protection.
PRotection is a writ and it lies where that a man will pass over the Sea in
the kings service, then he shall have this writ, and by this writ he shall be
quit of all manner of plees between him and any other person, except plees of
dower, Quare impedit, assise of nouel disseisin, darreine prosentment, and
attaintes, and plees before Justice in eire. But there be two writs of
protection, one Cum clausula volumus, and another Cum clausula nolumus, as
appears* in the Register. Also a protection shall not be allowed in any plee
begun before the date of the protection if it be not in vyages where the King
himself shall pass, or other vyages royals, or in messages of the king for
need of the Realm. Also a protection shall not be allowed for victual
bought for the vyage whereof the protection makes mention, nor in plees of
trespass or of contractes made after the date of the protection. But note that
any may attach or begin any action real against him that has such protection,
and therein pro^eede until the defendant comes and shows his protection in
the Court, and has it allowed, and then his plee or suite shall go without
day. But if after it appears that the party which has the protection goes
not a^o^d y^ affairs for which he has it, then the demau^dant shall have a
repeal thereof. And if he go and return after the business ended, the
demaundant shall have a resummons to recontinue the former suit.

Protestation.
PRotestation, is a form of pleading when any will not directly affirm, nor
directly deny any thing that is alleged by another, or which he himself
alledneth. And it is in two sorts: One is, when one pleads any thing which
he dar^e not directly affirm, or that he cannot plead it for doubt to make
his plee double. As in conueying to himself a title to any land, he ought to
plead diverse discents by diverse persons, and he dare not affirm that all they
were seized at the time of their death, or although he could do if it shall
be double to plead two discentes of both which, every one by himself may be a
good bar^e. Then the defendant ought to plead and allege the matter
interlasing this word Protestando: As to say, that such a one dyed (by
protestation) seized etc. and that is to be alleged by protestation, and not
to be trauersed by the other. An other protestation is, when one is to
answer to two matters, and yet by the law he ought to plead but toone,
then in the first part of the plee he shall say to the one matter
Protestando, and not cognoscendo, this matter to be true, and make his plee
further by these words, sed pro placito dicit etc. and this is for saving to
the party, (that so pleads by protestation) to be concluded by any matter
alleged or obieted against him, upon which he cannot join issue: And is no
other thing but an exclusion of the conclusion, for he; that takes the
protestation excludes the other party to conclude him. And this protestation
ought to stand with the sequel of the plee, and not to be repugnant, or
otherwise contrary.

Purchase.
PVrchase is the possession that a man has in lands or tenements by his own
act, means or agreement, and not by title of descent, from any of his
ancestors. See Littleton, lib. 1. cap. 1.

Q.
Quale ius.
QVale ius, is a writ and it lies where an Abbot, prior, or such other should
have judgment to recover l^nde; by the default of the tenant against whom the
l^nde is demanded, then before judgment given or execution awarded, this writ
shall go forth to the eschetor to enquire what right he has to recover, and if
it be ^ounde that he has no right, then the Lord which should have the land
if the tenant had aliened in mortmaine may enter as into land aliened into
mortmaine, for this loosing by default is like alienation. See the statute w.
2. ca, 32.

But a writ of Ad quod dampnum lies where one will give lands to an house of
religion, then this writ shall go forth to the Eschetor, to enquire of what
value the land is, and what prejudice it shall be to the King.

358 Quare eiecit infra terminum.
QVare eiecit infra terminum is a writ, and it lies where one makes a lease
to another for term of years, and the lessor enfeoffeth another, and the
feffee puts out the termour, then the termour shall have this writ against
the feoffee, but if another stranger put out the termour, then he shall have a
writ de Eiectione firmae against him, and in those two writs he shall recover
the term and his damages.

359 Quare impedit.
QVare impedit is a writ and it lies where I have aduowson and y^ parson dies
and another presents his clerk, or disturbeth me to present, then I shall
have the said writ. But Assise of darrain presentment lies, where I or my
ancestors have presented before. And where a man may have Assise of darrain
presentment, he may have a Quare impedit, but not contrariwise.

Also if the plee be depe^ding between two parties, and be not discussed
within v^^moneths, then the Bishop may present by laps, and he y^ has right to
present, shall recover his damages, as it appears by the statute of west. 2.
c. 5. therefore see the statute. Also if he that has right to present after
the death of the person, and brings no Quare impedit nor Darreine
presentment, but suffers a stranger to usurp upon him, yet he shall have a
writ of right of aduowson, but this writ lies not, unless he claun to have
the aduowson to him and his heirs in fee simple.

Quare incumbrauit.
QVare incumbrauit, is a writ, ^ it lies where two be in plee for the
aduowson, and the Bishop ad^^tt^th the clerk of one of them within the vi.
months, then he shall have this writ against the Bishop, but this writ lies
always hanging the plee.

361 Quare intrusit matrimonio non satisfacto.
QVare intrusit matrimonio non satisfacto, is a writ, and it lies where the
Lord profereth couenable marriage to his ward, and he refu^eth and enters into
the land, and marryeth himself to another, then the Lord shall have this writ
against him.

362 Quare non admisit.
QVare non admisit, in a writ, and it lies where a man has recovered on
aduowson, and he sends his conuenable clerk to y^ Bishop to be admitted, and
the Bishop will not receive him, the he shall have the said writ against the
Bishop. But a writ de Ne admittas lies, where ii ^e in plee, if the pl^intife
suppose that the Bishop will admit the clerk of the defendant, then he may
have this writ to the Bishop, comaunding him not to admit him hanging the plee.

Quarentine.
QVarentine, is where a man dies seized of a manner place and other lands,
whereof the wi^e ought to be endowed, then the woman may abide in the manner
place, and there live of the store and profits thereof, the space of x^. days
within which time her dower shall be assigned, as it appears in Magna Charta;
cap. ^.

Quid iuris clamat.
QVid iuris clamat, is a writ, and lies where I grant the reuersion of my
tenant for term of life by fine in the kings-co^^^, and the tenant will not
^^^orn, then the gran^ee shall h^^^ this writ for to compel him to atturne*
But ^ writ of Que^* r^ddit ^^^ reddit ^^th where I grant by fine a rent charge,
or another rent which is not ^^t service which my tenant holds of me, and
the tenant will not atturne, then the grauntee shall have this writ. And a writ
of Per que seruit^a lies in like case for rent service.

Also if I grant four diverse rents to one man, and the tenant of the land
atturneth to the grauntee by payment of a penye, or of an half penie in the
name of attornement of all the rents, this attornme^t shall ^^t him in seisin
of all the rent. But these iii. writs ^^ght to be brought against those which
are tenants at the day of y^ note levied, and against none others.

365 Fifteen.
Fifteen, is a payment granted in Parlyament to the Queen by the
temporaltie, namely, the fifteenth part of their goods: And it was used in
ancient time to be leuyed upon their cattle going in their grounds, which
thing was very troublesome* and therefore now for the most part, that way is
altered and they vs^ to leuye the same by the yard* or Ic^e ^or other measure
of land. By means whereof it is now less troublesome, and more certain the^
before it was. And every Town and Country do know what sum is to be
paid among them, and how the same shall be rays^d. we read that Moises was the
first that did number the people, for ^^ ^^^bred the Israelites, and therefore
the first Tax, subsidy, tribute, or fifteen was inverted by him among the
Hebrews, as P^l^dore Virgill does think.

Quod ei deforciat,
QVod ei deforciat, is a writ, and it lies where the tenant in the Ta^^^,
tenant in Dower, or tenant for term of l^^ lee^eth b^ defaut in any action,
then ^^ that l^^seth shall have this writie against him that recouereth, or
against his heir, if he think that he has better right then he which
recovered. See the Statute west. 2. cap. 4.

367 Quod permittat.
QVod ^^^^tat is a writ and it lies where a man is disseysed of ^is common of
pas^ure, and the diss^^sor ^lien^th or dies s^ys^d, and his h^^^e enters,
then if the disseisee m^ his heir shall have this writ.

368 Quo iure.
QVo iure is a writ, and it ^^eth where a man has had common of pasture in an
other several of (...) within the time of memory, then he to whom belongs
the several shall have this writ, and he shall be c^^^ged to show by what
title he claims the common.

369 Quo minus.
QVo minus is a writ, and it ^^eth where a man has granted to another
hous^^ote and hey ^o^e in his wood to take ^uerie year, and he that made the
grant makes such w^st and destruction that the grauntee cannot have his
reasonable estouers, then the grauntee shall ^^ue the foresaid writ, and it is
in manner of a writ of wast.

And note that housebote is called certain estouers to mend the house.

And heybote is certain estouers to mend heis and hedges.

Quo warranto.
QVo warranto is a writ, and it lies where a man usurps to have any
fraunchise upon the King, then the King shall have this writ, to make him to
come before his Justices, for to show by what title he claymeth such franchise.

R.
Rationabilibus diuisis.
RAtionabilibus diuisis is a writ, and it lies where there are two Lordships
in diverse Towns, and one nigh the other, and any parcel of one Lordship, or
of wast has been incrocht by little parcels, then the same Lord from whom the
parcel of ground or of wast has been encroched, shall have this writ
against the Lord that has so encroched.

372 Redisseisin.
REdisseisin, Look of that before in the title Assise.

373 Regrator.
REgrator is he that has corn, vittayles, or other things sufficient for
his own necessary need, occupation, or spending, and does nevertheless
ingrosso and buy up into his hands more Corn, vittayles, or other such
things, to the intent to sell the same again at a higher and deerer price, in
Faires, Markets, or such like places. Whereof see the statute 5. Edw. 6. cap.
14. for he shall be punished as a forstaller.

374 Reioinder.
REioinder, is when the defendant makes answer to the replication of the
plaintiff.

And every Reioinder ought to have these two properties specially, that is to
say, it ought to be a sufficient answer to the replication, and also to
follow and enforce the matter of the bar.

Release.
RElease is the giving or discharging of the right or action which any has or
claims against an other or his land.

And the release of right is commonly made when one makes a deed to an other
by these or like words, Remised, released and utterly for me and my heirs
quite claimed to A. B. all my right that I have, or by any means may have
hereafter in one mesuage etc, but these words (whatsoever I may have hereafter)
be void: For if the father be disseised, and the son release by his deed of
release without warrantie all his right, by those words, whatsoever I may have
hereafter and^ and the father dies, the son may lawfully enter in the
possession of the disseisour.

Also in a release of right it is needful that he to whom the release shall
be made; have a freehold or a possession in the lands in deed or law, or a
reuersion a the time of that release made, for if he have nothing in the land
at the time of the release made, y^ release shall not be to him available. See
more hereof in Litt. lib. 3. cap. 8.

376 Relief.
Relief, is sometimes a certain sum of money that the heir shall pay to
the Lord of whom those Lands are holden, which after the decease of his
ancestour are to him descended as next heir, sometimes it is the payment of
another thing, and not money: And therefore relief is not certain, and alike
for all tenures, but every sundry tenure has (for the most part) his
special Relief certain in it self, Neither is it to be paid always at a
certain age, but varieth therein also according to the tenure. As if the
tenant had Lands holden by Knights service (except graunde Serieantie) and
die, his heir being at full age, and h^ld his land by the service of a whole
knights fee, the lord of whom these lands are so holden shall have of the
heir C. s. in the name of the relief, and if he held by less then a knights
fee, he shall pay less, and if more, then more, having respect always to
the r^te for every knights fee ^n hundred shillings. And if he held by
Graund Serieantie (which is alw^ies of the Queen, and is also Knights service)
then the relief shall be the value of the land by the yeer^* ^^sides all
charges (...) out of the same.

Also if a man hold ^^ the King in chief, and of other Lords the King shall
have the ward of all the lands, and the heir shall pay relief to all the
Lords at his full age, but the lords shall sue to the King by petition and shall
have the re^t for the time that the inf^^t was in ward.

And note that always when the relief is due, it must be paid at one who^^
payment and not by parts, although that the rent be to be paid at several feasts.

Remainder.
REmainder, of land is the land that shall remain after the particular estate
determined: As if one grant land for term of years or for life, y^ remainder
to I. S. that is to say, that when y^ lease for years is determined, or lessee
for life is dead, that then the land shall remain, shall be, or abide with,
to, or in I. S. See Reuersion.

378* Remitter.
REmitter, is when a man ^^ has two titles to any land, and he comes to the
land by the last title, yet she shall be judged in by ^orte of his elder
title, and that shall be said to him a remitter, as it the tenant in the
tail discontinue the tail, and after disseiseth his discontinue and dies
thereof seized, and the lands discendeth to his issue or cousin collateral by
force of the tail, in that case he is in his remitter, that is to say, seized
by force of the tail, and the title of the discontinue is utterly ^^nulled and
defeated, and the reason and cause of such remitter is, for that that such an
heir is tenant of the land, and there is no person tenant against whom he may
sue his writ of Formedon for to recover the estate tail, for he may not have
an action against himself. Also if tenant in the tail infeoffe his son or
heir apparent in the tail which is within age and after dies, that is a
remitter to the heir. But if he were of full age at the (...) of such
feoffement; it is ^^ remitter, for that that i^ was his foli^^, that he being
of (...) age, would (...) such a feffement. Also i^ the baron alien lands that
he has in the right of his (...); and after take an e^state again to him and
to his wife for term of the^ lives, that is a remitter to the (...) for that
that this alienation is the ^^te of the baron on (...) of the (...) for no
folly (...) adjudged in the woman during the (...) of her (...), but if such
alienation be by fine in court of Record, such a taking again afterward to
the (...) and wife for term of their (...), shall not make the woman to be in
her remitter; for that in such a fine the woman shall be examined by the Judge,
and such examinations in fines, shall exclude such women for ever. Also when the
enter of any man is lawful, and he takes an estate to him when he is of full
age, if it be not by ^eede indented, or matter of Record, which shall est oppe
him, that shall be to him a good remitter.

379 Rents.
REnts, be in diverse manners, that is, rent service rent charge, and rent
secke.

Rent service is, where the tenant in fee simple holds his land of his lord
by fealty and certain rent, or by other service and rit, and then if the rent
of the tenant be behind; the lord may distraine for the rent, but for that
he shall not have an action of debt.

Also if I give land in tail to a man paying to me certain rent, then such
rent is, rent service. But in such case it behooves that the reuersion be in
the donour, for if a man make a feoffement in fee, or a gi^t in tail, the
remainder over in fee without deed, reserving to him a certain rent, such
reservation is void, and that is by the statute Quia emptores terrarum, and
then he shall hold o^ the Lord of whom his donour held.

But if a man by deed indent at such a day make such gift in tail, the
remainder over in fee, or lease for term of life, the remainder over, or a
feoffement, and by the same inde^ture reserve to him rent, and that if the rent
be behind that well it is lawful to him to distrain, th^^ such rent is rent
charge.

But in such case, if there be not any such clause of distress in the deed,
then such rent is called rent secke, and for such rent seck he shall never
distrain but if he were once seized he shall have assise. And if he were not
seized, he is without remedy.

Also if one grant a rent going out of his land with clause of distres, that
is rent charge, and if the rent be behind, the grauntee may choose to
distraine or sue a writ of Annuitie, but he cannot have both, for if he
bring a writ of Annuity, then the land is discharged. And if he distraine
and auowe the taking in the court of record then the land is charged, and the
person of the grauntor discharged.

Also if one grant a rent charge, and the grauntee purchases half of the
land, the^ all the rent is extinct.

But in rent service if the Lord purchase parcel of the land, then the rent
shall be apporcioned.

But if one has a rent charge and his father purchase parcel of the land and
that parcel discende to the son which has the rent charge, then the rent
shall be apporcioned according to the value of the land as it is said of rent
service, for that that the son comes to that not by his own act, but by
descent.

Also if I make a lease for term of years reserving to me certain rent,
that is called a rent service, and for that it is at my liberty to distraine
for the rent, or to have an action of debt, but if the lease be determined, and
the rent be behind, then I cannot distrain, but shall be put to my action of
debt.

And note well, that if the Lord be seized of the service and rent before
said, and they be behind, and he distraine, and the tenant rescueth the
distress he may have Assise, or a writ of Rescous, but it is more necessary
for him to have assise then a writ of rescous, for that by assise he shall
recover his rent and his damages, but by a writ of rescous he shall not
recover but the thing and the damages.

And note well, that if the Lord be not seized of the rent and service, and
they be behind, and he distraine for them, and the tenant take again the
distress, he shall not have assise, but a writ of rescous, and shall not need
to show his right.

And note well, that if the Lord may not find a distress by two year, he
shall have against the tenant a writ of Cessauit per biennium, as it appears
by the statute of west. 2. cap. 21. And if the tenant die in the mean time
and his issue enter, the Lord shall have against y^ issue a writ of Enter upon
Cessauit, or if the tenant alien the lord shall have against y^ alienee the
foresaid writ. But if the lord have issue and die, and the tenant be in
arrerages of the said rent and service in the time of the father of the issue,
and not in the time of the issue, he may not distraine for the arrerages in ye
time of his father, and he shall have none other recovery against the tenant or
any other, for that that such advantage is given by the law to the tenant. And
note well that rent service is that to the which belongs fealty, but to
rent charge and rent secke belongs not sealtie, but it belongs to rent
service of common right.

And note that if a man distraine for rent charge, and the distres be taeen
against his will from him, and he was never seized before, he has no recovery
but by writ of Rescous, for the distress first taken gives not to him seisin,
only if he hap the rent before, for if he were seized of the rent before, and
after the rent be behind, and he distraine, and rescous to him be made, he
shall have Assise, or a writ of Rescous.

And note well that in every Assise of rent charge and annual rent, or in a
writ of Annuitie, it behooves to him that brings the writ to show forth an
especialtie, or eis he shall not maintain the Assise. But in an Assise of
Mortdauncestor or Formedon in the discender, or other writs (in ye which title
is given or comprised) brought of rent charge, or annual rent, it needs
not to show the especialtie.

And note well that if a man grant a rent charge to another, and the grauntee
release to the grauntor parcel of the re^t, yet all the rent is not extinct.

And note well, that if rent charge be granted to two jointly, and the one
release yet the other shall have the half of the rent. And also if the one
purchase the half of the land whereof the rent is going out* the other shall
have the half of the rent of his companion: and if the disseisor charge the
la^d to a stranger, and the disseisie bring an assise and recover, the charge
is defeated. But it he that has right, charge the land, and a stranger feign
a false action against him, and recover by defaulte, the charge abides. And
note well, that in case that partition be between two parceners, and more
land be allotted to one then to the other, and she that has more of the
land* charge her land to the other, and she happeth the rent, she shall
maintain Assise without especialtie.

And it is a rent secke, where a man heldeth of me by homage, fealty and other
service, yelding to me acerteine rent by the year, and I grant this rent to
another, reserving to me the service.

And note well that if rent secke be granted to a man and to his beires and
the rent be behind, and the grauntour dye, the heir may not distreine nor
shall recover the arrerages of the time of his father, as it is before said of
rent service.

And in the same manner it is to say of rent charge or annual rent: But in
all these rents before said the heir may have for the arrerages in his own
time such advantage as his father had in his life. See the Statute 32. H. 8.
cap. 37.

And note well, that in rent seche, if a man be not seized of the rent, and it
be behind, he is without recovery, for that that it was his own folly at
the beginning when the rent was granted to him or reserved, that he took not
seisin of the rent, as a penie or two pence.

And note well that a man may not have a Cessauit per biennium, or another writ
of Enter sur Cessauit for no rent secke behind by two years, but only for
rent service, as it appears in the Statute W. 2. cap. 21.

And note well that in rent secke it behooves him that sueth for the rent seck
for to show a deed to the tenant, or else the tenant shall not be charged
with the rent, but where the rent secke was rent service before, as in this
case: Lord, mesne and tenant, and every of them holds of other by homage and
fealty, and the tenant of the mesne by x. s. of rent, the Lord paramont
purchases ye lands or tenementes of the tenant, all the seigniorie of the
mesne but the rent is extinct: And for this cause this rent is become rent
secke, and the rent service changed, for he may not distraine for this rent,
and in this case he that demands the rent shall never be charged to show a
deed.

Also in a writ of Mordauncestor, Aile, or Besail, of rent secke, it needs
not to show a specialtie, for that these writtes of possession do comprehend
a title within themselves, that is to say, that the auncestour was seysed of
the some rent, and continued his possession, because of which seysin the law
supposes that it is also auerable by the country.

Yet learn, for some suppose that it behooves of necessity to show forth a
deed, for that that rent seck is a thing against common right, as well as rent
charge.

But in Assise of Nouel disseisin, and in a writ of Enter sur disseisin
brought of rent seck, it behooves of necessity to show forth a deed, for
that that rent seck is a thing against a common right, except in the case
before said, where it was rent service before.

And Assise of Nouel disseisin, and a writ of Enter sur disseisin, contain
within them no title, but suppose a disseysin to be done to the plaintiff, and
of the intendement of the law the disseysin gives no cause of auerment
against common right, but of necessity it behooves to show forth a deed.

380 Repleuin.
REpleuin is a writ, and it lies when any man distrayneth another for rent or
other thing, then he shall have this writ to the Shirife to deliver to him the
distres, and shall find surety to pursue his action, and if he pursue it not,
or if it be found or judged against him, then he that took the distress
shall have again the distress, and that is called the return of the beasts,
and he shall have in such case a writ that is called Returno habendo.

Also if it be in any franchise or bailiwike, the party shall have a Repleuin
of the Shirife direct to the Baylife of the same franchise for to deliver them
again, and he shall find suertie to pursue his actio^ at the next county. And
this Repleuin may be removed out of the cou^ty unto the common place by a writ
of Recordare.

Look more of Repleuin in the title Distres.

Also a writ of Homine replegiando lies where a man is in prison and not by
special commandment of y^ king, nor of his justice, nor for the death of a
man nor for the kings forest nor for such cause that is not repleuisable, then
he shall have this writ directed to the shirife y^ he cause him to be
repleued: this writ is a Iusticies and not returnable, and if the shirife do it
not, then there shall go forth another writ, sicut alias, and afterward
another writ sicut pluries vel causam nobis significes, which shall be
returnable, and if y^ shirife yet make no repleuin, then there shall go forth
an attachement against y^ shirife directed to the Coroners to attach the
shirife and to bring him before y^ Justice at a certain day* and further more
y^ they make execution of the first writ.

Replication.
REplication, is when the defendant in any action makes an answer, and the
plaintiff makes an answer to that, that is called the Replication of the
plaintiff.

382 Reprises.
REprises, ar^ deductions, payments, and duties that go yearly and are paid
out o^ a manor. As rent charge, rent secke, pe^tions, corodies, annuities, fees
of stewards, baylife, and such like.

383 Receite.
REceite, is when any action is brought against the tenant for term of life,
or tenant for term of years, and he in the reuersion comes in and prays
to be received for to defend the land and for to plead with the demaundant.
Also when he comes it behooves that he be always ready to plead with the
demaundant.

384 Rescous.
REscous, is a writ and it lies when anit man takes a distress and another
takes it again from him and will not suffer him to bring the distress with
him, then he does to him rescous and upon that he may have this writ and shall
recover da^mages. Also if one distraine beasts for damage fesant in his
ground, and drives them in the hie way for to unpou^d them, and in going they
enter into the house of him whose they be, and he withholdeth them there and
will not suffer the other to impound the^ then that withholding is a rescous.

Reservation.
Reservation, is taken diverse ways, and has diverse natures, as sometimes by
way of exception to keep that which a man had before in him, as if a lease
be made for years of ground reserving the great trees growing upon the
same, now the lessee may not meddle with them, nor with any thing that comes
by reason of them so long, as it abides in, or upon the trees, as mast of Oak,
Chestnu^, Appels, or such like, but if they fall from the trees to the ground
then they are in right the lessees, for the ground is let to him, and all
there upon not reserved etc.

Sometimes a reservation does get and bring forth an other thing which was
not before. As if a man lease his lands reserving yearly for the same xx. li.
etc. And diverse other such reseruations there be.

And note that in ancient time, their reseruations were as well (or for the
more part) in vitualles, whether flesh, fish, Corn, Bread, Drink, or what
else, as in money* until at the last, and that chiefly in the Reign of King
Henry the first by agreement, the reservation of victuals was changed into
ready money* as it has hitherto since continued.

386 Retraxit.
REtraxit, is the preterperfectence of Retraho, compounded of Re and traho,
which make Retraho, to pull back. And is when the party plaintiff or
demaundant comes in proper person into the Court where his plee is, and says
that he will not proceed any farther in the same etc. now this shall be a
bar to the action for ever.

Reeue.
REeue is an Officer, but more known in ancient time then at this day. For
almost every manor had then a Reeue, and yet still in many Copiholde manors
(where the old custom any thing preuayleth) the name and office is not
altogether forgotten* And is in effect that which now every Baylife of a manor
practices* although the name of Baylife was not then in ure among us being
since brought in by the Normans: But the name of Reeue, aunciently called
Gereue (which particle (Ge) in continuance of time was altogether left out and
lost) came from the Saxon word Geresa. which signifies a ruler: And so in
deed his rule and authority was large within the compass of his Lords
manor and among his men and tenantes as well in matters of government in
peace and war, as in the skillful use and trade of husbandry: For as he did
gather his Lords rentes, pay Reprises, or duties issuyng out of the manor,
set the servants to work, fell and cut down Trees to repair the
buyldinges, and enclosures, with diverse such like for his Lords commodity:
So also he had authority, to govern and keep the tenauntes in peace, and
if need required, to lead them forth in war.

388 Reuersion.
REuersion of land, is a certain estate remaining in the lessor or donor,
after the particular estate and possession conveyed to an other by lease for
life or years, or gift in tail.

And it is called a Reuersion in respect of the possession separated from it:
so that he that has the one has not the other at the same time, for being in
one body together, there cannot be said a reuersion, because by the uniting,
y^ one of the^ is drowned in the other: And so the reuersion of land, is the
la^d it self when it falls.

Riot.
RIot is where three (at the least) or more do some unlawful act: as to
beat a man, Enter upon the possession of an other, or such like.

Robbery.
Robbery, is when a man takes any thing from the person of an other
feloniouslie, although the thing so taken be not to the value but of a penye,
yet it is felony, for which the offendour shall suffer death.

Rout.
ROut, is when people do assemble themselves together and after do proceed or
ride, or go forth, or do move by the instigation of one or more, who is their
leader: This is called Rout, because they do move, and proceed in Routes and
numbers.

Also where many assemble themselves together upon their own quarrels and
brauls, as if the inhabitants of a town will gather themselves together, to
break hedges, pales or such like to have common there, or to beat another
that has done to them a common displeasure or such like, that is a Rout and
against the law although they have not done or put in execution their
mischievous intent. See the statute 1. Mar. ca. 12.

S.
392 Sake.
SAke, this is a plee and correction of trespass of men in your court, because
(Sak) in English is Acheson in french, and sak is put for Sik, as to say for
sik, sak, also for what hurt, and Sak is put for forfait.

393 Scire facias.
SCire facias, is a writ judicial going out of the record, and it lies where
one has recovered debt or damages in y^ kings court, and he sueth not to have
execution within the year and the day, the^ after the year and day he shall
have y^ said writ to warn the party, and if the party come not, or if he
come and nothing say to discharge or stay the execution, then he shall have a
writ of Fieri facias directed to the shirife him commanding that he levy the
debt or damages of the goods of him that has lost.

Also the writ of Fieri facias lies within the year without any scire fac'
sued.

Also if the sum of the same debte or damages may not be levied of the goods
of him that has lost them, he may have a writ of Elegit directed to the
Shirife, that he cause him to deliver the one half of his lands and goods
except his oxen and implements of his cart.

Also when one has recovered debte or damages in an action parsonall (where y^
process is a Capias) he may have an other writ of Execution called a Capias ad
satisfaciendum for to take the body of him that is so condemned, which shall be
committed to prison there to abide without bail or mainprise til that he has
satisfied the party.

Also when one has judgment to recover any lands or tenementes, he shall
have a writ called Habere facias seisinam direct to the shirife, him
commanding to deliver to him seisin of the same land so recovered, See more of
yt in the title Fieri facias, and in the title Execution.

394 Scot.
SCot, that is to be quite of a certain custom, as of common tallage made to
the use of the Shirife or Bailife.

395 Knights service.
TO hold by knights service, is to hold by homage, fealty, and escuage, and
it draws to it ward, marriage, and relief, And note that Knights service, is
service of lands or tenementes to bear arms in war in the defense of the
Realm, and it owes ward and marriage by reason that none is able nor of
power, nor may have knowledge to bear arms, before that he be of the age of
21. years. And to the end that the Lord shall not leese that that of right
he ought to have, and that the power of the realm, be nothing weakened, The
law will because of his tender age, that the lord shall have him and his lands
in his ward till the full age of him, that is to say xxi. years.

Look of that more in the title Graund seriantie, and the title of Escuage.

Showing.
Showing, that is to be quite with attachment in any court, and before whom
soever in plaintes showed and not auowed.

Sok.
SOk, this is suite of men in your Court, according to the custom of the
Realm.

Sokmans.
SOkmans, are the tenants in ancient demesne, that hold their lands by
Socage, that is by service with the plough, and therefore they are called
Sokmans, which is as much to say as tenants or men that hold by service of the
plough, or plowmen: For Sok signifies a plough.

And these Sokmans or tenants in ancient demesne, have many and diverse
liberties given and granted to them by the law, as well these tenants that
hold of a common person in ancient demesne, as those that hold of the Queen
in ancient demesne, as namely to be free from paying toll in every Market,
Fair, Town, and City throughout the whole Realm, as well for their goods and
cattels that they sell to others, as for those things that they buy for their
provision, of other. And thereupon every of them may sue to have letters
patents under the Queens seal directed to her Officers, and to the Majors,
Baylifes, and other Officers in the Realm to suffer the^ to be toll free.

Also to be quite of pontage, murage, and passage, as also of taxes and
Tallages granted by Parliament, except that the Queen tax ancient demesne,
as she may at her pleasure for some great cause.

Also to be free from paimentes toward the expenses of the Knights of the
Shire that come to the Parliament.

And if the Shirife will distraine them, or any of them to be contributorie
for their lands in ancient demesne, then one of them or all as the case
requires, may sue a writ directed to the shirife commanding him that he do
not compel them to be contributories to the expenses of the Knights. And the
same writ does command him also, that if he have already distrayned them
therefore, that he redeliuer the same distress.

Also that they ought not to be impannelled, nor put in Iuries and enquests in
the country out of their Manor or lordship of ancient demesne, for the
lands that they hold there (except that they have other lands at the common
law, for which they ought to be charged) And if the Shirife do return them
in panels, then they may have a writ directed to him de non pone^dis in
assisis and iuratis: And if he do the contrary, then lies an attachment upon
that against him.

And so it is also if the Bailifes of Franchises that have return of writs
will return any of the tenaunts which hold in ancient demesne in Assizes or
iuries.

And also to be exempt from Leetes and the Shirifes turn, with diverse other
such like liberties.

399 Socage.
TO hold in Socage is to hold of any Lord lands or tenementes, yielding to
him a certain re^t by ye year for all manner of services.

And note well, that to hold by Socage is not to hold by knights service,
nor to it belongs ward, marriage, nor relief, but they shall double once
their rent after the death of their auncestor, according to that that they be
wont to pay to their Lord.

And they shall not be over measure grieved, as it appears in the Treatile of
wards and relief.

And note well that Socage may be said in 3. manners, that is to say: Socage
in free tenure, Socage in ancient tenure, and Socage in base tenure.

rent for all manner of services, as is before said, and of that the next
kinnes body shall have the ward to whom the heritage may not discende, till
the age of xiiii. years, that is to say: if the heritage come by the part of
the Father, they of the part of the Mother shall have the ward, And
contrariwise.

And note well that if the guardian in socage do make wast, he shall not be
impeached of wast, but he shall yield account to the heir when he shall
come to his full age of xxi. years. And look the statute of Marleb. cap. 17.
for this matter.

Socage of ancient tenure is that where the people in ancient demesne held,
which use no other writ to have then the writ of Right close, which shall
be determined according to the custom of the manor, and the Monstrauerunt for
to discharge them when their Lord distraineth them for to do other Services
that they ought not to do.

And this writ of Monstrauerunt ought to be brought against the Lord* and
these tenants hold al by one certain service, and these be free tenants of
ancient demesne.

Socage in ^as^ tenure is where a man holds in ancient demesne, that may not
have the Monstrauerunt, and for that it is called the base Tenure.

400 Summons ad warrantizandum etc.
SVmmons ad warrantiza^dum and sequatur sub suo periculo, See of them after in
the title voucher.

401 Spoliation.
SPoliation, is a suite for the fruits of a Church, or for the church it self,
and it is to be sued in the spiritual Court, and not in the temporal
Courts. And this suite lies for one incumbent against another incumbent,
where they both claim by one patron, and where the right of the patronage does
not come in question or debate. As if a Parson be created a Bishop, and has
dispensation to keep his benefice still, and afterward the Patron presents
another incumbent which is instituted, and inducted: Now the Bishop may
have against that Incumbent a Spoliation in the Spiritual Court, because they
claim both by one Patron, and the right of the patronage does not come in
debate, and because that the other incumbent came to the possession of the
benefice by the course of the Spiritual Law, that is to say, by institution
and induction, so that he has color to have it and be Parson by the
spiritual Law. For otherwise if he be not instituted and inducted etc.
Spoliation lies not against him, but rather a writ of Trespass, or an assise
of Nouel disseisin etc.

So it is also where a person which has a plurality does accept an other
benefice, by reason whereof the Patron presents another clerk, who is
instituted and inducted, now the one of them may have Spoliation against the
other, and then shall come in debate if he have a sufficient plurality or
not. And so it is of deprivation etc.

The same law, is where one says to the Patron, that his Clerk is dead,
where upon he presents another: There the first incumbent which was supposed
to be dead may have a Spoliation against the other, and so it is in diverse
other like cases, whereof See Fitzherbert Not. breuium.

402 Stallage.
STallage, that is to be quite of a certain custom exacted for the streat
taken or assigned in faires and markets.

Suit covenant.
SVit covenant, is when your ancestors have couenanted with my ancestors to
sue to the court of my ancestors.

Suit custom.
SVit custom, is when I and my ancestors have been seized of your own suit
and your ancestors time out of mind etc.

Suit real.
SVit real, is when men come to the shirifes turn or leete, to which court
all men shall be compelled to come to know the laws, so that they shall not be
ignorant of things that shall be declared there how they shall be governed. And it
is called real siute because of their allegea^ce* and this appears by common
experience when one is sworn, his oath is, that he shall be a loyal and
faithful man to ye Queen. And this suite is not for the land which he holds
within the County, but by reason of his person, and his abode there, and ought
to be done twice a year, for default whereof, he shall be amerced and not
distrained.

406 Suit service.
SVit service, is to sue to the Shirifes turn or Leete, or to the Lords Court
from three weeks to three weeks by the whole year, and for default thereof,
a man shall be distrained and not amerced. And this suit service is by reason of
the tenure of a man's lands.

407 Statute merchant.
TO hold by Statut merchant, is where a man knowledgeth to pay certain money
to another at a certain day before the Mayor, Baylife or other warden of any
town that has power to make execution of the same statut, and if the obligor
pay not the debt at the day, and nothing of his goods, lands or teneme^ts may
be found wtin the ward of the Mayor or warden beforesaid, but in other places
without, then the recognisee shall sue the recognisance and obligation with a
certification to the Chauncerie under the kings seal, and he shall have out
of the Chauncery a Capias to the Shirife of the county where he is to take
him, and to put him in prison, if he be not a clerk, till he have made
greement of the debt. And one quarter of the year after that, that he shall be
taken, he shall have his land delivered to himself to make gree to the party
of the debt, and he may sell it while he is in prison, and his sale shall be
good and lawful. And if he do not gree within a quarter of a year, or if it
be returned that he be not found, then the reconisee may have a writ of the
Chauncery which is called Extendi facias, direct to all shirifes where he has
lands, to extend his lands and goods, and to deliver the goods to him, and to
seize him in his lands, to hold them to him and to his heirs and his
assigns, till that the debtes be leuyed or paid, and for that time he is
tenant by statute merchant. And note well, that in a statute merchant the
recognisee shall have execution of all the lands which the recognisour had the
day of the recognisance made, and any tune after by force of the same statute.

And note well, that when any wast and destruction is made by the recognisee,
his executors, or by him that has estate, the recognisor or his executors shall
have the same law as is beforesaid of the tenant by Elegit.

And note well, if the tenant by statute Marcha^t hold over his term, he
that has right may sue against him a Venirefacias ad computandum, or else enter
by and by as upon tenant by Elegit. See the statut 11. E. 1. and of Acton
burnel, and 13. E. 1. de Mercatoribus.

T.
408 Fee Tail.
TO hold in the tail is where a man holds certain lands or teneme^ts to him
and to his heirs of his body begotten. And note well, that if the land be
given to a man and to his heirs males, and he has issue male, he has fee
simple, and that was aiudged in the Parliament of our Lord y^ king. But where
lands be given to a man and to his heirs males of his body begotten, then he
has fee tail, and the issue female shall not be inheritable, as it appears
the 14. year of Ed. 3. in Assise 18. E. 3. 45.

Fee tail, is where land is given to a man and his heirs of his body
begotten, and he is called Tenant in the tail general, but if lands be given
to the husband and the wife and the heirs of their two bodies begotten, then
the husband and the wife be Tenants in the tail especial, and if one of them
die, he that suruiueth is tenant in tail after possibility of issu extinct and
if he make wast he shall not be impeached for that wast. See Littleton.

But if the king give la^d to a man and to his heirs males, and the donee
dies without issue mal^, then the cousin collateral of the donee shall not
enherite, but the king shall reenter and so it was adjudged in the Eschequer
Chamber 18. H. 8. in an Information made against the heir of Sir T. Lou^l
knight.

409 Tail after possibility.
TO hold in the tail after possibility of issue extinct, is where land is
given to a man and to his wife, and to the heirs of their two bodies engendered,
and one of them oueri^^eth the other without issue between them begotten, he
shall hold the land for term of his own life, as tenant in the tail after
poss^bility of issue extinct. And notwithstanding that he d^e wast, he shall
never be impeached of that wast. And note y^ if he alien, he in the reuersion
shall not have a writ of entry in consimili casu. But he may enter, and his
enter is law^ull, per R. Thorp chief Justice 28. E. 3. 96. and 4^. E. 3. 25*

Tax and tallage.
Tax and tallage, are paiments, as tenthes, fiftenths, subsidies, or such like
granted to the Queen by Parliament.

The tenaunts in ancient demesne are quite of these taxes and tallages
granted by Parliament except that the Queen^ do tax ancient ^^^^sne, as
she may (...) she thinks good for some great cause. See ancient de^ mesne.

Tenure in capite.
TEnure in capite, is (...) any hold of the Queen^ as of her person ^^^yng
Queen, and of her cro^^^ as of a Lordship by it self in gross, and in chief
above all other Lordships, And not where they h^lde of her as of any Mau^^^,
Honor, or Cast^ll, except certeyn^ ancient honor^ which appear in the
Esch^quer.

Term dan^.
TO hold for term of yere^ is not but chattell in effect, for no action is
maintenable against y^ termour, for the recovering of the free hold, for no
freehold is in him. A leas for term of years is a chattell real, and the
other chattell is personal, and all goods which are remouable are chattels
parsonals.

413 Testament.
TEstament, is thus desined in master Plowdens C^^mentarus, a testament is the
witness of the mind, and is compound of these two words, Testatio and mentis,
which so signifies, truth is, that a Testament is a witness of the mind, but
that it is a compound word, Aulus Gellius ^^ his vi. book, cap. 12. does deny
the same to an excellent lawyer one Seruius Sulpitius, and says that it is a
simple word, as are these Calciamentu^, Paludamentum, Pauiamentu^, and di^^rs
such like.

And much less is agreamentum, a co^pound word of aggregatio and mentiu^, as
is said before in the title ^^ Agreement, for there is no such latin word
simple or compound, but it may nevertheless serve well for a law latin word.

And therefore thus it may be better defined. A Testament is the true
declaration of our last will, of that we would to be done after our death etc.

And of Testamentes there be two sorts, namely a Testament in writing, and a
Testament by words, which is called a Nuncupatiue Testament.

The first is always ^n writing as is s^^^.

The other is, when a man being sick, and for fear least death or want of
memory, or of speech, should come so suddenly and hastily upon him, that he
should be prevented if he st^yed the writing of his Testament, desires his
neighbors and friends to ^e^re witness of his last win* and then declares
the same presently by words before them, which after his dece^^^ is proved by
witnesses, and put in writing by the Ordinary, and then stands in* as good
force (except for lands) as if it had at y^ first in the life of the Testator
been put in writing.

414 Them.
THem, that is, that you shall have all the generations of your villames with
their suites and cattle wheresoever they shall be ^ound in England, except that
if any bondsman shall remain quite one year and a day in any privileged town,
so that he shall be received into their communaltie or guilde, as one of them,
by that means he is delivered from villeuage.

415 Theftbote.
THeftbote, is when a man takes any goods of a thief to favor and maintain
him: And not when a man takes his own goods that were stolien from him ^c.

The punishment in ancient time of theeftbote, was of life and member. But
n^we at this day Mast. Stamford seith, it is punished by ransom and by
imprisonment. But enquire further, for I think if be felony.

Title.
TItle, is where a lawful cause is come upon a man to have a thing which an
other has, and he has no action for the same, as title of Mortmaine, or to
enter for breach of condition.

Title de Enter.
TItle de Enter, is when one seized of land in ^ee makes feffement thereof
upon condition, and the condition is broken: Now after the condition thus
broken, the feoffor has title to enter into the land, and may so do at his
pleasure, and by his entry the free hold shall be said to ^e in him presently.

And it is c^lsed Title of enter* because that he cannot have writ of Right
against his feoffee upon condition, for his right was out of him by the
feoffeme^t, which cannot be reduced without entry, and the entry must be for
the breach of the condition.

418 Toll, or Tolne.
Toll, or Tolne, is most properly a payment used in Cities, Towns, Markets
and Faires, for goods and cattle brought thither to be bought and sold. And
is always to ^e paid by the buyer and not by the seller, except there be some
custom otherwise.

There are diverse others Tolles, as Turn toll, and that is where Toll is
paid for beasts that are driven to be sold, although that they be not sold in
deed.

Also Toll tr^^ers, that ^s where one claymeth to have a halfepenie, or such
like toll of euirie beast that is driven over his ground.

Through Toll, is where a town prescribes to have Toll for every ^rast that
goes through their town a certain, or for every ^^oore or 100. a certain:
which f^emeth not to be so unreasonable a prescription or custom, as some have
thought, although it be through the Queens high way (as they call it) where
every man may lawfully go, if that there be one thing for an other: As it
there be a bridge or such like commodity provided at the costs and charges
of the Town, for the case of trauaylers that drive that way, whereby their
journey is either shortened or bettered, why the^ may not toll be lawfully and
with good reason demanded of them etc?

But diverse Citizens and Towns men are free from paying toll by grant of the
Queen or her ancestors, or do claim the same by prescription or custom. So
also spiritual persons and religious men (as they call them) were quit of
paying toll for their goods and marchandises bought and sold, but now the
Statute of king H. 8. An. 21. cap. 13. will that they shall not merchandise.

Also tenants in ancient demesne ought to be quit throughout the whole Realm
of paying toll, as appears before in ye title Sokema^s. And in all these
cases where toll is demanded where it ought not to be paid of them that should
go, bay and sell toll free, there the party or parties grieved may have a
writ, De essendi quietum de tolonio, directed to him, or the^ that so demanded
toll contrary to the Queen or her progenitors grant, or contrary to
custom or prescription.

419 Treason.
TReason, is in two manners, that is to say, graund treason and petit treason,
as it is ordained by the statutes and therefore look the statutes, and Stamf.
lib 1. cap. 2.

420 Treasure troue.
TReasure troue, is when any money, gold, silver, plate or bolyon, is found in
any place, and no man knows to whom the property is, then the property
thereof belongs to the King, and that is called treasure trone, that is to
say, treasure found. But if any mine of metal be found in any ground* that
always pertayneth to the Lord of the soil, except it be a mine of gold or
silver which shall be always to the king in whose ground soever they be found.

Shirifes turn.
SHerifes turn, is a court of record in all things that pertain to the
turn. And it is the Queens leete thorough all the County, and the Sheriff
is judge. And whosoever has a leete has the same authority within the
precinct, as the Sheriff has within the turn.

V.
View.
VIew, is when ante action real is brought and the tenant knows not well
what land it is that the demaundant asks then the tenant shall pray the
view* that is to say, y^ he may fee the land which he claymeth. But if the
tenant has had the view in one writ, and after the writ is abated in
misnaming of the town, or by ioyntenure, and after the demandant brings
another writ against the tenant, then y^ tenant shall not have the view in the
second writ.

423 Vilaica remouenda.
VIlaica remouenda, is a writ, and it lies where debate is between two
Parsons or prouisors for a Church, and one of them enters into the Church with
great power of lay ^n^^, and holds the other out with force and arms, then
he that is holden out shall have this writ directed to the Shirife that he
remove the power which is within the Church, and the Shirife shall be
commanded that if he find any men there withstanding, that the Shirife shall
take with him the power of his County if need be, and stall arrest the
bodies of all them him resisting, and shall out them in prison, so that he have
their bodies before the King at a certain day to answer to the contempt. And
this writ is returnable, and it shall not be granted before that the bishop
of y^ place where such a church is, has certified in the Chauncerie such
resisting and force.

Villenage.
TO hold in pure villenage, is to do all that, that the lord will him command.

The diffinition of villenage is villein of blood* and of tenure. And it is he
of whom the Lord takes redemption to marry his daughter, and to make him
free, and it is he whom the Lord may put out of his lands or tenements at his
will, and also of al his goods and cattle.

And note well, that a sokeman is no pure villein, nor a vilei^e owes not
ward, marriage, nor relief, nor to do any other services real.

And note well, that the tenure in villenage shall make no freeman villeine, if
it be not continued ever since time out of mind* nor villain land shall make
no free man villeine, nor free land shall make no villeine free, except that
the tenant have continued free since the time of no mind.

But a villein shall make free land villeine by seisin or claim of the Lord.
And note well, that if a villeine purchase certain land, and take a wife and
alien, and dies before the claim or seisin of the Lord, the wife shall be
endowed.

And note well, that in case that the Lord bring a Praecipe quam reddat
against the alience of his villeine which voucheth to warrant the issue of the
villeine which is villein to the lord he shall have the voucher, and by
protestation the Lord may notwithstanding that he plea^e with his villeine,
save that his villein shall not be infranchised. And note well that a Bastard
shall never be judged villeine, but by knowledge in court of record. And
note well that if debt ^^ due by a Lord to a free man, and he makes two men
his executours the which be villeins to the said Lord and dies, the villeins
shall have an action of debt against their Lord* And notwithstanding that he
plede with them, and if he make protestation they shall not be thereby
enfranchised, for that that they be to recover the debt aforesaid to the use
of another person, that is to say to the use of their teitatour, and not to
their own use.

And if the tenant in dower have a villein which purchases certain land in
fee, and after the tenant in dower enters, she shall have the land to her and
to her heirs for evermore, and the same law is of tenant for term of years
of a villeine.

And note will that the Lord may rob^e, beat and chastise ^^s villeine at his
will, save o^^y that he may not ma^ne him, for then he shall have appeal ^^
maime against him.

And note well* that ^ villeine may have three actions against his lord, th^^
is to say, an appeal of the death of his ancestour, an appeal of rape done
to his wife, and an appeal of maime. And note well if ii. parceners bring a
writ of niefe, and one of them be nonsuit, the nonsuit of him shall be judged
the nonsuit of them both, so that if that nonsuite be after appearance, they
shall be saved from that action for ever, for the law is such in favor of
liberty.

And note well, if two have a villeine in common, and one of them make to him ^
manumission, he shall not be made free against both,

And note well, that in a writ de Natiuo habendo, it behooves that the Lord
show how the def. comes to be privy of the blood of the villeine of whom he
is lord etc. And if he nor none of his ancestors were not seized of none of his
blood, he shall not win by his action, if the villein have not knowledged in
Court of Record himself to be his villein.

And note well that in a writ of Niefe may not be put more Niefs then two and
this was first brought in the hatred of bondage. But in a writ de liberate
probanda may be put as many niefes as the plaintiff will.

And note well that if the villeine of a Lord be in ancient demesne of the
king, or other town privileged, within a year and a day, the Lord may seize
him, and if he dwell in the same town or other place franchised by a year
and a day without seisin of the Lord, he has no power to seize him after, if
he go^ not out of the foresaid franchise.

And some be villeines by title of Prescription, that is to say, yt they have
been villeines regardants to the manor of the lord of time of no memory.

And some be villeins by their confession in a courts of record. Also the
lord may make a manumission to his villeine, and make him free for ever.

Also if the villeine bring any action against his lord, if it be not App^ale
of mahim, and the Lord make answer unto it, then by this the villeine is made
free.

Also if a villeine purchase land, and has goods and sell the lands and goods
before any enter or seisin made by the Lord. the sale is good. But the King
which is Lord of a villein in such case may enter and seize the land alter
such sale made, for no time runs against the king.

425 Viscount.
VIscount, is either the name of one degree or state of honor under an Earl
or above a Baron, or else the name of a Magistrate and Officer of great
authority whom we commonly call (Shirife) or to speak more truelis (Shire
reave) and was at the first called (Shiregereue) that is to say the keeper of
the shire, vr the reave or ruler of the Shire, for (Gereue) being derived of the
Saxon word (Gerecean) to rule, was first called (Gerecfa) and then (Gerefa)
which betokens a ruler. And hereof comes (Portreue or Portgreue) a name
that in old time was given to the head officer of a Town, and signifies the
Ruler of the Town for that (Port) coming of the Latin word Por^^s,
signifies a Port town, and (Gereue) being derived as is aforesaid signifies
a ruler, so that Portgereue, or as we now shorter speak it (Portreue) is the
ruler of the town.

And thus was the head Officer or Governor of the City of London long since
(before they had the name of Mayor or bailifs) called, as it does appear in
diverse old Monuments. But chiefly in the Saxon Charter of william Bastard the
Corquerour, which thus begins.

William the King gr^eteth William the Bishop and Godfrey the Portreue, and
also the* Citizens tha^ in London be, etc.

So also they of Germany (from whom we and our language together first came)
call among them one governor Burgreeue, another Margreeue, and another
Landsg^ee^e, with such like etc.

Thus much is said only to show the right Etimon and antiquity of the word
(Shirif) to which Officer our common Law ^ath always accordingly given great
trust and authority, as to be a special preserver of the peace. And therefore
all obligations that he takes to the same end, are as Recognisances in law.

He also is a Judge of record when he holds the Leetes or Turns, which are
Courts of record.

Also he has the execution and return of writtes, and impanelling of Iuries
and such like etc.

426 Volunt.
VOlunt is, when the tenant ^oldeth at the will of the lessour, or of the
Lord, and that is in two manners.

One is when I make a lease to a man of lands, to hold at my will, then I may
put him out at my pleasure: But if he sow the ground, and I put him out, then
he shall have his corn, and going out and coming in till they be ripe to
cut and carry of the ground.

And such tenant at will is not so bound to sustain and repair the house as
a tenant for term of ye^^es is bound: But if he make wilful wast* the lessor
shall have against him an action of Trespass.

Also there is another tenant at will of the Lord by copy of Court Roll
according to the custom of the Manor: And such a tenant may surrender the
lands into the hands of the Lord by custom to the use of another for term of
life, or in fee simple, or in ^a^^e, and then he shall take the land of the
Lord or his steward by copy, and shall make fine to the Lord, But if the
Lord put out such a tenant, be has no remedy but to sue by petition, and if
such a tenant will impled another at the lands etc. he ought to enter a plaint
in the Court, and shall declare in the nature of what writ he will, as the
case lies.

427 Voucher.
VOucher, is when a Praecipe quod reddat of land is brought against a man, and
another ought to warrent the land to the tenant, then the tenant shall vouch
him to warrantie, and thereupon he shall have a writ called Summoneas ad
warrantizandum: And if the Shirif return that he has nothing by the which
he may be summoned, then there shall go forth a writ called Sequatur sub
suo periculo, and when he* comes he shall plead with the demaundant, and if
he come not, or if he come and cannot bar the demandant, then the demanda^t
shall recover the land against the tenant, and the tenant shall recover as much
land in value against the vouchee, and thereupon he shall have and writ called
Capias ad vavalentia^ against y^ vouchee.

Look more of Voucher before in y^ title Garra^tie.

Uses.
Uses of land had beginning after that the custom of property began among men:
As where one being seized of lands in fee simple, made a feoffement to another
without any consideration, but only meaning that the other should be seized to
his use, and that he himself would take the commodity and prosits of the
lands, and that the feoffee should have the possession and franktenement
thereof to the same use etc.

Now after this upon good considerations, and to avoid diverse mischiefs and
inconveniences, was the Statute of Anno 27. H. 8. cap. 10. provided, which
unites the use and possession together, so that who has the use of the land,
the some has the possession thereof, according to the use he has therein by
virtue of that estatute.

429 Usury.
Usury, is a gain of any thing above the principal, or that which was lent,
exacted only in consideration of ye loan, whether it be of corn, meat,
apparel, wares, or such like as of money.

And here much might be said, and many cases might be put concerning Usury,
which of purpose I omit, only I wish, that they who account themselves
religious and good Christians would not deceive them selves by color of the
statute of Usury, because it sayrth that it shall not be lawful for any to
take above x. pound in the C. li. for a yerare etc. whereby they gather
(although falsely) that they may therefore take x. pound for the loan of an C*
pound with a good conscience ^^ because the Statute does after a sort dispense
withal (for that it does no^ punish such taking) which thing it cannot do
with y^ laws and ordinances of God, for God will have his decrees to be kept
^uiolable, who says, lend ^o king for nothing thereby etc. By which words
is excluded, either the taking o^ x. li. ^ ^^. yea, or one penny above the
principal. But rather let such (...), that that statute was made upon like
cause, that moved Moses to give a ^ill of divorce to the Isra^lites, as
name^y to avoid a greater m^^^hiefe, and for the hardne^se of their hearts.

Vtlarie.
VTlarie, is when an exigent go^th forth against any man, and proclamation
made in v ^. counties, then a^ the v. county if the defendant ^ppea^e not,
then the coroner shall give judgment tha^ he shall be out of the pro^ection of
the king, and out of the ^yde of the law.

And by such a^ vilary in actions persone^s the party outl^wed shall forfait
al his goods and cattels to the king.

And by an vt^ary in felony he shall forfait as well a^ his ^a^des and ^enements
that he has insee simp^e, or for term of his life, as h^s goods and cattels.

Also though a man be outlawed, yet i^ any ^rror or discontinuance be in the
fuite of the process the p^rtie thereof shall have advantage* and for such cause
the ^tiary shall be reuersed and ad^^^^ed:

Also if the party defendant be over the sea at the time of the v^^arye
pronounced, that is a good cause of the reuersall of the vtlarie.

Also if an exigent be awarded against a man in one County where he dwells
not* yet an exige^t with procla^atio^ shall go forth to the County where he
dwells* or else i^ he be thereupon outlawed the vtlarie may be reuersed as it
appears by the statute made the 6. and 4. year of king H. 8. cap. 4.

Also if a man be ou^^awed in an action parsonel at the suit of another, and
after he purchase his charter of pardon of the king, such charter shall never
be allowed, till he has sued a writ of Scir^ facias to warn the party
plaintiff, and if he appear* then the d^fendant shall answer him and bar
him of his actio^, or else to ma^e agreement with him.

Vtrum.
VTrum* is a writ, and it lies when the right of any Church is aliened and
holden in lay fee, or translated into the possession of another Church, and the
alienour dies, then his successor shall have the sa^d writ, whereby an
inquest shall be charged to try whether it be the free alms of the Church o^
lay fee. And note well that none that has Covent, or common Seal may
maintain^ this writ, but a writ of Enter sine a^^en^^ capituli of the
alienation made by his predecessor.

W.
Waife.
WAife, is when a thief has feloniouslie stolen goods, and being nearly
followed with hue and cry, or ^^s ouercharged with the burden or trouble of
the goods, for his ease sa^e and more speedy trauayling, without hue and
cry, ^lieth away and leaves the goods or any part of them behind him, then
the Queens officer, o^ the ^eeue or Baylife to the Lord of the manor (within
whose ^ur^so^ction or circuit they were left) that by prescription. or grant
from the Queen has the Fraunchise of waife, may seize the goods so wayued to
their Lords use, who may keep them as his own proper goods: except that the
owner come with fresh sinte after the selon, and sue an appeal, or give in
eu^dence against him at his arra^nement upon the indictment, and be attainted
thereof etc. In which cases the first owner shall have restitution of his goods
so stolen and wayued.

But although as has been said waife is properly of goods stol^e^, yet waife
may ^e also the goods that are not stolen. As if a man be pursued with hue and
c^ie, as a felon, and he flies, and leaves his own goods etc. these shall be
taken as goods waiued, and forfait as if they had bee^e st^^ne.

Waiue.
WAiue is a woman that is outlawed, and she is called waiue, as left out or
forsaken of the law, and not an vtlaw as a m^ is. For women are not sworn in
leetes to the Queen, nor to the law^, as men are, who therefore are within the
law, wher^as women are not, and for that cause they cann^t ^^ said outlawed in
so much as they never were within it. But a man is called vtlawe, because that
he was once sworn to the law^ and now for contempt he is put out of the law,
and is called vtlaw, as one should say without benefit ^^ the law.

434 Warwit.
WArwit (or wardwit as some copies have it) that is to be quite of giving of
money for keeping of watches.

435 Wast.
WAst is where tenant for term of years, tenant for term of ^^fe, or tenant
for term of another life, tenant in dower, or tenant by the courtesy or
gardein in chiualry does make wast or destruction upon the land, that ^^ to
say, pu^^eth down the house, or cutteth down ^i^ber* or suffers the house
willing^y to fa^^* or diggeth the ground, there he in the reuersion shall have*
one writ for that wast* and shall recoue^ the place where the wast is done, and
t^^ble damages. And if a man cut down ^^mb^r without license and therewith
repaireth old houses, yet that is no wast. But if he with the timber build a
new house, then y^ cutting down of such timber is wast. Also the cutting down
of underwood or willowes, which is no timber shall not be said wast, but if
they grow in y^ sight or shadow of the house.

Wrecke.
WRecke or varech as y^ Norma^s from whom it came call it, is where a ship is
perished on the sea, and no man escapes a live out of the same, and the ship
or part of the ship so perished, or the goods of the ship come to the land of
any Lord, the ^orde shall have that as a wrec^e of the Sea, but if a man or a
dog, or cat, escape alive, so that the party to whom the goods belong come
within a year and a day and prove the goods to be his, he shall have them
again, by provision of the statute of westminster. 1. cap. 4. made in king Ed. 1.
days, who therein followed the decree of Henry the first, before whose days,
if a ship had been cast on shore, torn with tempest, and were not repaired by
such as escaped alive within a certain time, that the^ this was taken for
wrecke.

437 Withernam.
WIthernam, Look therefore in the title Distress.

438 Warren.
WArren is a place privileged by prescriptio^ or grant of the Queen for the
preservation of Hares, Comes, partriges, and Feasantes or any of them.

Abatement de brief ou plaint.
ABatement de br^e ou plaint est qua^t un action est port per brief ou plaint
en q^ fault sufficient and bon matter, ou auterment le matter allege, nest
certeinment allege, ou si le plaintiff, ou defendant, ou lieu sont misnom^, ou
sil appear variance perenter le brief and le specialtie, ou record, ou que le
brief ou declaration sont uncertain, ou pur mort del plaintiff, ou defendant,
and pur diverse auters semblable causes, donque sur ceux defaults, le def. poit
pry que le brief ou plaint abatera, cest adire, que le suit del pl. enuers
luy cessera pur cest te^ps, and q^ ^l commencer a auter temps son suit and port
un nouel brief ou plaint, sil soit issint dispose a fair. Mes si le def* in
ascun action plead un matt in bar pur adnuller le action a touts io urs, il
ne viendra apres a pled' in abatement de br^, mes si apres il appiert in le
Record q^ est ascun matt apparent pur que le br^ doit estre abat, do^q, le def.
ou asc' aut person, vt amicus curiae poit bn^ plede and mr^e ceo in arrest de
iudgem^t.

Veies les titles de brief, Misnosm^, and variance en les Abridgeme^ts, and le
liver appel le Digests del briefes, in quel est fort bn^ entreat especialment
de ceux matters.

Abatement de br^e ou pleint.
Fault de sufficient matter ou bone matter
Le matter nest certeinment allege plaintiff est Misnosme defendant est
Misnosme ou lieu est Misnosme variance enter Brief Specialtie ou Record
uncertainty del Brief Count ou declaration
Mort Plaintiff ou defendant

2 Abatement en terres
ABatement en terres ou ten^ts est quant un ho^e morust seisi de terres ou
ten^ts, and un que and droit entra en mesmes les tres, ou ten^ts, deua^t q^ le
heir fait son entry, cest entry de luy est appel un abateme^t, and il un
abator. Mes si le heir enter primes apres le mort de son auncestor, and le aut
ent sur le possession del heir, cest enter de luy est un disseisin al heir.
Vide liver dentres fo. 63. c. and 205 d. and 519. c. lou cest abatement est
appell en latin Intrusio, ^t^eo entende destre melius de appeller ceo in latin
Interpositio ou Intratio per interpositionem de fair difference inter ceo and
Intrusio^ puis mort tenant pur vie.

Abbot.
ABbe suit le sovereign test ou principal de ceux measo^s q^ux qua^t ils
fuerent, fuere^t appell Abbeys, and ce^ abbe ensemble oue les Moygnes de m^ le
meason, q^ux fuer^ appel le covent fier^ un corpor, and tiel sovereign de
ascun tiel measo^ ne ser^ charge per act de son predecessor, fill ne soit per
common seal, ou p^ tiel chose que vient al use de son meason. Auxi abbe ne
serra charge pur le det en q^ son comoigne fuit indet deuant son enter en
religion, mesque le creditor ad de ceo un especialty, sinon q^ il auoit deuenus
al use de so^ meason, mes les executors de comoigne serra charge oue ceo.

Vide pur ceo in le Abridgm^t m^ title, desouth quel veies com^t ascu^s de ceux
fueront elective, asc' presentatiue, Et com^t fueront prefect, and lour
aucthority, and en cel title so^t auxi comprehend touts autres corporations
spiritual, come prior and son covent, Frieres and Canons, Deane and Chapter.

4 Abbettors.
ABbettors sont in diu^s cases diuersm^t prise: un kind de abbettors sont ceux
que maliciousm^t sa^s droitur^ cause oudesert proeur^ auts de suer faux appeals
de murder, ou felony enuers ho^es al intent de troubl' and grieu^ eux and pur
fair eux en enfamy and slander. Abbettors in murder sont ceux que command,
procure, counsel ou confortauters de murder. Et en ascun case ^el abbettors
serront prises come principals and en ascu^ case forsque come Accessories:
Issint en auter felonies, Et lour presence a le chose fait, and lour abse^ce de
la, fait un difference ^^ le case. Il y ad abbett auxi en treso^, mes ils sont
en cas come princ', car en treas^ il ny ad ascun accessories.

Veies pluis de ceo en le lieur appel les Plees del Crown co^pile per le
tre^reuere^d Judge Sir W. Sta^f. en les titles de Accessories and damages en
appell.

Abeiance.
ABeiance est qn^t un leas est fait pur term de vie le remainder al droit
heirs de I. S. le quel I. S. est en vie al temps del grant, Ore per cest grant
le remainder passa horse del grantor maintenant, uncore il ne vesta maintenant,
ne prist effect en le grantee, cest adire le droit heir de I. S. mes est dit
deste en abeia^ce, ou come les Logiciens appelle ceo in potentia, ou in
intellectu, and come nous diomus in nubibus, cestassauoir, en le consideration
de le ley, Que si I. S. morust eyant un droit heir en vie, and viuant le
lessee pur vie, donques ceo est un bone remainder, and a ore vest and vient en
le dit droit heir, en tiel sort que il poit grant forfait ou auterment
dispose ceo, and cessa deste ore en abeyance, pur ceo que il est un a ore de
ability pur prender ceo, pur ceo que I. S. est mort and ad relinquishe un
droit heir en vie, le quel ne poit estre viuant I. S. car dura^t son vie null
poit properment este dit son heir. Ite^ si un home soit patron dun esglise,
and present auter a ceo, Ore est le fee des terres ou tenements perteignant al
rectory en le person, mes si le person morust and le esglise est deuenus void,
donque est le fee en abeyance, tanque il soit un nouel Parson present, car le
patron and le fee, mes so leme^t le droit de presenter, and le fee est in le
incumbent, que est present, and puis son mort, il nest en ascun mes en
abeyance, tanque il soit un nouel incumbent come est auant dit.

Veyes Lit. lib. 3. Cap. 11. Fol. 145. Et Park. fol. 12.

Abishersing.
ABishersing (and in ascun copies Mishersing) hoc est quietum esse de
amerciame^tis cora^ quibuscunque de tra^sgressione probata.

Abiuration.
ABiuration est un serement, q^ home ou feme preygnont quant ils ont commisse
felome, and fue al Eglise ou cemitorie, ou auter lieu privilege pur tuitio^ de
lour vyes, eslysa^t pluistost perpetual banishment horse de Realm, que a
estoier a le ley, and destre try del felony. En cel case deuant le Coroner il
ferra tiel confession que puit fair sufficient endytement de felony, donques
le Coroner al common ley luy ferra de abjure la Realm et assign a luy quel
port il alera et luy iura que il ne va horse del haut chymin and que il ne
demurra en le port, (sil poit aver bone passage) forsque un flood and un ebb,
and sil ne poit aver passage, que il alera chescun iour durant xl. iours in la
meare a son genu, Mes si ^iel felon que abjure, ala horse de la chemine and fue
a auter lieu, si il so it prise, il serra amesne deuaunt le Judge, and la auera
judgment destre pendus. Mes sil que issint pria la privilege ne voil abjure,
donques il auera la privilege pur xl. iours and chescun poit luy doner vyande.
Mes si ascun doner luy vyande apres xl. iours, mesque il soit sa femme, tiel
doner est felony, Auxy cestuy que abjure serra deliver per un Constable a
lauter, and de un franchise a lauter, tanque il vient a son port, and si le
Constable ne voit receive luy, il serra greuousment amercie. Vide iuramentum in
tractatu de Abiuratione Latronum.

Et cest ley fuit institute per S. Edward le Confessor, un Roy de cest realm
deuant le Conquest, and fuit ground de le ley de mercy, and pur le amor and
reverence sans doubt, que il and auters ses successors porteront al meason de
Dieu, ou lieu de prayers and administration de son parol and sacraments, le
quel nous appellomus, le Esglise. Nota cel ley est ore change per statutes 21.
H. 8. ca. 2. 22, H. 8. ca. 14. and 32. H. 8. ca. 12. Per queux appiert que il a
cel iour ne abiurera le realm, eins tout son liberty de cest realm, and de
son liberal and fra^k habitations, resorts and passages de touts lieus de cest
realm, a un certain lieu en cel realm a ceo limit per 32. H. 8. cap. 13. and
33. H. 8. ca. 15. Vide plus inde Staf. li. 2. ca. 10.

8 Abridgement de plaint ou demand.
ABridgme^t de plaint ou demand est lou un port un Assisse, brief de dower,
brief de guard, ou tiel se^blables, ou le brief de Assise est, de libero
ten^to, come en brief de dower, le brief est, Rationabilem dotem quae ea^
co^tingit de libero tenemento, w. son baron. En en un brief de guard le brief
est custod' terrarum and hered' etc. and le pl' ou demaundant, demand diverse
acres, ou parcells de terre, and le tenant plede Nontenure, ou ioyntenancy, ou
ascun auter tiel semblable plee a parcel del terre demand, en abatement del
brief, do^ques le plaintiff ou demaundant poit abridger son plaint, ou demand
al cest parcel, cest adire, il poit omit horse cest part and pry q^ le tenant
respondra a rest a que il ne ad uncore pled' ascun chose. Le cause est pur ceo
q^ en tiels br^es le certainty nest mise, mes demand est generalment de libero
ten^to; and nient obstant le demaundant ad abridge son plaint ou demand en
part, uncore le brief demurre bon de libero tenemento pur le residue.

Accedas ad Curiam.
ACcedas ad Curiam est un brief direct al vicont, luy commaundant daler a tiel
court dascun seignior ou franchise lou un plaint est sue pur prisel del auers
come distress, ou ascun faux judgment est suppose destre fait en ascun suit
que fuit en tiel court, quel nest court de record, and que le vicont la ferra
record del dit suit en presence del suitors de mesme le Court, and de quatuor
autres chiualers del County, and oeo record certifier^ al court, and a cel
iour quel est assign en le brief.

Acceptance.
ACceptance est un prendrans en bon gree, and come un agreement al ascun chose
fait deuant, le quel poit este avoid and vnfait (si tiel acceptance and estre)
per luy ou ceux que issint accepta, sicome pur example: si un Euesque deuant
primo Eliz. less terre part del possessions de son Euescherie pur ans
reseruant rent and morust, and puis un auter est fait Euesque, le quel accepta,
cest adire, prist ou receive le rent quant il est and doit estre pay, ore per
cest acceptance le lease est fait perfect and bon, le quel auterment le nouel
Euesque poit assets bien avoid and fair frustrate.

Semblable ley est, si un home and sa feme seisi de terres en droit del feme
ioin and font leas ou ^effment per fait reseruant rent, and le baron monist, el
accept ou receyu^ ^^ rent, per cel le feoffement ou lease est fait perfect and
boue, and serra bar a luy de porter sa brief appel Cui in vita.

11 Accessories.
ACcessories sont en deux sorts, lun auaunt le fact, le auter puis le fact
fait. Accessorie deuant le fait est celuy que comma^da ou procura auter de
fair felony, and nest la present luy mesme quant lau ter le fait, mes sil soit
present donques il est auxi principal. Accessorie puis le fait est celuy que
receiua, fauora, aida, assist, on comfort ascun home que ad fait ascun murder
ou felony, don't il ad conusance, tiel accessorie serra punish, and auera
judgment de vie and de member, auxybien come le principal que fist le felony:
Mes tiel accessorie ne serra iammais mis a responder a ceo ta^que le principal
soit convict ou attaint, ou soit vtlage de ceo. Mes un feme en tiel case ne
serra accessorie pur le aider de son baron: en grande ou hault Treason sibien
les commanders, come les assisters and receiuors ap^s so^t touts foits
principals*

Auxy un poit estre accessorie al accessorie, sico^e un feloniouseme^t receive
un auter q^ est accessorie al felony, la le receiver est un accessorie.

Veies pluis del accessorie en le dit Lieur de les Plees del Crown, le primer
lieur, cap. 44. 45. 46. 47. 48. 49. and 50.

12 Action.
ACtion est le form de un suit done per le ley de recover chose, come action
de debt and tiels semblables.

Vide Lexicon Iuris pur action.

13 Actions personals.
Actions personals sont tiels actions pur queux home claim det ou auter biens
and chateux, ou damage pur eux, ou damage pur tort fait a son person, and est
properment cel que en le Civil ley est appel Actio in personam, quae aduersus
cum intenditur, qui ex contractu vel delicto obligatus est aliquid dare aut
concedere.

14 Actions reals.
ACtions reals sont tiels actions per queux le demandant claim title al ascun
terres ou teneme^ts rents ou commons, in fee simple, fee tail, ou pur term de
vie.

Action populer.
ACtion populer est un action q^ est done sur le breach dascu^ penal statute,
le q^l actio^ chesc* ho^e q^ voit poit suer pur luy m^ and le Roigne, per
information ou auterm^t, come le statut allow and le case require. Et de ceux
actions il y ad infinite number, mes un pur example est: Qua^t ascun del Jury
que sont impanel and iurus de passer perenter party and party
indifferentment, prist ascun chose de lun part ou laut, ou de ambideux parties
pur lour verdict dire al ceo part, donques ascun home q^ voit deins lan
procheine ensuant le offense fait, poit suer un brief appel Decies tantu^
enu^s luy, ou ceux q^ issint prist pur lour verdit dire, and pur ceo q^ cest
action nest don al un ho^e specialm^t, mes generalment al asc* de les peopl*
del R. q^ voit suer, il est appell un Action populer, mes en cel case, quant un
auoit commence de pursuer cel action, null auter poit ceo suer, and en ceo come
semble cel vary del action populer per le Civil ley.

16 Action mixed.
ACtion mixed est un suit done per la ley de recover le chose demand, and auxy
damages pur le tort fait, come en Assise de Nouel disseisin, quel brief (si le
disseisor fait feoffeme^t al auter) le disseisee auera verse le disseisor and le
feffee ou auter terre tenant, and en ceo recouera son seisin del terre and ses
damages pur le mean profits, and pur le tort a luy fait. Et issint est un
action de Wast and Quare impedit. Mes un actio^ de Detinu nest appel action
mixed, com^t per ceo le chose detenus est demand, and serra recover si poit
este troue, and damages pur le detain^, and si ne poit estre troue, do^que
damages pur la chose and la deteiner* Mes ceo est appell solement action
personal que serra port solement pur biens ou chattels.

Action del brief.
ACtion del brief est un phrase del parlance, use quant un plede ascun matter,
per que il monstre que le plaintiff and cause dauer le brief que il port, and
uncore poit este que il poit aver auter brief ou action pur mesme le matter:
tiel plee est appell plee al action del brief, lou si per la plee appiert que
le plaintiff naueroit ascun cause de aver ascun action pur le chose demand,
donq^* ceo serra dit plee al action.

Action sur le case.
ACtion sur le case est br^ port enuers un pur ascun offense fait sans force,
come pur nient performance del promise fait per le defendant al plaintiff, ou
pur parlance des parolles per queux le plaintiff est defame, ou pur auter
misdemeanor ou disceit, lou tout le case serra contenus en le brief.

19 Action sur le statute.
ACtion sur le statute est brief foundue sur ascun estatute, lou per ascun
estatute un action est done a un en ascun case lou null tiel action fuit deuant:
Come lou un commit perjury al prejudice dun auter, cestuy que est dampnifi^
auera brief sur lestatute and son case. Et le difference enter action sur le
statute and action Populer est, que lou le statute done le suit ou action al
party grieve, ou auterment, a un person certain, ceo est appell Action sur*
le Statute: Mes lou per le statute authority est done a chescun que voyle de
suer, ceo est appell action populer.

Account.
Account, est un brief, and gist lou Bailife ou receiver dascun Seigniour ou
dauter home, que doit render account, ne voit son account render, donques celuy
a que laccompt doit este rende, auera cest brief. Et per lestatute de
Westminster 2. Capitulo 10. si laccomptant soit troue in arrerages, les
Auditors que sount a luy assigns, ount power de agarder luy a prison la a
demurrer tanque il ad fait gree al party, Mes si les Auditors ne voillont
allower reasonable expense and costage, ou sils chargeront luy oue plusours
resceipts quant ne duissent, donques son procheyne amye, que voit suer pur luy,
suera un brief de Ex part talis horse del Chauncery, direct al Vicount de
prender iiii. mainpernors de render son corpse deuant les Barons del Exchequer a
certain iour, and de garner le Seigniour dapperer la a mesme le iour.

21 Accord.
ACcord est un agreement perenter deux al meins pur satisfy un offense que le
un ad fait al auter, Quant un home ad fait un trespass ou tiel semblable al
auter, pur le quel il ad agree oue luy de satisfier and content luy oue
recompense, quel si soit executed and perform^, do^ques pur ceo que cest
recompense, est un pleine satisfaction pur le offense, il serra un bon barr^ en
le ley, si laut apres laccord perform, voit suer arere un action pur mesme le
trespass.

Nota que le primer est proprement appelle un Accord, le aut est un contract.

22 Acquital.
ACquital est quant, il y ad Seignior, mesne, and tenaut, and le tenant tient
de le mesne certain terres ou teneme^ts en frakalmoigne, frankmariage ou tiels
semblables, and le mesne tient ouster auxy de le Seign^ paramount ou deuant
luy. Ore doit le mesne acquit ou discharge le tenant, de tout and chescun
manner de service, q^ ascu^ aut vo^t aver ou demand de luy concernant mesmes
les tres ou teneme^ts, pur ceo q^ le tenant doit fair le service a le mesne
tantsolement, and nemy al diverse Sn^rs pur un ten^t, ou parcel del terre. Mesm^
le ley est ou il est Sn^r, mesne, and tenant come aua^tdit, and le mesne granta
al tenant (sur le tenure fait parenter eux) pur acquiter and discharger luy de
touts re^ts, services and tiels semblables, Cest discharge est appel Acquitall.

Mesme le ley est, si tenant tient de son mesne per autiels services, come le
mesne tient ouster del Seigniour, and le tenant fait ou pay services al mesne,
mes le mesne ne fesoit ses services al seignior paramount, per que il distreine
les bestes del tenant, en cel case le mesne pur le ouelty del services doit
acquitter le tenant del services due al Seignior.

23 Acquitance.
ACquitance, est un discharge en escript dun sum de money, ou auter duty, quel
doit este pay ou fait: Si come un soit oblige de paier money sur un obligation,
ou rent reserve sur un leas, ou tiel semblable, and le party a q^ le money ou
duty doit este pay, ou fait, sur le resceit de ceo, ou sur auter agreement
parenter eux ewe, fait escript, ou bil de son main en discharge de ceo,
testmoinaunt que ^l est pay, ou auterment content, and pur ceo acquit, and
discharge luy de ceo, le quel acquitaunce est tiel discharge and bar in le
ley, que il ne poit demand and recover mesme le sum ou duty auter foits
contra a ceo, sil poit monstre le acquitance.

Cest paroll differt ab hoc, quod in iure civilly acceptitatio dicitur, quia
illud fieri potest verbo fine scripto, and nihil aliud est quam ^icta solutio
and liberatio, licet solutio non sit: nec Apocha dici potest, quae cautio est
solutae dataeue pecuniae* quae non liberat nisi pecunia soluta sit.

Acts.
Acts de parliament sont leys positive que consist de deux parts, cest adir
de les parols del act, and del sense de ceo, and ils ambideux joint ensemble
font la ley.

Additions.
ADdition, est ceo que est done al home ouster son proper nosme and sirnosme,
cest adire, pur monstrer, de quel estate, ou degree, ou misterye il est, and de
que Ville ou Hamlett ou County.

Additions de estate sont ceux, yeoman, gentleman Esquire, and tiels se^blables.

Additio^s de degree sont ceux q^ nous appellomus nosmes de dignity, come
Chiualer, Conte, Marquis and Dux.

Additions de mystery sont ceux, scriuener, painter, mason, carpenter, tailor,
smith, and issint toutes auters de semblable nature, car mystery e^ le craft ou
occupation, per que home gain son living.

Additions de villes come Sale, Dale, and tiels auters, and issint de les
auters.

Et lou un home ad household en deux leuz, il serra dit demurr en ambideux,
issint que son addition en un de cux suffist.

Fuit ordeine per lestatute Anno 1. Henrici 5. Cap. 5. que en suits ou actions,
ou process dutlagarie gist, tiels additions serra al nosme defendant, a declarer
son estate, mystery and lieu ou il enhabite, and que tiels briefs abateront
sils ne ount tiels additions, si le defendant prist exception a ceo, mes ils ne
abateront per office del Court.

Auxy Duke, Marquess, Count, ou Chiualer ne sont pas del ceux additio^s, mes
nosmes de dignity, queux, duissont aver estre done deuant le Statute.

Et ceo fuit ordeigne per cest Statut fait en le primer an de Roy H. le 5. ca.
5. al intent q^ un home ne serroit grieve ne trouble pur le vtlagarie de un
auter: mes que per reason de le certain addition, chescun home poit este
certainment conus, and portera sa burden demesne.

Adiournement.
ADiourneme^t est quant ascun Court est dissolve and determine, and assign
destr^ guard arrere al auter lieu ou temps, and come semble, est co^pound de
deux parols, (ad) ou (al) and iour.

Admeasurement de Dower.
ADmeasurem^t de dower est un brief* and nest lou un feme est endowe per un
infant, ou per un gardein de pluis que deuoit aver, le heir en tiel case auera
cest brief, per quel le feme serra admeasure, and le heir restore a le
surplusage. Mes si un abate, cest adire, un que and droit enter apres le mort
le barron, and endowe la feme de cestuy que est mort, de pluis que doit aver,
le heir nauera cest brief, mes assise de Mortdauncester verse la feme, and si
el plede que el fuit endow de ceo terre come del franktenement sa baron, le
heir monstra coment el fuit endowe per labatour, and quel el ad pluis, que
deuoit aver, and prier^ que il soit restore al surplusage, and si soit troue,
il serra restore.

28 Admeasurement de pasture.
ADmeasurement de pasture, est un brief, and gist lou plusors tenaunts ont
common appendant en auter terre, and un surcharge le common oue plusors auers:
Do^ques lauters co^moners poient aver cest brief verse luy, and auxy poit estre
port per un commoner soleme^t, mes donq^es couient estre port verse touts
lauters commoners, and verse cesty q^ surcharge, pur ceo q^ touts les co^moners
serront admeasures.

Et cest brief ne gist verse luy, ne prour luy que ad common appurtenant, ou
common ingros, mes ceux que ont common appendant, ou common per cause de
vicinage.

Vide le diversity de touts ceux commons apres.

Auxy cest brief ne gist pur le seignior, ne verse le seignior, mes seignior
poit distrain les auers le tenant que sont surplusage. Mes si le seignior
surcharge le common, les commoners nont remedy per le common ley, mes un Assise
de son common.

Administrator.
ADministrator est celuy a que le ordinary commit ^administration des biens la
mort pur defaut de executors, and action gist verse luy, and pur luy come pur
executor, and serra charge resques al value des biens le mort and nie^t ouster,
sil ne soit per son faux plea, ou pur ceo que il ad wast les biens le mort. Mes
si le administratour deuie, ses executors ne sont administrators, mes couient
al Ordinary de commit nouel administration: mes si un estrange que nest
administratour ne executor prist les biens le mort, and administer de son tort
demesne, il serra charge and sue come executor, and nemy come administrator en
ascu^ actio^ que est port verse luy per ascun creditor. Mes si lordinarie fait
un brief ad Colligendum bona defuncti, cestuy que ad tiel letter nest
administrator, mes laction gist verse le Ordinary auxybien come sil prist les
biens en son maine demesne, ou per le maine de ascun de ses servants per ascun
auter co^mandme^t.

Admiral.
Admiral est un officer south le Roigne, que ad aucthority sur le mere tantum,
pur veier le navy repair and maintain pur suppresser and chaser dehors
estimures de mere, and de fair droit de contractes perenter party and party,
concernant chose fait sur and ouster le mere, and pur cest purpose il ad so^
court appel le Admiraltie. Il poit causer son Citation destre serve sur le
terr^ and pre^der le corpse del party ou biens en execution sur le terre.

Ite^ il ad cognizance del mort ou maihem de un home fait en ascun grand mefe
fleetant en graund ryuers en le Realm, debase les pontes de eux prochein al
mere.

Auxy pur arrest niefes en les graund streams pur les voiages del Roign and
realm, and ad jurisdiction en les dits streams dura^t mesme viages.

Ad quod dampnum.
AD quod dampnum est un brief que doit este sue deuant le Roy grant certain
liberties: Come fair, market, ou tiels semblables queux poient este p^iudicial
al autres. Et per ceo serra inquise si serroit prejudice a granter eux, and a
que serra prejudicial, and que prejudice ent auiendra.

32 Aduowson.
ADuowson est lou un home and ses heirs ont droit de presenter lour clerk al
Ordinary al un parsonage, ou auter espiritual benefice quant il deuient void.
Et celuy que ad tiel droit de presenter est appel patron.

33 Age prier.
AGe prier est quant action est port verse enfa^t de terre que il ad per
descent, la il monstra le matter al court, and priera que le action demurra
tanque a son plein age de xxj. ans, and issint per agard del Court le suit
surcessera.

Mes en brief de Dower and en Assise, and auxy en tiels actions lou le infant
est suppose a veneral terre en demand de son tort demesne, il nauera sa age.

Auxy nota que sont plusors diversities de ages, car le Seignior auera aid de
son tenant en Socage pur marrier sa file, quant le file le seignior est del
age de sept ans. Et auxy aid pur fair son fites and heir chiualer, quant il
est del age de sept ans.

Auxy feme que est espouse al age de ix. ans* si sa baron morust seisie auera
Dower, and nemy deuant ix. ans.

Auxy xiiii. ans est le age de feme que ne serra en guard, si el fuit de tiel
age al temps del mort son auncestor, mes si el fuit deins age de xiiii. ans,
and en guard son seignior, donques el serra en guard tanque al age de xvi. ans.
Et auxy xxi. ans est lage de heir male destre en guard, and apres ceo horse de
guard. Et auxy il est le age de male and female de suer and destre sue des
terres, q^ ils ont ou claim per disce^t and de fair touts manners contracts
and bargains and nient deuant: mes si tiel infaunt deins age de xxj. ans done
ses bie^s* and le donee eux prist, lenfant poet aver un action de trespass, mes
auterm^ il est sil deliver eux.

24 Agreement.
AGreement* est en cest manner define ou expound en master Ploudens
commentaries. Aggreamentum, est un paroll compounde de deux parolx; cest
assauoir, de Aggregatio and Mentium, cest a dire agreement de ments, issint que
aggreamentum est aggregatio mentium in re aliqua facta vel facienda. Et per le
contraction de les deux parolx, Aggregatio and mentium, and per le correpte and
brief perlance deux, ils sont fait un parol, cestass. Aggreamentum, le quel
nest auter chose, q^ un vnio^, collecte copulation and conjunction de deu^ ou
plusours ments in ascun chose fait ou deste fait. (Veies apres en testament.)
Et cest agreement est in 3. manners.

Le primer est un agreement executed en fait al commencement.

Le second, est un agreement puis un act fait per auter, and est un agreement
executed auxy.

Le tierce est un agreement executory ou deste fait e^ te^psvncore a vener.

Le primer que est un agreement executed en fait al co^mencement, est tiel de
q^ mennon est fait en le statute de 25. Ed. 3. cap* 3. de panms in le quart
statute que dit, que les biens and chooses achates per forestallers, q^ de ceo
serront attaintes soient forfaites al Roigne, si le achator e^t vst fait gree
al ve^dour. En quel case, cest parol (Gree) q^ est auterment appel agreement,
serra entende agreement execute, viz. payment pur les chooses.

Le second manner de agreement est lou un fait un chose ou act, and un auter
agree ou assent a ceo apres, come si un fait disseis^n a mon use, and apres ^eo
agree a ceo, ore ieo serra disseisor ab initio* and tiel agreement est un
agreement puys un act fait.

Le tierce agreement est quant ambideux parties a un temps sont accords que
tiel chose serra fait en te^ps a vener, and ceo agreement est executorie enta^t
que le chose serra fait apres and uncore la lour ments accor^ a un temps. Mes
enta^t que le perf^^ma^ce serra apres, and issmt le chose sur que lagrem^t fuit
fait, remain a fair, ceo agreement serra dit executorie. Et ceo le statute de
26. H. 8. cap. 3. prove, ou il dit, q^ chescun vicar, parson and tiel etc.
deuant lour actual possession ou meddling oue les proofits de lour benefice
satisfiera, content etc. ou agreera a paier al use le Roign les primer fruits
etc. (...) si asc tiel Parso^, vic etc. enter e^ actual possession, etc. ceo
agreement est deste entende executory, come le common usage prove, car est use,
que^l oue un ou deux oue luy fa^er^ deux vel trois obligations pur ceo deste
pay en certain iours apres, and cest agreement executory est deuidem deux
points. Un est agreement executory, que est certain al co^mencement, come est
dit darraine deuant del primer fruits.

Lauter est lou le certainty napp^ert al primes and les parties so^t accords q^
le chose serra perform, ou pay sur le certainty conus* come si un vend al
auter tout son wheat en tiel tasse en son barn nient thresh and il est agree
perenter eux, que il payera pur chescun bushel xii. d. quant il est thresh,
clean, and measure.

Aid.
Aid, est quant tenant a term de vie, tenant en dower, tenant per le
courtesy, ou tenant en tail, ap^s possibility dissue extinct est implede,
do^ques pur ceo que ils nont que estate pur term de vie, ils praieront aid de
cestuy in le reuersio^, and process serra fait per brief verse luy, de vener and
pleder oue le tenant, en defense del terre si voyl, mes il couient, que ils
accord en plee: car sils vary, le plee le tenant, serra prise, and do^ques
leyde pryer est en vain, mes si ne vient al second brief, le tenant
respondera sole.

Auxy tenant pur term de ans, tenant a volunt, tenant per Elegit, and tenant
per statute merchant aueront aid de cestuy en la reuersion, and le servant and
bailey de lour master, quant ils ount fait ascun chose loyalme^t, e^ le droit
lour master, auero^t aid.

36 Aid de Roy.
Aid de Roy, est en se^ble case come est dit deuant de common person, and auxy
en plusours auts cases, lou le roy puytauer perde, coment que le tenant soit
tenant in fee simple, il auera aid, Come si un rent soit demand verse tenant
le Roy, que tient en chief, il auera aid, and issint nauera de auter person.

Auxy lou un City ou Borough ad un fee farm del Roy, and ascun chose est
demand verse eux que apperteme al fee farm, ils aueront aid pur le perde le
Roy.

Auxy home auera aid de Roy en lieu de voucher. Auxy le Baylife, Collectour
and Purueiour del Roy aueront aid del Roy, auxy bien come les officers de
auters persons.

Ayle.
AYle, est un brief que gist lou terre descend de layell a son neuiew, viz.
fits, ou file del fites de layell, le pier esteant mort, deuant entry per luy,
and un abate, le heir auera verse le abator cel brief.

38. Alien.
ALien, est celuy q^ pere and il mesme fuer^ ambideux nee horse del legeance le
Roigne, and si tiel alien, nesteant un enemy del Roigne, mes un alien amy vient
and demurr^ cy en Engleterre and ad issue, cest issue ne^ alie^ mes Anglois.
Issint si un Anglois ala ouster le mere oue le license del roign^ and la ad
issu, ce^ issu ne^ alien.

39 Alienation.
ALienation, idem est, quod alienum facere de alter^, ou mitter le possession
de terre ou auter chose de lun home al auter.

40 Ambidexter.
AMbidexter, est celuy que quant un matter est in suit parenter homs, prist
money de lun part, and del auter, ou pur labor le suit, ou tiels semblables, ou
sil soit del jury, pur dire son verdict.

41 Amendment.
Amendment, est quant error est en le Process, les Justices poient ceo amender
apres judgment. Mes si error sort en judgment done, ils ne poyent amender ceo,
mes le party est mise al brief de error. Et in plusours cases lou le default
appiert en le clerk q^ escriera la Record il serra amend: Mes tiels chooses que
vient per informatio^ del party come le ville, mystery, and huiusmodi ne
serra amend, car il doit informer very a son peril.

Amercement.
AMercement, plus properment est un penalty assesse per les piers del party
amercie, pur un offense fait, come pur default de suit de court, ou pur non
amend' de ascun chose que il fuit appoint de redresser deuant, ou pur tiel
semblable cause, en quel case la party que offend soit mist en le mercy del
roy ou Seigniour, and sur ceo cel penalty est appel Amercement.

43 Amercement royal.
AMercement royal, est quant un Vicont, Coron^ ou aut tiel officer del Roigne
est amercie per les Justices pur son misdemeaning en le office, q^re si neserra
dit fine.

44 An, iour and wast.
AN, iour and wast, est un forfaiture, qua^t un ho^c ad fait petit treason ou
felony, and ad terres queux il tient de ascun common person, q^ux serra scisi
pur le Roigne and remain en sa maines per la space de un an and un iour
procheine apres le attainder, and do^ques les aibres serro^t defosse, les
measons serront rases, and les pastures, and prees aires and plowed, sinon que
il, a que le terre deuenera per leschete ou forfaiture, ne ceo redeem^ de Roy,
un chose le plus de greeuer le offenders and terrify auters de cader en
autiel, en demonstraunce, coment le ley detest lour offense, cye auaunt issint
que il execute judgment and punishment sur lour mute and mort chooses.

Annuitie.
ANnuitie, est un certain su^me de money grant al un auter, en fee simple, fee
tail, pur term de vie ou pur term de ans, a receiver del grantor ou ses
heirs, issint q^ null franktenement est charge de ceo, de que home nauera
vnques, assise ne aut action forsque brief de annuitie, and nest ascun assets
al heir le grantee a que il discendera.

Appeal.
Appeal, est lou un ad fait murder, robbery ou mayhem, donques la feme cestuy
que est tue, auera un action de appeal verse le murderer, mes sil and femme
donques son procheine heir male auera le appeal a ascun temps deins lan and
iour apres le feast, Et auxi cestuy que est issint rob ou mayhem auera son
appeal, and si le defendant soit acquit, il recouera damages verse lappellour
and labbettors, and ils auero^t le imprisonment dun an and ferra fine al Roy.
Appeal de mayhem nest en manner forsque action de trespass, ear il ne recouera
forsque damages.

47 Appellant.
Appellant est le plaintiff en le appeal.

48 Appellour.
APpellourou Approuer, est cesty q^ ad fait asc felony le quel il confess and
a ore appeal, ou approve, cest adire, accuse autres que fueront coadiutors ou
aiders oue luy en feasans de ceo, ou autres felonies, le quel chose il voit
approuer and ceo est appelle e^ latin Probator.

49 Appendant and appurtenant.
APpendant and appurtenant sont chooses q^ per temps de prescription ont belong,
appertain, and sont join al auter principal chose, ouesque que ils passont and
va come accessarie al mesme principal chose, per virtue de ceux parolx
Pertinentijs: come terre, aduowsons, co^mo^s, piscaries, chimins courts, and
diverse tielx se^bl', al un manor, measo^, office, ou tiels auters.

Apporcionment.
APporcionment est un dividing en parts de un re^t (le quel est diuidable and
meant intier ou whole) and enta^t q^ le chose horse de quel il fuit deste pay, e^
separate and divide, le re^t auxy serra divide, ayant respect a les parts.
Sicome un home ad un rent service issuant horse de terre and il purchase parcel
de le terre, le rent serra apportion, accorda^t al value del terre.

Issint si home tient son terre dun auter per homage, fealty, escuage, and
certain rent, si le seignior de que le terre est tenus purchase parcel del
terre le rent serra apportion.

Item si home lessa terres pur ans reseruant re^t, and apres un estrange
recover part de le terre, donques le rent serra apportio^, cest adire divide,
and le lessee payera ayant respect a ceo que est recover, and a ceo que ore
remain en ses maines accordant al value.

Mes un rent charge ne poit estre apportion, ne chooses q^ sont entier: Sicome
un tient terres per service de paier a son Seignior annuelm^t a tiel feast, un
chiual, esperuer, un rose, un chery, ou tiels semblables, la si le Seignior
purchase parcel de la terre, cest service est tout ale, pur ceo q^ un chiual,
esperuer, rose, ou un chery, and tielx auters ne poient estre divide, severed,
ou apportio^ sans damage al entiertie.

51 Appropriation.
APpropriations fueront qua^t ceux measons de le Romish Religion, and ceux
Religious persons, come Abbots, Priors, and tiels semblables, ont le aduowson
de ascu^ parsonage al eux and a lour successors, and obtain license de lour S.
Pere le Pape, and de le Ordinary and Roy, q^ ils mesmes and lour successors de
ceo en auant doyent este parsons la, and il serra en aua^t un vicar', and que
le Vicar seruera le cure. Et issint al co^mencem^t Appropriations fueront
faites solement a ceux persons spirituals, que puisscie^t minister les
sacraments, and dire divine service, come Abbes, Priors, Deanes, and tiels
semblables. Apres per petite and petite ils fueront enlarge and fait as auters,
come nosmement al Deane and Chapter, quel est corpse corporat, consistant de
plusors, q^l corpse ensemble ne puissoit dire divine service: and q^ pluis fuit,
al Nuns que fueront Prioresses de ascun Nu^ry quel fuit chose horrible, entant
q^ ils ne puissoient minister sacraments ne preacher, ne dire divine service al
parochians.

Et tout ceo fuit sur pretense de hospitality and maintenance de yeel. Et de
supplier cel defectes un vicar fuit devise, quel serroit deputy al Priores ou
Deane and Chapter, and auxy al darrein al dits abbeis and auters a dire divine
service, and il aueroit pur son labor forsque petite portion, and ils a quel le
appropriatio^s fueront fait reteigneront le grand revenues, and ils fesoient
riens pur ceo, per means de quel hospitality decay en le lieu ou il doit estre
chiefement guard, nosmement en le parish ou le benefice fuit, and ou les
profits cresscient, and issint il continue tanque a cest iour, al graund
hindrance de erudition, al impouerishment de le ministry, and le infamy de
le Gospel and le professors de yeel.

Le Vicar auera un certain portion del benefice, and que le Abbe and le Covent
serront parsons and auero^t les auters profits: Cest appel un appropriation,
and donques le Abbe and le Coue^t serro^t parsons imparsonees. Mes tiel
appropriation ne poit estre fait a commencer en le vie le parson sans son
assent.

Mes si tiel aduowson del parsonage soit recover per ancient title, donq^s
lappropriation est adnul. Et est appel appropriation, pur ceo que ils teigne
les profits al lour proper use.

Approuement.
APprouement est lou un home ad common en le wast terre del Seignior and le
seignior enclose part del wast terre pur luy mesme, relinquishant nient obstant
sufficient common oue egresse and regresse pur les commoners: Cest enclosure
est appel approuement.

Arbitrament.
Arbitrament est un award, determination, ou judgment, quel plusors font al
request de deux parties al meins, pur, and, sur ascun det, trespass, ou aut
controversy ew perenter les dits parties. Et cest appel en Latin Arbitratus
and Arbitrium, and ils que font le awarde ou arbitrament so^t appel Arbitri, en
Anglois Arbitrators.

54 Arrest.
ARrest est quant un est prise and restrain a son liberty. Null serra arrest
pur det, trespass, detinue, ou auter cause de action, mes per virtue dun precept
ou commandment horse de ascu^ court. Mes pur Treason, Felony, ou debruser del
peace, chescun home ad authority de arrester sans garrantie ou precept. Et
lou un serra arrest pur felony, il couient que ascun felony soit fait, and
que il soit suspect de mesme le felony, ou auterment il poit aver enuers luy
que issint luy arrest un brief de faux imprisonment. Et quant ascun home est
arrest pur felony il serra amesne a le gaile, la a demurrer tanque al procheine
sessio^ pur este indite, ou pur este deliver per proclamation.

Arrerages.
ARrerages sont duties arrere nient pay apres le iours and temps, en quel ils
fueront dues, and doyent aver estre paies, soye^t il rent de manor, ou ascun
auter chose reserve

Assets.
ASsets est en deux sorts lun appel (assets per descent) lauter (Assets enter
maines.) Assets per descent est lou un home est oblige en un obligation and
morust seisy de tres de fee simple, queux disce^de a son heir, donques cest
terre serra appel assets, cest adire sufficient de payer cest det and per cest
means le heir serra charge cy auant que le terre issint a luy discende voyle
stretch. Mes sil ad alien deuaunt que le obligation soit mise en suite, il est
discharge.

Auxi quant un home seisie de terre en tail, ou en droit de son feme, alien
ceo oue garrantie, and ad en value tant terre en fee simple que discende a son
heir: q^ est auxi heir en tail ou heir al feme, Ore si le heir apres le
mort so^ ancestor port un brief de Formedon ou sur cui in vita, pur le tree
issint alien, donq^s il serra bar per reason dun garra^ty and le terre issint
descend, que est tant en value come ceo q^ fuit vende, and issint per ceo il
and receive ascun prejudice, and per ceo cest terre est appel Assets per
descent.

Assets enter maines est quant un home endet, come deuant est dit, fait
executors and relinquist a eux suffic' de paier, ou ascun commodity ou profit
est venus al eux en droit lour testatour, cest appel Assets en lour maines.

57 Assignee.
ASsignee est celuy a que un chose est appoint, ou assign^ deste occupy, pay ou
fait, and est toutes foites tiel person, que occupy ou ad le chose issint
assign en son droit demesne and pur luy mesme, Et de assignees il y sont ij.
sorts nosme^t assignee en fait and assignee en ley. Assignee en fait est quant
un leas est grant al un and a ses assignees ou sans ceux perols, assignees,
and le gra^tee done, grant ou vende le dit leas al auter, il est son assignee
en fait. Assignee en le ley est chescun executor nosme per le testatour en son
testament: si come un leas soit fait al un home and a ses assignees (sicome est
aua^t dit) and il fait ses executors and morust sans assignm^t del leas al
ascun aut, Ore les executors au^a m^ le leas pur ceo q^ ils sont ses assignees
en ley. Et issint est en auters semblables cases.

Assise.
ASsise est un brief and gist ou ascun home est mis horse de son terre ou
tenementes ou de ascun profit apre^dre en certain lieu and issint disseisi de
so^ franktenement. Franktenement a ascun hom^ est lou il est seisie de terres
ou tenements ou profit a prender in fee simple, fee tail, pur term de son vie
demesne, ou pur term dauter vie. Mes tenant per Elegit, tenant per statute
merchant and statute staple poient aver assise, come^t que ils nont frank
tenement, and cest est ordain per diverse statutes.

Auxi en assise il couient touts fo^^es que il soit un disseisor and tenant ou
auterment le brief abatera.

Auxi ou un home est disseisi and recouera per assise de nouel disseisin, and
puis est auterfoits disseisi per mesme le disseisor, il auera verse luy un
brief de redisseisin direct al vicount de fair inquisitio^, and si troue
soit le redisseisin, il serra mis en prison. Auxi si home recou^a per Assise de
Mortdauncester ou per auter Jury, ou per default ou redditio^, and sil soit
auterfoits disseisie, il auera do^ques un brief de Post disseisin, and cestuy
q^ est pris and impriso^ pur redisseisin, ne serra deliver sa^s especial
commandment le Roy. Vide les estatutes inde Merton ca 3. Marlbridge, Cap. 8.
Et Westminster 2. Cap. 26. Auxy il est un auter Assise appell Assise de Fresh
force and gist lou home est disseisie de tenements queux son deuisables, come
en le City de London ou auter Boroughs ou villes que sont enfraunchises,
donques le defendant viendra en la Court de dit Ville and entra son plaint, and
au^a un brief direct al Maire ou Baylifes etc. and sur ceo passera un Jury en
manner dassise de Novel disseisin, Mes il couient que il entra son pl^int
deins xl. iours, vt dicit ou auterm^t il serra miss a le common ley, Et si le
ministres delay execution, donques le plaintiff auera un auter brief dauer
execution^* Et Sicut alias, and Pluries etc. Vide Lattlet Ca. Rents, Assise e^
nosme equiuocum etc.

59 Assise de darraine presentment.
ASsise de darrain prese^tm^t, vide de ceo ap^s titulo Quare impedit.

60 Assise de Mortdancester.
ASsise de Mortda^cester, vide de ceo apres titulo Cosinage.

61 Attainder.
ATtainder, est un conviction dascun person dun crime ou fault, don't il ne fuit
conuicte deua^t, si come un home fait felony, treason, ou tiels se^blables, and
de ceo est endicte, arraign^, and troue guilty and adiudge, donques il est dit
deste attaint, and ceo poiet este deux voies, lun sur appara^ce* le aut sur
default: le attainder sur appearance, est per confession, battle ou verdict,
le attainder sur default est per process tanque il soit vtlage.

62 Attaint.
ATtaint est un brief and gist lou faux verdicte est done per xij. homes and
judgment done sur ceo, donque le party verse que ils auoyent pass auera cest
brief verse les douze homes, and quant ils sont a issue, il serra try per vynt
quater Jurors, and si faux verdict soit troue, les douze Jurors sount
attaint, and donques le judgment serra que lour prees serront aires, lour
measons debruses, lour boys subuertes, and touts lour terres and tenements
forfaites al Roy, mes sil passa enconter celuy que port lattaint, il serra
imprison and grieuousment ransom al volu^t le Roy, Vide le Statute 23. H. 8.
cap. 3. Attaint auxy est quant judgment est done en treason on felony.

Attournement.
ATtournement, est qua^t un est tenant pur tme de vie, and cestuy en la
reuersion ou remainder granta son droit ou estate a un auter, donques il
couient q^ le tenant pur tme de vie agree a ceo, and ce^ agreem^t est appel
atturnment, ear si cestuy en le reuersio^ grant son estate, and son droit a un
auter, si le tenant pur term de vie ne attourna, riens pass per le grant.

Mes sil soit grant per fine en Court de record, il serra compel de attourner,
Et vide de ceo apres titulo Quid iuris clamat, vide pluis de ceo en Litt lib 3.
cap. 10.

64 Audita quaerela.
AVdita quaerela, est un brief and gist lou un est oblige en un estatute
merchant, estatute Staple ou Recognisance, ou lou judgment est done verse luy
pur det, and son corpse in execution sur ceo, donques sil ad un releas ou auter
sufficient matter deste discharg del execution, mes and iour de ceo pleder,
donques il auera cest brief verse cestuy que ad recover, ou verse ses executours.

65 Auerment.
AVerm^t est lou un home plede un plee en abatement de brief ou bar dactio^,
quel il did, il est prist de prouer come le Court voit agard, cest offer de
prouer son plee est appel un Auerm^t.

Auerpeny.
AVerpeny, hoc est quiet esse de diuersis denarijs pro aueragiis domini Regis.

Auncien demesne.
AVncien demesne sont cert tenures tenus de ceux Manours queux fuero^t en
maynes de S. Ed. le confessor, and les queux il fist escrier en un liver
appelle Domes day, Sub titulo R. and toutes les terres tenus del dit Manors
sont auncien demesne, and les tenants ne serro^t implede horse del dit Man^s,
and sils sontils poie^t monstre le matter and abater le brief, mes sils
respo^der al brief and plede and iudgm^t done, donq^s les terres so^t deuenus
frank fee a touts iours. Auxi touts tenants en auncien demesne sont frank de
toll, pur touts chooses concernant lour viand' and husbandry en auncien
demesne, and pur tiels terres ils ne serront mis ne impanel sur ascun enquest.
Mes touts les terres en ancient demesn^ queux sont in maines le roy sont frank
fee and pledable al common ley. Veies plus apres en le title Sokmans.

68 Auowrie.
AVowrie est lou un prist distress pur rent ou auter chose, and lauter sua
repleuin donques celuy q^ auoit prise iustifiera en son plee, pur quel cause il
prist ceo, and si il prist ceo en son droit demesne il ceo doit monstre, and
issint auowa le prisel, and ceo est appel son auowry: Mes sil ceo prist en ou
pur le dr^t de un auter, donque quant il auoit monstre le cause, il ferra
conusa^ce del prisel, come bailie ou servant a celuy en que droit il prist ceo.

B.
Bail.
Bail, est quant un ho^e est prise ou arrest pur felony, suspicion de
felony, indict de felony, ou ascun tiel case, issint que il est restrain de
son liberty. Et esteant per la ley bailable, offers suertie al eux que ont
authority de luy bailer, q^ux suerties sont oblige pur luy al use le Roigne
en un certain sum dargent, ou corpse pur corpse, q^ il appearera deuant les
Justices jail delivery al prochein sessions etc. Do^ques sur le bonds de ceux
suerties, come est auantdit, il est bail, cest adire, mis al liberty tanque
le iour appoint pur so^ appara^ce.

Bailement.
BAilement, est un delivery de chooses, soyent ils de escripts, biens ou stuff
al auter, ascun foits destre redeliuer arrere al bailor, cest adire al celuy
que issint deliver ceo, ascun foits al use del bailee, cest adire de luy a que
il est deliver, and ascun foits auxy il est deliver a un tierce person, cest
delivery est appell un bailement.

71 Bailife.
BAilife est un officer que appertient a un manor, pur order le husbandry, and
ad authority de paier quite rents issuing horse del manor, succider arbres,
repair les measons, fair pales, haies, distraine au^s dam^ fesa^t sur le
terr, and diu^s tiels semblables.

Cest officer est celuy q^ les ancient Saxons ont appel un Reave, car le nosme
Bailife ne fuit donque conus enter eux, mes vie^t eins oue les Normans, and est
appel en Latin Villicus.

72 Backberinde thief.
BAckberind thief e^ un laron q^ est prise oue le manner, cest adire, aia^t ceo
troue sur lui estea^t pursue oue le hue and cry) le quel il ad emblee, soit il
money, lynnen, woollen, ou auter stuff: mes il est pl properment dit, quant il
est prise porta^t tiels chooses que il ad emblee en un bundel ou fardel sur son
dorse.

Bargain and sale.
BArgain and sale est qua^t un recompense est don per ambideux les parties al
bargain: come si un bargain and vend son terre al auter pur argent, icy le
terre est un recompense a luy pur le argent, and largent est un recompense al
auter pur le terre, and ce^ est un bone contract and bargain, and fee simple
passa nient obstant il ne dit a aver and tener le tree a luy and a ses h^s. Et
per tiel bargain and sale terres poient pass sans liuerie de seisin, si le
bargain and sale soit per fait endent, seal and enrolle, ou en le county ou
le terre gist, ou en un des Courts del Roigne de record, al Westminster deins six
mois prochein apres le date de mesme le escript endent, accordant al statute en
ce^ case fait en le 27. an de H. 8. cap. 16.

74 Bar.
Bar, est quant le defe^dant en ascun action plede un plee que est un
sufficient respons, and ceo adnul le action del plaintiff a touts iours.

75 Base fee.
TEner en Fee base, est a tener a volunt le Seignior.

76 Bastard.
BAstard, est celuy que est nee de ascun feme nient espouse, issint que son
pere nest conus per le order del ley, and pur ceo il est dit filius populi.

Mes per la ley del Romish esglise, si un engender un enfant sur ascun feme,
quel enfant est nee horse del espousels, and puis il espouse m^ la femme,
donques tiel enfant serra dit Mulier, and nemy bastard.

Mes per la ley Dengleterre il est bastard, and pur cest cause quant tiel
especial bastardie est allege, il serra try p^r le pais, and nemy per
Leuesque* Mes generalment bastardie allege serra try per le certificat del
Euesque.

Et si un feme soit gross de enfant per son baron que morust, and el prist
auter baron, and apres le enfant est nee, cest enfant serra dit lenfant le
primer baron. Mes si el fuit priuement enseint al temps del mort sa primer
baron, donques il serra dit lenfant del second baron. Sed quaere and veies le
opinion de Thorp 21. E. 3. 39.

Auxi si un home prent feme que soit grosseme^t enseint per ascu^ aut q^ ne
fuit son baron, and apres lenfant est nee deins les espousels, donques il serr
dit lenfant le baron mesque il fuit nee fors^ un iour apres les espousels
solempnise.

77 Battle.
Battle est un ancient trial en nostre ley, que le defendant en un appeal de
murder, robbery, ou felony poit eslier, cestascauoir, a combater oue
lappella^t, pur proof sil soit culpable del felony ou non: quel combat sil
succeed sibien del part le defendant que il vanquish lappellant, il alera
quite, and luy barrera de son appeal a touts iours. Mes si un soit indict de
felony, and un appeal est port sur mesme le indictme^t, la le defendant ne
gagera le battle: battle auxi poit estre en un brief de droit.

78 Bigamy.
BIgamy, fuit un counterple (devise al council de Lions sur missike de second
marriage) deste object quant le benefit de clergy, cestassauoir, son liver,
come nosment a dire, que il que demand le privilege del Clergy, fuit marry
a tiel femme en tiel lieu, deins tiel dioces and que el est mort, and que il ad
apres marry un aut feme deins mesme le diocese ou deins ascun auter diocese,
and issint Bigamus. Ou sil and este forsque un temps marry, donques adire que
el que il espouse est, ou fuit un viefe, cest adire, le relicte dun tiel etc.
Le quel chose serra try per Leuesque de le Diocese ou le espousals sont
allege. Et esteant issint certify per Leuesque le prisoner perdera le
benefit del clergy: Mes al cest iour per force de le act fait en Anno 1. E.
6. cap. 12. cest null plea, mes que il poet aver son clergy ceo nie^t obstant.

Issint est Brook titulo Clergy placito 20. al mesme purpose. Et sur ceo si
vous estes desirous, de veyer q^ux reasons ils ont que persuade enuers second
espousals, lege ent diverse auters Frances Petrarche de remedus vtriusque
fortunae le primer liver and lxxvi. Dialogue, entitled de secu^dis nuptiis,
quel liver ore tarde Master Thomas Twine ad bien and oue bon grace (come ils q^
poyent iudger diount) translate horse de Latin en Englois, and mult aptment
appell ceo Physic encounter fortune.

79 Bloodwit.
BLoodwit, hoc est quietum esse de amerciamentis de sanguine fuso, and que
teneantur placita in curia vestra, habebiti^ amerciamenta inde prouenientia
quia (wit) en Anglois est misericordiaen Latin.

80 Boot.
Boot, est un viel parol, and il signify help, succor, aid, ou advantage
and est communme^t joint oue un auter parol, que signification il augment come
ceux bridgeboote, burghboote, fireboote, hedgeboote, plowboote, and diverse
tiels semblables, pur queux significations, ^eyes en lour proper titles.

Broodhalpeny.
BRoodhalpeny, en ascu^ copies, broodhalbeny, hoc est, quietum esse de quada^
consuetudine exacta pro tabulis leuatis.

Burgage.
TEner en Burgage est a tener sico^e les burgeis teigne^t de Roy, ou de aut
seigniour terres ou ten^ts rendant a luy un certain re^t per an, ou auterment
la ou un auter home q^ Burgeis tient dascun Seigniour terres ou tenements en
Burgage rendant a luy un certain rent per an.

Brugbote.
BRugbote (and en ascuns copies bridgbote (hoc est quietum esse de auxilio
dando ad reficiendum pontes.

84 Burghbote.
BVrghbote, hoc est quietum esse de auxilio dando ad faciendum Burgum, castrum,
ciuitatem vel muros prostrata.

85 Burghbrech.
BVrghbrech, hoc est quietu^ esse de tra^sgressionibus factis in ciuitate vel
Burgo contra pacem.

86 Burgh English.
BVrgh English, ou Borough English, est un custom en un ancient borough, ou
si un ho^e ad issue diverse fits and morust uncore le puisne fits solement
inheritera, and auera touts les terrer and ten^ts, q^ fueront a son pe re de q^
il morust seisie deins m^ le burgh per descent, come heir a son pere, per
force del custom de mesme le burgh.

87 Burglarie.
BVrglarie, est quant un debruse and enter en le meason dun auter en le nuit,
oue felonious intent, de robber ou occider ou de fair auter felony en queux
cases nient obsta^t il ne emport riens, uncore il est felony per que il serra
pendue. Auterment est fill soit en le iour ou que il debruse le meason en le
nuit, and ne enter pas en ceo a cest temps.

Mes si un servant voile conspire oue auters de robber son Master, and a cel
intent il over lesdores, and fenestres de son Master en le nuit pur eux, and
ils vient en le meson per cest voy, cest Burglarie en les estrangers, and le
servant est un laron, mes nemy Burglar. Et ceo fuit lopinion de le right
worshipful Sir R. Manwood Chiualer, plus digne Seignior chief Baron de le
Exchequer a la quarter Sessions tenus en Canterbury in January 1579. 21. Eliz.

Capias.
CApias, vide de ceo ap^s en la title Process.

Caruage.
CAruage, hoc est, quietu^ esse si dn^s Rex talliauent tota^ terra^ suam per
Caruas. Nota q^ un carue de tree est un plow land.

Certificatio in assise.
CErtificatio Assise nouae disseisine, est un brief and gist lou le baylife le
ten^t in Assise plede null tort etc. and parde per lassise, donques si le tenant
ad un release ou auter escript a pleder, il auera cest brief, and les primers
jurors serro^t garnes dapperer deuant les Justices and parties auxi, donques si
puit este troue que le release ou lescripts son^ voyer and bones, cestuy qui
recoueroit in lassise, rendra da^mages en double and perdra la terre.

91 Cerciorari.
CErciorari, est un brief and gist lou un est implede en un base Court, que
est de record, and il suppose que il ne poit au^ equal Justice la, donques sur
un bill en la Chancerie comprisant ascu^ matter en conscience, il auera cest
brief pur remouer tout le Record en la Chauncery, and la deste determine per
conscience, mes sil ne proua son bill, donques lauter party auera un br^ de
Procede^do a remau^d' le record en la base Court, and la deste detmine. Auxi il
gist en plusors auts cases pur remou^ Records pur le roy come inditem^ts and
auters.

Cession.
CEssion est quant un ecclesiastical person e^ cree Euesque, ou quant un person
dun parsonage prist un aut benefice sans dispensatio^ ou auterm^t me^t
qualified etc. En ambideux cases lour prim^ benefices sont deuenus void and
sont appel destre void per cession, and al ceux q^ il ad que fuit cree
euesque, Le Roigne prese^tera pro illa vice, quicunque soit patron de eux. Et
en laut case le patron poit p^s ent.

Cessauit.
CEssauit, est un brief and gist lou mo^ very tenant q^ tient de moy certain
tree ou tenem^ts rendaunt certain re^t per an, and le re^t est arrere nient
pay per deux ans, and null sufficient distress poit este troue sur le terre,
donq^s ieo auera cest brief per q^ ieo recouera le terre, mes si le tenant
vient in Court deuant judgment, and rend* le arrerages, and les damages, and
troue suerty que il ne cessera plus de paim^t de dit rent, ieo serra co^pel de
pre^der les arrerag. and les damages, and donque le tenant ne perdera la terre.
Auxy heir ne poyt maintain cel brief pur cesser fait en te^ps son au^cestor,
Auxi cest brief ne gist, mes pur annual service come rent and huiusmodi and
nient pas pur homage and fealty.

Auxi il y ad auter brief appel Cessauit de cantaria, and gist ou un done
terres a un meason de religion a trouer pur la^me de luy and de ses ancestors,
and de ses heirs annuelment un chandel ou Lamp in Esglise, ou pur fair ascu^
divine service, ou de paster les pouers, ou auter alms, ou auter chose fair,
donques si les dits charges ne sont pas fait per ij. ans, donque le donor ou
ses heirs auera cest brief verse quecunque est eins apres ti^l cesser. Vide
lestatut W. 2. cap. 41.

Challenge.
CHallenge, est lou Jurors appe^o^t pur trier un issue, donques si ascun des
parties supposont que ils ne sont pas indifferent, la ils poient eux challe^ge
and refuse.

Ils ad e^e diverse challe^ges: un est challe^ge al array: lauter est al polles.

Challenge al array est quant la panel est fauorablement fait per le vicount ou
auter officer.

Challe^ge per les polls so^t ascuns principal, and ascun per cause, come il
appel ceo.

Principal est quant un des Jurors est le fits, friar ou cousin al plaintiff ou
defendant, ou tenant a luy, ou q^ il auoit espouse la file le plaintiff, and
pur c^ux causes il serra retrait.

Auxi in plee de le mort de ho^e and en chesc* action real, and en actions
personal, si le det ou damages amount a xl. marks il est bon challe^ge q^ il ne
poit dispender xl. shillings per an de franketenement.

Challenge per cause est ou le party allege un matter que nest principal
challenge, come que fits dun des Jurors espouse la file le plaintiff, and
donques conclude and pur ceo il est favorable, quel serra try per auters del
enquest, si il soit favorable ou indifferent, and si ils* diont que il est
favorable, and nemy indifferent, donques il serra treit auterment il serra iure.

Auxy un felon que est arraigne poyt challenge xx. Jurors peremptory sans
ascun cause, and ceo est in fauore^ vitae, and tant que il voile oue cause, mes
donques il serra try si pur tiel cause il soit indifferent ou nemy.

95 Champertie.
CHampertie est un brief and gist lou deux ho^es sont impleadants, and lun done
la moitie ou part del chose in plee a un estraunge pur luy mainteiner
encounter lauter, donques le party grieve auera cest brief deuers lestrange:
Vide lestatute Articuli super Chartas Cap. 11.

Champertors.
CHampertors sont ceux q^ moua plees and fuits, ou cause deste move, per lour
ou auters procurement, and sue a lour costages and charge demesne, pur aver
part del terre, ou gains en variance.

Charge.
CHarge est lou un ho^e graunta un rent issuant horse de son terre, and que si
le rent soit arrere, que serra list a luy, ses heirs and assigns a distrayner
ta^que le rent soit pay, cest appel un rent charge. Mes si un grant un rent
charge horse del terre dun auter, and puis purchase la terre, le grant est void.

Charters.
CHarters de terres sont escripts, faits, evidences, and instruments, fait de
un home a lauter, sur ascun estate conveyed ou passed perenter ^eux de tres ou
tenem^ts, mo^stra^t le^s nosmes, lieu, and quantity del terre, le estate,
te^ps and manner del feasans de yeel, les parties a le estate deliver and prise,
les tesmoignes p^sent al ceo, oue auters circumstances.

99 Chattels.
CHattels sont en deux sorts, cest adire, chattels reals and chattels
personels, chattels reals sont leases pur ans, gards, and a tener a volunt.

Chattels personels sont touts moveable bie^s, come arge^t, plate, biens del
meason, chiuals, vacches, blees and tiels semblables.

100 Childwit.
CHildwit hoc est, quod capiatis gersumma^ de natiua vestra corrupta and
pregnata sine lice^tia vestra.

101 Chimin.
CHimin est le hault voy lou chescu^ home passa q^ est appel via Regia, and
uncore le Roy and auter chose la forsque le passage pur luy and son people, car
le franktenement est en le Seignior del soil, and touts les profits cressants
la come arbres and auters chooses.

Chose en action.
CHose en actio^ est qua^t un home ad cause, ou poit porter un action pur asc'
duitie due a luy, come un action de det sur un obligation, annuity, rent,
covenant, guard, biens, trespass, ou tiels semblables, and pur ceo que ils sont
chooses de queux un home nest possess, mes pur recovery de eux est mis a son
action, ils sont appel chooses en action. Et ceux chooses en action que sont
certain le Roigne poit granter, and le gra^tee poit vser un action pur eux en
son nosme demesne solement. Mes un common person ne poit graunter son chose en
action, ne le Roigne luy mesme ne poit gra^ter sa chose e^ actio^ quel est
uncertain, come trespass and tiels se^blables.

103 Cinque ports.
CInque ports, sont certain haven villes, sink en n^umber, as queux ad este
grant long temps pass mult liberties (que auts port villes nont) and ceo
primerm^t en le te^ps del* Roy Edward appel le Confessor (q^ fuit deuant le
conquest) and fueront increase apres, and ceo especialment en les iours del
trois Edwards, le primer, second and le tierce, (ap^s le conq^st) come apiert
en le lieur de Domesday, and auts vieux Monum^ts, queux en cest lieur serront
trope long de citer.

104 Circuity de actio^.
CIrcuity de action, est qua^t un actio^ est droiturelm^t port pur un duitie
mes uncore circum le bush come semble, pur ceo q^ ceo poit sibie^ estre
auterme^t respondue and determine and le suit save, and pur ceo q^ mesme le
actio^ fuit pluis q^ besoigne, il est appel circuit de actio^. Come si un home
grant un rent charge de x. li. horse de son manor de Dale, and apres le grantee
disseisist le grauntor de mesme le manor de Dale, and il port un Assise and
recover le terre and xx. li damages lequel xx. li. esteant pay, le grauntee
del rent sue son action pur x. li. de son rent due durant le temps de le
disseisin, le quel si null disseisin ad este il doit aver ew, Cest appel
circuitie de action, pur ceo que il poit aver estr pluis briefment respondue,
car lou le grau^tor doit receive xx. li. damages, and pay x. li. rent, il puit
aver receive forsque le x. li. solement pur les damages, and le grauntee puit
aver recoupe and retain arrere le auter x. li. en ses mains per voy de detainer
pur son rent, and issint per yeel poiet aver save son action.

Claim.
Claim est un challe^ge per ascun home de le property ou ownership de un
chose que il and en possession, mes ceo q^ est detain a luy torciousement.

106 Clergy.
Clergy est un ancient liberty confirm en diverse parliaments, Et est qua^t
un home est arraign de felony ou tiels semblables deuant un temporal Judge
etc. and le prisoner pria son clergy, cest adire, pur aver son Lieur, quel en
ancient temps fuit autant sicome il vst pry deste dismiss del temporal
Judge, and deste liver al Ordinary de purger luy mesme de mesme offense. Et
donques le Judge commander lordinarie de trier sil puit liar come un Clerk en
tiel liver and lieu come le Judge assignera, and si lordinary certify le Judge,
que il puit, donques le prisoner nauera judgment de perder son vie. Vide
Stamford. lib. 2. cap 41. and quere le statute 18. Eliz. cap. 7.

107 Clerk Attaint.
Clerk Attaint, est cestuy que pria son clergy apres judgment sur luy done
de felony, and ad son Clergy allow, tiel clerk ne poit fair son purgation.

Clerk convict.
Clerk convict, est cestuy que pria son clergy deuant judgment done sur luy
de le felony, and ad le clergy a luy grant, tiel clerk puit fair son
purgation. Nota que cel purgation fit, quant il fuit dismiss al ordinary, la
destre try del enquest del clerks, and pur ceo ore per statute 18 Eliz. ca.
7. null tiel est misso al ordinary.

109 Color.
Color, est un fained matter, le quel le defendant ou tenant v^e en son bar,
quant un action de trespass ou un assise est port enuers luv, en le ql il done
demaundant, ou plaintiff un show prima f^^ie, que il ad bone cause de action,
lou en verite il nest just cause, mes ta^tsolement un color ou visour dun
cause: Et il est use al intent que le determination del action doet este per
les judges, and nemy par un ignorant Jury, de xij. homes. Et pur ceo un color
doet este un matter en ley, ou difficult al lay gents: come pur example A. port
un assise de terre enus B. and B. dit que il m^ lessa m^ le terre al un C. pur
tme de vie and apres grant le reuersion al A. le demaundant, and puis C. le
tenant pur term de vie morust, apres que decease A. le defendant claimant le
reuersion per force del grant (ou C. le tenant pur vie ne vnques atturne)
entra, sur que B. entra, enuers que A. pur mesme enter port cest assise etc.
Cest un bone color, pur ceo que les ley gentes pensant que le terre voile
pass per le grant sans atturnment, lou en fait il ne voyle pass etc.

Auxy en un action de trespass, color doit este done, and de eux sont un
infinite number, un pur example: En un action de trespass pur prisel de auers
del plaintiff, le defendaunt dit, que denaunt le plaintiff riens auoit en eux,
il mesme fuit possess de eux come de ses proper biens, and eux deliver al A B.
pur eux rebailer a luy quado etc. and A. B. eux dona al Plaintiff, and le
plaintiff suppose le property destre en A. B. al temps del done prist eux, and
le defendant eux reprist del plaintiff, sur que le plaintiff port laction: cest
un bon color, and un bon plea. Vide de ceo pluis en les Drologues ent le
Doctor and Student. li. 2. cap 13.

Color de office.
Color officii, est toutes dites prist in malam partem and signify un act
malement fait per le countenance de un office, and il port un dissimulant
vy^age del droit office, lou le office nest q^ veil del fau^itie and le chose
est ground sur vice and ^offi^e ^st come un shadow al ceo. Mes ratione officii,
and vertute officii sont p^ises toutes for^es in bon^m partem, and lou le
office est le just cause del chose, and le chose est pursuant al office.

111 Collusion.
COllusion* est lou un action est port verse un auter per son agreement demesne,
si le plaintiff recover, tiel recovery est dit per collusion, and en ascuns
cases le collusion serra enqu^re come en un Quare impedit. Assise and tiels
semblables, queux ascun corporation ou corpse politic port enuers auter al
intent de aver le terre ou aduowson, don't le b^^e^e est port en mortm^ine. Mes
en auowrie ne en ascun action personal le collusion ne serra enquire. Vide
stitute W. 2. capit. 32. que done le quale ius and le inquiry in tiel case.

Common ley.
COmmon ley, est pur le pluis pa^te prise 3. voyes. Primerm^t, pur l^s leyes de
cest Realm simply, sans as^* ^^^ l^y, come customarie l^y, civil ley, spiritual
ley ^u qu(...) aut ley i(...) a ceo, come quant il ^^ despute e^ nostre l^yes
^angle^re, quid doet de droit est^ determine p^r le common ley and quid per
spiritual ley, ou le Court del Admiral ou tiels semblables.

Second (...)t il est prise pur les Courts le Roy, come l^ b^^ke le roy ou
common place, (...) pur m^nstre un diff(...)ce pe^e^^^r c(...) les base
courts, come customarie courts, courts Barons. County courts, P^powde^s and
ti^ls semblables: come qu^^ un ple de terre est remove horse de ancient demesn^
pur c^o q^ le ^re e^ fra^k s^e and pledable al common ley, cest adire e^ la
Court le R. and nemy e^ ancient demesn^ ou en as^* auter ba^e court.

Tierce^^t and pluis vsualment per le common ley est entendue tiels leys q^
fueront generalme^t prise and tenus pur ley deuant q^ ascun estatut fuit fait
pur alter ceo, come pur example, Tenant pur vie, ne pur ans ne fueront deste
punish pur fesance wast a^ common ley tanque le statut de Gloucester ca. 5.
fuit fait, le quel done un action de wast enuers eux. Mes tenant per le
courtesy, and tenant in dower, fueront punishable pur wast al common ley, cest
adire, per le usual and common received leys de Realm deuaunt le dit statute
de Gloucester fuit fait.

113 Common.
COmmon, est le droit que home ad de mitter ses beasts a pasture, ou de vser
and occupier le tree q^ nest son proper soil.

Et nota que sont diverse commons cest adire common en gross, common appendant,
common appurtenant, and common per cause de visinage,

Common en gross est lou ieo per mon fait grant a un auter, que il aver
common in ma terre.

Common appenda^t est lou home est seisi de certain terre, a que il ad common
in auter soil, and touts ceux que serront seisi del dit terre aueront le dit
common solement pur ceux beasts que compast sa terre a que il est appe^dant,
except oysons, chiuers, and porceaux.

Et touts iours, cest common est per prescription, and de common droit, and il
est appendant al terre erable solement, and nemy al auter terre ou meason.

Common appurtenaunt est en mesme le manner come common appendant. Mes est
ouesque toutes manners des auers cibien porceaux, chiue^s and tiel semblable
come chiuals, vacches, boefes, berbits, and tiels que compast^r de terre. Et
tiel co^on poit este fait a cest iour, and poit este sever del terre a que il
est appurtenant, mes issint ^e poit common appendant.

Common pur cause de visinage est lou les tenants de deux Seigniours que sont
seisies de deux villes, don't lun gist pres lauter, and chescun de eux ont use
de temps don't memory ^^ court de aver common en auter ville, ouesque toutes
beasts comminable.

Mes lun ne poit mitter ses auers en le terre lauter, car la ceux de lauter
ville poient eux distreine Damage fesant, ou aver action de Trespass, mes ils
eux mittera e^ lour camps demes^e, and sils estray en les camps del auter
ville, ils la doy^nt eux sufferer. Et les inhabitants de lun ville ne doyent
mitter eins tants come il voile, mes ayant regard al franktenement del
inhabitants de lauter ville, car auterment ^l ^e soit bon vicinitie, sur q^
tout cest matter depend.

Condition.
COndition, est un restraint ou bridle annex and join al chose, issint que per
le non perfourmance and fesans de c^o le party al condition reco^era prejudice
and perde, and per le performance and fair de ceo commodity and advantage.

Et toutes conditions sont ou conditions actual and express, queux sont appel
conditions en fait, O^ ^ls sont conditions implicit ou tacit, and meant
express, les q^ux sont appelles conditions en ley.

Auxi touts conditions sont o^ conditions precedent and vaiant deuaunt lestate,
and sont executed, O^ subsequent, and veniens apres lestate and executorie.

Le condition precede^t, sait gain and obtain le chose ou estate fait sur
condition per le perfourmance de mesme.

Le condition subsequent fait guard, and continue le chose ou estate fait sur
condition per le perfourmance de yc^l.

Actual and express condition, que est appel un condition en fait, est un
condition knit and annex per express parolx al feoffement, leas ou grant, ou
en escript ou sans escript. Sicome ieo enfeffe un home en terres reseruant
rent, destre paid a tiel feast, sur condition, que si le feoffee fail de
payment al iour, que donques il serra loial pur moy de reenter.

Condition implicit ou tacit and nient express, q^ est appel condition en
ley, est quant home grant al auter le office destr^ gardein dun park,
seneschal, beadle, baylife, ou tiels sembl' pur term de vie and nient obstant
q^ la ne soit ascun condition express en le grant, uncore le ley parle
couertment de un condition, quel est, que si le grantee ne execute pas touts
points apperteina^t a son office, per luy mesme ou son ^ufficient deputy,
donque serra loial pur le grantor de enter and discharge luy de son office.

Condition precedent and vaant deuant est, quant un lease est fait al un pur
vie sur condition, que si le lessee pur vie voile pay al lessour xx. li. a
tiel iour, que donques il auera fee simple, icy le condition preceede and va
deuant le estate in fee simple, and sur le performance de le condition, gain
and get fee simple.

Condition subsequent and veniens apres, est quant un grant a I. S. son manor
de Dale en fee simple sur condition, que le grauntee paiera a luy a tiel iour
xx. li. ou auterment que son estate cessera, icy le condition est subsequent
and sequens le estate in fee simple, and sur le performance de ycel, guard and
continue le estate.

Vide pluis de ceo en Littleton lib. 3. cap. 5. Et Perkins titulo vltimo de
Conditions.

115 Confirmation.
COnfirmation est quant un que aiet droit al ascun terre ou tenements fait un
fait a un auter que ait ent le possession ou ascun estate ouesque ceux parolx,
Ratificasse, approbasse, confirmasse oue intent de enlarger son estate, ou
fair son possession perfect and nient defesible per luy que fait le
confirmation, ne per ascun auter que poit aueigne^ a son droit.

Don't vide pluis en Littleton Libr. 3. cap. 9. de Confirmations.

116 Confiscate biens.
COnfiscate biens sont biens al q^ux le ley entitle le Roigne quant ils ne sont
pas claim per ascu^ auter. Come si un home soit endict q^ il feloniousment
emblea les biens de I. S. lou en verity ils sont ses biens demesne, and ils
so^t mise en court verse luy come un mayneur, and donques il est demand q^ il
dit a ceux biens, and il deny eux, ore per cest denicr de eux, il perdra ceux
biens, coment que apres il soit acquit del felony, and issint en auters
semblable cases.

Conspiracy.
Conspiracy est un brief and gist lou deux ou plusors sentailerent per
serement, covenant, ou aut manner aliance, q^ chescun aydera auter pur indicter
ou appeller ascun home de selonie, donques celuy que est per tiel manner endict
ou appeal auera cest brief, Mes cest brief ne gist verse lendictors.

Vade pluis de ceo en Stamford lib. 3. cap. 12.

Custom.
COnsuetud' and seruitijs est un brief, and gist lou ^eo ou mes au^cestois
depuis le limitation de assise, ne fueront seisie des customs ou services de
mon tenant, mes deuant, do^ques ieo au^a cest brief pur recover ceux services.

Auxy le tenant poyt aver cest brief verse son Seignior, mes apres que le
tenant ad count, le Seignior defendera les motes del count, and repliant dirra,
que il ne distrayna pas pur les costomes don't le count est, and donq^s il
countera tout le count de les customs and services, and donques le tenant que
fuit plaintiff deuiendra defendant, and defendra per battle ou graund assise.

119 Consultation.
COnsultation, vide de ceo apres en le title de Prohibition.

120 Continual claim.
COntinual claim est lou home ad droit de enter en certain terres don't un
auter est seisi en fee simple ou fee tail, and il ne osast enter pur pauor de
mort ou baterie, mes approcha cy pres come il osast, and fait claim a ceo
deins le an and iour deuant le mort de cestuy que ad le terre, si apres cestuy
que ad le terre deuie seisie, and son heir est eins per descent, uncore cestuy
que fait tiel claim poit enter sur their nient contristeant tiel descent, pur
ceo que il ad fait tiel continual claim: Mes il couient que cest claim touts
foits soit fait deins lan and iour deuaunt le mort le tenant, car si tiel
tenant ne morust seisie deins lan and iour ap^s tiel claim fait, and uncore il
q^ ad droit nosast enter, do^ques couient al cestuy q^ ad tiel droit de fair
auter claim deins lan and iour ap^s le primer claim, and apres tiel second
claim de fair le tierce claim deins lan and iour, si il voit este sur de
sauer son enter. Mes si le disseisor deuie seisi deins lan and iour apres le
disseisin, and null claim f^^t, donques lentre le disseisee est toll, car lan
and iour ne serra prise de le temps del title dentre a luy accrue, mes soleme^t
pur le temps del darrein claim per luy fait, come est auantdit. Vide pluis de
ceo en Littleton lib. 3. cap. 7.

Counterplee.
COunterplee est lou un port un action, and le tenant en son respons and plee
vouch ou appel pur ascun home pur garrant son title, ou prayer aid de auter,
que ad meliour estate, come de cestuy en la reuersion ou si un estraunge al
action vient and prayera deste resceu de sauer son estate, si le demand reply
a ce^, and monstre le cause que il ne doyt de tiel home eyde aver, ou que tiel
home ^e doit este resceu, cest plee est appel un cou^terplee al voucher, aid.
ou resceit come le case est, mes si le voucher soit allow, and quant le vouche
vient eins and demand quel chose le tenant ad de luy voucher, and le tenant
monstre son cause, and le vouchee plede ascun matter de a^^yder le garrantie,
ceo est appel counterplee del resceit.

121 Contract.
COntract, est un bargain, ou covenant penter ij. parties ou un chose est done
pur auter que est appel, Quid pro quo, come si ieo vende mon chiual pur argent,
ou si ieo covenant de fair lease a vous de mon manor de Dale, en
consideration de xx. li. que vous dones a moy, ceux sont bone co^tracts, pur
ceo que il ad un chose pur auter, Mes si un home fait promise a moy, que ieo
auera xx. s. and que il voile este dettour a moy de ceo, and puys ieo demand
xx. s. and il ne voyle a moy deliver, uncore ieo nauera ia^mes action pur
recover cest xx. s. pur ceo que cest promise ne fuit contract, mes nudus
pactus, Et ex nudo pacto no^ oritur actio, mes si ascu^ chose fuit d^ne pur le
xx. s. mesque il ne fuit forsque al value un denier, donques il fuit bone
contracte.

Contra formam collationis.
COntra formam collationis, est un brief, and gist lou home done terres en
perpetual almoigne a ascun meson de Religion, come a un Abbe and la covent ou a
auter sovereign, ou al garden ou master de ascu^ Hospital, and son coue^t de
trouer certain pouer homes, and de fair aut divine service, ^ils alien les
terres do^ques le donour ou se^ heirs, aueront le dit brief pur recover le
terre, mes cest brief serra tou^^ fo^ts port verse l'Abbote ou son successor,
and nemy verse alience, coment que il soit tenat: mes en touts auters actions
lou home demand francktenement, le brief serra port verse le tenant del
terre. Vide le statute W. 2. cap. 41.

124 Contra formam feoffamenti.
COntra formam feoffamenti, est un brief, and gist lou un home deuant
lestatute de Quia emptores terrarum, quel fuit fait Anno 18. Edw. infeoffe
auter per fait de fair certain service si le feoffour ou ses heirs distraine
luy de fair auter service que est comprise en le fait, donques le tenant
auera cest brief, luy commaundant que il ne distrayne luy de fair auter
service, que nest comprise deins le fayt, mes cest br^ ne gist pur le plaintiff
que claim per purchase del (...)fee, mes pur tiel pla(...) que claim come
heire^l primer feffee.

Contributione facienda.
COntributione facienda, est un brief, and gist lou sont diverse Parceners and
celuy que ad le part del eygn^, f^ut tout le suit al Seigniour, les auters
doient fair contribution a luy, and sils ne voillont il aver verse eux le die
brief.

Conusance.
COnusance de plee, est un privilege que un city ou ville ad del grant le Roy
de tener plee des touts contracts, and des terres d^ns le precinct del
Franchises: and que quant ascun home est impleded, pur ascun tiel chose en le
court de Roy al Westminster, les Majors ou Baylifes de tiels Franchises, ou
lour Atturneys poient demaunder Conusance del plee, scilicet, que le plee and
le matter serra pled and determine deuaunt eux. Mes si le court al Westminster. soit
loyalment seisie del plee deuaunt que Conusance soit demand, do^ques ils ne
auero^t Conusance pur cest suite, pur ceo q^ ils ont neglig^ntm^t surcease lour
te^ps de demaunder ceo, mes cest ne serra bar al eux dauer Conusace en auter
actio^, car ils poient demand Conusance en un action, and omit ceo en auter
action a lour pleasure.

Et nota que Conusance ne gist en prescription, mes ils couient monstre letters
patents le Roy pur ceo.

127 Corodie.
COrodie est un allowance de meat, pane, boier, argent, vestments, lodge. and
tiels chooses necessary pur sustenance: ceo ascun foits est certain ou le
certeinty des chooses est limit, ascun foits uncertain, lou nest limit le
certeintie que il au^ ^t ascun de eux commence per grant fait per ascun ho^e al
auter, and po^t est^ pur vie, ans, en tail ou fee: and ascu^ Corodies s^nt de
common droit, sicome chescu^ fou^der de Abbeys, Priories, Nunries, and auters
measons de religion papis^ick, auoient authority dassigner tiel in mesme les
measons (quant ils fueront) pur son pere, friar, cousin ou auter home q^ il
voit, prendroit ceo, sil ^uit un meason de moignes, and sil soit found del
meason de Nuns ou muliers, donque ceo pur sa mere, soer, cousin ou aut mulier q^
il voil direct al ceo, and touts iours ce^ prou^^o fuit ew, que il q^ ad Corody
en un meson de moignes ne doit mitter un feme de prender ceo. Ne ou Corodie
fuit due ^n un Nu^rie, l^ il ne fuit lo^all de appointer un ho^e de receiver
ceo, car en ambideux ^^ses tiel presentation fuit deste reject. Et cest Corody
fuit due sibien ^ un common person que fuit founder, sicome ou le Roy m^ fu^t
fou^der, mes ou ^e meason fuit ^e^is en frankalmoigne, la le tenure m^ fuit un
discharge de corody ^nco^t touts ho^es sico^e q^ il fuit ap^s charge
voluntarim^t, come ou le Roy voit mitter son brief al Abbe pur un Corody pur un
tiel le que ils admit, la le meason doit este charge per ceo a touts iours, si
le roy soit found ou nemy: vide breue de Corod. hab. en Fitz. Natura br^. fo.
230.

Coroner
COroner est un aunc* offic* de trust, and de grand aucthority, ordain de^e un
principal conseruator, ou gardein de la peace, a port record ^s Ples del crown
and de son view demesne and de diverse auter chooses mult en number etc. and pur
ceo ^n temps le Roy Edward le primer cest estatute sequens ^uit fait pur ceo
que petit gents meins sages soient ^^^^^s ore de nouel communement al office
del Coroner, ou mistyer serroit q^ probes homes loyalx and sages ^e
en^^r^e^^^nt de cel office. Puru^^^ est* q^ p^r toutes les Counties ^oyeat
es^^^s sufficient homes Coroners, de pluis loials and plu^s sages c^^^^l^rs,
que mieux sa^^at puissant and veilent a cel office entender, and q^ loyalm^t
attache^t and represente^t le plees del Corone.

Et meant obstinte le let de c^st estatute ne soit pcisement observe uncore al
meins le intent doit estre pursue, ^y pres come poit, que pur le default des
chiualers, g^ntle^o^es furnished oue tiels qualities si come le statut parle
(de que ^ls y a^ diverse) p^^^^ estre es^ieu ^ue c^st addition que ils soyent
ver(...) and (...) co^^^^ Christians: vide de ceo en b^i^^^ de ^^^o(...)
eligendo in ^^^ Natura breuium fol. 1^3.

129 Corporation.
COrporation, est un chose permanent que poit aver succession: Et est un
asse^bly and joining ensemble de diverse en un fellowship, fraternity and meant,
de que un est le test and principal, let auters sont le corpse, and ce^ test
and corpse joint ensemble font le corporation. Et de corporations ascuns sont
appels spirituals ascuns temporals, and de ceux que sont spirituals ascuns
fueront corporations de mort persons en ley, and ascuns auterment, and ascuns
sont per aucthority del Roy solem^t, and ascuns ont estr du^ mixed auctority. Et
de ceux queux sont te^porall ascuns sont per aucthority del roigne auxy, and
ascuns per le co^on ley del Realm^.

Corporation spiritual and de mort persons en ley est lou le corporation
consist dun Abbe and covent, and ceux ont lour co^mencement del Roy, and le
home de Rome, quant il y ad a fair cy.

Corporation spiritual and dable persons e^ ley est lou le corporation consist
dun Deane and Chapter, Master del College ou Hospital, and cest corporation
ad commencement del Roy solement.

Corporation temporal per le R. est lou est un Mayor and Comminalty.

Corporation temporal per aucthority del common ley est le assembly en
parliament, le quel consist del Roign le test del corporation and S^rs
spirituals and te^porals, and de les commons del Realm^ le corpse del
corporation.

Corpse politic.
Corpse politic, sont Euesques, Abbeis, Priors, Deans, Parsons dun esglise, and
tiels se^blables, queux ont succession en un person solement.

Corruption de sangue.
COrruption de sangue, est qn^t asc' est attaint de felony ou treason, do^q^s
son sague est dit deste corrupt, per reason de q^l ses enfants ne ascun de so^
sa^gue ne po^e^t estre heirs a luy ne ascun auter auncestor, perur que ils
doient claim perer luy. Et sii fuit noble ou gentle home deuant, il and touts
ses enfants per ceo sont saits ignoble and ungentle, ayant regard al nobility
ou gentry ils claim per lour pere, que ne poit este fait fane arrere sans
authority de Parliament.

132 Cosinage.
COsinage, est un brief, and gist lou mon besaiel mon tre^saile, ou auter
cousin deuie seisie in fee simple, and un estrange abata, cest adire, enter en
les terres, donques ^eo auera verse luy cest brief, ou deuers son heir ou son
alienee, ou deuers q^cunque que aueigne apres a les dits terres. Mes si mon
aiel deuie seisi, and un estrange abate, donq^s ieo au^a un brief de Aiel. Mes
si mo^ pere, mere, friar, soer, uncle ou au^t deuie seisie, and un estra^ge
abata, donque ieo auera un Assise de Mortdauncester.

Covenant.
Covenant, est un agreement fait per fait en escript and enseale per^^ter deux
persons, lou chescun de cux est tenus al auter de performer certain covenants
pur son part, and lun de eux ^e ^^ent p^^ so^ covenant mes enfreint ceo, donque
celuy q^ se sent grieve, auera un brief de Covenant.

Et nota bien que null br^ de Covenant sorra maintenable sans e^spe^altie, sinon
en la City de Londres, ou ^n ascun aut tiel lieu privilege per custom and
use.

Couerture.
COuerture, est quant un home and un seem sont espouse ensemble, ore ascun
chose que est fait co^cernant la feme en le t^ps de le continuance de cest
marriage perenter eux est dit destre fait durant le couerture, and le fem^ est
appel un feme covert.

135 Couin.
COuin, est un secret assent determine en les cures de deux ou plusors al
p^iudice dun aut: Come si tenant pur tm de vie, ou tenant en le tail
secretme^t conspire oue un aut, q^ laut recouera verse le t pur vie le terre q^
il tient etc. en prejudice de celuy en le reuersion.

136 Cui in vita.
CVi in vita est un brief and gist lou home est seisi de terres en fee simple,
ou fee tail, ou pur term de vie en droit sa feme, and alien^ mesme le terre
and deuie, donques el auera le dit brief pur recouerer la terre.

Et nota bien que en ce^ brief son title doit este monstre si soit de purchase
la feme, ou del heritage la feme. Mes si le baron alien le droit sa feme, and
le baron and la feme deuiont, le heir la feme auera un brief de sur Cui in
vita.

Cui ante diuortium.
CVi ante diuortiu^, est un brief, and gist en semble manner, quant tiel
alienation est fait per le baron del terre la feme, and puis deuorce est ew
enter eux, donques la femme auera cest brief, and le brief dirra, cui ipsa
ante diuortium contradicere no^ potuit.

Courtesy D^ngleterre.
CVrtesie Dengleterre, est lou home prent feme seisie in fee simple ou fee
tail general, ou seisie come heir de la tail especial, and ad issue per la
feme male ou female, soit le issue mort ou en vie, si la feme deuie, le baron
tyendra la terre deuant sa vie per la ley de Angleterre: Et est appel tenant
per le Courtesy Dengleterre, pur ceo q^ uest use en null aut Realm forsq,
ta^tsolem^t en Engleterre.

D.
Damage feasant.
DAmage sea^at est qua^t les beasts de un ^strag' sont in auters terres sans
authority loial ou license del tenant de la terre, and la mangeront, tread, ou
auterm^t spoyle^t les blees, grass, boys, ou tiels semblables: En quel case
le t q^ ils issint damage, poit pur ceo prender, distrain, and impound eux,
sibien en le nuict come en le iour. Mes en auters cases, come put rent and
services and tiels sembles null poit distrainer en le nuict te^ps.

140 Danegelde.
DAngelde, hoc est quietum esse de quada co^suetudine q^ cucu^rit aliquo
te^pore, qua^ quide^ Danu leuaueru^t in Anglia.

Ceo commence primer ^n te^ps le roy Etheldred, q^l esteant en graund distress
per le continual invasion de les Danes, pur purchaser paix, fuit compel de
charger son pais and people oue importable paiments, car il primerme^t dona cux
al sink several payment 113000. li. and puis grant al cux 48000. li.
annualment.

Darrein presentment.
DArrein presentm^t. Vide de ceo apres titulo Quare impedit.

Deane and Chapter.
DEane and Chapter, est un corpse corporate spiritual consistant de plusors able
persons en ley, come nosmement de Deane (que est principal) and ses Prebends,
and ils emsemble font le corporation. Et sicome cest corporation poyent
ioyntment purchase terres and tenements al use de lour esglis and successors.
Issint auxy chescun de eux seueralme^t poit purchase al use de luy and ses
heirs.

Decies tantum.
DEcies tantum, est un brief, and gist lou un iurour en ascun enquest, prist
^rge^t dun party ou dauter pur done son verdict, donque il payera x. foits a
ta^t q^ il ad receive. Et chescun que voyl suer auera action, and auera lun
moitie, and le roy lauter moitie. Mes si le Roy en tiel case release per son
perdon a tiel iurour, uncore ceo ne serra bar verscestuy que port laction,
mes que il recouera lauter moitie, si son action soit commence deuant le pardon
le Roy, mes si le pardon soit deuant ascun action, il est bar encounter
toutes gents. Et mesme le ley est de touts actions populers lou un part est al
roy, and lauter al party que suera. Auxi les embracers que procurent tiels
inquestes serront puny en mesme le manner and ils aueront prisonment de un an,
Mes null justice enquirera de ceo de office, mes solement al suite del party.

144 Declaration.
DEclaration, est un mo^strance en escript de le grief and complaint de le
commaundaunt ou plaintiff enuers le tenant ou defendant, en que il suppose de
aver receive tort, and cest declaration doit este plain and certain, pur ceo
que il impeache le defendant ou tenant and auxy chase celuy a responder. Mes
nota que declaration fait per le demaundant verse le tenant en action Real,
est: appel properment un Count.

Nota que le Count ou declaration doit contain demonstration, declaration and
conclusion. Et en demonstration sont conteines troys chooses (cest adire) que se
pleint, and deuers que and de quel chose, and en le declaration doit estre
comprise come and en quel manner le cause del action surdit enter les parties,
and quant and quel iour, an, and lieu, and a que laction serra done.

Et en perclose il doit auerre and profer de prouer son suite and monstra les
damages queux il sustain per le tort a luy faite.

145 Dedimus potestatem.
DEdimus potestatem, est un brief, and gist lou un home (...) le court le Roy,
^ou est sue and ne p^^t bien traueler, donque il auera ^est brief direct a
ascun Justice ou auter discreet person en le pays de ^oner a luy power pur
admit ascun pur son Attorney, ou de levy fine, ou de prender son confession ou
son respo^s, ou ^auter examination come le matter require.

146 Defendant.
DEfendant, est celuy q^ est sue en action personel, and il est appel tenant en
un action Real.

147 Defense.
Defense, est ceo que le defendant doit. fair immediatement apres le count o^
declaration fait, cest adire que, il defenda tout le torre force and damage,
lou and quant il deuera ^ and do^ques de proceed ouster a son plee, ou de
^^parler.

Et no^^* que entant que il defend tort and force il se excuse del tort ve^s
luy surmisee, and fait ^r party al plee, and per tant q^e il defend le^s
damages, il affirm le party plaintiff able deste respondue.

Et pur le^ re^idue d^l defense, il accept le power del Court de over and
determiner les pl^es de cel matter. Car sil voile pleder al Jurisdiction, il
doit omitter in son defense les parols (o^ and quant il deuera) and sil voyle
monstre ascun disabilitie en le plaintiff, and demand judgment si le party
serra respondu, donques il doit omitter le defense del damage.

Demaundant.
DEmaundant, est celuy que sue ou(...) complain en action Real put title de
terre, and il est appel plaintiff en un assise, and en un action personel, come
en action de debt, trespass, disceite, detinue and ^i^ls semblables.

149 Demaines.
DEmaines, ou demesnes generalment a parler solonque le ley sont touts les
parts de ascun manner ^l ne sont en maines del freeholders destate denheritance,
coment soyent occupies pe^ tenant per copy de Court Roll, lessees pur ans, ou
pur vie, cy bien come tenant a volunte: me^ specialment a parler dem^nes
solonque le common parlance sont solement entend le principal manor place del
seigmo^^, que il and ses ancestors ont ewe de temps horse de memory en lour
maines demesue, and ount occupy ceo, ensemble oue touts edifices and measons
quecunque, Etauxi les prees, pastures, boys, terres e^^able, and tiels
semblables, oue ceo occupy.

Demi sanke ou sangue.
Demi sanke est quant un ho^e marie un feme, and ad issue per luy un fits ou
file and el morust* and donques il prist un auter feme, and ad per luy auxy un
fites ou file. Ore ceux deux fits so^t solo^que un manner freres, on come ils
sont appels demi freres, ou freres del demi sanke ce^ adire friar ^ le part de
pier pur ceo que ils ont ambideux un pier, and sont ambideux de son sa^gue, and
nemy freres per le part le mere, ne de ascun sanke on kin cest voy, and pur
ceo lun de cux ne poit este heir al auter, car il q voile claim come heir al
un per descent, doyt este dentier sa^ke a luy de q^ il claim. En mesme le
manner est si feme ^yt diverse issues per diverse barons qui fratres vterini
dicuntur.

Demurrer.
DEmurrer est quant ascun action est port and le defendant plede un ple a que
le plaintiff dit que il ne voile responder pur ceo que il nest sufficient plee
en le ley and le defendant dit al contrary que il est sufficient plee, and sur
ceo ambideux mist^ro^t le cause al judgment del Court, donques ceo est appelle
un demurrer.

152 Denizen.
DEnizen, est lou alien nee deuient le subject le Roy and obtain le letters
pate^ts le roy pur enjoy toutes privileges, come un hoe Anglois, mes si un
^o^^ ^an Demzen il paiera customs and diverse auters chooses come alien* come
appiert per diverse Statutes de ceo faits.

153 Deodande.
DEodande, est quant ascun home per misfortune est occide per un chiual ou per
charet ou per auter chose que mouet* donques cel chose que est le cause de son
mort, que al te^ps de la misfortune moua, serra forfait al Roy, and ceo est
appell Deodande, and ceo pe^^^ne al Almener le Roy pur disposer in Alms and
acts de charity.

Departure de son plee ou matter.
DEparture de son plee ou matter, est lou un home plede un plee en bar and le
plaintiff reply a ceo, and sil apres en son ^^^omder plede ou monstre auter
matter contrary a son primer plea en bar, ceo est appell un depart de son
barr^ etc.

Departure in dispite del Court.
DEparture in dispite del Court, est quant le tenant ou defenda^t appear al
action port enuers luy, and ad iour ouster en m^ le term ou est demand
apres, coment null iour so^t a luy done issint que soit en mesme le term ^^ ne
appear me^ fa^t defaut, ce^ un departure in dispite del Court, and pur ceo il
serra conde^^^^.

156 Deputy.
Deputy est celuy que occupya en aut droyt soit ceo office, ou ascun auter
chose, and son forfaitur^, ou dismeanor cause^ officer, ou celuy que deputy il
est de pard' son office ou chose. Mes un ^e poit fair son deputy en touts
cases, nisi le grant soit issint, si come il soit o^^ ceux ou tiels se^blables
parols, exerce^do per se, vel sufficientem deputatum suum, ou si les parols va
ouster per se vel deputat* suum* aut deputat* deputati, donques il poit fair
un deputy and so^ deputy auxi poet fair un deputy, auterm^t nemie.

157 Det.
DEt est un brief and gist lou ascun sum dargent est due a un per reason
^accompt, bargain, contract, obligation* ou aut especialtie, a estre pay ^
ascu^ certain iour, a quel iour il ne paia pass, do^ques il auera cest
brief. Mes si ascun sum de argent soit due a ascun seignior per son tenant,
pur alcun re^t service, le seignior ne vnques au^a actio^ de dett, mes il
couient touts foits distrain. Auxi pur rent charge ou rent secke, quel home ad
pur term de son vie, en tail ou en fee, il nauera actio^ de det, cy long
come le rent endure, mes ses executors poient aver un actio^ de det pur les
arrerages de ascun des dits re^ts due e^ le vie lour testator, per lestatute
32. H. 8. c. 37.

Mes pur les arrerages de re^t reserve sur un lease pur term de ans, le lessor
est a son election de aver action de debt, ou pur distrainer: Mes si le lease
soit determine, donques il ne distreinera apres pur cel rent.

Mes couient luy dauer un action de det pur les arrerages.

Deuastauerunt bona testatoris.
DEuastaueru^t bona testatoris est qua^t les executors voile deliver les
legacies que lour testator ad done ou fair restitution pur torts faits per
luy, ou pay ses dets due sur co^tractes, ou aut dets due sur specialties, que
iours de payment ne sont uncore venus etc. Et ne guard sufficient ^n lour maines
pur discharger ceux dets sur records ou specialties, q^ ils sont co^pellabl'
primerm^t per le ley de satisfier, do^ques il serront co^strain de payer de
lour biens, demesne ceux duties, le quel al primer per le ley ils, fi^^ront
compelles de paier, accordant al value de ceo q^ ils deliuero^t ou pay sans
compulsion, car tiels paime^ts de dets, ou delivery de legacies, come est
auantdit, deuant dets paies sur specialties* ou records, quel iours de payment
sont a ore venus* sont account en le ley un vasta^t des biens del testator, cy
tant come si ils ad done eux sans cause, ou vend eux and convert eux a lour
proper use.

159 Devise.
Devise est lou un ho^e en son testament, done ou grant ses biens ou ses terres
a un auter apres son decease. Et lou tiel devise est fait des biens, si les
executors ne voilent deliver les biens a le deuisee, le deuisee and remedy per
le common ley* Mes il couient de aver un Citation verse les executors le
testator dappearer deuant le Ordinary* de monst^ pur quoy il ne performa le
volu^t le testator, car le deuisee ne poit p^nder le legacy and luy m^ s eru^,
mes il deit estre deliu^ a luy per les executors.

Mes per le co^mon-ley, si home fuit s^le seisi de terres e^ son demesne come
de fee* and deuisa les terres per son testam^t* cest devise fuit void* (...)
les terres seront en un City ou borough lou terres sont deuisable per custom.
Mes si ascun home soit* enfeoffe al use dun auter and ses heirs, and cesty a
que use il fuit issint seisse fait devise de ses terres, cest devise fuit bone,
coment que il ne fuit en ville lou terres sont deuisable.

Auxy si asc' home devise tres en city, ville ou borough deuisable, and le
deuisor deuie, si son heir ou asc' auter abate en les terres, donques le
deuisee au^a br^ de Ex graui quaerela: Mes cest br^ ne serra iammes plede
deua^t le Justice le Roy, mes touts foits deuant le Mayor on Bailifes in le dit
ville.

Et ore al fine de monstre quant les leyes de cest Realm, and les discreet
Judges de ceo, q^ux sont les interpreters de le ley, ont favor volunts and
testaments, and issint devises en yelding al eux ^iel reasonable co^struction,
come ils pensant poit bien agreer oue les menes de les morts, considerantes q^
volunts and testam^ts sont pur le plus part, and per common intendm^t fait
quant le testator est ore en graund langor, feeble and passa tout sperans de
recovery, car il est un opinion en le pais enter le greinder number, que si un
home per chance soit ey sapient come de fair son volunt en son bone sane,
quant il est strong, de bone memory, and ad temps and opportunity, and poit
dema^d counsel si ascun doubt soit de le learned, que do^ques il ne doit viuer
long apres, and pur ceo ils ceo defer tanque tiel temps quant ceo soit plus
convenient de applier eux mesmes a le disposition de lour alms, q^ de lour
terres and biens, sinon que il soit que per fresh memory, and recital de eux
a cest temps, il poit estre un cause de mittr^ eux en meant* de asc' de lour
bie^s ou tres fauxim^t purchase and issint move eux al restitutio^ etc. Et a
cest te^ps le escripture de tiels volunts sont communem^t commit al minister
del paroch ou al ascun aut plus ignorant que luy, que ne seauoit q^ux parolx
sont necessary pur fair un estate e^ fee simple, fee tail pur term de vie,
ou tiels semblables, preter diverse aut mischiefs: Ieo voile pur ceo mise cy
ascuns de ceux cases queux so^t plus common en les bouches de les ignorant
homes and portont per le sauient interpretations de les judges, come est
auantdit, un large and plus favorable fe^ce en volu^ts q^ en faits.

Et pur ceo primerme^t si un devise al I. S. per sont volunt, touts les terres
and tenem^ts, icy non solement tout ceux tres, q^ il ad en possession passo^t,
mes auxi ceux de que il ad le reuersion, per virtue de ceux parelx teneme^ts.

Et si terres sont devise a un home ae aver a luy in perpetuum, ou a aver a luy
and a ses assigns, in ceux deux cases le deuisee au^a fee simple, Mes si soit
do^e per feoffem^t ^n tiel manner, il and forsque estate pur term de vie. Auxy
^i un home devise ses terres al auter, pur doner, vender, ou fa^^ de c^o a so^
will and pleasure, cest fee simple.

Un devise sait al un and a ses heirs males fait un estate tail, mes si ^i^ls
parols so^t mise en un fa^^ de foffement, il serra prise fee simple, pu^ ^eo
que il ^appiert de que corpse les heirs males serra ingend^e. Si terres sont
done per fait al I. S. and a les heirs males de son corpse etc. que ad issue
file, que ad issue fites and morust, la le terrie reuertera al donour, and le
fits de file nauera ceo, pur ceo que il ne poit a luy mesme conueier per heirs
males, car sa mere est un obstacle a ceo, mes auterme^t est de tiel devise,
car la le fites del file ceo auera plustost que le volunt serra void.

Si un devise al enfant in ventre matris suae, cest bone devise, auterm^t est
per feoffement, grant, o^ done, ca^ e^ ceux cases il doit estre un del
ability pur prender maintena^t, auterment il est void.

Un devise fair e^ fee simple sans express perols del heirs est bo^e e^ fee
simple.

Mes si un devise soit al I. N. il auera les terres forsque pur term de vie,
car ceux parols ne voile^t porter greinder estate.

Si un voile que son fits I. auera son terre puis le mort son feme, icy le fe^e
le deuisor au^r le tree primes pur term de sa vie. Issint si home devise ses
biens a sa feme, and que apres le decease de son feme, son fits and heir auera
le meison ou les biens sont, la le fits nauera le meason durant le vie de le
feme, car il appiert que son intent fuit, que sa feme doit aver le meason auxi
put term de sa vie, nient obstant il ne fuit devise a luy per express parols.

Si un devise soit al I. N. and a les heirs females de son corpse engendres,
apres le deuisce ad issue fites and file, and morust, icy le file auera le
terre, and nemy le fits, and uncore il est plus digne person, and heir al so^
peire, mes pur ceo que volunt del mort est, que le file doit ceo aver, ley and
conscience voet issint auxy.

Et en cest point les heathen fueront precise, come appiert per ceux verses de
Octauins Augustus que Donatus report il fesoit apres que Virgil a son morte
donoit commaundem^t, que ses livers doie^t estre combure, pur ceo que ils
fueront imperfect, and uncore ascuns persuadont que ils doient estre save, come
en fait ils happiment fueront a que il respond issint: Sed legum serua^da
fides, suprema voluntas, Quod mandat, fierique iubet, parere necesse est.

Diem clausit extremum.
DIem clausit extremu^, est un br^, and gist lou le tenant le Roy, q^ tient en
chief morust, donq^ ce^ br^ serra direct al eschetour denquirer de quel estate
il fuit seisi, and que est procheine heir, and de q^ lage and de la certainty
del ^ie and de quel value le (...) est. and de que ceo est ten^s, and cel
inquisitio^ (...) return en le chancerie and est communement appel, The office
after y^ death of that person.

161 Descent.
Descent, est en ij. sorts, o^ lineal, ou collatal.

Lineal descent est quant le descent est convey en mesme le line dentier
sangue, come aile, peer, fits, fits del fits and issint debassa.

Collateral descent est dehors en un auter bra^ch dehaust dentier sangue come
le friar del ayle, friar del peer, and issint debassa.

Nota que si un deuie seisie en fee, ou en tail de terre en quel auter ad
droit denter, and ceo descend a son heir, tiel descent tollera lentre de
cestuy que droit auoit denter, pur ceo q^ le heir ad ceux per le descent de
son pere, and issint vient a les teneme^ts per act del ley, and cesty que
droit ad ne puit luy ouster per enter sur luy, mes est mise de suer son brief a
demand le terre solonque le nature de son title. Vide de ceo Littleton, liver.
3. ca. 6. and Stat. 32. Henr. 8. cap. 33.

Disclaymer.
DIsclaymer, est lou le seignior distraine son tenant, and il sua repleuin,
and le seignior auowa le pr^sel, per reason que il t^^nt de luy, si le tenant
dit que il disclaim de tener de luy, cest appel un disclaimer, and si le
seignior sur c^o port brief de droit sur disclaimer, and il soit troue
encounter le tenant, il perdera le terre. Auxy ^^ un port un precipe verse deux
auters pur te^re, and le tenant disclaim and dit, que il nest de ceo tenant,
ne claim rien en ceo, donques lauter auera tout le terre. Mes si le precipe
soit envers un sole, and il disclaim, come auant est dit le brief abatera, and
uncore le demandant poit enter en le terre, and ceo teter en son droiturel
estate come^t son entry ne fuit loyal.

Discontinuance.
DIscontinuance, est qua^t un home alien a un ^nter terres o^ tenements and
morust, and un aut ad droit a m^sme les terres and ^e puit enter ^n eux per
cause de cel alienation, sicome un Abbot alien les tres de son meason a un
auter en fee, ou en fee tail, ou pur term de vie, ou si un home alie^ les
terres q^ il ad en droit sa fem^, ou si tenant en tail alien les terres done a
luy and a ses heirs de son corpse, donque tiels alienations sont appels
discontinuance, car tiels estates passont touts foits per liuerie and seisin,
and en ceux cases le successor labbe, ne la feme apres le mort son baron, ne
lissue en le tail apres le mort le tenant en le tail ne poient enter mes
chescun de eux est mise a sonaction. Vide pluis de ceo en Litt lib. 3. ca 11.
and 32. ^. 8. ca. 28. que toll les discontinuances per baron seisi en droit son
fe^e.

164 Dismes.
DIsmes, sont les dismes parts de asc* chose* mes proprem^t de ceux chooses que
increase, q^ux pur le pluis part perteigne al Ministres desgli^e pur lour
maintenance and ils so^t deuides en iij. sorts, nosm^t Predial dismes, Parsonel
dismes and Mixed dismes, Predial dismes sont dismes, q^ so^^ paid de chooses,
q^ux vie^t de le terr^ solem^t, come bles, sein, f^uits del arbors and tiels
semb.

Parsonel dismes sont dismes que sont paies de tiels profits que veigne per le
labor and industry del person dun home, come per emption and venditio^, gain
de merchandise and de manuel crafts homes laborers and tiels q^ labor pur
salary, come carpent, masons and tiels se^blables.

Mixte dismes sont les dismes de vitels, agnes, porcels and tiels se^blabl* q^
increase partm^t del tree, sur q^ ils sont depastures, and partm^t del garding,
e^dustrie, and diligence del owner.

Disparagement.
DIsparagem^t est un ho^t, disgrace ou villanye fait per le gardein en
Chivalry a son guard en chiualry, esteant deins age per reason de son marriage.

Come quant le gardein marry son ward deins age de xiiii. ans, and deins tiel
temps q^ il ne poit consent al marriage, al un nief^, o^ al file dun q^ d^murt
en un borough (que est deste entend tiels que peers profess maincrafts and
tiels baser arts de emption and venditio^ pur gam^ lour viuer p^r ce^) ou al un
que ad forsque un pee, ou un maine ou est decrepit ou deforme, ou aiant
horrible disease, come le leprosy, les pockes de frankes, falling sickness, ou
tiels semblables, ou marry luy a un feme que est pass lage denfanter and
diverse tiels auters, donque sur le complaint fait per les amies de tiel heir,
le s^^r ou gardein perdera le gardship and les profits durant le nonage de le
heir pur le hont fair a luy. Vide Litt lib. 2. ca. 4.

166 Disseisin.
DIsseisin, est quant un ho^e ent en ascu^ terres ou tenements, lou son enter
nest pas congeable, and ousta celuy q^ ad le fraktenement.

Disseisin sur disseisin.
DIsseisin sur disseisin, est quant le disseisour est dis^eisie per un auter.

Disseisour and disseisee.
DIsseisour, est celuy que ^^st ascun home horse de son terre sans order de ley,
and disseisee est celuy que est issint ^^s.

Disceit.
DIsceit est un bre, and est ascun foi^s original, and ascun foits judicial,
mes quant il est original, gist lo^ ascu^ disceit est fait a asc^^ ho^e pro un
aut, issint q^ il and sufficientm^t perform s^n bargain, ou ni^nt perform son
promise, do^que c^luy que est en tiel man^ disceiue auera cest brief.

Auxy quant cest brief est judicial il gift ou scire facias est s^^ horse de
ascun Record ve^s un and le Vicount return que il est garnye, ou il ne fuit
garnye ou lou un Praecipe quod reddat de plee de terre, ou Quare impedit del
presentment al esglise est sue verse un, and le vicou^r return que il est
summon, lou il ne fuit summon, per quel disceit and faux return le demaundant
recover en le plaint, donques le party grieve auera cest brief verse celuy que
recouera, and verse les summoners, and verse le vicont, donques le brief serra
direct al Coroners de mesme le county, si il continue vicount que fist le
return.

170 Distress.
Distress est le chose q^ est prise and distraine sur ascun terre pur rent
arrere, ou pur auter duitie, ou pur tort fait, coment q^ le property del chose
soit perteignant al estrange: Mes si sont auers que perteignont al estrange, il
couient q^ ils sont leuaunt and couchant sur m^ le terre, cest adire que les
auers auoyent este sur le terre per certain space, que ils ont eux bien repose
sur la terre, ou auterme^t ils ne sont distreinable pur rent ou serm^*.

Et si un distraine pur re^t ou auter chose sans cause loyal, donques le party
grieve auera un repleuin, and sur surety troue de pursuer son action, auera la
distres a luy redeliuer. Mes sont diverse chooses q^ ne sont distrainable, viz.
robe de auter home en le meason de un Tailor, ou drape en le meason dun fuller,
sheereman ou weiuer, pur ceo q^ ils sont common artificers, and que le common
presumption est, que tiels chooses ne sont perteignant al artificer, mes al
auters persons que le mittont la a ouerer.

Auxi via^d' ne^ p^ distreinable, ne blees en sheues, sinon q^ ils sont en un
chareot, pur ceo q^ distres couient este toutes foits de tiel chose, don't le
vicont poit fair repleuin and redeliu^y en auxi bon case q^ il fuit al temps
del prisel.

Auxi ho^e poit distreine pur homage de son t, pur fealty and escuage, and
auts seruic', and pur fines and amerc' que sont assesse en un Leete, mes nemy
en un Court baron. Et auxy pur damage fesant, cest adire, quant il troue les
beasts ou bn^s des auters feasant tort ou incumbrant son terre: Mes home ne
poit distraine pur ascun re^t ou chose due pur ascun terr^, mes sur mesme le
terre q^ est charge ouesque ceo; Mes en case lou ieo veign^ a distrainer, and
lauter veyant mon purposechase les beasts, ou port le chose dehors, al intent
que ieo ne prendra ceo pur distres sur le terre, donques ieo poy bien pursue,
and si ieo prise ceo maintenant en le hault chimin ou en auter soil, le prisel
est loyal, auxy bien la come sur la terre charge a quecunque la property des
biens sont.

Auxi pur fines and amerciam^ts q so^t assesse en un leete, un port touts
foites pre^der les bn^s celuy que est issint amerce, en quecunque soil que ils
sont deins le jurisdiction del court vt dicitur. Et quant un ad prise un
distres, il coment a luy de amesner ceo al common pound, ou auterment il poit
garder en ouert lieu, issint q^ il done notice al party, que il (si le distres
soit viue auers) poit doner a luy viand, and donques si le auers morust pur
default de viand, celuy que ^^^t distrein serra a le pard, and donques lauter
poit distraine auterfoits pur mesme le rent on du^tie. Mes sil amesn^ le
distres a un forslet, ou horse del county, q^ le vicont ne poit bie^ fair
deliverance sur repleuin, do^q^s le party sur le return del vicont au^a un
brief de Withernam direct al Vicont, q^ il prendra tant de ses auers, ou tant
des bie^s lauter en son guard, tanque il ad fait deliverance de la primer
distres. Auxi siso^t en un forslet ou castle, le vicont poit pre^der oue luy le
power del County, and abater le castle. Come appiert per lesta. W. 1. cap. 17.
Ideo vide Statutum.

171 Divorce.
Divorce issint appel de Diuortium, venie^s del verb Diuerto, que signify
deretorner arere, cest est use en ley quant un home est separate de sa feme, il
luy return arrere a sa pere ou auter amies, ou a luy ou il luy ad, and per
tiel divorce le marriage est defeat and distroy.

172 Donor and Donee.
DOnor est celuy q^ done terres ou tenements al auter en tail, and celuy a que
il est done est appel Donee.

173 Double plee.
DOuble plee est lou le defendant ou tenant en ascun action pled un plee en que
deux matters sont comprehendus, and chescu^ per luy mesme est un sufficient
bar ou respons al action, donques tiel double plee ne serra admit pur plee,
sinon q^ un depend sur lauter, and en tiel case si il ne poyt aver le darrein
plee sans le primer plee, donq^s tiel double plee serr^ bien suffer.

Dower.
DOwer est un brief and gist lou home est sole seisie durant le couerture
perenter luy and sa feme, de terres ou teneme^ts en fee simple ou fee tail,
lou per possibility le issue enter eux poient enherite, si tiel ho^e deuie sa
feme recouera la tierce part de touts les tres don't le baron suit sole seisi
ascun te^ps durant le couerture per brief de Dower vnde nihil habet mesque il
ne morust seisie, and mesque il ad fait alienation de ceo en sa vie. Mes si
ho^e deua^t le statute de Uses 27. H. 8. ad terres, en queux aut ho^e, ou
auters homes fueront seisies a son oeps touts foits durant le couerture, and
cesty a q^ oeps ils fueront seisies deuie deuaunt le dit statute, sa feme ne
serra endow.

Et aux^ si deuant le dit Statute deux homes sont seisies de terre al oeps de
un de eux, and cestuy a que oeps etc. deuie deuant le di^ statute, sa feme ne
serra indow Auxi si feme port br^ de dower, el recouera damage, pur le profit
incu^rus apres la mort le baron fill morust de ceo seisie, Mes si ascun
alienation o^ estate soit fait durant le couerture, issint que le baron ne
morust seysie, donques mesqueel recover la terre uncore el ne recouera
damages. Auxy il est un auter brief de dower, appel brief de droit de dower,
and gist lou feme ad recover part de sa dower en mesme la ville, and auter
part el est a recover. Auxy en diverse cases fem^ nauera dower, sicome le baron
fait treason, pur que il est attaint, donque sa feme nauera dower. Auxy si el
elopa de son baron ouesque un auter home in auowtry, and si il ne soit
reconcile per son baron de son bone volunt sans cohersion d^l Esglise, el ne
serra endowe.

Droit.
DRoit, est lou un ad chose que fuit toll de auter per torte, come per
disseisin, discontinuance, ou eiectment, ou tiels semblables, and le challenge
ou claim q^^l ad, que auoit le chose, est term droit.

Droit dentre.
DRoit dentre, est quant un seysie de terre in fee, est de ceo disseisi: Ore le
disseisee ad droit dentre en le terre, and poet quant il voile, ou il poet aver
brief de droit enuers le disseysor.

Dum non fuit compos mentis.
DVm non fuit compos me^tis, est un brief and gist lou ho^e que est horse de
so^ bone memory, cest adire, insane ou lunatique, alien les terres que il ad in
fee simple, and deuie, donques son heir apres son decease auera cest brief,
mes il mesme nauera cest brief, pur ceo, que home ne serra resceu a disabler
luy mesme. Auxy cest brief puit este fait en le, per, cui, and post.

178 Dum fuit infra aetatem.
DVm fuit infra aetatem, est un brief and gist lou enfant deins age alien sa
terre que il ad in fee simple, ou pur term de vie, quant il vient a son pleine
age il auera cest brief, ou il puit enter sil voile: mes il couient que il
soit de pleine age, iour de son brief purchase. Auxy si enfant alien sa terre,
and deuie, son issue a son pleine age au^a cest brief ou puit enter, mes
lissue nauera cest brief deins son age.

197 Dures.
DVres, est lou un home est guard in prison ou restrain de son liberty
contrary al order de ley, and si tiel person issint esteant in dures, fait
ascun especialty on obligation per reason de tiel imprisonment, tiel fait est
void en le ley, and in actio^ port sur tiel especialtie il puit dire que il
fuit fait per dures de ^o^ imprisonm^t, mes si home soit arrest sur ascun
action al suite un auter mesque le cause del action ne soit bon ne voir, sil
fait ascu^ obligation a un estraunge estea^t in prison per tiel arrest, uncore
il ne serra dit per dures, mes sil fait obligation a luy a que suit il fuit
arrest deste discharge de tiel imprisonm^t, donques il serra dit dures vt
dicitur.

E.
Eiectione firm.
EIectione firm, vide de ceo en le title, Guard.

Eiectment de guard.
EIectment de guard, vide de ceo en le title Gardes.

Eire Justices.
EIre Justices, ou Itinera^t, come nous appelle eux fueront Justices que use de
equitare de lieu al lieu per tout le Realm pur administer Justice.

Elegit.
TEner per Elegit, est lou home ad recover det ou damage per brief deuers un
auter per Conusance ou en auter manner, al auera deins le an deuers luy un
brief judicial nosme Elegit dauer execution del moitie de toutes ses terres
and chattels (exceptes beofes and affers a sa carues) tanque le dett ou les
damages soient oustreme^t leaves ou paies a luy, and durant cest term il est
tenant per Elegit. Et nota sil soit ouste deins le term il auera Ass. de nouel
disseisin, and apres un redisseisin si besoigne soit, and cest done per le
estatute de Westminster. 2. cap. 18.

Et auxi per lequitie de mesme lestatute celuy q^ ad son estate, sil soit ouste
auera assise and redisseisin si besoigne soit. Et auxi sil face ses executors
and deuy, and ses executors entro^t and puis soient oustes, ils aueront per
lequitie de mesme lestatute tiel action come luy mesme suisdit. Mes sil soit
ouste, and puis fait ses executors and deuy, ses executors purro^t ent and sils
soient estops de lour enter, ils aueront un brief de trespass sur lour matter
and case.

Et nota sil face wast en tout la terre ou en parcel, lauter auera enuers luy
maintenant un brief judicial horse de la primer record appelle Venire facias
ad computandum, per force de quel serra inquise sil ad leuy touts les deniers
ou parcel, and sil and leuy les deniers, donques serra inquise a quant le wast
amount, and si le wast amount sinon a parcel do^ques ta^ts des deniers que le
wast amount serra abridge de les suisdits deniers queux fueront estre leuies.
Mes sil ad fait pluis wast que le auantdit sum dargent que fuit a estre leuy
amount, lauter serra discharge maintenant de touts les deniers suisdits and
recouera sa terre. Et pur la superfluity de wast fait oustre ceo que amount a
le dit sum, il recouera ses damages single: and mesme le ley est de ses
executors, and auxi de cestuy que ad son estate.

Et nota sil alien en fee, ou a term de vie, ou en tail tout le terre ou
parcel de la terre, que il tient per Elegit, si le alienation soit fait deins
le term ou apres, cestuy q^ ad droit auera verse luy un Ass. de nouel diss. Et
couie^t que ils soient mise en lassise ambideux, auxibie^ le alience come le
alienor, and non obsta^t que lalienor deuie maintena^t, uncore cestuy que ad
droit au^a verse le alience sole Assise, come sil vst estre son simple tenant a
term de ans. Et ceo est per lequitie del Statute de Westminster. 2. cap. 25. pur ceo
que il and sinon chatel en effect: and mesme le ley est de ses executours, and
de cestuy que ad son estate, come est suisdit.

Et nota que en Elegit si le vicont return que il auoit riens iour de la
recognisance fait, mesque il purchase terre puis le temps, adonques le party
plaintiff auera nouel brief de aver execution de ceo: mesme le ley est de un
estatute Merchant.

Et nota que apres le Fieri facias un home poyt aver le Elegit, mes non
econtra, entaunt que le Elegit est de plus haut nature que le Fieri facias, Et
nota que si home recover per brief de det and sue un Fieri facias, and le
vicount return que le defendaunt and ryens don't il poit fair gree a la
party, do^ques le plaintiff auera un Elegit, ou un Capias sicut alias, and
Pluries. Et si vicount return a le Capias mitto vobis corpus, and il and riens
dount il poit fair gree a la party il ferra maunde al gayle del Fleet, and
illonques demurra tanque il ad fait gree al party, and si le vicount return
Non est muentus, adonques issera Lexigent enuers luy. Et nota que en brief de
dett port deuers person de Saint Esglise, que and rien de lay ^ee, and le
vicount return que il and riens per que il poit estre summons, adonques suera
le plaintiff brief al Euesque que il face vener son clerk, and Leuesque luy
ferra vener per sequestration del Esglise. Et nota que si home port brief de
dett and recover, and face ses executours and deuie, ils naueront execution non
obstant que al soit deins lan per un Fieri facias.

184 Embrasour ou Embraceour.
EMbrasour ou Embraceour, est celuy q^ qua^t un matt est en trial perenter
party and party, vie^t al bar oue un del parties (aiant receive asc' reward
pur issint fair) and parle en le case, ou priu^r^t labor le jury ou stat la pur
surueier ou suruiew eux per cest means de mitter eux en pauour and dout del
matt. Mes homes q^ sont erudite e^ le ley, poie^t perle en le cas pur lour
clients.

185 Encrochment.
ENcrochm^t, est dit qua^t le seigniour ad happa seysin de pluis rent ou
services de sou tenant que de droit est due, ou doet e^^ pay o^ fait a luy,
Come si le tenant tient sa terre de son Sn^r per fealty and ii. s. rent
annuelm^t, and ore de tradife temps le Se^g'ad happa seisin de 3. s. rent, ou
de homage ou escuage ou tiels sembl, Donques ce^ appel un Encrochm^t de ce^
re^t ou ser'.

Enheritance.
ENheritance, est tiel estate en terres ou tenements, ou auts chooses, q^ poient
estre enherite per le heir soit ceo de estate en fee simple ou tail per
descent, de ascun de ses ancestors ou per son purchase demesne.

Et enheritance est divide e^ deux sorts, cestassauoir, enherita^ce corpor' and
enherita^ce incorporat.

Enheritance corporate sont mesuages, terres, prees, pastures, rents, and tiels
semblables, que ont substance en eux mesm^s and poient continuer tout temps. Et
ceux sont appel chooses corporal.

Enheritance incorporate sont aduowsons, villains, ways, commons, courts,
piscaries, que sont ou poient este appendant ou appurtenant a enheritances
corporate.

167 Enter.
Enter, est lou un home entra en ascun terr^ ou tenements* en son proper person
ou auter person commandment.

Auxy sont diverse br^es dentre queux sont en diverse manners, Un est brief dentre
sur disseisin, and cest brief gist lou home est disseisi, il ou son heir
lauantdit brief auer^ verse mesme le disseisor, ou ascun auter apres tenant
del tree, Et si le disseisour alyen ou de^^e ^ey^i, donques le br^ de Enter
serra verse le heir ouesque alienee en le per* cest adire, en q^ le tenant non
habet ingressum nisi per tiel nosmant le disseisor, que luy auoit disseisie etc.

Et si le heir ou alience deuie seisie, ou aliena al auter, donques le brief
serra en le Per and Cui, cest adire, en que le tenant non habet ingressum nisi
per tiel nosmant le heir ou le alienee del disseisor, cui tiel (nosmant le
disseisour) il demisit, que luy per tort disseise etc.

Et si terre soit convey ouster al plusors, ou si le primer disseisor sort
disseisi, donq^s le br de Entr^ serra en le Post, cest adire, q^ le tenant non
habet ingressum nisi post disseisina^ quel le primer disseisor fait al
demandant ou son auncestor. Vide ap^s Enter en le Per.

Brief de Enter en le Per gist lou home est disseise de son franktenement, and
le disseisor alien ou deuie seisie, and son heir entra, donques le disseisee
ou son heir auera le dit brief verse le heir le disseisor, ou verse le alienee
l'disseisor, mes viuant le disseisor il poit aver Assise si il voile, and le
brief de Enter dirra, in quod A. non habet ingressum nisi per B. que illud ei
dimisit, qui inde eum unjust disseisiuit etc. Mes si le disseisor alien, and
le alienee deuie seisi, ou alien ouster a un auter, ou si le disseisor deuie,
and son heir entra, and cely heir aliena ou deuie, and son heir entra, donq^s
le disseisee ou son heir auera brief de Enter sur disseisin en le Per and
Cui, Et le brief dirra, in quod idem A. non habet ingressum nisi per B. cui C.
illud ei dimisit, qui unjust etc.

Et nota bien, que null brief de Enter en le Per and Cui serra maintenable verse
nulluy, mes lou il que est tenant soit eins per purchase ou per descent: Mes si
le alienation ou descent sont deuenus horse des degrees, sur quel null brief
poit estre fait en le Per, ne en le Per and Cui, donques serra fait en le Post,
and le brief dirra, in quod A. non habet ingressum nisi post disseisinam, quam
B. inde unjust and sine iuditio fecit praef. N. vel M. proauo N. cuius haeres
ipse e^.

Auxy sont v. chooses que mittont le brief de Enter horse des degrees cest adire,
Entrusion, Succession, Disseisin sur disseisin, Iudgem^t, ou Escheat.

1 Entrusion est quant le disseisor deuie seisie, and un estrange abata.

2 Disseisin sur disseisin est quant le disseisor est disseisie per un auter.

3 Succession est ou le disseisor est un home de Religion and deuie, ou est
depose, and son successor entra.

4 Iudgem^t est quant un recover verse le disseisour.

5 Escheat est quant le disseisor deuie sans heir, ou fait felony, per que il
est attaint, per que le seigniour entra come en son Escheat.

En touts ceux cases le disseisee ou son heir nauera brief de Enter deins les
degrees en le Per, mes en le Post, pur ceo que en ceux dits cases ils ne sont
eins per descent ne per purchase.

Auxy il y ad un brief de Enter ad communem legem, and gist lou tenant a term
de vie, tenant a tm dauter vie, tenant per la courtesy, ou tenant en dower
alieu and deuie, donque celuy en le reuersio^ aver le auatdit br^ deuers
quecunque q^ soit eins ap^s en les dits tenements.

Auxy brief de Enter in casu prouiso gist, si tenant en dower alien en fee, ou
pur term de vie, ou pur auter vie, viuant le tenant en dower, celuy en le
reuersion auera le brief appel brief de Enter in casu prouiso.

Auxy br^ de Enter in casu consimili gist, si tenant pur term, de vie, ou ^
per la curtesy alien en fee viua^t eux, celuy en le reuersion auera un brief
appel brief de Enter in co^simili casu,

Auxy br^e de Enter ad terminum qui praeterijt gist, si un hom^ lessa terres a
un aut put term dans, and le tenant tient ouster son term, do^ques le lessor
auera br^ que est appel brief de Enter ad terminum qui praeteriit.

Et auxy si terres sont less a un home pur term dauter vie, and cestuy pur que
vie les terres sount lesses deuie, and le lessee tient ouster, donque le lessor
auera cest brief.

Auxy brief de Enter sine assensu capituli gist, lou un Abbe, Prior, ou tiel
que ad Covent ou common seal, aliena terres ou terements del droit de son
Esglise, sans le assent del Covent ou Chapter and deuie, donque son successor
auera cest brief.

Auxy br^ de Enter causa matrimonii prelocuti gist lou terres ou tenements sont
done a un home sur tiel condition, que il prendra la donour a sa feme deins
certain te^ps, and il ne luy espousa deins la dit temps, ou espouse auter
femme, ou luy fait Preister, ou entra en religion, ou luy disable, issint q^ il
ne puit luy prender accordant a la dit condition, donques le seem donour and
ses heirs auera le dit brief verse luy ou verse quecunque est eins en le dit
teire. Auxy il couient q^ cest condition soit fait per Indenture, ou auterment
cest brief ne gist, and touts ceux and auters briefes dentre poient este fait
en le Per, Cui and post.

188 Entrusion.
ENtrusion, est un brief and gist lou tenant a term de vie deuie seisie de
certain terres ou tenements, and un estrange entra, celuy en la reuersion
auera le dit brief verse labator, ou verse quecunque que soit eins ap^s lour
entrusion. Auxi un brief de entrusion serra maintenable per le successor dun
Abbe verse labatour que enter ascun terres ou tenements tempore vacationis que
appent a sa Esglise per statute Marlebridge capitulo vltimo.

189 Equity.
Equity, est en deux manners, diverse moulte lun del auter, and sont de
contrary effects, car lun abridge, diminish and toll de le letter del ley,
Le auter enlarge amplify and add a ce o.

Le primer est issint define, Equitas est correctio legis generatim latae qua
part deficit, le quel correctio, del general parols, est moult use en nostre
ley. Sicome pur example, quant act de parliament est fait, quecunque que fait
tiel act serra felon, and serra mise al mort, uncore si home de non sane
memory, ou enfant de tender age que and discretion le fait, ils ne serront
felons, ne mise al morte.

Auxi si estatute fuit fait q^ touts persons q^ recetteront, ou doneront
maunger ou boier, ou aut aid a cestuy q^ faira tiel act, serro^t accessarie a
son offense, and serront mise al mort si ils conustero^t del fact, uncore lun
fait tiel act, and veigne a sa proper feme, que scia^t ceo luy receive and
done manger and boier a luy, el ne serra accessory ne felon, car en le
generaltie de les dits parols del ley, cestuy de non save memory, ne le
enfant, ne le seem, fuerent include in intent.

Et issint equity correct le generaltie del ley en ceux cases, and les parols
generals sont per equity abridge.

Lauter equity est defined en tiel manner. Equitas est verborum legis directio
efficiens, cum vna res solummodo legis ca^etur verbis, vt omnia alia in equali
genere, eisde^ caueantur verbis: and issint quant le parolx enacte un chose,
ils enactes toutes chooses que sont en semblables degrees, sicome le statute que
ordeigne que en action de debt verse executors, cestuy que vient per distress
respondera, extenda per equity al administrators, car cestuy de eux que vient
primes per distres respondera per equity del did act, Quia sunt in aequali
genere.

Issint le statute de Gloucester done le action de Waste, and le punishment de
ceo verse cestuy que tient pur vie ou ans, and per le equity de ceo home auera
actio^ de wast verse cestuy q^ ^ien^ forsque pur un an, ou demi an* and uncore
ceo est ^ors d^l parols del estatut* car cestuy que tient forsque demi an ou un
an, ne ^^en^ pur ans, mes ceo est le intent, and le parols que enact lun, per
equity enacteront lauter.

Error.
ERror, est un brief, and gist lou judgment est done en le Common bank ou
deuant* Justice in Assise, ou deuaunt Justice de Oyer and terminel ou deuaunt
le Mayor o^ vicont de Londre^ ou en auter Court de Record* contre le ley* ou
for undue ou male process* donques per cel brief, le party green (...) que
le judgment est done ^uera cel brief ^ and per ^^o causera le Record and
process destre remove deuaunt les Justices de bank le Roy. Et la si er^ soit
troue il serra reuerse: mes si erroneous judgment soit done en bank le Rov,
donques ^^ ne poit estre reuerse forsque per Parliament tanque le statute (...)

Auxy si faux judgment ^^i^ done en court q^ ^^st de record* come en County
hundred ou court ha^ on* donque le party a^a b^ de (...) judgment pur fair le
record vener deuant Justice de common bank. Auxi si error soit ^^oue ^n
Leschequer ^l serra redress ^ le Chancellor and Tresore^vt patet (...) E. 3.
An. 31. cap. 12.

191 Escape.
EScape, est lou un que est ^^ arrest* deuelgue a ^on liberty de ^aunt q^ il
soit deliver per agard de ascun justice* on per order del ley* Escape est en
deux sorts, (...) voluntary and negligent*

Voluntary escape est quant un arrest^ aut pur felony, ou auter crime and puis
celuy en q^ custody il ^oi^, luy lesser ale^ ou il veult* cel lesser de luy
aler, est un voluntary escape.

Et si larrest de cestuy que escape fui^ pur felony, ceo serra dit felony en
cestuy que luy lessa descaper, and si pur treason il serra treason en luy, and
si pur un trespass, donque trespass, and sic de singulis.

Negligent escape est qua^t un est arrest, and puis escape enconter le volunt
de cestuy q^ luy arrest* and ne soit ^reshment puisue, and reprise deuaunt que
le pursuor perda le view de luy, ceo serra (...) negligent Escape, non obstant
q^ cestuy horse de q^ possession il escape luy reprist a^r^^ le vieu per^u. Auxy
^^ v^ foi^ arrest, and puis escape and est a son liberty* and cestuy en que
guard ^l f^ist luy reprise apr^s, and luy amesne a le prison, uncore i^ est
escape en luy.

Auxy si un felon so^t arrest per le Constable, and amesne a le garle en le
county* and le gailer ne voit luy receiver and le constable luy de^it, and le
gailer aux^, and issint il escape, cest est un escape en le gailer pur ceo* que
en ^^el case le gailer est tenus deluy resc^i^er per le main le Constable sans
ascun precept de le Justices de peace. Mes auterment est si un common person
arrest auter pur suspicion de felony, la le gayler nest tenus de luy resce^u^
sans precept de ascun des lustices de peace, Il y ad v^ escap^ auxi sans
arrest, come si murder soit fait en le iour, and l'murderer ne soit prise,
do^que il est escap^ pur q^ le vil' ou le murder fuit fait serr^ amercie.

192 Eschete.
ESchete, est lou un tenant en fe^ simple face felony pur q^ il est pendu, ou
abjure le Realm, ou vtlage de felony, murder, ou petit treason, ou side tenant
morust sans heir general ou special donque le Sn^r de q^ le terre est tenus
per le tenant poit enter per voy de eschet, ou si aut home ent le Seign^ auera
verse luy un br^ appell br^ de Esch^^* que^ come semble est derive del paroll
francoys Eschien.

Escuage.
EScuage, est appel en latin Scutagium, cest adire, seruitium scuti, and cesty
que tient per escuage, tie^t per service de chiualer, and a ceo appe^t guard
marriage and relief, mes ceo serra entend de escuage non certain quant lescuage
courge per tout Engleterre, quant est ordeigne per tout le counsel Dengleterre
que ap^s les guerres chescun Seigniour auera certain sum de son tenant que ne
fuit en le dit guer Mes si le tenant que tient dascun Seign^ per Escuage soit
oue le roy en ses guerres in Escose, and le seign^ voit distrain luy pur
Escuage il serra bon ple adire que il fuit oue le roy in Escose en le guerr^,
and ceo serra try per le Marshal le Roy.

Et nota bn^ q^ home ne poit tener per escuage sino^ q^ il teign^ per homage
pur ceo q^ escuage de Common droit treit a luy homage come il fuit Judge in
Term^ H. 21. E. 3. ca 42 folio. 52. Auowrie 115. and nota que Escuage est un
certain sum de argent, and doit estre leuy per le Seign^ de ses tena^ts
solonque le quantity de son tenure quant le Escuage courge per tout Englet, and
ordein e^ per tout le counsel denglet quant chescun tenant donera a son
seignior, and ceo est properm^t pur susteiner la guer par ent Engl', and ceux
de Escose, ou de Gales and no^ p^ per ent auters tres, pur ceo que les aua^tdit
terres serront de droit appendant a la roi^lme Dengl'. Vide Lit. lib. 2. cap. 3.

194 Esplees.
ESplees, est sico^e le seisin, ou possession dun chose profit ou commodity
que est a prender, come dun common les Esplees, est le prender del grass ou
common per les bouches de les beasts que common la: dun aduowson, de prender de
gross dismes per le person pres ent, de boys, le vender de boys, dun orchard,
le ve^der de pomes ou auts fruits cressa^ts la, dun molin le prisel de toll est
le esplees and de riels semblables. Et nota q^ en brief de droit de terre, ou
aduowson ou tiels semblables, le demanda^t doit alleger en son count, que il ou
ses ancestors prise les esplees de chose en demand, ou ante^m^t le count
nest bon.

Essoine.
ESsoine, est lou un actio^ est port, and le plaintiff ou defendaunt ne poit
bien appearer al iour in court pur un de v. causes desouth expresses, donque il
serra Essoin de sauer son default. Nota que sont v. manners de Essoins, cest
adire Essoin de ouster le me^e, and ceo est le def* auera iour per xl. iours,
Le second essoin de terra sancta, and sur ceo le def. auera iour per un an and
un iour, and ces deux serront gist al commencement de plee, Le tierce Essoine
est de male vener, and ceo serra adiorne a common iour co^^ laction require,
and appel le common Essoin: and quant, and coment cest Essoin serra, vide les
statutes and liver de Abridgme^t de statuts lou il est bie^ declare* Auxi le
iiij. Essoin De malo lecti, and ceo est solement en brief de droit, and sur
ceo issera br^ horse de Chauncerie direct al vicou^t que il maunde iiii.
Chiualers al tenant de veier le ten^t, and sil soit malade, de doner a luy iour
apres un an and un iour* Auxi le v. Essoin est de service le roy, and gist en
touts actions forsque en Assise de Nouel disseisin, br^ de Dower, Darrein
presentment* and in appel de Murder, mes en cest essoin il couient al iour de
monstre son garrant* ou auterment il tornera a un default, sil soit en plee
real, ou autment il perdera xx. ^* pur le journey ou pluis, per le discretion
del lustice, sil soit en plee personell, vt patet per le statute de Gloucest.
cap. 8.

196 Estoppel.
EStoppel est quant un est conclude and deny en ley de parler encounter son
act ou fait demesne, nient obstant il soit pur dire le verity.

Et de estoppels il y ad un graund number, un pur example est, quant I. S. est
oblige en un obligation per le nosme de T. S. ou ascun auter nosme, and est sue
apres accordant al mesme le nosme mis en lobligation, cest adire T. S. ore il
ne serra receive adire que il est misnosme, mes serra chase a respo^d'
accorda^t al nosme mis en lobligation, cest adire T. S. car peradventure
lobligee ne scauoit pas son nosme, mes de le report tantsolem^t del obligor
mesme, and entant que il est mesme le home que fuit oblige, il ferra estoppe
and deny en ley pur adire le contrary enconter son fait demesne, car ^uterm^t
il poit pre^der advantage de son tort deme^ne, le q^l le ley ne voit suffrer un
home de fair.

Auxy si le file que est heir a son pere voit suer liuerie ou^ sa soer que est
un bastard, el ne serra apres receive pur dire q^ sa soer est un bastard,
entant que si la bastard soer prist le moitie del terre oue luy, il and remedy
per le ley.

Auxy ^^ un home seisie de terre en fee simple voit prender un lease pur ans de
mesme le terre de un estranger per fait endent cest un estoppel durant le term
de ans, and le lessee est per ceo bar adire le verity, car le verity est,
que il q^ lessa la terre and riens ^n ceo al temps del lease fait, and q^ le
fee simple fuit en luy que prist le lease: Mes ceo il ne serra receive adire
tanque apres les ans serra determine, pur ceo q^ il appiert que il ad estate
pur ans, and il fuit son folly de prender un lease de ses terres demesne, and
pur ceo serra issint puni^ pur son folly.

197 Estraungers.
EStraungers sont ascun foits prise ils, q^ ne sont parties ne priuies al fine
levy, ou fesans de un fait, ascu^ foits ^ls que sont nee ouster de mere.

Estray.
EStray, est lou ascun beast ou cattle est en ascun seigniorie, and null conust
le owner de ceo, donques il serra seisie al oeps le Roy, ou de le seignior que
ad tiel estray per grant le Roy ou per prescription, and si le owner vient and
faite claim a ceo deins an and iour, donques il le reauera, ou auterme^t ap^s
le an le property de ceo serra al Seigniour* issint que le Seigniour face
proclamation de ceo accordant a le ley.

Estrepment.
EStrepment est un brief, and gist lou un est implede per un Praecipe que
reddat pur certain terre, si le demanda^t suppose que le tenant voile fair
wast pendant le plea, il auera verse luy* cest brief q^ est un prohibition, luy
commandant q^ il ne face wast pendant le plee.

Et cest brief gist properment lou^n home demand tree per Formedon, ou brief de
droit, ou tiels briefes lou il ne recover damage, car e^ tiels briefs lou il
recouera damages, il auera ses damages, ayant regard al wast fait.

200 Etate probanda.
ETate probanda, est un br^ doffice, and gist pur le heir le tenant q^ tient
del Roy in capite, pur prouer q^ il e^ de plein age, direct al Vicour pur
enquirer de son age, and donques il demendra tenant al Roy per mesme les
services q^ son ancestor fist al Roy: Mes il est dit, q^ chescun q^ passera en
cest enquest serra del age de xlii. ans al meins issint que il fuit de pleine
age al temps quant cestuy que suist le brief fuit nee.

201 Excommengement.
EXcommengement, est adire e^ Latin Exco^municatio, and est lou un ho^e per la
iudgm^t en Court christian est exco^menge, donq^s ^l est disable de suer ascun
actio^ en court le Roy, and sil remain excommenge xl. iours, and ne voile este
justify per son Ordinary, ^donques le Euesque mandera son letter al
Chauncelour de certificer le excommunication ou contempt, and sur ceo serra
command al Vicount de prendre le corpse lexcommenge per un brief appel
Excommunicato capiendo, iusque il ad fait grce al saint Esglise, pur le
contempt and torte, and quant il est justify, and ad fait gree donque leuesque
maunde ra la letter al Roy, certifiant ceo (...) and donques serra maunde al
viscount de luy deliver per un brief appel Exco^municato deliberando.

Exchange.
Exchange, est lou un ho^e est s^isi de certain terre, and un auter home est
seisi de auter tree, si ils per un fait endent, ou sans fait si le terres, sont
e^ un cou^tie, exchange lour terres, issint que chescun de eux auera auters
terres, a luy issint exchange en fee, en fee tail, ou a tm^ de v^^ ceo est
appel un exc(...)ebtor and est bone sans livery and seisin.

Auxy in exchange il couient que les estates a eux limitte per lexcha^ge sont
egalles, car si un ad estate en fee in sa terre, and lauter ad estate in aut
tree forsque pur term de vie, ou en tail, donques tiel exchange est void, mes
si les estates sont egalles, and ses terres ne sont de egal value, uncore
lexchange est bone. Auxy un exchange de rent pur terre est bone. Auxy exchange
inter rent and commen est boue, and ceo couie^t este per fait. Auxy il coment
touts foi^s q^ cest parol excha^g soit in le fait ou auterm^t rien passa per le
fait sinon q^ il aiet liuerie and seysin.

203 Execution.
Execution, est lou judgment est done en ascun action que le plaintiff recouera
la ter^e, le det ou damages, come le case est, and q^t ascun brief est agarde
de luy mitter en possession, ceo est appel ^^* ^^ execution* and qua^t (...) le
possession de le terre, ou est pay de det ou damages, ou ad le corpse le
defenda^t agard al prison, donques il ad execucion, and si le ple soit en
County, o^ Court Baron, ou hundred, and ils alieno^t le execution del judgment
in favor de party ou per au(...) encheason, donque le demandant auera brief de
Executione iudicii. Nota q^ en brief de det, ho^e nauera recovery de null terre,
mes de ceux que le defendant auoit iour de judge(...)t rendu. Et de chateux home
au^a execution solement des chateux, q^u^ il auoit iour de execution sue.

Executor.
EXecutor, est q^t home fuit son testament and darre in volunte, and in ceo
nosma le person que executera son testam^t, donq^ cesty que est issint nosm^
est son executor, and est a tant come en le civil ley (here is designatus vel
testame^tarius) come al debts, biens and chattels son testator, and tiel
executor au^a actio^ verse chescu^ debtor de son testator, and si lexecutors ad
assets, chescun a q^ le testator fuit in debt, auera action verse lexecutors sil
ad obligation ou espec^^ltie, mes in chescun case lou le testator puissoit
gager son ley ^nul action gist verse execution^ Vide pluis de ceo deuant titulo
Administrators.

205 Exigent.
EXigent, est un brief, and gist lou home sue action personel, and le
defenda^t ne puit ^^ tro^^e ne ad rie^s deins le county, per que il pui^ ^^
attach^ ne distrein donq^s cest brief issera al Viscount de fair proclamation
al v^counties chescun apres auter qu^ il appearer ou auterment que ^l serra
vtlag^: and si soit vtlage, donques touts ses biens and chateu^ sont forfaites
al Roy. Auxy en un enditement de felony le exigent ^sse^a apres le primer
capias. Et auxy en capias ad computandum ou ad satisfaciendu^, and en chescun
capias que issist apres judgment lexigent issera apres le primer Capias. Et
auxy en appeal de mort, mes nemy en appel de robbery ou appel de maim.

Ex part talis.
EX part talis, Vide de ceo deuant titulo Account.

Ex graui querela.
EX graui querela, Vide de ceo deuant titulo Devise.

Extinguishment.
EXtinguishment, est lou ascun seign^, ou asc* aut ad ascun rent ou service
issant dascun terre, and il purchase mesme la terre, issint que il ad tiel
estate en la terre, come il auoyt en le rent, donq^s le rent est extincte* pur
ceo que un ne puit aver rent issant horse de son tree demesne. Auxy qn^t ascun
rent serra extient, il couient que le terre and le rent sont en un maine, and
auxi q^ lestate q^ il ad ne soit defesibl': and auxi q^ il ad auxi bo^ estat e^
le tree come en le rent, car sil ad estat ^n le tree forsque pur tme de vie ou
da^s, and ad un fee simpl en le re^t donq^s le re^t nest extinct, mes le rent
est en suspe^ce pur cel temps, and donque apres le term le rent est revive.
Auxi si soit Seigniour, mesne and tenant, and le seignior purchase la tenancie,
donque le mena^tie est extinct, mes le mesne au^a le surplusage del re^t, si
asc* soit come rent secke. Auxi si ho^e ad chymin appendant and puis purchase
le terre en q^ le chymin est, donques le chymin est extinct, and auxi est de un
comen append'.

209 Extortion.
EXtortion, est un tort fait per un officer, Ordinary, Archdeac*, Official,
Mayor, Bailife, Vicount, Escheator, southuicount, Coroner, gailer ou auter
officer, Color offic^j sui en prendra^s excessive reward ou fee, pur execution
de son dit office, ou auterm^t, and nest aut chose in fait, que plain
robbery, mes plus odible que robbery, car robbery est apparent, and tout
temps ad oue luy le countenance de vice, mes extortion esteant cy haut vice,
come robbery est port oue luy un countenance de virtue, per reason de quel
ile^ le plus dure deste ^rie, ou discern, and pur ceo le plus odibile, and
uncore ascuns il y ad que ne valie^t demu^^, mes stretch lour office, credit,
and conscience pur purchaser money, cibien per extortion, come auterment,
accordant al disans de le Poet Virgil, Quid non mortalia pectora cogit, auri
sacra fames?

F.
Failer de Record.
FAiler de Record, est q^t un action est port enuers un, and le defendant
plede ascun matter de Record en auter sort and au^ de ceo prove per le Record.
Et le pl* dit null tiel Record, sur que le def. ad iour do^e a luy, pur amesner
eins le Record, a quel iour il fail, ou amesne eyns un tiel que nest bar al
cest action, donques il est dit de failer de record, and sur ceo le plaintiff
auera judgment de recover etc.

211 Fait.
FAit est un escript enseal and deliver a prouer and testify de le agreement
del party quel fait il est, al chose contain en le fait, Come un faite de
feoffement est un prove del liuerie de seysin, car le terre passa per le
liuerie de seisin, mes quant le faite and le liuerie est joint ensemble cest un
prove del liuerie, and que le feoffour est content que le feoffee auera le
terre. Et nota que touts faites sont ou indent, de quel y sont deux, troys, ou
plusors parties, come le case require, de que le feoffour, grauntour, ou
lessour ad un, le feoffee, grauntee, on lessee, un auter, Et peradventure ascun
auter person auxy, un auter etc. Ou auterment ils sont faites poll, ou single
and forsque un, le quel le feoffee, grauntee, ou lessee, ad etc. Et chese* fait
consist de trois principal chooses (and sils trois ne sont join ensemble, il
nest perfect fait de lier les parties) nosm^t, escripture, sigillation, and
delivery.

Le primer point est escripture, per que est declare les nosmes del parties al
fait, lour habitation, lour degrees, le chose grant, sur queux considerations,
lestate limit, le temps quant il suit grant, and si simplement, ou sur
condition, oue auters tiels semblables circumstances. Mes si les parties al
fait, escript en le fine lour nosmes demesne, ou mise a ceo lour marks (come il
est communem^t use) il ne fait ascu^ matt (come ^eo suppose) car ceo nest
entende, ou il est dit, que chescun faite couie^t de aver escripture.

Le second point est sigillation, que est plus testimony de lour consents al
ceo contain en le faite, come appiert per ceux parolx. In cuius re^
testimonium etc. ou a tiel effect mise en le fine de faits, sans qux parols, le
fait est insufficie^t. Et pur ceo q^ nous sumus en sigillation and signing de
faits, il ne serra dehors icy a monstre a vous, pur Ie amor de antiquity, le
manner del signing and subscribing de faites en nostre ancestors le Saxons
temps, un fashion different de ceo que nous use en ceux nostre iouis, en ceo
que ils a lour faits subscribe lour nosmes, (communement adding le sign del
Cross) and en le fine mise un graunde number des testmoignes nient vsant a cel
temps ascun manner de sigill. *Et nous a cest ^our pur plus suertie, aux^bn^
subscribe nostre nosme (meant obstant ceo nest mult necessary come ^eo aye
deua^t dit) and mis nostre sigilles, and use le aid destesmoignes auxy. Cest
primer fashion continue per tout, tanque al temps del Conquest per les Normans,
que manners per petite and petite al darraine prevail enter nous, car le primer
charter sigil en Engl* est pense destre ceo del Roy Edward le Confessor al Abbe
de West* que esteant educate en Normandy, port en cest Realm ceo, and ascun
aut de lour guises. Et apres le venians de Guilliam le Conquereur, les Normans,
estimans de le custom de lour pays, (come naturalment touts nations font)
reject le manner que ils tro^ont cy, and reteigno^t lour proper, come Ingulphus
le Abbot de Croyland, que vient eins oue le Conquest tesmoigne, dicens:
Norman(...) cheriographorum confectionem, cum crucibus aure^s, and aliis
signaculis sacris in Ang. firmari solita in caera impress. mu^a^t, modu^ q^
scr^bendi Anglicum re(...)ciunt. Mes meant obstant ceo ne fuit f^^t tout al un
temps, mes il increase and vient eins per certain steps and degrees, issint que
p^^mes and pur un season ^e Roy solement, ou un peu auters de le Nobility
ouster luy use de sigiller. Donque le nobl* homes pur le plus part, and null
auters, quel chose un home poit veyer en le History de Battle Abbey, ou
Richard Lucy chief Justice de Engleterre, en le temps del roy Henry le second,
est report de aver blame un mean subject, pur ceo que il use un private sigil,
quant ceo pertain (come il dit) al roy and Nobility solement.

A quel temps auxy (come I. Rosse note ceo) ils use de ingraue en lour sigils,
lour pictures demesne, and counterfaits, cover oue long tunicle super lour
Armors. Mes apres ceo les Gentlehomes del meliour sort prist le fashion, and
pur ceo que ils ne fueront toutes governors, ils fesoyent sigilles engraue oue
lour several coats ou shields de arms, pur difference, come mesme le
aucthour report. Al darraine, in temps del roy Edward le iii* sigils fueront
mult common, issint que non solement tiels, que porta^t arms use de sigiller,
mes auters ho^es auxy fesoyent al eux mesmes signets de lour devise demesne
ascuns prendrans les letters de lour nosmes demesne, ascu^s flowers, ascu^s
knots and florishes, ascu^s au^s ou beasts, and ascuns auts chooses, come nous
ore vnc' iournalme^t veiomus en use.

Ascuns auters manners de sigillation ouster ceux ad estre oye enter nous, come
nosment ceo del roy Edw. le iii. per que il done al Norman le hunter: Le hop
and le hopville, oue touts les bounds vpside down, and en tesmoigne que il
soit very, il morde le cere oue son fonge dent.

Le se^blable de cest fuit monstre a moy per un de mes amies en un lose chart*
mes non mult auncientm^t escript, and pur ceo il voil moy q^ ieo esteema de ceo
come ieo pense bn^: Il fuit come ensuist.

Ieo Guilliam King, done a vous Powlen Royden, ma hop and ma hop terres, oue
touts les bounds up and down, de coelo al terre, de terre ad infern^, pur toy
and vestres a demurrer, de moy and mes, al ^oy and vestres, pur un arck and un
broad sagit, qua^t ieo veign^ pur hunter sur yarrow. In ^esmoign^ q^ ceo est
very, ieo morde cest cere oue mon dent, in presence de Magge, Maude, and
Margerie, and mon tierce fits Henry.

Item ceo de Alberic de Veer, conteignant le donation de Hatfield, al q^l il
fix un curt noier haft cuttel, semblable al un vieux demi denier whittle, en
steed de un seal, oue diverse tielx semblables.

Mes ascun peradventure voylent pense que ^^ux fuerount receive ^n common use
and custom, and que ils ne fueront les devises and pleasures dun peu singular
persons, tiels quels ne sont meines deceive, que ils que pensont chescun
charter and escript que ne ad sigille annex, deste cy ancient come le
Conquest, lou en verity sigillation ne fuit co^muneme^t use tanque al temps
del roy Edward le tierce, come ad este dit.

Le tierce pointest delivery, quel nient obstant il soit mis darrein, nest le
meanest, car apres que un fait soit escript and sigil fill ne soit deliver, tout
le residue est a null purpose.

Et cest delivery doit estre fait per le party luy mesme, ou son sufficient
garra^t, and issint il luy liera quecunque escript ou sigille ceo, and per cest
darraine act, le fait este fait perfect, accordant al intent and effect de
ceo, and pur ceo en faits le delivery est destre prove etc.

Issint pores veyer que escripture and sigillation sans delivery est a null
purpose, Que sigillation and delivery lou nest ascun escripture, work null
chose, Ne escripture and delivery sans sigillation auxy fait null fait. Et pur
ceo ils touts doie^t ^ointment concur pur fair un perfect fait, come est
auantdit.

212 Farm ou Ferme.
Farm ou Ferme est specialment le chief mesuage en un village ou town a que
appertient grau^d demeanes de touts sorts, and ad este use deste less pur
term de vie, ans, ou a volunt.

Ite^ le rent q^ est reserve sur tiel lease ou sembl', est appel farm ou ferme.

Et farmor ou fermor, est celuy que occupia le farm ou ferme, ou est lessee de
ceo.

Auxy generally chescu^ lessee pur vie, ans, ou al volu^t, nient obstant il
soit du^ petit cottage, ou mes. e^ appel farmor ou fermor

Et nota, que ils sont appels farms, ou fermes, del Saxon paroll, Feormian,
que signify pur feed, ou render victual* Car en ancient tempes, lour
reseruations fuer cy bien (ou pur le plus pert) en victual come argent, tanque
al darraine, and ceo principalme^t en le temps del Roy H. le primer (per
agreement) le reseruatio^ de victuals, fuit convert en ready argent, and issint
uncore ad continue enter plusors homes.

Faux imprisonment.
FAux imprisonment, est un brief, and gist lou ho^e est arrest and restrain de
so^ liberty per un auter encounter order de ley, do^ques il au^a verse luy cest
brief per q^ il recouera damages: Vide plus de ceo deuant titulo arrest.

Faux judgment vide de ceo deuant titulo error.

Fee ferme.
FEe ferme, est quant un tenant tient de son seignior en fee simple renda^t a
luy le value del moitie ou de tierce part, ou quart part, ou de auter part
del terre, per an, and que tient en fee ferme ne doit paier relief ou fair
auter chose, mes sico^e est contein en le feoffement forsque fealty, car ceo
appe^t a touts man^s tenures.

Fee simple.
FEe simple, est quant ascun person tient terre ou rent ou auter chose
inheritable a luy and a ses heirs a touts iours, ceux parols ses heirs font
lestat denheritance, car si terre soyt done a home a touts iours, vnquore il
and forsque estate pour term de vye. Auxy si tenant en fee simple deuie, son
primer fites serra son heir, mes fill and fits, do^ques touts les files que il
ad serront son heir, and chescun auera son part per partition, mes sil and
fits ne file, donques son procheyn cousin collater* de le^tier sank serr^ son
heir.

216 Feoffment.
FEosment, est lou un don terre, ou tiel chose corporal hereditable a un auter
in fee simple, and de ceo deliver seisin and possession del tree ceo est un
feoffment. Auxy si un fait done in le tail ou leas pur term de vie, ou pur
term dauter v^e, il couient auxy de done livery and seisin, ou auterment riens
passera per le grant.

217 Feoffor and feffee.
FEffor, est celuy que enfeoffe, ou fait feoffem^t al auter de terres ou
tenements en fee simple. Et feffee est celuy, q^ est enfeoffe, ou a q^ le
feoffme^t est issint fait.

Fealty.
Fealty, est un service appel en latin Fidelitas, and serra fait in tiel
ma^ners. le ten^t tiendra sa main dexter sur un liver, and dira a son seign^.
Ieo a vous serra foyal and loyal, and foy vous portera des tenements que ieo
claim de tener de vous, and loyal vous serra les costumes and services que
fair vous doye al terms assigns, sicome moy eyd dieu. Et basera la liver,
mes il ne genulera, come en fesant Homage: Et de ceo ^ide apres en le title
homage. Auxy fealty est incident a touts manners tenures.

Felony.
FElony, est un general term, que comprehend diverse heinous offenses, pur que
loffendors doient suffer mort, and perder lour terres: Et semble que eux sont
appels felonies del latin parol Fell, q^ est Angloys gall, en Francoys Fiel: Ou
del* ancient paroll angloys Fell ou fierce, ou pur ceo que sont entend deste
faits felleo ^i^o, with bitter, fell, fierce, ou mischeuous mind. Et ascun de
ceux sont, quant home sans ascun color de ley, emb ley les biens dun aut
amountant al value de xii. d. ou plus, ceo est larceny, mes si un approcha a le
person un auter en le chimin, and luy robba de ses biens, mesque ils ne sont
forsque al value de un denier, il est felony, and ceo est appel robbery, and
pur ceo il serra pendu.

220 Fireboote.
FIreboote, est necessary boys pur arder, quel per le common ley, lessee pur
ans, ou pur vie, poet prender en son terre, nient obstant il ne soit express
en son lea^, and nie^t obstant il soit un leas per parol tantum sans fayte: Mes
sil prist plus que besoigne, il serra punic en wast.

221 Fledwite.
FLedwite, hoc est quietu^ esse de amerciamentis cum quis vtlagatus fugitiuus
veniat ad pace^ domini Regis sponte, vel licentiatus.

Flemeswite.
FLemeswite, hoc est quod habeatis cattalla sieve amerciame^ta hominis vestri
fugitiui.

Fletwit.
FLetwit (ou Flitwit) hoc est quietu^ esse de contentione and conuictis, and
quod habeatis placitu^ inde in curia vestra, and amerciame^ta, qa (flit)
Anglice est Tensone gallice.

Forstall.
FOrstall, hoc est quietum esse de amerciamentis and cattallis arrestatis infra
terram vestra^, and amerciamenta inde prouementia.

Forstaller.
FOrstaller est celuy que achate blees, auers, ou aut marcha^dize quecu^que est
ve^dible per le chimin qua^t il vient al markets, faires, ou tiels se^bl' lieus
deste vend' al intent que il poit vender ceo auterfoites al un plus haut and
chare price, en praeiudice and damage de le commonweal and people etc.

Le penalty pur ceux queux sont co^uict de ceo, est le prim^ temps imprisonm^t
per i^. mois, and perde le value del chose vend.

Le second temps, imprisonment per space de demi an, and perdra le double value
des bie^s etc. Le tierce temps, imprisonm^t durant le pleasure le roy, and
judgment del pillory, and forfeite touts ses biens and chattels. Vide lestatute
5. E. 6. cap. 14.

226 Franches Royal.
FRanches Royal, est lou le Roigne grant al un and a ses heirs que ils
serront quite de tolnet, vel huiusmodi.

227 Frankalmoigne.
FRankalmoigne, est lou en ancient temps terres fuero^t dones a un Abbot and
son covent, ou a un Dean and le chapter, and a lour successors in pure and
perpetual almoigue sauns express ascun service certain, ceo est
frankealmoigne, and ils sont tenus deuaunt dieu de fair orasons and prayers
pur le donour and ses heirs, and pur ceo ils ne ferront fealty, and si tiels
q^ ont terres in frank almoigne ne font ascun prayers ne divine service pur
les alms le donor, ils ne serront per les donors a ceo co^pelles, mes pur ceo
ils poient complain al Ordinary, luy prayant q^ tiel negligence ne soit pluis
auant, and Lordinarie de droit ceo doit fair^.

Mes si un Abbe etc. tient terres de son Seignior pur certain divine service
de estre fait, come de chaunter chescun venderdie un mass, ou de fair aut
chose certain, si tiel divine service ne soit fait le Seign^ poit distreiner,
and en tiel case labbe doit fair a le Seign^, fealty, and pur ceo il nest pas
dit tenure in frank almoigne, mes tenure per divine seru', car null poit tener
in fra^k alm', si soit exp^sse ascu^ certain service.

Frank fee.
TEner en frank fee, est a tener en fee simple terres pleadable a la common
ley, and nient en ancient demesne.

229 Formedone.
FOrmedone, est un brief and gist lou tenant en le tail enfeoffa un estrange
ou est disseise and deuye, le heir auera brief de Formedone pur recover la
terte, mes sont trois briefes de Formedone, un est in le disce^der, and ceo est
in le case auant dit. Auxy si un done tree in le tail, and pour default dissue
le remainder a un auter in la tail, and que put default de tiel issue, la
terre reuertera al donour, si le primer tenant in le tail deuie sans issue
cestuy en le remainder auera un br^ de Formedone en le remainder, mes si le
ten^t en le tail deuie sans issue, and cesty e^ le remainder auxi deuy sans
issue, do^ques le donor ou ses heirs au^a un formdon in le reu^ter.

230 Fieri facias.
FIeri facias est un brief judicial, and gist lou home recouera debt ou
damages in Court le Roy, do^ques il auera cest brief al vicount luy
co^manda^t q^ il levy le debt and les damages des biens celuy q^ ad perdus,
and gist touts foites deins lan and iour, and ap^s lan luy couient de suer un
scire facias, and sil soit garne, and ne vie^t al iour etc. ou sil vient and ne
scauoit rie^ dire, donqs celuy que recouera auera br^ de fieri facias direct al
vicont que il face luy aver execution de judgment.

Mes si home recouera verse un feme and el prist baron deins lan and le iour
donques il couient que cesty que recouera auera Scire facias verse le baron.

Auxy est si Abbot on Prior recover and deuie, so^ successor deins lan auera
Scire facias. Vide de ceo plus in la title Scire facias, and title Execution.

Fine.
FIne ascun foits est prise pur un sum dargent quel ascun est de payer al roy
pur ascu^ contempt ou offense commit per luy* quel fine, chescun que commit
ascu^ trespass ou que est co^uict, que il fauxm^t deny son fait, ou fesoit asc*
chose en contempt del Roy, paiera al roy, quel est appell Fine al Roy. Ascun
foits Fine est pr^se pur un special concord, quel est ewe enter ascuns persons
touchant ascun terre, ou rent ou auter chose, don't ascun suit, ou brief est
enter eux pendant en ascun court, q^l poit ee in diverse manners. Lun est quant
lou party reconust ceo este le droit del auter come ceo q^ il eit del done
cestuy q^ fesoit le re^onusans, quel toutes foits suppose un feoffem^t p^cedent
and e^ dit Fine execute: ou si il reconust ceo deste le droit del aut omittant
les parols (come ceo q^ il eit de son done) quel estea^t fine sur conusauns de
droit tantum, si soit leuy a cestuy q^ eit le franktenem^t del terre est Fine
sur release. Et si cesty que ceo conust est scisi, and celuy a que est leuy
neit le fra^ktenement del terre, donques est dit fine executorie, quel ^estuy a
q^ le tree est conus poit executer per Enter ou per Scire facias.

Et a^c* foits tiel sine sur conusans de droit tantu^ est pur sa^^e un
surre^der, lou en ceo est repeat, que le reconusor eit estat pur vie* and
lauter en reuersion.

Et asc* foits ceo est ew de passer un reuersio^, lou particular estate est
recite deste en auter, and q^ le reconusor voit que le auter auera le
reuersio^, ou que le terre remain^ al auter apres le particular estate finie.

Et ascun soits celuy a q^ le droit est conus, come ceo que il ad del done le
reconusor, re^dra le terre, ou un rent horse de ceo al conusor. Et a^cun^o^ts
pur lent^^r fee. Asc^n foites pur particular estate oue remaind* ou remainders
ouster. Et ascun (...)u^ reservation del r^nt^ ou^ distres and gr(...) d^ ceo
ouster per mesme ^ine.

Et est appel fine quia per ceo le su^^ est determine, and si ceo soit record
one proclamation, ceo barr^ estrangers.

232 Frank marriage.
FRank marriage, est qua^t un home seisi de terres en fee simple done ceo al
auter home and a sa feme que est file, soer ou autm^t de kin al donour) en
frankmariage, per virtue de queux parolx ils ount un estate en special tail,
and tiendra le terre del donour quit de touts manners de services tanque le
iiij. degree soit pass, accountants eux mesmes in le primer degree, sinon
fealty, queux ils fieront, pur ceo que il est incide^t a toutes tenures
forsque frank almoigne. Et tiel done poit estre fait cybien apres marriage
solemnise, come deuant. Et home poit doner terres a son fits in frankmariage
come a sa file, per le opinion de Master Fitzherbert en son brief de
Cha^pertie. H.

Mes il appiert auterment en Master Littleto^, and en Master Brook titulo
Frankmariage, Pla. 10. Et issint il fuit tenus clear ^ Graies Inn e^ Lent, An.
1576. 18. Eliz. per le Worcester. Master Rhodes donques lector la.

Franktenement.
FRankteneme^t, est un estate que home ad en terres ou tenements, ou profit a
prendre en fee simple, tail, pur term de son vie demesne, ou pur term dauter
vie, en dower ou per le courtesy Dangleterre* Et south ceo il ne est
franktenem^t, car il que ad estate pur ans, ou tient a volunt and asc*
franktenement, mes ils sont appel chattels.

Et de franktenem^ts il y ad deux sorts, ce^ ascauoir franktenement en fait,
and franktenement en ley.

Franktenem^t en fait est qu^t un ho^e ad entered en tres ou tenem^ts, and est
seisie de ceo realm^, actualm^t and en fait: Si come le pere seisi de terres ou
ten^ts en fee simple deuie, and son fits enter en eux come heir a son pere,
donques il ad un franktenement en fait per son entry.

Franktenem^t en ley, est quant terres ou tenem^ts sont discendus al un ho^e,
and il poit enter en eux quant a luy plest, mes and uncore fait son entry en
fait, come en le case auant dit, si le pere esteant seisie de terre en fee
simple deuie seisi, and ils descend* a son fites, mes le fites and uncore enter
en fait en eux, ore deuant so^ entry il ad un franktenement en ley.

234 Freshsuit.
FReshsuit, est quant un home est rob, and le party issint rob, pursua le
felon immediatment, and luy prist oue le manner, ou auterment and do^ques port
un appeal enuers luy, and luy convince del felony per verdicte, le quel chose
esteant enquire pur le Roigne and troue, le party rob au^a restitut* de ses
bie^s arrer^.

Item il poit este dit, que le party fait Freshsuit, nient obstant il ne prist
le felon presentment, mes que il soit demi an ou un an apres le robbery fait,
deuant que il soit prise, si soit issint que le party rob fait tant que en
luy est, per diligent inquiry and search de luy pre^der, nient obstant q^ il
est prise per un auter home, uncore ceo serra dit bone freshsuit.

Et issint freshsuit est quant le Seignior vient pur distreiner pur rent ou
service, and le owner des beasts fait rescous, and enchase eux en auters terre
que nest tenus del seign^, and le seignior ensue presentment, and reprist eux,
cest appel freshsuit. Et issint en auter semblables cases.

G.
Gager de deliverance.
GAger de deliverance est, lou un sua Repleuin de biens prise, mes il and
delivery des biens, and lauter auowa, and le plaintiff monstra* que le
defendant est uncore possess des biens etc. and pria que le defendant gagera
deliverance, donques il mittera eins suertie ou pledge pur le redeliuerance,
and un brief issera al Vicont pur redeliuerer les bn^s etc. Mes si home claim
property, il ne gagera deliverance.

Auxy sil dit q^ les auers sont morts en le pound, il ne gagera etc.

Auxy home ne gagera iammais le deliverance auant q^ ils soyent a issue, ou
demurrer en ley, vt dicitur.

236 Garrantie des charters.
GArrantie des charters, est un brief, and gist lou ascun fait est fait q^
comprehend clause de garr^. s. dedi ou concessi, ou cest parol Warrantizabo,
and si le t soit implede per un estrange si soit en Ass. ou tiel action lou il
ne poit vouch a garrant, donque il auera ce^ br^ verse son feoffor ou son heir,
and si le tree soit recou^ verse luy, il recouera tant del tree en value verse
cestuy que suist le garr^. Mes cest br^e couient este sue pendant le prim^ br^
verse luy, ou autme^tal ad perde so^ aua^tage.

Auxy sur garrantie en ley, come sur homage auncestrel, ou sur rent reserve sur
lease a term de vie, ou done en le tail home auera brief de garrantie de
charters, mes nemy sur eschange.

Garrantie.
GArrantie, est en deux manners. s. garrantie lineal and garrantie collateral.

Garrantie lineal est lou home seisie en fee, fait feoffement per son fait a un
auter, and oblige luy and ses heirs a garrant, and ad issue fits and morust,
and le garrantie descend a son fites, ceo est lineal garrantie, pur ceo que si
null fait oue garrantie vst este fait, donques le droit des terres discenderoit
al fits, and il conueyeroit le descent de le pere a le fits. Mes si tenant en
le tail discontinua le tail, and ad issue and deuie, and luncle del issu
relessa al disco^tinuee oue garrantie etc. and morust sauns issue, ceo est
collateral garrantie al issue en le tail, pur ceo q^ le garrantie discende sur
le issue, le q^l ne poit soy conueyer a le tail per le mean de son uncle. Et
en chescun case lou ho^e demaunda terres en fee tail per br^ de Formedon* si
ascu^ del issue en le tail que auoit possession, ou que nauoit possession fait
un garrantie, and cesty que sua le brief de Formedon poit per possibility per
ma^ter que puissoit este en cest fait conueier a luy title per force del done
per celuy que fist le garrantie etc. ceo est donques un lineal garrantie, and
per tiel lineal garrantie, le issue en le tail ne serra bar, sinon que il ad
assets a luy discendus en fee simple: Mes si il ne poit per null possibility que
poit este conueyer a luy title per force del d^n per celuy que fi^t le
garrantie, donques ceo est un collateral garrantie, and per tiel collateral
garrantie, le issue en le tail serra bar sans ascun assets. Et le cause que
tiel collateral garrantie est un barr^ al issue en le tail, est pur c^o q^
touts garranties deuant lestatut de Gloucester, queux discendant a ceux queux
sont heirs a eux que fesoyent les garranties, fueront bars a mesme les
heirs a dema^der ascun terres forsprise les garranties que commence per
disseisin, and pur ceo que le dit estatute ad ordeine que le garrantie del pere
ne serra bar a son fites pur les terres que veigne del heritage le mere, ne
garrantie le mere ne serra bar al fits pur les terres que veigne del heritage
de pier, and lestatute and fait ne ordeine remedy encounter le garrantie que
est collateral al issue en le tail, and pur ceo le garrantie que est
collateral al issue en le tail, uncore est in sa force and serra bar al
issue en le tail, come il fuit deuaunt lestatute, Auxy il couyent que toutes
garranties, per que ascun heir serra bar, que le garra^tie descend per
course del common ley a celuy que est heir a luy que fist le garrantie, ou
auterment il ne serra bar, car si le tenant in le tail des terres in borow
English, lou le puisn^ fits inheriter^ per la custom discontinua le tail and
ad issue deux fits, and luncle releas al discontinuee oue garrantie and deuye,
and le puisne fits port Formedone, uncore il ne serra bar par tyel
garrantie, causa qua supra. Auxy si ascun home fait ascun fait oue garrantie,
per quel son heir serroit bar, and puis cestuy que fist le garrantie soyt
attaint de felony, donques son heir ne serra bar per tiel garrantie, pur ceo
que tiel garrant ne puit discender sur luy, pur ceo que le sanke est corrupt.
Auxy si le sits purchase tree, and puis lessa le terre a son pier pur term
dans, and le pier per son fait de ceo enfeoffa un estraunge, and oblige luy and
ses heirs a garrantie, and le pier deuie, per q^l le garrantie descend al
fits, uncore ce^ garranty ne barrer^ my le fits, mes le fits bien puit enter
nient obstant cel garranty, pur ceo q^ cest garranty commensast per disseisin,
quant le pier fist le feoffement que fuit un disseisin al fits, and come est
dit de le pier, issint puit este dit de chescun auter auncestour. Et mesme le
ley est si launcestor soit tenant per Elegit, ou per statute merchant, and
fait ascun feoffement oue garrantie, tiels garranties ne serro^t bars, pur
ceo q^ ils co^menceont per disseisin.

Garrantie.
GArrantie, est quant un est lie al auter que ad terre de garr^ le terr^ a luy,
le quel poit commence per deux meanes*s* per act del ley: come si un and ses
ancestors ont tenu terre del auter, and ses auncest' per temps don't memory ne
curt, per homage* q^ est appel homage auncestrell: Ou per lact del party, q^
graunta per fait on fine al tenant del terre de garrant ceo a luy: sur quel
garrantie si le tenant soit implead per luy que doit garrant, ou ses heirs,
le tenant barrera le demaundant per pleder del garrantie verse luy, que est
appell Rebutter: Ou si soit implead per auter en action, en que poit vouch, il
vouchera cestuy que garrant, ou ses heirs: Et si le plaintiff recouer^, le
tenant recouera en value verse vouchee.

239 Guard.
Guard, est quant un enfant que auncestor tient per service de chivalry, est
en le g^rde and custody de le seigniour de que ils fueront tenus: Et si le
tenant tient de diverse seigniours diverse terres, celuy seigniour de que il
tient per prioritie, cestascauoir, per le plus ancient Tenure, auera la guard
del enfant, mes si un tenure soyt auxy ancient que le auter, donques celuy q^
primes, happa le guard del corpse, gardera ceo, mes en ceo case, chescun
seignior auera le guard del terre que est tenus de luy, mes si le tenant tient
ascu^ terre del Roigne en chief, donque le Roigne per sa prerogative au^a le
guard del corpse, and de tout le terre que est tenus de luy, and de chescu^ auter
seigniour.

Auxy sont diverse briefs de guard, un est brief de droit de guard, and gist lou
le tenant deuye, son heir deins age and un estrange entra in le terre, and
hap^ le guard de corpse de lenfant.

Brief deiectment de guard gist lou home est ouste de la guard de terre sauns
de corpse de lenfant.

Brief de rauishment de guard gist lou le corpse est prise de luy solement and
meant le terre.

Gardeine.
GArdeine, ou gardeine plus properme^t est celuy que ad le guard ou custody
dun heir, and de son terre tenus per service de ch^ual^^e, ou de un de eux a
son use demesne, durant le nonage del h^* and deins cest temps ad le bestowing
del corpse del hr^, en marriage al son volunt sans disparagem^t.

Et de gardeines il y ad ii. sorts* nosmement: gardeine en droit, and gardein
en fait.

Gardein en droit, est celuy que per reason de son seigniorie est seisie del
gardship on custody del terre, and del heir, durant le nonage del heir.

Gardeine en fait, est lou le seigniour apres son seisin, come auauntdit,
graunta per fait, ou sans fait, le gardship del terre ou del heir, ou
dambideux a un ant, per force de quel grant, le grauntee est en possession,
donques est le grauntee appell gardein en fait.

Et cest gardeine en fait poit grant le heir al aut auxy, mes cest auter nest
properment appell gardeine en fait, car ceo est le grauntee del garden en droit
solement, mes le gardein en socage ad le profit solement al use del heir
resque il ad accomplish lage de xiiii. ans, and rendra pur ceo account al
heir* Vide plus de ceo Lit. li. 2. ca. 4 and 5. Et Sta^f. sur statute de
Prerog. ca. 1. 2. and 6.

Garnishment.
GArnishment est, sicome un action de detinue des charters est port verse un,
and le defendant dit, que les charters fuer^nt deliver a luy per le plaintiff
and per un auter sur certain conditions, and prey que lauter soit garny de
pleder oue le plaintiff si les conditions sont pimples ou nemy, and sur ceo un
brief de Scire facias ^ssera verse luy, and ceo est appel un Garnishme^t, and
lauter quant il vient eins pled* oue le plaintiff, and ceo est appel enterpleder.

Gauelate.
GAuelate, est un special and ancient kind de Cessauit used en Kent ou le
Custom de Gauelkinde continue, per quel le tenant forfeitera ses terres and
tenements al Seigniour de que ils sont tenus, sil detain de son Seigniour ses
due rents and services, solonque cest manner que ensuist.

Si ascun tenant en Gauelkinde retain sa ^ent, and ses services de le
tenement que il tyent de son Seigniour, querge le Seigniour per agarde de sa
Court, de trois semaines en trois semains, de trouer distress sur cel teneme^t
iesque a le quart court, a touts foits per tesmoignes. Et si deins cel te^ps ne
troue distress en cel tenement, per queux il puisse son tenant iusticer,
Donque a la quart Court soit agarde que il preigne cel tenement en sa main, en
nosme de distress, auxy come fuit boefe ou vache, and le tie^t ^n an and un
iour, en sa maine, sans maine ouerer, deins quel term, si le tenant vient, and
rende ses arrerages, and fait reasonables amends de la deteiner, adone eit,
and ioyse son tenement, sicome ses ancestors and luy auant tiendront. Et sil
ne vient deuant le an and le iour pass, done auage le Seigniour al procheyne
County court ^uyant oue tesmoygnes de sa Court, and face la pronuncier cel
process pur tesmoynage aver, and per agarde de sa Court (apres ceo County
tenue) entra and meynou^ra en cells terres and tenementes, sicome en son
demesne. Et si le tenant vyent apres, and voyler reauer ses tenementes, and
tener sicome il fist deuant, face gree al Seygniour, sicome il est auncientment
did.

Neghe since selde, and neghe since gelde, and v. li. for the were, ^r he become
healder. Vide de ceo 10. Hen. 3. Fitzherb. Cessau^t ^0. and statute 10. Ed. 2.
de Gauelet en London, en le Collectio^ del statutes London 2. matter tendant
mult a cel purpose, q^ per cel parol Gauelet le seign^ auera le terre, pur
cesser le ten^t. Et vide Westminster 2. cap. 21. que done Cessauit.

Il y ad ascuns copies que ad le primer Verse issint escript.

Nisith yield, and nisith gelde.

Et auters issint.

Nighesith yield, and nighesith geld.

Mes ceux ne differ en signification, auter copies ont ceo solo^que ce^ sort.

Nigondsith selde, and nigondsith geld.

Cestassauoir, paiera il nouies foits, and nouies foits repay.

243 Gauelkinde.
GAuelkinde est un custom annex and current oue tres en Kent appel Gauelkinde
terres tenus en ancient Socage tenure. Et est pense per les erudite en
Antiquities, deste appel Gauelkinde de Give al kin, cest adire a toutes les
kin en un line, accordant come est use enter les Germans, de que nous
Anglois, and especialment de Kent venomus. Ou il est appell Gauelkinde de Give
al kind, cest adire al touts les males, car kind en Dutch signify un male.
Et diverse auters semble co^iectures sont fait per eux de le nosme (Gauelkind)
le quel ieo omit de purpose pur brevity.

Les plus usual customs de eux sont, que le terre est diuidable enter les
heirs males, and q^ le heir al age de xv. ans poit do^e and vende sa terre,
and serra inherit coment son pere soit attaint and pendue pur felony, and sa
feme serra endowe del demi del terre, don't son baron deuie seisie, and le baron
serra tenant per le courtesy del demi, coment ne auoit issue per sa feme: mes
lestate del baron and feme cease per lour second marriage. Et diverse auts
Customs sont uses en Kent de terres en Gauelkind, pur queux veies le
Perambulation de Kent, fait per M. Lambert, Pur quel cause le residue ieo voile
omit come impertinent a cel lieur, and entreat ampleme^t en le dit
Perambulation.

244 Gelde.
GEld, hoc est quietu^ esse de co^suetud' seruilibus q^ quon la^ dari
consueueru^t and adhuc da^t, come hornegeld and h^is similibus.

245 Graund Cape.
GRaund Cape, vide de ceo ap^s tit petit Cape.

246 Grand Serianty.
GRaund Serianty est lou on ho^e tie^t de roy certain terres per le service de
porter so^ ba^ner ou lau^ce, ou amesner son host, ou destre son caruer ou
butteler a son coronment and tiels sembl', and ceo est la pluis honorable
service and pluis digne, q^ le tenant poit fair, and pur ceo e^ appel graund
serianty, Mes petit Seria^ty est quant un tient de roy luy rendant annuelm^t un
arc, un coteau, un lance, and tiels sembl', and ceo nest forsque socage en
effect, mes ho^e ne poit tener in graund serieanty ne per petit serieanty sinon
de roy. Auxy si tenant per graund serieantie morust son heir esteant de pleine
age, le heir paiera al roy pur relief le value des terres ouster les charges
que il pay al Roy per grand serieantie: mes cestuy que tyent per Escuage paiera
pur son relief forsque C. s.

Auxy ceux que sont en le Marches de Scotland, que tient del Roy per Cornage,
cest est, pur ventiler un cornu quant les Scots entront en Angleterre, sont
tenants per graund serieantie.

Auxy ou un home tient de roy pur trouer un home en sa guerre deins le Realm,
cest est dit grand Serieantie, pur ceo, que il est fait per corpse dun home. Et
si le tenant ne poit trouer home de fair ceo, donques il est tenus de fair
ceo luy mesme. Et il que tient per grand serieantie tient per service de
chiualer, and le Roy auera guard, marriage and relief, mes nemy de ceux que
tient per petite serieantie, mes le Roy nauera de eux que tient per grand
Serieanty escuage, si^on que ils tient per escuage. Issint ceux que tient per
grand sericantie ou escuage tient per service de chiualer. Mes un poit tener
per grand Serieantie and nemy per escuage, and per escuage and nemy per grand
serieantie. Et le service de chiualer toutes foites treit. a luy guard, marriage,
and relief.

247 Grithbrech.
GRithbrech, hoc est pax domini Regis fracta, quia (Grith) Anglice pax Latin.

H.
248 Habere facias seisinam.
HAbere facias seisinam, est un brief judicial, and gist lou un ad recover
certain terres en court le Roy, donques il auera cest brief direct al Vicont,
luy commaundant de doner a luy seisin del terre, and ne serra returnable.

Hangwit.
HAngwit, hoc est quietum esse de latrone suspenso sine iudicio, vel extra
custodiam vestram euaso.

Hariot.
HAriot, est e^ deux sorts lun Hariot custom, le auter Hariot service.

Hariot service (ascuns diont) est touts foits express en le grant dun home,
ou en son fait que il tie^t per tiel service pur paier hariot al temps de son
mort, Et cest Hariot est paiable apres le mort de le tenant en fee simple.

Hariot custom, est lou hariots ont este paies temps horse de memory per
custom. Et ceo poit este apres le mort del tenant pur vie etc. mes a parler de
ceo generalm^t.

Hariot est le meliour beast (soit il Chiual, Boef, ou vache) que le tenant ad
al temps de son mort. Et le Sn^r poit seize, ou p^nder un distress pur ceo,
soit il Hariot service, ou Hariot custom, al use del Seignior de que le tenant
tie^t per son baylie ou auter officer de son manor. Mes de droit le Seigniour
ne son officer ne doit prender Hariot deuant que il soit present al prochein
court tenus apres le tenant est mort, and que tiel beast est due al seigniour
pur son Harriot.

251 Haybote ou hedgbote.
HAybote ou hedgbote, est necessary stuff pur fair and amend haies, que
lessee pur ans, ou pur vie de common droit poit p^nder sur le tree a luy less,
nient obstant il ne soit express en son lease, and nient obstant q^ il soit un
lease per parols sans escript.

Haybote auxy poit estre prise pur necessary stuf pur fair rakes, forks and
tiels semblables instruments oue q^ux homes vsont en summer de tedder and fair
feme Et issint un lessee pur ans prist ceo and fuit a luy allow per so^ lessor,
plus tossed come ieo suppose, pur ceo que tiels instruments sont communement fait
de slender subboys, q^ per le common ley lessee pur ans poit succider and
prender come est auantdist.

Hidage.
HIdage, hoc est quietum esse si dominus Rex talliaue^it totam terram per hidas.

Nota q^ un hide de terr^, est un entire plowland. Et cest kind de taxing per
hides fuit mult use en viel temps cibien pur provision de armor, come paime^ts
de argent, and ceo principalm^t, en les iours del Roy Etheldred (un Roy en cest
pays deuant le Conquest) que en le an de Christ 1006. quant les Danes p^^st^
land al Sandwich en Kent tax tout son terre per hides e^ cest manner, Que
chescun 310. hides de terre do^ent trouer vne niefe furnish, and chescun 8.
hides doient trouer un lack and un sallet, pur le defense del Realm.

Hotchpot.
HOtchpot, est un meddling, ou mixing ense^ble, and un partitio^ de tres done en
frankmariage, ouesque auter terres en fee simple discendus. Come pur example:
un home seisi de 30. acres de terre en fee simple, ad issue ij. files, and done
ouesq^ un de ses files al un home q^ luy marry 10. acres de ceo terre en
frankmarriage, and morust seisie de les auters xx. acres: Ore si el que est
issint marry voiloit aver ascun part de les xx. acres de que son pier morust
seisie: El doit mise ses terres done en frankemariage en Hotchpot, ceo est
adire, el doiet refuser de prender le sole profit del terre done en
frankemariage, and suffer le terre de estre commixt, and mingle ensemble
ouesque le aut terre de q^ son piere morust seisie, issint que un equal
division poit estre fait de lentyer perenter luy and sa soer: Et issint pur sa
10. acres, el auera xv. auterment sa soe^ voyt aver les xx. acres, de que lour
pier morust seisie.

Homage.
Homage, est un service que serra fait en tiel manner, cest ascauoir, le tenant
in fee simple, ou fee tail q^ tient per homage genulera sur ambideux genus
disce^t, and le seigniour serra and tiendra les mayns son tenant inter ses
mains and le tenant dira. Ieo deueigne vostre home de cestuy iour en auant de
vie and de member and de tertaine honor, and a vous serra foial and loyal, and
foy vous portera des terres que ieo claim de tenuer de vous, salve le foy que
ieo doy a nostre seigniour le Roy, and donques le seigniour issint seant luy
besera.

Mes come^t fealty serra fait, vide deuant in fealty.

Et le seneschal le seigniour puit prender fealty mes nemy homage.

Homage ancestrel.
HOmage auncestrel, est ^o^ un ho^e and ses auncest' de te^ps do^t memory ne
courge, ont ten' la tree del Sn^r per homage, and si tiel Seigniour ad resceu
homage il est tenus de acquiter le tenant ^er^ toutes auters seigniours
paramont luy de chescun mann^r service. Et si tenant ad fait homage a so^
seigniour and soit implede and vouche le seigniour a garrantie, le seigniour
est tenu^ de luy garranter, and si le tenant perde il recouera in value verse
son seigniour tant des terres que il auoit al temps de la voucher ou vnq, puis.
Auxy si home que tient sa terre per homage auncestrel alien le terre e^ fee
donques le alience ferra homage a son Sn^r, mes il ne tiendra per homage
ancestrel pur ceo que le continuance del tena^cy in le sank le prim^ tenant
est discontinue.

256 Homesoken.
HOmesoken, (ou hamesoken) hoc est quietu^ esse de amerciamentis, de ingressu
hosp* ciorum violenter and sine licentia, and contra pace^ domini Regis. Et
quam teneatis placita de hm^di transg' facta in curia vestra, and in tra vestra.

Homicide ou Manslaughter.
Homicid' ou Ma^slaughter, est le occider dun home felonieusment sans malice
prepenced. Il est auxi define issint Homicidium est hominis occisio, ab homine
facta, s^ aute^ a cane, boue, vel alia re, non dicitur proprie homicidium:
dicitur homicid' ab homine and caedo, quasi hominis caediu^.

Hornegelde.
HOrnegeld, hoc est quietum esse de quadam co^suetudine exacta per tallag. per
totam tra^, sicut de quacu^q, bestia cornuta.

Housebote.
HOusebote, est necessary timber, q^ le lessee pur ans, ou pur vie, de common
droit poit prender sur le terre, pur repayrer les measons sur mesme le terre a
luy less, meant obstant il ne soit express en le lease, and meant obstant il
soit un lease per parols sans fait. Mes sil prist pluis q^ besoigne, il poit
^ste punish per un action de wast.

260 Hundred.
HVndreds, fueront devise per Alfred le roy, apres que il ad divide le entier
Realm en certain parts ou sections, le quel de le Saxo^ parol Seynan,
significant de seinder, il term Shires ou (sicome nous vnco^e pa^le) Shares
and portio^s. Ceux Shires il auxy divide en petites parts, de queux ascuns
fueront appelles L^thes, de le parol Ielapian, que est de assembler ensemble,
auters Tythinges, issint nosme, pur ceo que la fueront en chescu^ de eux al
number de x. persons, de que chescun fuit suertie and pledge pur auts bone
behavior: auters hundreds, pur ceo que ils co^teine jurisdiction sur un 100
homes ou pledges demurra^t peradventure en ij. ouiij. ou plus paroches,
borowes, ou villes, esteant and adioynantes meant meines prochein ensemble, en
le quel il appoint administration de Justice destre exercise seueralm^t e^ter
eux de mesme le hundred, and nemy que lun irra horse disorderment en lauter
hundred, lath, ou tything, en que il ne demurt. Ceux hundredes continue a c^st
iour en force, meant obstant non en tout al mesme le purpose, pur que al primer
ils fueront ordein, uncore a ore mult necessary, and en temps de peace pur
bone order de government diverse voyes, and auxy en guerr pur certainty de
leuying de homes come auterm^t pur le plus spedi collections de paiments grant
en Parliament a les Ro^es and Roign^s de cest Realm.

Hundredum.
HVndredum. ^oc est qetu^ ^sse de d^n^r^ vel consuetudinibus faciendis
p^aepositis and hundredarijs.

I.
Idiot.
Idiot, est celu^ que est un ^ot natural de sa ^eysture, and ^e scanoit de
accompter ou number xx. d, ne poit nosm^r son pere ou mere, ne de quel age il
m^ est, ou tiel semblable plain and common chooses, issint q^ il appiert q^ il
and ascu^ manner de intendement de reason ne government de luy mesme, quel est
pur son profit, ou disprofit etc. Mes sil ad tant entellige^ce que il poit
lier, ou apprender de liar per instruction and informatio^ de auts, on poit
measure un vlne de drap, ou nosme les iours en le semaine, ou enge^der un
enfant, sits ou file ou tiel se^blable, per q^ il poit appear que il ad ascun
lumen de reason; donque tiel nest Idiot naturalment.

263 Idemptitate nominis.
IDemptitate nominis, est un br^e, and gist lou br^ de det, Covenant, Account,
ou tiel semblable brief est port verse un home, and un auter que ad mesme le
nosme come le defendant ad, est pris pur luy, donque il auera cest br^ per que
le viscount fra inquiry deuaunt Justice assign in m^ le county, si soit mes^e
le person ou nemy, and sil ne soit troue le party donques il a^e^ sans iour in
peace.

Ieofayle.
IEofaile, est qua^t les parties al ascun suit en pledant ont a tant proceed q^
il aient join issue quel serra try, ou est try per un Jury ou enquest. Et
cel pleding ou issue est cy malement plede ou ioyn q^ il serra error si eux
proceed: Donque ascun del distes parties poit per lou^ Counsel monstre ceo al
Court auxibien apres verdist done and deua^t judgment, come deuant le Jury
soit charge. Le monstrans des q^ux effects deuant le Jury charge fuit souent
qua^t le Jury veign^ al Court de try le issue, do^que le Counsel q^l voit ceo
monstrer dira, ce^ enquest ne do^es prender, Et si soit apres verdict, donque
il voiloit dire, Al judgment ne deues aler. Et pur ceo q^ ceux mults delays
fueront en suites, diverse statutes sont faits de redresser ceo, auxibien en
temps Roy H. le 8. Anno 32. cap 30. come en te^ps le roigne que ore est de
queux home poit dire come les Ciuilians diont. Quod tame^si ^u^is formulas
amputari iusserit Constantinus Imperator, quotidianus tamen forensis vsus eas
reuocasse vide^, vel potiu^, quod crescunt vt Hidrae capita.

265 Illoyal assembly.
ILloyall assembly, est lou people eux assemble ^usimul pur fair illoyall
chose encounter le peace, nyent obstant que ils ne execute lour purpose en fait.

266 Imparlance.
IMparlance, est quant un action de dett, trespass, ou tiels semblables est
port enuers un home, and apres que le plaintiff ad count ou declare, le
defendant pria le Court que il poit aver temps de mitter ^ins son respons al
auter iour en mesme le term, ou en le procheine term, cest stay de respons
est appel imparlance.

Imprisonment.
IMprisonment nest auter chose forsque le restraint del liberty dun home, soit
ceo en le ouert cha^ps ou en le cippes, ou cage en les estreates, ou en le
proper meason dun ho^e, ^ibien come en le common gaol. Et en toutes ceux lieux
le party issint restrain est dit deste un prisoner cy longem^t come il and
son liberty frankme^t de ^re a touts lou il voit, sans bail, mainprise, ou
auter authority.

Infangthefe.
INfangthefe, hoc est qd' latrones capti in dominico vel in feodo vestro de
latrociniis conuicti, in curia vestra iudic ent.

Information.
INformatio^, pur le roign^ est ceo que pur un common person est appel un
declaration, and nest toutes foits fait directment per le Roigne, ou sa
Attorney, mes per un aut home. Qui tam pro domina Regina quam pro seipso
sequitur, sur le breach de ascu^ penal ley ou statute, en que un penalty est
done al party que voit suer pur ceo, mes null actio^ de dett pur recover ceo,
donque il doit e^e ewe per informatio^.

270 Ioyntenants.
IOintena^ts sont lou deux homes vient a ascu^ terres on tenements per un joint
title: Come si home done terre a deux homes and lour heirs.

Mes Tenants en common sont lou ii. homes out terres per several titles, ou per
feffement al deux, a aver and tener lun moitie al un and ses heirs, and lauter
moitie al lauter and ses heirs, en touts ceux cases null de eux scauoit son
several, come il serra dit apres.

Et nota si sont deux ou trois ioyntenaunts, and un ad issue and deuie, donques
cestuy ou ceux iointenants que suruesque auera lentiertie per le suruiuor.

Mes si deux iointena^ts font particion enter eux per fait per agreement
donques ils sont several tenants.

Mes si un iointenaunt grant ceo que a luy appent a un estranger, donques
lauter iointenant and le stranger sont tenants en common.

Et mesque ij. tenants en common sont seysie per my and per tout, and null
conust son several, uncore si un deuie, lauter ne auera lentiertie per
suruiuor, mes son heir auera le moitie.

Et issint si sont iii. iointenants, and un de eux fait feffement de son part a
un auter, and le feffee deuie, donques son heir auera le tierce part, and les
auters i^. sont iointenants come ils fueront, pur ceo que eux deux sont seisies
per un joint title.

Auxy si tree soit done al baron and sa feme, and le baron alien and deuie, le
feme recouera lentiertie: mes si ils fueront iointena^ts deuant le couerture,
donques en tiel case el recouera forsque le moitie.

Auxy si terre soit done al baron and sa seem, and al tierce person, si le
tierce person grant ceo que a luy appent, la moitie passa* per cel grant, pur
ceo que le baron and sa feme sont forsque un person en le ley, and en cest case
ils nont en droit forsque le moitie.

Auxy si deux ioyntena^ts sont des tres en ville que est borough English, lou
terre est deuisable, and lun per son testament devise ceo que a luy appent a un
estranger and deuie, cest devise est void, and le auter auera lentiertie per
suruiuer, pur ceo que le devise ne poit pre^der effect tanque apres le mort le
deuisor, and immediate apres le mort le deuisor, le droit deuient al auter
iointena^t per le suruiuor, le quel ne claim rie^s per le deuisour mes en so^
droit demesne per le suruiuer: Mes auterme^t est de Parceners seisies des tres
deuisables, causa qua supra.

Indicauit.
INdicauit est un brief and gist lou debate est perenter deux Clerks en court
Christian dun Esglise, ou part de un Esglise pur dismes q^ amou^t al meines a
le value de la quart part del Esglise, and pur ceo q^ le patron del Clerk le
defendaunt perdra son aduowson, si le clerk le plaintiff la recouera, donques
il auera brief direct al Clerk le plaintiff ou al officers del co^urt
Christian, eux co^maundant de cesser de lour plee, iesques il est discuss en
court le Roy a q^ laduowson appent, Et cest brief serra enter quater persons,
deux serront patrons, and deux serront clerks. Mes cest brief nest
returnable: mes sils ne cessont lour suit il au^a un Attachment.

Iointure.
IOinture est un estate and assurance fait al un feme en consideration de
marriage pur term de sa vie, ou auterment, come est mention en lestatute 27. H.
8. ca. 10. soit il deuant ou apres le marriage. Et si soit apres le marriage,
do^ques el poit a sa liberty apres le mort de son baron refuser de p^ender, ou
aver les terres issint assure pur sa iointure, and demand sa dower al common
ley: Mes sil soit fait deuant marriage, donques el ne poit refuser tiel
iointure, ne aver dower accordant al common ley, sinon q^ quant el port sa
brief de Dower, le defenda^t pled tiel plee que ne voile luy barrer de sa
dower, donques el serra endow: Sicome il dit en bar, q^ sa baron ne fuit
seisi de tiel estate de quel el doit este endow, ou ascun tiel plee, and ne
monstre que el ad un iointure fait etc. and pur ceo demand judgment de cel
action, ou judgment si el serra auxy endow, ou ascun tiel semblable plee etc.
Et ceo fuit lopinio^ de le droit worshipful M. Brograue, al son lecture en
Graies Inn en Su^mer An. 1567. 18. Eliz. sur un bra^ch, del statute fait An.
27. H. 8. ca. 10. concerna^t Iointures and dowers,

Et per luy de ceux chooses de que un feme poit este endowe, el poit aver un
iointure, come de mines, vestura^ terre, bo^es, villes, Isles, meadows, and
tyels semblables. Item dun aduowson, dun reuersion dependaunt sur un estate pur
vie, dun Windmill, un haut chamber, un rectorie and tiels auters, and ils sont
appels tenements. Item dun villen, car il est hereditament. Et de touts ceux
profit poet vener al feme. Mes de ceux chooses de que null profit voet vener,
mes plustost un charge, un iointure ne poet este fait.

L.
Larceny.
LArceny est un torcyous prisell des biens dun auter home, mes nemye de son
person, oue un meant de eux embleer encounter son volunt que biens ils fueront.

Et la^eeny est en deux sorts, lun issint appelle simplement, and lauter petit
larceny.

Le primer est lou le chose emblee exceda le value de xij. d. and ceo est
felony.

Le auter (que est appell petite larceny) est lou le chose emblee, ne exceda le
value de xii. d. and ceo nest felony.

284 Lastage.
LAstage, hoc est quietu^ esse de quada^ co^suetudine exact^ in nundmis and
mercatis pro rebus cariandis vbi homo vult.

285 Leases.
LEases sont gra^ts ou demises per un q^ ad ascun estate in heredit de ceux
hereditam^ts al auter pur meinder te^ps, and ceo sont en diverse ma^ners, cest
ascauoir, pur term de vie, pur term da^s, pur term dauter vie and a volunt.

Auxy un lease de terre est auxy bone sans fayt come per fayt.

Mes en leas pur term de vie, il couient de doner livery and seisin sur le
terre, ou auterment riens passera per le grant, pur ceo que ils sont appels
franktenements.

Auxy un leas de un comen ou rent, ne poiet este bone sans fait.

Mes de un parsonage, il est bon sans fait, pur ceo que lesglise que est
principal, puit assets bien passer sans fait, and issint les dismes and
offerings que sont come accessory al esglise.

Mes dismes and offerings per soy, ne poyent este lesses sans fait vt dicitur.

Lessor and Lessee.
LEssor est celuy que lessa terres, ou tenements ^l auter pur term de vie,
ans, ou al volunt, and celuy a que le leas est fait, est appell lessee.

Leuant and Couchant.
LEuant and Couchant, est dit, quant les beasts, ou Cattle dun estraunger
sont venue en le terre dun auter home, and la ont remain un certain bone
space de temps.

288 Ley.
LEy est quant action de det est port verse un sur ascun secret judgment ou
contract ewe perenter les parties sans especialty monstre, ou auter matter de
Record, come action de detinue pur ascun bie^s ou chattels, do^que le defendant
poit gager son ley, sil voile, cestassauoir, de iurer sur un lieur, and
certain persons oue luy, que il ne deteyna les byens, ou doit riens al
plaintiff in le manner and form come il ad declare.

Et cest allow solement in cases de secrecy ou le plaintiff ne poit prouer le
surmise de son suit per ascun fait ou ouert act: ou le defendant poit ceo
discharge secretme^t perenter eux sans ascu^ escript de acquitance ou public
act, and pur ceo en action de det sur un leas pur term dans ou sur arrerages
de account deuant Auditors assign^, ho^e ne gagera son ley.

Mes quant un gag^ra son ley, il amesnera ouesque luy vi. viii. ou xii. de ses
vicins, come le Court luy assignera, de iurer ouesque luy, mult semble al
serement que eux fesoyent que sont uses in common ley, de purger auters de
ascu^ crime al eux impute: q^ sont appell conpurgators.

Nota que le fesans del serment est appell le gager del ley, and quant il est
accomplish, donque est appell se fesans del ley.

Et auxy si le Vicount in ascun action return que il eit summon le defendaunt
de appearer in Court a ascun iour a responder le plaintiff, a quel iour il fait
default, process serra agard verse luy de vener and save, ou excuser son default:
que est a tant a dire, come purgare moram, ou auterme^t de perder le chose
demand: Et donque le defendaunt vient and voit iurer que il ne fuit summon,
que est appell gager de ley, donque il doit ceo fair al iout assign^ oue xii.
auters, and en fesant del le^ il doyt son serement affirmer directment al
contrary de ceo que est impute a luy, mes lauters ne dira, mes que eux intend
que il dit le verity.

289 Liberate probanda.
Liberate probanda, Vide de ceo en le title de Natiuo habendo.

290 Liuerie de seisin.
LIuetie de seisin, est un ceremony use en conueyance de terres ou tenements
lou un estate en fee simple, fee tail, ou un franktenement passera: Et il est
un tesmoigne de le voluntary departing per luy que fait le liuerie del chose de
que liuerie est fait: Et le resceite del livery est un voluntary acceptance per
le auter party, de tout ceo de que lauter ad luy dismiss. Et fuit inue^t come
un ouert and notorious chose, per means de q^ le common people poie^t aver
intelligence de passing ou alteration de estates de ho^e al home, que per ceo
ils poient estre le meliour able pur trier en que le droit and possession de
terres and tenementes fueront, sils doient estre impannel and iures, ou
auterment ont a fair concernant ceo.

Le common manner de liuerie de seysin, est en cest sort fait: Si^l soit en le
ouert champe ou ne sont edifices, ou meason, donques un que poit liar prist le
sait en son maine, si lestate passera per fait, and declare al eux que la sont,
le cause de lour vener la ensemble, and donques ouertment lya le fait, ou
declare le effect de ceo ^n Engloys, and apres que il est seal le party que
est a departer oue le terre, prist le sai^ en ses maines ensemble ouesque un
clodde del terre, and un twigge ou bow, sil y ad ascun la, and tout ceo il
deliver al auter party, en le nosme de possession ou seysin accordant al
form and effect del fayt; que deua^t eux fuit la lie ou declare. Mes sil
soit un habitation ou edifice sur le terre, donques ceo est fait la a le door
del ceo, null esteant relinquishe a cest temps deins le meason, and le party
deliver tout les auantdites ensemble ouesque le annell del door en nosme de
seysin ou possession, and il que receiua le liuerie entra primes sole and shota
le door, and prelentme^t ouert ceo, and lessa eux eins etc. Sil soit de un
meason a que est null terre, le lyuerie est fait and possession prise per le
delivery del annuell del door and fait solement. Et ou il est sauns fait de
terres ou tenements la le party declare per parol deuant testmoignes, lestate
q^ il entende de departer oue, and donques deliver seisin ou possession, en
manner come est auantdist, and issint le tree ou tenement passera cybien lou il
and fait, come per fait, and ceo per force del livery de seisin: Il fuit agree
en Graies Inn per le droit worshipful M. Snagge, al son lecture la en summer
An. 1574. que si un feoffour deliver le fait en view del terre, en nosme de
seisin, que il est bone, pur ceo que il ad un possession en luy mesme. Mes
auterment est dun Attorney, car il doit aler al terre, and prise possession luy
mesme, deuant que il poit doner possession al auter accordant al parols de son
garrant etc. Et lou liuerie de seisin est per le view, si le feoffee ne entra
pas puis etc. null chose passa, car il doit enter en fait.

Lotherwite.
LOtherwit, hoe est quod capiatis eme^das ab ipso qui corrumpit vestram natiua
sine lice^tia vestra.

M.
Mahim ou Maime.
MAhim, est lou per le ^orcious act daut ascun member est dampnifie ou tol, per
que le party is^int da^pnifie est fait imperfect a co^bater: Come si un osse
soit prise horse del test: ou un osse soit debruse en asc' auter part del corpse,
ou un pee; ou maine, ou digit, ou joint du^ pee, ou asc' member soit sciet: ou
per asc' plague les nerves so^t fait de shrinker, ou aut member, ou les digits
faits curue, ou si un oil soit mise horse, ou les anterior de^tes debruse, ou
asc' auter chose e^ le corpse du^ ho^e, per reason de que il est fait le meins
able pur defender luy m^, ou offend so^ enemy.

Mes le s^yer dun de un ori^l, ou n^se, ou le^fied' del* de^ts* moliers, on
tiels semblables, nest asc' ma^hem, pur ceo q^ il est pluis un deformity de le
corpse; que un defect del strength, ^^ ceo est communement try per I^nspection
del party per les Justices. Et si les justices so^t e^ doubt ^^ ^e^^am^ soit
un ma^h^m ou (...), ils. use* and voylent ^e ^our graund discretion prender le
aid and opinion de ascun erudite Surgion, pur consid* de ceo deuant que ils
determine sur le case.

Mainprise.
MAinprise, est quant un home est arrest per Capias, done les Judges poient
deliu^ son corpse a certain homes pur garder and de luy am^^ner deua^t eux a
certain iour, and ceux so^t appels mainpernors, and si le party ne appear al
iour a^s^gne, le mainpernou^s serront amercie.

Manor.
Manor, est un chose compound de diverse chooses, come de un meason, terre
arrable, pasture, pree, bois, rent, auowson, court baron; and tiel semblable
font un manor. Et c^o doit este per ancient continuance de temps, cui^s
contrarium memoria hominu^ non existie: car a ceo iour un manor ne poit este
fait pur ceo q^ un Court baron ne poit estre fait a ore, and un ma^nor ne poit
estre sans un court baron and ^uters ou fra^ktenants, deux al meines, car ^i
tontes les franketenements forsque un escheat al Seign^, ou sil purchase tout
preter un, la son manor est ale, pur ceo que il ne poit estre un manor sans un
Court Baron (come auantdit.) Et un court baron ne poit este tenus mes deua^t
suitors, and nemy deuant un suter, and ideo lou forsque un fra^ktenem^t o^
fra^kt est, la ne poit este manor properm^t, coment en common parla^ce ceo poit
estr^ appel un manor.

295 Manumission.
MAnumissio^, est e^ deux sorts, le un est un manumission explicita, laut un
manumissio^ implicita.

Manumission explicita est quant le Seignior fait un fait al son villeine pur
luy enfra^chiser per cest parol (Manumittere) quod idem est quod extra manum,
vel extra potestate^ alterius ponere.

Le manner de manumitting ou enfranchising en te^ps pass plus vsualment fuit
issint* Seignior (en presence de ses vicines) prist le villeine per le test
disant, Ieo voile que cest home soit frank, and oue ceo il luy mise auant horse
de ses maines, and per ceo il fuit frank sans ascun pluis fair.

Manumission impli^ita sans cest parol (Manumittere) est quant le seignior fait
un obligation a son villeine a payer a luy money al un certain iour, ou luy sue
lou il poit enter sans suit, ou granta al son villeine un annuytie, ou lessa
terre a luy per fait pur ans, ou pur vie, and en diverse tiels semblables cases,
le villeine per ceo est fait frank.

Maxims.
Maxims sont les foundations del ley, and les conclusions de reason, and sont
causes efficient, and certain universal propositions, cy sure and perfect que
ils ne poyent este a ascun temps impeach ou impugn, mes doyent touts foits
este observe and tenus come fort principels and aucthorities de luy mesme,
nient obstant ils ne poyent este prove, per, force de argument ou demonstration
logical, mes font conus per enduction per le yoy de sense and memory: Come pur
example, il est un Maxim que s^^n home ad issue deux fits* per diverse venters,
and le un de eux purchase terres en fee and morust sans issue, lauter fits ne
vnques serr' son heir etc.

Item il est un aut maxim, que terres discendra del pere al fits ^ mes nemy
del fits al pere, car ceo est un ascension etc. Et diverse tiels semblables il y
ad.

297 Maynour.
MAynour, est quant un laron ad emblee^, and est pursue oue hue and cry and
prise, ayant ceo troue ouesque luy q^ il ad emblee ceo est appel le maynour* Et
issint nous co^munem^t use* pur dire quant nous trouomus un fesant de un
illo^al act, que nous luy prist ouesque le maynor, ou manner.

Maintenance.
MAintenance est lou ascun home done ou deliver a un auter que est plaintiff ou
defendant en ascun action, ascun summ^ dargent ou auter chose pur mainteiner
son plee, ou fait extreme labor pur luy qua^t il and riens a ceo fair,
donque lauter party grieve auera verse ^uy un brief appel brief de
Maintenance.

Mesne.
MEsne, est lou le owner del tres ou ten^ts ceux teigne de un per certain
services, and il ceux tenoyt de un aut per autiels ou aut services, la cestuy
q^ tient les terres est appel tenant perauaile, and cestuy de que il teigne est
appel mesne, and cestuy de que le mesne tenoit est appel seigniour paramont. Et
en cest case si le seigniour paramount distrem^ le tenant pur les service le
mesn^ q^ luy doit acquit al seign^our paramont, donques le tenant auera un
br^ verse le mesne, que est appell brief de mesne, and si il ne vient pur
acquiter le tenant, donque le mesne perdra le service le tenant and serr'
foriudge de seigniorie, and le tenant serra tenant immediate al chief
seigniour, and fra mesmes les services and suites come le mesne fist al
seigniour.

300 Misprision.
MIsprision, est quant ascun sc^it que un auter ad fait treason ou felony, and
il ne voile luy discover al Roigne, ou sa Counsel ou a ascun Magistrate, eins
concela son offense: Diverse auts offenses sont appel misprision, sicome un
Chapleine ad fix un ancient seal dun patent, a un nouel patent de Non
residence, and ceo fuit tenus deste Misprision de treason tantu^, and null
counterfaiter del seal del Roigne.

Item, si un auter sceit money destre faux, and port ceo horse de Irelande en
Engleterre, and utter ceo en payment, ceo est forsque Misprision of Treason,
and nemy Treason, and issint est en diverse tiels se^blabl' cases.

Et en touts cases de Misprision de treason le party offender forfaitera se^
biens a touts iours, and les profits de ses terres pur term de son vie, and
son corpse al prison, al pleasure del Roigne.

Et pur Misprision de felony ou trespass, le offendour serra commit al prison,
tanque il ad troue suerties ou pledges pur son fine, q^ serra assesse per le
discretion de les Justices deuant q^ il fuit convict.

Et nota que en chescun treason ou felony, est include Misprision, and lou
ascun ad fait treason ou felony, le Roigne poit causer luy deste indicte and
arraigne forsque de misprision solement sil voile. Vide plus de ceo Stamf. lib.
1.

Monstrance de faits ou Records.
MOnstrance de faits ou Records, est sico^e pur example, un action de debt,
soit port enuers un sur un obligation per un ou per executors etc. la apres que
le plaintiff ad declare, il doit monstre son obligation, and le executor le
testament al court, and issint est de Records.

Et le diversity perenter Monstrance de faites ou Records, and oyer de faits
and Records, est issint, il que plede le fait ou record, ou declare sur ceo, a
luy il appertain de monstre ceo. Et lauter verse que tiel fait ou record est
plede ou declare, and est per ceo deste charge poyt demand oyer de ceo fait ou
record, que son adversary port, ou plead verse luy.

302 Mortdauncester.
MOrtdauncester, vide de ceo deuaunt titulo Cosinage.

303 Monstrauerunt.
MOnstrauerunt, est un brief, and gist pur le tenant en ancient demesne and
est direct al seigniour, luy commandant que il ne distraine son tenant pur
fair auter service q^ fair ne duisse^t, and ils poyent aver cest brief
direct al viscont q^ il ne suffer le seigniour a distreine les dits tenants pur
fair auter service. Auxy si le tenants ne poyent este en quiet ils poye^t aver
un attachment verse le seignior dapperer deuant les Justices, and toutes les
nosmes des tena^ts serront mise en le br^ come^t q^ forsque un de eux soit
grieve solement.

Auxi si ascun terre en ancient demesne soit en variance enter les tenants
donques le tenant issint grieve auera verse auter br^ quod vocatur Droit close
secund' consuetudinem manerii, and ceo serra touts foits port en le court le
Seign^, and sur ceo il countera en le nature de quel brief il voit come son
case gist, and cest brief ne serra remove sinon pur graund cause ou non power
de Court.

Auxy si le Seignior en auter lieu horse de ancient demesne distraine son
tenant de fair auter service quel ne doit, il auera brief de droit appel ne
Unjust vexes, and cest un brief de droit patent que serra try per battle ou
grand assise.

304 Mortgage ou Morgage.
MOrtgage ou Morgage est quant un fait un feoffement a un auter sur tiel
condition, que si le feoffour paya al feoffee a certain iour xl. li. darge^t,
que adonques la feoffour puit reenter etc. en ceo case le feoffee est appell
tenant en Morgage. Et sicome un home puit fair feoffeme^t en fee en morgage,
issint il puit fair done en le tail, ou leas pur term de vie, ou pur term
dans en morgage. Et il semble que la cause pur q^ il est appel Mortgage, est
pur ceo q^ il estoit en aweroust si le feoffor voile payer al iour limit le
argent ou non, and sil ne paya pass, donque la terre que il mit en gage sur
condic' de payment de de le money, est ale de luy a routes iours, and issint
mort a luy sur condic', and sil paya le money, donque est le gage mort quant a
le tenant cest ascauoir, le feoffee, and pur cest cause il est appel en Latin,
Mortuum vadium, come Master Littleto^ dit, ou mortuum vas, come ieo pense.

Auxy si feoffement soit fait en morgage sur condition que si le feoffour paya
tiel sum a tiel iour etc. Et le feoffour morust deuant le iour uncore si
lheire le feoffour paia m^ le sum a mesm^ la iour al feoffee, and si le
feoffee ceo refusa donque lheire le feoffour poit enter, mes en tiel case si ne
soit ascun iour de payment express, donques tiel tender del heir est void
pur ceo que quant feoffor morust le temps del tender est pass, ou auterment
les heirs le feoffor aueront temps del tender a touts iours que serra
inconvenient q^ un auera un fee simple a luy and a ses heirs q^ serra
defeisable toutes foites a le pleasure and volunt des auters, mes en le prim^
case le te^ps del tender ne fuit expire per la mort le feffor.

305 Moderata misericordia.
MOderata misericordia, est un brief and gist lou home est amercy en court
Baron ou county plus que deuer este, donques il aver cest brief direct al
Vicont si soit en county ou al Bailife si soit en Court baron, eux commandant
que il ne luy amerciont, mes eient regard al quantity de trespass, and sils ne
font sur cel brief, donques issera verse eux un sicut alias and causam nobis
significes and apres ceo un attachement.

306 Mortmaine.
MOrtmain est lou terres sont dones a un meason de religion ou a un aut company
que sont corporate per le grant le roy, donque cest terre est deuenus en
mortmaine, cest adire en Angloys a dead hand, and donque le roy ou le seign^ de
q^ le terre est tenus poit entercome appiert en lestatute de religiosis, ideo
vide lestatute, Auxi si un fait feoffement sur confidence a certain persons al
oeps de un meason de religion, ou oeps de ascun gyld ou fraternity corporate,
donque il serra dit mortmaine, and il encourge m^ le pain, vt patet per
statut, Anno 15. Richardi 2.

Mulier.
MVlier, est un parol use en ^r^e ley, mes come aptment, ieo ne poy dire ne
scay bien, Car accorda^t al proper signification, Mulier est faemina corrupta,
sicome il est use per Vlpianus, en un certain lieu en tiel manner. Quod si ego
me virginem emere putarem cu^ esset mulier, emptio non valebit. Per ceo poyes
voyer, que mulier est un fe^e q^ ad ew le company dun home: Mes a relinquisher
le droit signification, Mulier est prise en nostre ley, pur un q^ est loyalme^t
engender and nee: and est toutes dits use en comparison ouesque un bastard
soleme^t pur monstre un difference parent eux, come pur example. Un ho^e ad un
fites per un fe^e deuant marriage, ce^ issu est appel un bastard and illoial. Et
ap^s il marry oue le mier del bastard, and ount un auter fites, cest second
fites est appel Mulier, cest adire loyal, and serra heir al son pier, mes le
auter ne poit este heir al ascun home, pur ceo que il nest conus ne certain,
en le judgment del ley, que fuit son pere, and pur cest cause est dit, deste
nullius filius, ou filius populi, and issint sans pere accordant al cestuy
viele verses.

Cui pater est populus, pater est sibi nullus and omnis.

Cui pater est populus, non habet ipse patrem.

Et toutes foites vous troues cest addition al eux (Bastard eigne and mulier
puisne,) quant ils sount compare ensemble.

Murder.
MVrder est un volu^tarie occider dun home sur malice prepense, and semble de
vener de le Saxon paroll Mordren q^ issint signify. Et Mordridus est le
murderer ta^que al cest iour ent eux en Saxony, de q^ nous auomus mulis de
nostre parolx come ad estre souent dit. Ou poit estre derive de Mort and dire,
quasi mors dira: Vide St. Ples de le Cor. li. 1.

N.
Natiuo habendo.
NAtiuo habendo, est un brief, and gist lou le villein ou niefe dun seign^ est
ale de luy, donques le seign^ auera ce^ brief direct al vicount que il face le
seignior aver son villeine ou niefe ouesque touts ses chateux. Auxi en cest
brief plusours villeins ou niefs ne parront este demands q^ deux, mes auxy
plusors villeins ou niefs q^ voilent ensembl' poient port br^e De liberate
probanda. Auxi si un nief port brief De liberate probanda auant que le
seignior port cest brief donques le villeine pl' ou niefe serra en peace iesque
al venue des Justice, ou auterment son brief ne luy aidera.

Auxy si un villeine ad demurre en ancien demesne per un an and un iour sans
claim del Seignior, do^ques il ne poit luy sciser deins le dit franchise.

310 Ne admittas.
NE admittas est un brief direct al Euesque al suit de un q^ est patron de
ascun Esglise, and il doubta que Leuesque voit collate un son clerk, ou admit
un auter clerk present per auter home al dit benefice: donques il que ceo
doubta auera cest brief de inhibiter le vico^t de collater ou admitter ascun a
son Esglise.

311 Non omittas propter libertatem.
NOn omittas propter libertate^ est un brief, and gist lou le Vicont return
sur brief a luy direct, que il ad maund al Bailife de tiel fraunchise q^ aver
return des briefes, and il and seruie le brief, donques le plaintiff auera
cest brief direct al Vicont, que il luy mesme enter en le franchise and
execute le brief le Roy.

Auxy le Vicont garnera le Bailife que il soit deua^t les Justices al iour
contenus en le brief, and sil ne vie^t and luy acquit, donques touts les
briefes judicials que passeront horse del Court le Roy dura^t mesme le plee,
serront briefes de Non omittas etc. and le Vicont ferra execution de eux
pendant cel plee.

Negatiua pregnans.
NEgatiua pregnans, est quant un action ou informatio^, ou tiel semblable est
port enuers un, and le defendant plede en bar del action, ou auterment un
negative plee, que nest cy special answer al action, mes que il enclude auxy
un affirmative. Come pur example: Si en brief de Enter in casu prouiso, port
per cestuy en le reuersion sur alienatio^ per le tenant pur vie, supposant que
il ad alien en fee (que est un forfaiture de son estate) and le tenant al
brief dit, que il and alien in fee, cest un negative, en que est enclude un
affirmative: car nient obstant il soit very que il and alien en fee, uncore il
poit estre que il ad fait un estate en tail (le quel est auxy un forfaiture)
and donques le entry de celuy en le reuersion est loyal etc.

Item en un Quare impedit, le Roigne fist title de presenter a un Prebe^d,
ratione que les temporalties de leuescherie sueront en sa maines per le mort de
W. nuper Episcopi etc. Le defendant did q^ ne voida pas esteants les
temporalties en les maines des Roign per le mort de W. cest un negative
preignans, car il poit estre en les mains del Roigne, auterment que per le mort
de W. and i^ su^fist al Roigne si soit en sa mains etc.

Issint est lou un Information fuit port in Scaccario verse I. S. pur ceo q^ il
achate laines enter shering temps and le Assumption tali anno de I. N. Le
defendant dit quod non emit de I. N. come il est allege etc. ceo est appel un
Negative preignans, car ^il ceo achate de auter, uncore il est culpable pur le
achater.

Ne unjust vexes.
NE unjust vexes, Vide de ceo deuant titulo Monstrauerunt.

Niefe.
NIefe, est un ^eme que est bond, ou un villeine feme, mes si el marie un
frank home, el est per ceo fait frank, pur ceo que el and ^on baron sont
forsque un person en ley, and el coment estre de mesme le nature and condition
en ley a touts intents come son baron. Mes sa baron est frank a touts intents
sans ascun condition en ley, ou auterment: and issint per consequens, le feme
couient estr^, and est frank accorda^t al nature de so^ frank baron, and
donques si el soit un foits frank and clerem^t discharge de villeinage a touts
intents, el ne poit estre nief apres sans especial act fait per luy, come
divorce ou conusans en court de record, and ceo est en favor de liberty, and
pur ceo un frank feme ne serra villein per prisel del villein al son baron: Mes
lour issue serra villeines come lour pere fuit, que est contrary a le ley
Civil, car la est dit, partus sequitur ventrem.

Bondage ou villenage ad son commencement enter les Hebrews, and son original
proceeding de Chanaa^ le fites de Cham, que perur ceo que il auoit derisee son
pere Noe gysant dissolutement quant il fuit ebriee, fuit puny en son fites
Chanaan ouesque penalty de bondage.

Nihil dicit.
NIhil dicit, est quant un action est port enuers un home, and le defendant
appear, le plaintiff declare, and le defendant ne voile responder, ou plede al
action, and no maintain son plee, mes fait defaulte, ore sur cest default, il
serra condemn, quia nihil dicit.

Nisi prius.
NIsi prius, est un brief judicial, and gist quant l^nquest est empanell and
return deuant les Justices en bank, donques le plaintiff ou defendant puvt
aver cest brief direct al vicont, luy commaundant que il face venir la pais
deuant les Justices en mesme le county a lour venir la destre detmine, and ceo
pur easement denquest.

Nomination.
NOmination, est ou vne poit en droit de son manor ou auterment nominate, and
appoint un able Clerk, ou home al un Parsonage, Vicarage, ou tiel spiritual
promotion. Et nota que cest nomination doit estre al auter que lordinarie, que
auter luy presentera al Ordinary.

318 Nonabilitie.
NOnabilitie, est lou un action est port verse un, and le defendantdit que le
plaintiff est non able de suer ascun action, and demand judgment sil serra
respond. il y ad vi causes de nonabilitie e^ le pl', come sil so^t vtlage, ou
vne alien nee, mes cest disability est e^ actions reals and mixed solement and
non en actions personals, sinon q^ il soit un alien enemy, ou co^dempne en
praemunire, ou profess en un Abbey, Priorie ou Friarie, ou excommenge, ou un
villain, and sue son Seigniour, mes cest darreme nest plee pur auter que nest
Seigniour al villain. Vide plus de ceo Littl. lib. 2. cap. 11.

Nude Contract.
NVde Contract, ou nude promise, est lou un home bargain ou vende ses tres, ou
biens, ou promise pur doner al auter money, ou un chiual, ou a edifier un
meason, ou fair tiel chose a tiel iour and null recompense appoint a luy pur le
fair de ceo. Come si un dit al auter, ieo vende ou done a vous touts mes
terres ou biens. Et la est null chose appoint, assign, ou agree, que lauter
donera, ou payera pur ceo, issint que il and quid pro quo, cest un nude
contract and void en ley, and pur non performance de ceo null action gist, car
ex nudo pacto non oritur actio.

Nusauns.
NVsans, est lou ascun home leuye ascun mure, ou estop ascun ewe ou fait ascun
chose sur son terre demesne a noyance son prochain, cestuy que est grief auera
ent un brief appell Assise de Nuisance. Auxy si il que fist le nusaunce alien
sa terre a un auter, donques cest brief serra port deuers ambideux come appiert
per lestatut westminster, 2. cap. 24.

321 Nuper obijt.
NVper obiit, est un br^, and gist lou un ad plusours heirs, cest ascauoir,
plusours filesou plusours fits si soit en gauelkind e^ Kent, and deuie seisie
and un heir entra en tout la tree, donque les auters q^ sont tenus dehors,
aueront ce^ br^ verse le coheire que est deins. Mes brief de Rationabili part
gist en tyel case ou launcestour fuit un foits seysie, and ne mo^ust seisie de
possession, mes del reuersion.

O.
322 Oredelfe.
ORedelfe, est lou vne claim de aver le ore que est troue en son soil ou
terre.

323 Outfangthiefe.
OVtfangthiefe, hoc est, quod latrones de tra vestra, vel feodo vestro, extra
tra^ vestra^, vel feodu^ vestru^, capti cu^ latrocinio, ad curia^ vestram
reuerta^rur, and ibidem iudicentur.

Oweltie.
OWeltie, est quant il y ad seigniour, mesne and tenant, and le tenant tient
del mesne per mesm^ les services que le mesne tient ouster de le seigniour
paramount. Come si le tenant tient del mesne per homage, fealty, and xx. s. de
rent annuelment, and le mesne tie^t ouster de le seigniour paramont per homage,
fealty, and xx. s. re^t auxy, cest appel oweltie de services.

Oier de Records and faits etc.
OIer de records and faits, e^ sico^e pur example, un action de det soit port
enuers un ho^e sur un obligation, and le defendant appear al action, and
donques pray que il poitoier obligation ouesque que le plaintiff charge luy.

Issint est quant executors port un action de debt, and le defendant demand
oyer del testament: sur cest demand il serra lie al defe^dant. Mes sil soit en
un auter term, ou apres que le defendant ad imparle, donques il n^uera le oyer
Et issint come est dit de faits est deste inte^d de Records que sont allege
enuers luy.

326 Oier and Terminer.
OIer and Terminer, est br^ appel in Latin de Audiendo and terminando, and gist
q^t ascun graund ou sodein insurrectio^ est falt ou ascun auter sodein
transgression que require hasty reformation, donque le roy directera un
commission a certain gents and Justices de audiendo and terminando.

Nota que les Justices de Assise ont un commission doier and determiner direct
al cux, and diverse auters inhabitants deins les Counties as queux lour circuit
extend don't chescun de les Justices de Assise sont del Quorum, pur le meulx
oier and determiner de diverse offenses queux poi^nt a vener in lour circuites
quels sanscel Commission eux ne poient fair.

P.
Pape.
PApe, est un ancient nosme fauxement arrogate, ou hautm^t usurp per le
Euesque de le sole City de Rome e^ Italy, and est communem^t appel en Anglois
le Pope, un nosm^ veram^t mult freque^nt en nr^e aunc annels liu^s, specialm^t
e^ les te^ps de ceux Royes, queux grandm^t abandona^s lour imperial aucthority,
and abasa^ts eux mesmes mult debase lour estate, ne fueront hont de suffer un
alien and outlandish Euesque que enhabite ouster cynq^ diz ce^t miles de eux,
destre sovereign dehaut eux e^ lour dominions demesne, and de toller de eux
non solem^t le disposition de certain petire trifles de null account, mes auxi
le nomination de Archieuesques, euesq^s, Abbes, deanes, prouosts,
appropriations de benefices, presentatio^s al parsonages, vicarages, and
gen^alm^t de touts spiritual persons a lour preferm^ts ascun temps per laps,
ascun temps per provision ou auterment, per que le praerog. del royes fuit
moult abridg deins lour realms demesne, Pur le repression de quel diu^s
statutes ont estr^ fait, mes null sufficient remedy ta^q^ roy H. le 8. tout
ousterment reject cel judge de luy and ses subjects.

328 Per que seruitia.
VIde de ceo apres, titulo Quid iuris clamat.

329 Parceners.
PArceners, sont solon^que le course de common ley, and solonque le custom.
Parceners solo^que le common ley sont lou un enheritor ad issue forsque files
and deuie, and les teneme^ts descendont a les files, donques ils sont appel
parceners, and sont forsques un heir. Mesme le ley est, si neyt ascune issue,
and que ses freres serroyent ses heirs, Mes si home ad forsque un sile el nest
dit parcener, mes el est dit la file, and la heir. Et si ne sont files ne
soers les terres descenderont a les auters, and ils sont appels parceners. Auxi
quant terres descendont a diverse parceners, else poyent fair partition enter
eux per agreemente, mes si ascun deux ne voilent fair donque lauter ou les
auters aueront un brief de Participatione sacienda direct al vic' que ferra
partition enter eux per le serement de xii. loyals ho^es de sa bailiwik. Auxi
partition per agreement poit este fait per le ley, auxibien per parol sans fait
come per fait. Et ^ sont de plein age, le partition touts iours demurrera, and
ne seria vnq^; defete. Mes si les terres sont a eux in le tail, and come^t q^
ils sont co^cludes dura^t lour vies, vnc' lissue cesty que ad le meinder part
in value poit disagreer a le pertition and enter and occupier in co^en ouesq^
laut part. Et auxy si les barons des parceners font partition, quant le baron
deuy, la feme poit disagreer a la partic'. Auxi si le parcen^ q^ est deins age
fait pertition, quant el vient a son pleine age, el poit disagreer. Mes il
couie^t de bn^ garder qua^t el vient a son plein age, q^ el ne preigne touts
les profits a son use demesne des terres q^ fueront a luy allots car donques el
soy agrea a le partition, and le pleine age serra toutes foits de ceo intend al
age de xxi. ans.

Auxi si sont diverse Parceners q^ ont faite partitio^ enter eux, and le part de
un soit recover verse luy per title loyal, donque el compeller^ les auters de
fair nouel partition.

Auxy ils sont Parcen^s solonques le custom, lou home est seisie des terres en
gauelkind come in Kent and auters lieus fraunchises, and ad issue diverse fits
and deuie, donques les fites sont parceners per le custom.

330 Partition.
PArtition est un division de terres discendus per le common ley, ou per
custom perenter coheires ou parceners, ou ils sont deux al mein^s, soyent ils
fits, files, soers, aunts, ou auterm^t de kin al auncestour de que le terre
descend al eux.

Et cest partition est fait quatuor voves pur le plus part, de que trois sont
al pleasure and per agreement perenter eux, le quart est per compulsion.

Un partition per agreement est quant ils mesmes divide le tree equalment en
tants parts, come la sont de eux coparceners, and chescun de ^slier un share
ou part, le eigne primerment, and issint lun apres lauter, come ils sont de
age, sinon que le eigne per consent fait le partition, donques le election
appertient al procheine, and issint al eigne darreinment, accordant come il est
di^ Cuius est partitio, alterius est electio.

Un auter partition per agreement est quant ils eslient certain de lour amies
de fair division pur eux.

Le tierce partic' per agreement est per trahens de lots issint: Primerm^t de
deuider le terre en tants des parts come la sont parceners: donque a scriber
chescun part seueralment en un petit scrol ou piece de paper ou parchment, and
de m^tter ceux scrols closeen un hat, cap, ou aut tiel se^blable chose, and
do^ques chescu^ parcener, un ap^s aut come ils sont de age a traher horse de ceo
un piece ou scrol en que est escript un part del terre q^ per cest trahens est
ore seueralme^t allotte al cux en fee simple.

Le quart partition que est per compulsion, est lou un ou ascun de les
coparceners voilent aver partition, and auts ne voilent agreer a ceo, donque
ceux q^ issint voylent aver partition poyent porter un br^e de Partitione
facienda enuers les auts q^ux ne voylent fair partition, per virtue de q^l ils
serront compel de departer etc.

En Kent lou les terres sont de Gauelkinde nature, est appel a cest iour nostre
partition Shifting, il mesme parol q^ les Saxons use, nosmement Shiftan, que
signify pur fair partitio^ perenter coheirs, and pur assigner a chescun de
eux lour portion, In Latin est appel Herciscere.

Partition auxy poit estr^ fait per ioyntenants ou tenants en common per lour
assent, per fait enter eux, ou per brief per les statutes de 31. H. 8. cap. 1.
and 32. H. 8. cap. 32.

Parties.
PArties al fine ou fait, sont ceux queux sont nosmes en faits ou fines come
parties a ceo, come ceux queux levy le fine, and auxy ils a que le fine est
levy. Et ils que font un fait de feoffement, and ils a que il est fait sont
appelles parties al fait, and issint en auters semblables cases.

Nota que si un Indenture soit fait enter deux come parties a ceo en le
commencement, and en le fait un de eux graunta ou lessa un chose al un auter
and un que nest nosme en le commencement, il nest party al fait, ne prendra
riens per ceo

332 Patron.
PAtron est celuy que ad le aduowson de parsonage, vicarage, fra^k chapel, ou
tiels semblable spiritual promotions appertient a son manor, ou auterment en
gross, and per ceo poit ou doit doner mesme le benefice, ou present a ceo,
quant and cy tossed que il deuient void. Et cest esteant patron ou patronage ad
commencement pur le pluis part per un de eux trois voies, nosmement ou ratione
fundationis, pur ceo que le patron ou ses ancestors ou ceux de que il claim
fueront founders ou edifiers de le Esglise, ou ratione dotationis, pur ceo q^
ils endow ou done terres al ceo pur maintenance: ou autm^t ratione fu^di, pur
ceo q^ le Esglise fuit mise ou edify sur lour soil ou terre: Et diverse temps
per reason de ils touts trois.

Perquisites.
PErquisites sont advantages and profits queux vient al un ma^nor per
casualtie, and non annualment, come escheates, hariots, reliefes, waiues,
estraies, forfaitures, amerciame^ts en courts, gardes, marriages, biens and
terres purchase per villeins de mesme le manor, fines del copyholds, and diverse
sembl' chooses queux ne sont certain mes happen per chance, ascun temps pluis
often que a auter temps. Vide Perkins fol. 20. and 21.

Perambulatione facienda.
PErambulatione facienda est un br^, and gist lou deux seigniories gisont un
pres lauter, and ascu^ encrochment est fait per long temps, donques per assent
de ambideux seigniors le vicont prendera ouesque luy les parties and les
vicines, and ferront perambulation, and ferroit les mets come ils fuero^t
adeuant, mes si un seign^ incroche sur lauter and il ne voile fair
pera^bulation, donq^s le seign^ issint grieve auera brief verse lauter, q^ est
appel de rationabilibus diuisis.

Petit Cape.
PEtit Cape est un brief, and gist quant ascun action real. s. de plee de
terre est port, and le tenant appear, and puis fait default, donque issera
cest brief de petit cape de seiser les terres en main le Roy, mes sil ne
appera, mes fait defaut al primer somons, donque issera un graund cape, and pur
tiel defaut le tenant perdra la terre, mes sil gage son ley de non summo^s, il
sauera son defaut, and donques il puit plede ouesque le demaundant. Et en
graunde Cape le tenant serra sommo^ pour respo^der al default and ouster al
demaundant, mes in petit Cape il serra summon pur respo^der al default
solement, and nemye al demandant, and est appell petite cape pur ceo que il ad
minus en cel brief, que en lauter.

Petit serieantie.
TEner per petite serieantie est sicome un ho^e tient de roy terres ou
tenem^ts, rendant a luy un cuttell, un escue, un sete, un arck sauns cord, ou
auter service sembl', a la volunt le primer feoffor. Et la nappent, guard,
marriage ne relief. Et nota que home ne puit tener per graund serieantie, ne
per petite serieantie, si non del Roy.

Plaintiff.
Plaintiff, est celuy q^ sue ou complain en un assise, ou en un actio^
personal, come en un actio^ de det, trespass, disceit, and detinue, and tiels
semblables.

Pleading.
PLeadings, sont appell^ toutes acts del parties al suit apres le count ou
declaration, nosement ceo que est conteyne en le bar, replication, and
reioynder, and non ceo contain en le count mesme, and pur ceo defaultes en le
matter del count, ne sont co^prise deins mispleading, ou insufficient pleading,
ne sont remedy per le statute de Ieofailes, 32. H. 8. Mes solement ceo
mispleading ou insufficient pleading, commit en le bar, replication, and
reioynder, sont la provide.

339 Post disseisin.
POst disseisin, Vide de ceo deuant in le title Assise.

340 Possession.
POssession, est dit deux voies, ou actual possession, ou possession en ley.

Actual possession, est quant un home enter en fait en terres, ou tenem^ts, a
luy discende, ou auterment. Possession en ley est quant terres, ou tenementes
sont descend al un ho^e, and il and uncore realment, actualment, and en fait
enter en eux. Et il est appell possession en ley, pur ceo que en le oil, and
consideration del ley, il est pense deste en possession, entant que il est
tenant a chescun action que ascun voet suer concerna^t mesmes les terres ou
tenements.

Pounds.
Pounds, sont en deux sorts, lun pounds ou^t, les auters pounds close.

Pound ouert, est chescun lyeu en que un disstresse est myse, soit ceo common
pound, tiels que sont en chescun ville ou Seigniorie, ou soit ceo backside,
court, yard, pasture, ou auterment quecunque, lou le owner del distress poit
vener a doner eux viande sauns offense pur lour esteaunt la, ou son vener. la.

Pound close, est tyel lieu, lou le owner del distress ne poit vener a done
eux vyande sans offense, come en un close, meson, ou quecunque auter lieu.

Preamble.
PReamble ad son nosme de le preposition (pre) deuaunt, and le verb (Ambulo)
pur va, issint joint enseble, ils font un co^pound verb de le primer
coiugation (Preambulo) pur vaer deuaunt, and de ceo le primer part ou
commencement dun act est appell le preamble de act, le quel preamble est un
cliffe de ouerer les ments del fesors del act, and les mischiefs que ils
intend de remedy per ceo, come pur example lestatute fait al W. le primer le
37. cap. que done attaint, le preamble de que est issint. Pur ceo que ascuns
gents de la terre doutent meins faux serement fair, que fair ne duissent, per
que multes des gentes sont disherites and perde^t lour droit, puruiewe est etc.

343 Praemunire.
Praemunire est un brief, and gist lou ascun home sue ascun auter in court
christian pur ascun chose que est determinable en le court le Roy, and ceo est
ordeine per certain statutes, and graund punishment a ceo ordeine come appiert
per mesme les statutes. s. que il serra horse de protection le Roy, and q^ soit
mis en prison sans Bail ou mainprise tanque ils ad fayt fine al volunt le Roy,
and que ses terres and chateux serront forfaites sil ne veigne deins deux moys.
Auxi lour prouisors, procurators, attourneys, executors, notaries and
mainteners serront punish en mesme le manner, ideo vide Statutum. Auxy ascuns
diont que si un Clerk sue auter home in court de Rome pur chose spiritual lou
il poit aver remedy deins cest realm in Court son Ordinary que il serra in
case del statute.

Et sur diverse auters offenses est impose per statutes depuis fait le penalty
que eux incur queux fuer attaintes en praemunire, Come per 13. El. ca. 8. ceux
que aidont a fair corrupt bargain sur que usury est reserve ouster x. li pur
le hundredth en lan etc.

Precipe in capite.
PRecipe in capite, est un brief and gist lou le tenant que tient de Roy in
chief, come de sa Corone and il est deforce do^ques il auera cest brief, and
cest brief serra close and serra plede in le common bank. Auxi si ascun
tenant que tient dascun Seigniour sort deforce, luy couient suer brief de droit
patent que serra determyne in le Court le Seignior, mes si le terr^ soit tenns
de Roy, le brief de droit patent serra port in Court de Roy, and cest brief
poit este remove de la Court le Seigniour en la County per un tolt, and de la
county in commen ba^ke per un pone. Ideo vide deuant titulo Droit.

345 Prescription.
PRescription est quant un person claim ascun chose pur ceo que il, ses
ancestors ou predecessors, ou ceux que estate il ad ont ew ou use ascun chose
don't null memory court al contrary.

Mes ne poit prescribe encounter un estatute sinon que il ad auter statute que
serve pur luy.

Presentment.
PResentment est equiuocu^: lun est presentment al Esglise quel quant ascun
home que ad droit a done ascun benefice spiritual, and nosme le person al
Euesque a que il voit le doner, and fait un letter al euesque pur luy, ceo est
un presentation ou p^sentment, Mes si diverse coheires ne poient accorder en
presentment le^^ne serra admit, mes de iointenants and tenants in common, sils
ne accordent, deins les size moys, le Euesque presentera per laps.

Lauter est un presentment ou informatio^ per ascun Jury en un Court deuant
ascun officer la q^ ad aucthority de punishe^ ascun offense fait contra le ley.

Pretensed Droit ou Title.
PRetensed droit ou Title, est lou un e^ en poss. de ^erres, ou tenements, and
un auter que est horse de possession, claim ceo, ou sue pur ceo. Ore le
p^tensed droit, ou title, est dit en luy q^ issint sue ou claim. Et sil puis
vient a le possession de mesme les terres, ou tenements, son droit ou title est
annex al terre and possession, and me^t donque appel droit.

348 Privy ou Priuitie, and Priuities.
Privy ou Priuitie, est lou un lease est fait a tener a volu^t. pur ans, pur
vie, ou un feoffement en fec, and en diverse auts cases, ore pur ceo de ceo q^
ad pass perenter ceux parties ils sount appell priuies, en respect de
estrangers per ent queux null tiel conueiances ad estre.

Auxy si soit Seyguiour and tenant, and le tenant tient del Seigniour per
certain service, il y ad un priuitie perenter eux per cause de tenure, and si
le tenant soit disseisie per un estraunger, il ad null priuitie perenter le
disseysour and le Seignior, mes le priuitie uncore demurt per ent le Seign^ and
le tenant que est disseisie, and le Seigniour auowera sur luy pur ceo que il
est son tenant en droit, and en le judgment del ley. Priuies sont en diverse
sorts come nosment, priuies en estate, priuies en fait, priuies en ley,
priuies en droit, and priuies en ^ange.

Priuies en estate, est lon un lease est fait del manor de Dale al A. pur vie,
le remainder al B. en fee, la and A. and B. sont priuies en estate, car lour
estates fueront ambideux al un temps.

Et issint est en le primer case cy, ou un lease est fait al volunt, pur vie,
ou ans, ou un feoffement en fee, les lessees ou seffees sont appel priuies en
estate, and issint sont lour heirs etc.

Priuies en fait est lou un lease est fait pur vie, and apres per un auter
fait, le reuersion est grant al un estraunger en fee, c^st grauntee del
reuersion est appel privy en fait, pur ceo que il ad le reuersion per fait.

Privy en ley est lou il est Seigniour and tenant, le tenant lessa le
tenancie pur vie and morust sauns heir and le reuersion escheate al Seignior,
il est dit privy en ley, pur ceo que il ad son estate solement per le ley,
cest adire per escheat.

Privy en droit est lou un possess dun termepur ans, graunta son estate al un
auter sur condition, and fait ses executors and morust, ore ceux executors sont
priuies en droit, car si le condition soit enfreint, and ils entront en le
terre, ils aueront ceo en le droit de lour testatour, and a son use.

Privy de sanke est le heir del feoffor ou donor etc.

Item si un fine soit levy, les heirs de celuy que levy le fine sont appell
priuies.

349 Privileges.
Privileges sont liberties and franchises grant al un office, lieu, ville, ou
manor, per la graund charter del Roigne, letters patents, ou act de
Parliament, come Toll, Sake, Socke, Infangthiefe, Outfangthiefe, Turn toll,
Oredelfe, and diverse tiels semblables, pur queu^ veyes en lour proper titles
and lieux.

Process.
Process, sont les briefes and precepts q^ iss^nt fur le original: Et in actions
reals and personels sont diverse sorts de process, car en actions reals process
est grand Cape deuant appearance: ideo vide de c^o en le title petite Cape.

Mes en actions personals, come en det trespass ou detinue, le process est un
distres, and si le Vicont return Nihil habet in balliua etc. donq^s le process
e^ alias Capias and Pluries, and un Exigent, and ils sont appels Capias ad
respondendum. Auxy lexigent serra v. foites proclaims, and si le pertie
^appeare il serra vtl^ge^ Mes en diverse actions ^ont diverse manners de process,
q^ pluis long est declare in Natura breuium.

Auxy s^nt diverse auters process apres appearance quant les parties sont al issue
pur fair lenquest apperer, come un brief de Venire facias, and sils ne
apperont al iour, do^ques un brief de Habeas corp. Jurat, and apres un br^e de
Distring jurat.

Auxy sont diverse auters process apres iudgm^t, come Capias ad satisfacicndu^,
Capias vtlagatu^, and Capias ad valentiam etc.

Mes Capias ad satisfaciendum gist lou un home est condemn in ascun det ou
damages, donques il serra arrest per ce^ brief and mis en prison sans bail ou
mainprise, tanque il ad pay le det and les damages.

Mes Capias vtlagatum gist lou un est vtlage do^ques il serra prise per tiel
br^e, and mis en prison sans bail ou mainprise, pur ceo que il ad fait
contempt enconter le ley.

Capias ad valentia^ gist lou ieo sue implede de certain terre, and ^eo vouch a
garrantie un auter, and il ne scauoit pas bar le demandant, issint que le
demandant recover verse moy, donques ieo recouera tant in value verse le vouchee,
and donques issera cest brief.

Auxy sont auters process and briefs judicials, come Fieri facias, Scire facias,
and plusors auters: and ideo vide ceux e^ lour titles.

Prochein amy.
PRochein amy, est communem^t prise pur Guardian en socage, and est lou un home
seisi de terres tenus en socage morust, son issue deins age de 14: ans, donques
le prochein amy, ou prochein de sank a que les terres ne poient vener ou
discender, auera le guard del heir, and del terre, al use solement del heir,
tanque il vient al age de xiiii. ans: Et donques a tiel ans, le heir poit
enter and luy ouste, and aver luy de accompter: Mes en cest account il auera
allowance put touts reasonable costs and expe^ces bestow, ou sur le heir ou
son terre.

Et le prochein amy ou procheine de sanke a que le inheritance ne poit
discender est issint deste entende: Si les terres discende al heir de son pere,
ou ascun del sanke del part son pere, donques le mere ou auter del part le
mere, sont appelle procheine de sanke a que le enheritance ne poit discender,
car deuant que il issint discendera, il pluis tossed escheatera al seignior de
que il est tenus.

Et issint est deste ente^de lou les terres vient al heir de sa mere, ou ascun
auter de sanke del part sa mere, donques le pere ou auter del part son pere
sont appell le procheine de sanke a que le enheritaunce ne poit descend, mes
pluis tossed eschetera al Seigniour de que il est tenus.

Auterment procheine amy est celuy q^ appiert en ascun Court pur un enfant que
sue ascun action, and que ^^de le enfant de pursuer son suit: don't vide les
statutes de W. 1. cap. 47. and W. 2. cap. 15. que un enfant ne poit fair
Attorney, mes le Court poit admitter le procheine amye pur le plaintiff, and un
guardian pur le enfant def. come son Attorney.

Procedendo.
PRocedendo, est un br^e and gist lou ascun action est sue en un Court, que est
remove a un pluis hault, come al Chauncery, bank le roy, ou common bank, per
bre de Privilege ou Cerciorare, and si le defendant sur le matt monstre and
cause de privilege, ou si le matter in le bill sur que le cerciorare issuit ne
soyt bien prove, donques la plaintiff auera cest brief de Procededo pur
remaunder le matter al primer basse court, and la destre determine.

Prohibition.
PRohibition, est un br^e and gist lou home est implede in court Christian de
chose que ne touch matrimony ne testament ne meereme^t dismes, mes q^ touch le
corone nostre seigniour le Roy, and cest brief serra direct auxibien al party
come al Judge ou son official, de eux prohibit que il ne pursue ouster. Mes
si il appear apres a les Judges temporal q^ le matter est destre determine en
le spiritual Court, and nemy en le Court temporal, donque le party auera un
br^ de Consultation, commandant les Judges de le Court spiritual de proceder en
la primer plee.

354 Protection.
PRotection, est un brief and gist lon home voit passer ouster le meare en le
service le Roy, donque il auera cest brief, and per cest brief il serra quite
de tout manner des plees enter luy and ascun auter person, except plees de
dower, Quare impedit, assise de nouel disseisin, vlti^e presentationis and
attain^s, and plees deuaunt Justice in eire. Mes sont deux brief de
protection, un Cum clausula volumus, and lauter Cum clausula nolumus, vt appert
in la Register. Auxy protection ne serra allow en ascun plee commence deuant
le date de la protection si ne soit in vyages ou le Roy mesme passa, ou auters
vyages royals, ou in message le Roy pur besoin de Realm. Auxy protection ne
serra allow pur vitailes achates pur le vyage, don't le protection fait mention,
ne in plees de trespass ou de contracts fait puis le date de mesme le
protection. Mes nota que ascun poit attacher ou commencer ascun action real
verse cestuy que ayt tiel protection, and en ceo proceder tanque le defendant
eigne and monstre son protection en le Court, and ayt ceo allow, and donques
son plee ou suit serra mise sans iour. Mes si apres il appiert q^ le party que
ad le protection ne va en le besoigne pur que il cir, donque le dema^dant auera
un repeal de ceo. Et sil va and return apres le besoigne sine, le demandant
auera un resummons de recontinue le former suit.

355 Protestation.
PRotestation est un form^ de pleading quant ascu^ ne voyt directm^t affirmer
ne directment denier ascu^ chose quel est allege per auter, on q^ il m^
allege. Et est en deux manners, lun est quant un plead ascun chose quel il ne
osast directment affirmer, ou que il ne poit ceo pleder pur doubt de fair son
plee double. Come si en conueying a l^y title al ascun terre, il doit pleder
diverse discents per diverse persons, and il nosast affirmer que eux toutes
fueront seisi al temps de lour mort, ou coment il ceo purroyt, ceo serra double
a pleder deux discents, de queux ambideux chescun aperluy poyt estre bone
bar, Donques le defendant doit pleder and alleager le matt enterlasant cest
paroll Protestando, come adire, que tiel obiit (protestando) seisie etc. Et ceo
est deste allege per protestation and nemy trauersable per lauter. Auter
protestation est, quant un est de responder al deux chooses and tamen per le ley
il doit pleader forsque a lun, donques en le primer part del plee, il dira al
un matter, Protestando, and non cognoscendo, cel matter estre vere, and fair
son plee ouster per ceux parols, Sed pro placito dicit etc. and ceo est pur
salvation al party (que issint plede per protestation.) deste conclude per
ascun matter alle^ge ou object encounter luy, sur que il ne poit ioyner issue.
Et nest auter chose que exclusion del conclusion, car il que prist le
protestation exclude lauter party de concluder luy. Et cest protestation doyt
estoyer one le sequel del plee, and nemy deste repugnant, ou auterment
contrary.

Purchase.
PVrchase est le possession que un home ad en tres ou tenements per son act
demesne, means, ou agreement, and nemy per title ^e disc^n^, de ascun de ses
ancestors. Vide Littleton lib. 1. cap. 1.

Q.
357 Quale ius.
QVale ius, est un brief and gist lou ascun Abbot, Prior, ou ^tiels auters
aueront judgment de recover terre, per le default del tenant ve^s que le tree
est demand; donques deuaunt judgment don ou execution agard, cest bre issera
al eschetour pur inquirer quel droit il ad a recover, and si soit troue q^ il
and droit donques le seigniour q^ duist aver le terre si le tenant vst alien en
mortmaine poit enter come en terre alien en mortmaine, Cor cel perd per default
est come alienation, Vide le statute W. 2. cap. 32.

Mes brief de Ad quod dampnum gist lou un voile doner terre al meason de
religion, donques cest brief issera al Eschetor, pur inquirer de que value le
terre est, and quel prejudice il serra al Roy.

Quare eiecit infra terminum.
QVare eiecit infra terminum est un brief, and gist lou un fait lease a un
auter pur term dans, and le lessour infeoffe un auter, and le feoffee ousta le
termour, donques le termor auera cest brief verse le feoffee, mes si un auter
estrange ouste le termor donques il auera brief de Eiectione firm verse luy,
and in ceux deux briefes il recouera le term and ses damages.

Quare impedit.
QVare impedit, est un br^, and gist lou ieo aie aduowso^, and le person deuie
and un auter present son clerk, ou moy disturb de present, donque ieo auera
le dit brief. Mes assise de darraine presentment gist, lou ieo ou mo^
ancestors ont present deuant. Et lou home poit aver Assise de darrain
presentment, il poit aver un Quare impedit, mes nemy contrary.

Auxi si le plee soit dependant inter deux parties, and ne soit discuss deins
vi^^oys, donques leuesque presentera per laps, and cestuy que ad droit de
presenter, recouera dam^ com^ appiert per statute de West. 2. c. 5. Ideo vide
statut^^. Auxy si cestuy q^ ad droit de presenter apres le more le parson, and
ne porta Quare impedit, ne darrem presentment, mes suffer un estrange de
usurper sur luy, uncore il auera un brief de Droit daduowson, mes cest br^e ne
gist, sil ne claim dauer lauowson a luy and ses hr^es in fee simple.

360 Quare incumbrauit.
QVare incumbrauit, est un brief, and gist lou deux sont in plee pur lauowson,
and Leuesque admit le clerk dun de eux depuis les vi. mois, donques il auera
cest brief verse leuesque, mes cest br^ gist touts foites pendant le plee.

Quare intrusit matrimonio non satisfacto.
QVare intrusit matrimonio non satisfacto, est un br^ and gist lou le sn^r
profera conuenable marriage a son guard and il refusa and entra in la terre and
soy marry a un aut, donques le Seigniour auera cest brief verse luy.

Quare non admisit.
QVare non admisit, est un brief, and gist lou home ad recover un aduowson,
and il maund son conuenable clerk al euesque pur este admit, and le Euesque
ne voile luy receiver, donques il auera le dit brief verse le Euesque, mes
brief de Ne admittas gist lou deux sont in plee si le pleintife suppose que
leuesque voit admit le clerk le defenda^t, donque il poit aver cest br^al
Euesque, luy co^maundant que il ne luy admit pendant le plee.

363 Quarentine.
QVarentine est lou ho^e deuie seisi dun manner place and dauters terres, don't
sa feme doit este endow, donque la feme tiendra se en le manner place, and la
viue del store and issu de ceo por quarant iours, deins q^l temps son dower
serra a luy assign come appiert in Magna Charta Capitulo 6.

364 Quid iuris clamat.
QVid iuris clamat, est un b^e and gist lou ieo grant le reuersion de mo^
tenant a term de vie per fine in Court le roy, and le tenant ^e voyt atturner,
donques le grantee auera cest brief pur luy chaser pur atturner. Mes brief de
Quem redditum reddit gist lou ^eo grant per fine un rent charge, ou auter rent
que nest rent service quel mon tenant tient de moy, and le tenant ne voit
atturner, donques le grauntee auera cest br^. Et brief de Per que seruitia
gist en semblable case pur rent service.

Auxy si ieo grant iii^. diverse rents a un home, and le tenant del terre
attorna al grauntee per payment de un denier, ou un maile en no^me de
attornement de toutes ceux rents, cest attornement luy mittera en seisin de
tout cest rent. Mes ceux ii^. briefes couient estre port verse eux que sont
tenants iour del note leuy, and verse null auters.

Quinzime.
QVinzime est un payment grant en Parliament al Ro^gne per les lays gents,
cestascauoir, le quinzime part de lour biens: Et fuit use en ancient temps
deste levy sur lour auers esteants en lour terres, que chose fuit mult
troublous, and pur ceo a ore pur le plus part, cest voy est alter, and ils use
de levy ceo per les Verges, ou Acre, ou auter measure de ^re. Per reason de
que il est a ore meins troublous, and plus certain ^ deuant il fuit. Et
chescun ville and pays scient, quel su^me est deste pay parenter eux, and
coment ceo ser^ raise. Nous ^egimus que Moses fuit le primer que number le le
people, car il number les ^sraelites, and pur ceo le primer Tax, Subsidy,
tribute, ou quinzime fuit invent per luy enter les Hebrews, come Polidore
Virgile suppose.

366 Quod ei deforciat.
QVod ei deforciat, est un brief and gist lou tenant en le tail, tenant in
dower, ou tenant a term de vie perde per default in ascun action, donques
cesty que perde auera cest brief verse celuy que recouera, ou verse son heir,
si il intend que il auoit melior droit que il que recouera. Vide le Statute
Westminster. 2. cap. 4.

Quod permittat.
QVod permittat est un brief, and gist lou ho^e est disseisie de so^ common de
pasture, and disseisou^ alien ou deuie seisie, and son heir entra, do^ques si
le dis^eisee deuie son heir a^era cest brief.

Quo iure.
QVo iure est un brief, and gist lou home ad ew common de pasture en auter
several de darrem temps puis le temps de memory donques celuy a que appertient
la several auera cest brief, and il serra charge demonstrer per qu^l title il
claim le common.

Quo minus.
QVo minus est un brief, and gist lou un home ad graun^a a un auter housebote
and heybo^e in son bo^s a prender chescun an, ^ celuy ^ ^esoit le grant fait
tiel wast and d^st^uction que le grauntee ne poit aver son reasonable est^uers
do^^ues le grauntee au^ra lauatdit brief, and est ^n nature de ^^i^fe wast.

Et nota que housebote est appel certain estouers pur amender la meason.

Et heybote est certain estouers pur amender heis and hedges.

370 Quo warranto.
QVo warranto est un brief, and gist lou home usurp dauer ascun fra^chise sur
le Roy, donques le Roy auera cest brief, de fair luy vener deuant ses
Justices, pur monstre per quel title il claim tiel fraunchise.

R.
371 Rationabilibus diuisis.
RAtionabilibus diuisis est un brief, and gist lou sount deux Seigniories en
diverse villes, and un pres le auter, and ascun parcel de un Seigniorie ou de
wast ad este encrocht per petits parcels, and donques celuy Seigniour de quel
parcel de terre, ou le wast ad este encroche auera cest brief enuers le
Seignior que ad issint encroche.

Redisseisin.
REdisseisin, Vide de ceo deuaunt en le title Assise.

Regrator.
REgrator est celuy que ad blees, vittailes, ou auters chooses sufficient pur
son necessary oeps, occupation, ou expenses, and nient obstant ingrosse and
achate en ses maines plus blees, vitailes, ou auters tielx chooses, al intent de
vender ceo arrere al un plus hault and chare price, en Faires, Markets, ou
tielx semblables lieus. De que vide le statute 5. Edw. 6. cap. 14. car il serra
punie come forstaller.

Reioinder.
REioinder, est quant le defendant fait respons al replication del plaintiff.

Et chescun Reioinder doit aver ceux deux properties specialment, cestascauoir,
il doit estre un sufficient respons al replication, and auxy de subsequer and
enforcer le matter del bar.

375 Release.
RElease est le done ou discharge del droit ou action que ascun eit ou claim
enuers auter ou son terre.

Et le release de droit est co^munement fait qua^t un fesoit un fait a un auter
per ceux ou tielx parols, Remisisse, relaxasse, and omnino pro me and haered
meis quietum clamasse A. B. totu^ ius meu^ quod habui, habeo, seu quouismodo in
futuru^ habere potero in vno mesuagio etc. Mes ceux parolx (quouismodo habere
potero) sount voides: Car si le pere soit disseisie, and le fites release per
son fait de release sans garrantie de tout son droit, per ^^s parols,
quouismodo in futuru^ etc. and le pere morust le fits puit loyalme^t enter sur
le possession le disseysor.

Auxy in un release de droit il couient que il a que release serra fait, ad un
franktenement, ou un possession in les terres in faite ou in ley, ou un
reuersion al temps de le release faite, car sil and riens in le terre al te^ps
de release fait, le release ne serra al luy auailable. Vide plus de ceo Lit.
li. 3. c. 8.

Relief.
RElief, est ascun foits un certain sum de money que le heir paiera al
seigniour de que ceux terres sont ten, queux ap^es le decease de son ancestor
sont a luy descend co^eprochein heir, Ascun foits il est payment dun auter
chose, and nemy money. Et pur ceo relief nest certain and se^ble pur touts
tenures, meschescun sundry tenure ad (pur le plus pert) son special relief
certain en luymesm^. Neq^ est ceo destre pay touts foits al un certain age,
mes il vary e^ ceo auxy accorda^t al tenure. Come si le tenant ad terres tenus
per service de chiualer (foreprise graund serieantie) and morust son heir
esteant de plein age, and tient ses terres per le service dun e^tier fee de
chiualer, le seigniour de que ceux terres sont issint tenus, auera del heir C.
s. nomine releuij, and si il tient per meins que un fee de chiualer, il paiera
meins, and si plus donque plus aiant respect touts foits al rate pur chescun
fee de chiualer un cent souz. Et si tient per graund serieanty (que est toutes
foits del Roigne, and est auxy service de Chiualer) donques le relief serra le
value del terre per an, preter touts charges issuant horse de ceo.

Auxy si home tient de le Roy en chief, and des auters Sn^rs, le Roy auera le
guard de touts les tres, and le heir paiera relief a touts les sn^rs a so^
plein age, mes le sn^rs suera al roy per petition, and aueront le rent pur le
temps que lenfant fuit in guard.

Et nota que touts foits quant le relief est due, il doit este pay al un
entier paim^t, and nemy per parts, nie^t obstant q^ le re^t soit deste pay al
several feasts.

377 Remainder.
REmainder, de terre est le terre que remainera apres le particular estate
determine: Come si un grant terre pur term de ans, ou pur vie, le remainder al
I. S. cest adire, que quant le lessee pur vie est mort, que donques le terre
remainera, serra, ou abide, oue, al, on en I. S. Vide Reuersion.

Remitter.
REmitter, est quant un home ad deux titles a ascun terre, and il vient al
terre per le darrain title, uncore il serra adiudge eins per force de son pluis
eisne title, and ceo serra dit a luy un remitter, Come si tenant en le tail
discontinua le tail, and puis disseisi son discontinuce and morust ent seisi,
and les tres discendont a son issue ou cousin inheritable per force del tail,
in ceo case il est in son remitter, cest ascauoir, seisi per force del tail,
and le title del disco^tinuee est ousterment anye^t and defeat, Et le reason
and cause de tiel remitt est pur ceo que tiel heir est tenant del terre, and
nest ascun person tenant verse que il poit suer son brief de Formedone pur
recover lestate tail, car il ne puit aver action verse luy mesme. Auxy si
tenant in le tail infeoffa son fites ou heir apparent in le tail que est
deins age, and puis deuie, ceo est un remitter al heir. Mes sil fuit de plein
age al temps de tiel feoffement, il nest remitter pur ceo que il fuit son folly,
que il esteant de plein age, voile prender tiel feoffement. Auxy si le baron
alien terreque il ad en le droit son feme, and puis reptist estate a luy and a
son feme pur tme de lour vies, ceo est vne remitter al feme, pur ceo que cest
alienation est lact le baron and nemy le feme, car null folly puit este adiudge
en le feme durant le vie le baron. Mes si tiel alienation soit per fine en
court de record, tiel repris^ll apres al baron and feme pur term de lour vies
ne ferta la feme deste en son remitter, pur ceo que en tiel fine le feme serra
examine per le Judge, and tiels examinations e^ fines excludero^t tiels femes a
toutes iours. Auxi q^t enter dasc' ho^e est congeable and il prist estate a luy
quant il e^ de plein age si ne soit per fait indente, ou matter de record, q^
luy estoppera, ceo serra a luy bon remitt.

Rents.
REnts, sont en diverse manners, cest ascauoir, rent service, rent charge, and
rent seck.

Rent service est, lon le tenant in fee simple tient sa terre de son seigniour
per fealty and certain rent, ou per aut service and rent, and do^que si le rent
de le tenant soit arrere, le seignior puit distraine pur la rent, mes pur ceo
il iammais nau^ra actio^ de det.

Auxy si ieo done terres en le tail a un home rendant a moy certain rent, ore
tiel rent est rent service, mes e^ tiel case il couient que le reuersio^ soit
e^ le donor, car si ho^e fait feoffement en fee, ou do^e en tail, le remainder
ouster en fee, sans fait, reseruant a luy un re^t, cest reservation est void,
and ceo est per force del stat. quia emptores terraru^ and donques il tiendra
de le seigniour de que son donor tenoit.

Mes si home per fait indent a cel iour fait tiel done e^ le tail, le remainder
ouster en fee, ou less a term de vie, le remainder ouster, ou un feoffement,
and per mesme lendenture reserua a luy un rent, and que si le rent soit arrere,
que bion lirroit a luy a distreiner, ore tiel rent est rent charge.

Mes en tiel case si ne soit ascun tiel clause de distr^ en le fait donq^s tiel
rent est appel rent secke, and pur tiel rent seck, il ne iammais distreinera,
mes fi fuit un foits seisi, il au^a Assise, and si il iammais ne fuit seisi,
est sans remedy.

Auxy si un grant un rent issant horse de sa terre oue clause de distres, ce^
un rent charge, and si le rent soit arrere, le grauntee poit eslier de
distraine ou suer un brief dannuity, mes il ne poit aver ambideux, car sil port
br^ dannuity, donques le terre est discharge. Et sil distrein and auowa la
prise en court de record, donques le terre est charge, and le person del
grantor discharge.

Auxi si un grant un re^t charge, and le grantee purchase le moity de la tree,
ore tout le re^t est extinct.

Mes e^ rent service si le seigniour purchase parcel del terre donques le rent
serra apporcion.

Mes si un ad un rent charge and son pier purchase parcel del terre, and cel
parcel descend a le fits que ad le rent charge, ore cel rent serra apportion
solonque le value del terre come est dit de rent service, pur ceo que le fits
ne vient a ceo per son act demesn^, mes per descent.

Auxi si ieo faice un lease pur term dans reseruant a moy un certain rent,
cest appel un rent service: and pur ceo il est a mon liberty a distrainer pur
le rent ou aver un actio^ de det, mes si le lease soit detmine, and le re^t
foit arrer^, donques ieo ne puisse distreine, mes serra myse a mon action de
det.

Et nota que si le seigniour soit seisi des services and rent auantdists, and
ils soient aderere, and il distrain, and le tenant rescue le distres il poit
aver assise, ou brief de rescous. Mes il est plus necessary pur luy de aver
assise, que brief de rescous pur tant que per assise il recouera son rent and
ses damages, mer per ce^ brief de Rescous il ne recouera mes les reprises and
les damag*.

Et nota quesi le seigniour ne soit my seisie del rent and service, and ils
sont aderere, and il distrain pur eux, and le tenant repre^t le distress il ne
poit my au^ assise, mes br^ de rescous, and ne couient my al Sn^r de monstre
son droit.

Et nota que si le seigniour ne poit my trouer distress per deux ans, il auera
verse le tenant brief de Cessauit per biennium, vt patet per lestatute de
Westminster 2. cap. 21. Et si tenant deuie en le mean temps and son issue enter
le seigniour auera verse lissue brief dentre sur Cessauit, ou si le tenant
alien, le seigniour auera verse lalienee laua^tdit brief. Mes si le seigniour
ad issue and deuie, and le tenant soit en arrerages de dit rent and services de
le temps le pier del issue and nemy en temps del issue, il ne poit my distrein
pur arrerages en temps son pier, and il nauera ascun auter recovery verse le
tenant ou ascun auter, pur ceo que tiel advantage est done per le ley altenant.
Et nota q^ rent service est c*, a quel appent fealty, mes a rent charge and
rent secke ne appent pass fealty, mes il appe^t a rent service de common
droit.

Et nota si home distr^ pur rent charge, and le distres soit res^u de luy, and
il ne fuit mie seisie adeua^t, il nv ad my recou^y forsq^ per br^ de Rescous,
car le distress primerme^t fait, ne done a luy seisin, forsque sil hap le
rent adeuant, car sil fuit seisi del rent adeua^t and pais le rent soit
aderere, and il distraine, and rescous a luy soit fait* il auera Assise, ou
brief de Rescous.

Et nota, q^ en chescun assise de re^t charge and annual re^t, ou en un br^ de
Annuity, couie^t a celuy q^ port le br^ de mo^stre aua^t un especialty, ou
auterm^t il ne maintenera Assise. Mes en Assise de Mortdancestor ou Formedon en
le discender, and auters br^s (en les queux title est done ou comprise) port de
rent charge, ou de annual re^t, nest my besoign^ de monstre especialty.

Et nota que si home grant rent charge a un auter, and le grantee relessa a
grauntor parcel de le rent, uncore tout le rent nest extinct.

Et nota, que si rent charge soyt grant a deux ioyntment, and lan relessa,
uncore le auter auera le moity del rent. Et auxy si lun purchase le moity de le
terre don't le rent est issuant, lauter auera le moity del rent de son
compaignion. Et si le disseisour charge la terre a un estrange, and le
disseisee port lassise and recover, le charge est defeat. Mes si celuy que ad
droit, charge la terre, and un estrange feign un faux action e^uers luy que and
droit and recover per default, le charge demurra. Et nota que en case un
purpartie sort perenter deux parceners, and pluis terre soit allot a lun que a
lauter and celuy que ad pluis de terre, charge sa tree a lauter, and el hap le
rent, el maintainera assise sans especialty.

Et est Rent secke lou home tient de moy per homage, fealty, and auts services,
rendant a moy un certain rent per an, and ^eo grant cest rent a un auter,
reseruant a moy le service.

Et nota que si rent seck soit grant a un home and a ses heirs, and le rent
soit aderere, and le grauntour deuye, le heir ne purra mye distreyner, ne
recouera les arrerages de temps son pere, sicome est auaundit de rent service.

Et en mesme le manner est adire de rent charge ou annual rent: Mes en touts les
rents auandits le heir purroit aver pur arrerages en son temps demesne tiel
advantage come auoit son pere en sa vie. Vide Statutum 32. H* 8 cap. 37.

Et nota que en rent seck, si home ne soit seisie del rent, and il soit
aderere, il est sans recovery, pur ceo que il fuit son folly demesne adeprimes
quant le rent fuit grant a luy ou reserve, que il ne prist my seisin del rent
sicome un denier ou deux.

Et nota que home ne poit my aver Cessauit per biennium, ou un auter brief
dentre sur Cessauit pur null rent secke aderere per deux ans, mes ils purront
tantsolement pur rent service, vt patet in lestat W. 2. cap. 21.

Et nota q^ en rent secke il couient pur luy que sue pur le rent seck pur
mo^stre fait al tenant, ou auterment le tenant ne ^err^ my charge del rent,
forsque lo^ le rent secke suit rent service adeuaunt, come en cest case:
Seignior, mesne, and tenant, and chescun de eux tient de auter per homage and
fealty, and le tenant del mesne per x. s. de rent, le Seignior paramont
purchase les terres ou *tenements del tenant, tout le seigniorie del mesne,
forsprise le rent, est extinct: Et pur cest cause cest rent est deuenus rent
seck, and la rent service change, car il ne poit distraine pur cest rent, and
en cest case celuy que demaunda le rent ne serra iammes charge de monstre fait.

Auxy en b^ de Morda^cester, Aile, ou Besaile, de rent seek, il ne beforgne de
monstre especialtie* pur ceo que ceux briefes de possession comprehendont un
title deins eux mesmes, cestascauoir, que launcestor fuit seisi de mesme le
rent, and continua son possession, per cause de quel seisin le ley suppose q^
est auxy auerrable per le pais.

Tamen quaere, car ascuns supposant que il couient a fine force a monstre auant
fait, pur ceo q^ rent seck est un chose enconter common droit, auxibie^ come
rent charg.

Mes en Assise de Nouel disseisin, and in brief de Enter sur disseisin port de
re^t seck, il couient de fine force de monstre auant fait, pur ceo que rent
seck est un chose encounter common droit, sino^ en le case suisdit, o^ il fuit
rent service adeuant.

Et Assise de Nouel disseisin, and brief de Enter sur disseisin, ne conteigne
deins eux null title, mes supposont un disseisine deste fait a le plaintiff, and
de entendement del ley, le disseisin ne done null cause de auerrement enconter
common droit, mes de fine force il monstra auant especialtie.

Repleuin.
REpleuin est un brief, and gist quant ascun home distraine un auter pur rent
ou auter chose, donques il auera cest br^e al Vicont pur deliver a luy le
distres, and trouera suertie de pursuer son action, and si il ne pursua, ou si
soit troue and judged enconter luy, donques cestuy que prist le distr^ reauera
le distres, and cest appel return des auers, and il auera en tiel case br^e
que est appel Returno habendo.

Auxy si soyt en ascun franchise ou bailiwike, le party auera un Repleuin del
Vicont direct al bailife de mesme le fra^chise pur eux redeliuer, and il
trouera suertie de pursuer son action al procheine county. Et cest Repleuin
poit estre remove horse del County en le common bank per brief de Recordare.

Vide pluis de Repleuin deuant titulo Distres.

Auxy brief de Homine replegiando gist lou un ho^e est en prison, and nemy per
especial commandem^t le Roy ne de ses Justices, ne pur mort de home, ne pur le
forest le roy, ne pur tiel cause q^ nest repleuisable, donques il auera ce^ br^
direct al vicont que il luy fair esse repleuie: and cest br^e est un Iusticies
and nient returnable, and si le vicont ne ceo face donque issera aut br^ sicut
alias and apres, auter brief sicut pluries, vel causam nobis significes, q^
serra returnable, and si le vicont uncore ne face repleuine, donques issera un
attachem^t verse le vicont direct al coroners dattacher le vicont and de luy
amesn^ deuant les Justices a un certain iour and ouster ceo q^ ils facent
execution del primer brief.

381 Replication.
REplication, est quant le defenda^t en ascu^ actio^ fait respons, and le
plaintiff fait un respons a ceo, ceo est appel le Replication del plaintiff.

Reprises.
REprises, sont deductions, payments, and duities, que va annuelment and sont
pay horse dun ma^nor. Come rent charge, rent secke, pentions, corodies,
annuities, fees del sen^schal o^ baylife, and tiels semblables.

Receite.
REceite est quant ascun action est port verse tenant pur term de vie, ou
tenant a term dans, and ^estuy en la reuersio^ vient eins and pria deste
resceiue pur defend la terre and pur pleder ouesque le dema^dant. Auxy quant il
vient il couient q^ il ^oit touts foits prist a pleder oue le demaundant.

Rescous.
REscous est un brief and gist quant ascun home prent distres and un auter
reprist la distress de luy and ne voyle suffer luy de amesmer le distress oue
luy, donques il fait a luy rescous, and sur ceo il puit aver cest brief and
recouera da^mages. Auxy si un distraine bestes pur damage fesaunt en sa terre
and les enchasa per le haute chymin pur eux enparker and en alant ils entrent
en le meason celuy a que ils sount, and il eux de^ient la and ne voyle suffer
lauter de eux imparker, donques ceo deteyner est rescous.

385 Reservation.
Reservation, est pris diverse voyes, and ad diu^s natures, come ascun foits per
voy de exception de reserve ceo que un home ad deuant en luy. Come si un lease
soit fait pur ans de tree reserua^t les grau^d arbo^s cressants sur ceo. Ore le
lessee ne poit meddle ouesque eux, ne ouesque ascu^ chose que vient per reason
de eux cy long come il demurt en, ou sur les arbors, come mast de Oak,
chestnut, pomes, ou tiels semblables. Mes sil chient del arbors al terre,
donques ils sont en droit les lessees, car le tree est less a luy, and tout sur
ceo nient reserve etc.

Ascun foits un reservation obtains and port horse un aut chose que ne fuit
deuant. Come si un ho^me less ses tres reseruant annualme^t pur ceo xx. li.
etc. Et diverse auter t^els reseruations y sont.

Et nota q^ en ancient temps, lour reseruations fueront sibien (ou pur le plus
part) en victuals, soit ceo, carne, pishe, blees, pane, boyer, ou auterm^t,
come en money, ta^que al darraine, and especialment en le temps del roy Henry
le primer per agreement, le reservation de victuals fuit change en prist money,
come il ad tanque cy continue.

Retraxit.
REtraxit, est le preterperfectence de Retraho, compound de Re and traho, q^
signify Retraho, pur euulser arrere. Et est quant le party plaintiff ou
demaundant vient en proper person en le Court ou son suit est, and dit que il
ne voyt vlterius prosequi in placito illo etc. Ore ceo serra un bar al action
a touts iours.

387 Reeue.
REeue est un officer, mes plus conus en ancient temps que a cest iour. Car
chescun manor ad donques un Reeue, and uncore en diverse Copyhold ma^nours (ou
le veyle custom ascun chose prevail) le nosme and office nest en tout oblie.
Et est en effect ceo que a ore chescun Bailife dun ma^nor practice: nient
obsta^t le nosme de bailif ne fuit do^ques en ure enter nous esteant puis port
eins per les Normans: Mes le nosme de Reeue au^cientment appel Gereue (quel
perticle (Ge) en continuance de te^ps fuit ousterment omise and perde) vient
del Saxon perol geresa, que signify un rul'. Et issint veram^t son rule and
auctority fuit larg deins le co^pas del manor son seign^ and enter ses homes
and tenauntes cybien en chooses de gouemement en peace and guerre, come en le
skillful use and trade de husba^dry. Car sicome il collect les rentes del
seigniour, pay reprises, ou duities issuants horse del manor, appoint les
servants de worker, succide and decoupe arbres pur repayrer les edifices, and
enclosures, ouesque diverse tiels semblables pur le commodity del Seigniour:
Issint auxy il ad authority de gouerner, and garder les tenants en peax, and
sil besoigne, de conducter eux en guerre.

Reuersion.
REuersion de terre, est un certain estate remainant en le lessor ou donour,
apres le particular estate and possession convey al un auter per lease pur vie
ou ans ou done en tail.

Et est appell un Reuersion en respect del possession separate de ceo: issint
que il que ad le un, and le auter a m^ le te^ps, car esteant en un simul, la ne
poit este dit un reuersio^, pur ceo que per le uniting, lun est merge en
lauter, Et issint le reuersion del terre, est le terre mesme quant il eschuest.

389 Riot.
RIot est lou troys (al meins) ou plures font ascun illoyal act come de bater
un home, enter sur le possession dun auter, vel huiusmodi.

390 Robbery.
Robbery, est quaunt un home prent ascu^ chose del person dun auter
feloniousme^t, coment que la chose prise ne soit al value forsque dun denier,
uncore il est felony pur quel le offender suffera mort.

391 Rout.
ROut est quant people assemble eux mesmes, and puis procedu^t, ou chiuauchant,
ou allant aua^t, ou mouent per instigation dun ou plusors que est conduct de
eux: Cest appelle un rout, pur ceo q^ ils mouent, and proceed en routs and
numbers.

Item ou plures assemble eux sur lour quarrels and braules demesne, come si les
inhabitants dun ville voile asse^b eux pur debruser huis, mures, fosses,
pales, ou tiels semblabl^, dauer commen la, ou de bater un auter q^ ad fait al
eux un common displeasure, vel huiusmodi, cest un rout and encounter le ley,
coment q^ ils nont fait, ou mise en execution lour male intent, Vide lestatut
1. Mar. 12.

S.
Sake.
SAke, hoc est placitu^ and emenda de transgr^ hominu^ in cur^ vestra, quia
(Sake) Anglice, est Acheson Gallice, and dicitur pur sick sack, ide^ quod pur
quel acheson, and sack dicitur pro forfait.

Scire facias.
SCire facias est un brief judicial issant horse de record and gist lou un ad
recover det ou damages en Court le Roy, and il ne sue pas dauer execution deins
lan and le iour donques apres lan and iour il auera le dit brief a garner le
party, and si le party ne vein ou sil vein, and ne scauoit rie^s dire
encounter execution donq^s il auera un brief de Fieri facias directes al
vicount luy commaundant que il levy le det ou les damages des biens celuy que
a^ perdue.

Auxy le brief de Fieri facias gist deins lan sans ascun Scire facias suer.

Auxy si le sum de mesme le det ou damages ne poit este leuy des bie^s celuy
q^ auoit perdue, do^ques il poit aver un brief de Elegit direct al vicou^t que
il fac' luy deliver la moitie de sa terre and bie^s except ses boues and
affries de sa carue.

Auxy quant un ad recover det ou damages en action personal (lou le process est
un capias) il poit aver un auter brief de execution appell capias ad
satisfaciendum, pur prender le corpse celuy que est issint condemn que serra
commit al prison illonques a demurrer sans bail ou mainprise tanque il ad
satisfy le party.

Auxi quant un ad judgment de recover ascu^ terres ou tenements il auera un
brief appell Habere facias seisina^ direct al vicount luy commaundant de
deliver a luy seisin de mesme le terre issint recover, Vide plus de ceo en le
title Fieri facias, and en le title Execution.

Scot.
SCot, hoc est quietu^ esse de quadam co^suetudine, sicut de communi tallagio
facto ad opus vie' vel balliuorum eius.

Service de chiualer.
TEner per service de chiualer est a tener per homage fealty, and escuage, and
treit a luy guard marriage and relife. Et nota que service de Chiualer est
service de terre ou de teneme^ts pur arms port en guerre en defense de Royalme
Et doit guard and marriage per la reason q^ null est able ne de power and ne poit
aver conusance darmes porter auant que il soit dage de xxi. ans. Et pur tant
que le Seignior ne perdera ceo, que de droit il doit aver, and que la power de
la royalme de rien ne soit enfeeble: la ley voet per cause de son tender age q^
le Seignior luy auera en sa guard ta^que al pleine age de luy, cestassauoir
xxi. ans.

Vide de ceo pluis en le title Graund seriantie, and en le title Escauge.

396 Showing.
Showing hoc est quietu^ esse cum attachiament in aliqua curia, and coram
quibuscunque in querelis ostensis and non aduocat.

397 Sok.
SOk, hoc est secta de hominibus in Curia vestra, secundum consuetudinem Regni.

398 Sokmans.
SOkmans sont les tena^ts en ancient demesne, queux tient lour terres per
Socage, cest adire per service del carue, and pur ceo ils sont appel Sokmans.
que est tant adire come tenants ou homes queux tie^t per service del carue, ou
homes del carue: Car Sok signify un carue.

Et ceux Sokmans ou tenants en ancient demesne, ont plusors and diverse
liberties done and grant a eux per le ley, sibien ceux tena^ts queux tient dun
common person en ancient demesne, come ceux queux tient del Roigne en ancient
demesne, come nosment deste quite de paier toll en chescun Market, fair,
ville, and City per tout le Realm, sibien pur lour biens and chattels que ils
vend as auters, come pur ceux chooses que ils achat pur lour provision, de
auters. Et sur ceo chescun de eux poit suer dauer letters patents desouth le
seal le Roigne a ses officers, and al Majors, Bailiss, and auters Officers en
le Realm de suffer cux deste quite de toll.

Item deste quite de pontage, murage, and passage, and auxy de taxes and
tallages grant per Parliament, sinon que l^ Roign tax ancient demesne, come
el poit a sa pleasure pur graund cause.

Auxy deste quite de payments a les expenses del Chiualers del shire queux
vient al Parliament.

Et si le Vicont voile distrainer eux, ou ascun de eux destre contributorie pur
lour terre en ancient demesne, donques lun de eux ou touts come le case require
poit suer un brief direct al vicont, luy commandant, que il ne compel eux
destre contributories al expenses de chiualers. Et mesme le brief luy command
auxy, que si il ad distraine eux pur ceo, q^ il redeliuer mesme le distres.

Item que ils ne deueront estre impanel, ne mis en Iuries and Enquests en le
pais horse de lour manor ou seigniory de ancient demesne, pur les terres queux
ils teigne la (sinon que ils ont auters terres al common ley, pur queux ils
deueront estre charge.) Et si le Vicont return eux en pannels, donques ils
poient aver un brief direct a luy de Non pone^dis in assisis and iuratis: Et
sil face al contrary, donques gist un Attachment sur ceo enuers luy.

Et issint est auxy si les Bailifes des franchises q^ux ont retournes des
briefs voile return ascun del tenants queux teigne en ancient demesne en
assise ou iuries.

Et auxy deste exempts del Leetes, and de turns del Vicont, ouesque diverse
auts se^blables liberties.

Socage.
TEner en Socage est a tener dascun Sn^r terres ou tenements rendant a luy un
certain re^t per an pur touts manner des services.

Et nota que tener per Socage nest pas tener per service de chiualer, ne la
appent guard, marriage, ne relief, mes ils double^o^t un foites lour rent apres
le mort lour auncestor, solonque ceo que soloyent paier a lour Seignior,

Et ils ne serront ouster measure greeues, come il appiert en le treatise de
gardes and Reliefes.

Et nota q^ Socage poit estre dit en trois manners, cestascauoir, Socage en
frank tenure, Socage en ancient tenure, and Socage en base tenure.

rent pur touts manner des services, come deuant est dit, and de ceo le prochein
amy auera le guard a que le heritage ne purra my discender, tanque al age le
heir de xiiii. ans, cestascauoir, si le heritage veign per le part le pere,
ceux del part le mere aueront le guard, Et econtra.

Et nota que si guardian en Socage fait wast, il ne serra my empeache de wast:
Mes il rendra account al heir qn^t il vie^dra al plein age de xxi. ans. Et vide
lestatute de Marlebridg capitulo 17. pur cest matter.

Socage de ancient tenure est ceo lou les gents en ancient demesne tenoyent,
que ne soylent auter brief auoir que le brief de Droit close, que serra
deternune secundum consuetudinem manerij, and le Monstrauerunt pur eux
discharger quant lour Seignior eux distraine pur fair auters services que
fair ne duissent.

Et cest brief de Monstraueru^t doit estr^ port e^uerslour seignior, and ceux
tenaunts ^eignent touts per un certain service. Et ils sont franktenants de
ancient demesne.

Socage en base tenure, est lou home tient en ancient demesne, q^ ne puitauer
le Monstrauerunt, and pur ceo il est appel le base Tenure.

Summons ad warrantizandum etc.
SVmmons ad warrantizandum and sequatur sub suo periculo, vide de ceux a^^^s en
le title voucher.

Spoliation.
SPoliation, est un suite pur le fruits dun esglis, ou pur lesglis mesme, and
est deste sue en le spiritual Court, and nemy en les temporal Courts. Et
cest suite gist pur un encumbent enuers un auter encumbe^t, ou ils ambideux
claim per un patron, and lou le droit del patronage ne vient in question ou
debate. Come si un person soit cree un Euesque and ad dispensation de tener son
rectorie, and puis le patron present auter encumbent que est institute and
induct: Ore leuesque poet aver enuers cestuy encumbent vne* Spoliation en le
spiritual Court, pur ceo q^ ils ambideux claim per un patron, and le droit del
patronage ne vient en debate, and pur ceo que lauter encumbent vyent al
possession del benefice per le course del ley spiritual, cest ascauoir, per
institution and induction, issint que il ad color de aver ceo, and deste
person per le espirituall ley. Car auterment sil ne soit institute and induct
etc. Spoliation ne gist enuers luy, mes un brief de Trespass, ou un assise de
nouel disseisin etc.

Issint est auxy lon un person que ad plurality, accept auter benefice, per
reason de que le patron present un auter clerk, q^ est institute and induct,
ore lun de eux poit aver Spoliation enuers le auter, and donques viendra en
debate si il ad un sufficient plurality ou non. Et issint est de deprivation
etc.

Mesme le ley est, lou un did al patron, que son clerk est mort sur que il
present un auter, La le primer incumbent que fuit surmise de estre mort poit
aver un Spoliation enuers lauter. Et issint en diverse auters semblables cases
de que veyes Fitzherbert Natura breuium.

Stallage.
STallage, hoc est quietu^ esse de quadam consuetudine exact* pro pl^tea capta
vel assignata in nu^dinis and mercatis.

403 Suit covenant.
SVit covenant, est quant vostre ancestors ont covenant oue mes ancestors de
suer a le court mes ancestors.

404 Suit custom.
SVit custom, est quant ieo and mes ancestors ont estre seisies de vestre
suite demesne and vostre ancestors de temps etc.

405 Suit real.
SVit real, est quaunt homes vient al turn de vicont ou leete, a q^ courts
touts homes serra compel de vener a conuster les leyes, issint que ils ne
serra ignorant de les chooses queux serra monstres la coment ils serra gouernes.
Et est appel real suit per cause de lour allegiance, and ceo appiert per common
experience quant un est iure, son oath est que il serra loyal and foyal home al
Roigne. Et ceo suit ne^ pur le terre que il tient deins le county, mes per
reason de son person, and pur son rest la, and doyt estre fait deux foits per
an, pur default de que, il serra amercy and non distreigne.

Suit service.
SVit service, est de suer al turn del viscount ou Leete, ou al Court del sn^r
de trois semaines en trois semaines per lentier an: Et pur default de ceo, un
ho^e serra distreigne and non amercy. Et cest suit service est per reason del
tenure del terres dun home.

Statute merchant.
TEner per Statute merchant, est lou hom^ conust a paier certain denyers a un
auter a certain iour deuant le Maire, bailie, ou aut gardeine dascu^ ville que
ad poyar de fair^ execution de mesme lestatute, and si le obligor ne paya le
dett a le iour asses and rien de ses biens, terres on tenements ne purront
estr^ troues deins la guard le Mayor ou gardein auantdit, mes en auters lyeus
dehors, donque le recognisee suer^ le recognisance and obligation oue un
certification al Chauncery de south le seal le Roy, and il au^a horse de la
Chauncery un Capias al Vicount de quel county il est de luy apprender and
metter en prison sil ne soit clerk, tanque il ad fait gree de la debt. Et un
quarter de lan apres ceo que il serra pris, il auera sa terre liver a luy mesme
pur fair gree a le party de debt. Et il puit vender tanque il est enprison,
and sa vendr^ serra bon and loyal. Et sil ne face gree deyns le quarter dun an,
ou il soit return que il nest troue, and sil ne soyt Clerk, adonques le
reconisee puit aver brief de la Chauncerie que est appell Extendi facias,
direct al toutes vicounts lou il ad terres dextender ses terres and biens, and
ses byens a luy deliver, and luy seiser en ses terres, pur les tener a luy and
a ses heirs and a ses assigns tanque le debt soyt leuye ou pay, and per cel
temps il est tenant per statute merchant. Et nota que en lestatute merchant,
le recognisee auera execution de touts les terres que le recognisor auoit iour
de la recognisance fait, and vnques puis per force de mesme lestatute.

Et nota que quant ascu^ wast ou destruction est fait per le recognisee, se^
executors, ou per celuy que ad son estate, le recognisor and ses executors
aueront mesme la ley come est suisdit de le tenant per Elegit.

Et nota si tenant per lestatute Merchant tient ouster son term cestuy que ad
droit poit suer enuers luy Venire facias ad computandum, ou entrer tantost
sicome sur le testant per Elegit. Vide statute 11. E. 1. and de Acton burnel,
and 13. E. 1. de Mercatoribus.

T.
Fee Tail.
TEner en le tail, est lou home tient certain terres ou tenem^ts a luy and a
ses heirs de son corpse engendres. Et nota que si la terre soit done a un home
and a ses heirs males, and il ad issue male, il ad fee simple, and ceo fuit
adiudge en le Parliament nostre Seigniour le roy. Mes lou terres ou tenements
sont dones a un home and a ses heirs males de son corpse engendres, il ad fee
tail, and lissu female ne serra my inherit, vt patet Anno 14. E. 3. en un
assise 1^. E. 3. 45.

Fee tail, est lou terre est done a un home and a ses heirs de son corpse
engendres, and il est dit tenant en le tail general, mes ^i terre soit done
al baron and feme and al heirs de lour deux corpse engendres, or^ le baron and
la fe^e sont tenants en le tail especial. Et si un de eux deuy cest^ que
survive est tenant en le tail apres possibility dissue extinct and ^il face
wast il ne serra empeche de cel wast. Vide Littleton.

Mes si le roy don terres a un home and a ses heirs males, and le donee deuie
sans issue male, donques le cousin collateral del donee inheritera, mes le roy
reentra, and ^ssint fuit adiudge en leschequer chamber Anno 18. H. 8. en un
information fait verse ^heire de Sir T. Louel Chiu^ler.

Tail apres possibility.
TEner en le tail apres possibility dissue extinct, est lou terre est do^^ a
un home and sa feme and a les heirs de lour deux corpse engendres, lun de eux
survive lauter sans issue enter eux issuant, il tiendra sa terre a term de sa
vie demesne, come tenant in le tail ap^s possibility dissue extinct. Et non
obstant q^ il fait wast, il ne serra iammays empeche de cel wast. Et nota sil
alien, celuy en la reuersion ne auera brief dentre in consimili casu. Mes il
poit entrer, and son enter est congeable, per R. Th. chief Justice 28. E. 3.
96. and 45. E. 3. 25.

410 Tax and Tallage.
Tax and Tallage, sont paiments, come dismes, qui^zimes, subsidies ou tiels
^emb^ables grant al roigne per Parliament.

Les tenants en ancient demesne sont quits de ceux taxes, and tallages
g^auntes per Parliament, sinon que le Roigne tax ancient demesne, come el
poet quant a luy pleast pur graund cause. Veies ancient demesne.

411 Tenure en capite.
TEnure en capite, est lou ascun tient del Roigne come de ^a parson estea^t
roigne, and de sa Corone, come dun Seigniorie per luy mesme en gross, and en
chief desuis touts auters Seigniories, Et nemy lou ils tient de luy come de
ascun manor, honor, ou Castle, sinon certain ancient honors, vt patet in
Scaccario.

412 Term dans.
TEner a term da^s ^est forsque cha^^ell en effect, car null actio^ est
maintenabl*enuers le termor quant a recouerer le frankten^t, car null
franktenem^t est a luy. Lease a term dans est chattel real. Et lauter chattel
est personal, and touts bn^s mouables sont chatels personals.

Testament.
TEstament, est issint define ou expound en Mounsier Plowdens Commentaries:
Testamentum est testatio mentis, and est co^pou^d de ceux deux parolx, Testio
and mentis, q^ issint signify, very il est, q^ un testament est testatio
mentis, mes q^ il est un co^pound parol, Aulus Gellius en son vi. liver ca. 12.
deny ceo al un excellent Lawier un Seruius Sulpitius, and dit q^ il est un
simple parol, come sont ce^^ Calciamentum, Paludamentu^, Pauiamentum, and
diverse tielx semblables.

Et mult meines est agreamentum, un co^pound pa^oll de aggregatio and mentium,
come est dit en le title de agreement, car il ny ad null tiel latin parol simple
ou compound, mes il pe it nie^t obst serve bn^ pur un ley latin parol.

Et pur ceo il poit issint este meliour define. Testamentum est vltimae
voluntatis iusta sententia de to quod quis post morte^ suam fieri vult etc.

Et de Testaments il y ad deux sorts, cestascauoir un Testament en escript, and
un Testam^t per parolx, q^ est appel un Nuncupatiue Testament.

Le primer est touts forts en escript come est dit.

Le auter est quant un home esteant en malady, and pur pauor ne mort ou fault
de memory, ou de parler, voit vener cy suddeinment and hastiuement sur luy,
que il serra prevent sil demurt le scripture de son Testament, request ses
vicines and amies de porter tesmoign^ de son darreine volunt, and donques
declare ceo presentment per parolx deuant eux, que apres son decease est prove
per tesmoignes, and mis en escript per le Ordinary, and donques il est en cy
bone force (sinon pur terres) sicome il ad al primer en le vie del testator
este mis en escript.

Them.
THem, hoc est quod habeatis totam generationem villanorum vestrorum cum eorum
sectis and cattallis vbicu^que in Anglia fuerint inuenta, excepto qd' si
aliquis natiu^ quiet per vnu^ annu^ and die^ in aliqua villa priuilegia^a
manserit, ita qd' in eorum co^muniam vel gildam, tanqua^ vnus illaru^ repertus
fuerit, eo ipso a villenagio liberatus est.

Theftbote.
THeftbote, est quant home prist ascun biens dun laron de luy favorer and
mainteiner: Et nemy quant home prist ses biens demesne, q^ fueront emblees de
luy etc.

Le punishment en ancient temps de Thefebote, suit de vie and de member: Mes a
ore M. Stamford dit, que il est punish per rau^some and emprisonme^t. Sed
quaere car ieo pense ceo este felony.

416 Title.
TItle, est lou loial cause est veigne a un home de aver chose que auter ad,
and il and ascun action pur ceo, come title de Mortmaine, ou de entry pur
condition enfreint.

417 Title de Enter.
TItle de Enter, est quant un seisie de terre en fee fait feoffement de ceo sur
condition, and le condition est enfreint: Ore apres le condition issint
enfreint, le feoffour ad title de enter en le tree, and issint poit quaunt a luy
pleist, and per son entry le frank teneme^t serra dit en luy maintenant.

Et est appel Title de Enter, pur ceo que il ne poit aver brief de Droit
enuers son feoffee sur condition, car son droit fuit horse de luy per le
feoffement, le quel ne poit este reduce sans ^ntrie, and le enter doit este pur
le enfreinder de le co^ditio^.

Toll, ou Tolne.
Toll ou Tolne, est plus properment un payment use en Cities, villes, markets,
and fayres, pur biens and cattle port la destre achate ou vende. Et est toutes
dits destre pay per le achator, and nemy per le vendour, sinon que soit ascun
Custom al contrary.

Il y ad diverse auters Tolles, come Turn toll, and ceo est lou toll est pay
pur auers, queux for drives deste vendus, com^t que ils ne sont vendus.

Item toll trauers, ceo est lou un claim dauer un ob. ou tiel Temblable toll
de chescun beast que est drive sur son terre.

Through toll, est lou un ville prescribe de aver toll pur chescun beast q^
ale through lour ville, un certain, ou pur chescun vin^ ou cent, un certain:
que ne appiert deste cy unreasonable prescription ou custom, come ascuns ont
suppose, nient obsta^t il soit per le hault chimin del roigne (come ils ceo
appel) lou chescun poit loialment pass, sil y ad quid pro quo: Come si la soit
un pont ou tiel semblable commodity, puruey al costs and charges del ville,
pur le ease de trauaylers que chase mesme voy, per que lour journey est ou
abridge ou fait le meliour pur que donques ne poit toll este demand loialment
and oue bone reason de eux etc*

Mes diverse Citizens and Burgesses sont quite de pay toll per le grant del
Roigne, ou sa ancestors, ou claim ceo per prescription ou custom. Issint
auxy espiritual persons and religious homes (come ils fueront appels) fueront
quite de toll pur lour biens and marchandises achate and vendus etc. Mes a ore
le Statute del Roy H. 8. anno 21. cap. 13. voit q^ ils ne marchandiser^.

Item tenants en ancient demesne doyent este quite per tout le Realm de paier
toll, come appiert deuaunt en le title Sokemans. Et en touts ceux cases ou
toll est deste demand, ou il ne doit este pay de eux q^ doyent aler, achate,
and ve^de, quite de toll, la le party ou parties grieve poyent aver un
brief, De essendi quietu^ de tolonio, direct a luy, ou ceux que issint
demand toll contra al grant le Roigne ou sa progenitors, ou contra al
custom ou prescription.

Treason.
Treason est en deux manners, cest ascauoir* haute treason, and petit treason,
come est ordeine per lestatutes, and ideo vide statuta and Stamford lib. 1.
cap. 2.

Treasure troue.
TReasure troue, est qua^t ascun money, or, argent, plate ou bolion, est troue
en ascun lieu, and null conust a que le property est, donques le property de
ceo appertient al Roye, and ceo est dyt treasure troue. Mes si ascun mineral
de metal soyt troue en ascu^ terre, ceo toutes foites pertient al Seigniour
del soil, forsque q^ il soit mineral de or ou de arge^t, queux serront touts
foits al Roy, en quecu^que soil que ils sont troues.

421 Turn del vicont.
Turn del vicont, est un Court de record en touts chooses que pertain al
turn. Et est le leete le Roigne per tout le County, and le viscount est
Judge. Et quecunque ad un leete ad mesme le authority deins le precinct,
sicome le vicont ad deins le turn.

V.
422 View.
VIew, est quaunt ascun action real est port and le tenant ne seauoit bien
quel terre il est que le demau^dant demand, do^que le ten^t priera la view,
cest ascauoir, que il puit veyer le terre q^ il claima. Mes si le tenant ad ew
le view en un brief, and puis le brief est abatus per misnomer de ville, ou
per iointenure, and puis le demandant port un tiel br^e verse le tenant, donque
le tenant nauera le view en le second brief.

Vilaica remouenda.
VIlaica remouenda, est un brief, and gist lou debate est perenter deux
persons ou prouisours dun Esglise, and lun enter en lesglise, oue graund power
de les ho^es and tient lauter dehors oue force and arms, donq^ celuy que est
ten dehors, auera le dit brief directal vicount que il remoua ce^ power q^ est
deins leglise and serra command al vicont que sil troue ascuns homes luy
resistants, que le vicont prender^ oues^ luy la poyar de son county si
besoigne soit and ferra attach per lour corpse touts ceux luy resistantes and
les mittera en prison issint q^ il eyt lour corpse deua^t le R. a certain iour
de respo^der del contempt. Et cest brief est returnable and ne serra grant
deua^t q^ leuesque del lieu lou tiel esglise est, eyt certify en le Chauncerie
tiel resistance and force.

424. Villenage.
TEnure en pure villenage, est a fair tout ceo que le seigniour luy voit
commander.

La diffinition de villenage est villeine de sank, and de tenure. Et il est de
que son seignior prent redemption de sa file marrier, ou soy mesme enfranchise,
and le seigniour puit luy ouste de ses terres ou tenements a sa volunt, and
auxy de toutes ses biens and chateux.

Et note que Sokeman nest pas pure villeine, ne villein doit pas guard marriage
ne relief, ne fair auter services reals.

Et nota que tenure en Villenage ne ferra null frank home villeine, sil ne soit
continue puis le temps de non memory, ne villeine terre ne ferra frank home
villeine, ne frank terre ne ferra villeine frank, s(...)on que le tenant
soit continue frankment puis le temps de non memory.

Mes villein ferra frank terre villein per seisin ou per claim de son
seigniour. Et nota que si villein purchase certain tree and prent feme and
alien and deuie deuaunt le claim, ou seisin de son seignior, la feme serra
endowe.

Et nota que en cest case que le o^n^r port Praecipe quod reddat enuers
lalienee son villein le q^l vouche a garrantie le issue la villein que est
villein a la seignior, il auera le voucher. Et per protestation le Sn^r poit
sauer (que non obstant que il plede oue son villeine) uncore son villeine ne
serra mie enfranchise. Et nota que bastard ne serra iammais adiudge villeine
sinon per conusance en Court de record. Et nota que si dett soit due per un
seignior a un home and il face deux homes ses executors, les queux sont
villeines al dit Seignior and deuie les villeins aueront Action de debt enuers
leur seigniour, Et nient obstant que il pled ouesque eux, and il face
protestation, ils ne serrontpurtant enfranchise, pur ceo que ils sont a recover
le debt auantdist al use dun auter person, cestassanoir, al use lour Testator
and nient a lour use demesne.

Et si le tenant en dower eyt un villeine, le quel purchase certain terre* en
fee and puis le tenant en dower enter, el auera la terre a luy and a ses heirs
a touts iours, and mesme le ley est de tenant a term dans de un villeine.

Et nota que le seignior poit robber, naufrer and chastiser son villeine a
savolunt, salve que il ne puit luy maime, car donques il auera appeal de maihim
enuers luy.

Et nota que villain poit aver trois actions ^^uers sa seigniour, cest
ascauoir, un appeal de mort son auncestour, un appeal de rape fait a sa feme,
and un appeal de maihim. Et nota si deux parceners port brief de nieftie, and
lun de eux soit nonsuite, le nonsuite de luy serra adiudge la nonsuite de
ambideux issint q^ si le nonsuit soit apres appearance, ils serront save de
cest actio^ a touts tours, car la ley est tiel en fauorem libertatis.

Et nota si deux ont un villein in common, and lun de eux fait a luy un
manumission, il ne serra my enfra^c enuers ambideux.

Et nota que en br^e de Natiuo habe^do il couie^t que le Sn^r monstr^ coment
aueigna privy de sanke a celuy villeine de que il est Seigniour etc. Et sil ne
null de ses ancestors ne soit seisi de null de son sanke, il ne gainer per son
action si le villeine and pas conus en court de Record luy estr son villeine.

Et nota que en brief de niefe ne purront estr^ mis plusours niefes que deux
tant soleme^t, and hoc introductum fuit prius in odium seruitutis. Mes en brief
de liberate probanda, purront estre mise ta^ts Niefs come le plaintiff voudra.

Et nota que si le niefe de seignior soit fue e^ ancient demesne de roy ou
auter vill priuilegie, deins lan and iour le seigniour poit luy seiser, and sil
demurt en la dit ville ou lieu franchise per un an and un iour sans le seisin
de sou seigniour il and my power de luy seiser apres sil ne va dehors le
suisdit franchise.

Et ascuns sont villeins per title de Prescription, que tout lour sanke out
este villeins regardants a le manner dun Seigniour de te^ps de non memory,

Et ascun sont fait villeins per lour confession en un court de record. Auxy le
Sn^r poit fair un manumission a son villein and luy infra^ch^a touts iours.

Auxy si le villeine port ascun actio^ verse son seigniour, si ne soit appel de
maihim, and le seignior a ceo sans protestation fait respons, donqs per ceo l^
villein est franches.

Auxy si un villeine purchase terre, and ad biens and vend les terres and bie^s
deuant ascun enter ou seisin fait per le Seignior, la vend est bon, mes le roy
que est seignior de villein e^ tiel case poit ent and seiser le terre ap^es
tiel vendr fait, quia nullum tempus occurrit regi.

Viscont.
VIscont, est ou le nosm^ de un degree ou state de honor soubs un Cont and
paramont un Baron ou le nosme de un Magistrate and officer d^l grand aucthority
q^ nous communem^t appellomus (Shirif) ou de parler plus verayment (Shire reave)
and fuit al primes appel (Shire gereue) ce^ a di^e custos co^it^tus, ou le reave
ou ruler del county, car (Gereue) esteant derive de Saxon parol (Gerecian) pur
rule, fuit al primes appel (Gerecfa) and donques (Gerefa) que betoken un ruler.
Et de ceo vient (Portreue ou Portgreue) un nosme q^ en viel temps fuit done al
chief officer dun ville, and signify le governor del ville pur ceo q^ (Port)
v^niens de le latin parol ports, signify un port ville, and and (Gereue)
estea^t derive come est auantdit signify un ruler, issint que Portgereue, ou
come nous a ^^^ briefement parle ceo (Portreue) est le gouernet del ville.

Et issint fuit le chief Officer ou Governor del City de Londres long temps
past (deuant que ils ad le nosm^ del Mayor ou Bailifes) appel, come il appiert
en diverse viculx Monuments: Mes principalm^t en le Saxo^ Charter de Guilliam
Bastard le Conqueror, que issint commence.

William Cing greit William Bisceop, and Godfrey Ges port Gerefan, and dalle
tha Burwarren the on London beon etc.

Issint ils de Garmanie (de que nous and nostre language ensemble primerment
vient) appel enter eux un governor Burgreeue, un auter Margreeue, and un auter
Landsgreue, oue tielx semblables etc.

Cest tant est dit tantsolement pur monstre le droit Etymon and antiquity del
parol (Shirife) a quel officer nostr commo^ley ad toutes foits accordant done
graund confidence and authority, come destre un special p^seruer del peace.
Et pur ceo touts obligatio^s q^ il prist a mesme le purpose, sont come
Recognisances e^ ley.

Il auxi est un Judge de record quant il tient les Lee^s on Turns, les q^ux
sont Courts de record.

Item il ad le execution and return des briefs, and empannelling des Iuries,
and tiels semblables, etc.

Volunt.
VOlunt est quant le tenant tient a la volunt del lessor ou del seignior and
ceo est en deux manners.

Un est quant ieo face lease a un home de terres, a tener a ma volunt, donques
ieo p^^s luy ouster a mon pleasure: Mes si il emblee le terre, and ieo luy
ousta, donques il auera son emblee^^* and egresse and regresse i^sq, ils sont
mature pur cux scier and carrier horse del terre.

Et^^iel tenant a volunt nest pas tenus de sustayner and repairer le meason
sicome tenant a term de ans est tenus: Mes si il fait voluntary wast, le
lessour auera verse luy un action de Trespass.

Auxi est auter tenant a volunt del Seignior per copy de court Roll solonque
le custom del manor: Et tiel tenant poit surre^der le tree e^ le mains le
Seignior per le custom al use un auter pur term de vie ou e^ fee simple, ou
fee tail, and donques il p^ndra le terre del Sn^r ou so^ Seneschall per copy,
and ^erra fine al Seigniour: Mes sile Seigniour ousta tiel tenant, il and
remedy mes de suer per petition, and si tiel tenant voile emplede un auter des
terres etc. il couient enter un plaint en le court, and cou^tera en le nature
de quel brief il voit, sicoe le case gist.

Voucher.
VOucher, est quant un Praecipe quod reddat de teire est port verse un home, and
un auter doit garrant le terre al tenant, donques le tenant luy vouchera a
gair ^ti^, and sur ceo il auera un brief appel Summoneas ad warrantizandum:
let si le vicon^ return que il and ri^ns per que il poit este summon, donques
issera brief appel Sequatur sub suo periculo, and quant il vient il pl^d^r^
onesque le demaundaunt, and si il vient and ne poit bar le demaundaunt,
donques le demaundant recouera, la terre verse le tenant, and le tenant
recouera tant de terre en value verse le vouchee, and sur ceo il auera un brief
appel Capias ad valentiam verse le vouchee.

Vide pluis de Voucher deuant titulo Garrantie.

428 Uses.
Uses de terre ad son co^mencement apres q^ le custom de property co^mence
ent homes: Come ou un esteant seisi de ties en fee simple, fait un feoffement
al un auter sans ascun consideration, mes solement meaning que le auter serroit
seisie al son use, and que il mesme voile prender le commodity and profits de
les terres, and que le feoffee doit aver le possession and franktenement de ceo
al mesme le use etc.

Ore apres ceo sur bone considerations, and pur auoider diverse mischiefs and
inconveniences, fuit le Statute de An. 27. H. 8. ca. 10. puruiew, q^l unit le
use and possession ensemble, issint que il que ad le use de terre, il mesme ad
le possession de ceo, accordant al use que il auoyt en c^eo per virtue de cest
estatute.

Usury.
Usury, est un gain de ascun chose ouster le principal, ou ceo que fuit lent,
exact solem^t en consideration de le loan, soit il de corn, viande, apparel,
wares, ou tielx se^blables, come de money.

Et icy mult poit estre dit, and diverse cales poyent estre mis concemants
Usury, le ql de purpose ieo omit, solement ieo pua, q^ ceux q^ account eux
mesmes religious and bone Christians, ne voylent deceive eux mesm^s per color
de le statute de Usury, pur ceo q^ il dit, que il ne seria loyal pur ascun de
prender ouster x. h. en le C. li. pur un an etc. per que ils collect (mes
fauxement) q^ils poyent per ceo prender x. la. pur le loan dun C. li. oue un
bon conscience, pu^ ceo q le statute solonque un manner dispense oue ceo (p^^
ceo que il ne punish u^lx prendors) q^el chose il n^ po^t fair oue les leyes
and ordinances de d^^u car Di^u voile aver ses decrees observe inviolable, que
dit, lend expectans pur null chose pur ceo etc. Per queux parolx est exclude,
le p^sell de x. li. v. li. ou de un denyer ouster le principal. Mes plus
pensant ^^els que cest statute fuit fait sur t^el cause, q^ moua Moses de
doner un bill de divorce 2 les Israelites, come nosment, pur auoyder un
greinder mischief, and pur le du^itie de lour ceurs.

430 Vtlary.
VTlarie* est quant exigent issist verse ascun home and proclamation fait in v.
counties, donques a le v. county si le defendant nappeare, le coroner don^ra
iudgem^t que il ^erra horse de protection de Roy, and horse del eyde le ley.

Et per tiel vtlarie in action personels ^e party vtlage forfetera touts ses
b^^ns and chateux al Roy.

Et per vtlarie in felony il forfeitera auxy byen touts ses terres and tenem^ts
que il ad in fee simple, ou pur term de sa vie, come ses biens and chateux.

Auxy mesque un home soit vtlage, uncore si a^cu^ discontinuance ou error s^it
in la suite del process, le party de ceo auera la advantage and pur ^iel cause
lutlagary ^erra reuerse and adnul.

Auxy si le party defendant so^t ouster la mere al temps de vtlaga^y
pronounce, ceo est bon cause de reuer^al del vtlarie.

Auxy si un exigent soit agard verse un home in un county lou ^l ne demurra
pas, uncore un exigent oue proclamation issera al county lou il demurre ou
auterment sil soit sur ceo vtl^ge vtlagarie puit este reuerse come appiert per
lestatute fait anno 6. and 4. Henric^ octaui, cap. 4*

Auxy si un soit vtlage in action personal al suite dun auter and puis il
purchase son charter de pardon de Roy, tiel charter ne serra iammes allow,
tanque il ad sue un brief de Scire facias de garn^ le party pleintife, and si
il appear, donques le defendant respondera a luy and luy barrer^ de sa actio^,
ou auterment de fair agreement ouesque luy.

431 Vtrum.
VTrum, est un brief and gist quant le droit dascun esglise est alien and
tenus in lay fee, ou translate in possession dauter esglise, and le alienour
deu^e, donques son successor auera le dit brief, per q^ un enquest serra
charge de trier vtrum sit libera el^^mosina ecclesiae vel la^cum feodum. Et
nota que null que ad covent ou common seal, puit mainte^^er cest brief, mes
brief Dentre sin^ assensu capituli de alienation fait per ^on predecess^ur.

W.
Waife.
WAife, est quant un laron ad felomousme^t emblee biens, and esteant ne^reme^t
pursue oue hue and cry, ou auterment surcharge oue le burden ou trouble des
biens, pur son ease and plus speedy tra^aile sauns hue and cry fua, and waiua
les byens o^ ascun part de eux a^^ere luy etc. donques le officer del Ro^gne,
ou le Reeue ou Baylife al Seigniour del manor (deins que jurisdiction ou
circuit ils fuerount way^e) que per prescription, ou grant del Roig^e ad le
fra^^chi^e de waife, poyent seiser les biens i^^^^t wayfe al v^e de lour
Seigniour, q^ poet retain eux come ses proper byens sinon que le owner vient
ouesque fresh ^uite apres le felon* and sue un appell, o^ done en evidence
enuers luy al son arraignme^t sur lendictment, and il attaint de ^^o etc. En
queux cases le primer owner auera restitution de ses biens issint emblee and
wayfe.

Mes nient obsta^t come ad este dit, waife est properme^t de biens emblees,
uncore waife poit este auxy de biens nient embles. Come si un ho^e so^t pursue
ouesque hue and cry, come un felon, and il fue and relinquish ses biens
demesne etc. ils serra prise come biens waife, and forfait com^ sils ad este
emblees.

433 Waiue.
WAiue, est un feme que est vtlage, and est appeal waiue, quasi relicta a lege,
and non vtlage come home est, car femes ne sont iures en leetes al Roigne, ne
al ley come homes sont, queux pur ceo sont de^ns le ley ou femes ne sont, and
pur cest cause ils ne poyent este dit vtl' ent^nt que ils ne vnques fueront
deins ceo. M^s un home est dit vtlage, pur ceo que il fuit un foits ^ure al
ley, and a ore* pur contempt il est mys horse del ley, and dictus vtlagatus
quasi extra legem positus.

Warwit.
WArwit (ou wardwit come ascuns copies ad ceo) hoe est qu^etum esse de d^nari^s
dandis pro wardis faciendis.

Wast.
WAst est lou tenant a term dans, tenant a term de vie, ou renaunt pur term
dauter vie, tenant en dower, ou tenant per la courtesy, ou gardein en chiualry
fait wast ou destruction sur la terre. s. sil debrusa meason, ou coupe merisme,
ou suffer le meas voluntarily pur esch^er, ou foder la terre, donq^ cesty en le
reuersion auera un brief and recouer^ le lieu ou le wast fuit fait and treble
dam^, mes si home coup^ merisme sans license, and ouesque ceo repair les
ancient measons, vnc' ceo nest pas wast. Mes sil ouesque le merisme ^d^fia un
nouel meason donques le couper de tiel merisme est wast. Auxi le couper de
subboys ou willowes q^ nest pas merisme, ne ser^a dit wast, sino^ que ils
cressount en le view del site del meason.

436 Wrecke.
WRecke ou varech come les Normans de que il vient appello^t ceo, est quant un
^^efe est perish sur la mere, and null home escape viue horse de niefe and le
niefe ou part del niefe issint perish ou les biens en la niefe vient al terre
dascun seigniour, le seigniour les auera come un wrecke de mere, mes si un home
ou un chyen ou chate escape viue, issint q^ la party a que les bie^s sont
veign^ de^ns lan and iour, and prove les biens destr^ ses, il auera eux arr^,
per provision del statute de West. le primer ca 4. fait en les iours del Roy
Ed. 1. que en ceo followed le decree de H. 1. deuant que iours, si un niefe ad
estre mise sur le shore, torn oue tempest, and ^emy repaier per eux que
escapont en vie deins un certain temps, que donques ceo fuit prise come wrecke.

Withernam.
WItherna^, Vide de ceo deuant, titulo Distress.

Warren.
WArren est un lieu privilege per prescription ou grant del Roign^ pur le
preservation del liuerets, comes, perdices and fesants, ou ascun de eux.

FINIS.

