THE COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN from PARIS, the 20. of May 1610.

Declaring the manner of the execution of FRANCIS RAVAILLART, that murdered the
French King. With what he was known to confess at his death. And other the
circumstances and dependencies thereupon.

Together with two Edicts; One of the Parliament alone; The other of the new
King in Parliament, declaring and confirming the Queen mother Regent of France.

Imprinted at BRITAIN BVRSE. And are there to be sold.

ANNO 1610.

THE COPY OF a Letter written from PARIS the 20. of May 1610. Declaring the
manner of the Execution of Francis Rauaillart that murdered the French King, etc.
SIR,
THough Tragedies be sorrowful representations, yet the Spectators having
beheld and seen the former acts, they are likewise desirous to know the
catastrophe; So fares it with you, (as I conjecture,) who having understood by
my former Letters, what has hitherto passed about this direful act, you will
likewise covet to hear the end of this execrable actor, with other the
consequencies; which here you have.

Two days since, being the 18. of this month, I was an eye witness of the
execution of this accursed creature, which was in this manner as I shall here
truly tell you. As soon as he was brought upon the Scaffold in the ordinary
place appointed, He began first with crossing himself, and the people, (as in
deed he had truly done in an other sense: For never came there a heavier
cross nor loss to any Nation, then this untimely death of this King to this
kingdom;) Then fell he down upon his knees, making his Confession to the
Priest. What he said in particular could not be heard, but the Priest thereupon
there openly gave him Absolution.

Then was he laid naked upon the Stage, and pinched in diverse places with hot
Pincers, After which they burned his hand with the knife therein, wherewith he
killed the King; Then powered they hot lead into the wounds made with the
Pincers, And lastly drew him in pieces with horses. His torments lasted two
hours, and at every action with horrible cries and struggling, he testified
the sense he had of his pains; Albeit all the while his torments lasted, he
ceased not speakeing, and in the intermission thereof was demanded diverse
questions by his Confessor, and by the Officers of Justice, but as it is said,
he persisted obstinately without confessing any material thing. The people
did exceedingly rejoice to see him thus tormented, And much ado there was
through their rage, to bring him alive to the execution, and after his death
they satisfied themselves what they could by dragging and trailing his members
in great fury about the town.

This was the manner of his death, and all that is made known of his
confession: but there is generally conceived a secret jealousy against the
Jesuits: And whatsoever of his confession is concealed, may be presumed to be
fear to discover that of the Church of Rome, which they are ashamed to lay
open. He suffered the torment only twice before his death, and had bin
executed four or five days sooner, if the Queen by express commandment had
not hindered it.

The causes of his speedy execution that are alleged by the Court of
Parliament, are these; That by their form of proceeding, they never torment
any man before he be condemned, and keep him not alive above a day after. That
they feared he might die of his torments, and so they to be bereaved of his
confession at his death, and the people of so desired a spectacle; who were
much pleased and satisfied to see him so cruelly (though deservedly) tortured.
He confessed that he had conuersed and spoken with a certain Jesuit in Paris
called Father d' Aubigny, but denied that he had in any sort communicated his
purpose unto him; but this Jesuit being examined, utterly denied that ever he
had seen this man before, which denial made the matter the more suspicious,
they find by letters written to this town, and by autentical certificates
that the very day of the Kings murder, and the day before, there were reports
spread thereof out of the Kingdom. They say further that they do well find,
that the damnable Maxims which have been insinuated these 20. years by
seditious Books, and Preachings, in derogation of the sacredness and
authority of Princes, have been a chief occasion of this mischief. A point
which all Princes had need nearly to regard. And so St for this time I will
add no more to your trouble: what else may ensue, you shall hear soon after
that I may know that to be true which I shall be about to tell you: and other
then truth you shall ever be assured never to receive from me; and so I rest
ever ready to do you service.

Paris 20. May. 1610.
THE SENTENCE of Court of Parliament for establishing the Q. Regent the same
evening that the King was slain.
WHereas the Kings Attorney general has made remonstra^ce unto the Court of
Parliament and all the Chambers thereof assembled, that (the King being now
murdered by a most cruel, inhumane, and detestable paricide committed upon his
sacred Person) it were necessary to provide for the affairs of the present
King, and of his Estate; and required that there should be presently order
given concerning his service, and the good of his Estate, which could not be
ruled and governed but by the Queen, during the minority of the said King
her son; And that it would please the said Court to declare her Regent, that
the affair of the Kingdom might be ordered by her. The matter having been
deliberated upon, the said Court has declared, and does declare the said
Queen (mother of this King) Regent in France for the administration of the
affairs of the Kingdom during the minority of the said King her son, with
all power and authority. Done in Parliament 14. May 1610.

Signed DV TILLET.

THE KINGS CONfirmation of the Sentence of the Court of Parliament, Maij 14.
declaring the Q. his mother Regent of France.
THe KING sitting in his Seat of Justice, by the advice of the princes of his
blood, and other Princes and Prelates, Dukes, Peers, and Officers of the
Crown, having heard the request of his Attorney general, has declared and
does declare (according to the Sentence of the Court of Parliament the day
before) the Queen his Mother Regent of France, and to have the care of the
education, and bringing up of his person, and the administration of the
affairs of his Kingdom, during his minority, and this present EDICT shall
be published and registered in all the bailliages and senechauses, and in other
Jurisdictions depending upon the said Court of Parliament, and in all other
Parliaments of this said Kingdom. Done in Parliament the 15. of May, 1610.

Signed DV TILLET.


