THE THIRD BOOK, DECLARING BY Examples out of Ancient Councels, Fathers, and
Later writers, that it is time to BEWARE OF M. JEWEL.

By John Rastel Master of Art and Student of Divinity.

Math. 7. Beware of false Prophets, which come unto you in the cotes of sheep,
but inwardly are Ravening Wolves, etc. ANTVERPIAE, Ex officina Ioannis Fouleri.
M.D.LXVI.

To the Indifferent Reader.
I PERFOVRME now unto thee (Indifferent Reader) that which I Promised in my
last book, which was, to give thee other Arguments, then presently at that
time I did prosecute, for which thou should BEVVARE of M. Jewel: The
Arguments co^stist in these points, that M. Jewel

1 Has made an unreasonable Account upon the first six hundred years. Fol. 1.


2 That him self uses the Testimonies of what so ever Age. Fol. 22.


3 That he will not stand to the Testimonies of the first six hundred years.
Fol. 40.


4 That he uses the self same Testimonies of the first six hundred years,
Fol. ^3.
against which he brings Exceptions.

5 That he alleges such Authorities of Fathers, as do plainly confound the
Procedinges. Fol. 9^.


6 That he alleges for him self the Fol. 104.
words and deeds of Old condemned Heretics.

7 That he has Abused Aunciente Councels. Fol. 123.


8 That he has abused the Decrees of the Canon Law. Fol. 129.


9 That he has abused the very Gloses of the Canon Law. Fol. 137.


10 That he has abused the Constitutions of the Civil Law. Fol. 146.


11 That he has abused the Ancient Fathers. Fol. 163.


12 That he has abused Later Writers. Fol. ^08.


13 That he has ^alle^ into many Contradictions to him self. Fol. 216.


14 That he has a great account to be made for his Lies. Fol. 229.


15 And that (if the foolish Objection be allowed among the Brethren) he is a
Borower. Fol. 233.


These be the Arguments, made to persuade thee, to BEVVARE of M. Jewel, And
these I have confirmed and declared, by their propre and peculiar Examples.
What remains then? Any other thing, thau that such a destroyer and spoiler of
Souls, should be brought to his Answer? This in deed should be done with the
first, if there were that care in men, of their Souls, as should be in them,
that acknowledge any Immortality of the Soul.

But I may well compare, the seeing and suffering of false and blind Teachers
that now take cure of Souls, to the permitting and honoring of Mountebanks,
that go abroad with diverse things for men's Bodies.

These Mountebanks, Mountebanks ^or the Body.
are a free kind of Wanderers, Pedlars, Surgeans, Physicians, Historiographers,
Poets, or what so ever name besides you will give unto them, men altogether
for the penie, which is the cause that they profess so many things. They take
up their standing in Market places, or void rooms mere for the ^^course of
people, there they set a stool to stand upon, or make a little scaffold for the
purpose, from which they play their part.

Their Greatest Grace is in the Countenance and Tongue, through which, they
look so Saddely, and speak so eloque^tly, that a man would swear upon a
book for them, that they think as they speak, and speak no more, than they
will do.

What so ever thing they have to sell, as News out of India, Or The Original of
the Turkishe Empire, Or Merry Tales, Or Songs and Ballets. Or a Powder to kill
worms, Or A Preservative against the Plague, Or A Water to make the skin
fair and white, Or Pinnes, Points, Laces, whistles, and other such ware,
whatsoever it be, they commend it and praise it before. But they do^ it with
such a Grace, with such a Constancy, with such Copy of words, with such
moving of Affections, that it is wonderful. As

If it be a Water, a Powder, an Oyntmente, a Confection not worth twenty
pence, he will make such a do about it, as though it could scarce be bought for
half a Kings ransom. And standing first up like a worshipful man, Arrayed in
his silks and veluettes, And al to be rayed with braslettes and bowed pieces
of gold, And chained about the neck with a great thing (of copper and gylt, as
many iudg^, but) of pure and fine gold, as far as the eye sees, he will tell
his Audience: That he is come unto them for good wills sake, moved in him by the
Fame and Worthiness of them and their City or Town: He will tell them, that he
can not tarry long, and that, before he depart, he would fai^e bestow upon them
some token of his good affection: Then will he bringfurth that water or powder,
or conceit, which he would utter, and say, That it was brought from beyond
Calecut, or the Red Sea: and then will he point with his finger toward
Calecut, and make a like disgressio^, to declare how far that is of, from their
Country, as M. Jewel does to praise (after his manner) y^ Popes of Rome: after
this, he will show the virtue and strength of his Powder: And further declare,
how much thereof has been bought in great Cities, and of noble Personages
which he will name: and further yet, he will make them think, that it is all that
he has leaft, that which he offers to be bought of them: He will also
disgrace other Mountebankes that go abroad the Country, and say, That their
wares are but counterfeit, but that his are fine, and pure, and fresh. For why
he se^keth not after gains* as the coue^ous and beggarly knaves do, but as it
becomes ^ good Gentleman, he trauaileth far and wide upon his own Charges
to get such gear, as may bring Commodities to whole Countries. In Conclusion,
when he has spoken as much as he can, then he provoke the hearers again and
again to bye. And if it be a water which he commended, he puts in Glasses,
made for the purpose, half a skore or a skore of drops thereof: If it be a
powder, he puts as much as he can hold between his Thombe and Forefinger, in
several papers, and begins to make merchandise. And that which as it should
seem by his tale, should be well worth a Croune a drop, he will sell, with good
gains, for a myte or two, of which, twelve do make but a penie.

Such manner of Fellows be the Mountebankes. But what say the Lords and
Signiours of the Towns unto them? They contein^e them undoubtedly in their
Judgment* and think it not al worth the taking up, which they so highly
commend. Yet they laugh at them, and say that so good and eloq^ent an Oration,
as they make to the people, does them a farthing worth of g^od, at y^ least, in
relieuing their spirits, and moving their Affections. So that there is no
great harm done, although it be nothing worth, that which they utter.

Especially whereas some of the Mountebankes, do either by Singing, or plai^ng
upon Instruments, so hold the people in the mean time, whiles they look for
their merchantes, that for their fit of mirth only, they are worthy of
somewhat. And besides this, al is not cou^terfeit, that they put forth to sale,
and though they make it more in words* than it is worth, yet if they should
hold their peace altogether, it is not nothing that which they sell. And in
Conclusion, whiles they hurt not the Sta^e and the Commonwealth, let the people
and them cope together, what is that to great affairs?

A Montebank then, may crake, and lie, and outface his Adversary, and make
somewhat of nothing, and mingle sport^ with sadness, and play what part he will
in the sight of the people, and hundreds will gase upon him, but none will
reprove him.

Like unto these, in an other kind, there be other Mountebankes, Mountebankes
for y^ Soul.
men so fr^e, that they be lawless, So full of fair promises, that they sell,
for one coming unto them, everlasting life, So loving and kind hearted, that
they forsake their own Country, and without asking of license, or directly
against commaundment, bye and sell within other men's Jurisdiction.

Yet, in Faith, they do it somewhat manerly, they rush not into Cities and
Towns at the first, but, without the Town walls, they choose out a place in
the open field, or in some wodde, and xx. or xxx. tur^es being cut and set one
upon the other, there straitewaies is a place for the Preacher, and there
straitwaies does the Mountebanke begin to open.

But what stuff it is* that he there opens, it can not be declared in a
short time and Preface* the So^me yet is this: That he comes unto them with
comfortable wares: That he comes from far Countries: That except they will
be thankeful and receive the Grace that he brings, he will depart again: That
he will ask nothing for his labor: That he delivers them quite, from fear of
Purgatory, and Hell also (for Purgatotorie there is none at al, and to hell he
will warrant them never to come) That they shall have no more bond of fasting,
watching, praying, performing of lawful vows, etc: That they shall have no
more Sign of Cross, or Christ, or our Lady, or any Saint in their eye, nor
any memory of them in their heart, and yt they shall have al peace and comfort,
if they will bye but one dram of the doctrine yt he brings.

And then he instructs them in the Doctrine of Calvin, Or (if the Mountebanke
be a Lutheran) in the Doctrine of Luther, Or (if he be an Anabaptist) in the
Doctrine of Rotman. For the Mountebankes be of fundry sects, and every one
praises his own wares most, and contemns his fellows pack.

The people then, The effe^t of the Mountbankes drugges.
hearing of so great treasures to be sold so good cheap, And being weary of the
discipline and gravity of (...) Religion, they qui^kly take that is taught
them, and within very few days after, they were ra^^shed with such a
Contemplation of the world to come, that they utterly ^orgotte, al honesty,
and Justice of this world. And whiles they were in that p^ng^e and extasis,
like men clean besides them selves, they run a^out the Cities and Countries,
And of al places desired to be in Churches and Religious houses. For the
Mountebankes always lightly, do commend Ob^dience unto the Superior powers,
and ex^ort their Audien^e most earnestly, to keep their hands from doing of
wrong to the Co^menaltie.

Therefore, whether it were for Devotion to the Church and houses of Religion,
or for re^erence of their Preacher which had counseiled them to be Injurious to
no man, they did not meddle with private men's houses, nor put them at al,
directly, in any Fear^. But in the Churches, their Sprite worked, and in^^^med
them, and ^^etted them, and ravished them.

In heat and force of which Sprite, they pluck down Images, (...)
break Aulters, Spoil the vestrie of Copes, Chalices Ornaments, Treas^^es,
(...) very Seats and Seeling of the Churches away: Tread of the (...) their
feet, and in their hearts, s^ng all that while, praises (I ^row) (...) the Lord.

That done, to show their Charity toward their neighbor also, as they had
by these former (...) clearly before God, They brake open y^ poor Ce^les of
Friars and (...), (...).
they take violently from them, their Books, their Clothing, their Bedding, and
(which was exceeding Charity) they did not kill them. But that in deed was
(...) Charity, for (...) it, and they will study to (...) into Order, and kill
whom they take of the Cloister, the next time that y^ spri^e moves them.

But to make an end, after the Church and Cloister spoiled, (...)
they go into the Libraries, and of one whole one, in y^ (...) Friars at
Antwerpe (which was f^l of many and goodly books) they l^^t not one unburned.
In other places, they did cut only the Books, Or sell them, or carry them away.

And by this time they were thirsty, Provision of meat c^st away.
I trow. For as for meat, many in these Countries care not much, as appears
by the casting away of the barreled bief, and other provision, as y^ Graie
Friars had gathered of alms, for this whole year remaining.

To the good Wine therefore and Beer, they make more have, and when they had
their heads full thereof, for the nonce they pull out the spiket, Beastliness.
and let the (...) run abroad in the Floor. And in the Abbey of S. Michels
in Antwerp, they drank so much, that they lay down in y^ c^ller not able to
stand or go away, or lie waking. and they let out so much beer and wine,
setting al tappes open, that they had been drowned in it, if other more sober
had not come thither, and pulled them out.

Uerely this is a sowsing Gospel, which so ^mbrueth the minds of the folowers
of it: And these are perfect and excellent Mountebanks, which can give such
preservatives, against al Godliness, and Obedience, and Honesty. If there had been any Fear of God or Man, remaining in these men's hearts, would they have
spoiled Innocents, Or without lawful Authority, have enterprised feats so
desperate? Crake not of these Proceedinges, O ye fervent and hot sprited
Merchantes of this world, and send no letters of praise to the Lord for this
victory, which co^sisted in oppressing of Innocents, and in plain robbing of
Churches. Came our Savior into the world with such terror? Did the Apostles
convert the world, by violent and felonious entering into any places? Did they
deny lawful Obedience unto the Magistrates, and the Princes and Rulers of any
Country? The Procedings of these days, are no more like the preachinges of
the Apostles, or the Primitive Church, than a Devil is like an Angel. And yet
the Mowntebankes continue still, Lutherans against Caluinistes, Caluinistes
against Lutherans, both they against Anabaptists, and Anabaptists against
them both.

But what speak I of other? Is M. Jewel him self any better than a
Mou^te^anke? (...).
Consider by that only which I have proved against him, how fair (...) he is,
how much corrupt stuff he h^^h, how highly be sets by it, how (...) he
^r^keth of it, how singularly he (...) him self by it. For when he (...) all the
learned men that be alive, (...) for no more than One sufficient sen^ence, And
requires to have that b^oug^t o^t of any Old Catholic Doctor or Father* or
any Old General Council, etc: What other thing is this, but a Mountebankes
Preface, to commend his wares unto the Audience? As if he should say in plainer
words (...) to them:

(...) beloved in the Lord, you may t^ke me perchance for a Benchwhist^er, or
a man of little knowledge and practice, and altogether unable to reprove the
General and Catholic Doctrine of the whole world, and to draw you from those
Masters and Teachers which always hitherto, ye have been ruled ^y. But I shall
tell you (dear brethren) I have seen and readen as much as any man, yea as all
the learned men alive: I have travailed unto the very Primitive Church it
self: I have been conversant with Old Catholic Doctors, and Fathers, and old
General Councels. As for these Priests, Cardinals and Popes, whom you follow,
they bring nothing, but Conclusions of Scholemen, and devises of Later
Doctors, and Ceremonies of their own making, etc. But I will bring you no
other thing, but that which is Ancient. I will bring you back to the
Institution of Christ himself. You shall have al things ministered unto you, as
they were in the time of the Apostles. You shall hear God himself speak unto
you. The Priests shall rob you no more of half the Sacrament. You shall
know, what you hear readden in the Church. Ye shall have no Supremacy of
Pope, no Real Presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament. Ye shall be brought to
Old Customs, which ye Council of Nice would have to prevail: And Tertullian
shall teach you, how that is true, that was first ordained. And, as I said
before, so say I now again, If any man alive be hable to reprove me, I will
become his obedient Scholar. But I know, there is not one that is able to do^
it, and because I know it, therefore I speak it. So begins, the Mountebanke.

But in further process he is proved to be so vain in Craking, So crafty in
Shifting, So demure in Cou^terseiting, So false in Affirming, So desperate in
Abusing of his Adversary, of old Councels, and Doctors, yea and of new also,
that it is perceived well enough, even of them that say, God save you my Lord,
unto him, that al is not so as he says. Nevertheless they have a good sport,
to see the pretty Shifts, and Defenses, and Scapes, that the Mountebanke can
make, And though it be evident that he li^^h, yet they think not, these matters
to be so great or necessary, but men may suffer them well enough to be
maintained how so ever it be, as long, as neither Trade of Merchaundise, nor
Study of Temporal Law, nor Pastime abroad, nor Pleasure at home, is hindered by
it.

For, like as we may understand by the ma^ket folks, how the market goes, So,
when it is in sight, that in Countries and Cities of greatest policy, private
men's goods are not without punishment touched, but the Common Churches of the
whole Country, are openly spoiled: And when Papists are neither suffered to
speak* nor to go abroad, but Caluinistes, Lutherans, and Anabaptists, are not
only suffered to speak, but to speak one against the other, And in one City
or Country, to set fur^h and maintain contrary Doctrines: it is easy to
perceive, that, The wisdom of God, is but folly among men. And that al is
for Policy, and nothing for Religion, and that men have so forsaken the old
Faith, that they are not s^ttled in any new, And that Faith in deed is almost
extinguished, by to much following of Carnal Reason, and that Reason in
thousands, is utterly blinded, because they have put from them the Obedience
unto Faith.

Yet this Corruption notwith^tanding, I have taken some pains in ^erswading
with thee (Indifferent reader) to BEVVARE of M. Jewel: Fearng in deed, least
to many be so in Indifferent, that they pass not whether he say true or false:
And praying to God that they may have A desire to know the Truth, which as
yet, care not for it, and that other may have a constancy to confess the
Truth when they know it, And that the rest, condemn not the the Truth, before
they know it.

Farevvel. From Louane.
Qua^doquidem liber hic tertius contra M. Ievvellum a viris Linguae Anglicanae
and Sacrae Theologiae eruditissimis probatus est, iudico eum tuto posse
distrahi and eu^lgari.

Ita testor Cunerus Petri, Pastor S. Petri.
Louanij. 3. Nouemb. 1566
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Folio. Page. Line. Fault. Correction. 6. 2. 1. Latins La^enesse 40. 2. 12. ye
he 47. 1. 6. Degrees Decrees 63. 1. 13. Dionysi. of Dionysius 63. 2. 19. them
then 80. 2. 2. tell lies to tell lies 118. 2. 14. Co^sta^^in. Constantius 141. 2.
4. y^ visible that a visible 142. 2. 15. he co^clu. he were conclu. 160. 2. 3.
primitive Primate 181. 2. 16. the communion prayer Specially to be amended.
the Lords prayer 191. 1. 3. people un. people might un. 195. 1. 7. of old Fa.
of the old Fa. 197. 1. 14. Vale^tians Valentinians 206. 1. 18. Suprem.
Preeminence 216. 2. 27. y^ it were that if it were 217. 2. 4. ar bound are not
bound Ibid. 24. How say How said 221. 2. 10. yet if yet it 225. 2. 11. can say
can truly say 230. 2. 8. gather easily gather 234. 2. 16. Trick or two Trick
or Toy In the Margent.
172. 1. for is for there is 228. 1. Jew. 21. Joan. 21. Ibide^. taken out of,
taken of

The Third Book of BEWARE OF M. Jewel.
IT may seem by my Two former Books, y^ I have detected as great Sophistry,
Bravery, and Insinceritie of M. Jewels, as any man lightly, that has but
worldly regard of his Truth and Honesty, may coulourably venture to practice.
But in comparison of that which I have further to object, the forsaid
behauiours, may seem to be perdonable.

For D. Harding is but one man, and the same not known to the whole world,
and much less honored of the whole. He is also his Adversary, and M. Jewel
takes him self, to be in no point perchaunse, of less worthiness: And if in
some one or two, D. Harding far pass^th him, yet in many more on the other
side, he thinks him self to be better. And therefore, when he does handle
him at his pleasure, and belie him, Contemn him, Mock him, and Toss him,
without doubting or blusshing: although it be very il done, yet it is not
exceeding il.

But to despise men (without al doubt) worthy and notable, To set light by
them, whom the whole world has reuere^ced, To interpret Laws and Canons
after his own liking, To disanul general councils, To corrupt Ancient Fathers,
To set them up, to pull them down again, To bring them in, to thrust them
again out, To bind men to the Authority of the first six hundred years, To
appeal to the Primitive Church only in his own cause, and to draw his
Adversary unto any State of Church within these last fiftene hundred years,
and for a^vantage to make the practice thereof, a Definitive sentence: This is
exceeding presu^ptuous, and exceeding Injurious, and this is that, which I shall
now lay to M. Jewels Charge.

Of M. Jewels exact accompting upon the vj.C. years next after Christ.
YOu Appeal (M. Jewel) most instantly, to the Witnesses of the next six
hundred years after Christ, by which you geaue us to understand, that either
your guilty Conscience fears, to be tried by God and the Country: either
that your simple understanding conceiueth, to help your cause by remo^ing of
it. Of which two, there is nere a good, neither Conscience already condemning
you, by the verdite of ix. C. years together: Neither lack of Wit and
Consideration moving you, of xv. uniform Witnesses ix, put aside, to Imagine
that the lesser number of vj. only remaining, could be so used, as that they
should appear, either contrary to the ^ine, Or of more credit and
worthiness, then the nine. Both which things (either that the Church of
Christ should be contrary to it self, or in some one part of her Age more
worthy of credit than in some other) are plainly and utterly impossible, both
by Faith and by Reason.

For, like as we are assured by right Faith, ^ Tim. 2.
that there is but One God, One Jesus Christ God and man, 1. Cor. 12.
One Spirit dividing unto each as he will, Ephesians. 4.
One Body, One Dove, One Louier, Cant 6.
One Bevvtiful and One Catholic Church: so is it impossible by Natural Reason,
that of Unity, A Division might be made, And that one Part might be found
contrary to the other, or One Part worthier than the other, where there is no
Parts making at all, and therefore no Parts taking at al, to cause any Discord.

Is Christ (says the Apostle) divided? 1. Cor. 1.
Is it yea and name with him? Yea, does not he himself say: Luc. 11.
Every kingdom divided with in it se^fe shall be left waste and desolate? Da.
7.
And do not both Testamentes, Luc. 1.
new and old, plainly teach, The church is one by Faith.
that his kingdom is everlasting? How then should his Church be Contrary unto
it self, and thereby cumming to Division, end afterward in Dissolution?

Again, The Spiritie of Truth was promised unto her, which should teach her
all Truth, and tarry also with her for ever. There be also provided for her,
meet Governors and Officers, to continue with her and serve her, to the Ephe.
4.
perfiting of the holy, until all do meet together, in Unity of Faith, and
knowledge of the Son of God: so that, because of the Authority of the
Chief Master, whom it is Impossible to lie, And the continual succession of
Ushers under him, The church ca^ not err or fail.
whom he makes to teach as he Inspireth: the Lessons which at this day are
readen in the Church, ought to be in deed of as great Credit among us, as
any of the Primitive Churches lessons. Except perchance the Sprite be so
blind or blasphemous in any person, as to deny his Almightinesse in making of
such as dwell in his house, of One mind and Accord, Of whose Promise,
Provision and Charity toward his church, we have so infallible testimonies.

Therefore, as the Scriptures persuade our understanding to believe, that the
Church is One, That it shall Continue for ever, The church is allwaies one and
true, by reason.
That it shall never Err in Doctrine: so Reason concludes by this gift and
light of Faith, that because it is ONE, it must either be NONE at all, or
continue ONE. And because IT CONTINVETH FOR EVER, it can not therefore be NONE.
Remaining then ONE, it is to be credited without al doubt, because it has the
Sprite of Truth with her and can not err: And as well to be credited now, as
it was xv. hundred years sense, because it is ONE, and the self same now, as
it was then, concerning Assistance of the Holy ghost, Privileges of Honor,
Infalliblenesse of Truth, Or any other like, parteining to the very Substance
and nature (as I may say) of the Church of Christ.

Like as, in your self (M. Jewel,) Or in any of us, the same Reasonable Soul
and Sensitive life, that we received of God and our Parents at our beginning,
continues yet still with us the Self same in substance, Notwithstanding many
thousand Alterations, in Affections of mind, and Disposition of body, which
have in the mean time chanced unto us, In what things the Church is not
allwais one.
And chainged us, in the chance: so, notwithstanding many Alterations, which
have been in the Church of Christ these xv.C. years, concerning external
Government thereof, and Ecclesiastical Orders. The life yet, Soul and Sense
thereof, is of the same making and worthiness, in all Times and Circumstancies.

In the Opinion and Imagination, of fainte hearted and weak Christians, it
appears (I grant) to be of more Authority, If Christ, in his own person
speaks, than if S. Paul his Apostle, by his will and commandment speak
it. And, no doubt, they have a good Zeal therein often times and Devotion, but
they have not always good knowledge and Understa^ding. The Mary's brought
tidinges unto the Apostles, of the Resurrection of our Savior, and though they
were but Women, yet they were devout, Wise and blessed women, And their
sayings agreed with the words of Christ himself spoken unto them before his
Passion, so that they might well, and should have been credited: Nevertheless,
their words seemed unto the Apostles no better than A Doting and vain tale,
Luc. 24.
And S. Peter ran to the Sepulcher, to see perchance whether he could find
a better Argument or Testimonye of the Resurrection, than the Mary's had
brought, unto him and his fellows. Which Argument, Let us not be unbelieving,
but faithful.
when it was the self same day, made after the best manner unto them, that is,
by Christ's own presence and words: yet S. Thomas being at that time absent,
and hearing at his Return, of the sight and joy which his fellows had: Joan*
20.
Except I see (quod he) the print of the nails, and put my hand into his side,
I will not believe. As who should say, that he alone could see more in such a
matter, than ten other, Or that if he once tried i^ and believed it him self,
then it were to be bidden by: but, if he learned and received it of other men's
Report and knowledge, then lo, it was not clear, and out of question. Yet the
Truth is always O^e. And as faithfully it was to have been believed, yt, which
the Mary's or Apostles saw and heard, As that which S. Thomas not only saw or
hard, but fealt also.

Now, in these foresaid Persons and Examples, the inward and hearty devotion,
did somewhat extenuate the Carnalitie of the Affection. Mary in other Cases, it
is grosser and viler. Carnal judgment.
As, when A Noble and Honorable man speaks A wise word, it is regarded and
remembered: but when a poor and Simple Soul, does speak the like, it lacks
the same Grace and strength, with the hearers. Yet, the Truth and wisdom of
the saying being on both sides all ONE in goodness, it might well become all
men to honor it, without Respect of persons.

When our Savior upon a time, preached in the Synagoge of the Jews, so
singularly well, that all men wondered at his Doctrine: Marci. 6.
How cummeth this felovve, (said they) by all this lerning? Is not this he,
that is the Carpenter, the son of Mary, the brother of James and Joseph? Are
not his sisters also here dwelling with us? As who should say, We know his
bringing up well enough, And therefore he is not so greatly to be wondered at.
Such is the Judgment of carnal men, even unto this day. They measure Truths,
by their Imaginacions, And set a great Price on things, that are farther out
of their reach, Contemning as good or better than those things are, when they
are easy to be found or always present.



But in M. Jewel, whereof may I think, that this Affection does come, of which
I speak? For you also, in defining of everlasting Truth, by Term of years,
do seem to have a spice of their disease, which coutemne the good things that
are nigh unto them.

Shall I Impute this faule, unto the general Misery of our nature, which was
corrupted in our first Parents?

God send you the^ Grace to resist evil motions, Rep^n^
And for this which you have already done, Repent and be sorry.

But came it of a certain wantones or niceues in you, Or play no more the
wanton
that as Childerne crave Dis piece or Dat piece of one and the self same meat
or bread, Or women love farfet and dear bought things, so you will not be
served, but with the Testimonies and Authorities of the first six hundred
years of our Lord? Truly, if it be so, you can not look for the Favor, that
childerne and Women have in their Infirmities.

Will you have it then, to be attributed unto lack of Lerning, Or plain
Dullness, that you are so blind and blunt, Or learn more wit.
as to set at naught the Practice and Euidencies of the Catholic Church for
nine hundred years together? It seems no, because the Opinion undoubtedly,
which your predecessors of late, had of their own Judgment, Knowledge and
Wittiness, moved them especially, to refuse the General and Approved Faith of
the world. And so I believe they lacked no wit, but only Grace, and they were to
wise to be Obedient and Faithful.

How now then? Was it any Sprite of Malice or Contention, that caused you to
rest upon the first six hundred years only, that the further you went out of
sight, you might the more boldly show ^oule play, Or An^^er the Objection
Maintain the quarrel, Make the victory uncertain, And trouble the lookers
on? If it be not so, we shall easily believe you, if you show any good Cause or
Reason, wherefore you have appealed unto the first six hundred years: And so
appealed unto them, not, as the best time to find witnesses in: but as the
only time: neither as Preferring those Days, but as Condemning ours.

But, let us first see the Examples, by which your fact and behauioure herein
may be Evident, And then after, we shall the better consider it, whether you
have any reason or no, to make for you, And what (by likelihode) was the cause
which moved you.

Leontius Bishop of Nicopolis, The fir^^ D. Har, Example.
wrote the life of Ioannes Eleemosinari' an holy man of the first six hundred
years after Christ. Why should I not believe Leontius?

Mary, Ie. pa. 75
he wrote (say you) A great while after that.

And what of that? Ra.
Is S. Bedes History, of the cumming of S. Augustine the Monk into England, to
be discredited, because S. Bid began to write, a great while after S.
Augustine was departed this world? Or, because the next six hundred after
Christ, were much passed when he wrote it? Are the books of Genesis, in any
point, to be doubted of, because they declare the beginning of the world, and
Acts Dated two thousand years, before Moses the writer of them was borne? Yet
says M. Jewel against Leontius, This one Circumstance (of his Latins)
answeareth the matter wholly. And in the margin he geaueth a special note: Ie.
fo. 75.
M. Harding rangeth without the cumpasse of six hundred years.

Vrbanus Regius, The ij. D Hard. Fol. 36.
a Doctor of Luthers School confesses in his book De locis Communibus, that
in the first Council of Ephesus, an Order was taken for Communion under one
kind: which, he being a Lutherane, would never have written, if he had not
found it, in some Ancient Record and worthy of credit.

But Vrbanus Regius (say you) departed this life, Jew. 112.
not above.xx. years a go, and therefore, is a very young witness to testify a
thing done so long time before.

In deed to testifye it as of certain sight or knowledge, Ra.
it were hard for so young a witness: but to testify it, as of good History
and Authority, it is possible enough for them, which are.xx. years younger.

What shall we think of S. Bernard: The iij.
A man, not only in his own time of most worthy Estimation and Authority, but,
in all the Church ever sense, of singular Credit and worthiness? If he were
now alive among us, And might be seen and heard sensibly, would there be found
in all the world any man of Honesty or Discretion, which considering his
Holiness, Wisdom and Gravity would think him A witness of little weight
and worthiness? Yet, Father Jewel says, as though he had been a Reader of
Divinity, when S. Bernard was yet but A Noui^e in the Faith:

S. Bernard, Jew. 116.
calls the washing of feet a Sacrament. I grant. But S Bernard was a
Doctor but of late years, and therefore his Authority must herein weigh the
lesser.

Was he of so late years, Ra.
as Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Peter Martyr, and other Great Anceters of your
new Religion? Why does not the latenesse of these fellows, offend you? Why
think you, the xij.C. years after Christ, to be so far and wide from his
Truth, that no certainty thereof may be taken in them: And Conclude,
Determine, Protest and Defend, that, to be Sure and Autentike, which rises
xv.C. and some odd years after Christ?

Of the like kind of Imaginacion and Answer it is, where you say: Lyra and
Te^tonicus Lived, The iiij. Jew. 140
at the least, thirtene hundred years after Christ, wherefore their Authority
in this Case must Needs seem the less. No remedy: M. Jewel has so appointed.

Again. The v. Jew. 217.
Bessarions Authority in this case can not seem great, both for other
sundry causes, (which you leave) And Also, (which must needs be a good cause
and not forgoten) for that he lived at the least fourtene hundred years after
Christ.

And again. The v^. Jew. ^89
Pope Nicolas, was the second Bishop in Rome after Pope Iohane the Woman. (Note
here that Other men reckon, from S. Peter downward, this man compteth from
Pope Iohane, An English woman, as the reporter of the tale says, borne at
Magunce in Germany.) Which was almost nine hundred years after Christ. Wherefore
his Authority might well have been spared.

Thus we see then, Ra.
by manifest Examples, the exact Account that you make of the first six hundred
years after Christ, As though the whole Truth of A matter were lost, if it come
to knowledge, any long time after the thing was done.

Let us consider now, Whether any honest Cause and Reason may be alleged for
your so doing, Or whether you did it without cause, Or else were sturred up with
some unlawful Affection and Repro^eable Cause. And here now, take no skorne M.
Jewel if I appose you in a few Questions. For, either you be hable to Answer
them, and that shall be to your worship: either not Answering them, you shall
occasyon Truth thereby to be known. And that shall be to Gods glory and the
Cumfort of the doubtful. Surely, if it were to my self, and if so much might
be obtained, that I should be Answered in some One thing thoroughly, and be bid
to choose, out of all that which I have to demand, that One thing which
seems strongest against my Adversary, and surest of the Catholics: I would
be glad of the Occasion, One place for all: let M. Jew. or any other Answer it.
and all other matters quite and clean put to Silence, I would speak of these
few points which follow, And either without more words, hold my peace, If in
them I were satisfied: Or requ^re, that our Adversaries never trouble their
hearers or Readers any further with other conclusions, before these f^we
questions were Answered. Therefore, I pray the (Indifferent Reader) to consider
this pla^e which follows, though thou Read no more of all the Book.

First, The first question. Faith, or ^o Faith?
I ask of you (M Jewel) whether you have any Faith at all, or no?

If you have none, what meddle you, with any Religion: except it be for Civil
Policy sake? For which to do as you do, though it would prove you less mad
or unreasonable, yet should you be (for lack of Faith) as dead in soul and
as Godless, as any Infidel in all the world. If ye have any, Faith.
how came you by it? for we are not borne Christians, but Regenerate: neither
do we receive faith by Nature, but by Teaching. And, faith is by hearing, Romans
10.
says the Apostle.

Of whom then have you heard and learned your Faith? The ij. question. Learned
you it, of y^ quick or the dead?
Of them that lived and died before you were borne? Or of such as preached and
taught in the world sens your self were of remembrance?

If you learned of the first, how could they teach, without A tongue? Or how
could you hear without an care? For they were now dead in body, and clean
dissolved, and you were not yet made of body and soul, nor had any instruments
of senses.

If you learned of the Quick and Living, your self also quick and living, Of
the Quick. The iij. Question.
were those your Teachers of such Authority with you, that you submitted your
senses and understanding, Followed you their Authority or no?
to their judgment? Or examined you, by your self, their Doctrine and Sayings?

If you the Scholar did judge of the Master, you were without all doubt, a
Malapert and Folishe Scholar. Malapert, because you would break order, and
proudly go before him, whom you ought meekly to have followed: And Folishe,
because in matters of Faith, (of which we now speak) all Wit and Reason of man,
is altogether unworthy and unable, to Judge of that which is Proponed.

If you then followed their Authority, The iiij. Question.
and submitted your understanding and will unto their Doctrine, without Moving
or Mistrusting any doubt about it: What were they in all the world, What are
they?
unto whom you gave such credit?

I ask you not this question, for the time of your Childhode, in which, though
true Faith be Habitually in them that are Baptized: yet there is not that
Discretion or Consideration, by which they may return their minds upon their
own^ acts, Or put a difference between their Gra^dmothers tale of Bloody bone,
Raw head, Bloudelesse and Ware woulf, and the Churches Doctrine of Hell and the
Devil. But I speak now, as to one that has Understanding and knowledge of
his own state, And Experience of many things, And Lerning enough for the
purpose, And such a one, whose part and profession it is, to be able to geaue a
good Cause and Reason, for the Faith and Religion which he follows. Of you
therefore I ask, what Authority that was, Or is, which moved you to be, and
continue A Christian?

Here, you must not say unto me, that you considered the wrytinges of the
Fathers of the first six hundred years. And that you gave your mind to Reading
of the Scriptures. etc. Here let all the heretics in y^ world ioin with the
Papists if they can.
For what so ever such tale yo^ tell me, it will always remain to be Answered
of you, what Instruction or Authority that was, which either Taught you, Or
(...) you, to esteem those Ancient Doctors of the Christian Religion, Or
these Scriptures of which you make your self so certain? For by your self,
you could no more know, the difference between Writers and Writers, or true
Scriptures and lying Fables, than A Blind man ca^ judge of Colors, Or a
Stranger know the right way in A Wilderness, or he Read, that knows no
letter on the book.

You are not (I am sure) wiser tha^ S. Augu. Neither have you better thought
upon these matters, than he did. He says of himself, y^ concerning the Faith
which he had in Christ. August. ad Honoratu^ cap. 14. de vtilit ate credendi.
He savv himself, to have believed none, but the established opinion of Peoples
and Nations, and the very Common and renoumed Fame of him. Than which cause, if
you can give any better, it is time y^ you show it. As for us, neither we find
any like, And we need not be ashamed to be persuaded by it, which moved S.
Augustine him self, to come unto Christ.

And I think verily, that neither you, studying never so much for it, An
evident Demonstration to persuade us to believe.
can bring any so perswasible a Reason, why you believed Christ, as this is:
that, So many Nations and peoples of the world do bear witness to him. For
this is so Great and so Strong to induce us into Faith, that we should not now
be desirous of visible Miracles for Proving Or Confirming of it, S. Aug^stine
most wisely and Reasonably warning us: De ciuit.
Quisquis adhuc prodigia, Dei lib. 22. Cap. 8.
vt credat, inquirit: magnum est ipse prodigium, Qui MVNDO CREDENTE non credit.
Who so ever does yet seek after Strange and vvonderfull things, to make him
believe: he is himself a strange fellow or Great vvonder, which believes
not, when the world believes.

This Conclusion then standing so sure, (that the Uoice of the World, so
Great, so General, so Certain and so Famous, has made wise men to come unto
Christ) I will, in like sort, dispute with you (M. Jewel,) as S. Augustine did
against the Manichees. And as he said against them upon the foresaid Truth:
De Vtilit. cred.
Cur non igitur apud eos potissimum, diligentissime requiram, quid Christus
praeceperit, quorum authoritate commotus, Cap. 14.
Christum aliquid Vtile praecepisse credidi? Tune mihi melius expositurus es
quid ille dixerit? Quem fuisse, aut esse, non putarem, si abs te mihi hoc
commendaretur esse credendum* Hoc ergo credidi (vt dixi) famae, celebritate,
consensione, Vetustate roboratae. Vos autem and tam pauci and tam turbulenti
and tam noui, nemini dubium est quin nihil dignum authoritate praeseratis.
Seeing I have believed the constant Fame and Report of Nations in Cummyng to
Christ, why should not I then, most diligently seek what Christ commanded,
among them most chiefly, by whose Authority I have been moved to believe that
Christ commanded things profitable? Will thou better expound unto me what he
said? whom I would not believe to have been, Or to be, if from thee, this were
Commended unto me to be believed. For I have believed it, (as I said) because of
the fame established and stre^ghtned by Renoune, Consent, Auncientnes: But you,
both so Few, and so Troblesome, and so New, there is no man doubts, but that
ye can show nothing worthy of Authority.

Thus S. Augustine.

The Manichees would answer as heretics do now. ^anich.
What? you must make no question of it, whether Christ is to be believed or no.

S. Augustine August.
Replieth and so do we. Quae igitur ista tanta demenia est? Illis creed,
Christo esse crede^dum, and a nobis disce quid dixerit? Cur obs^^ro te? Nam si
illi. etc.

What exceeding madness then is this? Believe them (the Catholics) that thou
must believe Christ, and learn of us what he said. By what reason I pray the?
For, if they should fail, and could not teach me any thing, I would much more
easily persuade my self, that Christ is not to be believed: than, that I should
learn any thing concerning him, but of them, through whom I had ^eleued him. O
what a great Boldness is this, or rather what a great Folishnesse?

I will teach you (says the Heretic) what Christ commanded, Manich.
whom you believe. To whom S. Augustine.

What if I did not bele^e him? August.
Could thou teach me any thing of him?

Nay there is no remedy (says the Manichee) you must believe. Manich.
Saint Augustine answers:

W^ether by your Commending of him? August.


No (says he) For we lead them by Reason, Manich.
that believe him.

For what Reason then (says S. August.
Augustine) must I believe him?

Because there is A grounded and established Fame? Manich.


Was it grounded by you or by other? August.


By other says he. Manich.


Ergo shall I believe them, August.
that you may teach me? Perchance I should, except they had especially
warned me hereof, that I should not at al, come unto thee.

Thou will Answer, Manich.
They Lie.

How then shall I believe them concerning Christ, August.
whom they have not seen, and shall not believe them concerning the, whom
they will not see?

Believe (says he) the Scriptures. Manich.


But what so ever Scripture it be, August.
if it be brought forth new and unheard of before, the credit is given, not
unto it, but unto the^ that bring if forth. Wherefore, the Scriptures
themselves, if you so few and unknown do bring forth, I have no list to believe
them.

Here again (says S. Augustine to the Manichee) thou will call m^ back unto
the multitude and the fame.

And so do our Protestants now. What (say they) will you doubt of the
Scriptures? Co^fer and consider whether y^ vpstart he retikes be not like the
old.
Nay then fare well. There is no talk with you, we perceive. Why there is no
man that denies them. We see how generally they are allowed and received of all
men. Either we must believe nothing, or believe them: whom by so many men's
Report and Consent, we find to be agreed upon.

To whom we answer as S. Augustine did unto the Manichee, which would have the
Fame and Uoice of the World, to be an evident and sure Argument, wherefore we
should make no doubt of of the Scriptures, And yet, would not be ruled by the
Uoice and Consent of that Multitude in the rest of the Christian and Catholic
Faith:

Cohibe tandem pertinaciam et istam nescio quam indomit am propagandi nominis
libidinem, August.
et moan potius vt huius multitudinis Primates, quaeram diligentissime ac
laboriosissime; vt ab his potius de his literis aliquid discam. etc.

Stay now at lenght your egernesse and contention, and this, I can not tell
what, Unruly desire and Lust of getting and stretching forth a name. And
Counsel me rather to seek out the Primates and Chief of this multitude, and
to seek them out most diligently and ernestly, that of them rather, I may
learn sumwhat of these letters* (the Scriptures.) Which me^ if they were not, I
should not at all know it, that I had any thing to learn. As for the (that
art the Heretic) return into THY LVRKING HOLES AND CORNERS AGAIN. etc.

Thus far S. Augustine.

By which his Discourse against the Maniches, and our following of it against
the Protestants, how Uncertain, Unsensible, and Contentious must it be, to
Appeal to the vj.C. years only after Christ, as though there were none, at
this present, in the world, which might and ought to be fully obeyed? For, if
the Scriptures themselves are now believed, not because they were believed in the
vj.C. after Christ, (for what can we judge by any sense of things paste and
gone A thousand years sens?) But because they which now li^e, and whom we may
justly believe, do report so unto us, that they have been commended unto the
World by them that saw Christ, and heard him, and touched him: And that they
have continued, these xv.C. and odd years among Christians, allwaies of full
Authority, (be it the six hundred or ten hundred, or xv.C. after Christ, that
you will coumpt upon.) If, I say, the Scriptures themselves are believed of us,
because of the present commendacion of this Age which we be in, and Authority
which is in the primates of this multitude of Christians:

How can we go in any matter of the Faith, from the Judgment of this present
Age, And refuse every thing that is brought unto us, except it be out of the
first six hundred years after Christ?

For suppose it, that no man alive NOW, had openly held with Christ: would M.
Jewel cleave unto y^ Creedes of the first six hundred years? And by his own
self, would he choose to follow the Christian faith of those days, if there had been in the world, for these last years, no Praise or Speaking of Christ at all?

How is it credible? For being but a man, how should he not, by all
likelihoode, follow the common course of men? And if he would needs be
Singular, how could he discern between the true and the false Opinions of the
first six hundred years, whereas he should find Examples and Wrytings of both?
Or not able to discern between them, how could he fasten his mind and belief
upon any one of them both, Who has com^e^ded Christ unto M. Jew. but the
report of this age in which himself has lived.
except he were A Singular one in deed? For wisemen, do not lightly take that
way, in which they see not, either the Town plainly before them, or some
Cawsey, Paths, or Steps of feet to direct them: Neither do they use (when
they go in the right way, and come at lenght to some turning or duble way) to
go forward, I can not tell how, without loking back if any follow, Or loking
about if any be within sight: but either rest themselves, until they spy of
whom to ask, Or go so doubtefully forward in that which leeketh them, that
if better Counsel and teaching come unto the^, they will be returned and
ordered.

And if it be so in A corporal and visible way, ought it not to be much more
so, in following the right way unto truth of understanding and knowledge? And,
when the whole world takes one way, Or diverse cumpanies in the world follow
diverse ways, would any man of Discretion be so Bold or Foolish, as to go
peaking alone by himself in such an Opinion or Imagination, as no man byside
himself aloweth? And so directly go in it, that to live and die, he would not
be brought from it? If therefore these forty years last past (or what so ever
it be more that M. Jewel has lived in the world) nor Christ had been Preached,
nor the Primitive Church commended: he could not undoubtedly by any good
Occasion or Reason, have esteemed the Christian writers of a thousand years
sens, Or geauen any Faith unto Christ. Except we should think (otherwise than
y^ Apostle has taught us) y^ faith comes without hearing, Or that no man
sent for him, yet by some Miracle perchannce he was brought unto Christ. Of
which two, both are out of course: And without some Extraordinary way of making
them likely unto us, both are Unreasonable, both are Incredible.

The present Fame then, Renoume, and Testimony of this Age, drawing men of
this Age unto Christ, yet does M. Jewel so little set by it, as though it were
worthy of little credit, or rather none. And he so clea^eth unto those vj.C.
years, past A thousand. years, almost, sens: as though he could be sure of the
Catholic and true Faith that was then, without the Testimonies of the Catholic
Church now, Or as though some secret Mystery or Security were in them, to
further him in vnreueled Conclusions, And exempt him from all Jurisdiction. In
so much, that although in xv.C. years rekening, which the Church has continued
in (as it shall to the worlds end) viij. years can not greatly hurt the
Account, Yet, so true an Audite of the^, is kept by M. Jewel, that he will not
receive the Testimonies of the viij. years next after the first vj.C. but
notes in his Book their cumming to late, though they came very nigh. His
words be these.

M. Harding knows well, Jew. 242 Sticking upon viij. years.
that this grant (to be called The Head of al Churches,) was made unto
Bonifacius the third, which was Bisshope of Rome in the year of our Lord vj.C.
and viij. Even at the same very time, that Mahomete first began to plant his
Doctrine in Arabia. And therefore makes nothing to this purpose, as being
without the cumpasse of six hundred years.

As who should think, Did he, think you, persuade with the Emperor, to geaue
y^ Title, Or with the Pope to receive it? Or how bring you Arabia and Rome here
together?
that within those viij. years on this side the six hundred, The Pope, and
Emperor, with the whole world, were Suddenly and Straungely, converted from
the Faith and Order which they were of viij. years before, And (no History
mentioning it) were made of Pure Protestants, Gross Papists.

Yea, not only of viij. years above the vj.C. he makes a sad rekoning toward
his Uantage, but of the vj.C. year it self (if he can bring D. Hardings
testimony so low) he so vaunteth and braggeth, as though either himself had
the Uictorie, Or else, nothing should be won or lost. For, whereas D. Harding,
for proof of y^ Church Service in a Straung Tongue, and unknown to the Uulgare
people, and that also within the first vj.C. years, alleged the cumming of S.
Augustine the Monk and our Apostle into England, (which was by his account the
14. year of Mauritius Emperor, and the 596. of our Lord.) Master Jewel in
answering it says.

Of the 600* years after Christ, Jew. 192.
whereupon Iioyne wish him issue, Liberally, and of his own accord, he gives
me back five hundred, four scoare and sixtene, And of so great a number (as
600. are) reserueth unto himself four POOR YEARS, Wretched craking.
and yet, is not very certain of the same.

And then it follows. But if Marianus Scotus account be true, that Augustine
came into this Realm not the fourtienth of the Emperor Mauritius, but four
years after, which was just the six hundred year after Christ: then he
reserueth not one year to himself, but yeldeth me back altogether.

Lo what a wise contention here is: Ra.
And how sadly M. Jewel follows it?

Did he think with himself, that none, but Children or Idiotes, would Read
his Reply? And if he provided to make it so, as not only Wisemen should
consider it, but the Adversary also might ^e answered by it: how could he for
shame of the world, so Trifle, and Wrangle, and Set forth himself so much,
upon so little occasion? For, if the vj.C. years shall try the matter, he that
comes four years before they be ended, comes time enough to confute M.
Jewel. And his Cause therefore being lost, Or his Bragging at least confounded,
if, in any time before the vj.C. years expired, the contrary, to this
Assertion, may be proved: Why should he call them four Poor years, or set
them at naught, which making to the number of the first 600. years are part of
the years upon which he joined Issue, and are (by his apointement) of great
Authority.

The crake herein is, like as if one should say, In all S. Augustines works,
you shall not find this word Missa, and thereupon I will join with you: ( as
though a great point of Divinity consisted herein.) An other answeareth, yeas
Mary, I find the word in such, and such Sermons. Ser. 137. de temp:
Then Replieth the Challe^ger: Of so great a number of Tomes, as S. Augustine
has written, of so many books in every Tome. etc. (as far as his Rhetorike
permits) you geaue me back, Liberally, And of your own accord, all the sort
of them almost, and reserve unto your self two POOR SERMONS: and yet are you
not very certain of them, whether they be S. Augustines or ^oe. As if he
should say, I laid hard to his charge, and there was but two poor places
between me and the victory, which, although he has over me, yet, it shall not
be said that I lost it easily, and he shall not crake or triumph, that he came
lightly by it.

Confer now this Example with M. Jewels forsaied words. The place is before
thee, and being so plain as it is, it greueth me to spend time in Repe^ing and
Applying it.

But M. Jewel goes further, he will not leave so much as one years vantage to
D. Harding. For,

If Marianus Scotus account be true. Jew. 192.
(Note here that you know not your self what to answer absolutely) then M.
Harding reserueth not one year to himself, but yeldeth me back altogether.

Go to (M. Jewel) be it so. Ra.
Let D. Harding geaue ^uer all other vantage, and let it be supposed (which yet
is most false) that he had brought nothing for the proof of the Public Service
in the Uulgare Tongue, biside this Historye, of S. Augustines planting the
Christian Religion in England: Thus much only then is concluded, y^ just in the
vj.C. year after Christ (what so ever it was before) The Public Service was in
some place in such a tongue, as the vulgar people did not understand.

And what now shall we say to it? Where is the Uictorye? Nothing won or lost.
On your side, or D. Harding? But first it would be known whether you, at the
beginning, did take the vj.C. years, Exclusive or Inclusiue?

And whether you meant, that if to the last day of the six hundred year, any
thing should be found against you, you would subscribe: Or else, that if your
Adversaries Reason were not of an higher Date than the first day of the last
year of the vj. hundred, you would utterly refuse it.

Well, how so ever it be, it seems now that it is but a dead victory, Or a
Stale and that he which will check M. Jewel, must begin again, If Marianus
Scotus account be true* etc. As, on the other side, if it be false, then is he
ouercummed by four pore years yet, as he terms the^.

But consider now (Indifferent Reader) whether this be manly Dealing or no? To
refuse the Authority that is at Absurdities.
hundred years space. To pare every thing so precisely by the first

Is the Truth of God bound to the first six hundred years? M. Jew. puts
Truth within a Circle of years.
And must it not pass that cumpasse which M. Jewel has appointed unto it? Is
God a God of six hundred years only, and not of all time and all worlds? Was
the Holyghost promised to tarry with us, til vj.C. years were come and gone, and
not to the end of the world? The kingdom of Christ, which should be
everlasting, and his power which should not be taken away: must it be
interpreted now, to have their full term out, in vj.C. years only?

What Grace have the first vj.C, Or what curse of God have these last.ix.C.
years? Now know you also, when the first vj.C. ended, Or what trust have you in
them, which number the years unto you? Some Historiographers reckon one way,
Other reckon an other way.

What certainty then can you have of the^? Again, those writers whom you
follow, either do at this present live, Or he commended unto you by them that
now line. And how dare you trust, either those that now live and write of
things so long sens past: Or those, that a great while sens are dead, your
self not then borne to live with them, and examine their doings?

Consider also, how many have written within the space of these last nine
hundred years: how perfect in life, how Excellent in knowledge, how Painful in
studies, how Worthy in their own days, How Famous with the Posterity, How
mete witnesses in the cause of God, and trial of a Pure and holy Religion?
Abbates, Monks, Friars, are in these new Gospelling days, terms of great
shame and Ignominy: yet what says and honest Protestant, against S. Bernard,
Rupertus, Thomas Aquinas, Bonauenture, Dionysius the Carthusian, and other
such? Can M. Jewel find any fault in their life, by any Report of brute or
Fame? Or any Irreligiousnes in their books and wrytinges, which are extant,
for him to consider? Let him say his worst, Let him leave poring in Gloses of
no Authority, to find some mad thing or other, against the wisdom of the
Church, And let him confer his leisure to Reading or Examining rather of these
Witness (according to the State he takes upon him) whose sayings, he
knows, we esteem as we ought to do.

O, says he, these were of late days. I grant* And not only that, but also,
and you will, that they were in evil and corrupt days. But were they
corrupted in them? Did they not write against corrupt living? Did they suffer
new Preachers and Apostolikes, to go out of the Church or come against ye
church by their evil Doctrine? Or did they communicate with Pope, Cardinals,
Bishops, Abbots or any other of all the world in their living? Seeing they
neither f^ared hatred nor curred Favor, why should not their Testimony be
received, no other exception being brought against them, but that they lived in
so late days, or such A world?

All is Ungodly, All is Unreasonable, All is Uaineglorious, to appeal to the
at this present in Christendom, the Greatness of which has moved you to
believe, what so ever you believe upon any good ground.

Here therefore M. Jewel, defend your doings, And show us the cause, wherefore
you do, or should refuse the Testimony of the last ix. hundred years which
are against you. If it be not for Childeshnesse, or Wantonness, or
Unsensiblenesse, that you will none of so many and so grave Witnesses: yet
except you allege some honest cause and reason, It will remain, I believe,
that you do it upon a very blind Stomach and contention. My questions are
short, and easy to be answered, if you have any Faith or Conscience at all. As
in Example.

Was there not a Church of God, Here let any Protestant geaue a Reason of his
faith?
in the world, when you were borne?

Did not the Greatness, Gravity and Authority of Nations which were of it,
move you to believe?

Did the Invisible and little Congregation work that effect in you?

If ye trusted the Catholic Church of your time, in commending Christ unto
you, and without her Commendatyon would not have credited him: can you, with a
safe conscience, contemn the voice of the same Church, And, to color your
defection and Fleeing from it, take hold fast of the first six hundred years
only, As though you could with all your wit, judge better what the Primitive
Church thought and believed, than the present Church which is of one Spirit with
the Primitive. etc.

But there is no Remedy, upon the first six hundred years M. Jewel joins
with us, And if any thing be longer than that measure, he will none of it: he
has said it.

How M. Jewel himself does use the Testimonies of what so ever Age and
writer, though he bind other to the first six hundred years only.
TO the first six hundred years cumpasse then, we must be bound, al against
Reason and Conscience, but what shall we do, when the standing in our right
against the Adversary, How the heretics do apointe 1. questions 2. Order of
disputing 3. Manner of Authorities, 4. Age of the witnesses: all at pleasure but
nothing, after right and reason.
and the Refusing to encountre with him upon his conditions, shallbe thought of
some Judges to be A Prejudice unto our cause, and A great Argument that our
hearts fail us?

Dispute (says the Heretic) with me, upon these questions, whether the
Public Service in an unknown tongue, Or Receiving under one kind, Or
Reserving of the Sacrament in A Pix with A Canopie over it* etc. Was ever used
in the Primitive Church. No Mary (would I say, if it were to me only), I will
not Dispute with thee upon thees^ points. But, if thy Heart and Learning serve
thee, make few words and Answer me, from whence thou c^mest? Who sent thee?
Reasonable Demaundes.
What are their Names? Where are their Sees? What is their Succession? What is
their Authority? In which points if thou satisfy me, not only then, in these
few Articles which thou demaundest, but in every point and part of the
Religion, which thy Church aloweth, I will be Faithful and Obedient.



First he will Dispute in Latin: Then he will write his mind, and speak
nothing: After that, he will have the matter Reasoned in English, and wise men
shall be Judges: And, after that again, he will have it done in the hearing of
the people, not by quick Disputation, but by Reading only the Arguments out
of a Book.

If the Catholic Disagree in any point, and stand upon it: either
stubburnesse, either Mistrust of his Cause, either some fault or other, shall be
laid unto him. And so were many great and heighnous matters Objected against
S. Ambrose, Ambr. lib. 5.
because he refused to have the cause between himself and the Heretic
Auxentius, Ep. 33.
to be tried in the Consistory of the Emperor, before Secular Judges. And his
Exception, against the Place only and Audience, was accounted an high and
intolerable Treason.

In like manner: You shall Dispute tried by the linely word of God, That they
flee the light, That they dare not commit their cause to the Scriptures.



Be it so then, The Catholic must let go the vantage of ix.C. years, he must
fight within that time and cumpasse that the Heretic prescribes: And although
that naturally, al men are more favorable, to them that are called in to the
law, than the suers and troblers of them, and suffer the defendant, whom
worldly frindship clean forsakes, to have as much right as his cause will
geaue him: Yet, let all things be forgoten, which may commend the Catholics,
and as M. Jewel has appointed, so, let the first six hundred years only be
considered and allowed.

But here now let me ask one Question. As it not Reason, A most reasonable
condition.
like as our adversary prescribes unto us, the number and Term of years, out
of which we must gather our Arguments: that so likewise he, should not come
against us with any Testimony or Authority, which were out of those appointed
Limits and bounds of years? If a Challenger shall say to the Party whom he
Provoke, come, let us strait ways try the matter between our selves in the
plain Field, and bring thou thy Sword and Buckler as I will mine: when they
are agreed, upon the Time, Place, and kind of Weapon, if the Challenger would,
against the others single sword, come with sword, dager, horse, spear, Dagge,
and what so ever defense or help he could get ^yside, should he not be compted
Awretched and Contentious, and A glorious Jack Bragger? He that bids the
combat, seems to take himself for the better man, and to like his own cause
and quarrel very well: how Ignominious then and Shameful must it be unto him,
not to fight upon equal conditions with his Adversary?

Reason you against me (says M. Jewel) out of the first six hundred years
only: but I for all that, will be at my liberty to use any Testimony out of
the xv.C. and odd years sens Christ. Which in very deed is as much to say, as
knele you here upon one knee, and Fight not out of this Circle which I make to
you, As for my self I will go or run at my pleasure about you, and take my
vantage where I can find it, sometimes within, sometimes without the Circle,
sometimes standing nigh, sometimes coursing about the field.

Mary Sir, if such Privileges might be granted to Warriers, it were an easy
matter to prolong the Battle, and to win the praise of much manliness, by
spurring cut hither and thither, and no matter how. For, he takes no care
hereof, how truly he allege, the Testimonies of these last nine hundred years,
Or how worthy and approved Authors they be, whom he alleges, but without
exception he takes all that he finds, and from the highest to the lowest,
from the Text to the Gloss, and among Gloses from the best to the worst of
them, he Takes, and Draws, and Heapeth against us, All that may seem to
help his Assertions.

Tell us therefore (I pray you M. Jewel) what Equity or Conscience you follow?
Will you bind the Catholics, to the first six hundred years, And will your
self argue out of cumpasse? May not we use the worthy Authority of
Bonifacius, because he was Bishop of Rome in the year of our Lord 680, and will
you admit the sayings and doings of Luther, Zwinglius and Calvin, all
condemned Persons; through the Catholic Church, and living xv.C years after
Christ?

S. Bernard (you say) was A man of late years. So was Dionisius the Carthusian,
So were others, whom I have rekened up, in the chapter before: And therefore,
by your account, of less Authority. And why then do you all^age not only S.
Bernard, Jewel.
but Durand, Gerson, Alexander, 260
Lynwod, Camotensis, Hugo Cardinalis, 195.
Eckius, Aeneas Syluius, Erasmus, 150.
and other? I report me to the very margin of your book, 199
by that it will appear, 175.
whether you do not stuff your book, 177
with Canons, Constitutions, Gloses, 10.
Histories, Interpretations of scripture, Testimonies of Fathers, Opinions of
Scholemen. etc. such as altogether you scrape out of these last nine C. years.
For which your so doing, if you can bring any Reason, or show any Special
Pryuilege granted to you, against the law of Nature, that you might do against
an other, that, which you would not have done to your self: either, of this
unreasonable Favor and License, you must geaue some cause, or else you must
suffer us to complain of it, that you dele not with us Indifferently.

But it will be thought, perchaunse, of others, that you allege not y^ later
Writers, of any time these nine C. years, for the Estimation or Credit, which
you have them in, but only, because your Adversary makes great Price of them.

Suppose it were so: yet you do him great Wrong, to put him to Answering of
more Witnesses, than he should do by right: And to fill your Reply with those
men's sayings, whose Authorit^es though he do not contemn, yet he would not
have them to possess, and occupy y^ place, which more Ancient and worthier
Persons should have. And although we think as it becomes us, of s. Bernard,
s., Bonaue^ture, S. Denyse. etc. Yet, if you would needs have us in Reasoning
with you, not to pass the Bounds and Term of vj.C. years, you should not,
though we allowed the Persons never so much, bring any of A lower degree and
later age against us, either to stand in the place which S. Hierome, S.
Ambrose, S. Augustine, or S. Chrysostom should occupy, either to commend that
place the better by their Presence, which the Ancient Fathers of the Primitive
Church, do furnishe abundantly by themselves: and which also they only should
furnishe, by your appointement. And further I say, that if you will not suffer
me to take any vantage against you, by the testimony of any good Man or writer
of the nine hundred years last past, it is no equality, that, whther I will or
no, you should make me to Answer the sayings, which you bring against me, out
of those years which you pass not upon. And whereas it shall do me no good,
though I prove, that S. Bernard (for Example) in that place which you will
allege, does not only not hinder, but also further my cause: to what purpose
should I spend anyetime at all, in hearing or examining his words, which,
although I declare to make for me, may not be lawfully used of me?

And therefore, notwithstanding you judge truly of us herein and better of us
than of your self, that we, the Catholics, do not refuse the Authority of
later Fathers and Doctors, whom the Church yet never condemned or despised:
Yet, this our credit which we have them in, must not serve you for any cause
or excuse, why ye should bring them forth against us, except we may do the
like against you. For, as you have appealed to the first vj.C. years, thereby
to let us of our Liberty, so we do require you also, not to pass that number
or cumpasse of those years, thereby to cut away your superfluity. And in thus
doing, we are not weary of the later Doctors of Christendom, nor afraid of
their Judgments but we are offended with your vainglorious, and very wretched
behauioure, which will not keep the law yourselfe, that you prescribe unto
other.

There is, I grant, A kind of Argument ad hominem, non ad rem, to the man not
to the matter. As, to some of our Country men, at this present, and them of the
most Perfect and exquisite Trade, in following of the Gospel, if A Catholic do
say, that Father Calvin himself, (whose Judgment is much praised in the
Congregation,) was of this mind, Com: ^, Amos
and was also Zealous in it, that they did very ill, which ga^e to king Harry
the viij. that he should be head of the Church: this argument so taken of his
Authority, that was a Proud, and Folishe, And Lousie Heretic, although it be
nothing worth in deed, and in that respect not to be used of A Catholic, Yet,
to him that accompteth of Calvin, as if he had been one of ye lights of the
World, y^ Catholic may right well use it, and drive him by force of the
Consequence, either to deny Caluines Authority (which he will not) Or y^ kings
supremacy (which he dares not.) So y^ against him, that is addicted to any one
Opinion of his own, or of other who^ he builds upon, to bring an Argument
grounded upon his own Opinion and judgment, and thereby to make him forsake his
own opinion, or keep still in his memory the Contradiction which inwardly
pincheth him: It is A kind of Reasoning, good and profitable.

And, in this respect, if any Catholic were so blind and singular, as to set
more by the Gloss upon Vna^ Sancta^, Extr. de Mayor and Obed* than the
Commentaries of S. Hierome, and S. Chrysostom: Or by Durand, Gerson, Lynwod.
etc. than any of the most Ancient Fathers: M. Jewel then, might be suffered to
argue ad hominem, that is, to allege Gloses, Scholemen and later Doctors, to
him that has A special fancy unto those, more than any of the Primitive
Church. But now, se y^ Inequality and ods. For neither D. Har^nor his
Inferiors, are so ignorant of y^ sense and strength of this word Catholic, y^
they should be addicted to any one, two, or three men's private sayings of what
degree or time so ever they have been, (without the consent or warrant of the
Church) neither should M. Jewel allege unto them, any Testimony of the last
nine hundred years, himself referring the trial of the the whole matter to the
first vj.C. only. And having such Adversaries, as are very well content, to be
ordered by the sentence and Judgment of that first age, and that Primitive
Church.

Yet go to for a while, let M. Jewel be suffered: And let it be his excuse,
that he has argued always ad hominem, to the man, when he has used the
Testimonies of later times, thereby to impugn D. Harding. Let him say (I
mean) that he has recited in his Replye, Durand, Gerson, Biel, Denyse, Hugo
Cardinal, Thomas Duns. etc. not, because himself aloweth them, but, because
they are esteemed of y^ party against who^ he writes.

But is this true? And has not he used their Testimonies in respect also of
his own opinion, and confirmed himself in it, because of their Testimonies?
When he reasons Substantially, and Directly, and Plainly to his Purpose, and
ad rem to the matter, and out of his own Principles (as it were) and
Authorities, does he not allege the forsayde Doctors, although they were, all
the sort of them, far under the first six hundred years, to which only he
would have the Decision of the controversies referred? Whether this be so or
no, let Examples try it.

M. Jewel is of the Opinion that no Christian Churches were built in the
Apostles time: Jew. 19^.
And much less then Aulters (if his Logic be good.) For may we think
(says he) that Aulters were built before the Church? Of which Lie, In the
Chapter of Lies.
we shall speak in an other place. But to my purpose. It follows in him:

Neither afterward, Jew.
when Aulters were first used, and so named, were they strait way built of
Stone, as Durandus and such others say, they must needs be, and that, Quia
petra erat Christus, Because Christ was the Stone.

Whereof then were they built, Ra.
according to your Opinion? And what Cause or Authority have you for it? It
follows.

For Gerson says, Jew.
that Siluester Bishop of Rome, first caused Stone Aultars to be made. etc.

Is Gerson then, Ra
of Authority with you? And a man of so late years, and little Fame and
Estimation, in comparison of many Fathers and Doctors of the ix.C. years last
past, all which you refuse, is he now a witness for your^ Here it is plain
that you bring in this late writer, to serve directly your own Opinion, and,
that he stands you in such steed, that without him, you prove not that
which you said.

You depend not therefore upon your Adversaries allowing of Gerson. as who
should say: if he admit the Testimony of him, then do I confirm my
Assertion, and if he do not, yet have I other Authorities to prove my sayings
true: but, you do so absolutely and proprely for your own Opinion use him,
that without him, you leave your matters unproven. But let us see an other
Example.

It is required of M. Jewel, that forasmuch as the Catholics could never
yet find, that the Public Service in the Primitive Church, was in any other
than Greek or Latin, and he yet is sure of the Contrary, that it was every
where in a tongue known to the Uulgare People: he show therefore his Profes
and Authorities, such by all likelyhode, as himself is persuaded withal,
before he would have other to allow them. Mark then what he says.

And, Jew. 175.
to avoid multitude of words, the case being plain, Eckius in locis Com.
Durand. lib. 4. ca. 1. Nicolaus Lyra. Thomas in. 1. ad Cor. 14.
Eckius says, the Indians had their Service, in the Indian tongue, Durandus
says, The Jews, that were Christened, had their Service in the Hebrew tongue.

Nycolas Lyra, and Thomas de Aquine, say, The Common Service in the Primitive
Church was in the Common vulgar tongue.

And in the next leaf following, he aleageth Aeneas Syluius and an Extrauagant
de Officio Iudicis Ordinarij. 177.
and John Billet in Summa de Diuinis officijs.

But what are all these? Ra.
Were they not writers of very late Years? Were they not Popisshe Doctors, or
Popysshe Proctours, not woorthe the naming (by M. Jewels Account) and much
less worth the Crediting? Why the^ does he allege them? Will he say, he
condescended herein to D. Hardinges Infirmity? And, that he uses his own
Doctors for the better contentation of his mind? No verily he must not say so.
For he was required to bring his own grounds and witnesses, and not such, as
are allowed only per accidens, that is, because it so happens, that an other
man likes them. He was content also to show his profes, and to yield to the
foresaid Request, both for the goodness and pregnancie of the cause, Jew. 175.
and also specially, Good Christian Reader, (says he,) for the better
Contentation of thy mind.

If the cause then be good and pregna^t, why use you so ill and baren
Testimonies, as all theirs are (if your account be true) which come forth,
after the first six hundred years? And, if you seek after the Contentation of
your Readers mind, you signify thereby, that the Authorities, which you
allege, are worthy and alowable. Not, because Doctor Harding will make no
Exception, perchance, against them, but because yourselfe like them and
esteem them.

Otherwise, what Contentation of the Readers mind, call you this, to Reason
upon their Authorities, whom yourself would have to be contemned? Or, to
establish any opinion upon such grounds upon which you can build nothing,
except unto him, which holds them for sure and good? Of which sort of men,
you make not (I trust) every your good Christian Reader to be. Especially, many
of them, by your often Appealing to the first six hundred years, being
occasioned, to set little by any Testimony of lower time and degree.

Thus we see again, that M. Jewel has used the late writers Testimony
Eckius, Durand, Thomas Aquinas, and John Billet, not, because of D. Hardinges
opinion or regard of them (which how great or little it is, he does not know)
but, because of his own liking of them.

Neither does he peeke (as it were) an occasion to use them, out of his
Adversaries estimation of them, but whether D. Harding aloweth them or no, M.
Jewel flatly uses them, nor is ashamed of the latenes of them. A thing, at
other times so material with him, that on pain of forfaiting all a man's
labor, none must be brought in for witnesses, but such as are, within little,
a thousand year old.

See one place more and with that, we shall end this Chapter. It is a
question between the Catholics and the Heretics, Whether the words of
Christ, in the sixth of S. John, are to be understood, only of the
spiritual eating of his body, Or of the Spiritual and Sacramental both. The
first is the new Masters, the second is the Old Fathers. To prove the
first, that the words of our Savior in that Chapter, are taken and meant of
spiritual eating only, Thus says Master Jewel.

For to leave S. Augustine, Jew. 104
Origin, and others of that age: Nicolas Lyra, a man of later years says, The
said words of Christ, must needs be taken Spiritually, and none otherwise.

Likewise, one Michael Vaehe, one of late years, a man of M. Hardings own
side, touching the same matter, writes thus ( against Luther.) This says he,
is a weak reason, for, the words, that be spoken of Spiritual eating* He
Applies to the Sacramental eating. Here may M. Harding see, besides S.
Augustine, Origin, and other old Catholic Fathers, whose Words I have not
aleaged, what men he has called New Masters. Nicolas Lyra, was an Englisshe
man, and lived two hundred years before Luther. Michaell Vaehe, was of late
years, and wrote namelye against Luther.

Here I trow, Ra.
it is perceived that M. Jewel uses late writers Testimonies, in defense of
his side. The question is, whether the sixth of S. John, be understood of
Spiritual eatinge only or no. If it be, let us set your Authorities (M.
Jewel) and reasons.

The new masters (as D. Hard. terms them) expound it so. They are not all
new masters (say you) that have so taken the How prove you that? For Nicolas
Lyra (You Answer) says it* and one Michael Vaehe one of late years. M. Jew.
belieth his witnesses.
They say it not, that it is to be understood only of Spiritual eating,
but of Spiritual eating without ONLY. Suppose yet they said it, what were
that to purge the new Masters of the fault of Singularity, or to persuade
your Reader that it must be so taken? I do not disprayse neither Nicolas Lyra,
neither Michaell Uehe, but I can not but mislike it greatly in you, to aleage
their Names in your defense, whose Authorities are neither Excellent, nor
Years Ancient. Especially, whereas you would seem to have S. Augustine,
Origin, and others of that age, to stand with you in this matter. But you
leave them and come to Nicolas Lyra.

What do you M. Jewel? Is there any man, in all the Catholic Church, which
will give you leave, M. Jew. leaves S Augustine etc. ^ follows Nicolas Lyra:
to answer him rather by Nicolas Lyra, then S. Augustine? And does it become
your Manheade and Courage, (which is so great, that you will have Controversies
examined by no later writers, then those of the first six hundred years,) thus
to leave, S. Augustine (whose Authority is worthelye regarded of all wise men)
and clean to Nicolas Lyra, whose testimony any man (except it be of contempt)
may lawfully let alone with out using or alowing of it? You commend him to us
in two points, He was (you say) An English man, and lived two hundred years
before Luther. I have read the contrary, that he was a Jew, borne at Liere:
nevertheless if you for Country sake (as borne perchance in the old or new
Jury in London) or for Age sake, as living two hundred years before Luther, do
think that he is a worthy witness to English men of this age, I will not
reprove your kindness of heart toward your Countrymen, nor affection to the
time later by seven hundred years than the Primityue church unto which you
apeale so precisely: But this, who can abide? To consider M. Iuell, so great a
Contemner of later Dyuines and Scholemen, to leave S. Augustine, Absurd.
Origin and others, and to defend his fellows, by Nycolas Lyra and Michaell
Vaehe? And not only that, but to crake (as it were) that S. Augustine is also
with him, and yet not so much as to name the Place where it might be sought
and found. For consider his words.

Here may M. Hardinge see besides S. Augustine, 104
Origene, and other old Catholic Fathers, whose words I have not allegaed,
M. Jew. belieth himself.
what men he has called New Masters.

In deed, Ra.
he may see that you have brought forth, Nycolas Lyra, and one Michael Vaehe:
but y^ he may se them, bysydes S. Augustine, Origene, and other Old Catholic
Fathers, How is it possible? For your self confess, that, you have not
alleged their words. And how then should he see them? If D. Harding do no
more, but quote only the Places of the Doctors, in which his sayengs be
verefied, And leave the writing out of their whole Sentences: all this (you will
say) is but a Camissado, I^w. 6.
these be but visardes: They be no faces: They are brought in, like Mummers,
for a show, and say nothing. And what pretty Cou^terfeiting may we call this,
to allege A later writers saying fully, and not so much as quote the place of
the old Fathers: And yet, to make an O^tentation with, here may M. Harding
see, bysides S. Augustine, Origin, and other old Catholic Fathers whose words
I have not alleged, what men he has called new masters? Uerely, this is biside
all reason, to tell me that bysides S. Augustine etc. I may See what Nycolas
Lyra testifies, where no one Sentence or Half sentence of S. Augustines is to
be Seen, Heard, or Understanded, in the place on which I am bid to look.

But, This is worse than mu^mery.
I have not alleged their words, says M. Jewel. And why did you not, I pray
you, Sir? Were you in such have to come to Nycolas Lyra and Michael Vaehe, that
you could not carry with S. Augustine, Origene, and other old Catholic Fathers?
Is it your manner of writing, to spare the Alleging of old Fathers? Or, was
their word, not worth the hearing? Or, must we needs believe your Assertion,
without further evidence? The Truth is, neither Saint Augustine, nor Origin,
nor any other old Catholic Fathers did precisely say, that the sixth of S.
Ihon, must be understood only of the Spiritual eating of Christ's flesh. And
you, although you could not have their voices, yet you were so bold as to use
their Names: And pretending, as though it were easy to see, that they did
testify for you, so, you leave them quite and clean, and bring in, Nycolas
Lyra an Englisheman, and Michael Uaehe of late years, to speak somewhat for
you.

Consider now (Indifferent Reader) whether M. Jewel uses the later Writers, as
Necessary Witnesses in his own cause, or no? And whether he brings them in,
as Men whom D. Harding is well content withal, Or as Persons, without whom,
his sayings, could have no Probalitie at all? For, if he had alleged, first S.
Augustine, Origin, and other old Catholic Fathers, and afterward, had
rehearsed the Opinions and Judgments of later writers: he might have been
thought to have done it for A Surplussage, and to have sought thereby, to
persuade rather his Adversary, than to Confirm his own Assertion. But on the
other side now, to leave S. Augustine, Origin and other Fathers, and to stay
only upon Lyra and Uaehe, what other thing is it, than to Protest that by their
Testimonies his cause is Sufficientlye proved? And, to take vantage of their
sayings, which lived out of the six hundred, next after Christ? And, this is
that which deserves just Indignation, that any man, bearing the Person and
Face, of one that had discretion or Conscience, should bind an other to a
certain compass of Time and Years, which, in no case, he should pass, in
Debating of any controversy: And yet, would in the mean Time himself, Argue,
Reason, and Conclude, out of any Time, and require to have it stand, for proof
good and sufficient, of his own Assertions: And to use that kind of Liberty
or Prerogative, not only when he speaks ad hominem, that is, to the Meaning,
Sense, Opinion, or Fancy of the man, with whom he has to do, but also, ad
rem, that is, according to his own Meaning and Judgment, in which, he takes
the testimonies by himself alleged, to perteine, Directly, and in deed, to
Confirmation of the cause, which he susteineth.

Yet (as I said before) let M. Jewels excuse be, that he has used Late
w^yters Testimonies, not for any stay of his own Opinions (the contrary whereof
I have showed) but to stop only D. Hardinges mouth, and to set one Papist
against an other, Let him so say, and let us so take it: yet, is this no
indifferent dealing. For, if he will bind us to the first six hundred years, and
himself yet, will press us with Authorities of later age, either he minds
that we shall Answer him in them, or hold our peace and be still.

If we shall answer: why appointed he the Lymites of six hundred years to be
kept of us? For, when he provoke us, with matter collected out of the cumpasse
of them, we must needs come also out of them, and join with him, thereupon.

And, if he minded that we should not at all Answer him, and that himself yet,
would Object such Testimonies unto us: Why did he then Object them? Except we
shall Judge of him, that he is so Folishe, as to apoint it, or so Proud and
Stately, as to conceive it, that it may be lawful for him, in fighting
against his Adversary, to have certain Places open unto his Desperate Foynes,
and that no Warding of the Danger, and no Buckler should be used. And
therefore,

It is not to be granted unto you M. Jewel, to Bind us to the first six
hundred years, And to be Loose yourselfe, concerning any witness or
Authority, of the nine hundred folowinge: To set us within a Circle, and
yourselfe to Discourse out of Order and Cumpasse: To forbid us, the Alleging
of S. Bernard, and yet to charge us with the Opinion of Michael Uehe, or any
such other. No Sir: to the first six hundred you have Appealed, to the first
six hundred only, you shall stand.

If you will Reply, they be our own Doctoures, and therefore we may not
Refuse them: We Answer shortly unto you, that whereas in your Singular
Judgment they be no Doctoures at all, And whereas you will not Suffer them to
be O^res, Or that we may allege them and recite the^ as our own: we therefore
in this Case and State of Reasoning with you, do not take them for our own.
Yea, they must be so compted upon and so set aside, as if they were no men's
witnesses at all, Because you, in Drawing the matter to the first six hundred
years only, do Import and Conclude thereby, that, of al later Times and
Writers, you would have A sad Silence to be agreed upon, and kept.

But, where will M. Jewels Glory be then? And, if he himself shall use no
Testimony under the first vj.C. years: how little will his Reply be? How
uncertain must his Answers be? How great Blindness and Silence must he come
unto? Take away from M. Jewel, and his fellows the last nine hundred years, and
you take away from them the Flowers of their Divinity. The flowers of the new
Gospel.
Out of those years, they Rake all the evil that is spoken, of Popes,
Cardinals, Priests. etc. that by reueling other men's Turpitude, they may
commend their own bare Honesties. Out of those, come many Canons of Councels,
Constitutions of Emperors, Uarieties of Historiographers, Conclusions and
Distinctions of Schole men, in the number of which, it is easy to find
somewhat, always, that shall sound against the Catholics. Either, because all
things, are not to be taken as they lie, but need an Interpretation: either
because, when many write of one Fact, Or entreat of one matter, they do not
always so thoroughly agree, in every point of the History or Question, but
that he, whom it Pleases to strive thereupon with an other, may sone find A
doubt Or Argument to serve his humor of Contradiction. Out of those, many
Gloses are peeked, so Obscure or Trifling, that were it not, for the Diligence
of Heretics, which have brought them forth in to light, They would as little
have been sought for of the Catholics, As they are now little esteemed of them,
when they are Found out and showed to them by the Heretics.

Take therefore, the wrytinges of the last nine hundred years, away from the
Protestants, and there must needs follow, such lack of matter, to make up
their Tales, that they will sone be at an end, both in writing and in
Preachinge. And, not only concerning their ill Purposes: (As, to bring either
the Departed into hatred, by opening their faults, Or them that at this
Present line, into Infamy, by charging them with the faults of their
Forefathers (but, concerning also good and wholesome Laws, Decrees, Definitions,
Orders of Government, Customs, Ceremonies, which have been in these last nine
hundred years, Wisely appointed, and Profitablie continued, If nothing, that is
testified by the Writings and Practice of them, shall stand in any steed to
make a Sentence or Argument: what Confusion, Contention, Destruction,
Blindness, Desperatnesse, will be caused in both States, Spiritual and
Temporal, It is easy to be percea^ed.

What Church shall keep her Privileges? what Clergy continue in any Order of
Serving God? what King or Emperor, maineteine the Crown upon his head? what
state of Common wealth in all Christendom may be defended?

If, the Records, Wrytinges, Answers, Decrees, Acts, Dispensations,
Conclusions, and Laws of the last nine hundred years, must be, all, either
utterly refused, Or beter Examined before they be received?

For in these later years, Countries have been converted: Religion has been
Planted: Heresies, by the Authority of Councels, have been condemned: The
Empire, has been translated: Our own Realm of England has been conquered,
And, in all these so great points, the Iudgmente and Sentence of the Pope
has always ben regarded. And that, which at this day is holden for Truth, in
A thousand cases both Spiritual and Temporal, depends in deed upon the
Decree and Order, which the Governors of the Church for that time, made for it
and appointed, when the case was first moved, Or exhibited.

If therefore, no Authority or Testimony of these later nine hundred years,
must be admitted, let M. Jewel with all his own wit, And Policy of his friends
byside, see how he can begin the World a fresh.

And, the foundation of six hundred years standing on sure ground, let him
pull down all, that has been builded, and show us some fine pe^ce of work
of his own, such I trow as shall in all Proportion agree with the Primitive
Church and rise in a most goodly Order of every H^ndred year since, one
above an other, until he come unto this very time, in which he lives, and
give men to see most plainly and evidently, that his Church now, is of the
same making, without any Imperfection, Or gaping of the work that may be
espied. Let him I say make an Uniforme and Apt work.

For if he will begin at the end of the six Hundred years, and immediately,
join thereto, the state of His Congregation at this Present: either it will be
a Miraculous work to see foundacions with me^ely high walls, and a Roufe a
great way from them, without any Stone, Timber, Stay or Workemanshippe
between: Either will it be a very E^ilfauoured matter, to see one piece
hanging so far from the other, as Germans of Heretics lips do hang
together. If therefore your building be Sure and True, Join years to years,
and without all gappes or holes, make the whole, Perfect, Close, and One.

But ye are as well able to do it, and knit or join your Church to the
Primitive, as ye are to build up again, All the Abbeies in England, Or prove
unto us that the Stones of them, which lie now broken in high ways, or were
carried out of the way, to building of Gentelmens places, do answer rightly in
the form which they have at this present, to the Foundations and Pillars,
remainyng, yet, unto some Religious houses, from whence they have been taken.
Especially this Principle of your Artificio^snes standing, that the Testimony
of these last nine hundred years, is not to be Alleged or Allowed.

Which being so Unjust and Unreasonable, as I have declared, Either, let M.
Jewel utterly put out of his Replye, what so ever he has gathered and scraped,
out of Canons, Gloses, Scholemen, Heretics, Historiographers, and other
Writers whatsoever of later years, And from hensefurth, fill no more Papers
with such kind of stuff: Either else, let him be ashamed, to bind us to the
first six hundred only, himself not able to Contain himself, Or Maintain
his cause, within that cumpasse.

But, I know, I ask his loss. For, If he may not peeke out of all times such
Signs of Defense for his cause, as ma^^ seem to serve for it, he will be
quickly undone in the best Limme he has, And, without all doubt will be
^ongtied. As, on the other side, If he will set us have right, and suffer us to
prove our cause by godly and Learned witnesses, of what so ever Age they be, so
that he can make no lawful Exception against them, then is he utterly undone
in his own Conscience: knowing that the Catholic Church, does expressly and
by name, condemn his Masters Heresies. So that it is not otherwise likely, but
he will have us to stand fast bound to the first six hundred years, and will
reserve unto himself, that special Privilege, to Take and Make his vantage,
Where, and When so ever he may.

1 That M. Jewel refuses to ^e tried by the Sentence or Testimony of the first
six hundred years, to which only he appealeth.
WHat Remedy then? If M. Jewel shall provoke manfully, and wretchedly apoint
us a bound, which we may not go beyond in coming against him: If he may use
xv.C. years and odd, and we not vi. C. and one day over: If he shall fetch need
less vagaries, and we be restrained of our lawful liberty: what Remains*
Uerelye to have patience, until it shall please Almighty God either to
conuer^e his heart to repentance, either to move the minds of other, to hau^ a
better consideration of these Matters which pertain to their Salvation,
either to come him self in Judgment, and make an end of all Proceedings.
Yet this in the mean time, thou may consider (indifferent Reader) that we
are two manner of ways abused, by M. Jewel.

First, that ye will prescribe unto us from whence we shall take our Arguments
against him. Secondly, that himself will not be content with those Conditions,
which he prescribes unto us.

But is this all the wrong that Master Jewel does unto Us? No, it is not all.
For now, I shall declare unto thee, how Himself will not admit the Witnesses
of the very first six hundred years, unto which he straightly byndeth us. And
what can be more unreasonable? For in seperating the last nine Hundred from
the first six, and in alowing the First, and condemning the Latter, what does
he but note unto us the I^corruption and Purity of Faith in those days, and
not warrant the Testimonies to be good, if it be taken out of the first six
hundred years after Christ.

Of the first he says, Jew. ^. ^*
If any learned man. etc be able to bring any one Sufficient Sentence. etc.
that the things upon which he Chalengeth us, were used or allowed in the
Primitive Church, for the space of six hundred years after Christ, I am
content to yield and subscribe. Of the Later years he says. 116.
S. Bernard is a Doctor but of late years, therefore his Authority must weigh
the Lighter.

If therefore there be no Excellency or Prerogative in the first six hundred,
why divided he them, so Precisely and Diligently from the later nine? And, If
there be so Great, as he seems to make, why will not he himself stand unto
the Judgment of that Primitive Church, And that first age so chaste and
undefiled? Choose one of these two (M. Jewel,) which you will: And let us see
an Example and token, either of your wisdom and Prudencie, in Separating, for
some just cause, the Beginninges of the One, and whole Sum of xv.C. years,
from the latter ends of it: either of your Justice and Indifferency, in
regarding the witnesses of the First six hundred years, which you require to be
exactly followed of others.

For as you say, Jew. 140.
Lyra and Teutonicus, lived at the least, Thirtene C. years after Christ:
Therefore their Authority must needs seem the less: Why say ye not also,
S. Leo, and S. Gregory, lived five hundred years after Christ, Therefore
their Authority must needs seem the less? Or why put you A Difference,
between the Former and the later years of the xv. C. in which Christ has ruled
his church? And, if your wisdom saw good causes, wherefore you should sort y^
years which have passed sense Christ's Incarnation after a rare manner, and cul
out (as it were) the best from the worst: with what Conscience then and
Equity, can you refuse to be ordered by the Testimony of the better sort of
them?

For, if against the later nine hundred years which you take from us, this
Exception of yours is enough to discredit them, M. Jew. special Exception
against the last ix.C. years, proves that he would be ordered by the vi.C. y^
went before.
that they were Late: It follows consequently, that to the first six hundred
years, this alone is Commendacion enough, that yourselfe make no Exception
against them, but permit us to take all the vantage we can out of them. As if
you should have expressly said unto us: for as much as I will admit no Late
Catholic Doctor, Father, or Council, but Catholic, Old and Ancient, And,
for as much as I take the last nine hundred and odd years sens Christ, to be
but late, and out of the cumpasse, which I will allow unto you in reasoning
against me: Therefore, if you look, that I shall make no Exception against the
Authority and Witnesses which you will bring, Provide by time, that they be
taken out of the vj.C. years, next after Christ.

This Truth therefore so standing, that, In refusing the witnesses of Later
years, you must be understood to allow unto us the Catholyke writers of
Ancient time, and this Ancient time, being defined unto us by you, y^ it
consists just in y^ vj.C. next after Christ, so that if it be found later
but by one year, you will not take it to be old enough: Let us see now, in what
Manner and Fashion, you conform yourself to the judgment of that very Time,
which you took yourselfe unto, So precisely, as if it should make altogether
for you.

First of all, you do not allow, Clemens de Consti Apost. Neither Abdias:
Jew. 7. 8. 9. 12. 233. 264. 66. and. 223.
nor Hypolitus Martyr. And Athanasius Epistle is to you a Scar crow stuffed up in
straw, and Julius Epistle seems to ^auoure of some corruption: And at one
word, Ancient Authorities denied by M. Jewel.
the Decrees and Epistles decretal deprave the Scriptures, Mainetaine the
kingdom of the Pope, Publisshe a multitude of Vain Ceremonies, and I can not
tell what. For how worshipful and worthy causes, you make Exceptions against
them, you shall better understand that by him, which alleged them.

But concerning my Objection, I have more plain and sensible Demonstrations,
to declare, how you refuse Ancient Fathers, and witnesses, that I need not to
reason at all with you, about your Ignominious and Injurious Extenuations of
the forsaid Authorities. And, if by these Examples which I shall now bring, it
be not made Open and manifest, that in deed you little regard Antiquity, then
will nothing ever make it plain: And, if this which I shall declare, do prove
so much to the Indifferent Reader, Enough is as Much, as he can require.

Here then, it would be remembered or considered, that, which D. Harding
brings, Hist. Eccl. li. 8. ca. 5.
out of the Ecclesiastical History, for A token and argument of Communion
under one kind: The Story is, of A noble woman and Heretic, which, being
driven thereto, by fear of leesing her husband, promised him to Receive with
him. And, at the time of the Mysteries, having the Sacrament delivered into her
hands, she Received it not, but took of her Maied that stood by, A piece of
Bread, that she had caused to be brought for the purpose, from her own house.
Which, as she would have biten, it hardened in to a Stone. Hereof D. Harding
gathers, that.

If both kinds had then ben ministered, Harding. Fol. 45
she would have practiced some other shift, for the avoiding of the Cup, which,
had not ben so easy. what says M. Jewel hereunto?

I may not disgrace the credit of this Story, Jew. 136. Flateringly.
albeit, in Sozomenus and Nicephorus, of both whom, the same is recorded,
there be sundry things, that may well be Filed.

You signify then, Ra.
that you might do more, than you will. And, were it not for A certain quiet
Affection, that is suddenly come over your mind, we see, that, because
Sozonemus and Nicephorus have sundry things, that may well be filed,
Undoubtedly, this Storye should be one of them, If it were, at this present
your Pleasure. But, because you fear no Inconvenience, If you should grant
it, therefore you make no Exception against it. And yet, least by this letting
of the Story to pass so quietly, you should seem to geaue Occasion to some
hereafter, of taking vantage against you thereby by: you geaue your Reader a
watch word, that you do not allow the Storye absolutely, but that you do
not Disgrace it, And that this selfsame not Disgracing of it, cummeth rather
of your free will and Humanity, than of any bounden Duty. For, In Sozomenus
and Nicephorus both, Sundry things (you say) may well be Filed. But
perchance ye need not in this Storye, to show how finely you can file it. For
it follows.

But I see no cause yet, Jew.
wherefore M. Harding should blow the Triumph.

As who should say: Ra.
If there were any loss cumming unto you, by this Story, then lo, you would
File it. But there is no Fear of any. And why so? For,

Why might she not take the Cup, Jew.
and feign that she drank: and yet, Drink nothing.

She might have done so in deed by the nature of Absolute Possibility, Ra.
but we speak now, what is likely to have been done, by the course of the
Story.

And whereas in bowing down, after she had taken the Sacrament into her
hands, and making resemblaunce to Pray, she might have so handled the
matter, that she should have seemed to have put somewhat in her mouth. etc. And
yet did not so, but provided between her self and her maid, to bring Bread
from her own house and to eat that in steed of the Sacrament: And yet
practiced no shift to avoid the Cup, It is very Likelye and Probable, that
there was no receiving of the Cup, at that Present: for which, because there
is (as you will not deny) a ^leight in a woman's wit, she should have rather
provided, as being more hard to bring to pass.

For in deed, to put the Cup unto her mouth, and feign that she drank, It
was an Easy matter: And more easy it was, when she bowed down her self,
(after the taking of y^ Sacrament into her hands), like one that would pray,
to put her hand only unto her mouth, And, either feign that she Received, or
conueigh the matter so closely, that it should not be Perceived: But, the
Circumstance of the Story geaneth it, that she could not escape so: (For then
undoubtedly she had been a very Natural, to trouble her Maied and her self,
with care, to couueigh the household bread unto her, and care to receive it.
etc.) Ergo, neither by putting the Cup only to her mouth, (if any then had been used) she could have satisfied her husband Or the common expectation of the
lookers on, or her own fear.

Now, whereas no Cup was at that present received, she was delivered of the
care, to find A shift to avoid it, And the Precise and Singular providing to
receive householde bread, under color of the Sacrament, proves, that she was
not trobled with any Fear of receiving the Cup, or care of avoiding it. And
this Reason or Argument, is problablye gathered out of the Story it self. But
let us hear M. Jewels Devise and Imagination.

Touching the Truth of this whole matter, Jew. 13^.
if a man list only to go by Gheasse, as M. Harding does, why may he not thus

Thus (says M. Jewel) Why may not A man Imagine with himself, Ra.
if he list. But, will ye know why not? I will tell you. No man ought to make
such A Gloss, as shall mar the Text. Nor Imagine that, which goes
Directlye against the Literal Sense of an Historye? For, the Historye, the
credit whereof you may not disgrace, Consider M. Jew. listing and imagining
against y^ Story. which he promised not to disgrace.
(you said before) makes express mention, of bread taken at her Maids
hands, And of the same received by the Maestres in the open Church, And of her
faining and Hypocrisy, how it was confounded. And this now, is done and past
above A thousand years sens, And how it was done it remains in writing. But
you, nevertheless, come in with your Listing and Imagining. Not to find out
that, by probable Conic^tures which lies hid in the Story, but by clean
Contrary and froward Fancye, destroying the very Literal state and
Description thereof.

And to this effect, as though that the Sleight of a woman's wit were little
worth, you add of your own invention A further fetch. Which, perchaunse, the
woman would have followed, if she had known it in time: but now, after all is
done, to ask, what need she had to take the Bread at her maids hands. Or
to wonder, how she could so openly Receive it without Suspicion. Or to teach
her, that she might have brought it in a napkin Or to persuade with her, that
the burden was not great, as though the gentelwoman had been so tender and
fine, y^ she could not have carried y^ weight of A Singing cake more then her
Ordinary, Or to Conclude with her, that her Faining would be the Easyer:
thus, I say when all is past remedy, to feed your own Fancy, or fill your
Readers ears, with so long and so vain A tale, It is to simple for any woman's
wit.

For Imagine you, as much as ye lift, that she neded not to take the bread at
her maids hands: The Story so plainly testifying, that she took it, what
must follow? No other thing surely, but that the Story is unlikely. Such is M.
Jew. when him lists.
And so of every other of the Circumstancies, which your man that has A list
to Imagine, gathers of that which himself thinks meet to have been done,
what other thing follows, but that the Story, which reports the Coutrary to
have been done, is very unlikely and Incredible.

Such a Fauorer you be of Antiquity, and promising at the beginning of your
Answer, not to disgrace the credit of this Story, you fall afterward, into
such A path of your accustomed Rhetorike, that by A Figure of listing and
Imagining, and by certain howes and whyes, ye destroy A plain fact and
confessed. Who may trust you in Obscure or Long matters, which is an Evident
and Short history, do so boldly argue against it? No wonder if you persuade
your Fellows or folowers, to Discredit Clemens, Abdias, Hippolitus, Martialis,
Athanasius, and all the whole Book of Degrees and Decretals, which have the
Grace and Feate, to let an History stand for true: and yet so rightly to
Gheasse at it, that, If the guess be True, the history must be False.

The History says, the Gentelwoman took the Bread at her maids hand: M.
Jewels, or his Gheasse that (by his grant) lifts, is, What need she? how
could she without Suspicion? Why might she not have brought it in a napkin. etc.

Now whether D. Hardinges Gheasse, (as M. Jewel terms it,) concerning the
Receiving in this place under one kind only, be as unable to stand with the
history, as the Imaginations which M. Jewel has here rekened up for greater,
than the Sleight of a woman's wit did atteine unto, let the Indifferent Reader
confer and judge. My proper intent and purpose was, to show by this Example,
how M. Jewel, can speak, so favorably, of the Ancient Histories of the first
vj.C. years, as though he would not Discredit them: And yet how in deed, he
practices with such Liberty or Licentiousness rather against them, as
though what him lists to Imagine, might be better allowed and liked, than the
fact it self, which the Historye witnesses.

But let us try M. Jewels fidelity, in an other Example. What say you, to the
Liturgy of S. James? I trust you will not make exception against it, that it
was found very lately in the I Will of Can die, Or, sought out, and found, and set
abroad of very late years, Or, that it is a very little book of small price
lateli set abroad in print about vij. years past: (which are so great matters
in your Judgment, that for these causes, you will repel an Authority,) I
trust, that you have no such thing, to lay against S. James Mass. For, by the
testimonye of an ancient Council, we understand, that S. James wrote a
Liturgy or form of a Mass. What say you then unto it? It may be doubted of,
you say. And why so? For,

S. James Liturgy has a special prayer for them that live in Monasteries.
And yet it was very rathe to have Monasteries built in all S. James time.

You mean, I think, y^ there were no such Monasteries then built, as of late
have been pulled down in England, large and fair, and Commodious places for
holy purposes, with Church, Cloister, Capiter house Refectory, Dormitorie,
Infirmatorie, bisides Revenues and lands for ever, left there by Devout, Noble,
and worthy Men and women, to that end, that God might be served of men and
women accordingly, and the religious having all things provided unto their
hands, might serve him quietli.

But, what the^? The form and accidents of an house, do not make a Monastery,
no more then y^ manner of aparel does make a Monk. And although, in the
Apostles time, no such peace or glory was in the church, y^ by great buildings
or te^poralties, it was known and esteemed in y^ world: yet (without all doubt)
the Ordres and Rules among some Christians of that time so rathe (as you call
it) were so religious and well appointed, that S. James might well pray for
such as lived in a singular manner and fasshion of a Monastical and
Spiritual life.

I will not trouble you with many witnesses in a matter so plain and evident.
^useb. Ecc. ^isi. lib. 2. ca. 17. et 17
I refer you to Eusebius, and He will direct you to Philo Iudeus, which lived
in the time of the Apostles, and wrote such things, as himself knew to be
p^actized of Christians, before the name of Christians was well known abroad.

First, he testifies of them, that they renounced all their goods, that they
went out of the City, and lived together, like with like, in their small
grounds and gardens abroad.

He declares also, that they had certain special houses appointed for
Prayer, which they called (...) or (...).

He testifies of their Excercisies, that from Morning to Night, they were
occupied in the studieng upon Scriptures.

He tells, how they leied Chastity, and Continency, as it were a
Foundation in their Hearts, and that the Women and Virgins lived by them
selves and the men by them selves.

He shows, that none of them did eat or Drink, before Sun set, and that
they neither did eat Flesh nor drink Wine.

He Testifies of their Watchinges all night long, and fastinges together with
it, at some times especially, as at Ester. And, of their order in Singing of
Psalms.

To conclude. He shows how the priests and Ministers did then their Duties,
and how the Bishopes See was above All.

This does Philo testify, as done, at the very beginning, under the Apostles,
in whose time himself also lived. And how far is this of, from a Monastical
life? Yet, says M. Jewel.

It was very rathe, to have Monasteries built in all S. James time.

But was it very rathe, to have Men and women live in A Monastical kind of
life by Sequestring themselves from resort, and haunt of Towns, by wilful
Poverty, Obedience, Chastity, and Spiritual exercisies of Fasting, watching,
and Praying? You here what Philo testifies, and how can you then for shame
either deny it, or doubt of it?

If therefore there were that so lived, they lived in some Places I trow. In
Caves under the ground, or under trees, or under Rocks at the least, if you
will allow them no better rome. And yet, of their special place of Prayer,
where they met together, Philo makes an express mention, calling them (...)
monasteries. And who, but wilful and wild Adversaries, will think, that they
lived here and there, out of order, in the open Fields and Air, without any
defense or cover, against wind and weather, Or any distinction and closeness
of dwelling, which both, are so much desired, and are so necessary, for the
religious in deed?

Now, if they had places to pray, to co^fer to Eat, to Sleep, and to do other
things in* which our Infirmity requires to be occupied or sustained by, what
let is there, but y^ S. James might pray for them that lived in Monasteries?
Or, what Repugnance or Impossibility is there in y^ matter, that, because such
Monastical houses were not then builded, as are now exta^t, therefore the
Monastical and Religious persons which then were extant to the praise of
Christianitye, and Glory of our Savior, might not be commended unto God in S.
James Prayer?

But consider in this place, how M. Jewel carries the Readers mind away, from
the matter: And turns it, from the persons to the places: from the edifying of
souls, to building of houses: from setting of me^ in an order of perfect life
together, to joining of Stones and framing of Timber: from that which no man
will deny, (As, that in the Primitive Church, there were found, which for the
love of God conte^^ning the world, did live solitarily and orderly and
co^templatiuely) to that which no man will say (As, that monasteries were built
in the Apostles time) understanding by Monasteries, such places as commonly now
in this Age, go under that name.

But what should he win by it, so to chainge from the persons to y^ places?
mary thus much at the least: that, whereas every man, without further Examining
of the matter, will reasonably gather, that the poverty and Paucitye, of the
Christians in the Primitive Church, could not well stretch to the Building of
any such rich and great houses for the service of god, as are now called, by
the name of Monasteries: it should therefore be suspected, that there could be
no Monks at al in those days. For although wise and Learned men, may easily
consider it, that the thing it self must go before the name, and the Monk
before the Monastery, and the Substance before the Accidents, yet, through the
Desperateness of Heretics, which care not what they speak or feign against
the Catholic Faith, the Simple or Common sort is made to believe, that the
Papists do put so great A Religion and Excellency in external things,
that it must follow, there were no Monks in the Apostles time, if it be
granted there were no Monasteries. And Monastetries, they can not conceive,
what they were, or will not believe that any were, except we should prove, that
they were of like making with these which they remember, to have stood very
fair once, in England, or yet to stand and remain beyond the Seas.

It was therefore nothing else, but A very Craftiness of M. Jewels, to argue
against the Religious, for whom Saint James prays, because there was no
building of Monasteries, in S. James time. Or, if it was not Craftines, it was
plain vnsensiblenes.

For what can he answer? S. James Liturgy (says he) has an express prayer
for them that live in Monasteries. Be it so. But what call you them in one
word? for A name, I am sure they have. Surely what so ever name you geaue
them, your Argument must be this: there were no Monasteries built in S. James
time, Ergo, there were no (...): that is to say, there were no Religious men,
so rathe in the world, neither living alone in solitarines, neither in
fellowship with all things Common among the^. etc. As though S. Ihon the
Baptist, or before him, Helizeus, and Helias, could not in their life time be
Commended unto God, in a Special Prayer for Monks, Heremites, or Religious
persons, because it was very rathe to have Monasteries or Religious houses
built, so long before the Gospel of Christ.

Not to epsy therefore, the rudenes of this Argument, it was very gross and
insensible, and unlike, perchaunse, to be found in M. Jewel: But, to remove the
Intention of the Reader, from the Persons to their houses: and to draw the
question unto this Common place, not, whether Monks or Religious Persons were
extant in the Apostles time* But, whether Monasteries were built so rath, (In
which question, taking the word Monastery Grammatically, he should be easily
confuted, but taking it Commonly, as it is now used of the people, he might
probably maintain his Assertion, and also, under the Ambiguitie of the word,
go from one Sense to an other, and make A show of a good cause and plentiful,
because in some sense his words be true.) This in deed proceeds of M. Jewels
wit. Of whom that thou may the better Beware, Remember how he seems to
allow and esteem the Testimonies of the first six hundred years, and Consider
upon how light and vain Occasions, he takes Authority away, from the Liturgy
of S. James the Apostle.

Of the like Reverence to Antiquitye, and wisdom in making of Arguments, that
also cummeth, which you gather, against S. Chrisostomes Mass: saying.

Chrisostomes Liturgy prays for pope Nicolas* etc. Jew. 10.
And likewise in the same Liturgy, S. Chrisostomes Liturgy deni^ed.
there is A Prayer for the Empire, and victory of the Emperor Alexius. etc.
Now it were very much, for M. Harding to sai, Chrysostom prayed for me^ by
name, seven hundred years before they were borne. I trow that were
prophesiyng, and not Praying.

Your troweing is Reasonable: Ra.
And if S. Chrysostom should be affirmed unto me, to have prayed for A Pope
and an Emperor, borne five or six hundred years after him, I could not but
suspct the matter. M. Jew. hasty in his judgment.
But will you examine and consider it no better? Or will you geaue sentence
against a Book, before you have seen the Copy of it?

Why, you will Answer me, that you read in the printed Liturgies which are now
extant, and attributed to S. Chrysostom, the names of Nicolas and Alexius. Yea
but where read you, that S. Chrysostom used those Names, when he came to his
Memento in his Mass? Why say you, did not he speak every word, as it is now
expressed unto us in Print, that he did speak: No forsothe, concerning the
names. For, in setting out the form of A Mass, the most of the things that
should be followed, he might so appoint, that they should never need to be
chainged. All these things are found in S. Chrisostomes Liturg^e: Whether are
they also in y^ ne^ Communion ^okes, in which the form of al Antiquity (they
say) is expressed?
As, the manner, of cumming to the aultare, Of standing and tarying there, Of
Bringing thither y^ bread that should be consecrated, Of putting wine and water
together, Of Praying alowde, Of Praying Secretly, Of Drawing the curtains, Of
showing the Sacrament, Of receiving the Sacrament and so forth: the manner (I
say) of these things, might so be Invented or Delivered at the first, that
they might (if it pleased the Posterity) well continue for ever after.

But, whereas in certain places of his Liturgy, he would have special mention
made of the holy Saints in heaven, or some singular Persons on earth: could
he put presentli al their names in, whom he would have to be remembered in those
places? In deed, that required A gift of Prophesying, which in this place
needed not. For, in all Forms and Paternes not only of Public Service, but
also of Common and temporal matters, (as, the Styles of Princes, the Tenours
of Indentures and Obligations, The manner of Inditements. etc.) the rest of the
words are expressed, as they shall continue, only, when the place comes,
where the Persons name must be specified, to whom the cause pertains, there
is no certain name Defined, but A great N. set, to keep the room, and to
signify, that when you put that form of write in Practice, you shall place the
parties Name, where that letter stands.

So was it in S. Chrisostomes Liturgy. The Form whereof being well liked, and
therefore copied out that it might go abroad and continue, was not chainged
in any point, concerning the manner of Celebrating and Praying, which presently
then might be defined. But, where as he makes, in Distinct places of his
Mass, special mention of the Saint, whose feast shall happen to be
celebrated that day, and of the Patriarche and Emperor, which should be alive
when his Mass would be said, he could not presently put in their Names.

What remained then but that he should put in such a phrase (as (...)) by which
it should be declared, y^ what so ever Saint, Patriarch or Emperor he were,
there his name should be rehearsed where y^ (...)* was found to stand.

Yet, this notwithstanding who can let, but he that would, might in copying out
the Liturgy, apply it to his own time, and name the Emperor then living. But
when y^ Emperor shall afterward depart, his name must be scraped out, to geaue
place to an other, except priests should always do so much without book, as to
pray for the Emperor y^ lives, though y^ name of the dead Emperor continue in
y^ Mass book. Of the name therefore, of either Patriarche or Emperor, which is
specified in some Liturgy, no Argument can be made y^ the form thereof was not
extant, before the Persons therein expressed were borne, but only, that when
they lived and Ruled in those quarters, they were prayed for in the Public
Mass.

But of this matter, how some Copies have the name of Nycolas universal
Patri^^ch* (...) ^lexius: And, the Greek Liturgies printed at Uenys and Paris,
have no express mention of any, though special Prayer be made in them, both
for the Patriarch and Emperor: Also, by what occasion Nycolas and Alexius
names, came in: Again, how the Nycolas, whom you speak of, was not y^ Pope of
Rome, which lived 200. years before Alexius, but the Patriarch of
Constantinople which lived at one time with him: And in conclusion how
euidentlye it may be perceived, that this Liturgy, which is said to be
Chrysostomes, was in very deed, that blessed Doctors making, of all this,
Master Pointz in his Testimonies for the Real Presence, M. Pointz ca, 7.
has spoken truly and abou^dantly. There may he, y^ will see, find how
absurdly and Ignorantly M. Jewel has argued. For me it is enough to declare,
that he make light of the Authors within y^ first vj.C years. And, y^ he has
no other shift, but to deny the^. And, y^ his reason, upon which he grou^deth
his opinion in refusing some of the^, is so feeble and vain, y^, as it
confirms his purpose nothing at al, so it declares, y^ he has a very light
head of his own, and a very Presumptuous mind, which upon small Occasion, yea
rather against all Occasion, was so ready to take authority away from that
Liturgy, which, both the Greek Church uses, And the Latin aloweth, for
Chrisostomes own.

But tho^ see not yet (I^different Reader) the worst of M. Jewel, As in some
examples more I will make plain unto thee, and so end this Chapter. Of
Dionisius Ariopagita, in whom express and reverend Signs or Examples of the
Catholic Religion or Popish, is to be seen, thus he says.

Dionisius although he be an Ancient writer, Jew. 10.
as it may many ways well appear, yet, it is judged by Erasmus, John Colet,
and other many grave and Learned men, that it can not be Ariopagita S. Paul's
Disciple that is mentioned in the Acts.

I will Answer you with your own wise Reason, Ra.
which you make Against S. Bernard, M. Jew. answered, by M. Jewel*
Lyra, Teutonicus, and Bessarion: and in your Terms I say unto you: Erasmus
and John Colet lived at the least, xv.C. years after Christ, wherefore their
Authority must needs seem the less.

Here, If you like your own Reason, you be Answered: If you mislike it, I am
glad that you are wiser, than you were wont to be.

Yet, I do not refuse Erasmus, or D. Cole^s judgment, because, they were of
late years, but I prefer the Gravity, Learning, and Number of their betters,
and their elders. Those I mean, which lived and flourished A thousand year
together, before Erasmus was borne, and of whom, you can find no one, which
has denied the Dionisius of whom we speak to be S. Paul's scholar: Dionysius
Alexandr.
And I can name some unto you which have not only believed it, Maximus.
but for reverence and worthiness of him, Pachymeres, Dionysius Car^hus.
have given light to his books by their Commentaries.

But consider you (M. Jewel) in this place, whether it be not most true in you,
that you seek always, how to Destroy or Diminishe all things, as much as ye
can? For, if there be no false Doctrine in these ^okes, nor any thing contrary
to good manners, The sprite of the new Gospel is a spoiler.
what should it hurt you or your cause, to have men believe, that they be the
works of that Dyonisius, which was S. Paul's scholar? And because you shall
see my meaning in an other Example, as also have it noted unto you, that
Erasmus, whom, in disgracing of S. Denyse, you bring in, as A grave and learned
man, is better interteined of you than he deserves, I say:

Before Erasm^s (more bold, Erasmus justly reprehe^ded.
surely, than wise in that point) before he began to play the Censor, and by
once reading of A Book over, to gather A private counsel within his own head,
and geaue A Definitive sentence, against ancient fathers works, or else for
them, before (I say) he took so much upon him, and exequuted it not always
discreetly, the book ad Quirinum, In Ce^sura de libris ad Quirinum.
was embraced as S. Cyprians. Erasmus yet puts the matter in question, and
after great arguments made Pro et Con, wtin himself, his final answer is,
that, probabilius videtur non esse Cypriani, it seems more probable that it
is not S. Cyprians.

Well M. Doctor and Censor, S. Hierome is witness that it is, and uses A
Chapter thereof as an Authority of S. Cyprians, Hier. lib. 1. aduers Pelag.
wherefore you may perceive, that either you have not seen al things, either
have not remembered them, Or else that your judgment is not all of the best.

But let this pass, that S. Hierome is directly against you, was there any
thing in the Book ad Quirinum, hurtful either to Faith or good Manners? No
verily, you find no such fault in the book. Why Disputed you then, whether it
were S. Cyprians or no? And, if for your exercise sake, you would needs move
the doubt, you should better have invented an Answer against the Objection
which did hinder the Estimation of it, than by needless making of it, minister
any Occasion unto your Reader to set less by such a work, as by much
crediting of which, he could take no harm.

For suppose it so, that being not S. Cyprians in deed, I so love and Read
the book, as if it were his: what danger hereby is cumming unto me: the Book
being Sound and good, which I do Read?

But now on the other side, the Book being tried to be S. Cypria^s, or if it
should not be so tried, yet, in truth* being his: yourselfe first, do hurt
your own Fame and Estimation, in geauing so rash A sentence, And you cause me
to have le^sse mind unto a good book, and to Suspect that, which should not be
distrusted. So that in letting the titles of Books alone, as we found them,
though they should (by putting the case so) bear false names, there is no
Injury done or taken, if the book be alowable: but in Changing or Disgracing
them, when it needs not, (for any harm which is to be feared in Reading of
the book,) it lacks not a piece of vain Glory, Or of angry Folly.

As in our case now (M. Jewel) of the Book de Ecelesiastica Hierarchia, you
tell us that it is Judged (of such men, as neither you nor we, make great
account upon) that it can not be the book of Ariopagita, S. Paul's disciple,
that is mentioned in the Acts. But to what end tell you me so? Is the book to
be Credited or no, tell me that? Is there any Heresy in it? Is there any
Irreligion? Is there any Folly?

Is there any thing that you can contemn? Or forbid to be readen? I can not so
think of you, whereas yourselfe confess it, that the Author of the forsaid
book was, Jew* 10
An Ancient writer, as it may, many ways well appear.

To what purpose then is it that you ^each us, that he can not be Ariopagita S.
Paul's disciple. For, If he be an Ancient and ^^rthy writer, though he should
not be so old, as an Apostles Scholar, what is tha^ to us, which seek after
auncie^tnes in writers, such as may suppres with grave countenance, the lusty
and high lokes of youthful Scriblers, and not such, as must be so old, that
there may not well be A Superior? And if, by your own confession, the Author be
Aunc^e^t, though his name be not Dionisius Ariopagita, what is that to the
dispro^e of the matter which we defend by him?

Did you think (M. Jewel) by wryring your mind in this fashion, not to hinder,
in any respect, the credit of the forsaide book, but only to show a point of
your knowledge, And how that you were not Ignorant, what Erasmus, John Colet and
others (I ca^ not tell, who) thought in this matter? Uanitie.
Uanitie (M. Jewel) vanity: to make your own Fame the end of your doings,
without any profit to your reader.

But, said you so much as you have don, that the book might be disgraced, and
that some Scruple might be cast in the Readers way, to trouble him only, y^ he
should not quietly assent, Contention.
unto y^ contents thereof? And how can you the^ excuse yourself, of blind Folly
and Contentiousnesse?

For, whereas S. Denyse the Ariopagite, is not he alone, that must be credited,
but every Ancient writer (whom you do allow for ancient) may well stand for
a witness: what wiseman would ever enterprise, to diminish the Estimation of A
Substantial witness, by casting in against him (of his own or other men's
Suspicion,) that in some Corners he has an other name, than generally he is
taken by? And, whereas it helps your cause nothing at all, though Dyonisius
Ariopagita were not Author of the book de Eccles. Hierarch: so y^ you deny him
not to be an Ancient and credible wi^nesse, who but Unquiet and Contentio^s,
would labor to make A question about it?

Surely (M. Jewel) if you were not more desirous, of marring than making, and
of contrarying your adversary, than agreeing with Reason: you should allwaies
follow, the more Peaceable and Harmless Opinion. And whereas you might know,
that for One Erasmus and John Colet, there have been in these last thousand
years, a thousand Learned men, which have taken S. Denyse the Ariopagite, for
the Author of the foresaid Book, what Quiet and Good nature would incline to
the worse of the two, and thynk, that more probable, which tends to the
Disgracing (so much as it is) of a Divine and Excellent piece of work? But (if
there be no Remedy) keep yourself in your Trade of mistrusting, Denying, and
Spoiling the Monumentes of the Catholic and True Religion, and let me hold my
peace, and permit unto you, that the Author (of whom we speak) was not
Dio^ysius Ariopagita* What was he then?

An Ancient writer, Jew. 10.
as it may, many ways, well appee^e.

We Require you then, to stand to his Testimony. For no doubt, he is within the
first six hundred years, whom you vouchesa^e to call Ancient And what so ever
his Name be, M. Jew. requited to stand unto Ancient witnesses.
so that he be A writer whom you admit, al is One to us, which seek only, to
declare A Truth, and not to Prolong A Talk. After which sort, if you also be
disposed, let us not strive upon it, whether he be Ariopagita, or no, but spend
the time better, in considering what he tells of the Churches Orders in his
days. And then, comparing it with the Popish Religion, and the Protestants
Reformation, let us see, which of the two, is more like unto it.

First you shall find in his Ecclesiasticae Hierarchia, that, the Apostles
delivered heavenly things under sensibles signs. etc. partly by by vvrite^,
Unwrite^ Uerities:
partly vnvvriten Institutions and Traditions. And this is directly against
them, to whom there are no Uerities but unwritten. After this.

In the ministration of the Sacrament of Baptism, you find plain mention
made, Of Hymns: Of Kissing the holy Table* Of God Father: Godfather
Of turning the party which is to be Baptized, toward the Vveast: Of
bidding him to Blow and Puff out the Devil three times, And thrice to
pronounce solemn words, of Abrenuntiation and Defiance against him:
Abrenuntiation.
Of Turning him again toward the East: Of Blessing him, and pu^ting of
hands upon him: Of Stripping him: Sign of the Cross.
Of making the Sign of the Cross upon him three times, Oil* halovving of the
water.
before he be Anointed over the whole Body: Of Sanctifiing the water, with
thrice pouring in, of Oil thereto, in form of A Cross: Of Dipping him thrice
in to the water, with naming of the three Persons in Trinity: Of putting a
new Cote upon him, Chrisome.
Of Anoi^ting him again: Confirmation.
Of Pronouncing him ready for the Sacrament of the Aultare.

These Ceremonies and holy Signs, in which the Apostles covered the Secret
Mysteries, (which were not to be told all men,) how irreverently you esteem
of, Your ^rinning, and Railing at them, and Abrogating or Abbrigging of them,
does prove abundantly. But let us go further.

Concerning the reverent administration, of the Communion, you shall find
expressly declared. How the Bishop beginning at the Aultare, Incensing.
goes censing about the holy Place. How, after his return thither made, he
begins to sing psalms: Singing of Psalms.
Then, how the Lesson (...) be read in order. Reading of Lessons.
How the Cathecumini (which were Nouices yet in the Faith and Lerners of it)
And Energumini (which were possessed and trobled with evil spirits) And
Poen^^entes, Putting out of the unworthy
(which had not fully done their (...)) were, all, pu^ out of the Church: how
the Ministers are divided in their Off^cies, Orders of Officies.
Some standing at the Doors, Hym^es.
some bringing forth Bread and wine, Washing of hands.
some doing other things: how they Praise God: how they they Sal^te one an
Other: How the Bishop vvasheth his hands, and stands at the midst of the
Aultare: how the Priests wash their hands, and stand about him, with the
Select Ministers only. How the Bishope, ea quae diuinissima sunt, Consecration.
rite persicit, does work and perfect dul^e, Shevving of the Sacrament.
those things that are most Divine: Communion
how he shows the Gifts Divinely wrought: How he receives himself, and
inuiteth other thereto. How he ends (...) Thanks geauing.

Now, with how Reverent behavior of body, with how convenient Gestures, with
how solemn words, Signs and Ceremonies, with how singular Preparation,
Attention, Devotion, Adoration, all those things were done, it is easy to
gather, of these few points which are noted here unto us, which could not
be so quickelye done, as theye are shortly spoken, and of which, as shortly
as they be spoken, the Author makes Divine and high Mysteries.

For Incensing, Are these signs and tokens of a Communion, after ye last manner
of the English church Or of A Popish Mass.
Singing, Shutting of doors, wasshing of hands, standing alone, perfiting of
the Gifts, (which are y^ bread and wine proponed) Shewinge of the Sacrament,
Receiving, And Thanks geauing, These things are sone told, but if a man had
been Present, to see, with what Countenance, Gate, Action, Circumstaunce,
Order and Reverence, every one of them was exequuted, I doubt not but it would
have seemed unto him, a more Popish and Superstitious Service (as the
Heretics now call it,) than that which is now done every So^daie, at S.
Michels in Antwerpe. To which Church, I refer my self, because the Deacon
and Subdeacon, do Ordinarily, there, Communicate on such Days with the
Priest, so that M. Jewels old shift, shall not serve, in making his Reader
believe, that our Mass is such A thing as is Distincted from A Communion. And
true it is in deed, Of an English Communion, but not of A Catholic and
Christian Communion.

But here is not all, that is to be marked, out of the forsaid Author. For, he
declares also how Oil was halovved* halovving of Oil.
First the unworthy were put out. Then ^olovved incensing, Singing, Reading
of Lessons, putting of the Oil upon the Aultare covered before, with xij.
vvhinges: Praying over it, and halovving it with holy Ceremonies, Reservation.
and keeping of it, to serve in all Bishoply Office.

He declares further, how Bishops, how Priests, how Ministers are
Consecrated, Some kneeling on both knees, Giving of Orders.
some upon one, some by Imposition of hands, other with the Bible also
holden over their head. But, all, have the Sign of the Cross made upon them.

He declares also how Monks are Cons^crated, Monks.
They stand only behind the Priest, which having ended his mis^icall Prayer
for them asks whether they Renounce all Secular and distracted kind of Life,
Professio
Then, does he make the Sign of the Cross upon them, Sign of the Cross.
and sheare them, in the name of the Trinity, And putting them out of their
former Apparel, Shearing.
he does other on them, Inuesting.
Saluteth them, and Ministers the Sacrament unto them.

He declares, last of all, the manner of Burying. Distinction of places in
burying Solemnities in Funerals.
If he that is departed were A Priest, he is laid before the Aultare, If he
be of the Laietie, or A Monk, he is laid before the holy Place where the
Priests go in. But who so ever he be: Solemn Prayers and Thanks, are made
and geauen unto God. Promises of the Resurrection are rehearsed, Psalms are
Song, Cathecumeni are put out of the Church, Praying for the Souls departed.
The Good men departed are praised and blessed, The Living and present are
exhorted to pray for a good end. And then Cummeth the Bishope to the departed:
Prays for him: Saluteth him, and after him, Pouring of Oil.
all that be present: Pours Oil upon him: And Lays his body in an
honorable place, with others of the same Order.

Thus have I, sumwhat largely, gathered out of the forsaied Author, these
Particulars: that, by the more open sight of these matters, it might the better
be considered, I^dge now, who so^uer will
which of the two, the Church or the Congregation, the Papists or the
Protestants, the Old men or the New, are liker in their doings, to the
Primitive Church. And here now let us join with M. Jewel.

Sir, Allow you these doings of the Primitive Church, or do ye not? If you do:
why are they not extant then, in your Congregation? Or, if yourselfe will be
more Spiritual and Deiforme, than to use External and Sensible means, to
conduct you unto that, which is One, Single, Pure, and Invisible: why have you
not suffered others, which have not the like Elevation and Abstraction of mind,
to use these visible and holy signs, of Incensing, The ioy^ing of the iss^e
with M. Jew.
washing, Crossing, Anointing, Consecrating, Shearing, and other which I have
mentioned?

If you do not: how look you like one, that would follow Autentike and Grave
Examples, testified by Ancient and sad writers? And, wherefore do you make
the world believe, that you, good men, would have all things reformed,
according unto the Pattern of the Primitive Church, whose Procedinges are found
to be so contrary, unto the Ecclesiastical Orders of that time?

Be plain (M. Jewel) in that which you intend, and Quod ^acis sac citius.

If you esteem Antiquity, let neither Baptism lack Abrenuntiation. etc:
neither Confirmation, Oil^: neither the Sacrament of the Aultare, singular
demonstration of it, and Reverence: neither Priests their due Consecration:
Nor the Living, Occasions to bring them by outward Signs to Devotion: nor the
dead, Prayers: And that Sign, which has been used in all holy Functions, and
which, of old, they made in the Foreheade, to testify that they were not
ashamed of Christ, the sign I mean of his CROSS, which is not only new A
Folly to Panimes, or Offense to Jews, but an Ignomynie to the Gospel, and
Apishnes in the Catholics, as some worse than Jews or Painimes do Blaspheme,
this Sign of the Cross (Master Jewel) restore again unto the Churches, and
suffer not them to be in Honors, which think it a shame to have a Token of
our Redemption, before their Eyes: If you esteem Antiquity.

And if ye regard it not, why make ye us believe, that you would be ruled by
yt? Or why feed you the common sort with sweet hope of having a Sincere and
Pure Religion restored unto them, according to the Exaumple and Orders of the
Ancient and holy Church, whereas you have, either blindely abandoned them,
before you knew them, either desperately do contemn them, after ye be
advertised of them.

O, say you, He, that wrote those books De Ecclesiastica Hierarchia, was not S.
Denyse the Ariopagite. As who should say, that if it were he, you would in no
wise contrary him. But how shall I believe you? Whereas you pretend, that you
will be content with the Aunciedt Fathers testimonies, and yet cry out against
that form of Administringe the Sacraments, which every man sees to have been
used in the Catholic ancient world, by report of this writer. whom your
self confess to be Ancient and that it may so appear many ways.

And now, after it is euidente, that whosoever he be, he makes against you
would you Change you Opinion (M. Jewel) and Repent your self of all former
Lightness, If in in deed a more Learned and Grave man, than Erasmus, John
Collet, or any other that you can tell of, should testify, that it is S.
Denyse the Apariopagitas work? Uerely S. Gregory the Great, greg. ho. 34
makes mention Dionysius Ariopagita, which is unto him, Antiquus and
Venerabilis, Pater an Ancient and venerable father, who^ he says, by report
of other, to have written of the nine Orders of Angels. Of which books this
that we speak of, De Ecclesiastica Hierarchia, is the fellow: Origene also
makes an express mention of him, Orig. Ho. 1 in Joan
alleaginge a text out of these Books which you mistrust.

But would this make you Change you Opinion? No: you would have xx.
questions unto me, and escape from me by xx. ways, rather than I should hold
you so fast, by this Argument out of S. Gregory or Origin, that you should
not but confess unto us, that you are deceived in your Judgment, concerning
this Book de Ecclesiastica Hierarchia. And, if to prove me to be suspi^ious,
you would, in deed, incline to that side, that not only some Ancient Father,
but Ariopagita himself, were Author of this book: Reform then yourself, and
stop the mouths of the Railing and Ignorant, unto who^e, Crossing, Incensing,
Anointing, and Signifying of Spiritual things by Corporal and External
Forms and Imagies, seems to be, altogether Papistrie.

Yet it is no matter to me, in this obiecting against you, what the name of that
Author was. You confess him to be ancient: Short and clear.
I infer them, that he is worthy of credit. You will not be ruled by his
Testimony, I gather then, that you Regard not the Ancient. And that I prove
by an other Example. The Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, of how great force
and strength it is, the Catholics and Heretics both, do see. And as we do
prove it by true Experience, that nothing is more needful to be persuaded unto
such as love to have a sure Stay in all matters of Controversies: so, our
adversaries do set against nothing so Ernestly and Outragiously, as the
Prerogative of that See. Here upon starteth a Chalenger up: Show me (says he)
that the Pope was ever Called Head of the Church. The Catholic Answers, He
was, in deed, Head of the Church, as appears many ways, though he were not
called in his Ordinary Style of writing, Head thereof.

Nay, Jew. 306.
says the Challenger, show me the name it self, That, is the very thing
that we deny. But ye can not.

Sir, Ra.
how often must I bring forth y^ name?

Mary, Jew. 1.
If any learned man of our adversaries, or if all the learned men that be
alive, be hable to bring any one sufficient sentence etc. I am content to yield
and subscribe. And again. As I said at the beginning, one good sentence were
proof sufficient.

Uery well Sir: Ra.
One you shall have, if that can persuade you to Subscribe.

Eugenius Bishop of Carthage answered to Obadus, requiring A Council to be
kept in Aphrica, wherein, The Arrians might dispute with the Catholics,
concerning Religion and Faith: that, he would write to his brethern, that his
fellow Bishops might come. Et precipue, Ecclesia Romana que Caput est omnium
Ecclesiarum, and the Church of Rome especially, which is the head of all
Churches.

Here now, of this Story and Text, I gather, that the Bishop of Rome, is HEAD
of all Bishops, and so much ought the Aduersarye to grant unto me, if he loved
not, by force of consequence, to be driven unto the confession of Truth, but,
of his own accord, to yield unto reason. For, when Eugenius the Bishop
answered, that he would write, that the Church of Rome (most chiefly,) should
come to y^ Counsel, what meant he thereby? Did he mean that any message should
be sent, to the marble Pillars, Foundations, Row^es, walls of Stone, or any
such insensible thing, perteining to the Material Church of Rome? Truly, then,
for his wit, who so ever should think so, might be President of that Council,
where Posts and Pillars should meet together, and hear the cause of our
Religion debated.

But did he mean by the Church of Rome all the Christians of Rome? Who then
should keep the City whiles they were from home? Or how was al Carthage, able
to receive them? Or what has the Laity to do in Councels? If then, neither
the walls etc. of Rome, neither all the Christen people of it, be rightly
understood by the Church of Rome, which B. Eugenius would have to come to
the Counsel at Carthage, what other thing may be meant thereby?

You will say, perhaps, the Clergy thereof. Whether al, or some? If al, do you
think Eugenius to be so simple as to require, that al Priests, Deaco^s,
Subdeaco^s, Lectours, Exorcistes, Sextines, Clerks, belringers, and
Quieresters, might come to the Council?

If some: what should they be? Exempted from the Jurisdiction and Government
of the Pope, Or subject unto him? If Exempted: who should they be in all Rome,
with whom the B. of Rome, should have nothing to do? If subject: how could they
come without his leave and license? Or how should not he that sends them, be
much more higher and worthier, then those which must ask leave to go?

What so ever you Answer, If the Church of Rome be head of al Churches,
because of some part of the Clergy thereof: must it not much more be head of
al Churches because of the Bishop there, which is head over that Clergy?

For, if the lesser thing, be in Estimation and Authority, much more the
greater in the same kind must be in Authority. As, if an Angel naturally does
pass in degree of worthiness, every man, much more he* that by the gifts of
nature does excel among Angels, must consequently be far above man.

We need no^ use so many words, in opening this Argument, if we had to do
with Quiet and Reasonable men: but M. Jewel will needs be Ignorant, or
Contentious. For (says he) Uictor which reports the forsaid Answer of
Eugenius the Bishope, Jew. 310.
Does not call the Bishop of Rome the Head of the universal Church, only he
says, Rome is the Chief, or Head Church of al other.

No, he says not Rome, but y^ Church of Rome. And if you will defend your
self, that by Rome the Church of Rome is meant in common speech, I pray you
Sir, can you not also remember, that in naming the Church of Rome, the Bishop
of Rome is understood to be spoken of? And, if in other places it might be
sometimes otherwise, yet in this testimony of Uictor, it can not but be meant
of the Bishop of Rome especially.

For consider, I pray thee (Indifferent Reader) the Circumstancies of the
Story.

Obadus the Captain required a Counsel to be kept in Aphrica. In which, it is
for Bishops, not only to sit, when it is called, but first to determine
whether it shall be called or no.

He required it also, of the Bishope Eugenius. For although Huneryke his
Master, King of the Uandales was in those parts a Co^queror, yet there were
not at that time such Flatterers or Gospellers as might tell his Grace, that him
self was Supreme head of the Church, and that he needed not to care, what the
Popish Bishopes would think in any matter.

Thirdly Eugenius answered, that ^e would write to his Brethren, that his
felowbishopes might come. By which it is clear, that he wisshed, not, either
for the material Church of beyond the seas, or all the Ministers and officers
of those Churches, but only for Bishopes.

Finally and Chiefly, he would write (he answered) that the Church of Rome the
head Church of al Churches, might come. And how can this otherwise be
understood, but according to y^ nature of the Matter, and Persons which he
spoke of before? For, whereas A Council requires Bishopes to be present, And
himself expressly declares it, that he would have his Felowbishopes come: In
saying, immediately after, that above all other he would the Church of Rome to
come, he must so take these words, the Church of Rome* as they may serve for
A Council, and for the meeting together of Catholic Bishops. But to such A
purpose, it was neither possible, to bring the external Church of Timber and
Stone, neither was it convenient, profitable, or customable, to have y^ whole
Clergy of every country, to be present at Councels: Ergo he meant it of the
Bishop of Rome, himself.

Then whereas he would, the Church of Rome most Chiefly to come, because it is
head of all Churches, he signifies thereby, that his mind and desire was, to
have other Churches to come also. For else he would have said, I beseech the
Church of Rome, only to come, and not Chiefly. Because the word (Chiefly)
has A Relation to other that should come also, though not so principally and
agreablie to his intent and purpose.

Now in expressing this his mind, that he would have other Churches, of
beyond the Seas, to come, what words uses he? Does he not call straitewaies
for his Felowbyshopes? And in respect of them, does he not require, that most
Chiefly the Church of Rome should come? And what other sense can that have, by
any reason, but that the Bishop of Rome should come? For, if he had said thus,
I vvil vyrite to my Brethren, that the Churches of beyond the Seas may come,
and most chiefly to the Church of Rome* then had the sentence gone forward in
like terms. And in this case, who but Rude and Ignorant, would deny, that by
Churches he means the Bishops them selves, Or by their appointment some to
represent or fill their place? But he changed the Terms, and in one part
speaking of Bishops, in the other he names not the Bishope, but the Church of
Rome.

Yet what of this? Shall this changing of Terms alter his meaning?

And wishing in the former part of his sentence, that Bishops should come,
but especially the Church of Rome, what can he rightly mean by the church of
Rome but the Bishop of Rome, if one part of the sentence hangs with the
other? For this were al together out of reason, that, naming first Bishops, and
then a thing more requisite in the same kind of purpose, then Bishops: he
should mean by that thing which he prefers, a less in effect and
Authority, then they were whom he had less compted upon.

This place then making so plainly, for the Authority of y^ Bishop or Church
of Rome (for all is in effect one, to them that understand the common phrases of
Speech) what will M. Jewel do? Subscribe to antiquity, Or maintain still his
Heresy? No, he loves him self, and his own vain glory so much, that rather
then he will seem to take a foil, and to have spoken more, then he is hable to
assure, he will not lack his Exceptions, against the witnesses of the First six
hundred years. For thus he opens him self more and more, Jew. 310.
saying:

Touching Victor that wrote the story of the Vandales, Consider by this that
follows how willing M. Ie^. i^ to admit Antiquity, and how profoundly h^
reasonet^.
he is neither Scripture:

For Scripture he was not alleged. And this also is against sincere and honest
dealing, to promise or rather protest that you would be tried by any Doctor,
Father, Council, or Example of the Primitive Church: and now so desperately to
come in with this exception, that Uictor is no Scripture. It follows.

Nor Council. Jewel.


Remember your self M. Jewel. There are, among your Favorers, some discrete,
Sad, and Just men. Whom, your Invention in this place, will little please. And
your much seeking to extenuate Uictors Authority, will be an Argument unto
them, that you fall to Copy of words, and shifts of Rhetorike (meet for
Childerne) when Copy of Sense* and certainty of good Answer, does not serve
your great Stomach.

You said well once, 151.
that one good sentence were Proof sufficient, and are you so much chainged,
so suddenly, that you dare set light by an Ancient and grave witness,
because he is no Council? You need surely some good counsel, least by extreme
following with all your wit, the defense of your mad Challe^ge, you chance to
fall bysides your wits, and have no sense at al of your doings. It follows.

Nor Doctor. Jewel.


Now define you then, A Doctor? For in deed, whom you will allow to bear
that name, I can not tell. And, such Liberty you have taken now unto your self,
of binding us to your meaning, that if you will understand by a Doctor none
other, but either S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, or S. Gregory, which
are called the four Doctors of the Church, Or some such, as has been solemly
Created and made Doctor in some University: we must be conten^ with your
sense, and let you have your own mind and meaning.

But if you will be ordered by reason, you will not deny (I suppose) that Uictor
might well be A Doctor, which being a Bishop of no small City in Aphrica, had
by all likelyhoode the knowledge of Scriptures, and grace of expounding them,
and diligence in executing his office. Except that M. Jewel will be so Injurious
to the first six hundred years after Christ, in which Uictor lived, that he
will Judge any one to have been made Bishop in those days, which was unworthy
to be a Doctor.

Again if he were no Doctor, was he therefore no Father? And your self
promising, to admit any sufficient testimony of any Father, how wisely make ye
now, an Exception against Uictor* because he was no Doctor. It follows.

Nor writes the Order or Practice of the Primitive Church. Jewel.


O worthy Exception. Does S. Augustine in his books of Confession, write the
Order or Practice of the Primitive Church? Nothing less. For al^ogether they
are compiled, of his own Acts, Life, Chances, Cogitations, and
Interrogations. But what then? Might not one, for all this, bring a good
testimony out of those books, for prou^e of any matter that is in controversy?

And when the Heretic denies prayers for the Dead, Confes^. lib. 9.
should not the example of S. Augustine (whose prayer for his Mothers soul, is
extant in his Confessions) quite and clean s^oppe his Procedinges, and make
his very Impudency, ashamed?

What new found reason then, is this of M. Jewels, to contemn an Ancient
writer, if he write not of those Matters, and write also, in such Order, of
them, as he requires?

When we allege Clemens, de Constitutionibus Apostolicis, S. Denyse de
Coelesti and Ecclesiastica Hierarchia, S. James Liturgy, S. Chrysostomes
Liturgy, Sozomenus, Nicephorus, Or* the Decrees and Decretales: straitwaies
you either deny them, either suspect them, either will fyle them better, before
you believe them. Yet, there are not, in whom you may see more expressly, the
printes and the forms, of the order or practice of the Primitive Church. For
where shall one better find, what the Religion was in every Age, than, in the
Histories of those times, and in Decrees, Answers, and form of public
Service, that in every of them was used?

You therefore which, so little set by those writers, by whom we may understand
most plainly, what the particulars were, of the cause and state of our Religion
in the Primitive Church: now when Uictor is brought against you, suddenly you
be so changed, as though it might be an exception against a witness, that he
writes not the Order or Practice of the Primitive Church.

And yet, this Exception of yours, comes not so luckely against Uictor. Which
although he take not into his story, the Acts of the Apostles, or the
succession of Bishops, after them, or all the persecutions throughout
Christendom, or the Martyrs of al Countries, Or the perfection and rule of
those holy Monks that lived in wildernesses, Or the Decrees of al Councels, Or
every other such matter as might be spoken of, by a General Historiographer:
yet, what state the Church was in, under the Uandales, he describes
sufficiently. And by his telling this much we understand of the Order and
Practice, (if not of the Primitive Church, yet) of that Church, which was
within the six hundred years after Christ, the which time you have allowed us,
that in a matter concerning Faith, and in a Council to be gathered, it was
thought m^ete then, to make other Bishops besides them of Aphrica privy
thereof: and especially to have the presence of the Bishops of Rome, because
The Church of Rome is head of al churches. Which Evidence, because it is so
plain against you, therefore having nothing to said reasonably against the
sentence, Yo^ h^^e s^retched your wits to find^ ^x^eptions against the
Reporter o^ it. And you sai^ farther against him.

Nor is it well known, Jewel.
either of what credit he was, or when he lived,

Concerning his Credit, he was Bishop of Uti^a, and by likelyhoode therefore,
of good Estimation among the Catholics, and A Man worthy to be hele^ed. For
in all kinds and Contrarieti^s of Religion, such as are high Priests, Bishops,
or Superintendents, it seems that they are of the better sort, of the
Fami^ie, Church, or Cougregation: out of which they are taken do do that
Office. And further, whose books were comp^ed then worthy the copieng out, and
were so kept then, that they remain yet unto us, And are so accepted at this
present, that they be translated into French: His credit needs not to be
mistrusted, or called without cause into question. He wrote also unto Hunericus
King of Uandales an account of his faith being driven thereto by the
Commandment of y^ King. By which you may perceive that great account was made
of him.

Concerning then his age, he lived not long after the time of S. Augustine:
far within the First six hundred years, out of which, any Testimony is
sufficient against you. For when the Uandales were in Aphrica, and were busy in
furthering the Procedinges of the Arrians, then lived Uictor, as may appear by
his Answer to Hunericus, and by diverse places of his history, in which he
speaks of him self as one present at y^ doing of things. For in this very
place which is alleged ou^ of him for y^ Supremacy of the Church of Rome, he
says, that when Hunericus had required by his Edict and Commandment, that
the Catholic Bishops, should by a day, meet at Carthage, there to have their
faith examined and tried:

Cognoscentibus igitur qui aderamus simul, etc. We then that were together
knovving of this Decree, did tremble at the heart, especially because of those
words of the Edict, In Prouincijs nostris a Deo nobis concessis* scandalum
esse nolumus, quasi id diceret, in Prouincijs nostris, Catholicos esse nolumus:
Vv^ vvil, that in the Provinces granted by God to us, there be no scandalum or
offense, as though he should say. we vvil not that any Catholics be in our
Prouincies. Him self therefore being then present when Hunericus Edict came to
the Bishops of Aphrica, and that persequ^^ion of the Uandales beginning about
the year of our Lord. 435. no man should reasonably doubt, of the age in
which Uictor lived.

But these things you say, are not well known. If they be known, it is
enough: As for the well knowing of them you are either so suspicious or
malicious y^ (I fear) it will never be well known, y^ which comes directly
against your Procedinges. For how easy a matter is it to deny, and doubt, and
object, and find fault, and make somewhat always lacking?

You find the Book extant, and that before this age in which your Heresies
have vpstarted, and the Catholics have sought to suppress them: You see it
alleged: You see it allowed: you bring nothing against it, neither that it
was ^ound of late, neither that the phrases of Speech are vncongrue and
barbarouse, neither that he has any fault in his story, neither that grave
and learned men have doubted of him, nor any other exception which may take
Credit away from it. And what reason then, is there in it, that you should
make strife and conten^ion, where none was before, and rather follow your own
Negative, without any cause or probability, than the Catholics Affirmatyue,
which bring forth the Evidence of the book it self, for them?

May we think you to have any regard to the first six hundred years, Or any
Reverence toward Ancient writers, which are so loath to admit the books that
come forth in their names, and so Ready to make all the Exceptions, that ye
possibly can, Or Suspicions against them?

It is not well known (say you) of what Credit he was, or when he lived. Is it
not well known? If he made in any point, for the Lutherans or Sacramen^aries
opinion, you would not only have known him well, but also praised him
excedingly, but now, becasue he confirms the Catholic Faith, and declares
such cruel practices of the Barbarous Uandales then, against the Catholic
Priests and Bishopes, as are most like the merciful Procedings of the Gentle
Gospellers of these times, against the Catholics: And because he prefers
the Church of Rome, before all other Churches, And prays to the Saints, And
shows himself most Evidently to be A Papist: you know him not, and you
regard him not. So that you be ruled by Affections and not by Reasons, and you
pass no more upon Antiquity, saving for y^ fasshion that al learned and wise
men do make account of it, than you do upon your rochet, gown, typet, four
cornerd Cap, and other such things, that go clean against the Conscience,
saving that you condescend therein unto the weakelings, as yet, in your faith,
least you should make them werys of you, altogether.

Yet, although you be very wise hypocrites, out breaks for all that sometimes,
the Jesting and Scoffing inward Sprite, that in open Sermons and printed Books,
speaks of the holy and old Fathers, full Re^erently, As shall by most manifest
examples appear.

S. Benet, how Uertuous, wise, holy, Contempla^iue, and Divine a Father he was,
if the world that has been ever s^ns, would or could say nothing, S. Gregory
alone has said enough. Which being now ^ope, and to good a man, to mind
unprofitable tales, and to much occupied, to intend it, in writing four
books of notable and worthy men and m^ters, the Second he bestows upon S.
Benet alone: Declaring such things in it, as he had heard of most Reverend
Fathers, ^ial. lib. ^in praef.
and S. Benets own Scholars, Constantius, Valentinianus, Simplicius, and
Honoratus: by reading of which, the Faithful could not but be moved, Ps. 67.
to believe that God is VVonderfull in his holy ones, Psalm. 138.
and that his frindes are excedingly honored. In tellinge then many things of
S. Benet, he cummeth at length unto this. (...) lib.


When a certain young Monk of S. Benets, ^dial. (...).
had upon a time gone out of the Monastery, without his blessinge, home to
his Father and Mothers house, which he loved more then he should have done,
the self same day, as soon as he was come unto them he dyed. And after he
had been now buried, his body the next day was found cast up, which
they provided to bury again. But they found it the next day cast up
again, and unburied as before. Then lo they ran with speed unto ^ather
Benets feet, and with much vveepinge desired him, to be so good as to grant
his favor aend mercy unto him. To whom, the Man of God gave strait way
with his own hands the Comm^nion of our Lords body, saying. G^e ye, and
put ye this body of our Lord upon his breaste, and so bury him. Which as soon as it was done, the earth took and kept his body, and can it up no
more.

Thus far S. Gregory. But wha^ says M. Jewel to the matter? Forsath his
sentence is this.

It was but fondly done by S. Benet, Jew. (...)
as Gregory re^orteth of him, Impudently.
to cause the Sacrament to be laid upon a dead man's breast.

Was it but fondly done? Ra*
How dare you so interpret the fact of an Ancient and holy Father? How dare
you dissent from the Opinion that S. Gregory and other elder Fathers whom he
followed, had of it? Are you he, that regards Antiquity? Are you he, whom one
sufficient sentence of any Catholic Father or Doctor shall make to yield?

The fact you do not deny: Against the worke^ of it you bring no exception:
S. Gregory the Reporter of it, lived within the first six hundred years, And
he reports it to the Praise of S. Benet, And the effect which God gave,
declares that it was not mislyked: and how ^are you say, it was but fondly
done?

But this is it that I say. Though you look demurely upon Reverend and old
Fathers, and speak, as though you regarded their words and deeds: yet
sometimes your Sprite is so moved in you, A Lurki^g sprite and watching for
more opportunity to break openly out.
that from the pytte of your heart, it cummeth up to the typ of your tongue,
and boldly geaueth sentence against those persons, whom the whole world, for
age, Holiness, Lerning and I^dgement, does worthily esteem, and whom yourselfe
dare not dishonor but covertly. Wherefore, that this foul Sprite of Contempt
of Old Fathers which lurketh in the breast of M. Jewel, may be the better
examined and espied what it is, whiles it waggeth now his tongue: we shall not
need to have an Exorcist for the matter, but any reasonable and Indifferent
man, shall be hable, to convince him, by these short questions.

For first of al, how know you (^. Jewel) that it was fondly done of S. Benet
to cause the Sacrament to be laid upon a dead man's breast? S. benet defended.
Did S. Benet himself, think it to be fondly done? Then would neither he ever
have do^e it, or they which sought Remedy of him against yt terrible chance,
you may be assured, nor they so willingly have obeyed.

Did S. Gregory find any such fault in it? He would never have rehearsed it
then, to y^ disgracing of him, whom he intended to honor. And bysides this, the
Epiphone^^^ or sententious conclusion which he infers immediately upon the
forsayed example or fac^, does prove that he highly esteemed it. For, unto Peter
his Deacon, with whom he talks in those Dialogues:

Perpendis Petre etc. Thou see Peter (says he) What merit and worthiness,
this man was o^, before Jesus Christ our Lord, that the earth did cast forth
his body, which had not the Favor and blessing of S. Benet.

Did God himself mislyke with it? The event does prove otherwise. For, as the
castinge up of the Childs body again and again, after it was buried, does
signify that al was not well about it, where such extraordnarie effect followed:
so the resting of it in the earth after the body of our Lord was put upon it,
does declare that he was now pleased, which before was offended. If then none
of al these can be perceived to have mislyked S. Benets precept or Counsel: by
what Authority sai^th M. Jewel, it was fondly done by him?

Again, what thinks M. Jewel of S. Benet? It seems* that he contemns him
not utterly, because of the (S.) which he puts before his name. Except he
would have it understood, that the (S.) in this place must go not for Sain^t
Benet, but for Sir Benet. He lived also within the first six h^^dred years,
and was for all virtue and holiness, A very miracle in the world. It seems
then, that his do^inges are to be Judged of, with Reverence. Forth then to S.
Gregory.

What opinion has M. Jewel of him? I should think very good. For he was an
holy and learned Father, and lived also within the first six hundred years. And
(which is more worth than all this) A Late writer in deed, but as he would be
thought, a great Frind and Patron of Antiquity, One M. Jewel has these
words of him: (...)
Verily S. Gregory's Authority in this case were very good, if he would say
the word. If therefore, so gr^ate Authority make for this fact of which we
speak, and if the spirit of God were in those two Fathers S. Benet and S.
Gregory: what knowledge is that in M. Jewel, by which he is hable to say,
It was but fondly done by S. Benet, etc?

If y^ like case should happen unto him, that any of his brethernes bodies in
the Congregation of Sarum, should be cast up again after it were once buried,
what would his polytike wisdom do? Command it he would perchaunse, to be
buried again^. So might he in deed.

But if it were cast up again after the second buri^ing, and if further yet,
as often as it should be put under the earth over night, it were found upon the
ground in the morning: what then would his holiness or wisdom do? Would he
bid the Brothers or Systers, cast that (with all care after it) out of the way,
and suffer that to rotte above ground, which will not lie still under ground,
when it was well enough buried? For his wisdom and devotion he might do it well
enough.

But if God, which suffered the forsaied castinges up again, of the dead
body, to signify thereby a displeasure justly conceived, if he now would by
other ways declare the same, even upon this body which M. Jewel should leave
unburied, were he hable to abide the ^error of it? And would he not seek for
some Remedy against an extraordinary and strange effect of Gods indignation?

And what remedy would that be? I can not tell verily, there is so little power
or none rather at al, in any thing that they can do. Yet (for example sake)
if it were put in his mind to make a Cross upon the breast of the dead body,
or to put a Relic of some holy man upon it, Or the Gospel of S. John, Or a
piece of holy bread, Or (if these things would not like him) if he should
venture to put upon it a leaf of Caluines Institutions, Or of the Communion
books, Or a piece of Latimers staff, Or Cranmers gown, or Hoopers bones, Or
any other thing that he estemeth: If that after any of these things were put
on the Body, it should be quiet and lie still where it were cast or buried: were
it a likely matter that it should be fondely done, to have applied that to the
dead Body, of which a merueilouse and comfortable effect should be seen to
follow?

Surely, if by your Communion book, or any bone of your false Martyrs, a
Miracle should seem to be wrought, I would never think, that you did fondly to
use the means of those things that are precious emonge you, to the bringing of
some purposes to pass: but this I would certainly Judge, that your selves are
very fond men to esteem those things that you do, and that the Devil had
power to illude you. Now if you dare say, that S. Benet did not well, to have
so excellent and great opinion of the Sacrament as he had, Or that it was the
work of the devil of hell and not of God, that the Monks body remained under
the earth, after the Body of Christ was laid upon it: then lo, I perceive
that you have spoken very favorably of S. Benet in saying, that it was but
fondly done by him, and that in deed, you Judge it to have been wickedly and
shamefully done of him. And you must judge, not of him only, so, but of
Constantius, Ualentinianus, Simplicius (S. Benets successors) And of S.
Gregory ^ most excellent Father, And of al other a^ y^ time, unto whom, the^e
men's authorities were singular, of al these, you must judge, y^ they were
blind, fond, gross, superstitions, wicked, deceived by illusio^s of devils,
and ^oid of y^ Grace of y^ Gospel.

Put of your vysard (M. Jewel) and show your self in your own likeness. Put
of your apparel of a sad and discrete person, which knows his nurture, and
can tell how to give place unto Reverend and holy Fathers: and come forth in
your own solemn Robes, with iags and tassels enough about it, that your cote
may declare what you are. For in deed were you not desperate, you would more
quietly have judged of S. Benets fact, than you have done, and not so quickly
have condemned it as but fondly done: and were you not your self very fond,
you would never have contemned that, which was done and regestred and commended
within the first six hundred after Christ, your self so appealing unto those
years, as though you would be reformed by the Example and Testimony of any
Catholic Father within those years.

Yet if you continue still in your Hypocrisy, the I^different Reader will (I
trust) perceive well enough, that you are but a Counterfai^t, and that you bear
no hearty good will and reverence, toward old and blessed Fathers. For what
would not he not do, if fear of the Magistrates (...) shame of the world (as
yet) did not let him, which is so folishe harby, as to put in one case or
degree the tales of Heathen Poets, and the Records of Christian
Historiographers: the Fancies of Idle men, and the Dispensatio^s of almighty
God: the Co^ceptes that move sensuality, and the Examples that procure
devotion? He brings it in, by occasion of S. Basils vision which Amphilochius
speaks of: and so much the more utters his cankred Stomach, by how much he
had the less occasion to follow it. His words be these.

We may now the better believe that Jupiter with his Gods went down sometimes
for his pleasure to banquet in Aethiopia, Jew. 83. Shame (...) thee.
Or that an Angel evermore ministered the Sacrament unto Marcus that Holy
Monk: Or. etc.

As who should say, the one is as likely as the other, Or, the one as vain as
y^ other. But what man of honesty would ever say so? If some brutishe and
insensible Heretic should plainly, at the beginning, protest, that he would
no better esteem what so ever Fathers Testimony* than Christian men do
regard Homers Poetry, although for his blu^tnes he might be condemned, yet
for his plainness he should not be blamed. Mary if an other man, who knows
the price of sundry books though they be not scripture, and most distinctly
signifies it, that he will admit any Catholic writer, of the first six hundred
after Christ, if he suddenly will liken any Ancient writers narration, to
Homer the Father of al Poets Imagination, he shameth utterly his own study,
doings, promise, and honesty.

Are the coming of Iuppiter down to a banquet in Aethiopia, and the Angels
coming to Marcus an holy Monk to geaue him the Sacrament, are these two so
like, that M. Jewel could think it reasonable, to put them in one sentence,
and in one kind of case together? As for Iuppiters Godhead and his banketting
in Aethiopia, not only al Christians do take for a wretched and vain fable,
but the Painimes also themselves, such as were of the more learned sort, Aug.
de ciui. Dei. lib.
did never so account of him: as in outward words they seemed to do. 4* cap.
27. and (...).
But Marcus the Monks holiness, and the Service that the Angel did under God,
unto him, none surely but Infidels will judge to be fained. For to a good and
faithful mind, what is there in this story that does sound absurde^y?

To have a Monk holy, should that seem incredible? He does very il him self
when he is alone, that Judges so wickedly of the Solitary life. And this
Reproach or Scla^nder, does not touch only Marcus, The story of the holy
Monk Marcus, defended.
Milarion, Antonius, Moses and other of whom Ecclesistical Stor^es make
m^ntion, but Helias also and Helizeus, and S. John the Baptist him self.

But is it like to be fained, when the Sacrament is said to be geauen unto
some persons by the ministry of an Angel? what shall we think then, (...).
of the Angel that carried the Prophet Abacu^ by an hear of his head, from
Judea to Babylon? Or, of the Angel Raphael that went like a goodly young man,
with Tobie the younger, and did eat drink, talk, make merry with him, and
instructed him in all things, in like manner as dear and hearty friends and
fellows behave them selves toward their friends and companions? Uerely,
whereas almighty God him self has so debased him self, that he is become
man, and geaueth him self wholly unto man, to be eaten of him, that man might
be united unto God and live by his life: it were no wonder at al, in
comparison, if y^ Divine food should be always ministered to man, by the
visible service of Angels. For neither can the Angels disdain at it, to serve
that Creature, the nature of which he sees to be exalted above al
Principates, Potestates, Dominations, Cherubines, and S^raphins: And when Gods
infinite majesty will be mea^e, he can not be loath to carry the Dishe.

Wherefore then, does M. Jewel join so wickedly together: An Angel ministering
the Sacrament, and Iuppiter going to banquet in Aethiopia?

Was Sozomenus that reports i^ A fabler only, as Homer was, so much the more
at liberty tell lies, because he wrote in prose, and no^ in verse? He lived
within the first six hundred years, he was A Christian, he wrote an
Ecclesiastical History, and not Poetical Fables, his writings are allowed and
received, and this, which he reports, of the Angels ministering the Sacrament
to Marcus an holy Monk, Sozome^us lib. 6. cap. 29.
he confirms by the Testimony of Macarins an Ancient and Famous Priest.
Which not only said it, but for the Truth and certainty thereof assured it,
that at the time of receiving, an Angel did always give marcus the Sacrament,
and not he. And that he saw always an hand only, as far as unto the wreast of
it, at which Marcus took the Sacrament. In testimony undoubtedly of the
clea^e and singular good soul that was in Marcus. For he was even from his
youth m^rueilous expert in the Scriptures, and Gentle, and Chaste, and Devout,
and at that present, one of the most notable in all the world.

What finds M. Jewel in this story, that he may contemn? Or why refuses he
the judgment of Sozomenus and of Macarius? Of whom, the one reports it, the
other confirms it: And the one in reporting it, signifies it to be credible,
the other in seeing it, assures it to be notable.

If it were altogether feigned in deed, and if other yet should be persuaded to
accept it as Truth, what harm could come to them by it? For all, that may be
gathered thereof, is, that Marcus was a merueylous holy, and angelical man. And
that God even in this world, does excedingly comfort his servants by more ways
than one: And that the Service and attendance of the Angels upon men is
singular: And that, if the vnclea^es of our wretched life did not let it, we
should find the Angels more present and comfortable, then they are perceived to
be. And is there any harm in this, to judge well, of man, Angel, and God? If M.
Jewel can find no greater faults or hinderancies to good life and true Faith,
in the going of Iuppiter to bankette with his younger Gods in Aethiopia, I
would never sti^ke to believe it, or at the least ways, to p^rmit it. But the
adds is so grea^e (...) ^^ident, that he which has put (...) and the (...) in
one case, may (...).

(...) that (...) have, you that have (...) ^aith remaining yet unto you: And
^ou that have no s^ith, And mind ((...) knows when) (...) for all that,
(...) it, (...) the (...) them selves will not, in some points, (...) tym^ is*
y^ world is not yet at the worst.
speak against it. For now, not to believe the Canonical Scrip^ures who dares?
And how great cause has A fainte and weak heart to assent unto them, whiles
the enemies of the Catholic faith, do not openly deny them? But, when
hereaft^r, Iniquity and Impudency shall so abo^nde* that faith shall be
measured by Reason and not by Authority, and when by little and little men
shall be accustomed to conte^^e and mock the Appari^ions made unto holy persons
by Angels, Saints, the Mother of God, or Christ himself, and lyken them to
fables and Illu^ions of the (...) Poets and wicked Sprites that reigned among
the Panymes: what credit will be geaue^ shortly after to the Scriptures
themselves?

Will not the Coming of the three Angels to Abraham, Ge^e. 1^.
and the Feast which they took at his hands, will not the wrestling of the
Angel with Jacob a whole ^^ght long together, 32.
will not the Angels that appeered to Agaz, Iosue, Balam* Man^e, David, Genesis 21.
Elias, will not the fiery Chariots that Elize^s saw, Iosu. 5.
will not the Terrible horse with one in golden N^m. 22.
armor sitting upon him, Iud. 13.
and two goodly and glorious young men in bewtifull ^. Paral. 21
apparel, 3. Re. 1^.
which scou^ged Heliodorus that would have spoiled the Orphans, 4 Re. 6.
and wydowes, Match. 2.
and other, of their goods that late in safe keepinge in the Temple of
Jerusalem: will not the Angels appeering to the Mary's, Mar. 16.
and the Apostles, al in white, Acto. 1. and 12.
and the Angel that bid S. Peter arise, and put on his hose and shows, will not
al these things be quikly and desperately resembled to the conuersations which
Homers Gods and Goddesses had with such as they favored?

Nothing is so easy as to call things into doubt, and to disgrace a true and
holy Story, by obiecting a like unto it, of the telling of Idolatours, or the
making of Poets. In which kind of Confounding, Marring, and Spoiling of
things, M. Jewel has a Folissh Grace: and if he had any Reverence to Old and
Approved Stories, he would never have joined Sozome^us, and Homer together.

He therefore that has Faith, let him thank God for it, and pray for the
increase: he that has none, but is negligente or Indifferent, let him think
aduysedly upon the saving, of both soul and body, and make speed to believe
the Scriptures themselves, whiles so little contradiction is, against them. For
other writers then afterward, let him consider, whether it will stand with
salvation to believe none, or whether it be of necessity, to admi^ al: Or
whether it can agree with any reason and constancy, to contemn them, whom he
has, for good cause, once allowed.

In believing nothing but Scripture there is present danger. For by that
Reason, Scripture it self can not be ^redited, because it is not written in all
Scripture.

In beleeuinge every thing there is absurdity, because of so many
Contradictions and Contrarieties as are found among Writers.

In believing of certain books not yet as Scripture, but as the books of
Learned, Ancient, and Generally received Authors, and sayings as worthy to be
credited and esteemed as our own opinions, there is wisdom and discretion.

But* if (as M. Jewel has geauen most shameful Examples) any man will contemn
the selfsame, whom he would seem to allow, that is such a point, not only
of Hypocrisy, but of Injury also, that, as he should BEWARE OF M. JEWEL for
it, so should ^e take heed to him self least he fall in it.

How M. Jewel uses the selfsame testimonies, of the first six hundred years,
against which he brings Exceptions, when his Adversary allegeth them.
THus far then we are come against M. Jewel, y^ I have proved him, to ^ind y^
Catholics unto y^ first six hundred years, bysides al reason and equity, And
that himself alleges Authorities of later years, with all holdnes and
liberty: Thirdly, that he will not stand, to the witnesses of the first six
hundred years, unto which he appealed so precisely.

And what is there now, that may be added unto his Chivalry? For in deed,
this may be well called his Chivalry, to provoke, as it were all the world,
and, to make conditions such as (...) him, and when the battle increa^eth* to
chainge his armor, to put on a (...) face, to deny that he allowed, to allow
that he denied. In which, as he has showed himself (like as I* by Examples,
have declared) A (...) so, what he may or has add^d thereunto, to would be
considered. And I find that his noble Courage and tried Magnanimity is so
great, that, the self same Authorities, against which he fought too the and
nail, in the Chappiter before, he himself, in his own proper person, aloweth
in other places of his Reply, and uses for substantial and good Arguments.

This, to prove at large, were very easy, but in recompense of the last
Chappiter before, which has been longer than my opinion, I will make this
present one, shorter than my first determination. And shortness also may well be
taken when the matter is in sight that is to be proved. I say therefore.

Against S. Chrysostomes Mass, M. Jewel does argue in the 10. page of his
Reply, And not only reasons simply, that it can no^ (...) his, but taunteth
also them pre^ily, that would have it to be S. Chrysostomes. But* how much he
is deceived in his A^gument, and how little cause he has to dalie as though he
had the victory, it is sufficiently declared already fo. 53. of this book.

The same M. Jewel in the 89. and 90. page of the Repli^ where the place of S.
Chrysostom (There is none to Communicate) is laid against him, there, I say,
he uses the testimony of this Liturgy, and con^esseth it to be S.
Chrysostomes. For these be his words.

Chrysostom himself in his Liturgy says thus. Jew. 89.
Again. But what needs much proof, in a Case that is so plain? Chrysostom
himself in his Liturgy that Commonly bears his name, 90.
follows the same order. Again, This was the order of S. Chrysostomes Mass,
touching the Clergy, and that by the witness of S. Chrystostom himself.

Note the words (Indifferent Reader) and see what proportion is in M. Jewels
doeings. R^.
That Liturgy, which, before, could not be S. Chrysostomes, because it prays
for Pope Nicolas: and because, Jew. ^. 10
A prayer is there, for the Empire and Victory of the Emperor Alexius: and
because, I trow it were prophesieing and no^ praieing, that Chrysostom prayed
for men by name, seven hundred years before they were borne: that same now is
S. Chrysostomes, by M. Jewels own confession. And not only S. Chrysostomes,
but Chrysostomes himself.

For herein also is a great strength: that y^ place, which was obie^ted
against him, being taken out of S. Chrysostom, he thought to add a Grace
unto his Answer by continuinge in the testimonies of the self same Doctor,
and by making S. Chrysostom to agree with S. Chrysostom. And so he repeateth
oftentyme. Chrysostoms Liturgy confessed by M. Jew.
Chrysostom himself, saying: Chrysostom HIMSELF in his Liturgy.
Chrysostom HIMSELF in his Liturgy. Chrysostom HIMSELF in the Liturgy. The
very order of Chrysostomes Mass, by the witness of Chrysostom HIMSELF. As
though that nothing were so much to be feared, as that some like himself, would
deem it to be S. Chrysostomes Liturgy, and then should he leese a good
Argument. Therefore he sets the Book forth very well, and names it the
Liturgy of Chrysostom himself, and makes so much of it, that he signifies
it, to have in it self Authority enough to prove an assertion, without any
more words. For thus says M. Jewel.

But what needs much proof, Jew.
in a case that is so plain? Chrysostom himself. etc.

As if he should say: (...)
That the Clergy received in old time, with the Priest that celebrated. I
have proved it, by the Canons of the Apostles, by Pope Anacletus (...), by the
Council of Nice, (...), Laodic^a, and of Toledo. But what needs much proof
in a case that is so plained? I could allege more witnesses, Antiquity is full
of Examples, The case is clear and ^uident. But to be short, I will bring one
Testimone for all.

And what is that? Mary, Chrysostom him self* Where I pray you? In the
Liturgy. Why did Chrysostom ever make any? Where should one find it? By what
note might one know it? In the Liturgy (says M. Jewel) that commonly bears
his name. Speak you that to the disco^mendacion, o^ p^ai^e of it^ (...) to the
(...) as though it were not S. Chrysostomes in deed, but ^are only his name,
how agrees it, that Chrysostom him self, should witness any thing by this
Liturgy? For if you should have said no more but this, Ch^ysostome in the
Liturgy that commonly bears his name etc, you might have been thought to have
called it S. Chrysostomes Liturgy, because other so name it, and no certainty
might be gathered (...), of your own opinion and iudgem^^^. (...) now in
saying Chrysostom him self etc, you declare by y^ addition of the Pronoune him
self, that your opinion is, s. Chryso^tom, even ^e that made the 61. Domel^e
ad populum Antiochen. to be the very A^thor of this Liturgy. If therefore you
cast not in these words that commonly bears his name, to the dispraise or
discredit of the Liturgy, then have you not only confessed, that Chrysostom
him self should be maker of it, but farther also, you teach us to find out that
Liturgy by the title of y^ book and name of s. Chrysostom, which it commonly
bears, either you make A good Argument against singular and precise
Heretics, which will needs have things otherwise to be taken, then commonly
they are called.

Now, if you did put in, the forsaied words (that commonly bears his name)
neither to the praise nor dispraise of the Liturgy, but as it came to your
mind so you let it fall out into the Paper, that which might well enough have been spared: let so take it then. And what remains, but that Chrysostom
himself must be (...) undoubted Author of this Liturgy, by your conclusion?
Otherwise you have not proved by Chrysostom himself, that the Priests and
Deacons (which no man denies) received with the Bishop or Chief Exequutor at
the Aultare, if the Liturgy, by which you prove it, be not S. Chrysostomes
own.

Ergo, say I now, whereas M. Jewel in the 10. page of his Reply, disproueth
the Liturgy of S. Chrysostom: And, in the 89. and 90. of the same Reply,
affirms S. Chrysostom himself, to say that, which in the Liturgy is
affirmed: It is most plain and evident, that the selfsame Authorities of the
first six hundred years, which he will destroy and deny rather, than his
Adversary should use them, he yet himself will occupy at his pleasure, and
make a great show and countenance, that he is a follower of Antiquity.

In like manner in the. 66. page of his Reply, he argues against a Decree of
Soter Bishop of Rome, and in the. 76 page following, he applies the self same
Decree to his purpose. Read and consider y^ places them selves, you to whom M.
Jewels sayings are precious, I will note only the brief some of the whole matter.

Soter Bishope of Rome (says D. Harding) made this statute or decree, Hard. De
Consdist. 1. ca^ Hoc quoque.
That no Priest should presume to celebrate the solemnity of the Mass, except
there were two present and answer him, so as he himself be the third. For
whereas he says, Dominus vobiscum, Our Lord be with you, and likewise in the
Secrets, orate prome, Pray form: it seems evidently convenient, that answer
be made to his Salutation accordingly.

Now of this Decree he gathers, that a^ the (...) were not present of
necessity ^t the Service, and much more, y^ al did not receive with the Priest
when so ever he celebrated. For it had been unreasonable so earnestly to provide
by a solemn Decree, that without the presence of two mo^e besides him self,
no Priest should be so (...) as to celebrate, if the general and necessary
practice of that time, had so defined it that all the parish should communicate,
or that without a number of Communicantes, there should be no Mas^e said at
al. This Decree therefore, which so evidently destroys the position of M.
Jewel, see how he laboreth to disgrace.

First he sets men together by the cares (as it were) with Some sa^e, Jew.
66. Note the process of M. Jew.
this decree was made ^y Pope Anacletus. Some others say by Soter. And so
whiles some say one thing some an other, be thinks that the quiet Reader
which loves concord and peace* will follow his resolution, which is to follow
none of the both, but (...) an opinion of his own, that it is (...) nor (...)
his decree.

After this he falls into a common place, that It was evermore the common
practice of Deceivers, to blase their doings by the names of such, as they knew
to be in estimation in the world. And in this place to let pass Homer,
Hesi^de, Ticero, Plautus, he allegeth S. Paul. 2 Thessalonians. 2 And counterfeite
Gospels and works, in the name of Peter, Th^m^s, and other the Apostles,
Concluding, that we ought the less to merueil, if the like have happened unto
Anacletus, Euaristus, Soter, etc. So that y^ Conclusion is brought to an If.

Thirdly, Soters Decree refused by M. Jew. Did. 19.
he speaks I^d (...) ^^gainst the Decretal Epistles, Alleging (...), that
they have been doubted of among Learned men, and D. Smith, although his
au^thoritie be not great, that they can not possibly be theirs, whose names
they bear.

Fourthly, he confirms D. Smithes sayings by certain reasons not of D.
Smiths, but of his own: as, These Decretal such things as M. Harding knows
to be open and known lies, and this later point is proved by certain
conjectures.

But all this hitherto, is nothing to the disprouing of the foresaid Decree,
either that it is not Soters, either that it is not to be credited, if as
others say, it were Anacletus. He busieth him self in general and Indefinite
propositions, to no purpose, or conclusion, but to breed Suspicions and
Doubts. Much like as if in reasoning against some heretic, I would not, nor
could not prove that he were a Devil, but yet would tell a long tale and prove
it very substantially, that the Devil has oftentimes gone abroad and ben
conversant with men, and spoken very manerly of Religion, so like an honest and
true man, as any may seem to be in all the world.

Fifthly then, after all Preludes or Preambles ended, he touches specially the
decree it self, upon which the Argument of D. Hardings was grounded. And his
reasons against it, are shortly these. S. Austin, and ^. Hiero^ who lived. 250.
years after Soter, Have recorded that the people of Rome used to take the
Communion together every day, ergo that practice will hardly stand with
Soters decree. As who should say, that all the people might not receive at ou^
priests hands if any other priest, when they were departed, should go to the
Aultare, and have no more but two to answer him.

Item, this word, Sole^^^ seems to importe a solemn company or resort of
people. Yea but Missarum solennia does import, not by seeming, but by plain
construing, neither cumpanie of masses, neither of people, but the Appointed and
Reverend and Catholic manner of exequuting the Mysteries.

Item, It may well be doubted, whether Dominus vobiscu^, and, Orate prome
fratres (which words are in the decree) were any part of the Liturgy of Rome
in Soters time. What harm I pray you is in those words, that it might be
well douted, whether they were used so tymely in the Church? In Dominus
vobiscum, our Lord be with you, the Priest saluteth the pople Charitably and
Godly, And in Orate pro me, pray for me, he confesses himself a sinner, and
req^ireth their help, both de^outly and humbly. But because the self same
words are now in the Mass, M. Jewel can not brook them, as he can neither
the word Mass it self, for which in this place (^ul finely forsooth) he uses
the term of Liturgy of Rome and not of Mass of Rome. Fine M. Jewel.
And so he that can not abide to have S. Chrysostomes Liturgy called A Mass
(which is our English word, to signify that Service of the Church, Jew. 12.
that answers the Liturgy of the Grecians) he now like a merry Greek,
speaking of that Service of Rome which was ever called among the Latinistes
Missa, and among y^ English, Mass: terms it very ^rymly in English, the
Liturgy of Rome. But let us go forward.

After all these foresaid Inventions to move an Altercation and busynes about
the decree of Soter, he would make the Catholics afraied, as if he should say:
If you will hold with Soters decree, I will drive you to an Inconvenience, and
therefore you were best to let go your holdfast. But wha^ is that
Incon^enience? Mary says he, in that Soter requires, that the two (of whom
he s^eaketh) make answer unto the Priest, there in is included both nearness
of place, for the people to stand in, and to hear, and also a Common known
tongue. Which both are Contrary to M. Hardinges Mass.

But he stands nigh enough, I ^rowe, that stands by the Aultare, and he
answers in a Common known tongue, that answers in y^ Latin tongue. And
both these things are done, by the simple Parisshe Clerk, or little boie that
serves the Priest at Mass. And therefore the decree of Soter hyndereth the
Catholics, nothing at al. And if you have no more to object against it, than
these foresaid trifles, you may either hold your peace, or bring some other
fressher Arguments.

But other Arguments you have none: Only you take it for a good sport, to
note the questions which are moved by the Canonistes about this Decree. As,
whether the two whose presence is required, ought to be two Clerks or two lay
men, Jew. ^8.
or one Clerk and one lay man, or one man and one woman. The Resolution
whereof is, that they must be two Clerks* Yet you declare out of Summa
Angelica, that in Private Mass one is sufficient. And to this you allege
Gersons Opinion, that the Priest may well say, Dominus vobi^cu^, our Lord be
with you, though but one be present, because he speaks unto the whole Church
of the Faithful, and not to that one only, that (...) by him. Or (as
Innocentius (...)) because it may be thought, there be Angels there, to
supply the men's Rome.

Thus you make some sport to your self by rekenyng up of the Canonistes
opinions, but what sad conclusion you can pe^ke out thereof, against Soters
Decree, it is not perceived. Except you will reason after this sort, that,
because the Late Doc^ours or Rulers of the Church, have either expounded
according to Charity the words of that Decree, Or have loosed according to
their Authority, the bond which was put upon the Priests by the Positive Law
thereof: therefore So^er was never a^thor of it.

The last quarrel that M. Jewel has to Soters Decre, is that it makes mention
of Secreta the Secrets of the Mass, which to have been in the time of Soter,
it were very hard for D. Harding to prove. For the^ Every piece of the Mass
was spoken alowde. But, how prove you th^^? For concerning D. Harding, he may
speak upon some Authority, because he alleges the plain words of Soters
Decree for it.

But it is not my purpose, exactly to refel M. Jewels Arguments made against
Soter: Only this I pray thee now to consider (Indifferent Reader) how many
fetches and devises he has in this place had, against that Decree of his.
Anacletus ( quod he) as some say, made it: Then, Counterfeite Books have been
set abroad. A b^ndle of shifts.
Furthermore Decretal Epistles have been doubted of. And more specially to the
matter, The practice ( sa^eth he) of S. Augustine and S. Hieromes time can
hardly stand with that is here imagined. Again, Solennia seems to import, a
resort of people. Again, it may he well doubted whether Dominus vobiscu^ were
any part of the Liturgy of Rome in Soters time. Again, That any Secreta were
in the time of Soter, it were very hard for M. Harding to prove. Then add unto
this. That question is moved by the Canonistes what those two ought to be,
whose presence is required, at the Priests Mass. And first, the Resolution is
this, Straitwaies, The matter is otherwise determined. Then, Gerson says this.
Yet, Pope Innocentius has an other fetch.

How think we now, has this fellow left any corner unsearched, out of which
he might scrape any Gheasse, conjecture, or Suspicion, to Diminisshe the
Authority of this decree of Soter? From Generals which proved nothing, cummeth
he not to bare conjectures against the Specialties of the decree? When he
could say no more against y^ decree itself, sought be not to bring it into
contempt by questions, Resolutions, and variations of the Canonistes about it?
Well, M. Jewel, you shall have your asking. Let not this be Pope Soters decree,
which D. Harding has brought against you. And that, which you, with so great
bending of wit and turning of Books, have sought to conquer us in, let us
(in trial of a ^urther conclusion) yield voluntaryly unto you. And so it
remains, that it be not used of any of us, as an Ancient Decree of Soter.

Tell me then, wherefore do you allege it? This very Decree (Indifferent
Reader) about Discrediting and disgracing of which, M. Jewel bestowed a whole
leaf together in his Reply, this selfsame he uses, not six leaves after, in
the selfsame Reply. But consider with what Constancy he does it, Soters
decree alo^wed by M. Jew.
and with how great Reverence toward Ancient decrees. His purpose was to
disprove the Private Mass, which Ioannes El^^mosina^ius an Ancient and holy
Bishope is reported to have said. His words be these. M. Hardinges Leontius
says, John the Almon^r said Mass in his Oratorie at hom^, Jew. 76.
being sure of no more company but of one of his own household servants alone.

Here is a dubble lie. Ra.
For neither Leontius says so much, neither D. Harding gathers it. For by
Leontius, it appears that be seen for A certain noble man to come unto him,
as though it had ^en about some matter of* the common weal: And so, was the
noble man also present, at the private Mass with the Bishopes servant. And D.
Harding gathers not that he was sure, of no more cumpanie, but of one of his
own household Servants alone, but rather, that he was sure neither of the
noble man, neither of his servant, that they could or would receive with him.
But of their company concerning presence in the place, though not in
participation of the Mysteries, he was so sure as one may be of that which he
presently sees before his eyes, because both were with him at Mass and
Answered him. But this lie of M. Jewel must be dissembled, if you will see how
earnestly he allegeth the decree of Soter. Suppose it then to be so, (against
both Leontius, and D. Hardinges plain saieinges) that the Bishop was sure of
no more but one, to be present at his Mass. What can you lay against him for
it?

Let us consider ( say you) how safely he might so do by the order of holy
Canons. Jew. 76.


Why Sir, Ra.
in breaking of them, what danger is there? Mary,

To break them, Jew
Damasus says, is blasphemy against the holy Ghost.

Show then, against what order of holy Canons, Ioannes Eleemosinarius has done
in saying Mass, none but his servant (according to your sense) being present?

Pope Soter as it is before alleged by M. Harding straightly commands, Jew.
that no Priest presume to celebrate the Sacrament without the cumpanie of two
together.

What say you M. Jewel? Ra.
that very Decree of Pope Soter against which not fine leaves before you were
so vehement, is it compted now among the holy Canons? That Decree, against
which that you might have the more vantage, you entered into a Common place of
bringing the whole Book of Decrees and Decrecretals into discredit or
contempt, (so great was your Stomach against Soter) the same now do ye allege
so formally, and with so great Charge commend ye it unto us? For to break the
order of holy Canons (you say out of Damasus) that it is blasphemy against the
holy ghost.

And where then was your modesty (for Gods sake) when of the Decretal
Epistles, you utter a Copy only of tha^, which lies in your Store against
them, Jew. 67.
affirming that they manifestly deprave and abuse the Scriptures, Maintain the
kingdom of the Pope, Publish a multitude of vain and superstious Ceremonies,
Proclaim open Lies? For if to break the order of holy Canons, it be
blasphemy against the holy Ghost: How far of are you from the Sin against
the holy Ghost, which plainly do contemn Ancient Canons (as this of
Soters) and yet allege the selfsame afterward, which you contemned before?
For, if in speaking against it, you followed your Conscience, could the same
Conscience also permit you to hold with it? And if, on the other side, your
conscience gave you, that it was Soters Decree (as in this place you allege it
for no less) was it not of plain malice, and directly against your own
knowledge, that you busied your self so much, as I have declared, with seeking
and ^umpassing to deface it?

Consider then (indifferent Reader) and see by this which I have declared,
whether M. Jewel use not for his own poor va^tage, the self same Testimonies
of y^ first six hundred years, which he strives most extremely to discredit,
when y^ Catholics do allege them. Concerning which point, if thou co^et to
have more examples, remember what he says against Dionysius, Jew. ^* 136. 66.
223.
Sozomenus, The Decrees and Epistles Decretal, and then do no more but look in
the quotations only of his Reply, whether thou find them not alleged of
him. And if thou find them not, never trust me hereafter: but if you shall
perceive, Dionysius, Sozomenus and others to be brought in of him, as occasion
sometimes serves, but y^ Decrees and Decretal Epistles to be so thickly set in
his Reply, as though he were some great Canonist and Papist, and not the exact
follower of fine Divinity, the^ have I proved my Objection. And now what is he
worthy to have, which so abuses y^ world in setting up and pulling down of
Ancient and approved witnesses? For whereas by writing and reasoning we seek
always to come nerer and nerer to some Conclusion, by this liberty of
Replieng which M. Jew. follows, we shall be always y^ further of from y^
ending of controversies. For if he would have plainly said, you shall bring
forth no witness, except he lived within the first six hundred years, and of
those very years I will not allow al witnesses, and especially the Decrees and
Decretals I refuse utterly: then would his Reply have been shorter by. xx
parts, and with more speed it should have been answered, and with more
facility it would have been perceived. But now, when he is so uncertain, that
he can not readily tell, what to allow or refuse, and is so mutable, that he
allows in some one place the same which he disproued in an other, how should
it not be both cumberous and injurious? Cumberous, because of the heaping of
many Authorities and Testimonies, such as him self knows and makes to be
uncertain and doubtful: Injurious, because of taking away from an other, the
free use of those writings, which himself with all boldness avouches. So y^ when
D. Harding allegeth Pope Soters Decree, all the decrees and Decretals should
hear the worse for it: And when M. Jewel allegeth the self same Decree,
s^^aitwaies it is blasphemy against the holy ghost, to break any of the holy
Canons.

Such Hypocrites and wranglers, and braggers, and Gospellers, by whose means
new Contentious and troubles are reised and continued in y^ world, it is pity
(to speak the least) y^ ever they were admitted before they were examined, or
that now still they should be credited, a^^er that they be detected.

How M* Jewel allegeth, to small purposes, such Authorities of Fathers, as do
plainly confound y^ procedings.
BUt what shall we say? We are not Masters of other men's wills? neither do we
believe that this creature (man) whom God has made after his own Image, should
lack that power of his soul, and gift of God, which consists in free will.
If therefore men will not Beware, when they may, what should we do? I have
already declared in special chapiters, such matter against M. Jewel, that of al
men that ever yet wrote, there was never any of less Gravity, Sincerity, or
Conscience in his writing. To him that has a will to save his soul, so much is
sufficient to make him seek after better Instruction: To him that thinks
only of Civil Policy, or of Temporal life and living, and will not trouble
his head with the euerlastingnes of the Soul, and a world to come, no
Arguments against M. Jewel can be sufficient. But concerning them which would
in sad earnest save one, and are not fully resolved that M. Jewel behaueth
himself vnreasonablie and wickedly, may it please them to consider, how he shall
be yet better taken in his Hypocrisy.

To Antiquity he appealeth: And (because he would be seen to deal plainly) he
apointeth out the first six hundred after Christ, for trial of the matter. Now
when some witnesses of that time come against him, he will not yet allow them.

And yet when he has taken them away from his Adversary, him self for all
that will afterward allege them. And of these points we have spoken already:
but what may be added more, to the discovering of his beha^iour? Mary this much
I can say and prove more, that such testimonies of Holy Fathers and Cou^^els,
as he brings in against the Catholics, do in the self same sentence y^ he
allegeth, give a great wound to his Religion. So greedy he is of tro^bling y^
Catholics peace, that to make some of them shrink, as if in deed a blow
were coming, he is content him self to bring his own cause into y^ danger,
that he y^ will take the advantage may quikly so strike it, y^ it will never be
good after. And not only so, but so little favored he is of Antiquity, y^ in
very mani places he cannot utter the full sentence, but it shall straitwaies be
perceived, that y^ late procedings do impugn directly the orders, practice,
and Religion that were used in the Primitive Church. As in Example.

M. Jewel, thinking to destroy thereby, the Sole Receiving of the Priest,
proves it, that in the Primitive Church, they which would not Communicate,
were bid to avoid. The first Exampl^*
For, It is Decreed (says he) by the Canons of the Apostles, that al faithful
that enter into the Church, and (...) are the Scriptures, and do not continue
out the prayers, Can. Apost Can. 9.
nor receive the Communion, should be excommunicate, as men vvoorking the
trouble and disorder of the Church. Ievvel.
Again: If thou be not worthy to receive the Commmunion, page 39.
then art thou not worthy to (...) pres^^^ at the prayers. Chrysostom ad popul.
Antioche^. Hom. 61.


Therefore M. Harding should drive his unworthy people from the Church, and not
suffer them to hear his Mass.

Let me ask you then one question M. Jewel. Ievvel.
Why do you constrain, page 23.
by fear of high displeasure* Ra.
Loss of goods and imprisonment, such as never were yet of your Religion, to
come into your Co^gregations, and to receive also with you? You would have D.
Harding to drive them out which are unworthy by the authority of this saying
of S. Chrysostom: Compelling of catholics to come to the Congregation.
Should not you by the same reason, cease to draw them into your Congregation,
which are no brothers of your Religion? D. Hard. gathering it of your Sermon,
that you should be of the mind, to have all the people to Receive, Or them y^
would not, to be driven out of the Church, you cry out and say: Fol. 79.
O M. Harding, how long will you thus wilfully pe^uert the ways of the Lord?
You know, this is neither the doctrine neither the practice of the Church.
Howebeit the Ancient Doctors have both taught so, and also practiced the
same. Anacletus de Cons. did. 1. Episcopus Calixtus de cons. did. 2. Peracta.

But O M. Jewel why say you so? Do you confess that ancient Fathers have
used it, and yet dare you Proteste, that your Church has no such practice?
Where is your Reverence now, to the first six hundred after Christ? Where is
your bringing al things, to the first Pattern? I perceive by this, what your
answer will be to my question out of S. Chrysostom. You will plainly say, that
your Church follows him not. And wherefore then do you make out of him, Rules
to the present Church, whom your self will not follow, in the selfsame
sentence, which you lay against us? O M. Jewel, how long will you Imperially
allow and refuse the Authority of ancient Doctors, The second Example.
al at will and pleasure?

Likewise to prove that which no man denies, that in the primitive Church the
people did communicate with the priest, M. Jewel declares the manner of their
assemblies, Jew. 11.
saying out of Justinius Martyr: Justinius Martyr. in 2. Apol.
Before the end of our prayers, (...) kiss each of us one an other. Then is
there brought unto him, that is the chief of the brethren, bread and a cup of
Wine and water mingled together: Which, having received, he praises God and
geaueth thanks a good space. And that done, the whole people confirms this
prayer saieing, Amen. After that, they that among ^s be called Deacons* give
unto every of the^ that be present, part of the bread and likevvyse of the
wine and water that are consecrate, with thanks giving, and ary he same
home unto them, that happen to be absent.

Again speakinge of the effect of the Sacrament, by which we are made al one
in Christ, and all one among our selves, he allegeth S. Chrysostom. Jewel fol*
27.
Propterea in mysterijs etc. Chrysostom. (...) Hom* 61.
For that cause in the time of the mysteries we embrace one an other, that
being many we may become one.

Again, speaking of the people receiving of the Sacrament in their own
hands, Jew. (...) 48.
which is also a matter indifferent in it self, he says to prove it: I speak
of him, August. ^on^ra. lit. (...) 23.
whose co^^e of peace ye received at the ministration, and at whose hands ye
laid the Sacrament.

The Testimonies are of your own bringing, Ra.
and therefore, I would think of your own alowing. Where then is your
mingling of wine and water together* Water and wine migled together.
in your Mysteries? Where is the embracing of one an other, and the Cosse,
so much used in the primitive Church? The Church sense that time, Geauing of a
cosse.
has changed the manner of kissing, and kept the signification which was in
it, by geauing of the pax or peace.

But this peace ( say you) was not a little table of silver or somewhat else, Jew.
153.
as has been used ( yea and is still used) in the Church of Rome: but a very
cosse in deed in token of perfect peace and unity in faith and religion. So
Justinius Martyr says speaking of the time of the holy Mysteries: we salute
one an other with a cosse, So likewise Chrysostom and others.

True it is M. Jewel, Ra.
and knowing so much of the practice in the Primitive Church, why do ye not
use this so Ancient and holy a Ceremony? If you will not have the Pax of
silver, either for sparinge of charges, Or fear of Commissioners upon Church
goods, Or in despite of the Church of Rome: use then in your mysteries a very
cosse in deed, according to the Pattern of the Primitive Church. And i^
neither old nor new Ceremonies can please you, why crake you, in contemning
the Later, that yet you regard still, the Ancient and Approved Orders? Or with
what face do you allege these approved Fathers testimonies, by whose sayings
you will not be ruled?

M. Jewel is always ^^sie i^ pro^ing, The third Example.
that the people in the Primitive Church did Communicate with the Priest. As
though the concluding of that were a clean overthrow to the Catholic
Religion: yet no Catholic did ever de^se it, and a^ this time also when
Charity is (...), Jew. (...). (...).
yet do the people often in the year (...) with the Priest. Now by occas^on of
pro^ing this, which (I must again say) no man denies, he says in diverse
places of his Reply. Chrysostom. in Litur.
The Deacons receive the Communion, afterward the Mysteries be carried unto a
place, (...)
where the people must Communicate.

It is lawful only for the Priests of the Church, (...).
to enter into the place, (...).
where the Aultare stands, and there to Communicate.

Let the Priests and Deacons Communicate before the aultare, Con. Tol^^. 4.
cap. 17.
the Clerks in the quiere, and the people without the quiere.

How like you these dstinctions of Places and Pers^ns, Ra.
M. Jewel? Yea rather why like you them not? Have not yo^ ^ulled down
Chauncell, Taken away partitions, made the pauement thoroughout level,
Distinction of places.
Set the Communion table in the myddle, Set forms for the Laity to sit about
it? And have not your self geauen strange orders, as it were to all the people,
noting it by your own wit (as app^ereth) out of Fabian the Pope: that men and
women made the sacrifice of the aultare, and of bread and wine, and therefore
after the order of Melchisedech? But, if the people could not so much as come
nigh the Aultare where the Priest stood, or recey^e, at the most, in the quier:
how far of were they, at those days, from y^ irreuere^cie y^ now is used? And
how far wide are you, from y^ toward^es is reform al things, by the pattern of
the primitive Church? Yet are you not afraied nor Ashamed, to allege those
Councels and Authorities, which condemn your ^rocedinges utterly. The fourth
Example.


S. Basile (says M. Jewel, thinking still all things to help him that prove
a co^munitating of more together) reports an ecclesiastical decree or Cano^,
Basil. exe. ad piet. sermon. 4.
that at the receiving of the holy Communion which he calls Mysticum pasca,
Jew. pa^ 3.
there ought to be twelve persons at the least, and never under.

And you, Ra.
to prove your selves folowers of Antiquity, and Restorers of ecclesiastical
Canons, have decreed, that three shall make up a Communion, and for A need,
The fifth Example.
the Priest and the sick person alone.

Si haec vasa etc. If the matter be so dangerous, Chrysostom. in opere imper.
Hom. 11.
to put these sanctified vessels unto Private uses, wherein is contained, not
the very body of Christ, but the mystery or Sacrament of Christ's body, etc.

You judge, Ra.
I perceive, the Author of that book to be S. Chrysostom, and this place to
be true and godly. Therefore*that you may consider it the better, and, by your
commendacion, other Protestants: I will english the whole sentence unto them.
The Author of that book, whosoever he were, persuading with the people, to use
well their tongue, least unclean spirits do enter thereby into their bodies:
If it be sin and danger ( says he) to put haloued vessels, unto private
uses: as Balthazar teaches us, which, because he drank in halovved cups,
was put byside his kingdom and his life: If then it be so dangerous a matter
to put these sanctified vessels unto private uses, in which the true body of
Christ is not, but the mystery of his body is contained: how much more
behooves it us concerning the vessels of our body, vhich God has prepared for
himself to dwell in, not to geaue the devil place to do in them what he vvil?

A strong argument surely and persuasible. For, Ra.
if dead metal, which by it self is not apt to receive holiness, be had yet
in Reverence, because of the special use which it serves for, in the temple
of God: how should not our bodies, the lively vessels of our reasonable Souls
be kept still pure and Inuiol^^ed? If, for the vessels which Balthazar
^^phaned, which served in the Figur^^ of the old law, which had not y^ very
body of Christ in them* but A sign and Mystery only thereof: If for these,
God plagueth and strikes, how shall they escape, which receive into their
bodies, the very true Body of Christ, and have God corporally dwelling in them,
through the Mystery of his Incarnation and virtue of his Consecration: And yet
dare turn themselves, unto profane and unclean uses? This is the true sense
of that place.

But when begin you (M. Jewel) to tell openly the danger which they incur
before god (though y^ world allow it) which, Either after vow made of Chastity,
have turned them selves, first out of their Monasteries, and shortly after,
have ouerturned themselves into Incestuous Car^alitie: Either spoiling the
Churches of God, Church goo^^s.
of the hallowed and consecrated vessels, have converted them into profane
uses, and drink in Chalices at their Tables? No doubt, by the example of
Balthazar, but that they are in sore danger, which serve themselves an^ their
private Affections, with the (...), and proper vessels appointed for God. And
if it be so in corruptible and base matters, are not the polluted weddinges of
Non^es, Monks, harlottes, and Renegates, much more accursed and execrable? But
when will you protest this much M. Jewel? And if you like not this consequence,
why refuse yo^ your own witness?

This place also that follows, is made to serve for prou^e, The. ^. Example.
Jew. 74.
that there were that Communicated with the Priest.

They that have fallen into Heresy and do penance for the same, when the
Nouices that be not yet Christened be commanded to depart out of the Church,
let them depart also* Ergo they that remained, did Communicate together.

Well to let go y^ Argument, R^.
the grau^ting of which proves nothing against us: What place is that in all
your Communion, where Nouices or Penitentes must go out? Or how agrees this
with the compelling of men into your Congregation against their wills? The* 7.
Example. Jew. 174*


The people rise before day and hie them to the house of prayer.

You bring in this upon occasion of Praying in a known tongue, Ra.
which the Greek and Latin both are. Basil. in epist. ad Clericos Neoc^s.
Of which I have spoken of, in the third Article of my first book. But how
like you this rising before day?

Non sum, The. 8. Example.
inquis, Monachus. etc. Tho^ vvilt say, Chry^ost. in Mat. Hom. (...)
I am no Monk, I have wife and children and charge of household. This is it,
that as it were with a Pestilence, Jew. ^08
infecteth altogether, that ye think the reading of the holy Scriptures
belongs only unto Monks.

This is spoken of M. Jewel, Ra.
to exhort the people to y^ getting of knowledge which may be well spoken to
them, and sone gotten of them, if Curiosity does not let it. But what were
these Monks, so distincted by the study of Scriptures, from the rest of the
people? And what like Profession or Example have you, The. 9. Example.
in all your Reformations?

Decernimus ^um extran^um esse. Council. Chalced. action prima.
etc. We decree that he shall be removed from his office of Priesthood, and
from our Communion, and from the Primacie of his Abbie. Jew 245


This is alleged of M. Jewel, Ra.
to prove a confessed Truth, that Primatus is taken for any preferrement before
others. But let him consider it: were Abbeys then within the.600. years after
Christ* And in such reputacio^, that a general Council counted it, among other
things, for a great Ignominy and Punishment, a Monk to be deposed from y^
Primacie in them? M. Jew. hoping to conclude thereby y^ the B. of Rome should
not be Supreme over al, shows what large Priuilegies Emperors have given to
the Clergy, which for Civil Actions he may do well enough, as being in them
Suprem himself: The* 10. Example.
Omnes qui vbic^que sunt, etc. All that be or hereafter shall be Priests or
Clerks of the Catholic faith, Cod. de Episc. and Cleric^^ Omnes.
of what Degree so ever they be, Monks also, let them not in any Civil
A^tions be drawn ^oorth to any foren Judgment by the summon or commandment
of any Judge more or less: Jew. 267
neither let them be driven to come forth of either the Province, or the
place, or the country where they dwell.

If you see then how greatly the Clergy was honored in times past, Ra.
and allow the Authors of their Priuilegies: Why labor you, as much as ye can,
to to bring all the Spiritual power into subjection? Priuilegies gra^to priests
and monks
Or why defend you not the right of the Clergy, like Reformers of the Church?

Priests and Clerks are before your (...), drawn before temporal Judges into
their Courts. Monks, not only not saved from the pains, to go for any matter
out of the Country, but not suffered to have any place in your Country. Such
charity has been taught by your Gospel, and with such pure following of
antiquity you have proceeded.

The place appointed unto the priest for the hol^ Ministry as it may be
gathered by S. Chrysostom, The. 11. Example. Jew. 196
at certain times of the Service, was drawn with Curtains.

This proves not, Ra.
that the Aultare was placed in the midst of the Church, as M. Jewel would
have it, but by this we may well gather, that great reverence was used then
about the Mysteries, which you, forsooth, have so maintained, that as though
the Celebration of the Mysteries was not open enough before, you have, in some
places pulled down the Partition, between the body of the Church and the
Quier, And have caused generally, the Communion Table to be ^^ought down
nearer the people, least (...) Curtains, which you occupy, should let their
sight.

Ergo vt (...) p^ssint. (...)
etc. Therefore that these things may ^e well examined, Co^c. Ni^. primum.
it is well provided, that every year in every Province, at two several
times, there be holden a Council of Bishops: Ca^. 5.
that they meeting together out of al parts of the Province may hear and
determine such (...). Jew* 26^


When begin you to put this Canon in execution? Ra.


Truly Liberatus says, The. 13. Example.
The manner was in Alexandria, that who so ever was chosen Bishop there,
Libera^us Cap. ^0.
should come to ^e bear, and lay his Predecessors hand upon his head, Jew.
283
and put on S. Marks Cloak, and then was he sufficiently confirmed Bishop,
without any mention made of Rome.

You are a special frinde to the Bishop of Rome, Ra.
which rather then he should have to do with Consecrating of Bishops, you
can well fancy a dead man's blessing, and the solemn using of a Relic: which
how heartily ye favor, I am in doubt.

I prove it therefore unto thee by these Examples (Indifferent Reader) not
only that M. Jewel is a dec^itful Man, but I give the also occasions how to
try him, whether he be in deed an hypocrit^, or no. For if he think the
forsaid testimonies out of the holy Fathers or Councels to be of such force and
generality, that we may in no case receive a diverse order from theirs: Why
are not Monasteries standing with them? Why are not old Ceremonies observed?
Why is not water and wine mingled together in their Chalice, as plain Examples
of y^ Primitive Church, declare unto us, to have been then used? And, if he
Answer, that the Canons, Orders, and Fasshions, or practices of old time, are
not so to be understood of us, as though the Ages following might not by
lawful Authority and f^l consent, put an other Cano^ in place of the old: Why
lays he it to y^ Catholics charge, that the Priests now say Mass, though
but one alone be present, which was otherwise by Pope Soters decree? Or why
tells he us (out of S. Basil) of an old Canon y^ appointed twelve at the
least to receive together?

Here (I should think) he must needs be taken, (for who knows the uttermost
of his Art in shifting?) but I think verily he could not escape in this
place, a just note either of high malice, in obiecting that, against his
Adversary, which him self knows to be little worth: either of deep
Hypocrisy, in pretending a Reverence toward Antiquity, which in very deed
he c^ntemneth.

How M. Jewel allegeth for himself, the words and deeds of Old condemned
Heretics.
BEVVARE therefore of M. Jewel, you that seem to have, as it were, A
Conscience, and make a Religion of Religion. For many there are that live among
Christians, them selves also being Christians, which so heartily follow y^ world
and their own co^cupisce^ces, y^ neither Catholic books will do them good,
they are so careless, neither heretical do them harm, they are so desperate.
But you, which are not past al fear of God, and care of Salvation: whom
examples of sin, which were to be seen among the Papists, or were gathered
out of al Stories and Countries against them, did make to a^horre even the
Religion it self, which corrupt persons professed: Whom fair Promises of
Gospellers, that they would show you a ready and short way unto Heaven, in
which you should have no carriage of Ceremony, Tradition, Lentes, Fast,
Penance, Fear of Purgatory, etc. And that you should have al things
ministered unto you, in like order and manner, as they were used among the
faithful in the Primitive Church: you I say, whom these fair promis^^, have
made to forsake the Old and Catholic Religion, upon hope to find a more
Ancient and Received Religion which y^ new Masters and holy Doctors and
councels would teach you: BEWARE you of M. Jewel.

For whereas you would not have forsaken y^ religion in which you were baptized,
and which al Christians then in all the world professed openly, ex^^pt you had
believed y^, as it was told you, so you should ^e reduced to the perfect state
of A true Religion, even as it was to be found in the Primitive Church: how
mis^rably are ye now deceived, where your M^sters do not in deed regard the
Example and practice of the same Church, for love and des^er of which you
followed them, leading you quite away, from the Obedience of the present
Church? How well may every one of you, whom M. Jewel has perverted, ^aie
unto him?

Sir, have you put me in this hope, that in following of you, I should go in
the safe way of the primitive Church, of holy Fathers, of Ancient Councels?
And my mind geauing me, that al was not well in this present Church in which
you and I both were baptized, and that the nearer one might come to the
beginninges of the Christian Faith, he should find it the more surer and purer,
have you served my humor therein? and promising to reform al things
according to the pattern of the Ancient Catholic Church, are you proved in
the e^d to neglect those self same orders, which were observed in the most
best and most Ancient times? Spoke you fair unto me, until I was come unto
you, from the Cumpanie where I lyned, and do ye not (...) those things unto
me, for hop^ of which I brake from my (...) cosse, I know, or a curtain, Or A
(...) in the Church, are not essential, an^ without them we may be saved: But
yet, if in the pure and Primitive Church such things were allowed, you have
not done well, to make me contemn the Pax, or vestmentes, or distinction of
places, such as were used in the Church, from which I departed.

And yet: If these things be bu^ light, and Rags, as some will say, of the
(...) Religion, was the building of Monasteries a light matter in the primitive
Church? And that Rule of life, which Monks then followed, was it of small
importance, by the Judgment of that world so nigh to Christ? You have made me
believe, that to live in such Order, should be a derogation to the merits of
Christ, A trusting to our own works, A ^ondage of conscience, a promise of
things impossible, A Superstitions and (...) fashion, and at one word, that
Monkerie should be Trumperie: And yet does it appear, by our own allegations,
that Monks and Abbates were in the Primitive Church, and that they were also
in great rep^^ation.

What shall I say of the most high and dreadful Mystery, the Sacrament of the
body and Blood of Christ, whereas the witnesses that yo^ bring in for other
purposes, do testify unto me, that the Cup of the Lord was mingled with
wine and water: can I take in good part and with a quiet Conscience, that you
put no water at al in the Cup of the Lord?

If you had not challenged, if you had not provoked, if you had not geauen most
infallible tokens (as me thought) that al Antiquity had gone smothe with you:
or, if you had refused at y^ beginning al other Authority bysides the Express
Scriptures, I might have deliberated whether I would have followed you, or no:
But now, making so large and goodly promises, that you would not take my
Religion away from me, but that you would only reform it, and that you would
not deny the Faith, which the whole world professes, bu^ require it to be
reduced unto the order of the Primitiu^ Church, I yielded quickly therein unto
you, and thought, that these surely be the men of God, which shall purge the
Church of al Superfluites, and leave it in as good health and constitution, as
ever it was in her florisshing time. And are you not ashamed, that the very
printes, and steps of papistry, are found, even within that age, which you
warranted unto me to be altogether for the Gospel? And that, in those selfsame
testimonies, which your self upon occasion, do bring out against the
Papists? what were not they themselves lykely to show, if they might be
suffered to utter, what diversity there is betwixt this Late welfauored
Gospel, and the Catholic old Religion: seeing that you can not so order the
matter, in reciting of Ancient Fathers and Councels, but it must be strait
ways perceived, that your procedings are not conformable unto the Primitive
Church.

O wretched and vile Glory, to fill the margin of a Book, with the Councels
of Nice, Carthage, Chalcedon, Constantinople, Ephesus, etc. and with the
testimonies of Anacletus, Felix, Soter, Calixtus, Chrysostom, Basile, Ambrose,
Augustine, etc. as though that it were not M. Jewel that made any thing of his
own, but as though in all that he concluded, he followed most exactly, the holy
Councels and Fathers* and, before all be known, to be conuin^^^ most clearly
and evidently, that his doeinges are not like the holy Fathers Religion, what a
confusion is it unto that Glory, and what a Detriment to right meaning and well
willing consciencies?

In this sort might an honest and grave man complain, and say less than M.
Jewel deserves. For now I will show unto thee (Indifferent Reader) that he
allegeth, and that very sadly and solemly, the testimonies of Heretics as
though it were no matter at al, how well it would be admitted among the learned,
so that the common Reader be persuaded that M. Jewel speaks not without his
Authorities. For proof thereof let this be one Example.

The Bishopes of the East part of the world being Arians, Jew. ^6^
vvriting unto Julius the Bishope of Rome, took it gree^ously, that he would
presume to over rule them. Sozome. lib. 3. ^a. 3.
And shevved him, that it was not lavvful for him, by any slight or color of
appeal, to undo that thing, that they had done.

This is one of M. Jewels testimonies, to prove against the Bishop of Romes
Supremacy. In alleging of which, although he lacked a point of discretion, in
bringing of their sentencies forth, Arrians witness for M. Jewel.
whom all the world has condemned for starcke Heretics: yet he has not
forgoten al conscience and charity, in that he confesses to his Reader, that
these Bishops of the East, whose doings he thinks worthy to be
considered, were Arians. Which I pray thee (Indifferent Reader) to think well
upon, that it may be perceived, how well the Protestants and Arrians agree
together, in their proud and rebellious behauyours: and how well the testimony
of blasphemous Heretics may ser^e, to disprove any Catholic and honest
conclusion. An other Example is.

Donatus being condemned, Jew. 272
by threescore and ten Bishops in Aphrica, Appealed unto the Emperor
Constantinus, and was received.

But what was Donatus? Ra.
A singular proud heretic. For proof whereof, let y^ Epistles and books,
which S. Augustine wrote against him and his folowers, be witnesses. Let that
(...) also be witness, which S. Augustine wrote purposely of heresies: In
which the Donatiani or Donatistae have their proper place. For when Cecilanus,
Aug. de ^^^resibus ad Quod^ul^ deum.
A Catholic and good man, was made against their wills, Bishope of Carthage,
they objected certain crimes against us, which being not proved, and sentence
going against their, Donatus being their Captain they took such a Stomach,
that they turned their Schism into heresy, and held the opinion, that al
they, whatsoever they were in the world bysides, that agreed not with them,
were infected, and excommunicated persons. And hereupon (as the nature of
heresy is to go, deeper and deeper still, into desperate blindness and
presumption) they did baptize again, such as had been already baptized in the
Catholic Church. It appears als^, what an honest and Catholic man (...)
was, in that M. Jewel confesses him to have been condemned of three score and
ten Bishopes, which was not, I believe, for any humility, Obedience, Faith, or
Charity of his.

Donatus then being an Heretic, Donatus the Heretic ^ present witness for
M. Jew.
what has M. Jewel to do with him? Like will to like perchance, and the same
Sprite y^ inflamed Donatus, warmeth M. Jewel: otherwise, it is not to be
gathered out of the practices of Heretics, what the Order that we ought to
follow, was in the Primitive Church: But of the Catholic and allowed Examples.
And if M. Jewel, could show, that this Appeal of Donatus unto the Emperor
from the Bishopes that condemned him, was good and lawful, in the Judgment of
any Father or Doctor of that age, then might this example have some
lykelyhoode in it, to serve his purpose: otherwise him self does minister the
Catholic an Exception against his own witness, the Ancient and Re^^rend
Heretic Donatus.

But Constantinus the Emperor ^eceaued his Appeal. What of that? Is al well
done, that Emperors do? And are no^ many things permit^^d unto them for
Civil Policy, and quiet sake, which, by right following to Ecclesias^ical
orders, should not be suffered? Again, Constantinus, was a Christian,
Catholic and good Emperor: and he received in deed Donatus Appeal. but
recea^ed he it willingly, or no? And thought he himself to do therein
lawfully, as A Supreme head and Governor, or else to pass the bonds of his
Imperial Authority, and to meddle with a Jurisdiction belonging to more
excellent Officers? UVndoubtedly, he would feign have been rid, of the
importunity of the Donatistes, and lyked it not in his own conscience, that
himself should be taken for the highest Judge in matters Ecclesiastical. HJow
pro^e I this now? Sufficiently enough: by S. Augustine. And mark the place
well (Indifferent Reader) that thou may see the devotion of that so mighty
an Emperor.

First, Donatus and his fellows, The true story of y^ Dona^^s^es appeal to y^
^mperor
perceiving that, although they had condemned Cecilianus y^ Bishope of
Carthage, and set an other, of their own^ making in his place: Yet the rest of
the Bishopes of the world, did still write and send to Cecilianus, as the true
Bishope in deed, and such as they communicated withal: they (I say)
perceauing this, made suit to Co^stantin^s the Emperor, that they might have
the cause of Cecilianus examined, before the Bishopes of beyond the seas. In
which point, S. Augustine finds, that they had a duble fetch and subtlety.

The one, that if those Bishops, whom the Emperor had procured to hea^e the
whole matter, should condemn Cecilianus, then lo, they should have their lust
fulfilled: The other, that if those should absol^e him, then would he with his
fellows say, that the Judges were not indifferent, and so, by consequence,
appeal from them. In which case, though (as S. Augustine says) there remained
a general Council of the vniuerfal Church, in which the cause between them and
their Judges, should have been handeled, yet what did they? Mary, they went to
the Emperor, and accused the foresaid Bishopes before him. And how was this
taken (think we) of the Catholics? Uerely not well, as appears by S.
Augustine, which notes the Donatistes of folish boldness therein.

Iudices enim Ecclesiastic^s etc. August. Epist. 16^.
For the Ecclesiastical Judges, Bishopes of so great Authority, by whose
sentence and judgment both the Innocence of Cecilianus, and their
naughtiness^ was declared (these men of such worthiness says S. Augustine)
they durst accuse, not before other their fel^vvebishopes and Collegies, but
unto the Emperor, that they had (...) judged well.

But now, when they had broken the order of the Ecclesiastical Law, and were
come to the Emperor, what did he? Did he commend their Obedience, or
Wisdom? Did he prefer his own Court and Authority, before the
Consisto^ie and Judgment of Bishops? What he did, the Acts and Registers of
his own Court declare, as S. Austine records out of it. For after y^
Donatistes were now condemned by y^ Pope of Rome and other Bishopes assistant,
and refused to stand to their sentence, requiring help at the Emperors
hands: Dedit ille aliud Iudicium Arelatense, aliorum scilicet Episcoporum: He
gave and appointed unto them other Judges at Arles, I mean other Bisshoppes

Why: if the Emperor had in those days taken the Pope for chief Bishope in all the world, would he have further committed, unto the Bishop of Arls, the
sitting upon that cause, which already was decided by the Bishop of Rome?

It seems altogether unlikely: And therefore M. Jewel may be thought to
bring in deed an invincible Argument for the Emperors Supremacy, against the
Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome.

But mark the Circumstances and Considerations which moved the Emperor, and
then will the contrary conclusion be manifestly proved, that the Emperor took
him self to be the inferior unto Bishops, even in that cause, which was
brought unto him after Bishopes, and which he caused to be examined again,
after it was sufficiently judged. For thus it follows in S. Austin.

Dedit ille aliud Arelatense Iudicium, non quia iam necesse erat, sed eorum
peruersitatibus cedens and omnimodo cupiens tantam Impudentiam Cohibere. That
is, He gave other Judges, not because it was now necessary, but because be
yielded to the frovvardnes of them (the Donatistes) and desired by all means, to
restrain so great Impudency of them. Neque enim a^sus est Christianus
Imperator, sic eoru^ tumultu^sas and fallaces querelas suscipere, vt de iudici^
Episcoporum, qui Romae sederant, ipse Iudicaret, sed alios, vt dixi, Episcopos
dedit. For the Christian Emperor (as who should say, other Emperors, which
forgette themselves to be Christians, and in whose ^ares nothing stands so
much, as Obey the higher powers, and, obey the King as the chief, which is by
the interpretation of blind Gospellers and Flatterers, that every Prince is
for his own Country Suprem under God in all matters both Ecclesiastical and
Temporal, such Emperors: would not only have contemned the sentences of
Priests in comparison of their Majesty's Judgment, but also have punished
such as would signify it, by never so small a token, that the Emperor can not
well be Supreme Judge in matters Ecclesiastical, But) The Christian Emperor
durst not receive their (the Donatistes) Sediti^us^ and dec^itful ^^mplaintes,
in such sort, as that him self ^v^uld judge of the sentence of the Bishopes
that sat at Rome but he appointed (as I have said) ^ther bish^pes. And that,
for the causes above mentioned: which were, the frovvardnes and the Impudency
of the Dona^istes.

A quibu^ tamen illiad ipsum rursum Impera^orem prouocare maluerunt. From
^vhich Bisshoppes for all that they ch^se to provoke again to the Emperor. And
what said he unto them? Forsoothe, he Judged C^cilianum Inn^centissimum, illos
improbissimos, Caecilian to be most Innocent* and them most wicked.

Yea but, you will Reply, did not the Emperor (...) Judge upon the matter,
when it had been, twice before (...) to Bishops? True it is in deed, that
you say: But consider, that they were Heretics, which appealed from
Bysshoppes to the Emperor, and that although he heard their Cause, yet he
detested their Contentiousnesse; and thought also before upon it, to ask
pardone of the Bisshoppes, for meddling in the matter after them. For thus it
follows in Saint Augustine.

Qua in re illos quem admodum det^stetur, audistis. Atque Vtinam saltem ipsi^^
Iudicio insanissimis animositatibus suis finem posuissent. Atque vt eis ipse
cessit, vt de ill^ causa post Episcopos i^dicaret, a Sanctis An^ist^^ibus
postea veniam petiturus, dum tamen illi, quod vlterius dicer^nt non haberent,
s(...)eius sententiae non obtemperarent, ad que^ ipsi pro^ocauerunt, sic and
illi aliquand^ cederent Veritati. In which thing (that they appealed unto him,
after they had been with two several Judges of the Clergy) how he detested
them, you have heard. And Would God they had made an end of their most
^utragious stomaking of the matter, if it had been for no more then for his
sentence sake. And as he (the Emperor) yielded unto them, to judge of that
cause after the Byshopes, min^ing to ask^ pard^n^ afterward of the holy
Bishops, (...) that they (the Donatistes) should not han^ (...) say further,
if they would not obey his sentence, unto whom they appealed: So would God,
that they once yet would yield unto the truth.

Consider now indifferently with me, upon this whole matter (gentle Reader) And
this appealing of the Donatists unto the Emperor, and his hearing of the whole
cause, being not once or twice, but very often alleged by M. Jew. it is worth
while to be well remembered, that which I have already said, and that which by
occasion hereof may be further gathered, and well be noted.

See then first, what busy Heretics these Donatistes were, and how full they
were of Shifts and Quarrels making: From the Emperor to Rome: From Rome they
go to the Emperor again: From him then by appointement and agreement, they
go to Arls and the Bisshops there: And from Arls, they return, with
complaint, to the Emperor yet again. At last, the Emperor himself hears y^
cause, yet would they not stand to the Emperors sentence, but maintained still
their false Bishope, whom to put in the Sea of Carthage, they thruste out
Cecilian, and they continued still in their heresy, accompting all the
Christians of y^ world accursed, which were not of the side of Donatus.

Such is the nature and practice of Heretics, they pretend conscience, they
commend holy and Ancient Fathers, They appeal to the Primitive Church: They
crave for General Councels, for free disputations, for surcease of Inquisition,
for Service in the vulgar tongue, for Comm^^^on in both kinds, and other such
things more. If the Princes and (...) resist them in any point, strait ways
they make exclamations, they stir up angers, ^hey complain of sentence
geauen upon them before they be heard, of the lack of ghostly consolation,
which should come to the people by understanding of Scriptures and receiving
the Sacraments, of the penalties of laws and Statutes. What is it so little,
that they will not murmur against, if they may not have their f^l will* In
respect then of peace and public tranquillity* if you will not strive with them
upon mater^ indifferent, but dispense with them in their requests or
demaundes, yet will they not suffer the Catholics to be in rest: And if you
put them out of fear of the Inquisition, they will troble yet the whole
Country with preaching in the open field: And if you provide a General Council
to satisfy them, they will not come at it: if at every mass there should be
Communicantes, they will not allow the Sacrifice. And when the Prince is made by
them the Supreme Governor under God* in any country, yet will they stoutly
disobey y^ prince in a small matter of wearing a (...) gown and cap. So y^ al y^
they do, is (...) to maintain talk, and find always somewhat, in which
they may occupy the Catholics, until that at length, when their power is so
great, that they ^are meet in field with their Adversaries, they may boldly
and d^sperately, leave al reasoning, conferring, Applealing, demanding,
protesting, and Lawleying, and with open face com^ against the Catholics: Pull
down Churches, (...) officies: Take away Sacraments, Alter the sta^e of
commonweals, hang, draw and quarter Priests: Set Inquisition against
Catholics: And confirm their Gospel by terror.

These and such like things we in our days see by experience. Constantinus
the Emperor did not see so much: Yet fearing the busy nature of Schysmatykes,
and hoping by fair demeanes to bring the Donatistes to a peace with all
Christendom, he yielded as much unto them as he could, and (as ye have heard)
he received their provoking to him, not because he thought that him self was
the chiefest Judge in all the world, even in matters Ecclesiastical, but because
he hoped, in yelding unto the Donatistes in all their requests about
apointynge or changing of y^ Judges, to bring them at length unto such a
remembrance of themselves, that they should cease, for shame, to make any
further brable about that, in which by every Judge that did hear the cause,
they were condemned.

Now, if at those days, either the wise and learned about him, or he himself,
had believed the hearing of causes Ecclesiastical to belong unto his court or
consistory, what needed him to borowe^ point of the law, and to account upon
askyng of pardon of the Bishopes, for his meddling with that cause, which they
already had ended? Can we have any thing more plain and manifest, that this
Christian and wor^hie Emperor, did in conscience think himself to base to sit
and Judge after Bishopes, whereas enforced thereunto by the importunity of the
Donatistes, and trusting, by that his yelding, to pacify the commotion y^ was
raised in the catholic Church, yet was not sure of his doeinges herein, but
determined to ask forgeauenes of the holy Bishopes?

As if he should say: The Donatistes here, trouble the Church, They appeal
unto me, as though I were chief. If I will not hear their cause, there is no
man shall Rule them: And if I take open me to hear it, the Bishops, which
alreahaue decided it, will be offended. Well, I will venture yet, And if the
Donatistes will stand to my judgment, and be quiet for ever after, that is so
great a benefit, that to cumpasse it, I may stretche my conscience. And if,
for all that pretense, my fact shall be misliked, I will ask pardon of the holy
Bishopes, which have already judged of the matter, This is the very truth of
the Emperors receiving of the Donatistes Appeal. He did it upon occasion, and
if it were not well done, he was ready to take a pardon for it. In all things
he sought the best way to help the Church, and showed his most due, and
humble, and Obedient affection toward Bishopes.

Yet does M. Jewel bring in this Story, Jew. 272
to prove that It is well known, that Appeals even in the Ecclesiastical
causes, were made to the Emperors and Civil Princes. Seconly, that the
Bishope of Rome determined such cases of Appeal, by vvarrant and commission
from the Emperor. Thirdly, that matters being heard and determined by the
Bishope of Rome, have been, by Appeal from him, removed further unto others.
Which Conclusion will seem well enough to follow upon the Appeal of the
Donatistes unto y^ Emperor, and y^ Emperors sending of them first unto the
Bishope of Rome, and then to the Bishope of Arles, but consider the matter
truly, and M. Jewels Arguments mu^t be these.

Schismatikes Appealed in an Eeclesiastical cause* unto the Emperor
Constantinus: Ergo Catholics, maie^ like causes, appeal to Ciuil^ Princes.

Again, Constantinus the Emperor, received for (...) sake the Schismatikes
appeal, and (...) Rome there to be tried, and durst not him self judge of
that cause, when the Bishope of Rome had determined it. Ergo the Bishope of
Rome had a vvarrant and commission sent unto him, to hear and determine that
matter.

Again, Constantinus the Emperor yeldinge unto the importanitie of
Schismatikes, when they would not obeie the Sentence of the Bishope of Rome,
sent them to the Bishope of Arls, and when they would not be ruled neither by
that Sentence, he heard the cause himself, and minded to ask pardon of the
holy Bishopes, for his sitting upon that matter, which already by them was
determined: Ergo Appeals may be lavvfully made from the Bishope of Rome to
other Bishopes, and the Emperor is Supreme hea^ under God in earth: So that al
causes must in the end be referred unto him. These be the only premises which
the Story geaueth, unto which if he can join his conclusion, then shall he
make contraries agree: but whereas he can not, whi makes he conclusions
without premises? Or why makes he Arguments out of y^, which either
Schismatikes used, or that which Catholics yielded unto, in con^^deration of
Schismatikes? Will M. Jewel never leave his impuden^ie: But let us go further.
The third Example.


The Council of Antioche deposed Pope Julius: Jew. 289
Yet was not Julius therefore deposed.

This you bring in (M. Jewel) to declare, R^.
that the sentence given in Councels was not always put in execution. To which
I answer, that if the Council be lawful and Catholic, the decrees ought to be
put in (...): if they be not, it follows not, that the Sentence of the Council
may be (...), or neglected, but that they which being of Authority do not see
the Councels (...), are to be (...) Councels, neither their (...) their
examples are to be (...).

You reason much like, as if one should say against the Obedience due unto
the priuye Council of a Realm: The Sons of King David, the Capitanes of the
hosts, Abiathar also the high Priest, consented and agreed, saieing: Viuat Rex
Adonias, God save Adonias the King, and yet Adonias was not king, ergo the
Proclamations or Determinations of lawful Authority may be little esteemed. For
this Council of Antioche, was a Schismatical assemble, and whereas they deposed
him, over whom they had no Authority, there is no absurdity at al, nor fault
to be laid unto any man's charge, that will not obey, or like their procedings
and doings therein. But when y^ lawful and head Bishope of the world, does
define and subscribe in a General Council, though there follow no execution in
act, yet there is one to be done by right. And it can be no sufficient excuse
before God, when the conscience shall be examined, to allege, that because
Schismatikes decrees have not ben executed, therefore the Obedience which is due
to the Sentence of Catholics, may be diminished. But see yet an other Example.

M. Jewel will prove that Bishops of other Countries, never yielded to the Popes
Supremacy. For faith he:

The Bishopes of the East, The. 4. Example.
writing unto Julius, allege that the faith that then was in Rome, Jew. 278
came first from them, and that their Churches, as Sozomenus writes, ought not
to be accounted inferior to the Church of Rome: And as Socrates further
reports, that they ought not to be ordered by the Roman Bishope.

You have much to do M. Jewel with the Bishopes of the East, R^.
and no man, I think, that reads your Book will judge otherwise, but that
they were learned and good men, such as whose opinions both your self allow,
and commend unto others to be regarded. And truly, if they were such men, I
will say nothing, but that he that is disposed, may esteem their sayings: but,
if it shall be proved most manifestly, y^ they were rank and obstinate Arrians,
then truly, the more ignominiously and co^temptuously they spak against the
Bishops of Rome, the better they do declare, of what kind and succession they
are at this present, which set their whole studies against the Sea Apostolyke,
and will not be ruled by the highest Bishop in Christendom.

For proof of your assertion, you refer us to Sozomenus, and Socrates,
Ancient and lawful Historiographers, whom we also do admit. And, as though
any man would strive with you hereupon, that the Bishopes of the East, did not
so little set by y^ Bishop of Romes Authority, as you seem to gather, you put
in the margen the greek text it self, that he which knows no greek at all
may yet say to him self: Bir Lady M. Jewel alleges y^ express Text for
himself, and it apeareth by y^ English thereof, that the Bishopes of the East
made no such account of the Pope, as at these Days is allowed.

But what shall we say? It can not be denied, Arrians alleged by M. Jewel full
^adly:
but the Bishops of the East, those of whom Sozomenus and Socrates speak,
did take themselves to be as good as the Bishop of Rome, and disdayned to y^lde
obedience unto him.

But, were they Catholics, or Heretics? Undoutedly Heretics, and that of the
worste ^^king. For they were Ar^ians. How prove I this? Mary by Sozomenus and
Socrates both, which agree in telling the Story. And that is this.

At what time, Sozomenus lib. 3. Cap. 8.
S. Athanasius fled to Rome, being persequ^ted of the Arrians, ^or defending of
the Consubstantialitie of God the Son with the Father, Socrates lib. 2. ca.
15.
it so ^ame to ^asse, that, at the same time, Paulus Bisshoppe of
Constantinople, and Marcellus Bisshoppe of (...), and Asclepas Bisshoppe of
(...) Bishop of Hadriano^le, (...) also to Rome, being al Catholic
Bisshoppes, and al driven out of their Churches and Sees, through the
Accusations and I^uasions of the Arrians.

Hereupon Julius the Bisshoppe of Rome, understanding what faults were laid
to their charges, And perceiving, that all were of one mind concerning the
Decrees of the Nicene Counsel, he thought it meet to communicate with them,
as with men of the same faith and opinion with him.

And as Sozomenus writes (...) because of the worthiness and digniti of his
See, or as Socrates says (...), forasmuch as the church of Rome had the
Prerogatives and priuilegies* he restored every one of them to his See, See
with what Authority Pope Lucius writes to the Bishopes of y^ East.
And wrote freely and sharply to the Bishops of the East which had expelled
them, declaring that they had troubled the Church, and that they had not
judged aright, of the forsaid Bishops Requiring furthermore, y^ some of them
should appear at an appointed day before him, and that he would not suffer it,
if they ceased not to be newfangled.

The Arrian Bishops, upon the receipt of this letter, and for indignation
that the Bishop of Rome had restored to their lauful Sees, the catholic
Bishops ^^hanasius, Paulus, Marcellus, As^le^^^, Lucius, whom they had
vnplaced, they called a Council at Antioche, (...)
and (...) again a fair letter to Pope Julius, full of pretty scoffs and
tauntes, and not without sharp threatenings also.

And, among other points, these that M. Jewel reckeneth are some, that,
forsooth, they ought not to be accounted inferior to the Church of Rome, And
that they ought not to be ordered by the Roman Bishope. Hitherto is the
story as I gather it out of Socrates and Sozomenus.

Consider now of it indifferent Reader.

Was Athanasius an holy Bishope, or no? Was he a most worthy and tried
defendour of the Catholic faith, or no? Did almighty God miraculously defend
him against al his enemies, or no? Eusebius, Sozomenus, Socrates, Theodorit^s,
al y^ ever wrote the story of y^ time, speak so much good of him, (...)
declare such a providence of God to have been about him, that he must be a very
blind and wretched Arrian, which sees not his worthiness, Or (...) at his
Glory.

And whom then follow you M. Jewel? Those Bishops of the East, whom your
wisdom and Religion brings in for substantial witnesses? They condemned
Athanasius. And for what other cause so principally, as for his defending of
the Catholic faith, against the blasphemies of y^ Arrians? Allow you then his
condemna^o^? Utter now your stomach and speak plainly, whether you believe y^
Christ is of one and the self same Substan^ce with his Father. Show yourselfe,
as you are, in your Opinions, and put of the name and person of an honest
Superintendent, which you would seem to bear, and with all boldness, utter
your secret Divinity.

For h^re now I challenge you, and here I charge you. The Chalenger challenged.
Allow you the Condemnation of ^tha^asius, which your Bishops of the East
concluded upon? If you do, Auaunt Arria^^* If you do not, how can you but
think evil of such arrogant and wicked Arrians, which not only put him our of
his See, but also, when he was resto^ed again unto it, by the Judgment of the
Bishop of Rome, contemned that his Sentence, with greater spite and
Insolency, than they had expelled Ath^nesius and others, at the first.

I say further: If Athanasius, Paulus. Marcellus, Asclepas, and Lucius, so
(...) Fathers* ^eing ^r^elled by the (...) of the East, thought themselves
safe enough against all their Enemies, having the letters of the Bishop of Rome
for their lawful Return unto their Sees, should not this alone, be Argument
enough to any Indifferent Protestant in all y^ world, that he should not
Contemn, Abandone and Accurse the Authority of the Sea of Rome? For, whereas
the Examples of Learned and Holy men are to be followed: And, whereas M. Jewel
the Challenger with others of his vain, I^ Fathers shall be followed, here they
are.
do pretend great Reverence toward Antiquity, provoking their Adversaries,
to bring Testimonies out of the Primitive Church, And exhorting their Hearers
and Readers, to consider the practice of the Ancient times and Fathers: how
should he not have the Bishop of Rome in great Admiration, whom he sees to
have been so highly esteemed, of the great Bishops or Patriarchs, rather of y^
East Church Athanasius, Paulus, Marcellus etc. y^ his letters were of more
force with them, to restore them to their Sees, than their own Power and
Ability was, to keep themselves in their own places, when they had them?

Note also, that whereas they were expelled by violence, And were sent home
again, not with an Army, but with Letters only, Yet those letters prevailed
so much with the People also of their Cities and Countries, that strait ways
they were gladly received. And had it not ben for the Conuenticle and
Conspiracy of the forsaid Arrian Bishops of the East, in which they not only
set al their own Power, against the Catholic Bishops Athanasi^s, Paulus, etc.
restored by the Pope of Rome, but accused them to the Emperor Co^stantinus,
making him to use Uiolence against them: the Catholic people of
Constantinople, Alexandria, and other places, would have honored and Obeyed
them still, as their own true and lauful Bishopes.

Of which it is easy to gather, (...).
that, First the Blessed and Reverend Bishops themselves Athanasius, Paulus,
etc. did se^ very much by y^ Bishop of Romes letters and sentence: And then,
that the Catholic and devout people also of those quarters, did regard and obey
the same: Thirdly, that such as resisted then the Authority of y^ Bishope of
Rome, were plain Arrians. And last of al, that it was not done by law or any
order, that those holy Bishopes, Athanasius, Paulus etc. enjoyed not the right
of their own See^, but by false Accusations of the Arrian Superintendente^, and
Indignation, Stomach, Edi^^, Uiolence, and Persecution, of the Emperor
Constantius.

How little then does this Example of the Arrian Bishops make for M. Jewels
purpose? Yea rather, how much does it make clean against him? For when wicked
and nawghtie men's factes are put forth in writing, they are for this end put
forth, to be abhorred, and not to be followed: As Cains murdering of his
brother, or Judas betrayinge of his Master.

Yet, when the persons are notorious, as Cain and I^das, Or the factes them
selves are evidently naught, as to kill or berray. Inno^entes; he should not
do much harm, which would desperately go about to persuade any to follow such
Examples. But here is the mischief, when Historiographers are brought in, as
alowing tha^ which they condemn in deed, Or wh^^ heretics are made to go
for catholic Bishops: And when y^ is put forth as an Example to be followed,
which served rather to dehort men from resisting Truth and Authority: And
when by natural reason the matter is not so evident, but examples of former
times in the one si^e or other, may well move the vnlea^ne^ to follow them.

And in this art M. Jewel is a doctor. For if he would have expressly said,
The Arrians and Heretics of the East Church when they had wrongfully expelled
the catholics and good Bispopes, Paulus, Athanasius, etc. out of their sees,
they contemned the Bishope of Romes letters by which they were required to
receive them again, and to set aside al Injury and new^anglenes: Ergo the
Bishope of Rome is supreme head of the Church: If M. Jewel would after this
open and plain^ manner have used himself, there is not, I suppose, so
insensible A Protestant, which would not have judged him, to have reasoned very
folishly.

But now whiles he gives them no worse name than the Bishops of the East, and
keeps from the knowledge of his Readers, that they were Heretics and Arrians,
he makes them to think, that al is well, And that these Bishopes were men of
much credit and worthiness, and that not only late Gospellers, but old
Catholic Fathers also, have denied Obedience to the Bishop of Rome. Which
things being altogether otherwise, the Readers are driven into perdition: And
M. Jewel either sees not that an Argument brought from the Authority of
blasphemous heretics is nothing worth (which is incredible in him that has so
great insigh^e in the true Logyk^ and Divinity) either saying it, he makes
no conscience of it, to bring his purposes to an end, by what means soever he
may, and this is so credible, that it agrees very well both with the
desperatnes of his cause and of his stomach.

BEVVARE therefore (Indifferent Reader) of M. Jewel, and know this for most
certain, that as I have declared by a few Examples in this Chapter that he
allegeth the condemned sayings and doings of Heretics under the color (...)
Catholic and approved witnesses, so in many more places of his Reply, he does
in like manner, abuse them most shamfully. But of them thou shall read in other
Books.

And what now is there more (M. Jewel) that ye will require or use against us?
To the first six hundred years only you have appealed, your self yet do use
the testimonies of al ages. To the first six hundred only you have appealed,
and yet against the approved writers of that self time, you have excepted.
Besides this as though there were not to be found Catholic witnesses enough in
the cause of the catholic Faith, you covertly bring in against us, the
accursed sayings and do^inges of Heretics. Which one point excepted (that you
shall not in question of the Catholyke Faith and Tradition* make any old
Heretics Judges in the cause, Or witnesses) for the rest I dare grant unto
you, to take your vantage, where you can find it.

But having so large cumpasse granted unto you, against the express reason
and Equity which should be in your Challenge, shall it not become you, to use
this privilege discreetly and truly? And so to allege your witnesses, as in
deed they mean in their own sense, without false applying thereof: And as
they speak in their own tongue, without adding unto their say inges, or
taking away from them, any thing that is of the substance of their verdicte?
Thus, whether you do observe or no, let it be tried.

And that it may be tried the better, I will briefly and plainly prove
against you (M. Jewel) before any indifferent Reader: First, y^ you have abused
Councels, then Laws, Canon and Civil: Thirdly, Fathers and Doctors, Ancient
and Late: And that ye have spared no kind of writer that came in your way.

How M. Jewel has abused Councels.
COuncels, in one sense, are abused, when that which is found in them to be
condemned, is brought forth by any Protestant as though it were approved. As in
example whereas D. Harding concluded, upon the profit which comes of
celebrating the memory of our Lords Passion, that the Sacrifice of the Altar,
which is made in remembrance thereof, should not be intermitted, although the
people would not communicate: M. Jewel,

To add a little more weighte to this seely reason, says further in D.
Hardings behalf.

If this Sacrifice be so necessary, Jews. 15.
as it is supposed, then is the Priest bound to Sacrifice every day, yea
although he him self Receive not.

But how proves he this? Ra.
it follows.

For the Sacrifice and the receiving are sundry things. (...)


And what of that? Ra.
For although Communion bread and wine be sundry things, yet you will not
permit the Receiving of the Lords supper in one kind only. And so although
Sacrifice and Receiving be distinct: yet does it not follow, that a Priest may
offer and not receive. But you will prove it, by better Authority then your
own, for thus you say.

As it is also noted in a late Council holden at ^oledo in Spain. Jew.
Quidam Sacerdotes and caet. Certain Priests there be, that every day offer
many Sacrifices, and yet in every Sacrifice withhold themself from the
Communion.

What is your Ergo then upon this place? Ra.
Your Conclusion should be, Ergo A Priest may Sacrifice, although he himself
do not Receive. But can you gather this out of the Council? Does it not rather
make expressly to the contrary? Does it not reprove the Priests, which
Sacrifice, and Receue not? Let the place be considered, and then conferred with
M. Jewels collection. The whole place is this.

Relatum est, and caet. Con. Tole^. 1^. cap. 5.
It is told us, that certain emonge the Priests, do not so many times
Receive the grace of the holy Communion, as they seem to offer Sacrificies in
one day, but if they Offer more Sacrificies in one day, they vvithhold
themselves in every offering from the Communion, and they take the grace of
the holy Communion, only i^ the las^e offering of the Sacrifice: A^ though
that they should not, so often participate the true and singular Sacrifice, as
often as the offering of the body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ shall be
sure to have been made. For behold, the Apostle says, do not they eat the
Sacrificies, which are partakers of the Altar? Certain it is, that they
which do Sacrifice and do not eat, are guilty of the Sacrament of our lord.
From henceforth therefore, whatsoever Priest shall come to the Divine Altar to
offer up Sacrifice, and vvithhold himself from the Communion, let him know,
that for one years space he (...) repelled from the grace of the C^^munio^, of
which he has unseemly deprived him self. For, what manner of sacrifice shall
that be, of which no not he that does Sacrifice, is known to be partaker?
Therefore, by all means it must be observed, that as often as the Sacrificer
does offer and Sacrifice upon the Altar the body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, so often he give himself to be partaker of the body and blood of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Hitherto the Council of Toledo.

How think we then? Has not M. Jewel properly alleged it for his purpose?
could he have brought a place, more plain against himself? M. Jewel says
that Sacrifice and Receiving are sundry things: And means thereby, (...)
that the priest may do y^ one and leave the other, that is, Offer and not
Receive: the Council defines, that what so ever Priest do Offer and not
Receive, he shall be kept away from the Communion a tweluemonth together. And
what other thing is this to say, then that Sacrifice and Communion are so
sundry, that the Priest for all that, can not put them a sunder, Or do one
without the other? Thus has M. Jewel, to put more weight to his seely reason,
confirmed it by a fact condemned by the same Council, in which it is found
reported. And this is one way of Abusing of Councels.

In an other kind, it is an abusing of Councels, when that is Attributed unto
them which at al is not in them. As in Example.

The Intention (says M. Jewel.
Jewel) of the Church of Rome, is, to work the Transubstantiation of bread
and wine, Flat lie.
The Grek church had never that Intention, as it is plain by the Counsel of
Florence.

Thus you say M. Jewel, Ra.
and in the Margin you refer us to the last session of the Council of
Florence, but in that Session there is no mention at al of Tra^substantiation,
Or, Intention. The greatest and the only matter, therein Discussed and defined,
was, concerning the Pr^ceding of God the Holyghost from the Father and the
Son, in which point the Grecians then were at one with the Latins. It followed
then, after a few days that the union was made, that the Bishop of Rome sent
for the Grecians, and asked of them certain questions, concerning their
Priests and Bishopes, and Anointing of their dead, and Prayers in the^^
Liturgy, and choosing of their Patriarchs.

But it was neither Demanded of them what Intention they had in Consecrating,
Neither Answered they any thing to any such effect, Neither did the Bishop
open unto them, his Faith and belief therein. So that altogether it is a very
flat lie, that M. Jewel here makes upon that Council. Except he mean the
Doctrine that there follows geauen to the Armenians, in which
Tra^substantiation and Intention both is comprehended, wh^revnto the Sacred
Counsel whe^^of the Grecians were a part, gave their consent.

A third manner of Abusing Councels, is, to allege them truly in deed as they
say, but yet to allege them to no purpose. As in example. The fourth Council of
Carthage decreed, that in certain cases, the Sacrament should be powered into
the sick man's mouth. of which word (powered) being proper only to things that
are fluent and liquide, D. Harding gathers, that the Sacrament which they
received, was in the form of win^, and not of bread. Hereupon M. Jewel comes
against him, and he calls it a Gheasse, that the bread can not be powered into
a sick man's mouth. But how proves he it to be but a Gheasse? Or what says
he to the contrary? It follows.

And yet he may learn, Jew. 140. Council.
by the third Council of Carthage, and by the abridgement of the Council of
Hippo, Carth. ^* Ca. 6.
that the Sacrament was then put into dead men's mouths.

Your Argument then is this: Ra.
One (y^ is so foolish or superstitious) may put the Sacrament into a dead man's
mouth, Ergo D. Harding does not gheasse well, A worthy co^seque^ce of M. Jewels.
that bread can not be powered into a sick man's mouth. But al things are here
unlike, both Persons, and Acts, and Terms.

First of al, dead men are distincted from Sick men, and the dead you may
order violently, but the sick will be used Reasonably, except none but
Enemies be about them.

Then, in the one side, the Act is unlawful (to put the Sacrament in a dead
man's mouth) On the other, it is lauful (to power it into a sick man's mouth).

Beside this, Putting is one thing, and Pouring is an other, and whether it be
bread or wine, you may be suffered to say, that they are put into the mouth,
but how bread should be poured into ones mouth, except in all haste you minded
to choke him or fill him, I can not tell.

Last of al, the term Sacrament, which is forbidden to be put in the dead man's
mouth, may signify any of the two kinds: That is, either of Bread or wine*
but in naming the Bread, you are bound to that one kind only of the Sacrament,
and must not mean thereby, wine. So that there is neither Rhyme nor Reason in
it, to tell us full solemnly, that the Sacrament was put in dead men's mouths,
the Proposition, which you thereby would disprove, being only this, that Bread
can not be poured into sick men's mouths. And therefore to speak the least,
and best of it, this is a very vain and idle Abusing of the Authorities of
Councels.

But of al other it passes, when M. Jewel takes, Mark this trick.
as much as pleases him, of any Canon of Council, and makes a full point
before he come to the end of the Sentence: Mainteining his Heresy, by that
Piece which he pulls away, And dissembling that which remains, by which his
Objection should be straitwaies refelled. For otherwise, to rehearse no more of
a Canon, than serves our purpose, it is common and tolerable. But when that
point which an Heretic leaves out, pertains to the qualifying of that other
Piece, which he would have to be understand absolutely, that is such a point of
an Heretic, as may well cause any reasonable man to BEVVARE of him.

But is it possible, that M. Jewel may be taken in this fault? If he be not,
then will I grant, that he has not, in as Ample and Shamfull manner abused
Councels, as any of the most Desperate, of all that ever wrote. And if he be, I
ask no more, but that he may go for such as he is. The Example shall make this
plain.

In the Council of Laodicea it is decreed like as also in the Council of
Carthage, Jew. 153.
that nothing be readde in the Church unto the people, saving only the
Canonical Scriptures.

I wonder then, what your Homelies do in the Church, Ra.
except you think that they be Canonical Scriptures, What answerye?
Or else, that you so precise folowers of Antiquity, are not bound to the
Canons of Ancient Councels. But as I do grant unto you, that the Council of
La^dicea has, that such only books as are of the old and new Testament should
be readen in the Church, so, that y^ like also is declared (as you boldly say)
in the Council of Carthage, it is so manifestly untrue, y^ it may not be
suffered. For these are the very words of the Council. (...)


Item placuit, (...)
vt praeter Scripturas Canonicas ^ihil in Ecclesia legatur sub nomine Diuinarum
Scripturarum. Can. 47.
that is, We like it also, that nothing besides the Canonical Scriptures be
readen in the Church, in the name of the Divine Scriptures.

The Council therefore forbids not other things bysides the Canonical
scriptures to be readen in the Church, but it provides, that nothing be readen
there, as in the name of Scripture which is not true Scripture in deed. And
this appears most evidently by other words, which follow in the self same
Canon where it is said.

Liceat etiam legi Passiones Martyrum, Cum Anniuersarij eoru^ celebrantur. Be
it lauful also to have the Passions of Martyrs readen, when their yearly Days
are celebrated and kept holy.

By this, Passions of Martyrs reade^ in y^ Church, and their yearly days kept
it is most evident, that other things bysydes the Canonical Scriptures, as
the Passions of Martyrs (such undoubtedly as we have, for a great part, in the
Legends of the Church) were permitted to be readen in the public Service: And
that M. Jewels comparison (that the Lessons then read in y^ Church were taken
out of y^ holy Bible (ONLY as he meneth) as it is now used in the church of
England,) has no agreablenes and Proportion. For wh^t one Martyr is there in all the whole book of the Common prayer of England (S. S^euen only excepted)
which has any Festiual day appointed out for him, or any story of his Passion
declared?

But like perfect Divines, you will no other thing, but Scripture only readen
in your Churches: in which point, you would be seen to follow the Council of
Carthage. You deceive the people, by your glorious lying. An Impudent lie of M.
Jewel.
The Coun^^l of Carthage (as you perceive by the words which I have alleged)
allows not only Ca^onical Scriptures, but Martyrs Passions also to be Readen
in the Church. Why say you then so impudentlie, that it it was there Decreed,
that nothing should be read y^ Church unto the People, saving only the
Canonical Scriptures?

I ask of you also, where the Passions ^f those Martyrs are, which at the
beginning had their Holidaies in the Church: And should to this day have
them if (as you do challenge it) you were of the holy and Catholic Church? S.
Clement, Cornelius, Cyprian, ^istus, Lawrence, Uincent, Sebastiane, and other,
whom the whole world honoreth: what solemme Feasts have you of them, or what
Lessons and Homilies are Readen in your Churches, of their Passions? Were there
no Martyrs in the world, after the Apostles were once departed this life? Or
know you any more excellent, than these whom I have named? Or have you no
mind or affection to any of them? Or have you spied a Canon in the Council of
Carthage, that nothing but Canonical Scriptures shall be readen in the Church?
And could you no^ see the plain Exception, which is strait ways in the same
Canon made against it, that, notwithstanding the former words, the passions of
martyrs should be reade^ in the Church, when their yerelie days are celebrated?

But of the beggarlines of this new Religion* and how it is altogether
d^stituted of Martyrs, Confessors* Uirgi^s, of all kind of Saints, it is to
be spoken at more leisure: in the mean time, this I lea^^ most evidently
proved, th^^ M. Jewel has abused Councels.

How M. Jewel has abused the Decrees of the Canon Law.
THere is small hope, that he which dares wrest, Beli^, and Peruerte Councels,
will spare to use al Losenesse and Liberty in squaring o^ Decrees and Decretals
to his purpose. And many will think on the other side, that M. Jewel is so
honest and good, of nature, that he would not, no no^ of the devil himself
(if he might) win any thing by lying, and muchlesse in the cause of God and
his true Religion, report any thing, of any man that ever yet wrote, otherwise
there* the Truth is, and the words of the Author. Examples then must confirm
my objection, emonge which this is one.

Fabianus ( s^^^th M. Jewel) Bishop of Rome has plainly decreed, (...)
that the people should rec^aue the Communion every sondaie. His words be
plain. Dec^rnimus etc. We decree that every sonda^ the Oblation of the
Aultare, be made of al men and women, both of bread and wine.

True it is, that Fabianus willed such Oblations of bread and wine to be made,
R^*
and them to this end, (...) a peccatoru^ suorum ^ascibus liberentur, that the
people might be delivered of the burden of their sins. But offering every
Sunday, and Receiving every Sondaie are two things. To provide, that the
people should Offer Bread and Wine every Sondaie, it was necessary, because,
that is the proper matter of which the Sacrament of the Aultare is made, and
because the Clergy also lived then, of the offerings of the people. But to
decree, that al men and women should Receive eu^rie Sunday, it is altogether
unreasonable, that it should have been Fabianus mind.

For, in the very same place, there is an other Decree of his, that men should
Communicate thrice, at the least (if no oftener) in a year, that is At Easier,
(...)
^itteso^^ide, and Chrisimasse, except perchance some man be let by any
kind of the grevous crime^.

If then ^e required no more, but that the people should Receive thrice a year,
how is it possible, that, by this decree, of which M. Jewel speaks, and in
which there is no m^ntion of the peoples receiving, ^ut of their Offering only
of Bread and Wine, (...).
any charge should be laid upon al men and women's consciencies, to Receive
every Sondaie? Ye might as well conclude, that in every parish of England, th^re
was some one or other of the lay people, that Received always on Sondaie, in
one kind, at the least, with the Priest, because an holy loaf (as we call it)
was Offered every Sondaie.

But consider yet further (Indifferent Reader) how finely and properly, M.
Jewel gathers Arguments out of Ancient Popes decrees. He notes, out of the
foresaied words, not only that men and women Received every Sondaie, but also
that they Offered bread and Wine every Sondaie, according to the Order of
Melchisedech. By which account, so many Priests and Sacrificers were in the
Church, as were men and women that offered bread and wine.

Yea, not only men, and women that are of perfitte discreation, but all the
bo^es and wenches of the Parish, may, with little charges, be quickly within
orders. For, as M. Jewel compteth, there is no more in it, but to Offer bread
and wine to the Aultare, and straitewaies all that do so, are Priests, after
the Order of Melchisedech.

But if that be so, how is the order of Melchisedech more perfitte, than the
Order of Aaron? Or how was there such a Religion and Reverence about the order
of Aaron, that none but of a certain tribe should be made Priests, neither
they also, without vocation and consecration: if to the order of Melchisedech
(at yt coming of which, that of Aaron is perfited and accomplished) every woman
be within the Order, by offering of bread and wine to the Altar? You M. Jewel
that have such knowledge in the understanding of the Popes decrees, are you
Ignorant in the law of Moses? Remember you not, Leu.^ and, (...)
that among other things that the people Offered, Bread and wine were in y^
number? But what speak I of the peoples Act? The priests themselves, y^ ^oke
such bread at their b^ndes, and lifted it up before their Lord, and offered
likewise of the wine, by pouring out of it in the sight of the Lord: were they
of the order of Melchisedech or no? No surely not of Melchisedechs order, but
of the order of Aaron only. (...)
If therefore a solemn offering of bread and wine, even in persons
consecrated, does not include the o^der of Melchisedech, you are much to ^eking
of your purpose, which note, that y^ men and women that offered in S. Fabians
^^ne* bread and wine to the Altar, were (...) after the order of Melchisedech.
So abs^rde it is, y^ a Pope of Rome should have any such meaning in his de^^^e,
as you do gather thereof, y^ I believe the most folishe heretic in all the
world, would not, but with much study have peeked it out. (...) us consider an
other exa^mple.

Certainly ( says M. Jewel) it seems (...) S. Gregory in his time, (...).
154*
thought singing (...) the Church to be a fitter thing for the multitud^ of the
people, (...)
the^ for ye priest. For he expressly forbids the Priest to sing in the
Church. But I do not remember that ever he forbadde the People.

The more you warrant it with your Certainly, Ra.
that S. Gregory should be of the mind which you imagine, y^ more ernestly I
beseech thee (indi^^er^t reader) to mark how substa^tially M. Jew. bu^ldeth
without any foundation. For this first is manifest, there have been, from y^
beginning, disti^ct orders and officers in y^ (...) of christ as Bishops, Co^
C^^. 40.
priests, dea^ons, subdeaco^s, acoli^es, exorcists, reade^^, sexti^s, Singers.
And if these (...) were ever kept in the Church, without question, they were
observed most orderly, in S. Gregory's time, whom, for his great diligence in
setting forth of the service of god, the heretics themselves do call, saving
their charity, Magistru^ ceremoniau^, the Master of ceremonies. He therefore
seeing this fault in the Church of Rome, that men appointed to higher offices,
were also chosen to serve in lower functions, as in example, y^ Deacons to
become singingmen, provides by a special decree, to have it reformed. The
Decree is this.

In sancta Romana Ecclesia, dudum consuetudo est valde reprehensibilis exorta,
Did. 9^. In Sanct^ Rom^na*
and cae^ There is risen of late, a very il custom, in the holy Church of
Rome, that certain, which are appointed to serve at the holy aultare, are
chosen to be Singyn^ men And that they, which are placed in the degree of
Deaconship, should be occupied about the svveete tuning and delivering of their
voices: whom it were more meet, to intend their office of preaching, and to
be diligent in distributing of Alms. ^hereof, ^or the more part, it cummeth
^o pass, that vvhiles a svveete voice is sought for, a tunable and agreeable
life is neglected: and the Mi^ister or D^acon which is A Singing man does
prick and grieve God with his manners, vvhiles h^ delig^teth the people with
his voice. Wherefore by this present decree, I apointe it, that, in this See,
the Ministers at the holy Aultare, shall not singe, (^^derstand beneth in the
quier as Singing men do^) and that they shall only do their Office in Reading
the Gospel at the Celebration of Mass. As for ^^^^mes* and ^o forth lessons, I
decree that they shall be done by the Subdeacons, or (if necessity require) by
the lesser Orders.

This is the whole decree. But where is it here, that a Priest should not
Singe* The cause of making this decree, was the (...) of the Deacons. And, the
Singging* which was forbidden them, was of that kind as y^ Singing me^ used,
and no such Singing, as is used in Reading of a Gospel.

To speak also of the Priest, thinks M. Jewel, that the Mass which he
celebrated solemnly in S. Grigories time was of his part celebrated without
note? And that in beginning of, Gloria in excelsis, Or in saying of, Dominus
vobiscum, Or, Sursum corda, and so forth in the Preface, he sang (...) not out,
in a certain quiet and easy tun^? The contrary is so clear, that the note
which is used in the Church in prefaces of y^ Mass and in halowing of the
Font, which are done by a Priest only or Bishop, is called Cantus Gregorianus.

But go to M. Jewel, proceed in your Abusing of Decrees: If singing be not
fit for a Priest, for whom is it fit? You answer that:

Certainly, Jew.
it seems that S. Gregory in his time thought singing in the Church, How
^^^^tainly h^ (...)
to be a thing fitter for the multitude of the People, then for the Priest.

Now for shame of your self, ^a.
dare y^ put it in print, yt Certainly it seems so? And dare ye note unto us
the Decree In Sancta Romana, for proof thereof? There: is no one word in the
whole Decree, that sounds to y^ purpose. There is no mention of the
multitude. Yea the multitude of people is excluded, as it is cert^inly to be
gathered, of the decree. For it appoints the Psalms to be song of the
Subdeacons, by name ^ut if necessity should require* y^ then, th^i of the
inferior orders of the Church, might excecute y^ office. If therefore, it was
not Ordinari^, no not for every one of the Clergi^, to sing y^ Psalms, and if
when y^ case of necessity came, that only ca^e made it lauful, for y^
inferior Orders to sing and read in y^ Church: how Absurdlie or impudentlie
gather ye out of this Decree, yt to sing in the church was thought fitter for
the multitude of the people, then for the Priest?

It is to be noted further, y^ M. Jewel speaks not of people Indefinitely,
but of the multitude of people, Co^fusely. For people to b^ suffered to sing,
may have a tolerable sense, when certain meet for the purpose, should be taken
thereunto (And yet in S. Gregory's time, this would not (...) suffered in Rome,
as appears by the forsaid Decree) but y^ multitude of people to be compted
fit for singing in the church, it is altogether so o^t of tune and Order, that
they lack both ears and reason coa^ (...) it.

And whereas in S. Gregory's time, none (as it appears) but of y^ Clergy did
serve in the church, And in our more loose days, al persons yet, without
(...), are not permitted to execute the of^ice of Singing or Reading in the
Church: M. Jew. in speaking for the (...) that (by likelihood) as a copy (...)
be seen, at their Sermons, so in ye churches, Men, women, boy^^, we^ches,
souldiars, mari^ers, mercha^ts, begg^rs, tag and rag, al should be fit (...) to
bear a part: as he is therein more open and loose than we of these disool^^e
days, so, with S. Gregory and his time, he agrees nothing at al. Confer,
and Judge.

An other Example. Jew, 18^*
Omnes Episcopi, qui huius apostolice ^edes ordinationi subiace^t. Neither true
inter pre^ation, nor Collection.
etc Al Bishops says M. Jew. out of an episile of Anac^et^s) y^ be bound to
have their orders confirmed by this apostolik see, etc. whereby it may be
gathered, y^ other bishops were not subject to y^ ordinance of y^ see

This Decree is two ways abused: first in englishing i^, R^.
then in reso^ing (...) it. Concerning the Interpr^tation: it is two things,
to say, Al Bishopes that are bound to have their orders of the Apostolic See.
And, Al Bishopes that are bound to have their Orders confirmed by the
Apostolic See: Because y^ second is twenty times larger then the first. Of the
first Anacletus speaks, meaning that al they, which are immediately subject
to the Bishop of Rome, and take Orders immediately at his hands, shall (as it
follows in the Decree) com or send yearly about the Ides of May, to S. Peter
and Paul's Church in Rome. Of the Second M. Jewel speaks, which are out of
the peculier Province of the Bishope of Rome, And which yet, when they are by
their Clerg^ named and elected at home must be afterward confirmed by the B.
of Rome, and ar^ so ordained and consecrated in their (...) Province: So that
the Bishopes of Italy, are ordained and confirmed both, by the B. of Rome: but
the Bishops of France or England (when it was good) are not made by him, but
confirmed, that is to say (as the word i^ self geue^h) he ratifieth that
which other have or shall do.

The Interpretation therefore of M. Jewels is false: so is also his collection
and Argument. For, although all the Bishopes that are under the Bishope of Rome,
and bound to receive their orders at his hands immediately, although al these
(I say) be within Italy only, or nigh thereabout, as far as his special
Province goes, yet does it not follow thereupon, that the Bishope of Arls, or
Caunterburie are not at al subject unto him. Like as in an Army, where y^ King
him self is present, when he shall diuid^ the battle, and appoint the
gouern^men^ of diverse bands to diverse Capitaines, reserving to him self one
among al of which he, by him self, will have y^ charge: Although these now that
he has chosen out, be all that he has to set in array and order by him self,
yet must you (...) infer, that he has no Authority over the other parts of
the Army, because he does not as immediately govern the whole, as his special
part? For, Immedia^elie, but one part is under his charge, but by means of
his Capitaines, whom he only has appointed, and whom he again by his
authority may vterly displace, or other wife (...) he is King over the whole.
So is (...) B. of Rome. His authority is as (...), ^s the name of Christians
does (...) abroad, And Christ which commit^ed unto S. Peter his Lambs and
Sheep, charged thereby, all that would be of hi^ flock, to obey his Uicepastor.

Now, because the faithful are so multiplied, that one man by himself, can not
Personally ^ome to every place, therefore, even from y^ beginning, there was
made distinc^ion of Provinces, and Jurisdictions in the Church of Christ: in so
much, that the Pope himself had and has still, a det^rmined portion. Not that
any Archebishope in the world, should take him self for as good as his
Patriarche, Or y^ the Primates themselves should presume to ^e as Supreme as the
Pope: but that y^ charge being divided among many, y^ whole might ^e with more
speed and less ^rouble, (...). He rules therefore his own ^art. as if he were
but a Bishope. Archbishope, or Pa^riarche, he rules y^ whols, as the Uicare of
Christ, and head of his Church under him. He rules his own part,
Proportionablie, because he is a man which can not do al by himself: he rules
the whole by special prerogative of Christ's grace and power, because he is the
chief Steward over y^ house of Christ, which he has purchasen by his mo* (...)
death, the whole world. Concerning his own part, other Bishops be his fellows,
as laboring to the perfection of that whole, in which every of them has also a
part. Concerning the whole, some are Archebishops, and Primates, some
Patriarchs, every one of a larger Jurisdiction then other, and one alone, is
^o^e.

This distinction then being most plain and manifest, that Rule and
Government, is put in practice, both Immediately by y^ Rulers own Act, And
Mediatlie, or by means of other: to take away the second by affirming y^
first, whereas first and second do in sundry respec^es well st^ad together, it is
without reason or consequence. As, if one would say, The King charge al his
Lords and Officers about him, to mete where he has appointed, ergo it may be
gathered, that no other with^^ England beside them of y^ Co^rt, are bound to
appear where he shall appoi^te them.

And so does M. Jewel reason, Al Bisshopes that are bound to take their Orders,
(or as he falsi^ieth the text, to have their Orders confirmed) by the
Apostolic See, must (as it follows in the Law) come or send yearly to Rome:
Ergo other Bishopes that are not Immediately, but Mediatly under him, are not
subject to the ordinance of that See.

Note also, that whereas the Decree of Ana^letus, is concerning the yearly
coming of Bishopes to Rome* and not of any other point of Obedience and duty:
M. Jewel might well argue thus.

The Bishopes only of Italy, that are subject to the Apostolic See, are
bound ^er^ly to come to Rome, etc. Ergo the Bishops of other Countries, that
are further of, are not bound to come yearly ^hither. But, from this one
particular for which only the Decree was made, to reason gen^rally, of the
Obedience and Subjection due to the ordinance of that See, it is Sophistically
and Unreasonably done.

By this I move then sufficiently, y^ he has abused the Canon Law.

How M. Jewel abuses the very Gloses of the Canon law.
BUt does his boldness stretch no further, than to the Text? or does he not
corrupt also the Gloses? verily he leaves neither them untouched, that is to
say, uncorrupted. For if M. Jewel once touch a place, it is very ^ard but it
will be the worse for his handling. And cause truly he has none, why he should
allege any Gloss of the Canon law, at al. For whereas himself regards not,
no not the Text it self, and the Catholics also will not be bound to make ^ood
the private say^ing of any Gloser, it is a great vanity, to bring in such
^itnesses, as him self may well know are not sufficient. Yet, though I say
so, ^e shall not require of me, to mock straitewayes at any Gloses, Or to
bring forth unto y^ knowledge of the si^e wits of y^ world, some simple
devises and dis^ourses that they have made, to the^tent they may be laughed at.
For there are Degrees in every thing, and he that will not be so good as to
praise every Invention of the Gloss, needs not to be so il, as to seek how
to find fault with it, but may well enough be suffered to hold his peace.

Now concerning M. Jewels behavior, if he has such an itche, yt he thinks
to rub us on the gal, by alleging such witnesses as we may and do laufully
refuse, Why does he not allege them truly? Why does he tell their tale after
them in such sort, as he finds not in their own words? Why does he (upon
this prejudice among the greater number that Glosers are but Ignorante and
trifling men) bring forth blind and vain sentences out of them, which in deed
are not theirs, (though it will be easily susspected) but M. Jewels: whom many
compte so honest, that he will not in any case make a Lie, or missuse his own
witnesses in any point?

This Objection of mine, to Exemplify or Prosequ^te at large, I doo^ not
intend, but, in one or two examples, I will begin the Chapter, that he which
herafter will add more unto it, may have a plain and peculiar place where to
put it.

In the Answer to D. Hardinges Preface, it pleases M. Jew. to open his mouth
awide, and to avouch that the Pope speaks after this manner.

I can do what so ever Christ him self can do: Jewel i^ y^ Answer to D.
Hardings Preface.
I am al, and above al: Al power is given to me, as well in Heaven as in Earth.

You are not so honest as to be trusted upon your bare word, Ra.
and therefore name unto us your witnesses which may depose for you, that the
Popes have ever uttered words with such Arrogancy.

And you refer us to the Gloss De Maioritate and Obedientia, vnam Sanctam.
But what says that Gloss? Does it tell of any one Pope by name, Or does it
report so much of the order and succession of them, that every one of them,
has in his course and for his time, Jewel.
^ounded it out into all the world, that, I can do, what so ever Christ him
self can do, etc?

You will Answer (because there is no other shift) that the Gloser speaks such
words of the Pope, not that y^ Pope himself, does speak them, in his own person
of him self. Why then, I Judge you by your own words, that you have made an
open lie, in attributing that, unto the Popes own Act, which is not his* but
y^ Glosers collection upon the Canon law.

Then, further I say, that many things are verfied in sundry Persons,
concerning their Uocation, or Office, which i^ cannot become the persons
themselves, to appropriat to them selves. For the Apostles of Christ were
light^ of the world. Mat. 5.
Yet if S. Peter had begone his Epistl^s with this style and Title, Peter the
Apostle of Jesus Christ, and one of the lights o^ the world, he could not have
be^ thought to have followed the humility which was in Jesus Christ. Likewise,
every man that is in the state of Grace, is undoubtedly the Son of God, and
Fellow of Angels, and Conqueror of Devils, (...)
vutyl he doc forsake that Grace: ^et if you (M. Jewel) should ^^ent yourselfe
of al your bragging, (...)* lying* etc. and Re^urne to y^ Catholic Church, and
be received into the Communion of Sain^es, it would not be liked in you, to
write yourselfe Ihon Jewel A Conqueror of ye wicked Sprites, A terror to
heretics, A Comfort to Catholics, A well-beloved of al Virgins, Confessors,
Martyrs, Apostles and Patriarchs, A fellow with the Angels, A Cusson of our
Ladies, A son of Almighty God.

And so the Conclusion being true, that there is no Authority in the world
comp^rable to that which Christ gave to S. Peter and his Successors* yet does
it not agree that the Pope should in the first person crake or sound out of
himself, I can do whatsoever Christ himself can do. For whereas high
dignity and Authority is given unto men, for others sake which are to be
governed, and not for their own which bear the Office, and whereas such Gifts
and Graces fo government make not the (...) of them acceptable (as says, hope
and charity do) there is no occasion to ^rake of that which pertains not to
any man in respect of his Person, but only of his Office.

On the other side, whereas to co^fe^^e the worthin^sse of an Office, may well
become a wise and worshipful man, so that he attribute nothing thereof unto
himself as he is one singular person: if the Pope Concerning his Office do
confess it that the chief Bishop in the Church, must rule al Christians and
be subject to none of them al: M. Jewel must not therefore slander him, that
he opens his mouth a wide, and utters blaspemies and sounds out these
words into all the world: I may judge al me^, but all the world may not Judge
me. But by such form of speech the simple Reader, and common Protestant,
co^ceiueth of the Pope, that he stands a tipp toe: And ouerlooketh all the
world: And is in great love and conceit of him self: And respects always
his private Estimation: And forgets that there is a God and right Judge, and
that him self is a Man and a Sinner as other folks are: and that he
attributes an Omnipotency to his own proper person, etc. Whereupon, he
takes an Indignation, and accompteth him to be a very Beast or Devil and no
man, that so prefers him self before other men, And is ready to accurse,
and detest, and revile, and speak, and judge the worst y^ he can of the Pope.

And this is one of the vile and wicked kinds of Rhetorique, that is used n^w
in the world. For, when it is plainly and simply said, Devilish Rhetorik*
Jew. ^0.
Christ breathed upon the Apostles, and said, take ye the holy ghost, whose
sins ye forgive, they be forgeuen, whose sins ye retain, they be retained,
he that will find any fault, must not be angry with the Apostles which take the
Grace, but with the Author and geauer of it, Jesus Christ: But no Christian I
(think) and faithful man, does abhor to hear these words spoken. Now then

The Devil which sees Christ his own person to be in much honor, and that
when words are considered as spoken of him, the Christians hearts are subdued
by them: What does he? He turns his form of speech, and understanding well
enough the Pride and Malice of our corrupt nature, he makes his Orators and
Interpretours, to bring the selfsame words (which in deed have s^rength of
Christ only) out of y^ mouths of spiritual Persons. Bishops or Priests: And
deuiseth, that they shall utter them in their own persons: as in example, (...)
makes the Pope to say: Whose sins I forg^^e they be forgiven, Whose sins I
ret^ine they be retained. Which because it is Proudly and Arrogantly spoken, it
is easy to make him contemned which takes s^ c^eeding much upon him, and to
bring the Office and Authority it self into disecredite, because it agrees not
with the nature and i^firmitie of the persons, to speak so bigly and to
perform it accordingly.

Concerning then now y^ Gloss of which M. Jewel speaks, if in deed it be
there found, that Al Power is given to the Pope, as well in heaven as in Earth,
yet to make the Pope speak it in his own person, Al power is given to me as
well in Heaven as in Earth, it is spirefully and wickedly turned.

But let us see the Gloss it self, whether it has that Sense, which M. Jewel
gathers thereof. For touching y^ form of word^, it is manifest that they are
not to be found there, as spoken in the first person.

The question, which the Gloss moves, (...)
is this. Whether the Spiritual power ought to Rule the Tem^orall. And it
seems (says the Gloss) that no: whereupon he brings in certain
Arg^^entes, for the Temporal, against the Spiritual Iur^s^iction, but
afterward be dissolueth every doubt and objection laieng this one Argument
for a ioundation.

Christ com^^tted his ^^arshipe, (...) the big^est Bishope:

But all power was geauen to Christ in Heaven and in Earth, Mat. 28.

Ergo the highest Bishop which is his (...) this ^ovver.

And what is the thing now, that M. Jewel in this place does mis^yke: Or what
Sense, gathers his understanding hereof? M^ry sir of this place he concludes
the Po^e to say, Al power is geauen to me, as well in Heaven as in Earth. But
the Glsse (M. Jewel) concludes not so. For ac^^^ding to the matter which is
vroponed, the (...) of the Conclusion must be ordered. Of the Spiritual and
Temporal (...) here in earth, the Glos^ (...): It speaks also, of the
government, as it parteineth to one that supplieth the place of Christ on
Earth, and not as it is enlarged to heaven. That visible man should be left,
after the depart^re and astension of God and man, to govern that visible
Church which consi^teth of men: It is so Comfortable and Reasonable, that
Faith, Order, and Peace, without it, could not well have been kept. The gloss
(...).
But to make any man, living yet on earth, A Doer and Officer, concerning the
Tri^^phant Church in heaven, where Christ himself is in his person so present,
that he uses not a Uicare, that is absurd and unlikely, and with this, M.
Jewel, charge the Pope, that he should Open his mowthe awyde and say, al
power is geauen to me, as well in Heaven as in Earth. Which Conclusion is not
uttered nor intended in the Gloss.

No say you, (...)
does not the Gloss, vp^on this text of the Scripture spoken of Christ, Math.
(...).
al power is geauen to me in Heaven and in Earth, Does it not infer, that the
^igh Priest, his Uicare on earth, has the (...) it speaks not of the same,
(...).
but of (...) power. And this power is meant not generally of all power that
Christ has, but of that which is proponed in the question, that is, the
Spiritual and Temporal power here in Earth. As if he should more plainly have
concluded: Al power both in Heaven and Earth, is geauen to Christ: Ergo that
in Earth. Again, the highheste Bishope has Christ's place and Rome in Earth,
Ergo he has al power in Earth: Ergo the Spiritual power ought to Rule the
Tem^oral.

The weak brother in Faith and wit may reply. Objection
If the Pope have as much power on Earth as Christ, It will follow that Christ's
power in Earth being infinite, the Pope also may do what he will, as in
example, Remove hills, go dryshod over great rivers, turn water into wine,
strike five thousand men down with a word, as our Savior did in the Garden.

No my frind, the Generality of a propo^ision, (...)*
is to be measured by the matter which is in question. And because the question,
moved in this place by y^ Gloss, is not of working miracles, or (...) it be,
over which y^ almightines of o^r Savior has absolute power in Earth, but of
the Authority, (...)* and i^risdi^tion, which the Spiritual rulers should have
above the Temporal, with^n the Church of Christ, that is yet militant;
therefore the supplieing of Christ^^ place in earth, and the Receiving of the
same power which he had, must be extended no further, than to the ruling and
Governing of men here, beneth in the world or though out of the world, yet in
their way unto heaven.

And therefore M. Jewel has shamefully abused this gloss, as though it made
the Pope a God. and that without a^^e Limitation or (...), or interpictation,
be concluded to have al power, as well in heaven as in Earth, even as Christ him
(...) has.

An other gloss M. Jewel has peeked ent. (...)
from the decree 24. (...) ^aieing (...).

But* do not you M. Jewel, Ra.
most shamf^lly err in (...) y^ gloss? Let us see for what (...) it was
alleged of you, and (...) better consider, whether it (...) that, for which you
alleged it. (...) greably to the catholic says, y^ Although the Sea of Rome
has failed sometimes in charity, yet it never failed in Faith. Against this
conclusion M. Jewel comes in with these words.

Certainly the very gloss upon the Deeretals puts this matter utterly out of
doubt: Jew. (...)
these be the words, This is not the matter.
Certu^ est quod Papa errare potest: It is certain that the Pop^ may err.

As if he should say: Ra.
to pro^e by y^ text it self of y^ decretale. y^ the church of Rome, may err
in Faith, it is so easy a matter, I^^de not work y^ way. But the very gloss
upon the decr^tals, which always is favorable to y^ see of Rome, and which by all means possible, mainteineth y^ Popes kingdom, and which is, not of y^
making of any ancient or learned doctor, but of some old mu^simns papist and
ba^barous master, How (...) dely?
yet this very gloss is against y^ (...) of y^ see if Rome, y^ it can not e^e
in faith. But is this true: Yes certe^ly quod M. Ie^^ puts this matter out of
dout, and y^ vtterli.

Certainly, if the gloss has so taken the matter, it is a great argume^r, y^
much more y^ text is against us. or if the text be (...) the Catholics, It is
a simple argument of M. Jewels, to bring a Gloss against the Text, and so to
speak of the Gloss, as though the text were much more for his purpose? For the
very Gloss (says he) puts the matter utterly out of dout. Let us see then,
first of al, what is the Text.

Lucius the Pope, writing to certain Bishops which were trobled with
heretics, And showing them, where upon to stay themselves, that they might
no: waver hither and thither: wills them to solow the Church of Rome, (...)
praise of which, (...)
thus he says. (...) sancts and ^pos^olica, matter omnium Ecclesiarum Christ,
(...), qua per Des Omnipotent is graia^^. a tramite Apostolica traditiones
nunquam errass: probatur. This holy and Apostolic Church: is the mother of all
churches of christ: (...)
^hichs (through the Grace of almighty God) has never ben proved to have
erred from the right trade end pathe of the Tradition of the Apostles. Thus
says Pope Lucius, and he makes expressly for D. Harding, as far downward,
as Lucius own Popedom was, ^nno Do 258.

This conclusion then being certain, by the express text of the law, Let M.
Jew answer, or give over
what says the Gloss thereupon? Does it follow the text or no? If it do not:
Remember then (I pray you M. Jewel) your charitable and affectuous words to
D. Harding: O M. Harding, It is an old saying: Maledicta Glosa quae corrumpit
textum. Accursed be that Glosing construction, or Gloss that corruppteth the
text. Remember well this old saying, and forget not yourselfe, which bring forth
with so great a confidence, a Gloss that impugneth the text.

But does the Gloss follow the text? If it do, be ashamed man then of yourself.
which do so Certainly warrant it, that the very Gloss puts this matter out
of doubt (that the Sea of Rome may err in Faith) the text it self making to
the contrary.

But of this, perchance, you have little rega^de, how the Gloss agrees or
disagreeth with the Text. And where you find your vantage, (...).
there you are determined to take it, having a simple and plain eye, neither
loking to that which goes before, nor that which follows, neither that which
is of any side of you. And so* the Gloss saiting. that Certain it is the Pope
may err, that is enough for y^u, and that, puts the matter utterly out of
doubt, that the Church of Rome may err^.

You are deceived, M. Jewel, through your Simplicity: For if you, or your
^rindes about you, had been circumspect, you would never have brought this
Gloss surth, with such confidence, as you have done. It is two things, to
say, The Pope may err, and, the Church of Rome may err. The first is
granted: (...) it may possibly be, that the Pope, concerning his own private
mind and opinion, may crre in understanding, as Ioa^nes 22. did, or whom
soever else you can name unto us. The second is utterly denied, that the Church
of Rome can err. For that presupposes, y^ the Pope should ^e geauen over, to
decret, Set ^^rth or determine by his Judicial Sentence, some thing,
contrary to the Apostolic Faith, and that it should be received and believed
in the Church. Which absurdity (that any error should be suffered in have
credit in that Church, which is y^ Mother of al Churches: and that under the
government of the holy ghost which continues with it, and is the spirit of
Truth) becasue it is impossible, therefore it is also impossible y^ the Church
of Rome should err, in any point of y^ Faith. And in such extremities, where
y^ Pope, for his own person, is persuaded in a contrary conclusion unto our
Faith, almighty God, that his care over the church may be manifest, provides
always, to take such persons out of the way, when they might (if they had
lived) done harm, as he did, Ioannes. 22. and* Anastasius.

Now that the Gloss faith no more, but, the Pope may err, the Pope to err and
y^ Church of Rome to err* are two suntry things even by y^ very glo^e which M
Jew. alleges.
which we will not deny, Causa. 24
and not that the Church of Rome may err, qu^st ^.
which was D. Hardings affirmation: by whom shall I better prove it, In Glos^.
tha^ by y^ gloss it self, which is a little before in this very cause. 24, q.
1. out of which M Jew. peeked his Certainti y^ out of doubt the Sea of Rome may
err. In y^ chapter Quodcunque ligaueris, the Gloss upon a certain word there
gathers an Argument, that the sentence of the whole Church, is to be
preferred before the church of Rome, if they gainsay it, in any point. And he
confirms it by y^ 93. Distinction, Legimus. But does the Gloss rest there?
and as M. Jew. Certainly avouches it does it put the matter utterly out of
doubt th^^ the church of Rome may err* Judge of the mind of the Glosator, by
y^ words of y^ Gloss. For thus it follows.

Sed (...) And for co^firmatio^ of his belief he refers us to y^ Chap. (...)
which follows in y^ cause and questions Nis (faith he) erraret Romana
Ecclesia, (...) M. Jew. the Gloss, if ye like not the Text.
quod no credo pos^e fieri, quia Deus no^ mitteret. Arg. infra ead. c. 4 Rect a
etc. Pude^^a Except the church of Rome should err. which I believe cannot be,
because God would not suffer it As it is proved in the Chapiters following,
which begin, A Recta and Padenda.

Consider now (Indifferent Reader) and judge between us both. M. Jew. says The
Gloss puts the matter utterly out of doubt, that y^; Church of Rome may err,
because it says, the Pope may err. I answer, y^ the Gloss upon y^ chapter a
Recta, (...) it, that the Pope may Err: but, in the third Chapit^^ before.
Quod^^qu^ ligaueris. it believes, that it can not be, that the church of Rome
should err because God would not permit it. Whereof I gatder. that the Pope to
err, and the Church of Rome to err, are (...) points, and that if it be
granted unto him, y^ the Pope in his own prina^ sense may hold an heretical
opinion, yet y^ church of Rome for all y^, cannot err, because God will not
suffer it, y^ any thing should be decreed by y^ Pope, y^ is contrary to faith.
And this is manifest, even by y^ very Gloss which M. Jewel trusts so much, y^
he took y^ matter to be vtterli out of dout, when the Gloss had once spoken it,

What is abusing of testimonies if this be not? what conscience is there,
either in Credo non posse fieri, 24. qua^s^ I^ Glos^
quia Deus non permitteret. I believe that it can not be (that the Church of
Rome should err) because God would not suffer it. Now

For more Examples I am not careful, And more might be found, if I would take
the pains to seek. But I would wish the learned in the Law, to examine and
consider right well, M. Jewels testimonies out of the Law. They shall speak
with more Grace, as speaking of things in which they are practiced, and with
more facility, they shall discover M. Jewels unskillfulness, as knowing at the
first sight, wherein and when the Laws of Gloses are abused. And if nothing
else were, the common Ennemie to al Truth, should be convicted by the expert in
every Faculty.

How M. Jewel abuses the Constitutions of the Civil Law.
IF the Canon law be, at these days, of so little price among Heretics, that,
for spite they have to y^ Pope, and the Clergy, they care not how they
misreporte it and disorder it: of the Co^stitutions yet of Temporal Princes,
they should have some more reguard, least whiles they be manifeslly proved to
use their accustomed liberty, of alleging or interpreting the textes also of
the Civil law, they care not with how little truth or honesty, they should be
rightly co^uinced to have neither Spiritual nor Temporal law for them selves.
Now, whether M. Jewel he as bold with Constitutions of Princes, as Decrees of
Popes, I will bring in his own words as they lie, and confer them with the
Constitution, upon which he groundeth them. Thus he says.

If only the negligence of the People have enforced Private Mass, Jew. 17.
Auth. Collat. ^. vt. determinatus sit numtrus Clericorum.
How then came it into Colleges, Monasteries, Cathedral churches, yea (mark
now indifferent Reader, how constantly he speaks) even into the very holy
church of Rome, whereas be such numbers of Clerks, Vicars, Monks, Priests,
and Prebendaries, that the Emperor Justinian was feign to stay the increase of
them, al Idle, al in study and co^templation, al void from worldly cares, al
confessed, al in clean life, al prepared?

I trust, Ra.
after so great a vomit, your Stomak be somewhat better at case. And first
concerning y^ question it self, D. Har. has it not, y^ only ye nelige^ce of
ye people, has enforced private Mass, but yt often times ye Priest at Mass has
no co^partners to receive with him, it proce death of lak of devotion of ye peples
part. And so has it sometimes come of lack of devotion, y^ religious me^ have
not receued so often as they might. And if this does comfort your heart, y^ I
grant unto you, faults to have been found among religious persons, I cannot let
you of your own will, but I wonder at your fausie, to feed upon carren.

Sometimes therefore, y^ Priest receives alone, because none is ready to be his
co^parteuer, and sois his Sole receiving or as M. Jew. would say, his private
Mass, not enforced but occasioned thereby. For yt lak of deuorio^ or diligence
in y^ people is not an Essential, (...)
but an Accident (...) a cause that goes before, but yt follows af^^^, and it
does not make y^ Sole receiving, but is made rather thereof. For, to speak
proprety (...) orderly, if I were asked what (...) y^ cause, why the Priest
receives alone I would answer: The Caufe is, y^ he is not bound to have
company, and yt he has a godly desire to celebrate and receive, and yt the
celebrating of ye Mysteries and enjoying of them, depends not upon the
mutabilitie of ye peoples mind but upon commission, power authority, grace,
and effects, yt Christ has endued his Priests and his Sacraments wtal. And
this much concerning M. Jewels Objection, least any should be troubled with it.
(...)
Now to ye co^stitution of Justinian. First M. Jew. would have it conceived yt
The Emperor should find fault with the numbers of Clerks, etc. in his time,
because of some disorder or misbehauiour among them, and to to this purpose, he
thrusts into his sentence, by a certain figure of lying and mocking, Al Idle,
al in study and co^templacion, al void from worldly cares etc.

Then would he have it to be conceived yt either there were that went about to
redress this gear and could not preuail, or y^ in deed neither Pope, nor
Cardinal, nor Bishop cared for it, so yt the Emperor Justinian was fain to stai
the increase of them. Thirdly, he so speaks as though Vicars Monks and
Prebendaries were noted in the Coustitution.

Last of al, which is chiefly to be marked, he is so bold as to say it, that
Justinian should be fain to stay the increase of Clerks, etc. ye even in the
holy Church* of Rome, where, etc As though the Emperor had been so lofty, as
to take upon himself the office of the Pope, and in the Churches, which are
specially under the government of the B. of Rome.

Concerning therefore the first and second of these points, it is manifest in
ye Constitution, yt the cause of staying the number of Clerks in
Constantinople, and therabout, was not for any such misliking as heretics have
now with the number of Priests which are not al of ye best, but only because
the Revenues of ye church in Constantinople were not able well to find them.
And therefore (how much the Spiritual Rulers did think of ye matter, (...) can
tell, but) the Emperor, for the honor of the Clergy, and not for co^tempe of
the Degree, wrote unto Epiphanius, the Archbishop of Constantinople about this
matter, and no doubt but with his advise and consent, appointed yt order which
should be taken. Which was this, that as many as already, had alowa^ce or
living in ye great Church or other of Constantinople, should have it still, but
that from thencefurth, no more should be found of the Church, than answered the
just number of the persons, which by the foundation of the Churches had
portions and stipendes to maintain them.

To the third point then I answer, yt Justinian speaks not of Vicars, Monks
and Prebendaries, and that herein M. Jewel showed a point of an heretical (...)
pite, to geaue such names to the persons whom the Emperor should seem to
bring under his law, as are at these days most odious, and to move suspicion
to his Reader, that the number of Monks were even in Justinians time abhorred.
Which is so false, as it is true, that in all tha^ Constitution, there is no
mention of Monk or Religious person but only of such as served in the
Cathedral Church, and other of Constantinople, or the quarters there about.

And by this, it does well appear, that it is to to impudently said (touching
the fourth point) Justinians Constitution for staieing the increase of the
number of Clerks etc should be made, yea, even for the very holy Church of
Rome. For it is directed only to Epiphanius. Archbishope of Constantinople, and
all the constitution, through, he makes mention only, Huius Regia Civitatis;
of this princely City. meaning Constantinople, and especially, of the great
Church there. Of which, he has such care, and for which, he takes such a
Special order, that he apointeth, how many Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacons
etc. it should have, and not above. As three skore a hundred Deacons, What
should al (...)
and Women forty (which were not, you may be sure their Wives, except two men
and an half should have gone to one) Subdeacons nynetie, Readers a hundred and
ten, Singers five and twenty: so that all the number of the most Reverend
Clerks of the most holy Great Church shall consist in four hundred twenty and
five, besides and above a hundred of them which are called O^^arij that is,
Porters.

So many then, Justinian aloweth to the number of one Church in Constantinople,
for all his stay made, that Clerks should not increase. And that* because
that one Church was well hable to find so many, without borowing of others or
laying to pleage of their own. (...)
But with the Church of Rome or with Monks, he does not once meddle, I fai^ it
again M. Jewel, he does not meddle, so much as once.

With what Face then and Conscience refer you this Constitution to the Church
of Rome? And in so greait a matter, as the Supremacy is, wherefore abuse you
the Authority of the Emperor, in making your Reader conceive, that Justinian
for all that the Papists call the Church of Rome, Holy, feared not yet to
made a Law, that it should not have above a certain number of Uicars, Monks,
and Prebendaries, of which it would follow by likelihood, that the Emperor
took him self for a worthier Head of the Church, than the Pope.

A plainer Example tha^ this to show M. Jewels falsehod, I can not lightly
have: but that he shall not say that this is al I can object against him, for
mistaking or mi^nsing of the Clin^e Law, behold an other.

The Law says, Jew. 172 (...) lie at the first.
Generaliter dictum, Generaliter est accip^endum. The thing that is spoken
Generally, most be taken Generally.

The Law says it not* Ra.
But whereas a Legacy is to be paid pare^tibus and liberis, to parents and
children, no mention being made in the Testament, how far these names should
stretch, (For in the name of Parents, Father, Mother, Grandsire, and
Grandmother, And in the name of Children, not only the Natural, but the
Adoptiue sons and daughters, etc. are understood) The Praetor in this case,
answers that they may be referred unto all that may be comprehended within the
forsaid Names. Hereof the Lawiers gather a Rule, that The thing that is spoken
Generally, must be taken Generally. But the Law it self (...) it not.

Now these Rules of the Lawiers wit and co^lection are not General but
indefinite, neither they in all places true, but in certain. They are, as some
call them, but Burchardica, that is, of the making of Burchardus the B. of
worms, or (as other say) Brocardica, that is to say, meet Rules for such fine
fellows emonge Lawiers, as brokers are among the Merchants. They give a show of
cunning and learning, as though he that uses them, both knew and spoke law:
but in deed none but triflers and pelters use them, except they prosecute them
in their right sense.

For, how sone may it be Objected, by any man, that, if this Rule were true,
no man should be so hardy, as to kill a lowse: because the law of God says,
thou shall not kill, Ex^d. 10.
and M. Jewels law says, that, the thing that is spoken generally, must be
taken generally, upon which objection, if M. Jewel would bid me stay a while,
and to understand the law of God, M. Jew. apposed in his own Rules.
according to the Rule of reason and equity, and that the killing only of man
is forbidden, such as proce^eth without lawful Authority, or tends to the
breach of Charity etc: I would Reply (not so wisely in deed as it should
become a reasonable man, but after as wise manner and fasshion, as M. Jewel
uses) and say, Jew. 172.
It is commonly said, vbilex non distinguit, stiguit, nos distinguere non
debemus. ^here the law makes no distinction, the^^ ought we to make no
distinction. And therefore away with this Sophistical distinction, of lawful
and unlawful killing, and go to the Text it self, which says expressly:
Theu shall not kill. And so by this mean which M. Jewel follows, an Heretic
might be lousie by Authority, nor only of the Law of God, but the Rule of man:
except he would be so merciful as not to kill the vermyne, but, by some other
way put them away from him.

Now, if M. Jewel know not so much, as that these Rules, which he allegeth, are
not to be understood Generally, although they sound Generally: why would he
meddle with that, which he did not know? On the other side, if he kn^we well
enough, that there are many limitations upon these rules, why would he put
that forth to be taken of his Reader, absolutely and Generally, which is not
true but in certain cases only?

^ertainely* y^ lea^ned in law, when they. speak of these very rules they
rest^ict the^ many ways, which I need not rehearse unto you, being acquainted
very well with the civil Lawiers, or law. Otherwise if you were not, you
should do well to read Alciat de verboru singnifi. and Nico^aus Ever ardus in
his book entitled Loct argumentorum legales And because one example against
you to open your naughty dealing in this point, Aliciatus de vet. sig. lib. 1
is enough, as also, because the example is better ^ercei^ed of the common
people then the rule, Euerard in loco a rati^us l^ gisstrict^.
I will rehearse y^ one most sensible case, which the law^ers the^ selves do put
to prove, that y^ foresaid rules which you have put forth for general, must he
limited.

Suppose, y^ there is an act or law made by the prince, y^ whosoever stryketh A
man within his court, and makes him bleed, shall leese his head, or his hand
for it. Here, the law is general, in saying whosoever, without exception of
persons, What thus heth M. Jew* in this case?
and therefore (as M. Jewel would have it some) it must be taken Generally. It
chances then after this, y^ some of y^ privy Chamber lies sick of a
pleurisy. And the Phisitio^ being at hand, he counseleth y^ party to be let
blood. And this being y^ most present remedy: the Bargar cu^meth, stretches
the vain, makes the Gentleman bleed, and looks for a good reward: I ask
the^ whether the Barbar shall leese his head or his hand for his labor? And who
sees not, that no? Yet the law was general that whosoever strecheth etc. yea
but the Rule is not general, that, the thing that is generally spoken, must be
taken generally. For where y^ common wealth should take hurt by it, if the
law were understood generally (as in the case of the Barbar, it is not for
the common wealths profit, that he an Innocent should leese either life or
lymme) there must be used necessarily one Restriction (at the least) of the
laws Generality.

Wherefore then does M. Jewel, so like dodger, dodger
come in with such Rules, as deceive the simple Reader, and fill his papers to
no purpose? Wherefore makes he Objections which he knows to have casie
answer? Or why has he no care by what means he brings his matters, to pass,
so that for the present, he say somewhat to his Adversary.

Upon confidence of these general Rules, which at the first feeme reasonable,
he carries the Readers away with him, into blind knowledge, maineteyning his
own heresies and their errors, by the superficial words of the Civil Law,
either not atteiuing to the sense thereof, Or quite leaving it. And this will I
prove by a manifest example, so much the more willingly, because I shall have in
the end a further Occasion, to show an other limitation unto this rule which M.
Jewel would have to be taken Generally.

D. Harding alleged out of an Edice of Justinians this evident place, for the
Supremacy of the B. of Rome. Sancimus, etc. We ordeine, according to the
determinations of the Canons, that the most holy Pope of the Elder Rome, be
^ormost and chief of al Bishopes. But it is worth the marking, to hear how
Justinian brings in these words.

We Decree ( says he) that the holy Ecclesiastical Rules, In Auther De
Ecclesi^is.
which have been set forth and established of the four Councels ( of Nice,
Coustantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedone) shall stand instead of Laws. For we
receive the Decrees of the four Synodes, as the ^oly Sc^^^res, and the Rules
of them vvc^h serve as Laws. And therefore we ordeine, according the
determinatoions of them, that the most holy Pope of the Elder Rome, shall be
foremost and Chief of al Pries^es Now unto this so ^laine an Argument for y^
Supremacy, what Answers M. Jewel? Forsothe

The Emperor lustinian had a special inclination to the City of
Constantinople, Jew. 241 The (...)
for that it was now gro we^ in wealth and puissa^ce, etc And for that it was as
he says, Matter pictatis nostrae, the Mother of his Majesty.

Well* here is some cause why he should favor the City of Constantinople, Ra.
but what is this to Rome? It follows.

For like Consideration the Emperor gave out this special Privilege ( upon
which D, Jew.
Harding groundeth his Argument) in favor of the Sea of Rome.

Let this also be gra^nted, Ra.
that he favored Rome as well as Constantinople. But what reason can ye show,
wherefore h^ should prefer it vefore Constantinople, and s^t Rome in the first
degree and place, and Constantinople in the next? For by all likelyhod.
Constantinople being the place where he kept his court and to which most
resort was made, concerning matters of the Empire, if the giving of Prinilegies
unto See and Bishops had depe^ded of his favor only, he would have honored
first of al, the Patriarche of his Chief and Imperial City.

But is it not a manifest lie, Note the Lie.
that the Emperor gave the Chiefdom to the B. of Rome upon a special
inclination which he had to y^ City? Consider the words of his Edice. What
are they? We Ordein^ (says the Emperor) according ^o the determination of
the Canons, that the Pope of Rome be Chief of al Priesetes. He followed then,
the Law of the first four general Councels, and not his own Inclination. And
he honored y^ See of Rome with his Edict, not because he favored Rome in his
special a^ ^ectio^, above al other Sees, but because y^ former Councils which
he regarded as y^ Scriptures themselves, and as inviolable laws, had so
decreed and determined, y^ the B. of Rome, should be Primus, First or Chief of
al Priests. How impude^tly then does M. Jew. abuse y^ Emperors edict, by
making y^ to be y^ chief cause thereof, which in deed was not the cause? But let
him go forward.

And by the way least any error happen to grow of this word Papa, Jew. To
what purpose?
it behooves thee. Good Reader, to understand, that Papa in old times, in the
Grek tongue, signified a Father etc. And further in S. Augustines time and
before, the same name was given generally to al Bishopes, etc.

You say truly, Ra.
and you prove it excedingly, and if ye would be rather called Pope Jewel, then
Bishope Jewel, be it at your own choice, and your friends most wise. But
returnem, I pray you, again into the way, and Answer the Edict of Justinian.

But to return to the matter. Jewel, Fear, where no cause is showed.
M. Harding may not of every thing that he reads, conclude what he lists.

If he do. you can with fewer Circumstancies tell him of it. Ra.
But Primus ^mnium Sacerdotum* is in English the First and Chief of al
Priests. And he which has so much given unto him, by General Councels of the
Primitue church, he is higher (I trow) then any of his Fellows. And therefore
it is much looked for, that you should Answer directly to the Privilege.

This Privilege granted unto the Jew.
Bishop of Rome, to be the First of al Priests was not to bear the whole
sway, and to over rule all the world.

Ye speak like a man that were offended with tyranny, Ra.
and ye speak of over ruling. But we think not, that, as the chief among the
Brothers, when he has gotten, Hugono^es, Guses, Loiterers, Lutherans,
Caluinistes, Anabaptists, and other divine fellows enough, about him, then he
beginnneth to over rule and over run the Country, by spoiling of Churches,
killing of Religious persons, rauishing of holy Uirgins, and doing of other
feats of your Gospel: so the Pope may set and let, pull in, pluck out, kill and
save, and do what him lists upon a Fury or Bravery: but that power only we
require to be geauen him, which they acknowleged, that determined him to be
First or Chief of al Priests.

And we ask you, of his Power that he has to rule over all the world, and not
of over rule all the world. For although y^ places, to which his I^risdiction
extends it self, are not limited, yet his power to rule them is limited: and
he that over rules any one Country, be it never so much his own, does more
then he ought to do, by that which is over measure and Rule. Leaving therefore
to press us with your odious and slau^dcrous terms, as though any Catholic
were of y^ opinion, y^ the Pope might or should play y^ part of a Tyran, and
care for no law nor reason, but over rule all the world, and bear the whole sway
in the world, Answer to y^ Authority of Iustiniaus Edict, and show wherein was
the Privilege granted unto the Bishope of Rome. It was not (you say) to over
rule all the world.

But only in General meetinges, Iewe^
, and Councels to sit in place above al others, and for avoiding of
Confusion, to direct and order them in their doings.

How prove you this? And remember, Ra.
that you must prove, that the Privilege granted unto the Bishope of Rome was
to sit only above others. and cet.

The Emperors words be plain, Jew. This was not spoken for ther^. of Rome.
Praerogatiuea in Episcoporu^ Co^silio, vel extra Conciliu^ ante alios
residendi. A Prerogative in the Counsel of bishops* or without the Council, to
sit in order above other.

Oh Desperateness. The Emperors words (you say) be plain.

They are so in deed plain to the eye, both in your Book which is well
printed, and in the Code of Parise printe, where they may be readen without
spectacles, except a man's sight be very ill. But dare you say, that this place
pertains to the Bishop of Rome? For of the Bishop of Rome our question
is, whether his Privilege to be First and Chief of al Priests, consisted
only in sitting above other, in General meetinges. I will tell thee
(Indiffetent Reader) the Sense of these foresaid words, and the Cause of
making the Decree in which they are found, that thou may judge whether M.
Jewel be a fine and upright Lawyer.

Whiles the Emperor Leo was gone toward the East, Odactus A Tyranne,
invaded in the mean time the Churches^, and set foor^h many Laws and
Statutes, against the Liberties and the Priuilegies of them.

The Emperor here upon made a Law, after the Country was diliuered of the
Tyranny, that, those things being abroga^ed and taken away, which had been done
against the true Religion of God, al other concerning Churches and Martyrs
Chapels should stand in the same state which they were in before his time. And
further, he Decreed that it should be utterly abrogated, what so ever had been
newly brought up, against the Churches and the Bishopes of them, C^d. de
Sacrosact. Eccle. Decernimus.
Seu de iure Sacerdot alium ^reationum, seu de expulsione cuiusquam Episcopi a
quolibet his temporibus facta, seu deprarogatiua in Episcoporum Concilio, ^el
extra Concilium ante alios residendi, Either concerning the right of making of
Priests, either the expulsio^ of any bishop made by any man at this time, or
the prerogative of sitting before other, either in the Council of Bishopes, or
without it.

Consider now (Indifferent Reader) whether the Pre^ogatiue, of which the Law
here speaks, was meant only of the Bishope of Rome: Or whether y^ Emperors
vvoo. d^s here be plain, to prove that the Bishope of Rome should ^it first
(...) General meetings, whereas there is no mention at al in this place of the
B. of Rome, but only of Acatius, by name, Patriarche of Constantinople, and of
other Bishops in general, which had taken wrong under Odoactus the Tyranne.
And whether the B. of Rome were one of that number, it appears not by any
word of the Decree: so that it is altogether boldly and nothing discreetly
said, that the Prerogative spoken of in this place, is plain for the Popes
sitting above other, or that the Popes Prerogative is no more but to sit above
al others. Jew. 142
It follows.

This Prerogative in Greek is called (...), that is, the Privilege of the
first place. Greeks for the (...) ^riuilege of y^ first place.


So is the faining of a Person, Ra.
and making of that to speak, which has no sense or tongue, called in Greek
(...): but we require not here of you, to tell your Countriemen what is Greek
for this or y^ thing, but what is ye answer to the Argument that is made,
against you. For let it be so, that (...) in greek signifies the Privilege of
the first place: you do not yet show unto us, that the Privilege, spoken of in
this Edict of the Emperors, is so called: or that it is meant of the Bishope
of Rome, to prove that his Prerogative is to more but A (...) A privilege of
the first place. But you proceed out of the pupose and say,

That these phrases in that tongue be known, Jew. 242
and Common (...). Like as also the^e in he latin tongue, Who will learn
phrases of y^ Greek: or latin tonue.
obtinere primas, secu^das, Tertias, that is, to have the Preominence of the
first, Second, and Third place.

This would serve well, Ra.
if either we doubted, Or were ignorant of these phrases, or if the declaring
of them perteined any point to the quesion. and yet I say unto you, that,
Obtinere primas, or (...), is, not only to have the first place, but also, to win the best game, Or to have the Chiefeste part in any F^are or Act, Or to
bear the highest Office, and so furthe. So that, to your matter of the Place,
they do not serve necessari^y. And if by Obtinere Primas, this only thing
were meant, to sit in the First Place, yet should not this prove, that the
Edicte of the Emperor, in which you show not that the self same Phrase is
used, does plainly make for it: That the Popes Prerogative is no greater,
than to sit first at General meetinges. For this is the question, And not
what, Obtinere Primas, or Secundas, signifies in good Latin. And to this we
look for your Answer.

But you say (as though you had proved so much) in further confirmation
thereof,

And that the Emperor Justinian meant ONLY thus, Jew.142 You do not prove it.
and none OTHERWISE, it is manifest even by the self same place, that M.
Harding has here alleged.

Mary Sir that is worth the hearing: Ra.
but mark thou (Indifferent Reader) M. Jewels words ONLY, and NONE OTHERWISE.
For except I be fowly deceived, he will not prove so much as he pretends. But
let us hear the Emperor, and M. Jewels Comment upon him.

Sancimus etc. Jew.
We ordeine.

Your etc. Here, first of all, has no Place: Ra.
For it puts these words out, (...)
which are much to the matter. And they ^re these: Sancimus secundum Canonum
defi^tiones, v^^ ordain according to the determinations of the Canons, that,
etc.

By which it appears, that Justinian did no more but exquute the former
D^crees* and was not himself the Author or Geauer, of the singular Privilege
which is due to the Sea of Rome. And now let M. Jewel go forewarde.

We ordeine, (...)
and caet that the Pope (Read Sanctissimum, most holy) of the Elder Rome
shall be (Read, is) the first of all the Priests, and that the most holy
Archebishope of Constantinople, which is named New Rome, have the second
place: It follows in the Decree. After the holy Apostolic See of the Elder
Rome.

But what concludes M. Jewel hereof? It follows. Ra*


Hereby it is plain, (...).
that this Privilege stands ONLY in placing the B. of ^ome in the first Seat
above others. (...).


It is so plain, Ra.
that no man sees it. Be thou Judge, Indifferent Reader: Yea let any
Protestant in all the world tell Truth l^e and not. Does he find in the
foresaied wo^^s of (...) Decrec, this word ONLY? Does he find, that the (...)
of the B. of Rome, is declared by the Emperor, to stand in none other thing,
but in sitting first?

A warthie matter in deed, for An Emperor to set forth Seats for Bisshoppes,
if he have no further respect, than unto the Seat. But First, he declares
the Bishope of Rome to be Primum omunm Sacerdotu^ that is, to be Chief of
Priests, and not I trow to sit only in the best Chair. Then, he apointeth the
Bishope of Constantinople to have the Second place. But wherein^ Over Scates,
Or over Priests? Uerely he spoke not of Seats but of Priests, in respect of
which, he says, let the B^shope of Constantinople have (...) that is, as M.
Jewel limiteth it, The second place, but as the Tr^eth (...), ye (...)
english it, the Second Dig (...) Or w^rshipe. For the word (...) signfceeh, A
rome, A: Oder, An Office, A Dignitit, A degree, and A p^^ce, not only to sit
first in, but to Go, to Stand, to Fight to Speak, to Determine, or to do
what so ever it be, worth the speaking.

And therefore (M. Jewel) has in this place, ^ho says M. Jew. death not lie?
twyse together abused the decrce of Iustinianisirst, restricting that, unto
sitting in A place, which was spoken of Prerogative over Pricstes. And then in
saying, that the privilege co^sisted only in sitting in the first Seat, whereas
this term only, or any other word to like effect is not at al in the Decree.

But I beseech thee, Jew. ^41
Gentle Reader, weigh well the words that follow in the same Decree.

And I beseech thee also, Ra.
Gendtle Reader, to weigh them well.

It follows Immediately. Jew.
We ordeine that the most holy Archebishope of Iustiniana the first which is
in our Country, shall have for ever under his jurisdiction the Bishops of the
provinces of Dacia, Dania, etc. and that he, in the provinces subject unto him,
shall have the place of the Apostolkie See of Rome.

But what of this* Ra.


Here we see, Jew.
the Bishop of Iustiniana set in as high Authority, and power within his
own lurisdiction, as the B. of Rome within his.

But by whom was he set in so high Authority? By the Emperor? And who gave
the Emperor such power? Or was he so priuileged by the Pope? Yea surely by the
Pope, if any Authority were lawfully taken and exercised. But so much does not
appear by the Decree. Yes verily does it. But M. Jewel takes his vantage, and
mangleth Decree^ at his pleasure. For thus it follows in the law* that the
Bishope of Iustiniana shall have in the P^ouincies subject unto him, More (...)
of senteaces. that is, more of M. Iewe^s (...),
y^ place of the Apostolik Sec. (...)

Set then, if the Bishope of Iustiniana, for all that the Emperor honored that
Con^trie so much, if he received so great Authority from the Pope: how ^uch
was the Pope above him, y^ gave him y^ authority* Could y^ Pope, subject unto
a new Bishope the Proiunces of Dacia, Dania, Dardania, Misia, and Pannonia? Or
exempt him from the Jurisdiction of his Metropolitan, or primitive, except in
deed his authority had been universal? Yet such privileges gave the Pope unto
the B. of Iustiniana, and the Emperor was not the doer in it, but y^ Executour
only of the Popes determination.

Note also and see (M. Jewel) that it is not in this decree, that the B. of
Iustiniana, shall have within his own Jurisdiction, (...)
as high authority as the Bishop of Rome within his, there is no such
comparison made, but only that he shall have within his Jurisdiction, the place
of the Apostolic See of Rome. And so have many of the Popes Legates, in the
prouincies unto which they be directed, but none was ever yet so folish, as to
gather hereof, y^ the Pope therefore ca^ do no more than his Legate. For as y^
is true, in such cases as the Pope permits unto y^ Legates ordinance: so
absolutely it is most false, because the Pope may when he will depose his
Legate, or abridge his Authority, or send an other to govern with him, but no
such thing may be exequu^^^ against the Pope.

If therefore the B. of Iustiniana do never so much enjoy the Priuilegies
granted unto him by the B. of Rome, let him take them as Privileges, not as
Canons: Let him acknowledge himself to supply the Place of the Bisshoppe of
Rome within his own Prouincies, and not to sit, as it were, in his own proper
and ordinary Place: Let him give place to the B. of Rome, if he should
personally come within his Jurisdiction, and let him not crake of it, that he
has as high Authority within his Jurisdiction, as the B. of Rome within his.
For if he do, Uigilius the Pope that gave him such prerogative, may pull it
away again from him, And M. Jewels argument shall be utterly dasshed, that
thinks, the Privilege of the Apostolic See, granted to any particular
Bisshoppe over his country, to derogate from the Authority of the Apostolic
See which is in Rome, And which has Jurisdiction over all Bisshoppes in
Christendom.

Now one place more, and so we shall end this Chapter. M. Jewel goes further
and says.

In like sort, the Emperor Justinian says: Jew. 242
Ecclesia vrbis Constantinopolitanae Romae veteris praerogatiua laetatur. The
Church of the City of Constantinople, enjoys now the prerogative of Rome the
Elder.

Let me be answered then in one question. You said, Ra.
not twenty lines before, that the prerogative of the Bishop of Rome
censisted only in sitting in the first place, How can it be Answered?
at general meetings. If therefore the B. of Constantinople have the same
Preuogatiue that the B. of Rome, who shall sit first I pray you? Or shall they
sit one in an others lap? Or, shall one of them stand whiles the othersitteth?
Or shall the prerogative of the B. of Rome be interpreted, to signify some
other thing byside the sitting only in the first place?

For, if the prerogative, of the Pope be to sit only first, and if the B. of
Constantinople have the like prerogative as the B. of Rome, he must likewise
sit first: Ergo, Justinians Constitution, that the B. of Constantinople, should
sit in the second place, is void. Ergo M. Jewel by one law (through his blind
interpretation) does destroy an other. Surely this alone does prove
sufficiently, that you huddle up Constitutions one upon an other, to make a
show only of great learning, and not because either you understand the law, Or
speak after it, or seek to make the truth plain and evident.

But let us consider the place it self. The Church (you say) of
Constantinople enjoys the privilege of the Elder Rome. But what privilege is
that? To Rule the whole world? To call general Councels? To Confirm them? To
disprove them? To increase the Jurisdiction of Bishops or Patriarchs, and to
diminish it again as it shall be profitable for the Church of Christ?

The B. of Rome, is hable to geaue unto any B. in all the world, as great
precogatiue over his diocese, as himself has over Italy, like as Uigilius the
Pope gave to the B. of Iustiniana: but is any Archebishope in all y^ world hable
to give an other, either the Prerogative of the Church of Rome, either the
Prerogative which himself ^ath from the Church of Rome, without asking of
leave of y^ B. of Rome? No surely, the Effect can not work upward toward the
cause, or work so excellently douneward, as the cause: neither the Bisshops of
Constantinople or Iustiniana, taking their Prerogatives from Rome, can endue
others with like Privileges, without consent of the Bishop of Rome.

Therefore, although the Bishop of Constantinople has the Prerogative of the
Litie of Rome, it follows not, that the Bishop of Rome is nothing superior
to the Bishop of Constantinople. And if y^ Lord President in Wales should have
geauen unto him all the Prerogatines of the Kings Court in England, it follows
not, that the King and he are Hayle fellows well met for ever after. And
Christ our Savior although he said unto his Apostles As my father sent me so I
send you, geauing thereby unto them as great Prerogative as himself had, yet
he meant not, that y^ Apostles should think themselves as good as their head,
even in those things which they should do as well as Christ.

M. Jewel therefore does very unteasonably conceive of the Law, that the Popes
Supremacy was not acknowledged, because, the Communicating of his Prerogative
with some other Bisshops, is found expressed in the Law.

But it will be replied, that Generaliter dictum generaliter est accipiendum,
The thing that is spoken generally must be taken Generally. I answer: this Rule
fails, when by other expressed text of the Law, that which seems to be
spoken Generally in one place, is restricted and limited in an other. For in
the next title before this of which we speak, the Emperor says to y^ B. of
Rome. Omnes Sacerdotes, vniuersi Orientalis tractus, De Su^^^ Trinit. and ^id.
Cath. l. Nos reddentes.
and subijcere and vnire Sedi vestrae Sanctitatis proper auimus. We have made
speed, both to subject and to unite unto the Sea of your Holmes, all the
Priests of the West parts. Again in the same law, a little after. We vvil
not suffer (says Justinian) that anything, which pertains to the state of
Churches, although that which is in controversy be undoubted and manifest,
shall not also come to the knowledge of your Holiness, Quae Caput est omnium
Sanctarum Ecclesiarum, Which is the Head of al boly Churches.

Let the Bishope then of Constantinople enjoy the Prerogative of the City of
Rome, in as large and General sense as M. Jewel will, yet this must be provided
for, first of al, that the Prerogative which the B. of Constantinople shall
enjoy, do not contrary the former law, which Subiecteth al Priests of the
west unto his holiness, And which confesses him to be head over al Churches.

Thus have I sufficiently and manifestly proved, that M. Jewel has abnsed the
Canon Law. The Lawiers themselves have more to say unto him for his impudency,
if he be so impudent as ever to show his face before them.

And now to the Old Fathers, and Doctoures.

How M. Jewel has abused the Ancient Fathers.
IT is incredible, how M. Jewel has abused the Doctors. Incredible (I mean)
not, in respect of Protestants which think so well of him, that they believe no
oue evident untruth to be within all his Replye: but of Catholics, which
knowing the cause that he defends, to be utterly false, may justly suspect
every Witness, that he brings in for his Doctrine, And which having already
taken him in manifest corrupting of Witnesses, cannot but know him for one that
looks suspitiously, when so ever he is about Ancient Fathers. Yet (I assure
thee* Indifferent Reader) the Catholics themselves did not think, that any
man would so have corrupted true Sentences, as he has done: Or so ofre have
followed such unlawful crafts, as are not once to be used of honest men.

But these, you will say, are but words: let us therefore come, to the things
themselves. And first, concerning such Illations of M. Jewels, as he uses in
giving of the cause or proof of his sayings, He applies thereto, the
Testimonies of Ancient Fathers, so loosely and so disagreeably, as if a man
would say: The Waters of Bath are exceeding good against the Ache in the
Joints. And (...) the Prophet says: Omnessitientes venite ad aquas, Alye
that be a thirst, come to the waters. Yea M. Jewels Applications do worse
agree with the premi^^es. For his position, lightly, is heretical or erron^ous,
and his Authority for it, is no more proper unto it, than the foresayed
sentence of Esaie serves to the commendation of the Ba^hes in England. For
proof hereof I will choose but our place, in which, for establishing of his
Assertion, he brings one upon an other very thick, four Ancient Doctors
together, Of all which there is not one that serves his purpose.

M. Hardinges Athanasius says, Power to bind and loose is geauen to the holy
See of Rome, Jew, 23^ you prove (...) not by any of the testimonis (...) follow.
And yet the old Catholic Fathers could never understand any such special
Privilege.

Mark now, Ra.
Indifferent Reader, whither the places which M. Jewel will allege, do prove
any such thing at al.

S. Cyprian abused.

S. Cyprian says: Quamuis Dominus Apostolis omnibus etc. Jew. Faults (...)
in (...)
The Lord (read, And although our Lord) after his Resurrection gave like power
unto his Apostles (Read, all his Apostles) yet to declare unity, he disposed
by his Authority, the Original of unity ( Read, of the same unity)
beginning of one: The rest of the Apostles were even the same that Peter was,
endewed with like fellowship, both of honor and of power ( here does M. Jewel
make a full point, yet it follows in the same very sentence) But the Original
comes of unity, to declare that the Church is one.

In this testimony of S. Cyprian, Ra.
those words ( And although) which M. Jewel left out in the beginning of the
(...) are first to be considered, as depending of the sentences, which
immediately went before, And opening the question which now we have in hand. For
after S. Cypriane had declared, that the Devil, seeing the Idols and Temples
which he occupied before, to be forsaken and left void, through y^ increase of
the Faithful, converted his craft to devising of Schisms and Heresies, by
which he might ouerturne the Faith, corrupt the truth, and cut or divide
unity. After this he ^^ferreth: ^oc eo fit, fratres dilectiss. dum ^d
veritatis orig^em non reditur, Cypr. de Simplicitatep^^lat.
nec caput quaeritur, nec magistri coelestis doctrina Seruatur: This most
dear brethren, (understand, that Heresies are set abroad) does therefore come
to pass, for that we return not unto the original of truth And for that an
Head is not sought for, nor the Doctrine of our heavenly Master is observed.

Now because every man perceives not the force of this saying, and diverse
would have it better opened and expressed unto them, He adds: Probatio est ad
fidem facilis compendio veritatis, that is, The proof hereof, to make thee
believe it, is easy, because of the compendiousnes of the truth. And how is
that? It follows, Loquitur Dominus ad Pe^rum, etc. Our Lord speaks to Peter,
I tell thee (says he) that thou art Peter, and upon this Peter (or Roc^e) I
vvil build my Church, and the gates of hell sh^lnot overcome it. Unto the vvil
I give the keys of the kingdom of Heavens, and those things that thou shall
bind in earth, shall be bound in the heavens also, and what soever thou shall
loose upon earth, shall be loosed also in the Heavens.

And unto the same (Peter) after his (...) my sheep.

By these words then it is manifest, what is, Original, Head, and Doctrine of
our heavenly Master, that is, to the forsaking of which, Saint Cyprian
imputes the Proceedinges of the Devil, and of Heresies. Uerely no other, than
that, which our Savior by the foresaid express Scriptures, gave to S. Peter.

But now, here arises a grea^^ doubt and question, that S. Peter can not well
be the Head, because every one of the Apostles, was as great in Power as he.
And this in deed is the Argument, that M. Jewel makes, out of S. Cyprian,
against the Supremacy.

Which if Saint Cyprian had not espied and Answered, Note vn^easarable foul
dealing
then should M. Jewel easily be pardoned: But now, what an intolerable kind of
soul dealing is this, to take an Objection out of an Old Father, and either
for Have. Or Negligence, Or Craftines, Or Desperatnes, to let go the right
answer unto it?

For, concerning the Objection, Saint Cyprian thus withstandeth it, saying:
And although he gave after his resurrection, like power unto al his Apostles,
etc. yet to declare unity, he desposed by his Authority, the Original of the
same unity, beginning of one. By the Objection then it scemeth, that no more
account should be made of S. Peter, then of the vest of the Apostles, which
severally was as great in power as he: But by the Answer, made with this
Aduersatiue Tamen, Yet, it is manifest, that, notwithstanding the equa litie
among y^ Apostles, S. Peter yet was y^ First and the Head among them. For
Christ disposed by his Authority (says S. Cyprian) the Original not of unity
(as you mangle it M. Jewel) but, Is not this mangling of sentences:
of the same unity (which undoubtedly was in the Apostles) beginning of one,
which is S. Peter.

As in the Sentence following, more manifestly appears, to the further opening
of S. Cyprians right meaning, and your false dealing. For the one half of the
Sentence is this: in deed the rest also of the Apostles were the same that
Peter was: endevved with like fellowship, honor, and power: This half M.
Jewel you rest upon, and build your Conclusion, that one of them had no more
Privilege than an other. Clipping of Sentences.
And why interpreted you no further; Is the sentence or Sense, (think you) at
an end, when you have your purpose? Does not S. Cyprian Interpret, Correct,
Amend, or Determine it with an Adnersatiue yet, saying (least any man should
through his former words set less by S. Peter or his Chair) But yet the
Original comes from v^itie, that the Church may be shevved to be one? And
what other thing is this to say, but that, notwithstanding it to be true, that
the Apostles were endewed with like honor and power as S. Peter was, yet no man ought to gather hereof, that there was no Order among them, Or that one
Bishope now has as large and absolute Authority as an other. But this rather
must follow, that because schisms and Heresies do grow apase, where no
Original or Head is sought for or regarded, And because it should be perceived,
that the Church is One, in that it consists of one Head, unto whom all the
rest, were they never so high or fellow like, must be refer red: therefore
Christ, by his Authority, disposed the Original of that unity, ^ endewed S.
Peter with a singular Prerogative, that he should be that One in the Church,
from whom whosoever departed, should not be of the Church.

And note well the Cause, why the beginning must rise of One, vt Ecclesia vna
monstretur, that the Church might be shevved to be one. The unity of the
Church, i^ proved by the one Head there of.
Why; Should it not be One, though in every Diocese, through the world, every
several Bishop were Chief therein; No surely, by S. Cyprian, it should not be.
But, in that the Head thereof is but one, the unity of her does follow
necessarily. How does it follow; Mary, Whosoever holds not with this Head, he
is not in the Church, and so must none remain within her, but the Catholic
and obedient Christians. How ca^ they but agree then al in one Head, if they
mind to continue in y^ Church, whereas y^ departure from him, is to take an
other Church, bisides that, whose special mark is Unity in one Head. This
conclusion then standing, that S. Peter was set, by the Authority of Christ,
Simple co^clusions
in the first place, was that no special Privilege, trow you? Or was he First,
to that intent only, that in reckening up the Apostles, men should know where
to begin? Or, that in their meetings together, he should sit first? Or speak
first? Or subscribe first? How simple things are these for the wisdom of God
to think of? And how little auailable to the preserving of the Church in
Unity, if no further Preeminence were given him?

And again, if the B. of Romes authority now, as S. Peter's was then, were of
no more force, yet being of so much, if other would sit before him, Or speak
before him in any Council, should they not be Offenders against the ordinance
of God? How can it be otherwise, whereas he appointed by his Authority the
Original of Unity to begin of One? Suppose then, that some one transgresses
this order, who shall reprove him? If none, how unreasonable is it, to set a
law, and not to include thereby an authority to punish the transgressor of the
Law? If any: who more worthy of that Office then the Chief Bishope? Ergo there
was in S. Peter, The Privilege of S. Peter must be more then to sit or (...)
first.
a proper Authority joined to that dignity of his first place (which M. Ie.
grau^teth unto him) by which he had power to co^troll them, y^ should or would
^esist that Primacie of his in how small thing so ever it consisted. And if
there were such Authority, Ergo, some special P^^^lege of Binding or Losing,
which no other of the Apostles had. Except ye will be so mad as to think, that
in co^trolling of a fault committed against any Excellent Person, his Inferior
should be Judge in the matter, and bind or loose at his will or discretion.

I leave it therefore as most manifest, that notwithstanding the Apostles were
equal in felowshipp of honor and power* with S. Peter, yet the Original of
(...) was appointed by our Saluiour himself, to begin of S. Peter only, and
none other. And this his preeminence (make you it as little as you can)
requiring A Proportional Authority to be granted unto him, for the defense
thereof against al disdain or disobedience that might be procured or used
against it: he had, without al doubt, some Prerogative of Jurisdiction above
any other, and by Consequence some more power, then the rest of the Apostles
bad.

And this I speak with the least, because our Adversaries be contentious,
knowing in deed, y^ if I would press the^ further with this Testimony of S.
Cyprian, they could not honestly deny, but such a wisdom of God, and
prerogative of S. Peter was expressed, in erecting one Head and beginning, as
should keep the Church in unity, And be a sure and certain way for all them
to take, which live in danger of heresies. Which can not be so mean a thing,
as to sit first only in a place, or speak only before other, without further
superiority above other: but enough is already said, both to de clare y^
truth of S. Cyprians words, and the falsehoode of M. Jewel in abusing them.

Origene abused.

Origene says: Jew 239.
An ver^ soli Petro etc. What, has Christ geauen the keys of the kingedome of
heaven, In a mistical sense this is true, not in the literal.
unto Peter only? and shall no holy man else receive them? This saying, To thee
vvil I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven, is common also to the rest.

To whom the rest? Uerely to every good man, Ra.
which shall have it reveled unto him, that Christ is the son of the living
God. How think you then M. Jewel, Absurdities following upon M Tewels sense.
has every good and Faithful Christian in the world, as great and as special
authority as S. Peter? If it be so: how does S. Paul say, that, God has
appointed in his Church first Apostles, then Evangelists, Thirly doctors etc.
1.Cor.12.
How says he in an other place, that, Christ has geauen to his Church some to
be Apostles, some Prophets, other Evangelists, and other to be Pasteurs and
Doctors. Or how is not the Subdeacon as Ephesians. 4.
great in authority as the Priest, and the Priest as the Archebishope? Yea the
common lay men or women steadfastly confessing Christ, how have not they, y^
Reies of y^ kingdom of heaven in their hands, even as the Apostles or S. Peter
himself had? For Origene pronounces without exception, that, to have the keys
of the kingdom of heaven, is promised to all that have it reveled unto them,
that Christ i^ the Son of the Living God.

If therefore this sense can not stand, we must* of necessity seek an other.
And consider in what sort Origin says, the keys of the kingedome of heaven to
be given, not only to S. Peter, but to the rest also of good and godly men. But
nothing more easy to be found. For Origin y^ place (as his manner is) gathers
a mystical or moral sense of the literal and plaint history: Not by denying
the History, but by applying it to edificati^. Like as^. Paul, writing unto
the Galathians, and declaring unto the^, y^ the two sons of Abraham, the one
borne of Agar y^ servant, Gala. 4.
the other of Sara the free woman, signified the two Testamentes: meant not to
make us believe, that there was not such a man, as Abraham is described to have been, or that such real and corporal promises were not made unto him, as the
Scriptures do testify, but out of the Literal history, he gathers a
mystical sense, knowing that unto the Fathers of the old law, al things
chanced in figures, 1. Cor.10
the Truth of which is reveled by Christ unto his Church.

Now, that Origin does so as I do say, it is plain by his own words. For
after he had shortly go^e over y^ text, of Christ's question to his Apostles
(vvho^ do men ^ar the son of man to be) and the Apostles answering thereunto:
then entering, as it were, into a new matter, and leuing y^ history y^ he might
come to y^ morality, Orig. tr^^1. in Man.
he says: Fert assis aute^ quod Simo^ Petrus respo^de^s (...) Christus filius
dei (...) Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, If we shall likevvyse
say as Peter did, being reveled unto us not of flesh and blud, but of the
light which lights our heart from the Father which is in heaven, we also
are that which Peter was etc.

And afterward he says, that if we confess as Peter did, it shall be said
unto us, Thou art Peter, and so forth as it follows in the Gospel. So that
the Church is builded, upon every such good man, and the keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven, are geauen unto him, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against
him.

And again, if any man say to Christ: Thou art Christ the son of the h^ing
God: ^rigen himself (...) I Difference between the Literal and Mystical sense
of the foresaid place.
Non ex carnis a^t sanguinis reuelatione, sed patris qui in coelis est,
consequetur ea quae dicta sunt, vt euangelij quidem scriptum habet, ad illum
Petrum, vt ver^ docet illius spiritus ad quemuis quit alis factus ^uerit,
qualis erat ille Petrus. That is, If any say to Christ, thou art the son of
the living God, not by revelation of flesh and blood, but of the father which
is in heate^, he shall attain unto those things which (as the vvriting of the
Gospel has it) were spoken of to that Peter, but as the sprite of him, or
thereof, teaches unto vvhomsoeuer you vvil, which shall be made such a one as
Peter was. It is plain then by these words of Origene, that he sets a
difference between the Literal sense, and the Spiritual, And, that according to
the text of the Scripture, Thou art Peter, was spoken unto that singular
Apostle S. Peter. But according to a Mystical or Spiritual sense, it is and may
be spoken, unto any good and Faithful Christian. Yet every one of them shall not
be an Apostle, Or have power to forgeaue sins or exercise Jurisdiction.

This is therefore much to be noted, Note wherein consists (...)
and to be abhorted in M. Jewel. He takes the words of A Doctor, which in
the Doctors own sense are true and godly, and draws them to his own
Interpretation, in which they are most false and unreasonable. So have rebels
don hertofore, as y^ rebels of Iermanie, saing out of the Scriptures, Brethren
ye be ^alled (...) liberty, and gathering thereupon that (...)

The greater is M. Jewels fault, Do ^o no (...)
which knowing (except he have utterly lost his wi^re) that it is to the
present danger of the common Reader, to have the words of any Doctor alleged
unto him, without the plain declaration how they are taken: does, for all this,
suffer, yea teach him to believe, that Literally, which is true only mystically
or morally. As, that S. Peter had no greater Privilege than any other, because,
after a spiritual understanding, it is said unto every one that confesses
Christ accordingly, Thou art Peter. After which rate, our Lady only, should
not be the singural and natural Mother of Christ, because whosoever does y^ will
of his Father, is his Mother.

S. Cyril abused. Jew. 139 He falsi^ieth the place, for is no mention of power.


S. Cyril says: Apostolis and eorum in Ecclesijs Successoribus plenam
concessit potestatem, Christ gave ^ul power unto the Apostles, and others that
succeeded them in the Churches.

(...) And the Correction, due and ready for them which without license
obtained, meddle in an other man's Office, do plainly prove the contrary.

And therefore undoubtedly, if you will have this place understood
particularly of every Bishope, and say, that God has geauen each of them, full
power: the practice not only of al Christendom, but of your own congregation,
will confute you, In which there is difference between the Superintendent of
Sarum and of Canterbury. But, if you will refer the gift of full power, unto
some singular successors of the Apostles, then is this text nothing
prejudicial, to the Supremacy of the Bishope of Rome, in whom alone, when full
power rests, the saying of S. Cyril may be verified. For what they have, it
is true to say, that the Apostles successors have it.

And this alone were enough to answer: But now I say further, That S. Cyril
has not as you report. For in repeting shortly the Spiritual sense, which was
to be gathered out of those two acts of Christ, the one, when he passed over
the Sea of Tyberias (signifying thereby, the forsaking of the Jews) and went
up again into an hill with his disciples: The other, when he cast up his eyes,
and beholding a number of people coming toward him, fed them to the full,
with five loaves and two fishes, of this miraculous fact of our Savior he
says: Quare, vetera and noua scripturae mandata, fidelibus per Apostolos
apposita intelligebamus, cuius myslerij plena^ and Apostoli and eorum in
Ecclesijs successores gratiam possidebunt: By which thing (that is by Christ's
feeding of five thousand with five loa^es and two fisshes) we understand the
Old and Nevy Commandments of the Scripture, to be set by the Apostles
before the faithful. Cyril. in Joan. l. 3. cap. 20.
The full grace of which ministry, both the Apostles and their successors
in the Churches shall possess.

Confer now (Indifferent Reader) these things together. Is not this
wickedly don of M. Jewel?
M. Jewel tells thee (as out of S. Cyril) of a full power: S. Cyril speaks
of no more than a full grace. M. Jewel by this full power, would have thee
think, that in the authority of binding and loosing, no Bishop is higher then
an other: S. Cyril by his full grace comprehends the grace of preaching only,
and instructing of other. The full grace which S. Cyril names, is so confessed
to be in y^ Apostles and their successors, y^ yet he signifies not, (...)
whether al should have it equally, or some be therein before their fellows, or
whether the heads of the Church, should apoint the Preachers (which is nothing
contrary to a Supremacy) or every man use his gift before he be licenced,
which were altogether one of order: M. Jew. concludes of that full power
(which he makes S. Cyril to speak of) not only y^ such a power was in the
Apostles, and is in their Successors, but also that it is full in every one of
their successors, and that the B. of Rome has not y^ Supremacy for which his
handeling of y^ ancient Fathers, if he may yet escape y^ note of a Falsifier,
then go not the procedings forward by indifferency, but with hatred of the
contrary side, and with evident injury. And now follows immediately the
abusing of an other Doctor.

S. Basil abused.

And S. Basil says: (...)
Christ appointed Peter to be Pastor of his Church after him: And consequently
gave the same power unto al Pastors and Doctors. vita Solitaria.c. 23 quemad^
moda^ ille.
A toke^ whereof is this, that al Pastors do equally bind and loose as well as
he.

First let us see upon what occasion, Ra.
and to what end, these words are spoken. S* Basiles purpose in y^ whole
Chapter out of which those words are taken was, to exhort unto obedience, such
as lived in solitarines and exercise of perfecti^. Hervpo^ he brings forth
y^ authority of Scripture, saying, Rom.13.
Let every man be subject unto the higher powers. Which Text, by his
collection, proves more strongly that Religious men should obey their Priors,
than Temporal men the Princes of the world. Agai^e, Heb. 13.
he alleges Obey your Prepositours and be ye subject unto them.

After this, he comes to the Examples of Abraham, in the Old Testament, and
the Apostles in the New: and (...) hanging upon Crosses, and diverse other
things. But how? For their own sakes only? No, but Vt per eos forma^
relinqueret ^and^ sequuturae posteritati, that by them he might leave the same
Example and Pattern, to the Posterity that should follow. How likes M. Jewel
this Obedience?
What Pattern? Mary the Pattern of Obedience, that as the Apostles followed
Christ through al Contradictions of the world, and Adversities, and Deaths: so
should Religious men obey their Fathers and Superiors in all things. Then does
it follow.

Atque hoc a Christo ipso docemur, Basil. c. 23.
dum Petrum Ecclesiae suae pastorem post se constituit. Cons^it.


And this we be taught of Christ him self, Monast.
when he appointed Peter to be the Pastor of his Church after him. What This,
be we taught?

Whether that one Apostle is as good as an other, or one Bishope as high as an
other, or the Curate of as great Authority as the Person, or the Person of as
large a Jurisdiction as the Bishope?

No. But that we should be obedient unto our Pastors. For thus it follows in
S. Basile.

Quem admodum igitur. etc. Therefore like as Sheep obey the Sheepeherd, and go
what soever way he vvil, so they that exercise them selves in godliness, must
obey their Rulers, and nothing at al search their commandments curiously
when they have no sin in them, but co^traryvvise to accomplish them with
most readiness of mind and diligence. As if he should shortly have said:

Christ appointed Peter and other after him in order to be Sheepherds,

Ergo Christ appointed such as were under their Charge to be as Sheep.

But Sheep obey their Shepherd without making any inquisition upon his leading
and guiding of them:

Ergo we be taught obedience by Christ him self, in this also, that he made
Peter y^ Pastor of the Church after him.

To this end, by these means, S. Basile brings his discourse in the
foresaid Chapter, which I have the more at large opened unto thee, that thou
may see (Indifferent Reader) how little he intended to speak against the
Popes supremacy, or for the equality of Priests of Bishopes, that one of
them should be as high as an other.

What moved then M. Jewel, to use S. Basil in this place? Or what words are
they here, by which he co^^irmeth his Assertion? His Assertion is y^, Jew. 239
the old Catholic Fathers could never understand any such special Privilege of
binding and loosing, as M. Hardinges Athanasius attributes to the Sea of Rome?
But how proves he this? S. Basile for the supremacy.
Christ (says he out of S. Basil) appointed Peter to be Pastor of his church
after him. Note then, that Christ is First and S. Peter Next. And this makes
directly for the Supremacy. But it follows.

And so consequently gave the same power unto al Pastors and Doctors.

Be it so. But what is consequently? How M. Jewel takes it, I can not tell, but
(...), in greek, which phrase S. Basile uses, signifies the Pastors that
follow in order and row after S. Peter. Now Order requires, that although al be
Pastoures, yet they may not take upon them, and rule co^fusely al in a clampe
together, but every man in his place and degree, according unto y^ proportion
of his Flock and Charge. And therefore this, hitherto proves rather that y^
Pope of Rome, is the Chief after Christ, and that al other what so ever they
be, go not cheek by cheek by him, and as worthy or Supreme as he, but every
man in his order and degree after him. But this that follows, is perchance
altogether for M. Jewel. what is that? Marie

A token whereof is this, that al Pastors do equally both bind and loose
as well as he.

True it is M. Jewel, Ra*
the most simple in all the world does bind and loose, like as the Pope him
self. But this is true, in such things, as are permitted unto his
Jurisdiction. For in some kind of Faults, the party must be referred unto the
Judgment of the Bishop* And in cases of Heresy, Breaking of Uowes, and
Robbing of Churches, the Bishop has not in his hands to absolve the offender,
but the whole must be reserved unto the Pope. And therefore, although in such
faults as every Prior or Priest may forgive or retain, the Jurisdiction,
which he excerciseth, be as effectual, as if S. Peter himself had absolved or
bound the Parties: yet this is nothing against the special Priuilegies above al
others which are granted unto the Sea of Rome. As in example of five hundred
Capitaines in a Field, Or five hundred Lords in a Country, every one
commands the Soldier of his band, or Tenant of his land, and yet this is
not preindicial unto the worthiness and excellency of the General Capitaines
and chief Lords. All that do one thing equally, are not of like Authority.
The Angels do al of them wait and attend upon God, and at the later Day, all the Elect shall have every one his penie and reward: yet the Cherubins are of
higher Authority than the inferior Angels, and the Apostles shall be in
greater Glory, than Confessors. What shall we say of Christ him self? Joan.
20.
As my Father (says he) sent me, so (end I you, And when he had said this, he
breathed upon them, and says unto them: Take ye the holy Ghost. Whose sins
you shall forgeaue them, they are forgeuen them, and whose sins, ye do
retain, they be retained. Here lo, you may see that he has made the Apostles
equal with him. How then? will you conclude that Christ is not supreme in his
Church, and that he has not the authority of binding and loosing in a more
high degree than any of his Apostles? Such yet is your divinity (M. Jewel)
that because al Pastors do equally bind and loose, therefore the Pope has no
special Privilege above other. But you lacked the understanding, that al do
equally bind and loose in such cases and Persons, as are subjected unto them,
And that, because every Bishop can not exercise the power of his Orders when
and where it pleases him, therefore it is evident, that all are not equal, but
that the Superiors may restrain the Jurisdiction of the Inferiors, which is
enough to prove a Supremacy.

Thus has M. Jewel brought four several Ancient Fathers, al in a cumpanie
together, to prove that, the B. of Rome has no special Privilege above
others of binding and loosing. and there is not one of them al, which proves
that Conclusion. For S. Cyprian, is plain for one head, notwithstanding the
equality of the Apostles in honor and power. Origin, and S. Cyril, speak not
literally but mystically, And S. Basile last of all tells such a Truth as
every Catholic will confess, and is nothing contrary to the doctrine of the
Supremacy, except there be so insensible an heretic, that will think the
lowest Minister in the congregation, to be as high in Authority as the
greatest Superintendent or general, because he preaches and baptiseth, and
ministers the Lords Supper, and burns (if need be) in his opinion, in like
sort as the Chiefest Superintendentes themselves do.

And this vanity and falsehood of M. Jewels, when he allegeth Ancient Fathers
words without their Sense, is so common, that I will be bound to make a whole
book of his So says S. Cyprian, and Therefore S. Hierome says, and other
such Idle Illations: if either it were not enough, to note only what he is, Or
if my will and leisure served me so much, as to be occupied in so tediouse A
matter. But now let us go forward with the Doctors, and show how shamefully
he has abused them.

Our Savior ( says D. Harding out of S. Augustine) gave not commandment, in
what Order the Sacrament should be received, meaning to reserve that matter
unto the Apostles, by whom he would direct and dispose his Church.

Ergo, the observation, of number of Communica^ts, of Place, of Time, of Order,
Manner, and Circumstance in Receiving, depends of the Churches ordinance, and
not of Christ's Institution.

S. Augstine abused.

S. Augustine speaks not one word of any number. Jew. 20.


He speaks of a power left with the Apostles, Ra.
to apoint in what order the Sacrament should be Received, but the Order and
Manner of doing a thing, extends it self to al Circumstances: ergo to number
also. And therefore it is no wrong dealing, to infer A particular upon the
grant of the proper universal thereof.

Again, whereas the blessed Apostle, after certain talk had about the
Sacrament, 1. Cor.11.
concluded saying: Caetera cum venero ordinabo, As for the rest when I come my
self I vvil set in Order, S. Augustine infers, Vnde datur intelligi^quia
multu^ er at, vt in epistola Todispose and set (...)
totu^ illum agendi ordine^ insinuaret, quem vniuersa per orb^ seruat ecclesia,
ab ipso ordinatum esse quod nulla moru^ diuersitate variatur. Whereof it is
geauen us to understand, that it was ordained of the Apostle, that which is
not varied by any diversity of manner and fashion, because it was, much for him
to show in an epistle, all that order of Celebrating and Ministering the
Communion, which the whole Church through out all the world does observe.

As who should say: If it had not ben, that the Apostle had not place enough,
in his Epistle to the Corinthians, to declare his mind at full: In what order,
and with what Ceremonies and Circumstancies, he would have the celebrating of
y^ mysteries to proceed, he would have left it in plain writing, how al
things should be don: but because that was to much for an epistle, to receive,
And because the order which he would have observed, was not so quickly
appointed, as to Read A* Chapter or two of the Bible, and to tell the story
of Christ's entering into his passion, and that done, to receive bread and wine
in remembrance thereof, and to be thankeful: therefore he promised to come
himself, and set things in order: and therefore such orders and manners, as
the whole Church has and does thoroughly use, about the celebration of the
Mysteries, are to be thought to have come from the Apostles.

Of these words then also ( As for the rest when I come my self, I vvil
dispose) it may, with good reason, be gathered, that the Apostle did prescribe
orders and rules to be observed concerning Persons, Time, and Place, with other
Circumstances, And that the Institution of Christ, stretched no further than to
Consecration, Oblation and Participation of his precious body: And that one
alone or many together to receive, was not, by Christ, appointed, but left to
his Apostles to be ordered. But it follows in M. Jewel: that,

S. Augustine in this place, Jew. 20.
speaks not one word of any number. But, only of the time of Receiving,
whether it might seem convenient to minister the Communion after Supper.

You be very bold, Ra.
either with S. Augustine, or with your Reader. Do ye call y^ speaking only of
the time, ^. Iew^ bold^^s
where the question of time is not at al spoken of? Read the place who will,
and if there be any such question entreated, as M. Jewel reports, although I
have many Arguments to the contrary, yet will I say he is an honest and true
man.

In the fifthe chapter of that epistle, these questions are mentioned, whether
upon good friday, Oblation and Sacrifice should be done twice, in the morning
first, and then after supper, Item, whether the people should, first keep
their fast, then eat that days meal, and last of all have the Oblation and
Sacrifice made. Or, first keep their fast, and then have the Sacrifice made,
and last of al go to their meals meat. To which questions his answer is, that
every man should, in these points, do, as ye use of the church is, unto which
he cummeth. Because there is nothing in them, against either Faith or good
manners.

In the next chapter following, out of which D. Harding took his testimony, the
question and doubt is, not, whether one might Offer or Receive in the morning,
or at evening (which pertains to time) but, whether he that had eaten the
same day before, might afterward either Offer, or Receive the body of
Christ, which is A Question concerning the state of the Persons only, And
not the quality of Time. The reverence given to the Sacrament.
Unto which, his answer is, that it has pleased y^ holy Ghost, that for the
honor of so great a Sacrament, the body of our Lord should first enter into
the mouth of a Christian, before external and carnal meats.

Now because the heretic might say (as some in these days uphold) where is it
in all the Scripture, that a man should come fasting to the communion? And whi
might not one (if he would) receive after Supper, as the Apostles did, or in
the Supper time, as the Corinthians did: S. Augustine meets with this
objection, alleging that sentence which M. Harding to like effect used, and
saying: That in what order the Sacrament should be received, Christ gave no
precept thereof, but left that office to his Apostles.

Let M. Jewel now, defend himself, if he can, and prove, that he has not
falsely reported of S. Augustine, in the place of the Epistle ad ^anuarium,
saying of him, that he speaks not one word of the number (of Co^municantes)
but only of the time of Receiving.

That he speaks only of the time of Receiving, it is false. For these be his
words: Saluator non praecepit quo deinceps ordine sumeretur, vt Apostolis, per
quos dispositurus erat, ecclesiam, seruaret hunc locum. Our Savior gave no
commandment, in what order it should be Received, to the intent he might
leave that matter to his Apostles, by whom he would dispose his Church.

Hereof I gather this Argument. The apointing of Order, how things should be
don, does extend itself to more, than apointing only of the time, in which it
is to be done: S. (...)
But, of the Authority left with the Apostles, to set an Order in Receiving of
the Sacrament, S. Augustine does speak, in his epistle (...) speaks only of
the time of receiving.

S. Gregory abused.

In the communion, I^w. 76.
As the people said the Lords prayer altogether (as it is noted by S.
Gregory) so they Received al together. impude^cie


Are ye not ashamed so to say, Ra.
that it is noted so by S. Gregory? we have (I think) his epistles in the
same pri^t as you have them, and y^ effect of that epistle, out of which, you
have gathered this note upon S. Gregory, is, that he answers certain
persons, it agrees not here. it to like* was a (...) mass so long ago?
which thought it was unmeet, that he should go^ about to keep under the
Church of Constantinople, but his own Church. And of the Pater noster he
says: Dominica oration apud Graecos ab omni populo dicitur, apud nos autem a
solo Sacerdote. Our Lords prayer is said among the Grecians, of all the people,
but with us, it is said by the Priest alone.

Here then I appose you again (M. Jewel) was the Mass of S. Gregory's time, a
Communion or Private Mass* (for you make an oppositio^ between these two
things). If it were a private mass, then must you yield and subscribe, because
it is then found by your own confession, within the first six hundred years. I
wonder what ca^ be answered.
If it were a Communion, how say you, that the people said the communion prayer
al together, as it is noted by S. Gregory, whereas you see him, so plainly, to
testify, that in Rome, the Priest alone did say our Lords Prayer?

Yea (say you perchance) but it was otherwise emonge the Greeks, and in their
Communion the people said the Lords prayer al together. Ergo M. Jew has
belied him
Yea, but S. Gregory notes not only such point, and he speaks not, of their
communion, or not Communion. So that you be exceeding much to blame for abusing
the names of holy Doctors so vainly, and making them to be compted to think
that, which they do not speak.

S. Cyprian abused.

The Cathol^ke Faith is, that the Church is not bound by the virtue of
Christ's Institution, to deliver the Sacrament, under form of wine, unto the
people. The here^ikes repi^e against it, and say, that by Christ's Institution
the people should Receive the Cup also. But how will this be proved? By many old
Fathers. But,

In steed of many, Jew. 106
for shortness sake, to allege but one, S. Cyprians words in this matter be
very plain.

Remember then, Ra.
what the matter is. You must prove out of S. Cyprian, that the people should
Receive not in the one kind alone of Bread, Mark what is to be proved.
but of wine. also And if you (M. Jewel) will not remember it, yet I pray thee
(gentle Reader) to mark diligently whether he prove any such thing out of S.
Cyprian.

Some there be, Jew.
that in sanctifiyng the cup, and delivering it to the people, do not that
thing that Jesus Christ our Lord and God, Cypri. li 2 Epist. 3.
the Author and Teacher of this Sacrifice, both did and tawght.

Surely, whosoever he be that does so, Ra.
is much to blame. For Christ's Institution is to be observed. But the question
is, whether to deliver the Chalice to the lay people, be of y^ necessity of
Christ's Institution. But go ye further in S. Cyprian.

He adds further. Jew.
If any man be in this error, Truly said, but to no purpose.
seeing the light of the Truth let him return again unto the Root, and unto
the Original of the Lords Tradition.

This also is well done, so charitably to warn the deceived, Ra.
to return unto the truth. But I think it is not wisely done, to speak so
generally of error and truth, our question being specially about one Article.
But you have more to say out of S. Cyprian.

And after in the same Epistle, Jew.
we keep^ not the thing that is commanded us, (...)
unless we do the same that the Lord did.

Here is much a do to prove, Ra.
that we must keep the Iustitution of Christ, which we do not deny: but
where is it ^ere, y^ give the Cup unto the people is Christ's Institution, so
absolute, that they may not be served in one kind? Prove this, which we ask,
out of S. Cyprian, and let that pass, which we nothing doubt of. It follows.

In these few words, Jew.
S. Cyprian says, the Lord both did it and taught it to be don. Craftily
He calls it the Lords commandment.

What is this ( it) of which you speak? Ra.
Why name ye not the thing it self, that we may know where about ye go? Say,
if ye dare, that by this term ( it) you understand the delivery of the Cup
unto the people. If ye dare, how can you verify it, That the Lord did it? For
Christ, M. Jew. apprehended.
I am sure, gave not the Cup in his last supper to the people. If ye dare not,
what honesty is this, to bring in so craftily into your conclusion, that,
which was not proved by the premises?

Is this the S. Cyprian, whom in steed of many you promised to allege? Is this
y^ shortness for which sake you would allege but one Father? Call ye these words
of S. Cyprians, very plain, for proof hereof, y^ Christ's Institution
charge us to deliver the Cup also, unto the people, whereas he speaks of no
such controversy at al.

M. Harding (you say) can not here steal Jew.
away in the myste and say, S. Cyprian meant all this of the cup that the
Priest co^secrateth for himself. For his words be plain to the contrary, In
calice dominico sanctificando and ministrando, that is, insactifieng the Lords
cup, and ministering it unto the People.

Steal you away, Ra.
no more than D. Harding does, and it will sone be perceived who is the thief.
For in deed, you play that good felows part, which being himself in danger
of ^aking, would point to another y^ is giltlesse, (...)
and did the standers by to look that he escape not away from them. As if he
should say, my masters and friends, of al things I hate stealing and iuggling.
And see therefore I pray you, diligently to that fellow that goes yonder, y^
he cast not a myste before your eyes, and so steal away.

For that which you speak, as it were to take D. Harding, as though he would
flee from that, which you imagine against him, that is nothing so. D. Harding
will not, I warrant you, say, that S. Cyprian meant al y^ you have recited out
of him, of the cup that y^ Priest consecrateth for himself. But as the
Catholic Church leads him, he confesses, that in y^ primitive Church the
people received in both kinds. And therefore S. Cyprian speaking of the Cup
sanctified and distributed unto the people, can not move him (which confesses
it, to be agreeable with that time) to steal away for the matter.

But here is the question, whether this distributing of the Cup to the people,
be That tradition, for keeping of which, S. Cypriane makes, so justly, so
many words? Do you mark this M. Jewel? Steal not you, I pray you, away
here in this place. We confess that the cup was delivered unto y^ people, in
S. Cyprians time, but we ask now, whether S. Cyprian in this foresaid epistle,
Answer directly
says, that it is the Institution of Christ that it should be so. The fact we
grant, but of the necessity of it, whether upon pain of Gods Indignation,
the people must have the Cup delivered unto them, that we demand, And to that
you answer, that they must, And to that you apply these foresaied testimonies,
making your Reader, to believe that the Lords Tradition and y^ Lords
commandment of which S. Cyprian speaks so ernestly, (...) meant of the
delivery of the Cup unto the people.

But, if there were no other argument to the contrary, what yet could be
spoken more absurdly and idly? For if the Tradition of our Lord, which S.
Cyprian mentions, is to be understood of y^ delivery of the cup to the
people, of which point only, our question is, then Ioe, when he says: Some
there be, that in (...) the Cup. and delivering it unto the (...), do not that
thing, that Jesus Chrifst both (...) and taught. he should mean thus, that
Some there be that in sanctifieng the Cup and delivering it to the people, do
not deliver it unto the people, as our Lord both did and taught. (...)


And how then does this gear hang together, that, in delivering it unto the
people, they should not deliver it unto the people? Or, that S. Cyprian should
reprove any man for not keeping of our lords tradition in delivering of y^ Cup
to y^ people, whereas he plainly says that it is sanctified and delivered, and
yet, that our Lords tradition is not observed? By which it is most evident,
that the Tradition, which S. Cyprian in this place, so grieuou^lie takes to be
omitted, can not possibly be referred to the delivery of the Cup to the people,
which he confesses to be observed.

And this much might be said with good reason, if S. Cyprians meaning were not
to be found expressed in open words, within ten lines of these, which M. Jew.
has rehearsed. But it is so evident, y^ even at the very beginning of y^
Epistle, he declares* what the cause of his writing is, and what the fault is,
which he would have amended. For the first Sentence thereof has this sense.

Albeit I know (most dear brother) that many Bishops do keep the Order and
Rules of our Lords Tradition, yet because some in sanctifieng the Cup and
delivering it unto the people, do not that thing, which our Lord both did and
taught, I thought it good and necessary to write letters thereof unto you, that
if any man be deceived, he may return, unto the Original of our Lords
Tradition.

This is the first sentence, in which there is Generally signified a thing to
be amiss, but what that is, it is not yet specially declared. And out of this
one sentence, M. Jew. peeketh an absolute Testimony, y^ it is Christ's
Institution, that the people should have the Cup delivered unto them, because
he loves not y^ truth should be stolen away in a mist. The sense of the next
sentence is,

And think not (most dear Brother) that I write this upon mine own mind
and vvil, but when any thing is commanded by the Inspiration of God, the
faithful servant must obey.

So that this hitherto is nothing but a preface or entrance to the matter. Then
follows the third sentence.

Admonitos autem nos scias. etc. But ye shall understand, that we are warned (
by special reuelacion from God) that in offering of the Chalice the Tradition
of our Lord be kept, and that no other thing be don of us, than that which out
lord did for us, first* that the Chalice which is offered in rememb^aunce of
him, should be mixed with (...).

Lo this is the state of y^ whole Epistle, and the Tradition and Commandment
of God, which so often and so earnestly he speaks of, is referred to this end
only, y^ wine and water should be offered up together in the Mysteries. And y^
fault which he finds with the celebrating y^ some used, was, y^ they took
water only into y^ Chalice, Wine and water to be mingled together in the
Chalice is y^ Tradition and Commandment of Christ.
like as on the contrary side y^ Heretics now take only wine. Both which
extremes the Tradition and Commandment of God (which S. Cyprian does prove,
by y^ old and new Testament most abundantly) does so fully and perfitely
confound, that as the Aquarij then were disproued, so the Vinarij now should be
ashamed.

But as concerning the diliuering of the Sacrament, in one or both kinds, he
intended it not, nor determines it. And this M. Jewel perceived well enough, y^
S. Cyprian in that Epistle was wholly bent against Aquarij (were they
schismatikes only or heretics) and, that the fault which he laboreth to amend
in them, was, not for not giving the cup unto the people, but for giving water
only in it, and not wine mixed with water.

Where then was M. Jewels wit to let go many fathers, (...)
which he would have it thought, to be for him, and, for shortness sake to allege
only S. Cyprian, and, that S. Cyprian should speak nothing at al, of that
question which properly is demanded of us, and to which we looked for an
absolute and perfect answer from him?

It is not credible but he saw well enough, what we could Reply, and therefore
he provided this safeguard for his estimation. For thus he says:

If S. Cyprian might well write thus against Jewel.
the Heretics called Aquarij, See the fetch, least (...)
which in the holy ministratio^, would not use wine but instead thereof did
Consecrate water, and Ministered it unto the People, much more may we say the
same against our Adversaries, which Consecrate and Minister unto the people, no
Cup at al.

What you may say, it is an other question, but we seek now, what S. Cyprian
did say. If that Learned and blessed Father, whom you have alleged instead of
many, if he spoke nothing directly of our question, it is no matter to us, what
you will Apply him unto, neither was it cunningly enough done of you, to bring
him alone (whereas you had, except you belie your self, copy) which makes
nothing at al for you, but by a consequence of your own devising.

And yet this very Consequence of yours, M. Jewels fetch, dissapointed
does nothing follow. for to consecrate in water only, and to minister it so
unto the people (which clause of ministering it unto the people, is in deed out
of the matter which S. Cyprian discussed. But let it occupy a place, if you
think it will ease you) To Consecrate (I say again) in water only, and to
minister it so unto the people, is against the Tradition, Institution, and
Commandment of our Savior. And this is proved at large throughout y^ whole
epistle of ^. Cypri^^.

But, to consecrate the wine and water together, and not to minister it unto y^
people who is against it? what Scripture, counsel, or father? You say it is
against Christ's Institution. We deny it. You made, as though you would prove
it ou^ of S. Cyprian. But S. Cypria^ speaks not of this question: yet, you
say, y^ as ^. Cypria^ spoke against y^ Aquarios for (...) in water only, and
ministering it so unto the people: so may you much more speak against the
Church, for ministering no Cup at al unto the people. I have showed how unlike
this comparison is.

But will you have a good Argument, and like to y^ of s. Cyprians? This it is.

S. Cyprian justly found fault with the Aquarios for consecrating in water
only, In Invincible Argument except M Jew, will deny S. Cyprians authority
which only he has used in steed of many Fathers.
and ministering it so unto the people: Ergo, he would have found fault with your
Procedings, which put wine only in the Cup, and minister it so unto the people.

For the Reason on both sides is one, that the Tradition of our Lord, is to be
observed, and that to Consecrate wine and water together, was his Tradition.

Answer this Argument with all your cunning (Learned M. Jewel) and answer your
dear friends expectation, which will think, that you have not abused S.
Cyprian. The judgment whereof, I permit, unto any reasonable Adversary.

S. Augustine abused.

S. Augustine, willing the Priests to apply their studies, Jew. 156
to correct their errors of their Latin speech, adds thereunto this Reason,
Vt populus ad id quod plane intellig^t, dicat Amen. That the people unto the
thing, that they plainly understand, may say Amen. This of S. A^gustine seems
to be spoken Generally of al tongues.

How can it seem so, Ra.
whereas he so expressly speaks of the Latin tongue only?

S. Augustine (you say) willing the Priests, Jew.
etc. Ra.
This first of al is falsely reported. For S. Augustine in this place, False.
went not about to exhort the Priests to the study of y^ Latin tongue, as
who should think that it were not to be suffered, A Priest or Bishop to be
ignorant therein: but he showed, how such, as come fresh and fine from the
Schools of Grammarians, and Rhetoricians, with knowledge and Eloquence enough
of words, should, in their first entrance into y^ church, there to be
instructed of y^ Catholic Faith, learn to be humble and wise in judgment,
and not to contemn y^ Scriptures, because they be not write^in so lofty and
exquisit a Style as profane books, nor to set more by flourish of words, than
substance of Sense. And further he says:

Nouerint (...) n^ esse vocem ad aures dei, sed animi affectu^.it a enim no
^^^deb^t, si aliquos Antistites and (...) Ecclesiae forte animaduerterint, vel
(...) barbarismis and solaecismis Den^ muocare, vel ead^ verba quae pronu^ciant
no^ intelligere, ^turbate ^ue disi^^guere. that is, Let them understand al^s,
that it is not the voice, that sou^deth in the ears of God, but the ^artines
and denotio^ of mind. For so they shall not laugh the Bishops and ministers of
the church to scorn, if perchance, they shel perceive them to call upon God,
either with barbarouse and incongrae Latin: or else not to understand the
words that they speak, either to point them out of order.

To such therefore, S. Austine directs his talk in y^ place, and makes no
exhortation at al to Priests, to learn their latin tongue better. And why
should M. Jew. dissemble y^ true persons, of whom s. Augustine there speaks?
I will tell you: (...)
There is not a place more plainer than this, if it be considered, to prove y^
it was not thought in S. Augustines time, so necessary a m^t^r, that al things
in the Church should be done in a known Tongue, as now it is avouched to be.

For if the Public Service was every where executed, at that time, in the
vulgar Tongue, or in a known one to the common people, although it were not
their vulgar, how is it possible, that the Bishopes themselves, should be to
seeking in the right pronouncing, and pointing, and understanding of that,
which they openly said in the Church?

The Sir John Lacklatines (of which there is much speaking among the brothers)
they have been such an occasion of ruin and perdition to the worldly wise, as
none has been greater. For the evil life of Priests, although it be A great
Argument unto them, that the Religion is not effectual, which has such holy
ons in it: yet whiles they see in every kind of Protestation or Confession,
Lack of knowledge does more hurti this (...) lack of good li^e.
many such to be found, of who^ they may well enough be ashamed, they temper
their Judgment, and will not utterly condemn a Religion for this cause only,
that some Professors thereof be wicked.

But when they see Public Service to be said of them which understand it not,
and for them which are also as ignorant, this seems to be so absurd, that
they can not conceive, how the Spirit of God should direct their doeinges,
which see, and suffer, yea and defend, that Public Service may be done, in a
tongue which the vulgar people do not understand. And in this point, they are so
much the more vehement, because they see, how all the new Gospellers follow a
contrary way, and use no learned Tongue at all in their Ordinary Service, but
the vulgar and known Tongue of the Country, where they pitch. So that, the
Protestants are compted herein, to work so sincerely, to speak so
reasonably, and to challenge so inuincibly, that thousands of the worldly wise,
whiles they stand in their own judgment, fall in deed into everlasting
per^ition, by the judgment of the blessed and learned Fathers.

For, if al things must be don in the Church, so, as the people do understand
what is prayed, how should that case ever be heard of in the Primitive Church,
where some Bishops, understood not what they prayed in the open Church?

May we think, that any of them, understood not the vulgar speech of his
country? That is very incredible, because, unto the high office, of Ruling
and teaching the whole People, That the Service was in S. Augustines time in y^
latin Tongue which was unknown to y^ vulgare^ people.
he should not be chosen, which could not well be understood of the people.

But may we rather think, that the public Service, was in a learned tongue,
sometimes not perfitly known of the Bishope himself, like as unto the vulgar
people it was not known? Of this, there is no doubt: Because in praieng to
God, devotion and not eloquntion is required, and because he might have a good
grace, of preaching in his natural tongue unto the people, which yet had very
simple understanding, of any Greek or latin writings: And because, it is
plain by S. Augustine, that some such were in his time.

How then (you will say) is Ignorance in a Bishope to be suffered? I say not
so, neither on the other side, I think that al is marred, except every man,
woman and child may have the Bible in the vulgar Tongue. Or, that no Tongue
is to be suffered in the Church of God, but that, which is the common and
known tongue, of the Country. But as there is a difference between wincking
and staring, so is there a discreation and judgment to be used in this matter
of Tounges of which we speak. And S. Augustine aloweth it not, that a Bishope
should not understand the Latin tongue in which he prays, neither yet does he
cry out against that lack of theirs, requiring that al Public Service should
straitwaies be in the vulgar Tongue. For after he had told it, how some
Bishopes pray in false and barbarouse Latin, and understand not what they
pray, he adds further least, you should think him to allow Ignorance, and
says:

Non quia ista m^^me corrigenda sint, Aug. de Catethi. rud. ca. 9.
vt populus ad id quod plane intelligit, dicat, Amen: I would, that the fresh
and trym Scholars, coming lately from their Eloque^t Lessons, should not laugh
y^ Bishops to skorne, which speak in their prayers false Latin: not because
these things were not to be amended in the Bishopes, to the intent the people
might answer, Amen, to that which they clerelie understand. (as who should
say, I allow not their lack of knowledge: And it were well, that they did so
speak, as the people understand them) Sed tamen pie toleranda sunt ab eis qui
didicerunt vt sono in soro, sic voto in ecclesia benedici. but yet these
lackes, are charitably to be borne vvithal, of them, which have learned, that
as things are well said in court before Judges, by sound (of voice) so are
they well said in the Church, by vow of mind.

Of which words I gather, that as he would wish it better, y^ the Bishops and
Priests of the Church should so speak, as the people might understand: yet, he
would not have the Service of the church utterly changed from the Latin tongue
not understood, to the vulgar tongue which nor Priest nor peole could be
ignorant of. But, even those wa^tes of some Bishopes and Priests, The
Ignorance of the latin tongue in the Latin prayers is to be tolerated in A
Priest or Bishop, and not moke^^
in the true Reading, Pointing, and Understanding of their Public Prayers, he
would to be charitably borne and suffered, upon this consideration, that
although in the ears of men, their words sound not plain and good, yet in y^
sight of God, the good affection of their heart is allowed.

Now if S. Augustine had been of the Protestants mind, he would not have taken
the matter so quietly, but with great Stomach would have said, away with this
murmuring of prayers not understood: away with this Latin and Strange
tongue, which, S. Augu. would nener have said so.
the Priest himself knows not, what it means: Away with this lip labor:
Let us have the Bible turned into the vulgar tongue, let every man come to the
Church and singe Psalms to the Lord: let the people understand what is said:
let us do as the Apostle commands us, let us speak with tounges: and so
forth, with a great tale, out of the xiiij. Chapter of the first to the
Corinthians, altogether out of purpose.

But, as it appears by this place, which I have opened, S. Augustine was of
an other mind, and would have given such Protestants an other lesson, that
they should not mock at poor Sir John's, which pray in latin and yet
understand not latin, like as his counsel is, to eloquent and smoeth tounged
Gentlemen, that come from secular Schools, to the Church of Christ, there to be
instructed.

And because the opening of so much, would have been a great disauantage to M.
Jewel and his fellows, therefore he speaks only of Priests whom S. Augustine
willed to correct the errors of their latin tongue, and dissimbleth the
answer, which S. Augustine gives to those ioly fellows, which would be ready
to mock at Priests, because of their barbarouse and false praieng, in the
Public Service. By which we understand, that the public Service was then in
Latin, and that it was so strainge also unto the vulgar people, that some of
the Priests and Bishopes did not understand it.

Of this also it follows, that the conclusion which M. Jewel peeketh out of
this testimony of S. Austine, is so gross and insensible, that I wonder where
his wits were when he wrote it. Thus he says.

This of S. Augustine seems to be spoken generally of al tounges. Jew.
False and absurd.


Seems it so in deed? Ra.
And do not your self so understand the place in y^ very beginning of your
alleging thereof, that you say, S. Augustine wills the Priests to correct
the errors of their latin tongue? If then it be the latin tongue by name, for
which he reasons, how does it some unto you that he speaks generally of al
Tounges?

Again, if he spoke generally of al tounges, ergo of the Punike tongue. I ask
you then, which of the two, it is like that the Aphricanes understood better,
the Aphricane and Punike tongue, Or the Latin?

If the Aphricane (as being their natural and vulgar tongue) was more familiar
with them, why does S. Augustine will the Priests to study the Latin tongue,
that the people might understand them the better, whereas (by your account) they
should have spoken in their own vulgar tongue, and so with less labor, the
people should have been more edified?

If the Latin was more familiar, how could any Priest or Bishope in Aphrica, be
so ignorant thereof, Here is no escape or shift for M. Jew.
that he should not pronounce his Latin prayers, and understand them? Or, how
does S. Augustine seem to speak generally of al tongues, which extends out
his Reason and argument, no not unto the Punik tongue? Here again I pray thee
(Indifferent Reader) to consider, whether M. Jewel has not clerckly alleged
the Doctors.

S. Irenens abused.

S. Ireneus, has a manifest tastimonie for the Supremacy of the Church of
Rome. (...) Church (says he) must resort Lib. 3 Cap. 3.
to this Church of Rome, because of the mightier Principality of the same. And
this place trobleth M. Jewel very much, as it appears by y^ extra^^gants, and
idle discourses, which he makes about it. But out of his A^swers is this, that,

The Principality that Ireneus meant, Jew. 244*
was the Civil Dominion and Temporal Sta^e of the City of Rome, Impuden^y or
blindness.
in which God had then planted the Empire of the world, and made al nations
subject unto it.

See the impudency or blindenes of the man. Ra.
Are ye not very carnal in your Judgment, and make ye not the like arguments,
as the worldlings do? What society, between light and darkness? and what
participation, between Christ and Belial? what has the everlasting kingdom, to
depend upon the transitory and temporal kingdom* And why should the wealth or
dominion of any City diminish or increase the E^^imation of any one Church?

Consider I pray thee, Indifferent Reader, what a wise interpretour M. Jewel
is? He makes y^ learned Father ^. Ireneus to have this dull and gross sense in
him. M. Jew. a gross in terpretour
All the Churches of the world must resort unto the Church of Rome, because the
civil dominion and state thereof, is the greatest in the world, Or thus, All the faithful in the world, must resort to S. Peter's Successors, because the
Romain Emperors, are the migthtiest Princes in the world.

By what consequence? The cause undoubtedly, which should move the Faithful to
come to Rome, must have been spiritual and not temporal. They should have
resorted thither, to be instructed in their faith, against the heresies that
trobled their understanding, and not to ask any Counsel, or seek any wordly
benefit, (...)

Again, in this one sentence, S. Ireneus dath twice name Ecclesiam Church. If
therefore in the first place, (...)
M. Jewel will have the Civil dominion of Rome to be understand by, hanc
Ecclesia^, this Church: th^n is it reason that he mean by omnem ecclesia^
every Church (which words fo^^^ in the sentence) the Civil dominion in every
part of the world. But S. Ireneus by every Church, understands as him self
expounds it, eos qui vndique sunt fideles, y^ faithful that are every where
about: Ergo by Ecclesiam the Church, in the former part of his sentence, he
means the company of the Faithful that are in Rome, of which the Bishop
there is the principal head.

I add further, If the Principality of the Civil dominion in Rome, did seem a
worthy cause unto the learned and ancient Father Ireneus, why al Faithful
should resort chiefly thither, than which Conclusion, he thought nothing less,
yet if M. Jewel will needs have that consequence, how chanced it, that, when
Constantine the great, gave place to S. Peter, and went with his Principality
of Civil dominion unto Const^ntinople, that all the Churches of the world did
not for all that so resort unto the Church of Constantinople, but that the
Church of Rome continued still in her Supremacy?

As for that which you say, Jew. 244*
that principalis Ecclesia is sometime used of old Fathers, to signify the
civil dominion and principality of the City, where the Church is: (although
in the Examples which you bring, in the first of them. 7. qu^s^. 1. placuit
principalis cathedra, (...)
does properly signify a spiritual office and not a worldly dominion, And in
the second, inter epi^tolas Augustini 35. epi. although the word principalis,
be referred to Alipius as Bishope) yet let me grant so much, and consider your
di^ine Logike. After the alleging as the foresaid testimonies, which in deed
make quite against you, you conclude saying.

Thus the principality that Iren, means, Jew.
stood not in the preaching of the Gospel, but in the civil estate and
worldly dominion, not in the Bishop that professed Christ, but in the
Emperor that was an heathen, not in the Church, but in the persequutours and
enemies of the Church.

^

If you would have said* Ireneus takes Principalitas in this sense, Ergo,
Paulinus in using the word Principalis, may be interpreted to have the like
sense: Although this also were no good Argument, when the word has more then
one or two Relations: yet in the descending from the superior to the
inferior, there might appe^re a show of likelyhod. But this Logike passes in
deed (for it is M. Jewels) that Paulinus which was borne three hundred years
after Ireneus, uses the word principalis in this sense, Ergo Principalitas of
which Ireneus speaks stood not in the Bishope that professed Christ, but in
the Emperor that was an heathen.

Thus thou maise see (Indifferent Reader) what foul shifts, and devises, and
lies, M. Jewel had made to turn away the Authority of Ireneus, that it
should not be taken for the Principality of the Church of Rome. But his
conclusion is notable. Jew.


To be short (says he) If the Church The cause of the Supremacy is not
desperate. M. Jewel will allow it on condition.
of Rome would now faithfully keep the Traditions, and Doctrine of the
Apostles, we would fra^kely yield her all that honor, that Ireneus gives her:
but she has shaken of the yoke of Christ.

O good men. It was then, by likelihod, Ra.
for pure love of God and godliness, that you are departed from the Sea of Rome.
There were so few Sacraments, and those of so little effect, there was so
little Fasting, Watching, Praying, so little chastity, Discipline, and Order,
that you could not abide to live so loosely, but would needs take an yoke upon
you, to keep your bodies low (by carrying your yoke^elowes about the Countries
with you be^ides other burdens) And to keep your spirits humble (by obeying,
neither spiritual nor temporal Iuris^iction). For the Saxons in Germany, the
Hugonots in France, the Guses in Flaunders and Brabant, which of late, because
the yoke was not heavy enough upon their shoulders, have (I can not tell for
what penance sake) made themselves great fardels and packes of Church goods,
and sweat again with the carriage of them away, were not they, and are not
these, Cusson germans unto you?

But you will do more for Christ's sake than this. You will be content, I
perceive, to go even to Rome it self, upon certain conditions. And what are
they? Forsooth, if y^ church of Rome would keep the Traditions and doctrine of
the Apostles, then ^o, you would frankly honor it. And, is this possible?
Traditions you know, are verities and orders not written in the Scriptures,
but delivered without writing. And is there any thing which you will f^ankely
bear, except it be written in express Scriptures? Surely, I can (...) believe
it, yet if ye would, upon conditions give y^ honor to the Church of Rome,
which S. Ireneus absolutely gave, without any such cautels, you are not so
unlike to be a Papist as I thought you were.

For let us suppose it, that as you would with, so all the Traditions and
Doctrine of the Apostles, were faithfully kept in Rome, would ye frankly yield
her, al honor that Ireneus gives her? ^elme then, if (...) or any other
Heretics, would devise (...) of their own, and trouble the Church of England
with them, would ye go to Rome for the matter, and ask of the Civil Estate
there* Or the Emperor if he were a heathen, Or of the persequutours M. Jew.
would not do as (...) says.
or Ennemies of the Church (if such fellows had dominion there) would ye ask of
them, what should be thought of the Old Heretics newly vpstarted?

If ye would go to them that have no Religion, to (...) counsel of them about
(...) (...) For, concerning plain be^^sies, we are now so accustomed to read
them and hear them, that they are not strange unto us, but, when hypocrisy
is joined with heresy, Or when verity is disse^bled through ^eare or (...),
there we are desirous to have the party examined, And con^^re^ned, either
^la^^ly to confess his here^^e, Or faithfully to stand with y^ verity.

Shortly therefore to you M. Jewel.

If you would honor the Church of Rome in like sort as S. Iraeneus charge
all the faithful to do, how (...) ye give to the ^^nges of England, and that by
the ^^^esse ^criptures (as you interpret them) such Supremacy in matters
eccle^^^^ical, as can not stand possibly with the going to Rome, (...)
in any question of Faith? For by Aet of Parliament, and your own oth^^, and
the practice of the Realm, there is no (...) power that has to do with the
Church of England. And therefore, were Rome never so per^^^^, no great^r
Principality could be attributed to the Church of Rome, than the ^ing of
England has, whom you byhold to be (...).

On the other side, if ye will defend still that, which hitherto ye have set
^^rth, by Laws, Oaths, Sermons, (...) etc. What an Hypocrite are you, so to
speak as though ye would, as frankelie yield to the Church of Rome principal
honor, as ^ren^us both ear^estly require it, that for the (...) al Churches
(...) for trial of true doctrine, resort unto it.

(...) (...) (...) you of these days have them in contempt and dishonor,
therefore you speak of no more then y^ Temples built in their remembrance. And
yet this very building of Temples, in the honor of Martyrs, it seems not
that you like very well, whereas unto any one of your so stinking a cu^pany of
Martyrs, (...)
we hear^ of no gro^nd y^ you have meat^^ out as ye^, to lai^ therein y^ (...)
of any Pulpit. House, or (...), of your Champions.

Now to the sense of S. (...) words. Why do they not go to the Mar^^^? Why
(...) they not to the Church? That is* as you (M. Jewel) understand him, (...)
Receive they at home, and not at Church? But this is not S. Hieroms meaning.
For he reproves not their Receiving at home, but their Receiving at home the
next day that followed their nights pleasure taking of their Wives. S. (...)
reprou^th not Recc^^uing at home.
Mark that Circumstance, and you shall quickly perceive, that you are deceived,
or have deceived.

For take the whole Sentence with you. (...) Apologia
I know (says S. Hierome) that this Custom is in Rome, that the faithful do
receive daily the Body of Christ. And what say you than to that Custom?
aduersus Iouinianu^
He Answers. Q^^d nec reprehend^, (...). which thing I neither reprove nor
allow, for every man abundeth in his own sense.

What shall we say then to this case? If a man be sufficiently prepared, and
(...) the Sacrament in his own house at home, and never go to the (...) for
it perteyned not to the question of (...), of which he there cons^^eth. Yet, M.
Jewel thinks, that S. Hierome Answers this foresaied question, and that he
makes a full determination thereof, with an ernest reprouf of the parties
offending against it. As if S. Hierom should say to the Romai^ts: (...)
what mean you to doubt in this plain matter? Or why should ye think that
Receiving at home were lawful? Do ye not know that the Lords supper is ^
Communion, and must not be taken of one alone? Why dare ye not go to the
Temples of the Martyrs* Are ye afraied of (...)? Why go ye not to the Church?
Is not that, the proper place, to Receive the Communion in?

Such a Comment would M. Jewel make upon S. Hierome, And to this effect, he
draws his ernest and sharp Interrogations. But y^ case unto which S.
Hieromes words do rightly answer, is only this. Whether he, that has had
carnal knowledge of his Wife the night before, do not well to abstain the next
day from going to y^ Memories of Martyrs, and the Churches abroad, Or whether
he may not Receive the Sacrament at home? To which his Answer shortly is this,
that he may as well receive at church as at home, and that he should do well not
to receive at al, the day following the night of his carnal pleasure, with his
wife.

For after he had said, that he would neither reprove nor commend the Custom
of daily receiving of the faithful of Rome: he comes in with an aduersatiue
But, in this sort: Sed ipsorum conscientiam conuenio, qui eodem die post coitum
co^municant etc. Quare ad Matyres ire non audent? Quare non ingrediuntur
ecclesiaes? But yet I appose their conscience, which communicate the same day
after they have carnally known their Vviues. Why dare they not go to the
Martyrs Memories? Why go they not to Church? Is Christ one abroad, an other
at home? That, which is not lavvful at Church, is not lauful at home. To God
nothing is hidden, ye^ darkenes^e also shines before him. Let every one
examine himself, and so come to the body of Christ.

To this end therefore S. Hierome brings his whole Argument, not, that it
were simply to be reproved to rece^ue at home, but, that such as had companied
with their wi^es the night before, should not the day after Receive at home,
considering that they are worthily abashed to come before the Martyrs Relics
after such nights, and that Christ is to be honored, above al, and in all
places, both at home and abroad. Of which conclusion it would follow, that
Matrimony is not so good as Uirginitie, which was one of the heresies of the
Protestant Ioninian, whereas by the Act of Matrimony, the party is made for
a time unmeet to Receive the blessed Sacrament.

Judge thou now (Indifferent Reader) whether S. Hierome does ernestly reprove
the custom of Receiving at home, without any addition of such Circumstance as
varieth the whole question.

S. Angustine abused.

^ho is he (says D. Harding out of S. Augustine) that knovveth not, that the
Principality of Apostleship, is to be preferred before any Bishoprike that is?
Which words S. Augustine speaks, because of a comparison which he made,
between S. Peter and S. Cyprian. For whereas the Donatistes, did much object
against the Catholics, that S. Cyprian, with many other his Felowbishopes,
concluded and determined in a Cou^^el had among themselves, that such as were
baptized of heretics should be rebaptized again, when they came to the
Catholic Church, by which Authority of S. Cyprians name and other Bishops
many, they thought to bear down y^ papists before them: S. Austine, like an
holy and reverend father, conte^neth not the Authority of S. Cyprian, but
prefers y^ authority of S. Peter, before it.

Now, these foresaid words making expressly for the Principality of the
Apostleshipe which was in S. Peter, what saicth M. Jewel unto them? Mary his
first Answer is that Principatus Principality, does not signify an universal
power, Jew. 249 Spoken grammatically.
Of which Answer we have already spoken, but shortly, this may be repeted, that
although Principatus, put alone by it self, does not signify always an
universal power (for in every degree of act and art the best has the
Principality, and yet he shall not be Pope or Emperor) yet Principatus
Apostolatus, the Principality of Apostleshipe, (...) declare, that in that
Order itself of Apostles, he that has the Principalititie is the Chief. And
surely then, the Chief among the (...) which were heads of the world, must
needs be Supreme Governor over al Christendom. And thus much shortly
concerning M. Jewels first Answer. The second Answer, or not answer properly,
but Ca^^laud and quarrel, is, Jew. 250


That M. Harding dissimbleth the words, that S. Augustine in the very same
place allegeth out of S. Cyprian, very well serving to this purpose. Ra.


To what purpose? To prove that there is no Supremacy in the Church? (...)

The words be these, Nec Petrus vendicauit etc Neither did Peter challe^ge any
thing, (...)
or proudly presume of himself, to say, that he had the primacie, and that
therefore others, as Nou^^es and Underlings should be Obedient unto him. All
these things M. Harding dissimbleth.

Is this it, that very well serves to the purpose? Does the omitting of this
sen^ence, Ra.
make D. Harding A Dissimbler? In these words, as you allege them, I see the
humiliti^ of S. Peter much commended, but I see not the Principality of his
Apostleshipe disproued. Wherefore then should D. Harding have alleged them, or
why lay you dissimulation to his charge, for omitting that, which if it had been uttered, had nothing hindered the Principality of Apostleship, which he
sought to declare?

But I pray thee (Indifferent Reader) to consider M. Jewels sincerity in this
place. In this place I say, where he (...) it again an^ again, and
triumphs upon it, Mark this place again and again.
that M. Harding dissimbleth, and that to fournisshe out his matter, and to
smoothe his Reader, he leaves out, what he lists.

O the Truth that is in M. Jewel. It seems by him, that if he might win
whole kingdoms, be would not leave out any jot of Chapter, that should very
well serve to the purpose. This that follows will try it.
But is he not deceived in his own opinion of himself? Is not he himself
properly a dissimbler?

Behold what be has done. In this very sentence, for leaving out of which, he
notes D. Harding, himself leaves quite and clean out those words, which if
he had interpreted, as he did the rest of the sentence, it should easily have been perceived, that D. Harding had no cause to dissimble. What m^a^e I here by?
Mary this I mean, that this sentence, which M. Jewel would have to be taken, as
qualifieing and diminishing, the Principality of Apostleshipe, by which D.
(...) (...) our Lord chose him to be first, and that vpp^n him he builded his
Church. (...).

But will A man see a dissimbler? You M. Jewel are he. And that in this (...)
place where you are busy in finding fault with other for dissimbling. (...)
These words, M. Jewel, touching S. Peter, Whom our Lord chose to be first or
Chief, and upon whom he builded his Church, Did ye not see these words M.
Jewel? How could ye but see them, whereas they stand in that sentence which you
so much tied, that for not speaking of it, you ^ind fault with D. Harding? The
beginning and end of which, whereas you interpreted unto the Reader, how could
ye but see the myddle? And therefore seeing the words, and yet skipping them,
who now is the dissimbler, if we may come before equal I^dges? The words which
you leave out, are not light, they are not impertinent to the question of y^
Supremacy, they are plain and evident, that Our Lord chose Peter to be first
or Chief, and that upon him, he builded his Church. And yet you (good man)
have dealt plainly, in leaving them out altogether.

And now, because such dissimulation is very wicked, and (...) your honesty
(M. Jewel) may the better be noted, I will bring one place more out of the
Doctors, in which I will show, y^ you have abused them in this special point of
dissimbling, and Smoothing your Reader, and leaving out what lists you.

S. Ambrose abused.

To prove, that S. Peter's Supremacy was no greater than his fellows, you
allege S. Ambrose after this sort. Jew. 246 Most sha^ful dissimulacion and
craft.
Even so says S. Ambrose too, and that, in the very same place that M Harding
has alleged. Inter Petrum and Paulum quis cui praeponatur, incertum est. Of
Peter and Paul whether ought to be preferred before other, it is not known.

Does S. Ambrose speak these words, Ra.
as doubting which were higher in dignity (...)

^

How say you then, does not this plainly declere, that the doubt in which S.
Ambrose was, (...)
whether of the two ought to be preferred before the other, came not of
ignorance of that point, which concerned the Supremacy of the Sea and Church
of Rome, but of this which pertains to their personal deserts and merits. In
which, he thinks that the one was equal with the other?

And wherefore then have you left out those words that followed so immediately,
by which the true and right understanding of the place might be perceived? Is
not this crafty dissimbling? Will you say that you did not see so much, whereas
so much follows immediately in S. Am^rose? Or can you say y^ you thought it
little to serve to the purpose, whereas the true Answer to you^ Objection, is
thereby uttered and expressed? But let us come nearer.

Not six lives before this place of which you would have your Reader to
geather, that S. Peter had no greater Supremacy than S. Paul, thus says S.
Ambrose after a short discourse made upon S. Peter and Paul. Ambo igitur
clau^s a Domino perceperunt, Scientiae iste. ille potentie. So then both of
them have received (...) of our Lord, S. Paul of science, S. Peter of power.

Consider now of this place, Indifferent Reader, was S. Ambrose in any doubt,
which of the two, S. Peter or S. Paul was to be preferred? He was, (...)
and he was not. Concerning their godliness and Merit^s, he knew not whom to
prefer before the other, but thinks them to be equal therein. Concerning
Authority and Office, (...)
he knew how to geaue each of the^ his own, preferring S. Paul for his
knowledge, and S. Peter for his power. It is not therefore simply true, as M.
Jewel reherseth the words of S. Ambrose, that, whether of them ought to be
preferred before the other it is not known. For if he would have looked to
that, which went but a little before, he should have readen the keys of Science
geauen to S. Paul, and the keys of power to S. Peter.

What say we then to this blindness or Craft? Is M. Jewel that fellow, that does
not dissimble? Does not he take what him lyketh, and refuse what him lists?
He begins Sentencies where him pleases. He ends senses when he is
disposed. The myddle of Sentencies, he leaves quite and clean out, That which
went before or comes after, he looks nothing unto, such is his Simplicity.
To make himself the less suspected, he finds (without just occasion) fault
with other for leaving out I can not tell what. To be short, there was never, I
think, an Heretic so full of words, so untrue in words, so fair spoken, so
fowly intending, so much alleging Ancient Fathers, so little regarding any
Authority, So precise in appealing to phrases, terms, and ti^les, And so
loose in abusing the sense and the meaning of his Witnesses. And thus much
concerning the Ancient Fathers.

How M. Jewel has abused the Later Writers.
TO speak of y^ Later writers, who^ M. Jewel has al used, I have no great
mind, because if I prove, never so plainly, any article of the Catholic Faith
by them: that anaileth nothing unto them, which utterly refuse al Late writers,
at their pleasure. Yet that M. Jewel may hereafter, use more Truth and
Sinceri^^^ in his writings, he shall perceive that they are like to be marked,
how tedious (...) them through his he^ps of (...): I will begin the Chapter
unto which, such his abusing of Late Writers is to be r^ferred, as shall be
^ound ^as^ly in his writings.

And first, concerning holy and (...) Fath^rs though not so old as others, I
will b^ing in S. Bernard as M. I^w^l says, but as the Truth is (...): I^ the
second Place (...) de Hale^^ for Scholemen: In the third Polid^^e Uergile, ^or
humanitians, that (...) few k^^de of Writers M. Jewel spar^^h, it may easily be
perc^iued in E^am^ples. As thus*

(...) abused.

Men and Women made the Sacrifice of the Altar, (...)
and that of Bread and wine. And therefor after the order of Melchi^edech.
Therefore S. B^rnard says, Non solus Sacerdos sacrifi^ at, sed totus
Conuentus Fidelium, not only the Priest Sacrifices, but also the who^*
Cu^panie of the Faithful.

Is it possible that S. Bernard might s^y so? Ra.
An Abbo^^, A Saier of Mass, A notable Papist? (...) is it posible that M.
Jewel, ^ath in all his art, any shift to defend (...) place from lying?

First it is most evident, that S. Bernard has no such words. In any of these
two poi^ts M. Jew. may be apprehended.
The Sermon which M. Jewel refers us unto, is the holy Fathers Guerricus
Abbat of Igniacum.

Then, neither he says as M. Jewel concludes. For why? there is not in all his
Sermon, any mention of Bread and Wine offered at the Altar, Or, to the Altar,
by men and women, Neither of the Order of Melchisedech.

Of the offering up of Turtles and Doves, he speaks, but he means not of
the birds themselves, but of the virtues represented by them: as Chastity of
body and soul, Compunction of heart, Simplicity, Patience, Charity, and such
like. Whereupon he infers, concerning Priests, saying:

Such manner of men it becomes us to be, Guerricus in Ser. de purificatione.
when we Consecrate the Body of Christ etc. And concerning the Laietie: Such
manner of men also it behooves you to be, which receive of our hands, the holy
Sacramen^, etc.

Now because it might be objected, that it is for Priests to have the foresaid
virtues, Or that it is their charge only, to prepare them selves, least they
receive the Sacrament unworthily (as though the standers by, had little to do
with him in those matters) he answers, We must not believe that the forsaid
virtues are necessary for the Priest only, as though he alone should Consecrate
or offer the Body of Christ. He does not sacrifice alone, he alone does not
consecrate, A point of M. Jewels art.
but all the cumpanie of the faithful (and here M. Jewel makes a full and a
foul point) that stands by does consecrate with him, does sacrifice with him.

But how? After the order of Melchisedech, Or, by their own Act and Priesthood,
as M. Jewel gathers? Surely, except Guerricus him self had made it plain,
in what sense the Priest and the People do offer, no doubt, but M. Jewel in
this place, would outface us, that this Abbat meant, that men and women were
Priests after the order of Melchisedech. Notwithstanding that it is not said,
the cu^pani of the faithful do consecrate, as though they might do it by
themselves, but they consecrate with him (the Priest) signifieng the Office to
be singular. And it follows in the Sermon.

Neither the Carpenter alone does make a house, but one brings rods, an
other rafters, an other posts or beams and other things. By which Similitude,
it is manifest, that the people consecrate, in this sense, that they bring
sumwhat to that end. And what is that? By this that follows it will be
understood. For thus he concludes.

Therefore the standers by, ought to have of their own, even as the Priest
ought? What? A Cope trow you M. Jewel, upon their backs, or a Surplesse like
Ministers, or power and Authority of Priesthod? No. but, a sure faith, a pure
prayer, a godly deuoti^n. Where then is the Bread and Wine, Answer to this
point.
or the Order of Melchisedech, which you would prove to per^eine to the common
people with, Therefore S. Bernard says, or Otherwise called Guerricus.

Here is a Conclusion without Premises, And a comparison without any
likelyhoode. And A falsification without truth or honesty.

Alexander of Hales abused. Jew. 98.


The people taking but one kind only receives injury, as M. Harding may see
by Alexander de Hales, and Durandus, and other of his own Doctors. Alexanders
words be these. Licet illa Sumptio, etc. Although that Order of Receiving the
Sacr^ment* which is under one kind, be sufficient, yet the other which is
under both kinds, is of greater merit.

All this, Ra.
M. Jewel, is true: but this proves not, that the people have any injury done
unto them. For to Receive under one kind, it is sufficient by Alexanders
express words: but undoubtedly, (...)
if any thing lacked of that which were d^e* there were not sufficie^cy: Ergo,
how prove you by Alexander, that the people are I^iuried, in receiving under
one kind?

You will Reply out of him, that it is of greater merit to receive in both
kinds, than one. And what of that? It is a greater merit to Celebrate thrice a
day (as at Christmasse) then once, (...)
as Ordinarily Priests do use. Do ye think then, that any Priests have
Injury don unto them, because the Order is otherwise, that they say but one
Mass in one day, except one day only in the year?

Again I say, that Alexander notes a greater merit to be in Receiving under
both than one kind, not in respect of the Sacrament, which is as perfect in
one as both, and in the least part of one, as the whole: but in respect of the
Receivers, because their devotion is increased, and their Faith dilated by
longer continuing in the Act of Receiving, and their Receiving is more Complete
as being ministered in both kinds. And as the causes on the behalf of the
Receiver, do make it, to a person so disposed, more effectual, to Receive in
both than one: So other causes there be, which do make y^ Receiving under one
kind, to be to the party so affected, more fruietful and meritorious, than if
he took both. For, (...).
he that would say unto him self, I will content my self with the common Order
of the Church, I will not make any Stir about both kinds, knowing y^ as much
is under one as both: undoubtedly such a man should both for his Humility, and
for his Faith, deserve more a great deal, then if he should Receive in both
kinds, and find a certain sense and taste of Denotion.

The strength therefore and efficatie which Alexander speaks of, depending
upon the Act of the Receiver, and not upon the Virtue of y^ Sacrament, which is
al one in effect, whether it be ministered in one or both kinds: M. Jewel does
very injuriously, to put a fault herein, y^ they Receive not under both, and to
make Alexander of this opinion, that to minister in one kind, were an Injury
unto the people.

For this I would ask further of him, whether the simple and devout people,
are not more stirred up to remember the Death and Blo^d of Christ, A Case to
M. Jew.
if they should Receive in Claret or Red Wine, than in White? No doubt, but the
imagination would be more affected and moved, by seeing a like color unto y^
which it would conceive, than a contrary or diverse color. How then? Would M.
Jewel think it an Injury to minister in white wine unto the people, though
they would be desirous of Red? He should not think it, if he be wise. And why
so? Mary, because they have as much in the White as the Red, and to receive in
Red, hangs upon their private devotion, and not upon any precept of the
Church, or doctrine of the Apostles, or Institution of Christ, to which
only, the Priest is bound, and which, if he observe, he does his duty,

Be it so then, that many good ^olke for diverse causes, should be exceedingly
moved and edified, by drinking of the Chalice, and contemplating of more then
is Ordinary in their mind: should they have any Injury done unto them, if
they received afterward, when the Priest should judge it expedient, under y^
form of bread only? Neither does Alexander de Hales so say, neither any reason
does make for it. But let us see an other place of Alexander, which M. Jewel
has abused.

The same Alexander again says, Jew. 99. Shamfully abused.
Totus Christus, etc. Whole Christ is not contained under each kind by way of
Sacrament but the fleash only, under the form of bread, and the blood under
the form of wine.

The words can not be denied to be Alexanders, Ra.
but what sense gathers M. Jewel of them?

Here M. Hardinges own Doctors confess, Few. Open Lie
that the people Receiving under one kind, receives not the full Sacrament,
nor the blood of Christ by way of Sacrament.

You understand not Alexander, Ra.
or you will not. For, whereas he says: Christ is not contained under each kind
Sacramentally, he means not, that the people Receive not the Full Sacrament
and their own Maker, Godde and Manne, under each kind: but by this word
Sacramentally, he means, that concerning the form of words, by which
consecration is perfited in each kind, and by external form of the Signs
under which Christ is exhibited, the flesh only is contained under the form of
Bread, and the blood under the form of Wine As, when Christ said: This is my
blood: the words which we hear, do signify no more than Blood to be there
present, And y^ external Sign and liquor of wine, does represent a presence of
blood only. And this is that which Alexander means, by the word
Sacramentally, when he says, Whole Christ is not contained under each kind
Sacramentally. For he speaks of the representation only which is made to our
senses, by exter^al words and Signs, and not of y^ thing it self and
substance of the Sacrament, which is apprehended by Faith.

Now that Alexander was not of this mind, which M. Jew. would make him to be
of, that whole Christ should not be received under each kind, though whole
Christ were not signified by the sound of the words of Consecration in each
kind, it is manifest by the next article in him, q. 4^. Mem. 3. art. 3.
where he concludes, that, Christus integer Deus and homo est sub specie
Panis, Whole Christ God and Man is under the form of Bread. And, both
sayings are true, that whole Christ is not under each kind* if ye consider
only the Sign of the words that are spoken, Let M. Jew. distinct things
rightly and he shall perceive quickly his own ignorance.
or the things that are showed (for in saying, this is my body, no mention is
made of blood). And again, that, whole Christ God and man is under the form
of Bread, if ye consider the matter Really.

Alexander therefore, speaks no otherwise in this point, then it becummeth A
faithful and Catholic man to do. And M. Jewel does no otherwise, than he is
wont to do, but otherwise surely than becumneth an honest and learned man,
specially having no need to allege any Scholemen, and less need to corrupt
them, when he allegeth them.

Polidorus Uergilius abused.

S. Cyprian calls the Church of Rome, Cyp. lib. 1. Epist. 3.
Ecclesiam principalem, vnde unit as Sacerdet alis exorta est, the principal
Church, from whence the Unity of Priests has spronge. Out of which
testimony M. Jewel gathers A force, as it were, of two Arguments that might
be made, the one in that it is called, Ecclesia principalis, the principal or
chief Church: the other because it follows, vnde vnitas Sacordotalis exorta
est (which words D. Harding does interpret thus) from whence the unity of
Priests is spronge. M. Jewel thus, from whence the unity of the Priesthood
first began. In which his Interpretation there is a plain falsehod and
craftines.

For in repeting the words, and in writing of them, so as if they were D.
Hardings, it becummed him to deliver them forth in the same form, as he ^ound
them in D. Harding. Then, whereas it is not al one to say, the unity of
Priesthood sprange from Rome, and the unity of Priesthod began first at Rome
(for there may be springs two or three in one place, and although the water
issue not out, first at the lowest, yet the lowest of the three may be the
chief head unto all the rivers beneth) M. Jewels intent was not simple, to cast
in this word ( first) into the sentence, as though the question were, not
whether the Chife Priest in all the world were at Rome, but, whether the first
Priest in all the world began at Rome. Craft in chainging and interpreting.
Between which two propositions, there is a great difference.

But what says M. Jewel to these words, Vnde vnitas Sacerdotalis exorta est,
from whence the unity of Priesthood first began, as he englisheth it for a
va^tage?

For that these words seem for to weigh much, I^w. 305
I think it good herein to hear the Judgment of some other man, that may
seem Indifferent.

Why should Polidore Uergile be Indifferent? Ra.
He lived not fifty years sens he was a Collectour to y^ Bishop of Rome, and
therefore to you not Indifferent. And to us on the other side, not Indifferent,
because this very book de Inuen^or^^^s rerum, is condemned by the General
Council at Trent. But you have found somewhat in him by likelihod, which makes
for you, that you esteem of him so well. And what is that, I pray you? We ask
you for the Answer to S. Cyprians words, you bring in Polidore to expound them.
but what will ye conclude of Polidore? That, Jew. Fals^hode in collecting of
arguments.
This commendation (of which S. Cypria^ speaks) was geauen by S. Cyprian to
the Church of Rome in respect of Italy, and not in respect of the whole world.

Whether this be so or no, Ra.
Polidors own words shall try it. In his fourth book the s^xth Chapter,
(...). li. 4. ca* b. de Inue^. rer.
his purpose was to show, of whom first the Order of Priesthood was Instituted.
And he proves, that Christ him self was the first maker of Priests. Then
both it follow in him.

A^ pos^ Chris^um Petrus in Sacerdotio praer^gatiua^ habuis^e dicitur, quod
primus in Apostolorum ordine, and eius Sacrosancti Collegij Caput fuisset*
Quapropter D. Cyprianus epist. 3. a^ Corneliu^ Cathedram Petri Principale^
vocat. But after Christ Peter is said to have had the prerog^^iue in
priesthood, because he was the first in the revv of the Apostles, and head of
that holy College. therefore S. Cyprian in his third epistle to Cornelius,
calls the Chair or Sec of S. Peter the (...) or principal.

(...) then this, touching any wo^ds of S. C^prian, (...)
if any man can there find i^ Polidore, I will le^se my right hand for (...) and
never write hereafter against any hereti^e. but the Book is common, the place
is intelligible, and my eyes and understanding serves me so well, that, I am
sure, Polidore in that place expounds not these words of S. Cyprian, ^nde
^nitas Sacerdot alis exorta est.

What Impudency then is it in M. Jewel, for that these words seem to weigh
much, to bring forth the Judgment of Polidore, a man that may seem to be
Indifferent, impude^cie
whereas they are not at all in Polidore? Polidorus Virgilius (says he)
expounds the same words of S. Cyprian. Dare ye say he expounds them,
whereas he has not them? He brings in S. Cyprian, to prove that the Sea of
S. Peter was principal, but, of Vnitas Sacerdotalis, the unity of Priesthood,
Upon which words, you made have to show his exposition, he makes no mention.
He says in his own words, not in S. Cyprians, that the order of Priesthood
can not be sated to have grown first from the Bishope of Rome, unless we
understand it only by Italy, for Priesthood was rightly instituted at
Jerusalem but that the Commendation geauen by S. Cyprian to the Church of Rome
was geauen in respect only of Italy, and not in respect of the whole world, he
said it not, nor intended it.

The Order also of Priesthood, and unity of Priesthood are two things. In the
Order, is considered, the Author and effect of that Sacrament: In the Unity is
considered, the preservation and Government of that Order. Of the Order it
self, and where Priesthod first began, Polidore does speak. Of the unity, and
of the Relation which all Priests should have to their chief head and
Governor, S. Cyprian does speak, and Polidore says nothing. The Order began
at Dierusalem and not at Rome. The unity, I will not say began at Rome, but
after y^ s. Peter had by his martyrdo^ there taken full possession of that See,
then was it seen, where the Principal Church in all the world was, and to what
beginning al things should be referred, and in what unity they should be
preserved.

Has not M. Jewel, then, done very sincerely, to allege Polidore, so far and
wide from the meaning of Polidor? I would there were some man so indifferent,
as M. Jewel takes Polidore to be, to Judge between him and us, whether he has
not shamefully abused the Later writers.

Of M. Jewels Contradictions.
Hitherto, by many Examples I have proved it, y^ M. Jewel has not understood
other men: now will I show it, by a few Arguments, that he does not well
understand himself. And no marvel truly, if in speaking so many words, he has
not remembered every word, Or, if in co^eting to save his honesty for the
present place, he say and unsay again, like A man that were not sure yet what
to bide by. But because his Frindes and Fellows will think this incredible,
that out of his smooth month, and doctrine squared by the rule of the
Scriptures, Fathers, and Councils, any thing should proceed hacked and
slittered, therefore will I geaue an occasion to the Indifferent, to Beware of
the dub^le tongue and mind, in one and the self same (...).

The Receiving with Company, Jew. 25.
is no substantial p^rt of Christ's Institution* Ergo, we are not bound
therein, to follow the Example of Christ. We are ^ound to y^ e^am^le of Christ.
First this Antecedent i^ false, and if it were no part, of the substance of
Christ's Institution, Yet we are nevertheless bound to his Example, because he
has commanded us so to do.

Here in this place (M. Jewel) you are of the mind that there is a difference,
Ra.
between the Institution of Christ, and the Example of Christ. Otherwise your
saying were very folishe, As by which this only is imported, that, it were no
part o^ Christ's Institution, yet are we nevertheless bound to his Institution.
Which makes a plain contradiction, if that by Institution and Example, you
mean but one thing. An other thing that I note here, is, that you say, we are
bound to Christ's Example, although the thing which is to be done, were not of
his Institution.

What say ye then, to washing of feet, for which you have the express words
of our Savior in the Gospel? (...). 13.
If I (says he) your Lord and Master have vvashed your feet, you also ought
to vvash one the others feet. For I have geauen an Example unto you, that as I
have done, so likevvyse that ye also do. What say you then (M. Jewel) to this
example of our Savior? shall it be followed, or no? You Answer,

That this Objection of washing of feet is common, Jew. 116.
and has been often Answered. And in the same page. The wasshing of feet, was
neither Institution of Christ, We are not bound to the example of Christ.
nor any part of the Sacrament, nor Specially appointed to be done by the
Apostles, nor the breach thereof ever deemed Sacrilege.

To let pass the manifest lie, Ra.
which here you make, that Christ appointed not washing of ^eete to be done by
the Apostles, I mark this only for the present, y^ you labor with all your
wit, to prove, that ye are bound to keep y^ Example of Christ. Reconcile me
then (I pray you) these two places, And tell us how it may stand together,
that we are bound to Christ's example, in that which is not of the Substance of
Christ's Institution, And yet that you may freely (as ye do) let go washing of
feet in your Congregation, because it was not Christ's Institution?

In the Primitive church, Jew. 31.
this order ( of sending the Sacrament to them that were departing this world)
was thought expedient not for the Sick: Not for the sick.
For they in their health received daily.

Ergo, if in health, they needed, Ra.
or used that daily sustenance, was it not provided for them in their sickness?
Yeas, ye confess so much, And therefore you say:

And in their sickness, Jew. For the sick.
had the Sacrament Ordinarily sent home unto them.

How say ye then even now, Ra.
that this order (concerning the necessary vitaile, the Sacrament) was not
thought expedient for the sick? Except you know that a man may be in
sickness, and yet not sick. But g^e ye forward, and make an end of your
^ale. If the necessary vitaile, was not for y^ sick, for who^ was it then?

Not for the sick etc. Jew. For persons excommunicate.
but for persons Exco^munica^e, etc.

Uery well. How long will you tarry in this mind? Ye amend it, Ra.
within xx. lines following. For thus ye remember your self better.

Howbeit I confess, Jew. For other than excommunicate.
sometimes it was otherwise used.

We take your confession, Ra.
that you know not well where to stay. For dividing (as it were) all the
Faithful, Into Sick, A pretty Division.
and Excommunicate, And subdiuiding the Sick, into them that were either in
health, either in Sickness: You le^t none but Persons Excommunicate, for whom
the necessary vitaile, called viaticum, should serve. How be it, ye confess
it was Sometimes otherwise used, and so it must necessarely follow, that it was
not for the Excommunicate only. How these things agree, I do but ask you the
question.

If there had been in it any show of truth, Jew. 111
M. Harding as he is eloquent, would have laid out all the circumstancies, when
this strange error first began, where, and how long it continued, Declari^g
of Circu^ces required.
who wrote against it, And by whom, and in what Council it was condemned.
Verily this great Silence declares some want.

See how ernest the man is, Ra.
to have al Circumstances declared. But, I trow, he will not tarry still in this
mind. For when D. Harding (as reason is) asked, when the Latin Service began
in England, and when the English ceased (for Heretics say, y^ in the primitive
Church, al public prayer was in the known and vulgar Tongue, And the
Catholics think, that some token then or Monument should be extant, of so
general A matter) M. Jewel with open mouth replieth:

O what folly is this? Jew. 187 Declari^g of Circu^stancies refused.
Who is hable to show any Book written in English a thousand veres ago? Or if
it could be showed, yet who were hable to understand it?

Lo, Ra.
now it is folly to require, but some little sign of the beginning or ceasing of
a public and common matter, but in an other place he thinks it wisely spoken
(for he speaks it him self) to demand particularly of diverse
Circu^stancies, when, where, how, who, by who^, and in what Council, errors
began or appeared.

That certain godly persons both men and women in time of persequution, Jew.
42. Receuing at home allowed.
or of sickness, or of other necessity received the Sacrament in their houses,
it is not denied.

Ergo Receiving at home is not reprouable, Ra.
for which there are to be found the Examples of Godly persons both men and
women.

This manner of receiving at home was not lauful for the Laiemen. Jew. 42.
Rec^uing at home disalowed
For it was abolished by godly Bishops in general Counsel.

You belie the Council, unto which you refer us. Ra.
For of Receiving at home it speaks no one word, but, If any person* says
it, Council. Caesaraugustanu^. Cap. 3.
be proved not to have received in the Church, and not to have made an end, of
the Grace of the Eucharist, let him be accursed for ever. Now this forbyddeth
not, but that the Priest may carry the Sacrament home to the houses of
Christians, as it is, at this present, used in the catholic church, And that
they may with good Conscience receive it. But let this be referred to the
Chapter, How M. Jewel has abused Councels. In this place, I press him only
with his contradi^tion: that sometym^s he does not deny, but that Godly
Persons did receive, Privately at home, and, at an other time, he is
altogether changed, and will needs have receiving at home to be an Abuse
condemned by Councels and Fathers.

The Single Communion was never taken for lawful, Jew. 59. Singl^ Co^mu^io^ in
some cases lauful.
but only in consideration of circumstancies, and cases of necessity.

How then is the Mystical distribution a part of the substance of Christ's
Supper, if, Ra.
for any respect it may be altered or omitted?

Thinks M. Harding, Jew. 61. Distribution is of y^ Substa^c^ of Christ's
Supper. And so is Single Communion absolutely unlawful.
that the Sacrifice, whereof neither Christ nor his Disciples ever spoke one
word, is the substance of his Supper, And that the Mystical Distribution in
remembrance of his Death, whereof he gave us such a straight Commandment, in
so manifest and so plain words, is no part of the Substance?

And think you, that if Distribution be necessary, Ra.
any man may receive by him self alone, in any kind of Case or Circumstance?
For as no necessity can make it lawful, to Consecrate in Cheese or Milk,
because Bread and Wine perteine to the matter and Substance of the Sacrament:
So, if the Single Communion be lawful, that is, if one by him self alone may
Receive the Sacrament, it must needs follow, that to Receive with Cum^any, is
not of the Substance of Christ's Institut^on.

The simple people hearing Mass in a strange Language, is dea^e, Jew. 70.
Hearing and not Hearing.
and hears not at al.

You must expound your meaning, Ra.
or else hearing, and not hearing, will not be well perceived. For, if ye refer
hearing of Mass, to the hearing of y^ words, the ^ownd does s^^ike the ear,
though ye meaning come not to the mind. And if ye refer hearing of Mass, to
y^ understanding of y^ which is there done, then does every faithful, y^
believes y^ body of Christ there to be off^red up vnblondily, for him, etc.
hear the Mass as excellently, as if he could conster and p^rse every word of
the Canon. And therefore you can not without plain injury, make y^ people not
to hear y^, which they do hear with their ears: or not to apprch^^d y^ in
their heart, which they be assured of by Faith.

Melanchthon and Bucer accounted the receiving in one or both kinds a thing
indifferent. M. Jewel answers: Jew. 110.


Thus far forth their desire was, it might be judged free, not that they
thought Christ had not ordained the Sacrament to be ministered unto the people
in both kinds, Not indifferent.
or that in itself it is Indifferent, Indifferent
but that the Faithful of God might indifferently and freely use it without
controlment.

These words need A Reconciliation, Ra.
to bring them at one together. For if the receiving in both kinds be not in
it self Indifferent, how may the faithful of God indifferently use it? And if
they may Indifferently use it, how it is not Indifferent?

Note also the Craft or blindness of M. Jewel. He Interprets Melanchthon and
Bucer, in such sort, as if the question had been, Whether the people might not
choose, whether they would receive in both kinds, M. Jewels private comment
upon Melancthon and Bucer.
or not receive at all. And he makes them to answer, that they wish it to be
free and Indifferent, to Receive in both if they will. But the question in
deed, is of Receiving in both kinds, or in one: And they Answer, that it is a
thing Indifferent. And what is y^ to say? Whether that it should be free for
the people to Receive in both? Yea truly this is one part of the sense. But
another is, that it should be as free, for them that would, to receive in one
also.

For the two points, between which the Indifferency goes, are, to receive in
one kind, Or to receive in both, without controlment. Which being granted to
the Protestamts, they should not inueigh and cry o^t against the Papists, for
receiving in one, but they might think themselves chari^ably dispensed withal,
for their free Receiving under both. So that Melanchthon and Bucer were not of
the mind to condemn the manner of other Christians, as M. Jewel in this (...)
falsely interprets them, but like (...) ^^r^tikes, they provided for their
(...) (...), wishing that it might be law^^^ (...) their brothers, to Receive
in both kinds, without c^trolment, and y^ it should (...) be made a matter of
cons^ience and ^^^^gion, whether the people were served in both or one kind,
the thing in it self being Indifferent.

To minister unto the vulgar people in both kinds was not Christ's
Institution, Jew. 119 ^e only says it.
says D. Harding. M. Jewel replieth: Thus he says, and says it often, and
only says it. Other Authori^^e than his own he brings none.

Surely we must look for no reason or cause of his so saying. Yet is follows
Immediately: Ra.


The Reason that moves him, Jew. His reason is this.
I we^ne is this. ^or that there was no Lay people at that banquet with Christ,
but the Apostles only.

I ween then, he does more than only say it, Ra.
when he geaueth A Reason for it.

It does not follow, We may break A Ceremony: Jew. 117 The (...)
Ergo we may break the Substance of Christ's Institution.

It fol^weth not in deed. And hereby you may see, that the Terms of (...) and
Substance, in Christ's Institution, are not Unnecessarie and vain.

This difference in Terms of Jew. ^0.
Substance and Accidents in Christ's Institution, The Terms of (...) and (...)
is newly found out, and has no warrant, neither of the Scriptures, neither of
the Old Fathers.

You be to fine and precise, M. Jewel, for simple Catholics, (...)
And it seems Ra(...)
that yourselfe would not speak but out of Scripture or Old Father, like as
some in the world more curious than ^digent, will have no one word in all
their writings, which they can not bring out of Cicero.

But, I pray you, is not the Distinction of things about Christ's Institution,
into Substance and Accidents, as reasonable and as necessary, as into Substance
and Ceremonies? For by Ceremonies you must needs mean a diverse thing from
Substance* and such as may be let alone or taken away, without corr^ption, of
Subject or Principal (...) And what other thing is that but a plain Accident?

If y^ find then any (...) of the Scriptures or of the old Fathers, to (...)
your Terms of Substance and Ceremonies about Chri^^es I^stitution: you may be
bold without further warrant, to admit the Terms of Accidents and Substance,
about the same Institution. And if that you (notwithwsta^ding you find not that
former distinction in Scriptures or old Doctors) dare boldly sai, y^ it does
not follow, we may break a Ceremony, Ergo, we may break the substance of
Christ's Institution: it follows then, that the Distinction is good, and, y^ we
may affirm, well enough, A reasonable Conclusion: And use proper Terms and
words to express it by, although we have no warrant of the Scriptures neither
of the old Fathers.

The Council of Basile above one hundred and thirty years past, Jew. 9^.
made no conscience to grant the use of both kinds unto the kingdom of
Bohemia, The Papists ^raunt y^ use of both kinds.
and this Counsel now presently holden at Trident, upon certain conditions
has granted the same, to other kingdoms and Countries.

Of whom then speak you these words, Ra.
in an other place of your Reply?

These men take quite away from the people both the Element and kind of wine,
Jew. 115. The Papists take (...)
and also the words of Consecration.

Call you this, taking of the kind of wine quite away, Ra.
the use whereof was permitted to Bohemie, and at this day is ready to be
permitted unto other, if that would deliver them from their heresies? If needs
you will lie, you should do it always so warely (as ye can, well enough, when
you be disposed) that you might not yet be co^uinced thereof, through any of
your own words, spoken at other times. But now it is past remedy, except you
will Repent, because I point you to the places, where ye confess, both that the
Papists have granted the use of wine to other kingdoms and Countries,
bysides Bohemie, and also object, that they have quite taken away the kind of
wine from the people.

All the East speaks the Greek Tongue says S. Hierome. Jew. 16^
To this I Answer, (says D. Harding) y^ some of al Countries of the East spoke
Greek. M. Jewel Replieth:

M. Hardings distinction of al in General, It cannot be general o^lesse it
include every particular.
and al in Particular, that he has here devised to shift of S. Hierome,
seems very homel^ and home made. For how can it be a general, unless it
include every Particular? By M. Hardinges construction we must take AL, for
SOME, or AL, not for the (...) part of AL, And by this Rheto^^^e, less then
half, is as much as AL, and so AL is not AL.

I would say unto you, saving that you be a fore fellow when you come to
quiddities, Ra.
and also that you would ask for a warrant of the Scriptures or old Fathers,
^o justify my words by it, else I would say, that ALL that you have now spoken,
is Nothing and that should seem more (...), than that AL is not AL. But I will
not geau^ you this vantage, I will put your own words unto you.

All the Jews Generally gloried of the Law, Jew. 164
even so, all the Greeks Generally, gloried in their wisdom. And S. Paul
says Generally of them both: ^. C^r. 10.
The Jews call for (...) and Miracles* and the Jews (...). And therefore one
of the Philosophers said, In old times there were Seven Wise men among the
Greks, but now there are not so many Fools, for that they all Gloried in
their Wisdom,

What think you then of the Apostles, Ra.
Or of our ^lessed Lady herself, and other good and holy Jews, did they call
for Signs? If they did, M. Jew. co^st^^ned to take AL, for not AL.
then were they reproueable, because the strength of a Christian, rests upon
Faith, which comes by hearing of Gods word, and requires not the showing
of Merueilouse Signs. If they did not, How did all the Jews call for Signs,
except you also will take AL for SOME, or AL, for not AL?

The Philosopher also, which said very wittily, in reproach of the Grecians
vain Opinion of themselves, that there were not so many Fools emonge them,
as of Old time were Wise men, for that they all Gloried in their Wisdom: He
meant, I trow, y^ there were almost seven fools in Greece, nigh to the number
of the Seven wise, that were i^^ Old times there. And he took him self
perchance to be one of the Seven: So that his General Proposition included not
every Particular. But I have yet a better Example to declare my purpose.

What say you (M. Jewel) to S. Chrysostomes words? Jew. 88.
No body does Communicate* You Answer: His purpose was to rebuke the negligence
of the people, for that in so populous a City, they came to the holy Communion
in so small companies, which companies, he, in a vehemency of speech, by an
exaggeration, It may be general although it include not every particular
in respect of the whole, calls NO BODY. The like manner of Speech, is used
also sometimes in the Scriptures. S. John says of Christ, Testimoniu^eius
nemo accipit, not for that no body at al received his witness (for his
Disciples and many other received it) but for that of a great multitude, very
few received it. In like Phrase Chrysostom him self says other where, Nemo
diuina sapit, No Body sauoreth Godly things.

These be your own words, M. Jewel, Ra.
and whose were those other, where you said: How can it be a General, unless
it include every Particular? Jew. 162
Be not these also yours? How make you then, both to agree together? For NO
BODY imports an universal and general Negative, and then by your very homly
and home made Logique, it includes every Particular. M. Jew. beaten ^ his own
(...).
How make ye then in this place, of NO BODY, SOME BODY, and of NO BODY not NO
BODI, but Disciples of Christ, and many other?

Thus you see, that by your own words in one place, you be driven from your
own Sense in an other, And by reason of your Contradictions, none more Ennemie
to M. Jewel, than M. Jewel.

Jew. 185 Converted from (...). not turned to Religion.
Notwithstanding S. Augustine (whom S. Gregory sent into England) withdrew
the English Nation from their gross Idolatry, wherein he had no great
travail (for perchance it is an easy matter to convert Countries) Yet it is
certain he planted not Religion in this Realm.

What did he then unto them whom Ra.
he withdrew from their Idolatry? Did he leave them without a Religion? Did he
pull their old Cote from them, and give them no new? He Baptized at one
Christmasse, Greg. lib. 7 ep. 30.
more than ten thousand English men, as S. Gregory witnesses. And before he
baptized them, did he not plant Religion in their hearts? Otherwise how is it
credible, that ever they would have come to Baptism? Yet I note this place,
not for the open lie, which is in it, but for the Contradiction, for that it
seems impossible, y^ a Nation should be converted from Idolatry, and yet not
turned to Religion, whereas, the very Conversion it self, does import a
forsaking of one mind and taking of an other. And no Heretics have power to
turn Nations, and the Catholics to whom God geaueth that Grace, do for that
end turn them from Idolatry, that afterward they may become Christians.
Which End if they be not brought unto, Who can say that they are converted?

S. Gregory judges Generally of the Name of Universal Bishop, Jew. 226 The
title of Universal Bishop, condemned Jew. 242 The title of Universal Bishop,
alleged. Ra.
that it is vain and hurtful, the Corruption, the Poison, and utter and
Universal destruction of the Church, etc.

Verily Justinian him self writing unto Epiphanius the Bishop of
Constantinople, calls him the Universal Patriarch.

Whom then da you follow, the Pope or the Emperor* S. Bregorie, or Justinian?
ye follow both, and ye are contrary unto your self, at one time defying the
Title, at an other, alleging it.

Certainly Balaam, Jew. 274 For the cuil life sake of the preachers
notwithstanding he were a False Prophet, yet he opened his mouth and Blessed
the people of God: Cayphas, although he were a wicked Bishop, yet he pphesied
and spoke the truth: we must not condemn the Lawful doctrine.
A Seal although it: be cast in Lead, yet it geaueth a perfect Printe. The
Scribes and Phari^eis, although they were Hypocrites and lived not well, yet
they instructed the Congregation and said well.

By these Examples then it appears, Ra*
that A Doctrine is not to be forsaken, because of the evil life of the
Preacher. What fault then is Doctor Harding in, for saying, that

Be the Bishop of Romes life never so wicked, yet may we not sever our selves
from the Church of Rome?

For if other causes be alleged, wherefore we should do it, they are to be
Answered: but this Objection of the evil life of the Bishops of Rome, is
sufficiently confuted by these Examples which M. Jewel, here has clearly
allowed. Yet (see the nature of the man) when D. Hardinge had said so much, he
could not abide it, but straitewaies comes against it with this Authority.

How be it, S. Cyprian says otherwise, Jew. 276 For Y^ euel life sake Y^ people
must sever them selves from their Rulers.
Plebs obsequens, etc. The people obeying Gods Commaundeme^ts, must sever them
selves from the Wicked that rules over them.

S. Cyprian speaks of Basilides and Martialis, Ra.
Bishops that had defiled them selves with Libels, Lib. 1. ^p. 4
in which they gave their names to Idolatry. For which cause, they were
excommunicated of other Bishopes, and the people were forbid to come to their
Sacrifice. But it is no matter to M. Jewel, how the case stands with any
Testimony, that he brings. So desirous he is to gaynsaie D. Harding, that he
falls into Contradictions with himself also* speaking at one time for
credit to be given to Priests, notwithstanding their evil life, And at an
other time making it lawful, to forsake the Doctrine of the Preacher or Ruler,
for because of his evil life.

When Christ had delivered both kinds unto his Disciples, Jew. 103 The Argument
Ab Authoritate negative, (...).
he said unto them, this do ye, the same that you see I have done. But where
did Christ ever say, Minister un to yourselues one way, and an other wai un to
the people? The like Argument he makes. pa. 119. Where did Christ. and caet.
As who should say, Christ has not expressed it, Ergo it is not to be observed.

Here lo we see, that M. Jewel aloweth the Argument called in Schools Ab
Autoritate Negative. except you will say that him self uses that, which him
self allows not. But hear now what he says in other places of his Reply.

M. Harding Gheasseth thus It appears not by Beda, Jew. 187 The Argument Ab
Authoritate negative, disproued.
the Service was in English, Ergo the Service was in Latin.

What kind of Logique have we here? Or how may this Reason hold? It concludes
Ab Autoritate negatiu^^. I believe M. Harding him self will not allow it.

The Argument in deed he will not allow, as you have made it. Ra.
But for as much as Bede purposely speaks of such things, as concerned
Religion, It is not to be thought, that he would have passed it over in
Silence, if the Mass had been translated into the English tongue.

But how agree you M. Jewel, with your self, that can both refuse and use, one
and the self same kind of Argument? You have, I trow, some defense for you
self in this matter. For you say in an other place:

The weight of M. Hardinges Argument, Jew. 126
is taken, as they name it in Schools, Ab Autoritate negative, and unless it
be in consideration of some other circumsta^ce it is so simple, that a very
Child may sone Answer it.

What Circumstance then is that, Ra.
which being observed makes the Argument ab Authoritate negative, good? Surely
that Circumstance were well worth the learning, that we might perceive, both,
how to make such Arguments ourselves, without doubt of your reprehension, and
also how to warn you thereof, when yourselfe go without the Cumpasse of your
own Circumstance. Perchance you mean hereby not more, but that which you
have already expressed in the first Article, where H. Harding obiecteth unto
you, the Common use of this kind of Reasoning, which is ab Authori^ate
negatiu^^. For thus you say, and it is (I believe) the most you can say, Jew. 68
that,

The Argument ab Authoritate negatiu^^ Few, 68
is thought to be good, The Argument Ab Authoritate ne^atiue, taken out of Gods
word is good.
when so ever prouf is taken of Gods word, and is used not only by us, but also
by S. Paul, and by many of the Catholic Fathers. S. Paul says: God said
not unto Abraham, In thy SEEDS al nations shall be blessed, but in thy SEED,
which is Christ. And thereof he thought he made a good Argument. Galat. 3.


Suffer me than to make a like Ra.
Argument out of Good word, and let me have your Answer used it. Christ says
to S. Peter, Jew. 21.
Feed my sheep, he said not these or them: Ergo without Exception he
com^^itted his sheep unto S. Peter But you like not this Argument. For you say,
it is against the Rules of Logique, and that it was

An Error in Bonifacius, Jew. 305 The Argument Ab Authoritate negative taken
out of Gods worde^s naught.
to reason thus, Dominus dixit Generaliter, etc.

The Lord said Generally unto Peter feed my Sheep, he said not specially feed
these or them: therefore we must understand, that he committed them unto Peter
altogether.

Yet this Argument, is like to that of S. Paul's of SEEDS and SEED, which in
deed is not Ra.
(...) negative, but Affirmative. For he presses the word of the Scripture
SEED, in the Singular number, which to make the better observed, he bids it
to be noted, y^ it was not said, SEEDS. But how so ever that be, M. Jewels Art
may be well enough espied, which al at pleasure affirms and denies, says,
and vnsayeth, makes Rules and Observes them not, and is Contradictorie unto
him self in very many places.

This very name, Jew. 306
the HEAD of the universal Church, is the very thing that we deny.

Then are you a very unwise man, Ra.
to set the State and Substance of your question upon a Name: And to contend
upon words, affirming them to be the very things. And there appears here
unto me to be a manifest Contradiction, that the name should be the thing. For
if it were so, that all this writing on both sides, were no more but an
Alteration of Brammarians or Rhetoricians, then in deed it might be a
question, whether this word HEAD were ever Readen in such a Case, or such an
Author, or ever applied to such and such a person, and then ^roprely the Name
should be the thing.

But now whereas al our conflict, is about the Truth of things that are to be
believed, and we seek not after Terms and Phrases of Speech, but sense and
meaning of Truths, And whereas the understanding (which both parts think to
instruct) is not bettered by any NAMES, but by the very things them selves:
It is al together unreasonable, to say or think, that the very name should be
the very thing, among the Divines.

Yet who so considers diligently, M. Jewels manner and behavior of writing,
shall sone perceive, that he so handeleth the matter, as though he were a
Grammarian only, or a Rhethorician, and not a Divine, and as though in deed he
passed not upon the very Things, so that he might have the very words that
could serve his turn. For which cause he has furnished himself with
Testimonies and Phrases enough, For y^ church, Against the Church, For
Custom, Against Custom, For Fathers, Against Fathers, For Councels, Against
Councels, For Receiving at home, Against receiving at home, For Receiving in
One kind, Against Receiving in O^e, For Receiving alone, Against Receiving
alone, For S. Peter's Pricipalitie, Against S. Peter's principality, For
equality of Bishops, Against equality of Bishops, For Distinctions, against
Distinctions, For Arguments taken of Authority, Against Arguments taken of
Authority, And so truth in many things more, which I have showed partly in the
Second Book, partly in this Chapter of Contradictions, And were more to be
showed, if time or occasion required. But now to an other matter.

A Note Concerning M. Jewels Lies.
ANd what other matter might that be? For I have already discovered his
unreasonableness and falshed, by so many ways, that it may seem, both that I
am at an End, of finding any more Obiectio^s, and he of ministering any more
Occasions. For as concerning his Lies, of which I either intended or promised
to make a special Chapter, there can be no worse nor plainer, than I have
already declared, and therefore let me be excused, if I satis^ie not (...) that,
by now and (...) which is so abundantly (...).

D. Harding does charge him, with 225. Un^ruthes.

M. Staple^on (^^^^pting the Untruths of the first Article, (...)
in which he can not but (...) with D. Harding) does charge him with. 474.

I reckon not the.218. which D. Sander obiectech against him.

And of the (...), which my self (...) found in him, in talking with him about
the State of the Question in the first (...), and about his shamful ordering of
D. Harding, And about his (...) of (...) Glo^es, (...) And Later writers: the
truth is, I have kept no reckening.

But this I am sure of, that although 699. (...) are found in his four first
Articles only, yet many of them that I object unto him, are none of the number
of those. 699. And yet I pass not the cu^passe of the same Articles.

More specialties than these, if any man will require, I am not my self at
leisure, but if he think it expedient, he may by him self gather the
Particulars into one Chapter, by telling only the bart Untrueth, without
further discoursing upon it. And he should do well, not to reckon every one (for
that would occupy a great room) but such notable and singular Lies, as might
not only be understood, but fel^^s it were and seen. As if this Lie should
be the First in the Rewe.

The Bishop of Rome and his Cardinals, ^ew. 1^.
scarsely have leisure to Sacrifice once in the whole year. And Again:

They do scarsely Communicate once in the year. 15.


For this is so notorious a Lie, and so palpable, that he that would report it,
to another that never yet was at Rome, might be thought never to have come to
Church, whiles be tarried there: And he that shall have occasion to journey
thither, shall sensibly perceive and see, that it is a most shamful Lie.

And so forth in other of the like making, the number of which, although it
would be less, yet it should appear most manifestly, that the plain meaning
consciencies, had need to BEVVARE of M. IEVVEL.

How M. Jewel has left some places altogether unanswered.
THus then the Chapter of Lies, being referred to the diligence of other that
would have them set in their Ranks, and which have leisure to bring it to
pass by themselves, Is there any more to be objected against M. Jewel? Yea
mary is there, and that to his reproach and ignominy. For pretending to Answer
every word of D. Hardings, and showing a countenance of such Learning, that
he could, and such diligence, that he would leave nothing undiscussed, and
vnperfited: a great and just shame it is, for him, that many and (...)
Arguments and Testimonies against him, he so passes by, as though he had
never scene them. As in example:

Do ye reprove the Mass, Jew. 57.
(says D. Harding) Or do ye reprove the Private Mass? And M. Jewel
Answers with other questious unto him again, concerning Sole Receiving, and
Single Communion, Private Mass and Sole Receiving. Sacrifice of the new
Testament and A li^^le Book of his own, but to the question it self, he
Answers not.

Concerning the public Service of our (...), if it had been in English at y^
beginning, Jew.117
Doubtless (says D. Har. some mention would have been made of ye time and
causes of the leaving such kind of Service, and of ye beginning of the New
Latin Service. As certain of S. Gregory's works turned into English by Bid
himself have been kept so as they remain to this day: But M. Jewel will not,
or cannot answer.

Si Benedixeris Spiritu, Jew.197 (...)
etc. If thou make thy prayer in the Congregation, with thy Spirit or noise of
Strange words, how shall the unlearned man, thereunto say Ame^? Thus does M.
Jewel interpret y^ place: But y^ translation (says D. Harding) authorized by
King Edward and his Council, is truer, which has thus:

When thou blessest with the Spirit, how shall he that occupies the room of
the unlearned, say Amen, at thy geauing of thanks, seeing he understands not
what thou say? And M. Jewel answers not one word in his own defese,
for saying, The unlearned, in steed of, He that occupies the room of the
unlearned.

Of the Service in ye vulgar tongue the people (says D, Har.) will frame lewd
and perverse meanings, of their own lewd senses. Of y^ Latin they cannot do so:
Ergo Latin is more meet for pu^lik service. Jew. 215
M. Jew. a^swereth nothing.

S. Peter (says Hilarins) deserved for the confession of his blessed faith,
Supereminentem Locum, A Preeminence above other. Jew 146
To Supereminence, or Preeminence above other, which is imported by Super,
above, M. Jewel answers nothing.

How shall the Contumacie and Jew. 258
Pertinacitie of mischievous persons be repressed, specially if the Bishops be
at dissension within themselves, if there be not a Supreme Power, who, toward
some, may use the rod, toward other some, the spirit of Lenity?

M. Jewel answers nothing.

Cum tantum etc. Whereas we see ( says S. Augustine) so great help of
God, Jew. 148 Aug. de (...). credend. c. 17.
so great profit and fruit, shall we stand in doubt, whether we may hyde
ourselves in the Lap of the Church, which (though Heretics bark at it,
round about, condemned partly by the Judgment of the people themselves, partly
by the Sadness of Councels, and partly by the Majesty of Miracles, even to
the Confession of Mankind) from the Apostolic See, by Successions of Bishopes,
has obtained the top or highest degree of Authority? To which Church, if
we vvil not give and grant the Primacie, soothly it is a point either of most
high vvickednes^e, or of headlong arrogance.

To this place M. Jewel answers nothing, I believe, because he had nothing.
For, his diligence and Order in Answering three other places of S. Augustine,
which went Immediately before this, in his 14. Division of the fourth Article,
do^ prove, that he lacked not Occasion to Answer this also, which was so
largely alleged by D. Harding, and followed so Immediately, in the 14. Division,
but that, he knew not well what to say unto it.

After this manner, it were easy to find more places, and them of no small
weight, which should declare M. Jewel, for all his fair show of an Absolute
Reply, not to have touched yet many principal Reasons and Testimonies of D.
Hardings. But I have already proved my purpose sufficiently.

Of a new devised and childish Objection, solemly used of late, against the
Catholics, by which M. Jewel also is touched.
ANd now to make an end, what may any Indifferent Reader ask for more, to
persuade him in this one point and Conclusion, that he ought to BEVVARE OF M.
^EVVEL?

There cannot be a greater Bragger, than he that provoke all the men alive:
Nor a greater Shifter, than he that will (...) no question to ^and in the state,
in which he did first put it: Nor a greater Wrangler, than he that (...) the
meaning of his (...), almost in every Argument: Nor a greater Corruptour of
Witnesses, than he that will suffer nor Text, nor Gloss, nor Canon nor Civil
Law, nor Old nor Late Writer, to continue in his right form of Verdie^: Nor a
Writer more perilous, than M. Jewel.

But in one thing, I tr^we, he is (...) And what is that? Mary he (...)

In Schools, it is a vain glory and pride (...) y^ boys, to contemn that,
which is common, to affect singular and (...) things, to refuse that which an
other (...), and to fall out with their fellows, that (...) out of their
Notebokes, any of their treasures. Which Affection allthough they be not beaten
for, because of the first beginnings which are nourished with hope of praise:
yet the ^umour is (...) and co^rupt, which breeds such an ytch of Folly, or
canker of Envy in them.

In Courts also, it is a sad Pride and glory, to have such a Cut of
Appataile, or such a Trick or two about it, as none ^ls uses. which after it
begin to be (...) of other, the Authors are strait (...) weary of it, and turn
them (...) to other fash^ons. Concerning which matters, there be great Rules
and Ohseruations, As that a man must not (...) one Coat above a certayen
(...). Also that he wear his own and not an other man's Coat, And generally,
that in all his manners, he may seem to stand by bu^selfe alone, and to depend
of no other. In so much, that it is a great grief unto some, to hear it
s^yed unto them, I know where you had this, or where you bought that, As (...)
were lost, beacause they can not be singular.

Now, if this Contention and Folly shall be allowed also in matters of (...)

(...)

Let him understand briefly, how M. Jewel also may be pressed with it.

S. Cyprian. Lib.2 Epist.3. For the Institution of Christ. Alleged, in the
Defense of the Truth. Fol. 11. Used by M. Jewel. Page 106.

Tertulliams place, aduersus ^raxeam. That is true, that was first ordained.
Alleged, in the Defense of the Truth. Fol.11. In the Apology of England. Used
by M. Jewel Pa.258. 313.

The Sorry of (...). Declared by Fox. Page 9 Used by M. Jew. Page.236.

The Gloss, Domine cur ita facis? Sir why do ye so? Alleged by M. Nowel.
Fol.26. Used by M. Jewel. Page 258. and 313.

That the Book called (...), is not S. Basiles. Labored by the Magdeburgenses.
Cent. 4. Cap.10. Col.946. Used by M. Jewel. Page.86.

That S. Augustine, whom S. Gregory sent into England, was of no Apostolic
Spirit, etc. Set forth by Bale. Lib.2 de actis. To. Pomisicum Page 51. 52. 53.
Alleged, by the Magdeburgenses. Cent.6.ca.10.col.748. Used by M. Jew. page.185.

The discourse upon the first bringers in of the Faith into England. Made by
the Magdeburnenses, Cent 1,lib.2cap.3.col.23.Cent.2.cap.2.col.6 and
8.cent.3.cap.2.col.4. Used by M. Jewel. Page 190.

The arguments against the (...) Epistles. ab Autoritate negative of S.
Hierom. Bennadius Damusus.
Made of the Magdeb Cet.2. ca.7 col.151. And of the sayings of Clemens.
Cent.2.ca.7.col.185 Antherus. Cent.3.ca.7.col.189 Marcellin.
Ce^t.4.ca.7.col.576 Marcellus. Cent.ibide^.col.578 Zepherin.
Ce^t.3.ca.7.col.179 Meltiades. Ce^t.4.ca.7.co 577



Arguments against Anacletus Epistles gathered. 1 Of the Story of Times. 1
Alleged by the Magdebur. Cent.1 li.2.c.10.co.637. 2 Of the building of S.
Peter's Church. 2 Centur.2. cap.7. col. 140. 3 Of the alleging of old Fathers
Decrees. 3 Centur.2. cap 7. col. 144. 4 Of ye Phrases of the Epistles. 4 Cent.2
c.7 col.143. 5 Of the Interlacing of the Scriptures. Centur.2. cap.7. col.143.
6 Of the needelesse alleging of them. 6 Cent.2 c.7 co.140. 141. 142. 148.
Used by M. Jewel, not one argument left out. Page 67. 223. and 224.

This for an Example is enough. For if a man were so disposed, to spend long
time in examining of this one Point, Whether M Iesels great and full stuffed
Reply, came i^mediatli from his own singular Inue^tion and diligence, or no:
there is no dout, but he has either none at al, or very few Arguments and
Authorities, which are not to be sonnde also in other that have written before
him. Especially if it shall be rightly considered, how much Peter Martyr,
Calvin, and the Magdeburgenses only (to let other s^rapers pass) have
written against y^ Catholic Church, even upon these very ^^estions which M.
Jewel has proponed.

Yet I think not, that all that he has gathered, has com out of them,
although it may be found in them also (for why may not an English Protestaut,
be as sone taken up, to serve the Devil in setting surth of Heresies, and to
Receive secret Intelligence from him, what he shall study upon, and mark
especially, as any Heretic of beyond the Seas?) And if it were gathered out
of them, I would not Object it unto him, as one of the Deadly sins for which
men should BEVVARE of him. For among friends al things are common, and no man
that wise is and honest, writes to make him self a name in the world, but to
help the common cause, for which him self, with other, stands.

But this much only I note, Pluck out the beam out of your own eye.
that such as seek very egrely and impotently, to hurt the Catholics
estimation by it, in telling them that they are Borowers, may understand, that
the same Objection (if it be any thing worth) may be easily returned back upon
them again.

In making of which, I think in deed, M. Nowel no borower, for none so (...)
that the Author thereof was no borower, although there has been already so
much invented and imagined against Catholics, as more, by any occasion, could
not be uttered. Let him therefore alone have the praise of it, for devising and
mainteining so insensible an Objection, as neither has been used of former
Heretics, though they sought all means how to deface us, neither can be
reprochful unto the Catholics, which know that nothing is new under the
Son, And, that al Scriptures, and Docto^rs, and Writers are ours, which make
for the Defense or Sense of the true Faith.

Unto your charge therefore, M. Jewel, I do not lay it, whether you have
taken out of the M^gdeburgenses, or any Notebookes of other men, that which you
utter, M. Iewles charge
but, with your Appealing unto the first six hundred years, and your Refusing
of the Authorities within the same years, And with your Excoursing into al
Ages for witnesses. And for your Abusing of the witnesses of al Ages, with
these so principal matters, I burden you. Which if it seem light unto you, I
do not care (for I make no account upon it, that your self should have leisure
or respect to my small writings) but that other might think better of it, I
have provided by special noting of such matter, in which M. Jewel might be taken
for no great Jewel when al is known.

In gathering and setting forth of which, if I se^me to have d^ne otherwise
than well, I am ready either to defend it, either to confess it. Assured for all that, that there is no one P^ot^rtant in all England, that shall be able to
disprove my Objections, and trusting, that in the Judgment of the Catholiq^^s,
I shall not much need to crave any pardon.

And now, as from y^ (...) through the Book, I have always appealed to the
Indifferent Reader: so now to conclude, I say unto him, and desire of him, that
he neither favor Jewel, because of the Procedinges: nor hate Rastel, because
of his Religion, but Judge according unto that which is alleged and proved,
whether M. Jewel be not that Fellow, of whom the whole co^^trie ought to BEVVARE.


