A REPLY against an answer (falsely entitled) in Defense of the truth, made by
John Rastell: M. of Art, and studient in divinity.

Forte est vinum, 3. Esd. 3.
fortior est Rex, fortiores sunt mulieres, super omnia vincit VERITAS.

Wine is strong, a King is stronger, Women be stronger, but, above all things,
truth ouercummeth.

Imprinted at Antwerp by Aegidius Die, x. Martij. Anno M.D.LXV. CVM
PRIVILEGIO.

Regiae Maiestatis Priuilegio permissum est Iohanni Rastello in Artibus
Magistro and Sacrae Theologiae candidato, vti per aliquem Tipographorum
admissorum impun^ ei liceat imprimi curare, and per omnes suae ditionis
Regiones distrahere, librum inscriptum, A reply against an answer (falsely
entitled) in defense of the truth, and omnibus aliis inhibitum, ne eundem
absque eiusdem Iohannis consensu imprimant, vel alibi impressum distrahant, sub
poena in Priuilegio contenta. Datum Bruxellae.x. Martij, Anno M.D.LXV.

Wouwere

TO THE READER.
THE more worthy of love and honor, that the nature of Truth is, the more
shameful without doubt, and hateful it must be, to do any violence unto it.
For, where more occasions are offered, to stay men from their evil purposes,
there to pass the bonds of righteousness, it proves a greater impudency. As
for example, in young ladies, whom complexion has made bewtifull, and lack of
brothers only heirs, and good education worthy of all praises, and pure love
of holiness has persuaded to continue virgins, if any act dishonorable, or vile
rape be committed, what stranger is so unkind and far of from the country or
sight of that person and virtue, which but hearing only of her injury, does
not rise in his heart, against the worker of it. But, what virgin ever was
there, so fair, so princely, so noble, so chaste, and so without all spott, as
Truth? And what greater vilanie can be practiced, then by dissimbling, lying,
slaundering, and blind reasoning, to go about to defloure such a virtue?
Surely, if those eyes and judgments, by which spiritual bewties are
considered, were as generally and co^monlie in men's heads, as the bodily
eyes are, which judge of colors, it would offend the gentell blood and heart,
a thousand times more, to see the truth abused, then to behold a Lucretia (if
you will) of their family violently to be taken of some villane, and
constrained to serve him at his pleasure. But, so great and greauouse is the
plage, which thorough Adam his disobedience falls upon every soul, our
education also and conversation is so carnal and corruptible, by reason of
gross and sensible things, with the which we are so well acquaynted, that a
blow geauen unto some worshipful frinde of ours, or a foul word and
opprobrious spoken to the face of our natural Prince, does more frett the heart
with compassion or indignation, then when we hear it readen never so plainly
and treatablie, that: Pilate then took Jesus and whipped him. 10. 19.
And the souldiars, platting a crown of thorns, did put it on upon his head,
and set a purple robe about him. And they came to him, and said: Hail, o king
of the Jews, and they boxed and buffe^ed him. After which sort, if but a
cusson of any Christian Prince in the world* should be ordered of his tenantes
and servants at this present, what exclamations would we make, and what
detestations would we conceive against them? There is not undoubtedly, there is
not, that zeal for the truth it self, which is uttered in defense of plain
vanity: and God most almighty and glorious, is not so attentively
considered, as a man, or a mase, or a badge only upon the sleeue, which are
nothing in comparison. For defense yet of which things so small, how great
angers and stomakes are taken, and how much is he contemned in the world, which
dissembleth an injury in such matters? And in deed, allthough the things
them selves are but simple, yet the truth is in them also, moderately to be
followed, and in right judgment it were not to be suffered, that either
officers, either orders, should be freely disgraced: how much more justly
then are the sacraments and the ancient manners of the Catholic faith, to be
considered of all sober heads, and maintained in all humility, and if truth
in wordlie and common matters be embraced of every honest man, whi is the
everlasting verity, and cause of owr soul, which should be chiefest, either
not sought for, when it is easelie to be fownd, either else not cared for, when
it is evidently perceived. Has he (trow you) a good judgment or a noble
heart, which either affects ignorance, and will not turn over the leffe, least
he should have a conscience of the truth once known, either being convinced
by evident reason, that his forfathers believed well and truly, does think
that divines only have to think of such matters, and follows outwardly the
fond and newfound brothers? Or they, which read the books of both sides, and
either through lightness and vanity do bear away no more then the phrase and
manner of writing of the authors, either for malice and enemitie, consider only
how to find faults with the writer, do they show therein, any point of great
wit and gravity? And so, whiles some think, and those I fear no young babes
or beggars, I hold with Christ whom all confess, and further if I should
consider the question, I might be made, to my cost, a papist: and others say
privily, in deed the old religion is best, when all is done, but we must bear
a little with the world: further when on other sort reports, it is smoothelie
done, or he paieth his adversary home, or he runs like oil, or he byteth
like vinegar: and finally whiles others say, directing their eye not to the
matter, but against the author, that, herein he declares little good nurture in
not belording some person, or he misseth in congruitie of speech, or he tells
old dreams and stories, or he iesteth and dalieth all together: the
conclusion is, that very few do honor the truth, or seek earnestly for it.
For, they which refuse to be acquainted with it, or dissimble the knowledge
thereof, do without all doubt geaue occasion to disgracing of it. Like as in
court, to make as though you knew not some notable and worthy Lord, it is
half a dishonor unto him. And others, which busy themselves about words and
titles, and pass over, with out consideration, the sense of things and the
matter, are like them which look a man in the face, whiles he tells them a
sadd tale for their profit, and think all that while upon nothing else in a
manner, but what tailer it should be, which made his cote and apparel. I appeal
therefore unto every conscience, and my self I provoke to the uttering, and
the, (Reader) to the considering of the truth.

It is not enough to read, but thou must also consider, and it little
profits to consider, except it be a truth worth the marking. Of the.ij.
women, which striued before Salomo^, one told a long tale, of her dwelling in
one house together with her fellow, of her own and her fellows childebearing,
of her quick child taken in the night season from her side, and the placing of
her companions dead boy in her bosom, with other such circumstancies more, to
move perchaunse some affections. When she had ended: It is not so (quod the
other woman unto her) as thou say, 3. Reg. 3.
but thy soune is dead, and mine lives. But on the other side, Thou lie,
says she, for my soune is a live, and thine is dead. And thus they striued
before te king. Now, what sentence the wise Prince gave, it is commonly
known, as how he called for a sword, and commanding the quick child to be
divided in.ij. parts, sought to find out thereby, in which of the.ij. women
the natural compassion over her child would sonest appear. Which straitwayes
uttering it self brimly, in one of them, as he wittily had conceived, unto her
he appointed the quick child, and sensibly dissolved a secret question. Of
which example, this I think, may be well gathered, that in all controversies
we go strayt to the quick of the question, and rest not upon the by matters.
For, in disputing of the Sacrament of the altar, and the necessity whether
some allwaies should communicate, thou lie says one, thou blasphemiest
says the other, this is an itching folly says one, this is sluttisshe
eloquence says the other, you play apishe parts says one, you be like S.
George an horseback says the other, and this is no little sport unto many to
see, how contrary sides can cut one the other. But this undoubtedly is
nothing to the question, how even one is with the other. For concerning such
odd words, as I can not tell hou they come in, and serve to the expressing of
affections, so let him take heed which uses them, that they consent and agree
with the matter, and let other be warned, which are the readers or hearers, not
to gape after such glauncies, which happ now and then in sadd writing, but to
mark aduisedlye what truth is in question, and neither by acclamation to the
wordlie proceedinges, neither indignation against the old faith and Catholic,
to shrink in any part from it. Which is (me thinks) to call for a Salomons
sword, and not to sit still in judgment with harkening after such by phrases,
as are not of the substance of the question. The sharpnes of which sword will
show, who is the false harlot, and who is loath to be inwardly examined, caring
not what absurdity he permits, so that he be not openly confounded, and
the nature (as I may say) of the question be not espyied. And this, I speak,
not only for the indifferent reader his sake, whom I wisshe to consider the
truth ernestly, but for our ease also in this fight with the Protestants,
that we might come to some peace and conclusion. For, to the books of
Catholics, which of late have been printed, some of the answers, and the most
common are these: It is an unlearned book, it does not observe the styles and
titles which it should do, it names him but Master, whom it should call my
Lord, it alleges such authorities as we never saw, it recites visions which
are not in scripture, it has false Latin in it, it is full of skoffes and
tauntes. As who should think, the argument were dissolved, if the maker of it
were reproved, for lisping in his utterance, or making a wrie mouth upon his
adversary. For, if these were heighnous faults, and might in deed be so
proved against the Catholics, or if there were not a perfect hatred, which the
holy Prophet boldlye confesses, Psalm. 138
in loving the persons of his enemies, with detesting to the uttermost, and
defying all their iniquities, yet a wise preacher, would not speak at all of
them, or lightly pass away from such matters, and go exactlie to the point of
the question, and prove that it touches not the state of his religion.

Yet I grant, if a religion were approved by long use of all Christendom, it
were enough to tell the people, that the contrary is not to be credited: and
they without more words ought to be persuaded, as bound to follow an universal
authority of Catholic priests and Bishopes. But when new opinions are
brought forth in to open pulpites, and they commended by no formar authority,
also when strange Ghospells are confirmed by no miracles, but only by naked
affirmations, and private interpretatio^s, that this is true, and this we
understand it, or else by no likely and probable reasons, by which the
understanding might be sumwhat directed, it is no honest and indifferent
dealing, that when such their words and arguments are disproued, it should be
enough for them to answer again, you lie, or you jest, or you favor not the
pure and sincere Gospel. I gather by the handeling of other Catholics, what
I have to provide for, about my own doings.

A preacher at paul's cross, (in an evil hour) provoked all the Catholics
in the world, upon manifold articles, against him (for part of his lying) a
short confutation was straitwaies put in writing. which for the shortness of it,
being easelie copied out, and for the truth and soundnes of it, liked very
well of the Catholics, through much goeing abroad in to many places, and free
communicating of it unto diverse persons, it cummeth at length unto a
protestants hands, which before that, was desirous of it. Which, (to the
co^mendacion of his zeal undoubtedly, although not of his science) made with
speed an answer unto it, and entitled it, An answer in defense of the truth.
etc. Wherein you may note, how much in a short time the world is changed. For,
at that season, simple and familiar letters of Catholics, not framed to such
purposes, were out of hand answered, and put in print. Treatisies also, which
went abroad without name from frind to frind, were sought and inquired for
curiously, and set forth in print to be considered. Yet now, when they are
provoked again and again, to make good the crakes set on their Gospel,
they work (I fear) by deceipts and subtelties, and have either no answer at
all to make, or that which they have made is not lyked of their favorers, or
else they will make so many words and so great a work, that like crafty
worms they may cover themselves under leaves, and still maintain a russhing,
with creeping yet away from the taking, or else they are not so hott in sprite,
as they were wont to be. But concerning that called Defense of the truth, being
sent unto me by a great fauorer of the proceedinges, and sent of very good
will and frindshipp, that I should be reformed (after his desire) by it, by
considering how the Papi^^es are always repelled, I tarried not long, but made
a reply against it, the verity of our cause was so evident, and the false
demeanure of the adversary, that I might well defend the Catholic, and turn
the glory of crakers in to confusion. What I did, that it might come in to the
hands of our adversaries, and find among them a direct answer unto it, or else
a quiet geauing over of their further striving against the truth, allthough it
be harmless, yet being needelesse, I will not declare it. Yet, this I am bold
to say, that they might (if they would) have done by this book, as they did by
the Apology (as they termed it) of private mass, and have set it forth in
print with their answer unto it, for the glory of their religion, and much
liberality toward poor Catholics, whose writings without the author his
labors and charges, full diligently they have printed. Which, whether it were
worth the answer, or no, therein let any reasonable men be judges, and let the
truth be considered, I pray the (Reader) most hartelye, without respect of
any my manner of writing. Not because I am not willing to answer, to every
point that they may have against me, but that the truth should be seen the
better, when extraordinary inuectiues are not intended. For, (as I have
said,) I fear, by the examples of other, lest this will be their chiefest
answer: It is not worth the answering, it is full of toys and fancies. It
forgets good nurture in writing. etc. As who should think, that they (like
gentle doves) had no manner of gall in their writings, or as though that a
wiseman might not dissimble an injury, and answer to the matter directlye.
But, be it so, you be patient, quiet, fairespoken, innocent, harmless, you
think evil of no man, you pray for the Pope and the Cardinals, you reverence
the name of religious folks, you know not how to nickname the Papists, no
bitterness, no skoffing, no vncurteousnes, is in your preachinges and writings
espied, and the contrary vices are in Catholics. Forgeaue us then, I pray
you, these our singular faults, considering yourselues, that you also may be
tempted. And if a sharp word or sentence, allthough it be medicinable, must
not be spoken unto you, take away all such words in this book, as may troble
your patience, and let the truth by itself be considered, and briefelye
answer just objections.

First^y say, and replye against the maker of the defense, that he proves or
impugneth that, which is not denied or maintained, dissimbling (as it seems)
the a^swering to the point, upon which the question rests. Def. fol. 24. 25.
26. See the rep. fo. 46 31. 32. 33. 72 46 113 56 133 63. 64. 65. 147 109. 110.
111. 112. 196

Furthermore I say, that whereas the question is, whether private mass be
against Christ his institution, he alters the state of the controversy by
adding these terms, In case of necessity. Def. fol. 19 pa 1 Repl. fol. 36 If
the people will not communicate. 19 2 37 the common use of the private mass. 27
1 49 more to use the sacrament. 29 2 in extremity orderly used. 60 2 141

Again I say, and would call it a slander, but do you term it as
favorably as you may, that he can not stand by his words which he reports
of the Catholics, and their church, defense fol. 1 pa. 2 lin. 21 See the
repl. fol. 4 6 1 10 12 8 2 13 19 28 2 20 52 29 1 4 55 34 2 2 73 45 1 13 84 55 1
24 133

Besides this, I object, that he does greatly forgett himself, and mistake the
matter of which he should speak, Def. fol. 45 pa. 1 linea 22 See the reply
folio 106 66 2 9 140 76 2 12 162

Now concerning the arguments, which he makes such as the known Logike or
Divinity never allowed, they will appear

Def. fol. 11 pa. 2 lin. 19 See the reply folio 24 30 1 2 58 33 1 10 72 33 2
18 75 41 2 14 94 45 2 3. 11. 108. 110 50 1 1. 7. 118 51 2 19 121 52 2 24 135 58
1 2 136 70 2 18 151 92 1 185 104 1 13 193

Finally there is one feate much used in his book, and properly it would be
called a lie, but how so ever it must be termed, you shall find it Defense fol.
14 upon pa. 2 li. 9 see the reply fol. 27 18 1 10 31 45 S. Cypriane 1 20 105
21 S. Irenei. 1 17. 18 44 30 S. Austine, 2 18. 19 68 3^ and the fath. 2 1 70 31
the doctors 1 15 69 38 S. Chrisost. 1 21 81 38 Christ, and 2 3 84 38 his
Apostles 2 24 89 50 S. Hierome 2 5 119 55 Socrat^ and 1 13 129 55 Syn. Gang. 1
18 132 57 the Eua^gel. 1 15 134 86 and S. Paul. 2 6. and 11 173. 174

I had forgoten almost S. Cyprian, excedinglye abused, Defense fol. 71. pa. 1.
Replye. 155. and not well understood, Defense fol. 100. page 2. Reply fol.
189.

Therefore let the truth be considered, and the substance of the matter
regarded, that, when preachers and prelates find fault with our manner of
wrytinge, as though all the book were then answered, if they say toys and
nothing else to be in it, thou (indifferent Reader) be not so quieted, but
either judge thou by our doings, 3. Reg. 3.
whether we be like Luther and skoffers, or whether the cause it self be not
separated, from the manner and fasshion of handeling it. For which purpose, I
have gathered this table, of such things as mislike us in the maker of the
defense, by which, one may see what religion they be of, and how shamefullie
they abuse their whole country. The end is this, let no honest man be ashamed
of the truth, let no protestant belie the truth, if we defend a evil cause,
there are wits to discuss it, and proving our matters so evidently, why is
no more regard made of them? If our Lord be the God, follow him, if Baal be he,
follow him. If we slander or misreport our adversaries, let the places be
noted, and we shall satisfy them. If they have not done so with us, the places
are quoted, we look for their answer.

That they may be short and compendious, I require them to speak to the
questions, and that they may not wander in confusion of talk, I have brought
our objections in to order.

They can do to their country at home, and us here abroad, no greater
pleasure, (except they would out of hand return unto the Catholic church)
then speedilye and honestlye to clear themselves of such matters as are laid
against them, that we may have a further occasion to show the weakness of this
new religion, and that others, which through harkenyng to the world, and their
own private lusts or opinions, have neglected the authority of all
Christendom commended to them by long contynuance, may with reason believe
rather the Catholics, whose words shall be found more truer, and more
certain to build, or else beware upon (as they have to mistrust their
devotions) lest in deed they be of no religion. For which kind of men, if it
were not, less preuailyng against the truth and less alteration would be
permitted, but seeing man is free and master of his own actions, they can be
no more then warned, that they seek after truth, and follow it. God be
merciful unto us, and if he has said it by some of his Prophets, upon us,
that for our sins sake, and dishonoring of his exceeding great name, we shall
be carried away prisoners in to Babylon, yet, 4. R^. 20.
as Ezechias the King answered for his time, if we also may be so favored of
him. Bonus sermo Domini, quem locutus est, sit pax and veritas in diebus
nostris. It is a good saying, which our Lord has spoken, yet for our days let
there be peace and verity, Fare well. From Louanie, the second of March.

A REPLY AGAINST THE FALSENAMED Defense of the truth.
CAP. I.
WHETHER M. Iuell, or the author of the Apology of pryuate Mass, have for
their parts done all things so perfectly, that they may or should be defended
of those, which are of the same opinion and faith with them: in the one side it
may be a question, and on the other, I know it is none at all. For, as
concerning the folowers of new religions, which believe that the true light is
reveled in these last days, they have to strive and labor for them, whom they
take for their Apostells: but the Catholic, whose faith is not to finding out
in the end of the world, he has not to hang upon any one man's authority,
except he be such as is commended by the whole worlds testimony. Yet,
forasmuch as the answerer to the Apology of private mass, begins first
with the author of that very Apology, I will not by my silence, be thowght to
confess him utterly guilty, and yet I will not make for him such hard shift,
and stout defense, as thowgh any part of owr cause were lost, if he be not
thoroughly cleared. Therefore to begin with you, which would seem to defend the
truth, what fault do you find with the author of the Apology of private
Mass? First of all you reprove him sharplye, that he brings his own sense
unto M. Iuels words, and after, so reason against it, as though it were his
meaning. But, how prove you this upon him? Mary, the Bishope of Salisburie (say
you)* He never said simply, Defense.
that he should make no rekonyng of his doctrine, because he was Bishope.

Truly neither the Apology does simply so report of him. Reply.
But his words rather be these: I marvel not a little, why you, being reputed
a man of such lerning, wtterlie refuse to prove the doctrine you teach:
alleging very slender causes of your refusal, etc. Meaning his vocation to
so high a Rome, and the place where he tawght, and the honorable estate of the
audience, and the doctrine authorized by the realm. Now it is.ij. things, to
say, I refuse to do this, and, I should not do this. Or else* I refuse to do
this, and I allege my vocation for one cause, and, I should not do this,
because I am a Bishope. For in refusing and alleging cause of it, there is
greater occasion geauen of further consideration: but in sayng, I should not do
this, because I am a Bishope, there is small grace showed because of so hasty
conclusion. This second kind of phrase, is for them which stand gloriously
upon their honor and estimation, but the first agrees even with such, as are
ready to fulfill their vocation. The one sentence does challenge a thing of
duty, the other emploieth within it a reason and co^ueniencie. And to be
short, the one may be spoken, mildlye, discreetly, and charitablie, but the
other is uttered (I think) stoutly, vnwyselie, and presumptuouslie. Wherefor,
Sir, you make the matter worse by your telling, then it was in the author his
writing: and you find fault with others for misreporting and misco^struing,
providing not in the mean while for your self, to use and show true dealing.
The Catholic does not take M. Iuell to be so folishe, as to think that
because he is a Bishope, he should make no rekonyng of his doctrine: but he
marueleth rather (his lerning considered) that he would allege such causes as
he did, for the refusal of proving his doctrine. And so he may yet still
marvel at it.

But (say you) my Lord Bishope did not say, Defense.
he should not prove his doctrine, but that he might not well do it without
further license. Wherein truly you do take very much from a Bishope his
liberty, Reply.
if he can not safely co^ferr with such as D. Cole is, withowt obteinyng of
license. And you will troble also the counsel of the realm with more matters
then needful, if they shall make so little of their Bishopes, that they are not
to be trusted, with using of their office, except they first ask leave and
license. If the Catholics, which are in prison, were such greuouse offendars
against the state, that it might be suspected they would practice all treason,
then in deed, for suertie that none of their religion might come unto them, it
were not done vnwyselie to make the restraint general: and then might a new
Bisshope doubt perchaunse to conferr with them, without further license. But
where as all the fault, which is laid to their charge, has no other name but
papistrie, and old religion, M. Iuels doubt was more then needful, to refuse
the prouyng of his doctrine without further license. But it is well that you
will declare unto us, the rightfullnes of his refusal, and make his part more
probable. Wherein your reasonyng is this: Were it good reason (think you) that
a magistrate at the demand of every subject, Defense.
should bring reason to prove any law, publisshed by the prince, to be good?
etc.

Neither every demand, Reply.
neither every subject is to be answered, and God forbed, that either
cardmaker, or tapster, or fyddler, or peddler, should be permitted among their
pottes and packes, to sit judges upon great Doctors, or reverend Canons of
general Counsels. Yea truly, if either gentleman or merchant, would
captiouslie and proudly appose the priest or curate of his parish, it were
not to be suffered. But is D. Cole every man? and the good and learned
Catholics, which continue in indurance, are they no more to be regarded, then
the common sort of English men? or on the other side, are they to be abhorred,
as a singular sort of wicked men? To submitt the judgment of the Prince and
realm, to the myslykyng of one wayward subject, I grant with you, it would be
great impeachme^t to the Princes authority* nevertheless to defend the
judgment, which has passed by consent of any Prince, or realm, it commends
their estimation and dignity. But, concerning waywardnes, has D. Cole showed
him self to be such a one, in his request and letter to M. Iuel? In deed you
speak brodely of him, and say that he required a proof of M. Iuels doctrine,
under pretense of lernyng, but in deed quarelling. But a^ee herein yowr honest
and true charity. M. D. Cole in his first letter to the Bishope, promises by
the faith he bears to God, that he will yield so far as M. Iuel shall geaue
him cause. And he again in the second letter* to M. Iuell, in most hearty and
humble wise, desires him to geaue ear unto his suit, and he speaks so
loulie and baselie, that it may be well marueiled, why such a Catholic would
submitt him self unto a protestant. Yet this notwithstanding, you, which see
further in other men's hearts, then you can gather by any outward sign, dare to
speak it, and that in print, that for all M. D. Coals pretense, yet in deed,
he went about quarelling. And you speak not only for your self, but you
would have other believe, that M. Iuell also was of the same opinion, The M.
of the defense slau^dereth D. Cole, and Master Iuel, both.
as though he had therefore made strange, without further license, to show
forth the proufes for his doctrine, because he had to do with a wayward and
quarelling subject. Whereof you do foully and unworthily cause him to be
suspected* as it does clearly appear by his answer to M. D. Coals first
letter. In which after he had declared the doubt of his mind whether without
further license, he might safely geaue a rekonyng of his doctrine, M. Iuell in
the answer unto D. Coals first letter.
Not withstanding (says he) for as much as I am persuaded that you
charitablie desire to be resolved, I can also charitablie be contented etc. to
conferr with you herein. Wherefor truly, Sir, (what so ever you be) you be much
to blame to report in such sort of D. Cole, as neither by him is to be
gathered, by the faith he owes unto God, neither to M. Iuell is persuaded, as
plainly appears by his letters. If therefore D. Cole was not in such sense
taken by M. Iuell, as you suppose him to have been received, it is evident that
as you understood not the meaning of the author of the Apology, so likewise,
you have mistaken the mind and saying of your Lord of Salisburie. Which makes
me justly to doubt, whether you understand your self in such matters, as you
have enterprysed. As, in an other reason which you bring for M. Iuell, it may
be partly proved, until I proceed further. Your reason is this, In that he is
orderly called, Defense.
to the state of a Bishope, he is in possession of the truth. And therefore it
were not reason, he should ^e requested first to show his evidence.

What mean you then, Reply.
I pray you, by possession of the truth? Is the truth so joined unto the
Bishopericke of Sarum, that he which is set in possession of the lands, is
straitwaies placed in the possession of the truth? And because it is not so:
how is M. Iuell at this day more properly in the possession of the truth, then
he was seven years past, when he was out of all possession of land? And if
seven years past, he might have been required, and nothing have doubted, to show
his evidence, unto a Catholic Bishope: wh^ is it against reason that at this
day (for all his temporal honor) he should do the like? For allthough palace,
parkes, revenues, servants, horses, and such like, do make him in the sight of
the world more worthyer, yet all the riches and glory of the world, should not
make him, by one jot, the truer. If the will or counsel of mighty Princes of
the world, or if the consent of the commons of any realm, were able to set
the students of divinity in the possession of the truth: then, not only such
Princes or such commons might be called Lords of the truth, but also the
truth, which is one in it self, should be oftentimes changed, even as their
minds should be altered which are letters and setters of it. But the
wisdom of God has appointed a better order. And he has geauen unto his
only-begoten and singularly well-beloved soun Ihesus Christ, the nations of the
world, as his just inheretance, which yet is so geauen of the father, that the
soun by his pretiouse death has truly and deerly purchased it. To take
therefore the possession of the world, which he might of right challenge for his
obedience unto death, he sent forth his officers and Apostells, and by his
divine power, How the possession of the truth was geaue^, and who be the
holders of it at this day.
and showing of miracles, he placed those so few and so simple persons, in the
possession of his lands, and by sending unto them all the gifts and graces of
the holyghost, he set them perfectly in the possession of his truth, Io. 16.
as it is written, when the holygost cummeth, he shall teach you all truth. Now,
that the possession of this truth might not be lost for ever after, and that,
allthough the Apostells and Disciples should within few years, depart from
this world, yet that such should never be to seeking, as might hold the
possession of truth once taken, therefore God (which was able to perform it*)
did apoynt in his church, some Apostles; Ephesians. 4.
some Prophets, some Evangelists, other some Pastors and teachers, until all
we shall come and meet together in unity of faith, and knowledge of the soun
of God. Such therefore as succeed the Apostells in their faith and places, and
such as have continued in the possession of the truth ever sense Christ
hitherto, such also as keep the Catholic tradition and priesthode in the most
parts of Christendom, are to be regarded and esteemed as the right heirs of
the Apostles and Christ. But if in some corner of Christendom, the old and
ancient Bisshopes be driven out of their places, and if a new religion be
planted.xvC. years after Christ, allthough it should continue without
interruption in that one particular place unto the worlds end, yet could it be
never rightly said, to have the possession of truth by order. No verily, it
has not so much as the possession of place orderly, and much less the
possession of the truth. For, I pray you, what manner of faith was he of, whom
M. Iuell succedeth in the palace of Sarum? Or what order can you number up,
sense England was Christened, of Bisshopes and Priests inspired with the like
confession of faith, as now is, for the time, used? Well Sir yet again, if the
order which any one Realm takes, be able to settle men in the possession of
truth, and if for the time of that order standing, no Bishope is to be required
to show his evidence: how chaunseth it, that in the disputation which was
prepared at Westminster, the catholic Bishopes, which then were in possession,
were not yet permitted to enjoy their pruilege? Or whi did your Bishopes now,
which then were out of office, refuse to show their evidences as they were
required? As the church of Christ had hundred of years together used, so did
the Bisshopes and clergy of England observe and keep in their service and
order of church, what time you began to rise and reason against them. And
whereas it was sufficient cause inowgh for them to believe and maintain as
they did, because they had so received of their predecessors and fathers, whose
wysedomes they had not to suspect, yet you were not content with the license
granted unto you, of disputyng with them, but you would also apoint unto
them, what order they should take in the matter. And for all their possession,
yet you would drive them to show their euidencies. What if they had lost their
writings? or could not find them presently? or would not show them to such as
you were: is their silence, or refusal in that behalf, to be accounted for a
loss of their cause? But (thanks be to your Bishoperickes) when you be now
well placed, The heretics change their arguments, together with the changes
of time.
you are content that the plaintyfe should first and foremost show his
evidence. And now it is against reason, that the possessor should take the
person of a plaintyfe, which, before this time, would not be granted, whiles
your selfs were out of all possession. But how say you, if the Catholics do
continually yet keep their possession? for the Bishopes of France, Spaigne,
Germany, and Italy, are not yet driven out of their chaires and places of the
Apostells. And as long as they keep their romes, you can not enter in to the
church, as it were a house forsaken and destitute. how then? will you drive
them out by force, vi and armis? In deed it is one of the chiefest ways, by
which the new ghospel has proceeded, which if you can not, as yet, follow
thoroughly, you must then, either let them alone (which you do not as
appears by your sermons and writings) or else bring forth your euide^ces
against them which be in possession. But no reason shall prevail except it
make for you, and therefore you pass not upon the possession, which the
Catholics hold and keep in the world, but you will drive them to the prouyng
of such articles as do offend you, and for your own part, you will stand upon
the negative. The resting upon which, because you say, it is mistaken, let us
hear your exposition, how it must be understood? M. Iuell (say you)
perceauyng us to make this auau^t, Defense.
that the church has taught as we do, these.xvC. years, did both wyselie and
lernedly see, that there was none so fytt way to drive us from it: As to rest
upon this true negative, that we have, no suf^icient proof, out of the
authorities of scriptures, fathers, or counsels. But, Sir, how can your
wisdom serve you to think, Reply.
that because you will have us to prove our doctrine, therefore we must do it?
If every Catholic Bishope in the world, should in his own conscience have
mislyked, the use of the Catholic church in sundry articles, yet for the
reverence, which they owe unto antiquity, they should not without evident and
manifest reason, have lightly geauen over their old orders, for the strength of
tradition is so great, that allthough I could see no reason why I should defend
it, yet I should not contempne their authority, from whom it was received. For
like as in the Epistle unto the Romans (which epistell tradition teaches me
to be S. Paul's) I must not blott out every sentence, which unto my judgment
may seem either untrue, either unprofitable, but reverently think, that all
is well, allthough my understanding be very evil: so when the church of
Christ does generally receive and follow a custom, I ought to judge the best
of it, allthough I were not able to prove it. To dispute of that which the
whole church thorough the world does use, August. ad ^anu. epist. 118.
it is (says S. Augustyne) a point of most insolent madness. If therefore being
able to geaue no other reason for my belief, then only tradition, I should not
rasshely depart from it, shall my adversary require of me a cause of my doings
in writing, and except I show it out of hand, pull me away from my religion?
Let me suppose that you browght M. Iuell unto me, and that he should find me
standing in this point of the Catholic faith, that it is not of necessity
required in a Christen man to receive under both kinds. What might he, (think
you) say unto me either wisely, either lernedly against me? you would make him,
(I know) to speak after this sort, that I have no sufficient proof, out of
Scriptures, Doctors, or Counsels, to make for me. Yes Sir (would I answer)
and please you, I have sufficient authority for my belief therein, but I am
not disposed to tell you of it, and I would not care to take a blow for so
answering a Bisshope. Yes Mary (shall he say) if you had any, you would
allege it, and except you tell me of one or other, you shall be accounted to
make only an auaunt, and in deed to have nothing. And here, I trow, if all
Catholics should hold their peace, in like manner as I do, it should be
declared at Paul's cross the next sunday following, that the papists have no
one sentence or word to make for them, in all Scripture, Doctors and
Cou^cells. Well Sir then, allthough this be to much injury and oppression,
because the Catholics were not disposed to refell your negative, thereupon to
conclude, that they are able to say nothing: I will yet go further with you,
and grant for disputation sake, that which for truth sake is to be denied. And
what is that? forsooth that I have no other cause in all the world, for defense
of the article which I mentioned, but only this one, that it has very long,
and quietly continued. How say you in this case? will you stand still upon the
negative, which for trying of your wisdom, I grant unto you? And to keep
your negative, will you deny, that receiuyng in one kind only, has not ben long
used in the church? No verily, that can you not do, because it is so plain
and evident, that receiuyng in one kind has continuance of time, and approved
practice of Christendom for it, that your selves do cry out and gapple in
pulpites, that many hundred of years together before you were breathed out in
to the world, all Christendom, as in sundry other points, so in that also
was miserably deceived. How then? you will perchaunse prove unto me, that my
argument is not good, because all the world has hitherto ben seduced. And
truly, what other thing you might say, I can not tell. For when I should yield
unto you that I have no Scripture, Doctor, or Council, for communion in both
kinds, and when you should not well call me unreasonable, for dwelling against
you in that article and opinion, alleageing the consent and use of Christendom
for me: either you must declare, that reason of mine to be nothing worth the
staying upon: or else you must hold your peace, as having no more to say unto
me: or else you must repete your beginning again, and harp madlye upon one
string, in telling me that I can show no sufficient sentence, example, or
authority, why communion should be geauen under one kind only. Now, as you
have to much variety to harp still upon one point, and as your heart is to
great in you to be tongtyde, so must it remain that you will refell my
argument, and tell me that I do not safelye and wisely, to have in regard and
estimation a general consent of all Christendom. After which bold saying, you
must come to the particulars, and show by council, doctor, example or
scripture, that the whole church may be foully deceived, and I miscarye in the
following of her. At which point if you tell me of pilgrimages, images, pardons,
or purgatory (with the misusing or mistaking of which the church does never
bear) I must answer you, that they apperteine to an other time, and that you
should more properly talk of communion under both kinds, of which our
question is instituted, and of which you make your self sure. In which matter,
if you can and will prove the whole world to have been deceived: then shall you
be driven from the rest upon your negative, and take upon you the person of a
plainetyfe, in proving unto us, that one kind alone should not be ministered,
but both of necessity received. And if you refuse to do so, you shall hold
your peace, and hold down your head for all your negative, which you thought
should defend you, because I put the case so, that I would grant you your
negative. Wherefor M. Iuells invention of his negative, has neither so great
wit nor lernyng, as you suppose, because it would never serve him, if the
Catholic should tell him plainly, either that he would not, either that he
could not answer him. Now, as concerning all this question of apposing and
answering, and all the shifts likewise, and practisies, which are conu^eighed
under the name of negatiues, it should have beco^med right well the professors
of a new Gospel, not to have made their chief defense upon the weakness (if
any should be) or behauyor of their adversaries, but openly and willingly to
have uttered their good tydinges: and not to invent in their writing what might
grieve the adversary, but rather to have taken every occasion, which had been
able to edify. Now, because you, which have taken upon you the defense (as you
call it) of the truth against the Apology of private mass, do leave the
further discussing of these matters, unto some other meeter places, I shall be
contented likewise to geaue over with you, allthough it would have done us no
harm, shortly to have understood your iud^gement. But this much yet is
clearly gotten, that whereas it has been hitherto avouched, that the Catholics
had no one authority for their purpose: now yet there is come forth a little
Apology of private mass, conteinyng many good authorities for the prouyng of
the Catholic faith, which book, how truly and faithfully it is answered, it
shall appear after just examination and heed taken.

The second Chapter.
HERE now we are come to the very matter it self, in which the author of the
Apology, for avoiding of endless brablyng, thought good to declare his
meaning, as concerning the word and term, Private, when it is applied to the
mass. And his conclusion is this, that if you will take the word, private, as
it is contrary unto common, so the church has no private mass. But if a
private mass be understood for a mass in which the priest receives alone,
without any imbarring of other to communicate with him: the church in deed does
allow sole receiuyng. Mary, the term of private is not properlye hers, but
invented in the schools of heretics. This distinction then being laid, the
master of the defense, which writes against him, is very much greaued with his
plain dealing, as one which could be well content to fight with his
twohandsword, and so to chainge from one sense to an other, that he might not
be directly ouercummed. And therefore in his anger, whereas the Catholic spoke
it very sadlye, that the church acknouledgeth no private mass, as private is
contrary unto common, he madlye alleges:

That in deed we have been very bountiful in bestowing the benefyte of our
mass, Defense.
and especially when money was brought in abundantly. But, may you not be
ashamed, Reply.
to object that against your adversaries as their own deed and workyng, which
you can never find written in any of their books, or by any of their talks
approved? what if you can descant upon diverse matters, and make gaye voluntary
sport upon no laufull dittie, allthough your own side might make you a
Bisshope for your singing, yet, when without all affection the truth should be
examined, all your exceeding melody, would be found no better then barkyng. Do
you not think, that as many points might be fott upon tapsters, fiddlers,
peddlers, baggpypers also and sowgelders (Sir reverence) which for idleness
sake do come unto your ministry, and for lack of better, are received by and
by: as you can make upon such wretched men, which make merchandyse of their
masses? if you can prove, that the church of Christ, does not teach her
scholars, that the mass is a common and no private service: then should you
speak unto the purpose somewhat, and be thought to write gravely: but when you
can say nothing to the matter, to object against us the bestowing of masses for
money, such as the church never allowed, we can gather no better sense hereof,
then that you can pleasauntly dally. And thus much for the first understanding
of private Mass. Touching the other signification of private, by which the
heretics have meaned sole receiving, the church does hold, that the priest may
receive alone at his mass, if no other will communicate with him. Against which
conclusion, what one wise word have you to bring forth? Marie, you find fault,
that the Catholic requires you to prove the affirmative, which is, that
every priest owght, when he receives, to have a cumpanie to receive with him,
which is a shift (as you say) of him that mistrusteth his quarrel. Then
further, you blame him, that the question being of private masses, he makes
his issue in sole receiving. And you ask the question:

Is there no difference (think you) between sole receiving and private Mass?
Defense.
does every one that receives alone, say a private Mass? Ask not this
question of Catholics, Reply.
but of Luthera^s. For the Catholics have no such private mass, as you have
made. It is the Lutherans invention, whom it pleased to call that service and
office of the church a private mass, in which the priest receives alone.
Which office the church calls mass, and the Lutherans nickname it private,
because of sole receiving. The church therefore does not say, that he, which
receives alone, says a mass, or that sole receiving and a private mass are
all one, but she openly tells you that in deed no mass is private: yet
because she has to do with heretics, and for better expedition of matters is
contended to use their terms, therefore the Catholics of this time do call
that a private mass, at which the priest receives alone, which they do not,
out of their own books, but because they read among the heretics, that they
have such a sense of private mass. Wherefor you have done very vnskilfullie
to tell us of Tully and Panetius, and to require that we should define private
mass unto you, which have not ben the inuentors and first authors of that
term. And if the Lutherans for the breeding of suspision, and bringing forth
of errors, have so folishly mengled sole receiving and mass together, that
it is proved an absurdity, that he which receives alone, says thereby a
private mass: let the shame light upon their heads, and not upon the
Catholics. And yet for all this you will make us believe, that we must define
a private mass, and whether we will or no, you will define it for us. But it is
well yet that you amend the matter, in saying that you will show out of our
own authors (not what we take, but) what you take our private mass to be.

It is a sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, Defense.
used in the church,1 in place of the Lord his supper,2 by one priest alone
offered to God the Father for the sins of quick and dead, which,3 without
any to participate with him, he may apply to the benefit of what persons and
things he lists. If this be the definition o^ a private mass, Reply.
how will you define (I pray you) that mass which is called, and is in deed
common? Or where find you in all our doctors a division of mass, in to private
and common? here be so many faults in this definition, that not only the
schools of the Catholics would never have made it, but not so much as a
reasonable scholars head would ever have permitted. first you define that thing
(and that out of our own authors you lie) which we do not confess to be
extant, because we believe, that there is no mass private. For you may read in
the scholeme^ of private and solemn mass, D. Th. ^. part. q. 83. art. 5. ad
12.
not as it were ij. kinds of masses, but at the most.ij. circunstancies only,
and accidents of mass: but of private and common to make such differencies,
as though the definition of the private were essentially distincted from the
common, it is such an invention, as may well becum perchaunse your pregnant
wit, but it is not, I assure you, in the Catholic doctrine. Yet, let us
consider the framyng of your definition. A private mass (say you of your own
head by the Catholics) is a sacrifice. In deed, if you understand by mass,
the offering of the body and blood of Christ, so is mass properly a
sacrifice: but considering that you in reprouyng the parts and ceremonies used
in the celebration thereof, and the common people together with you do
understand it more largelye, you should not without some distinction so
absolutely have called it a sacrifice, whereas in the co^moner sense, it is
taken for that office or service of the church, not which is it self a
sacrifice, but within which there is offered up a sacrifice. And therefore if I
would not, without addition, say, of the mass it self which we hold and
defend, that it is a sacrifice, (except I would speak figuratiuelie, and call
that which does contain, by the name of the thing which is contained) how much
less would I say that a private mass is a sacrifice. But you add further
unto your definition, it is a sacrifice used in place of the Lord his supper:
which words do sound so strangely, that a Catholic would never use them, as
which beleiueth that he has, not any such thing which is in place of our Lord
his supper, but that undoubtedly he has the same meat, which was geauen to
the Apostels the night before Christ suffered, and that he enjoys the
selfsame supper in deed. Again to make up your definition, you say that it
is a sacrifice by one priest alone offered to God the father: As who might
think, that there were some kind of masses, in which more priests then one
did offer up sacrifice. And again, these words of one priest alone, were
craftily thrust in to the heap, that thereof might be gathered some argument
of private mass. It follows further: which sacrifice without any to
participate with him he may apply etc. But why do you make mention of
participantes with the priest? might he then, apply the effect of the
sacrament, when any would communicate with him? And is this it which greiueth
you, that he may apply it without any to participate? Who does not se^ (which
is a Catholic, or else but indifferent and learned) that you labor as much as
you may to bring in such phrases by which a private mass might be suspected?
for leave out these words of ( one priest alone) and ( without any to
participate with him) there is nothing in the definition, which might be
enforced to serve for mass private. And yet when they be added, we do right
well know that they are not essential points of a mass. Wherefor I might
justly say, that this definition of a private mass, which you attribute to
the Catholics, is far unmeet for their lernyng, as being improper,
heretical, superfluous, and wandering. But for all this, you will prove the
truth of this definition unto us, wherein I wonder at your presumption, that
you will attempt things impossible. But yet let us geaue you the hearing. All
your sort-doe rasshlie confess, Defense.
and stoutly defend, that it is a sacrifice of Christ his body. But first let
me hear of what you speak? Reply.
Did you not go about to define a private mass? And does all our sort say
that private mass is a sacrifice? How often shall I tell you, that we know no
private mass? We confess that in the mass there is the body and blood of
our Sauyor, and that it is our daily sacrifice, and that it is offered for
quick and dead. Yea, but does one priest alone offer it? Yea Sir except you
think it necessary to have more priests then one to celebrate at one altar
at one time. And does not the priest, make application of the Sacrament as he
li^teth? No forsooth, not as he lists, neither as you mak^ definitions by
adding and taking away what pleases you, but with reverence and horror, and by
way of supplication and request, he serves for some one more then an other,
the virtue of the sacrifice in it self considered, continuing allwaies perfect
and infinite. And be not all these things defended of all your side? Not these
things only, but.xx. other more also, and yet every one of those.xx. shall
not be iumbled up together in one definition of mass. But all this while, how
prove you that we define a private mass in such sort as you have invented? You
might have made it probable, if you had said that we define Mass, after the
same manner as you report (and yet you should have made a lie, for all your
sight in our authors) but you can never be able to show, that we make such
definition of a private mass, whereas so expressly we answer you, that we
have no mass private. But it is to be noted the authority, with which you
make your conclusions. I do therefore (say you) take private mass to be not
only as you etc have wrested it, Defense.
but as it was commonly used in the world before, and as it was set forth in
your scholemen, to the great defacing of Christ his death and passion. If you
have any face at all of a true man, Reply.
show in what place of any scholeman, any such private mass is spoken of as
you define. And I would also that you had concluded, whether you will take
this word (private) in such sense as by the Lutherans it is appointed, to
express sole receiving. For allthough you join your issue with us, about this
definition of private mass which your self have invented: yet you will not
refuse alltogeather, to take private mass as we do (thorough the occasion of
certain heretics) for sole receiving. Which whether you do, because you would
not seem to grant unto the Catholics, that private mass has been in the
primitive church (which is concluded easelie, understanding by it sole
receiving) or rather because you would have some liberty to hyde your self
under ambiguities, and thereby to troble your adversary, when he should not
know where to find you, as I fear them both, so I will not determyn upon any
one. But if you mind to stand with us upon that definition of private mass,
which you have made, we say that there is no such thing among us, as you do
enforce your self to prove out of owr authors. And yet if you will put out the
word ( private) which you never learned of us, for the rest we will abide by all
that which the church has received and delivered, concerning our sacrifice,
and the value of it, and in what sense the priest may apply a benefit proper
to some peculiar person.

And therefore, when you will, begin, and you shall be answered: or rather
answer when you can, for we have allreadie begone. We, I mean, Catholics,
which speak in all tongues, that if you find not our arguments in Englisshe,
yet you may resort to the Italian, Spaynisshe, French, Laten, and to the Duch
tongue. But if now on the other side, you will admit such an interpretation of
(private) which word Luther has joined unto the mass, as shall signify and
declare sole receiuyng: then shall we join this issue with you, that the
priest is not bound to have present company to receive with him, but that
without all danger of God his indignation, he may celebrate a private Mass,
as you term it. etc.

The third Chapter.
FOrasmuch as M. Iuell with other, do think the^ selves to hurt our church very
much in their stout denial, that there was any mass private (as they term
it) in the primitive church, the Catholic therefore in his Apology, although he
had good authorities to confute that bold conclusion, yet for the better
opening of their weak kind of reasonyng, he so begins with them as though
it were true, that there was no ptiuate mass in the primitive church. And he
seems to make these arguments for us. Not, if there were no private mass in
the primitive church, therefore it must of necessity follow, that none might or
should be used at these days. For many things were then interdicted, which
now are permitted. And many things were not extant then in the church, which
now are to be maynteined. Examples hereof may be perceived in wasshing of
feet, 10. 13. Act. 15. Luc. 22. Cyp. ser. 5. de laps.
in absteinyng from blood, in receiuyng of the sacrament after supper, in
howseling of infantes, in temporalties of Bishopes, and Christenyng of Princes.
To call therefore such things to the state of the primitive church, is, to
enforce a taule man to return to his swathing clothes. Again, men at that
time were so well disposed, that it was no wonder if at every mass there were
co^municantes: but now there is such coldness of charity, that if we should
allwaies tarry for communicantes, we should very seldom have any mass at
all. Furthermore, the people are not commanded, but counseled only to the
frequentation of their housell, but the priests are commanded to celebrate
oftentimes. Therefore it is no reason, that a duty should be omitted, and the
priest made to wait upon the pleasure of the laity. And so he shortly
concludes, that, to prescribe of necessity, that there ought to be a cumpanie
to receive with the priest, it is an itching folly. But now, against these
reasons of the Catholic, what says the M. of the defense? You would seem to
take from us, Defense. fo. 8.
the true and right rule to reform the church of Christ? You be very
suspitiouse Sir, Reply.
or very injurious. For no other thing was gone about in this third chapter,
but that all things should not be required to be done, as they were used in
the primitive church. Which conclusion, do you simply and plainly yield unto,
or else will you drive us to the further prouyng of it? Nay, you confess it to
be so evident and true, that you marvel at the Catholic, because he endeavored
to open it. Where the^ is that fault which you find with him? or what true and
right rule of reformyng the church might he seem to take away from you? He
said nothing else, An vnreaso^na^^e manner (...) fass^^on of the (...) of the
def^nce his writing
but that all things should not be so required to be done, as they were used
in the primitive church, and yourselfe confess this* to be a most true saying,
and yet you mis^lyke with him, because of the speaking of it. Here now it may
appear, who lurketh out of the light, or who draws back. For, whereas you
without distinction have abused the name of the primitive church, and made so
little rekonyng of these last.ixC. years, and more, as though you would admit
no other thing, then that which should be proved to agree with the example of
the primitive church: what thing is more necessary to be spoken of, then that
discretion is to be used in this matter, and that all things are not
absolutely to be reduced unto the pattern of the primitive church? For
allthough you, for your own part, be of such judgment, that you can make
distinction between things necessary and indifferent: yet when the multitude
of light heads, do hear you to appeal simply to the primitive church, and
to crake that the right and true reformation, is from thence to betaken: they
fall in to such a conceit by and by, that except the Catholics can bring all
their orders from the primitive church, they will not be ruled by them. And if
I were so suspicious as you, I could say that your own preachers and masters
do seem to be of the same opinion, when they make so exact rekonyng upon the
time, in which orders have by holy men ben brought in to the church, as though
nothing were to be permitted, but that which has come from the Apostles, or
that those things should be alltogeather now aute^tike, which were used in the
primitive church. But if the Catholic has been superfluous, in proving of that
which no man (as you say) has denied, if you will charitablie forgeaue him
this once, he shall within the turnyng of one leaffe in your defense, do the
like again for you. And now (I trow) we do agree in this one point, that for
ceremonies and things indifferent, we are not bound unto the Apostells time.
In what things then are we bound to do after the example of the Apostels, and
the primitive church?

In truth of doctrines and right use of sacraments, Defense fol. 10.
as things in the church most necessary. And you do allege this cause of
your so saying: In doctrine there is but one verity, and but one right use of
the sacraments.

If I were able precisely to know, Reply.
what you mean by the right use of Sacraments, I could sone answer you, how
farfurth we agree with you in this part of your distinction. For to receive in
the morning or evening, to receive fasting or after meals, and to receive with
cumpanie or alone, they be such things as you may, at your pleasure,
understand by the right use of the Sacrament, or say to disagree from the
right use of it. 1. Cor. 11.
For in S. Paul's time among the Corinthians they used to receive at night
about supper time, and they made no matter of conscience, if they had dined
that day before. And you can not say, but, notwithstanding the breaking of
their fastes, or taking of their suppers, they did in that beginning of the
church, rightly use the Sacrament. If therefore the use of the Sacrament, is to
be taken for that manner and order which they rightly used at the beginning in
receauyng of the sacraments, I deny unto you, that the right use of them, is
to be accounted among precepts and laws unchangeable. For the right use is
but one (you say) and therefore like as they of the Apostells time, did sit
together in the church about evening, and receive, either after or before
other meats, Christ his very natural body: so should we do now of necessity
in these days, or else we use not the sacrament rightly. To which case, if you
will answer, that time, place, and manner of supping with common meats (which
then were used) do nothing apperteine to the right use of the sacrament, so
shall I again infer, that number of communicantes, and receiving in one or
both kinds, are as little required to the right use of the sacrament. Therefore,
to avoid the occasion of stryuing, which could not but be geauen if one part
understood not the other, our meaning is this, that in the articles of our
faith and necessary doctrine, we have to keep one verity, which has been from
the beginning: but in canons and orders which have been added sense, unto the
substance of our religion, the church of Christ is not so straictly bound unto
them, but that she may, with discretion, abrogate, or alter them, or permit the
discontinuance of them. And in this kind of orders we understand the use of the
sacraments, which in substance are to this day one with those of the primitue
church, do they never so much differ in ceremonies, circunstancies, and manner
of using them. We do not therefore grant unto you, that the right use of the
sacrament is but one, or that the use of a sacrament is in the same authority
and estimation, as the truth of doctrine is. For he which receives alone (if
he be in state of grace) does well, and he which receives with cumpanie does
well, if his liffe be clean. And then again, a conclusion in doctrine can
never be removed, but in receiving of sacraments, diverse uses may be
permitted, except you doubt, whether both parties should be thought baptized a
right, of which the one were but once dipped, the other thrice washed and
perfunded. Wherefore the use of the sacraments being* with us a thing
indifferent in it self, (allthough not indifferent unto every rasshe
controller) you speak very absurdly unto our judgments, The intricate talk
of the M. of the defense.
first in not bynding us unto the observations of ceremonies and things
indifferent, and then again requiring of us to keep the ceremonies of the
primitive church* For when you had said in one sentence, ( For the use of
ceremonies, and things indifferent, we do not bind you to the Apostles time,
and the primitive church,) in the next sentence following, you call for
redress, according to the scripture and primitive church, not only for use of
sacraments, or false opinions, (which are referred to the first member of your
distinction) but also as concerning ceremonies, which allthough you call
superstitious, that you might seem to have some just cause of taking them
away, yet you do against right dealing, to call us to the primitive church
for ceremonies, which you said before were in themselves indifferent. And here
lo you make a rule, and say, Fo. 10. and. 11.
that nothing is to be added unto the first ordinances of the law, and that we
must bring things unto the institution of Christ. And again: that we must not
harken what other did before us, but what Christ first did, that was before
all. And yet again: That, that is true, that was first ordained: and that is
corrupted, that is after done: which rule if you will have to be understood
in such matters as concern immutable doctrine, then have you proved that
thing which none of ours denies unto you, and so you are all fallen in to the
same lapse, for which you misliked with others. But if you understand
generally, by truth of doctrine, the use of Sacraments and ceremonnies, then
have you much forgoten yout self, which even now made ceremonies, indifferent.
But if you do it for that purpose, that a Catholic should not know where to
have you, allthough I seem to ask your loss, yet, for truth sake, amend that
fasshion. And perchau^se this might be amended also, that you do not truly
allege your testimonies, saying that to be Saint Cyprianes in his Epistle unto
Cecilius, which is not at all to be found there, but in his goodly treatise De
simplicitate praelatorum. In which place the seeking unto the head, S. Cyprian
mistake^, of the M. of the defense
which you do mention, is not understood for to seek unto the beginning of a
doctrine or custom, but unto that head of whom it is written, Math. 17
Thou art Peter (that is to say) a rock, and upon this rock I will buyld my
church. But how rightly you allege the doctors, and how much they make for
you, it will be perceived before we have ended. Hitherto let it be marked, that
we refuse your rule of resorting to the first institution for the redress
about the use of the Sacraments. Because the use of them is a thing
indifferent, and it neither makes neither marreth to receive alone or with
cumpanie, and to receive in one or in both kinds, or at night or in the
morning, or thrice in the year, or ones in all our liffe, so that the church be
obeyed.

And now we will come to an other part of this third chapter, in which you do
excedingly reprove the Catholic, because of the similitude of a taull man and
infant, which he used to the openyng of his purpose, and confounding of his
adversary. Which so much displeases you, that you say: I assure you it was
never invented without the spirit of Antichrist, Defense. fol. 11.
nor can not be maintained withowt blasphemye against Christ, and singular
reproach of his Apostells and their successors. Sir, Reply.
I beseech you to pacify yourselfe, and to use the matter so calmelie and
quietly, as you promised to do in the end of the.ij. chapter. Consider, I pray
you first, whether the Catholic has such a meaning, as yon make sense upon
him. Let us rehearse faithfully the words of the Catholic, and then as far as
your grammar rules will suffer you, make your construction upon them. He had
spoken before, of the co^mones of all things in the Primitive church, Apol. of
private Mass fol. 5.
of miracles, of covering of women's faces, of temporalties of Bisshopes, of
receiuyng after supper, of eating of blouddinges, and houseling of infantes, of
which all he says in manner of a conclusion: To call such things to the
state of the Apostles time, and of the primitive church again, is nothing else
but to enforce a taule man, to come to his swadeling clothes, and to cry
alarm in his cradel again. These lo be his very words, in which, do your
worst, and tell us what fault you find? He resembles the primitive church
(say you) to infancy, which similitude you term, as please you, an invention
of Antichrist, a blasphemy against Christ, and singular reproach of his
Apostells. But see now, herein how much you be deceived. The Catholic does not
(as you ween) say, that alltogeather that church was an infant, but in such
things as he speak of, concerning order or dispensation which then was used
in the church, he says, and says it truly, that to require that all things
should be now in these days observed, as they were then used, it were no more
nor better, then to bring a taule man to his swadeling clothes again. And yet,
as though he had made no more of the primitive church, then as if none but
boys had lived in it, so you full manly reason against him, and prove your
self to lack discr^^ion.

For you say: If that time were the state of infancy in the church, Defense.
fo. 11.
when Christ himself instructed, when his Apostles taught, when the holy
fathers governed next their time: A fond collection of the M. of the defense
then we must needs reckon Christ, the Apostles, the fathers, to be infantes
in religion, to be babes in government of the church. If we must needs do so
as you say, Reply.
then is there no remedy. But certenlie it is wonder unto me, how any such
necessity should be concluded: yea allthough I would affirm it, that not only
in a few particular causes, but also concerning the whole state of her, the
church was then in her infancy. For allthough the whole house be full of
childerne, yet it must not straitwaies follow, that the goodman and the
goodwiffe must needs be childerne. Or if in a schole of one hundred of
scholars, the best is not come unto his Catechism, or the institutions of
Caluyne in Englisshe, (books which will sone make one a Doctor) it must not
follow of necessity, that the master understands not his accidence. The
Apostells of our Sauyor Christ, before the cummyng of the Holyghost in fiery
tongues upon them, Luc. 18. f 10. 20. b.
they were allwaies full of imperfection, Math. 16. c.
both in will and also understanding: Math. 26. f
ergo was Christ our master to be reckened for an ignorant person? For so
runs your wise reason, that if that time were the state of infancy, then we
must needs reckon Christ to be an infaent in religion. The Christians also,
after the ascension of Christ, and preaching of the Apostles, were for the most
part frail and weak, of which the Apostle had need to say: If a man be
prevented in any fault. etc. And again: Gal. 6.
I speak gently and favorably, To. 6.
because of the weakness of your flesh. And unto the Hebrews: Heb. 5.
Every body that is partaker of milk, is void of the talk of justice, for
he is little one: but the sound and strong meat is for the perfect. Yet, not
withstanding the imperfections of the weaker, there were many spiritual men
apt to instruct others: and the Apostle had many things to tell his
countriemen which could not be well interpreted, because they were unable to
hear him. But you, to make your part the stronger, do prove that the primitive
Church had use of reason, and wisdom, and you go so far in the matter, that
you define unto us what the word Infancy does signify, and you say, that
young age is for no other cause named infancy, Defense for. 12.
the^ for that it has not the use of tongue and can not speak. But the
primitive church could speak, ergo you would have us discredited, because we
say that she had her infancy. In very deed it had been better for you, if you
could have neither spoken, neither written so childishly. For (to let that
reproufe which you deserve, to pass, that you do not rightly conceive his
meaning, whom you would seem to answer) you must consider, that he which
shall compare the time of the primitive church unto infancy, may have right
good meaninges therein, such as yourselfe must allow. For, How the church may be
said to have her infancy.
like as to infantes many things are permitted, which afterward shall
leisurely be taken away: so in the primitive church under the sight and
government of the Apostells, some ceremonies of the old law were suffered to
continue, which now among all Christians are utterly abrogated: Act. 15. ^ etc.
21. d
as circuncision, purification, and absteinyng from certain meats. Again, like
as all things are not opened unto childerne, which in further process of
years, serve for their profit and understanding: so the wysedom of God, which
was abundantly in his Apostells and their successors, did not straitwaies put
forth in writing all mysteries, but as occasion afterward required, so it
brought forth in to the open knouledge of the church, the ancient and
Apostolical verities. I might also say, that because the church then, was, in
external show, both poor and naked, and subject to persequutions, therefore it
was in her infancy, but now when it is so glorious, so strong, and mighty,
that she has the Princes of the world obedient and subject unto her, and has
noblely spreaden herself over the cumpasse of the whole world, it is no great
absurdity (I trow), if she be said to have come to a perfect age and stature.
Which yet, if you will call dotage, because of many evil manners and enormities
extant in her, I would not strive with you upon it, concerning some members of
her, if you did so speak without privy spite and malice. But yet this does
follow, that the same was then, by our saying, in her infancy, which now is
come, as you report, to her dotage. And as infancy then, did nothing
preiudicate unto her wisdom, by which she was well able to govern and rule
her childerne, so her dotage now, which is seen in the liffe of many, does
nothing excuse you, for contempnyng your old mother. If therefore now, it may be
well said, in sundry ways and senses, that the church in the Apostells time,
was in a certain infancy, what spryte moved you to make such a sense of it, as
against which you might use your indignation, without the matter and purpose?
Or with what honesty could you co^clud, that the Catholics do make Christ and
his Apostells infantes: of which the one, they honor as true God, the others,
they worship as Doctors and Patrones of the world? Brothern (says the
Apostle) I could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, 1. Cor. 3.
but as to carnal, like as to little ones in Christ, I gave unto you milk to
drink, not meat. For as then you were not able, no neither yet you can. For
as yet you be carnal. And to the Galathians: Gal. 4.
O my little childerne (says he) with whom I am in travail again, until
Christ be formed in you. Do not therefore, Sir, I pray you, so ernestly take
the matter, when you see the Apostle himself, not to leese any of his own
strength and wisdom, because of the imperfection of the Corinthians and
others: and consider also, whether they might not be called infantes, which as
yet, were to be fedd with milk. But let us go further in to the chapter. You
lay the cause of private Mass upon the keycold charity of the people,
Defense. fo. 14.
(and perhaps the first occasion came thereof in deed) but. etc. Who told
you that this was the cause of private Mass? You read it not, I am assured, in
the Apology which you would feign answer: and yet you buyld so much upon it,
as though it had been a most plain conclusion of it. The Catholic in his
Apology says, that the constant faith, the pure liffe, the fervent charity,
etc, which florisshed in the primitive church, were causes perhaps, why no
Mass was then celebrated, but that diverse Christians did communicate. But what
conclusion does he infer there upon? not that truly which you dream of, The
M. of the defense mistaketh the Catholic.
but this only which he labored to prove, that you should not therefore require
the like manner of co^municatyng with the priest, to be at these days used,
when the like devotion and charity is not in the peoples hearts grounded. He
said not, that the keycold charity of the people should be the cause of private
mass, no more then he said that the number of communicantes was the efficient
cause of saying mass, as though there might have been no mass at all, except
there had been some prepared to receive. Is there no difference (trou you)
betwyxt There were no masses said in the primitive church, but there were some
ready to comm^nicate, and, Except there would have been no masses in the
primitive church. The first perhaps was true, and the cause thereof is
attributed in the Apology, unto the devotion of the people. The second is
denied plainly unto you, because the sacrifice of the church of Christ, does
not depend at all, upon communicantes* for like as in these days at an Easter
time, the perfect holy men may be espied to go closely in to some one chapple,
and there say privately a mass, in great devotion and silence, the cause of
which is, not in the lack of such as would communicate, but, together with
many other causes, the desire which they have geaue^ in to their hearts, to go
so much the further from the sight and respect of men, by how much the nearer
they would come to the contemplation and admiration of God: so it might right
well have come to pass, without any scripture, a^thoritie, or reason to the
contrary, that even in the most best time of the primitive church, such masses
were said now and then, which you do odiously call private. Wherefor seeing
there is so great fault committed of you in the misconstruing of the Catholic
his reason, no wonder if you have taken great peines in commentyng upon it all
out of purpose. As when you tell us of many commodities, which grow by the often
receiving of the sacrament etc. But who shall bring the people daily or weekly,
yea quarterly rather unto the receiuyng of their maker, if they will not
themselves? The priests (say you) should warn them and instruct them,
Defense. fo. 16.
and tell them plainly, that if they be gasers only and no receivers, they
runn thereby in to displeasure of God: with many other vehement sentences,
which for that purpose you allege out of S. Chrysostom. And you make the
matter so easy, as though for the speaking, the priest could bring the people
unto the communion: whereas it does presently appear eue^ in your late erected
churches, that, for all that you are able to do, you have most often times no
communion at all. And except it were, more for the princes law, then for that
by your vehement exhortations you should perswad the people, I think there would
be fewer co^munions by four parts, then are now in England, which as many as
they are, do not lightly excede one or.ij. a quarter in most parisshes. Math. 7.
First therefore pluck the beam out of your own eye, and then you shall be
better able to take a mote out of an others eye. And when you shall perceive by
experience (which allreadie in part does try it) that except you co^straine
men by act of parleame^t, you shall never bring them, by the strength and
dailynes of your preaching, unto the frequentyng of the communion, then lo you
shall be more merciful toward others in your own exact judgment, and
think, that with good cause, that may be unspoken, in which you should have no
hope of redress to be made by your speaking. But of the diligence and
discretion of the church which she has used, concerning the calling of people
unto their housel, because of better occasion which hereafter follows, I will
in this place leave it vncounted.

But ye object, Defenc^ fol. 17.
that priests are bounden of duty to the daily frequentation of it, and the
people left free. That would I feign learn at your hand, and see some good
proof of the Scripture, for the same. If you would feign learn, Reply.
tarry until I bring our doctors and readers unto you. But as though you had
all the lernyng of the world, set in a table before your eyes, so you answer,
that we have less then a light shadow to hyde our assertion in.

Truly, Sir, you geaue testimony against your self, that you be very blind,
because you can judge no better of colors. For this first I trust you will
grant, that priests and lay men are not alltogeather one. You must grant
also, that as we are under a proper and most excellent law, so likewise that
we have a correspo^dent priesthode: as it is written, Heb. 7.
When the priesthode is transferred, it must needs be, that there be made a
transferring of the law also: because law and priesthode do go^ jointly
together. Then it follows hereupon: That every Bisshope chosen out of men,
Heb. 5.
is appointed for men, in those things which are to Godward, that he should
offer up gifts and sacrifices for sins. etc. But sacrifice for synn there is
none in this law and time of grace, besides the body and blood of our Sauyor,
ergo that must be offered. Yet no man should take an office upon him, except he
were called, and there is no place in all scripture, where that calling is
expressed, but only in the last supper of Christ. Priests are bound to offer.
therefore whereas he in that his last supper gave authority unto priesthode in
saying: Luc. 22.
Do this in remembrance of me. I conclude, that priests only, are bound to
bless, to break his body, and consequently to eat it. I say not that every
priest is bound to daily frequentation of the sacrament, (which if you think
us to do, you speak without book therein, and misreport the Catholics) but
concerning the whole body of priesthode, and the necessity of a daily
sacrifice, priests are not only bound to offer, but to provide that there be
daily offering. Knowing this, D^. 12.
that it is a most sure token of Antichrist his presence, when the Judge
sacrificium, the daily sacrifice, shall cease to be offered. For they only are
called to that high office, and their duty is to follow their office. And this
thing being rightly considered of the ancient fathers, made them so reverently
to behave them selves, toward the blessed sacrament.

As S. Denyse the Areopagite, speaking of the order of mass in his time,
says, that the Bisshope excused himself, that he offered up the helthsome
sacrifice, which is above his power, and that he cried out decently, saying
unto God, Lib. de Eccle. hier.
Thou have said: Do this in my remembrance. As who sold say, except thou
hadest geauen license and authority, what man would have be^ so bold, as to
come nigh to the touching of so divine mysteries. S. Iustine also the Martyr
witnesses, Apo. 2.
that the Apostles in their commentaries, which are the ghospells, do declare
that Christ commanded them to consecrate the bread by the prayers of his word:
at what time he took bread, and after thanks geauing, said: Do this in
remembrance of me. And S. Cypriane more plainly says, that in Christ his
last supper, those sacraments came forth, which had been signified from the
time of Melchisedech, Cypr. de coena do.
and that the high priest brings forth unto the sounes of Abraham, which do
as he did, bread and wine, sayng, this is my body. Of which bread (says this
blessed martyr) the Apostells did eat in the same supper before, according
unto the visible form, but sense the time that it was said of our Lord (do
this in my remembrance, this is my body, this is my blood,) as often times as
the thing is done with these words and this faith, this substantial bread and
chalice, consecrated with the solemn blessing, profits unto the liffe and
health of all the whole man, being both a medicine and a sacrifice, to heal
his infirmities, and purge his iniquities. Wherefore if you, Sir, would
consider, how great this mystery is, you should perceive how great honor and
preeminencie all priests are endued with. For when they work, Chry. li. 3. de
Sacerd.
then are these holy things, which I speak of, begone and perfected. But say
you.

Christ his institution was general, and his commandment therein stretches
as well to the people, Defense fol. 18.
as to the priest. I have proved unto you the contrary, Reply.
both by reason, (because priesthode is a distinct office, unto which certain
only are appointed, and chosen out from the laity) and by scripture (as you
may consider by S. Paul to the Hebreues) and also by Doctors, as S. Denyse,
Iustine, and Cypriane, do plainly testify. But then you bid us to understand,
That S. Paul, a good interpretour of Christ his mind, Defense ibidem.
applies the words of Christ to the whole congregation of Corinth, where it
is certain, were both ministers and common people. Nay Sir, Reply.
understand you this rather, that you understand not S. Paul, which in that
his chapter alleges the institution of Christ to this purpose, that the
Corinthians, by consideration of the charity and majesty which was
represented therein, should be more felolyke in the communicating of their
common meats, from which they were fallen unto several and private tables or
suppers in the church. And he does tell historically, what Christ said unto
his disciples, not what Christ appointed the Corinthians and every other of the
Christians to do. For I have received of owr Lord that which I have delivered
unto you, 1. Cor. 11.
says the Apostell. But what means he by these words, I have delivered? he
spoke unto all the Corinthians without respect of spirituality or temporalty,
but did he speak by way of instruction, or by way of geauing some office and
function unto them? And that which he received of Christ, did he deliver unto
them as a doctrine and article to be learned, or as a commandment to be
exequuted? if you mean the first, you agree with us: if you mean the second,
you disagree from common sense and evident truth. for if it apperteine unto all
Christians, without distinction, to do as S. Paul received of Christ, and as
the Corinthians received of S. Paul: then must every Christian take bread,
geaue thanks, and break it, and when every body is a minister, who then shall
be a receauer? Again, in the words of our Sauyor (Do this in remembrance of
me) how much is wylled to be done? Are the words, (do this) to be referred
only to the taking and eating? no truly. for (do this) does not follow in Saint
Paul, immediately upon the words (take and eat) but after the words (this
is my body) and it were better and plainelier englyshed (make this) then (do
this) thereby to geaue you to understand, Hoc facite. Make this.
that by those words, authority of making and consecrating Christ his body,
was geauen unto the Apostles. But taking (do this) after the largest manner, it
can not yet be referred to taking or eating only, but must also be
understood of, blessing. now, if you will have these words of ( do this in
my remembrance) to stretch as well unto the people, as to the high order of
priests, then may you complain not only that they receive not as often as the
priest, (which they will not, I warrant you, for all your great mouyng) but
also and rather, that they take not the bread in to their hands, and bless
it themselves, and say mass, such as may be called private in deed. Which
insensible and pernitiouse folissh opinion, because you will not suffer to
enter in to your heart, therefore you must of necessity grant, great difference
to be, betwyxt the priest and the people, and confess that, taking, blessing,
and breaking, is so properly his, that it can not rightly be the common
peoples. Yea marie (say you) but Christ took the bread, Defense.
etc. then the priest in his ministration must do as Christ did, and no
otherwise, that is, to take break, and geaue unto the people. etc. Speak you
this of your own mind, Reply.
or do you speak it, as it were upon occasion of the Catholics words? If you
think as you speak, why find you no fault with your communion, where no rule
is appointed unto ministers, of taking the bread in to their hands, or of
blessing it, which Christ himself did? But if you believe not, that of
necessity every thing must be done, as Christ did, at his maundy: what cause
then moves you, whi distributyng should be more required, then taking and
blessing of the holy host, which by your service is omitted? For, the Catholic
church does teach, that as the body of Christ is a sacrifice and a sacrament,
so likewise that it is two distinct acts* his body to be offered, and the same
to be received. And as S. Cypriane, The body of Christ is a sacrifice and a
sacr^ment.
whom I have alleged, does testify, that the bread which the true
Melchisedech, and our high priest Christ, gave to his Disciples, was both a
whole burnt offering and sacri^ice, and also a medicine, so, as it is a
medicine, it is to be received of all Christians, because all without exception
are diseased: and as it is a sacrifice, it is actually to be offered for all
persons, by such as are properly appointed out for that purpose, because no man
should take an office upon him, before he be called. Yet because one may justly
say, that to show forth the death of our Lord until he come, does well agree
with every Christian man his part and office, and thereupon untruly conclud,
that Do this in remembrance of me, (which is, by the interpretation of S.
Paul, to show forth the death of Christ until he come) should in all points
be referred as well unto the people, as the priest: therefore I answer further,
that allthough many things which Christ spoke to the Apostles only, and their
successors, may be truly applied unto every Christian, so is it in this case of
which we talk. Christ said unto the Apostles only, You have not chosen me,
Joan. 15.
but I have chosen you. which allthough it may be truly verified of every
Christian man, woman, and child, (because that Christ in deed has chosen us to
his people, so many other besides continuing in their infidelity or Iuisshnes)
yet it must not follow, that Christ did not mean by those words, that the
Apostles were singularly chosen unto the proper office of preaching, and
ministering his sacraments. Therefore allthough one may use the words (Do this
in remembrance of me) in respect of the common peoples affection, yet it is not
true that Christ had no larger or greater meaning in them, then that by eating
of his body, we should only remember that he dyed for us, which every one may
do as well as a priest. Wherefor Sir, as you have concluded, that the priest is
not bound to minister to other, if there be none to receive, (which is quickly
to be granted unto you) so I say, that you have nothing at all proved, that
Christ his institution, stretches as well to the people, as the priest, or
that the priest could not laufully receive, except there were some cumpany. But
where now are your scriptures, your Doctors, your general counsels, and your
crakes, by which you should directly answer, to that which is required of you.
We shall perchaunse hereafter in your defense, read many great arguments
against us, but in the mean time, you think it good to provide for a place of
refuge, when the overthrow shall be geauen unto you. And therefore you say: If
we had no scripture at all, Defense fol. 18.
to prove that the priest should not receive without cumpany, if ye did geaue
us the overthrow in that, yet could ye not triumph therein, as though ye had
wonn the field. And why so, I pray you? Our contention ( you answer) is for
private Mass, etc. fo. 19.
of which sole receauyng, is but one part. You pitch your camp, Reply.
Sir, in a very wide field, and your kind of fight is such, as we perceive, you
would never be ouercummed. The church of God, whose armies of doctrine and
verities do allwaies stand in good order, if she be justly ouercu^med in any
one thing, which she absolutelye mainteineth, she straitwaies shall be
forsaken, as one which is not to be credited. But you (in whose name I will not
say) are so trimlye prepared, that allthough you be overthrown in one of your
articles, yet you will not be ouercummed in the state of your whole religion.
Yet how well this may be granted, let us consider. Do not you distinct
things, some in to necessary, some in to indifferent? Do not you say,
Defense fo. 10. and. 18.
that the sole receauyng of a priest by him self, is not a thing indifferent?
And do not you make a necessity of doctrine in it, that the people must
receive with the priest, or else Christ his institution is broken? Tell me then
now further: 1. Tim. 3.
Is not the church of Christ, the pillar and stay of truth? And can that be
possibly his church, which would set forth a lie? No truly. It is impossible
that the church should err in doctrine, lo^. 16.
to whom the Holyghost was promised to teach her all truth, and also to tarry
with her for ever. And if but one article which she defends, be proved false,
I will not say, that all the rest which she uttered is false, but this is most
certain, that she is not the church, which is to be followed. Yet see, you can so
dispose your selves, that allthough you be proved liars, in one of those your
articles which you make necessary, yet you will not be mistrusted, but that
nevertheless you be the true church of Christ. And whereas the Holyghost,
Joan. 16.
which was promised unto the church, does teach her all truth, yet you so
understand the matter, that for all the overthrowing of one whing of your
battle, you nevertheless will not leese the whole field and victory. Which
one saying of yours alone, without further stroke geaue^, does so wound your
church and confound it, he that discrediteth the church in one poi^t, must
either seek an other chur^che, or recant his saing, and judgment.
that in deed you have lost the victory. And it may well be, that your tongue is
yet free, and that your feet may serve you to runn in to other questions,
besides the purpose, but as concerning the truth (which is with you in all
points, if you be the true church) you have lost for ever the grace of it,
either because (as we know) you can not disprove sole receiving, either because
yourselfe say, that if you were therein overthrown, you had not yet lost the
victory. Which is thus much in effect, that the church of Christ, (which honor
you challenge unto yourselfe) might in any one article be deceived, and teach
that sole receauyng is against the institution of Christ, and grant for all
that, that no overthrow is taken, if the clean contrary be proved. But let us
consider now, what shifts you can make, to the disapointing of our purpose?
Our contention is for private Mass. etc. of which sole receiving is but one
part. Defense.


You may freely make, as many and as few parts as you will herein, Reply.
because it is alltogeather of your own private devising. The Catholic
church, (as it is oftentimes told you) has no private mass, and we can not
find, for what other cause you nickname it a private mass, then, for that the
priest alone receaueth. And if we hitherto have not understood your meaning,
your selves are very much to blame, which have not defined it unto us. All be
it, if one may come to an others mind, by considering his ways in reasonyng,
we can think no other, but that you mean the priests sole receiving without
the people, by the name of private mass, because in all your speaking against
it, you argue directly and only against sole receiving. Which whether we have
concluded against you or no, what have you to the contrary? This you say: It
folowth not, Defense. fol. 19.
to say, the priest in case of necessity, when none will receive, may take
the Sacrament alone, therefore he may do it without necessity, when he may
have other to communicate with him.

Yeas truly, Reply.
it follows very well. for if it be so as you report, that the right and
necessary use of the sacrament, is, to receive it with cu^panie, then can the
priest never receive it alone by himself, what so ever necessity should come
upon him. for in such things as apperteyne to the substance of the sacrament,
no creature can lawfully use the contrary unto them. But sole receiving seems
to be granted of you to us, in case of necessity, (which provision or
exception you prove not hitherto, out of the express word of God), ergo it is
no part of the necessary substance, which must be observed about the sacrament.
And if it be not essential, then doubtless it may be dispensed with all, then
also may the Church of Christ without breach of his institution, let the
priests alone with their sole receauyng. what say you then? is receiving with
cumpanie necessary? if you say, yea: then is it for no man's pleasure or
ordinance, in any case to be altered. If you say, no, that is, if you grant
it to be indifferent: why then might nor the priest receive alone, for any
commandment of Christ or his Apostels? And what law have you, either of God
or good man, that charge him, to have always communicantes with him? And
this I speak concerning your weak argument, and also of the liberty which
is in the priest, if he be disposed to use it: Allthough in deed that you can
not show the example, where the priest did receive alone when others would
communicate with him. But now Sir, I pray you, come nearer to the matter, and
show unto us due and good proufes against the priests sole receauyng. Because
ye urge so ernestly, Defense fol. 19.
to have due proof against sole receauyng by the priest if the people will not
communicate, I will show you some reasons: But before I enter. etc. Take our
whole meaning with you, Reply.
Sir, we require to have your proufes, against sole receiving by the priests,
not conditionally, (with your if the people will not communicate) as who should
say, see how the M. of the defense is ever going from the purpose.
that the only cause of the sole receiving, were thought of us to be in the
lack of cumpanie, and as though necessity, which has no law, and not the
truth of the cause did make our assertion good: we will not (I say) so
vnperfectlye go to work against you, but we believe and hold absolutely, in
the nature of the things themselves, that the sole receauyng is not against
the word of God. And now, do you what you can, to prove, that upon pain of God
his indignation, there ought to be a cu^pany to receive with the priest at
every mass* Apology fol. 10.
as the Catholic in his Apology requires of your side: Or that it were
better, not only to pluck him from the altar, but also to cast him out of
the church to, rather then he should receive alone, and alter the institution
of Christ (as you understand it) and cause the people to runn headlong in to
God his displeasure. Defense fol. 17.
which words whether you spoke in vehemency of spryte or spyte I can not
tell, (yet who should presume to pluck Ambrose from the altar, when the
Emperor himself is commanded out of the quyer) But if you spoke as you
thought, and can prove that which you spoke, let us have a copy of your
reasons, and of the authorities, which so necessarily do move you. And to the
end that it may be perceived, who deals plainly, and who goes from the
purpose, let this be the form of the question, which is to be talked of
betwixt us. The stat^ of the controversy of private mass.
Whether, upon pain of God his indignation, the priest ought to have allwaies
cumpanie to r^ceaue with him: Now, that you may not say, that sense your
defense has come forth, the state of the controversy is quite and clean
altered, turn you, unto the.7. and.10. leaf of the Apology, and you shall
read most manifestly, that, unto this state, the question is driven. Therefore
Sir, after you do perceive the ground upon which we do, and you should stand,
march you forward in your captain his name, (what so ever he be) which moved
you. You say then: I will show you some reasons. Defense. fo. 19.
But before I enter in to that, I must warn you once again, that if our
reasons, were not so well able to prove necessity, yet could you not conclude
your purpose, for that your private Mass is nothing less then necessity.
What we can conclude, Reply.
it shall appear before we depart. But it may be gathered already, that you
are concluded up in to a very hard case, Is it not plain, that the M. of the
defense shrinketh?
which make such protestations before you come to the matter. You said a little
before, that if we did geaue you the overthrow, yet we could not triumph: and
now you warn us, that if your reasons be not so well able to prove necessity,
(which is meant, I trow, by the necessity of some to communicate with the
priest) that yet we could not conclude our purpose, because our private mass
is nothing less then necessity, (by which necessity, you understand, I
think, the lack of communicantes, when the priest would receive) wherein if I
do not rightly interpret you, you must be contented to excuse me: because that
if you yourselfe were at this place in so great necessity and lack of
words, that you could not plainly express your mind, no wonder, if he, which
reads your sentencies, be brought in to doubt, what sense he should make of
them. As for necessity, in which many things are granted, and as concerning
the blessed thief, which never (you say) was baptized, (which you say truly
in that he was not dipped in water, and yet he was baptized in the Holy ghost,
and in his own blood) because of our principal question, I will not stand
about him. And whether in the ordinary use of it, the supper of the Lord,
ought of necessity to have co^municantes to be partakers of it, (as you would
make the controversy to be,) I will not reason with you at this time. Either
because it is not perceived, what you will mean by the term ( ordinary use,)
either because the question is more general, as we have put it forth unto you.
And whereas at other times, The wavering of heretics, and uncertain senses.
in your pulpites and also books, you appeal unto the institution of Christ,
and make the matter so weighty, as though it might never be suffered, that one
should receive alone with out cumpanie, yet now you talk of an ordinary use of
the Sacrament, as who should think, that you never denied, but that in
particular cases, and for extraordinary causes, one alone might receive,
without any injury done unto the institution of Christ. And yet again, when
the Catholics do allege diverse examples and authorities, to prove, that
cumpanie is not necessary, absolutely, in the use of the Sacrament, then lo
you be so ernest against them, as though it were in no wise to be granted,
that in the primitive church any one example, authority, or argument might be
showed, to prove sole receiving, as thowgh yowr cause were anyiote hindered by
it, if in deed you hold the question not absolutely, but only concerning the
ordinary use of the Sacrament. Wherefor seeing that you go so in and out,
hither and thither, without all manner of keeping of order and place, like
dimilaunces or light horsemen, or else like the wild Irisshe in their fighting.
I therefore think it necessary, again to bid you remember your self, and to
consider the state of the question, upon which the Catholic rested.

And thee (gentle Reader) I desire to mark exactly, the chief and principal
matter which we have to debate upon. which is this. Not, whether in time of
necessity a priest may receive alone, Not whether the ordinary use of the
Sacrament, ought of necessity to have communica^tes, we will not at this time,
meddle with these questions, because we have allreadye a greater and more
principal in hand: but our question is this, Whether (as I have said before)
upon pain of God his indignation, the priest ought to have allwaies cumpanie
to receive with him. Let this be first examined, and then shall the other, be
quickly answered. Trusting therefore that thou wilt mark diligently, where upon
the catholic strives against the adversary, I now return again, unto the
M. of the defense, and require the to consider the manner of his fighting. In
answering the Catholic his demand, he says: defe^. f. 19.
Our proof is this. Mayor.
In the celebration of this sacrament of the Lord his supper, we ought to do
that only and nothing else, Minor.
that Christ the author of it, did in his institution: But in Christ his
institution, appears neither sole receauyng, Conclusio.
nor ministering under one kind: therefore in celebration of the sacrament,
neither sole receiving, nor ministering under one kind ought to be used.

First to the mayor, then to the minor, Reply.
Sir I deny your mayor unto you, To do all that Christ did in his last supper,
is not, with out all exception and limitation, necessary.
because you affirm, that generally, which is true only in certain points of
Christ his mau^dy. For, if we must do that only, which Christ did at his
supper, and do nothing else but that, then must we use sitting, and not
kneeling or standing, then must the Sacrament be delivered unto.xij. persons
and neither to more nor less: then shall we not celebrate before dinner, or in
a cope or surplesse, or with psalms, organes, and solempnitie, such as you
also use, because we must do nothing else but that, which Christ did, as your
mayor imports. Now if you be to wise and learned to think that in such a
general manner, we ought to do as Christ did at his last supper, then have you
just cause to correct your mayor, and we can not but deny it, until we may
understand of your limitation, which you will (we trust) add unto it. And what
limitation might that be, which being added, we would grant your proposition.
Forsooth if for the term institution, you would put tradition. For what so
ever Christ did about the co^secrating or delyuering of his precious body, it
may be truly said, that he did it in his institution, but yet such
circumstancies as he then used, are not believed to be his tradition. For it is
also one thing, to say, this is Christ his institution, and it has a far
other meaning, to say, Christ did this in his institution. For his institution
imports a law, and is directly to be observed, but the phrase of in his
institution, imports a signification of time, and place, and circumstancies,
within which his institution was uttered. Which things, as they be not
essential, but stand only about the substance, themselves being accidental
and chaingeable, so they may be, without all hurt, altered, as the church shall
think good and convenient. Therefore, as I grant, that in matter of weight and
substance, Christ only, and no other, is to be followed: so in that general
manner of speech, which you do use, I am sure, it can never be proved. Yeas
say you: The mayor is S. Cyprianes, Defense fol. 19.
proved at large and much stayed upon, in his epistle ad Cecilium, de
Sacramento sanguinis.

You may be for ever ashamed, Reply.
that you allege Saint Cypriane for the proof of your proposition, which
nothing at all makes for you, and that you do so wickedly, in so ernest a
matter, abuse the simplicity of your countriemen, such as can understand no
Laten. And because it is not once or twyse, that you appeal unto this epistle
of S. Cypriane, I will therefore sumwhat at large, show it furthe in this
place, to the Reader, that he take good heed for ever, of geauing hasty
creditt, unto strainge and newfound teachers.

There were in S. Cyprians time, some such priests, which, either for
simplicity, or for custom sake, or for certain devout causes, did offer up at
the time of the mysteries, not wine and water together, but only water by
itself. Against whose doings in that point, S. Cypriane most ernestlye
writes, Cyprian. li. 2. epi. 3.
and it is the only scope and mark, at the which he shoots in all that long
epistle: alleging first the example of Melchisedech, Genesis 14.
which brought forth bread and wine, for he was the priest of God most highest:
afterward the saying of Solomon, Prouer. 9
how that wisdom killed her sacrificies, and mingled her wine in a cup: then
further, the prophecy of ^acob, speaking of his soun Judah in the figure of
Christ, Gene. 49
and saying: he shall wasshe his robe in wine, and his cloak in the blood of
the grape: after that again, the testimony of Esai, Esa. 63.
when he saw the vestmentes of Christ full of redd spots, as if he had come
lately from the wynepresse: Math. 26.
he alleges also the institution of Christ, 1. Cor. 11.
and the testimony of S. Paul, by which both places he proves, that we
should offer up not water only, but also wine. Then he makes further
argument, saying, That wine and water should be mengled together in the
chalic^.
that the mixture of wine and water in the chalice together, does signify the
conjunction of Christ and his church, and that if wine be offered up alone, the
blood of Christ is without us: and that if water alone be offered up, then the
people begin to be without Christ. Which reason of his, if you will co^tempne,
I am sorry, that S. Cyprian has so sone displeased you, whom you seemed to make
so much of, before. But as concerning the argument of that epistle, he proves
by those testimonies, which I have touched, and by many other ways, that in
the offering, which the priest makes, water and wine both, are to be mengled,
and that it was Christ his institution so to do, and that Christ only is to be
followed therein, and that we must do herein no other thing, the^ that which
Christ himself did first of all. Now, Sir, then, with what face can you
allege S. Cyprian, for proof of your proposition which is general, whereas
he speaks of water and wine to be mengled, when the priest does sacrifice,
which us a special case only? And see how the dyuel did owe you a shame. If
you will refuse Saint Cyprian in that place, then stands your mayor like a
miserable proposition without any similitude of defense. If you allow S.
Cyprian, how stands your religion, in whose communion and Lords table, water
and wine are not mengled together, which should be so duly and necessarily
observed? Will you say here that the field is not lost, and that this is but
an overthrow of one wing only? Do you fight for the victory, and not for the
verity? so that you may be seemed to have somewhat allwaies to say, do you make
no conscience nor rekonyng, of your unjust and foul play? Answer directly
unto this one argument, or confess your falsehode or ignorance, and geaue over
your stryuing against the manifest verity. If all things are to be observed
in such manner as Christ has them instituted: wherefor have you no water in
the chalice, which Christ (as S. Cyprian proves) has so solemply delivered?
Let this be answered.
Now, on the other side, if some things may be well vnfolowed, which Christ
himself appointed: why make you such a general stout proposition, which by
yourselfe is so quicklye neglected? For the mixture of wine and water in the
chalice, you can not say that you have no authority of scripture, no example
of primitive church, no testimony of ancient Doctor, for in that one epistle
of Saint Cypriane, of which we speak, which you seem not to have readen
only, but also to allow, you shall find all those places, by which the verity
of this tradition may be proved. Where then is your memory? That which S.
Cyprian of purpose declares, of the mixture of wine and water in the chalice,
you either see not, or regard not. and that which you put forth of the general
observing and keeping whatsoever Christ did in the institution of his
sacrament, is not at all in that epistle, and yet you can read it there proved
at large. And here now, Note diligently how S. Cyprian is misconstrued, and the
reader abused by the M. of the defense.
I have to say further against you, that you do not rightly interpret, not
only his mind, but not so much as his words. For whereas that blessed martyr
says: Admonitos autem nos scias, vt in calice offerendo, dominica traditio
seruetur* which is: Know you further, that we be warned, that in offering of
the chalice, the tradition of our Lord be kept. you interpret it after this
fasshion: Do you know therefore, that we be admonisshed, that in offering the
sacrament of the Lords blood, his own institution should be kept. For
examinyng of which your interpretation, if you should be brought, but unto a
Grammar schole, dominica traditio, is to shortly Englisshed, his own
institution, and, in calice offerendo, is to ignorantly Englisshed, in the
offering of the sacrament of the Lords blood. so that I believe verily, if the
Scholemaster were not very much a sleep, he would bear softly at your back
door, and make you to remember yourselfe better. But if little regard be taken
of construction, which is made in schools, yet it is to be provided diligently,
that no false construction be set forth in print, especially in such kind of
matter, as apperteineth unto our soul, and is of so great weight and
efficacy, that it makes or marreth an heresy. You Englissh traditio, not
tradition, but institution. And whi rather institution, then tradition? Verily
for no other cause, I think, but for that you abhor the name of tradition,
and because you would seem to the ignorant Reader, to be a great fauorer of
Christ his institution. You Englisshe, in calice offerendo, after this sort, in
offering the sacrament of the Lords blood, and whi not rather, in offering the
chalice, as the words themselves do signify? You had no little craft in your
mind, when you set upon the translating of this plain sentence, and for the
word, chalice, to substitute, the sacrament of the Lords blood, it was a
deceitful enterprise. For if you would have plainly said (as S. Cyprians
words do signify) that, in offering the chalice the tradition of our Lord be
kept, the diligent Reader would have been moved to require, what tradition that
should be, which must be observed in offering the chalice? and he should be
truly answered, that it was the tradition of using not wine alone or water
alone, but water and wine both, in the chalice, together. which would much
disgrace your communion. But when you make S. Cyprian to sound after this
sense, that, in offering the sacrament of the Lords blood, his own institution
is to be followed, you geaue occasion to a simple and inexpert Reader, to
think, that hereby it is manifestly proved, that the lay people at these days
also, must necessarily receive his blood, because he, in his institution of
his sacrament, delivered forth also his blood. Which S. Cyprian yet did no
more think upon, then he feared least any gra^marian should come, many hundred
years after him, and interpret his plain words in such a froward sense as
you have done. And so in the Englisshing forth of the selfsame sentence, after
these words, and no other thing to be done, then that the Lord did first for
us hymselue, you make a full periode and point: whereas it follows in S.
Cyprian, as clause of the same sentence, that in deed we should do as our
Lord had done first himself, but wherein and how far, trow you? in all
things, and all circumstancies? no truly. For straitwaies it follows, in S.
Cyprian, and it is the limitation of the whole proposition, that the chalice
which is offered up in commemoration of him, be offered up mixed with wine. By
which words he plainelye declares his intent and purpose, which was that for
the tradition of mengling water and wine in the chalice, we should not follow
any other order, then that, which Christ himself first used. Therefore, if you
mean by your mayor proposition, that which S. Cypriane means, the plain
sense thereof is this, that as concerning the offering of wine alone, or water
alone, we should follow Christ his tradition only, which apointeth for the
chalice both water and wine. But then your argument will be very ridiculous, as
in example: We ought to do that only, Mayor.
which Christ did, and nothing else, as concerning the ordering and tempering of
the chalice:

But in Christ his institution appears, Minor.
neither sole receiving, nor ministering under one kind:

Therefore ( you may infer when you will) that, Conclusio.
if all abbeis were destroyed, we should have forty eggs for a penie.



The mayor of this argument is S. Cyprians, and much stayed upon in his epistle
ad Cecilium. The minor is your own. The conclusion is lawful and current. For
to such agreeable and proper premises, every conclusion will serve will
inowgh.

But now if you will have your mayor to be general: first I flattly deny it:
then I have declared that it is not extant in S. Cypriane: and thirdly, I
answer unto you, that you do not believe your own mayor, because that in your
communion no water is put in to the chalice.

Now as concerning your minor, I grant it unto you, that in the last supper of
Christ, there appears no sole receiving. I also confess, that S. Iustine,
and S. Denyse the Areopag^te, whom you allege, do well prove, that in their
days there were co^municants to receive with the priest. But, as I must tell
you again, our question is not of what was done, but of what might have been
done then, and now is done withowt offense of God, and breach of Christ his
commandment.

I answer: Defense fol. 26.
Christ's institution, the example of the Apostles, the common use of the
fathers, was otherways: therefore the priest should not communicate without
other. I deny your argument. Reply.
for their vsages and doings, are not laws unto the church, so as they may
not be altered. And by this reason you may bring us to receive after supper,
because of the institution of Christ, Luc. 24.
example of the Apostles, and common use of the primitive church. As we again
might bring you to take the sacrament in one kind, because of the authority of
Christ, and example of the primitive church. But you seem to yield that you
have no express commandment to bring furthe against us, and yet that
notwithstanding, you will have us to be ouercummed. And to this purpose, you
say: You have no express commandment, Defense. fol. 26.
which forbeadeth you, to baptyse in the name of the father only: but that
Christ his institution was otherwise. What was the institution of Christ
therein? Reply.
was it not, that his Apostles should baptize, in the name of the Father, the
Soun, and the Holighost? Yet the Apostles did baptize, in the name of JESUS
only, without mention made of the Father, or the holighost. If they did break
Christ his institution, they were not faithful Apostles, and yet, they do not
seem to keep it, when they do not baptize in the name of the three persons.
What then shall we say? Truly, that you understand not the institution of
Christ, and that the church is the stay of all the Catholics, which does
interpret unto them Christ his full mind and order. And like as it is answered
by autentike, and good authority, that in baptising in the name of Ihesus
Christ, the sacrament is full and perfect. For he which says, CHRIST,
co^prehendeth in that one word the father which anointed him, and the holyghost
with whom he was anointed, and then Christ, which is by interpretation the
anointed, and so does make up the mystery of the three persons: so in
receiving under one kind, we receive both flesh and blood, as perfectly as if
both kinds had been ministered: and in receiving alone, we receive as much of
the true and real profit which cummeth unto us by the sacrament, as if all the
parish did bear us cumpanie at the altar. Therefore, when you talk of Christ
his institution of baptism, you speak you can not tell what, and you know
not, Joan. 3. and 4.
I believe, when Christ instituted that sacrament. For he baptized before his
resurrection, were it by himself or by his Apostells, and he gave not the
commandment of baptising, Math. vlt.
in the name of the father, the soun, and the holighost, before the time of his
ascensio^. And again, when you tell us, that we have no other proof against
him, which would baptize in the name of the father, then Christ his
institution, The bold ignorance of the M. of the defense.
you would seem to understand and know all our reasons and conclusions, and
yet you be as ignorant in that point, as he which never had readen any other
then his own doctors. Read in Petrus Lombardus, that learned Bishope, in what
sense it may be true, Senten. li. 4. did. 3.
that one might baptize in the name of the father, without specifying of the
Soun or the Holyghost. Therefore to conclude, you have hitherto, either not
prouyd your purpose, either spoken out of the purpose, either made directly
against your own purpose.

The fourth Chapter.
THE Catholic in his Apology, following his principal purpose, begins to
show, what the priest may do. And he alleges S. Chrysostom, by whom he
would make yt plain, both what the priest may do, and what the people should
do, that if the people will not follow good exhortations, then the priest
without all doubt, may do his duty. As who should say* if communicantes
were to be had, then were the question a great deal more doubtful: but if
none will be brought to receive with the priest, then is there nothing to stay
him, but he may receive alone. For as all surseasing of suits in the law, is
first to be wished, and if that can not be obtained, that then a man may sue
for his right: so all good men may wish, that the people should be allwaies
well disposed, and yet if they will not be brought unto it, the priests may
sue for their right. Which similitude being alleged, and serving also well for
this purpose, that if we can not come to the best, we may laufully take the
next best unto it, yet the M. of the defense, does make such a do against it,
as though it were a principal argument of ours, in refelling of which, he might
show his florishies. And thus he says: In recityng the authority of
Chrysostom, Defense. fol. 27.
you bring in a similitude or comparison, which, of how small force they be in
prouyng, your lerning can not be so little, but that you must needs know.

The similitude (of which you speak) was not brought in, Reply.
so much to prove, as to open and expound that, which then was to be approved.
And whereas you confess, and we know, that similitudes are of small force in
them selves, wherefor do you discuss so narowlie, all the parts of this
similitude, as though there had not ben one special point, for the which it
was alleged? which is this: If we can not obtain the best, that then we
should take the next best unto it. which verity being so natural, and
reasonable, the author of the Apology was not so scrupulous, as to pass upon
a most perfect squaring of his similitude, whereas, to his intent and
conclusion, it was, he thought, well inowgh framed. But yet let us consider
your wisdom in using of your adversary, and the mighty strength of your
reasons, which you bring forth against him. Besides this you conclude here only
the case of necessity, Defense.
which helps the common use of the private Mass, very little.

As for the common use (as you speak now) or the ordinary use, (as you spoke
before) or the term of necessity, Fol. 20. p. 1.
(in which necessity, it seems by your own confession, that we prove unto
you our sole receiving, which you call private Mass,) all these are but
shifts of yours, and starting holes, in which you may couche, before the
ignorant, and seem to have some heart left unto you. As for us, if we prove
that in necessity, when the people will not receive, the priest may take and
eat alone: ergo sole receiving may be used, ergo the indignation of God
hangs not over him which has no fellow communicantes, ergo we have our
purpose, which was, to make the state of our question, not upon common use or
ordinary use, but generally upon sole receiving, whether, absolutely, it be
against Christ his commandment and his truth or no. but let us come to the
forsaid similitude which so much displeases you.

You make your comparison, Defense
between things very unlike and of nature diverse: that is, between possible
and impossible, and lawf^ll and unlawful. I will not greatly wonder, Reply.
if you have strainge opinions as concerning divinity, whereas in natural
matters and reasonable, you make new conclusions besides all truth and
consequence. What call you then impossible? Mary (say you) that all contention
should be banisshed from among men in this world. What think you then of
virginity? Is it not as impossible, that it should be kept of all Christians,
as you think it impossible, that an universal concord might be continued
among men, whiles they live in this world? No doubt, but you will grant my
saying true, in respect of the whole number of Christians, whereas many of the
spiritual fathers, and brothers of your side, do think that virginity can
not be kept undefiled, no not in any one person of the world. As a Prophet of
your own, boldly preached at Abingdo^, in presence of the whole deanery, A
holy prea^her.
to the great commendation, forsooth, of his chastity, that All things which
bear horn or hear, must go to their mate, once a year. But, I think not
so evil of you, that virginity should be altogether impossible, mary that
generally it is to be no more looked for, then surseasing from all contention,
in so miserable a world, I am sure, you confess it unto me. Yet, I dare to
make this similitude, and stand in it also against you, that, like as queen
apples, (or take what other name of good apple you will) are most to be chosen,
and yet if a man love a crabb better, God make him merry with it: so it were to
be wisshed, and it is most best in deed, that all should, be virgins, yet if
any body have a mind to marriage, I am not master of his taste, therein. How say
you Sir, to this comparison? will you tell me, that the nature of apples and
virginity, A similitude may be made between things, in nature, diverse.
are very unlike? or that crabbes are sour, and marriage is sweet? or that it
is impossible that all should be virgins, but in any markett day of the year,
a man shall find good apples? or that marriage is honorable, and that crabbes
are meat for swyne? will you make such a serching or Anatomy of a simple and
plain similitude, and gather so evil a sense of it, as either folly or malice
can deuyse? Or else rather, will you examine it no further, then the present
matter and cause required, for which only the similitude served? for as I do
not deny but that a pleasant fellow would make much sport upon my similitude,
yet nevertheless my meaning is very true and honest: that if a man will not
follow counsel in the best, he may be suffered to follow his fancy, in that
which is not the worst.

Crabbes also, are not evil, as some choke pears are, and they add a certain
grace unto the cupp when they be roasted: and, to be short, they are not so far
behind good apples in worthiness, as marriage is far beneth virginity, be it
spoken without irreuerencie, unto the Sacrament of wedlock. Therefore, your
conclusion, upon the Catholics comparison, is very false and faulty, because
I have showed a good and true similitude, in which yet after your
interpretation, the one member is impossible, and the other is possible. Also
your merry following of the catholics similitude, and your co^cluding (as it
were by the like argument) that bisshopes must not forbydd priests to have
such cussons with whom Si non cast tamen caute: is much like as when Jack an
Ape, Neither apes, men: neither the M. of the defense does follow well the
Catholics.
does besides the right way and manner, put a reasonable man his cote upon
himself. For as the suing for our right is lawful, so will we prove that sole
receyuyng is lawful: but as the suing for a man his right is lawful, so
neither you neither we do think, that priests to have lemmans is lawful. We
also come to our conclusion by an honest principle, as, When the best is not
obtained, let us yet take the next best unto it, but the principle unto your
conclusion must be this, ( when the best is not obtained, let us take that,
which is naught.) Yea truly, not in sport but in sadd ernest, you make a worse
kind of reason, fauling from the not obtaining of the best, to concluding of
that, which is worse then naught. As, when you can not have ministers to live
chaste, to geaue them free license to take open harlottes. whom although you
cover, with the name of wives or sisters, yet are they in very deed, no better,
then I have termed them. Now after all this, you say that all our whole drift
is, by alleging the corruption of manners in the world, to prove that priests
must therefore receive alone, because none will receive with them. But once
again, I tell you, you understand not our dryft. for if the whole world might
and would receive together with a priest, yet we hold, that sole receauyng is,
in itself, alowable. And as you do misunderstand us in this, so do you in an
other point, saying: Ye have taken order for the people, Defense fo. 28.
generally to receive, only at Easter.

As who should say, Reply.
that the church has provided, that they should not receive generally at other
times of the year, but only at Easter. Which is as false as God is true. For
the Canon and decree of the church, is, that who so does not receive at Easter,
shall not be accounted a Christian. The words are these. Omnis vtriusque sexus
sidelis, Co^cilij Lateranensis sub Inno. 3. ca. 21.
postquam ad annos discretionis peruenerit, omnia sua solus peccata confiteatur
fideliter, saltem semel in anno, proprio sacerdoti, and iniunctam sibi
poenitentiam studeat pro viribus adimplere, suscipiens reuerenter, ad minus, in
Pascha, Eucharistiae sacramentnm, etc. and they are thus much in English, Let
every faithful man, woman, and child, after they come to years of
discretion, confess by them selves, faithfully, unto their own priest, all
their sins, once a year at the least, and study to fulfill according to
their power, the penance enjoined them, reverently receiving the Sacrament of
the Eucharist, Note the M. of the defense his honesty or knowledge i^
understanding of general counsels.
at Easter, at the least. etc. By which decree she does not (I trow,) take
order that the people shall generally receive only at Easter, but that if
they receive not at that time ( ad minus, at the least,) they shall be punished
for it. Declaring hereby how much she mislyketh, that the people will not
voluntarily prepare them selves to receive their maker, whereas she is
constrained to put forth a law, that, at the least, they shall receive at
Easter, or else be accounted for not Christans. where learned you then, that the
people were appointed to receive only at Easter? Or in what text or gloss do
you find it, that the church has taken order for them, not to receive
generally at other times? Tell us, I pray you, whether all be one in your
judgment, to say, you shall receive at Easter, at the least, and, you shall
receive only at Easter? The first the church decrees, constrainyng thereby,
herr childerne to remember their duty, and to receive the cumfort of their
sowles. The second is only by you imprinted, to make the laity suspect the
gouerme^t of the Catholic Bishopes, as though they should study how to
diminisshe the common peoples profit and knowledge, and therefore had taken
order and diligence, that they should receive only at Easter. What authority
you have to make such open and wicked lies, I know not. but allthough it might
be geauen, yet a good man would not use it. And allthough you might escape
unespied, thorough the great credence in which your brothers have you
perchaunse, yet should you not show such malice or boldness toward the good
and indifferent reader, or toward a never so euillbeloued adversary. But now
to an other matter. An other matter I may well say. For whereas it was
consequent, to bring in the testimony of S. Chrysostom, you deferr that over
unto the fifthe chapter, and occupy the reader and the replier also, (when
any such would be found out for you) with the question of the sacrifice. In
which matter, although I might be long and copious in answering you, yet, as
much as I can provide for it, I will be short and compendious, in declaring the
truth. Therefore let us hear of you, where your grief is, that, by answering
yea or no unto it, we may the quicklier end this extraordinary eruption of
yours, against the truth of our sacrifice. First you allege, that to say,
that the priest is bound to offer up the daily sacrifice, is, The root of all
the abuses of the Lords supper, Defense fol. 28.
that have been brought in to the church of Christ. etc. Do you think then,
Reply.
that if priests were not bound unto it, all abuses which have sprung up (as
you say) would straitwaies decaie and wither, the root of them being taken
away? But who shall then stand at the altar, and intend upon the mysteries,
for duty sake? And when the parissheners shall make courtesy, and say one to
the other, (Go you, and, nay go you, and, by my trothe I am not ready, and
by my trothe then, let all stand) will you permit such disorder to continue,
when the root of abuses shall be taken away by you? or will you apoint some
one or other, which shall be bound to serve in the office? whom yet if you will
apoynt to be a reader only, and to have no further authority, the^to open the
book, and tell what is written in it, then shall you disgrace very much the
priesthode and order of the newlaw, which by all common reason, should be more
worthier, then any ptiesthode that ever was in the world.

Now, if you, being venterous to take the rule of Christen sowles in to your
own hands, are enforced to keep officies and dignities among you, for the
better commendation of your Gospel, think you that the wisdom of God, and a
God him self Jesus Christ, would gather a multitude of nations together in to
one faith, one hope, and one absolute form of serving and honoring God, and
provide no officers concerning that effect, over them? Or when he has appointed
most perfect and excellent offices to be taken and exequuted of men, for the
wealth of his well-beloved, would he leave them to their pleasure, whether they
did follow their office, or no, and let them stand unbound and vncharged? It
seems then, that as by his divine providence, he, as man, began a priesthode
to serve for his church, in matters apperteinyng unto God, so by as necessary
consequence, he charged his leuetenantes and vnderofficers in that kind, to
exequute his will, and do their duty. Wherefor that priests should be bound
to daily offering (concerning the whole body of priesthode, and not every
particular person) it is so far of, to be the root of abuses, that except
such a duty were followed, we should by this time have had no supper of our
Lords at all, I warrant you. Iniquity would so much have prevailed, when the
daily sacrifice should have ceased, and no man his law could have continued it,
if by the law of God, it had be^found unrequired. And further I say, that the
church has brought in or allowed no abuses in the ministration of any
sacrament. But you go forward and lie: This is, Defense. fol. 29.
wherewith you do pitifully deface the death and passion of Christ, making your
self, for your glories sake, as it were means of reconciliation, between God
and his people.

This is a shameful lie, Reply.
yea rather it is a slander, whereas you make the desire of glory to have been
the cause in the church of Christ, of having her priests endued with such
excellencies and prerogatives. And you speak so advisedly, as though Aaron
had not stood laudablie, betwyxt God and the people, when the plague was sent
forth against them, Number. 16. Number. 14.
or Moses had done presumptuously, to be the spokesman for the people unto
God, or as though Christ had not sent his Apostells even as his Father sent
him, Io. 20.
or S. Paul had not geauen warnyng unto the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 4
concerning such as he was him self, that they should take them so, as the
ministers of God, and dispensators or distributours of his mysteries. Again,
This is it, Defense.
that has discoraged Christen people from the often use and frequenting of the
Sacrament. As though that, Reply.
if there were no priests at all, there would be continual receiving, or that
priests would receive more often then they do, if they were free and not bound
unto it. The people (say you) is left free to come as seldom as they will. You
speak cuttedly and untruly: Untruly, because yourselfe confess, that the
church has taken order, that the people receive at Easter, and then are they
not left free to come as seldom as they will, which must come ones a year:
And cuttedlie, because they are left free to come in one year, not as seldom
as they will, but also and rather as often as they will. And if it be in their
will and power, to come every week or day, in which mass is celebrated, how
should the state of the priest be the cause of stopping their liberty?

You shall go with him for his wisdom, which being condemned for robbery,
said, that if he had never prayed to Saint, he had never come to ha^ging. As
you do now put the cause of the peoples fault, in the holy order and office of
priesthode. But, I trust, you had somewhat that moved you against priests,
about their office of sacrificing. Where upon it follows: Sure I am, that
neither the institution of Christ makes mention of any oblation or sacrifice
to be done by the minister, saving only the sacrifice of thankesgeauing, nor
yet the scripture apointeth any bounden duty for the priest, more to use the
sacrament, then other godly and well disposed Christians.

Whether the priest is bound to use the sacrament, more the^ other good people,
it is nothing to the purpose to ask it, except you take the word (use) for
sacrificing. I tell you so often of your evil manner herein, because you should
hereafter amend it. But for the other matter, which in deed is now in question,
what if you read not in the institution of Christ, special mention, of
oblation to be done by the priest, are you straitwaies at your wits end, that
you can not tell where to seek further for the truth? Do you not know, that
our Savior was found after iij. Luc. 2.
days seeking, in the middle of doctors? and, do not holy men interpret us
our Sauiors meaning, such as ourselves should never find in scripture, if we
looked till our eyes were out, in the letter only and text of it? Also where
find you in the institution of Christ, any precise mention made of the
sacrifice of thanks geauing? which only sacrifice you find there, or else you
lie. Then, as you might think us of very small judgment, if we would deny
the sacrifice of thanks geauyng, because we do read no such word (sacrifice)
in the text of Christ his institution of the sacrament: so, (as we may be
content, that you show unto your self therein, some part of favor, and believe
that which is not expressie written) yet do ye not use, such argume^tations by
negatiues, with us hereafter, except we should reason, only for making of
sport, or spending of time. Yet to declare unto you shortly, that some see more
then you do in this matter, I answer that (hoc facite) which is to say, do
this or make this, stands among other his significations there, also for
sacrificare. For so is facere taken, in sundry places of the scripture. And if
you take ( facere) in his most common signification, Leu. 24. lud. 13. Ezech. 45
I say, that Christ did make an oblation and sacrifice of his body, in his
last supper, and his Apostles are authorized and charged to do as he did, ergo
they were bound to offer, and to sacrifice, Bishopes also and priests now must
follow their example, whom they succeed in office. The priests are bound to
offer.
For Christ our Savior, after he had ended the eating of the lamb, according
to the manner of the old law, he instituted and brought in, the eating of his
own flesh, of the truth of which the old paschal was but a figure. Read S.
Hierome upon the. 27. of S. Matheu. But the paschal lamb was off^red up to God
before it was eaten, Ex. 14.
therefore undoubtedly, (that the truth might answer the figure) Christ offered
himself in his maundie before the Apostles received him. Consider also, that
a sacrifice properly, is, when any thing is made holy to the honor of God:
and what thing in old or new testament, did ever set forth the honor of God
more worthily, then the geauing of his own flesh to feed wretches?

Or where was there any thing ever made of profane holy, if not then, when
Christ took bread in to his hands, and said in his allmightines, Math. 26.
This is my body? I note, besides all this, unto you, that in S. Luke his
Gospel it is said expreslie of our Savior, taking the bread in to his
hands, Luc. 22.
This is my body, which is geauen for you. Not, which shall be geauen only upon
the cross, but which presently is geauen, neither geauen only to you at this
present, as though all consisted in the eating, but even now geauen for you, by
which, an oblation, a present, a sacrifice, or some such service of his body,
is signified. Think you the^, that you might not read in the very
institution of the sacrament, that his body was offered of himself, and that
the Apostles had commandment to follow his example therein, if you had a
simple and faithful eye, to see all that to be true, which the church spelleth
unto you? But a sacrifice is a thing geauen unto God, Defense. fol. 30.
the sacrament was a thing geauen unto us, nothing can therefore be of nature
more contrary, then your sacrifice, and Christ his sacrament.

You must not stand herein, Reply.
if you do well. For Luthers opinion, and Zuinglius encountering him in the
sacrament, are a thousand times more contrary, A sacrament and sacrifice may
stand together.
the^ a sacrifice and a sacrament. For they can never be brought to agreement,
but sacrament and sacrifice, do very quietly stand together what? Did you
think that we offered sacrifice unto any other then to God? Or if we had any
part in it for ourselves, weened ye, that God must be unserved? Marie, Sir, if
there were nothing else, yet because we have a God, there is nothing more
convenient, then to have a sacrifice for him, and nothing to him is more
welcome, then his very own soun his body. Were it not a great absurdity,
that of our corn or any like thing, we might make both an offering unto God,
and meat also for our selves afterward, and that Christ of his body, the
true and sweet flower or meal, should make no larger commodity, the^ to geaue
undeserved bread to sinners? where learned you, that one, the self same thing,
can not be both a sacrifice and a Sacrament? we have sucked (you say) our
error, out of the fashions of speaking, which the old fathers used (perverted
yet of us,) but what old father or young brother has taught you, the mighty
contrariety (which you speak of) between sacrifice and sacrament. Yet go
to, if we have mistaken the old fathers, how well do you understand them? you
can not deny, but the old fathers do call the sacrament an oblation or
sacrifice, but you will expound their meaning unto us. Whereupon, you tell us,
that in the beginning, the people at the celebratio^ of the Lord his supper,
offered up, wine, bread, and other victuals, partly to find the priests, and
partly to refresshe the poor, and also to serve the communion. And so
partly It came to pass (the example being taken first Defense fol. 30.
of the common people) that the administration

An other occasion, fol. 31.
that the Doctors used those terms of sacrifieng and offering, was, that in
the celebration of the sacrament, they

After, Ibidem.
the fathers called every good action a sacrifice, were it private or common:
And therefore their successors by little and little, bent the same name, unto the
action and celebration of the Sacrament:

An other cause that the holy fathers call the sacrament an oblation or
sacrifice, Fol. 32.
is, because according to Christ's ordenance, we celebrate



Where I may begin to speak against you, Reply.
for this your division of sacrifice, I can not readelie tell, there are so
many things, which are to be moved and reproved. First the imperfectnes, that
you have used in it* because you have not expressed the full cumpasse of this
word, sacrifice, as the holy Fathers have understood it. Then your
superfluousnes, because you make many parts of that, which you should have
concluded in one member. As, if every good action be called a sacrifice, the^
should you have well brought the other kinds which you speak of, under this
one signification, as the principal largest, above all other. Allthough you,
in devising three manners, after which the fathers take the word sacrifice, do
leave this one out of the number, by which every good action (as you report)
is called a sacrifice, which yet deserves to have the first place among them,
if that which is most general, should not be omitted in dividing. Thirdly
your division is to be reproved, for the great untruth which is contained in
it, as I shall declare unto you hereafter. If first you will consider, what an
other manner of division was to be learned out of the Doctors, and in what sense
it is spoken and believed of us, that a sacrifice propiciatorie is offered in
our mysteries. what a sacrifice is.
Understand you therefore, that A sacrifice, is a reverent service and worshipp,
due unto God only. Now again: Of sacrificies, some be internal and
invisible, August. li. 10. de ci^i. Dei ca. 4.
other some external and visible. The inward and internal sacrifice may be
thus defined: It is that worshipp and service, what an internal sacrifice is.
in which our heart and will is geauen unto God, and this is done upon the
altar of our heart, when either we burn the incense of holy and devout love
in his sight, or when we vow to him ourselves and his gifts in us, or when we
remember his benefits in solemn feasts and holidaies, or when upon the
altar of our heart, with the fire of charity, we burn the offeringes of
humility and praise, unto him. And this is the pure and acceptable sacrifice,
which only God requires of us, not because of his own profit and vantage,
but that we, by uniting of ourselves to him, might live and continue for ever
with him. But how shall a man know, that there is such a spiritual, invisible,
and acceptable sacrifice? Of his own doing a man perchau^se may know, but of
an others mind, who can tell, without some external sign or token showed?
Again, if a man would utter his own inward devotion, how can he exemplify
it, without some external sign, either of bowing of knees, or holding up of
hands, or lifting up of eyes, or knocking of breast, or offering up of some
gift? yea rather the soul and body being so nigh together as they are, it is
impossible, that the heart and soul, should entierlie be occupied, in the true
worshipe of God, and that by no manner of similitude it should be perceived in
the body. Therefore, by necessary and natural consequence and following, there
must be an external sacrifice. And that is defined of S. Augustine, by these
words, The visible sacrifice is a sacrament, what an external sacrifice is
that is to say, an holy sign of the invisible sacrifice. Of this second
kind of sacrifice if you require examples, you may easelie find them in the
sacrificies of Abel, Noe, Abraham, and others in the law of nature, Gene. 4. 8.
13. and. 20
and in the book of Leuiticus, as concerning the old law, and in the churches
and devotions of Christians in this time of grace, as when they offer candells,
burn frankincense, take ashes, bear palm, and do anything outwardly to the
honor of God. In which things, except the offerer have an internal devotion
and piety, all those external ceremonies are not to him worth the using, and
if he be in heart and memory fully disposed and advised to consider his own
misery, and god his mercy, then are these outward actions and observations,
holy signs and tokens of the internal sacrifice, and may be called external
sacrificies. But let us speak of one singular example for all. The visible and
bitter death of our Savior Christ upon the cross, was an external and bloody
sacrifice. But in what sense and meaning? undoubtedly as it was and is called
visible. But what mean I by visible? I mean, that so painful manner of his
hanging by the hands and fcete upon the cross, and so universal a wounding
of every part of his pretiouse body, so that from the croune of his head to
the soele of his feet, there was no whole place in him, and the panting of
every vain and stretching of every joint, and incredible torment in all his
blessed flesh, these things with many other, were (I mean) holy signs of
his inward sacrifice, in which he offered up (before him and to him which sees
all secreates) his liffe, his heart, his will, his thanks, his praises and
prayers, and all that was his, for the saving of mankind, and satisfieing of
his fathers Justice. Yea, concerning the eyes of men, not only the sight of
God, who may doubt of his patience, which in all those torments did never once
murmur? who can mistrust or suspect his charity, which among so many
cruellties done to him, forgot not to love his enemies? who should not but
consider his endless obedience, whose soul could not be removed from the
keeping of his fathers will, when the body was disioynted, the one member from
the other? In very deed, this was an holy sign and sacrament, of the
invisible and principal sacrifice of his pure heart and mind, and by this we
understand, that God excedinglie loved man, which of mere good will and
compassion, was content so to suffer for man. What shall we geaue then again
unto God, for all this, which he has done for us? we owe to him remembrance of
these benefits: we owe unto him thanks: we owe unto him love. Remembrance is
moved by representation and sign: Thanks require a present and gift to be
uttered by: Love desires to be made one with that which is loved.

To keep his benefits in remembrance, we might use, either reading, or
hearing of his acts out of books, or painting of his passion, and expressing
of his liffe in colors. But images, we know are similitudes only, and are
far from the things themselves. To the signifieing of our thanks, we might
either sing them by mouth, or sound them by instruments, of show them in the
buylding of churches, and decking of them with ornaments. And as concerning
Love, we might fetch deep sigthes, and have ernest desires, but as the
servants of holy Job said by their master, in token of their exceeding love,
who might geaue us to have our full of his flesh? Job. 31.
We ought to render singular devotions, because we have received singular
benefits, but our memory is so unstable, our power so little, and our charity
so faint, that allthough very reason persuadeth, that we, after a most best
manner, should remember, thank, and love, so merciful and bountiefull a
Savior as Jesus is, yet the misery of nature declares, that we are not able
to do, either as we should, either, perchaunse, as we would.

In this doubt therefore, who shall help us, but he, which has dyed for us?
which because he is made our head, has therefore this office to direct and rule
the body. And so truly he has done. For in his last supper he took bread,
and said This is my body, he took the cupp, and said, This is my blood of
the new testament, and with this body and blood which he has and does geaue
unto us, we are able to discharge all our duties, and make a full and perfect
offering. Of which body, and the mysteries and treasures thereof, if I would
particularly speak, all time and study were to little for the greatness of the
matter. But for those three points, the which I make mention of, they may be
perfectly brought to pass, in the having and enjoying of his true body.

For as concerning our charity and love, it is the most that we can desire in
the state of his liffe, to be corporally, spirituallie, reallie, faithfully,
bodily, and ghostly joined unto him, which only is to be loved. Co^munio.
Of which our conjunction with Christ our God, the body and blood which he gave
under the forms of bread and wine, are a sign and sacrament, and are called
in respect of this signification and effect, (...) in Greek, Communio in
Laten, and Communion in our Englisshe.

Then for geauing of thanks, what greater present is there in earth or heaven,
the^ the firstfruct of the virgins womb, and the chiefest portion of all
creatures, which is the body and blood of Jesus Christ? So that if holy Abel,
No^, Abraham, and other, have testified their inward sacrifice of thanks, by
lambs, corn, grapes, oil, and so forth: and if Moises with all his people
has pleased God, in offering the firstfructes of their vineyardes, Exo. 23.
and. 34.
and glebeland, with firstfructes of men and beasts, Eucharisti^.
in testimony of the honor and thanks which they gave unto God: how much more
acceptablie, are we now able to offer unto God a most worthy and pretiouse
gift, which have received for that purpose the body and blood of Christ, in
whose only body, the particular values and prices, of all other presents,
that ever were under any law, are shortly comprised, and reckened summarelie?
And so in this respect, the body of our Savior is unto us Eucharistia, or a
sacrifice of thanks geauing.

But now, for the third point, who thanketh him, whom he remembers not? or who
remembers him, whom he is not warned of? or what warning can be greater, then
the real presence of the party? and the party being present, what is first
considered but his cheifest and worthiest benefit? That we should therefore
always remember our Sauyor his death, which he so openly suffered, that all
creatures should behold it, he left unto us the same body that suffered for us.

In presence of which, if we will not be brought to remember him, we will never
be brought. And in this respect, our Sacrament is called a Sacrifice, Sacrifice.
because it is, unto all such as have the true and sincere faith, a most holy
sign and token of that sacrifice of the cross, which so long time sense is
ended, as concerning the painefullnes and bloudnies of his crucified body, and
yet continues still in fresshe memory, by reason of the real presence of the
same body which then suffered.

And like as when Easter draws nygh, we say, to morrow or the next day
after, is the passion of our Lord, because it is a like day unto that in which
he suffered his passion: so, because that in the mysteries of Christians, the
representatio^ of Christ's perfect sacrifice, which he offered once for all, is
perfectly worked, therefore it bears the name of that bloody sacrifice, which
it represents. For in deed, we do not at this day, sacrifice Christ
bloudelie, but rather celebrate the memory of his paineful sacrifice, which
memory is by no mean, more effectually preserved, then by this, that the
same body is now made reallie present before us, which at that time was
sensibly offered for us. But how then is it propitiatory? forsooth, because of
the offering of one selfsame body. for allthough we make a co^memoration only
of his death, and not put Christ to death in deed, yet we have (thorough his
gift) the selfsame body, which the^ being put to death rose again to lyffe,
that it might never more die, which then was offered up bloudelie, and now is
offered misticallie, and is in both manners the same Christ verelie, and to the
same effect dispensatiuelie. Therefore, as Christ is the true fontaine of lyffe,
and the everlasting and shyning light of cumfort, and as his pretiouse side
after it has been once opened, is never shut up and stopped again, but
always geaueth out the streams of mercy and peace: so it can not but make for
the clensing of their sins, which stand before it, and hope after remission,
forgeauenes, and mercy, by it. And as the word propitiation, does signify
nothing else, but graciousnes, favor, cause of favor, or some such like, so the
mystical offering of his real person, which is the deseruer and geauer of all
perdon, can not be but propitiatory unto them, which come lowly before his
grace, and do him faithful honor, not withstanding his external baseness, and
the curteins, which he keeps him self under.

Thus I have shortly declared, what a sacrifice is: And, that one is
internal, an other external: And that under the name of internal sacrifice,
all piety and devotion of the heart is contained, in to how many kinds so
ever it may be divided: And that all good external actions, done in respect of
God, are comprehended under the name of external sacrifice, with all the
variety and number of them, be they never so diverse and many. In which kind
of external sacrifice, I have putt the sacrifice of the church, geauing
warning unto you, in what sense the church does call it a sacrifice.

And now therefore to return unto your division of sacrifice, you may learn
hereafter to do your things, in better order. For the oblations, which the
people made, of bread, wine, and other victuals: likewise the praying for all
states in the ty^e of celebration^: thirdly every good act and consequently
the action of the priest at the altar, should have been putt of you, under the
title or member of external sacrifice. And then you should have spoken sumwhat
of internal sacrifice: And before you had come unto that, you should have
defined unto us, what a sacrifice had been, that we might have a little
perceived your good judgment in the doctors. But let us forgeaue you this
vnskillfullnes, and consider now, whether that, which you have spoken without
order, be not spoken also of you, without truth or reason.

First we agree with you, that the people made such offeringes as you speak
of. the oblations of the people, in bread, wine, and victuals, was not the
cause why the doctors call the sacrament a sacrifice.
But we deny, that the offering of the people, was cause unto the holy
fathers, that they should geaue the title of sacrifice, unto the sacrament. For
it is unreasonable, that the Sacrament should borow the name of oblation, of
the peoples offering, and not rather the peoples wine and bread, be honored
with that title* because of the Sacrament. For in every kind of thing, the
first and chiefest in that kind, is first and formest to be accounted. As for
example, the offering of Christ, which he made of himself upon the cross,
because it was the most perfectest and best that ever was made, you should not
therefore say, that by the example taken of the offering up of calves, sheep,
or lambs, Christ is said to be offered, but rather because of his principal
sacrifice, all other must from thence have and borow their name. And so because
the oblation, which is made in the mysteries, is of more excellency, and of
higher degree, then the offeringes of the people: no doctor of the church would
be so unlike him self, as to call that, which the priest consecrated at the
altar, by the name of sacrifice, because it was a selected portion out of the
peoples offering. Again, if yt were true, that in respect that the bread and
wine was taken out of the peoples offering, therefore the bread and wine
consecrated, should have the name of an oblatio^, yet you could never call the
priest an offerer, except for some action, in which his offering might be
perceived. And this shall be the better proved, by considering of your example,
which, to show your purpose, you bring out of S. Irenei, which speaking of the
bread and wine, of which Christ said, This is my body, Iren. lib. 4 cap. 32
this is my blood, witnesses, that Christ therein taught them (not us, as you
conster it, but the Apostles first, and after them, and by them, us) a new
oblation of the new testament, which the church taking of the Apostles,
offers up to God in all the world. Here lo in this sentence, if it were
possible that the term (oblation) should be applied, not properly unto the
sacrament, but in respect, (as you think) of the oblation of the people, yet
how does the church offer, when by your saying, there is nothing to offer. But
consider for shame the words of S. Irenei: He taught (says he) the Apostels,
a new oblation of the new testament. If Christ taught them, they were to
lerning of it: if he taught them a new oblation, it was such as they never had
before. Yet of the offering of bread and wine, and such like, Leu. 23.
they had not only hard of before, but were also offerers of it them selves,
because all the nation of Jews had example or commandment of it, in the law.
Again, if it were a new oblation of the new testament, it is plain, it was
more worth, and more royal, and more true, then any of the old law, what time
all things chaunsed unto the^ in figures, 1. Cor. 10.
and were done for us, which live now in the later end of the world.

And therefore, if in the old law, the priests oblations were true oblations,
and had not that name or title, because they were offered up before of the
people: what a vile reproach is this, to the everlasting and new testament, to
say, that when the Doctors do speak of the oblation made at the mass, they
mean thereby, that the common people made offeringes of bread and wine, to
serve therewith the altar, the priests, and poor beggars.

Also, this holy father says, That the church, receiving (that oblation) of
the Apostles, does offer it up to God, in all the world. Furthermore he
brings in, the testimony of the Prophet Malachie, to prove that the
sacrificies of the old law should be abolisshed, and one pure and clean
sacrifice succeed them, and please God more then all they had done. I have no
mind to you, Mala. 1.
(says God, by the Prophet, unto the Jews, as concerning their sacrificies)
because, from the East to the weast, my name is great among the Gentiles, and
in all places there is sacrificed and offered up unto my name, a pure oblation
or offering, because my name is great among the Gentiles. This testimony of
the Prophet, S. Irenei alleges, to prove the new testament of which he
spoke. And by all this, which the church has received, the Apostles have
delivered, the Son of God has taught, the Prophet has forshewed, the whole
world does celebrate, is this (trow you) understood, that the people should
in the time of the new law and kingdom of Messiah, come in to the churches
with bread, wine, butter, eggs, and cheese, and other good victuals, that of
the bread and wine, which they offer, a portion should be taken, to serve at
the communion? I will be short with you, we the Christians, either have no
external sacrifice, and then we be in more worse and discumfortable case, then
ever any before have been, in any kind of religion, or else we have an excellent
oblation delivered unto us, as the Prophet Malachie foreshewed, and Christ
exhibited, and the church observes. But this excellent oblation, and so much
spoken of, is not the oblation, which the people make, (for the offering of
come, wine, and victuals, was more largely and plentifully used among Jews
and Panimes both, then it is with us) Ergo the Prophet Malachie spoke of an
other and better kind of offering. Ergo also S. Irenei, did not mean in his
sentence by you alleged, the simple and obscure oblations of the people,
because he speak of that, which the Prophet Malachie had written of.

Yet to show the grace which you have in understanding of the Doctors, whereas
this present testimony of S. Irenei makes so plainly against you, you say,
that he expounds himself in an other place, as in the.34. chap. of the
forsaied book, And signifies, that he speaks not of the offering of the
sacrament consecrated, Defense. fo. 30.
but of the bread and wine, offered partly to the use of the supper, partly
to the finding of the poor. It is wonder to see your boldness. Reply.
For the place of S. Irenei, by which you would prove this your comment, does
neither make mention of the use of the supper, An ancient doctor foulie
abused by the M. of the defense.
neither of finding the poor. But rather he says, we make offering up to
God, etc. offering unto him the firstfructes of his creatures, etc. and this
pure offering, the church only offers to our maker, etc. But where does he
say in that place (which either should have served your purpose, or else not at
all have been alleged) that the new oblation of the new testament, and the
prophecy of Malachie, of which he had spoken in the 32. Chapter before, were
to be understood of the bread and wine, offered to the use of the supper, and
finding of the poor? we do not deny, but that the people offered bread and
wine for such intentes, but you should have proved, that same to be the pure
offering, which the church only offers, as S. Irenei says. Which can not
possibly be ever concluded, because neither the offering of the people
singularly pure, neither the Church only does offer bread, wine, and
firstfructes, which the very panymes, and that naturally, do offer up,
against reason, unto their false Gods and Idols. wherefor you have brought
S. Ierenei out of place, not to expound himself, but to confound your
miserable lying. And thus much for the first signification, which you make of
the word oblation and sacrifice.

Now as concerning the second, we grant, and the church also has taught it
you, that there is a sactifice of prayer, and a sacrifice of thanks geauing.
But how can you prove, that the sacrament it self is not also a sacrifice,
that is to say, an external and visible sign, of our thanks geauing and
prayer? for not only Te Deum laudamus, or, Agnus Dei miserere nobis, are
sacrificies of thanks geauing, and humble praying, but most especially the
holy host consecrated. And you must not by one truth take away an other, as,
because no man will deny, that the prayers to God, and praises of God used in
the mass, are true sacrificies, to conclude therefore, that the body and blood
of Christ, are for us no sacrifice. Further, where you say, concerning the
prayers and thanks geauen at the celebration of the sacrament: That the
Doctors in infinite places affirm, Defense fol. 31.
that to be the true and only sacrifice of the new testament:

It is most false and unreasonable. Reply.
For thanks and prayers are co^nion sacrificies unto all religions, and all
laws, new and old, supernatural and natural. And then if we should speak
exactlie, there is none true and pure sacrifice, Our thanks and prayers are
not the only and true sacrifice.
but only that which our Savior makes of himself, in what so ever form,
place, and manner, it pleases him to be offered. For all our Justice,
considered by it self, without relation made unto the holiness and merits of
Christ, Esaie. 64.
are like the foul clothes of women, all unclean and polluted. And the
stars themselves being not clean in his sight, Job. 25.
muchlesse any prayers or praises of men, if without mercy they should be
considered. Again, where you draw the matter out with more length then truth.
That the fathers called every good action, a sacrifice, Defense fo. 31.
were it private or common, as S. Austine also signifies: (but you tell not
where) you report of them untruly, Reply.
as S. Augustine may prove unto you. For he says not, Not every good work is
a Sacrifice, but:
that every good work absolutely, but every work that is done to the
intent we might cleave unto God in holy society, is a true sacrifice. As if
you should geaue an alms to one, because he is your poor frind which asks
it, and not referr the geauing of it unto that supreme end and point, which is
God himself, all though the act be good morallie, yet can it not be called a
sacrifice. After this you bring in Ireneus, The M. of the defense occupies
himself in matters which are not in question.
Eusebius, Chrysostom, Austyne. but to what purpose? verelie to prove that
which is not denied, that the Christians do offer up the sacrifices of thanks
geauing, of prayers, and the remembrance of that great sacrifice of the cross.
For who denies this unto you? I tell you again, that (to go no further then
the selfsame places of the Doctors which you recite) we offer to God most
high, Eusebius. de demonstr. Euan. li. 1.
a sacri^ice of praise, but also as it follows, we offer a full, a sweet, and
holy sacrifice, after a new sort, according to the new testament. Yet if you
mean the simple praises of our heart and lips, they are not worth the honor
of so many epithetons and titles, as Eusebius attributes unto the sacrifice
of this owr time of grace. The M. of the defense beaten down with his own
weapons.
Again, according to the same Eusebius, true it is, we celebrate the
remembrance of that great sacrifice, but yet we take that which follows,
according to the mysteries instituted by Christ himself. By which words he
geaueth you to understand, that the matter hangs not upon your newly devised
apprehension, by which we represent unto our memory, the passion and merits
of the Soun of God, but thorough the institution of the mysteries, which the
fatihfull have allwaies honored, that remembrance of the high and bloody
sacrifice, is continued and celebrated accordingly.

We hold furthermore, Lib. 22. de ciuit. Dei cap. 10.
with S. Austine, that the Martirs are the mystical body of Christ, but yet we
hold also with him, that, at the sacrifice which we offer unto God, the
Martirs in their place and order, are named. For as our Sauyor has true
bodies, one mystical, an other natural, so the offering of the mystical,
must not exclude the presence and offering of the natural. Yea rather, how can
the mystical body be offered, except it be thorough the presence of the
natural? For the offering of ourselves, is not the offering of Christ his
whole mystical body, although you affirm it. And if the whole parisshe would
join itself never so strongly together, how do they offer S. Peter, S.
Paul, and all the rest of the elect and chosen? But when the natural body of
Christ is offered, (unto whom, as the head, all the elect, as members, are
joined, and not only they which are departed this world, or which are in it at
this present, but all they which ever hereafter shall be borne, until all the
number be fullfilled) then lo and only then it is verified, that Christ his
mystical body is offered: because he the head is offered, which, as
concerning God his everlasting apointme^t, will, and pleasure, never wants
any one part of his perfect and full mystical body. Otherwise how can the
body be well offered without the head, which for that cause only is an
acceptable body, and worth offering, because it cleaves unto such an head.
Again, S. Austine in this place, allthough he denies, that the priest
offers sacrifice unto the Martirs, yet he confesses, that the Martirs are
named at our sacrifice, declaring thereby most plainly against you, that we
have a sacrifice, which they are not, but at which they have a due and
convenient commemoration.

Likewise again, we say with Chrysostom as you do, Chris. (...). 17. ad
Hebr.
that we offer every day, doing it in remembrance of his death: but we add
further out of the same place, that this sacrifice is one, and not many. And
also, that we do not offer up now one, tomorow an other, but allwaies the
selfsame. For else, because it is offered up in many places, they be many
Christ's. Not so. But Christ is every where one, being whole both here and
also there, one body. For like as he which is offered up every where, is
one body, and not many bodies, even so is the sacrifice also one.

Therefore to conclude with S. Austine, true it is, that in our sacrifice, there
is a thanks geauing and remembrance of the body and blood of Christ, Aug. ^.
de fide ad P^.
(but consider that which follows) that he gave and shedd for us. By which
words he wills you to understand, that we have in deed a remembrance of
Christ his body and blood, not in respect of his real absence from us, but in
respect of his painful suffering for us. You may see then by this time, that
you have proved a sacrifice of prayers, of thanks geauing, and a remembrance
of Christ his passion to be celebrated in the church, (which the schools did
teach, many hundred years before you or Luther war borne, and which we know
better then you) and that you may be ashamed to have gone so far besides the
purpose, being in deed able to disprove by no authority the sacrifice
propitiatory of Christ in his church, An evil manner of reasoning by
authority, negatiuelie.
against which all your malice is. I except this argument only, which in deed
your wisdom does use more then once, when you say: Eusebius here makes no
mention of propitiatory sacrifice, De demo^st. euang. li. 1. Aug. lib. de fide
ad Pet.
and, S. Austyne says not, that here is an offering of Christ his body and
blood for sins, Ergo there are no such things at all. As though that all
things could be spoken at once, or all mysteries should be straitwaies
revealed, or as though there were no difference, betwyxt not speaking of the
thing, and denieing the thing. In which kind of reasoning, you continue for the
rest of your chapter, alleging out of S. Cypriane, (you tell not where) and
out of the Greek cano^ of the Mass, that they offered for our Lady, and out
of S. Chrysostom, that thanks were offered for the whole world, and as well
for them which were before, as them which shall come after, of which you
conclude, saying: This was their offering for the dead, Defense. fol. 34.
and not a practice to pull souls out of purgatory, for merchandise and
money, as you have used in your private Mass.

This is your practice, both in reasoning and in slaundering. Reply.
In slaundering, because you attribute unto our religion, a selling and byeing
of souls out of purgatory for money, which you never find to be taught or
allowed of any one good man, and much less of the whole church: In reasoning,
because you conclud, that not to be at all in the author, which you find not
expressed in some place which pleases you. For (to continue in the testimonies
which you do bring) allthough S. Cyprian, Cyp. li. 4. Ep. 5.
in the.5. epistle of his fourth book, make mention of sacrifice for martirs,
undoubtedly to thank God for the^, yet in his first book and.ix. epistle,
Lib. 1. ep. 9
he proves, that there is an oblation which the priests do make for the
dead, such as were no martirs, and he testifies also of a deprecatio^ and
prayer which the church uses in their names. For in chargeing the clergy,
unto which he there writes, to make no oblation and prayer, for the soul of
one Victor, which had transgressed a canon and decree of the Bisshopes, he
shows therewithal, what the clergy would have done, had not his
commandment stayed them, and he proves that, for some kind of such as were
departed, not only praises and thanks, but supplications rather and prayers
were offered.

Then as concerning the greek Canon, which of them you did mean, I cold not
tell, but now, by reason of M. Grindal sermon, which he made not long sense at
an Englisshe funeral, of Ferdinand the Emperor, it is evident unto me, that
you mean the mass of S. Chrysostom. In which, One truth must not be impugned
by an other.
allthough I can not find any oblation made for our lady, the prophets, or
Apostles, (allthough that a commemoration of thanks may be offered also for
them,) yet if it were true, that in one place of that greek Canon, an oblation
were made for our lady, that does not prove, but in an other place of the same
Canon, an express oblation and prayer was made for the dead, such as were not
yet at rest. For after the consecration of the sacrament ended, he says
within a few lines, Chris. in Liturg.
we offer unto the, this reasonable service, for those which sleep and rest in
the faith, for our fathers and our great graund fathers, thorough the
intercession of Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostels, Martirs, and all Saints.
But especially, for the supplications and prayers, of the perpetual virgin
Marie mother of God, our Qnene, for ever blessed, undefiled, and most holy,
Saint John the baptist, prophet and precursor, the holy and most renoumed
Apostels, and the Saint whose memory we celebrate, and all thy Saints,
visit us (o God) and remember all them which sleep in our Lord, in hope of
the rising again unto everlasting life, and grant them rest, where the light
of thy countenance does intend over them.

Now again, allthough you allege a true saying out of S. Chrysostom, upon
the.viij. Chapter of S. Matthew, that the priest standing at the Altar, when
the sacrifice is set forth, commands the standers by, to offer up thanks
to God for the world (in which testimony it is plain to see, that the
sacrifice proposed is one thing, and the sacrifice of thanks an other) yet,
(to let go this vantage) you can not deny but he in an other place says,
Chris. ho. 3 ad Philip.
It was decreed by the Apostles, not in vain, that in the celebratio^ of the
venerable mysteries, a memory should be made of them, which were departed
hence. They knew, that much commodity and much profit did come hereof unto
them. For the whole people standing by, with lifting up their hands unto
heaven, and also the cumpanie of priests: and the venerable sacrifice being
laid out and proponed, how should we not pacify God, in praying for them?

Therefore it is clear, that your argument is very unlearned and childissh, to
say, that Chrysostom upon the.viij. of Matthew, makes mention only of
thanks geauing for all men which are passed, or which are to come, ergo there
is no other sacrifice but thanks, to be offered for the souls departed: or
else, (to declare more sensibly the absurdity of your reason,) ergo in his
third homely upon the epistle unto the Philippians, he has no word of the
Apostels tradition, that in the presence of the reverend mysteries, prayers
should be made for the dead, to cause God to be merciful unto them. But see
again: S. Ambrose offered for Valentinian the Emperor then dead, Defense.
and S. Ambrose doubted not of his salvation, ergo he did no more but thank
God for him.

This is your argument without reason and knowledge. Reply.
For every soul, of whose salvation we need not to doubt, is not straitwaies
in heaven. As S. Austine, allthough he doubted not but that his mother Monica,
did yield at her death a saved soul unto God, of whom he testifies, that she
so lived, that God was praised in her faith and manners, and that she was a
merciful woman, and forgave all them which had trespased against her, and
that she came every day to church, and served God before the altar, from
which she knew the holy sacrifice to be dispensed, by which the byll of debt,
which was contrary unto us, was put out and cancelled, Yet for all this,
knowing the account, which every soul shall geaue, Mat. 12.
for the least word that is spoken against the commandments of God, and
leaving a side her good deeds, for which he joyfully thanketh God, he prays
for his mother, that her sins might be forgeauen, and says, Let no
creature pull her from thy protection. Conf. lib. 9. cap. 13.
Let not the lion and dragon put him self in between, neither by force, nor
by subteltie: etc. Grant, that she may be in peace with her husband, before
whom and after whom she was married to no other, etc. And inspire, in to thy
servants my brothers, and thy childerne my masters, that, as many of them as
shall read these thin ges, may remember at thy altar, thy servant Monica with
Patricius her husband.

Therefore that you may know your folly, and learn from hence forward to
harken unto the whole tale, before you geaue definitive sentence, I will say
unto you with S. Austine unto Laurentius, It is not to be denied, that the
souls of them which are departed, In Enchiri dio, c^. 110
are relieved and eased by the d^^otion of their frindes living, when the
sacrifice of our mediator is offered for them, or when almeses are geaue^ in
the church. etc. and, in the end of the chapter, he concludes, Therefore,
when the sacrificies, either of the altar, either of any kind of alms, what
so ever it be, Prayers and helps for the dead.
are offered, for all such as have departed with baptism, they are for
Understand you this Englisshe? and do you mark, how one selfsame sacrifice,
does serve to render thanks by it, and to be also a propitiation for sinners,
such as die not desperate? Will you bear away the distinction of three sorts
of men, which S. Austine here makes? and see by reason, that some die in such
case, as not praises but prayers rather are to be made for them? do so I pray
you then. And never fill your papers in writings or your audience ears in
preaching, with such arguments, as are taken of authority of holy fathers
negatiuelie, or with such commendacio^ of one truth, as craftelie shall
disgrace an other, Note the sheep skins of ^eretykes.
as true. Like as many use to prove, that the true fast is in absteinyng from
synn, (which no man denies,) and infer thereupon wylilie, that to abstain
from corporal meats, serves not to any kind of reasonable fasting. Or, as
some do show by many authorities, that Christ is to be received spirituallie
by faith, and deny therefore, that he is eaten reallie, which yet is as true,
as the other. Or like as you in this chapter, have abused your reader, in
proving a sacrifice of prayers and thanks geauing, and denying any oblation to
be in the church for sins, which yet the holy fathers in their writings
have expressed.

The fifthe Chapter.
IN this chapter, you find fault with the Catholic, that he alleges the
place of Chrysostom, other wise then it is in him. which as concerning the
interpretation of Musculus, you might say perhaps, but, (I trow,) ye should
not report of him, that he recites the place otherwise then it is in S.
Chrysostom, except you disproued him by the greek text it self, which you
have not. And truly, what great reproueable diversity should be, in saying:
Sacrificium frustra quotidianum offerimus, or, frustra habetur quotidiana
oblatio, whereas both come to one end, that the daily oblation or sacrifice is
made in vain, I can not readily tell, except you mislike the term of
offering, and think that the having of a daily sacrifice, might be made
without the act of offering. But go to, for quietness sake, we are content with
Musculus interpretation, and what say you then unto the argument of the
Catholic? The words of S. Chrysostom are these: Frustra habetur quotidi^na
oblatio, frustra stamus ad altar, nemo est qui simul participet, Our daily
sacrifice is had in vain, we stand at the altar in vain, there is none to
take part with us. By this testimony, to conclude shortly, there was daily
sacrifice in S. Chrisostoms time, and there was not daily receiving with the
priest, ergo to have communicantes, is not of the substance of the Catholic
mass. Unto this argument, I find, as it were four answers for your defense,
of which the first is, that Chrisostom, to exaggerat the peoples slacknes,
says, (there is none to be partaker) meaning they were very few and seldom,
Defense. fol. 37. The first answer to S. Chrisostomes places.
in comparison of that their duty was.

Do you think then, that every day, there was one or other of the people,
which did come to the communion? then did he not stand in vain at the Altar,
except you can prove, that in that world, such a canon was made, that there
should be no communion without.iij. to receive at it: on the other side, if in
any one day at all, there was found no one to communicate, the sacrifice being
offered every day, it was celebrated some times without co^municants. For, it
is not material unto us, whether the people received, some at Easter, some at
tweluetyde, and other some more ofter, but whether as the oblation was daily,
that so the receiving appropriated (as you think) unto it, should have been
daily. And all the authorities which you bring of S. Ambrose, Austine,
Chrysostom, and Concilium Elibertinum, to prove that the people did
communicate more then once in the year, and that great fault was found with
manies slacknes in that behalf: The M. of the defense speaks out of his
purpose, to the Catholics commodity.
as they do make directly against him, which would maintain the opinion, that
the people never received but at Easter, so they confirm rather our
conclusion, which is, that communicantes are not necessary at every time of
mass to be celebrated. For, whereas the Bisshopes or Synodes, as you confess,
appointed and charged the Christians to receive once, twyse, thryse, or four
times in the year, and whereas the council called Elibertinum, decreed that
all the faithful should communicate, at the least, thrice in the year, it may
be very well gathered hereof, that there was no daily receiving with the
priest. Because the council, in charging them to receive thrice at the least,
shows thereby conseque^tlie, that they came not so often, as thrice in the
year. And S. Ambrose, in that he reproves the custom in the East parts,
Amb. li. 4. de Sacra.
of receiving no more then once a year, he proves therein unto you,
necessarily, that there was such a custom. Wherefore, to grant unto you, that
S. Chrysostom, in saying there is none to communicate, uses a certain
exaggeration, and means that there are very few and seldom which
communicate, yet the sacrifice being daily, he offered and received some times
without communicants. For allthough a few might have come daily, and so have
made up a communion, yet when S. Chrysostom means, (after your comment upon
him) that they came seldom also, there were undoubtedly some vacant days
between, in which the daily sacrifice was offered, and yet none did
communicate with the priest.

But let us come to your second answer, in which you say, that allthough this
place did prove, the second answer.
that none of the common people would communicate, (whereupon we have
concluded, that the priest received alone, for any cummyng of theirs) yet, say
you to us: Ye can not, Defense fol. 37.
by this testimony, declare, that none of the ministers and clergy received
with him, being Bisshope there. etc. for the manner was not then, as you do use
it now. etc. but all the ministers and clergy did communicate together with
the Bisshope, or chief minister that celebrated.

You speak herein very reasonably, Reply.
that the Bisshope himself celebrating, had (according unto the manner of that
time) not all the clergy, I believe, but allwaies some of them to communicate
with him. And likewise in Cathedral and principal churches, it is very
credible, that some of the clergy did receive with the chief minister. Such
was the order then, and manner in the church. But how can you prove, that the
Bishope himself, celebrated every day, solemplie? or that he said mass
allwaies in a great or Cathedral church, with his priests, archedeaco^s,
deacons, and other officers, about him? Or that there were no small and little
parisshe churches; oratories, chappells, and such like, in that world, which
one priest and a clarke might have served well enough, without more cumpanie of
the clergy? Then also, if the populous cities of Antioche or Constantinople,
(in which S. Chrysostom, did bestow the most of his life and lernyng,) had
either but one Cathedral church, (which is as convenient and reasonable, as
one city to have one Bisshope,) or if they had a number of fair and great
churches, and them all furnisshed, with priests, archdeacons, deacons,
subdeacons, readers, singers, exorcistes, and other officers perteinyng to the
clergy: yet, that the clergy and ministers, did every day receive with the
priest at the altar, (as we grant that somtymes they did so in deed,) or
that the sacrifice went not forward, except some co^municantes were prepared,
(which properly is our question,) I deny it flattlie unto you, until you can
prove the contrary. For I see no vrge^t cause, why I might not think, that
the clergy also of that time, was slack in the daily cummyng to the
communion, and that they having one to exequute and to offer the daily
sacrifice, for the rest, co^tended them selves, with communicating in prayer
only and spiritual eating, and not in the Sacramental receiving. Especially
if it be considered, how vehemently S. Chrysostom notes and reproves his
clergy, for laughing not only abroad with good merry fellows, but also in
the church it self, Chr. ho. 15. Epist. ad Hebr.
at the time of prayer. Against whom among other strange arguments, and well
worth deep consideration, this is one, that he says, The priest of God does
stand offering up the prayers of all, and thou do laugh, and he truly does
tremble in offering prayers for the, and thou set light by the matter. By
which, it is credible, that not only the people, who^ canons had need to
co^straine to come thrice a year to receive their maker, did suffer the priest
to receive alone, but that also in the clergy, there was such lack of
consideration (as it is in many Catholics now, whose faith is
stedfastinough) that they were not in have to accumpanie daily the priest
which celebrated, nor glad to make them selves ready to communicate with him,
but talked or laughed (the more pytie) to geather, thinking perchaunse that all
will be well enough, because the priest, in all their names, offers a most
acceptable sacrifice for the^. The which fault, I would it were not among the
Catholics, and that they would keep themselves as attent and devout, when
they hear mass only, mynding not to communicate sacramentallie, as the truth
is, that their part is in the oblatio^, and remember that not only the priest
must behave himself reverently, but all the clergy and laietie present,
though they stand never so far from the altar. Therefore, as we will not
strive against you in this one point, that the ministers received with the
Bisshope or chief priest, so we bydd you to prove it, that allwaies the
ministers did communicate, when the daily sacrifice was offered. Which,
because you thought (as I guess) that it should be over hard for you, therefore
you invent a third shift, for your defense, which is this: But if I should
flatly deny, Defense. fo. 38.
that the minister received, when none of the people were partakers, how could
you prove it, A third answer or shift.
by this place?

This is your third answer to S. Chrysostom. As who should say, Reply.
if I can not prove, first, that the people did communicate with the priests,
or secondly, that the clergy did allwaies communicate, yet thirdlye will I
answer, that the priest at the altar did not receive, when he saw that none
would come and eat with him. And here, you require our proof against our
saying: unto which I answer, that because the oblation and sacrifice was
daily, therefore it was offered and taken of the priest, allthough none were
prepared to receive with him. But you are not pleased with this, and therefore
you interpret S. Chrysostom, that He named it oblationem, Defense. fol. 38.
either for that it was done in remembrance of Christ's sacrifice, or for the
offering up of the bread and wine, to the celebration of the Lords supper. Well
Sir, Reply.
first of all, what understand you by that, which, you say, was done, in
remembrance of Christ's saerifice? Can, you understand any other thing but the
taking and blessing and breaking of bread? for in doing these things, we follow
Christ's example, and remember his passion. If then, according unto your first
sense of this term, oblation, you grant, that, without any to communicate,
the priest alone did offer, ergo you grant as much as we require, that the
priest did take, bless, and break, in remembrance of Christ's sacrifice.

But on the other side, if you take the word, The M. of the defense put to the
foil on bo^ the sides.
oblatio^, for the offering up of bread and wine for the provision of the Lords
supper, that was not the priests offering, of which S. Chrysostom speaks,
but it was the offering of the people. And according unto this your sense, S.
Chrysostom could not say, that there was none to communicate, because the
good people, which offered the bread and wine toward the supper of the Lords,
were in that point, not only communicantes, but also chief ministers and
doers. Or, at the least, the priests and poor folk, which were sustained by
such oblations, were never so evil taught, that they would not remember their
daily bread, or so well fedd otherwise, that they needed not to care for the
welthiers alms, and make S. Chrysostom to complain upon it, that there is no
body to communicate. And further more, none of these.ij. kinds of oblations,
of which you now speak, were in vain or fructlesse unto the people, but as
concerning the oblation which S. Chrysostom means, his words be plain,
that the daily oblation is in vain offered. Also, if these words, ( daily
oblation and sacrifice,) by putting the case that none at all did receive, are
to be understood for that which is done in remembrance of Christ's passion, or
for the offering up of bread and wine to the celebration of the Lords supper,
you leave (I do trust) a more excellent sense of these words ( daily
oblation,) for that time and place, when the people do communicate with the
priest. For if you doenot, then is the oblation all one, whether some or none
do receive: and if you do, then must you tell us of one way more, of taking
this word oblation, then you have yet uttered. Again if a man will consider
how royally, and yet truly, ho. 3. ad Ephesians.
S. Chrysostom in the forsaid homely, speaks of this daily sacrifice,
calling it an oblatio^, at which the very Angels do tremble, Consider how
reverently we should behave our selves in the presence of the sacrament.
and warning the people to think well upon it, how the kings table stands
there, that, the Angels are waiting, and serving at it, that, the king himself
is present, that, Christ the lamb of God is offered up: further, if one should
mark well, but those external preparations, of which he there speaks, as,
the drawing a side of curteines, the making clean of the table, the setting
down of patins with all reverence and diligence, can he think that S.
Chrysostom did mean, by daily sacrifice, no more but a remembrance (you do
not tell what) of the sacrifice which Christ made upon the cross, or else the
only offering up of bread and wine toward the mainteaning of the Lords
supper? But let us go further. If you be so cunnyng, in expounding of
(oblation) against the mind of the author, and besides all color of reason,
make an end of your comment, and tell us what Chrysostom means by
quotidiana, daily?

He calls it Quotidianam, Defense fol. 38.
to the imitation of the sacrifice of the old law. May one then imitate the
old law in speaking? he may do it undoubtedly. Reply.
Yet you, fo. 33. of your defense, do make that odiouse, by an vnreuerent and
suspitiouse manner of uttering it, which in itself is honest and lawful, and
which yourselfe do use at this present. For to say, Quotidianam, and daily
sacrifice to be so called, to the imitation of the sacrifice of the old law, it
sounds well and tolerablie, and yourselfe do take S. Chrysostom an that
sense to no dispraise or contempt of him. Yet when the Catholics now a days,
call their mysteries by the name of sacrifice, you will not say, that they
have taken that manner of speaking out of the old law, (for that sounds to no
reproach) but of the Iewisshe priests, as who should gather a suspicion of
Iewisshnes upon us. It is worth the noting, because it is worth the amending.
But to S. Chrysostom his Quotidianam, what answer you?

He calls it Quotidianam. Defense.
etc. not because it was done every day, without intermission. How then does
it imitate the old law, which had daily offering? Reply.
or how can it be called Quotidiana, which is daily? The daily sacrifice of
the old law, was.ij. lambs of one year, without spott, which God appointed to
be offered up in sacrifice, Nu. 28.
every morning and evening, for ever, and they made the quotidianum, the judge,
and the daily sacrifice of the Jews. You say therefore, the inconstancy of
the M. of the defen.
and vnsaie. First, that the sacrifice, which S. Chrysostom calls
Quotidianam, is so termed, to the imitation of the Jews, whose daily, and
specially also daily sacrifice is commanded by God to be allwaies
continued, and then you tell us, that it was not done every day without
intermission, which is in effect to say, that it is not called quotidian to
the imitation of the Jews. Yet let us hear further: He calls it
Quotidianam, not because it was done every day, but for that it was oftentimes
celebrated, Defense. fol. 38.
that is, so often as the people assembled together to the church or common
place of prayers etc. at which times, he allwaies had, either some of the
people, or the residue of the ministers and clergy, to communicate with him.

Mark here, Reply.
gentle Reader, the folissh hardines of this M. of defense, and consider by
this one example, how wickedly the learned and holy doctors are abused. Did the
service then of the church, depend upon the cummyng of the people? or did some
one or other allwaies receive, when the daily oblation was offered? where
should we seek more better for the truth of this question, then in Saint
Chrysostom his own mass and works? for as concerning the daily saying of
mass in the latin church, it is plainly concluded by the testimony of S.
Austine, which reports of his mother, that she served and honored God at his
altar nullius diei pretermissione, Conf. li. 9. cap. 13.
without letting one day pass. But let us be contented with that which S.
Chrysostom alone shall geaue us. It appears then in his mass, that they had
for every ferie in the week, a certain song in the praise of our lady, S.
Michel, S. John the Baptist, and other, Chrisost. in Liturg.
which they used immediately after the Gospel, and called it apoliticion.
Further it appears, that they did not first ask among the people who were
disposed to receive, and upon the answer geauen, That the sacrifice of the
church was daily in deed, and not daily, that is to say often.
frame the matter to a communion, but first of all they went to the
consecration, and after that the oblation was finisshed, and the priest with
such about him as would, had received, then dydd the Deacon turn himself to
the people, and say, Come you near in the fear of God. Which is confirmed by
Saint Chrysostom again, in his Homelies upon the Epistle unto the Hebreus,
where he fayeth, that the Deacon cries out, and calls unto the people with
these words, sancta sanctu, which is, these holy things are for the holy,
not before the priest does consecrate, but, hanc emittit vocem postquam
sacrificiu^ perficitur, he speaks this word after the sacrifice is thoroughly
ended. Wherefore as the offering of the sacrifice did not then hang vncertenly
upon the cummyng or going of the people, so, it is vnreasonablie and
vnlernedlie spoken, that the daily sacrifice had that name, not because of the
daily celebration, but because of the seldom using of it, when the people did
gather themselves unto the church. Furthermore, if for your pleasure sake, (
Quotidiana) when we talk of oblation, does not signify daily, what will you
say unto singulos dies, every day: by which we shall better perceive the
disease of your quotidian. Nonne per singulos dies offerimus? ho. 17. ad Hebr.
says Chrysostom, Do we not offer up day by day? how can so express
mention of offering day by day, be interpreted of you, (without a manifest
lie) to signify a sacrifice celebrated, not daily, but oftentimes? you have
readen also, (if you remember it,) that the greek church in the lent season
did not celebrate but upon saturdaie only and Sunday, using for the rest of the
week, those hosts which were consecrated before. And what other thing is this
special observation of theirs, Council. Constable. 6. can. 52.
in the lent, but a manifest argument that all the year before and after, they
used daily consecration? Therefore truly Sir, you were to hardy in ventering
upon so strainge and untrue interpretation of quotidian sacrifice, especially
whereas in so doing you are come within danger of much folly. For whereas by
dryuing of your daily oblation unto seldom, you would seem to gather cumpany
for every such seldom oblation, you forget the Sundaies and many feasts of
our blessed Lady, Apostels, and Martirs, which in the primitive church were
devoutly observed, by fasting, watching, lying on the ground, and praying,
unto all which, the people resorting, if they did receive at them all, then
make you S. Chrysostom, yea and S. Ambrose, S. Austine, and the council named
Elibertinum, very forgetful and hasty, which either reproved the people,
because they did communicate only at Easter, or at some one or two feasts
more in the year, either provided against their slacknes, that they should
receive at the least thrice a year. Whereas, (after your saying) there failed
no such day, in which the people assembled together for prayer sake, but that
ordinarily communicants were ready to go up and receive with the priest.
Which yet is so unlikely, (that, I mean, at every holydaie, the cummyng
together of the people, did allwaies serve to have co^municants) that you may
well doubt, whether the best among the people did receive at the very
principal feasts and solemnities. For, by S. Chrysostom himself it
appears, that the end of his vehement calling upon the people, was not, to
have them in all have to communicate, but to make them provide for cleanes of
lyffe and conscience, that they might safely and profitablie communicate. For,
Hom. 17. ad Hebr.
says he, we do allow, neither those which receive once, nor those which
often, nor those which seldom, but those which come with a pure conscience.
And the preparation which they were bydd to make, was of such reverent manner,
that even the honest married men should abstain from the cumpanie of their
lawful wives, certain days before they received, as it is manifest by a decree
of Concilium Elibertinum, and by S. Austyne in his sermons unto the people.
Ser. 2. do. 10. post trinitatem.
What would S. Austine the^, or the fathers of the primitive church have
thought of your married priests, which within an hour, two, or three, after
they are departed from their paramours, do come unto the communion table with
heads full of wordlie cares and nights fancies, and there dare to call for
the people, and press them, (if they come not) with the institution of Christ,
and Paul the first unto the Corinthians the.xj. chapter? Whereas, if there
were any reverence or regard of Christ, in this new law of yours, the example
should never be suffered, by which his special ministers might be provoked
unto carnalitie. For if lay men, before they communicated, were commanded to
abstain from their lawful wives, what does a minister, a man of God, and
quick of the sprite, with an unlawful woman or yokefelow, which should exhort
others to the right and worthy manner of receiving? And again, if such
cleanes was required in them, whose life was occupied in worldly business and
labor, how could they receive daily, which could not be ready daily? And yet
the daily service of the church failed not, because that peculiar and proper
ministers were found to intend upon it, and the sacrifice depended not upon the
cummyng of the laity, because it is a principal and singular part, of the
clergies duty.

But this, you say, is dallying, to stand upon the proper signification of the
word, quotidianum. As though it were in you, true dealing, to bring by your
exaggeration a quartan to a quotidian, or by your extenuation a quotidian to a
quartan, as to say, that the sacrifice is named, daily, in respect of the
peoples receiving, which perchaunse was but quarterlie, or to deny that the
sacrifice was daily, because the people were not ready but at principal and
quaterlie feasts of the year. And herein, to grieve us again, you press us
with the word frustra, in vain, yet you do it so manerlie, that allthough
much wrong be done therein unto us, we should not, for all that, be justly or
greatly offended with you. For if we will geaue over the hold, which we have in
the word quotidianum, then will you also, let go the word frustra, but if we
will defend (as the words literallie do sound,) that by S. Chrisostomes
testimony, the sacrifice in his time was daily, then say you. Then must you
geaue me leave, Defense. fo. 38.
as extremely to urge these.ij. sillabes frustra. in vain is our oblatio^, in
vain is our sacrificing, etc. because it is done without cumpanie to receive
with us.

It lies not in us, Reply.
to geaue you leave to make a lie. and if the place itself will admit your
interpretation, you are not so shamefast, as to spare your advantage, for
reverence of the church your mother. But, How feign the M. of the defense would
be at one, or divide stakes?
whether you can have any vantage in the extreme vrgyng of these.ij. sillabes
frustra, it is not in vain to consider. First, we say with S. Chrisostom,
that the oblation was daily, and we take the word daily, in his proper
signification. Then, (say you) I will use the word frustra, and I will say,
that the daily oblation was had in vain. There is no reason to let, that you
should not use it. For we both do see that it is plain, in S. Chrysostom,
frustr^ habetur quotidiana oblatio: the daily sacrifice is had in vain. And
as we require, that ( Quotidiana) be taken in his proper signification of
daily, so do we grant unto you that you shall use the word frustra in his
most proper signification, neither do we contrary you in it, but that frustra
in this place, is taken for vain. Therefore, you can urge the word frustra no
more extremely then we do, except you can make worse of it then vain. Yea,
(say you further) it was done in vain, because it was done without cumpany,
but we think rather it was in vain, as concerning the priest his looking for
the people. And so it appears that you do not hurt us in alleagyng of (
frustra), which we take in the proper signification of it as well as you, but
our stryuing must now be upon the referring of that word, unto the peoples
receiving, or unto the offering of the sacrifice. And further, it appears, as
we do urge the word Quotidiana, that you do not so urge the word frustra,
(as you asked leave to do) but quyte leaving the signification of the word,
(as upon the which we do not disagree) you run unto the constrewyng of the
word. And if we will have the oblation to be daily, you will have it so
understood, that, by Saint Chrysostom his own words, it should seem to
be done in vain, because it was done without cumpany, which how well it may
follow, I require but indifferent judgment. For if it were (according to your
thinking) done in vain, when the people did not receive: ergo yet it was done.
In vain, you say. Be it so, for a while. But yet it was done. For of that
which is not done at all, you can not say any thing, the one way or the other,
to the praise or disprayse of the doing. Now, if the sacrifice were offered in
vain, when no co^municantes were ready, do you make such a trifle of Saint
Chrysostom, that he would do any thing which he was persuaded, should be in
vain? And if he did think, that all was to no purpose, which he did in the
sacrificyng, except the people did communicate: would he not first of all, have been assured to have communicantes, before he would enter unto the act of
offering? And in so high matters, would he have entered in to the celebratio^ of
mass, of which he could not presentlye tell, whether he should say it in vain
or no? Nay, the church of England yet is more wyser then so. For, left their
pains should be lost, in the Lords supper, the ministers must be warned
before hand, if any will communicate, that (according unto your interpretation)
the oblation be not in vain, if they shall have no cumpany to receive with
them. And yet, your wisdom, to prove that our daily oblation, which we gather
out of S. Chrysostom, should not be as we understand it, does bring S.
Chrisostomes saying unto such a sense, which does not become any common wit
and understanding. For by you S. Chrysostom might have this meaning: Here good
people, I have stood all this while at the altar, and have prayed for all
states, and have consecrated the sacrament of the Lords body, which you should
receive with than kes geauing: and now I perceive, all that I have done, is in
vain, because there is none to receive with me. But, phye upon such a sense,
in that learned and godly heart of Chrysostom. For we might say unto him: Sir,
you which do make so great price of the misteryes, why did you go unto them,
before you were sure to make a fructfull end of them? why did you not send your
Deacon, to know how many would receive with you, lest you might proceed further
in vain, when you should in the end lack communicantes? And if you were
persuaded, that you did receive in vain, except some communicated with you,
whi would you receive at all? or how do you, but receive that to your own
condemnation, in which you do not follow the institution of Christ, and take
cumpany with you? This, with much more, might be justly said against Saint
Chrysostom, if the daily sacrifice, which we read so playnelye in him, could
be thowght of him to be done in vain, if none did communicate, as you full
clerkelye do urge the two syllabes frustra. Then besides this, I answer, that
how so ever you will take the word sacrifice, allthough none, either of the
clergy or layetie, would communicate with the priest, yet the act of
sacrificyng can not possiblye be therefore vain, because there lacks cumpany
to receive. For, if you understand by daily oblation, either daily alms, or
daily praises and thanks, or daily remembrance of Christ's passion, or the
very body and blood of our Savior, what one of all these are vain, only
because the people do not communicate? Therefore in grawnting unto us, (which
you can not deny) but that the oblation was daily, how can you use the word
frustra, to prove (as it were by S. Chrisostomes own meaning) that it was to
no purpose, when the people did not receive? Whereas every kind of Christian
men's oblation, is good and acceptable in it self, by reason, either of the good
will with which it is offered, or the price and pureness of the thing which is
offered, as in the example, of the body and blood of Christ. Who, but
insensible, can think that S. Chrysostom did judge, at the end of his mass,
when cumpany did not come to receive, that all his supplications and prayers,
which he had made before with all his heart and power, for the quick and the
dead, and all his praysinges of God in the memory of his Saints, and all his
prayers unto Christ in the sacrament, that he might not receive him to his
condempnation, which sits at the right hand of God his father in heaven, and
yet was there inuisibly present before him: who (say I) can think, that S.
Chrysostom did eo^clude all those things to have been done in vain, because
the people did not receive? How then? If the people do receive, are all
things straitwayes trymlye wrought? Ergo it is the peoples will, which geaueth
strength unto the sacraments, and not the institution of Christ. And the
consecration is perfyted, not by the allmightynes of the word (as S. Cypriane
says), Cypri. de coena Domini.
nor by these words of our Lord, This is my body, (as S. Ambrose witnesses),
Amb. li. 4. de S^.
but by the cumming of the people to receive, at the end of service. Liturgi^
Chrysostom.
For as I have showed before, after that the priest had received, and had fully
ended his office in offering, the^ were the people called, and then were they
served without the chauncell, in a place meeter for them. Now, these things
not with standing, you be so vain in your two syllabes frustra, that allthowgh
at the beginning you asked leave to use them, and took leave also to do it,
conditionallye, if we would abide by it, that the word Quotidianum signifies
daily, and not seldom, yet in further reasonyng you do so far pass your
own self in knowledge, that you affirm absolutelye, that these words, ( the
daily oblation is had in vain) declare playnelye S. Chrisostomes mind, that
he thought it to be of the substance of the sacrament, that a number should be
partakers of it. As who should say, that in the third Hom. upon the Epistle to
the ^phesians, he had spoken against sole receiving, and not rather signified
unto them, that he labored, not upon their daily cu^myng, but only their
devout and worthy cummyng. For, after he had said: Chr. ho. 3. ^d Ephesians.
we stand at the altar in vain, there is no body to communicate: least the
people should think, as you do now, that their receiving parteyned to the
substance of the sacrament, he adds: I speak not these things, because ye
should simplelie communicate, but that you should make your selfs worthy. Do
we then deny, that the daily sacrifice was done in vain? No. But we
understand it, how it was done in vain. Not in respect of the sacrifice it
self, but in respect of the people, for whom the meat was ready, and for whom
preparance was made, but they would not come unto it. As in an other place,
speaking against certain, which did not consider and bear away the textes
of scripture, which were readen in the church twyse or thryse in the week, the
reader allwaies telling them the name and place of the Prophet which was then
in hand: Chr. ho. 9. ^d Heb. 5.
Therefore (says he) they owght to be more clearer unto you, and you owght to
know not only the text, but the cawses also, of the things which are written,
and his name which wrote them. But all is in vain, and without fruct. Yet he
meaned not absolutelye, that all the labor of the reader was in vain, nor that
all the hearers were fructlesse, (of which he excepteth a few in that very
place) but that as concerning the peoples common profytt, which was intended in
those lessons, all was vain and fructlesse. Which being so reasonable, and so
convenient a sense, it is wonder that you would not se it, but follow rather
your own invention, and leese the meaning of S. Chrysostom. And truly no
great meruell, if you mistake an other man's mind, whereas in your own
inventions you may be proved so forgetful. For in this last end of your fifth
chapter, you conclude playnelie, that S. Chrysostom understands, the
oblation to be vain, which has no cumpany to receive at it: and that cumpany
is taken of him, to be of the substance of the sacrament: to which purpose you
allege, that who so ever is not partaker of the misteryes, does impudentlie
and wickedlye, to stand there by in presence. Well Sir, if you call this vain,
how does S. Chrysostom say truly, that the oblation is had in vain? For now
you call it vain, the M. of the defense is over cast in his own turnyng.
because of lack of cumpany, and by your answers in this chapter before, you
proved that he never lacked cumpany. How can you make these your two deuyses to
agree together? Our daily sacrifice, says S. Chrysostom, is had in vain.
He means (say you) that he had no cumpany, the having of which being a
substanciall point, ergo that must be in vain, which was done without it. But
(say I now against you) S. Chrysostom did never lack cumpany, when he
received, ergo it is not truly said of him, that the oblation was in vain.
Either he then, so good a Bisshopp, lies, which so says that the oblation
was in vain: or you do lie, in the interpreting of him, and making him to have
such a sense of this word vain, as destroys a certain other verity, as
you do make it. But how prove I, that he never received alone? Truly not by my
own knowledge, but by your answers. For, your second answer, unto the
Catholics objection, was, that in S. Chrisostomes time, the clergy did
always receive with the Bishope, or chief ministre. And this you promised to
prove more largelye hereafter. But the better you prove it hereafter, the worse
it is for you in this present place. You said again, that daily was taken
for, often, and that at those times, in which the people did not daily, but
often come, he always had either some of the people, or the residew of the
ministres and clergy, to communicate with him. So then, by these your own
conclusions, I prove, that the priest did, at that time, never receive alone.
How have you then now so forgoten your self, in this end of your chapter,
that you make S. Chrysostom to say, that none does communicate with him, and
that the oblation is therefore in vain? whereas at the beginning of this
chapter, you would have it clear and evident, that the priest never lacked
cumpany to communicate with him solemplye. Sir, I confess plainly, we shall
be ouercummed, if we strive long with you, or if we can not be ouercummed,
because faith does not referr herself, unto the event of disputations, yet we
shall be (I trow) confownded, because we can not tell where to have you. For,
when we think, that upon the sight of S. Chrisostomes words, which we have so
much spoken of, you would say, that we had at the least some color of
argument for sole receauyng, you make shift by and by, with all the learning
that you have, to prove that there was always some cumpany or of clergy, or
of layetie, to receive with the Bishop, or chief minister. And when we think
to find you standing in that conclusion, and draw nearer unto you, strait
ways you fall besides your self, and run in to a contrary corner, where you
fight against your own saying, and prove, that allthowgh there were oblation
and sacrifice daily, which, by force of the word Quotidianum, you could not
deny unto us, yet that granted, none received with the priest, (say you) and
therefore it was frustra. Wherefore (good Sir) take the counsel unto your self,
which you do geaue unto us, and use not to ground doctrines upon the
conjecture of a few sillables: and (with further counsel unto you) beware that
you geaue not your adversary so much, that you make your own case the worse:
as to permit us to enjoy Quotidianum, in his proper sense, by which we proved
daily sacrifice, and then to labor to prove that it was in vain, because of
lack of cu^pany, as thowgh you had not concluded before, that no oblation was
without cumpany. Which to tell you of, allthough it be a little disauantage unto
us, yet it is recovered an other way by having of a reasonable and plain
dealing aduersarye.

The syxt Chapter.
THat which is not euidentlye determined in scripture (says the Catholyke
upon his adversaries granting, of this vain principle) ought to stand as
indifferent.

But the necessity of cumpanye to receive with the priest, is no where
determined:

Ergo it ought to remain indifferent.

In denying and controlling the parts of this argument, the Master of the
Defense, does bestow his syxt chapter. And first he denies the second
proposition, afterward he comes to the declaration of the first, in which
part, he casts in, between so many new devises and conclusions, that we
have to abhor them, which are not of the ancient religion. Let us follow the
same ways which he takes, and let us defend the Catholic his argument, in
that self same order, by which he does impugn yt.

Go to then Sir, what myslyketh you in our argument?

Your second proposition is not true. Def^nce. fol. 41.
For I say, that it is determined in Christ his institution. In luke he
says, Take this, and divide it among you. Is this your text, Reply.
by which you will conclude, that the priest must have of necessity cumpanye
to receive with him? Christ, Luc. 22.
you know, spoke then to his Apostles only, he spoke nothing of the people to
receive with them. Take (says he) and divide this among you, and not, (as you
would feign have it to be,) take you and divide it among other. For as
concerning other, whom afterward they should have the government of, he left
it unto their wisdom, to geaue it or deny it, as they should see it
expedient. Except you think, that the priest, for diverse considerations, might
not keep back the Sacrament from some, which would receive with him. which
yet, (if they would be ruled by you,) being repelled, might answer the priest
again, and stoutly say, that it is of the substance of the Sacrament, that it
should be divided, and therefore that they have great wrong done unto them,
except they may be admitted. And they might truly allege, that Christ gave
the Sacrament unto Judas the traitor, which without controlling did receive it,
because of Christ his institution, Take and diuyde among you. But, as all the
Christians generallye, can not by virtue of these words, ( diuyde among you)
challenge their part in the communion, if the priest should think them
unworthy, even so, neither Christ had this meaning in them, that they should
be as a necessary commandment to charge thereby his priests, always to
divide and distribute his sacrament, but for that present cumpanye of his most
dearest Apostles, he said, Take and divide it among you. How then? May not the
sacrament be divided among the people? Yes truly. But that it should be
divided among the people, such necessity is not gathered out of, Take ye, and
divide it among you. But say you How can it be taken at the minister his
hands, Defense.
and divided or distributed among them, unless there be a cumpanye?

But what talk you, Reply.
of, to be taken at the minister his hands, as though that S. Luke did make
thereof any signification? He tells us, that Christ our Sauyor said unto his
Apostles, Take this: but he makes no word at all, of taking at the minister
his hands. But, this would serve well your purpose, if that when Christ said
distinctlye unto his twelve, Take this, you could persuade the rude, that he
spoke unto the people, and commanded them to take his sacrament at the
minister his hands. Then further, where you ask, how it can be distributed
among them, except there be a cumpanye? For whom you do speak, I can not
redely tell. For if you mean the Apostles, there was a good cumpany of them,
to take that which was distributed: and if you mean the people, I wonder why
you call them unto this matter, the Evangelists speaking of the Apostles
only. You allege the text of the scripture: go not then, I pray you, from
the text. The words be plain: Take and divide among you. If it had been said
indefinitelie, divide, you might have thought with some reason, that a
commandment of distributing the sacrament for ever afterward, had been geauen
in those words. But, our Sauyor determines the word divide, in saying,
Divide this among you. Which words yet if you think to have been spoken, not
only to the Apostles personally, but to all Bishopes and high Priests, which
should have in time to come, the place or office of the Apostles, as I grant
this sense, because it is convenient and true, so yet the people (you see) are
not comprehended within the text of which we speak. For, The M. of the defense
has promised more then he can perform*
of these three points, Take you, divide you, among you, no one can be
understood, as spoken unto the people. And if one may, why not all, as well
as one, seeing that in those three points, the persons are not varyed? Where
then do you find now any commandment of distributing the sacrament unto the
people? It can no be divided, (say you) except there be cumpany. You speak
somewhat therein, but tell us first, what cumpanye you mean? The sacrament is
truly divided among us every day.
For I say, that unto this day, if you consider the whole church, as one
house, and every altar in the world, as one table, and the body of Christ, as
it is one, allthough the mystical signs of it be in many places, so shall you
see it performed, that which you be so glad to hear, that the sacrament is
daily taken, eaten, and divided among us. But now, tell us further, what
necessity you find, why it should be divided? In deed distribution
presupposes cumpanye. But we ask what necessity does require distribution?
For the words of our Savior do not absolutelye command it, Let the M. of
the defense speak to the question.
but unto the Apostles especyallie his words were directed, because they were
with him, to receive at his hands. And so, the same words may appertain to
all that celebrate mass, when some are ready to receive. But as, if twelve be
not ready to receive, yet four may: so, if four be not ready, one may
receive alone. But then you complain upon us, and say, that we may as well
leave out, eating, drynkyng, and doing in remembrance of Christ, as we do
dispense with distributing. Fear not (I warrant you) we be nothing so folish.
For meats are necessary, but not distribution, and without other men's mouths
we can eat: but we can not distribute, without others hands or mouths to
receive it. Also, the remembrance of Christ his passion, is and may be
allwaies used: but distribution of the Sacrament, is not allwaies possible. And
(to be short) the sole receiving can not be without eating, etc.: but the sole
receiving at mass, is and may be without distributing. And here now, for
fear least we should not regard the institution of Christ, you tell us
again, out of Saint Cypriane, that nothing must be altered in the precepts
of Christ, which saying you extend unto sole receiving* and receiving under
one kind, (which S. Cypriane never thought upon in that epistle,) and you
forget to mengle water and wine together at the communion, which S. Cypriane
in that place so earnestly requires to be done, as I have before declared at
large. Wherefore Sir, have no mistrust, but that God the Holyghost provides
abundantlye, that Christ's and his own institution, shall never be broken of
the church: and when you be delivered of this fear, see whether you can prove
any better, then you have done hitherto, that the necessity of cumpany to
receive with the priest, is determined in scripture. And if it be not
determined expreslie, it stands as a thing indifferent, by your own vain
principle, and then it is no breach of Christ his institution, to use sole
receiving. How say you then? Will you forsake that fond principle of yours,
that nothing is of necessity to be credited, but that which is expreslie in
the scriptures? No, you will not, I know, your heart is so great against
traditions. Make then no more a do, but grant, that the observing of number
and cumpanye, is no more requisite, then the observing of the time, place,
kind of persons, and other circumstances, which the Gospel shows to have been used at the institution of the Sacrament. No say you, that Many
circumstances of place, person, and time, may be altered etc. we grant you:
but, that cumpanye in receyuyng is one of those circumstances, that we can not
grant, as well for the reasons before declared, as also that we have none
example of the Apostles, or primitive church, that we may so do.

Consider, I pray you Sir, the manner of your reasonyng. We conclude upon your
own principle, (which again we must call vain, lest any should think,
that we do allow it) that cumpanie in receiving, is by express scripture, of
no more necessity, then the circumstances of time and place, which Christ used
in the delyuering of his sacrament: and you answer, that it is not found in
the example of the Apostles, or primitive church, that the cumpanie in
receiving was omitted, as time and place are found to have been altered, in
which saying you do but enlarge your vain principle, upon the granting of
which our argument proceeded. Cumpany in receiving, in respect of the sacrament
received, is no greater matter then the circumstance of time and place* but yet
of sole receiving (say you) we have none examples of the Apostles, or
primitive church, as though nothing might be used otherwise then as of former
example it may be gathered, which addition, if you think good to use, to make
your foresaid principle vain absolutelye, let it be so then, and according to
this reformed principle, our argument shall thus come against you. What so ever
Christ did, at the institution of the sacrament, which we find not to be
altered by the authority or example of Apostles, or primitive church, that is
of necessity to be observed. But, our Savior delivered the sacrament at night,
and the Apostles with the primitive church of their time, have no example or
manner to warrant us to do otherwise: ergo, we must of necessity receive at
night. But, it is unreasonable to bring in such a necessity: ergo it is a
vain principle which maintayneth such absurdity. And what you might answer
unto this, I can not divise, except you will take examples of the primitive
church which followed the Apostles. But then remember what you be wont to say
out of Tertullian, how that is best which was first: and again out of S.
Cypriane, Christ is most to be followed, which was the first of all. And
consider also, 1. Cor. 11.
whether the church of Corinth did not receive the sacrament at night, Acto. 20.
and read in the acts of the Apostels, whether there was not breaking of
bread at night: and find, if you can, in all scripture, that ministering of the
sacrament was used in the morning. Are you wiser then Christ? can you better
dispose the times, then the maker of time himself? Did not the Corinthians
receive at night? An easy matter it is to troble the church if me^ would follow
the common places of heretics.
Is there any mention in scripture of receiving before none? These, lo, be
your common places, which if I would follow, I could make as great exclamations
at the breaking of Christ his institution in the time, as you do make for the
lacking of communicantes. For it is no matter to us, whether you do bring two
or three causes, wherefore the receiving at night, is or may be altered, (for
if good causes would have prevailed, you would never have played so madd parts
in crying out against sole receiving) but, all things (you say) must be
brought to the institution of Christ, and as he gave example, so must we
follow: and wherefore then, might not one first break his fast, and afterward
come to the Lord his table? And, if busynes let a Merchant all the day, why
might he not receive at night? If you can dispense with one thing, you may do
the like with all. If you alter the time, you may alter the manner, the place,
the bread, the wine, and all that Christ did. This kind, Sir, of Rhetoryke and
Logike we learn of you, which if you do greatly myslyke, when you hear it of
an other besides your self, look then upon your self better, and correct
that vain glorious principle, which has a show of learning and piety, but
is in deed most rude and wicked, when you say, that nothing should be
necessarylie observed, which is not expreslie in scripture, or, nothing thereof
might be altered, without authority or example of the Apostles and primitive
church. Which example of Apostles or primitive church you need not to pass
upon in this kind of matter. For if you be most surely persuaded, by the very
text of the scripture, that company to receive with the priest, is of the
substance of the sacrament, allthough example might be found in the primitive
church of sole receiving, or receiving under one kind, you would yet condemn
that example, by the plain institution of Christ, as you would take it: what
good then should an example do to you, which, although it were never so plain,
yet you would not be persuaded, but that the cumpany at the communyon is
allwaies of necessity? Note this point.
But, of our examples, we shall speak hereafter, in the mean time, what bring
you, to show that the having of company, is of the necessity of the
sacrament? And mark, that we ask you not of company, whether it be laudable,
convenient, or honorable at the celebration of every mass, but whether it be
necessary. Of necessity our question is, and of express commandment, and
you tell us of the Paschall lamb of the Jews, and apply it unto our
Sacrament, that like as cumpanye was of necessity to the eating of the
Paschall lamb, so that it should be as necessary to the receiving of the
sacrament. After which argument, you triumph without victory, and ask of us:
Will you say, Defense.
that company to eat up the Paschall lamb was not of the substance of the
sacrament? etc. If you mean by the word (sacrament) in this place, Reply.
the Paschall lamb it self, cumpanye (you know) was no more of the substances
of the lamb, the^ you with your bydden gestes, be of the substance of your
meat, when you have provided for your self and them a fatt goose and a capon.
But, if you understand by sacrament, all the act and ceremony of preparing and
eating the lamb, the calling of company unto it was in some case materyal. For
if the number be less, then shall be able to eat up the lamb, Exo. 12.
then (says God) he, whosoever he be, shall take his next neighbor. But you
may say, although the calling of company were conditional, Cumpanie in eating
of the Paschal lamb was not of absolute necessity.
yet the having of company was of the substance of the sacrament, It was so of
the substance, as other things were which God in that place commanded, I
mean gyrding of their loins, and having of shoes on their feet, and holding
of staffes in their han^es. But if by reason of some wound or disease, any
one of them had not ben able to suffer his shoe on his foot, although his
feet would not bear him, yet if his stomache served him, could he not have
eaten with his fellows, and eat as fast as the best, without breaking of the
matter? Likewise if one had been borne without hands, or had lost his hands in
fighting for his country, so that he could not hold any staff in the hand
which he had not, was he to be excluded from his part in the lamb? If these
points then, which God so distinctlie commanded, have their interpretations,
and are not so absolutely to be observed, but that, for considerations, they
may be omitted, I see no cawse, why the having of number in eating of the
lamb, should be so necessary, that it could not be omitted. But the matter
would be playner, if we were once agreed how the term of ( substance) is to be
taken, when you speak of it. For if you mean, that to be of the substance of
a precept, which, without case of necessity, and without dispensatio^ of the
chief governors, can not be rashlye omitted, as every private man shall think
good in him self, then I grant, that all those points, which are
comprehended within the ceremonye of eating the paschall lamb, were of the
substance of it: But, if substance shall signifye such parts of any sacrament,
as which no man for any respect may omit or chainge (in which sense we do
take it, in speaking of the necessary form and matter of every sacrament)
then do I deny unto you, that every point comprehended within the ceremonye
of eating the lamb, was of the substance of that matter. Therefore if your
comparing of all Christendom unto all the Jews, and our particular churches
unto their sundry houses, and the eating of our Sacrament unto their lamb,
did never so well agree together, yet, because it is not proved of you, that
every point commanded of God, about the eating of the lamb, is so
essentiallie of the sustance thereof, that in no case it may be omitted or
altered, therefore you come nothing nigh to the answer of our question, which
is, whether that of necessity there must be company allwaies, to receive at
the mass? Then again, it is to be noted, that in the old law, God did not
command them to have company at the eating of the lamb, but, rather then
any part should be left uneaten, he wills them to call more conpanye,
presupposing that there would be in every household company enough to eat a
lamb, but yet geauing no commandment of company to be at it. For if one by
him self alone, had eaten a whole lamb, his wife and children round about
him, not loving that kind of meat, and yet delighting in the histories which
he would tell them of Egypt and the redd sea, I see not that you were able to
burden him with the breach of Gods institution. Besides this, whereas the
lamb of God which is eaten of the Christians, is not more meat unto a
thousand then unto one alone, and one alone receives the whole, that he
needs not to send for his neighbor, your proportion betwyxt the lamb of the
jews, and our Sacrament was not rightly devised of you. Also, if I could find
no fault with your application, yet, except you brought greater authority
for the defense of it then your own, I would likewise of mine own head,
invent an other sense besides yours, and say that my understanding of that
place, serves better to the purpose then yours. In which case, as both of us,
might use perchance probable interpretations, so yet none of us both should
conclude any thing of necessity. And yet, I need not to run unto mine own
wytt for this matter, because that, long sense, Saint Denyse the Carthusyan
does say in his Commentaries upon Exodus, Dionisius Carth. in 12. ca. Exp.
that the calling of a neighbor to eat of the lamb, if howsehold cumpanie
were not sufficient, does signify that every Christian, which is never able
by himself to consider, sufficiently, the mercyes of God, showed unto us in
the death and sacrament of his Son, should call his neighbor to him, and
provoke him to help forward that all thanks and praises might be geauen unto
the author of so excellent benefits. Now, to speak somewhat more of this
lamb, (whilst you are of so good a mind and remembrance, to confess that
there is a proportion and lykenes betwyxt our sacrament and it,) consider that
the lamb was offered up to God before it was eaten, An allegorical
exposition of the paschall lamb.
which proves that Christ offered his body and blood in his last supper,
before the Apostles did receive him. The blood also of the lamb, was put upon
both posts of the doors, which signifies, that good Christians do receive
Christ in the mouth and in the heart. And they which receive unworthily, Eusebius.
Emi scenus in hom. feriae 2. post Pascha.
or else in receiving, do not believe it to be the blood of Christ, these put
the blood upon one post only. You are commanded also, to devour the head
with the feet, and the appourtena^ces, that you should not be curious and nyce
in your feeding, but faithfully and humbly receive his divinity, his
humanity, and all other profond and secret mysteries. In which, if any thing
shall seem absurd unto your gross understanding, you must referr all unto
the working of the Holyeghost, and so you shall fulfill the law, which
commands the residue of the lamb to be burned with fire. It is sufficient
to believe if it be not granted to understand, Eusebius ibid.
for more do eat this flesh, through believing, then understanding. Wherefore,
as the figure of the paschall lamb does nothing make against the order which
the church uses, so it does most playnelie confound your suppositions and
imaginations, by which you take Christ's real presence from us, and the
offering of his body. And now, what follows in your defense? You lay unto our
charge, that We take upon us to alter, Defense. fo. 45.
chainge, and take away, by our spiritual governors, all the parts of the
Lord his supper, as you will declare to us in order, by the doctrine of our
defense of private Mass.

Certainly, Reply.
this is a great accusation, and we are never to be trusted in any thing, if
this be proved. Do we (say you) take upon us to alter, chainge, and take
away, all the parts of the Lord his supper, by defense of private mass?
What a wicked and shameful lie is this? For there was never yet any mass
celebrated among us, Note how freely and sensibly the M. of the defense
belieth the Catholics.
so quycklie, so shortly, so secretelie, and so much without cumpany, but it
had in it, bread, wine, and water, blessing, breaking, remembering of Christ
his passion, together with all that, which the Apostle speaks of unto
Timothe, 1. Timo. 2.
saying: Therefore I pray the, first of all, that besechinges, prayers,
requests, and thanks giving be made for all men. etc. But why should we make
wondering at this lie, being not the first in your defense, and having many
after folowers? Will you declare this in order, which you have taken in hand
to prove against us? Your heart is good ever, allthough your matter be naught.
For this you say: The Sacrament, Defense fol. 45.
as it is in use, has two parts, the matter and the form. What parts has
it then, Reply.
before it come to the use of which you speak? And if there should chance to
be no such present use of the sacrament, what matter and form has it, as it
is considered without the use? Can you define this sacrament, which are so
cunnyng in the numbering of the parts of it, as it is in use? And has not
every sacrament matter and form, The matter and for me of the sacrament.
of which two it is constituted? Is not the sensible thing and element (as
bread, wine, oil. etc.) called the matter of them: and the words, which are
added to those elements, are not they called the forms? The word, Aug.
tract. 80. super loan.
says S. Augustyne, comes unto the element, and there is made a sacrament.
Bread, is the matter of the sacrament of the altar, and the words This is my
body, are the form of it: which two, when they are brought together by the
intention of such as are called rightly to the office, straitwaies there is a
sacrament, consisting of the visible sign, and of the invisible and natural
body of our Sauyor. And whether it be received or reserved, God does not pull
back his word at the departing, or not coming of men. But go to. what say
you of the matter of the sacrament, as it is in use?

The matter, Defense. fo. 45.
is bread and the body, wine and the blood of Christ. If the body of Christ
be the matter, Reply.
as you separate the matter from the form, how comes it to pass, I pray
you, that there is the body of Christ to him which will use the bread? Do you
think, that where so ever any bread is, there is also the body of Christ,
to him which will use the bread? If this be false, (as it is) then I say that
the body, with which (and the bread) you make up the matter of the sacrament,
as it is in use, does not come to the bread without some di^ine operation.
Except you think, that any power of creature is able to exhibit the body of
his creator and maker. What operation then is that, by which this matter, which
you say is bread and the body of Christ, does come to that perfection, to be
the body of our Savior. For we know, that bread may be had from the bakers,
or if (as your selfs now do mislyke with bakers bread) you will have clean
and fine cakes, to be made for the purpose, they are men or women which make
them, and their howses are not invisible. But how come you to have that body,
Let this be distinctlie and directly answered.
with which (and the bread) you make up the matter of the sacrament as it is
in use?

For you can not use the words of the Gospel to bring that to pass, because
they are the form of the sacrament, and you in this place do so speak of the
matter, as it is distincted from the proper form. Then again, how
ignorantly* and irreverently is it devised of you, to make the body of
Christ, the material part of the sacrament as it is in use, to the exhibiting
of which body, all matter and form serves which is required to the
sacrament? But if this be the matter, what is the form? The form of
ministration is, Defense fo. 45.
that the minister should take the matter, and with the words of the gospel
geaue it to them present, as Christ did. God send you better memory, Reply.
or if memory faill not, God send you more honesty. Did you not begin to
tell us of the matter and form of the sacrament, as it is in use? make then an
end of that which you began. The matter you have defyned. what is the form
of the sacrament? The form (say you) of ministration is, etc. The form of
ministratio^? Who required it of you? You must tell us of the form of the
sacrament as it is in use, and not the form of ministration. And whereas among
all learned men, the form is the perfection of the matter, either else you
should never have made such a division of the sacrament as it is in use,
Consider, by this one place, what proper scholemen the new gospel has
created.
or else you should have told us of such a form, which does geaue (as I may
sai^) a grace unto the matter. Is the form of the sacrament and form of
ministration all one with you? or the form of the sacrament as it is in use,
and the form of ministratio^, is it all one? what you might make of the first
you could not tell, and therefore you turned out of your purpose unto the
second. And although you speak nothing of the matter of ministration, you
expound yet the form of ministration unto us, and whereas you began with the
matter of the Sacrament, you refuse to declare unto us the form of yt, which
we looked for. Now, if your judgment served you, to make all one thing of the
sacrament as it is in use, and of the ministration of yt, then must the bread
and body (as you lie) of Christ, be the matter of ministration, like as it is
the matter of the sacrament as it is in use: which if it be true, I put the
case, that the minister would not deliver that foresaid matter unto the people
with his oune hands, but bydd them take it themselfes, and distribute it among
them? were it not the body of Christ? It could be no otherwise, because you
say, that the matter of the sacrament, as it is in use, and as it is
considered as a separate part from the form, is bread and the body. But how
can it be his body before the words of the gospel do come unto it? and how
are the words of the gospel used to that purpose, whereas you say that the
minister takes the matter in to his hands, (which is by your interpretation
the bread and the body) and delyuereth it with the words of the gospel. So
that the words come after, and the body is allreadie in his hands before.
Also what words of the gospel are those, which you mean, when you say,
that the matter must be delivered with the words of the gospel? If you mean
the words of consecration ( this is my body, this is my blood etc.) Then is
the English ministration imperfect, which used not those words in the
delyuering of their, what shall I call it. And except you mean those words,
what other in the gospel may serve to that purpose, I can not devise? For as
concerning those words, Take, eat, divide yt among you, do this in my
remembrance, they need no repetitio^ by mouth, but only expressing of them in
deed. And then, as concerning the word ( divide) when yt is spoken to each
one of the co^municantes, to whom shall each one of them divide any part^ of
that the which he receives wholye himself? Yet if the word ( diuidite,
divide yt) be an essential and formal part, of the sacrament as it is in
use, then must every one which shall rightlye use it, make parts and division
of it, except you mean, that the use of the sacrament perteyneth only unto the
minister, or that the people must take and eat, as the Gospel commands
them, and that, to divide it, was not spoken to them, although that word does
also follow in the gospel. But to what purpose have you, so scholastically,
made such a distinction between the matter and the form of a thing? T^ewly
that you ^ight with some orde^ declare it, that our spiritual governors have
chainged all the parts of the Lord supper, for they which take away both
matter and form, leave no substanciall part or point of the thing: And you
say, we have done so. Ergo (if this be proved) the Catholics be very traitors
unto God. But how prove you, that we have chainged those principal parts
belonging to Christ his supper? say first as concerning the form, and tell us
wherein we have altered it? mary Sometimes (say you) the priest may receive
alone without the people, Defense.
sometime the people without the priest, sometime both together.

Call you this the altering of the form? Replye.
and have you so quyckly forgotten, that you said the form to be, what a
dodger i^ this M. of the defense.
when the minister did gea^e the matter with the words of the gospel? how
think you the^? when he geaueth it to one alone with the words of the
gospel, has not that one person received the perfect Sacra^^nt with all his
parts, according unto your newly devised division? what if the priest alone
receive the matter with his own hands, and use the words of the gospel,
does he not fulfill all that which is to be required? The priest, you know,
does first receive him self, before he geaueth unto other. And what does he
receive, I pray you? does there lack either matter or form, or any
essential part, unto that which he receives? Or will you say, that the
sacrament which he has already taken and eaten, has not his just form,
before the people also have received? if the case be so hard, then were it
necessary, that when the matter is taken into the hands of the communicantes,
a watchworde should be geauen, when all they at once with the words of the
gospel, should receive that matter. But if this be but a folysh toye, meet
for an idle brain, to think that each one does not receive the sacrament with
all the parts of yt, except his neighbor eat with him, how do the Catholics
take away that very form which you speak of, in using of sole receiving? for
your form (which you have inverted) is, to deliver the matter with the words
of the gospel, but the matter may be delivered unto one alone, or received
of one alone, with the words of the gospel, ergo, the allowing of sole
receiving does not take away your form. And this I speak, as though it were
true, that which you babble of the form of the sacrament. For as concerning the
very form of the sacrament, the church has always taught, and in all
schools it is openly declared, that these words ( This is my body) are the
form of the Sacrament. But (say you) I talk of the form of the ministration
of the sacrament. Why did you not tell us so much of your mind at the
beginning? And if we did not keep the form of ministratio^, how could you
prove thereby, that we altered the formal part of the Lord his supper? For
(I trust) you be not so void of natural sense, but that you understand, the
matter and form of a good dyshe of meat, and the serving in of the same
meat, to be sundry things and different? And, as the man and the meat are
different, so is the matter and form of either man or meat seperately to be
distincted and talked of. Yet you, in so plain a matter, have so forgotten
your self, that beginning to speak of the matter and form of the sacrament
as it is in use, and having ended the definyng of the matter, you skyp
straytwayes to an other thing, and tell us of the form of the ministration.
Much like as if you would say, I will tell you, my masters, the matter and
form of a marchepane, when it is come to be eaten: the matter of it is, sugar,
rosewater, allmondes. etc. The form is, not that you should fetch it out of
the oven your selfs, but tarry until one clean fellow or other, bring it to
the table, and some other diuyde unto every geste a convenient part an portion
of it. Which yet, is no more the form of a marchepane, the^ it is of a roasted
piece of beef, when it is cleanely brought unto the table, and divided among
the gestes. But make an end of your accusation, and declare how we do chainge
the other substanciall part of the sacrament: which is the matter?

The matter also* ye signifye, Defense fo. 45.
may be altered at your pleasure. This is a most evident lie. Replye.
For all our schools do hold, that the necessary matter of the Sacrament,
Note the lie of the M. defendour of the truth.
is, bread and wine, and the most due and conuenyent matter, is, unleavened
bread and wine mixed with water. Yea we be so earnest in the defense of this
truth, that we be angrye very much with a certain kind of heretics, which
will use no water in the celebrating of the mysteries. I meruail therefore
much, what reason you may allege, to prove this fault by us. Yet you say:
For to receive the Sacrament of the blood is not of the substance of Christ his
institution, Defense
for if it were, the church could not alter yt, as you do commonly in the
ministryng to the people.

If this be true, Reply.
tell us, what name that has, which the geaue to the people in steed of the
blood? Do we geaue them the sacrament of blood, either in ale, beer, milk,
or any other liquor, besides wine? if we do not, how can you say, that we
chainge the matter? no mary, (say you) you geaue them no sacrament of the
blood at all. That which we do, we have received from antiquity and
authority, and the receyuer takes no loss therein, except he think that
Christ his Savior is not perfectly under the form of bread. And again, if
you consider, that the people with us, do always receive unconsecrated wine,
after they have eaten the body of Christ in form of bread, and that the cupp
which you geaue is unconsecrated, they did receive in the form of wine as much
good as you minister unto then, and so by indifferent reckenyng, you can not
complain that the Catholics take any thing from the people, which geaue them
as much as you do, that is to say, clean wine and no more. But, do you call
this an altering of the matter of the sacrament, when we use none other matter
at all besides that which Christ appointed, but only admit a good dispensation
and order, in the use of it? if there might be any fault found with us in
this point, for ministering the sacrament, at one time under the form of bread,
at an other time under the form of wine, yet it is not proved hereby, that we
chainge the matter of the sacrament. For how so ever we do it, yet we minister
in none other matter then bread or wine, how then do you prove that we chainge
not only the form, but also the matter? may not every reasonable man then
see, that you prove your self, what you are? do you make any regard, either
what you promise, either what you perform? here I challendge you, to make good
your word, or else, if you be an honest man, to revoke your word. Answer if
you can.
Where is that matter of the sacrament, which the Catholics do alter? Show,
if you can, that we use in our ministeries, any other thing then bread, wine,
and water, or any thing more or less, for the matter of the sacrament? But
this can never be proved. Yet you, as though it were proved, so ye conclude
most wyckedlye and slau^derouslye, that the sacrament of the Lord his supper,
has by our doctrine either no part that is of the substance, or else, that we
have the authority to chaynge every part of it. Which conclusion of yours,
is not only so false, but so folysh also, that if I would grant all your
premises, which you have out of all fasshion divided, yet this your conclusion
will not follow. For all that which you understand by the terms, of (matter
and form of the sacrament) perteyneth only to the manner of ministryng the
bread and the body, wine and the blood, with the words of the gospel. In
which points, if I would (for spedines sake) grant, that we observed nothing
of that which you requyer, yet you should not so absolutely and boldly report
of us, that we leave either no part of substance, as concerning the sacrament,
either chainge it, at our pleasures, and take away Christ his institution.
For, (as I say again unto you) we hold the words of Christ, This is my
body, as the form, and bread, wine, and water, as the matter, which can not
be altered. We believe also, after the words are spoken by a lawful priest,
upon the bread, wine, and water, that Christ is really present, under each of
those forms, to be unto us, a sacrifice for sin, a food for our hunger, a
confort in this misery, a pledge of the everlasting glory. And we believe his
words to be so true, that if none will receive him, when he comes before
the^, yet that their incredulity, or their lack of charity, does not make his
presence nothing. How say you then now, for shame? do we leave no part that
is of substance in the sacrament, because we do not agree with you in such
kind of substanciall parts as you have invented? Do we make our governors
omnipotent (as you say) in transposing and altering the sacraments instituted
by Christ? or may we defraude the people of the whole sacrament? I would you
did no more harm to the people, or take no more upon you, then the church has
done. They should not be served with signs and figures, in steed of verities,
and the words of Christ should stand as he meant them, saying This is my body,
which is geauen for you, and This is my blood of the new testament. But for
this matter we shall have an other time and leisure.

The seventh Chapter.
THE Catholic in his Apology, considering that our adversaries do so egerly
strive for the having of company to receive with the minister, because they
would make up a communion, answers directly, and truly, that although none
does visiblie receive at the same altar with the priest, yet never the less,
that there is a communion. For like as in prayer, when I am alone, I pray
together with all them which be of the same body and faith with me: so
although I receive the Sacrament alone, yet in deed I communicate with other.
Against which so plain reason, although nothing can be directly spoken: yet
the master of the defense will show his cunning, how many pretye florysshes he
can devise besides the matter. And first he auau^seth him self with standing a
typtoe, and ouerlooking of other, with these words: Who sees not, Defense*
fo. 46.
that prayer, and the Lord his supper in the use of them, be nothing like?

But who sees not, Reply.
that you can^not tell your self how like they are? For as prayer is made for
other, so in like manner is the body of Christ offered by him for other. Offered
(I say) once upon the cross immediatlye by him self in a bloody and visible
manner, to the redemption of mankind: and yet daily still offered by him,
through the ministry of his priests, in mystical and unbloody fasshion, to
the employing of that redemption. But who goes about to prove that praying and
receiving should be both in all points a like? Prayer (you say) is a common
action, Defense.
which done of one may stretche to the benefyte of many, but the Lord his
supper is no such common action.

The commodity of prayer is always common: but it the act of praying is
more often private then common. The receiving of the sacrament is a personal and
singular action: but the commoditye, when it follows, is communicated with the
whole body.

One may pray without a guide: one can not baptize himself without a
minister. A man's prayer also may profyt him which prays not, but any ones
baptism may not profyt him that is not baptized. And what of all this? Christ
(say you) taught us to pray one for an other, but he never said, receive the
communion, or be baptized one for an other. O Sir, Replye.
remember your self. The Catholic, against whom you write, does not meddle
with this question, of which you speak. He says not, that one may be
baptized or houseled for an other: but he says (if you will mark) that like
as in our praying alone, a perfect communion is in all things among Catholics.
we communicate with all Christendom, so in receiving alone, we communicate
with the whole body of Christ. And to make this his saying plain unto your
runnyng wytt, he alleges the article of our Creed, which is, that we believe
the communion of saints. And to make the matter further yet out of all doubt,
he recites a testimony of S. Denyse the Areopagite, in which it is proved
unto you, that the supper of our Lord is therefore called a communion, because
all the lyuelye members of the church are brought thereby to an unity with
Christ their head. And if all this be not sufficient, then do you further
understand, that, like as in our natural body, when one part reioyseth, all
the rest is glad of it, and if any one be payned, all the rest does feel it:
so, in the mystical body of Christ, there is a divine, entiere, and
charytable communion, of all the fructfull pains, actions, and graces, which
any one of the singular members, either receives, either practices. And this
communion is not only in respect of the uniformity of the church in
Sacraments and scriptures, (as you say,) but also, as concerning the
communicating of benefytes, which are received by those sacraments, or
deserved by good deeds, and meritoryous. Of which fellowshipp, it comes to
pass, that the obedience of Abraham, and patience of Job, with all their
virtues which lived in the fear and knowledge of God before the coming of
Christ, and the humility of the most blessed virgyn, labors of the Apostles,
constancy of martyrs, and holiness of all good Sowles, sense the Ascension of
our Sauyor, go forth without envy, to the bewtifying and comforting of every
joint of the whole mystical body. Of which, Io. 1.
Christ is the head, which is blessed for ever, which is full of grace and
truth; of whose fullness every membre receives a portion, Psalm. 48.
whom the holy ghost has anointed with the oil of gladness and rejoicing,
which oil from the head droppeth down into the berde, Psalm. 132.
and so continues in communicating his graces, until that the very skyrte of
his vestimentes, and the least of all his church, receive of his influence. And
this heads example, all the members do follow, each of them gladly
communicating with his next fellow, some part and measure of his merits and
glory, unto whom again the inferiors do ascend with a sweet savor of thank
and praises, so that in the whole body, there is no one part for it self,
but as God is for all, so all they are for God, and are, both for their
beginning and ending, in most perfect socyetie. Therefore in this body, how can
any part do any thing for it self alone? or how can there be but a
communion betwixt all the members of so perfect a dodye? And to this end only
does the Catholics argument come, not as you grosely understand him, that he
went about to prove, that as one may pray for an other, so one might receive
for another. Against which point, the more you talk, the more you make some to
laugh, and some to be angry, that you reason so hardly without any occasion.
And yet, you can not pretend ignorance herein, for at length you espy your
own fault your self, and you declare, that you see well enough what we might
say against you, and therefore you come in with these words: You will say
perhaps you do not infer this upon the argument of general communion.
Defense fo. 49.
but only that they which are in diverse places may communicate. Yea Sir, we
say so without perhaps, Reply.
and if you had been a reasonable man, you would never have made such an earnest
battaill against your own fancye* supposing one to stand before you, which
should say, that as one may pray for an other, so one might receive the
Sacrament for an other. Against which conclusion, you might have some
advantage, by gathering thereof this absurdity, that, so it would follow, that
our baptism here in England, might benefit some that are in France, yet our
only meaning was, to show, how they which are in diverse places, may, that
notwithstanding, communicate together. Of which thing what say you now? well
Sir, Defense.
I grawnte you that.

Remember, Replye.
I pray you then, what you grant. you grant us this, that they which be in
diverse places may communicate. well Sir I grant you that, Defense fol. ^od.
but yet, ye should have inferred the other point, etc. That is: to be like
communion in the Lord his supper of one alone received, as there is in prayer,
when one man in place alone, prays for a multitude.

That your self may not seem to have spoken much out of the purpose, Reply.
therefore you tell us, See how the M. of defense will apoint the Catholi^ke
what argument he should use, that himself might have r^me and opportunity to
reason against him.
what we should have inferred. But let the Apology be considered again, and
if it can be proved that any such conclusion was intended as you do speak
against, then shall you have the victory. You understand the catholic in this
fashion, that whereas he said, there is a communion between all faithful
Christians, as well in receiving the Sacrament as in prayer, you conclude, that
like as one alone may pray for a multitude: so, that we should infer, that
one alone may receive the Sacrament for a multitude. As who should say, when a
similitude or proportion is made betwyxt two things, that they must in all
parts answer one an other, or else the comparison is nothing worth. Yet we
read in wise men's works this similitude, Cypr^ ad ^ulianu^.
Like as a munkey does counterfeit and follow a mann, so do the heretykes covet
to appear like unto the true Catholykes: It is not necessary that.ij. things
compared together, should be in all points one like the other.
in which so saying, no man (I trow) does mean that all heretics have tails,
but only that in the act of imitating perfect and good Christians, they play
very munkyshe parts. which comparison, if you shall despise, because it is
made of twoe things of nature very diverse, and tell us that a munkey has an
other manner of hear and coat then a man, or make sport, against the author of
that similitude, as though he would have concluded, that a reasonable man is no
better then a beast, I would not geaue over so, but further continue in the
similitude, and say, that like as munkeyes, when they have spent all their
other knackes, do make moppes and mowes cunningly, to delight thereby the
lookers on: so some men in the world, when they have no more to say or do,
least they should seem to be y^le, resort unto making of new constructions,
as it were distorted and madd faces. For in deed, it is of your own making,
when you say that the catholic should have proved, if he had followed good
order, that like as one may pray for a multitude, so likewise that one may
receive for a great number. For it was not said unto you, that receiving and
praying were in all things like and proportionable, but only, as concerning
the strength of communion, which goes through the whole mistical body of
Christ not in prayer only, or receiving of the sacrament, but in fasting, alms
deeds, penance, or any other good act or benefyte. And therefore, concerning
the proportion, which is in this respect betwyxt prayer and receiving of the
sacrament, you have to answer, why there is not a communion to be granted,
when one alone receives, as you can not deny, a plain communion, when one
alone prays. We ask not o^ you, why one may not be howseled for an infidel
as well as he may pray for an infidel, but, whereas in our most private and
secret prayers, we say, Our father which art in heaven, and not my father, by
which words, we declare that we be not alone, but accompanied with a number of
other sons and brothers. by what reason then may you say, that he which
receives alone, (to your sight) has no communion with other of the faith,
hope, and charity? It is two things, to say, I pray for other, and I pray
with other, Note, to receive for other and with other
or, I receive for other, and I receive with other. To pray for other, is not
allwaies in owre intent, because of private and peculyar cases which do so
fully occupy us, yet a faithful man does allwaies pray with other, because
he is in that body, whose parts are joined together and animated with
charity. To receive for other, is a question of an other time, and in some
sense impossible, but to receive with other, is most consequent for all times,
except a man be out of that body, which copleth and unites all Catholics
together.

And now, what follows hereof? Truly this, first of all, that you which make
your arguments against receiving for other, do very much range out from the
matter, which is of receiving with other. And again, seeing there is such a
felowshipp and communion, between the members of one body, how can any priest,
in his sole receiving to our sight, lack such as receive with him, whereas he
communicates with all other which receive of the same body, why then, (say
you) we infer this, A sore objection of the M. of the defense.
that he which says Mass in our lady chapple in Paul's at six of the clock
in the morning, does communicate with him, that does the like in Jesus Church
at Nine of the clock the next day.

But Sir, we did not speak of this day and the next day, which times,
although they make great difference in the judgment of folysh unlearned men,
yet before God, unto whom all things are present, six of the clock this day,
and nine to morrow make no breach of communion, except you think that when all
candles be put out in the night, the world is at an end, and with the next
morning, the world begins again. For otherwise, why might not he, which
says mass this day, communicate with an other which shall celebrate an
hundred years after him, as well as we communicate with the Apostles, which
have departed this world fyfteene hundred year before us. The^ what need you
to encomber your self, with this day and to morrow, whereas your cause is
utterly lost, if for the day which is present, there be found at every sole
receiving of the priest a communion? which is shortly concluded in this manner.
There is a communion between them which being of one religion and faith,
receive in sundry places. But (for example sake) Sir Thomas celebrateth Mass
and receives alone in Paris, and Sir Ambrose does the like in Venyce: Ergo
Thomas and Ambrose do communicate together.

Sir I deny your argument, Defense fol. 50.
and say, that neither the one, nor the other does communicate with any Christian
man, because neither of both receives according to Christ his institution. You
be allwaies like your self, Reply.
in forgetting your self. For here you deny the argument, and the cause of
your denial is the fault which you find with the mayor and minor propositions
of it. what new logi^^e is this?
But if the fault be only in the propositions; why deny you the argument? And
if the argument be faulty, how vncunnynglie do you prove that, by the denying
of the propositions? But go to, let the first proposition be interpreted as you
would have it, and let us then repete the argument, saying, They which receive
in diverse places, according to the institution of Christ do communicate
together. But Sir Thomas. etc. (as before) do so: Ergo they communicate
together. How say you? does this argument please you? yea truly I think it
does: why then did you deny the former argument, which was altogether of the
same form and making with this? But such disputors they be, with whom the
church has to do. Now again, if you admit the argument as concerning the
form of it, what say you to any of the propositions? Mary, you deny the
second proposition, and say, that none of those two priests, whom I named, do
work according to the institution of Christ. And why so? Forsooth (say you)
because they receive alone by them selfs. Yea but herein you say falsely,
because the one of them at the least, receives with the other, and so they
have a communion, and observe the institution of Christ. Naie, say you again:
There should be a particular communion (as I may term it) between the members
of one congregation. Defense fol. 50.
You do wisely to mitigat the matter, and as it were, Reply.
to ask leave that you may call it a particular communion. But you must have
none, your request is so unprofitable. For this particular communion is nothing
worth, yea it is no communion at all, except it be referred unto the true and
general communion in deed. And if the communicating in the most perfect and
best manner, The needless and vpstart invention of a particular communion*
be fulfilled, will you bring us so fair downevvarde, that we must have the
particular, or else say the whole is destroyed? May I not, because of your
fancyes, rest in the end, when I am at it, but come back again to the
beginning, or myddle of the matter? The end of a Christians desire, is, to be
united unto God, through Christ our head in the unity of his body, and to this
end I receive his body in the sacrament, which, because he is both God an man,
is therefore able to join us together in unity with God and man. And therefore
when I receive him, I communicate both naturally and mystically with his
body. Can I desyer any more, and is any thing imperfect herein?

Yea mary ( say you) Christ would have us make a particular communion also.
But how prove you that by Christ? he which was wisdom it self, would he make
such an account of a particular, that although the whole some and perfection
might be obtained without it, yet he would have a particular communion? He
which co^municateth with the whole body, communicates also with particulars,
and therefore what talk you of a particular communion, as though that could
want, when the whole is obtained? If you would deny, that there is a perfect
commonion between men of one religion, notwithstanding they be not in one time
and place together, although you should speak untruly, yet you should speak
not most absurdelie: but, when you grant the general communion, and yet
besides require of necessity a particular, you speak so far out of all form
and fasshion, that no reason or probability, may be perceived in your saying.
Yes (say you) unity and concord is lively represented, as well for the
multitude, which do communicate, as for the apt signification of the external
elements. But what of this? for, every thing of which a good meaning may be
gathered, is not, of necessity, to be observed of us. To communicate with
Christ our head and his mystical body, is a thing most necessary, if we
think to receive him worthelie: but to have a particular communion, (as you
term it) although it be very laudable, yet is it not necessary, and the
institution of Christ does not require it of us. For if his blessed will had been, as you do seem to interpret it, that there should be a visible company to
receive together at his table, that the beholding of one the other, might
lyuelie represent the unity, which Christ with them and they have with Christ,
and that, without this particular communion, there might be no receiving of the
sacrament, woe then unto poor blind folks, which can not see how many
receive with them. Whom, if the mercy of our Savior has not excluded from
coming to his table, it must follow then necessarilye, that it was not Christ
his institution and commandment, that without a visible cumpany of
communicantes, his sacraments could not be ministered. And as such a
commandment did not become his wisdom and his bountefullnes, so would it
have been a great foil and disco^fort unto his church, if the neighbors
slacknes should have let the devotion of the well willing persons, or if no
receiuyng at all, might be suffered without a particular communion, whereas any
one Christian receiving all alone, does yet therein communicate with Christ his
whole mystical body. Now, because this general communion of which we speak,
does greaue you very sore, which love to make parts and separations, you
complain that excommunication seems to be taken away, by this our devise
(as you call it) of a communion between such as are absent and distant. But,
as you are allwaies very discrete and wittye, so you geaue a reason hereof, to
excuse you from folly. And what reason is that? Marye, After your devise, a
priest, that is excommunicated of the Bishop, Defense.
may say mass in his chamber, and affirm that he will communicate with him,
whether he will or no. If you think as you say, you be very dull of
understanding, Reply.
or short of memory, because our opinion proves the clean contrary. For
whereas we tell you, that he which receives alone, does communicate yet, with
the rest of the body of which he is a part, how far and wide so ever the
whole be dilated: so he which is separated by excommunication from the body,
co^municateth with no part of it, whether he receive alone, or receive with
many. But, if your sentence were true, as concerning particular, communion,
then would it straitwaies be very hard, to have any excommunication. For if
England would not receive one, he might seek after the congregation of
Scotland. If they would reject him, he might seek many corners of Germany and
Hungary. If Lutherans would defye him, he might be intertayned of the
Zuinglians. If they both were to honest for him, he might receive after the
institution of Christ (as they would say) with Anabaptists, Arrians, and such
other. But with us, how can it come to pass by any devise of yours, that he,
which is excommunicated by the Bishop, and therefore quyte separated from the
communion of all Saints and Catholics, should communicate with the Bishop,
or any other, whether they would or no? Nay truly Sir, if Christ his
institution had specially commanded a particular communion, as you say it
does, so in deed if the Bishope should excommunicate you, yet you might call
half a dozen of good fellows unto you, and in chamber, orcharde, grove,
den, stable, or under hedges, celebrate a memory of Christ his passion, and
challendge unto your selfs the following of his institution, which institution
whilst you understand so grossly as you do, you must further expound unto
us, in what quantity of number, time, and place, a communion may be
celebrated. And if for all your fancying of particular communion, you have no
joy to speak of such particular cases, albeit you may tell us, that you have
weighty matters in hand, and can not therefore dally, yet we see playnelie,
that you have not what to answer us, lest you should be driven unto many
absurd folyes. And therefore to shifte your hands of those questions, in which
your spirits might be tried, you tell us, that you see in the Evangelist and
S. Paul, that Christ took bread, brake it, gave it. etc. and that he did his
things, in convenient time and place, and that he had company, which if we
either did not know, either would deny unto you, then had you said somewhat.
But our principal question is, whether such a company and number, as he used,
be necessary, or no: as yourselfe have before confessed, that the observation
of place and time, which Christ used, is not necessary. And because you
styffelie hold, that cu^pany is necessary, we would understand your mind
further, within how great and how small number, that necessary company
consists. For it is written in the Englysh service, that without three, no
communion may be celebrated, except upon the special request of the syck
person, and in time of plagues, when one may receive with the priest alone.
But yet, (I trow) the institution of Christ, does permit well enough two alone
to receive together at all times. Now if you be to seeking, for your answers
in such questions, which would declare unto us the full meaning of your
opinions, how dare you set up a religion, Blind guides.
which know not the parts of your own religion, and can not tell how fa^r you
may grant, or how much you may deny. As concerning accidences without their
subjects, and other such true conseque^cies, which do follow necessarylie upon
other principles of the Catholic faith, we are able to prove them, if you were
able to understand them. Of which things, we are not ashamed, because they
have been openly declared and believed in all the Universities and divinity
schools of Christendom (many faier years before your divinity was published;)
and if the^ might be any offense taken of them, or else not sufficient defense
made for them, (if your side should be judge,) yet the questions are so subtle
and curyous, that a good Bishop might with honesty say, that he needs not
to prove them. But you, which are the fynders out and founders of the gospel*
the controllers of Christendom, the special vessels of God, and reformers of
the perfect and Apostolic religion, in so plain and sensible a matter, as
place, number, and time is, for the^ which will communicate, to run into
corners, The false heart of the M. of the defense.
and feign that you have weighty matters in hand, and command your
adversaries to silence, and not to trouble your grauities with any particular
questions, it is much against your worship and honesty, which would be
accepted of privy counsel with God and Christ, as concerning the ordering of
sacraments. Also, that accidences may be comprised without subjects, and
bodies be without dimension, it is openly in schools concluded, to see who can
prove the contrary. But how few, or how many may make o^ mar your communion,
you dare not, or can not answer unto it, least you should be reproved.
Wherefor, seeing that you make silence your defense, and will not utter the
state of your religion, it is no little confort unto us, that you be confounded
yet in your own conscience. And as we have so faithful minds, that in God
his mysteries we go no further, then he and his holy church leads us: so yet
(thanks be to God) our wits are not so simple, that in a plain and sensible
question we can not tell what to answer, but say that either our adversary
dallieth, or feign, that the question which is asked, conteyneth a mystery.

The aight Chapter.
THE Catholic in his Apology, to prove that number of communica^tes is not
necessary in the receiving of the Sacrament, alleges a saying of Erasmus,
which he shows to be agreeable unto the testimonies of learned and holy
fathers, Tertullian, S. Cyprian, S. Cirill, and S. Ambrose. which if we should
dilate so far forth as we might, our reply would he very long and tediouse,
and except we do declare in what sense they serve for our purpose, it can not
be but intricate and comberous. Shortly therefore to make a state of our
question in this chapter, and to have the more leisure to speak of the
testimonies brought in for v^: Let this be our argument, which I pray the
good reader to bear away, E^as^us says, that in old time the body of our
Lord was delivered into folks hands, that they which had taken yt might
receive yt at home, when they would, Ergo yt is not necessary to have always
communicantes. Now unto this argument what do you answer with all your
defense? Sir it seems very strange to me, Defense fol. 52.
that you, which have so much hated Erasmus, etc. should now in your need take
help and succor at his hand. Sir, Reply.
our store is so great, that we need not Erasmus authority, but our behauior
is so reasonable, that we do condescend to you, in alleging your own
doctors. And it seems very strainge unto me, that Erasmus, whom you call a
singular instrument provided of God to begin the reformation of his church,
Eras* co^tra Eua^gelicos Item, co^tra fratres inferioris Germaniae
should yet be proved to have written by name against the false ghospellers and
beginners of this new reformation of Christianity. For is God divided? or has
he no better provided, but that such as you call the singular instruments of
uttering his pleasure and will, should be found so contrary among them selfs
and so far repugnant, one unto an other? But as concerning this learned man,
we take his confession, we use not his testimony. And we tell you what he
thought, if perchau^se that may move you, but we take him not for a wytnes in
our cause, as though we might not well spare him. And this does hereby well
appear, that we bring forth holy and blessed men's authorities to prove that
most true which Erasmus has confessed. Of whom, if you be now werie, for all
that God provided him singularly (as you say) for you, what say you then to
S. Cyprian, S. Cirill, S. Ambrose, and Terrullian, by whom it is proved, that
in old time, there was sole receiving among Christians? And here now to
declare pe^chaunse that you be well scene in antiquities, you tell us a sadd
tale of much trouble, vexation, and persecution which was used in the primitive
church, and that the Sacrament was sent to such as were absent, Defense fol. 54.
and that Hereof it came, that diverse received alone in their houses. Now
thanks be to God, Replye.
that at length yet, you can not but confess that sole receiving was used in
the primitive church. Where now are your loud exprobrations, The M. of the
defense confesses sole receiuyng to have been used in the primitive church.
that we have not one word or syllable in all the Doctors, for the space of
six hundred years after Christ, to make for us? That we have not so much as
any color or similitude of truth, as concerning sole receiving* etc? That
Christ his institution is wholly against us? That there must be necessarily (as
you do term it) a particular communion? You be not far from the kingdom of
heaven, you be almost welcome home, or at least ways, you be looking
homeward a little. But this news is to good (I fear) to be true, and allthough
you can not deny sole receiving, yet you will not be quiet, but continue still
in your stryuing. For you say this: But you should bring such places, Defense.
as might prove, that the common minister in place of the Lord his supper, did
celebrate and receive alone, other being present, and not partakyng.

No Sir, you must not rule us in the manner of our reasoning, Reply.
and appoint us to prove that, which we take not upon us. This is it, which I
have wysshed before to be well remembered, that our question is not, whether any
priest then did receive alone, but whether he might do it laufullie, or no,
that is our question. And as the Catholic in his Apology fol. 8. warned you
most playnelie, that there is an open difference between these two sentences:
There was no private mass at that time* and* There ought to be no private
mass at any time. So take a fayer warning again, that we labor to prove, not
what thing was then commonly done, but what may now, and might then have been
laufullie done. Mary, we can not prove (say you) that the common minister did
celebrate and receive alone, Note again how the M. of the defense runs from
the question.
other being present. Ver^^e what the priest did we take not upon us to prove,
but what he might do, that we can show unto you. Do not you allwaies appeal
unto Christ his institution? Do not you make your selfs so cunnyng in it,
that you can tell us of the indifferent parts, and of the substanciall parts
of it? Have not you defined it, that, to receive with cumpany is a substanciall
part of it? And do not you conclude hereupon, that the priest can not receive
by himself alone, without breach of Christ his institution? These being your
principles, if we do disprove any of them, then is your conclusion destroyed.
But how can we more playnelie do it, then by reciting the examples of the
primitive church, by which you are contented to be tried, in which age sole
receiving was used, and yet Christ his institution not thought to be violated?
Can you deny that sole receiving was the^ used? you can not. But you make this
limitation, that it was used in case of necessity, and of lay men, not of
priests. Well, make the case how hard so ever you will, we ask no more, but
that all men should know, that sole receiving was lawfully then used. Now
therefore (say you) let us see, how aptly upon this grant you conclude your
purpose? More aptly (I trust) then you have done it for us, which behave your
self so uprightly, that all is the worse for your handeling. We therefore do
not straitwaies look for a priest at an altar, but first, we take your
confession that sole receiving is lawful, as being used in the primitive
church: and then we infer that Christ his institution does not require of
necessity a number to receive allwaies together: Ergo then Christ his
institution is not broken, when a priest alone by hymself^ receives: Ergo you
should amend your needeles appealing unto that institution which you do not
understand, and confess that there is no impediment wherefore a priest may not
say mass, and receive alone. For if it had been a substa^ciall point of Christ
his institution, to have co^municantes, no necessity might have made for sole
receiving, but in the primitive church there was sole receiving: Ergo that,
which you term particular communion, is not of the necessity of Christ his
commandment. For as concerning the persecutions of those times, which caused
that the Christians could not come together, they served well, to deliver men's
co^sciencies from the scruples, which they might have had, for not receiving,
but they do not license them, to receive against Christ his institution. As
for example, at an Easter time, when all Christians do receive of duty, if
through persecution, certain of them were driven unto such extremytes, that
they could have neither wheaten bread, nor wine, nor priest to minister the
communion unto them, this necessity does not make it laufull, that they
celebrate in oten cakes and whey, or that with their laycall hands they take,
bless, and receive, in the remembrance that Christ dyed for them, and be
thankful: but only it makes for their quyetnes of mind and conscience, that
they think not them selfs to have transgressed the law of the church, because
of the present necessity, which has none other remedy, but patience. And so
likewise, if the Bishopes which governed the church in those persecutions, had
thought it to be ^f the substance of Christ his institution, that without your
particular communion the sacrament might not have been received, they would not
have sent it home to Christians howses, there to be received of them privately,
but they would rather have exhorted them, not to be discomforted for all the
lack of the visible sacrament, and willed them to pray for a quiet and good
time, in which they might communicate after Christ his institution. But for all
the trobles of persecution, they did not so, Ergo it is plain to perceive,
that they thought not as you do of Christ his institution. And this being once
confirmed, that the institution of Christ does not require of necessity,
co^municantes, we do rightly infer, that a priest may receive alone, without
any iniuire done to the institution of our Sauyor. But, (good Lord) how
miserably are you tormented within your selfs, as it may seem? You grant
sole receiving in some case, you confess it to have been used in the primitive
church, and yet you say, that Christ his institution does allwaies require
company. To deny the authority of the primitive church, A great distress of
the ^. of the defense.
you dare not: and revoke your own comment, made upon Christ his institution,
you will not. What will ye do poor souls? you turn and w^nde your selfs,
loath to refuse the authority of the primitive church, and sorye that you can
not make it agree with Christ his institution, as you expound it. And
therefore, not withstanding your former grant, that sole receiving was used in
the primitive church, yet now you temper the matter, signifying, that it was
then, either tolerable, or pius error, but, that now it should be intolerable
and impia prophanatio. As who should say, In deed, it can not be denied, but
that in the primitive church sole receiving was used, undoubtedly against the
institution of Christ and example of S. Paull in his epistle to the
Corynthians, but yet, we must not say so expreslie (for then we shall mar
all) but confess the matter, making the best that we can of it, and saying,
that it was tolerated and not allowed, or a certain good and harmeles error in
the people, and not a wicked profanation of Christ his commandment. But
whether this be true or no, that in the primitive church a plain transgressing
of Christ his commandment in the substance of the sacrament, would have been
tolerated of the blessed clergi^ of that age, or that they would have smyled at
the breach of Christ his institution, and called that fault by no worse name
then pius error, it will easily appear by this, that sole receiving at home
was never yet thought intolerable and wicked. Yes say you: Hyerome against
Iouinian mencioneth, Defense fol. 55.
that in his time some used to receive in their houses, but he earnestly
inueigheth against that manner. Why (says he) do they not come into the
church? Is Christ sometime abroad in the common place, sometime at home in the
house?

Believe not every spirit (says the Apostle) but try them whether they be of
God. Replye. 1. ^o. 4.
But (alas) how shall he, which knows none other tongue then his English,
try the truth of his sayings, which speaks unto him out of Latyne authors?
But if the simple can not, or should not rather, examyne these matters, let the
indiffere^tlie learned take an example by this one place, with what conscience
and honesty you allege and abuse the doctors. Might not a man think, which
had never read S. Hierome against Iouinian, Mark how shamefully S. Hierome is
belyed of the M. of the defense.
that he expreslie condemns the receiving at home, out of the church? Yet he
says nothing less, which to make more plain unto you, consider the occasion
of Saint Hierome his words in that place. Iouinian the heretic, would have no
excellency to be in virginity above marriage, S. Hierome co^futeth him at
large, using among other arguments, that weddlock is not so great a good
thing, seeing that prayer is hyndred by it, the Apostle saying: Do ye not
defraude one the other, 1. Cor. 7.
except it be upon consent for a time, that ye may entend to pray. He said
also, what manner of good thing call you that, which lets a man from the
receiving of Christ his body? For he presupposes, Exodus 19.
that if the Israelites did abstain from their wives three days before they
received the law, and if David the king with his cumpanye were examined whether
they had layen with their wives lately before, when they desired to have some
of the loeues which are called propositionis panes: 1. Reg. 21.
much more a Christian should absteyne a certain time from his laufull wife,
before he did presume to receive Christ his body. Yet says S. Hierome, In
Apologia aduersus louinianum.
I know that this custom is in Rome, that the faithful do at all times
receive the body of Christ, which thing I do neither reprove, neither allow,
for every man abundeth in his own sense. But I ask of their consciencies,
which do communicate the same day, after they have had carnal knowledge of
their wives, and i^xta Persium, noctem flumine purgant, wherefore they dare not
go unto the Martyrs? wherefor they go not unto the church? is Christ one
abroad, and an other at home? that which is not lawful in the church, is not
lawful at home. etc. How say you then? Does S. Hierome in this place inueigh
against the manner of receiving at home? Is it not most plain and evident, that
he speaks against such, as had no fear to communicate at home after the
nights pollution, and yet would not venture to come unto the places where
Martyrs bones rested, or into the church? And why should any man fear to come
unto the chappelles, or memoryes of Martyrs, after the nights, what shall I
call it, with his wyffe? Undoubtedly for reverence sake, and honor, which they
gave to Martyrs, as S. Hierome also testifies of him self, Hieron. aduersus
vigilantium.
saying: I confess unto the my fear, least perchance it come of superstition:
when I have been angrye, and have thought upon some evil thing in my mind, and
when some fancy of the night has deluded me, I dare not go into the churches
of Martyrs, I do so thorowghly quake for fear, in body and soul. Therefore,
whereas the Romans, after the use of their wives the night before, would not
come the next day into the presence of Martyrs memories, and yet were not
ashamed to receive the body of Christ at home, he asks of them earnestly:
Wherefore they go not unto the church? not in this sense which you have
invented, as though he should say: Wherefore do you receive at home? why go
you not to the church? why receive you in corners? why come you not to the open
congregation? I like not these communions at home, the doors of the
congregation be open to the faithful, it is a shame so to receive by your
selves alone, the institution of Christ is excedinglie broken, he instituted
not his sacrament, that they should have it brought home to the^, or that they
might carry it home with them, I know not what place is better for that purpose
then the house of God, where all the people may be present together, and
edify one the other through beholding the fellowship and communion of
themselves. S. Hierome was not so full of the spirit, or so empty of wytt, but
only he corrects their folly, which in some things made a conscience, in
other some of greater force, made none at all. And he asks, why they do not
as well come in to the church, and in to the chapples of Martyrs, after they
have co^panyed with their wives, as they dare to receive the body of Christ at
home, for all the formar nights fancye and pleasure? Is Christ one abroad,
and an other at home? As who should say, will it hurt you if you come to church
in the presence of Christ his Martyrs, and make you no conscience of rec^^uing
Christ his body at home in your houses, whose Martyrs they were? Yet he does
not reprove them for receiving at home, as by his own words appears,
saying: That the faithful receive at all times the body of Christ, I neither
reprove, neither allow. But to this conclusion he labored to drive the matter,
that whilst they should be sorye, that they had not communicated some certain
day, because of their pleasure, taken the night before with their wives, they
might thereby abstain a little from them, that they might communicate with
Christ. But go you forth. Have you any other authority, to prove that sole
receiving at home was ever condemned?

In Socrates the second book we read that Synodus Gangrensis condemned
Eustathium, Defense. fol. ^5.
for that, contrary unto the Ecclesiastical rules, he granted license to
communicate at home. Where a man should find this Socrates, Reply.
of whom you speak, you only (I believe) do know. For in the second book of
the Tripartite historye, Socrates makes no mention at all of any such
Eustathius as you speak of, Tripart. hist. ca. 4^ lib. ^.
but in the.2. of that book, we do read of one Eustathius a ver^e good
Bishop, condemned by a false forged tale made against him by a common harlot,
his judges being to the outward show Catholic Bisshops, but in heart and deed
Arrians. For which cause, says the history, Many holy me^ and priests with
others, forsaking the company which r^sorted unto the common churches, did come
together among them selves, whom, all other called Eustathianos, because that
after Eustathius departure, they (...) ^^g^ather a side from others. Now if you
do allow the condempnacion of this Eustathius, then must we beware of you
hereafter, least you bring forth new Arrians unto us. And any other, besides
this catholic Eustathius, I can not find in the second book of the
Tripartite history. Therefore I turn me unto the Councelles, and there in
deed, I find that Synodus Gangrensis condempneth one Eustachius (not
Eustathius) for many notable heresies, but yet there is no mention, that he was
condemned (as you say) for granting of license to receive at home. The M. of
the defense does dubly ^elie Socrates and Synodus Ga^grensis.
But rather, as it appears by the epistle prefixed before that Synod, these
Eustachians were of the opinion that no prayer or oblatio^ should be made in
married men's houses, they co^tempned also the places of holy Martirs, or
churches, and reproved all such as resorted to them, they took further upon
them to distribute the oblations made in the church, and therefore the fifth
canon of that Council is this: Concilij Gangre^^is ca. 5.
If any man do teach, that the house of God, is to be contemned, and the
meetinges which are celebrated in it, let him be accursed. And the sixth canon
says: If any man does make conuenticles without the church, and despising the
church, will usurp those things which be the churches, without the priest
coming unto it, let him be accursed, according (...) the decree of the
Bysshope. This much (...) I find in Gangrensis Synodus, which does not so much
as seem to found any thing nigh unto your purpose. Where then is, that your
Eustathius which was condemned for granting license to communicate at home? or
how well have you proved, that the custom of the primitive church, which for
that time was tolerated, was at any time after forbidden as profane and
wicked? If therefore these testimonies of S. Hierome and Gangrensis Synodus, by
which you would prove, that to receive at home, was greatly inueighed at and
condemned, do no more make for your purpose, than to say that a lay man
should not lie with his wife the night before he receives, or that those
heretics are to be condemned, which contempne Martirs chapples or churches:
how little at all could you prove, that any myslyking was ever had, of the sole
receiving at home, used in the very primitive church? The use of which time,
you dare not openly condemn, but privily you leave to be gathered, that it
was pius error in them. Whereas contrary wise, if sole receiving be such a
matter as you make it, that it goes most directly and playnlie against the
substance of Christ his institution, then I am sure, that the contempt of this
life and world, was so great in the Christians at those bless^^ days, that
rather then ^hei would have received alone, to the confounding of Gods l^w and
ordenance, they would have been content, never to eat any thing in this world,
but ^uffre the most cruel death of hunger. And upon this ground so s^re, that
it is not against Christ his institution to receive alone, we can do none
otherwise, but confess that the priest receiving alone is not to be pulled, by
you, from the altar, not denying, but that in the primitive church the people
most times received with the priest, and that if they had not done so, they
were commanded to go out of the church (which thing yet you do labor so to
prove, as though the obtaining of it, did make any thing to the purpose) but
orderly following our intent, which is, to prove that sole receiving is not
against Christ his institution, and that it is not necessary to have allwaies
a particular communion.

Now, because the Catholic in his authorities of Tertullyan, S. Cyprian, and
S. Ambrose, proved, not only sole receiving to have been used at that time, but
also communion under one kind (which thing secondly in this chapter you take
upon you to reprove) let us mark your fighting in this part, and try
masteryes with you. First you say, that the institution of Christ, of
communion under both kinds.
is expressly against us, for, In the Evangelists and S. Paul, Defense fol. 57.
we see testified, that Christ took bread, and gave with it his body, and
afterward took the cupp, and gave with it his blood, and willed them to
observe and use the same.

You make a shameful and wicked lie, Reply.
in sayeing that it is testified either in the Evangelists or Pawle, that
Christ took bread and gave with it his body, for it is mani^est, that he took
bread and delivered it sayeing, This is my body, and not as you report, with
this I geaue my body. But the scriptures, I perceive, are not yet plain enough
for your purpose, and you will (I fear) never be contented, The M. of the
d^fenc^ adds unto the scriptures, most shamefullie.
until, after many affected translations of the scripture in to the mother
tongue, you alter the autentike and pure text of it, by conneighing in, these
words, (Take and eat, with this is my body.) Then, as concerning Christ his
institution, like as he spoke then, to his Apostles only, and in them unto his
priestes' of the new law: so the priests do always, when they consecrate,
receive under both kinds, but as for priests not consecrating, or the lay
people standing by, it is not of necessity, to deliver it unto them in both.
And hereof, we have alleged this cause unto you, that it is a matter
indi^^erent, and not of the substance of the Sacrament. O (say you) ye flee to
your old place of refuge. why (Sir) what would you have us to do? if you
keep still one argument, may not we likewise apply one answer? And is
every thing fresh and gaye, which you bring, although it be twentye times
repeted and not once proved, and shall not we have license to refell your
objections with such an answer, as you never yet have disproued? yet, we have
not barely affirmed our saying, but we have geauen good cause for it, that to
receive under both kinds should not be of the necessary substance of the
Sacrament, as concerning the people. Of which causes, you choose out one, where
we say, that per concomitantiam, the body of Christ is never without his
blood, and his blood is not separated from his body, so that no loss or
hinderance comes unto the receyuer, which takes as much under one kind, as
he should have done under both. At which cause, you peck with a skornefull
exclamation, and say, O profounde and deep fett reason, wherein you seem to
make your self wyser then Christ himself, that ordained the sacrament. But I
would that you, or the best of your side, were but a quarter so godly, or
learned, or wise, as those Masters of divinity which were authors of the word
(^o^comitantia) the meaning of which word, was ever believed in the church of
Christ, It is yet a comfort unto us, that such things as we believe, (...) not
invented of late by our selves, but received of the teachers of Christendom,
but o superficial and light wits of yours, which make Christ not to have be^
so wise as he was, which resist his holyeghost, and go about to read a
lecture unto the Church of God. What fault do you find, with concomitantia?
Mary say you, The communion of Christ his body and blood, Defense fol. 57.
is not the work of nature in this Sacrament.

What mean you by the words (communion of his body) we talk of
concomitantia, Reply.
that is, whether under the form of bread there be his body acco^panyed with
his blood and his flesh together. And you tell us, that the communion of his
body is not the work of nature. Speak unto the matter and show some reason,
why that his body should be without blood, in the sacrament of bread?

What so ever is here geauen unto us, Defense (...). 58.
is to be taken by faith. As who should say, Re^^y.
that faith might rest upon a fancy or figure, or that by the same faith, by
which I believe that I receive his body, I might not also believe, that I
receive together his blood. But again, So much is geauen unto us, as God
appointed to geaue, Defen^^. fol. eod.
of whose will and pleasure, we know no more, then his words declare unto us.

Why Sir, Reply.
does not the word (body) declare well enough that it is not without blood?
When Saint John in his gospel says, Io. 1.
The word was made flesh, will you say, with old heretics, that the word
took not also our life and soul unto him, because S. John mencyoneth none of
them expressly, but only that the word was made flesh? Yet almighty God,
w^^ch spoke by the Evangelist, was wise and able enough to declare his mind.
In Christ's natural body, Defense. fol. eod.
that is in heaven, I know, his flesh is not without his blood, but in the
sacrament, which is no natural work, how will you assure me, that the flesh
and blood ysioyntly signified and geauen unto me, under one part only? If the
sacrament be no natural work, Reply.
what is it then, Supernatural, or artificial? If you make it a less work
then natural, then do you debate greatly the glory of the new testament,
whereas the manna of the old law, Exodus 16. and 17.
and water which issued out of a rock for the Israelites, were more excellent
figures, then the verities of them, which are among true Christians. But if you
think, that they be not natural, to make us thereby to conceive a greater
estimation of them, then say I, so much the more it is credible, that the
blood should be joined unto the body, because that in very common nature we see
it so, and nothing wonder at it. But yet (say you) Christ which knew as well
as you the joint condition of his flesh and blood, Defense. fol. (...).
did not with standing, in two sundry external things, geaue the communion of
them to his Disciples.

This lets nothing our belief, which do know, Reply.
as well as you, that Christ gave his body and blood under two forms of bread
and wine, and yet notwithstanding one Christ was received under both forms of
bread and wine. But therefore he delivered himself under those two kinds, and
not one, that we might the better consider his passion, in which the blood was
separated from the body.

Therefore the faith of the communicantes in the one part, Defense ibidem.
receives the body, trusting to Christ his promises: the same faith in the
other part, receives the blood, beleiuing also our Savior his words therein.
You have not to prove, that in the one part the body was received, Reply.
but that the body only without blood is received. And then further, where
you say that the faith of the communicantes receives the body, does it
receive it as a dead carkas, (shame to think it) or else as the body of the
soune of God? Christ our Savior says: Io. 6.
The flesh profits nothing, it is the spirit which quyckeneth. That the
co^municantes receive not a body without blood and liffe.
How then, does the communicantes faith receive such a sole body, which has
neither blood, neither life, neither divinity in it? The forgeauenes of sins
comes only from the Deity, but the chief instrument, by which God works,
is Christ's our Savior most dearlye beloved Humanity. Which, if a man
conceive, as separate from his Divinity, then truly as it is among all
creatures most excellent, so yet is it but a creature, and very little
auayleable unto us: mary, as it is the body and blood of him, which was not
only man, but also God most glorious, his body and blood does releive us
through the presence of his majesty. You therefore which do divide Christ, and
by your faith (which no wise man does ever trust) make a receiving of a body
without all blood, life, or divinity, do most playnelie take the fructe of
their redemption from the people, and make them to hang upon gross
imaginations of a body without blood, and blood without a body, to their
exceading loss and injury. But now, if all other arguments failed us, and if
your devise were not so obscure and vile, as it is, yet the authority of the
church, is no small thing among Christians, against which you speak so like a
madd master, as though you knew the voice of Christ, better then the church of
Rome, which yet do not know whether there be any Christ, or no, except it were
for the authority of the church of Rome. And whereas you buyld all your
institutions and articles, upon the textes of the scripture, and your private
interpretations, and co^tempne your mother Church, yet except you follow the
voice of the church of Rome, you can with no reason defend that this which you
hold, is scripture. And here again you call upon us to remember S. Cyprian,
which in all that epistle of his, unto which you do referr us, does so make
against them which ministered only in water, that he co^futeth also them, which
minister only in wine, proving both by the old and new law, that wine and
water both should be mengled together in the mysteries. But as concerning the
receiving under one kind, of which we have to speak, what answer you unto
the place of Tertullian, or unto S. Cyprian his authority? You say, that our
arguments taken out of them are but conjectures, and the same very uncertain,
for often times in the Doctors where one kind is mencyoned, Defense. fol. 59.
both are understood, as after shall more appear. Let the words of the
authors them sel^es try it, Reply.
whether you, or we do use the uncertain conjectures. Tertullian, in his
second book unto his wife, where he tells her of the sondrye faults and
inconueniencies into which those women do bring themselfes, which after their
husbands death do become wyffes unto infidel and heathen rulers or gentlemen,
themselves being Christians, among which this is a very principal one, that
in the houses of paynyms they shall not well be able to keep the orders of
Christian people: he says, after other persuasions: Shall thou not be espied
(cum lectulum, Tertull. ad vxorem, proved to make for receiving under one kind.
cum corpusculum tuum signas. etc?) when thou do bless thy bed and thy
body with the sign of the cross^? when thou do spet out with exu^flation
some unclean thing? when also, thou do arise in the night time to pray:
and shall thou not be thought to work some witchcrafte? Shall not thy husband
know what thou do taste secretly of, before all meat? And if he know it,
he belei^eth it to be bread, and not that which it is said to be. Of these
words you gather that in the name of bread is understood also wine, and why
so? Mary because that some times among the Doctors (of which hereafter we shall
speak more) both kinds are understood, when but one is expressed: ergo
Tertullian in this place is in like manner to be construed. But our collection
is otherwise, that because we read but one kind specifyed, therefore without
any necessity we do not make conjectures that he means both. And we see,
that Tertullian in this book, was not in such have that he needed to speak by
figures unto his wife, or to number syx for the dozen. Then by common reason,
we see that wine, in so little a quantity as ones part comes unto in the
distributing of the mysteries, was not to be reserved of any person, because of
the quyck alteration of it. Also we believe, that under one kind Christ
wholye is geauen, and therefore that the governors of the church were not so
folysh or scrupulous, as to make a necessity of both. And whereas you perceive
by this testimonye, that sole receiving was then used, (which by your sayeing
Christ his institution does not permit) we had no just occasion to mystrust the
receiving under one kind, which we know to be of no greater force then the
receiving with company. And you also (if you had good wits) might for good
cause fear, least you were deceived in the question of receiving under both
kinds, whereas in the controversy of sole receiving, you be so openly
confounded, which yet you do as earnestile endeavor to prove, as you do shifte
to understand both kinds in Tertullian, whereas he mencioneth but one. Note
the chaingeablenes of heretics.
Note further, that when Christ said, This is my body, you will have no blood
to appertain unto it, and when any Doctor does speak only of bread, you will
at your pleasure make wine to be understood. Injurious in the one, and
superfluous in the other.

Therefore let it be tried, which of our two sides does use more uncertain
conjectures. Now as concerning S. Cyprian, When a certain woman (says he)
assayed with her unworthy hands, Sermon. 5. de Lapsis.
to open her cheste, in the which (Sanctu^ Domini fuit) the holy dody of our
Lord was, she was made afraid by fire arysing from thens, that she durst not
to touch yt. Of this place, if you will not admit our collection, that the
sacrament was in her cheste, under one kind, whereas S. Cyprian terms it,
Sanctu^ Domini, (which is spoken of one singular thing, whether you will
English it, the holy body of our Lord, or that holy thing of our Lords,
which phrase has much reverence in yt) yet understand you, that the Catholic
did not bydd you note in this example the receiving under one kind, the
Cath^like mistaken of the M. of the defense either ignorantly, either
craftelie.
but the sole receiving and re^eruation of the Sacrament, with the miracle also
that was here wrought. Yet* (see your craft) you say that the Catholic used
S. Cyprian his authority in this place, to prove communion under one kind,
that whiles you might make some probable argument, or conjecture about it, he
might seem to have been fully answered as concerning that point for which he
alleged S. Cypria^. And with like subteltie you examyne the testimony of S.
Ambrose, in that part of your chapter, where you talk of receiving under one
kind, whereas the principal point for which that authority was used, served
to prove reservation, which you can not deny, and then afterward receiving
under one kind, unto which only purpose, you do (...) apply it. Yet for all
that, let us consider how properly you do handle that history, that it might
not seem to make for receiving under one kind.

Satyrus, Ambros. inoratio^e funebri de ^^itufrat.
S. Ambrose his brother, what time that upon the sea, the vessel in which he
was carried him self, was driven upon the rocks of the shore, and shaken with
the whaues which laid upon her on every side, he, not for fear of death, but
for fear least he should depart this life without our mysteries, required of
the full and perfect Christians, (S. Ambrose calls them Initiatos) whom he
knew to be there, that divine sacrament of the faithful, not to fasten a
curious eye upon those secrets, but to get some help for his faith.
Whereupon he made it to be bound up in a stole, or (because that word does
not like you) in a lynnen cloth or napkyn, and the napkyn he wrapped about his
neck, and cast him self out in to the sea. This is a part of the history,
and out hereof we gather this argument, that the sacrament was then used under
one kind. And what can you say to the contrary? Mary first of all, you
contemn the argument, and you are so much deceived, that you ask, whether
that any fear of God be in them which in most weightye matters will use so
weak reasons? And then you report it again with much skornefull brauerye, and
ask of meet audience for such a preacher, whether ours be a strong reason as
they think? For, (say you) Though yt had b^n here mentioned, Defenc^
that Satyrus in this extremity received one kind alone, yt had been no
argument to prove that yt might orderlye be used. It is a very evil manner of
all such as you are, Reply.
to go from the principal question, and to talk of that which is not yet in
hand. I tell you again, that our arguments are not directed to prove, that
in case of necessity, An other example of the M. of the defense his flitting
from the purpose.
or in some extraordinary cause, one may receive alone, or under one kind:
but we seek to prove, that you are fowlie deceived, which preach and write,
that to receive with company, and to receive in both kinds, is of the
necessary substance and form of the sacrament. Against which your conclusion
we say, that if those things had been thought of the fathers of the primitive
church, to have been of the substance of the Sacrament, they would never have
suffered them at any time to be ^sed, but in some examples, we see that they
were not only suffered, but also allowed, therefore you be very ignorant or
peuysh, to make there a necessity where none should be at all. You do harp in
this chapi^er very often, upon this one st^^g, that we can not prove that the
common use, or the ordinary use of the sacrament in the primititiue church, was
to be received of one alone, or under one kind. And this you will enforce us to
prove against you, upon the which we strive not with you, but as we read what
the common use was, so we read that it was not such a necessary use, as would
admit no dispensatio^, For we bring you forth good examples, by which you
should understand, that eue^ in the primitive church, receiving under one kind
was used. We do not say that it was used commonly, either ordinarily, or as
a general rule, (for you be so full of play, that it is best to keep you
short) but we say, that it was used, and the use of it was not reproved, and
that the presence of Christ under one kind was confirmed by miracle, al which
points do appear in this one history of Satyrus. Whom if you can prove not
to have had the Sacrament about his neck, under one kind only, then shall you
say somewhat to the purpose. If we can prove by any one example, that
reseruatio^, sole receiving or receiving under one kind was allowed, your
buyldinges shall straitwaies come into contempt and confusion, because that you
work, (or else you lie,) after the substanciall and lively pattern of Christ
his institution, which is never to be altered (say you) in the substantial
points, The story of holy Satirus delivered from the suspicions and lies,
which the M. of the defense would bring in to it, and proved to make for
receiving under one kind.
of which you speak. The better willing therefore I am, to consider the
historye of Satyrus, which makes (we think) so directly for us. In answering
of which, you tell us first that Satyrus was a nouice in our faith, wherein you
say very truly, and make the example the greater, if he, which was not yet
fully instructed in our mysteries, did think so divinely and excellently of
them. Further you allege that it does not appear whether they, of whom
Satyrus received the Sacrament, were ministers or other. Why Sir, to what
purpose would it serve, if you could prove, that they had been ministers? Do
you think, that upon the sudden, when the tempest was coming, they prepared
them selves to a comm^nion, and had not the Sacrament prepared before? And if
they had been of your order, would they have suffered a sage person, to tie the
Sacrament about his neck for safegarde sake, and not rather to make a communion
of it, after the right use of Christ his institution? The^ to put you out of
doubt, they were no ministers. For the history says, that when holy Satyrus
had escaped drouning him self, and him self coming first to land had either
helped to save other, or saw them all to be recovered, then he straytwaies
asked where the church was, there to geaue thanks, and receive also those
everlasting mysteries, aeterna mysteria. Also, proving so great defense to have
come unto him, by having the heavenly mystery folded up in a cloth, how much
(thought he) shall I wyn, if I do receive him in my mouth and with all the
botome of my heart? But although he were desirous, yet he was not folish
venterous. Therefore he calling the Bishop unto him, asked whether he did agree
with the Catholic Bishopps, that is to say, with the church of Rome, for the
church of that country, as concerning that place, was in a schism. Which
being well considered of him, and that allthough they of those quarters had
belief in God, yet they were not faithful unto the church, he departed from
thens, differring the payment of his thanks, and the debt which he was in for
receiving the Sacrament, and went forth until he came to such place where he
might be safely discharged. Now therefore, if they had been ministers, which
deliuerd the Sacrament unto S. Satyrus in the shipp, he might have received it
at their hands when he was now come to land, and never have sought further
for the matter, but whiles he was so desirous to receive his Lord and defendor
( Praesulem suum says S. Ambrose,) and yet was not so bold as to receive him
in that country, he declares therebie, not only that he had no priests in
his company, but also that we should not communicate with schysmatikes* and he
interprets unto us what a Catholic Bishopp is, saying that he is such a one
as agrees with the church of Rome. what a Catholic bisshope is.
But to make more doubts, and that in speaking much, it should appear that
the historye of Satyrus is not clean and clear against you, There is (say
you) nothing to the contrary, Defense fol. 61.
but that the same persons which had the Sacrament of our Lord his body, had
also about them the Sacrament of the blood. If you leese the cause yet you
provide to wynn the praise of a man full of nymblenes and actiuety in his
invention. Reply.
And truly, you find nothing to the contrary, but that Christ delivered the
Sacrament of his body only without the cupp, unto the rest of his disciples
and folowers, which were in other chambers of the house where he kept his
maundey. But if they (of whom ye speak,) had the Sacrament of the blood about
them, wherein had they it, I pray you? Either in some convenient vessel,
Defense ibidem.
or else after some other fas^ion as diverse of simplicity upon a zeal at that
time used. Does the history geaue you any occasion to think so, Reply.
or else do you speak it, but upon your own head? For if some at the
beginning, when the church was persecuted openly by the princes of the world,
did carry the sacrament of Christ his blood about them, it does not follow that
in Saint Ambrose his time, when the church was more enlarged and better
setteled, the like manner was allwaies used. You tell us, that in taking of a
long journey some carried the sacrament of the blould with them, and because they
could not conuenietly carye wine with them, they soked the Sacrament of the
Lord his body in the blood.

As who should say, that they might not more convenient lie have carried the
blood in some vessel for the purpose. Other (say you) moysted a lynnen cloth
in the Sacrament of blood, Some, either because they could not by nature, or
would not for religion drink wine, used only water. Some other used milk for
wine. But what of this? Can you infer, upon these particular cases, that it is
lykely that they which delivered the Sacrament unto Satyrus, (as S. Ambrose
writes) had the Sacrament of blood also about them as you do suppose? As well
it will follow then, that they had the Sacrament of Christ his blood, either in
form of water only or of milk, because that you have readen that in such
forms it has been received. Consider also, that in S. Ambrose his time the
church was not so much under fear of princes as before, neither was holy
Satyrus such a simple soul, allthough a nouice then in our faith, as to
receive the Sacrament of such whom he knew not to be perfectly instructed in
the Christian religion. And he, being a man of honor, it is not lykely that the
Ini^^ati, the full Christians I mean, which were in the self same ship with
him, did keep the sacrament with the^ in such sort, as was to be wynked at for
a time, and not absolutely to be allowed. But let yt be with them as you will,
and you shall freely make as many supposinges as you can, that they had the
Sacrament of the blood either in a vessel, or soked in bread, or in a lynnen
cloth, or in any other manner. Yet what say you to holy Satyrus? how did he
receive it at their hands? In a stole (as you call yt) Defense ibid.
Well Sir, the word is orarium, which if it be not well Englished a st^le,
Reply.
what other name do you geaue it? You leave it with out a name, and will have
orarium to signify perchaunse a what shall I call it, to the intent you may
apply it to what so ever thing you will. Ambros. in oration^ de fide
resurrectionis^
S. Ambrose in his oration made of the belief which we should have of your
resurrection, speaking of Lazarus, says, that Facies eius orario colligata
erat. His face was bound up with a sudarye or kerchey. Epist. 85.
Again, in his tenth book of epistles, speaking of the holy relyques of
Geruasius and Prothasius: Quanta oraria iactitantur, quant a indumenta* supra
reliquias sacratissimas, vt tactu ipso medicabilia reposcantur? How many
napkins or kercheyes, how many coats or clothes are cast upon the most holy
relyques, that being made medicinable through the very touching of them, they
might be required for, and had away again? Therefore, if orarium shall not be
englysshed a stole, yet that you may not think, that it was a bottle to carye
wine in, I have showed you two places out of Saint Ambrose, in which it is
taken for a lynnen cloth. And now, if holy Satyrus did put that sacrament which
he received, in a lynnen cloth, and wrapped it about his neck, it is very
probable unto us, that it was in form of bread only, except you will yet
still contynew in your imagination, and make a guess, that it was either a
mylkesopp or a wynesopp, or a lynne^ cloth moysted with wine, which he folded
up in a kerchey, napkyn, or stole. And then let any indifferent man be judge,
which of us two speaks most reasonably, you which think that he had the
sacrament of blood together with the sacrament of Christ his body, or we,
which can not deuyse how wine should be there enclosed, where we read no
mention of other thing, but only of a lynen cloth. Now, as concerning that,
where you say, that learned and holy men did wynke and bear with many things
in the beginning, (as though the reservation of the blessed Sacrament, or using
of it in suchesorte as that holy Satyrus did, were to be numbered in that kind
of things) you make S. Ambrose therein to lack a great part of his fortitude
of mind and wisdom. For he, such a Bishop, would never have suffered any
substanciall part of our faith to be defaced within his knowledge, and
especially with his brother he might and would have been so bold, as to
reform his simplicity and superstitious zeal of mind toward the
sacrament. And if you will ymagine, that he was loath to tell his own brother
the perfect truth of thin ges in his life time, yet at least, after his death
he should never have praised him, (as he does in a most exquysite manner) for
that, which (according to your saying) was to be tolerated only in the quyck,
and not praised and commended in the dead. Saint Ambrose therefore, in a most
sadd manner and time, praising his good brother, which then was departed this
world, for many and sundry virtues, of justice, clemency, temperancie, and
chastity, and especially commending him, for his faith and piety, which
showed it self in the shipwreck of which we have spoken, how can it be
thought, that so wise and constant a Bishop would allege that history to
prove the piety of his brother, which rather (after your interpretation) was
to be wynked at and kept under silence, least he should seem to betray and
utter his superstitious behavior and folly? You myngle also milk, wine,
water, soppes, and moysted lynne^ clothes altogether, as though there were no
difference, whether one did celebrate in milk alone, or wine alone, or as
though that, if the soking of the sacrament of Christ his body in his blood
was by Iulis decrees reproved, therefore also receiving under one kind, or
sole receiving should be in like case myslyked. And yet, against water alone,
or milk in steed of wine, you have the express institution of Christ, and
the express canons of Bishops and Councelles, but you can bring no such
proof against us, that the sole receiving or receiving under one kind is in
no case lawful. One thing I must confess unto you, that in deed you have taken
pains to prove, that the common manner of receiving in the primitive church,
was under both kinds, and in this part you allege Gelasius, Tertullian,
Iustine, Cyprian, Ambrose, Gregorye Nazianzene, Hierome, Hilary, and
Chrysostom learned men all, and the most of them Saints. How well they serve
for your purpose, what should I need to examyne, whereas you will conclude no
more by them, The fallacy or folly that the M. of the defense uses against
so, le receiving.
but that which we grant without proving. It was a common manner to receive in
both kinds, and to receive with cumpanie, but what of that? May you conclude
thereby that it was also the only manner? and except you prove that it was the
only manner, all your reasoning make nothing against us. Therefore Sir, as you
fought all this while out of the fyelde and matter proposed, so have you
triumphed, without any victory at all obtained. And although you lay almost
desperate stubbernes unto our charge, and exhort your readers to behold the
slendernes and feebleness of our reasons, yet we will not be aferde to resist you
in those points, against which you can say nothing, and we shall counsel
likewise the reader, not to walk upon other men's feet, but by his own sense
and disctetio^, to consider whether that you have not halted out of the
question of which only we had to talk, proving unto us, that receiving with
cumpany and under both ^yndes was ordinary, and accustomable, in the beginning
of the church, (which we grant,) but nothing at al disprouing, that sole
receiving, or receiving under one kind may and has been used without any
breach of Christ his institution.

Thirdly now it follows, to speak of reservation of the Sacrament, which you
think that no man has ever flatly denied to have been used in the primitive
church* how now then? Of reservation of the Sacrament.
are not they impudent which will speak against it? No say you. And why say
ye no? Mary because we may deny

Either that we have any testimony in the word of God to iustifye it, Defense
fol. 67.
or that all the holy fathers did approve it. Nay verelie, Reply.
this can not excuse some man of impudency, The M. of the defense would feign
bring down the challenge, and make the question more larger out of time, place
and expectation.
those I mean, which are so^ full of bosting, and so void of doing, that they
stand not upon these two points, whether it be first in express scripture, or
whether all the Doctors approve it, but say playnlie, that we have not one
word, one sentence, one example of the primitive church, to prove our
assertions. Against which kind of men, it is sufficient for us, to show, that
the thin ges which we affirm have been used, and that also of good men. In
deed it is sufficient to show that it was then used, Defense. fol. 67.
but it is not sufficient, that it must therefore be always used, or all did
well at that time in using of it. Sir we do not conclude a necessity, Reply.
that it must be used, because it was once used, See again how the M of the
defense runs from the question
but a possibility and lawfullnes, that it may be now used, that which in the
primitive church was not refused, and we say, not that all then did well in
using of it (for what can we judge of all their doings) but, if S. Ambrose his
brother alone, did well, it is enough for our purpose against certain
heretics, which make so much a do about the use of the Lord his supper, that
except the^ sacrament be straytwaies received, there should be no body of
Christ at all. And if we had no more, but S. C^rills testimonye against you it
is enough for us. Whom, before you answer, or rather not answer, but deny, you
make a protestation, and tell us what authority you attribute unto the old
fathers. And because your saying should have the more weight, you conclude with
S. Augustyne, that you do not count any thing therefore true, because men of
excellent holiness and lerning were of that opinion. But because, they can
persuade you, either by scripture or good reason, that it is not against the
truth* which saying of S. Augustyne, we gladly admit, and add further unto it,
that although scripture and reason be alleged plentyfully, yett that there is
a further and greater authority, Neither scripture neither reason can settle
our faith, but only the authority of the church
by which we ought to be ruled. For albe^^, that you do make this objection
against your self, as it were in our behalfes, that men of great holiness and
learning would never write that which they thought not to be agreeable with God
his word, by which your objection it might be suspected, that we do stiffely
and stoutly hold with every saying of the excellent doctors, yet the truth is
far otherwise. And we know better then you (because it was the Catholic
church which has defined it and not you) that Lactantius, Cyprian, Origin,
and many others, had their private opinions and errors. And if you, will stand
by that which you have protested, why be you not of S. Cyprian his mind, as
concerning rebaptisation, whereas he wanted neither scriptures, neither reasons
for his purpose? or why do ye not hold with Origin, Clemens, Alexandrinus,
Tertullia^, and other great clerks in such their false opinions which they
defended with apparent scripture and reason? Therefore as S. Augustyne says
wisely, that he will believe no Doctor upon his bare word, without scripture or
reason, and as we follow his lesson therein: so yet we add further, that, be a
man never so ancient and well learned, and let him bring never so much
scripture and reason, yet except he be allowed of the church, he is to be
eschewed, with all his (...) and learning. For if it shall please you to learn
more judgment, this (...) must understand, (...) in all places, The place^ of
refuge in doubtful times. August* ad lanu* epist. 118.
of all persons. To dispute of that which the whole church does observe through
the world* it is (says S. Austyne) a most impudent madness, and therefore it may
be rightlye and well believed, first of all, Universality.
that which the whole church does teach us. But what if there be schisms and
divisions in the church, for thetyme present? Mary Sir then, we must resort
unto Antiquity, Antiquity
and ask counsel of the most ancient fathers. But then again, what if the
ancient fathers agree not among themselfes? Truly then, Consent.
we must follow the voices of the most and best learned of them. And so by these
means, we have three places of refuge, Vniuersalitye, Antiquitye, and Consent.
And we the Catholics have most certain and infallible rules, by which we do
try private opinions of doctors, geauing less unto them then you do (which
esteem your own judgments so highlye) except th^^ agree with the church of
Christ, or agree with other of their (...) (as though that the Catholics did
make an article of faith, of every thing which they read in the fathers) but
consider rather that we try them more exactly then you do, and we can not be
straitwaies persuaded, without further question, if the best learned that ever
was, should bring scripture and reason, to prove his singular opinion. Yet,
seeing that you can find in your heart, so quickly to yield unto the learned
and holy men's scriptures or good reasons, although there is a better way which
you should take, nevertheless, to let you have a little your own mind, what
say you now unto S. Cyrill? his words be these unto Calosyrius: They are then
madd, D. Cyrill. ad Calosyrium.
which say, the mystical be^ediction or blessing to recise from her
sanctification, if any leauinges remain until the next day. 'Because the
very holy body of Christ, shall not be chainged, but the virtue, blessing, and
lively quyckenyng, is in it rather. This is S. Cyrill against you, an how can
you avoid him? You will not ( you say) playnlie deny the place, Defense fol.
70.
because it is alleged of diverse other. Yet because this work of S. Cyrill is
not extant, you have good cause to suspect it. Although the work be not extant
unto you, Reply.
yet it may be in some libraries of the world: and the place being alleged of
many, an honest plain dealing man would not suspect, without some good and
great cause, that it were falsely fathered upon S. Cirill. For if the
Catholics could have found in their hearts, to have mysused the simplicity
of others, and to attribute unto holy fathers, such sentences as were never
there is, it had been an easy matter for the Bisshoppes of Christendom, in that
great consent and peace of faith, which has been in the church for eight or
nine hundred years together (until the dyuell raised up Luther) to have
agreed upon such a book, which should make expressly against new vpstart
heretics, and have the name of S. Augustine, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, or some
other. And again, it had been an easy matter for some one Bishop, Abbot, or
Doctor, to feign that he had found such or such a book of S. Augustine, S.
Ambrose, S. Hierome, or other, if there had been no more conscience in
Catholics, then is proved to be now in heretics. It is sone said, this is not
Saint Cyrill his testimony, and as the proverb is in some schools, Plus
potest asinus negare, quam Aristoteles probare. And further also, if the
Catholics should be perceived never to have had among them this testimony of
S. Cyrill, before that late heretics of these days began to impugn them
openly, as one might easily allege, at all adventure, upon some private
wylfulnes, that S. Cyrill says this unto Calosyrius, so might he probably be
suspected of an other, lest perchau^se he invented false testimonies. But you
can not prove it by us, that we have used this defense out of S. Cyrill, only
sense we have striued against you, but rather, when all things were quiet, you
shall find those testimonies which you suspect, to have been recyted of
Catholics. And especially that saying of his, which makes for the supremacy
of the Bishop of Rome, which some hundred years ago, S. Thomas Aquinas has
recyted out of S. Cyrill Thesaurorum.xij. which testimony if it be not in the
Latin now extant, yet it may be in the Greek, and what Greek copyes are
beyond sea you can not tell, and if it be not in print, yet it may be in
written books, whereas many years, before any printing was in the world, this
testimony is alleged by approved men and excellent, both for learning and
living. Also, if you have cause to suspect the testimony which has not the
work extant, out of which it was taken, what cause moved you then, to make so
great store of a fragment of Gelasius which you do allwaies allege most
busylye, All is fish that comes to he retikes nets.
when you talk of receiving under both kinds. And allthough Gela^sius in that
self same abrupt and short sentence, does expresselye declare, that he
speaks against such as which upon a certain superstition, abstayned from the
receiving of Christ his blood, and serves nothing at all unto the purpose of
which we talk: Yet you delight so much in it, as though all were fys^he which
comes to your nett, and no testimony were to be suspected, which may seem to
serve for your purpose, although the work be not extant. Whereby it appears,
that you pick only a quarrel against the testimonye which we bring out of
S. Cyrill, and myslyke with it, not because the work is not extant, but
because he calls you madd men, in reproving reservation of the sacrament. Now
when you have said as much as you could, to the disgracyng of the testimony,
then flatter you with it again, and say: But be yt so, Defense fol. 71.
that these are Cyrill his own words in deed* we have for that one suspected
place, a number of sound testimonies, that all did not allow reservation,
Reply.
nor think it according to the word of God.

You geaue and take away again. You grant that they shall be Saint Cyrill
his own words in deed, and yet stratwayes you call it a suspected place. But
let us consider, how sound your testimonies be^ First you allege Origin,
which in deed has those words which you recite, but his meaning^ yet was not
to reprove all reservation of the sacrament* For he, (...)
expounding those words Leu. 7. in which it is commanded that the flesh of
the sacrifice which shall be offered in way of thanks geauing, shall be cat^h
the same day, and that nothing thereof shall remain ^^^yll the morrow, (...)
says, The flesh which is appointed for the priests (...) of the sacrifice^,
Orig. in. 7 Leu^tici.
is the word^ of God, which they teach in the church. For this therefore they
are warned by mystical figures, that when they begin to preach unto the
people, they bring forth not the yesterdayes leauinges, (...) old things which
are after the letter, but that they speak always, ^re^^e and n^w things,
through the grace of God, and find out allwaies spiritual things. Now to
set forth, Origin proved not to make against reservation.
as it were, this his interpretation, ^he gathers many arguments very (...),
out of many things, in such sore yet, that you may rather praise his
invention, then requyer it to be taken of us for an assured conclusion. For
(says he) our Lord also did not di^^^^ the ^read which he gave to his
disciples, saying. Take and (...), neither did be command it to be kept v^tyl
the mor^w. Mat. 26
Perc^a^^^^ also this myst^rye is (...), in that, that he does not command
bread to be carried in our w^y^ or iourney^, to (...) that we should bring ^^rth
the bread of the word of God, Luc. 9.
which we carye with us allway^ new and fresh. Those Gabaonytes also, (of whom
it is written in the (...) of Iosue) are therefore condemned and made hewers
(...) wood, and caryars of water, because they brought old (...) bread unto the
(...), which the spiritual law (...) command to occupy fresh and new. Hereby
therefore it does appear manifestly, that Origin did not entend to make a
necessary conclusion, that the sacrament must not be reserved, no more then he
does affirm that the cause why the Gabaonites were made bondeme^ unto the
Jews, was; that they brought old crustes of who^e bread in their pouches and
budgetes. But, as he was an exceading subtyle divine, and latbored to draw all
things unto a good spiritual sense, so he says, that Christ gave bread
unto his Disciples, and bad them ^ate it straitwaies, and not keep it until
the morrow, to signify that our preching unto the people, and our praising of
God, should be allwaies new, that is to say, spiritual and hearty. Unto which
his argument and reason, if I would answer and say, that neither Christ did
bydd his Apostles to eat his body straitwaies, and that grau^ting also so much
unto him, yet reservation of the sacrament in the church, might stand with
Christ his fact in his supper well enough, I see not what might be replied
against me, or how he should maintain his proposition. Yet because his
conclusion is true (that in preching of the Gospel, and praising of God, we
should bring forth a new and spiritual sense,) I will not strive with him upon
the premises, but rather be glad of his wyt^^e interpretation. As in an other
example, to make this matter more easy, when some holy father says that God
at the beginning made two light^s, one greater, an other smaller, to signify
that the Christians are governed by spiritual and temporal officers. etc. I
have not to contend with him upon his subtyle collection, but to grant him
that I see so much in the Son and Moan, because I am not hindered by his
conclusion. To be short, this mystical Theology is not ^ounde and certain to
make arguments by. Therefore if you think Origin, in this place, to serve
for your purpose, and so to serve, that it is a more sound place for you, then
is S. Cyrilles against you, then truly, as you may have perchaunse a good taste
to try which baker of the town has the best bread, so have you a very
corrupt judgment undoubtedly, in the understanding of ancient Doctors, But
let us hear now an other sound testimony of yours. He that wrote the sermon de
coena Domini in Cyprian, Defense. fol. 71.
sa^eth playnlie of the sacrament, Recipitur, non in^luditur, it is r^ceyued,
not enclosed and shut up. First you might do well to name him which wrote
these sermons, Reply.
and to show some probable authority why they are not S. Cyprianes. Then
whereas you promised to bring such testimonies, which should be ^ound and not
suspected, see the absurdity.
why allege you that sermon for your defense, which bears the name of
blessed S. Cyprian, and yet draw the authority of his name away from it,
whereby it has less commendation. Yet it is no^ I, which doubt of the
authority of that sermon, but glad I am, that though it be not S. Cyprians,
yet it is of such a truth and antiquity, that a sound testimony may be
borrowed allwaies out of it. Only this I would have you warned of, that after
fayer and great promyses of sound and ^^tentik^ testimontes, you disgrace not
your own cause, and geaue advantage unto your adversary to refuse that work
as altogether of no authority, which your self do think unworthy to be
fathered upon a right learned Doctor. But now, whereas S. Cyprian, or that
other, which (as you report) wrote that sermon, says: The sacram^nt is
received, and not included, or enclosed, and shut up, as you English it, what
understand you, by shutting up of the sacrament? does that place make against
reservation of the sacrament? and is this an other of your sound testimonies,
which you make so to sound as though the sacrament were not to be enclosed
within a pyxe, or shut up within some convenient place, one or other? S.
Cyprian in that sermon, after many other excellencies, which he found to be in
our sacrament of the altar, above the sacrifices of the Jews, says in
further commendation of it, in this sort: The prerogative of the L^uitical
dignity, Cypr. in sermon. de coena domini.
does admit to these loeues and bread, not priests only, but the whole church
is invited unto these bankettes. An equal portion is geauen unto all, he is
bestowed continuing whole, he is distributed and not dismembered, he is
incorporated and not wronged or iniuried, he is received and not included,
dwelling with the weak^ and sickly, he is not weak. etc. he is not offended
with the service of the poor. A pure f^^yth, a (...) mind does delight this
dweller, and the narrownes of our sely poor house, does not offend or bind
in the greatness of God, which is large and allmightye. How say you then? is
not the sense of those words, he is received, and not included, referred only
unto the commendation and setting forth of Christ in the sacrament, which
continues allwaies whole and one, although he should be divided among never so
many persons? and is not included within them, which yet do receive him? Yet
what a sense have you put upon this place? as though this were the meaning of
it, they which have any understanding, let them for truth sake consider, how
S. Cypriane, and the unlearned lay people are abused.
that Christ is received and not included, that is to say, we must receive the
sacrament and keep no part of it until the next day, nor shut up any
portion of it within pyx, box, or coffer, but straitwaies make a perfect
communion, that there may be in any case no reservation. Yet in that place,
there is nothing less intended, which (as every mean learned may perceive)
is wholly set forth and decked, with the coopling of contraries together, as,
To be distributed, which imports a making of parts, and not to be
dismembered, which signifies no part to have been pulled from the whole. To be
incorporated, which should not seem to be done without some alteration, and
yet not to be iniuried, which declares again the thing to contine^^ in his
former estate. To be received, by which word we seem to have it within us,
and not to be included, which sets again the thing at liberty. Wherefore
this place as it makes nothing for your purpose, so yet it may serve us, and
all other which have regard of their souls, to beware how they go upon other
men's feet, or ride (if they be gentlemen) upon an others bayard, except they
be sure before, that together with his boldenes he has also his eyes. After
this, you allege out of Isichius that the residue of the sacrament not
received, was in his time burned, and out of S. Clement, (whom you
contemptuously do call our Clement) you recite that the ministers must with
fear and reverence, eat up the remaynent of the consecrated hosts,
whereupon you conclude that reservation was not generally used, which being
granted unto you, it remains yet that S. Cyrill may stand well enough with
S. Clement and Is^chius. For as examples are brought for declaration of both
parts, so is reservation a thing indifferent to be used, or to be omitted. And
like as we should prove our selves very ignorant, if we should deny
absolutelye that reservation was at any ^yme omitted, so does S. Cyrill say
wisely and truly, that they are madd men, which make no price of the
sacrament, if it be once reserved. In the later end of the chapter, you press
us with S. Clement his authority, as though we had ever granted unto you,
that all is to be followed now of necessity, which was once observed in the
primitive church, or as though our answer had not ever ben, that receiving
alone or with cumpany is in it self a thing indifferent. But it seems, you
were well apaied, that you had shifted away the article of reservation, which
troubles you very ^ore, to which your answer is exceeding simple and
imperfect, yea rather it is no answer at all. Because you confess as much as
we do require, that reservation was then sometimes used. But you tell us, that
sometimes it was not used, which makes nothing so the purpose. Now one thing
more will I say, and so end this chapter. You protested to admit the Doctors,
in such degree as S. Augustyne teaceth you, which is to say, if they bring
either scripture or good reason. Therefore what say you to the reason, which S.
Cyril makes, that the sacrament, if it be reserved, is for all that of one
state and strength, because the virtue and power of consecration continues
with it? It is not man which blesses or consecrateth the bread, but it is
Christ him self, which does sanctify and chainge the bread and wine, whose
word being permanent, and out of the dainger and mutabilitie of time, how can
it be otherwise then his body, that which is once consecrated, if it should
remain vnreceiued a thousand years to geather? unto this reason and question,
you have to answer with all your cunnyng and learning.

The nynth Chapter.
SYrapion of Alexandria lying in his death bed, Eusebius* lib. 6. cap. vlt.
sent in the night season for the priest to minister the sacrament unto him.
The priest, being syck him self, delivered it to his ladd, and badd him moist
it, and so geaue it to his syck master. Of this history it is to be gathered,
(says the Catholic,) that the Sacrament was reserved, that it was received
under one kind, and that it was received without company. Therefore what say
you the Master of the defense unto it? First you answer, that It was a case of
necessity, or great difficulty. Defense


As though that were not enough for us to show, Reply.
that sole receiving, reservation, and receiving under one kind, are not
against the substance of Christ his institution. Secondlye you tell us, that
The history speaks not generally of all that lie in their death ^edd, but
only of one sort, Defense for. 73.
but only of one sort, that before were restrained from communion, whom they
called penitentes.

As though it were materyal what manner of person it was which lay in his bed,
Reply.
and not rather in what manner of fasshion he received the Sacrament, which in
those days was reserved. For how soever the person was, the thing which
^elonged for, the shifts of the M. of the defense concernig the story of
Sirapion are clean put ^waye.
is called his viaticu^, which is his viage provision, and was not so much
geaue^ unto him because he should be thereby delivered from danger of
excommunication, as that he might have comfort of the sacrament in the terrible
passage from this world unto an other. And the p^^nitentes of the old time were
not properly excommunicated, as they now are, which by definitive sentence are
cut of from the body of Christ, but they continued in the pain which the
officers of Christ his church did set upon their fault, and were in the mean
time yet in the state of grace, so that if they had departed this world without
the external receiving of the sacrament, yet they should not have been damned
for ever, with those which dyed excommunicated. And therefore although Syrapio^,
was in a great necessity and difficulty, as concerning his own life, yet there
was no such necessity wherefore he, more then any other Christian, should
receive the sacrament as he did. Yea rather, if they which have not fully
satisfied for their offenses, are favored yett so much of the church when they
are at the point of death, that they shall enjoy the benefit which is reserved
for true and upright Christians, how much more is it good reason, if
excommunicate persons receive the Sacrament at there death, why should the vpriht
and free Christians be kept from it?
that he which has not fallen into lapse, and has not in any thing offended
the church, should enjoy the comfort of his viage provision, which is not
denied unto the manifest before, and now penitent sinners? If the beggars at
our door be served with the white bread of children, when p^nges of sickness or
death come upon them, how much more ought the children, to have of their own
proper loffe, when they come unto the like cases? Ther^ was one which told me,
(says blessed Chrysostom,) not which had been taught it of an other, De
Sacer^ dotio. lib. 6.
but which was accomp^ed worthy to see yt and hear yt him self, that they
which are departing out of this life, if they be made partakers of these
mysteries (meaning the Sacrament) with a p^^^e and clean conscience, when they
are geauing up the ghost, they are carried from hence up straitwayes into heaven
by Ang^ls, which for that holy thing sake, which was r^ceyued, do stand thyck
about their bodies in manner of a guard or of ^anchmen. Therefore, as you can
never prove, that reservation was used only for their sak^s, which perchaunse
were like to dye before they had done their penance: so yet, if that were
true, we nevertheless obtain our purpose, which is, to declare that
reservation, sole receiving, and rece^uing under one kind, are not
necessariely forbidden by Christ his institution of his Sacrament. Which
conclusion of ours you do (for the most part,) make as though you did not
see, and you require still that we should prove the ordinary use of the
Sacrament to have been at those days as it is now* and yet privily (your
conscience I think prycking you) you come unto the same state at the which we
hold the question, Hypocrite
and make as though your self had invented what we might say, and that it
were not allredy to be seen expressly in our wrytinges. And therefore say you.

You will replye perhaps, and say, Defense fol. 7 ^.
by these ^xamples yt may appear^ that (...) receiving is not of necessity, or
if it had been, they would not have used the contrary. Yea Sir, this in deed is
and shall be allwaies our conclusion, Reply.
not, as you devise, that we go about to prove, that the ordinarye common and
whole manner of receiving in the primitive church was with out company, or in
one kind only, and therefore your answer in this point is much to be marked:
which is this Necessity and extremity may cause some kind of Gods
commandments at times to be omitted etc. Defense
No doubt thereof, especially if the commandment apperteyne unto ceremonies
and ordres in government, Replye.
but to have company in receiving, it is (you say) a substanciall part of the
sacrament, without the which the sacrament has not his inward perfection.
Wherein, if you say true, Syrapio^ or any other should never have been suffered
to receive the sacrament alone, and most plainly to go against Christ's own
law and commandment. And if, in that case, he should have dyed without his
comfort and viage provision, the^ might you have used you^ maxima and rule,
that necessity had no law. As concerning the Sabbate day, which the Jews
were commanded so expresselie to keep, which yet in time of necessity they
did omit without breach of the commandment, it serves nothing to your
purpose, because it is in some respect ceremonyall. For the tables of Moses
comprehend in them nothing else, but the law of nature, unto which we are bound
as well as the Jews ever were, but how do we keep it, whereas our day of
rest is not the Sabbate of the Jews, but the next day after, and that, for
the honor of Christ his resurrection?

Christ has not set us at liberty, to omit the natural law, but only the
positive and ceremonyall law of the Jews. But now, we keep not the Sabbate day
as they did, How the sabbat day is of necessity to be kept and how it
admits di spensation.
ergo that commandment as concerning that day, pertayneth unto the positive
law, which admits dispensation, and not the law of nature, which for no
necessity is to be broken. If then i^ were a point of ceremonyall or positive
law, to keep the seventh day holy, the Jews, notwithstanding the charge
which God gave unto them, might in cases of necessity work or fight upon the
Sabbate day. But as concerning the natural precept, which is, that we shall
take our selves at some times unto quyetnes and rest from all worldely busynes,
to consider therein the more earnestly the benefits and works of God
toward us, there is no such necessity which may cause it to be omitted. Marye
the appointing of the time for that purpose, and the namyng of the first,
second, or third month or day of the year, or the week, in the which we
shall leave of all wordlye toyling, and entend only upon God, this, as it is
ruled by positive law, so in time of urgent necessity it may be dispensed
withal, without breach of the law. Therefore some commandment of God may be
not fullfilled in time of necessity, and after the necessity ouercommed, it
may return unto his formar strength. But if God make, not politic orders, but
immutable sacraments, and geaue unto those sacraments form and matter, such
as shall be of the substance of them, No necessity can serve to omit or break
any commau^deme^t of God concerning the substa^tce of it.
I say, that in this case no necessity is able to make it laufull, that the
substantial order which he appointed, may be omitted. And so, no man can use
cheese or milk in consecrating of the sacrament. And if receiving with
cumpanye, be (as you report) a part of the substance of the sacrament, it can
not at all be omitted, what so ever necessity should be alleged.

Therefore, whereas reservation, and sole receiving, is so plainly proved by
the history of Syrapion, that you can not deny it: it is not of necessity to
receive straitwaies the sacrament, as soon as it is consecrated, or to receive
it with cumpanye. Last of all, whether Syrapion received in form of bread
only, or wine, because it were to no purpose to prove any one of them both,
whereas you are provided to understand both forms under that one, which I
might show to be agreeable unto that place, therefore I will not labor to prove
receiving under one kind, by this history of Syrapion, contenting myself
with this, that it proves most manifestly the reservation and sole receiving
of the sacrament.

The tenth Chapter.
IN the.xiiij. canon of the Nycene Council, it is proved, that Deacons have no
authority and power to offer sacrifice. The Defense fol. 76.
.xiiij. Canon of Nicene Council in no sense does prove sole receiving, as you
would have it seem to do. You be foulye deceived, Reply.
and besides you make a shameful lie upon the Catholic, The M. of the defense
does ouershote himself wonderfully.
because he concludes only (by that canon) reservation, and not sole
receiving, in so much that he uses not the place to prove receiving under one
kind, which, if he would follow your example in co^menting upon a text, he
might have done right well enough. But as concerning sole receiving, he has
no one word by which you should or might gather that he used the canon for
that purpose. He asks you most expressly, whether you can deny that, by the
testimonye of this Council, the sacrament was reserved? and you answer him,
that it does not prove sole receiving, and thereupon you make a great talk,
and ye triumph in your own folly, and say, that you are beholding unto him
for putting you in mind of this canon, and you think that he shall be little
thanked for bringing in this Council, and, to be short, as though all were
won, you sing, as it were, Te Deum, and you thank God that we are dryue^ so
much to our shifts, that we can not maintain falsehod, but that we are
constreyned to promote the truth. But, o Lord God, what has been said
wherefore this fellow should have such a vantage against us? or what falshod is
that, which we would maynteyne by this canon? or what truth is so singularly
uttered, by reason of this our testimonye?

This canon (say you) does not prove sole receiving. Mary, Sir, neither we
have used it for that purpose. It proves, (say you) that in the primitive
church the manner was to receive with cumpanye. We knew this before you told
us. Ergo (say you) all sole receiving is by this testimonye confounded. I deny
your argument, for as we confess and know, that receiving with cumpany was
ordinary in the church for some times and places, so we believe and have proved
it before, that sole receiving has sometimes ben allowed. Where now then is
your gaye victory? We resist not your authorities, by which you may prove many
to have received together, but we myslyke with your discretion, which conclude
that sole receiving is not therefore allowable. And again, what talk you in
this place of sole receiving? Answer rather unto our argument, which proves
reseruacion. The Deaco^s could not consecrate, the Bishops and Priests being
absent, in this case then (says the holy Council) let the Deacons
themselves bring forth the sacrament, and eat it. But how should they eat it,
except they had it? and how should they have it, except it were first
consecrated? or how could it be presentlye consecrated, when both Bishops and
Priests were absent?

Must it not follow necessarily, that it was reserved, in that they are licensed
to take it forth them selves, and eat it? If you can deny, reservation to be
proved by this place, we must wonder at your ignorancie: and if you confess it
playnlie, where is your proper answer unto it? Oh (say you) in these Deacons,
which received in absence of the Bishop and Priests, There appears an
extraordinary case. Defense fol. 77.


Such is your ordinary answer, but wherein is the case extraordinary? Reply.
In that the Deacons receive it in absence of the Bishop and Priests, or in
that it was reserved? It was ordinarye, that the Priests should geaue the
sacrament to the Deacons, but what if no Priest had been present? then, says
the Council, the Deacons may bring it forth, and serve themselves. And in this
respect, you say truly, that here is an extraordinary case. But as concerning
the reservation of the sacrament, how can you devise that it was
extraordinarye? Do you think when the Bisshops or Priests were sure to tarry
at home until the morrow, that they then did not make any store of the
sacrament, The.xiiij. Canon of the Nicene Council confirmed to make for
reseruatio^.
but presently bestow it among the communicantes, and when they could not
intend the mysteries the next day following, think you, that they consecrated
more hosts then needed for that time present, and said unto the Deacons: Syrs,
here is the sacrament for you in store until to morrow? But what necessity was
there for the Deacons to receive on the morrow, that the breach of Christ his
institution might be somewhat thereby excused? Truly the Deacons should tarry,
not only one day, but one whole year, rather then reservation should be
admitted, if so great fault (as you say) be in it. Now, if the sacrament were
not reserved upon such a special case, how can you say, that the reservation
was extraordinarye? And if the reservation were ordinary, (as undoubtedly it
was,) make the case then of the Deacons receiving as extraordinary as you will,
and it lets our purpose nothing. For we consider, not the act of the
Deacons in any other sense or meaning, then as it proves reservation. And here
you shall note further, that the sacrament was reserved not only for such
which lay in their death beds, and were not reco^cyled unto the church,
Fol. 73.
(as you said in the chapter before) but also that it served the uncorrupted
and faithful Christians, whiles they were yet in good health, except you can
think that the Deacons, whom the Nycene Council permits to take forth the
sacrament, and eat it, were either excommunicated persons, either such as
could not go abroad for weakness. Now, as concerning the receiving under one
kind, as it might be showed out of this place, if we would dally, as you do
use, and as concerning your great inuectyue against us, (as though any of us
did make a tryfle of Christ his institution, and not rather reprove your
interpretations, which make that to be Christ's which is not his,) as also
concerning S. Cyprian, Cypria. ad Cecil. ep.
whom you full madly allege for your purpose, which all together in that his
epistle, proves that wine and water should be mingled together in our
sacrifice, I will not speak at this present, because the first is not
maynteyned of us, the second is not to be regarded, and the third had been
spoken of before. But as concerning reservation, which we say, and say again,
to be most manifestly proved by the testimonye of the Nycene counsel, therein
we have you so fast bound that all accustomed shifts do fayll you: and you
w^ll not say (I trust) either that council to be of small reputation, although
the Bishop of Romes legates were chief men there, either the case of
reservation to have been extraordinary, or that the church was driven unto it by
plain necessity for their syckmens sake, which lay at the point of death,
and were excommunicated from other Christians.

The eleventh Chapter.
SAint Cyprian in his fyfth sermon de lapsis, declares, how an infant, which
had received before of bread and wine offered up to Idolles, had afterward
among Christians the blood of Christ powered into her mouth by the Deacon of the
church. And straitwaies yexing and vomiting follows, because that the
sacrament could not abide in a body and mouth defiled. Of this historye it is
gathered, that the babe received the sacrament in form of wine only. For if
the body had been received before, it would no more have tarried in a polluted
mouth then the blood did, but she was wonderfully vexed, or sore vexed, (for
both these phrases are used of the Catholic in his Apology) not before the
blood was powered into her mouth, but immediatlye after, therefore it is very
evident, that she received only in form of wine. Nay (say you) the first
trouble which the child had, was even in the ^yme of prayer, before the
sacrament was distributed. It was so in deed. For the child cried out, and
turned her self hither and thither for anguyshe of mind and inward torment.
But who suspected any harm thereof? or who did collect thereby, that the
child was defiled within, by reason of wine soppes, which were geauen to her,
of the offeringes to Idols? But the sore and greauous vexing of her, the
yexing and casting up of that which she had received, appeared first when the
blood of Christ was powered into her mouth. And note the cause wherefore it
appeared then first, that the child had been before polluted. Mary (says
Saint Cyprian) the drink which was sanctified in the blood of our Lord, did
burst up out of the polluted bowelles. So great is the power of God, so great
is his majesty. If therefore, the presence, and majesty of God, when it came
into the babe, did straytwaies reveal that, which before was unknown, his
power and presence being no less under the form of bread, then it is of wine,
out of all doubt the fact of the child had been bewrayed, before she had com to
the receiving of wine, if it had received the sacrament first of all in form
of bread. Because the power and majesty of God, The story of the child in S.
Cyprian. Ser. 5. de lapsis, confirmed to make for receiving under one kind.
which is fully and perfectly under the form of bread, would not have stayed
in the defiled mouth or body, but straytwayes have worked to the example of
others. And therefore, the argument of the Catholic continues in all his
strength and force, allthough the child were vexed before it received of the
chalice. For it was not vexed at the time of prayer, so sore that it cast up
anything, and the fault was not espied before the blood was powered into her,
and then it was first of al opened, because of the presence and majesty of God,
whose presence being as certain under one kind, as under the other, the
sacrament of the body would no more have tarried within her, then the sacrament
of the blood, if the child had received the body before the blood. well then,
say you, If it were so, Defense fol. 82.
it is not most evident, that yt was either because the child was so young that
it could not, or so trobled, that yt would not take the sacrament of the body?
As concerning the foremost of these causes, Reply.
it is very credible. for that it seems by S. Cyprian, that it was a sucking
child left upon the hands of the nurse the parents being fled away. But
the second is very unlike, for as the resistance on the childs part did not
let the Deacon, but that he powered the blood into her mouth, so although she
would not have taken the sacrament of the body, yet she might as well have been
enforced thereunto, as to receive of the chalice. And also, if that opinyon
which you hold now, had then ben in the church, that it is against Christ his
institution, to receive under one kind, they would never have proffered the
chalice unto any such as would not have received first and for most the body,
as you are wont to recite a fragment out of Gelasius, which you understand not,
that the division of one and the self same mystery, can not be done without
great sacrilege. But let both your reasons stand, is it not proved then
sufficiently, that to receive in both kinds is not of the necessity of Christ
his institution? And where then is your wit, to grant us that, by which our
purpose is brought to pass? For allthough you think, that you shall take no
foil, to grant that in necessity one kind might be used, and that
necessity which has no law, may cause a commandment of God to be omitted,
and allthough you may be so easily entreated to permit receiuyng in one kind,
that because the child, of whom we have spoken, would not or could not receive
the sacrament of Christ his body, you think it to be a case of necessity, in
which the institution and law of Christ should or might be omitted: yet if you
consider, that your self do take the receiving under both kinds to be of the
substance of Christ his institution, and not of the circumstance, and to be,
not an orname^t only but an express commandment, certainly when you grant
us, that in any kind of case, it may be allowed to receive the Sacrament
under one form, either of bread or wine, you be straitwaies convicted, that
Christ his institution does not necessarilye require them both. For such
commandments of God, as are geauen concerning circumstances and ceremonies,
they may be omitted in time of necessity without any offense committed, but
if he geaue commandment for the necessary and substancyall either form or
matter of any sacrifice or sacrament, necessity can not excuse us, if we
should offer sacrifice or minister sacrament in other form and matter, the^
was appointed by God. But to omit and leave altogether undone, (the
commandment I mean of sacrifice or sacrament) therein necessity shall have
good place, and save us from the danger of the law. Wherefore you, which make
the receiving under both kinds to be of the necessary substance of Christ his
institution, do utterly destroy this your strainge conclusion, in granting
that sometimes one kind may be lawfully used, and you speak also in laboring
for communion in both kinds, Vide Hosiu^ in confessione Cathol. pa. 87
directly against your father Luther, which in more the^ one place declares
the precept of receiving both kinds to be in it self indifferent, Lutherus in
libro de formula Missae.
and such as he, at his own pleasure, in some cases would either use or
refuse. Whereby it may well be gathered, how little ye pass, either what ye
affirm, either what ye deny, which say, that any man conversant in Luthers
books, may right well judge, that it is not so, as we report of him.

The.xij. and.xiij. Chapter.
From this place forth, although the Catholic does frame the conclusion of his
treatise, unto which when any one comes, he seems to be at the end of his
labor, yet by reason of this conclusion, such principal matters are moved, that
if they should be answered throughlye, we had need to make a new beginning.
For we have to reason about the contynua^ce of the church, the authority of the
Fathers, and the real presence of Christ in the sacrament, which are so
necessary and chief points to be considered, that I must not speak nothing
of them, and yet I have been so long here before in trying the master of the
defense, that I must not say all that I can, but with convenient speed
dyspatch these worthy questions.

First then as it has been proved against you, that the six hundred years,
which immedyatly followed the a^cension of our Savior, are not wholye with you,
for all your great crakes, so we may wonder not a little, why you make exception
against these last nine hundred years, by the practyse of which you refuse to
be tried? Is this (think you) a small and week argument to confirm and stay
our consciences upon, that for.ix. hundred years space, you, our adversaries,
can not deny unto us, but that all Bishops, Universities, Realms, and states
of Christendom, have quyetlie continued in one kind of true Apostolic faith,
until within these few days, that all the old catholic religion has in
some places ben abolyshed by public authority? If a rennegat and dissolute
friar, be thought worthy of estimation, because he has at these days many
folowers, are not the religious in deed, which continued in great number and
with much praise in there orders, much more to be regarded? If this be the time
of grace and light, in which we may see and lament, vows broken, monasteryes
ouerturned, the lands of Christ and his church alyenated, virginity, fasting,
praying, and all rules of good and perfect life contemned* what time was that,
in which the contraries of all these, were highly commended and practysed?
Continuance of time, does not a little make for the doctrine of the catholi^^^
church.
The continuance only, of a religion.900. years* without interruption, is a
very probable argument not lightly to pass away from it. But when it is
considered, how many learned and godly men, how great Universities, how mighty
Princes lived within the compass of those years, and that of them all no one
of the good and learned, did any thing write or preach against it, and none
of the Princes either would either could resist it, who but insensible, may
think that it should not be of God? Although that heresies do very shamefully
encreace, and that there be so many sects and divisions among them, that no
one part can ever be great, although the whole world were ouerturned unto
heresy, yet at this day more Catholics are in Christendom, then Lutherans,
Zuinglians, Osiandrians, Caluinyans, Anabaptists, and all the rest, of the
like making, together. For these heresies are yet (God make them narrower) but
here and there dispersed, and Germanye the mother of them, is for a great part
of it full Catholic. Yet as little place as the new gospel has, in
comparison of Christendom, see how much he, whom you take for no small fool,
the author of the Apology of the Englysh church f^lio. 8.
does crake and bragg of that little. Be ye sure (says he) so many free cities,
so many kings, so many Princes, as at this day have abandoned the sea of
Rome, and adjoined themselves to the Gospel of Christ, are not become madd.
Lo Sir, if this fellow might so truly have reported, that all Kings, all
Princes, all free cities of Christendom were of his religion, as he does
falselye make an account of so many free cities, so many kings, so many
princes, etc. how great an argument would you think that he did make for your
side? And again, if he had been able to prove, that for.ix. hundred years
together, Kings, and Princes, and free cities had continued in his faith
without open contradiction, how madd would he have said all such to be as
resist a religion confirmed by such authority and contynuance? But this is
your practice, to deny all things, which make presentlye against you, and to
allow the same again, when hereafter they may serve for you, As the world
cha^geth, so do the conclusions of heretics.
and so long as you be in danger of law, No man must be violentlye constrained
to receive the religion which his conscience can not allow. And when the Prince
and power is with you, then say you, Hanging is to good for him, which will
not believe as you do. And so, in the Apologye of your Englysh church, the
argument was ^ound, and comfortable, that because many Kings had abandoned the
sea of Rome, therefore they might seem not to be madd, which did follow them:
and now in this your defense of the truth, (as you call it) when we allege
contynuance, and authority of.ix. hundred years, you say, that multitude
makes not to the purpose, and you think your self not a little wise in
reproving of our argument. But how wise you prove your self therein, it is
worthwhile to consider. First, you say, that the prescription of.xv. hundred
years, the consent of the most part of Christendom, the holiness and learning
of so many fathers as have been these.ix. hundred years, the age and slender
learning of those which stand against you, (all which things we do bring for
our defense,) These things (say you)

Do nothing at all, either fear us, Defense.
or move us, to suspect that doctrine, which by Christ's authority, and wytnes
of the Apostels, we know to be true. Stood you by the Apostles at their
elbowes, Reply.
when they wrote their ghospells or epistles? or were you then present with
Christ, when he walked visibly upon the earth, and by signs and miracles
proved him self to be the soune of God? Truly, because your eye was not
present at Faith cu^meth by heering.
you must therefore resort unto such as may instruct you of all things by the
ear. And because credit is not lightly to be geauen, to an history which is
told Authority persuadeth
therefore they ought to be of good authority, whose words we should believe in
the articles of everlasting salvation. But there can be no greater, then the
testimonye of all No greater authority, then the testimony of the whole world.
and unknown, whom you would have to be our masters: therefore no reasonable
and wise man will suspect the authority of the world, and falsely persuade him
self, that he beleiueth Christ or his Apostles, when he has contemned the
voice of Christendom, which caused him to believe in Christ, and credit his
Apostles. For how know you what doctrine Christ or his Apostles have taught in
the world? If you know it by the scriptures, what persuades you these
scriptures to be true? For when any new scripture and vnherd of us before, is
alleged or commended unto us by a few, without any reason which is able to
confirm it, Aug. de vtilitate credendi cap. 14.
we believe not first the scripture, but them rather which browght it forth
unto us. Therefore, who told you that these be true scriptures? If you name
Luther, and such as he was, you have done very rashly to believe incredible
articles at the report of an vpstart rennegate, which confirmed his authority
by no miracle. But on the other side, if Luther and you both have been content
to receive the scriptures of the Catholics, lest you should be accounted over
frantyke or scrupulous, in doubting whether al Christendom were not deceived
therein, by what reason then can you suspect the contynuance, pietye, learning,
and multitude of Catholics in the church of God, and referr your self unto
Christ, and his Apostles, with contempt of the mystical body of our Savior?
whereas you could not by reason, without miracle, believe in Christ and trust
the Apostles, except the authority of the Catholic church, which you see to
contynew in the world, did move you? I would not believe the Gospel, (says
holy S. Augustine) except the authority of the Catholic church did move me
thereunto. Aug. c^. 5. co^tra epist. fundame^ti
Wherefore, the contynuance of.ix. hundred years, is and should be so worthelye
regarded, that eue^ the authority of the church, which now is, should by her
self persuade you to believe her. But, (say you) our possession which we bragg
of, has not ben quiet. For in the.600. next after Christ, our doctrines were
never heard of (which is a very foul lie, as it has been already here before
proved) and as concerning the 900. following, they did not take place so sone as
we would have wyshed the^. Let us see the^, how you prove that. Mary, say you
when they were rooted, Defense fol. 86.
God stirred up from time to time, diverse in all ages, that reproved them.

This shall be no lie at all, Reply.
if you can name the persons. And because we will not trouble you much, we shall
requyer of you but the name of one for your side against us, for every one of
the last.900. years, in which Christendom generally has gone against you. If
you dare, and if you can, show now your cunnyng and learning, An honest profer.
so shall the world easyly perceive, what manner of predecessors you have had in
your religion, and what manner of credit you geaue to holy and blessed men, or
else what a great and open lie you have made in this matter. For to make this
more plain in one short example: In S. Bernardes time we read of certain,
which named the^ selves Apostolicos, as if you should say, folowers of the
Apostles, and some of their opinions were these: That marriage was unlawful, D.
Ber. Ser. 66. sup. Can. Cant.
except it were between virgin and virgin: that all meats which come of
engendring are unclean: that children are not to be baptized: that the dead
are not to be prayed for: and that there is no fire of purgatory after death,
but that straytwayes the sowles go up to heaven or down to hell.

How say you then by these fellows? shall they be in the number of them, whom
God styrred up against our doctrines for that age, in which S. Bernard was?
If you say, they were of God, then do you condemn Saint Bernard, which of
purpose wrote against them in his.66. sermon upon Cant. Canticorum, and you
must also then forbid marriage, flesh meats, and baptizing of children. If you
say, they were not of God, then let us have your testimony, that they were vile
heretics, and so shall you hold with praying to Saints, praying for the
dead, purgatory. etc. And further, tell us what they were in S. Bernardes
time* (except they were these) which God styrred up to reprove our doctrynes?
Now, if you will or can tell what they were in every one of these last.900.
years, whom God sent to testifye his truth against the doctrine of our known
Catholic church, it will follow, I am assured, that you shall name either
plain heretics, or else condemn most holy and learned men, whom now you
will not seem, but to receive with much favor and reverence. But now again
what an unlike tale is this, that for these.900. years God has from time to
time labored, and at no time prevailed, and that he, being almighty, has
styrred up the hearts of diverse in all ages to reprove our doctrine, and yet
that no man knows their writings, or the only names of those iolye
prophets? when the holy Ghost was not yet geauen, because JESUS was not yet
glorified, and in the night and shadows of the old law, yet the longest
captivity that ever the people of God had, was much less then.400. years in
Egypt, and when it pleased God to send them delyuerance, consider with what
divine force and power, he made Moses and Aaron to ouerturne the might of
Pharao. But we, Exo. 13.
which are in the time of grace, and are co^ducted, not by Moses, and a pyller
of fire, or a cloud, but by JESUS CHRIST, and his holy and comfortable
spirit: yet (say you) we have been in miserable and blind captivity these. Io.
14. and 16.
900. years together, and the prophets, whom God has sent unto us, have
left no sign of their doings. The spiritual powers (you say, Defense.
but you lie) have disgraced such men and abolyshed their books, and memoryes
as much as might be, flatterers also have corrupted ancient fathers, and
forged new works, etc. It were pytty to troble your weak head with the
proving of all these things at large, Replye.
therefore we will ask no more of you at this time, slau^derous lies of the M.
of the defense.
but that you tell us the names only, of those spiritual powers, corrupters,
and flatterers, with the place where we shall find it declared, that there
were such, as you report some to be. Not because I deny that flatterers and
forgers are to be found among the Christians, but because you can never prove,
that by such means our doctrine has been maintained, against the will of God,
and labors of his servants. As for the donation of Constantyne, (although it
appertain to no article of our faith, who so ever gave it, so that the church
lawfully have it,) yet we have to say further therein against you, when you
have declared how Saint Syluester came by the possession of Rome with many
Seignioryes belonging unto it, or what Constantyn the Emperor did with the old
and ancient Rome, when he builded his palace at Byzant, and called it
Constantinople and new Rome? Then for your recityng of places out of the
Decrees, such as are not found in the Doctors upon whom they are fathered,
except any place in all the Decrees, contain an untrue and ungodly doctrine,
it is no matter of my faith, (I assure you,) if the author be mistaken, and if
the scribe or the printer do fayll in his memory or attention. And last of
all, where you say, that the east church has not allowed our errors, I will
make no other reply against that your saying at this time, but desyer you to
consider quyetly, how well they are rewarded for their labor. For whilst they,
contentiously and wyckedly endeavored to make them selves and their Archebishopp
as high as the Bishop and church of Rome, Pride will have a fall.
and to depart from the unity thereof, they were brought in to miserable and
pytefull bondage, and affecting the first place, whilst they flourished in the
second, they are long ago fallen in to the lowest and worst of all. And if
you think it more sure, to believe the Greek then the Latyne church, tell us,
I pray you, what you believe of the holy ghost? And so, whereas the donation
of Constantyne, and quotations of the decrees do make nothing for you, so
should the example of Greece geaue an occasion to amend you. When you consider
that the whole West church within it self has continued so many hundred
years in one state of doctrine, and that her sister and fellow the East church
in coveting to be maestres, has lost her perfect liberty, of body, by reason
of the Turks, of soul, because of schism and the devil. But, as you be
always good unto us, when it is not worth thanks, (as you do geaue it) so you
suffer us to take that, as it were a gift of your hands, which for very truth
and euidencie of the matter, we do wring clean out of your fingers whether
you will or no. And you say: But be it so, Defense fol. 87.
that the most part of Christendom.ix. hundred years, has taught as you
do, is that a sufficient argument, to reject a doctrine evident by the word
of God? Sir, if a doctrine be evident by the word of God, Reply.
there is no cause left to reject it, but in this case, when one shall say,
here is Christ in Geneua, an other say, here is Christ in Wyttenberge, an
other say, behold he is (...) the wooddes of Bohemye, every faction pulling
the simple unto it, here lo, to try such voices whether they come of God or
no, the sure way is, to harken unto the practyse and doctrine of the most part
of Christendom, as it has been for hundreds of years together. And
continuance of time in one doctrine with multitude of folowers, does make a
very good persuasion to reiecte the vpstart and vnaccompanyed religion. Nay,
(say you) if continuance of time, and multitude of persons, might be rulers to
govern men's consciences, then would that argument serve For the Israelites
against the Jews, Defense fo. 89.
for the priests against the prophets, for the Jews and Gentiles against
Christ and his Apostles, for the Turks against us Christians at this day.

See, Reply.
lo, how you be deceived? For I would say, first, not that a multitude of
Turks are better then a few Christians, or that a long co^tynued Idolatry, is
better then a new religion, In what sense, the multitude of folowers and the
continuance of a religion, are to be considered.
but in co^ferring Turk with Turk, Jew with Jew, Christian with Christian,
and so forth, I say, if the Mahometes law were good, and that schisms and
divisions should arise among the professors of it, that then, the surest way
should be, so to understand and receive that law, as it has been taken of
longest time before, and of the most part of all Turks. And in like manner,
when so ever among us which profess one Christ, divisions and taking of parts
do trouble men's consciences, the best way is, by all good reason, to follow
that side which has longest continued, and which has most voices for it. And
so, it a Turk or panyme, would allege continuance of time to prove thereby
his religion to be good, the next and wysest way to answer him, is not to
call him unreasonable and folysh for the bringing of that argument, (for
undoubtedly unto our natural and common reason it is no tryfeling persuasion
to see contynuance and multitude of folowers to be with us,) but the right way
of co^uerting or confounding them in that argument, is, either to show that
natural reason is confessing of our secret faults, quiet suffering of hard
penance, these are very much against the nature and appetyte of our flesh: on
the other side, that which the church teaches, the miracle of the contynuing
of the Catholic faith.
of saints, of sowles departed, of seven sacraments, and especially of that
one, in which almighty God is received, all this is so far beyond the
capacity of carnal reason, that except faith be infunded, it is never rightly
believed. Yet this religion so repugnant unto natural appetyte, so much
surmounting all reason, has been embraced of the poor and rich, the simple
and the learned, the stout and the tender, the beggars and the Cesars, and in
spite of the dyuell, the world, the flesh, and heretics, has continued
these.xv. hundred years, as we believe, and as you be sorye for it, these nine
hundred years together. It is no wonder, if a Turkyshe religion be much made
of and cherisshed, for they are permitted to have here carnal pleasures, and
for the world to come, they are promised to have their full of them. Again, I
do not maruayll, if many follow Luther the Father, or any of his evil
favored brood and children, for the flesh does well allow it, to eat what
it will at all times, to be free from early rising, to have short service in
the church, to have matrymonye no sacrament, to be bound to no ceremonye, and
to be subject unto none other authority, then the express scripture. But,
that the Catholic religion, which is so exact, so devout, and so grave, that
it makes the carnal men to wyssh that it were out of the world, should have
co^tynuall folowers of it, and before so long time preserved, it is not for
flessh and blood to bring it to pass, but it is the very work of God, whom
nothing can resyst and withstand. Consider also their lives and manners, which
have been among other, the maynteyners of it. And because none are more odious
unto the world, then prelates, monks, and friars, I wysh that some of them
were rightly considered. For if you can believe historyes and monume^tes, what
fault do you find in S. Francys, and S. Dominike, if you will read their
books, what can you say against S. Bernard, S. Bonauenture, S. Thomas of
Aquyne, Rupertus, Anselmus, Dionysius the Carthusian, with a number of such
holy and reverend fathers? whose writings sufficiently declare, how much they
remembered Christ, how diligently they did read the scriptures, how freely they
reproved faults, and lamented the evil life of Christians, how much they were
acquaynted with the sweet spirit of God, and practysed in fightyng for the
soul against the dyuell. The doctrine therefore of our church, has not only
continued meruaylouslye, but continued in many, and in those many no few have been excellent, and in such sort excellent, that, if not before, it might our
religion have been now allowed, because such godly and grave heads did use it.
Whereas on your side, if your inventions were tolerable, yet those Apostles of
yours, who^ in these latter days (you say) God has styrred to reprove our
vice and irreligion, and to reuyue his truth and testament, have been so vile
themselves, that undoubtedly God did never send them, and a reasonable man
should never follow them. What an Apostle was Luther? who gave him leave to
break his vow, which those holy men, whom even now I named, did keep unto
death? who moved him to lie with a noune? If he lived chaste, being yet within
his order, what spirit (trow you) was that, which could not afterward keep
him chaste, when he was selected to preach a Gospel? Then, Luther.
if he lived abominably when he was kept in Cloister, was he a meet instrument
for God, to work the redemption of his church so long deceived? And if God had
forgeaue^ his former great offenses, that he should be more humble in preaching
of grace and mercy, would he so sone have forsaken him, that in the heat of
his preachementes, he could not but take a noune to his bedfellow? And as he
was in his doings, so is he in his writings, so shameless, so fylthy, so
unclean, so slanderous, so mutable, so presumptious, and so desperate, that
it is wonder that he is accounted for a man, and much less, for a man of God.
I speak these things, to declare, what difference there is between our holy
Abbates, and your rennegate friars, the folowers of our religion, and the
founders of yours, to enforce you hereby, to show what you think of S.
Bernard, S. Bonauenture, S. Denyse, and others, and to signifye hereby unto
you, that as we stay upon contynuance and number, so yet we rejoice at the
virtues and graces, which have and do appear plainly in many of this number.
wherefore, it is not without cause, that we are confirmed in our faith and
doctrine, because of such a contynuance of it. Note, that I say, such a
contynuanbe. For Turks, Sarracenes, and Panymes may allege contynuance, but
such a contynuance, in which the doctrine taught, is greauous unto the carnal
man, and yet received, and the greatest professors of it, are hated of all
heretics, and yet for conscience and wordlye shame are not condemned: such a
one (I say) is much to be regarded, and such a one is not found, but only
among the Catholics. whose ways in doctrine, if they be not open and secure,
especially so great cumpany for so long time going in them with prosperous
faring to their iourneyes end, then will I never trust any way, but be, as the
cumpany is, indifferent to go with every one, until I am weary. But thanks be
to God, he has better provided for us, appointing his catholic church to be
the pyller and stay of true religion. 1. Timo. 3.
Which, although it is quyckly to be found out, because it is in deed
Catholic, yet you think it necessary to examyne what is the church, and how
it may be known. Go to then, we will follow you to the end of your defense,
in every conclusion which you make against us. The Scripture ( say you)
speaks of the church two ways, Defense fol. 90. and. 91.
sometime as it is in deed before God, and not known allwaie to man's
judgment. etc.

Sometime the church is taken for the universal multitude of all those, which
being dispersed through the world, acknowledge one Christ. etc.

Sometime the church is taken for the multitude of those that bear rule in the
church.

You perform more then you promised. Reply.
We looked but for two ways, and you have declared three, in which the
scripture speaks of the church, by which it appears, that you have pretye
knowledge, but you keep little good order in setting forth your divisions. Yet
go to, as concerning the first sense, which you make of the church, what make
you of her? Can it err, or no? No (say you) this church is the pyller of truth,
that never continues in error. This church is never forsaken of the spirit of
God. In to this church none be received but only the children of grace and
adoption. How might a man then (I pray you) know this church? Verily neither
you, neither any other can tell. Of the church as it co^sis^eth of the chosen
whom God only knows, little profit is to be gotten.
For whereas it consists of such, as be the elect and chosen, who can say
either of himself, that he is one of them, or how can one say that of an
other, whose heart he sees not, which he can not understand of his own case,
which is best known unto himself? Therefore as concerning the profyt and
co^moditye which they that would, might take of this church, which is the
pyller of truth, we can receive very little of it, because she is invisible unto
man, and known only before God. And if you dare say, that this church may
also be known unto man, I would you had showen one token or other of her, that
we might be sure where to find the pyller of truth.

Now as concerning the church, which is dispersed through the world, and
acknowledges one Christ, and is Through baptism admitted thereunto, and by the
use of the Lords supper, openly professes the unity thereof in doctrine and
charity: Is this church (trow you) the pyller of truth, or what other opinion
shall we have of her? This church, (say you) is resembled unto a nett, Defense
fol. 91.
which has good and bad in it, it is resembled unto a field which has pure
corn and cockle also in it.

You say herein truly, and you agree now very well with the catholic church,
Reply.
which teaches us, that in this world, the good and evil Christians are
mengled together. You make also much, against certain heretics, which stand
in it stoutly, that only the elect are of the howsehold and familye of God,
which yet (as you have clerkely defined it,) can not be so, because the good
and the badd which acknowledge one Christ, and receive the sacraments, are the
true church of Christ. Granting therefore unto you, that the church has good
men and evil in her, I ask now the cause of you, wherefore you labor to prove
that this church may go out of the way for some part of her? you tell us of
Noe, of the.x. trybes of Israel, of the Prophets, of the captivity of
Babylon, and other such historyes. But to what end and purpose? if you will
prove thereby, that they which bear the name of the people of God have often
times forsaken his law, and destroyed his Prophets, you have spoken that, for
proof whereof I would never have gone to the flood of Noe, having so many
examples at home, to make this conclusion manifest. For all they which be
Christened, do bear the name of the people of God, and the promyses are made
only unto them, yet this world may declare how many coniurars, dissemblers,
wicked lyuers, faithless ministers, lecherous friars and desperate peruerters
of all law and honesty, do live in the church. But if you would prove, that,
because a great number was deceived, therefore the whole church was subverted,
you speak alltogeather without book. For, (to consider one example for all,)
in the time of Elias the Prophet, when he, good man, thought, that all had
forsaken God besides him self, yet said God unto him, I have left my self
seven thousand in Israel, 3. Reg. 19.
which have not bowed their knees before Baal. And before that, it is plain by
the book of kings, that Abdyas the steward of king Achab his house, 3. Reg.
18.
did hyde a hundred Prophets of God from the sight of Iezabell the queen, and
fedd the^ with bread and water. Therefore, as it can not be denied, but that
they which have borne the name of the people of God, have not always and
wholly followed him, so yet it can never be proved, that the visible church of
God has been in all her parts subverted. And yet in the old law, the church
was not then so richely endowed as it was afterward in the coming of Christ
and his holy ghost, neither were those words spoken then, which have been
spoken sense and now presently do take place, our Savior faithfully promysing
unto Saint Peter, Matthew. 16.
that Thou art Peter (which is to say) a rock, and upon this rock I will buyld
my church, and the gates of hell shall not preuayll against it. So that if
nothing might be said to the contrary, but that in the old law the church of
God was not to be found, (which is impossible to be proved, Psalm. 2.
) yet in this time of grace, when all nations of the world are in the heritage
of Christ, as only the Israelites then were: Io. 1.
and when for figures we have truths: for Moses the servant and his chayer,
Hebr. 3.
Jesus the soune of God and his lieutenant: for the inspirations which came at
sundry times upon the Prophets, a continual presence of the majesty of the
holy ghost: Io. 14.
for promyses under condition to tarry with them if they would follow his
commandments, most absolute performance of the spirit of truth to be with
us until the worlds end: in this time of grace so gloriouse, so much made of,
so dear and welbe loved, so defenced, so priuileaged, to make so hard and
pynching rekoning, that the light of the world should be covered under some
busshell, and that city be vnperceauable, which Christ him self planted upon
the topp of a hill, Math. 5.
it is an ignominious and Iewysh, and cruel dysgracing of the church of
Christ. But because we may have a better time and leisure, to speak against
you in this matter, if this visible church, which has continued so long in one
manner of doctrine and sacraments, be not the true church of God, because the
visible church of the Unreasonable consequencies
and if some did so in deed, that all therefore without exception did it, or
if, because the Prophets Do that which they say unto you, Matthew. 23.
but do not after their doings. And, (to be short) if all these unreasonable
conseque^cies (which would please you very well) should be granted unto you,
tell us then, for conscience sake, what church we shall follow? If the church
of Rome, which has been and is so well received, has been and may be untruly
persuaded, may not that church, which you perchanse, shall point out unto us
with your little finger, be also with good lykelyhood very fowlie deceived? And
may not one third person, commend unto us an other church, which agrees with
none of our two, and yet is nothing the better? In this doubt, which does so
necessarilye arise, what is your ghostly counsel unto such as are fearful of
conscience? The right church therefore, Defense fol. 98.
as the fold of Christ, has the true word of God and use of his sacraments,
according unto the same, for the due marks thereof. After this manner, you shall
have some times the simple idiotes of the country to make answer unto
straingers asking the right way unto this or that place, Reply.
which they would come unto. For, (say they) you must go by my grandsyres
close, and then keep the straytwaye, and you shall never mysse. Or else, like
as a man would send his servant to London for a cupp of pure and clean wine,
uncertain marks to know the church by, alleged by the M. of the defense
and tell him that he shall be sure to have it there, where he sees an Iuye
garland to hang at the door, or the drawer of the wine to use no deceptfull
bruyng of it, (whereas the Iuye garland is no certain toke^ of good wine ready
to be sold, and every tapster will easily say for his own truth and
honestye,) so you have told us such marks to know the true church by, that as
the true church has them in deed, so yet every mysbegotten congregation, will
chalendge them unto herself. Except you think, that Luther and Zuinglius,
with all their forked tails of heresies, do not each of them stand in yt,
that they have the true word of God, and right use of the sacraments on each
of their sides, which yet are contrary the one to the other. I had thought, you
would have told of one such mark and sign to come by the knowledge of the
true church, that in all the controversies of opinions, and all the evil
conditions of living, we might have been directed unto one certain and approved
stay of our consciences, and you, (to declare your wisdom and understanding)
have named two such marks, as every kind of religion will boldly chalendge
unto her self. First, the true word of God (say you) is one true mark of
the church.

what mean you then, by the word of God? for if you mean the volume of the
old and new testament, and that wheresoever we find the bible in any persons
hands, that we must thereby straitwayes take this for a certain toke^, that
he which has the bible in his hand is one of the right church, so shall you
have not only your self, but Arrians, Anabaptists, and all the rabell of
myscreantes, to be of the true church, by good lykelyhod. On the otherside, if
you mean by the word of God, the two testamentes, not as they are to be sold
at bookebynders shopps, but as they are expounded of sincere and true
preachers, what toke^ the^ shall we have of you, to know readily who is a true
preacher? And as I have said of this first mark which you geaue, so may I
say again of your second, which is, the right use of the sacraments. Which
as I will grant unto you, to be rightlye practiced only within the true
church, so yet you have to show us further, how I may know such as do
minister them accordinglye. You would prove by S. Augustine, S. Cyprian, Saint
Chrysostom, and Origin, that the scripture is the true trial of the church.
Yea Sir, in one sense that is true in deed, as also that the church makes the
trial and declaration of the true scripture. But, that ever any good and
reasonable man had this meaning, that who so ever would, might take the
scriptures into his hands, and sytt judge over the church, I deny it utterly,
and I am sure, you can never prove it. For as the scripture declares which is
the true church, so does the church show the authority of the scripture,
and the scripture and the church, are the better, the one for the other of
them. Do you think to make us aferde by the appealing unto scripture? or do
you labor to move a suspicion, that you only have the Gospel for you? Verily
we are content to be tried, not only by the scriptures, but even by those holy
fathers, which you deprave in this place toward your purpose. The
controversy now, between us and you, is the same, Mark this place.
which was between S. Augustine and the Donatistes. We seek for the church,
and the place where she rests. You say, that it has been unknown, defaced,
obscured, and coarcted, you say that it is now in England, and before these
last.lx. years, you knew not where she was to be found. On the other side, we
believe that it has been and shall be continually visible, tholike, upon the
topp of the hill, not in gardens or chambers, not in corners of countries, but
in the open sight of the world. And here now at this point we shall have no
other thing, but our yea and our nay. Yes (say you) let the matter be tried
by scripture. So let it be, and because you are so trymlye seen in them, that
you will make us altogether ignorant, show us your scriptures to prove your
pretty, narrow, and shamefast church. If you can show none, read, for the
truths sake, those places which we shall name unto you. Genesis 26.
In thy seed all nations shall be blessed. Ask of me, and I will geaue the
for thy heritage the Gentyles. Psalm. 2.
He (meaning the Messiah) shall rule from sea unto sea, and from the flood even
unto the ends of the world. Again: The stone which was cut out of the hill
without hands, Psalm. 71.
filled the whole world. Da. 2.
So it has been written, and so it behooved Christ to suffer, Lukee ^ 4.
and repentance and remission of sins to be preached in his name, through all
nations. You shall be my witnesses in Jury and Samaria, Act. 1.
and unto the ends of the earth. But what of all this? Marye Sir, that you
should read in these scriptures, how plainly it was promised, that the whole
world should be Christ his inheritage, and that his church should be sought
for, not in pelting corners of Africa, of Europa, or Asia, not in wyttenberge,
Geneua, or England, but in all nations and in all countries of the world. And
if you myslyke this our conclusion gathered out of these places of scripture,
consider then, better then you have done, S. Augustins reasoning against
Petilian, and against all other Donatistes, when so ever he wrote against them,
as in his. 162. 166. 170. 171. and other of his epistles. In all which places,
he proves, that it is impossible, that Donate, which was an vpstart heretic
in Africa, should have the truth on his side, because the scriptures do so
plainly promise us, that the church of Christ should be enlarged over the
whole world, and because it was so sensibly performed, that every one might
see that church, which was extended through all nations. Now, if you have any
scriptures, or authorityes, or reasons, to prove that the church should not be
openly known for 900. years together, or that about the year of our Lord
God.1500. the light of the Gospel should begin to appear, or that the
church may be in one country only, or that Christ should leese his inheritage,
which was promised him over the world, or that all the dryfte of S. Augustyns
reasoning against the Donatistes, does not expressly make against you, then
shall you speak somewhat worth the answering. Against which time provide also
to tell us, how S. Cyprian (whom you allege, S. Cyprian alleged against the
M. of the defense himself.
to prove that recourse should be had to the scriptures) does make any thing
for you? Yea rather he makes clean against you, and if you had taken but
small leisure to consider him, he teaches you, that to come unto the truth,
and to be sure of it, there is an other and better way then you have yet
invented. For after those words, Hereof arise schysmes, Cyp. tract. 3. de
simpl. praelat.
because we seek not to the head, nor have recourse unto the spring, nor keep
the commandments of the heavenly master. After which words, you make a full
point, as though you had told all his meaning) he says further that to prove
this, there is no need of long talk or reasonyng. Our Lord spoke unto Peter,
and said: I tell the, thou art. Peter, Math. 16.
and upon this rock I will buyld my church, and the gates of hell shall not
overcome it. etc. And allthough he gave like authority unto all his Apostles
after his resurrection, and said: Io. 20,
Even as my father sent me, I also sent you, receive you the holyghost, if you
remyt any man his sins, they are forgeauen him, if you reteyne them, they are
retained, yet that he might make plain, and set forth an unity, he disposed
by his own authority the head and spring of that unity which begins of
one. And a little after he says: Does he believe, that he holds and keeps
his faith, which keepth not this unity of the church? How then could you bring
in S. Cyprian in the commendatyon of any of your two marks of the church,
which so expressly warns you to consider the unity thereof, and the
authority which was geauen unto S. Peter, in which unity who so ever is not
found has lost all true faith, crake he never so much of his sacraments and
scriptures? But now, because it is not enough, to declare that your marks of
the church are uncertain and controuersious, except we geaue some better
signs, which may lead all men unto the true church, therefore it is to
considered, what we profess openly in one of the articles of our Creed. I
believe (says every Christian) The true and certain marks of the church
one, holy, Catholic, and Apostolic church: and if he knows also what he
speaks, then shall he never be to seeking of the church. For she must be
first of all, One that is to say, she must have one profession of faith, one
order in sacraments, and one head for her government: by which one word,
they be quicklye tried for no good Christians, which can never agree upon their
faith, or have no certain head or governor. Secondlye, the church is holy,
in this sense, either because she is stable and inviolable. Which note does
warn us to beware of them which have no contynuance in their religion, but are
quyckely altered at every new preachers invention. Catholic, Catholic.
which is to say, she must go through the whole world, not only in respect of
place, but also of persons and time, whereupon it follows, that all such
religion as lurketh only in particular countries, or which has no antiquity
and contynuance at all, is to be rejected as a singular naught, and no
Catholic or good religion. And last of all, the true church Apostolic,
Apostolic
by which word I mean, that if they of England now, or those of Geneua, can
by degrees ascend, and from one minister unto an other go vpwardes in a
co^tynual order, until they do come unto one of the Apostles, who^ they will
prove to have been a father to their religion, that then, they have one good
sign to commend their doings. But, because this is impossible to be done of
them, therefore they are not of the church Apostolic, and for good cause they
are to be dyscredited. Lo Sir, if you be of a good conscience, contynew in the
faith which you have professed, and for two simple marks, which every man will
set upon his religion, take these four notes which al christendom aloweth, of
which four there is no heretic, which (work he never so craftily) shall ever
be able to prove that any one may serve for him.

The.xiiij. Chapter.
IF you had acquaynted your self with faithful Abraham and Isaac, and did
believe that God is able to perform what so ever he promises, you would make
no question of the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, and that chief
principle being once confessed, you should never make great quarreling about
certain consequencies which follow thereupon. As, whether Christ his body be
upon a thousand aultars at one time, or whether accidents be without
substance, and body without place, or whether reservation may be allowed, with
diverse other questions. This is the fault which the Catholic in this last
Chapter fyndeth with you, in auoyting of which, you say, first

We grant as freely as you, with Abraham and Isaac, Defense. fol. 102.
that God is able to perform what so ever he does promise. If you think as
you speak, Replye.
why are these bodging and souterly arguments so often repeted among you, that
Christ his natural body is in heaven, ergo yt can not be on the earth. Item,
a natural body occupyeth only one place, but the sacrament is in many places.
B^dging reasons and such as argue a faint and doubtful faith.
Again, accidences can not be without substance, ergo the substance of bread
is not chainged into the substance of Christ his body. Are not these your
arguments, most manifest tokens, that you speak against the possibility to
have Christ his natural body in the Sacrament? For otherwise, you should not
ask, how it might be, after the Iewysh fasshyons, but rather prove, that it is
not so, after the manner of wise heretics. Well yet, thanks be to God, that
you be not so folysh as your fellows, and that you grant, that yt is possible
enough unto God, to bring all that unto pass which the church teaceth us, as
concerning the sacrament, but, say you

How can you show, Defense fol. 130.
that it was God his holy will to have so many miracles wrought, as you without
necessity, do make in the Sacrament? Mary Sir, Reply.
we show it by his own words ( This is my body, This is my blood) upon which
one miracle, all the rest of our belief therein, does follow by necessity of
consequence. You ask also for an example in some place of all the scriptures
like unto this merueylous work which is believed to be in the sacrament.
Wherein I answer you, with the same words, as S. Augustine answered
Volusianus, Augustine. epist. 3. ad Volusianu^
as concerning the incarnation of God, If you ask for a reason, the thing shall
not be wonderful, and if you require an example, the thing shall not be
singular. Also, the miracles which the scriptures speak of, are not therefore
believed, because they have other miracles of like suit with them, but because
God is almighty, and because all scripture is true. We do not apoint, (as
though all were of our one making,) but we believe, that Christ his very body
is truly in the sacrament, and that it is there, not in manner of proportion,
quantity, or figure, also that it may be in a thousand places at once, and
yet in never a one of them all locallye, which is to say, as in a place of his
own. Oh, say you, Is not this to take away the nature of a body from his
body, Defense. fol. 104
and in deed to affirm it to be no body?

See lo where you be now. Do not these words importe, Replye.
that it can not be, that a natural body should continue natural and be in a
thousand places at once? in which your saying what other thing do you, but
priuelye conclude that it is impossyble. In which, least you should seem to
deny the power of God, of which you spoke reuerentlye a little before, you
amend the matter, and say: Yet we say not, Defense. fol. eod.
but that God is able to work that also, if it be his pleasure. Verily verelye
you be uncertain in all your conclusions, Replye.
for if you grant that God is able to do that, Note the doubtfullnes of mind
and understanding in the M. of the defense.
which we report of him, that he works in our Sacrament, why talk you of
the nature of a body and taking away of the nature of it, if Christ be really
in the Sacrament. And if it be impossible to have a body without quantity,
and in a thousand places at once, (as it is to make that one self same thing
should be a body and no body,) why say you, that God is able t^ work this
also, if it be his pleasure? you offend in both sides, doubting at one time of
God his allmightmes, by which we believe his natural body to be in the
sacrament, and at an other time making him so allmighty, as though he could
bring to pass, that such things might agree together, as are in them, selves
plain contradictorie, the one to the other. But as in this later point, you
go beyond all truth and possibility, so in the other, I trust you will
hereafter be more stedefast, and never argue against the power of God which is
able to perform all those articles, which the Catholics have gathered, upon
the sacrament. Which now you begynn to do at length, and say, that it is not
God his will to do, as we believe he has done in the sacrament. But how prove
you this? For neither is there any necessity that should once train him to do
yt, Defense fol. 104
nor does his word teach us that ever he did the like. These be your own
reasons, Reply.
as it is easylye to be perceived by the weight of them. which if you will
follow in other points of our faith, you may conclude all our Creed, Feeble
reasons.
to deserve no credit at all. For, neither any necessity constrained God
first to make, and afterward to redeem mankind, and the most of all his
works are of such a peculyar excellency, that we may think right well of
each of them, that they are in their kind singular. what necessity
constrained our Savior, to take our death upon him, and what example have you
in all the scriptures, like unto the miracle of the death of God? Ergo,
(according unto your divine logike,) it is only an invention of the papists,
that God him self did suffer a most paineful death for man. It is wisdom for
us, rather to believe the church, then to allow such arguments by which we
may destroy all true religion. And yet not only the church teaches, but the
scripture also witnesses, that this which the Christians receive in the
Sacrament, is the body of Christ him self, as he said most plainly, This is
my body which is given for you. Now whether the verb substa^tiue Sum, es,
fui, Luc. 22.
might be interpreted by transsubstantiare, tell me first, I pray you, whether
Sum, es, fui, may be taken among the grammaryans Assumere naturam, non
personam? which sense of the verb substantive, Sum, es, fui, after you have
not found in any dictionary of the best making, how will it sound in your
ears, to say, Deus est homo, God is man? The word was made flesh, Io. 1.
says the blessed Apostle and Evangelist, by which we confess and believe,
that God the word was not changed into flessh, or mingled and confounded with
it, or in any part altered, but that he took unto his person, the very nature
of man, and united it unto his Godhed. Which sense if you repyne against,
because the propriety of the tongue can not bear it, that ( factu^ est,) might
be interpreted by, vnita est diuina persona humanae naturae, the person of God
was united unto the nature of man: truly then, as your learning perchanse is
such that you may be suffered to read an open lesson in some grammar schole,
so without all doubt you are to be amended for the unright construyng of our
Christian rules. But, (say you) we must search the scriptures as Christ and
his Apostles taught us, and as the holy Fathers did use against the Arrians,
and other heretics. As who should say, that ( This is my body which shall be
delivered for you) were not scripture plain enough, or as though the Arrians
had not in sight, more places of scripture then the Catholic Fathers, or else
as though the most holy men of these fyftene hundred years, whom we follow in
the faith of the sacrament, had written whole and large treatyses of it, and
used no scripture at all. Well Sir, if we lack scripture, you, perchaunse, do
abound in it, and therefore what is your opinion of the sacrament?

when we interpret Christ his words, we say, Defense fol. 106.
it is a figurative speech, and such as the Holyghoste often uses in the
institution of sacraments and ceremonies. It is most true that figurative
speeches are often used in the scripture, Reply.
as when Christ said: I am the vine. etc. but can you therefore conclude, Io. 15.
that they are always used? and if, I am the vine, be figuratyue, is, This is
my body, like unto it? When the high Priests of the Jews asked Christ,
whether he were the soune of God, he answered, Mare. 14.
I am, he said again unto his dysciples, Io. 14.
I am the way, the truth, and life, and yet he was not a figuratyue life, but
real life in deed. And although that Christ speaking of S. John the Baptyst,
and sayeing, If you will receive him, he is Helyas, Math. 11.
meaned not yet that he was Helyas in deed, but that he represented Helyas for
some points, nevertheless saying of him self, Io. 8.
I am the beginning which speak unto you, he wills us to understand, not
that he represents only or signifies the beginning which is God, but that
in very nature and substance, Of particular premises to conclude generally it
is no good fasshion.
he is the author of all things. Whereby you may or should rather perceive,
that this argument which you gather out of particular phrases in the
scriptures, does help nothing your purpose, except you could prove them to be
general. Now as concerning these words of S. Luke and S. Paul, Luc. 22. 1.
Cor. 11.
This is the new testament in my blood, by which you understand, that the
Sacrament is a testimony or pledge of his last will and gift: concerning also
the number of testimonies which you bring out of the ancient Doctors, to prove
that Christ gave a memory, token, sign, figure, and similitude of his body.
I will not speak against them, because they be true sayings and Catholic.
But when will you leave to prove that which we deny not, and show directly
unto the purpose that Christ gave no body at all, but a figure only unto us?
The catholic faith is this, that the external signs and forms of bread and
wine are figures of the natural body and blood of Christ which are under them,
(for as bread is the most natural and necessary food, so we understand the
flesh of the soune of God, to be unto the faithful,) Also, that the very
natural body of Christ in the sacrament, is a figure of the glory to come,
and represents that unity which shall be between him and his elect in
heaven, (for he which communicates him self so freely and fully in earth unto
sinners, the catholics confess signs and figures in the Sa^rame^t but not
only them.
what will not he do to the holy ones in heaven?) Furthermore, both the
external visible signs of bread and wine, and the true body of our Sauyor
which is under the visible sacraments, are a figure and sign of the mutual
unity of Christ with his church, (for she is made one bread, through Christ,
as it were of many graynes, and one body consisting of many members.) Again,
the breaking of the visible sacrament, and the real presence of the body of
Christ, are in sign and memory of his passion, (for if a man should seek a
thousand ways to styrremen up to think on Christ, this passes all other
without comparison, to bring the self same body before them.) But with all
these figures and signs which are founded in the sacrament, we confess also,
that there is a real presence, not spiritual only, Lib. 8. de trinitate
but corporal. For S. Hilarye proves at large, that Christ unto thi^ day is
in us not only through concord and agreement of will, E^thimius in su^ P^noph.
pae. 2.
but also truth of nature. Also Saint Gregorye Nyssene has this conclusion,
that like as the bread which our Savior did eat, whiles he lived yet on earth,
was converted into his divine nature, Christ is reallie in the sacrament.
because that man, which did so eat it, was also God: even so, the bread of
our mysteries, is converted into the flesh of the word. Furthermore S. Hyerome
witnesses, that the blood and flesh of Christ, In epist. ad Ephesians. li. 1.
cap. 1.
is understood two ways, either for that spiritual and diuy^^ flessh, of
which he himself said, Io. 6.
My flessh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed* etc. either for
that flessh which was crucified, and the blood which was shedd with the spear
of the souldior. According unto this division, diversity of flessh and blood
is taken to be also in his Saints, so that it is one flessh which shall see
the saluations of God, and an other flessh and blood, which can not possess
the kingdom of God. Of this testimo^ye therefore we gather, that as our flesh
in heaven shall be true and real flesh, although it be made spiritual: so the
spiritual flessh which Christ promised unto us, is his very true and natural
flesh. Again, S. Chrysostom testifyeth, that we are turned into one flessh
with him, Ho.45. in Io.
not only by charity, but in very deed. And in an other place, He has made
us his body, says he, Ho. 60. ad po. An^.
not only by faith, but also in very deed. And it is so true, that Christ his
natural flesh is geauen unto us in the sacrament, that we should also see it
with our bodily eyes, except diverse causes were to the contrary, Amb. lib. 4*
(...). 4. de sa.
of which this is one, lest some horror and lothsomenes might trouble us, if it
were geauen in visible form of flesh and blood unto us. And to conclude: The
son of God is united unto us through the mystical blessing, Cyrill. lib. 11.
ca. 26^. in Io.
corporally as man, spirituallye as God. Wherefore we do not destroy one
truth by an other, neither so believe the presence of Christ his body, that in
no case we will admit any signification or figure, neither again so magnify
signs and figures, that we take away all real presence, De consecrat. 2.
cap. Vtrum.
S. Augustine teaching us, That the body of Christ, is both a verity, and a
figure: a verity, whiles the substance of bread and wine is made his body and
blood by the power of the holyghost: and a figure, because of that which is
outwardly seen and perceived. And so against the next time, (if you can have
any answer,) provide to prove, not that Christ gave a figure, but that he gave
nothing else but a figure. For if you will so grant a figure, that yet you
will not deny the real presence, then will all our other co^clusions, which
you despise now, be deduced out of the principle of Christ his real presence,
that you need to make no further question about them. As for the kings broad
seal, unto which you resemble the sacrament, it may be well and truly said,
that in deed the sacrament is a most sure confirmation of all the acts which
Christ did work for us, in the time of his visible conversation among us. For
how might we have his very true body among us, except he received a true
nature of man upon him? or how might we Christians doubt of it, whether he be
risen from death to immortality, whose flessh and blood is daily geauen to
such as will, to save them from corruption? But, if you make no more of it,
then that, as the king his broad seal does geaue a force to his letters
patentes, Goodly great words among the protestants but small and simple
sense.
so likewise the sacramental bread should confirm the testament and promyses
of Christ, and that in such a sense, that as truly as our body is fedd with
that bread, so truly our soul is norysshed with his spirit: verily you have
taken a great wonder at a common and easy matter. For every man, when he will,
not only in the church, but at home and else where, and not only by bread or
wine, but also, by every thing that is true, may use the like phrase, and
say: as truly as I stand, as I sytt, as this fire burns, as the son
shines, as I live, as I eat, etc. so truly God dyed once for us to save us
from death everlasting. And if you will contend, that although one may so say
of al things which are true, yet that there is a special regard to be had
unto bread and wine which Christ him self appointed for that purpose, yet you
have no great cause of wonder, no more then you should marvel in some weighty
account which the king himself would set for some profitable effect, that one
such piece of gold which right now stood but for a shilling, should be
suddenly removed and made to signify. 1000000. Li. For if all the dignity and
price of the Sacrament consists herein, that it represents a most
wonderful gift and benefyte, which the soune of God bestowed upon us: then
are you very much to blame for defacing, spoiling, breaking, and burning of
crucifixes, which did more lively represent the death of Christ, then any
external form of bread and wine can do. Whereunto if you will answer, that
Christ appointed the one and not the other, you may yet gather thereby, that
(according unto your imagination) there is no such great excellencye in the
institution of bread and wine to represent and declare unto us the verity of
Christ his promyses, but that a paynter or caruer may as evidently express
them by his art and colors, and more effectually also perchaunse, for the
plain, simple, devout and good men of the world. Wherefor that the holy
doctors and fathers of Christ his church* should mean nothing else by their
terms of ( transmutatio^, transelementation, mutation, conversion, alteration,
etc.) But the chainge of the external elements into this meaning, that they
do show the effect of the Sacrament, and seal up unto us the promyses of
Christ: it is a very abject and vile mysconstruyng of them. For they declare
most expreslye, that in the external elements there is no chainge at all, but
the chainge is only in the substance of the bread into Christ his body, which
at an other time is to be proved more largely, Sermon. de coena Domini.
but now S. Cyprian alone, may suffice, saying This bread, which our Lord did
unto his disciples deliver, being chainged not in outward show, but in nature
is made flesh by the allmightynes of the word, etc. But as much as you can for
shame you extenuate and debase the greatness of Christ his benefytes toward
us. The M. of the defense will not ^aue the benefits of God to be so great as
they are in deeds.
For Christ saying this is my body, you understand him to mean a figure only
of his body, and the holy doctors proving unto us, that it should not be
incredible, that of simple bread he makes unto us his precious body, because
he made all things of no thing, and can do more then is ordynary by the
common course of nature, yet, (say you) they speak of no other chainge, but
that which is about the external elements. And one of them, having this
similitude, Like as wax being set unto fire, is lykened unto it, no substance
remains, no overplus rests: so do thou think, the mysteries to be
consumed by the substance of Christ his body. No, (say you) it is not so, or
else it is to be understood after this manner, that like as when the king his
broad seal is set unto his lettres pate^tes, then have those letters their
effect, so, (I trow) that the Sacrament should be like a piece of wax to
confirm I can not tell what letters. For if you mean the promysses of
everlasting life, before we come to receive the Sacrament, we believe God and
his church, and doubt nothing of them, and therefore I confess my ignorance,
that I can not tell, what manner of leases or grauntes you conceive to be
vnconfirmed, before the seal of bread and wine be added unto them. But (as I
began to tell you) you take all things at the lowest and basest manner, and
this perchaunse is that, which you object unto us, (when your delicate and
deyntie eloquence could not abide to hear the Catholic to speak of the
pulling, skaulding, drawing, and rosting of a capon, before you did eat him,)
resembling us unto the servant, which being commanded to make the dinner
ready, would think upon great prouysion, the master him self meaning to have
nothing else but such cold meat set upon the table, as was in the house. As
who should say, Cold ro^^ among heretics.
we shall be saved and fare well enough, if we do but imagine that Christ dyed
for us. As for the having of his natural body, because it is a matter of
great provision, and it keeps a great sturr within a man's heart, to conceive
how it should be a natural body, and placed now in heaven, and yet present
and perfect on every altar in the whole world, and because it were little
enough to think all night long and morning before, how to come to such a feast
with contrition, confession, and satisfaction, therefore it is but superfluous
cost, and a torment unto the conscience. Cold meat shall serve us well
enough, and we shall be as merye with bread and drink in the remembrance that
Christ dyed for us, as with all the provision which the papists say Christ to
have made. In which similitude, you have as rightly expressed your inward
thoughts, as may be. And we truly, if we make great provision, we do no
other then we are commanded, because we be his servants which every day
geaueth the fatt calfe, for joy of his sounes which were lost and are returned
again, which was never a niggard of his meat and drink, in so much that when
he had none other, but servants in his house, yett he provided so royally for
them, that as every one of them wysshed, so did his meat taste in his mouth.
For consider only the excellencye of Manna of the old law. First of all it
came from heaven without any labor of the Israelites: it came daily, (except
one day in the week) that they should have it fressh and fressh: Exodus 16.
it came so plentyfullye, that yt covered all the ground about their tents:
and yet so equallye, that he which gathered more did not abound, and he which
gathered less did not want it came so simply as if it had been the seeds of
coryander: Number. 11.
and it tasted so wonderfully that it contained all delycates and hearts
desire: S^p. 16.
it continued to them.xl. losue. 5.
years together, and as surely as their bodies were noryshed with that bread,
so sure they might be, that their sowles and minds were fed with the grace of
Christ. And all this yet, was bestowed upon the Jews, before the incarnation
of the sou^e of God, before the coming of the holyghost, in the law of
bondage, in the time of figures, and when God (as I may say) did not yet keep
open householde in all co^treyes of the world, neither make so great cheer, as
he minded to do afterward. Therefore, if such things were geaue^ unto the
Jews, Christians are worse fed then the Jews were, except they receive the
true body of Christ.
what was to be reserved for Christians? and if we have not in deed the real
body of Christ among us, what like thing have we, unto their Manna. If there
were no other argument but this one, which is gathered upon the conferring of
time with time, state with state, figures with truths, Moses with Christ,
Jews with Christians, yet of very congruence and conscience, we should look
to fare better then the Israelites did in the barren wyldernes. But, except our
Savior his words, ( this is my body, this is my blood) be understood
literally and really, we fare a thousand parts worse. For as in our bread
unity is represented, so might it have been in (...) Manna: and as you be as
verily assured, that your soul does participate Christ in spirit, as your
body does receive the external bread, so likewise they, which were spiritual
among the Israelites, did, in their Manna, conceive and receive the bread of
life and the Savior of the world: and again, as your sacramental bread is a
token and seal unto you of the goodness and promyses of God, so was Manna unto
them; and that with much more miracle and comfort. So that you have nothing in
this your Sacrament of the new law, (which should be most excellent,) which one
may not find in the Manna of the old law, which yet was but a shadow and
figure of the body of Christ in the Sacrament, but Manna of that time, had
many wonderful prerogaty^es, by which it far passes in estimation, the
Sacrament of Christ his body and blood, if there be no more in it, then you
do conceive and utter. Which because it is unreasonable, therefore we can not
but understand Christ his words, ( This is my body, etc.) in that sense which
we do, and we do not fear least we shall offend in making to great a price
and value of the Sacrament, but rather we confess that we shall never be able
to express the majesty, the miracles, and the dignity of it. As for you, if
you be delighted with cold roast, and would not, (if you might) have Christ
really and naturally God and man, body and soul, to be geauen unto you, but
can satisfye your appetyte, with only figures, signs and similitudes, you shall
sytt by your self for the Catholics, until God shall send you more
charity. Which if it were, (as it should be in you) you could not find fault
with the real presence of Christ in his Sacrament, Defense fol. 118.
and call it a torment unto your conscience, but rather you would be werye of
all scrappes and leauinges of an yesterdayes feast, and contemn all
counterfeit dyshes, which have more appearance then substance. When you were a
child, if one had brought unto you a bird or a fysh made in fine and sweet
paste with a figg or such like thing within, you would have been more delighted
in it, the^ with the true meat of the bird or fysh, but after that you be
come to the state of a man, you should covet the sound and strong meats, and
let all such creekes and knackes alone, to serve for children. God grant that
you find not hereafter, fault also with the Catholics, that they teach you
to believe a true and natural flesh and soul in Christ and that you reprove
not the charges and cost which God has bestowed upon the redemption of
mankind, because the only word of his blessed will, was able to save us, so
that his incarnation needed not, but only a similitude of a body.

But for this time, let this be an end of this Replye, and I would to God, here
might be an end of all controversy, which because it is not very credible, in
such confusion and vnrulynes of sects and divisions, therefore some answer is to
be looked for, or rather some similitude of it. For as concerning any true
answer in the defense of your part, you can never make it in those points,
which you are burdened withal in this Replye, as, your mysconstruyng of holy
Fathers, and reasoning out of the purpose with many absurd and unlearned
conclusion. Yet no doubt, but you will co^tinew still in your stoutnes, and by
one mean or other, maintain your Capitaynes against us. For if Goliath be
stricken down, yet you set up an Achilles, and by chainging of the name you
think to chainge the cause. But if your bastard bravery, had not ben
sufficiently exemplified, by the fact of the vncircumcided Goliath, yet now by
the crake, which you set upon your profane Achilles, you prove your selfs
more like that fell Giant the^ ever you were before. For allthough Goliath was
bygg in stature and words, and contemned the simple staff and scripp with
which the loueable Dauyd came against him, yet after the stone once fastened in
his forehead, and the overthrow given unto him, the Philistians hearts were in
their heels, and they fledd away without any further bragging. But he, whom
you nyckname Paris, allthough he has utterly killed your Achilles, shooting
(as you say) his arrows out of a corner privily, but how so ever they were
shot, hitting (as we believe) the mark perfectlye, yet you make your Achilles
so invincible, as though he could not be wounded at all in this quarrel, and
as though he passed no more of any shot of ours then if benettes or strawes
should be cast again him. Which is so exceading and vain glorious a crake,
that it may rather be thought that your Achilles would be very gladd, if he
might never hereafter hear any more words, about his open and loud
challendge. For as concerning the manifest objections, which are made against
him, they are to be read in plain prent, which he has not be^ yet in haste to
answer (as far as we know) because perchaunse he knows his own imbecillitie.
And if this Apologye of the private Mass had been also putt in prent, that it
might have come unto his sight, he would (I think) have dyssembled the matter
or despised the arguments, to shifte away from him all the labor of
answering. But how so ever your Achilles be dysposed, you have showed your
self a frindlye Patroclus, which to save his worshipp, have taken upon you to
answer in his behalf. Which although you have done, with much infelicitie, yet
you have declared, your good heart and fidelity. You shall cause Achilles
himself, to take the matter into his own hands, partly for the challenge
sake, which he first of all pronunced, partly for you his friends sake, whom he
will be loath to see undefended. God send you of his grace abundantly, that you
fight not for an Helena in deed, mainteyning the lusts and appetytes of your
carnal reason, striving for your own inventions, and following your own
praises. The church and spouse of Christ is shamefast, chaste, gentle,
faithful, obedient, without murmour and spitefullnes, full of good vows,
steadfast in her profession, always desirous of unity, which virtues whiles
some have neglected, they have themselves ben contemned of God, and permitted
to follow their own frowardnes, to the increasing of their just dampnation. Of
this kind was Luther and his folowers, which as though they had nothing else to
study upon, but only how they might invent sects and diuisyons, so they left
no one thing which the church taught them, uncontrolled, or uncorrupted making,
at their will and pleasure, of things necessary, no matter at all, (as
appears in the seven sacraments, which they have brought to two only or
three, and them corrupted,) of universal and autentyke, so indifferent, that
every one might omit them, (as prescript fastinges, orders of praying, and
ceremonies) and of indifferent in the nature of them, so necessary and
absolute, that no dispensation may serve for the altering of them, (as in sole
receiving, receiving in one kind, and reservation of the sacrament.) So that
nothing pleased them, that the church, in which they took their faith,
delivered unto them, because they loved them selves to much, and their own
dear Cate and Helena. Whom, God shall at length, destroy with the spyrite of
his mouth, and by sending of his fear into their hearts which honor her, drive
away that wicked one, which maynteyneth the battle, and make such peace and
tranquillity in their conscience, that it may have good space and mind to
consider the security which is in the catholic church, and learn among many
other, this one point of charity, that neither sole receiving under one kind,
neither receiving under both kinds with company, does commend us unto God,
but the keeping of his commandments, and obeying of his ordynances, which he
has or shall utter, either by him self immedyatly, or by the Catholic church
his interpretour.

Amen.
Quandoquidem viri docti and scripturae sacrae atque Anglicae linguae periti,
librum hunc Ioannis Rastelli aduersus falso nominatam defensionem veritatis,
Anglice scriptum in quindecim ternionibus, testati sunt apud me, se eundem
accurate examinasse, seque reperisse eum non solum esse catholicum, sed etiam
vtilem qui ad aedificationem typis excudatur, omnino putamus operaepreciu^ esse
vt imprimatur.

Ita esse testor Cornelius Iansenius Theologus.

A table of particular matters which you shall find in this book.
That the church had her infancy. 24 That priests are bound to offer. 30. 54
A discussing of a testimony of S. Cyprian lib. 2. epist. 3. 43 Of the
sacrifice of the altar. 59 S. Chrysostom his words discussed, frustra
habetur quotidiana oblatio, the daily sacrifice is had in vain. 77 Of the
analogy and proportion between the paschall lamb and the sacrament of the
altar. 83 Of receiving alone at home. 130 Of holy Satirus and his shippwracke
with the manner of his receiving. 142 Of reservation of the Sacrament. 148 Of
Sirapio^ and his sole receiving in one kind. 158 The.xiiij. Canon of the first
Nicene Council, examined. 162 That continuance of time is a great
commendacion to a religion. 170 Of the church, and where it is to be serched
for. 188 Of the true and certain marks of the church. 190 Of the real presence
of Christ in the Sacrament. 196
faults escaped folio. page linea. Pruilege 6 2 22 privilege. not 9 2 12 put
it out contended 13 2 10 contented. speak 24 1 15 spoke. allthough 33 2 23
like as. fol. 19 41 2 in the marge^. 20 hymselue 45 2 2 himself. herr 53 1 6
her new testament 67 2 16 the sacrament of the new testament. Singularly pure
69 1 6 is singularly pure. Much less 70 1 3 much less are. war 72 1 25 were.
writings 76 1 23 writing. contended. 81 1 2 contented. strange 81 1 11 strong.
Substances 100 2 26 substance. of the matter 101 1 26 of the substance of the
matter. used 107 1 24 uses. geaue 110 1 21 geaueth. dyuided 111 2 5 devised.
it 113 2 19 yet. the faith 117 1 21 the same faith. fair 119 2 6 far. said
129 2 20 says. dodie 140 2 3 body. Iulis 147 1 6 Julius. make 147 2 9
makes. man 148 1 18 men. recise 150 2 18 cease. had 165 1 19 has. before 180
1 14 be for. it. 180 2 18 yet.


