MERCY TO A BEAST.

A SERMON PREACHED AT SAINT MARY'S SPITTLE IN London on Tuseday in Easterweeke.
1612.

BY JOHN RAWLINSON DOCTOR OF DIVINITY.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnes. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS Lord Ellesmere, Lord High Chancelour of England,
and Chancelour of the University of Oxford.
RIght Honorable; unworthy (I know) are these my endeavors either to be
honored with your worthy patronage, or but offered to your judicious view. Yet
your goodness, as it does exceed your Greatness, so will it also (I trust) excuse
my boldness, while I humbly beg of your Right Honorable Lordship, that as
the Cael Rhodogin. lect. ant. lib. 20. cap 5.
Ostrich, is said to hatch her eggs not (as do other birds) by sitting on
them, but by the effectual rays of her eyes: so you will deigne, by the
comfortable rays of a gracious aspect, to animate and hatch (if I may so
speak) this egg of your own laying; which peradventure will otherwise be in
no better case than Job. 39.17.
the Ostriches eggs in the wilderness, obvious to the incursion of every wild
beast.

-- Virg.
Etiam Parnassia laurus
Parva, sub ingenti matris se subijcit vmbra.
The Lawyers say, that Annulo alieno signans id in subscriptione debet
exprimere: He that signs with another man's ring, meet it is that he should
signify so much in his subscription; And I hold it a point of good ingenuity,
in this my praescription, Plin, ad Vespasian. praefat.
Fateriper quem profecerim, to acknowledge that it is your grane of mustard
seed which by the blessing of God is grown to so great a tree, in whose
branches not Mat. 13 32.
the fowls of heaven, but the souls of all sorts of men here on earth may
make their nests.

If any shall take this to be symptoma indicatorium (as Physicians speak)
whereby they shall judge me sick of the worlds disease, scribendi cacoethes,
that it ching custom of setting their pains a sunning, which has possessed
al sorts of men, learned and unlearned, in these voluminous days of ours,
because most men being like Pilate, unjust Judges of their own doings, will
never reverse their sentence of Joan. 19.22.
quod scripsi, scripsi; I will not allege the rarity (I think I might say
nullity) of sermons in this argument, which might happily be a tolerable, if not
plausible, apology: but will rather excuse my self (as I justly may) by a
longing desire I had to present to your Lordship, as did Genesis 27.19.
Jacob to Isaak his aged father, a meat that your soul loves; a sermon upon
this text, where in your soul so much delights. And no merveile; seeing it
is a text of merciful justice, which is no less the joy of your heart, than
the daily exercise of your whole life. If my art be not such as Rebecca's was
to make a savourie meat of this kid of your own flock, so pleasing to your
Lordships palate, that when you eat of it, your soul might bless me: yet my
heart (I am sure) is such as Ber. in Fest. omn sanct. sermon. 1.
S. Bernards was, when he wished upon like occasion; Vtinam ego fidelis coquus,
vtinam anima mea coquina vtilis videatur! O that my self were a skillful Cook
to dress it! o that my soul were a fit kitchen to dress it in! But sle^derly
cookt as it is, my hope is that your Lordship will not utterly reject it, who in
the time of my nearer attendance, did so often vouchsafe me a gracious hearing
of my more raw and rude meditations: but that you will favorably accept if not
of what I offer, yet of what I would offer, as well because Aquin.
Voluntas est mensura actionum; as because Impotentia excusat legem. It is
enough for Aelian.
little birds to be (...), ovipara; it is for beasts that are bigger to be
(...) vivipara. And for poor men that were not able to sacrifice a living
bull, it was thought sufficient by the Gentiles, if they did but Suid. in. voc
(...).
Tauru^ e farina fingere: offer up a bull of meal, a bakers bull.

He that should but know, what incredible favors and encouragements I have
from time to time received of your Lordship (such as neither can I mention
without note of arrogance, nor forget without impiety, but to deserve them is
no less than an absolute impossibility) would never blame me to be more than
zealous, even ambitious, to give some (howsoever slender) testimony of my
unfeigned thankfulness for them.

All the requital I can make your Lordship for this your so great, so manifold
goodness toward me, is (as thousands more do, and have cause to do) first to
praise God for you, who has given you so heroical an heart, and then daily to
pray unto him, that as for eloquence he has made you a second Homer.
Nestor, from whose tongue flowed speech sweeter than honey, (...):

So he would lengthen your years, as the years of Nestor, who because he
lived three ages of men, was called Gell Noct, At. l. 19. c 7.
Trisaeclisenex: yea and sweeten them too, as he has done your speech: And,
that as he has gloriously enriched you with gifts both of nature and grace,
wherein none can equal you, but your self, like as Deo nihil nisi Deus
aequale: so the glory of your Right Honorable Lordship, adorned by the Right
Noble Countess your dearest consort, and daily propagated in your honorable
posterity, may outline both you and them, and not end, but in that life of
glory which shall have none end.

While my heart is thus enditing of a good matter (for Psalm. 147.1.
a joyful and pleasant thing it is to be thankful) I must add yet one thing
more; namely, that as your LP. is -- Hor lib 2. Od. 17.
mearum Grande decus columenque rerum; So shall you ever be my terrestrial
trinity; Theognis sub init.
(...), the beginning, middle and end of all my travailes: and as to your
Lordship I have long since sacrificed both my self and my whole lives service;
so would I also be ready (if it were possible) to perform in act what Sen. de
brevit. vit. c. 8.
the ancient were wont to profess in word to those whom they did most
vehemently affect, Paratos se partem annorum suorum dare: even by shortening
mine own years to lengthen yours: and will therefore end with that Tertullian.
devout acclamation, wherewith they were wont to honor their triumphant
Emperors:

De nostris annis tibi Jupiter augeat annos! Your Right Honorable Lordships
most bounden Chaplain JOHN RAWLINSON.

PROVERB. 12.10. A righteous man reguardeth the life of his beast.

Or, according to the Septuagint;

A just man is merciful to the life of his beast.


WHAT care the Lord charged his Prophet to take for preserving that fiue-worded
name of Christ, Esa. 8.1.
Velociter spolia detrahe, festina praedari: Make speed to the spoil, haste to
the prey; The like, let me beseech you (right Honorable, right worshipful,
right dear and Christian brethren) to take of this fiue-worded text of mine:
(for the words, though in English the articles make them swell to a greater
number, yet in Latin they are but only five; Novit iustus iumentorum suorum
animas: and in Greek just as many, (...)) namely, to take unto you not two or
three loose papers, but Volumen, a book; and not a little petty book, but
Grande volumen, a great book; and to write in it, not with lead, which will
soon be obliterated and blotted out, but Stylo, with a pen; and not with the
pen of a curious scribe, whose writing few or none but the learned can read,
but stylo vulgari, or stylo hominis plebeij (as Mr. Calvin has it) with the
pen of a vulgar Scribe, whose writing may be familiar to the meanest reader.
And what is my desire herein, but that b Calvin. in Esa. 8.
which is also the meaning of the holy Ghost in that place (as Ad. Sasbout ibid.
Adam Sasbout has well observed) to give you to understand, that the words
though but five in number, yet are they of very great weight and consequence;
and that under them is veiled such variety of mysteries, that if any should
take upon him to reveal them, he should never be able to do it, no not in the
largest volume; That therefore they are not lightly to be reguarded, but
carefully to be registered and kept upon record.

A righteous man is merciful to the life of his beast. The sacred fire of this
sweet affection of mercy is so kindled within the bowels of a righteous man,
that smothered it cannot, it will not be; it must and will break forth. And
therefore it is not only (...), miseretur, in the Septuagint; which notes his
inward affection: but (as the vulgar Latin has it) Novit, he knows, or
reguardeth: (as Tremelius) Curat, he cares for the life of his beast; which
argues the manifestation of it in outward action.

First, Novit, he knows, or reguardeth. The phrase may seem somewhat strange
to the ignorant; yet (strange as it is) ye have it in many other passages of
holy writ. I will name but only two, which have best correspondence with my
text. The one is Psalm. 1.6.
Psalm. 1. Nouit Dominus viam iustorum: The Lord knows the way of the
righteous; as here, Novit iustus vitam iumentorum: A righteous man knows the
life of his beast. The other is Esa. 1.3.
Esa, 1. Novit bos possessorem suum: The ox knows his owner; as here, Novit
possessor bovem suum: The owner knows or reguardeth his ox, or his beast.

2. Yea, he so reguardeth it, that his Novit is also a Curat. He makes it some
part of his care and labor, to intend the preservation and welfare of his beast.

There is first Intensio, the Intension of a righteous man's mercy.

Then secondly Extensio, the Extension of it appears in the object, in that
it stretches it self so far, as to his beast. For a beast is not (as we say
in schools) Obiectum adaequatu^, the adaequate object, but Partiale, one
particular object of a righteous man's mercy. The meaning is; that he reguardeth
not only the life of men, which is ever in the first place to be reguarded, as
being a thing so precious, that of all other things it best deserves reguard
(for it is a truth though it were spoken by the father of untruths, the Devil;
Job. 2.^.
Skin for skin, and all that ever a man has will he give for his life) but his
bowels are so enlarged with pity, that he will not wrong, no not a brute
beast; nay more, he will be sure to do it right, and the more right, the less
able it is to right it self: and that he may do it right indeed (as he must,
if he will be righteous) he is ever ready to afford it such necessary helps, as
may any way conduce to the mainteinance of life.

Neither stands he thus affected to some one beast only, because peradventure
he has in all but one; which was the case of 2. Sam. 12.3.
the poor man in the parable which Nathan propounded to David, who having but
only one little sheep, he so cherisht it, that it ate of his own morsels,
and drank of his cup, and slept in his bosom, and was unto him as his
daughter: but, be he never so rich in beasts, to all of them does he stand
so humanely affected, that he will not suffer any one of them to perish for
want of tending. And therefore the Septuagint read it not (...), the life, but
(...), the lives; not (...), of his beast, but (...), of his beasts in the
plural. A righteous man is merciful to the lives of his beasts.

Having briefly illightened the letter of my text, I come now to the parts;
which are principally two: 1 The one; a general Thesis. A just man's is
merciful. 2 The other; a particular Hypothesis. He is merciful to the life of
his beast.


In the Thesis, there is 1 The Subject; Iustus, a righteous man. 2 And then,
the Affection of that subject: Miseretur: is merciful.


In the Hypothesis, there is 1 The Object of that affection: The life of his
beast. 2 And the^, in the Object (covertly implied) a threefold reason of his
affection thereunto.


So that, first we are to consider (How) then (Why) a righteous man is
merciful to the life of his beast. The (How) is six fold: the (Why)
threefold, as ye shall hear anon.

First then to begin with the Thesis. 1 THESIS.
A righteous man is merciful: and therein, first with the Subject; Iustus, a
righteous man.

This one word Iustus, 1 Iustus.
a righteous man, yeildes three things worthy your observation.

1. Scarsity of righteous men.
1 The first, that there is a very great scarsity of righteous men. I deny not,
but that Iustus, a righteous man, may here stand for Iusti, righteous men, by
an (...), or (...), which is the surrogation of the singular number for the
plural, (a figure very frequent thorowout the whole book of God) yet,
considering that in the clause next ensuing, (viz. Viscera impiorum crudelia;
the bowels of the wicked are cruel) the opposite word to Iustus, a righteous
man, is not Impius, a wicked man, but Impij, wicked men; I doubt not, but I may
hence no less fitly, than truly observe, that there is a very great penury
and paucity of righteous men: as on the other side there is Messis multa; a
great provent and harvest of wicked men.

Rari quippe boni, numero vix sunt totidem quot
Thebarum portae, vel divitis ostia Nili:
For good men (says Iuven. Satyr. 13.
the Satyrist) are very scarce; equal in number to the gates of Thebes, or to
the mouths of Nilus, which were but seven. So scarce; that 1. Cor. 9.24.
the Apostle 1 Cor. 9. comprehends them all under one; Vnus accipit branium:
One receives the price. One; yet not simply one and no more; but One (says
Lyran. ibid.
Lyranus) by a Synecdoche, for a very few. In token whereof, in all the old
world (which yet (I fear) was somewhat better tha^ this new) there was but one
righteous Noah, and seave^ more of his family, that were saved from perishing
in the waters; yet of those 7 one a cursed Cham. And of all the 10 lepers that
were cleansed by our Savior Christ, Luc. 17 15.
Luc. 17. there was but only one that returned to give thanks. As for the
other nine, they might very well be summed up, and figured with a cipher.

Yea, such a dearth is there of just men, that in Scripturephrase the just are
less than one, even just none: Perijt iustus de terra, and rectus in homine
non est: Mich. 72.
Mich. 7. The just man is perished from the earth, and there is none righteous
among men. And the Prophet David has told us four times (for failing) that,
Psalm 13 24.
there is none that does good, no not one. Twice, Psalm. 13. and Psalm. 52.2.4.
twice more, Ps. 53.

2 A second thing to be observed in the Subject, 2. Religion the root of
righteousness.
is this; that the root of righteousness, is religion, as irreligion is the
root of unrighteousness and injustice. This I gather ex vi vocis, out of the
signification of the word (...), irreligious, which in the next clause is
opposed to (...), righteous. For if the wicked be therefore (...), unrighteous,
because they are (...), irreligious, then surely a contrario, by an argument
from the contrary, the godly is therefore (...), righteous, because he is
(...), religious, having ever the fear of God before his eyes.

No true justice the^ without true religion. For though some of the heathen men
were morally just in an eminent manner, as was Aristides, who was thereupon
surnamed Iustus, the Just: yet could none of them properly be termed just. For
both their justice and whatsoever other virtues they had (because not seasoned
with religion) were (by Austin.
St Austins verdict) at the best but splendida peccata goodly and glorious
sins.

Learn we therefore (as in Zacharies song we are taught Luc. 1.75.
Luc. 1. to serve God in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life.
Not in righteousness without holiness (for no better can that be than a
painted righteousness) but in holiness and righteousness both together, else
can we serve him in neither: because (as Theoph. ib.
Theophylact notes upon that place) Sanctitas est iustitia erga Deum: iustitia
vero sanctitas erga homines. Holiness is righteousness toward God: and
righteousness is holiness toward men.

3. What kind of righteousness here denominateth a righteous man.
3 A third thing to be observed in the Subject, is this; what kind of
righteousness it is, that here denominateth a righteous man! Not to recount
those many several sorts of righteousness which both Divines and Philosophers
teach; I take it, that the obligation or bond of righteousness wherein a
righteous man stands bound to his beast, is (if we properly speak) a bond of
Oeconomicall or houshold-righteousnesse, Occonomicall righteousness.
which binds him to an honest care and reguard not only Familiae, of his
family, but Rei familiaris, of his cattle, and of all things else, that
apperteine to the good and welfare of his family.

Howbeit, because we are now in the book of Parables, and my text is not so
much literally spoken, as in a parable; (...) (as Heb. 11.19.
the Apostle speaks of Abraham's oblation of Isaak) I say, in a parable or
similitude of that reguard, which a righteous man has, as of his beast, so
much more of men, though among men of those especially, that more especially
belong to his care and custody; not unfitly may we reduce it to that
universal Moral righteousness, which duly distributeth to every one his
own. To every one his own; that is, Moral righteousness.
(faith Anselm.
Anselmus) Maiori reverentiam, pari concordiam, minori disciplinam etc:
Reverence to our Superior, concord to our equal, discipline to our inferior,
obedience to God, sanctimonie to our selves, patience to our enemy, works of
mercy to the poor; I may add out of my text; even to our poor beast. For so
general must be the extent and emanation of righteousness, dispe^sing to every
one his due, that it must not exclude, no not beasts themselves, and therefore
much less men: yea, by so much the less, by how much a man is more worth,
tha^ a world of beasts; though it is rufully true, that many men, (so deboshed
and depraved is their condition of life) might better be spared than some one
beast.

Let no man then of what estate or quality soever think to shift off this
duty of distributive righteousness, as if it concerned him not; For no less
does it concern every man, than does the very nature of man: so that to shift
off righteousness, is to shift off humanity and all. Vir a virtute: a man
(says Cicer.
the Orator) has his name of virtue: but vir a iustitia: a man (say J) has
his nature, that is, the perfection of his nature, from this virtue of justice.
For (to say nothing of that outward rectitude and uprightness of man's body,
which yet ought to teach us an inward rectitude and uprightness of mind;
Bernard.
Nihil enim indecentius, quam in recto corpore curvum animum gerere: For there
is nothing more indecent, than to carry a crooked mind in a straight body)
what else, I pray you, is that purer part of conscience, which the Schoolmen
call (...), seated in the upper portion of the reasonable soul of man, but
Inflexibilis mentis rectitudo, an inflexible rectitude, or uprightness of
minds, which cannot possibly be swaied to any kind of injustice, Aquia.
Quia instigat ad bonum, and murmurat de malo: because it pricks a man forward
to good, and checkes him for evil? So that, as Austin.
St Austin says of sin, that Omne peccatum est voluntarium, atque it a
voluntarium, vt si non sit voluntarium, no^ sit peccatum: Every sin is
voluntary, yea so voluntary, that sin is no sin, unless it be voluntary:
so may I also truly say of man; that Every man is naturally just, yea so just,
that man is no man, unless he be just. The truth hereof has Eccles. 12.13
Solomon sealed and delivered unto us, Eccles. 12. Let us hear the end of all:
fear God, and keep his commandments: (there is universal righteousness) for
this (says he) is the whole duty of man. So our English translations have it:
but, the vulgar Latin; Hoc est omnis homo: this is whole man, or, pefit man.
Out of which place Hugo de Sa^ct. Victore.
Hugo de Sancto Victore reasons thus: Siomnis homoest, qui Deum timet, and
mandata cius obseruat, constat quod ille homo nonest, qui hoc non facit, if he
be whole man, or perfect man that fears God and keeps his commandments, why
then it is clear and out of controversy, that whosoever fears not God, nor
keeps his commandments, is no man. For it he know God and his
commandments, and yet neither fear the one, nor observe the other, he is a
contemner of both, and is magis Diabolus, quam homo; rather a Devil, than a
man: but if he know not God, not his commandments, he is blind, and is magis
bestia, quam homo; rather a beast, then a man: but if he know, and fear God,
and keep his commandments, vere homoest, why then he is a man indeed (says
Hugo) that is, a whole, a perfect man.

Ye shall see this note made good out of the very letter of my text For it is
not here said, (...), in the Greek; or vir iustus, in the Latin; though the
English phrase enforce the additament of (man) to just: but (...), iustus;
just, without the addition of man: as if it were all one to say, (...), or,
(...); Iustus, or vir iustus; just, or, a just man; because either a man must
be just, or else no man; that is, no whole, no perfect man.

And so from the former part of the Thesis, which is the Subject; iustus, a
just man, which must be (as ye have heard) every man that will be a man
indeed; I come now to the later, which is the affection, 2. Miseretur.
or attribute of that subject: Miseretur, is merciful. As the root of his
righteousness is piety, so the fruit of it is pity: which is Proprium quarto
modo: a proper passion so inseparably attending the righteous man, that it
agrees Omni, soli, and semper: to every righteous man, to a righteous man
only, and always to the righteous. And therefore it is not here said, (...);
Ille iustus; that just man, per excellentiam; a man in the superlatiue degree
of justice just, as if it were possible for a man to be just in some inferior
degree, and yet not merciful: but (...), indefinitely; a just man, a man that
has but any jot of justice in him, it cannot be but that such a man will be
merciful. So that, as before I noted, that every man (truly and properly so
called) is just, yea so just, that if he be not just, he is no man: so may I
also truly aver, that every just man is merciful, yea so merciful, that if
he be not merciful he cannot be just. For so inviolably are all virtues
ioin'd together, that all of them make but as it were one chain, like that
(...), or golden chain in Homer. Iliad. th. sub init.
Homer, reaching from earth to heaven: so that if ye break but any one link,
that is, if ye lack but any one virtue, the whole chain will presently be
dissolved and fall in sunder. Vnaquaeque enim virtus tanto minor est, quanto
desunt caeterae: For every virtue (says Greg. Moral l. 22. c. 1.
St Gregory) is so much the less, the less it is accompanied with other
virtues: and if any virtue be single or solitary from other, it is either
none at all, or at the best but imperfect. Now if such be the affinity and
conjunction of all virtues, that no one of them may be divorced or sequestered
from other: much less may two so near friends, two such Alter Ego's as are
mercy and justice be dissociated or disunited one from the other.

I know it to be the erroneous conceit of the vulgar sort, that of all other
virtues these two are most incompatible, and are opposed, as it were at
crosse-angles, Mercy and justice are not contrary.
one to the other.

But see, I pray you, the inconsequence and absurdity of that conceit. For,
first, 1. One virtue is not contrary to another.
If we grant them to be contraries; then shall we be enforced to deny at
the least one, if not both of them, to be virtues; because though one vice may
be contrary to another vice, yet one virtue is never contrary to another
virtue, but only to vice. Again; If we admit them to be contraries, 2. God
is not capable of contrariety.
then may we not in any case suppose them to be in God, because God being
ever unchangeably one, and the same, is not capable of any contrariety
whatsoever. And if we suppose them not to be in God, then where shall be that
bountifulness, and severity of God, spoken of by Romans 11.22
St Paul, Romans 11? Or how shall it be true that Psalm. 25.10.
David says, Psalm. 25? All the ways of the Lord are mercy, and truth: Where
veritas, is put for severitas: truth, for justice.

Mercy and justice are the very essence of God.
Diue but yet a little deeper into this point, and ye shall find, that the
mercy, and justice of God, are so far from crossing, or contradicting one the
other, that they are the very essence of God: according to that ancient rule of
the Schools: Quic quid est in Deo, Deus est: whatsoever is in God, is God
himsefe: and therefore both of them as great as himself: both infinite, as he
is infinite. Whence it is, that God, in that his gracious proclamation of
mercy; Esa 43.25.
I, even I am he, that puts away thine iniquities; adds; Propter me for
mine own sake. Zanch de attrib. l. 1. c. 1.
His meaning was for his mercies sake, not for any merit of ours; yet he says
not Propter misericordiam; meam; for my mercies sake; but, Propter me; for mine
own sake; to show, that his mercy is not in him, as ours is in us, a thing
different from his essence, but that himself, in the simplicity of his own
essence, is mercy it self. Now, Mart. Bucer in Romans 9.
the same which we call the mercy of God, is also his justice, because it is
his nature (as is his justice) whereof we have no knowledge, or apprehension,
save only by his works. And of all his works, whither of mercy, or justice, he
has none other reason save only his will.

-- Stat pro ratione voluntas. As therefore it is true, that Cuius vult,
miseretur: He has mercy, on whom he will have mercy; neither has he any
other cause of extending his mercy to any, save only his will: so it is as
true, that Deus nihil potest facere iniqui, dum facit pro sua voluntate: God
can do no injustice, because he ever works according to his own will; and
injustice he cannot will, his will being justice it self, and that general
rule of justice, which only of all other can suffer no exception.

Seeing then, both the mercy and justice of God is God himself; far be it from
any Christian heart, to seek to set God at ods with himself, by opposing his
mercy against his justice, as if they were (...), and could not stand together:
or, to deny that to our Jehovah, which the heathen attributed to their Jove;
to wit, that he is Optimus Maximus; the Best and the Greatest: the Best, for
his mercy; and the Greatest, for his justice.

But are these two virtues ( mercy and justice) thus reconciled in the Divine
nature only, as being essential unto it? No; Psalm. 85.18.
the Psalmist tells us, Psalm. 85. that in the person of Christ, consisting of
two natures, Divine, and Humane: Mercy and truth are met together; Mercy and
justice in Christ.
righteousness and peace have kissed each other. For, Austin. l. de Spir. and
liter. c. 9.
Legem and misericordiam in lingua portat Christus: legem, qua reos faciat
superbos: misericordiam, qua iustificet himiliatos. Christ carries in his
tongue, both a Law of justice, and a Gospel of mercy: a Law of justice,
wherewith to convince the proud, of sin: and a Gospel of mercy, whereby to
justify those that are humbled. And Bernard. de adven. sermon. 2
St Bernard compares our Savior Christ to a Be, which flying into the city
Nazareth (which by interpretation signifies a flower) there allighted upon the
sweetest flower of virginity, that ever the earth yielded. The Psalmist (says
Psalm. 101.1.
he) knew well, that this Be had Mel and Aculeum; honey and sting both, when
he said Psalm. 101. My song shall be of mercy and judgment; unto thee, o
Lord, will I sing. And Psalm. 25.8.
again, Psalm. 25. Dulcis, and rectus Dominus. The Lord is sweet, and
righteous. Bernard. in tract. de 12. grad. humil.
Dulcis, quia perire non patitur: rectus, quia punire non obliviscitur. Sweet,
because he does not suffer us to perish and righteous, because he does not
forget to punish. Sweet in his first coming; righteous in his second: sweet in
his promises; righteous in his judgments: sweet in his mercy; righteous in his
justice. And whosoever he is that will not taste of the honey of his mercy,
shall be sure to feel the sting of his justice. So Cant. 5.10.
Cant. 5. he is said to be Candidus, and rubicundus; white, and red. White in
his right hand, Ratione influxuum gratiae and misericordiae; in reguard of the
sweet influences of his grace and mercy: and Red in his left, Respectu
defluxuum iustitiae and punitionis: in respect of the bloody fluxes of justice
and vengeance descending from him. And it is Cant. 8.3.
the Spouses wish, Cant. 8. that he would put his left hand of justice under
her head; that so, remembering his judgments, she may the rather apply
herself to divine things; and that he would embrace her with his right hand
of mercy, of which it is written, Psalm 16. v. vlt.
Psalm. 16. At thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore. Thus are mercy
and justice well agreed, both in God, and his Christ. But yet withal it would be
observed, that Oleum supernatat vino: Gods mercy exceeds his justice.
the oil of Gods mercy does swim abone the wine of his justice. A man would
have thought, that if ever the justice of God should have gotten the victory
over his mercy, it should have bin in triumph over those cruel persecutors,
that so grievously tormented Christ at his passion, yet Christ not only prayed
for them, but (as Austin. de vtilit poenit.
S. Augustine sweetly speaks) his mercy left them not, Quousque eius iam
sanguinem nossent bibere credentes, quem fuderant saeuientes: till they knew
how to drink that blood of his as belieuers, which they had spilt as bloody
persecutours.

Justly then may it be questioned, what the Psalmist might mean, Psalm. 150.
when he says Psalm. 150.2.
Laudate dominum, secundum multitudinem magnitudinis eius: Praise ye the Lord;
according to the multitude of his greatness. The multitude of his greatness?
what is that? Surely, the multitude of God, if we consider him according to his
Divine essence, is the number of persons in the Godhead, which is finite,
because but three: But the magnitude of the divine essence is not finite, but
infinite. Wherefore David wills us to praise God, not according to the
greatness of his multitude, that is, so much as his greatness is to be praised
(for that is impossible:) but according to the multitude of his greatness, even
the multitude of three persons in the divine greatness, which is but one: for
that c 1. and tractar. 31. in Joan.
we both may, and must do. But if we consider the multitude, and magnitude of
God, according to his attributes of goodness; sweetness, and mercy, then
impossible it is that we should praise him according to the multitude of his
greatness. For both his Psalm. 147.5.
multitude is without number, Psalm. 147. and Psalm. 145.3.
there is no end of his greatness, Psalm. 145. The multitude of his mercies such,
that no Arithmetike can number the^: the magnitude such, that no Geometry can
measure them: both of them such, that Psalm. 31.21.
David cannot but admire them, Ps. 31. Quam magna multitudo dulcedinis tuae,
domine! Ohox great is the multitude of thy goodness, O Lord, which thou have
laid up for them that fear thee! And this admiration he afterward turns into
Psalm. 51.1.
a petition, Psalm. 51. Have mercy upon me, o God, secundum magnam misericordiam
tuam: after thy great mercy; Et secundum multitudinem miserationum tuarum: and
according to the multitude of thy mercies do away mine offenses.

Wherefore, o thou drooping and soul sick sinner, perplexed and affrighted
with the dread and horror of thy sins (thy many, Application.
and great sins) still threatening thee a present precipitation into that
dangerous down fall of despair; O taste and see, how gracious the Lord is! If
thou have the multitude of thy sins to amate thee, behold here the multitude
of Gods mercies to recomfort thee: or, if thou have the magnitude of thy sins
to apal thee, behold here, the magnitude of Gods mercies to refresh thee: so
that, now thou may safely resolve with Hilar. in Ps. 129.
S. Hilary: Ad spem omne tempus est liberum, and mercedem non operis,
sedmisericordiae, vndecimae horae operarij consequentur. All time is free for
hope, and the laborers even of the eleventh hour shall receive a reward not of
their own merit, but of Gods mercy.

Thus, though mercy and justice go hand in hand both in God, and his Christ,
yet has mercy the right hand, that is, the upper hand of their justice: and
though mercy overtop, yet it never overturnes their justice.

Mercy and justice in Gods liefetenents.
As it is in God the King and Judge of all the earth: so should it also be with
Gods Liefe-tenents, the Kings and Judges of the earth: who though they be
called Dij terrae; Gods of the earth; yet must they remember, that they are but
Dij terrei; Gods made of earth: Vice-Gods, and pety-Gods, and vnder-Gods, and
men-Gods. And as they are Reguli; little kings here on earth under that Great
King of heaven; so must they also be Regulae; living Rules of justice; Not
Cael. Rhodogin. lect. antiq. l. 7. c. 22
Regulae Lesbiae; Lesbian, leaden rules, flexible with the clamours, or
importunities of whomsoever: but Regulae rectae; Rules no less straight, than
inflexible, infallible; ministering to every one a true and a right measure of
justice. For the old rule is, Regula per quam alia regulantur, debet necessario
esse recta: A rule by which other things are to be ruled, had need be right and
straight it self.

There must therefore be in them, as in God there is, a blessed medley and
mixture of justice and mercy. Mercy to mollify justice, and justice to
qualify mercy, that neither the one, nor the other grow too-ranke. For justice
without mercy is not justice, but tyranny; and mercy without justice is not
mercy, but fatuity. And what else (says Gregor.
S. Gregory) was meant, by anointing the Kings of old with oil out of a
horn, but that there must be a due temper of rigor and clemency? Vt sicut
cornu fodiantur, it a oleo foveantur: that, as some are to be goared with the
horn of justice, so others are to be anointed and cherished with the
Chrysostom. in Matt.
oil of mercy. But most notable is Pet. Blesensis. ser. 16.
Blesensis his illustration of this point. He tells us, there are two kinds of
letting blood: The one, by diminution of the quality, when the blood is
corrupt: the other, by diminution of the quantity, when the blood is
too-abundant. Nec minus periculosa est superfluitas, quam corruptela: and no
less dangerous to the state of the body is the superfluity, than the
corruption of it. Yet what more sweet and pleasing to the nature of man, than
blood? Wherefore, as it is sometimes expedient, that there should be a
diminution of blood in the body: so is it sometimes meet, that there should be
a diminution of virtue it self in the soul. It was Eccl 7.16.17.
a skilful Physician that said in the time of the law, Noli nimis iustus esse:
Be not too just: there is a just man that perishes in his justice. And there
was another, of better skill than he, in the time of grace, that would have Rom
12 3.
no man presume to be wise above that which is meet to be wise; but that every
man be wise according to sobriety. Romans 12. And if justice and wisdom (two
such capital virtues) had need of diminution, Cui putas venae virtutum
parcendum est? What one vein of virtues is there (trow ye) that would not be
let blood?

If the Judge be too-iust, though it be in a case against a rich man; what is
that, but to turn Amos, 6.12.
Fructum iustitiae in absynthium? the fruit of righteousness into wormwood?
Amos. 6. And if he be too merciful, though it be in a case for a poor man;
what is that, but to turn Mel in toxicum? honey into deadly poison? For Prove. 25
27.
Nimium mel non est bonum: Too-much honey is not good. Prove. 25. And therefore
God, though otherwise a father to the poor, yet because men naturally (if
nature be not corrupted by the are of bribing) are more inclined to pity the
poor, than the rich, has given an express charge concerning the poor, Exodus
23.3.
Exodus 23. Pauperis non miscreberis in iudicio: Thou shall not pity, no not a
poor man, to the prejudice of justice. So that, Justice is a pure intemerate
Virgin, that must not be corrupted by either of those two unchaste, or unjust
Suitors, Nimium, or Parum; too-much, or too-little: because too-much justice is
too little justice: and too-little justice is too much injustice. And for a
Judge either way to commit injustice, by being either too-long or too-short
handed in the administration of justice, is an argument of very great
impotencie of affection. Therefore well has Sirac. 20.3.
the son of Sirac, c. 20. compared such a Iusticer to an impotent Eunuch;
Concupiscentia spadonis deuirginavit iuuenculam etc. As when a guelded man
through lust would defile a Virgin, so is he that uses vtolence in judgment.
And both are abomination to the Lord (says Prove. 17.15
the wise man Prove. 17.) Et qui iustificat impium, and qui condemnat iustum:
as well he that justifies the wicked, through too-much favor and clemency,
as he that condemns the just through too-much rigor and extremity.

Let a Judge then (says one) carry in his right hand, (...), a bloud-stone,
wherewith to staunch innocent blood, and in his left hand, Gladium, a sword,
wherewith (if need be) to smite malefactors to death. And surely, great reason
have Judges being themselves (as Greg. Naz
Gregory Nazianzen terms them) (...), living laws, and many of them also
living by the law, to support mercy and justice, because mercy and justice
support the law, as did Exodus 17 12
Aaron and Hur support the hands of Moses. Exodus 17. Whence I take it to be,
that Prove. 3.16.
the wiseman, Prove. 3. v. 16. (for so the 70 have it, though the words be not
at all set down in the English) has placed (...), the Law, between (...),
and (...): righteousness, and mercy. (...). Out of her mouth (viz. out of the
mouth of wisdom) goes forth righteousness, and she carries law, and mercy
in her tongue. There is (...), the Law, between (...), and (...),
righteousness, and mercy. And no less reason have Kings to preserve mercy and
truth; because (as the wise King Prove. 20.28
Solomon tells us, Pro. 20.) Mercy and truth preserve the King. Without these
two, what are all those good and wholesome Laws; which by sincere and righteous
lawgivers have been spun out of the bowels of their compassionate care of the
weal public, as is the siders web out of her bowels, but (as Laert. l. 1.
Solon once complained) even as spiders webs indeed, which every great Droane,
or Humble be, will break through at his pleasure; when the poor seely fly,
shall be caught and entangled in them to his overthrow? Nay, without these two,
what will Judges themselves be, but as Greater thieues, sending less thieues
to execution? Nay, without these (says Austin. de civit l. 4. c. 4.
Austin) Quid sunt regna, nisi magna latrocinia? quia latro^inia quid sunt nisi
parva regna? What are kingdoms themselves, but as great robberies? For what
else are robberies, but little kingdoms?

Mercy must be above justice in the Magistrato.
Howbeit, as before I noted, that though God be both mercy, and justice it
self; yet mercy has the predomina^cie, and preeminence over his justice: So I
hold it a good caveat, to all Magistrates; that Margarita decreti.
Rationem praelati tutius reddent de miscricordia, quam de crudelitate. When
the righteous Judge of all the world, shall call Judges themselves to the bar
of his judgment, more easily will he dispense with their overmuch lenity, than
with their overmuch cruelty. For God, who loves mercy so well, that he has
made her as it were a Queen; giving her the supremacy, and soveraigntie Psalm.
145.9.
over all his works, Psalm. 145. and has so inserted, and ingraffed her within
the very bowels of man, that when he would speak to man's capacity, (...),
after the manner of men, and would insinuate his own merciful affection to
man, he is wont to express it, by calling himself (...), a man; as in that
parable, Luc. 14. Theophil. in Luc. 14.
where it is said; A certain man made a great supper, etc. no doubt, but as
himself is abundant in mercy; so will his mercy abound to those that abound in
mercy: but there shall be judgment merciless, to him that shows no mercy;
and mercy reioiceth against judgment. as it is, James. 2.13.
James, 2.

Be it then, that our English laws be not always written in blood, but
sometimes in oil; providing for some malefactors of better hope, some easier
penalty than death; as the Pylorie, rather than the Galowes; or, perhaps a
note of invstion in the ear, or in the hand, or whipping, or slitting of the
nose, or the like: shall they therefore be condemned as partial, because they
would in justice punish sin, and yet in mercy spare the Sinner? No, no: there
must be that which the Moral Philosophers call (...), an aequity, that must
allay and lenify (...), the severity of justice. Reverend Ioh. Gerson
Gerson, sometimes Chancelour of Paris, calls it Iustitiam interpretativam, a
justice that will make a favorable, yet a conscionable construction of law;
respecting that intent and meaning, which the Lawgiver had, or of likelihood
would have had, in this or that particular case, each circumstance thereof
being duly and rightly pondered. Well and wisely therefore has it been
provided, that there should be a conscionable Court of Chancery to mitigate the
rigid austerity of other Courts, because (as Cicer.
the heathen man says, Summu^ius, summa iniuria: Extremity of right, is no
better than extremity of wrong. And truly, The occasion of this text.
I should do my text but right, if I should term it a Chancery-text. For (to
confess a truth) that which caused me to fasten my me ditations upon it, was
this; that I have often heard it fall from the lips of my most honorable Lord,
the Lord Chancellor; as great, as grave, as wise, as noble, as judicious, as
merciful a Iusticer, as ever this kingdom had; and that, with such sweet
complacency of affection, that he has sometimes professed, that, were he a
Preacher, this should be His Text;

A righteous man is merciful to the life of his beast. As is the song of the
Civil Magistrate; Mercy and justice in the Minister.
such must also be the song of the Spiritual magistrate, which is the Minister.
It must be a song bipartite: of mercy and judgment. Mercy, in applying the
sweet promises of the Gospel: and judgment, in delivering the fearful threats
of the Law. A thing, not obscurely signified unto us Act. 2.3.
in those Linguae dispertitae, or cloven tongues, wherein the holy Ghost
appeared to the Apostles, Act. 2. Cloven tongues, to teach them, that their
song must be both of mercy and judgment. Not always of mercy, for fear of
presumption; nor yet always of judgment, for fear of desperation: but of
mercy and judgment both; for that's good discretion: because either of them
without the other, is like a good medicine ill applied, which rather hurts,
than helps the wound.

Mercy above justice in the Minister.
But o let the smoking flax never be quenched! so long as the paenitent sinner
can but send forth smoaky sighs and sobs for his sins, and so long as there
is any light or spark of grace in him, let him never want cherishing. But when
with the sharp share of the law, we have made as it were deep furrows of
sorrow in the hearts of our hearers, then let us sow the comfortable seed of
the gospel; following the example of God him self, who first said to Adam,
Genesis 2.17.
Morte morieris; thou shall die the death; there is the furrow of the law: and
then comes with Genesis 3.15.
Semen mulieris; the seed of the woman shall break the head of the serpent;
there is the seed of the gospel.

But, must justice and mercy rest only upon the heads of Moses, and Aaron; the
magistrate, and the minister? No (beloved) they must be like that precious
ointment, Mercy and justice in all sorts of men.
which being powered upon Aarons head, ran down to his beard, and so to the
very skirts of his garments: they must descend to the very lowest and meanest
of the people. And so dear must they be to all sorts of men, that Prove. 3.3.
Solomon, Prove. 3. not content to have said, Let not mercy and truth forsake
thee; adds further; Bind them on thy neck, or, wear them, vt torquem
aureum, as a chain of gold about thy neck, and write them in the tables of
thy heart. He afterward gives the reason, Prove. 21.21.
Prove. 21. He that follows after righteousness and mercy shall find life and
glory.

2. HYPOTHESIS.
And so from my first general part, which is the Thesis; A just man is
merciful; I now descend to the second, which is the Hypothesis; that, in
particular, he is merciful to the life of his beast. Wherein (I told you) we
are to note first (How) then (Why) he is to reguard it. In the handling
whereof, because I am not to teach you husbandry, but divinity; I will briefly
make particular application of each several point, that shall occur; according
as each of them shall minister occasion. Which (I hope) I may the more boldly
and safely do, having the warrant, not only of 1. Cor. 9.9.
S. Paul. 1. Cor 9. Numquid de bobus cura Deo? Does God (says he) take care
for Oxen? Either is it not altogether for our sakes? For our sakes, no doubt,
it is written: but of Mat. 6.26.
Christ himself, Mat. 6. where to induce his disciples to cast away all
anxiety of care for meat, drink, and cloth; and, wholly to rely upon Gods
providence, after he had first willed them to consider the fowls of the aer,
and the lilies of the field, how God provides for them, his inference is this;
V. 30.
shall he not do much more unto you, o ye of little faith?

Upon these, and the like warrants of holy scripture, why may not I also, by
like consequence, infer; If the righteous man do thus and thus, or, for these
and these reasons reguard the life of his beast, ought he not much more to
reguard the life of his brethren? For how much more worth are they, than many
beasts?

I. HOW a just man is merciful to his beast.
First then let us examine How a righteous man is merciful to the life of his
beast. The How stands upon six branches.

The first branch of his mercy, is In Pascendo: in feeding his beasts. For as
men, 1. In Pascendo.
so beasts also droope and faint, if they want their food. Therefore is it,
that both cattle are called (...), of (...); and (...), of (...), both
signifying to feed, or nourish: and those that feed them likewise have their
names of feeding. For a shepherd is called in Greek, (...), of (...): and
(...), of (...): and in Latin, Pastor, of Pasco: all signifying to feed; to
remember him, that his office is to feed.

-- Virg. Eclog 6.
Pastorem, Tityre, pingues
Pascere oportet oves.
A shepherd must have a care to feed fat his sheep. He must not Pascigrege,
but gregem pascere: not be a passive, but an active feeder: not feed upon his
flock, but feed his flock. For, Ezech. 34.2.
Vae pastoribus, qui pascunt semetipsos, says God, Ezech. 34. Woe be unto the
shepeards of Israel that feed themselves: should not the shepherds feed
the flocks? Ye eat the fat, and ye cloth you with the wool: ye kill them
that are fed, but ye feed not the sheep. Such shepherds are those retchlesse
and careless ministers, who when they are charged with a cure of souls, will
neither preach themselves, nor provide a sufficient preacher.

Now, if ye ask me, as one asked the Persian in Arist Oeconom. l. 1. c. 6.
Aristotle; (...); what it is that will most fatten the horse, the sheep, or
any other cattle? I must answer, as he did; (...): It is the eye, or care of
the Master. For, if they be wholly left to the care of servants, they can tell
how to be slack and negligent enough.

And, as the Masters care must be to feed them, not to feed upon them: so
must it also be his care, so to feed them, as that they feed not upon his
neighbors: that is to say, that he feed them with his own, not with other
men's pastures. But it is now grown to a practice no less common, than
lamentable; (if I speak not a truth, let Enclosers confute me) sunt qui pascunt
oves and boves, and occidunt homines: There are that think their sheep and
oxen are never fed fat enough, till they have eaten up all their neighbors
round about them; and that they never thrive, and prosper sufficiently, so long
as they graze but within their own tedder. These men have forgotten Prove. 5.15.
the wisemans rule, Prove. 5. Drink the water of thine own cisterne, and of
the rivers out of the midst of thine own well.

2. In Parcendo.
2 A second branch, of a righteous man's mercy to his beast, must be In
Parcendo, in sparing his beast. He will not exact more of his beast, than the
strength of it is well able to bear. He will not take too much of a
free-horse; -- Horat.
ne Peccet ad extremum ridendus, and ilia ducat: lest he have his skin in steed
of his service: and lest it fare with him, as Genesis 33.13.
Jacob said it would with his cattle, which with one days over-driving, would
die. Genesis 33. For, so necessary is rest, for laboring, or travailing beasts,
that Exodus 20.10
one clause of the commandment for the due observance of the Sabbath,
provideth for their rest, as if the Sabbath had been made for beasts also,
as well as men. Exodus, 20. Much less then will a righteous man make good the
Italian proverb; Bonus servus, bonus asinus: A good servant shall be a good
ass: that is, make his servant fare the worse, because his service is good.

2. As beasts must not be over-travailed, so neither must they be
over-burdened. For a strong ass, if he have two burdens at once laid upon him;
that is, more than he can weld; may hap to faint and sink under them, as
appears in Gen 49 14.
Issakars blessing, Genesis 49.

3 As beasts must not be over-burden'd; no more are those that have milk, to be
over-milkt. For, as Prove. 30.33
when one churneth milk, he brings forth butyre; and he that wringeth his
nose, causes blood to come out, Prove. 30. so he that brings his beast too often
to the milk pale; shall in the end, in sted of milk, have nothing but blood.
And Pomponius Laetus.
Qui totum lac ex vberibus ouium emulserit, agnos fraudans cibo, praedo est,
non pastor; says Pomponius Laetus: He that will have all the milk out of the
teats of the sheep, and so deceive the poor lambs of their food, he is a
thief, not a shepherd.

4 As those that have milk, are not to be over-milkt, so neither is milk to
be sought, where it is not to be had: according to that, of Greg. Naz.
Gregory Nazianzen; (...):
(...).
A goat heard (says he) if he will, may take upon him to milk his he
goats: but if he do insted of milk, he shall have nothing but streams of
blood.

5 In a word; As milk must not be exacted, where it is not to be had; and
where it is, it must not too abundantly be exhausted: so where a fliece is to
be had, there must not fleying go for fliecing: much less is the flesh it
self to be taken for the fliece; a whole sheep to be devoured, and no boanes
to be made of it; according to that excellent saying of Tiberius the Emperor
(in Dion Cass. l. 57.
Dion) (...): I will have my sheep (says he) to be shorn, not to be shaven.
He said his sheep; but he meant, his people: like as Homer. Il. (...); and
(...).
Homer calls a good King, (...): the shepherd of his people. But Suetonius
has it thus: Bont pastoris est, tondere pecus, non deglubere. It is the part
of a good shepherd, to sheare, not to eat up his sheep. Suetonius.


3. In Pat endo.
3 A third branch of a righteous man's mercy to his beasts, must be, In
Patiendo: in patiently suffering and pardoning their infirmities. For if thou
pity not, rather than punish the infirmities of thy beast, which through thine
own sin is become less plyant and tractable, than otherwise it was, and would
have been; what do thou else, but teach God, not to pardon, but punish
thine offenses, who by thy sin, art now degenerated into a beast?, and art
become Psalm. 32.10.
like horse and mule without understanding. Yea, Ier. 10.14.
every man is a beast by his own knowledge, Ier. 10.

If then thou see thy horse trip or stumble, break not out into Number. 22 29
Balaams phrenetike passion, Number. 22. to say, as he did to his ass, when he
would not go forward; I would there were asword in mine hand, for now would I
kill thee: But rather, remember that of Horat.
the Poet; which yet he never spoke in so good a sense; -- Cave ne titubes,
mandataque frangas. Beware lest thou also trip, and break Gods commandments.
It Is a rare thing in a beast, Suidas.
(...) (as Suidas has it) to stumble twice at the same stone. Yet such beasts
for the most part are men; they are wont to make amends for a lapse with a
relapse, and to stumble more than a thousand times, at the same stone: even at
the same stony tables of Gods law. Yea, Prove. 24.16.
Septies in die cadit iustus, Pro. 24. Agust man more than stumbleth; for he
falls, seven times a day. Septies, id est, saeptus: seven times, that is,
many times. If a just man fall himself so often, then (me thinks) it is but
reason, that he should pardon his beast, especially when he does less than
fall. And, if his beast; then much more his brother. And therefore, when Peter
asked, how often he should forgive his brother trespassing against him; whither
unto seven times? Christ tells him, Mat. 18.21.
Not unto seven times, but unto seventie times seven times: Matt. 18.

4. In Compatiendo.
4 A fourth branch of a righteous man's mercy to his beast, is In compatiendo;
in compassionating the needs and distresses of his beasts.

As first, If they wander, by reducing them to their own home: yea, though
they be not his own, but his enemies. For so runs Exodus 23.4.
Moses his charge, Exodus 23. If thou meet thine enemies Ox, or his Ass, going
astray, thou shall bring him to him again. If thine enemies, then much more
thine own. For, how think ye? If a man have a 100 sheep, and one of them be
gone astray: does he not leave 99, and go into the mountains, and seek that
which is gone astray? And if so be that he find it; verily I say unto you, he
reioiceth more of that sheep, than of the 99 which went not astray. It Is a
parable thus applied by Luc. 15.7.
our Savior Christ, Luc. 15. I say unto you, that likewise joy shall be in
heaven for one sinner that converteth; more than for 99 just men, which need
none amendment. If such be the joy in heaven, such also should be our joy here
on earth; whom Matt. 6.10.
our Savior has taught to pray, Matt. 6. Thy will be done in earth, as it is
in heaven.

Secondly, If they fall into a ditch, or a pit; by relieving them. For, which
of you shall have an Ox, or an Ass fallen into a pit, and will not straight
way pull him out; yea, though it be upon the Sabbath day? says Luc. 14.5.
our Savior Christ, Luc. 14. as who should say; No man, if he be a man
indeed, and have the bowels of a man, but will. It Is there applied by our
Savior, as a reply to a Pharisaicall quaestion, made by certain expounders of
the Law; whither it were lawful to heal on the Sabbath day, or no?

Thirdly, If they be sick, or wounded, by seeking to help, and heal them. And
this indeed (if ought else) is, Curare iumentum, (which, I told you, was one
reading of my text) so to reguard thy beast, as to cure it. For in such case,
if thy beast be left alone, sine cura, without care, it will soon be sine
cura, past cure. I will apply this none otherwise, than I find it applied by
Ezech. 343.
God himself, to the spiritual shepherds of Israel; against whom, he
complains, Ezech. 34. The weak have ye not strengthened, the sick have ye
not healed; neither have ye bound up the broaken; but with rigor, and with
cruelty, have ye ruled them.

5. In Compescendo.
5 A fifth branch of a righteous man's mercy to his beast, must be, In
compescendo: in guiding and ruling them. A thing, as necessary for them, as is
their meat and drink: which the Greeks have well expressed in this one word
(...), which signifies, both Pascere, and Compescere; to feed, and to guide.
For it is true of beasts, which we are wont to say of fire, water, and money;
that they are, Boni servi, mali Domini; Good servants, but bad Masters. As it
is in beasts, right so is it in men. By discipline, wild beasts are sometimes
made tame: Impune a Magistris leonum ora tractantur: The mouths of Lions (says
Sen de benef. l. 1.
Seneca) are safely handled by those that are their keepers. And, for want of
discipline, tame beasts many times become wild. Else, why did God command
Ezech. 19.2.
his Prophet, to take up this lamentation for the Princes of Israel, Ezech.
19. Wherefore lay thy mother as a Lioness among the Lions? She nourished her
young ones among the Lions whelps: and she brought up one of her whelps, and
it became a Lion; and it learned to catch the prey, and it devoured men.

If then there be any Canes rabidi, mad Dogs, that have in their tongues, that
which Greg. Naz.
Gregory Nazianzen calls (...), or (...), the dog-worme, which will make them,
if not bark, yet bite at every one they meet with (yea, they care not though
it be their own Master) it were good that they were wormed, not only for the
good of others, but of themselves too, lest hereafter they prove to be of the
number of those Apoc. 22.15
Foris Canes, Dogs that shall stand without, even without that heavenly
Jerusalem, whereinto shall enter none unclean thing, Apoc. 22.

If there be any untamed Bulls, that are enraged and horne-mad (as they say) at
the sight of purple, that is, (as Iud. Ep. v. 8.
S. Jude speaks) that despise government, and speak evil of them that are in
authority: Sons of Belial, which is interpreted, Sine iugo, without a yoke, it
were good that they were brought under the yoke of obedience.

If there be any lazy Oxen (which yet are Animalia na ta labori: beasts borne
to labor) I mean, lazy and sturdy Roagues, and vagrant persons: such as
Theocrit.
Theocritus speaks of, -- (...); who keep holy day all the year long: I say,
if there be any such (I might say, if there be swarms of such) either in your
city, or in your suburbs, it were good that there were stimulus, a goade
provided for them, to prick them forward to their labor.

If there be any fierce and fiery Horses, which are Deuteronomy. 32.15
Inerassati, impinguati, dilatati, Deuteronomy. 32. Made sat, and gross, and even
laden with fatness, I mean, Papists, that have been over-fed and filled with
his Majesty's favors, it were good, that he would in time Equis lasciuientibus
pabulum subtrahere: hold these fat and high-fed horses to hardmeate, lest they
begin to recalcitrate and kick, and perhaps, in the end throw their Rider:
and, that he would also provide both Fraenum, and Calcar; a bridle, and a
spur. A bridle, to refreine their forwardness where they should be backward;
and a spur, to incite their backewardnes, where they should be forward.

In a word; If thine own body, which is (as Bernard.
S. Bernard calls it) Asina animae, the ass of the soul, the ass that must
carry it either to heaven, or to hell, be either so dull in the souls service,
or rather, in Gods, as to droope in the ways of Christianity; or so wanton, as
to rebel against the spirit, it were good there were provided Flagellum, a
whip, both to quicken it, as also to bring it into subjection. For, Sirac.
33.27.
Servo maleuolo tortura and compedes: Torture and fetters belong to the evil
servant. Sirac. 33.

6. In Conservando.
6 The sixth and last branch of a righteous man's mercy to his beasts must be In
Conservando: in protecting and defending them. For if a shepherd should leave
his sheep to themselves, what were they else, but a common prey to the teeth of
Lions, Wolves, and the like? Or, what were he, but (as one says) Pro pastore
mercenarius, pro mercenario lupus, pro lupo diabolus? In sted of a shepherd a
hireling, (who when he sees the Wolf coming, he flies; and perhaps, before
too) nay, not a hireling, but a wolf; nay, not a wolf, but a devil. As
therefore a good shepherd must have Bernard. declamat.
Virgam, qua dirigat oves; a rod, wherewith to keep his sheep: so he must
have Baculum, quo abigat lupos; a staff, wherewith to keep away the wolf.
Both, mentioned by Psalm. 23.4.
David, Psalm. 23. thus speaking to the Lord his shepherd: The Lord (says he)
is my shepherd, therefore shall I lack nothing. Though I walk through the
valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none evil: for thou art with me;
thy rod, and thy staff comfort me.

Yea, so far will a good shepherd venture himself for the rescue of his
sheep, that he will Amos, 3.12
take out of the mouth of the Lion, if it be but two legs, or a piece of an
ear, Amos. 3. Nay, (as our Savior himself witnesses Joan. 10.) The good
shepherd gives his life for his sheep. And this did he also make good in his
own person, as upon Good Friday: when, to redeem the lives of us, his poor
sheep, from the jaws of death, and hell, he laid down his own life; which
yet, more than manfully (even by the power of his divinity) he resumed and
took up again, as upon Easterday. Had he not so done, we had all of us been
but Oves occisionis, as sheep for the slaughter; and Psalm. 49.14.
Oves in inferno, Psalm. 49. as sheep lying in hell, where both first, and
second death had everlastingly gnawne upon us. Wherefore, 1. Cor. 15.57
thanks be unto God, who has given us the victory, through our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. 1. Cor. 15.

Thus ye have heard (How) a righteous man is to reguard the life of his beast.
Let me now show you (Why) he is to reguard it. 2. WHY a righteous man is
merciful to the life of his beast.


The (Why) I told you, is threefold. Every one of these 3 words; Animam,
iumenti, sui; The life, of his, beast; carrying ^ Joan. 10, 11
in it a several reason of his mercy to his beast.

1 For first, Nouit animam, quia animam. He reguardeth life, because it is
life: that is, Propter mysterium; because of the mystery of saving life. Save a
beasts life, and save a man's.

2 Nouit animam iumenti, quia iumenti. He reguardeth the life of a beast,
because it is commodious and helpful to him. The very name of it imports
as much. For its called Iumentum, quasi iuvamentum, says Isidor.
Isidor; that is, Propter ministerium; because of the service, use, and benefit
he has of it.

3 Nouit animam iumenti sui, quia sui. He reguardeth the life of his beast,
because it is his: that is, Propter magisterium; because of his dominion and
Lordship over his beast.

1. Animam, qui^ animam.
First then, he reguardeth life, because it is life. So noble and precious a
thing is life, that Eccl. 9.4.
better is a living dog, than a dead lion, Eccl. 9. Yea, a worm, though the
basest of all living creatures, yet because it is animated, and has life in
it, is by philosophers said to be a nobler creature, than the heavens. Howbeit,
I cannot approve of Pythagoras his too too pitiful philosophy, which would not
allow, that the life of any either plant, or beast should be violated. Ovid.
Met. l. 15.
The Poet brings him in thus exclaiming against those that feed upon the flesh
of beasts; Heu quantum scelus est, in viscere viscera condi,
Congestoque auidum pinguescere corpore corpus,
Alteriusque animantem animantis viuere letho!
O what a shame and a sin is it (says he) that bowels should be buried in
bowels; (the bowels of beasts, in the bowels of men) that one body should be
crammed fat with another body; and that one living creature should live by the
death of another! No. I have learned of Arist. Polit. l. 1 c. 5.
Aristotle, that the earth was made to feed plants, and plants to feed beasts,
and beasts to feed men. But what do I speak of Aristotle? Did not God himself
immediately after the sloud, because (as it may be probably coniectured) the
waters had much impared the native juice and virtue of herbs and fruit, which
before were the only food of man, given him as it were a License to eat flesh?
Gen 9. saying, Gen 9 3.
Every thing that lives and moves shallbe meat for you: as the green herb
have I given you all things. But yet, behold, I show unto you a mystery out of
the words following: Flesh with the life thereof, I mean, with the blood
thereof, shall ye not eat. Where, though the use of flesh be permitted, yet
the eating of the blood is interdicted, lest by accustoming themselves to
eating the blood of beasts, they should make light of spilling the blood of men.

It has therefore ben a prudent caution of our Lawgivers, that Butchers (men
acquainted with shedding the blood of beasts) should not be admitted for Jurors
in cases of life, and death: it being a strong and violent presumption, that he
that has no pity upon the life of beasts, will not have so much as he ought to
have upon the life of men.

It is noted by some interpretours upon Genesis 4.23.
Genesis 4. that when Lamech unadvisedly slew his Great grandfather Cain, he
thought he had slain a beast, not a man: and yet (for all that) he was punished
as an Homicide; either, that it might appear, how heinous a thing in Gods
sight it is, to kill a man: or, that therefore he was punished, because he did
not more advisedly consider, whither it were a man, or a beast that he slew.
And, so much was he perplexed with this fact, when he had done it, that his
own mouth not only brings in the evidence, but likewise passes the sentence
against him: (...): (as the 70 read it:) I have slain a man to the wounding of
my self. If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, to wit, for slaying his brother
Abel, truly Lamech 70 times sevenfold, to wit, for slaying Cain.

O consider this, and tremble, ye bloud-thirsting Papists, who yet have had no
less than 8 of your Holy Fathers, the Popes, that have named themselves
Clements, which signifies Merciful. Clements have been their names: but yet
cruelty has been with them, as it is with you. (Judge the while, how glorious
a virtue Clemency is; when very Cruelty it self desires to mask, and shroud
it self under the name of Clemency) I say, consider this, and tremble, ye who
like vulturs, are still expecting, and gaping for a carcass, even Cadaverosam
ecclesiam, and rempublicam: the carcass both of our Church, and Commonwealth:
while ye thirst after the life-bloud, not of a cursed Cain, but of a blessed
King, whose life is the life and soul of them both. And, so ye may be
Hosticidae, killers of your enemies, ye care not to be Homicidae, killers of
men: nay, so ye may be Regicidae, killers of the King, ye care not to be,
Regnicidae, killers of his kingdom: I had almost said Deicidae, killers of God
himself; while ye labor to extinguish the true religion, and worship of God,
and his Christ. And, as for all true professors, such as cannot either halt
downright, or, at the least, limp a little in their religion; your desire is
to bereave them not of one life, but of three in one; the life of nature, the
life of grace, and the life of glory.

O consider this also, and tremble, ye the noble Ruffians; or, ruffianly
Nobles of these days, who as if ye could no way show the nobility of your
blood, but by your manful shedding (as ye deem it) of the blood of others,
are apt, upon every light occasion, to challenge a duel, or single-combate.
With you, it is no more but a word, and a wound: with you nothing can expiate
the ly-giving, but the life-taking.

O consider this also, and tremble, ye wanton strumpets, who by smothering
your poor, and innocent infants, are wont to smother your fornication. And so
far are ye from Genesis 30.15.
Rahels mind, who asked mandrakes of Leah, to make her fruitful, Genes. 30.
that ye rather seek Savin, or Coloquintida, to make an abortion: Or, if ye
suffer them to see light; ye do the office of Exodus 1.16.
the Egyptian Midwiues, Exodus 1. to make them away with the soonest. I would
not have touched this ulcer, but that it is now grown to such a head, that
needs it must be launced.

Thus, the wicked do Patrizare: they are of their father, the devil; who was
Ioh. 8.44.
a Homicide from the beginning, Io. 8. and in Greek, he is named Apoc. 9.11.
(...) a Destroyer, Apoc. 9. And well may he so be named: for, he spares
neither man, nor beast. In Matt. 8, the Devils begged leave of Christ, that if
he cast them out of the men, who before were possessed with them, they might
enter into the heard of swine: which, no sooner had they obtained, but they
presently entered into the swine, and ran them headlong into the sea, and so
destroyed them. Whence ye may learn, whose children and of what spirit
Witches are, who when they cannot have power l Matt. 8.32.
over the persons themselves, will bewitch and torment their poor cattle. But
on the other side, the godly, they also do Patrizare: for they are like God,
their heavenly father. Virg.
-- Pan curat oves, oviumque magistros. Our Great God Pan, who is 1. Cor. 15.
(...); All in all, 1. Cor. 15: he saves both man, and beast. Psalm. 36.7.
Homines and iumenta saluabis Deus: Psalm. 36. Thou (o God) savest both man, and
beast.

2. Iumenti, quia jumenti.
2 A second reason, why a righteous man reguardeth the life of his beast; is,
because it is Iumentum, a serviceable and helpful creature. For, though God
did justly punish man's disobedience to that Primum, and magnum mandatum; that
first, and great commandment, which he gave him in Paradise, by abridging, and
lessening the obedience of all his creatures toward him (for over all of them
had he the rule given him, if he could have kept it; Genesis 1.26.
Praesit; says God; Let him bear rule over them all, Genesis 1.) yet did he not
utterly abolish man's dominion over them: but so tempered the severity of his
justice, with mercy, that some of them he turned Ad Supplicium, to the
punishment of man; and those are called Ferae, or Bestiae; wild, and savage
Beasts; as Lions, Bears, and the like, which tear, and devour men: Others,
Ad Remedium; to the cure, and remedy of man; and those are called Reptilia;
creeping things, as are all kind of serpents; which though they be venomous
creatures, yet Physicians know how to make sovereign medicines of them:
Others, Ad Obsequium; to the use and service of man; and those are properly
called Iumenta, a iuvando, of helping; as Horses, Oxen, Sheep, and the like;
which are (...), living instruments of Oeconomie, or housekeeping. All three
sorts mentioned together in Genesis 1.25.
one verse, Genesis 1.25. where it is said, that God made Bestias terrae, the
savage beasts of the earth, according to their kind; and Iumenta, the Cattle,
according to their kind; and Omne Reptile, Every creeping thing of the earth,
according to their kind. But Iumenta, the Cattle, or, helpful beasts, those
be the beasts to which a righteous man is said to be merciful.

And surely, great reason has he so to be; seeing they are so many ways
helpful unto man; Some of them Arist. Polit. l. 4. c. 3.
helping him in war; where besides the other help, and service they do him,
they did also first help him, to that Honorable, and Worshipful name of Knight.
For at first, Knights were called Equites, of Equi, that Knights service, which
they did in war, by the help of their Horses. But all of them helping him in
peace; Some, Ad custodiendum, to keep the house, as Dogs: Others, Ad
colendum, to till the ground, as Oxen. For, of such necessary use are they for
husbandry, that Arist. Oecon. l. 1. c. 2.
Aristotel makes them a maine foundation of housekeeping; and, to that
purpose, cites the verse of the old Greek Poet, Hesiod.
Hesiod: (...). Let a man (says he) that means to keep a family, first,
get him a house; then, a wife; and then, Oxen for tillage. Yea, Plus valent
iumentorum stercora, quam quorundam hominum corpora: The dung of some beasts,
is of more use, than the whole bodies of some men. For, the dung of some
beasts, is good to fatten the ground; but some idle persons are good for
nothing. Others, helping him Ad vehendum, to carry both himself, and other
burdens. Others, Ad vescendum, in their life time to feed him with milk,
butire, and cheese: and at their death, with their flesh it self. Others, Ad
vestiendum, to cloth him, both with their wool, and with their pell. Sic vos,
non vobis vellera fertis, oues.
Sic vos, non vobis fertis aratra, boues.
So do ye sheep bear your fleece, so do ye oxen bear the yoke; neither of
you for your selves, but for us.

Add hereunto, that they do both Compati, and Pati. First, they do Compati,
compassionate the case of distressed man. For, did not Luc. 16.21.
the dogs come, and lick the soars of Lazarus lying at the rich man's gate;
Luc. 16. when neither the rich man, nor any of his servants would succor him?
Had not the dogs (...), bowels focompassion, when the richman had, (as has
the cruel man in the words following my text) (...), bowels without mercy? In a
word, was not Canis homini homo; the dog, a man to a man, when the richman
was but Homo homini canis; a man, a dog to a man?

Again; they do Pati, suffer for man; Not only loose their lives, to maintain
the life of man: so that, they (could they speak) might say to man, as the
holy Martyrs say to God, Psalm. 44.22.
Psalm 44. For thy sake are we killed all the day long, and are counted as
sheep appointed to be slain: but they many times also smart for the sin of
man, and more groan under the burden of man's sin, than under any other burden
that is laid upon them. For, besides that they were comprehended under that
general curse, which was laid upon the earth, for the sin of man, Genesis 3.17.
Ge. 3. Cursed is the earth for thy sake: they also Genesis 7.21.
perished in the waters of the flood with the men of the old world, excepting
only a little remnant of them that were saved in the Arc, Genesis 7. And, Exodus
9.3.
the fifth of those ten plagues, wherewith the Lord smote Egypt, Exodus 9. for
the hardness of Pharao's heart in oppressing the Israelits, was a mighty great
moraine upon the horses, the asses, the camels, the cattle, and the sheep of
Egypt. And ye know, that in the Leviticall law, beasts were killed and offered
up in sacrifice to God, as sin offerings; as if those beasts were slain in
place of sinners, and for expiation of their sins, who otherwise deserved to be
slain, as were those beasts. And, upon the Ninevites conversion at the
preaching of Jonas, Ion. 3.7.
the King of Nineveh commanded a proclamation to be made, Ion. 3. that neither
man, nor beast, bullock, or sheep should taste any thing, neither feed, nor
drink water: but that both man, and beast should put on sack cloth, and cry
mightily unto God. So that, there the very beasts became fellow-mourners with
them for their sins.

Now, if beasts be so many ways serviceable and helpful to man, ought not man
then Legetalionis, or lege debiti, by law of requital, or due compensation to
be beneficial and helpful to them? For, to him that works (says Romans 4.4.
the Apostle) the wages is not counted by favor, but by debt. Romans 4. And,
dignus est operarius mercede sua: the labourer is worthy of his hire, says
Luc. 10.7.
Christ to his disciples, Luc. 10.

Balaams Ass, though but an Ass, yet when he was injuriously smitten by his
Master, three times together, for not going forward, when yet his progress
was hindered by the angel of the Lord, standing with a naked sword in his way,
Number. 22.30.
Number. 22. God himself put so much language into him, as to plead the right of
his cause: to wit, that he had been an old servant of his, and had never before
at any time failed in his service, and therefore now deserved better wages at
his hands, than undeserved blows. Am not I thine Ass (says he) which thou
have ridden upon since thy first time unto this day? have I used at any time to
do thus unto thee?

If then these Iumentairrationalia, unreasonable helpers, even brute beasts,
may justly exact and challenge at our hands a due reguard of their service; how
much more may our household servants, being Iumenta rationalia, reasonable
helpers, such as have the use of reason, expect a due reward of their service?
that we allow them those Tria necessaria, three things that are necessary for a
servant, mentioned by Arist. Oeco. l. 1. c. 5.
Aristotel, Oecon. l. 1. c. 5. (...): work, correction, and meat. Work, to
maintain strength; correction, to retain nurture; and meat, to sustain
nature: because (as a learned writer notes) Cibus sine opere, poreum; opus
sine cibo, asinum; castigatio sine vtroque, canem ex servo facit. Meat without
work, will make thy servant a hagge: work without meat, will make him an
ass: and correction without both, will make him a dog. First therefore thou
must allow him a competent portion of meat, and then if he fail in his
business, spare not to chastise him. For, Prove. 26.8.
to the horse belongs a whip, to the ass a bridle, and a rod to the fools
back. Pro. 26.

The Devil himself is not so unjust, but that he will truly pay his
servants, that is, sinners, the wages due unto them. Now, what is the wages due
unto sin, and sinners? Romans 6.23.
The Apostle tells us, Romans 6. that the wages of sin is death. And because he
will be sure to pay them home, he will double their wages. Their wages shall be
not only a first, but a second death. Why then, he that will defraude the
labourer of his hire, whither it be his beast, or his man, or maide-servant, or
his day-labourer, or the Minister, who is also 2. Cor. 4.5.
his servant, for Jesus sake, 2. Cor. 4. (and so much does the Latin word,
Minister, imply) he is worse than the devil himself: for he duly pays his
servants their wages. Iac. 5.4.
S. James tells us, c. 5. that to deteine the wages of the hireling is a
fearful and crying sin, and the cry of it enters into the ears of the Lord
of hosts. And for the Minister, 1. Cor. 9.9.
S. Paul, 1. Cor. 9. cites Deuteronomy. 25, 4.
that place out of Deuteronomy. 25. Non ligabis os boui trituranti: Thou shall not
mussell the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn: Boui trituranti: that
is, (says Sedulius Hiberniensin 1, Cor. 9.
Sedulius Hiberniensis) Doctori triticum virtutum a palea vitiorum separanti:
the Ox that treads out the corn: that is, (says he) the teacher, or, the
minister, that severeth the wheat of virtues from the chafe of vices.

2. Iumenti; not Ferae; or, Reptilis.
2 Again; A righteous man is merciful to the life Iumenti, quia tumenti: of
his beast, because it is a helpful creature. Not Ferae, or Reptilis; not of
wild, or savage beasts; not of venomous, or noxious beasts. For the fewer of
them, the better because, though some of them, after their death, by skillful
Physicians may be made medicinable; as serpents: others, edible; as wild
beasts: yet, in their life time, they are not helpful, but hurtful to man.
Herodot. in Thalia. l. 3.
Herodotus (in his Thalia) delivers it as an argument of the providence, and
mercy of God to mankind, that, those beasts which are timorous, and fit to be
eaten, he has made to be (...), numerous and fruitful; lest, by man's daily
use of them, their store should be consumed: but, those which are of savage,
and malignant nature, he has made to be (...), to have but few at a birth,
lest by their number they should get the maistery of man, and consume him. It
is therefore, rather cruelty, than mercy to spare them, because they are so
cruel, as not to spare man.

Beloved; Are there not also such wild, and venomous and noxious creatures
among men? Man, when he is at his best, is Psa. 4^.^^.
Comparatus iumentis insipientibus, Psalm, 49. compared to the foolish beasts,
without under standing: foolish; but yet Iumentis; helpful beasts. But, take
him at his worst; and then, neither Lion, nor Tygre, nor Wolf, nor Bear, nor
Fox, nor serpent, nor any other creature, that for malice may be compared to
him. For, Quid bestialius homine rationem habente, and ratione non vtente?
(says Bernard.
S. Bernard:) What beast more beastly than a man that has reason, and yet will
play the beast beyond all reason?

Here could I tell you of diverse sorts of beasts, that had need be hunted
out of this Kingdom, by those that sit in the seat of authority, and should
therefore be Nimrods, mighty hunters of such kind of beasts before the Lord.
But I shall now be feign, only to point at two of them; which (in my opinion)
had most need of hunting.

1 The one, are those drunken beasts, who when they are intoxicated with strong
drinks, tanquam poculo Circeo; as with that inchaunting cup of Circe, which
transformed men that drank of it, into swine; then are they presently like
wild boares, foaming, and vomiting out their own shame: then who is he, that
shall be free from the danger of their tuskes? Yea, when once they have drunk
all the money out of their purse, all the wit out of their brain, all good
thoughts out of their mind, and all religion out of their soul, were it not
then better to meet with a wild boar, or with a shee-beare robbed of her
whelps, than with one of them?

2 The other, are those Cant. 2.15.
foxes, and little foxes, that spoil Gods vineyard, Cant. 2. I mean, Papists;
who, if ever for these many years together, they had need to be hunted, now
is the time. For it is too too true, that Mat 8.20.
Foveas habent, these foxes have hoales, as it is Matt. 8. Yea, and Fouentes
habent, they have friends too, both in Court, and Country. I had called them
Cubbs of Samsons foxes, save that they, though they were Caudis igniconiunctis,
joined together with Iudic. 15.4.
firebrands in their tails, Iudic. 15. yet were they Vultibus disiunctis:
their faces looked contrary ways. But these agree both In Capite, and in Cauda:
in head, and tail too. They all agree in one Head, which is the Pope; and in
one tail, one end, which (I fear) if they be not better looked to, will be
the combustion, and burning up of all, both the reekes, and standing corn in
the field of Gods Church. Ye know, how likely they were, not many years
since, to have given us a deadly flap with their fiery tails. And yet, for
all that, we will not be warned. I know not, whither we receive them to such
nearenes, and familiarity, because we take them to be good Physic against the
palsy, I mean, the commotion, and shaking of the whole State of our Land: but
sure I am, that the rankenesse of them, both for sent, and number, is very
offensive to al true Professors. And, it cannot be, but that their Foveae, the
deep hoales of their undermining subtilty, should be very dangerous both to
Prince, and people. What though it be a common practice among them (as the
manner of foxes is) Venatores suos vrina respergere; to fill their bushie
tails with urine, wherewith they besprinkle those that hunt them: that is, to
fill their followers with stinking slanderous reports, whereby they defame
them that pursue them? Yet, let not, o let not the Magistrate, whom it
concerns, either fear, or forbear to vnearth, and hunt these foxes, lest a
worse thing happen both to them, and the whole kingdom. It is noted by Aurel.
Vict.
Aurelius Victor, that when the Roman soldiers had flaine Maximinus the
tyrant, they made inquisition for his Son, and slew him also: saying, E pessimo
genere ne catulum quidem relinquendum: that, of a vile litter not so much as one
whelp is to be saved alive. For, Margarit. Decrec.
Crudelis est misericordia parcere vni in discrimen multorum: Cruel is that
pity, which spares one, or few, to the endangering of many. and, Qui parcit
Zizaniae, non amat frumentum, says Glos. in Matt. 5.
the Gloss in Mat. 5. He that spares the stinking weed, is no friend to the
good corn. For, while the Judge is too-too melting, and pitiful to thieues,
and malefactors, he is too-too cruel and merciless to good and honest men.
In a word; to let go one of these foxes, may hap to prove a greater fault,
than to kill a lamb in the flock. These are not Iumenta, but Bestiae; helpful,
but hurtful beasts: and therefore no pity to be had of them.

3. Sui, quia sui.
3 A third reason, why a righteous man reguardeth the life of his beast, is,
because it is Iumentum suum, his own beast. For, Suum cuique curare innatum
est. It Is naturally incident to every man to reguard that which is his own:
yea, though it be of little, or no use. Ought not then, a righteous man to
reguard his own beast, because it is his own; especially, it being
obsequious, and serviceable unto him? It is therefore the counsel of Sirac.
7.22.
Siracides, c. 7, If thou have cattle, look well to them, and if they be for
thy profit, keep them with thee. And, of Prove. 27.23.
Solomon, Prove. 27. Diligenter agnosce vultum pecoris tui: Be diligent to know
the face, or state of thy flock, and take heed to the herds. For, of them
has God made us Dominos vsufructuarios, as Lords to have the fruit, and use of
them: but himself is Dominus proprietarius; the property, and royalty of them
all, has he kept in his own hands. Peradventure, some few there are that may
say with him in Virg.
the Poet, Mill mei Siculis errant in montibus agni. A thousand cattle upon
the hills are mine: but there is none but God alone, that can say; as it is
Psalm. 50.10.
Psalm. 50. All the beasts of the forest are mine, and so are all the cattle
upon a thousand hills. His then they be (...), in right of possession: yet
(...), in fruit and use they are ours. Our fellow servants; as they, and we
both serve one Lord, Psalm. 119.91.
whom all things scrue, Psalm. 119. but our vnder-servants; as they have
relation only to us. And, being ours, we are to reguard them, because they are
ours; Else, shall we be worse to our beasts, than our beasts are to us. The
dog (says Herodot.
Herodotus) is (...): a beast that is kind, and loving to his Master: And,
Joan. 10.4.
our Savior tells us, Joan. 10. that sheep know the voice of their own
shepherd, but will not follow a stranger. If our beasts reguard us, because we
are their Masters; ought not we then to reguard our beasts, because they are
our servants?

Yet (beloved) God forbid we should so reguard our beasts, because they are our
own, as to prefer them before our Christian brethren, as the manner of some
is, who are rather (...), lovers of horses, or other beasts, than (...), lovers
of men. If their horse (forsooth) be but to run a race, he must have finer
bread than is made of wheat, diet-bread made of (I wot not what) costly
ingredients. And to their dogs which they keep but to hunt with for pastime,
they will make that allowa^ce, which, by Mat. 15.26.
our saviors testimony, is not mere, Mat. 15. They will take the childrens
bread, and cast it to their dogs. Their dogs, which many times consume and eat
up their masters, as Actaeons dogs did him, shall be fed with mans-meate, when
the poor shall not taste, no not so much as of that which the Matt. 15.2^.
woman of Canaan calls dogs-meat, even the crumbs, that fall from their tables.

Yea, if it be but an ill favored ape, which yet is not Iumentum, a helpful
creature, but Ludibrium and delectamentum naturae, the scorn and play-game of
nature, they will many times be at the cost of clothing him; though that
proverbiall speech of Lucian.
Lucian be true, (...): An ape willbee but an ape, though you cloth him in
gold, or purple. But, as for their poor naked brethren, whom God has made to
their own image, nay rather to his own, they can be content to suffer them to
ly and perish with cold for want of clothing. Thus are they Humani in belluas,
and belluini in homines: as men to beasts, and as beasts to men. Of such did
Ambros.
S. Ambrose in his time complain; Birds (says he) associate themselves with
birds, fishes with fishes, and beasts with beasts. Solus tu (homo) consortem
excludis, and feras includis: Thou only (o man) excludest man, and receiuest
beasts for thy consorts. Parietem vestis auro, and pauperem nudas vestimento:
thou cloathest thy walls with golden hangings, and robbest the poor of his
raiment. Pauper panem petit, and non accipit; equus tuus sub dentibus aurum
mandit: The poor beggeth bread of thee, and cannot have a bit, when yet thy
horse, if he would eat gold, he should have it: he has a golden bit between
his teeth to bite on.

I fear, I have already been too-bold with your honorable and Christian
patience, and my weak body will not give me leave to be much bolder.
Wherefore, now a word, or two, for application, and so I will leave you, with
all that has been spoken, to the blessing of God Almighty. Application.


his beast, because it is his: yea, if an unrighteous man also reguard the
superfluous and wanton welfare of his beast, because it is his; ought not a
righteous man much more to reguard the necessities of his brethren, because
they are his? Remigius, in Matt. 5.
Remigius notes, in Mat. 5, that Misericors dicitur, quasi miserum cor habens,
quia alterius miseriam, quasi suam reputat. A merciful man is so called, as if
you would say, a man that has a miserable heart, because he esteems another
misery, as if it were his own, and grieves for another grief, as for his
own. But so far are most men from grieving for others, that they are never
well, but when they are grieving others: so far from shedding tears for the
miseries of others, that they cause others to shed tears for the miseries they
bring upon them: so far from clothing the naked, that they spoil the poor
of their garments: so far from lodging the harborlesse, that they dislodge
and turn the poor out of their own homes? In a word; so far from
performing the will of the deceased, (which yet, think worldlings what they
will, is a special point of mercy) I say, so far from performing the will of
the deceased, which being once confirmed, Gal 3.15.
S. Paul thought no man so impious as to abrogate, Gal. 3. that, though it aim
at never so good and charitable uses, yet if they have but so much wit, and so
little conscience as to pick a quarrel with it, all is hazarded. It was
therefore a wise, and blessed resolution of him, who intending to have the
poor fare the better by him, said, he would not stand to the courtesy of
Executors, and Overseers, after his death; but, in his life time, would make
his own hands, his executors; and his own eyes, his overseers.

O that this were also the common care and resolution of you the worthy
Almoners of this honorable city; whom the Lord in the riches of his mercy, has
anointed with the oil of gladness, above your fellows, that at least some
part of it might run down, to the chearing and cherishing of the poor
distressed members of Jesus Christ. Ye are (...) (as Laert. l 6.
the Philosopher sometime spoke) sheep clothed with golden fleeces: and Oues
faetosae, sheep great with young, even with great store of young, poor, and
fatherless Orphans, Qui suxerunt vbera, and senserunt vellera; who have sucked
the paps of your bounty, and felt the warm fleece of your charity. And though
many glorious things be spoken of thee, o thou city of God, yet among them all,
nothing so glorious, as that thou so aboundest with piety and mercy: that thou
fillest so many empty bellies, cloathest so many naked backs, lodgest so many
houselesse strangers, relievest so many maimed soldiers, providest for so many
impotent creeples, and mainteinest so many fatherless Orphans.

Into these and many other the like channels, do the sylver-streames of your
merciful devotion run. But yet give me leave to speak freely, what I may
truly speak. The fountains from which these streams flow, are, for the most
part, dying, not living fountains. A blessed thing (no doubt) it is, thus to do
good, though it be but at your death. But, much more blessed should ye be in
your work, not only in the sight of men, but of God himself, if in your life
time ye would deal and distribute with your own hands, that which ye cannot
tell whither ye shall hold till your death, which indeed is to do good, rather
as sheep, than as swine; -- vitaque magis, quam morte iuvare: (as Ovid. Met.
l. 15.
the Poet speaks of sheep;) to benefit others rather by your life, than by
your death. So should ye be well assured, that no posthumous fraud or cunning
should be able to disappoint your religious purposes. And I doubt not, but ye
would soon fall to a godly vy and aemulation one with another, which of you
should have the precedence in this kind of mercy (being both the surest, and
the truest kind of mercy) if ye could but persuade your selves, as the Prove.
11.17
wiseman does, Prove. 11. that, Benefacit animae suae vir misericors: He that is
a benefactor to others, is a benefactor to his own soul: or (as some of our
English translations have it) He that is merciful rewards his own soul.

his beast, because it is his: ought not then every righteous Minister to
provide for the good and welfare of his flock, be cause they are his? And
every righteous Magistrate, for the good and welfare of his people, because
they are his? Are not these Romans 13.4.
the ministers of God, ordained by him, for the wealth of those that are under
them? Romans 13.

his beast, because it is his; ought he not then much more to reguard both
Vitam, and victum; the life, and living (the Greeks have expressed both in this
one word, (...)) both Esse, and Been esse; the being, and well-being, of his
wife, because she is his? of his children, because they are his? of his
servants, because they are his? Knowing, that as 1. Tim. 5.8.
the Apostle teaches, 1. Tim. 5. If there be any that provideth not for his
own, and namely, for them of his household, he denies the faith, and is worse
than an infidel. And, if he ought to provide for their corporal welfare;
ought he not then much more to provide for their spiritual welfare? And to say
with good Iosu. 24.15.
Iosuah, c. 24. Ego, and domus mea: I, and my house will serve the Lord?

his beast, because it is his; ought he not then much more to reguard the life
of his own natural body? Not to be (...), to lay violent hands upon himself,
as some in a desperate fit of male-contentednesse have done, whom the Apostle
deemeth monsters, rather than men. For, Ephesians. 5.29.
no man (says he) ever yet hated his own flesh, but nourishes, and
cherishes it, Ephesians. 5. And, if the life of his natural body; how much more
then his spiritual life, the life of his soul; which is so his own, as that
without it, himself were not his own? What a madness then is it (says one)
Plorare bestiam amissam, and non plorare animam? To mourn for the loss of thy
beast, and not to mourn for the loss of thine own soul? It is therefore the
counsel of Sirac. 30.23
Siracides, c. 30. Miserere animae tuae, placens Deo: Have pity upon thine own
soul, pleasing God. Please him better thou can not, than if thou have pity
upon thine own soul. And, it is the rule of the school; Charitas ordinata
incipit aseipsa: Regular charity begins with it self. And, as it begins with
it self, so will I end with it; Beseeching God, even the Father of our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, for his sake to give a blessing to that which has been spoken in your outward ears, that it may inwardly fructify, and bring
forth much fruit of mercy in your hearts; in some 30, in some 60, in some an
hundreth-fold; that so, when that great day of refreshing shall come, ye may
(every one of you) receive sevenfold into your bosom etc.

FINIS.

