THE JEALOUS LOVERS.

A Comedy presented to their gracious Majesty's at CAMBRIDGE, by the Students
of Trinity-Colledge.

Written by THOMAS RANDOLPH, Master of Arts, and Fellow of the House.

-- Valeat res ludicra, sime Palma negata macrum, donata reducit opimum.

Printed by the Printers to the Universitie of Cambridge. ANN. DOM. 1632.

To the Right Worshipful Mr. Dr. COMBER, Dean of Carleil, Vicechancellour of
the Universitie of Cambridge, and Master of Trinity-Colledge.
Right Worshipful,
I Have observed in private families, that the careful father disposing of his
children to several employments, sends some to school, some to his plough, some
to his flocks, while perchance the youngest, as incapable of greater business,
has the liberty to play in his hall. So is it in our Society (which joyfully
acknowledges you our careful and indulgent parent) those of stronger
abilities, more reading, and longer experience, are busied some in one, some in
another of the graver and more serious studies: while I, the last of that
learned Body, am task'd to these lighter exercises. Accept, Sir, a thing born
at your command, and preserved by your patronage. Not but that I vow the fruits
of my more precious hours to your service: for when I consider the
magnificence of our buildings, the riches of our endowments, the great examples
of those before me, and all these blessed in your auspicious government; I
find a fire kindled in my breast, whose flame aims higher, and tells me, so
glorious a hive the royal Founders meant not to shelter drones. So wishing our
whole Body long happy in so provident a Governor, I rest, what my oath and
peculiar engagements have bound me to be,

Yours devoted in all dutiful observance, Th. Randolph.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Beg thy pardon, if I put thee to the expense of a sixpence, and the loss of
an hour. If I could by my own industry have furnished the desires of my
friends, I had not troubled the Press. It Is no opinion of the worth that
wrought me to it; if I find thee charitable, I acknowledge my self beholding
to thee: if thou condemn it of weakness, I cannot be angry to see another of
my mind. I do not aim at the name of a Poet, I have always admired the free
raptures of poetry; but it is too unthrifty a science for my fortunes, and is
crept into the number of the seven, to undo the other six. That I make so many
dedications, think not that I value it as a present rich enough to be divided;
but know whom I am in piety bound to honor. That I admit so many of my
friends approbations, is not that I itch'd for praise and love -- rubbing, but
that I was willing thou should have something worth thy reading. Be to me as
kind as my audience, who when they might have used their censures, made choice
of their mercies: and so I must acknowledge my self indebted to thy clemency.
I confess no heights here, no strong conceits; I speak the language of the
people. -- Neque si quis scribit, uti nos,
Sermoni propiora, putes hunc esse poetam.
No, bestow the honor of that glorious title on those that have abler wits,
diviner inventions, and deeper mouths: Leave me to the privacie of my studies,
and accept for thy unknown friend

T.R.

To that complete and noble Knight, Sir KENELLAN DIGBIE.
SIr, when I look on you, me thinks I see
To the full height, how perfect man may be.
Sure all the Arts did court you, and you were
So courteous as to give to each their share,
While we lie locked in darkness, night and day
Wasting our fruitless oil and time away,
Perchance for skill in Grammar, and to know
Whether this word be thus declined or no.
Another cheats himself, perchance to be
A pretty youth, forsooth, in fallacy:
This on Arithmetic does hourly lie,
To learn the first great blessing, -- Multiply.
That travels in Geometry, and tires,
And he above the world a map admires.
This dotes on Musicks most harmonious chime,
And studying how to keep it, loses time.
One turns over histories, and he can show
All that has been, but knows not what is now.
Many in Physic labor, most of these
Lose health, to know the name of a disease.
Some (too high wise) are gazing at a star,
And if they call it by his name, they are
In heaven already. And another one
That cries Melpomene, and drinks Helicon,
At Poetry throws wit and wealth away,
And makes it all his work to write a play.
Nay, on Divinity many spend their powers,
That scarce learn any thing, but to stand two hours.
How must we, Sir, admire you then, that know
All Arts, and all the best of these can show?
For your deep skill in State, I cannot say,
My knowledge there is only to obey:
But I believe it is known to our best Peers,
Amazed to see a Nestor at your years.
Mars claims you too, witness the Gallion,
That felt your thunderbolts at Scanderon,
When Neptune frighted let his Trident fall,
And bid his waves call you their General.
How many men might you divide your store
Of virtues to, and yet not leave you poor,
Though enrich them? Stay here. How dare I then
To such an able judgment show my pen?
But it is, Sir, from a Muse that humbly prays,
You Will let her ivy wait upon your boys.
Your admiring servant, T. R.

To the truly noble Knight Sir CHRISTOPHER HATTON.
TO you (whose recreations, Sir, might be
Others employments, whose quick soul can see
There may, besides a hawk, good sport be found,
And music heard, although without a sound)
I send my Muse. Be pleased to hear her strain
When y' are at truce with time. It Is a low vein.
But were her breast enraged with holier fire,
That she could force, when she but touched her lyre,
The waves to leap above their clifts, dull earth
Dance round the center, and create new birth
In every Element, and out-charm each Sphere,
'Twere but a lesson worthy such an ear.
T. R.

To his honored Friend, Mr. Anthony Stafford.
SIr, had my Muse gained leisure to confer
With your sharp judgment, e're I ventured her
On such an audience, that my Comedy
Had suffered by thy Obelisk, and thee:
It needed not of just applause despair,
Because those many blots had made it fair.
I now implore your mercy to my pen,
That should have rather begged your rigor then.
T. R.

Colendissimo viro, and juris municipalis peritissimo, Magistro Richardo Lane.
SIr, if the Term be done, and you can find
Leisure to hear my suit, pray be so kind
To give this toy such courteous acceptance,
As to be made your client in the vacation.
Then if they say I break the Comic laws,
I have an advocate can plead my cause.
T. R.

Venerabili viro Magistro Olboston, praeceptori suo semper observando.
SI been quid scripsi, tibi debeo; si male quicquam,
Haec erit in vitiis maxima culpa meis.
Naufragium meruit, qui non been navigat aequor,
Cui tu Pieridum per freta Typhis eras.
T. R.

To his dear friend, Thomas Riley.
I Will not say I on our stage have seen
A second Roscius; that too poor had been:
But I have seen a Proteus, that can take
What shape he please, and in an instant make
Himself to any thing; be that, or this,
By voluntary metamorphosis.
When thou do act, men think it not a play;
But all they see is real: O that day,
(When I had cause to blush that this poor thing
Did kiss a queens hand, and salute a king)
How often had I lost thee? I could find
One of thy stature, but in every kind
Altered from him I knew; nay, I in thee
Could all professions, and all passions see.
When thou art pleased to act an angry part,
Thou fright'st the audience; and with nimble art
Turned Lover, thou do that so lively too,
Men think that Cupid taught thee how to woo.
To Express thee all would ask a better pen;
Thou art, though little, the whole map of men.
In deeper knowledge and Philosophy
Thou truly art what others seem to be,
Whose learning is all face: as 'twere thy fate
There not to act, where most do personate.
All this in one so small; nature made thee
To show her cunning in epitomie;
While others (that seem giants in the arts,
Such as have stronger limbs, but weaker parts)
Are like a volume, that contains less in it,
And yet looks big, 'cause it is a larger print.
I should my self have too ungrateful shown,
Sent I not thee my book: -- Take It, it is thine own
For thus far my confession shall be free,
I writ this Comedy, but 'twas made by thee.
Thy true friend, T. R.

Amico suo charissimo, ingeniosissimo, T. Randolpho, liberum de ejua Comoedia
judicium.
AVdebit proprios (...) odores
Myrrha fasciculus, suasque mellia
Mendicare medulla suavitates,
Prius quam his (...) credans,
Qua prae se placidos ferunt Amores.
Aeternum vigeat, vigous amore.
Quod fiquis lapides loquatur, istum
Iam jam aptum Tumulo scias libellum.
Ex noster bona verba portat author:
Illas unit dare, quas recepit, auras,
Ridentes, niveoque per jocase
Vincentes Charitas nitore frantis.
Amores simul elegantiasque
Ad partus properare tum putetis,
Quum risus popularis, and theatri
Plausus suppeditarit obstetricem.
DEsert keeps close, when they that write by guess,
Scatter their scribbles, and invade the press.
Stage Poets ('it is their hard, yet common hap)
Break out like thunder, though without a clap.
Here it is not so; there is nothing now comes forth,
Which has not for a license its own worth.
No swagg'ring terms, no taunts; for it is not right,
To think that only toothsome which can bite.
See how the Lovers come in Virgin die,
And Rosy blush, ensigns of modesty,
Though once beheld by such with that content,
They need not fear others disparagement.
But I Will not tell their fortune, what e're't be,
Thou must needs know it, if skilled in Palmestrie.
Thus much, where King applauds, I dare be bold
To say, It Is Pettie-treason to withhold.
Edward Hiac.

To his dearest friend the Author, after he had revised his Comedy.
THe more I this thy masterpiece peruse,
The more thou seem to wrong thy noble Musa,
And thy free Genius: If this were mine,
A modest envy would bid me confine
It to my study, or the Critics court,
And not make that the vulgar peoples sport,
Which gave such sweet delight unto the King,
Who censured it not as a common thing,
Though thou have made it public to the view
Of self-love, malice, and that other crew,
It were more fit it should impaled lie
Within the walls of some great library;
That if by chance through injury of time,
Aristophanus.
Plautus, and Terence, and that fragrant thyme
Of Attick wit should perish; we might see
All those revived in this one comedy.
The Jealous Lovers, Pander, Gull, and Whore,
The doting Father, Shark, and many more
Thy scene does represent unto the life,
Beside the character of a cursed wife:
So truly given, in so proper style,
As if thy active soul had dwelt a while
In each man's body; and at length had seen
How in their humors they themselves demean.
I could commend thy jests, thy lines, thy plot,
Had I but tongues enough, thy names; what not?
But if our Poets, praising other men,
Wish for an hundred congues; what want we then
When we praise Poets? This I Will only say,
This work does crown thee Laureat to day.
In other things how all, we all know well,
Only in this thou do thy self excel.
Edward Fraunces.

To his dear friend Mr. Thomas Randolph, on his Comedy called, The Jealous
Lovers.
FRiend, I must grieve your poems injured be
By that rare vice in poets, Modesty.
If you dislike the Issues of your pen,
You have invention, but no judgment then
You able are to write, but it is as true,
Those that were there can judge as well as you.
You only think your gold adulterate,
When every scale of judgment finds it weight,
And every touchstone perfect. This I Will say,
You contradict the name of your own play:
You are no lover of the lines you writ,
Yet you are jealous still of your own wit.
Rich. Benefield, T. C.

To his ingenuous friend, the Author, concerning his Comedy.
THe Muses (Tom) thy Jealous Lovers be,
Striving which has the greatest share in thee.
Enterpe calls thee hers, such is thy skill
In pastoral sonnets, and in rural quill.
Melpomene claims thee for her own, and cries,
Thou have an excellent vein for elegies.
It Is true; but then Calliope disdains,
Urging thy fancy in heroic strains.
Thus all the nine: Apollo by his laws
Sits judge in person to decide the cause:
Beholds thy Comedy, approves thy art,
And so gives sentence on Thalia's part.
To her he dooms thee only of the nine;
What though the rest with jealousy repine?
Then let thy Comedy, Thalia's daughter,
Begin to know her mother Muse by laughter.
Out with it, I say, smother not this thy birth,
But publish to the world thy harmless mirth.
No fretting frontispece, nor biting Satyr
Needs usher't forth: born toothed? fie, it is against nature.
Thou had the applause of all: King, Queen, and Court,
And University, all liked thy sport.
No blunt preamble in a Cynick humor
Need quarrel at dislike, and spite of rumor
Force a more candid censure, and extort
An approbation, maugre all the court,
Such rude and snarling prefaces suit not thee,
They are superfluous: for thy Comedy,
Backed with it is own worth, and the authors name,
Will find sufficient welcome, credit, fame.
James Duport.

Randolpho suo.
AN quaeram monumenta firmiora
Nostri nominis ut supersit aetas,
Cum scriptus legar in tuo libello,
Et tecum similis futurus avi,
Qui jam vita cluis Schola, and Theatri?
Nolo. Marmor erit mihi poetae.
Mausolaea mihi mei Menandri
O quam aeterna satis liber perennis!
Non quaeram monumenta firmiora
Nostri nominis ut supersit aetas.
Thom. Riley.

AGmine non tanto paupertas multa beatam
Divitis, and pransam vexat ubique domum:
Quot tua quotidie pulsarunt limina Charta,
Fervidus a tergo and quisque rogator adest.
Prodeat anducter, repetitaque vulnera praeli
Fabula, quae meruit sustinuisse, ferat,
Non horret tantum tua Musa, aut mutat, ut esset
Turpior ornatu Rustica nympha suo.
Car. Fotherbie, I. C.

Amico suo ingeniosissimo THOM. RANDOLPH.
FIngito zelotypos, quos pulchre fingis, amores;
Sed nil de Musa suspicionis habe.
Fae dominam ut plures norint, and adultera fiet;
Musa, licet fuerit publica, casta manet.
Fr. Meares.

Fratti suo Thom. Randolph.
NOn satis est quodte dederit natura priorem,
Ni simul and matu major, and art fores?
Illa sciens noster quam non fit magnus agellus,
Ingenio tenues jure rependit opes.
To. Randolph. aed. Chr. Oxon.

Authori.
HEi mihi! quos fluctus, quod tentas aquor, amice?
Queis te jactandum das malesanus aquis?
Irritata juvat quid possit lectio scire?
Aemula vel dete dicere lingua velit?
I felix, oculos dudum praedatus, and aures,
Censuramque ipsam sub juga mitte gravem.
Qui meruit CAROLO plausum spectante, popello
Non est cur metuat displicuisse rudi.
Dirige victorem captivo Caesare currum,
Augeat and titulos victa MARIA tuos:
Triste supercilium laevo nictantis ocello
Mitte sibi: Momis est placuisse nefas.
Thom. Vincent.

Dramatis personae.
TYndarus, son of Demetrius, and supposed brother to Pamphilus, enamored of
Evadne, Pamphilus, supposed son to Demetrius, but son indeed to Chremylus.
Evadne, supposed daughter of Chremylus. Techmessa, daughter to Chremylus.
Demetrius, an Athenian in the disguise of an Astrologer. Chremylus, an old man.
Dypsas, his wife. Simo, an old doting father. Asotus, his prodigal son.
Ballio, a Pandar, and Tutour to Asotus. Phryne, a Courtesan, and Mistress to
Asotus. Phronesium, a merry chambermaid. Hyperbolus, two soulders.
Thrasimachus, two soulders. Bomolochus, two Poets. Chaerilus, two Poets. A
Sexton: Staphyla, his wife. Paegnium, a Page. A Priest. Officers. Servants.
The Scene Thebes.

The Jealous Lovers.
ACTUS I.
SCENA I.
Simo, Asotus, Ballio. Simo. HOw thrives my boy Asotus? is he capable
Of your grave precepts?

Ball. Sir, I never met
A quicker brain, a wit so neat and spruce.
Well, -- get thee home old Simo: go and kneel:
Fall on thy aged knees, and thank the gods
Thou Have got a boy of wax, fit to receive
Any impressions.

Asot. As I am a Gentleman,
And first of all our family, you wrong me, Dad,
To take me for a dunce.

Sim. No, good Asotus;
It is thy fathers care, a provident care,
That wakes him from his sleeps to think of thee:
And when I brooding fit upon my bags,
And every day turn over my heaps of gold,
Each piece I finger makes me start, and cry,
This, this, and this, and this is for Asotus.

Asot. Take this, and this, and this, and this again:
Can you not be content to give me money,
But you must hit me in the teeth with it? -- S'lid.

Ball. Nay, good Asotus, such a loving father
That does not bless you with a sweaty palm
Clap't on your head, or some unfruitful prayer;
But lays his blessings out in gold and silver,
Fine white and yellow blessings.

Asot. Prithee Ballio,
I could endure his white and yellow blessings,
If he would leave his prating.

Sim. Do you hear him?
How sharp and tart his answers are? Old Simo,
Thou Have got a witty witty wagge, yet dear one,
When I behold the vastness of my treasure,
How large my coffers, yet how cramb'd with wealth,
That every talent sweats as in a crowd,
And grieves not at the prison, but the narrowness.

Asot. If I make not room for 'um, never trust me.

Simo. When I see this, I cannot choose but fear
Thou can not find out ways enough to spend it:
They will outvie thy pleasures.

Ball. Few such fathers!
I cannot choose but stroke your beard, and wonder,
That having so much wealth, you have the wit
To understand for whom you got it.

Asot. True:
And I have so much wit to understand
It must be spent, and shall boys.

Sim. Pray heaven it may!

Asot. I Will live to spend it all; and then -- perhaps I Will die,
And will not leave the purchase of a sheet,
Or buy a rotten coffin.

Ball. Yes, dear Pupil,
Buy me an urn, while yet we laugh and live;
It shall contain our drink, and when we die
It may preserve our dust: it is fit our ashes
Should take a nap there, where they took their liquour.

Sim. Sage counsel this -- Observe it boy -- observe it.

Asot. I live in Thebes, yet I dare swear all Athens
Affords not such a Tutour: thou may read
To all the young heirs -- in town or city.

Sim. Ah Ballio! I have lived a dunghill wretch,
Grown poor by getting riches, mine own torture,
A rust unto my self, as to my gold:
To pile up idle treasure starved my body
Thus, to a wrinckled skin, and rotten bones,
And spider-like have spun a web of gold
Out of my bowels; only knew the care,
But not the use of gold -- Now, gentle Ballio,
I would not have my son so loathed a thing:
No, let him live and spend, and buy his pleasures
At any rate. Read to him, gentle Ballio,
Where are the daintiest meats, the briskest wines,
The costliest garments. Let him dice and wench;
But with the fairest, be she wife or daughter
To our best Burgess: and if Thebes be scarce,
Buy me all Corinth for him: -- When I sleep
Within my quiet grave, I shall have dreams,
Fine pleasant dreams, to think with how much pleasure
Asotus spends what I with care have got.

Asot. Sure I were a most ungracious child now,
If I should spoil the dreams of a dead Father.
Sleep when thou will within thy quiet urn,
And thou shall dream thou see me drink Sack plenty,
Incircled round with Doxies plump -- and dainty.

Sim. How thrives my boy? -- How forward in his studies?

Ball. Troth -- with much industry -- I have brought him now
That he is grown-past drinking.

Sim. How man? past drinking?

Ball. I mean, he is grown perfect in that science.

Sim. But will he not forget?

Asot. No, I warrant you,
I know I shall not forget, because in the morning
I never remember what I did over night.

Sim. How feeds my boy?

Ball. Troth well: I never met
A stomach of more valor, or a tooth
Of such judicious knowledge.

Sim. Can he wench? ha?

Ball. To say the truth -- but rawly.

Asot. Rawly? -- I Am sure
I have already made my Dad a Grandfire
To five and twenty -- and if I do not
Out of mere charity people all the Hospitalls
With my stray babes, then geld me -- Woe to the Parish
That bribes me not to spare it.

Ball. Then for the Die,
He throws it with such art, so poys'd a hand,
That had you left him nothing, that one mystery
Were a sufficient portion.

Asot. Will you see me?
Set me a bag. These were an Usurers bones.

Ball. In this behold what frailty lives in man:
He that rubbed out a life to gather trash,
Is after death turned prodigal.

Sim. Throw, Asotus.

Asot. Then have at all, -- and 'twere a million. -- All!
Fortune was kind, the precious dirt is mine.

Sim. And take it boy, and this -- and this beside.
And 'cause desert may challenge a reward.
This for your pains, dear Ballio.

Ball. My endeavors,
Although to my best power, -- alas -- come short
Of any merit; Sir you make me blush,
And this reward but chides my insufficiency.
Pray urge it not.

Sim. A modest -- honest -- honest man:
I Will double it -- in faith I will -- I am
The joyfull'st father!

Ball. See how the goodman weeps!

Asot. So he will weep his gold away, no matter.

Sim. Come hither dear, come, let me kiss my son.

Asot. There Is a sweet kiss indeed, this it is to want
A Tutour; had you had my education,
You would have taken me by the lilie hand,
Then gazed a while upon my flaming eyes,
As wondering at the luster of their orbs;
Then humbly beg in language strow'd with flowers,
To taste the cherries of my ruby lip.
God-a-mercy for this, Tutour.

Sim. I am orejoy'd, I am orejoy'd.
Exit Simo.
SCEN. II.
Asotus, Ballio. Asot. Well, go thy ways, I may have a thousand fathers,
And never have the like: -- Well pockets, well,
Be not so sad, though you are heavy now,
You shall be lighter.

Ball. Pupil, I must tell you,
I do repent the loss of those good hours,
And would call back the study I have taken
In moral Alchymie, to extract a Gentleman
Almost out of a dunghill. Still do I see
So much of peasant in you?

Asot. Angry, Tutour?

Ball. Teemed my Invention all this while for this?
No better issue of my laboring brain,
After so many and such painful throe's?
Another sin like this, and be transformed
Mere clown again.

Asot. The reason, dear Instructour.

Ball. Have I not opened to you all the mysteries,
The precise rules, and axioms of Gentilitie?
And all methodicall? Yet you still so dull,
As not to know you print eternal stains
Upon your honor, and corrupt your blood
(That cost me many a minute the refining)
By carrying your own money? See these Breeches,
A pair of worthy, rich, and reverent Breeches,
Lost to the fashion by a lump of dross.
I Will be your bailiffe rather.

Asot. Out infection.

Ball. Who, that beheld those hose, could e're suspect
They would be guilty of mechanic metal?
What Is your vocation? Trade you for your self?
Or else whose Journeyman, or Prentice are you?

Asot. Pardon me, Tutour: for I do repent,
And do protest hereafter I will never
Wear any thing that jingles -- but my spurs.

Ball. This is gentile.

Asot. A way mechanic trash:
I Will kick thee son of earth: -- Thus will I kick thee, --
For torturing my poor father -- Dirt avaunt --
I do abandon thee.

Ball. Blessed be thy generous tongue.
But who comes here? This office must be mine:
I Will make you fair account of every drachme.

Asot. I Will not endure the trouble of account:
Say all is spent, -- and then we must have more.

SCEN. III.
Tyndarus, Asotus, Ballio. Tyn. WHat Fury shot a viper through my soul
To poison all my thoughts? Civil dissension
Wars in my blood: here Love with thousand bows
And twenty thousand arrows lays his siege
To my poor heart; which, manned with naught but fear,
Denies the great god entrance. O Evadne!
Can thou that risest fairer then the morn,
Set blacker then the evening? -- Weak jealousy! --
Did e're thy prying and suspicious sight
Find her lip guilty of a wanton smile?
Or one lascivious glance dart from her eye?
The blushes of her cheeks are innocent,
Her carriage sober, her discourse all chaste;
No toyish gesture, no desire to see
The public shows, or haunt the Theater.
She is no popular Mistress, all her kisses
Do speak her Virgin, such a bashful heat
At several tides ebbes, flows; flows, ebbes again,
As 'twere afraid to meet our wilder flame.
But if all this be cunning, (as who knows
The sleights of Sirens?) and I credulous fool
Trained by her songs to sink in her embraces;
I were undone for ever -- wretched Tyndarus!

Asot. Ha, ha, ha, he. This is an arrant Coxcombe,
That Is jealous of his wife ere he has got her,
And thinks himself a Cuckold before marriage.

Ballio. Want of a Tutour makes unbridled youth
Run wildely into passions. You have got
A skillful Pilot (though I say it, Pupil)
One that will steer both you, and your estate
Into safe harbor. -- Pray, observe his humor.

Tyn. Away foul sin. -- It Is Atheism to suspect
A devil lodged in such divinity.
Call snow unchaste, and say the ice is wanton,
If she be so. No, my Evadne, no,
I know thy soul as beauteous as thy face.
That glorious outside which all eyes adore,
Is but the fair shrine of a fairer saint.
O pardon me thy penitent infidel:
By thy fair eyes (from whom this little world
Borrows that light it has) I henceforth vow,
Never to think sin can be grown so bold
As to assault thy soul.

Asot. This fellow, Tutour,
Waxes and wanes a hundred times in a minute:
In my conscience he was got in the change o'th'Moon.

SCEN. IIII.
Chremylus, Dypsas, Asotus, Ballio, Tyndarus. Dyp. ROt in thy grave, thou
dotard, I defy thee.
Cursed be our day of marriage: shall I nurse
And play the mother to another brat?
And she to nose my daughter? -- Take Evadne
Your prety-precious-by-blow-fair Evadne,
The minion of the town: go -- and provide her
A place in the Spittle.

Chrem. Gentle wife, have patience.

Dyps. Let them have patience that can have patience.
For I will have no patience -- S'lid. Patience? patience?

Chrem. You know her daughter to our dearest friend:
And should my son committed to his care
Thus suffer as the poor Evadne does:
The gods were just so to revenge her wrong.

Dyp. I will not have my house afflicted with her,
She has more suitours then a pretty wench in an Universitie,
While my daughter has leisure enough to follow her needle.

Chrem. Wife, I must tell you you are a peevish woman.

Dyp. And I must tell you you are an arrant Coxcombe
To tell me so. My daughter nosed by a slut?

Asot. There will be a quarrel, Tutour: do you take
The old man's part, I am of the woman's side.

Chrem. Were every vein in poor Evadne filled
With blood derived from those, whose ancestors
Transmitted in that blood a hate to us,
A lineall hate to all our family;
Yet trusted to my care she is my daughter,
And shall share equal blessings with mine own.

Dyp. Then a perpetual noise shall fill thy house,
I will not let thee sleep, nor eat, nor drink,
But I will torture thee with a peal of chiding.
Thou shall confess the troubled sea more calm:
That thunder with less violence cleaves the air:
The ravens, schreech-owls, and the mandrakes voice
Shall be thy constant music -- I can talk.
Thy friends that come to see thee, shall grow deaf
With my loud clamours. Heaven be praised for tongue,
No woman in all Thebes is better weapon'd:
And 't shall be sharper; or were any member
Not dead besides my tongue, I would employ it
In thy just torment. I am vexed to think,
My best revenge age has prevented now,
Else every man should read it in thy brow.

Chrem. I will not wind you up, dear larum: Go,
Run out your line at length, and so be quiet.

Exit Chremylus. SCEN. V.
Dypsas, Tyndarus, Asotus, Ballio. Tyn. HEre is an argument, Tyndarus, to incite
And tempt thy free neck to the yoke of Love.
Are these the joys we reap i'th'nuptiall bed?
First in thy bosom warm the snake, and call
The viper to thy arms -- O gentle death,
There is no sleep blessed and secure but thine.
Wives are but fair afflictions: sure this woman
Was wooed with protestations, oaths, and vows
As well as my Evadne; thought as fair,
As wise and virtuous as my soul speaks her:
And may not she or play the hypocrite now?
Or after turn Apostate? -- Guilty thoughts
Disturb me not. For were the sex a sin,
Her goodness were sufficient to redeem
And ransom all from slander.

Dyp. Gentle Sir,
I pity the unripenesse of your age.
That cast your love upon a dangerous rock.
My daughter! -- But I blush to own the birth,
And curse the womb so fruitful to my shame.
You may be wise and happy -- or repent.

Exit Dypsas. SCEN. VI.
Tyndarus, Asotus, Ballio. Asot. THis woman is a devil, for she hates her own
children.

Ball. In what an ecstasy stands that grieved wight?

Asot. In troth I shall into compunction melt.
Will not a cup of Lesbian liquour rowze
His frozen spirits to agilitie?

Ball. Spoke like a son of Aesculapius!

Asot. My fathers angels guard thee. We have gold
To cure thy dumps, although we do not mean
It should profane these breeches. Sure his soul
Is gone upon some errand, and has left
The corpse in pawn till it come back again.

Tyn. Cold jealousy, I shall account thee now
No idle passion, when the womb that bare her
Shall plead her guilt, I must forget her name.
Fly from my memory, I will drink oblivion
To loose the loathed Evadne.

Asot. Generous Sir,
A pottle of Elixar at the Pegasus
Bravely carouz'd is more restorative.
My Tutour shall disburse.

Tyn. Good impertinent.

Asot. Impertinent? Impertinent in thy face.
Danger accrues upon the word Impertinent!
Tutour, draw forth thy fatal steel, and slash
Till he devour the word Impertinent.

Ball. The word Impertinent will not bear a quarrel:
The Epithet of Good has mollified it.

Asot. We are appeased. -- Be safe -- I say -- Be safe.

Tyn. Be not rash, Tyndarus. This malicious woman
May as well hate her daughter, as her husband.
I am too sudden to conclude her false
On such slight witness. Shall I think the Sun
Has lost his crown of light, because a cloud
Or envious night has cast a robe of darkness
'Twixt the worlds eye and mine-?

Asot. Can thou, royal boy,
Burn out the remnant of a day with us?

Tyn. I am resolved upon a safer trial.
Sir, you are Courtly, and no doubt the Ladies
Fall out about you: for those rare perfections
Can do no less then ravish.

Asot. I confess --
I cannot walk the streets, but straight the females
Are in a tumult -- I must leave thee, Thebes,
Lest I occasion civil wars to rage
Within thy walls -- I would be loath to ruin
My native soil.

Ball. Sir, what with my instructions,
He has the wooing character.

Tyn. Could you now
But pull the maiden-blossomes of a rose
Sweet as the spring it buds in, fair Evadne;
Or gain her promise, and that grant confirmed
By some slight jewel, I shall vow my self
Indebted to the service, and live yours.

Asot. She cannot stand the fury of my siege.

Ball. At first assault he takes the female fort.

Aso. And ride, loves conqueror, through the streets of Thebes. I Will tell you,
Sir: You would not think how many gentlemen-ushers have, and daily do endanger
their little legs, by walking early and late to bring me visits from this
Lady, and that Countess. Heaven pardon the sin! Never a man in this city
has made so many chambermaids loose their voices, as I have done.


Tyn. As how, I pray?


Asot. By rising in the cold night to let me in to their Madam. If you hear a
waiting woman coughing, follow her: she will infallibly direct you to some that
has been a mistress of mine.


Ball. I have read loves tactiques to him, and he knows
The military discipline of wooing.
To rank and file his kisses: How to muster
His troops of complements, and --

Tyn. I do believe you.
Go on -- return victorious. O poore-heart,
What sorrows do thou teem with! Here she comes.

SCEN. VII.
Tyndarus, Asotus, Ballio, Evadne. Tyn. ANd is it possible so divine a goddess
Should fall from heaven to wallow here in sin
With a Babion as this is? -- My Evadne,
Why should a sadness dwell upon this cheek
To blast the tender roses? spare those tears
To pity others, thy unspotted soul
Has not a stain in it to be washed away
With penitent waters. Do not grieve, thy sorrows
Have forced mine eyes too to this womanish weakness.

Asot. A pretty enemy. I long for an encounter.
Who would not be valiant to fight under such colors?

Evad. My lord, it is guilt enough in me to challenge
A sea of tears, that you suspect me guilty.
I would your just sword would so courteous be
As to unrip my heart; there you shall read
In characters sad lovers use to write,
Nothing but innocence and true faith to you.

Tyn. I have lost all distrust, seal me my pardon
In a chaste turtles kiss. The doves that draw
The rosy chariot of the Queen of love,
Shall not be linked in whiter yokes then we.
Come let us kiss, Evadne. -- Out temptation!
There was too much, and that too wanton heat
In thy lascivious lip -- Go to the stews,
I may perchance be now and then a customer,
But do abjure thee from my chaster sheets. Exit Tyndarus.

SCEN. VIII.
Evadne, Ballio, Asotus. Evad. THen from the world abjure thy self, Evadne,
And in thy quiet death secure the thoughts
Of troubled Tyndarus. -- My womanish courage
Could prompt me on to die, were not that death
Doubled in loosing him. The Elysian fields
Can be no paradise while he is not there:
The walks are dull without him.

Asot. Such a qualm
Of The sudden.

Ball. Fie, turned coward? Resolution
Is the best sword in war.

Asot. Then I will on,
And boldly. -- Yet --

Ball. What? will you lose the day
E're you begin the battle?

Asot. Truly, Tutour,
I have an ague takes me every day,
And now the cold fit's on me.

Ball. Go home and blush,
Thou son of fear.

Asot. Nay, then I Will venture on
Were she ten thousand strong. Hail heavenly Queen
Of beauty, most illustrious Cupids daughter
Was not so fair.

Ball. His mother.

Asot. It Is no matter.
The silly damsel understands no Poetry.
Daigne me thy lip as blue as azure bright.

Ball. As red as ruby bright.

Asot. What Is that to the purpose?
Is not azure blue, as good as ruby red?

Evad. It is not charitable mirth to mock
A wretched Ladies griefs. The gods are just,
And may requite you with a scorn as great,
As that you throw on me.

Asot. Not kiss a Gentleman?
And my father worth thousands? -- Resolution
Spur me to brave achievements.

Evad. Such a rudeness
Some Ladies by the valor of their servants
Could have redeemed. -- Ungentle god of love,
Write not me down among the happier names,
I only live a martyr in thy flames. Exit.

Asot. This is such a masculine feminine gender!

Ball. She is an Amazon both stout and tall.

Asot. Yet I got this by struggling. If I fit you not, a diamound ring out of
her ear.
Proud squeamish coyness! Tutour, such an itch
Of kissing runs all over me. I Will to Phryne,
And fool away an hour or two in dalliance.

Ball. Go, I must stay to wait on fair Techmessa,
Who is as jealous of young Pamphilus,
As Tyndarus of Evadne.

Asot. Surely, Tutour,
I must provide me a suit of jealousy:
It will be all the fashion.

SCEN. IX.
Techmessa, Ballio. Tech. Bless me! what uncouth fancies toss my brain?
As in yon' arbor sleep had cloz'd mine eyes,
Me thought within a flowrie plain were met
A troup of Ladies, and my self was one.
Amongst them rose a challenge, whose soft foot
Should gentliest press the grass and quickest run.
The prize for which they strove, the heart of Pamphilus.
The victory was doubtful. All performed
Their course with equal speed, and Pamphilus
Was chosen judge to end the controversy.
Me thought he shared his heart, and dealt a piece
To every Lady of the troup, but me:
It was unkindly done.

Ball. I have descried

Tech. What, Ballio?

Ball. A frost in his affections
To you, -- but heat above the rage of Dog-dayes
To any other peticoat in Thebes.
I do not think but were the pox a woman,
He would not stick to court it.

Tech. O my soul!
Thou have descried too much. -- How sweet it is
To live in ignorance?

Ball. I did sound him home.
And with such words profaned your reputation,
Would whet a cowards sword. One that never saw you
Rebuked my slanderous tongue. I feel the crab-tree still,
While he sat still unmoved.

Tech. It cannot be.

Ball. I Will undertake he shall resign his weapon,
And forswear steel in any thing but knives,
Rather then venture one small scratch to salve
Your wounded honor: or to prove you chaste,
Encounter with a pin.

Tech. I am no common mistress, nor have need
To entertain a multitude of champions
To draw in my defense. -- Yet had he loved me,
He could not hear me injured with such patience.
Ballio, one trial more: bring me his sword
Rather resigned then drawn in my defense,
And I shall rest confirmed.

Ball. Here Is a fine business.
What shall I do? go to a cutlers shop,
And buy a sword like that. O 'twill not do.

Tech. Will you do this?

Ball. It is resolved. I will
One way or other. Wit, at a dead lift help me.

SCEN. X.
Paegnium, Techmessa, Ballio. Paeg. MAdam, the wretched Pamphilus!

Tech. What of him?

Paeg. Is through your cruelty and suspicion dead.

Ball. That news revives me.

Tech. Haste, Techmessa then:
What do thou here when Pamphilus is dead?
Cast off this robe of clay my soul, and fly
To overtake him, bear him company
To the Elysian groves: the journey thither
Is dark and melancholy: do not suffer him
To go alone.

Paeg. Madam, I joy to see
With how much sorrow you receive his death.
I will restore you comfort: Pamphilus lives.

Ball. If Pamphilus live, then Ballio's dead again.

Tech. Do you put tricks upon me? we shall have you
On a little counterfeit sorrow, and a few drops
Of woman's tears, go and persuade your master
I am deeply in love with him.

Paeg. If you be not,
You ought in justice.

Tech. I Will give thee a new feather
And tell me what were those three Ladies names
Your master entertained last night.

Paeg Three Ladies!

Tech. You make it strange now.

Paeg. Madam, by all oaths
My master bears a love so firmly constant
To you, and only you; he talks, thinks, dreams
Of nothing but Techmessa. When he hears
The sound of your blessed name, he turns Chamaeleon,
And lives on that sweet air. Here he has sent me he lays down his sword, to
pull out his letters.
With letters to you; which I should deliver
I know not, nor himself: for first he writes,
And when that letter likes him not, begins
A second style, and so a third and fourth,
And thus proceeds, then reads 'um over all,
And knows not which to send: perchance tears all.
The paper was not fair enough to kiss
So white a hand, that letter was too big,
A line uneven, all excuse prevailed,
Language, or phrase, or word, or syllable,
That he thought harsh and rough. I have heard him wish
Above all blessings heaven can bestow
(So strange a fancy has affection taught him)
That he might have a quill from Cupids wing
Dipped in the milk of Venus, to record
Your praises and his love. I have brought you here
Whole packets of affection.

Ball. Blessed occasion! he steals away the sword.
Here is a conquest purchased without blood.
Though strength and valor fail us, yet we see
There may a field be won by policy. Exit.

Tech. Go, Paegnium, tell your master I could wish
That I was his, but bid him choose another.
Tell him he has no hope e're to enjoy me,
Yet bid him not despair. I do not doubt
His constant love to me. Yet I suspect
His zeal more fervent to some other saint.
Say I receive his letters with all joy,
But will not take the pains to read a syllable. Exit.

Paeg. If I do not think women were got with ridling, whippe me: Hocas, pocas,
here you shall have me, and there you shall have me. A man cannot find out
their meaning without the sieve, and sheers. I conceive 'um now to be engendered
of nothing but the wind and the weathercock. What? my sword gone? Ha! Well.
This same pandarly-rogue Ballio has got it; he sows suspicions of my master
here, because he cudgels him into manners. And that old scold Dypsas hires him
to it. How could such a devil bring forth such an Angel as my Lady Techmessa?
unless it were before her fall. I know all their plots, and yet they cannot
see 'um. Heaven keep me from love, and preserve my eyesight. Go plot Enginners,
plot on:

I Will work a countermine, and 'twill be brave,
An old rogue over-reached by a young knave.
Exit
ACTUS II.
SCEN. I.
Asotus, Ballio. Asot. REvenge more sweet then muscadine and eggs,
To day I will embrace thee. Healths in blood
Are soldiers mornings draughts. Proud, proud Evadne
Shall know what it is to make a wit her foe,
And such a wit as can give overthrow
To male or female, be they -- man or woman.
This can my Tutour do, and I, cr -- no man.

Ball. And Pamphilus shall learn by this dear knock
His liberal valor late bestowed upon me,
Invention lies at safer ward then wit:
This sword shall teach not to provoke the cruel.

Asot. And by this jemme shall I confound a jewel.
S'lid, Tutour, I have a wit too, there was a jest ex tempore.

SCEN. II.
Asotus, Ballio, Tyndarus. Tyn. PHysicians say, there is no disease so dangerous
As when the Patient knows not he is sick.
Such, such is mine. I could not be so ill,
Did I but know I were not well. The fear
Of dangers but suspected, is more horrid
Then present misery. I have seen a man
During the storm, shake at the thoughts of death:
Who when his eyes beheld a certain ruin,
Died hugging of the wave. Were Evadne true
I were too blessed; or could I say she is false,
I could no more be wretched. -- I am well:
My pulse beats music, and my lively blood
Dances a healthful measure. -- Ha! What Is this
Gnaws at my heart? what viperous shirt of Nessus
Cleaves to my skin, and eats away my flesh?
It Is some infection --

Asot. Tutour, let us be gone.
OF my life we are dead men else.

Tyn. My Asotus?

Asot. Keep your infection to your self.

Tyn. It Is love
Is my infection.

Asot. Nay, then I care not, Tyndarus:
For that is an epidemicall disease,
And is the finest sickness in the world
When it takes two together.

Tyn. Dear, dear self!
How fares the darling of the age? Say, what success?

Asot. Did not I tell you, Sir, that I was born
With a caul upon my face? My mother wrapped me
In her own smock. The females fall before me
Like trembling doves before the towering hawk,
While over the spoils in triumph thus I walk.

Ball. So he takes virgins with his amorous eye,
As spiders web intraps the tender fly.

Asot. True, Tutour, true: for I woo 'um with cobweb-lawn.

Tyn. I know the rest of women may be frail,
Brittle as glasses: but my Evadne stands
A rock of Parian marble, firm and pure.
The crystal may be tainted, and rude feet
Profane the milkie way: The Phoenix self,
Although but one, -- no virgin: E're I harbor
Dishonorable thoughts of that bright maid!
No Tyndarus, reflect upon thy self,
Turn thine eyes inward, see thine own unworthiness
That does thy thoughts to this suspicion move:
She loves thee not, 'cause thou deserve no love.

Asot. I do not know where the enchantment lies,
Whether it be the magic of mine eyes,
Or lip, or cheek, or brow: -- but I suppose
The conjuration chiefly in my nose.
Evadne, Sir, is mine, and wooed me first.
Troth it is a pretty less; and for a woman
She courts in handsome words, and now and then
A polite phrase, and such a feeling appetite,
That having not a heart of flint or steel,
As mine is an easier temper, -- I consented
To give her, in the way of alms, a night
Or so: -- You guess the meaning.

Tyn. Too too well.
And must her lust break into open flames,
To lend the world a light to view her shames?
Could not she taste her Page? or secretly
Admit a tuft-back'd Groom into her arms?
Or practice with her Doctor, and take Physic
In a close room? But thus, good heavens, to take
Her stallions up in the streets! While sin is modest
It may be healed; but if it once grow impudent,
The fester spreads above all hopes of cure.
I never could observe so strange a boldness
In my Evadne. I have seen her cheeks
Blush, as if modesty her self had there
Layn in a bed of coral. -- But how soon
Is virtue lost in women!

Ball. Mistake us not,
Dear Tyndarus, Evadne may be chaste
To all the world -- but him. And as for him,
Diana's self, or any stricter goddess
Would loose the Virgin-zone. I have instilled
Magnetique force into him, that attracts
Their iron hearts, and fashions them like steel
Upon the anvile, to what shape he please.
He knows the minute, the precise one minute,
No woman can hold out in. Come to me, Sir,
I Will teach you in one fortnight by Astrology
To make each Burgess in all Thebes -- your cuckold.

Asot. As silly lambs do fill the wolves black jaw,
And fearful hearts the generous lions paw,
As whales eat lesser fries; so may you see
The matrons, maids, and widows stoop to me.

Tyn. O do not hold me longer in suspense:
The prisoner at the bar may with less fear
Hear the sad sentence of his death pronounced,
Then stand the doubfull trial. Pray confirm me.

Asot. Know you this Jewel?

Tyn. O my sad heart strings crack!

Asot. If your Evadne be a Phoenix, Tyndarus,
Some ten months hence you may have more of the breed.

Tyn. This did I give her, and she vowed to keep it
By all the oaths religion knew. No Deity
In all the court of heaven but highly suffers
In this one perjurie. The diamond
Keeps his chaste luster still, when she has foiled
A glory of more worth then all those toys
Proud folly gave such price to.

Asot. This? a pretty toy;
But of no value to my other trophies
That the frail tribe has sent me. Your best jewels
Are to be found, Sir, in the weaker vessels,
And that is a mystery. I have sweat out such
Variety of trifles, their several kinds
Would pose a learned lapidary: my closet,
By some that knew me not for Cupids favorite,
Has been mistaken for a Jewellers shop.

Ball. And then for ribbands, points, for knots and shoe-strings,
Or to slip higher, garters, no Exchange
Affords such choice of wares.

Asot. Phoebus whip
Thy lazy team, run headlong to the West,
I long to taste the banquet of the night.
Sir, if you please, when I am surfetted
To take a pretty breakfast of my leavings, --

Tyn. Where art thou patience? Hence contagious mists
That would infect the air of her pure fame:
My sword shall purge you forth, base dross of men,
From her refined metal.

Asot. Bless me, Tutour,
This is not the precise minute.

Tyn. Why should I
Afflict my self for her? No, let her vanish.
Shall I retain my love, when she has lost
The treasure of her virtue? Stay, perchance
Her innocence may be wronged. Said I, perchance?
That doubt will call a curse upon my head
To plague my unbelief. -- But here is a witness
Of too too certain truth stands up against her.
Me thinks the flame that burnt so bright dies in me.
I am no more a captive, I have shak'd
My fetters off, and broke those gyves of steel
That bound me to my thraldom. -- My fair prison
Adieu. -- How sweetly breaths this open air?
My feet grown wanton with their liberty,
Could dance and caper till I knocked at heaven
With my advanced head. Come dear Asotus,
There are no pleasures but they shall be ours.
We will dispeople all the elements
To please our palates. Midnight shall behold
Our nightly cups, and wear a blacker mask,
As envious of our jollities. The whole sex
Of women shall be ours. Merchants shall proffer
Their tender brides. Mothers shall run and fetch
Their daughters (e're they yet be ripe) to satisfy
Our liquorish lusts. Then Tityrus happy call,
That loosing one fair maid has purchased all.

Asot. You have an admirable method, Tutour,
If this fellow has not been in my heart, I Will be hanged,
He speaks my mind so pat. Ha, boon couragio --

Ball. You see what more then miracles art can do.

Tyn. And when we have run over the catalogue
Of former pleasures, thou, and I, and Ballio
Will sit and study new ones. I will raise
A sect of new and rare Philosophers,
Shall from my name be called Tyndarides.

Asot. And I will raise another sect like these,
That shall from me be called -- Asotides.
Tutour, my fellow Pupil here and I
Must quaffe a bowl of rare philosophy,
To pledge the health of his Tyndarides.

Tyn. Come, blessed restorer of my liberty.

Asot. If any friend of yours want liberty
In such a kind as this, you may command me.
For if the brave Tyndarides be not free,
The Asotides shall grant them liberty.

Tyn. We will be frolic, boy; and e're we part,
Remember thee, Thou mighty man of art.

Exeunt Tyndar. and Asot. SCEN. III.
Ballio, Techmessa. Ball. THere is besides revenge a kind of sweetness
In acting mischief. I could hug my head,
And kiss the brain that hatches such dear rogueries,
Such loving loving rogueries. -- Silly Pamphilus,
With thine own sword I Will kill thee, and then trample
On the poor foolish carcass. Techmessa here?
Then fortune wait on my designs, and crown 'um
With a success as high as they deserve.

Tech. Me thinks sometimes I view my Pamphilus
Clothed Angel-like in white, and spotless robes,
And straight upon a sudden my changed fancy
Presents him black and horrid, all a stain,
More loathsome then a leper.

Ball. And that fancy
Presents him in his likeness. All the sinks
And common shores in Thebes are cleanly to him.

Tech. Peace, thou foul tongue.

Ball. Nay, if you be so squeamish,
I have no womanish itch to prate. -- Farewell.

Tech. Nay, do not leave me unresolved, good Ballio.

Ball. Why, I did set you out in more vile colors
Then ever cunning pencill used to limb,
Witch, hag, or fury with.

Tech. Thou could not do it,
And live.

Ball. I am no ghost, flesh and blood still.
I said you had a pretty head of hair,
And such as might do service to the State,
Made into halters: that you had a brow
Hung over your eyes like flie-flaps: that your eyes
Were like two powdring-tubs, either running over,
Or full of standing brine: your cheeks were sunk
So low and hollow, they might serve the boys
For cherripits. --

Tech. Could Pamphilus hear all this,
And not his blood turn choler?

Ball. This? and more.
I said your nose was like a hunters horn,
And stood so bending up a man might hang
His hat upon it: that I mistook the year,
And always thought it Winter, when I saw
Two icicles at your nostrils.

Tech. Have I lost
All woman, that I can with patience hear
My self thus injured?

Ball. I could beat my self
For speaking it, but 'twas to sound him, Madam.
I said you had no neck: your chin and shoulders
Were so good friends, they would have nothing part 'um:
I vowed your breasts, for color and proportion,
Were like a writheld pair of over worn footballs:
Your waste was slender, but the ambitious buttock
Climbes up so high about, who sees you naked
Might swear you had been born with a vardingal.

Tech. I am e'ne frighted with thy strange description.

Ball. I left, ashamed and weary: he goes on,
There be more chops and wrinckles in her lips,
Then on the earth in heat of Dog-dayes: and her teeth
Look like an old park-pale: She has a tongue
Would make the deaf man bless his imperfection
That frees him from the plague of so much noise:
And such a breath (heaven shield us) as out-vies
The shambles and bear-garden for a sent.

Tech. Was ever such a fury?

Ball. For your shoulders,
He thinks they were ordained to underprop
Some beam of the Temple, and that is all the use
Religion can make of you: Then your feet,
For I am loath to give the full description,
He vows they both are cloven.

Tech. Had all malice
Dwelt in one tongue, it could not scandal more.
Is this the man adores me as his saint?
And pays his morning orisons at my window
Duly as at the Temple? Is there such hypocrisy
In loves religion too? Are Venus doves
But white dissemblers? Is this that Pamphilus
That shakes and trembles at a frown of mine,
More then at thunder? I must have more argument
Of his apostasy, or suspect you false.

Ball. Whose sword is this?

Tech. It Is his. And this I tied
About the hilt, and heard him swear to fight
Under those colors, the most faithful soldier
The fields of Mars or tents of Cupid knew.
False men, resign your arms. Let us go forth
Like bands of Amazons: for your valors be
Not upright fortitude, but treachery.

Ball. I urged him in a language of that boldness,
As would have fired the chillest veins in Thebes,
To stand in your defense, or else resign
The fruitless steel he wore. He bid me take it.
He had not so much of Knight errant in him,
To vow himself champion to such a doxie.

Tech. Then Love, I shoot thy arrows back again,
Return 'um to thy quiver, guide thy arm
To wound a breast will say the dart is welcome,
And kiss the golden pile. I am possessed
With a just anger, Pamphilus shall know
My scorn as high as his.

Ball. Bravely resolved.
Madam, report not me to Pamphilus
Author of this: for valor should not talk,
And fortitude would loose it self in words.

Tech. I need no other witness then his sword.

SCEN. IIII.
Ballio, Asotus, Tyndarus, Techmessa. Tyn. TEchmessa? never did I understand
The sweets of life till now. I will pronounce
This for my birthday.

Tech. And this happy minute
Has cleared my soul too of the same disease.

Asot. Then do as Tyndarus did, and go with me,
We Will drink a pottle to Liberty, and another
Pottle to the Asotides, and a pottle to the Tyndarides,
And a fourth to the She-philosophers ycleped -- Techmessides.

SCEN. V.
Ballio, Asotus, Tyndarus, Techmessa, Pamphilus. Tyn. PAmphilus, welcome: Shake
thy sorrows off,
Why in this age of freedom do thou sit
A captived wretch? I do not feel the weight
Of clay about me. Am I not all air?
Or of some quicker element? I have purged out
All that was earth about me, and walk now
As free a soul as in the separation.

Pam. Brother, if any stream of joy can mix
With such a sea of grief as mine, and loose not
His native sweetness, it is a joy for you.
But I am all bitterness.

Ball Now, Asotus,
The Comedy begins.

Pam. When will my sufferings
Make my atonement with my angry goddess?
Do you celestial forms retain an anger
Eternal as your substance?

Tech. O fine hair!
An amorous brow, a pretty lovely eye,
A most delicious cheek, a handsome nose!
How Nectar-sweet his lips are? and his teeth,
Like two fair ivory pales, enclose a tongue
Made up of harmony. Then he has a chin
So full of ravishing dimples, it were pity
A beard should overgrow it: and his feet
Past all expression comely.

Pam. Do not add
Contempt to cruelty. Madam, to insult
Upon a prostrate wretch, is harder tyranny
Then to have made him so.

Tech. And then a shoulder
Straight as the pine or cedar.

Pam. Courteous death
Take wings, thou art too slow.

Tech. I could not hear
Those precious parts defamed, but I durst fight
In the just quarrel.

Tyn. It Is a touchy Tiger.
How happy am I that have escaped the dens
Of these she-wolves!

Ball. Now my safety lies
Upon a ticklish point -- a woman's secrecy.
Madam, my reputation is dear to me.

Pam. In what a maze I wander! how my sorrows
Run in a labyrinth!

Tech. I Will unriddle it.

Ball. St, St. The honor of a man at arms.

Tech. Then know, thou perjured Pamphilus, I have learnt
Neglect from thee.

Pam. Madam, I am all love:
And if the violence of my flame had met
With any heart but marble, I had taught it
Some spark of my affection.

Ball. Now it heats.

Tech. No doubt the flame is violent, and must work
Upon a breast so capable as mine.

Asot. I think Cupid be turned jugler. Here Is nothing but Hocas pocas, Praesto
be gone, Come again Jack; and such feats of activitie.


Tech. But I must tell you, you are false and perjured,
Or, what is more, a coward. Tell me, Sir, To Asotus.

For I suppose you of a nobler soul.
If you should hear your mistress by rude tongues
Wronged in the graces both of mind and beauty,
Could you have suffered it?
Asot. Madam, were you made
From bones of Hercules, and brawn of Atlas,
And daughter were to Gargantua great,
And wrong my mistress: you should hear my rage
Provoke my blade, and cry, Blade, can thou sleep
In peaceful scabbard? Out thou beast of terror,
And lion-like roar this disdainful wight
To Plutoes shades and ghosts of Erebus.

Tech. Yet you, my valiant champion, could resign
This (if you know it) rather then endure
The terror of your own steel, to redeem
My bleeding honors.

Pam. How am I betrayed,
And fallen into the toils of treachery!
Give me a man bold as that earth-born race
That bid Jove battle, and besieged the gods;
And if I make him not creep like a worm
Upon his belly, and with reverence
Lick up the dust you scatter from your shoe,
May I for ever loose the light I live in,
The sight of you.

Tec. I Will try your spirits, Phronesium, Enter Phrones. and exit rursus, and
statim intrat cum gladio


Tyn. That blood of goats should soften Adamant!
And poor weak woman with an idle face
Should make the soldier to forget his valor,
And man his sex!

Enter Phronesium. SCEN. VI.
Ballio, Tyndarus, Asotus, Techmessa, Pamphilus, Phronesium. Tech. Here Is a
champion for you.


Phron. Come, Sir, this sword be yours, and if you dare
Maintain-the lists against me, as I fear
Your blood is whey by this time, by your valor
You may redeem your honor, and your sword.

Asot. This is another Hercules come from the distaff.


Phron. If not, I do proclaim thee here, no Knight,
But mean to post thee up for a vile varlet,
And the disgrace of Chivalrie.

Pam. O my shame!


Asot. A dainty Lady errant.


Ball. A fine piece
Of female fortitude.

Phron. If this stir thee not,
Thy mistress is the blemish of her sex,
A dirtie filthy huswife.

Pam. Would it were not
Dishonor now to kill thee!

Phron. If your valor
Lie in your back-parts, I will make experience
Whether a kick will raise it. Pray go fetch him
Some aqua vitae: for the thought of steel
Has put him in a swound: Nothing revive you?
Then will I keep thy sword, and hang it up
Amongst my busk-points, pins, and curling-irons.
Bodkins, and vardingals, a perpetual trophie Exit Phron.

How brave a Knight you are.
Pam. Where shall I run
And find a desert, that the foot of man
Nere wandered in, to hide from the worlds eyes
My shame! God's Death, every Page, and sweaty Footman,
And sopie chambermaid will point and laugh at me.

Tyn. I joy to think that I shall meet Evadne
Turned on the sudden Moor. How black and vile
She will appear!

SCEN. VII.
Ballio, Tyndarus, Asotus, Techmessa, Pamphilus, Evadne. Tyn. O Heavens! who
will not dare
Henceforth to scorn your powers, and call sacrilege
Merit and piety? I do not see
A hair deformed, no tooth or nail sustain
The brand of her deserved shame. You punished
The Queen of beauty with a mole; but certainly
Her perjury has added to her form,
And that the abused gods bribe her with beauty,
As the wracked tenant strives to buy the favor
Of his imperious Landlord.

Evad. Gentle Tyndarus,
Load not weak shoulders with too great a burden.

Tyn. O lust! on what bright altars blaze thy flames,
While chastity lets her cold fires glow out
In deformed temples, and on ruined altars!
Tempt me not strumpet, you that have your hirelings,
And can with jewels, rings, and other toys
Purchase your journeymen-letchers.

Evad. My chaste ear
Has been a stranger to such words as these,
I have not sin enough to understand 'um,
And wonder where my Tyndarus learnt that language.

Tyn. I am turned eagle now, and have an eye
Dares boldly gaze on that adulterate sun.
I must be short. Who must this ring direct
Into your guilty sheets?

Evad. I do not know
How I should lose that pledge of my Lords love:
But it is not in the power of any thief
To steal away the heart I have vowed yours:
And would to all the gods I had kept it there!

Asot. Come, blush not bashful bellipiece -- I will meet thee.
I ever keep my word with a fair lady.
I will requite that jewel with a richer.
The glorious heavens arayd in all their stars
Shall not outshine thee. Be not, girl, ashamed.
These are acquainted with it. I would vex'um
To night with the remembrance of those sports
We shall enjoy, then pleasures double rise
When both we feed, and they shall Tantalize.

Evad. It is not manly in you, Sir, to ruin
A virgins fame, with hazard of your own.

Asot. Tut, less, no matter, we will be manly anon.

Tyn. A fine dissembler! ha! what tumults here?

Enter Paegnium and officers. SCEN. VIII.
Ballio, Tyndarus, Asotus, Techmessa, Evadne, Pamphilus, Tyndarus, Paegnium,
and officers. Paeg. That Is he, I charge you apprehend the villain.


1. Offic. Villain, we reprehend thee.


Ball. Slaves, for what?


2. Offic. For an arrant cutpurse: you stole away this little Gentleman's sword;
and being done by chance-medly, it is flat felony by statute.


Pam. I thank thee Innocence. Though earth disclaim
Thy title, heaven denies thee not protection.

Paeg. Confess, or I will have thee instantly
Hanged for a sign on thine own post.

Ball. Well, villainy
Thou will not thrive. Sir, for 'twas you I wronged:
I do confess the sword by which I raised
So strange a scandal on you, was by me
Stolen from your Page, as he delivered letters
From you to your Techmessa; and the plot
Was fashioned by her mother, though ill fortune
Made me the unlucky instrument. Asot. Cursed Tutour,
Thou have read nothing to me worth the learning,
But the highway to the gallows. There shall we
Hang up like vermin. Little did I think
To make the women weep and sob to see
Th'untimely end of two such proper men.
This mouth was never made to stand awry,
And sure my neck was long enough before.
Lady, upon my humbled knees I beg
Pardon for faults committed, I acknowledge
That striving with fellonious intent
To steal a kiss or two from your sweet lips,
From your sweet ear I stole a ring away.

Paeg. For which your sweet neck must endure the halter.

Tyn. I am again thy servant, mighty love!
O my Evadne, how shall I appear
So bold as but to plead in mine own cause?
It is so foul that none can seal my pardon,
But you that should condemn me.

Evad. Sir, you know
The power I have is yours: be your own judge,
And seal your pardon here.

Tyn. It Is double life
Granted by such a seal.

Tech. What punishment
Shall we inflict on these?

Asot. Gentle Lady,
E'ne what you please, -- but hanging, -- that is a death
My enemies will hit me in the teeth with.
Besides, it makes a man look like a Cat
When she cries mew.

Ball. I Will bark and bite awhile
Before the dogs death choke me.

Asot. Pray dismiss
This pack of hounds: and since we both are guilty,
Let us bestow on one another shoulders
The good and wholesome counsel of a cudgel.

Paeg. Pray let me intercede.


Asot. Thanks, pretty little Gentleman.


Tyn. Officers, you are discharged.


Asot. Are the mad dogs gone? Exeunt officers.

Come Tutour, I must read awhile to you
Under correction. -- Not so hard, good Tutour.
Tyn. Enough.


Asot. Nay, one bout I beseech you more
To make up satisfaction.

Ball. Well for this
I Will have one engine more, my bad intents
Mend not, but gather strength by punishments.

Tyn. Your satisfaction now is full and ample.

Asot. Nay, we must have the health in the crabtree-cup too:
One to th'Tyndarides, another to the Asotides,
And one, my dear instructour, to the Techmessides.

Pam. Nay, now your penance does exceed your crime.

Asot. Say you so? nay, then here is a health to the Pamphilides too:
And for his noble sake, to the Evadnides,
And all Philosophy sects what e're they be.

Evad. Your justice to your selves is too severe.

Asot. Then I ha 'done: farewell, and hearty thanks.
But, Tutour, stay, this little Gentleman
Has been forgot: -- Pray, Sir, what may I call you?

Paeg. My name is Paegnium. --


Asot. I were most unthankful
To pass over you. -- To the Paegniades, Tutour:
You have brought us to a fair pass, Tutour.

Ball. Tush,
'Twas but to exercise your passive valor.

Asot. Your passive valor? give me your active valor:
I do not like your black and blue valor,
When bones shall ache with magnanimity.

Exeunt Asot. Ball. Paeg. SCEN. IX.
Tyndarus, Pamphilus, Evadne, Techmessa. Tyn. BRother, I find my soul a
troubled sea
Whose billows are not fully quieted,
Although the storm be over. Therefore, Pamphilus,
By the same womb that bred us, and the breasts
Of our dead mother Lalage, I conjure thee,
With all the charms that love can teach thee,
Assault Evadnies faith: if thou report her
Constant, I end my jealousy: if frail,
The torrent of my love shall bend his course
To find some other chanel.

Pam. By that love
That made us twins, though born at several births,
That grew along with us in height and strength,
I will be true. Farewell.

Tyn. Be sudden, Pamphilus. Exit Tyn.


Evad. Me thinks this should confirm you.


Tech. That he was not
Guilty of this, acquits him not of all:
To prove a man free from an act of theft,
Assoils him not of murder. No, no, sister,
Tempt him with kisses, and what other dalliance
Craft and indulgent nature has taught woman
To raise hot youth to appetite; if he yield not,
I will put off distrust. I do not know
Whom I durst trust but you.

Evad. Though mine own love
Find me enough of business, yet in hope
That you will second me in my occasions,
I undertake the task.

Tech. Take heed Evadne,
Lest while you counterfeit a flame, you kindle
A real fire. -- I dare not be too confident.
Hence will I closely pry into their actions,
And overheare their language; for if my sister
See with my eyes, she cannot choose but love him
In the same height with me.

SCEN. X.
Pamphilus, Evadne, Techmessa in insidiis. Pam. IT grieves me that a Lady of
your worth,
Young, soft, and active as the spring, the star
And glory of our nation, should be prodigal
Of your affections, and misplace your love
On a regardlesse boy.

Evad. Sir, the same pity
I must return on you. Were I a man
Whom all the Ladies might grow rivals for
(As less you cannot be) I would not lose
My service to a Mistress of so coy
And proud an humor: -- True, she is my sister,
But the same womb produces several natures.
I should have entertained so great a blessing
With greater thankfulness.

Pam. That my stars should be
So cross unto my happiness!

Evad. And my fate
So cruel to me!

Pam. Sweet, it is in us
To turn the wheel of Fortune, she is a goddess
That has no deity where discretion reigns.

Evad. But shall I wrong my sister?


Pam. Do not I
Give just exchange, and lose a brother for her?
Our sufferings have been equal, and their prides.
They must be equal necks that can draw even
In the same yoke.

Evad. I have observed, the chariot
Of the great Cyprian Queen links not together
The dove with sparrows; but the turtle joins
With turtles, and the sparrow has his mate.

Pam. See if one softness kiss not in our lips.

Evad. One lip not meets the other with more sympathy,
Then yours met mine.

Pam. Let Us make the second trial.


SCEN. XI.
Techmessa, Pamphilus, Evadne. Tech. I Can endure no longer, -- Gentle sister.

Evad. I cannot blame your jealousy: for I find --

Tech. Too much of sweetness in his amorous lips.
There is no tie in nature, faith in blood
Is but a thing that should be. Brothers, sisters,
Fathers, and mothers are but specious names
Of love and duty: you and I have been
But guests in the same womb, that at first meeting
Change kind and friendly language, and next morning
Fall out before they part, or at least ride
Contrary rodes.

Evad. Will you then misconster
The service I performed at your request?

Tech. Henceforth I Will set the Kite to keep my chickens,
And make the Wolf my shepherd.

SCEN. XII.
Evadne, Techmessa, Pamphilus, Tyndarus. Tyn. PAmphilus, how is it?


Pam. I know not how to answer thee.
She met me with more courtship then I tendered.

Tech. Sir, we are both abused, and the same womb
That gave us life was fruitful to our ruin.
Your traitor wears the mask called Brother: mine
As cunning a disguise, the name of Sister.
These eyes are witness that descried 'um kissing
Closer then cockles, and in lustful twines
Outbid the ivy, or the circling arms
Of winding vines. Their hot embraces met
So near, and folded in so close a knot,
As if they would incorporate, and grow one.

Tyn. Then farewell all respect of blood and friendship,
I do pronounce thee stranger. If there can be
Valor in treachery, put thy trust in steel
As I do, not in brothers. -- Draw, or die.

Pam. Brother.


Tyn. I hate the name, it is a word
Whets my just anger to a sharper edge.

Pam. Hear me.


Tyn. I will no pleading but the sword.
Were thou protected by Apollo's temple,
Or had the altar for security,
Religion should not bind me from thy death.
Could thou retreat into my mothers womb,
There my revenge should find thee. I am sudden,
And talk is tedious.

Pam. Bear me witness heaven,
This action is unwilling.

SCEN. XIII.
Pamphilus, Tyndarus, Techmessa, Evadne, Chremylus, Dypsas. Chrem. PUt up for
shame those rude unhallowed blades,
And let not rash opinion of a valor
Persuade you to be Parricides. Pray remember
You thirst but your own blood. He that o'recomes
Loses the one half of himself.

Tynd. Dear Chremylus,
The reverence to your age has tied my hands:
But were my thread of life measured by his,
I Would cut it off, though we both fell together;
That my incensed soul might follow his,
And to eternity prosecute my revenge.

Pam. Brother, at your entreaty I adventured
To court Evadne; and because I found her
Against my mind, too easy to my suit,
Your rage falls heavy on me.

Tech. On my knees
I beg, dear father, cloister me in darkness,
Or send me to the desert to converse
With nothing but a wilderness, or expose me
To the cold mercy of the wind and wave,
So you will free me from the company
Of a false sister.

Evad. Sir, with much persuasion
She wrought on me to personate a love
To Pamphilus, to find if I could stagger
The faith he vowed to her. This have I done,
And this so much has moved her.

Chrem. Here you see
The fruits of rashness. Do you find your error?
But the foul spring from whence these bitter streams
Had their first head, I fear, it from you Dypsas.

Dyp. I will no more deny it, I have sown
Those seeds of doubt, wishing to see dissension
Ripe for the sickle -- For what cause I now
Forbear to speak -- but henceforth I will strive
To clear those jealousies, and conclude their loves
In a blessed nuptial.

Tyn. O how frail is man!
One Sunny day the exhalation reares
Into a cloud: at night it falls in tears. Exeunt.

ACTUS III.
SCEN. I.
Dypsas, Tyndarus. Tyn. IF it be not immodesty to demand
So bold a question; I would be resolved
Of one doubt yet.

Dyps. Speak boldly, by all holiness
My answer shall be true.

Tyn. When you were young,
And lively appetite revelled in your blood,
Did you not find rebellion in your veins?
Did not the same embraces tedious grow?
And cause a longing in your thoughts to taste
Varieties of men?

Dyps. I blush, I cannot answer
With a denial; not a proper Gentleman
But forced my goatish eye to follow him:
And when I had surveyed his parts, I would
With any loss of honor, wealth, and friendship,
Have bought him to my bed: and truly, Sir,
'Twas cheap at any rate.

Tyn. Steeled impudence!
What fruit can I expect the bough should bear
That grows from such a stock?

Dyps. I had of late
A months mind Sir to you: You Have the right make
To please a Lady.

Tyn. Sure this old piece of lust
When she is dead will make her grave a brothell,
And tempt the worms to adulterate her carcass.

Dyps. And that is the reason I have crossed my daughter
To further mine own love. Pity me, Sir,
For though the fewel's spent, there is a spark
Raked up in the embers. -- But I now desist.
Please you to go to Ballios house, my daughter
Shall meet you there -- I hope that out of duty
She will not grutch her mother a good turn
When she is married -- now and then.

Tyn. Is there no house
To meet at, but this Ballios? Is Evadne
Acquainted there? is that the rendevous
Of her hot meetings? -- yet I still suspect
This woman's malice to her child not lost.
I will bestow some time, and go to see
The strange event of this dark mystery.

Exit Tyndarus. SCEN. II.
Dypsas, Ballio. Dyps. BAllio.


Ball. Madam.


Dyps. See your house be stored
With the deboisest Rorers in the city
Let every room be filled with noise and quarrelling,
For Tyndarus is to meet Evadne there.
You guess the rest; if not, this purse of gold
Better inform you. Exit Dypsas.

Ball. Most celestial Lady,
Though I have practiced villainy from my cradle
And from my dugge sucked mischief more then milk,
This fury still out-does me. -- I am vexed,
Vexed to the heart to see a silly woman
Carry more devils in her then my self.
And yet I love thee -- thou she-rogue, I love thee.
Had I but such a wife; what a fine brood
Of toads could I beget!

SCEN. III.
Ballio, Simo. Ball. HEre comes my mole,
The son of earth, that digs his mothers entrals
To turn up treasure for his boy and me.
That with industrious eyes searches to hell
To buy us heaven on earth. Welcome, welcome
Thou age of gold: how do the bags at home?
Are all the chests in health? thrives the purse still?
And says it to the talents, Multiply?

Sim. Thanks to my providence like a swarm! Wealth falls
Not in small drops upon me, (as at first)
But like a torrent overthrows the bank
As it would threat a deluge. Were it not pity
My boy should not invent sluices enough
To drain the copious stream.

Ball. A thousand pities!
That you should lose the fruits of so much care.

Sim. True Ballio, true.

Ball. Trust me, what art can do
Shall not be wanting.

Sim. I Will not be ungrateful.
It lies in you to turn these silver hairs
To a fresh black again, and by one favor
Cut forue years away from the gray sum.

Ball. I had rather cut off all, and be our own carvers: -- Aside
Sir, if I had Medea's charms to boil
An aged lamb in some inchaunted caldron
'Till he start up a lamb, I would recall
Your youth, and make you like the aged snake
Cast off this wrinckled skin, and skip up fresh
As at fifteen.

Sim. All this you may and more.
If you will place me where I may unseen
Make my eye witness of my sons delight,
I shall enjoy the pleasures by beholding 'um.

Ball. True Sir, you know he is but your second self,
The same you might have been at one and twenty:
The bliss is both's alike.

Sim. Most Philosophical!


Ball. Place your self there.


Sim. I have no words but these
To thank you with.

Ball. This is true Rhetoric.


SCEN. IIII.
Asotus, Ballio, Bomolochus, Chaerilus, Thrasymachus, Hyperbolus. Simo in
angulis. Asot. COme forth my Rascals: Let the thriving Lord
Confine his family unto half a man
I cleept a -- Page. Our honor be attended
With men of arts and arms. Captain: and Poets
Shall with the Bilbow blade and Gray goose quill
Grace our Retinue -- And when we grow surly,
Valor and wit fall prostrate at our frown,
Crouch imps of Mars, and frogs of Helicon.

Sim. How they adore him! and the perilous wagge
Becomes his state: To see what wealth can do,
To those that have the blessing how to spend it!

Ball. Your blessing was the wealth: the art of spending
He had from me.

Sim. Once more I give thee thanks.


Thras. Who dares offend thee, Lord of fortitude,
And not pay homage to thy potent toe,
Shall be a morsel for the dogs.

Asot. Stoutly delivered,
My brave Thrasymachus -- Thou for this shall feed.
I will not suffer valor to grow lean,
And march like famine. I have seen an army
Of such a meagre troop, such thin-chapt starvelings,
Their barking stomachs hardly could refrain
From swallowing up the foe, ere they had slain him.

Hyper. If thou command our service, we will die
Dull earth with crimson, till the tears of orphans,
Widows and mothers wash it white again:
We Will strew thy walks with legs, and arms, and thighs,
And pay thee tribute thousand heads a day,
Fresh bleeding from the trunck: and panting hearts
Not dead shall leap in thy victorious paw.

Asot. Then say thou too to Hunger -- Friend adieu!
Ballio condemn a bag, let trash away,
See'um both armed in scarlet cap-a-pea,
Strike top-sail, men of war.

Ball. We must divide:
We that serve great men have no other shifts
To thrive our selves but guelding our Lords gifts.

Sim. Now I am rich indeed, this is true treasure.

Asot. Ha! has Melpomene taken cold of late,
That you are silent, my Parnassian beagles?
Is Clio dumb? or has Apollos Jewes-trump
By sad disaster lost her melodious tongue?

Chaer. Your praise all tongues desire to speak: but some,
Nay all I fear, for want of art grow dumb:
The harp of Orpheus blushes for to sing,
And sweet Amphions voice has cracked a string.

Asot. A witty solecisme reward the error! harp and sing, voice and string.

Bom. Give me a breath of thunder, let me speak
Sonorous accents, till their clamours break
Rocks with the noise obstreperous. I will warble
Such bounsing notes shall cleave obdurate marble
Upon mount Caucasus heavens knocking head,
Boreas shall blow my trumpet, till I spread
Thy fame, grand Patron of the thrice three sisters,
Till envies ears shall hear it and have blisters.

Asot. O rare close, a high sublime conceit!
For this I Will sheath thee in a new serge scabbard
Blade of the fount Pegasean.

Sim. What an honor
Will our blood come to! -- I have satisfied
For all the Orphans, Widows, and what others
My sacred hunger has devoured.

Asot. Ballio
Bless him with twenty drachmes -- yet forbear:
Money may spoil his Poetry. Give's some wine,
Here is a whetstone both for wit and valor.
A health to all my beads-men of the sword.

Thr. Hyp. This will engage the men of arms to fight.

Asot. This to the Muses, and their threed-bare tribe.

Cher. Bom. Thou do engage the learned troops to write.

Asot. Go sons of Mars, with young Apollos brood,
And usher in my Venus: wine has warmed
My blood, and waked it to an itch of sporting. Exeunt Bom. Hyp. Chaer. Thr.
for to fetch in Phr. Asot. the while is putting on his armor.

Ball. Some twenty ages hence 'twill be a question
Which of the two the world will reverence more:
You for a thriving father, or Asotus
So liberal a son.

Sim. Good, Ballio, good:
But which will they prefer?

Ball. They cannot, Sir,
But most admire your fist, which gripped so much
That made his hand so open.

Sim. Gracious stars,
How blessed shall I be twenty ages hence!
Some twenty ages hence.

Ball. You shall be called
A doting Coxcombe twenty ages hence.

SCEN. III.
Chaerilus, Bomolochus before personating 2 Mercuries, Phrine in an antique
robe and coronet guarded in by Hyperbolus and Thrasimachus. Asot. HOw bright
and glorious are the beams my star
Darts from her eye! Lead up, my Queen of beauty!
But in a softer march, sound a retreat:
Lead on again, I Will meet her in that state
The god of war puts on, when he salutes
The Cyprian Queen -- these that were once the postures
Of horrid battles, are become the muster
Of love and beauty. Say sweet brace of Mercuries,
Is she the -- Olympique or the Paphian goddess?

Ball Where are you Sir, where are you?

Sim. In Elysium, in Elysium.


Chaer. This is no goddess of the -- Olympique hall

Bom. Nor may you her of Neptunes issue call.

Chaer. For she nor Siren is nor Amphitrite.

Bom. Nor wood-nymph that in forest takes delight.

Chaer. Nor is she Muse.


Bom. Nor Grace.


Chaer. Nor is she ofe of these
That haunt the springs the beauteous Naiades.

Bom. Nor Flora, Lady of the field is she.

Chaer. Nor bright Pomona the Orchards deity.

Bom. No, she is none of these.


Chaer. Oh then prepare
To hear her blessed name.

Both. It Is Phryne fair.


Asot. Phryne the fair? Oh peace! if this be she,
Go forth, and sing the world a lullabie.
For thy dear sake in whom is all delight,
I will no more the trembling nations fright
With bellowing drums, and groans of slaughtered men.
My father brings the golden age again.

Phryn. Pardon me, dreadful deity of war,
'Twas love of you that forced me from my sphere,
And made me leave my Orb without her influence,
To meet you in the fury of the fight
Sweating with rage, and reeking in the blood
Of wretches sacrificed to the Stygian flood.

Asot. Come forth thou horrid instrument of death.

Ball. Do you hear him, Sir?

Sim. I, to my comfort Ballio.


Asot. I will dispeople earth, and drown the world
In crimson floods, and purple deluges.
The old, the young, the weak, the lusty wight,
Soldiers and scholars, fair and foul together,
Men, women, children, infants, all shall die.
I will have none survive that shall have left
Above one eye, three quarters of a face,
And half a nose. I will carve legs and arms
As at a feast. Henceforth to all posterity
Mankind shall walk on crutches.

Phryn. Cruel Mars!
Let the conjunction of my milder star
Temper the too malignant force of thine.
The drum, the fife, and trumpet shall be turned
To lutes, and citherns. We will drink in helmets,
And cause the soldier turn his blade to knives
To conquer capons, and the stubble goose:
No weapons in the age to come be known,
But sword of Bacon, and the shield of Brawn.
Daigne me a kiss, great Warrior.

Asot. Hogsheads of Nectar
Are treasured in the warehouse of her worth.
That kiss has ransomed thousands from the grave.

Phryn. Let me redeem more thousands with a second.

Asot. Rage melts away. I pardon half the world.

Phryn. O let me kiss away all rigor from thee.

Asot. Live mortals, live. Death has no more to do.
And yet me thinks a little rigour's left.

Phryn. Thus shall it vanish.

Asot. Vanish rigor, vanish.
Harness the lions, make my chariot ready:
Venus and I will ride.

Phryn. How? drawn by lions?


Asot. I, thou shall kiss 'um till their rigor vanish
(As mine has) into air. I will have these play
With Ounces, Tigers, and the Panthers whelp,
As with a Squirrel. Bears shall wait on thee,
And spotted Leopards shall thy Monkies be.
Sit down my Queen, and let us quaff a bowl:
See thou, my Phryne, what a fair retinue
I have provided thee? These for thy defense
Against any Lady rivals thee in beauty.
And these on all occasions shall vent forth
Swelling Encomiums, -- Say Bomolochus,
How sings my Mistress?

Bom. The Grasshopper chaunts not his Autumn quire
So sweet, nor Cricket by the chimney fire.

Asot. They Will make thee any thing. Thou art already
Cricket and Grasshopper. -- Chaerilos, how does she dance?

Chaer. Have you beheld the little fable beast
Clad in an Ebon mantle, hight a flea,
Whose supple joints so nimbly skip and caper
From hemme to sleeve, from sleeve to hemme again,
Dancing a measure over a Ladies smock,
With motion quick, and courtly equipage?
So trips fair Phryne over the flowery stage.

Asot. Now thou art a flea. -- How snorts she as she sleeps!

Bom. Zephyrus breaths not with a sweeter gale
Through a grove of sycmore one. The soft spring
Chides not the pebles that disturb his course
With sweeter murmr. Let Amphions lute
(That built our Theban walls) be henceforth mute.
Orpheus shall break his harp, and silent be,
The reed of Pan, and pipe of Mercury:
Yea, though the spheres be dumb, I care not for it:
No music such as her melodious snort.

Asot. Melodious snort! With what decorum spits she!

Chaer. Like the sweet gummes that from Electar trees
Distill, or honey of the laboring bees:
Like morning dew that in a pleasant shower
Drops pearls into the bosom of a flower;
Cupid with acorn cups close by her fits,
To snatch away the Nectar that she spits.

Asot. Ballio, present me with the crowns of laurel.
Thus I drop wine the best of Helicon
On your learned heads, and crown you thus with bays.
Rise Poets laureat both! Favor Apollo!

Both. The Muses and Asotus be propitious!

Asot. I will not have you henceforth sneak to Taverns.
And peep like fiddlers into Gentlemen's rooms,
To shark for wine and radishes: nor lie sentinel
At Ordinaries, nor take up at plays
Some novice for a supper: you shall deal
No more in ballads to bewail an execution
In lamentable rythmes: nor beg in Elegies:
Nor counterfeit a sickness to draw in
A contribution: nor work journey-work
Under some playhouse post, that deals in
Wit by retail: nor shall you task your brains
To grace a Burgess new post with a Rebus:
Or furnish a young suitour with an Anagram
Upon his mistress name: nor study posies
For rings and bracelets. -- Injure not the bough
Of Daphne: know that you are laureat now.

Ball. How like you this discourse?


Sim. Excellent well.
It is a handsome less. If I were young
(As I am not decrepit) I would give
A talent for a kiss.

Phryn. Come beauteous Mars,
I Will kembe thy hair smooth as the ravens feather,
And weave those stubborn locks to amorous bracelets;
Then call a livelier red into thy face,
And soften with a kiss thy rugged lips.
I must not have this beard so rudely grow,
But with my needle I will set each hair
In decent order, as you rank your squadrons.

Asot. Here Is a full bowl to beauteous Phrynes health.
What durst thou do, Thrasymachus, to the man
That should deny it?

Thras. Dissect him into atoms.


Hyper. I durst do more for beauteous Phrynes sake.

Thras. What, more then I? Hyperbolus, thou art mortal.

Hyper. Yield, or I see a breakfast for the crows.

Thras. Death to my lungs, I spit upon thy fame.

Hyper. Then with my steel I whip thy rash contempt.

Asot. Brawling you mastives. -- Keep the peace at home
And join your forces against the common foe.

Phryn. You shall not be angry: by this kiss you sha' not.

Asot. I will, unless you swear again.


Phryn. You shall not.


Sim. Ah, Ballio! Age has made me dry as tinder,
And I have taken fire. I burn, I burn.
The spark raked up in ashes is broke forth,
And will consume me, Ballio.

Ball. What Is the matter?


Sim. Love, cruel love. I must enjoy that lady
What ever price it cost me.

Ball. Your sons mistress?


Sim. Son, or not son. -- Let this entreat, and this.

Ball. This will persuade. I must remove your son,
His fury else will surely stand 'twixt us
And our designs. -- Old letcher, I will fit you,
And geld your bags for this. You shall be milk'd,
Emptied, and pumpt. Sponge, we will squeeze you sponge,
And send you to suck more. -- Invincible Mars.

Asot. What says the governor of our younger years?

Ball. You have worn this plot of Mars too stale already.
O shift your self into all shapes of love.
Women are taken with variety.
What think you of Oberon the king of Fayries?
I know 'twill strike her fancy.

Asot. Business calls.
Drink on, for our return shall sudden be.

SCEN. VI.
Ballio, Simo, Thrasymachus, Hyperbolus, Chaerilus, Bomolochus, Phryne. Ball.
PHryne, here is a boy of wealth, my girl,
The golden bull that got this golden calf
Deeply in love with thee.

Phryn. Let me alone,
I Will fleece him. --

Ball. Melt him, Phryne, melt him:
We must not leave this mine till we have found
The largeness of the vein. -- Suck like an horse-leach.
Come, Sir, and boldly enter: I have choked out
An easy path to tread in; 'twill direct you
To your wished journeys end, and lodge you safe
In her soft arms.

Sim. Thou art my better Angel.
Will thou eat gold, drink gold, lie in gold,
I have it for thee. Old men are twice children,
And so was I, but I am grown again
Up to right man. -- Thou shall be my Tutour too.
Is there no stools, or tables?

Ball. What to do?


Sim. I would vault over them, to show the strength
And courage of my back.

Ball. Strike boldly in, Sir.


Sim. Save you, Gentlemen. If you want gold, here is for you.
Give me some wine: Mistress, a health to you:
Pledge me, and spice the cup with these and these.
Thou shall have better gowns.

Thras. A brave old boy.


Hyper. There Is metal in him.


Chaer. I will sing thy praise
In lines heroic.

Bom. I will tune my lyre,
And chaunt an ode that shall eternize thee.

Phryn. Of what a sweet aspect! how lovely looked
Is this fine Gentleman! -- I hope you know
It is in Thebes the custom to salute
Fair ladies with a kiss. --

Sim. She is enamored.
Sure I am younger then I thought my self.
Fair Lady, health and wealth attend thee.

Phryn. Good Sir, another kiss: you have a breath
Composed of odours.

Sim. Buy thee toys with this:
I Will send thee more.

Phryn. How ravishing is his face?


Sim. That I should have so ravishing a face,
And never know it! -- Miser that I was!
I will go home and buy a looking glass,
To be acquainted with my parts hereafter.

Phryn. Come, lie thee down by me; here we will sit.
How comely are these silver hairs? This hand
Is e'ne as right to my own mind, as if
I had the making of it. Let me throw
My arms about thee.

Ball. How the burre cleaves to him!


Sim. This remnant of my age will make amends
For all the time that I have spent in care.

Phryn. Give me thy hand. How smooth a palm he has!
How with a touch it melts!

Ball. The rogue abuses him
With his greasy fists.

Phryn. Let us score kisses up
On one another lips. Thou shall not speak,
But I will suck thy words e're they have felt
The open air. --

Sim. That I should live so long,
And ignorant of such a wealth as this!

SCEN. VII.
Simo, Thrasymachus, Hyperbolus, Chaerilus, Bomolochus, Phryne, Asotus. Asot.
NOw am I Oberon prince of Fairy land,
And Phryne shall be Mab my Empress fair:
My soldiers two I Will instantly transform
To Will-with-a-wisp, and Robin-goodfellow,
And make my brace of Poets transmigrate
Into Pigwiggin and Sir Peppercorn.
It were a pretty whimsy now to counterfeit
That I were jealous of my Phrynes love.
The humor would be excellent, and become me
Better then either Tyndarus or Techmessa.
Thus will I walk as one in deadly dumps.

Sim. When shall we marry?

Phryn. I can hardly stay
Till morning.

Asot. O what Fury shot
A viper through my soul! Here Love with twenty bows
And twenty thousand arrows lays his siege
To my poor heart. -- O Phryne, Phryne!
I have no cause why to suspect thy love.
But if all this be cunning, as who knows!
Away foul sin. O eyes, what mischief do you see!

Ball. O, I could burst with laughter. Here will be
A pretty scene of mirth.

Sim. Thou do not love me.
My boy Asotus, my young sprightly boy
Has stolen thy heart away.

Phryn. He? a poor mushrum!
Your boy? I should have guessed him for your father.
He has a skin as wrinckled as a Tortoyse.
I have mista'ne him often for a hedgehog
Crept out on's skin. Pray keep the fool at home.

Asot. Patience go live with cuckolds. I defy thee.
Villain, rogue, traitor, do not touch my dear
So to unsanctifie her tender skin,
Nor cast a goatish eye upon a hair,
To make that little thread of gold profaned,
Or gaze but on her shoe-string that springs up
A real rose, from virtue of her foot,
To blast the odours: grim-fac'd death shall hurry thee
To Styx, Cocytus, and fell Phlegethon.

Sim. Asotus, good Asotus, I am thy father.

Asot. I no Asotusam, nor thou my fire,
But angry and incensed Oberon.

Sim. All that I have is thine, though I could vie
For every silver hair upon my head
A piece in gold. --

Asot. I should send you to the barbours.


Sim. All, all is thine: let me but share
A little in thy pleasures: only relish
The sweetness of 'um.

Asot. No, I will not have
Two spenders in a house, Go you and revell,
I will go home and live a drudges life,
As you have done, to scrape up pelf together:
And then forswear all Tutours, Soldiers, Poets,
Women, and wine. I will forget to eat,
And starve my self to the bigness of a polecat.
I will disclaim his faith that can believe
There is a Tavern, or a Religious place
For holy Nuns that vow incontinence,
And have their beads to sin by. -- Get you home.
You kiss a Gentlewoman to endanger
Your chattering teeth? -- Go, you have done your share
In getting me: to furnish the next age
Must be my province. Go, look you to yours.
Lie with your mustie bags, and get more gold.
S'lid, anger me, and I Will turn drudge for certain.

Sim. Asotus, good Asotus pardon me.

Asot. I wonder you are not ashamed to ask pardon.

Sim. It was the dotage of my age, Asotus.

Asot. Who bid you live until this age of dotage?

Sim. I will abjure all pleasures but in thee.

Asot. This something qualifies.


Sim. It shall be my sport
To maintain thine. Thou shall eat for both,
And drink for both. --

Asot. Good: this will qualify more.


Sim. And here I promise thee to make a jointure
Of half the land I have to this fair Lady.

Asot. This qualifies all. You have your pardon, Sir!
But hear you, Sir, it must be paid for too.
To morrow Mab I thee mine Empress crown.

Ball. All friends. A merry cup go round, What? Captains
And Poets here, and leave the sack for flies?

SCEN. VIII.
Ballio, Asotus, Phryne, Simo, Thrasimachus, Hyperb. Cheribus, Bomolochus,
Tyndarus. Hyp. THrasimachus, a whole one.


Thras. Done: I Will pledge thee
Though 'twere a deluge. -- By my steel you have left
Enough to drown an island, Chaerilus.

Char. And 'twere the famous fount of Hyppocrene,
I Would quaffe it off all, though the great Apollo
And all the Muses died for thirst, Bomolochus.

Bom. Come boy, as deep as is Pamassus high.

Tyn. What nurserie of sin is this? what temple
Of lust and riot? Was this place alone
Thought a fit witness for the knitting up
Chaste and religious love? Deeds dark as hell,
Incest and murder might be acted here.
The holy god of Marriage never lighted
His sacred torch at so profane a den.
It is a cage for schreetch-owls, bats, and ravens,
For crows and kites, and such like birds of prey.
But the chaste turtle, the indulgent pelican,
And pious stork, fly hence as from infection.
Evadne meet me here? Is she a parcel
Of the damned family? Are there such white devils
Among their Succuba's? No, thou art wronged, Evadne:
And there be some that scatter snakes amongst us,
Have stung too deep already.

SCEN. IX.
Ballio, Asotus, Chaerilus, Simo, Hyperbolus, Thrasimachus, Tyndarus, Evadne.
Tyn. Bless me eyes!
My troubled fancy fools me. I am lost
In a distracted dream. It is not she.
Awake thee Tyndarus: what strange sleeps are these!
Me thinks I am in hell, and yet behold
A glorious Angel there. Or have these devils
Broke into Paradise! for the place is such,
She blesses with her presence. -- Mere contradictions,
Chimaeras, of a restless brain.

Evad. Diana,
And whatsoever Goddess else protects
Untouched virginity, shield me with your powers.
To what a wilderness have my wandering steps
Betrayed me! sure this cannot be a place
To meet my Tyndarus in.

Tyn. It Is Evadne,
It Is the fair-foul Evadne. Now my sword,
That had a good edge to defend this woman,
Go send her soul into another mansion
Black as it self. It is too foul a tenant
For this fair palace. Stay yet, too forward steel,
Take her incircled in her stallions arms,
And kill two sins together. --.Let 'um be
At hell to bear the punishment of lust
E're it be fully acted.

Evad. What strange fancies
My maiden fears present me! Why, I know not:
But this suspicion seldom bodeth good.

Thras. A handsome Bona Roba, and my prize.

Hyper. I do deny't, she is my monopoly.

Chaer. Perchance she may one of the Muses be,
And then claim I a share for Poetry.

Evad. If ever silly lamb thus strayed before
Into a flock of wolves; or harmless dove
Not only made the prey, but the contention
Of ravenous eagles; such poor soul am I.

Thras. Give me a busse, my girl.

Evad. If there be here
A Gentleman in whom there lives a spark
Of virtue not yet out; I do beseech him,
By all the ashes of his ancestors,
And by the constant love he bears his mistress,
To rescue innocence and virginity
From these base monsters. I for him will pay
A thousand prayers a morning, all as pure
And free from earthly thought, as e're found passage
Through the strict gate of heaven.

Tyn. That Is a task for me.
A way fowl ravishers, I will teach my sword
Justice to punish you. Such a troup of Harpyes
To force a Ladies honor! I will quench
With your own blood the rage of that hot lust
That spurred you on to base and bold attempts.

Asot. Fly, Phryne, fly, for dangers do surround.

Sim. This is a pleasure that I care not for.

Exeunt. SCEN. X.
Tyndarus, Evadne. Tyn. Lady be safe.


Evad. Sir, may this favor done
An injured maid call blessings on your head
In plenteous showers!

Tyn. This courtesy deserves
Some fair requital.

Evad. May plumed victory
Wait on your sword: and if you have a mistress,
May she be fair as lilies, and as chaste
As the sweet morning dew that loads the heads
Of drooping flowers: may you have fair children
To propagate your virtues to posterity
And bless succeeding times. --

Tyn. Heaven be not deaf!


Evad. May you and plenty never live asunder.
Peace make your bed, -- and --

Tyn. Prayer is cheap reward.
And nothing now bought at a rate so easy
As that same highway ware. -- Heaven bless your worship.
In plain words Lady (I can use no language
But what is blunt) I must do what they would have done.

Evad. Call back your words, and lose not that reward
Heaven is engaged to pay you.

Tyn. Come: no circumstance.
Your answer? quick.

Evad. I beg it on my knees,
Have a respect to your own soul, that sinks
In this dishonor, Sir, as deep as mine.

Tyn. You are discourteous, Lady!

Evad. Let these tears
Plead for me: did you rescue me from thieves,
To rob me of the jewel you preserved?

Tyn. Why do I trifle time away in begging
That may command. -- Proud Damsel, I will force thee.

Evad. I thank thee blessed occasion: -- Now I dare She snatches a stilletto out
of his pocket.

Defy thee devil: here is that shall keep
My chastity secure, and arm a maid,
To scorn your strength.
Tyn. Be not too masculine, Lady.


Evad. Stand off, or I will search my heart with this,
And force my blood a passage, that in anger
Shall fly into thy face, and tell thee boldly
Thou art a villain.

Tyn. Incomparable Lady!
By all those powers that the blest-men adore,
And the worst fear, I have no black design
Upon your honor; only as a soldier
I did desire to prove whether my sword
Had a deserving cause: I would be loath
To quarrel for light ware. Now I have found you
Full weight, I Will wear his life upon my point
That injures so much goodness.

Evad. You speak honor.


Tyn. Blessed be this minute, sanctify it, Time,
'Bove all thy calendar. Now I find her gold.
This touchstone gives her perfect. The discovery
Of never found kingdoms, where the plow turns up
Rich oar in every furrow, is to this
A poor success. Now all my doubts are cleared,
And I dare boldly say, Be happy Tyndarus!

SCEN. XI.
Tyndarus, Evadne, Pamphilus. Pam. GReat Queen of love, sure when the laboring
sea
Did bring forth thee, before she was delivered;
Her violent throws had raised a thousand storms.
Yet now, I hope after so many wrecks
That I have suffered in thy troubled waves,
Thou now wilt land me safe.

Tyn. Pamphilus here?
He comes to meet Evadne. This is their house
Of toleration. She had spied me out
Through my disguise: and with what studied art,
What cunning language, how well acted gesture,
How much of that unbounded store of tears
She wrought on my credulity! The Fox,
Hyaena, Crocodile, and all beasts of craft,
Have been distilled to make one woman up. Exit.

Evad. And has he left me in this dragons den!
A spoil to rapine! what defense, poor maid,
Have thou against these wild and salvage beasts?
My stars were cruel: If you be courteous eyes,
Weep me a flood of tears, and drown me in it,
And be Physicians to my sorrows now,
That have too long been Heralds of my grief.
My thread of life has hitherto drawn out
More woes then minutes.

Pam. Health to the fair Evadne.


Evad. Is any left so courteous to wish health
To the distressed Evadne? Pamphilus?

Pam. Is my Techmessa here?


Evad. Now all the Gods
Preserve her hence, there is in hell more safety
Among the Furies -- Mischief built this house
For all her family. Gentle Pamphilus,
See me delivered from this jayl, this dungeon,
This horrid vault of lust.

SCEN. XII.
Pamphilus, Tyndarus, Techmessa, Evadne. Pam. TAke comfort, Lady.
Your honor stands safe on his guard, while I
Can use a sword.

Evad. You have confirmed me, Sir.


Tyn. How close they wind, like glutinous snakes ingendring,

Tech. Well sister, I shall study to requite
This courteous treachery.

Evad. Pamphilus, in me
All stars conspire to make affliction perfect.

Pam. Wait on heavens pleasure, Madam: such a one
The heavens never made for misery, they but give you
These crosses as sharp sauce to whet your appetite
For some choice banquet. Or they mean to lead you
Through a vault dark and obscure as hell,
To make your paradise a sweeter prospect.
-- Thus I feed
Others with hopes, while mine own wounds do bleed.

Exeunt Evadne, Pamphilus. SCEN. XIII.
Tyndarus, Techmessa. Tech. WHy should we toil thus in an endless search
Of what we now behold? -- Let us grow wise,
I loath false Pamphilus -- yet I could have loved him:
And if he were but faithful, could do still.

Tyn. Sure were Evadne false, yet Pamphilus
Would not be made the instrument to wrong me.
Or suppose Pamphilus were a treacherous brother;
Me thinks Evadne should be kinder to me.
Techmessa join with me in one search more,
Ballio.

SCEN. XIIII.
Tyndarus, Techmessa, Ballio, Asotus. Tyn. O Ballio, it is in you and dear
Asotus
To make two wretches happy.

Asot. Then be happy.


Tyn. 'Ile make you two joint heirs of my estate,
And you shall give it out: we two are dead
By our own hands. And bear us both this night
To church in coffins. Whence we will make escape,
And bid farewell to Thebes.

Asot. Would you not both
Be buried in one coffin? then the grave
Would have her tenants multiply: -- hear you Tutour,
Shall not we be suspected for the murder,
And choke with a hempen squincy?

Tyn. To secure you,
We Will write before what we intend to act:
Our hands shall witness with your innocence.

Ball. Well: Come the worst, I Will venture; -- and perchance
You shall not die in jest again of the sudden.

Tyn. What strange Maeanders Cupid leads us through!
When most we forward go, we backward move.
There is no path so intricate as Love!

ACTUS IIII.
SCEN. I.
Ballio, Asotus, Chaerilus, and Bomolochus, bearing the coffin of Techmessa;
Hyperocus, Thrasimachus bearing the coffin of Tyndarus, a servant. Ball. CArry
these letters unto Chremylus house.
Give this to Pamphilus, to Evadne that,
And certify 'um of this sad event.
It will draw tears from theirs -- As from my eyes,
Because they are not real obsequies.

Asot. So great my grief, so dolorous my disaster,
I know not in what language to express it,
Unless I should be dumb! -- Sob -- sob Asotus,
Sob till thy buttons break, and crack thy bandstrings
With lamentation, and distressed condoling,
With blubberd eyes behold this spectacle
Of man's mortality. -- O my dearest Tyndarus!

Thras. Learn of us Captains to outface grimme death,
And gaze the lean-chapt monster in the face.

Asot. I, and I could but come to see his face,
I Would scratch his eyes out. -- O the ugly Rogue!
Could none but Tyndarus and fair Techmessa
Serve the vile varlet to lead apes in hell?

Hyper. I have seen thousands sigh out souls in groans
And yet have laughed: -- it has been sport to see,
A mangled carcass broached with so many wounds
That life has been in doubt which to get out at.

Asot. Are crawling vermin of so choice a diet?
Would I were then a worm, freely to feed
On such a delicate and Ambrosian dish:
Fit to be served a banquet to my bed!
But O -- Techmessa death has swallowed thee,
Too sweet a sop for such a fiend as he.

Chae. Chase hence these showers, for since they both were dead,
Tears will not bribe the fates for a new thread.

Bom. Inexorable sisters, -- Be not sorry:
For Clotho's distaffe will be peremptory!

Asot. Go then, and dip your pens in gall and vinegar
To rail on Mors, cruel -- impartial Mors:
The salvage Tyrant -- all-devouring Mors:
The envious, wicked, and malicious Mors:
Mors that respects not valor, Mors that cares not
For wit or learning, Mors that spares not honor:
Mors whom wealth bribes not, Mors whom beauty tempts not.
Thus loudly rail on Mors, that Mors may know it
To be revenged on Mors I keep a Poet.

Thras. If Mors were here, the Skeleton should know
I Would cut his charnell bones to dice, for grieving
Our noble General -- Courage bon chevalier!

SCEN. II.
Simo, Asotus, Ballio, Thrasimachus, Hyperbolus Charilus, Bomolochus. Sim. WHy
is my boy so sad? -- Tell me Asotus:
If dissolved gold will cure thee, melt a Treasure.

Asot. O sad mischance!


Sim. What grieves my hope -- my joy.
My staff, my comfort?

Asot. Woeful accident!


Sim. Have I not barricadoed all my doors,
And stopped each chink and cranny in my house,
To keep out poverty and lean misfortune?
Where crept this sorrow in?

Asot. Here, through my heart.
O father, I will tell you such a story
Of such a sad and lamentable nature,
'Twill crack your purse-strings.

Sim. Ha? what story, boy?
My friend, my dear friend Tyndarus, Sir, is dead.
-- And, to augment my sorrow, -- killed himself.
And yet to add more to my heap of griefs,
Left me and Ballio -- his estate --

Sim. Alas!
Is not this counterfeit sorrow well expressed?

Ball. But I grieve truly that I grieve in jests

Sim. Half his estate to thee, and half to Ballio?
A thousand pities. -- Gently rest his bones.
I cannot but weep with thee.

Ball. Sir, you see
If you had left him nothing, my instructions
Can draw in patrimonies.

Sim. He is rich
In nothing but a Tutour. -- Good Asotus,
Though sorrow be a debt due to the hearse
Of a dead friend, and we must wet the turf
Under whose roof he lodges: yet we must not
Be too immoderate.

Asot. Bear me witness, heaven!
I used no force of Rhetoric, no persuasions
(What e're the wicked and malicious world
May rashly censure) to instigate these two
To their own deaths. I knew not of the plot,
All of you know that I am ignorant.

Phryn. Where is my love? shall sorrow rival me, Enter Phryne.

And hang about thy neck? If grief be got
Into thy cheeks, I Will clap it out. -- Dear chicken.
You shall not be so sad, indeed you shall not.
Be merry: by this kiss I Will make you merry.
Asot. Then wipe my eyes. -- Thus when the clouds are gone,
The day again is gilded by the sun.

SCEN. III.
Ballio, Asotus, Simo, Phryne, Thrasimachus, Hyperb. Chaerilus, Bomolochus,
Sexten. Asot. Who Is within here?


Sext. What Is the matter without there?


Asot. What art thou?


Sext. The last of tailours, Sir, that never take measure of you, while you
have hope to wear a new suit.


Asot. How do thou live?


Sext. As worms do: -- by the dead.


Asot. A witty rascal. Let Us have some discourse with him.


Thras. Are any soldiers bones in garrison here?


Sext. Faith, Sir, but few: they like poor travelers
Take up their inn by chance: but some there be.

Thras. Do not those warlike bones in dead of night
Rise up in arms, and with tumultuous broyls
Waken the dormise that dull peace has lulled
Into a lethargy? -- Do not hear 'um knock
Against their coffins, till they crack and break
The marble into shivers that intombes 'um?
Making the temple shake as with an earthquake,
And all the statues of the gods grow pale,
Affrighted with the horror?

Sext. No such matter.


Hyper. Do they not call for arms? and fright thee, mortal,
Out of thy wits? Do they not break the legs,
And crush the skuls that dare approach too near
Their honored graves? -- When I shall come to dwell
In your dark family, if a noisome carcass
Offend my nostrils with too rank a sent,
Know -- I shall rage -- and quarrel, -- till I fright
The poor inhabitants of the charnell house:
That here shall run a toe, a shin-bone there:
Here creeps a hand, there trowles an arm away.
One way a crooked rib shall halting hie,
Another you shall trundling find a skull.
Like the distracted citizens of a town
Beleaguered, -- and in danger to be taken.

Asot. For heavens sake, Sexton, lay my quiet bones
By some precise religious officer,
One that will keep the peace. -- These roaring captains
With blustering words and language full of dread,
Will make me quit my tomb, and run away
Wrapped in my winding sheet, -- as if grim Minos,
Stern Aeacus, and horrid Rhadamanth
Enjoined the corpse a penance.

Sext. Never fear it. This was a captains skull, one that carried a storm in
his countenance, and a tempest in his tongue. The great bug-beare of the city,
that threw drawers down the stairs as familiarly as quartpots; and had a
pension from the Barbour-chirurgeons for breaking of pates. A fellow that had
ruined the noses of more bawds and pandars, then the disease belonging to the
trade. -- And yet I remember when he went to burial, another corse took the
wall of him, and the ban-dog never grumbled.


Asot. Then skull (although thou be a captains skull)
I say thou art a coward, -- and no Gentleman;
Thy mother was a whore, -- and thou lie in thy throat.

Hyper. Do not, live hare, pull the dead lions beard.


Asot. No, good Hyperbolus, I but make a jest
To show my reading in morality.

Chaer. Do not the ashes of deceased Poets
Inspired with sacred fury, carroll forth
Enthusiastic raptures? Do not hear 'um
Sing mysteries, and talk of things concealed
The rest of mortal judgments? Do not see
Apollo and the Muses every night
Dance rings about their tombs?

Bom. Do not roses,
Lilies, and violets grow upon their graves?
Shoots not the laurel that impaled their brows
Into a tree, to shadow their blessed marble?
Do they not rise out of their shrowds to read
Their Epitaphs? and if they like 'um not,
Expunge 'um, and write new ones? Do they not
Rore in caliginous terms, and vapor forth
From reeking entrals fogs Egyptian,
To puzzle even an oculate intellect?
Prate they not cataracts of insensible noise,
That with obstreperous cadence cracks the organs
Acroamatick, till the deaf auditor
Admires the words he hears not?

Sext. This was a poetical noddle. O the sweet lines, choice language,
eloquent figures, besides the jests, half jests, quarter jests, and quibbles
that have come out o'these chaps that yawn so! He has not now so much as a
new-coyn'd-complement to procure him a supper. The best friend he has may walk
by him now, and yet have never a jeere put upon him. His mistress had a little
dog deceased the other day, and all the wit in this noddle could not pump out
an Elegy to bewail it. He has been my tenant this seven years, and in all
that while I never heard him rail against the times, or complain of the neglect
of learning. Melpomene and the rest of the Muses have a good time on it that he
is dead: for while he lived, he never left calling upon 'um. He was buried (as
most of the tribe) at the charge of the parish, and is happier dead then alive:
for he has now as much money as the best in the company, -- and yet has left
off the poetical way of begging, called Borrowing.


Asot. I scorn thy Lyrick and Heroic strain,
Thy tart Iambick, and Satyrick vein.
Where be thy querks and tricks? show me again
The strange conundrums of thy frisking brain,
Thou Poets skull, and say, What Is time to chimney?

Sext. Alas! Sir, you have posed him: he cannot speak to give you an answer,
though his mouth be always open. A man may safely converse with him now, and
never fear stifling in a crowd of verses. And now a Play of his may be freely
censured, without a libel upon the audience. The boys may be bold to cry it
down.


Ball. I cannot yet contrive it handsomely.
Me thinks the darkness of the night should prompt me
To a plot of that complexion. -- Ruminate,
Ruminate Ballio.

Phryn. Pray, Sir, how does death
Deal with the Ladies? Is he so unmannerly
As not to make distinction of degrees?
I hope the rougher bones of men have had
More education, then to trouble theirs
That are of gentler stuff.

Sext. Death is a blunt villain, Madam: he makes no distinction betwixt Jone
and my Lady. This was the prime Madam in Thebes, the general mistress, the
only adored beauty. Little would you think there were a couple of stars in
these two augur-holes: or that this pit had been arched over with a handsome
nose, that had been at the charges to maintain half a dozen of several silver
arches to uphold the bridge. It had been a mighty favor once, to have kissed
these lips that grin so. This mouth out of all the Madams boxes cannot now be
furnished with a set of teeth. She was the coyest overcurious dame in all the
city: her chambermaids misplacing of a hair, was as much as her place came to.
-- Oh! if that Lady now could but behold this physnomie of hers in a
looking-glass, what a monster would she imagine her self! Will all her
perrukes, tyres and dresses, with her chargeable teeth, with her cerusse and
pomatum, and the benefit of her painter and doctor, make this idol up again?

Paint Ladies while you live, and plaster fair,
But when the house is fallne it is past repair.

Phryn. No matter, my Asotus: Let death do
His pleasure then, we will do our pleasures now.
Each minute that is lost is past recall.
This is the time allotted for our sports,
Twere sin to pass it. While our lips are soft,
And our embraces warm, we will twine and kiss.
When we shall be such things as these, let worms
Crawl through our eyes, and eat our noses off,
It is no matter. While we lived, we lived.

Asot. And when we die, we die. We will be both embalmed
In precious unguents to delight our sense,
And in our grave we will busse, and hug, and dally
As we do here: for death can nothing be
To him that after death shall lie with thee.
Sexton, receive these coffins to the temple;
But not interre them, -- for they both are guilty
Of their own blood, -- till we make expiation
T'assoyl the fact. -- Tutour reward the Sexton.
I Will come sometimes and talk morality with him.

Ball. This, Sir, my Pupil gives you: -- but hereafter
I Will more then treble it, if you be no enemy
To your own profit.

Sext. Profit's my religion.


Asot. Now you that bore my dead friends to the grave,
Usher my living mistress home again.
Thus joy with grief alternate courses shares,
Fortune, I see thy wheel in all affairs.

Exeunt omnes prater Sexton. SCEN. IIII.
Sexton, and his wife Staphyla. Sext. STaphyla, why Staphyla: I hope she has
taken her last sleep. Why when, Staphyla?


Staph. What a life have I? I, that can never be quiet. I can no sooner lie
down to take my rest, but presently Staphyla, Staphyla. What Is the news?


Sext. A prize, my rogue, a prize.


Staph. Where? or from whom?


Sext. Why, thou know I rob no where but on the highway to heaven, such as
are upon their last journey thither. Thou and I have been land-pyrats this six
and thirty years, and have pillaged our share of Charons passengers. Here are
a couple of sound sleepers, and perchance their clothes will fit us. Then will
I walk like a Lord, and thou shall be my Madam, Staphyla.


Staph. Truly, husband, I have had such fearful dreams to night, that I am
persuaded (though I think I shall never turn truly honest again) to rob the
dead no more. For, me thought, as you and I were robbing the dead, the dead
took heart, and robbed us.


Sex. Tush, dreams are idle things. There is no felony warrantable but ours,
for it is grounded on rules of charity. Is it fitting the dead should be
clothed, and the living go naked? Besides, what is it to them whether they lie
in sheets or no? Did you ever hear of any that caught cold in his coffin?
Moreover, there is safety and security in these attempts: What inhabitant of
the grave that had his house broke open, accused the thief of Burglarie? Look
here: This is a Lawyers skull. There was a tongue in it once, a damnable
eloquent tongue, that would almost have persuaded any man to the gallows. This
was a turbulent busy fellow, till death gave him his Quietus est. And yet I
ventured to rob him of his gown, and the rest of his habillements, to the very
buckrum-bag, not leaving him so much as a poor halfpenny to pay for his
wafrage: and yet the good man never repined at it. Had he been alive, and were
to have pleaded against me, how would he have thundered it? -- Behold (most
grave Judges) a fact of that horror and height in sin, so abominable, so
detestable in the eyes of heaven and earth, that never any but this days cause
presented to the admiration of your ears. I cannot speak it without trembling,
it is so new, so unused, so unheardof a villainy! But that I know your Lordships
confident of the honesty of your poor Orator, I should not hope by all my
reasons, grounds, testimonies, arguments, and persuasions to gain your belief.
This man, said I man? this monster rather: but monster is too easy a name:
this devil, this incarnate devil, having lost all honesty, and abjured the
profession of virtue, Robbed, (a sin in the action.) But who? The dead. What
need I aggravate the fault? the naming the action is sufficient to condemn
him. I say, he robbed the dead. The dead! Had he robbed the living, it had been
more pardonable: but to rob the dead of their clothes, the poor impotent dead,
that can neither card, nor spin, nor make new ones, O it is most audacious and
intolerable! -- Now you have well spoke, why do you not after all this
Rhetoric, put your hand behind you, to receive some more instructions
backward? Now a man may clappe you of the coxcombe with his spade, and never
stand in fear of an action of battery.


Staph. For this one time, husband, I am induced; but insooth I will not make a
common practice of it. Knock you up that coffin, and I Will knock up this. --
Rich and glorious!


Sex. Bright as the sun! Come, we must strip you Gallants, the worms care not
for having the dishes served up to their table covered.


O, O, O! Tyndarus and Techmessa rise from the coffins, and the Sexton and his
wife affrighted, fall into a swoon. Staph. Heaven shield me! O, O, O!


SCEN. V.
Tyndarus and Techmessa. Tyn. HOw poor a thing is man, whom death it self
Cannot protect from injuries! O ye gods!
Is It not enough our wretched lives are tossed
On dangerous seas, but we must stand in fear
Of Pirates in the haven too? Heaven made us
So many buts of clay, at which the gods
In cruel sport shoot miseries. -- Yet, I hope,
Their spleen's grown milder, and this blessed occasion
Offers it self an earnest of their mercy.
Their sins have furnished us with fit disguises
To quiet our perplexed souls. Techmessa,
Let me array you in this woman's robes.
I Will wear the Sextons garments in exchange.
Our sheets and coffins shall be theirs.

Tech. Dear Tyndarus!
In all my life I never found such peace
As in this coffin: it presented me
The sweets that death affords. -- Man has no liberty
But in this prison. -- Being once lodged here,
He Is fortified in an impregnable fort,
Through which no doubts, suspicions, jealousies,
No sorrows, cares, or wild distractions
Can force an entrance to disturb our sleeps.

Tyn. Yet to those prisons will we now commit
These two offenders.

Tech. But what benefit
Shall we enjoy by this disguise?

Tyn. A great one:
If my Evadne, or thy Pamphilus
E're loved us living, they will haste to make
Atonement for our souls, stained with the guilt
Of our own blood: if not, they will rejoice
Our deaths have opened them so clear a passage
To their close loves: and with those thoughts possessed,
They will forget the torments hell provides
For those, that leave the warfare of this life
Without a pass from the great General.

Tech. I hope they may prove constant!


Tyn. So pray I.
I will desire you statue, be so courteous
To part with his beard a while. -- So we are now
Beyond discovery.

Sex. O, O, O!


Staph. O, O, O!


Tyn. Let Us use a charm for these!
Quiet sleep, or I will make
Erinnys whip thee with a snake.
And cruel Rhadamanthus take
Thy body to the boiling lake,
Where fire and brimstone never slake.
Thy heart shall burn, thy head shall ache*
And every joint about thee quake.
And therefore dare not yet to wake.

Tech. Quiet sleep, or thou shall see
The horrid bags of Tartarie.
Whose tresses ugly serpents be,
And Cerberus shall bank at thee.
And all the Furies that are three,
The worst is called Tisiphone,
Shall lash thee to ever^^^^.
And therefore sleep thou peacefully.

Tyn. But who comes hither? Ballio, what is his business?


SCEN. VI.
Ballio, Tyndarus, Techmessa. Ball. SExton, I Will open first thine ears with
these,
To make 'um sit to let persuasions in.

Tyn. These, Sir, will cure my deafness.


Ball. Art thou mine!


Tyn. Sir, you have bought me.


Ball. I Will pay double for thee.
Shall I prevail in my request?

Tyn. Ask these. --


Ball. Thou Art apprehensive, to the purpose then;
Have you not in the temple some deep vault
Ordained for burial?

Tyn. Yes.


Ball. Then I proceed:
We have to night performed the last of service
That piety can pay to our dead friends.

Tyn. 'Twas charitably done.


Ball. We brought 'um hither
To their last home. -- Now Sir, they both being guilty
Of their own deaths, I fear the laws of Thebes
Deny 'um burial. It would grieve me, Sir,
(For friendship cannot be so soon forgot;
Especially, so firm a one as ours)
To have 'um cast a prey to Wolves and Eagles.
Sir, these religious thoughts have brought me hither
Now at the dead of night; to entreat you,
To cast their coffins into some deep vault,
And to interre 'um. -- O my Tyndarus,
All memory shall fail me, e're my thoughts
Can leave the impression of that love I bear thee.
Thou left'ft me half of all the land thou had;
And should I not provide thee so much earth
As I can measure by thy length, heaven curse me!

Tyn. Sir, if your courtesy had not bound me yours,
This act of goodness had.

Ball. So true a friend
No age records. -- Farewell. -- This work succeeds!
Posterity, that shall this story get,
May learn from hence an art to counterfeit. Exit Ball.

SCEN. VII.
Tyndarus, Techmessa. Tyn. HEre was a strange deliverance! who can be
So confident of fortune, as to say,
I now am safe?

Tech. This villain has revealed
All our designs to Pamphilus and Evadne:
And they with bribes and hopes of an inheritance,
If you were dead indeed, have won this rascal
To this black treason. -- What foul crimes can Lust
Prompt her base vassals to! -- Here let us end
Our busy search, and travel over the world,
To see if any cold and Northern climat
Have entertained lost Virtue, long since fled
Our warmer country.

Tyn. Ha! -- It Is so! -- It Is so!
I see it with clear eyes. -- O cursed plot!
And are you brooding crocodiles? I may chance
To break the serpents egg, e're you have hatched
The viper to perfection. Come Techmessa,
My anger will no longer be confined
To patient silence: Tedious expectation
Is but a foolish fire by night, that leads
The traveller out on's way -- Break forth, my wrath:
Break like a deluge of consuming fire,
And scorch 'um both to ashes, in a flame
Hot as their lust. -- No: -- It Is too base a blood
For me to spill. -- Let 'um e'ne live t'ingender
A brood of monsters: -- May perpetual jealousy
Wait on their beds, and poison their embraces
With just suspicions: may their children be
Deformed, and fright the mother at the birth:
May they live long, and wretched; all men's hate,
And yet have misery enough for pity:
May they be long a dying -- of diseases
Painful, and loathsome: -- Passion, do not hurrie me
To this unmanly womanish revenge.
Will thou curse Tyndarus when thou wear'st a sword?
But ha, hark, observe! --

SCEN. VIII.
Pamphilus, Evadne, Tyndarus, Techmessa. Pam. VVAit till we call.
Heaven, if thou have not emptied all thy treasury
Of wrath upon me; here I challenge thee
To lay on more. What torments have thou left,
In which thou have not exercised my patience?
Yet cast up all the accounts of all my sorrows,
And the whole sum is trebled in the loss
Of dear Techmessa.

Tech. If this grief were real!


Tyn. Be not too credulous.


Pam. I have stood the rest
Of your afflictions, with this one I fell,
Fell like a rock that had repelled the rage
Of thousand violent billows, and withstood
Their fierce assaults, until the working Tide
Had undermined him: then he falls, and draws
Part of the mountain with him.

Evad. Pamphilus,
When did you see my sweetheart? prithee tell me,
Is he not gone a maying? -- he will bring me
Some pincks and daysies home to morrow morning.
Pray heaven he meet no thieves.

Pam. Alas Evadne!
Thy Tyndarus is dead.

Evad. What shall I do?
I cannot live without him.

Tyn. I am moved:
Yet I will make this trial full and perfect.
What, at this dismal hour, when nothing walks
But souls tormented, calls you from your sheets
To visit our dark cells, inhabited
By death and melancholy?

Evad. I am come
To seek my true-love here. Did you not see him?
He Is come to dwell with you, pray use him well,
He was a proper Gentleman.

Tech. Sir, what cause
Enforced you hither?

Pam. I am come to pay
The tribute of my eyes to a dead Love.

Tyn. Fair Lady, may I ask one question of you?
Did you admit no love into your bosom
But only his?

Evad. Alas! you make me weep.
Could any woman love a man, but him!
No Tyndarus, I will not long outlive thee:
We will be married in Elysium,
And arm in arm walk through th'-blessed groves,
And change a thousand kisses, -- you shall not see us.

Tyn. I know not whether it be joy or grief
Forces tears from me.

Tech. Were you constant, Sir,
To her whose death you now so much lament?
For by those prodigies and apparitions
That have to night shak'd the foundations
Of the whole temple, your inconstancy
Has caused your Mistresses untimely end.

Pam. The Sun shall change his course, and find new paths
To drive his chariot in: The Lodestone leave
His faith unto the North: -- The Vine withdraw
Those strict embraces that infold the Elm
In her kind arms: -- But, if I change my love
From my Techmessa, may I be recorded
To all posterity, Loves great Apostate
In Cupids annalls.

Evad. If you see my Tyndarus,
Pray tell him I will make all haste to meet him.
I will but weep a while first.

Tyn. Pretty sorrow!


Tech. Sir, you may veil your falsehood in smooth language,
And gild it over with fair hypocrisy:
But here has been such groans: Ghosts that have cried
In hollow voices, Pamphilus, O false Pamphilus!
Revenge on Pamphilus! Such complaints as these
The gods never make in vain.

Pam. Then there is witchcraft in it. And are the gods
Made parties too against me? -- Pardon then
If I grow stubborn. -- While they pressed my shoulders
No more then I could bear, they willingly
Submitted to the burden. -- Now they wish
To cast it off. -- What treachery has bribed you,
Celestial forms, to be my false accusers?
I challenge you (for you can view my thoughts,
And read the secret characters of my heart.)
Give in your verdict, did you ever find
Another image graven in my soul
Besides Techmessa? No! It Is hell has forged
These fly impostures! all these plots are coined
Out of the devils mintage!

Tech. Certainly
There Is no false fire in this.

Tyn. These cannot be.


Evad. Pray, Sir, direct me where I may embalm
My Tyndarus with my tears.

Tyn. There gentle Lady.


Evad. Is this a casket fit to entertain
A jewel of such value?

Pam. Where must I
Pay my devotions?

Tech. There your dead Saint lies.


Evad. Hail Tyndarus, may earth but lightly press thee:
And may thou find those joys thou art gone to taste,
As true as my affection. Now I know
Thou can not choose but love me, and with longing
Expect my quick arrival: for the soul
Freed from the cloud of flesh, clearly discerns
Forms in their perfect nature. If there be
A guilt upon thy blood, thus I Will redeem it, offers to kill herself.

And lay it all on mine.
Tyn. What mean you, Lady?


Evad. Stay not my pious hand.


Tyn. Your impious rather.
If you were dead, who then were left to make
Lustration for his crime? shall foolish zeal
Persuade you to a hasty death, and so
Leave Tyndarus to eternity of flames?

Evad. Pardon me, Tyndarus, I will only see
That office done, and then I Will follow thee.

Pam. Thou gentle soul of my deceased love,
If thou still hoverst here abouts, accept
The vows of Pamphilus. -- If I ever think
Of woman with affection, but Techmessa,
Or keep the least spark of a love alive
But in her ashes: let me never see
Those blessed fields where gentle lovers walk
In endless joys. -- Why do I idly weep!
I Will write my grief in blood.

Tech. What do you mean?


Pam. Techmessa, I am yet withheld; but suddenly
I Will make escape to find thee.

Tech. O blessed minute!


SCEN. IX.
Dypsas, Tyndarus, Evadne, Pamphilus, Techmessa. Dyps. WHere shall I fly to
hide me from my guilt?
It follows me, like those that run away
From their own shadows: that which I would shun
I bear about me. -- Whom shall I appease?
The living, or the dead? for I have injured
Both you, and them. -- O Tyndarus, here I kneel,
And do confess my self thy cruel murdresse;
And thine, Techmessa. -- Gentle daughter, pardon me.
But how shall I make satisfaction,
That have but one poor life, and have lost two?
Oh Pamphilus! my malice ruined thee,
But most Evadne: for at her I aimed,
Because she is no issue of my womb,
But trusted by her father to my care.
Her have I followed with a stepdames hate,
As envious that her beauty should eclipse
My daughters honor. -- But the gods in justice
Have taken her hence to punish me. -- My sins
March up in troops against me. -- But this potion
Shall purge out life and them.

Tyn. Be not too rash:
I will revive Techmessa.

Dyps. O sweet daughter!


Pam. Thou have revived two lives at once.


Evad. But I
Still live a widowed virgin.

Tyn. No, Evadne,
Receive me new created, of a clay
Purged from all dregs; my thoughts do all run clear.
Take hence those coffins. I will have them born
Trophies before me, when we come to tie
The nuptial knot: for death has brought us life.
Suspicion made us confident, and weak jealousy
Has added strength to our resolved love.
Cupid has run his maze, this was his day:
But the next part Hymen intends to play.

ACTUS V.
SCEN. I.
Demetrius solus. HAil sacred Thebes, I kiss thy blessed soil,
And on my knees salute thy seven gates.
Some twenty winters now have glazed thy floods
Since I beheld thy turrets, battered then
With war, that sought the ruin of those walls
Which music built, when Minos cruel tribute
Robbed mothers of their dearest babes, to glut
His ravenous Minotaure, I for safety fled
With my young sons, but called my countries hate
Upon my head, whom misery made malicious.
Each father had a curse in store for me,
Because I shared not in the common loss:
Yet would have willingly changed fortunes with me.
I dare not meet the vulgars violent rage
Eager against me. I will therefore study
Some means to live concealed.
SCEN. II.
Demetrius, Asotus. Asot. I Have heard my mother,
Who had more proverbs in her mouth then teeth,
(Peace with her soul where e're it be) affirm,
Marry too soon, and you will repent too late.
A sentence worth my meditation:
For marriage is a serious thing, perchance
Fair Phryne is no maid: for women may
Be beauteous, yet no virgins. Fair and chaste
Are not of necessary consequence.
Or being both fair and chaste, she may be barren;
And then when I am old, I shall not have
A boy -- to dote on, as my father does.

Them. Kind fortune fan you with a courteous wing.


Asot. A pretty complement. What art thou fellow?


Them. A Register of heaven, a privy Counselor
To all the planets, one that has been tenant
To the twelve houses, Tutour to the Fates,
That taught 'um thou art of spinning; a live Almanac,
One that by speculation in the stars
Can foretell any thing.

Asot. How? foretell any thing?
How many years are past since Thebes was built?

Them. That is not to foretell: you state the question
Of times already past.

Asot. And cannot you
As well foretell things past, as things to come!
Say, Register of heaven, and Privy-counsellour
To all the planets, with the rest of your titles,
(For I shall never be able to repeat 'um all)
Shall I, as I intend, to day be married?

Them. The Almutes, or the Lord of the Ascendeut,
I find with Luna corporally joined
To the Almutes of the seventh house,
Which is the matrimonial family:
And therefore I conclude the nuptials hold.
And yet the Aspect is not in Trine, or Sextile,
But in the Quartile radiation,
Or Tetragon, which shows an inclination
Averse, and yet admitting of reception.
It will, although encountered with impediment,
At last succeed.

Asot. Ha? What bold impediment
Is so audacious to encounter me?
Be he Almutes of what house he please;
Let his Aspect be Sextile, Trine, or Quartile;
I do not fear him with his radiations,
His Tetragons, and inclinations:
If he provoke my spleen, I Will have him know
I soldiers feed shall mince him, and my Poets
Shall with a Satyr steeped in gall and vinegar,
Rhyme 'um to death, as they do rats in Ireland.

Them. Good words.
There Is no resistance to the laws of Fate.
This sublunary world must yield obedience
To the celestial virtues.

Asot. One thing more
I would desire to know: Whether my spouse
That shall be, be immaculate. I Would be loath
To marry an Advowsion that has had
Other incumbents.

Them. I Will resolve you instantly.
The Dragons-tail stands where the head should be:
A shrewd suspicion, -- she has been strongly tempted.

Asot. The Dragons-tail puts me in a horrible fear.
I feel a kind of a sting in my head already.

Them. And Mars being landlord of th'eleventh house,
Placed in the Ram and Scorpion, plainly signifies
The maid has been in love; but the Aspect
Being without reception, lays no guilt
Of act upon her.

Asot. I shall be jealous presently:
For the Ram is but an ill sign in the head;
And you know what Scorpio aims at in the Almanac.

Them. But when I see the Ascendent and his Lord,
With the good Moon in angles and fixed signs,
I do conclude her virgin pure and spotless.

Asot. I thank the Ascendent, and his noble Lord;
He shall be welcome to my house at any time,
And so shall mistress Moon, with all her angles,
And her sixth signs. But how come you to know
All this for certain?

Them. Sir, the learned Cabalists,
And all the Chaldees do conclude it lawful:
As Asla, Baruch, and Abobali,
Caucaph, Toz, Arcaphan, and Albuas,
Gafar, with Hali, Hippocras, and Lancao,
With Ben, Benesaphan, and Albubetes.

Asot. Are Asla, Baruch, and Abobali,
With all the rest of the Jury, men of credit?

Them. Their words shall go as far in the Zodiac, Sir,
As another bond. Asot. I am beholding to 'um.
Another scruple yet, -- I would have children too,
Children to dote on, Sir, when I grow old,
Such as will spend when I am dead and gone,
And make me have such fine dreams in my grave.

Them. Sir, you are a happy man. I do not see
In all your horoscope one sign masculine,
For such portend sterility.

Asot. How Is that man?
Is It possible for any man to have children
Without a sign masculine?

Them. Sir, you mistake me:
You are not yet initiate. The Almutes
Of the Ascendent is not elevated.
Above the Almutes of the filial house.
Venus is free, and Jove not yet combust:
And then the signifier being lodged
In watery signs, the Scorpion, Crab, and Fish,
Foreshow a numerous issue of both sexes.
And Mercury in's exaltations
Placed in their angles, and their points successive,
Beholds the Lords of the Triplicity
Unhindered in their influence. You were born
Under a getting constellation,
A fructifying star. -- Sir, I pronounce you
A joyful father.

Asot. Happy be the hour
I met with thee. I Will have thee live with me.
Thou shall be my domestical Astronomer.
I have a brace of Poets as fit as may be,
To furnish thee with verses for each month.
Sir, since the gracious stars do promise me
So numerous a troup of sons and daughters,
It Is fit I should have my means in my own hands
To provide for 'um all: therefore I fain would know
Whether my father be -- long-lived, or no.

Them. The planet Mars is Oriental now
To Saturn; but in reference to the Sun
He bears a Westerly position.
Which Ylem linking Saturn with the Sun
In opposition, both sinisterly
Fallne from their corners, plainly signifies
He cannot long survive.

Asot. Why, who can help it?
There Is no resistance to the laws of Fate:
This sublunary world must yield obedience
To the celestial virtues. -- Were not providence
To bespeak mourning clokes against the funeral?

Them. It Is good to be in readiness.


Asot. If thou be
So cunning a prophet, tell me; Do I mean
To entertain thee for my wizard?

Them. Sir,
I do not see the least Azymenes,
Or planetary hindrance. Alcocoden
Tells me you will.

Asot. Tell Alcocoden then
He is in the right. Thrasimachus, Hyperbolus! Enter Thrasim. Hyperb.

We have increased our family, see him enrolled.
He is a man of merit, and can prophecy.
Thrasim. We Will drench him in the welcome of the celler,
And try if he can prophecy who falls first.

Asot. How will the world admire me, when they see
My house an Academie, all the arts
Wait at my table, every man of quality
Take sanctuary here! I will be patron
To twenty liberal sciences.

SCEN. III.
Asotus, Ballio. Ball. A Fair sun
Shine on the happy bridegroom.

Asot. Quondam Tutour,
(For I am past all tuition but my wifes)
Thanks for your wishes; have you studied yet
How with one charge (for ceremonious charge
I care not for) I may express my grief
At the sad funerals of my friends deceased,
And yet proclaim with how much joy I wed
The beauteous Phryne?

Ball. I have beat my brain
To find out a right garb: wear these two clokes.
This sable garment, sorrows Liverie,
Speaks funeral: this richer robe of joy,
Says it is a nuptial solemnity.

Asot. A choice device: -- I Will practice.


Ball. Rarely well.


SCEN. IIII.
Asotus, Ballio, Simo. Sim. GOod morrow boy: how flows thy blood, Asotus,
Upon thy wedding day? is it springtide?
Find'st thou an active courage in thy bones?
Will thou at night create me Grandfire? ha?
O, I remember with what sprightly courage
I bedded thy old mother, and that night
Bid fair for thee boy: how I cursed the ceremonies,
And thought the yongsters scrambled for my points
Too slowly: 'Twas a happy night, Asotus.

Asot. How sad a day is this! methinks the sun
Affrighted with our sorrows, should run back
Into his Eastern palace, and for ever
Sleep in the lap of Thetis. Can he show
A glorious beam when Tyndarus is dead,
And fair Techmessa? I will weep a flood
Deep as Deucalions; and again the Chaos
Shall musle up the lamentable world
In sable clokes of grief and black confusion!

Sim. What ailes my boy? unseasonable grief
Shall not disturb thy nuptials. -- Good Asotus,
Be not so passionate.

Ball. What incomparable mirth
Would such a dotard and his humorous son
Make in a Comedy, if a learned pen
Had the expression!

Asot. Now the the other cloak.
In what a verdant weed the spring arayes
Fresh Tellus in! how Flora decks the fields
With all her tapestry! and the Choristers
Of every grove chaunt Carrolls! Mirth is come
To visit mortals. Every thing is blithe,
Jocund, and joviall. All the gods arrive
To grace our nuptials. Let us sing and dance,
That heaven may see our revells, and send down
The planets in a Masque, the more to grace
This days solemnity.

Sim. I, this Asotus,
There Is music boy in this.

Asot. Now this cloak again.
You Gods, you overload mortality,
And press our shoulders with too great a weight
Of dismal miseries. All content is sled
With Tyndarus and Techmessa. Ravens croak
About my house ill-boding schreech-owls sing
Epithalamiums to my spouse and me.
Can I dream pleasures, or expect to taste
The comforts of the married bed, when Tyndarus
And fair Techmessa from the world are gone!
No, pardon me you gentle ghosts; I vow
To cloister up my grief in some dark cell:
And there till grief shall close my blubbered eyes,
Weep forth repentance.

Sim. Sure he is distracted!
Asotus, do not grieve so, all thy sorrows
Are doubled in thy father: Pity me,
If not thy self; O pity these gray hairs,
Pity my age, Asotus.

Asot. What a silly fellow
My father is, that knows not which cloak speaks?
Father, you do forget this is our nuptial.
Cast off those trophies of your wealthy beggerie,
And clad your self in rich and splendent weeds,
Such as become my father: Do not blemish
Our dignity with rags. Appear to day
As glorious as the sun. Set forth your self
In your bright luster.

Sim. So I will, my boy:
Was there ever father so fortunate in a child? Exit Sim.

Asot. Do not I vary with decorum, Ballio?

Ball. I do not think but Proteus, Sir, begot you
On a Chamaeleon.

Asot. Nay, I know my mother
Was a Chamaeleon, for my father allowed her
Nothing but air to feed on.

SCEN. V.
Ballio, Asotus, Phryne. Phryn. RIses Aurora with a happy light
On my Asotus?

Asot. Beauteous Phryne, welcome:
Although the dragons tail may scandal thee,
And Mars corrupt the Scorpion and the Ram;
Yet the good Moon in angles and sixth signs
Gives thee a good report.

Phryn. What means my dear?


Asot. Thy dear, my beauteous Phryne, means the same
With Hali, Baruch and Abobali,
Caucaph, Toz, Archaphan, and Albuas,
Gafar, with Asla, Hippocras, and Lencuo,
With Ben, Benesaphan, and Albubetez.

Phryn. I fear you have studied the black art of late.


Asot. Ah Girl! The -- Almutes of the filial house
Is not depressed, Venus is free, and Jove
Not yet combust: the signs are watery signs,
And Mercury beholds the trine aspect
Unhinder'd in his influence.

Phryn. What of all this?


Asot. We shall have babies plenty: I am grown
Learned of late. Go Phryne, be in readiness,
I long to tie the knot: at night we will make
A young Asotus.

Phryn. Health attend you, Sir. Exit Phryn.


SCEN. VI.
Dypsas, Tyndarus, Evadne, Pamphilus, Techmessa, Asotus, Ballio, Phronesium,
Priests and sacrifice, and Hymen's statue discovered. Asot. TYndarus living?
here take this cloak away, Ballio:
We have no use on it.

Ball. The more sorrow's mine.


Tyn. How does my friend Asotus?


Asot. You are welcome
From the dead, Sir: I hope our friends in Elysium
Are in good health.

Tyn. Ballio, I thank you heartily
You had an honest and religious care
To see us both well buried.

Ball. I shall be hanged. Exit.


The song and sacrifice. Priest. Hymen, thou God of union, with smooth brow
Accept our pious Orgies. Thou that tiest
Hearts in a knot, and link'st in sacred chains He presents Tyndarus and Evadne.
The mutual souls of Lovers, may it please
Thy Deity, to admit into the number
Of thy chaste votaries this blessed pair.
Mercy you Gods, the statue turns away.

Tyn. Why should this be? The reason is apparent:
Evadne has been false, and the chaste deity
Abhorres the sacrifice of a sported soul.
Go thou dissembler, mask thy self in modesty,
Wear virtue for a veil, and paint false blushes
On thy adulterate check. Though thou may cozen
The eyes of man, and cheat the purblinde world,
Heaven has a piercing sight. Hymen, I thank thee;
Thou stoppedst my foot stepping into the gulf.
How near was I damnation!

Evad. Gentle Hymen,
What sin have I unwillingly committed
To call heavens anger on me?

Priest. If there be
A secret guilt in these that has offended
Thy mighty godhead, will thou please to prove He presents Pamphil. and
Techmessa
This other knot? The Statue turns again!
What prodigies are these!

Pam. Celestial powers,
You tyrannize over man: and yot it is sin
To ask you why you wrong us.

Tech. Cunning Pamphilus,
Though, like a snake, you couch your self in flowers,
The gods can find your lurking, and betray
The spotted skin.

Priest. Above this twenty years
Have I attended on thy sacred Temple,
Yet never saw thee so incensed, dread Hymen.

Tyn. To search the reason, will you please to proffer
These to his godhead?

Priest. Will thy godhead daigue
These two the blessings of the geniall sheet? He presents Pamphilus and Evadne
He beckens 'um.

Tyn. I, there the faith is plighted.
False Pamphilus, the honor of the temple,
And the respect I bear religion,
Cannot protect thee. I will stain the altars,
And sprinkle every statue in the shrine
With treacherous blood.

Priest. Provoke not Joves just thunder.


Tyn. Well, you may take Evadne, heaven give you joy.


Pamp. Religion is mere juggling. This is nothing
But the Priests knaverie: a kind of holy trick
To gain their superstition credit. Hymen,
Why do thou turn away thy head? I fear
Thy bashful deitle is ashamed to look
A woman in the face. If so, I pardon thee:
If out of spite thou cross me, know, weak godhead,
I Will teach mankind a custom that shall bring
Thy altars to neglect. Lovers shall couple,
As other creatures, -- freely, and never stand
Upon the tedious ceremony -- Marriage:
And then thou Priest may starve. Who in your temple
Will light a -- Cere-candle, or for incense burn
A grain of frankincense?

Chrem. Heaven instruct our souls
To find the secret mystery!

Asot. I have entertained
One that by Ylem and Aldeboran,
With the Almutes, can tell any thing.
I Will fetch him hither: he shall resolve you. Exit Asot.

Chrem. Man is a ship that sails with adverse winds,
And has no haven till he land at death.
Then when he thinks his hands fast grasp the bank,
Comes a rude billow betwixt him and safety,
And beats him back into the deep again.

SCEN. VIII.
Enter Asotus, Demetrius: manent caeteri. Asot. Here Is another figure to cast,
Sir. These two Gentlemen


Them. A sudden joy o'recomes me.


Asot. Are to marry
Old Chremylus daughters. This is Tyndarus,
And he should have Evadne: and this Pamphilus,
That has a moneths-minde to Techmessa; but that Hymen
Looks with a wry-neck at 'um. If the Ascendent
With all his radiations and aspects
Know any thing, -- here is one that can unfold it.
I must go sit my self for mine own wedding. Exit.

Them. Fly from the temple you unhallowed troup,
That dare present your sins for sacrifice
Before the gods!

Chrem. What should this language mean?


Them. Think you that heaven will ever sign a grant
To your incestuous matches?

Chrem. How incestuous?


Them. This is not Tyndarus, but Demetrius son,
Called Clinias, and fair Evadnes brother.
Evadne trusted in exchange to Chremylus,
For young Timarchus, whom Demetrius took
With him to Athens, when he fled from Thebes
To save the infants from the monsters jaws,
The cruel Minotaur. Marvel not the gods
Forbid the banes, when in each match is incest.

Chr. I wonder he should know this.


Tyn. I am amazed.


Them. I will confirm your faith.


Tyn. My father? He pulls off his disguise


Pam. My father?


Them. No, good Timarchus, ask thy blessing there.
Sir, if I not mistake me, you are Chremylus.
Pray let me see that ring. -- Sir, I must challenge it,
And in requital will return you this.

Chrem. Demetrius! Welcome. Now my joys are full,
When I behold my son and my old friend.

Them. Which is Evadne? Blessings on thy head.
Now Chremylus, let us conclude a marriage
As we at first intended; my Clinias
With your Techmessa, and your son Timarchus
With my Evadne.

Chrem. Heaven has decreed it so.


Them. Are the young people pleased?


Pam. Tyn. Evad. Tech. The will of heaven
Must be obeyed.

Them. Now try if Hymen please
To end all troubles in a happy marriage.

Priest. Hymen, we thank thee, and will crown thy head
With all the glorious chaplets of the Spring,
The firstborn kid, and fattest of our bullocks
Shall bleed upon thy altars (if it be
Lawful to sacrifice in blood to thee,
That art the means to life) 'cause thy provident mercy
Prevented this incestuous match. Daigne now
Propitious looks to this more holy knot.
This virgin offers up her untouched zone,
And vows chaste love to Clinias. All joy to you.
The fair Evadne too is come to hang
Her maiden-girdle at thy sacred shrine,
And vows her self constant to the embraces
Of young Timarchus. -- Happiness wait on both!

Tyn. I see our jealous thoughts were not in vain.
Nature abhorring from so foul a sin,
Infused those doubts into us.

SCEN. VIII.
Enter Asotus in arms with a drum and trumpet, attended by Thrasimachus,
Hyperb. Bom. Chaer, Simo. Phryne. Asot. IF there be any Knight that dares lay
claim
To beauteous Phryne, -- (as I hope there is none)
I dare him to the encounter; let him meet me
Here in the lists: -- If he be wise he dare not,
But will consider danger in the action.
I Will win her with my sword: -- mistake me not,
I challenge no man. He who dares pretend
A title to a hair, -- shall sup with Pluto:
'Twere cooler supping in another place.
No champion yet appear? -- I would fain fight.

Phron. Sir, if you want a champion, I am for you.


Asot. I have no quarrel to thee, Amazon.


Phron. I must have a husband too, and I will have a husband; I, and I will
have you: I can hold out no longer: I am weary of eating choke and coals, and
begin to dislike the feeding on oat-meal. The thought of so many marriages
together has almost lost my maidenhead.


Asot. Why, thou shall have my father: though he be old,
He Is rich, and will maintain thee bravely. Dad,
What think you on it?

Sim. Thou Wilt make me, boy, too hap
She shall have anything.

Phron. You will let me make
My own conditions.

Sim. What thou will, my girl.


Phron. I will feed high, go rich, have my six horses,
And my embroidered coach, ride where I list,
Have all the gallants in the town to visit me,
Maintain a pair of little legs to go
On idle messages to all the Madams.
You shall deny no Gentleman entertainment
And when we kiss and toy, be it your cue
To nod and fall asleep.

Sim. With all my heart.


Asot. Then take him Girl, he will not trouble thee long.
For Mars being oriental unto Saturn,
And occidentall to the Sun, proclaims
He is short-lived.

Phryn. Well Sir, for want of a better,
I am content to take you.

Asot. Join 'um, Priest.


Priest. Thus I conjoyn you in religious bands.


Asot. Now usher Phryne to my amorous arms.


Priest. The generous Asotus and fair Phryne
Present their vows unto thee, gracious Hymen.

Sext. I forbid the banes.


Staph. I forbid the banes. They speak out of the coffin.


As. And can there be no weddings without prodigies?
This is the impediment, the Azymenes
Or Planetary hindrance threatened me.
By the Almutes of the seventh house,
In an aspect of Tetragon radiation,
If Luna now be corporally joined,
I may overcome the averseness of my stars.

Tyn. Sir, as you cleared our doubts, I will clear yours.
See you these ghosts? Well Sexton, take heed hereafter
How you rob the dead; some of 'um may cozen you.

Sext. Pardon me, Sir; I seriously vow
Henceforth to rob no creature but the living.

Tyn. Well, you shall both fast to night, and take penance at the lower end of
the table in these sheets, and that shall be your punishment.


Asot. Phryne, I take thee for my loving spouse.

Phryn. And I take you for my obedient husband.

Priest. And I conclude the tie.


Asot. Ha, you sweet rogue!


SCEN. IX.
Enter Ballio with a balter about his neck. Asot. WHy how now Tutour, a rope
about your neck?
I have heard, that hanging and marrying go by destiny;
But I never thought they had come together before.

Ball. I have cast a serious thought upon my guilt,
And find my self an arrant rogue. The gallows
Was all the inheritance I was ever born to.
E'ne use me as you please.

Asot. Pray, Sir, let me beg my Tutours pardon. --
Spare him to day: for when the night comes on,
There Is sweeter executions to be done.

Tyn. You have prevailed. No man be sad to day.
Come, you shall dine with me.

Asot. Pardon me, Sir: I will not have it said by the malicious, that I eat at
another man's table the first day I set up housekeeping. No, you shall all go
home and dine with me.


Tyn. Come then: our joys are ripened to perfection.
Let us give heaven the praise, and all confess,
There is a difference 'twixt the jealousy
Of those that woo, and those that wedded be.
This will hatch vipers in the nuptial bed,
But that prevents the aching of the head. Exeunt cum choro cantantium in laud.
Him.

Epilogus.
Asotus, Astrologer. Asot. HOw now? Will our endeavors give satisfaction?


Astrol. I find by the horoscope, and the elevation of the bright Aldeboran, a
Sextile opposition; and that th'Almutes is inclining to the enemies house.


Asot. A way with your Almutes, Horoscopes, Elevations, Aldeborans, Sextiles,
and Oppositions. I have an art of mine own to cast this figure by.

THe Lovers now Jealous of nothing be
But your acceptance of their Comedy.
I question not heavens influence: for here
I behold Angels of as high a Sphere.
You are the stars I gaze at, we shall find
Our labors blessed, if your Aspects be kind,

FINIS.

