A SERMON PREACHED AT St MARY'S IN OXFORD, the 5. of August: 1624. Concerning
the Kingdoms Peace.

BY JOHN RANDOL B: in D: of Brasen-nose College.

Omne quod est, tam diu est, quamdiu unum est; ens enim and unum convertuntur:

It Is a Principle in the METAPHYSICS. If their hearts be divided, they shall be
found guilty, and then follows destruction.

HOSEA 10.2. OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD and WILLIAM TVRNER. 1624.

MARK 3.24. And if a Kingdom be divided against it self, that Kingdom
cannot stand.


SChool-controuersies mixed with points of devotion I sometimes delivered from
this place; but now a Text that requires the divinity of a Prince, and
th'exposition of a Soldier, rather then a School: Yet-no man scandalize this
Text, himself, or me: was not our Savior an Orator upon it? and if our
Savior himself handle the Commonwealth it is possible then to be divinely
handled: and if divinely handled, it can loose nothing by the handling: If a
Kingdom be etc. Wherein you may please to observe, a State, the Quality of
such a State, and the effects of such qualities: the State not of a private
man, but the Compound aggregate State of a public Kingdom: a Kingdom; that is
certain: then the Condition, the Quality, or casual actions of such a State,
they are divisions against themselves; and they are uncertain; If a Kingdom
be divided against it self; If divided, that is uncertain: Thirdly, the Issues
and evil events of such divisions, and that is not-standing shall I say? nay,
it is non-possibility of standing, and that is too-too certain, God knows:
(...): it cannot stand if it be divided; that it cannot. To handle the State by
it self, and the casualtie of such a State after that; and so conclude with
the effects of all, were a pretty playing method, fit for easing of the breath;
but very unfit for the serious discussion of the Cause: we must collect the
whole, A divided Kingdom cannot stand. Had the time bin as royal as the Text,
I could have entertained ye all; but no -- Yet not like those who professing a
glorious magnitude are conversant in most inferior things: for I will open
that vnt'ee, which every man will not unfold; Treason against a King as a
bloud-guiltie sin, but against a Kingdom as much more, as any whole is
greater then its part: Lo, I present vnt'ee the Changes of States, desolations
of Kingdoms, the downfall of the whole full of Intemperance, injustice,
avarice, ambition, and whatsoever herein almost is worthy to be known; I
present the causes and the effects, together with the remedies of all, not
without some more especial application to the time; only be favorable I pray,
to this too much extemporary necessity of the man; so far as the single
nature of the Cause will bear, you shall have nothing more nor less, then the
division of a Kingdom will afford. If a Kingdom be divided against it self,
that kingdom cannot stand.

When the Prophet would foretell th'expiration of the Jewish reign, he
prophecies of dissensions-shall arise; The Child against th'auncient, the base
against the Honorable: Esaias 3. chap. 5. ver. and it follows in a moment
after; Cecidit Jerusalem, the Kingdom is fallen, in the 8th ver: divide it,
and it falls: it came to pass ( Josephus gives it) in three deadly Sects,
whose chiefes were Simon, John, and Eleazar: By civil discord did Carthage
fall; by the like did old Rome her Empire ruin; while their dissension gave
entrance to the Turk; the Kingdoms of Hungary, Rhodes, and other many
States, have felt the torment of this Text: what needs any more? Interpreters
say all, it is a popular argument our Savior uses, and too-too well known of
all, that a divided kingdom cannot stand; If a Kingdom be divided against it
self, that Kingdom cannot stand.

As th'essence of God is one, so it behooues all things to be unite, that will
subsist in him: take the most comely body in this learned Crown of men, and
divide either the spirits or humors of that body one against another, and
neither beauty, nor body can long subsist: out of the beauteous fabric of the
World, if ye take that excellent correspondence away, whereby the Caelestiall
Spheres, and the inferior Elements do lovingly agree together, the World it
self can never long endure: except the heavens hear the earth, and the earth
the heavens, and both agree unto the provision of the whole, the World it self
can never well subsist: Hosea 2.21.

The demonstrance is as plain; because division destroys the very Form it
self: as if ye divide a man, there remains no longer forma hominis, but forma
cadaveris: so if ye divide a Commonwealth, there remains no longer the form
of a good Commonwealth; but the form of barbarousnesse and folly does
remain: there may result out of such a division, two armies of soldiers, two
parties of a faction; but mean time, the fair, proper, entire bulk and
beauty of a kingdom is destroyed: that cannot stand: which is the emphasis of
the Text: (...): that kingdom cannot stand. Neither were it of much
consequence, if it destroyed form alone; but it perishes matter together with
the form: division weakens the strongest public State that is: division
calls in the foreign discontents of other Realms: division turns swords of
the same man's making one against another point: division destroys the very
end, for which a Kingdom was ordained: For the very prime ordinance of a
kingdom was, to unite all under one Head, one Law, one liberty, one profit and
pleasure of good life, that so the unity being equally interested among all,
all might with one accord more strongly combine themselves against the
auarices, ambitions, tyrannies of other encroaching men: for the World will
never want Nimrods: many Oeconomicall hunters there be, that hunt for the
provision of their own houses; and as many Venatores Politici, that hunt after
other men's Kingdoms: and therefore, vae si dividatur; woe unto that Kingdom
is divided; for the hunter will take it: If a Kingdom be divided against it
self, that Kingdom cannot stand: Wherefore, be we all united as firm as
flesh is to the bone, cemented all together in love, glewed unto the public
welfare of the state: If any divisions have amongst us bin, if any fallacy of
self-love, if any poison of debate, it must be so no more: I Will open the
remedies, do but you make righteous judgment, whether they be not better
then the disease.

Some have taken occasion to contriue a division upon mere REVENGE; so
Coriolanus in Plutarch being exasperated by an unjust condemnation, did derive
the war upon his own Country: So banished Alcibiades, how did he discover
the whole Council of Athens to the enemy? What a combustion did he make
between th'Oligarchye, and the Commonalty? So much revenge will do; and more
then so; for smaller injuries, though they be no positive evils, but
privatiues only; as the ten Tribes against David, because he afforded Judah
all the honor of attendance at repossession to his Crown, and did not send as
honorable a summons to invite them of Israel also; therefore in fierceness
they arose, pleaded proportion, number, valor, abuse of all; and a great
division, a great rebellion did they cause, 2 Samuel 19. and 20 chap. So much a
little distaste, a privative dishonor can produce: and the remedy is, whether
they be justly or unjustly punished; Superiors, Inferiors, to entreat all:
Superiors, their authority I entreat to distribute their face and lawful
favor as proportionably as they can. Give ten Tribes the respect of ten, and
two that belongs to two; give five hundred Counties the honor of five hundred,
and to the less number the less favor does pertain. It Is lawful
peradventure to favor these, not those, where both do equally deserve; but
it is not expedient so to do: For a little distaste, a great division may arise:
Achitophell will divert, and many a Politician more, unless they be employed:
on the other, the neglected inferior people, I entreat, to arm themselves
with patience, considering the honor of it; for it argues them nobly
sufficient of themselves; if they can live without the favor, as well as the
favor without them, but basely necessitous, if they stand in need of it: the
profit likewise; for what are faces and favors of Potentate men, but as the
face of the Sun? which many times dryes and withers, and extracts more out of
herbs, then ever it did infuse into them: and I have ever thought the men of
Israel were mad unto the highest degree, in quarrelling who should carry the
baggage after David, as if they had not trouble and tax enough beside: and let
this persuade all neglected Counties and Incorporations; suffer Potentates with
their favors; bestow them how they please; it should never cause a division
among wise men, it is liberty and profit to be without them many times: But you
say, there are no such, and God be thanked for it; I am very glad to hear the
State of our own Kingdom does so well agree with the State of the Kingdom in
the Text: for this Text is no positive inferring against the present state: but
a gentle referring of the caution to every man's conscience for time to come; If
a Kingdom be vindictiuely divided against it self: (...): and if it be
divided, it can never stand.

What if a positive dishonor? the revenge appears more just, but the remedy
is the same: Inferiors, superiors, to be detreated all; these to inflict
such gentle punishments, as either may not exasperate great spirits to desire
revenge, or else such mighty mortal strokes, as may utterly dis-enable them
from all power to execute the same: for men of vindictiue nature are hard to be
restrained: this was Gowries pretense, revenge: stop therefore beginnings; for
if ever any Gowrie divide, there will never want Alexanders, and Logans;
Bowers, and Sprotts to take his part: Those on the other, to consider how much
deceived they are; propound revenge they do, and why? Melle dulcior est: it is
sweeter then the hony-combe unto their souls: that is the old pretext, but it is
an Heathen one: amice amicis, inimice inimicis, I find it only in Aristotle,
and among the Jews; but otherwise with CHRIST; Love your very enemies: alas,
it is Satan's instigation, not their own: If 't be unjust unto the death it
self, yet he that is so most doing now, shall suffer most in the end: It Is a
pleasant damnation to be revenged do you say? Yes, so it is to others, but not
unto your selves: others indeed delight the combat to see you reciprocally
pined and wasted, and perished with each others blows; but you your selves,
what pleasure can you take in being made the very fable, the disease, and
slaves of other men? Quid tibi dulcedo si non conceditur uti? Quid tibi, si non
tibi? There Is no such crime, as is a studied sin; there is no such study to
the head, nor pain unto the heart, as is the torment of revenge: It Is
honorable to suffer and despise; but to seek revenge, that is a weakness of
not being able to endure; and that with prejudice to a whole Commonwealth;
it is Arch-diuelishly inhumane: I know herein also yee'll say, our Kingdom and
the Text agree; and GOD be thanked for it; there needs no positive reproof;
but howeuer, a suppositiue admonition is good against time to come; If a
Kingdom be vindictiuely divided against it self, you know what follows, si
modo diuidatur, If ever it be divided it can never stand.

Others in the LVCRATIVE kind have taken pains to generate a faction for money
sake: Philip the father of Alexander besieges Olynthus, could not take it by
force, but he corrupts Euthicrates the chief Governor by money, and so he
roceiues the Country betrayed into his hand: so much conetisme can do; and
the remedy as before, to entreat all, that such corrumpues may never be
employed, either in embassy abroad, or in office at home, whereby they shall
have any power of selling their State-Intelligence for a pension, their
Kingdom for a golden pound: Those of the suspected on the other, to consider
the baseness of the sin, what a thrice-odious earthlinesse it is to sell a
potent rich Kingdom for a little red earth: What, the Kingdom? why 'twere much
to sell the virginity of one maiden, if she were a pure devoted good creature:
but in betraying a Kingdom, the doctrine of Religion, the propagation of
Laws, the orders of Cities, the Arts of Universities, the Institution of
youth, the beauty, maidenhead of Humanity, Divinity, and all they sell, for a
little handful of red earth; which when they obtain, their second generation
shall never carry it to their grave, nor they themselves be ever buried without
an Epitaph of the basest kind: Vendidit hic auro patriam; here lies the
notorious corrumpue, that sold his whole Country to fill his own chest: or
that of Saint Bernard: Viluit huic populi salus prae auro Hispaniae, in his 3d
Book de consid. ad Eugenium. What cares he, when he is dead? no, nor the
Devil neither; but GOD will make them both care, when he has them together in
Hellfire: Yet ye say, there are no such neither, and who is not glad to hear?
the State of our own Kingdom does so well parallel with the Kingdom i'ch'
Text: for this is no peremptory reproof of any present State, but a loving
advertisement against time to come: If a Kingdom be LVCRATIVELY divided
against it self, (...): such a King dome cannot stand; it is nothing to our
own: there is the Emphasis at that Kingd me, not our own: that Kingdom cannot
stand.

Others by being ALLIED to foreign Nations, have been inclinable to divide:
as in the Sicilian war, the Chalcidians said, they were aunciently allied to
Athens, and therefore reason would they should partake with them against their
own Kingdom in the war. It Is in the 4th book of Thucidides, where you may
see what the fancy of Alliance can do in the division of a State; and the
remedy is for Chiefes in any kingdom, to make all their Allies of marriage and
other interests of relation, as much as their wisdom may, among themselves:
and if they chance otherwise to be allied abroad, yet know they must, they have
but allied themselves to such a private family, to such a public Kingdom they
cannot allye themselves, unless they will be Traitors to their own: to such a
Kingdom they cannot allye themselves, unless all allye: Give us your
daughters to wife, say Jacobs sons, and we will render ye ours: Let it be a
general alliance, and erimus quasi genus unum: Genesis 34.16: and unless it be
general, it can be no just tie of union to another State; because the private
good must ever give pre-eminence to the public weal; they may be defensive
to another, but never offensive to their own: why should they? allied by wife?
but you know not whether it be your wife or you they do so much respect:
peradventure others are allied unto her, as near as you your selves, yet never
carry opinion to such respects as those: they respect not your kingdom for
alliance unto them; why then should you theirs? If ever the enemy enter, there
will be no time to deliberate of Allies: Pardon the General what he please,
yet the Common Soldier will slay and rifle what he can: Suppose they should
offer to exempt ye from the rest, as Sylla did some special friends of his,
when Praeneste was besieged, yet were ye noble spirits, ye would scorn to
accept the condition, ye would rush in among the troops, and choose rather to
die for the honor of your Country, as those Praenestians did: But I hear you
say, you fear no such Allies neither, and I am glad ye are so parallel in all
things with the Text, which has no absolute reproof of any, but only
admonition against time to come; If a Kingdom be MATRIMONIALLY divided against
itself, that kingdom cannot stand.

Yet give me leave, what say ye to Alliance in Religion, which is the grand of
all? for division in Religion sets Preacher against Preacher; one Orator, one
Lecturer against another; division in Religion setts Scribe against Scribe; one
Hearer, one Reader against another; division in Religion sets Prince and
People, Nobles and Gentry, Clergy and Commonalty, every man, and all together
by the faces: the very name of Religion bearing show of honor in the
profession, of merit in the defense, makes many most willing to dye for their
Religion, if it be but Religio vitulorum, the Religion of Calves and Images,
yet you know they will suffer death for their Religion: if you know it not, yet
Jeroboam did, and that made him allye the ten Tribes to another Religion then
that of Judah, assuring himself they would not very soon complye with Judah
again: so much division of Religion can do; and what shall we say? that
herein also we are parallel to the Text? certainly, either are, or may be
very easily by redress: Let the order of Ministers be the same, Oath of
Allegiance the same; divine service all the same; articles of Belief, number
of Sacraments, authority of Scripture throughout the whole Kingdom the same,
and let it be pain of death to him that will transgress, if he practice
others but with a speaking countenance to do the like: so shall we soon be
parallel to the Text: for if their idolatrous Priests be banished, who shall
swear their Children to disobey the Crown? who shall marry them when they
come to years? or what lawful issue shall they have, if they be not married
as they ought? I speak it with a Deo gratias from my heart, you have a Law,
then which there cannot be devised a more prudent, a more Christian, no not a
more taking way to reduce the Religion of a Kingdom all to one: only let it
have due execution; he is not Caesar's nor the Kingdoms friend, that will not
zealously execute that Law, after the divided have been besought to consider
the difference between our diuiner solace, and their poor Roman joy? we
pronounce full absolution from Hell and Purgatory, and all other secret
torments whatsoever are unknown to mortal man, facilitating their last passage
with sweetness of the greatest hope, whereas they leave the most in fear of
Purgatory, and many times in suspense of Hell it self: and is there no
difference of gladness? we apply free remission while they are alive; they
make them pay for it after they are dead; and is there no difference in the
profit then? we carry them like noble men unto the Table of the greatest King,
in the comely gesture of fellow-heires with CHRIST; but they make them creep
like slaves unto it: we unfolding the whole Volume of GODS Word, make them
fellow-Iudges of other men's lives, and of their doctrine too: but they lead
them blindfold unto Hell: we make them partakers both of Bread and Wine; they
give them only dry bread at the Communion Table, and is there no difference in
the honor then? We translate the Bible for them to serve GOD in a well-knowne
tongue; but they impose a language, which the people does not understand; and
is there no difference of difficulty then? thus you may detreate them
peradventure without execution of the Law: but who? The Clergy dare not
approach unto them without fear of poisoning, or that which is worse:
Plebeians have no power among them: great ones therefore, every man according to
his acquaintance, his consanguinitie, his any respect whatsoever should assay
(the utmost he could) to have them all allied in the same Religion with us. O
that Solomon or his Courtiers had bin so industrious to woo and win the
souls of idolatrous women, as they were their bodies to command, soon would
the women have sided in the same Religion with them, and as soon their Priests
bin gone: though 'twere harsh at first, yet to posterity very grateful would
it be, and many thanks would they surrender for it: thus wrought upon; thus
allied in th'unity of the same Religion might they be: by Evangelical
persuasions in private, by legal executions in public: It Is no Religion to
abstain from division your selves, unless ye endeavor to extinguish it in
others also; that is true Religion indeed, says St Augustine; parum est non
excitare, nisi etiam extinguere coneris: There Is no such excuse for tollerating
two Religions in our Kingdom, as there is in some Lutherane Churches: for they
are in peril of desolation, if not; but we (God be praised) in a safer case:
wherefore if yee'll do nothing else, yet let the royal Statutes have their
force; and then herein also we shall be quickly equal to the Text, we shall
not need any fierce reproof, only a gentle caution against time to come; beware
of division in Religion above all; for if a Kingdom be MISRELIGIOVSLY divided
against it self, that Kingdom of all others can never long stand.

Will you have higher then these? the Poets moralize Saturn for chastizing his
father Coelum; castravit patrem; and Jupiter for deposing Saturn; and the
natural causes, (the Stoics say) for deposing Jupiter: The substance is,
Caracalla practiced against Severus, and Absalom against David and Solomon; the
son against the father, or one Princely brother against another: This is the
highest division, and the remedy as before; to beseech every sovereign father,
he would not streighten his sons too much in loosing them the flower of
their age: rather resign some portion of his Kingdom, honors or offices
before death, whereon to exercise the power of his regal skill; as David did
the whole to Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 23.1: and if he have more sons then lawful
wives or kingdoms to possess, then to compose the matter prudently before,
lest otherwise the kingdom suffer a division by it; as't did in Absaloms time,
one half cleaving to the father, the other accomplicing with the son,
wherein Absalom was chief offendour, yet David not altogether without sin:
on the other part those royal branches should consider the thorns that be
annexed unto the Crown: O did a Prince apparent know, what slavish deadly
troubles, what perils of poisons, what treasons are belonging thereunto; what
bloody judgments, what hell it self, especially if it be not very rightly
his; then would he soon throw down himself, his Crown and all, to adore
such a piece of earth with a most religious kiss, as would but unburden him
of so great a pain: as 'twas most elegantly aduertis'd by our fourth King
Harry to his son: But herein above all other ye may most justly say, our
Kingdom is agreeable to the Text, there needs no present rebuke for such
ambitious division, only a gentle admonition is good against time to come, If
a kingdom be so CAPITALLY divided against it self, that kingdom can never
stand.

What more? Sometimes the division arises merely from the harshnesse of a
King, as when Alexander past over himself and all his favors by deed-of-gift
into the Persian habit; so reprobating the very hopes of all his native
Macedons at one act: or as when Rehoboam with one proud tyrannical answer,
turned ten great Tribes into so many traitors at a breath: certainly the
remedy is for Kings to forbear such needless provocations, but Subjects them
to bear: what if once in seven generations come Rehoboams course to wear the
Crown? yet it is no warrant for Subjects to play the Traitors because their
Sovereign plays the folly: What if once in seven generations? what is that to
us? yet it is not so, nor likely to be so in our time: therefore there needs
no reproof here neither, but howeuer a gentle remembrance is good against
time to come: If a Kingdom be TYRANNICALLY divided against it self, that
Kingdom can never stand.

These are provocations within, there are instigations without, as the
Syracusan Orator taught the Camarins touching their neighbor Athenians, that
they should beware them, because they did wholly apply themselves to work
dissociations and divisions in other men's Kingdoms; ut alios ab alijs
dissociarent: so I am afraid do some neighbour-Nations upon us, as well as
others: I would to God 'twere otherwise, and that herein also we were equal
to the Text: but there are strong presumptions to the contrary: Pompeius Trogus
an ancient Historian says, there is a Kingdom near us of an unquiet mind,
their weapons dearer then their blood unto the^: women administer tillage to
what they have already, but they seek abroad for more: of an unquiet mind?
and seek abroad for more? Here Is presumption enough: can there be two greater
incendiaries then Polupragmacy and avarice? unquietness of mind, and
covetousness of goods? any one of them if it be well followed, doctis dolis,
have a learned dissimulador for an Agent, it is enough to divide all the
Kingdoms in the World, it is: what Kingdom is there, wherein you shall not
find a Polupragmatist, one or other? an Antony that will make the war upon
Octavius, be it never so unjust: alas this Inquietudo naturae, it is but his
nature, he cannot be quiet unless he do divide: and when two such meet
together, it is like the meeting of two winds, and what do they make but a
whirle-winde? and what does the whirle-winde (says the Philosopher) but gather
a company of leaves and feathers together? and what is that company, but one
part of the division? What speak I of unquietness by nature? there is an
insatiable ambition of domineering over all: What mean those vulgar reports,
that they can divide the Commons and the King, and so by a tolerable kind of
treason blow up a Parliament without gunpowder, when ever they please? What
mean those complaints from beyond the Seas, that their kingdoms have bin
divided from them? yet all this I know would seem fabulous to some, did not
their more then too much audaciousnesse so lately refresh the verity of it,
whenas in the face of the whole Realm they attempted a division between the
Kingly Father and the Princely Son: what? attempt a division between the
Trinity? It Is only that is greater then this? now woe upon such devils
incarnate, such forges, such firebrarnds, such bellows, such very winds of
Hell! never cease coveting of other men's Valtolines? O say the Inhabitants, if
they were once altogether in that Valtoline, where they might covet a drop of
English water to cool their tongues, then they would surcease: still making
divisions by their mineralls amongst us? If they were once in that division of
places among the sulphures and the mineralls, from whence there is no
redemption; where the fire diuides between the joints and the marrow; there
they should have division enough; their fill: -- Good ye unerring Iewry
remember these when ye come to fit upon the twelve Tribes; what compound
sinners! ambitious, unjust, intemperate, vnnameable transgressors! censure
them deep enough: but can the malignant aspect of Planets and blazing stars
do nothing in the mean time? Thou that rulest from the supreamest or be to the
center of the earth, shall such a kingdom stand, as seeks the ruinous
division of all other Christian kingdoms in the world, and that at such a
time, as they stand in greatest need to combine al against the common adversary
of Christ? They would cut all thy servants throats: they would burn all the
professors of thy truth: they would toss, they would tear thy dearest
childrens tender limbs on cold hearted iron spears: they would crucify them
beyond eternity, if they could. All these things have thou seen! But when? did
ever our agents seek to make a division in their state? or their own best
authors legitimate their making of it in ours? Stratagems in time of war,
solicitations to rebel, then peradventure lawful in some case; but when in
peace, in time of league wast ever heard? speak thou that ruind'st Iehoiakim
for not keeping his faith with an heathen king, ith 2. of K. 24. chap and when
thou speakst revenge thy self, not us, thy dear Apostolical truth: thou that
have numbered hatred and variance, strifes and sedition, in the 5th to the Galat.
among such operations as shall never inherit everlasting life: thou that hate
six things and accountest the seventh a very abomination to thy soul, Prove.
6.16. a proud look, a lying tongue, bloody hands swift feet (from Indies to
Indies) and that sows discord among brethren; are they not all in them? for
when they are amongst us, they take season, and they sow, and they sow
discord, and that which is the most abstract abomination of all, they sow
discord among brethren; among natural, among spiritual brethren, nay between
the subject and the king between father and son they sow it: If Scripture
move not, what says their own Secunda 2 ae in his 37th question? that is at
discord sins, but that introduces discord is a greater sinner, and therefore
the greater damnation he shall receive. But return to Scripture again, and S.
Paul did induce discord between the Sadduces and the Pharisees. Acts 23. but
return to exposition again and their own authors shall condemn them; for
Aquinas forecited says, and Caietan upon Aquinas says, and Lorinus the man
whom they all reverence says, that S. Paul did not purposely intend it, but
accidentally procure it to be done: or if purposely; yet 'twas an evil
heretical concord, not a good correspondency the Apostle did divide: or if a
good concord he did divide, yet he did it by true allegations, not by false; or
if by false allegations; yet 'twas with open profession of distaste, not under
color of goodwill: whereas they do it of studied purpose, to divide the best
concord, and that by most devilish false detractions, and that under profession
of peace and league they do it: there is the height, but where is the remedy?
unless as before, to entreat others Highness, lownes, all: Those that they
suffer no such nation (whosoever it be) to hold any farther knowledge or
correspondency in our kingdom, then they can take by force of arms: 'twas the
counsel of Don Bernardino to Philip Prince of Castile: these that they give no
farther credit to their accusations against one or other, then God himself
did, when the Devil accused Job: ad mutuam diffidentiam inducere (faith
Thucidides) there is nothing strengthens the enemy more, then for people to
distrust each other: nothing strengthens a people more then to distrust the
enemy: therefore believe them no farther, then the Philistines did Achish, 1
Samuel, 29.3. Where they still cried out: What do the Hebrews here amongst us?
So long as they are enemies, there is no other pleading, but quid hic Hebraei?
Why not we as wise in our generations, as they in theirs: Imo quid hic Romani?
What do our mortal enemies the Romans here amongst us? If they will depart,
we will accompany them to the shore; that was ever the wisdom of the ancient,
least by communication of language, they should corrupt the people, says the
historian: per commercium linguae: if not depart, yet bridle them from speaking
into the common peoples ears, as Eliakim besought Rabsekah, 2 K. 18 to
estrange his language, least the people should revolt: If none of these, but
that they will remain, and will make division amongst us; let every plot have
his counter-plot, as the Plataans served the Lacedaemonians, let them have
division for division, let their bowels be divided in the midst: nec lex est
aequior vlla: or if that too severe, yet let their tongues be divided in the
midst: the affinity of the punishment does so aptly resemble the sin; never
would nation more be guilty of such crime, as whose mocking punishment should
be so wittily the accuser of it self. Something must be done, and the safest
is to keep them out with iron hailestones, grandine ferreo, as that Queen of
heaven did after 88: Never kingdom so well stated, but discontents would arise
through naughty administration of Justice, partialities in choice of officers,
one way or other; if people refrain their appetites, yet always not a Prince;
if a Prince refrain his passions, yet always not a people. It Is to be noted,
says Bernardino, in this matter of malcontents, that they are to be found in
all kingdoms, Provinces, and the very Courts of Princes themselves, ye may
find men to work upon. It being annexed to humane nature, that men are never
satisfied, no not with the gouerments, which our Lord God himself ordaines: no
marvel then if they be discontented with the rules of more ordinary kings;
such is the corruption of universal nature, every one to imagine he could
govern better, then the man whosoever he be that is in place. These are the
humors to be wrought upon: Say they so? Therefore something of necessity must
be done shall I say? Nay therefore many things are done by men of potentate
place: the Firebrands are removed; the provoking cause is taken away, all that
were given to incense division are now restrained; there needs no positive
reproof, for herein also are we equal to the Text; yet a cautelous admonition
is good against time to come: If a kingdom do admit such stirrers of
divisions to reside among them, that kingdom never long can stand.

Howsoever our own present care must be, that we our selves belong not to
the number of those that will by any means be provoked to such a sin. It Is
all th'aduersary desires in any state, to find such matter to work upon: it is
their open profession, to fish in troubled waters: If you will be tinder, they will
be Fire: If you will be Waves, thei'l be quickly Winds: If you will be discontented,
thei'l quickly seduce ye to divide: If you will float, thei'l quickly contriue
ye to their own side: Wherefore I beseech ye receive a gentle persuasiue
remedy for this disease also: what does the unfortunately necessitous
conceive? That his case is desperate? Or what the prodigal waster of his
substance? that he cannot satisfy by making payment of the debt? What then?
Can he therefore satisfy by making a division in the land? Will one sin
expiate another? No more then one punishment will ease another: better
therefore he fall into the Creditours hands alone, then into the devils too,
where he shall be sure to pay the utmost farthing for both, and yet never shall
come forth: Or what the ambitious malcontent? That he is not officed
according to his worth? What then? that is another default, it is none of his:
but if he make a division upon it, then the sin is his own, and then he
may quickly be officed according to his worth: Are vnworthies promoted?
Stomach it he may; declare it seasonably to presidents of state he may; but
make a division for it among the multitude that he may not: 'twere a most
foolish indiscretion, and more then a deadly sin: Or what the vaineglorious
discontent, whose self-love will never be satisfied, what attributes soever
ye bestow upon him; unless that Country, that Shire, and that very part of
the shiere, wherein he was borne be preferred before all other Countries and
kingdoms in the world beside: unless that book, that method, and that
exposition which he likes, be deified before all other methods and expositions
that are; unless that rank, that condition whereto he belongs be magnified
above all other ranks and conditions whatsoeere they be. Thus they set Oxford
and Cambridge, Northern and Southern at variance among themselves. Thus they
make Nobles to despize Commons, and Commons to distaste Nobles, and King and
Clergy to be divided from them both: Are these the ingenuous men ye speak
off? Now I beseech them, what Poet or Orator, what Historian or Divine did ever
teach them this wit to divide a powerable kingdom againt it self? Were there
any depth of wisdom in them, they would never desire all of their shire, all
of their condition to be so highly extold above the rest: because then there
is no excellency left for him: If all be such, where I pray is the difference
of acumen that is belonging unto him? All these are fit materials for a
division. Their conferences, news, letters, verses, speeches, Sermous,
resenting of nothing more, then of desire to divide; whereat the enemy does
much rejoice, and hopes to suck no small advantage out of such divisions
ith'end. Wherefore they are often to be entreated, that they would abandon all
discontent, leave off such foolish factious words, partake with neither side to
the prejudice of the whole; but in a loueable prudent kind render to every
place his due; affection to whom affection, and subjection to whom subjection
is due, yet still keeping the correspondency of the whole together; not so
subject to a King as to talk tyranny against a state, nor so affected to a
state as to speak treason against a king: not so partake with Nobles as to
oppress the Commons, nor so with Commons as to scandal Nobles: not so with
City, as to incense the Country, nor so with Country as to enrage the City:
not they vilify our Clergy to magnify their Laitee, nor we vilify their
Laitee, to deisie our Clergy; because all these are the beginnings of
division: but every man being humble in his own eyes, let him esteem another
better then himself, and the preservation of the whole to be greater then all;
so shall we be all free from the greatness of this national sin, The division
of a land. If any be otherwise minded, and will maintain a faction still, that
Man-diuell is neither Caesar's nor the kingdoms friend: for he does but prepare
the Fuel of division to th'aduersaries hand; be does but maintain such
engines, as when any subtle plot-master meets withal, that kingdom can never
long stand. Some of them the Magistrate may meet withal: if their number
gather head and troop together, ye know the remedy is in the law: ye have
prisons for wandering rogues; houses of correction for idle tongued parties,
mysteries of trades for indigent men of occupation: let the multitude be looked
unto, and each man entertained in his own proper place: it is always best
walking in the safest way. The hitory of Florence can report vnt'ce, what
insolent divisions have arisen from certain distasts about the my steries of
wool. The history of the Turks, what armies have grown from exiles and
malcontents. The history of the Kings instead of al; Every one that was in
distress, every one that was in debt, and every one that was discontented
gathered themselves to David, and he became a Captain over them: says the
Text, 1. Sam. 22.2 These things ye know: happy are ye if ye do them: as
superiors have done their part, so let us do ours; they have taken the FIRE
away: let us remove the FVELL too. For if a Kingdom retain but the fit fuel
of division within it seife, that kingdom can never long stand -- So ye have
corruptions within, prouocations without, and the particular remedies of both.
Two other more general remedies there are, Meditation and Prayer. Consider how
UNPLEASANT it is to nourish a division in any kind: whether you sit at your
daily meals, walk in the private recreations of your gardens, or hold a parley
in any other perambulations that ye make, come there a pleasant conceit into
your head, you dare not utter it; come there a lofty censure, you dare not
utter it; for fear of misprision, misinterpretation, condemnation, you dare
not utter any thing: write any thing, it shall be censured; say any thing, it
shall be censured; nay think any thing, or if you please think nothing, yet
will they censure the very non-imaginations of your thoughts: o what a life is
this? you have a president of it at Samus; Thucidides sets it forth by three as
unpleasant things as ever mortality did endure, suspicion, silence, death: a
hurly burly; every man suspected his dearest friend, and in that suspicion kept
silence in the deep of his heart; but -- pain and grief unto them; and that
which was the plague of all, their silence was their death, because they durst
not answer of what faction they did partake: ye gentle sweet dispositions of
amity and peace, who would not hate, abhor the authors of divisions?
disturbers of all your Christian quiet, troublers of your hearts, impeachers of
all your joy; that Christian liberty, that sweetness of conversation, that
honest cheerfulness, that tranquillity of body and mind, wherein God allows
every man to pass his time away; how do they hinder all? O had you ever lived
in house or kingdom where divisions are, you would say it were a certain kind
of hell to be deprived of that sollace, which in peaceable loving societies ye
might enjoy. Stand ye newtrall, partake neither side, yet will the one strangle
ye with smoke, the other slander ye with baser kitchinstuffe, says
Alphonsus, ye were as good dwell in the middle chamber of an house, which is
sure to be abused of either side: but if ye be farther interested to bear a
part in the study of revenge, how vexatious a torment is it then unto the
brain, heart, and soul of man? what plodding, plotting, carking, caring,
contriuing must there be? A man were better uphold the building of 9 several
houses with his shoulders; then bear up the burden of one such division with
his head. Therefore for the odious unpleasantness of it let all men avoid this
sin of division: for the very sorrow and discontent thereof is enough to kill
the greatest, goodest part of men: If a kingdom be divided against it self,
it can never stand in temper long, for very sorrow that it cannot.

Who would not cover his face with a shameful blush, to be the author of so
many uncomely disorders in a state? Bring in a division once, and ye disrobe
the kingdom of all graceful meetings whatsoever they be: no such Acts of
Parliament; no such Commencements i'ch' University, no such festiualls of
country pomp, no such solemn celebrations at the Court; no such assemblies of
scarlet at the market, no such glorious congregations of Divines at Churches,
as now adays there are. Bring in a division, ye set son against father,
servant against master, the vassal against the king himself: what irreuerent
gestures, unseemly words, sawere actions? Alexander flies into the kings royal
face, grasps him by the tender soft throat, thrusts two or three of his
homeliest reprobate fingers into the Kings sweet eloquent mouth, to stop the
passage, that he might neither call on God nor man for succor. So and no
otherwise will your inferiors serve you all: every strong handed baser fellow
will kick ye, and tear ye, and trample ye, and all the good report ye
have into utter reproach, if ever ye introduce a division into the state: no
beauty of body, no good friendship of mind, no good report abroad, no
contentment at home, no true felicity of any kind can ye secure unto your
selves, if ever ye bring a division into the land; whose heart then is not
filled with holy indignation against such as are the authors of division? that
one illfauor'd fellow should undo so many rare comely beauties: one base
newter undo so many true loyal hearts! What? take away the form and beauty
of our kingdom from us? it is all one, as if they should confuse the order of
the stats; or take the spring from our the glory of the year: for shame of
dishonor then do not a division breed: if a kingdom be divided against it
selse, it can never stand long in the excellency of its former glory, that it
cannot: and then as good it never stood at all: If a kingdom be divided
against it self, that kingdom can never stand in any good fashion as it ought
to do.

If I should open the DISPROFITS of it; how it embaseth and impouerisheth the
whole commonwealth:-traffickes of wine, trafficks of rarer merchandise, it is
division sets the greater impost on them: dealings in Cartle, tradings in
cloth, it is division sets the greater price upon them: it is division many
times that makes the price of corn to rise: It is division of co^petitours
that makes the Landlord state his farmage at so high a rate: It Is division makes
Gold and Jewels to be exported into other lands: it is division makes each man
betray his neighbor into the enemies hands; to the Pyrat; to the robber, the
murderer; what not? And I wonder the authors of it do not foresee, that it
will be ith'end as prejudicial to themselves as others; for the ruin of
particulars will prove the ruin of the universal in the end, and a wise
Counselor did long ago advertise the Sicilian state.

Besides other dangers, which are possible enough: for whom will you call in to
decide the cause, if a division should arise? I will only inform ye what I
have read touching Philip King of Macedon, reputed a man of clemency, yet when
ever he was called in to be a Judge of differences in any kingdom, he did
always (not Venire but) supervenire, says the Text, ad iudicium tanquam ad
bellum: he came upon them always with an Army ready furnished, and I beseech
you mark the event, for so he devoured the Empire from them both: it is in the
8th book of Justin: Sic vtrunque regno spoliauit: And are there now none as
greedy after other men's kingdoms, as ever Philip was? I would it were not too
well known, that those which are the right male Catolici indeed do
acknowledge another Catholic king in temporalls to be above our Sovereign, as
well as the Pope in Spiritualls to be above our Archbishop: and is not this
dangerous? Who knows not how constant Flanders was to the kingdom of France,
till a great misleader persuaded the^, there was another King of France beside
Philip? then presently they revolted from him: and to speak all, the Grecian
Provinces were in an vproare, for want of expression to their joy, and thought
they had accusation enough against the Apostles, when they found them teaching,
there was another King beside Caesar, Act. 17.7 and for certain it had been a
dangerous doctrine, if of a temporal King: as yee'll take them teaching it of
a temporal King, that there is another Sovereign beside our Caesar: wherefore
be not miscarried to their bed of sleep: ye know the disprofit, ye know
the danger of it: suppose the enemy were approaching to the walls: the City
arm themselves; the valiant men of war marching forward with greater fury
then the rest, encounter the enemy at the gates; and now they charge and then
look back again; and now they fight, and then again look back, for fear
their greatest enemies be behind them, a division of their own: yet still
they make good the wall, until the heat of skirmish be began, and the^ the
mystery of discord also begins to work, and here a Captain flags, and there
another falsifies his fire: and one man shoots the enemy; and another shoots
his fellow Citizen that is next unto him; thus the division works: and then
to handy strokes they come amongst themselves: the throat that is next him
then, each bloody blade bereaues him of his life: then their glittering swords
are sheathed into each others guts: the hewing Axe and wounding Petronell set
blood for blood abroach: no matter though the enemy do prevail, says the
dissentious man, yet howsoever this villain my neighbor shall never live to
triumph over me again, and down he beats him to the ground: thus each
butchers other, while the enemy is glad to enter on so rich a spoil: and thus
a City and thus a kingdom is too too often lost: whereas if they were
unanimous among themselves, the enemy might sacrifice his powder to the empty
air; and feed upon the sound thereof instead of richer spoils. Alas, says
Solomon, The children of mine own mother, mine own mothers children have
fought against me, no marvel if I fall. -- If thus you stand affected against
each other; Alas the frustrate enterprises of our former Queen! Alas the
failing hopes of peaceable men! the too much deceived expectation of us all:
for I see you fighting, weeping, bleeding, dying; standing wet-shoo'd up to the
very ankles in each others blood, and more fearfully then so, it is deep
blood, it is very dreadful goarebloud I see; if so! I say; if so! For I delight
not these heavy descriptions, I had rather divine happy things vnt'ee: yet
weigh well the danger, that's the best preventing way: know ye not that the
furious Devil walks his rounds? the whole world is his family at hand and
beck: non infans vnius diei, imo non infans vnius Dei: not an infant of a day
old, but he labors to make it child of wrath, and of division as well as
others. Tu potes vnanimes armare in Praelia fratres,
tibi nominae mill -- mill nocendi arts:
A thousand several arts he has to make division in a land, he has false
teachers of every kind, and varieties of furies at command: the world full of
ambition without; we of inconstancy within: each gaping after change. It Is no
age for Tacitus his Prince to commit neighbor Provinces against each other:
that is when he fears a conspiracy within, but we most without: they are all
grown Machiavellians now: divide and impera; it is the precept, the practice of
them all: safe for them; dangerous for us: if none of these will move; go then
ye Pilot-marriners and make ye a tumult in the ship, let the winds blow, and
the surging waves arife, and the enemy come upon ye, yet still be ye roaring
mad against each other; there is no fear of robbing drowning, dying; there is
no danger in it: Alas, yes; nothing more; unless ye stand constant to the
whole, unanimously affected to each other, with one heart and hand to live and
die together; there is no preservation neither of ship nor kingdom, that there
is not: unless ye be all like Nestor and Achilles, whom neither Court nor
Country did ever hear to jar. Fly therefore faction, renounce debate; sharp
is the enemies stomach set with choler of ambition and revenge: why will ye
gratify the Roman power by committing your tongues, your swords one against
another? never talk against division, but live against it: never say peace,
peace; but do it: pacatius loqueris, quam vivis: put up your two-edged words
into their sheaths: leave off inuectiue Sermons; and each intemperate, bloody,
good name-killing abuse: each man be reconciled to his foe: great Babylon it
self can never stand, if Euphrat^s be divided into three hundred sluices, as
'twas in Cyrus time: put legal remedies in execution, and by all euengelicall
sweetness let us study to preserve the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace: one law, one religion, one King, and one kingdom let us by; ye all
mioy the same air, which makes your complexions to be liker to each other,
then ye are to any other kingdom in the world beside: ye all partake the
same blood by interveining marriages with each other: ye all partake the same
diet, the same studies; the same tutelary Angels do defend ye all: why
should there be any division amongst ye? because ye hate to be reconciled?
But Division will reconcile ye, whether ye will or no: See the shallowness:
for division at home does ever call in some warlike nation from abroad, and
they will make you Amici inimicis, and inimici amicis; friends with your
vtter'st enemies, which would make a wise man mad; and I would to God it would
make mad men wise also, for it will make you enemies with your best friends
too, whether you will or no; as the wise Hermocrates did easily fore see: so
that if neither for displeasure, nor dishonor, nor disprofir, nor danger
neither, yet for necessity it self each man of prudence division should avoid.

What higher? but their execution here, and the tormentiue punishments of hell
hereafter: Read Suidas, pervse the Athenian, the Roman Commonwealth; they were
ever banished or imprisond, or put to more shameful deaths. Remember Phryno,
Philocrates, Theagenes, and the rest: escape the common Soldiers knowledge,
yet the magistracy found means against them: escape the magistracy, yet the
Commous drew them to the market place, cut off their hands and bad them go now
and divide more kingdoms, betray more Cities, if they could: escape both
Commons and Magistracy; yet can they never escape the judgments of God: that
diuides a man is murderer of one; that a pregnant woman of more then that a
man; and that a Church of more then that a woman: but he that a kingdom does
divide, is a greater sinner then them all: he destroies truth, customs,
chastity, religion, from mothers, from Churches, elect, and reprobate
altogether: this is more then parricide, or tyrant, or the devil himself did
ever do: the sin of a whole kingdom, and the sorrows of a whole kingdom
are his guilt; and therefore his doom, as much as the punishment of a whole
kingdom shall it be: o did such a diuisioner see, what an intolerable sum
they make, when they come altogether: put Divesses punishment to Iudasses, and
Iudasses to Ahabs, and Ahabt to Hieroboams, that made all Israel to sin: put
the adulterers pains to the bloody murderers tortures, and both unto the
Idolaters sufferings; and whose flesh and blood is ever able to endure it? Nay
suppose all the pains, that are hellishly inflicted upon a whole kingdom of
reprobates, were all laid upon one man: even such shall the punishment be of
all them, that kingdoms do divide: and will not this dissuade neither?
Farther then this we cannot go, only we have access to him, that can go
farther, by prayer, which is the last remedy. Among twenty Commentators there is
one says, Precemur ergo deum: O ye that are chosen to collegiate lives;
increase ye the number, I beseech ye: what do you think, is the primitive
institution of the Founder, or what the expediency of such a pious place? that
ye should wax old in studying superfluous questions of Materia prima, and
whether puncta be entia realia in continuo, or no? admiring only the Man in the
Moon, and studying the question, till -- as wise as he. Ye have no pastoral
charges to converse withal: ye are sequestered from all the World beside: ye
are the only fit men and place for prayer unto God: O recommend this cause in
your petitions often to his Throne: Patria prae patre: The Philosopher was wont
to say, he loved his dome dearer then his own father: and I that could make
mine own interests (being a single man) upon foresight of advantage as well as
others, yet having conscience of the public, I so far prefer my Countries
good before mine own, that I baseech you all often to pray against division,
both in your private and public devotions unto God: that it would please him
evermore to preserve us from all mercenary pensioners, as he has at any time
done heretofore, from all false Catholics and contrarieties to the truth,
from all temptations to rebellion by foreign alliance whatsoever it be: that
he would so direct the kingdoms government, as no reuengefull spirit may have
any matter to work upon, either within themselves, or abroad among the
multitude of the Commonwealth: you have your iniunction the 1. Ep. To Tim. 2.
Chap. 1. ver. That prayers and intercessions be made for all: for Kings and
Kingdoms, and all that are in eminent place, that so we may lead a quiet and a
peaceable, a peaceable life. Peace is the fruit of prayer: Peace is the
preservation, the augmentation of the Church: pray therefore that our kingdoms
peace fail not; because the preservation, the augmentation of the Church
depends upon the kingdoms peace: these are the causes, effects, and remedies,
which in a Theological modesty we can be permitted to declare vnt'ce: other
there are more political, which if ye know them, happy are ye, if ye do
them; For if a kingdom be divided against it self that kingdom can never
stand.

And if ye do them, receive a word of consolation to your souls, all you
that are not guilty of this Nation-falling sickness, this kingdome-killing
sin: you have neither taken pension to betray the kingdom, nor for revenge
encouraged others to make a faction in the land: ye have not for schism sake
engendered any other religion, then that which is the maine orthodoxall of the
state: sollace your selves, you can be no causes of the kingdoms fall. But ye
say ye have been discontented at the present state, and that ye fear is
division: you have sometimes spoken a word against the disorders of the Realm,
and that is division, ye sear: ye have said 'twere good we had wars, and
is not that division too? No I beseech ye; mark but the emphasis: if divided
against it self! there is a division that makes for the good of the whole: so
the mouths of Disputants are many times divided in pursuit of deliberatiue
argument for finding out the truth, and yet they accord well enough in the
unity of the same conclusion all at last: and such a division is like a
division of notes in music: it is not divided against it self, it makes the
sweeter sound. Your discontented eyes gush out with tears, because men keep
not the law; this is not to make, but mar the division of a land: your tongue
reports unto the Church some disorders you have seen; but in words of sweetest
charity; in the abundance of lovely desires, not in any bitterness do ye
report the same: and so peradventure ye procure the evil to be taken away by
man, or pardoned by God, because ye are so zealous against the sin: in all
such estates of causes the division is not against it self, but for the whole;
such a kingdom is not divided against it self: you desire wars, but
foreign not civil wars; and that is no division against it self, but a
firmer union of the whole. And many other cases there are, wherein it is not
only lawful, but most necessary to be divided for the public good; and one
man's tongue to move one way, and another in a second path, as the Orbs do in
the Firmament: The primun mobile runs West, the next particular Spheres
East, the lower Planets obliquely take another course: yet all tempering
sweetly together for the commodity of the whole: otherwise if they should run
all one may, they would hurry the earth and all to pieces, and spoil the
natural growth of all: So runs the King our Primum Mobile, in motions all
aloft: the Nobles as the next Spheres seem another way: the Clergy and
Courts of equity like the nearer Planets take a third course: but all working
sweetly for the commodity of the whole: otherwise, if all one way; the Commons
which are terra Reipub: would be hurryed all to pieces, and it would spoil the
public growth of all: You know how Lucan describes the ouer-whelming of a
Ship: dum nimium pugnax: while they ran all to one side topsy-turvy by
unequal poyse they ouer-weigh'd the Ship: they must divide themselves
therefore, that mean to preserve the Commonwealth, that floating Ship: but
still they must agree in managing such a division very circumspectly, for the
welfare of the whole: If any man has bin guilty of indiscretion to the
contrary, let him hereafter temper himself in a wiser kind: if he will
endeavor to make us sing the 133 Psalm in a pleasanter tune then ever we did
before: O how pleasant a thing it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!
then shall his presence be as acceptable to our eyes, as Music it self is to
our ears: O how beautiful is the presence of them that preserve peace among
us: Music is no music to be compared with that sweet reciprocal
conversation of body and soul, of flesh and blood, which is most lively
displayed every hour between each other in time of Peace: Music only
glorifies the ear; but this the whole body of a Kingdom does adorn: It Is like
the precious ointment on the head, which runs down to the skirts of all the
Kingdom: Music preserues from Melancholy only for a while: but this for
evermore: for there the Lord promised his blessing, and life for evermore:
Music cannot make a little town a great City: but small and contemptible
beginnings have grown into great Kingdoms by concord, whereas mighty Empires
by division have bin ouer-turn'd: who then not honor those that do preserve
our peace? to them the comfort: Ye have prayed against diuifion, and there is
no sign in that of dividing a Kingdom against it self: ye have hated the
Societies of the seditious, as the King himself commands, Prove. 24.21: and
that is no sign of dividing the Kingdom against it self: ye have scorned
pension, alliance, revenge, ambition, all to preserve the Kingdom in unity
with it self: you have preserved the union of the Kingdom, and the union of
the Kingdom shall preserve you: you shall not be guilty of this foul
Kingdome-killing sin: But you say there are other destructions of a Kingdom
from without: it is true, yet I never love to wander from my Text: my Text
concerns only dissipations within: If a Kingdom be divided against it self,
that kingdom can never stand: Wherefore to sum up all; whether Princes be
divided against themselves, or Subjects against themselves; or Prince and
People one against another: whether about superiority, or any other pretensiue
matter of pleasure, profit, or revenge: whether the subtilty of any other
kingdom instigate, or they be the beginners of it themselves: whether it arise
from the Clergy, and so proceed to the Laity, or from Laity to Clergy:
howeuer it be, if it be absolutely divided against it self, it can never
long subsist, for it will turn the Physutian against the Patient, Son
against Father, Servant against Master, Flock against Minister; it turns
tongues and pens, hearts and hands, swords and spears of one against
another: makes them betray, murder each other behind their backs: disgrace
the meetings, solemnities, orders, attributes of each other, and therefore it
can never stand: a kingdom divided against it self can never stand.

Now to refresh ye with another word of special application to the time, and
so an end: To day is this Scripture doubly fulfilled in all your ears: had the
Court with them, or the Clergy with us, bin absolutely divided against the
Kingdoms good, the Kingdom had perished then, the glory of it now; ye had bin
both destitute of such a King, and such a glorious celebration of the day: the
one well known among our selves, the other all abroad: For as on this day
Gowrie and his brother set both upon the King -- But GOD gave the victory,
determined the question, sent his servants to rescue him; and Ramsay thrust
Gowrie through the heart: he struck him, and he struck him dead, and he
struck him dead at a blow, and I am somewhat afraid he struck his soul
down dead to hell: For he died in a moment, without crying either to the King
or GOD for mercy: -- the division of a Kingdom, of his own kingdom, and that
against so great an Anointed of the Lord, as our Sovereign is, whose Seed was
to govern in so many opulent Kingdoms after him; I see the rume of Ireland,
the confusion of Scotland, the division of England, the suppression of all
Protestant Religion in Germany, and what not? all in this one more then
National sin of Gowries Conspiracy; and therefore may I not justly fear he
struck his soul down dead to hell? -- divisions are too-too often in every
State, and that upon small occasions many times: what says Traitor Gowrie for
himself? 'Twas to revenge his father: to revenge your father? what, upon the
man that never wronged your father? upon the King himself? your father was a
tainted man; the King was but in his young minority; a merely gentle passive
in those affair: They were the Protectors and the hand of Justice cut your
father off, 'twas not the King: and if he were justly executed, why should you
not endure it? if unjustly, yet endure it; for then Heaven would revenge him
without any such sinful help of yours: your Tutor Rollocke (Mr Alexander) and
a greater then Rollocke, what says he? Tell me says Chrysostom, when Cain
put Abell unjustly death, which of those two was the dead man? dic quaeso uter
illorum erat mortuus? whether Abell, Ad Romans cap. 4. sermon. 8.
whose blood did after live to triurnph in a victorious cry, or Cain whose
blood did after live in servile fear of every aspine leaf? bloud-guilty Cains
countenance waxt pale, and speechless, and dead, while alive; but innocent
Abels blood was fresh and lively, and triumphant in a glorious cry: witness
the Law; it is the crying child, that does enjoy the state of life, and
therefore Cains blood was dead, but Abels was alive, because it cried unto the
Lord: so that if your father were an Abell, unjustly put to death, then was
your father alive, and being alive, his blood should have commenced the suite,
his blood have sought revenge, not you: but being justly executed, much less:
It Is reprobat-like to iniure those that iniure you; but pure damnation to iniure
those that never injured you: Is any man culpable? witnesses are produced; be
it the appearance of his own actions, or other men's suffrages to condemn him:
howeuer if he suffer, let him blame the witness, not the Commonwealth: if he
seek revenge by the division of a kingdom for it, he iniures those that never
injured him, and the height of damnation shall be his due. No, no, there was
somewhat more then the private revenge of his father that urged the Traitor to
it: he was brought up in Italy, the very place where the most King-killing
doctrine is taught to be the true meaning of the Gospel: I should misreport
the probability of all story, if I should arraigne Earl Gowry for a Praecisian
before ye, rather then a Papist in this fact-for he was a notorious Magician;
the Characters found about his, searched in the presence of the King: a very
usual thing with Papists, but where did ye ever know a Praecisian that was so
magically given? brought up in Italy? common among Papists; but where ever
Praecisian that was Italianly given? his plausible popularity argues him
Papist, or carnal Protestant at least: but where ever sowre-faced Praecisian,
that was so popularly given? his daily accomplices Logan and Bour, men of no
Religion at all, by Sprotts own Sprott at his Arraigment exhorted all to take
heed how they kept company with such as made no profession of Religion:
acknowledging before the^ all, that his haunting so much with the Lo: Logan, a
man without Religion, and subject to many other vices; as also his continual
being in company with the Lo: Bour, who was as irreligious as the other, and
without fear of God, had ensnared him thereunto: and therefore he desired them
all again, to beware of evil company, especially those that were void of
Religion: they are his own very words: published by authority.
Confession, his divine correspondencie with Jesuits also, who did ever know
Praecisian so irreligiously, so Iesuitically given? peradventure some
mis-praecisians did adhere too much unto the fairness of his tongue, because
they disaffected the Kings Episcopal government of the Church: peradventure
some allied by blood or service or other affection to the man can not so well
digest the mention of that treason unto this day: peradventure the ignorance of
others do to this hour mistake his intendments, as if they were really
belonging to their own side; but mistakes be they never so many, cannot
satisfy the arguments alleged; nor will the nature of the cause ever bear
it to be defined upon him as a Praecisians fact: The history is known, and I
have heard this pulpit speak so much about 14 years ago, that his
outlandish education was the chiefest cause of all: For there ye have the
height of all pride; there ye have professed schools and methods of revenge;
there factions are taught by rules, and treasons by a kind of Law. I would to
God I had but freedom to speak: but what ever the cause was, the sin is a
crying, killing, deadly, damning sin: Is this your Catholic trayning up of
children beyond the seas, to prepare them for after-treasons and divisions in a
State? Is this your hypocritical wearing of CHRIST'S Cross about your necks,
that so ye may more cunningly crucify others? is this the recompense ye
return him for all the merits of his passion? How often did he endure the
buffetting fist, the bloody spear, and many a tormenting division more? and
why? but that we might live and flourish in the fullness, the fatness of our
peace: Peace he brought down from Heaven with him: Peace he recommended being
about to die: But Logan will none of his peace, he says, he will hazard life,
lands, and honor; nay, Hell it self shall not affright him, but he will be
revenged upon the King, they are his own words. Not Hell it self affright him?
yes, the grisly ghastly looks of one tormenting fire-flaming devil would make
his traytorous bones tremble into so many several anguishes, as an
Angell-Oratour were never able to express: Irons, fires, chains, prisons,
gibbets, wheels, tortures, yellings, howlings, crucifyings, and every moment
they suffer the multiplication of a thousand several deaths: and that which is
the horror of all, those savage spiries are so furious about them, it seems
GOD does not restrain their malice in that world to come; but they may torment
a man beyond all infiniteness, if they will: For do ye not see the wheel
upon them? and the worm that never dies gnawing their conscience about the
heart? do ye not see the fire that never goes forth, parching their tongues
with burning thirst? and foul coale-blacke sprights tearing their flesh with
red-hot iron instruments of vengeance for their sin? just as they did offer
to pull and tear the visage of the King: O the intolerable painful
punishment they do endurel every hour a new addition to their old hell! do
ye not he are them cry sometimes, if ye listen well about the dead time of
the night? for certain it may well be some of that company; It any of the^ did
depart this world unrepented of so great a sin: And still they say, oh that
they might have a little ease, if it were but a very little ease, if but never
so little peace with those infernal fiends; they would willingly return to
their former pain again about an hour after with all their hearts: no, they
were full of division and blood, and vengeance, and all tormentiue imaginations
while they were alive, and therefore it is but justice now that the full vialls
of Gods vengeance should be powered out upon them.

Beware ye spirits of sedition, that ye come not to this burning lake: do not
effect those outlandish fashions of ambition and revenge: It Is not your
characters of Magic can secure you from the pains of hell, no nor from
stroke of execution neither, if ye deserve the blow: division of any kingdom
is a deadly sin, but the greater, if your own; and in your own the greatest
is against the King: seven times hotter shall be your hell: if he were
reprobate, yet your God on earth; but being regenerate, he partakes the
bloud-royall of JESUS CHRIST himself: for him ye must fight, as on this day
loyal Ramsay did; for him give thanks, for him pray: Come I beseech you, and
let us bind our selves again by faith and Sacrament unto him: by prayers
we will be his thundering Army, and if need require, those your fair learned
hands shall be his Praetorian band; faithful to the death! with whom can ye
be in charity, if not with him? you desired the pre-eminence should be taken
from your sister, and bestowed upon your selves; it was so: a new reformation
by Parliament ye did desire; to that his Majesty did consent: you desired the
forgiveness of old debts, it was so: that excessive bands of Usury might be
released, to that also he did consent: one while you desired there might be
peace in your own days, and it was so; another-while war, and to that also
he did consent: one while to be stewards of your own lands and moneys; it was
so: another-while commanders of your own waters, and thereto also he did
consent: Now what can he do more for his Vineyard, that he has not done? even
that also shall be perfited in after-time: Wherefore, long may he rule over us,
and never too long may we obey his prosperous reign; and living in unity one
with another, Let the world grow olds, but never this Kingdom know what
division means: If ye agree, no hostile power shall unarm ye; if divide,
every small enemy shall take your kingdom from ye: give me your spears, give
me strong cords, and I will break them before your faces, if ye divide them;
but keep them united, and Sampson himself shall not do the deed.

The time commands me: take only S. Bernard with ye, and I have done: Ante
mihi contingat mori, quam audire in vobis aliquem just clamantem; fily matris
meae pugnaverunt contra me Let me die, ere ever I hear any man justly
complaining amongst ye, that the sons of his own mother have fought against
him. Ye are all children of the same Kingdom, of the same Congregation all;
and all brothers to each other; neither is any man so like himself in all
things, as ye are all in some things like to one another: Love therefore but
within your selves; nothing without ye shall ever be prejudicial vnt'ee: the
29 Sermon: on the Canticles. -- O thou heavenly concord, that dwell above the
Orbs, descend into the hearts of such as hear me this day: or give them
concord, or else thou blottest me out of the book of life; or give them
concord, or else thou will divide me; or give them concord, or else we all
shall die: Hear us good Lord, and answer us according to the multitude of thy
mercies for JESUS CHRIST'S sake, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be
all honor and glory now and evermore, AMEN.

FINIS.

