POEMS WITH THE MUSES LOOKING-GLASS: AND AMYNTAS.

By THOMAS RANDOLPH Master of Arts, and late Fellow of Trinity College in
Cambridge.



OXFORD,

Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD Printer to the University, for FRANCIS BOWMAN: M.
DC. XXXVIII.

TO THE MEMORY OF HIS DEAR BROTHER Mr THO. RANDOLPH.
IN such a solemn train of friends that sing
Thy Dirge in pious lines, and sadly bring
Religious Anthemes to attend thy Hearse,
Striving t'embalme thy precious name in verse:
I, that should most, have no more power to raise
Trophies to thee, or bring one grain of praise
To crown thy Altar, then the Orbs dispense
Motion without their sole Intelligence.
For I confess that power which works in me
Is but a weak resultance took from thee;
And if some scattered seeds of heat divine
Flame in my breast, they are derived from thine:
And these low sickly numbers must be such,
As when steel moves, the Loadstone gives the touch.
So like a spungy cloud that sucks up rain
From the fat soil to send it back again;
There may be now from me some language shown
To urge thy merit, but 'twas first thy own:
For though the Doners influence be past
For new effects, the old impressions last;
As in a bleeding trunk we often descry
Leaps in the head, and rowlings in the eye,
By virtue of some spirits, that alone
Do tune those Organs though the soul be gone.
But since I add unto this general noise
Only weak sounds, and Echoes of thy voice;
Be this a task for deeper mouths, while I
That cannot bribe the Phansy, thaw the eye:
And on that Grave where they advance thy praise
Do plant a sprigge of Cypress not of Bays.
Yet flow these tears *not that thy Relics sit
Fixed to their cell a constant Anchorit:
Nor am I stirred that thy pale ashes have
Over the dark Climate of a private Grave
No fair inscription: such distempers flow
From poor lay-thoughts, whose blindness cannot* know
That to discerning Spirits the Grave can be
But a large womb to Immortality:
And a fair virtuous name can stand alone
Brass to the Tomb, and marble to the Stone.
No, it is that Ghostly progeny we mourn,
Which careless you let fall into the Vrne:
We had not flowed with such a lavish tide
Of tears and grief, had not those Orphans died.
For what had been my loss, who reading thine,
A Brother might have kissed in every line.
These that are left, Posterity must have;
Whom a strict care has rescued from the Grave
To gather strength by Union; as the beams
Of the bright Sun shot forth in several streams,
And thinly scattered with less fervor pass,
Which cause a flame contracted in a Glass.
These, if they cannot much advance thy fame,
May stand dumb Statues to preserve thy name:
And like Sun-dialls to a day that is gone,
Though poor in use, can tell there was a Sun.
Yet (if a fair confession plant no Bays,
Nor modest truth conceived a lavish praise)
I could to thy great glory tell this age
Not one envenomed line does swell the page
With guilty legends; but so clear from all
That shoot malicious noise, and vomit gall,
That it is observed in every leaf of thine,
Thou have not scattered snakes in any line.
Here are no remnants tortured into rhyme
To gull the reeling judgments of the time;
Nor any stale reversions patch thy writ
Gleand from the rags and frippery of wit.
Each syllable does here as truly run
Thine, as the light is proper to the Sun.
Nay in those feebler lines which thy last breath
And laboring brains snatched from the skirts of death
Though not so strongly pure, we may descry
The father in his last posterity,
As clearly shown, as Virgins looks do pass
Through a thin lawne, or shadows in a glass:
And in thy setting, as the Suns, confess,
The same large brightness, though the heat be less.
Such native sweetness flows in every line,
The Reader cannot choose but swear it is thine.
Though I can tell a rugged sect there is
Of some fly-wits will judge a squint on this;
And from thy easy flux of language guess
The fancies weak, because the noise is less;
As if that Channel which does smoothly glide
With even streams flowed with a shallow tide.
But let a quick-discerning judgment look,
And with a peircing eye untwist thy book
In every loome, I know the second veiw
Shall find more luster then the first could do.
For have you seen when gazing on the skies
With strict survey a new succession rise
Of several stars, which do not so appear
To every formal glance that shootes up there:
So when the serious eye has firmly been
Fixed on the page, such large increase is seen
Of various fancy, that each several veiw
Makes the same fruitful book a Mart of new.
But I forbear this mention; since I must
Ransack thy ashes, and revile thy dust
With such low characters, I mean to raise
Thee to my contemplation, not my praise:
And they that wish thy Picture clearly shown
In a true Glass, I wish would use thy own:
Where I presume how e're thy virtues come
Ill shaped abroad, thou art fairly dressed at home.
TO. RANDOLPH. M. A. Student of C. Church.

Lectori nimium critico qui Authoris Fescenninos sales plus justo rigidus
interpretatur.
DExtra quid Archetypae nudas mysteria chartae?
Privatique aperis limina clausa joci?
Non lucem patitur sed coelebs margo venenum,
Et videt ingenuis toxica mista jocis.
Quaeque stolata dedit sanctus Floralia vates,
Exuis, and nudos das sine vest sales.
Hin^ tota immeritam jugulat censura papyrum,
Et levis ingenuos damnat arundo sales.
Carnifices calamos and rauc^ jurgia Musae
Simplicitas casti sentit honesta libri.
Quid culpae fuerit si vatis amabile carmen
Lascivam casto schemate lusit anum?
Lintea si nudis iniecit pulchra pudendis?
Uel tegit incastam larva modesta Deam?
Nulla tuis regnant nisi nomina mascula chartis,
Si quod foemineum est culpa legentis erit;
(Vt proles uteri primo qui claustra reliquit,
Mascula, foemineum vidimus art Sporum.)
Das thalami lusus cortin^ at tegmine sanctos,
Cyntbia quos lectos gestiat esse suos.
Dii been, quam sanctis loquitur Venus impia verbis?
Tyndaris and raptus hic stupet esse pios.
Lecta puella tuis dum spectat crimina chartis,
Visa sibi est furt^ sanctior ire su^.
I nunc ingenu^ parcas lex Iulia chart^,
Scripta librum dederat, lecta lupanar erat.
TO. RANDOLPH. ex Aede Christi.

Blessed Spirit, when I first did see
The Genius of thy Poetry,
Nimble and fluent; in a strain
Even with, if not beyond the brain
Of Laureats that crowned the stage,
And lived the wonders of the age:
And this but sparkles from a fire
That flamed up, and soared much higher;
I gazed desierous to see
Whither thy wit would carry thee.
Thy first rise was so high, that even
As needs it must, the next was heaven.
I. T. A. M.

In Authorem.
CAnescant alii, sterilique aetatis honor
Laetentur; fecit te tua Musa senem.
^arcarum labor est vit^ mensura peractae:
Texuntur propria stamina vestra manu;
Felix qui primo excedis, Randolphe, sub aevo,
Nec Genii extincti praevia fata vides;
Dii been non dederint effoetae frig oravitae:
Debes quo fueras natus in igne mori.
THO. TERRENT M. A. (...) Aede Christi:

Upon Mr. Randolph's Poems, collected and published after his Death.
AS when a swelling Cloud melted to showers,
Sweetly diffuses fresh and active powers
Into the shrunk and thirsty veins of earth;
Blessing her barren womb with a new birth
Of grain and fruit: and so redeemes a land
Of desperate people from the destroying hand
Of merc'lesse Plague, Famine, or Dearth; and then
Collects it is streams unto the Ocean:
So thy diffusive soul, and fluent parts,
(Great miracle of natural wit and Arts,)
Rapt up some Regions 'bove our Sphere, did flow
And shower their blessings down on us below:
Whilst we, dull earth, in ecstasies did sit,
Almost o'rewhelmed with thy Floods of Wit.
What blood of verse is pump't from our dry Brains,
Sprung like a rushing Torrent from thy Veins.
When a long Drought presaged some fatal Dearth,
Thy unexhausted Founts gave us new birth
Of Wit and verse: when Cham, or Isis fell,
Thy opened Floudgates made their Riv'lets swell
'Bove their proud Banks: Where planted by thy hand
The Hesperian Orchards, Paphian Myrtles stand,
And those sweet Shades, where Lovers tell their blisses
To the whispering leaves, and summe'em up in kisses.
There in full Quire the Muses used to sing
Melodious Odes, bathing in Cham, their Spring:
And all the Graces, TOM, dwelt with thee too,
Crowning thy Front for old Citherons Brow.
Nor were we rich alone; Climes far from hence
Acknowledge yet thy sovereign influence:
Sicilians owe to thee their fruitful Vale,
And Cotswold (...) thy Dewes created Dale.
All Lands and Soyles from hence were fruitful grown,
And multiplied the measures thou had sown.
Green-sword-untilled milk-maids wish no blisses
Beyond a stammel Petticoat, and kisses,
And thy sweet Dowry! This alone, they cry,
Will make our Beasts and Milk to multiply.
And the d^ll Fallow Clownes, who never thought
Of God or Heaven but in a flood or drought,
Do gape and pray for Crops of Wit, and vow
To make their Lads and Wenches Poets now.
For they can make their fields to laugh and sing
To the Muses Pipe, and Winter rhyme to spring.
They pray for the first curse; like Scholars now,
To earne their livings by their sweaty Brow.
Then the fine Gardens of the Court, are set
With Flowers sprung from thy Muses Coronet.
Those pretty Imps in Plush, that on trust go
For their fine clothes, and their fine Judgments too,
The Frontispice or Titlepage of Plays,
Whose whole discourse is -- As the Poet says.
That Tavernes draine, (for Ivy is the sign
Of all such sack-shop wits, as well as wine.)
And make their verses dance on either hand
With numerous feet, whilst they want feet to stand.
That score up ^ests for every glass or cup,
And the total sum behind the Door cast up;
These had been all dried up, and many more,
That quafse up Helicon upon thy score.
The sneaking Tribe, that drink and write by fits,
As they can steal or borrow coin or wits,
That Pandars fee for Plots, and then belie
The paper with -- An excellent Comedy,
Acted (more was the pity,) by the Red Bull
With great applause, of some vain City Gull;
That damn Philosophy, and prove the curse
Of emptiness, both in the Brain and Purse;
These that scrape legs and trenchers to my Lord,
Had starved but for some scraps picked from thy Board.
They'had tried the Balladiers or Fiddlers trade,
Or a New Comedy at Tiburne made.
Thus, TOM thy pregnant Fancy crowned us all
With wealthy showers, or Mines Poetical.
Nor did thy dews distill in a cold rain,
But with a flash of Lightning op't thy brain,
Which thawed our stupid spirits with lively heat,
And from our frosts for^'d a Poeticke sweat.
And now, Wit's Commonwealth by thee repriv'd,
(For its consumption shows it not long lived,)
Thy far dispersed Streams divert their course,
(Though some are damned up) to the Muses Sourse,
This Ocean: -- He that will fadome it,
By's Lines shall sound an Ocean of wit;
Not shallow, low, and troubled, but profound,
And vast, though in these narrow limits Bound.
The tribute of our eyes or pens, all we can pay,
Are some poor drops to thy Pactolus Sea,
And first stolen thence, though now so muddy grown
With our foul channels, they scarce seem thy own.
Thus have I seen a piece of Coin, which bore
The Image of my King or Prince before,
New cast into some Peasant, loose its grace;
Yet's the same body with a fowler face.
If our own store must pay; that Gold which was
Lent us in sterling we must turn in brass.
Had thou writ less or worse, then we might lay
Something upon thy Vrne thou did not say:
But thou had Phansies vast Monopoly,
Our stock will scarce amount t'an Elegy!
Yet all the Legacies thy Fatal day
Bequeathed, thy sad Executour will pay.
To late Divines (by Will and Testament)
A Paraphrase on ^ach Commandment,
In Moral Precepts; with a Disputation
Ending the Quarrels 'bout Predestination.
To those that study how to spend the Day,
And yet grow wise -- The Ethics in a Play.
To Poets, 'cause there is no greater curse,
Thou bequeathdst -- Nothing, in thy ^mpty Purse.
To City-Madams, that bespeak new faces
For every Play or Feast, Thy Looking-glasses.
And to their chamber-maids, who only can
Adorn their Ladies head, and dream on man,
Thou Have left a Dowry; They till now, by stealth
Writ only members of the Commonwealth.
To Heaven thy Ravished Soul, (though who shall look
Will say it lives in each line of thy Book.)
Thy Dust, unnatural Relics that could die,
To Earth; Thy Fame unto Eternity.
A Husband to thy Widdow'd Poetry,
Not from the Court but University.
To thy sad Aunt, and now despairing mother,
Thy little Orphans, and thy younger Brother;
From all of which this free Confessions fit,
The younger sister had the elder Wit.
Ad Auhorem.
MOllia quod tenui currunt mihi carmina filo,
Et meus in gyro stet breviore labor,
Dum tua constrictis assurgit Musa Cothurnis,
Et Ueneres casto vincit Avena I^co,
Cedimus inculti! Fato par Gloria nostro
Quod Tua mirentur Carmina, Nostra legant.
R. BRIDE-OAKE. A. M. No. Coll.

WHat need thy book crave any other fame,
It is enough that it bears Randolphs name.
Who sees the title, and him understood,
Must much condemn himself, or say it is good.
Go forth example to the Neophyte,
Who hence should learn to Catechize his wit.
And dress his Fancy by this glass: whose Muse
Welfavour'd is, should here her face peruse,
It will not flatter, 'twill reflect the grace
She takes from th'owner of a beuteous face:
But if a menstruous, and illiterate eye
Blast her, the various specks shall soon descry
The foul beholder, and proclaim her spoil
Not to result from thence, but his own foil.
ED. GAYTON. M. A: ^oan.

Immortal BEN is dead; and as that ball
On Ida tossed, so is his Crown by all
The Infantry of wit. Vain Priests! That chair
Is only fit for his true Son and Heir.
Reach here the Laurel: Randolph^ it is thy praise:
Thy naked Scull shall well become the Bays.
See, Daphne courts thy Ghost: and spite of fate,
Thy Poems shall be Poet Laureat.
G. W. Joan.

To his worthy friend Mr ROBERT RANDOLPH of Chapter Chapter on the publishing of his
Brothers Poems.
WE thank you, worthy sir, that it is our hap
To praise even Randolph now without a clap,
And give our suffrage yet, though not our voice,
To show the odds betwixt his fame and noise:
Whose only modesty we could applaud,
That seldom durst presume to blush abroad;
And bear his vast Report, and setting forth
His virtues, grow a suff'rer of his worth,
Was scarce his own acquaintance, and did use
To hear himself reported but as news,
So distant from himself, that one might dare
To say those two were nere familiar:
Whose pollisht Fancy has so smoothly wrought,
That it is suspected, and might tempt our thought
To guess it spent in every birth, so writ
Not as the gift but Legacy of his wit:
Whose unbid brain drops so much flowing worth,
That others are delivered, he brought forth;
That did not course in wit, and beat at least
Ten lines in fallow to put up one Jest;
Which still prevents our thought, we need not stay
To the end, the Epigram is in the way.
The Town might here grow Poet, nay it is se'd
Some May'ors could hence as easily rhyme as read;
Whose loss we so much weep, we cannot hear
His very Comedyes without a tear;
And when we read his mirth, are feign to pray
Leave from our grief to call the work a play:
Where fancy plays with judgment; and so fits
That it is enough to make a guard of wits;
Where lines fulfill themselves, and are so right
That but a combats mention is a fight.
His phrase does bring to pass, and he has lent
Language enough to give the Things Event;
The lines pronounce themselves, and we may say
The Actors were but Echoes of the Play:
Me thinks the book does act, and we not doubt
To say it rather Enters then Comes out;
Which even you seem to envy, whose device
Has made it viler even by its price,
And taught its value, which we count so great
That when we buy it cheapest we but cheat;
And when upon one Page we bles^e our look,
How-ere we bargain we have gained the book;
Fresh-men in this are forced to have their right,
And it is no purchase though 'twere sold in spite;
So do we owe you still, that let us know
He gave the world the Plays, and you the Show.
IOS. HOW. Trin. Coll. OXON.

On his beloved friend the Author, and his ingenious Poems.
What need these busy wits? who has a Mine
His own, thus rich, needs not the scattered shine
Of lesser heaps: Day dimmes a taper's light:
And Lamps are useless, where there is no night.
Why then this train of writers? foreign verse
Can add no honor to a Poet's hearse,
Whose every line, which he to paper lent,
Builds for himself a lasting Monument.
Brave verse this privilege has; Though all be dumb,
That is the Authors Epitaph and Tomb.
Which when ambitious Pyles, th'ostents of Pride,
To dust shall fall, and in their ruins hide
Their then no more remembered Founders Name:
These (like Apollo ever young) shall fame
The first composer; whose weighed works shall tell
What Noble thoughts did in his bosom dwell.
But now I find the cause: they that do praise
Desert in others, for themselves plant Baies:
For he that praises merit, loves it: thus
He Is good, for goodness that is solicitous.
Else, though He diamonds keenly pointed write,
They but proclaim a quainter Hypocrite:
Thus in the future, it shall honor be,
That men shall read their names bound up with thee,
So country Moles, that would at Court appear,
Intrude some Camels train that does live there.
So Creatures that had drowned else, did imbarke
With Noah, and lived by being in his Arc.
Or if not thus; as when in Royal state
Nobles attend Kings to inaugurate:
Or as last year when you both courts did see
Beget joys noone in th'Vniversity;
All the learned tribe in reverend Habits meet,
As if the Schools were turned into the street;
Where each one strove such duty to put on,
As might give honor to their own Suns Sun.
Such honor here our dimmer pens would have,
In pomp to wait him to his solemn grave:
Since what he was, his own fruits better show,
Then those which planted here, by others, grow.
Rich jewels in themselves such luster cast,
As gold about them, is no grace, but Wast.
Such was his Genius: Like the eyes quick wink;
He could write sooner, then an other think.
His play was Fancies flame, a lightning wit,
So shot, that it could sooner pierce, then hit.
What e're he pleased, though but in sport to prove,
Appeared as true, as pity dwells with love.
Had he said thus, That discreet zeal might stan
Both with the Jesuit, and the Puritan,
T'had been believed; That ^tost from heat proceeds.
That chastity from ease, and fullness breeds;
That women ought to woo, as Eve at first
Wooed Man, to make the world, and man accursed.
All would be taken up for Truth: and sense
Which knew Truth coming, would not going hence.
Had he maintained Rich Lucans work had been
Mere History; there would no pen be seen,
To call it Poem. If for Caesar stood,
Great Pompey should be neither weak, nor Good.
Oh! had he lived to plead the craggy Law,
Which now unsettled holds the world in awe*
He would have met some Ostracisme, I fear,
Lest he had charmed the purple Judge to err.
Nor could he only in his Native speech
Robe his ripe thoughts; but even the Copious, Rich,
And lofty Greek, with Latin, did appear
In him, as Orient in their proper sphere:
That when in them, himself he pleased to express;
The ravished hearer, could not but confess,
He might as well old Rome, or Athens claim
For birth, as Britain, circled with the Maine.
It Is true, we have these lauguages still left;
But spoken, as apparel got by theft
Is worn: disguised, and shadowed. Had he
Lived but with us, till grave maturity;
Though we should ever in his change have lost,
We might have gaind enough whereof to boast
Our nations better Genius; But now
Our hopes are nipt, e're they began to blow
And sure I am, his loss must needs strike deep,
For whom in verse, thus Englands Eye does weep.
Whose tears thus dew'd upon his mournful dust
I will not longer trouble. They that must
Carp though at best things; let them only read;
These Poems here will strike that humor dead.
Which I should praise too: but in them I see
There is one blemish; for he has named me.
Else, I Will not think the Reader so distressed
In wit: but that he will admire the rest.
Concluding thence, though in his forenoon-youth,
(And what I now shall write is modest truth,)
He knows not him, who does so much excel,
That could so quickly, do so much, so well.
OWEN FELTHAM Gent.

On the death of Mr Randolph.
When Done, and Beaumont dyed, an Epitaph
Some men (I well remember) thought unsafe;
And said they did presume to write, unless
They could their tears in their expression dress.
But love makes me more bold, and tells me I
In humble terms to vent my piety
May safely dare; and reason thinks not fit,
For which I loved, I now should fear that wit.
Respect looks like a bargain, if confinde
To rules precise; and is more just then kind.
If by a poised and equal testament
It turns good will, into a covenant;
Must every present offered to a Prince
Be just proportioned to his eminence?
Or ought my Elegy unjust be thought
Because I cannot mourn thee as I ought?
Such laws as these, (if any be so bold)
Ought those unskilful but proud souls to hold,
Who think they could and did, at a due rate
Love thee; not me, whose love was passionate,
And has decreed* how ere the censure go,
Thus much, although but thus, to let men know.
I do admire no Comet did presage
The mournful period of thy wondered age;
Or that no Sybill did thy death fore tell,
Since that by it alone more ill befell
The Laurell-God, then when the day was come
Wherein his Delphick-Oracle was dumb:
In meaner wits that proverb chance may hold
(That they which are soon ripe are seldom old)
But 'twas a poor one, and for thee unfit,
Whose infancy might teach their best years wit;
Whose talk was exemplary to their pains,
And whose discourse was tutor to their streines;
If thou were serious, then the audience
Heard Platoe's works in Tullies eloquence:
If sad, the mourners knew no thrifty size
In tears, but still cried out, oh lend more eyes.
If merry, then the juice of Comedy
So sweetened every word, that we might see
Each stander by having enough to do
To temper mi^th, until some friend could woo
Thee take the pains to write, that so that pressure
Checking thy souls quick motions, some small leisure
Might be obtained to make provision
Of breath, against the next Scen's action.
I could go through thy works, which will survive
The funeral of time; and gladly strive
Beyond my power, to make that love appear
Which after death is best seen in a tear;
But praising one, I should dispraise the rest,
Since whatsoere thou did, was still the best:
Since then I am persuaded that in thee
Wit at her acmie was, and we shall see
Posterity not daring to aspire
To equalize, but only to admire
The^ as their archetype; with thought of thee
Henceforth I Will thus enrich my memory.
While others count from Earthquakes, and great frost;
And say in the last dear year, 'twould thus much cost.
My time-distinctions this shall be among,
Since wits-decay, or Randolph's death, -- so long.
R. GOSTELOW. Mr. A. Oxon.

To the pious Memory of my dear Brother in-Law Mr Thomas Randolph.
REaders, prepare your Faith; who truly tells
His History, must needs write miracles.
He lisp'd Wit worthy th'Presse, as if that he
Had used his Cradle as a Library.
Some of these Fruits had birth, when other Boys
(His Elders) played with Nuts; Books were his Toys.
He had not long of Plays Spectatour been
But his small Feet wore Socks fit for the Scene.
He was not like those costive Wits, who blot
A quire of paper to contrive a Plot.
And e're they name it, cross it, till it look
Rased with wounds like an old Mercers Book.
What pleased this year, is next in pieces torn,
It suffers many deaths e're it be borne.
For Humors to lie leidger they are seen
Often in a Tavern, and a Bowling-greene.
They do observe each place, and company,
As strictly as a Traveller or Spy.
And deifying dunghills, seem to adore
The scumme of people, Watchman, Changling, Whore.
To know the vice, and ignorance of all,
With any Rags they will drink a pot of Ale;
Nay, what is more (a strange unusual thing
With Poets) they will pay the reckoning;
And sit with patience an hour by the Heels
To learn the Nonsense of the Constables.
Such Iig*like flim-flams being got to make
The Rabble laugh, and nut-cracking forsake,
They go Home (if the have any) and there sit
In Gown and Nightcap looking for some wit.
E're they compose, they must for a long space
Be dieted as Horses for the race.
They must not Bacon, Beef, or Pudding eat,
A jest may chance be starved with such gross meat.
The Good Hour come, and their Brain tuned, they write,
But slow as dying men their Wills indite.
They pen by drams and scruples, from their quill
Words (although dreggy) flow not, but distill.
They sta^e, and sour their faces; nay to vent
The Brains they eat their fingers excrement:
And scratch their Heads, as if they were about
(Their wit so hide* bound is) to pull it out.
Every bald speech though Comicall it be
To their racked members proves a Tragoedie.
When they have had the Counsel of some friend,
And of their begging Epilogue made an end,
Their Play salutes the world, and claims the Stage
For its inheritance, being now of Age.
But while they pump't their Phansy day and night;
He nothing harder found then not to write.
No diet could corrupt, or mend his strain;
All tempers were the best to his sure Brain.
He could with raptures captivate the King,
Yet not endanger Button, or Bandstring.
Poems from him gushed out so readily
As if they would only been in's Memory;
Yet are they with as marble fancies wrought,
As theirs whose pen waits for the thirteenth thought.
They err who say things quickly done soon fade;
Nature and He all in an Instant made.
Those that do measure Fancies by the glass,
And dote on such as cost more time, may pass
In rank with Gulls, whom folly does e^tice
To think that best which has the greatest price.
Who poreing on, their Spungy Brain still squeeze,
Neglect the cream, and only save the Lees.
Stopping their flying quill, they clip Fames wing,
Make Helicon a puddle that is a Spring.
Nor was his Have hood winkt; his Rage was wise,
His Fury counsel had, his rashness eyes.
Though he (as Engines arrows) shot forth wit,
Yet aimed with all the proper marks to hit.
His Ink never stained the Surplice; he does right
That sometimes takes a care to miss the White.
He turned no Scripture phrase into a jest;
He was inspired with raptures, not possessed.
Some Divelish Poets think their Muse does ill
Unless their verses do profane or kill.
They boldly write what I should fear to think,
Words that do pale their paper, black their Ink.
The Titles of their Satyrs fright some, more
Then Lord have mercy writ upon a door.
Although his wit was sharp as others, yet
It never wounded; thus a Razer set
In a wise Barbers hand tickles the skin,
And leaves a smooth not carbonaded chin.
So sovereign was his Phan sy, that you would think
His quickening pen did Balsam drop not Ink.
Read's Elegies and you will see his praise
Does many souls before the Resurrection raise
No venom's in his Book; his very S^ake
You may as safely as a Flower take.
There Is none needs fear to surfeit with his phrase,
He has no Giant raptures to amaze
And torture weak capacities with wonder:
He (by his Laurel guarded) nere did Thunder
As those strong bumbast Wits, whose Poetry
Sounds like a Charm, or Spanish Pedigree.
Who with their Fancy towering 'bove the Sun,
Have in their style Babells confusion.
If puny eyes do read their verses, they
Will think it is Hebrew writ the English way.
His Lines do run smooth as the feet of time;
Each leaf though rich, swells not with gouty rhyme.
Here is no thrum, or knot; Arachne never
Weaved a more even webb; and as they are
Listed for smoothness, so in this again
That each Thread's spun, and warped by his own brain.
We have some Poetasters, who although
They never beyond the writing-Schoole did go,
Sit at Apollo's Table, when as they
But midwives are, not Parents to a Play.
Were they betrayed, they would be each Cobblers scoff,
Laughed at, as one whose Periwig's blown off.
Their Brains lie all in Notes; Lord! how they would look
If they should chance to loose their Table Book!
Their Bays, like Ivy, cannot mount at all
But by some neighboring tree, or joining wall.
With what an ecstasy shall we behold
This Book, which is no Ghost of any old
Wormeaten Author; here is no jest, or hint,
But had his Head both for it is Ore an' mint.
Were not for some Translations, none could know
Whether he had e're looked in Book or no.
He could discourse of any subject, yet
No cold premeditated sense repeat;
As he that nothing at the Table talks,
But what was cooked in's study or the walks;
Whose wit (like a sun-diall) only can
Go true in this, or that Meridian.
Each Climate was to him his proper Sphere;
You Would think he had been brought up every where.
Was he at Court? his Complements would be
Rich wrought with Phansies best embroderie;
Which the spruse Gallants Echo like would speak
So often, as they would be threadbare in a week.
They loved even his Abuses, the same ^eere
So witty 'twas, would sting and please their ear.
Read's flowery Pastoralls, and you will swear
He was not Iohnsons only, but Pans Heir.
His smooth Amyntas would persuade even me
To think he always lived in Sicilie.
Those happier Groves that shaded him, were all
As Trees of knowledge, and Prophetical:
Dodon's were but the type of them, Leaves were
Books in old time, but became Scholars here.
Had he lived till Westminster Hall was seen
In Forest Towns, perhaps he fined had been.
Whilst others made Trees Maypoles, he could do
As Orpheus did, and make them Dancers too.
But these were the light sports of his spare time;
He was as able to dispute, as rhyme.
And all (two gifts never joined before) outwent
As well in Syllogism as Complement.
Who looks within his clearer Glass, will say
At once he writ an Ethick Tract and Play.
When he in Cambridge Schools did moderate,
(Truth never found a subtler Advocate)
He* had as many Auditors, as those
Who preach, their mouths being Silenced, through the Nose.
The Grave Divines stood gazing, as if there
In words was color, or in the eye an ear:
To hear him they would penetrate each other,
Embrace a Throng, and love a noy some smother.
Though plodding Pates much time and oil had spent
In beating out an obscure Argument;
He could untie, not break, the subtlest knot
Their puzling Art could weave; nay he had got
The trick on it so, as if that he had been
Within each Brain, and the nice folding seen.
Who went to the Schools Peripateticks, came,
If he disputed, home in Plato's name.
His Oppositions were as Text; some le'd
With wonder, thought he had not urged but read.
Nor was his Judgment all Philosophy;
He was in points of deep Divinity
Only Not Doctor; his true Catho'lique Brain
The Learning of a Council did contain.
But all his Works are lost, his Fire is out;
These are but's Ashes, which were thrown about
And now raked up together; all we have
With pious sacrilege snatched from his Grave
Are a few meteours; which may make it ^e'd
That TOM is yet alive, but Randolph's dead.
Thus when a Merchant posting over the sea
With his rich laden ship is cast away;
Some light small Wares do swim unto the shore,
But th* great and solid Prizes never rise more.
RIC. WEST. Bac. of Arts, and Student of Chr. Church.

ON THE INESTIMABLE CONTENT HE INIOYES IN THE MUSES; TO THOSE of his Friends
that dehort him from POETRY.
GO sor did earth, and hope not to bewitch
My high-borne soul, that flies a nobler pitch!
Thou can not tempt her with adulterate show,
She bears no appetite that flaggs so low.
Should both the Indies spread their lapps to me,
And court my eyes to wish their Treasury,
My better will they neither could entice;
Nor this with gold, nor that with all her spice.
For what poor things had these possessions shown,
When all were mine, but I were not mine own!
Others in pompous wealth their thoughts may please,
And I am rich in wishing none of these.
For say; which happiness would you beg first,
Still to have drink, or never to have thirst?
No servants on my beck attendant stand,
Yet are my passions all at my command;
Reason within me shall sole ruler be,
And every sense shall we are her livery.
Lord of my self in chief; when they that have
More wealth, make that their Lord, which is my slave.
Yet I as well as they, with more content
Have in my self a Household government.
My intellectual soul has there possessed
The Stewards place, to govern all the rest.
When I go forth my Eyes too Vshers are,
And dutifully walk before me bare.
My Legs run Footmen by me. Go or stand
My ready Arms wait close on either hand.
My Lips are Porters to the dangerous door:
And either Ear a trusty Auditor:
And when abroad I go, Fancy shall be
My skillful Coachman, and shall hurry me
Through Heaven and Earth, and Neptune's watery plain,
And in a moment drive me back again.
The charge of all my Cellar, Thirst, is thine;
Thou Butler art and Yeoman of my wine.
Stomach the Cook, whose dishes best delight,
Because their only sauce is Appetite.
My other Cook digestion; where to me
Teeth carve, and Palate will the taster be.
And the two Eylids, when I go to sleep,
Like careful grooms my silent chamber keep.
Where least a cold oppress my vital part,
A gentle fire is kindled by the Heart.
And least too great a heat procure my pain,
The Lungs fan wind to cool those parts again.
Within the inner closet of my brain
Attend the nobler members of my train.
Invention Master of my Mint grows there,
And Memory my faithful Treasurer.
And though in others it is a treacherous part,
My Toungue is Secretary to my heart.
And then the pages of my soul and sense,
Love, Anger, Pleasure, Grief, Concupiscence,
And all affections else are taught to obey
Like subjects, not like favorites to sway.
This is my Mannor-house, and men shall see
I here live Master of my family.
Say then thou man of worth; in what degree
May thy proud fortunes overbalance me?
Thy many barks plough the rough Oceans back;
And I am never frighted with a wrack.
Thy flocks of sheep are numberless to tell;
And with one fleece I can be clothed as well.
Thou have a thousand several farms to let;
And I do feed on never a Tenants sweat.
Thou have the Commons to Enclosure brought;
And I have fixed a bound to my vast thought.
Variety is sought for to delight
Thy witty and ambitious Appetite;
Three Elements, at least, dispeopled be,
To satisfy judicious gluttony*
And yet for this I love my Commons here,
Above the choicest of thy dainty cheer.
Noe widows curse caters a dish of mine,
I drink no tears of Orphans in my wine.
Thou may perchance to some great office come,
And I can rule a Common wealth at home.
And that pre-eminence enjoy more free,
Then thou puffed up with vain Authority.
What boots it him a large command to have,
Whose every part is some poor vices slave!
Which over him as proudly Lords it there,
As over the rusticke he can domineere.
Whilst he poor swains does threat, in his own eyes
Lust and Concupiscence do Tyrannize.
Ambition wrackes his heart with jealous fear,
And bastard flattery captivates his ear.
He on posterity may fix his care,
And I can study on the times that were.
He stands upon a pinnacle to show
His dangerous height, whilst I sit safe below.
Thy father hords up gold for thee to spend,
When death will play the office of a friend,
And take him hence, which yet he thinks too late:
My nothing to inherit is a fate
Above thy birthright, should it double be;
No longing expectation tortures me.
I can my fathers reverend head survay,
And yet not wish that every hair were gray.
My constant Genius says I happier stand,
And richer in his life, then in his land.
And when thou have an heir, that for thy gold
Will think each day makes thee an year to old;
And ever gaping to possess thy store,
Conceives thy age to be above fourscore
'Cause his is one and twenty, and will pray
The too slow hours to have, and every day
Bespeake thy Coffin, cursing every bell,
That he hears tole, 'cause it is another knell;
(And justly at thy life he may repine,
For his is but a wardship during thine.)
Mine shall have no such thoughts, if I have one
He shall be more a pupil then a son:
And at my grave weep truth, and say deaths hand,
That bountifully unto thine gave land,
But robbed him of a Tutor; Cursed store!
There is no piety but amongst the poor.
Go then confess which of us fathers be
The happier made in our posterity:
I in my Orphane that has naught beside
His virtue, thou in thy rich parricide.
Thou several Artists do employ to show
The measure of thy lands; that thou may know
How much of earth thou have: while I do call
My thoughts to scan how little it is in all.
Thou have thy hounds to hunt the timorous hare,
The crafty fox, or the more noble dear;
Till at a fault perchance thy Lordship be,
And some poor city varlet hunt for thee.
For it is not poor Actaeons fault alone;
Hounds have devoured more Masters sure then one.
Whilst I the while pursueing my content,
With the quick Nostrils of a judgment, sent
The hidden steps of nature, and there see
Your game maintained by her Antipathye.
Thou have a Hawke, and to that height does fly
Thy understanding, if it soar so high:
While I my soul with Eagles Pinions wing,
To stoop at Heaven, and in her Talons bring
A glorious constellation, sporting there
With him whose belt of stars adornes the sphere.
Thou have thy landskips, and the painters try
With all their skill to please thy wanton eye.
Here shadowy groves, and craggy mountains there;
Here Rivers headlong fall, there springs run clear;
The Heavens bright Rays through clouds must azure show,
Circled about with Iris gaudy bow.
And what of this? I real Heavens do see,
True springs, true groves; whilst yours but shadows be.
Nor of your houshhold stuff so proudly boast,
Composed of curiosity and cost.
Your two best chambers are unfurnished,
The inner and upper room, the heart and head.
But you will say the comfort of a life
Is in the partner of our joys, a wife.
You may have choice of brides, you need not woo
The rich, the fair; they both are proferd you:
But what fond virgin will my love prefer,
That only in Parnassus jointure her!
Yet thy base ma^ch I scorn, an honest pride
I harbor here that scorns a market bride.
Neglected beauty now is prized by gold,
And sacred love is basely bought and sold.
Wives are grown traffic, marriage is a trade,
And when a nuptial of two hearts is made,
There must of moneys too a wedding be,
That coin as well as men may multiplye.
O humane blindness! had we eyes to see,
There is no wealth to valiant poetry!
And yet what want I Heaven or Earth can yield?
Me thinks I now possess the Elisian field.
Into my chest the yellow Tagus flows,
While my plate fleet in bright Pactolus rows.
The Hesperian Orchard's mine; mine, mine is all:
Thus am I rich in wealth poetical.
Why strive you then my friends to circumvent
My soul, and rob me of my blessed content?
Why out of ignorant love counsel you me
To leave the Muses and my poetry?
Which should I leave and never follow more,
I might perchance get riches and be poor.
In Anguem, qui Lycorin dormientem amplexus est.
VEr erat, and flores per apertum libera campum
(Vt Cereris spes una) legit mea flamma Lycoris.
At nimio tandem studio, nimioque labor
Admisit somnos virides defessa per herbas.
Vtque erat, and placidum carpebant membrasoporem,
Alterna varius macula de flore propinquo
Per vestes tacit subrepsit Lubricus anguis.
Vidi ego, and attonitam perculsus frigore mentem,
Omnia pertimui: Tu me Rhodopeia conjux
Serpentum insidiis blando direpta marito,
Prima feris: sed cum tendentem innoxia vidi
Spicula, nec lassae fraudem intentare puellae:
Quam long timor hic abiit, maiore secuto
Namque levis totum lustravit vipera corpus;
Iamque suam Lybiam and steriles fastidit arenas:
Et mirata femur, ventremque atque ubera lacte
Candidiora suo; Tali fas, dixit, in arvo
Fas mihi semper erit, perque istos serpere colles.
Me videt and metuens cerni fugit improbus anguis.
Sub niveoque latet collo, sua lilia credens;
Purpureis mox usque genis allapsus, in istis
Tutius est haerere rosis, and dulcius, inquit.
Tum frontem spectans, venasque in front tumentes,
Quaenam (ait ille) jugo violae nascuntur in isto?
Hinc ad Caesariem surgit, flavosque capillos,
Et stupet ^uratam formoso in vertice sylvam.
Hesperiumque nemus iam credit, credidit hortum.
Talibus aut foliis, aut tali fronde superba
Non illi Myrtus Paphiae, Dodonaque Quercus,
Thessala nec Pinus, nec erat Peneia laurus.
Gaudia iam tota implerant secura pericli
Pectora, descendit rursus, totosque per a^tus
Lascivus gestit numeroso ludere gyro.
Caudaque formosum cingat dum frigida collum,
Labra petit labris, and Nectaris osculalibat,
Spirantesque haurit Zephiros, atque omnia Phoenix
Quae potuit moriens precioso imponere bust^.
Quicquid olent Arabes, saevum non inde venenum,
Sed velut Hyblaeos discurrens incola campos,
Mella legit nova naper Apis: jam credit, possit
Inter Aristaei serpens armenta vagari.
Ah quoties metui coelestes frigidus Arts,
Rivalemque Iovem! forma ne callidus ista
Appeteret nostram, petiit Deoida Nympham.
Exerit ille caput (toto iam cord voluptas
Insedit) Cantuque suae blanditur amicae,
Dulciaque erectis (...) sibila cristis.
Excutitur Nymphae ^omnus; iam membra refecta
Luminaque attollit totum admittentia Phoebum.
Dumque ibi dispersos flores, lapsamque coronam
Colligit in gremio, maculosus cernitur angui^.
Illa (sibi notae quanta est fiducia formae!)
Nil metuens, tenerum tractavit pollice vermem,
Admovitque sinu, colloque and pectore fovit.
Hic ludens modo per digitos novus annulus ib^t,
Splendida nunc mediam complexus Zonae puellam;
Vivaque per teretes pendens armilla lacertos.
Gratior ut fieret cultus, in mill figuras
Flectitur, innumeros ^ese variavit in orbs,
Candida multiplici constringens brachia nodo.
Ah nimium superis, nimium est dilecta Lycoris!
Eo^s alii fluctus, and litt^ra rubra
Scrutantur; nulli misit prius Africa gemmas.
Perniciem quaecunque parant and flebile virus
Humano generi, cupiunt ornare Lycorin.
Namque ea, parva licet, summo quae pendula tect^
Nectit opus, cum de serpente monilia facta
Aemula vidisset, subito novus ardor amantis
Pectus agit: Serpensne, inquit, tibi gemma Licori?
Nulla ego contulerim divinae munera formae!
Nec mora; deposcit radios, sua retia mittit,
Quaeque solet trepidis venabula tendere muscis,
Et tibi subtiles meditatur Aranea telas.
Tu tamen, o serpens, qui nostris reptile felix
Deliciis fruere and triplici rapis oscula lingua,
(Sic semper novus exuviis and pelle renata
Perfectam repetas per saecula mill^ iuventam!)
Vestras pulchram arts and pharmaca vestra Lycorin
Edoceas, longam ne sentiat illa senectam,
Nec fronti turpes inscribant tempora rugas.
At nova perpetuo facies, eademque Lycorin
Monstret, and in speculo nunquam sese altera quaerat,
Et Venerem forma superans aevoque Sybillam.
At tandem hinc abiens, o felicissime Serpens,
Quando ren^scentes numerasti saepius annos,
Accedas aftris sidus, Pythone remoto,
Fluminis in morem flexus; Tu deinde Lycori
Cum taedet vitae Serpenti proxima charo
Stella nite, coelumque bea, tibi detque Cathedram
Gassiopaea suam, det Bacchi Virgo Coronam.
Englished thus (...)
THe spring was come, and all the fields grown fine
My flame Lycoris like young Proserpine
Went forth to gather flowers, bettring their sent
They took more sweetness from her, then they lent.
Now laden with her harvest, and o'repress't
With her sweet toil, she laid her down to rest.
Lyllies did strew her couch, and proud were grown
To bear a witness purer then their own.
Roses fell down soft pillowes to her head,
And blushed themselves into a deeper red
To emulate her cheeks: Flora did set
Her maids to work to weave the Violet
Into a purple rugge, to shield the fair
Lycoris from the malice of the Air.
When lo a snake hid in the neighbor bowres,
(Ah who could think treason should lurk in flowers?)
Shootes forth her checkered skin, and gently creepes
Ore my Lycoris, that as gently sleeps.
I saw it, and a sudden frost possessed
My frighted soul in my then troubled breast.
What fears appeared not to my mind and me?
Thou first were called bemoaned Euridice;
By serpents envy forced to expire,
From Orpheus rapt, and his death conquering lyre.
But when I found he wore a guiltless sting,
And more of love did then of treason bring:
How quickly could my former fear depart;
And to a greater leave my jealous heart!
For the smooth Viper every member scands,
Africa he loathes now, and the barren sands
That nursed him, wondering at the glorious sight
Of thighs and belly, and her breasts more white
Then their own milk: Ah might I still (quoth he)
Grawle in such fields, 'twixt two such mountains be!
There me he spied, and fearing to be seen,
Shrowds to her neck, thinking 't had Lyllies been.
But viewing her bright cheeks, he soon did cry
Under you Roses shall I safer lie.
Thence did her forehead with full veins appear,
Good heaven (quoth he) what violets grow here
On this clear Promontary? Hence he slides
Up to her locks, and through her tresses glides,
Her yellow tresses; dazel'd to behold
A glistring grove, an entire wood of Gold.
The Hesperian wood he thinks he now has seen,
That thought, But now, they had an Orchard been;
For leaves and boughs the Archimenian vine,
The Dodon Oak and the Thessalian Pine
must yield to these, no trees so bright as they,
Nor Paphian Mirtles, nor Peneian bay!
Joy now filld all his breast, no timorows fear
Of danger could find room to harbor there.
Down slips he and about each limb he hurles
His wanton body into numerous curles.
And while his tail had thrown it self a chain
About her neck, his head bears up again;
With his black lips her warmer lips he greets,
And there with kisses steept in Nectar meets.
Thence Zephyr's breath he suckes, then does he smell
Perfumes that all the Arabian gummes excel.
And spices that do build the Phoenix Pyre,
When she renewes her youth in funeral fire.
Nor seeks he poison there, but like the Be
That on mount Hybla plyes her husbandry.
He gathers honey thence, now, now I know
With Aristaeus flocks a snake may go.
Ah cold at heart, I feared some heavenly slight,
And love my rival; that his old deceit
Had once again this borrowed shape put on
To court my Nymph, as he Deois won.
Up lift the snake his head (for pleasure now
Held all his soul) and with erected brow
To flatter's Love he sung; he strives to play,
And hisses forth a well tuned Roundelay.
This wakes the Nymph; her eyes admit the day;
Here flowers, and there her scattered garlands lay,
Which as she picks up and with bents retyes,
She in her lap the speckled Serpent spies.
The Nymph no sign of any terror shows,
(How bold is beauty when her strength she knows!)
And in her hand the tender worm she grasped,
While it sometimes about her finger clasped
A ring enameled, then her tender wast
In manner of a girdleround embraced;
And now upon her arm a braslet hung,
Where for the greater ornament, he flung
His limber body into several folds,
And twenty winding figures, where it holds
Her amorous pulse, in many a various twist,
And many a love-knot ties upon her wrist.
Lycoris to the Gods thou art too dear,
And too too much of heaven beloved I fear.
This or that Nymph's the red sea spoils may be,
But Lybia never sent Jewels but to thee.
What e're to us are deaths and poisons sent,
Desire to be Lycoris ornament.
For that same little spider that hangs up,
Together with her web on the house top,
When she beheld the snake a bracelet made,
Struck with an envy, and a love; she said,
And shall a snake thy Gemme Lycoris be,
And such bright for me receive no tyres from me?
Then flings her nets away, and throwing by
Her subtle toil she sets to catch the fly;
To th'loom Arachne goes, and plyes it there,
To work a robe for my Lycoris wear.
But thou, o Serpent, which so blessed can be
To reap those joys for which I envy thee:
That, happy worm, upon her lip have hung,
Sucking in kisses with thy three-fork'd tongue,
(So may thou age and skin together cast,
And often recall thy youth, when it is past.)
Teach my Lycoris what your Arts may be,
Let her the Ingredients of thy Cordials see.
That she may never grow old, that times dull plow
May never print a wrincle in her brow.
I charge thee in the powerful Cupids name
May a new beauty always and the same
Lycoris show, never may she in her glass
Look for her own, and find another face.
Venus for beauty may she then appear,
When she has lived to old Sybilla's year,
And when, dear snake, thou will no more renew
Thy youthful vigor, bid base earth adieu.
Add glory to the night, or from his sphere
Huge Python pull and fix thy torches there:
Where like a river thou shall bending go,
And through the Orb a starry torrent flow.
And thou Lycoris, when the art pleased to take
No more of life, next thy beloved Snake
Shine forth a constellation, full, and bright;
Bless the poor heavens with more majestic light.
Who in requital shall present you there,
Ariadnes Crown, and Cassiopae as Chayr.
A complaint against Cupid that he never made him in Love.
HOw many of thy Captives (Love) complain
Thou yoak'st thy slaves in too severe a chain?
I'have heard 'em their Poetique malice show,
To curse thy Quiver, and blaspheme thy bow.
Calling thee boy, and blind; threatening the rod;
Profanely swearing that thou art no God.
Or if thou be; not from the starry place;
But born below, and of the Stygian race.
But yet these Atheists that thy shafts dislike,
Thou can be freindly to, and daigne to strike.
This on his Cloris spends his thoughts and time;
That chaunts Corinna in his amorous rhyme.
A third speaks raptures, and has gaind a wit
By praising Caelia; else had mis't of it.
But I that think there can no freedom be,
( Cupid) so sweet, as thy Captivity.
I that could wish thy chains, and live content
To wear them, not my Gives, but ornament:
I that could any ransom pay to thee,
Not to redeem, but sell my liberty;
I am neglected; let the cause be known;
Art thou a niggard of thy arrows grown,
That were so prodigal? or do thou please
To set thy Pillars up with Hercules
Weary of conquest? or should I disgrace
Thy victories, if I were daign'd a place
Amongst thy other Trophies? none of these,
Witness thy daily triumphs: who but sees
Thou still pursuest thy game from high to low;
No age, no Sex can escape thy powerful bow.
Decrepite age whose veins and bones may be
An Argument against Philosophy,
To prove an emptiness; that has no sense
Left but his feeling, feels thy influence;
And dying dotes: not babes thy shafts can miss;
How quickly Infants can be taught to kiss!
As the poor Apes being dumb these words would borrow,
IN was born to day to get a babe to morrow.
Each plowman thy propitious wounds can prove,
Tilling the earth, and wishing it were his love.
Am I invulnerable? is the dart
Rebeaten, which thou level'st at my heart?
Ill rest my Parents bones, if they have done
As Tethis once did to her God-like son
The great Archilles, dipped in Stygian lake;
Though I am so, Cupid, thy arrows take,
Try where I am not proof, and let me feel
Thy 'archery, if not in the heart, in the heel.
Perchance my heart lies there; who would not be
A Coward, to be valiant made by thee.
I cannot say thy blindness is the cause,
That I am barred the freedom of thy laws;
The wretched Outlaw of thy Mothers Court,
That place of comfort, Paradise of sport.
For they may say, that say thou blind can be,
Eagles want eyes, and only moles can see.
Not Argus with so many lights did shine,
For each fair Ladies sparkling eyes are thine.
Think thou because I do the Muses love,
I in thy Camp would a faint soldier prove?
How came Musaeus, and Anacreon then
Into thy troops? how came Tibullus pen
Amongst thy spears; and how came Ovid (say)
To be enrold great General in thy pay?
And doubts thou me? suspect you I will tell
The hidden mysteries of your Paphian cell,
To the straight laced Diana? or betray
The secrets of the night, unto the day?
No Cupid, by thy mothers doves I swear,
And by her sparrows, it is an idle fear.
If Philomel descend to sport with me;
Know I can be (great Love) as dumb as she,
Though she has lost her tongue; in such delights
All should be like her, only talk by nights:
Make me thy Priest (if Poets truth divine)
I Will make the Muses wanton; at thy shrine
They all shall wait; and Dian's self shall be
A votresse to thy Mothers Nunnerie.
Where zeal with nature shall maintain no strife;
Where none swear chastity, and single life.
To Venus-Nuns an easier oath is read,
She breaks her vow, that keeps her maiden head.
Reject not then your Flamin's ministry:
Let me but deacon in thy Temples be:
And see how I shall touch my powerful lyre,
And more inspired with thine, then Phoebus fire,
Chaunt such a moving verse, as soon should frame
Desire of dalliance in the coyest dame;
Melting to amorous thoughts her heart of stone;
And force her to untrusse her Virgin Zone.
Is Lucrece, or Penelope alive?
Give me a Spartan Matron, Sabine wife;
Or any of the vestals hither call,
And I will make them be thy converts all.
Who like good Proselites more in heart then show,
Shall to thy origies all so zealous go,
That Thais shall, nor Helen such appear;
As if they only Loves precisians were.
But now my Muse dull heavy numbers sings,
Cupid it is thou alone giv'st verse her wings.
The Lawrell-wreath I never shall obtain,
Unless thy torch illuminate my brain.
Love Laurel gives; Phoebus as much can say,
Had not he loved, there had not been the Bay.
Why is my Presentation then put by?
Who is it that my Induction dares deny?
Can any Lady say I am unfit?
If so, I Will sue my Quare Impedit.
I Am young enough, my spirits quick and good;
My veins swell high with kind and active blood.
Nor am I marble; when I see an eye
Quick, bright, and full, 'raid round with majesty;
I feel my heart with a strange heat oppressed,
As 'twere a lightning darted through my breast.
I long not for the cherries on the Tree,
So much as those which on a lip I see.
And more affection bear I to the Rose
That in a cheek, then in a garden grows.
I gaze on beauteous Virgins with delight,
And feel my temper vary at the sight;
I know not why; but warmer streams do glide
Thorough my veins, sure it is a wanton tide.
But you perchance esteem my love the less,
Because I have a foolish bashfulnesse,
A shame-fac'd rose you find within my face,
Whose modest blush frights you from my embrace;
That Is ready now to fall, if you will but daigne
To pluck it once, it shall not grow again.
Or do you therefore cast my love away,
Because I am not expert in the play?
My skill's not known till it be ventred on;
I have not Aristotle read alone.
I am in Ovid a proficient too;
And if you would hear my Lecture, could to you
Analize all his art, with so much more
Judgment and skill, then e're 'twas taught before.,
That I might be chief master, he, dull fool,
The under usher in the Cyprian School:
For petty Paedagogue, poor Pedant, he
First writ the Art, and then the remedy:
But I could set down rules of love so sure,
As should exceed Art, and admit no cure.
Pictures I could invent ( Love, were I thine)
As might stand copies unto Aretine*
And such new dalliance study, as should frame
Variety in that which is the same.
I am not then incapable (great Love)
Would thou my skill but with one arrow prove.
Give me a Mistress in whose looks to joy,
And such a Mistress ( Love) as will be coy,
Not easily won, though to be won in time;
That from her niceness I may store my rhyme:
Then in a Thousand sighs, to thee I Will pay
My Morning Orisons, and every day
Two Thousand groans, and count these amorous prayers
I make to thee, not by my Beads, but Tears.
Besides, each day I Will write an Elegy,
And in as lamentable Poetry
As any Inns of Court-man, that has gone
To buy an Ovid with a Littleton.
But ( Love) I see you will not entertain
Those that desire to Live amidst your train;
For death and you have got a trick to fly
From such poor wretches as do wish you nigh.
You scorn a yielding slave; and plainly show it,
Those that contemn your pow'er you make to know it.
And such am I; I slight your proud commands;
I mar'le who put a bow into your hands;
A hobbyhorse, or some such pretty toy,
A rattle would befit you better, Boy.
You conquer Gods and men? how stand I free,
That will acknowledge no supremacy
Unto your childish Godhead? does it cry?
Give it a plumme to still it is Diety.
Good Venus let it suck; that it may keep
Less bawling; gentle Nurse rock it a sleep.
Or if you be past babie; and are now
Come to wear breeches, much we then allow
Your Boy ship leave to shoot at whom you please?
No, whip it for such wanton tricks as these:
If this do anger you, I Will send a Be,
Shall to a single duel challenge thee:
And make you to your Mam run, and complain
The litlle serpent stung thee once again.
Go hunt the butter flies, and if you can
But catch 'em, make their wings into a fan.
We Will give you leave to hunt and sport at them,
So you let men alone. -- But I blaspheme
(Great Love) I fear I have offended thee,
If so, be merciful, and punish me.
A gratulatory to Mr Ben. Johnson for his adopting of him to be his Son.
I Was not borne to Helicon, nor dare
Presume to think my self a Muses heir.
I have no title to Parnassus hill,
Nor any acre of it by the will
Of a dead Ancestour, nor could I be
Ought but a tenant unto Poetry.
But thy Adoption quits me of all fear,
And makes me challenge a child's portion there.
I am a kin to Hero's being thine,
And part of my alliance is divine.
Orpheus, Musaeus, Homer too; beside
Thy Brothers by the Roman Mothers side;
As Ovid, Virgil, and the Latin Lyre,
That is so like thy Horace; the whole quire
Of Poets are by thy Adoption, all
My uncles; thou have given me power to call
Phoebus himself my grandsire; by this grant
Each Sister of the nine is made my Aunt.
Go you that reckon from a large descent
Your lineall Honors, and are well content
To glory in the age of your great name,
Though on a Herralds faith you build the same:
I do not envy you, nor think you blessed
Though you may bear a Gorgon on your Crest
By direct line from Perseus; I will boast
No farther then my Father; that is the most
I can, or should be proud of; and I were
Unworthy his adoption, if that here
I should be dully modest; boast I must
Being son of his Adoption, not his lust.
And to say truth, that which is best in me
May call you father, 'twas begot by thee.
Have I a spark of that celestial flame
Within me, I confess I stole the same
Prometheus like, from thee; and may I feed
His vulture, when I dare deny the deed.
Many more moons thou have, that shine by night,
All Bankrups, were not for a borrowed light;
Yet can forswear it; I the debt confess,
And think my reputation never the less.
For Father let me be resolved by you;
Is It a disparagement from rich Peru
To ravish gold; or theft, for wealthy Ore
To ransack Tagus, or Pactolus shore?
Or does he wrong Alcinous, that for want
Does take from him a sprig or two, to plant
A lesser Orchard? sure it cannot be:
Nor is it theft to steal some flames from thee,
Grant this, and I Will cry guilty, as I am,
And pay a filial reverence to thy name.
For when my Muse upon obedient knees,
Asks not a Fathers blessing, let her leese
The fame of this Adoption; it is a curse
I wish her 'cause I cannot think a worse.
And here, as Piety bids me, I entreat
Phoebus to lend thee some of his own heat,
To cure thy Palsy; else I will complain
He has no skill in herbs; Poets in vain
Make him the God of Physic; 'twere his praise
To make thee as immortal as thy Baies;
As his own Daphne; 'twere a shame to see
The God, not love his Priest, more then his Tree.
But if heaven take thee, envying us thy Lyre,
It Is to pen Anthems for an Angels quire.
In Lesbiam, and Histrionem.
I Wonder what should Madam Lesbia mean
To keep young Histrio, and for what scene
So bravely she maintains him; that what sense
He please to bless, it is done at her expense!
The play-boy spends secure; he shall have more;
As if both Indies did supply his store.
As if he did in bright Pactolus swim,
Or Tagus yellow waves did water him:
And yet has no revenews to defray
These charges, but the Madam, she must pay
His prodigal disbursments: Madams are
To such as he, more then a treble share.
She pays (which is more then she needs to do)
For her own coming in, and for his too.
This is reward due to the sacred sin;
No charge too much done to the beardlesse chin:
Allthough she stint her poor old Knight Sr John,
To live upon his exhibition,
His hundred marks per Annum; when her Joy,
Her sanguine darling, her spruce active boy
May scatter Angels; rub out filks, and shine
In cloths of gold; cry loud the world is mine:
Keep his Race-nags, and in Hide-parke be seen
Brisk as the best (as if the stage had been
Grownethe Court's Rival) can to Brackly go,
To Lincoln Race, and to New Market too;
At each of these his hundred pounds has vie'd
On Peggabrigs, or Shotten-herrings side;
And looses without swearing. Let them curse
That neither have a Fortunatus purse,
Nor such a Madam; if this world do hold
(As very likely 'twill) Madams grown old
Will be the best Monopolies; Histrio may
At Maw, or Gleeke, or at Primero play.
Still Madam goes to stake; Histrio knows
Her worth, and therefore dices too; and goes
As deep, the Caster, as the only Son
Of a dead Alderman, come to twenty one
A whole week since; you would know the reason why
Lesbia does this; guess you as well as I;
Then this I can no better reason tell;
It Is 'cause he plays the woman's part so well.
I see old Madams are not only toil;
No tilth so fruitful as a barren soil.
Ah poor day laborers, how I pity you
That shrink, and sweat to live with much ado!
When had you wit to understand the right,
'Twere better wages to have worked by night.
Yet some that resting here, do only think
That youth with age is an unequal link:
Conclude, that Histrio's task as hard must be,
As was Mezentius bloody cruelty.
Who made the living to embrace the dead,
And so expire: but I am rather lead
His bargain of the two the best to call;
He at one game keeps her, she him at all
De Histrice. Ex Claudiano.
Famed Stymphall, I have heard, thy birds in flight
Shoot showers of arrows forth all levied right.
And long the fable of those quills of steel
Did seem to me a tale incredible.
Now have I faith; the Porcupine I see,
And then the Herculean birds no wonders be.
Her longer head like a swines snowt does show;
Bristles like horns upon her forehead grow.
A fiery heat glows from her flaming eye;
Under her shaggy back the shape does lie
As 'twere a whelpe: nature all Art has tried
In this small beast, so strangely fortified.
A threatening wood over all her body stands;
And stiff with Pikes the spectled stalks in bands
Grow to the war; while under those does rise
An other troop, girt with alternate dies
Of several hue; which while a black does fill
The inward space, ends in a solid quill.
That lessning by degrees, does in a while,
Take a quick point, and sharpens to a Pile.
Nor does her squadrons like the hedghogs stand
Fixed; but she darts them forth, and at command
Far of her members aims; shot through the sky
From her shak'd side the Native Engines fly.
Sometimes retiring, Farthian like, she will wound
Her following foe; sometimes in trenching round,
In battle form, marshalling all her flanks,
She Will clash her javelins to aff right the ranks
Of her poor enemies: lineing every side
With spears, to which she is her self allied.
Each part of here is a soldier, from her back
But stirred, a horse and horrid noise does crack;
That one would think the trumpets did incite
Two adverse Armies to begin to fight;
So great a noise, from one so small did rise.
Then to her skill in Arms she is so wise
As to add Policy, and a thrifty fear
Of her own safety; she a wrath does bear
Not prodigal of weapons, but content
With wary threatening; and has seldom sent
An arrow forth, caused by an idle strife,
But spends 'em only to secure her life!
And then her diligent stroke so certain is
Without all error, she will seldom miss.
No distance cozens her; the dumb skin aims right,
And rules the levy of the skillfull sight.
What humane labor, though we boast it such,
Withal her reason can perform so much?
They from the Cretan Goats their horns must take;
And after, those with fire must softer make.
Bulls guts must bend their bows; and e're they fight
Steel arms their darts; and feathers wing their flights.
When lo a little beast we armed see
With nothing but her own Artillery:
Who seeks no for rain aid; with her all go,
She to her self is Quiver, darts, and bow.
One Creature all the Arts of warfare knows;
If from examples then the Practice flows
Of humane life; hence did the Invention grow
At distance to encounter with our foe.
Hence the Cydoniaus instructed are
Their Stratagems, and manner of their war.
Hence did the Parthians learn to fight, and fly;
Taught by this bird their skillful Archery.
In Archimedis Sphaeram ex Claudiano.
Jove saw the Heavens framed in a little glass,
And laughing, to the Gods these words did pass;
Comes then the power of mortal cares so far?
In brittle Orbs my labors acted are.
The statutes of the Poles, the faith of things,
The Laws of Gods this Syracusian brings
Hither by art: Spirits enclosed attend
Their several spheres, and with set motions bend
The living work: Each year the feigned Sun,
Each Month returns the counterfeited Moon;
And viewing now her world, bold Industry
Grows proud, to know the heavens her subjects be.
Believe Salmonius has false thunders thrown,
For a poor hand is Natures rival grown.
De Magnete. Ex Claudiano.
WHo in the world with busy reason pryes,
Searching the seed of things, and there descryes
With what defect labors the Ecclipsed moon,
What cause commands a palenesse in the Sun,
Whence ruddy comets with their fatal hair,
Whence winds do flow, and what the Motions are
That shake the bowels of the trembling earth;
What strikes the lightning forth; whence clouds give birth
To horrid thunders; and does also know
What light lends luster to the painted Bow:
If ought of truth his soul does understand,
Let him resolve a question I Will demand:
There is a stone which we the loadstone style,
Of color ugly, dark, obscure, and vile:
It never decked the sleiked locks of Kings,
No Ornament, no gorgeous Tire it brings
To Virgins beauteous necks, it never shown
A splendent buckle in there maiden Zone:
But only hear the wonders I will tell
Of his black peeble, and 'twill then excel
All bracelets, and what e're the diving Moore
Amongst the red weeds seeks for 'ith Eastern shore:
From Iron first it lives, Iron it eats,
But that sweet feast it knows no other meats;
Thence she renews her strength, vigor is sent
Through all her nerves by that hard nourishment;
Without that food she dies, a famine numm's
Her meager joints, a thirst her veins consumes.
Mars that frights Cities with his bloody spears,
And Venus that releases humane fears,
Do both together in one Temple shine,
Both jointly honored in a common shrine;
But different Statues, Mars a steel put on,
And Venus figure was Magnetique stone.
To them (as is the custom every year)
The Priest does celebrate a Nuptial there.
The torch the Quire does lead, the threshold's green
With hallowed Mirtles, and the beds are seen
To smell with rosy flowers, the Geniall sheet
Spread over with a purple Coverlet.
But hear (o strange) the statues seemed to move,
And Cytherea runs to catch her Love;
And like their former joys in heaven possessed,
With wanton heat clings to her Mars'es breast;
There hangs a grateful burden; then she throws
Her arms about his helmet, to Enclose
Her Love in amorous Gives, least he get out,
Here live embraces chain him round about.
He stirred with love breathed gently through his veins,
Is drawn by unseene links and secret chains
To meet his spoused Gemme; the air does wed
The steel unto the stone; thus strangely led
The Deities their stolen delights replay'd,
And only Nature was the bridal maid.
What heat in these two Metals did inspire
Such mutual league? what concords powrefull fire
Contracted their hard minds? the stone does move
With amorous heat, the steel does learn to love.
So Venus often the God of war withstood,
And gives him milder looks; when hot with blood
He rages to the fight, fierce with desire,
And with drawn points whets up his active Ire;
She dares go forth alone, and boldly meet
His foaming steeds, and with a winning greet
The tumor of his high swollen breast aff wage,
Tempring with gentle flames his violent rage.
Peace courts his foul, the fight he disavows,
And his red plumes he now to kisses bows.
Ah cruel Boy large thy dominions be,
The Gods and all their Thunders yield to thee:
Great Jove to leave his heaven thou can constrain,
And midst the brinish waves to Low again.
Now the cold Rocks thou striks't, the senseless stone
Thy weapon feels, a lustful heat does run
Through veins of flint, the steel thy Pow'er can taine;
And rigid Marble must admit thy flame.
De Seen Veronensi. Ex Claudiano.
HAppy the man that all his days has spent
Within his own grounds, and no farther went:
Whom the same house that did him erst behold
A little Infant, sees him now grown old,
That with his staff walks where he crawled before,
Counts the age of one poor cottage and no more.
Fortune never him with various tumult pressed,
Nor drank he unknown streams, a wandering guest.
He feared no Merchants storms, nor drums of war,
Nor ever knew the strifes of the hoarse Bar.
Who though to the next Town he a stranger be,
Yet heavens sweet prospect he injoyes more free.
From fruits, not Consuls, computation brings,
By Apples Autumnes knows, by flowers the springs.
Thus he the day by his own orb does prize;
In the same field his Sun does set and rise.
That knew an oak a twigge, and walking thither
Beholds a wood and he grown up together.
Neighbou'ring Veron he may for India take,
And think the red sea is Benacus lake.
Yet is his (...) untamed, and firm his knees,
Him the third age a lusty Grandsire sees.
Go seek whos' will the far Iberian shore,
This man has lived, though that has traveled more.
The second Epod: of Horace translated.
HAppy the man which far from city care;
(Such as ancient Mortals were)
With his own oxen plows his fathers land,
Free from Usurers griping hand.
The soldiers trumpets never break his sleep,
Nor angry seas that raging keep.
He shunnes the wrangling Hall, nor foot does set
On the proud thresholds of the Great:
His life is this (O life almost divine)
To marry Elmes unto the Vine;
To prune unfruitful branches, and for them
To graft a bough of happier stem.
Or else within the low couched valleys views
His well clothed floc'ks of bleating ewes.
Sometimes his honey he in pots does keep,
Sometimes he sheares his fleecy sheep.
And when his fruits with Autumn ripened be
Gathers his Apples from the Tree.
And joys to taste the pears himself did plant,
And Grapes that naught of purple want.
Under an Oak sometimes he lays his head,
Making the tender grass his bed.
Mean while the streams along their banks do float,
And birds do chaunt with warbling throat;
And gentle springs a gentle murmr keep,
To lull him to a quiet sleep.
When winter comes, and the air does chiller grow,
Threatening showers and shivering snow;
Either with hounds he hunts the tusked swine
That foe unto the corn and vine;
Or lays his nets; or limes the unctuous bush
To catch the blackbird, or the thrush.
Sometimes the Hare he courses, and one way
Makes both a pleasure and a prey.
But if with him a modest wife does meet,
To guide his house and children sweet;
Such as the Sabine or Apulean wife,
Something brown but chaste of life;
Such as will make a good warm fire to burn,
Against her wearied Mate's return;
And shutting in her stalls her fruitful Neat,
Will milk the kines distended Teat:
Fetching her husband of her selfe-brew'd beer,
And other wholesome Country cheer.
Suppe him with bread and cheese, Pudding or Pie,
Such dainties as they do not buy:
Give me but these, and I shall never care
Where all the Lucrine oisters are;
These wholesome Country dainties shall to me
Sweet as Tench or Sturgeon be.
Had I but these I well could be without
The Carp, the Sammon, or the Trout:
Nor should the Phoenix self so much delight
My not ambitious appetite,
As should an Apple snatched from mine own trees,
Or honey of my laboring Bees.
My Cattels udders should afford me food,
My sheep my cloth, my ground my wood.
Sometimes a lamb, snatched from the wolf shall be
A banquet for my friend and me.
Sometimes a Calfeta'ne from her lowing Cow,
Or tender Issue of the Sow.
Our Gardens sallets yield, Mallows to keep
Loose bodies, Lettice for to sleep.
The cakling Hen an egg for breakfast lays,
And Duck that in our water plays.
The Goose for us her tender plumes has bred
To lay us on a softer bed.
Our blankets are not died with Orphans tears,
Our Pillows are not stuffed with cares.
To walk on our own grounds a stomach gets,
The best of sauce to tart out meats.
In midst of such a feast, it is joy to come
And see the well fed Lambs at home.
It Is pleasure to behold the inversed Plow
The Languid necks of Oxen bow.
And view the industrious servants that will sweat
Both at labor and at meat.
Lord grant me but enough; I ask no more
Then will serve mine, and help the poor.
An Elegy upon the Lady Venetia Digby.
DEath, who'ld not change prerogatives with thee,
That do such rapes, yet may not questioned be
Here cease thy wanton lust, be satisfied,
Hope not a second, and so fair a bride.
Where was her Mars, whose valiant arms did hold
This Venus once, that thou durst be so bold
By thy too nimble theft? I know 'twas fear,
Lest he should come, that would have rescued her.
Monster confess, did thou not blushing stand,
And thy pale cheek turn red to touch her hand?
Did she not lightning-like strike sudden heat
Through thy cold limbs, and thaw thy frost to sweat?
Well since thou have her, use her gently, Death,
And in requital of such precious breath
Watch sentinel to guard her, do not see
The worms thy rivals, for the Gods will be.
Remember Paris, for whose pettier sin,
The Trojan gates let the stout Grecians in;
So when time ceases, (whose unthrifty hand
Has now almost consumed his stock of sand)
Myriads of Angels shall in Armies come,
And fetch (proud ravisher) there Helen home.
And to revenge this rape, thy other store
Thou shall resign too, and shall steal no more.
Till then fair Ladies (for you now are fair,
But till her death I feared your just despair,)
Fetch all the spices that Arabia yields,
Distill the choycest flowers of the fields:
And when in one their best perfections meet
Embalme her course, that she may make them sweet.
Whilst for an Epitaph upon her stone
I cannot write, but I must weep her one.
Epitaph.
Beauty it self lies here, in whom alone,
Each part enjoyed the same perfection.
In some the Eyes we praise; in some the Hair;
In her the Lips; in her the Cheeks are fair;
That Nymphs fine Feet, her Hands we beauteous call,
But in this form we praise no part, but all.
The ages past have many beauties shown,
And I more plenty in our time have known;
But in the age to come I look for none,
Nature despaires, because her pattern's gone.
An Epitaph upon Mrs I. T.
REader if thou have a tear,
Thou can not choose but pay it here.
Here lies modesty, meekness, zeal,
Goodness, Piety, and to tell
Her worth at once, one that had shown
All virtues that her sex could own.
Nor dare my praise too lavish be,
Least her dust blush for so would she.
Have thou beheld in the spring's bowers
Tender buds break to bring forth flowers:
So to keep virtues stock, pale death
Took her to give her infant breath.
Thus her accounts were all made even,
She robbed not earth to add to heaven.
An Epithalamium.
Muse be a bride-maid, do not hear
How honored Hunt and his fair Dear,
This day prepare their wedding cheer?
The swiftest of thy pinions take,
And hence a sudden journey make,
To help 'em break their bridal Cake.
Have 'em to Church, tell 'em love says
Religion breeds but fond delays,
To lengthen out the tedious days.
Child the slow Priest, that so goes on,
As if he feared he should have done
His sermon, e're the glass be run.
Bid him post over his words, as fast
As if himself were now to taste
The pleasure of so ^aire a wast.
Now lead the blessed Couple home,
And serve a dinner up for some;
Their banquet is as yet to come.
Maids dance as nimbly as your blood,
Which I see swell a purple flood
In Emulation of that good.
The bride possesses; for I deem
What she enjoyes will be the theme
This night of every virgins dream.
But envy not their blessed content,
The hasty night is almost spent,
And they of Cupid will be shent.
The Sun is now ready to ride,
Sure 'twas the morning I espide,
Or 'twas the blushing of the bride.
See how the lusty bridegrooms veins
Swell, till the active torrent strains
To break those over stretched azure chains.
And the fair bride ready to cry
To see her pleasant loss so nigh,
Pants like the sealed Pigeons eye.
Put out the torch, Love lovesno lights,
Those that perform his misticke rites
Must pay their Orisons by nights.
Nor can that sacrifice be done
By any Priest, or Nun alone,
But when they both are met in one.
Now you that taste of Hymen's cheer,
See that your lips do meet so near,
That Cockels might be tutored there;
And let the whisprings of your love
Such short and gentle murmurs prove,
As they were Lectures to the dove.
And in such strict embraces twine
As if you read unto the Vine,
The, Ivy and the Columbine.
Then let your mutual bosoms beat,
Till they create by virtuall heat
Mirrhe, Balm, and spikenard in a sweat.
Thence may there spring many a pair
Of Sons and Daughters strong and fair:
How soon the Gods have heard my prayer!
Me thinks already I espy
The cradles rock, the babies cry,
And drousy Nurses Lullaby.
An Epitaph upon his honored friend Mr War.
HEre lies the knowing head, the honest heart,
Fair blood, and courteous hands, and every part
Of gentle War, all with one stone content,
Though each deserved a several monument.
He was (believe me Reader) for it is rare
Virtuous though young, and learned though an heir.
Not with his Blood, or Natures gifts content
He paid them both their tribute which they lent.
His ancestors in him fixed their pride,
So with him all revived, with him all dyed.
This made death lingering come, ashamed to be
At once the ruin of a family.
Learn Reader here, though long thy line has stood,
Time breeds consumptions in the noblest blood.
Learn (Reader) here to what our Glories come,
Here Is no distinction 'twixt the House and Toombe.
Upon the loss of his little finger.
ARithmetique nine digits, and no more
Admits of, then I still have all my store.
For what mischance has taken from my left hand,
It seems did only for a Cipher stand.
But this I Will say for thee departed joint,
Thou were not given to steal, nor pick, nor point
At any in disgrace; but thou did go
Untimely to thy Death only to show
The other members what they once must do;
Hand, arm, leg, thigh, and all must follow too.
Often did thou scan my verse, where if I miss
Henceforth I will impute the cause to this.
A fingers loss (I speak it not in sport)
Will make a verse a Foot too short.
Farewell dear finger, much I greive to see
How soon mischance has made a Hand of thee.
On the Passion of Christ.
WHat rends the temples vail, where is day gone?
How can a general darkness cloud the Sun?
Astrologers their skill in vain do try;
Nature must needs be sick, when God can dye.
Necessary observations.
1 Precept.
FIrst worship God, he that forgets to pray
Bids not himself good morrow nor good day.
Let thy first labor be to purge thy sin;
And serve him first, whence all things did begin.
2 Pre.
Honor thy Parents to prolong thine end,
With them though for a truth do not contend.
Though all should truth defend, do thou loose rather
The truth a while, then loose their Loves for ever.
Who ever makes his fathers heart to bleed,
Shall have a child that will revenge the deed.
3 Pre.
Think that is just; it is not enough to do,
Unless thy very thoughts are upright too.
4 Pre.
Defend the truth, for that who will not dye,
A coward is, and gi^s himself the lie.
5 Pre.
Honor the King, as sons their Parents do,
For he is thy Father, and thy Country's too.
6 Pre.
A friend is gold; if true heel never leave thee,
Yet both without a touchstone may deceive thee.
7 Pre.
Suspicious men think others false, but he
Cozens himself that will too credulous be.
For thy friends sake, let no suspect be shown;
And shun to be too credulous for thine own.
8 Pre.
Take well what e're shall chance, though bad it be;
Take it for good, and 'twill be so to thee.
9 Pre.
Swear not: An oath is like a dangerous dart
Which shot rebounds to strike the shooters heart.
10 Pre.
The law's the path of life; then that obey,
Who keeps it not, has wandering lost his way.
11 Pre.
Thank those that do thee good, so shall thou gain
Their second help, if thou should need again.
12 Pre.
To doubtful matters do not headlong run;
What Is well left off, were better not begun.
13 Pre.
Be well advised, and wary counsel make,
E're thou do any action undertake.
Having undertaken, thy endeauours bend
To bring thy Action to a perfect end.
14 Pre.
Safe in thy breast close lock up thy Intents;
For he that knows thy purpose, best prevents.
15 Pre.
To tell thy miseries will no comfort breed,
Men help thee most that think thou have no need.
But if the world once thy misfortunes know,
Thou soon shall loose a friend, and find a foe.
16 Pre.
Keep thy friends goods; for should thy wants be known,
Thou can not tell but they may be thine own.
17 Pre.
To gather wealth through fraud do not presume,
A little evil got will much consume.
18 Pre.
First think, and if thy thoughts approve thy will
Then speak, and after what thou speakst fulfill.
19 Pre.
Spare not, nor spend too much; be this thy care,
Spare but to spend, and only spend to spare.
Who spends too much may want, and so complain.
But he spends best that spares to spend again.
20 Pre.
If with a stranger thou discourse first learn
By strictest observations to discern,
If he be wiser then thy self; if so
Be dumb, and rather choose by him to know.
But if thy self perchance the wiser be,
Then do thou speak that he may learn by thee,
21 Pre.
If thou dispraise a man let no man know,
By any circumstance that he is thy foe:
If men but once find that, they 'l quickly see
Thy words from hate, and not from judgment be.
If thou would tell his vice, do what you can
To make the world believe thou love the man.
22 Pre.
Reprove not in their wrath incensed men,
Good council comes clean out of season then.
But when his fury is appeased and past,
He will conceive his fault and men at last.
When he is cool, and calm then utter it;
No man gives Physic in the midst oth' Fit.
23 Pre.
Seem not too conscious of thy worth, nor be
The first that knows thy own sufficiency.
If to thy King and Country thy true care
More serviceable is then others are.
That blaze in court, and every Action sway
As if the Kingdom on their shoulders lay.
Or if thou serv'st a master, and do see
Others preferred of less Desert then thee.
Do not complain though such a Plaint be true,
Lords will not give their Favors as a Due.
But rather stay and hope: it cannot be
But men at last must needs thy virtues see.
So shall thy trust endure and greater grow,
Whilst they that are above thee, fall below.
24 Pre.
Desire not thy meane-fortunes for to set
Next to the stately Manors of the Great.
He will suspect thy labors, and oppress,
Fearing thy greatness makes his wealth the less.
Great ones do love no Aequals: But must be
Above the Terms of all comparitie.
Such a rich Neighbor is compared best
To the great Pike that eats up all the rest.
Or else like Pharaohs Cow, that in an hour
Will seven of his fattest friends devour.
Or like the sea whose vastness swallows clean
All other streams, though no increase be seen.
Live by the Poor, they do the Poor no harm;
So Bees thrive best when they together swarm.
Rich men are Bears, and Poor men ought to fear 'em
Like ravenous wolfes; it is dangerous living near 'em.
25 Pre.
Each man three Devils has self borne afflictions;
The unruly Tongue, the Belly, and Affections.
Charm these, such holy Conjurations can
Gain thee the friendship both of God and man.
26 Pre.
So live with man as if Gods curious eye,
Did every where into thine Actions pry.
For never yet was sin so void of sense,
So fully faced with brazen Impudence.
As that it durst before men's eyes commit
Their beastly lusts, least they should witness it.
How dare they then offend, when God shall see,
That must alone both Judge and Jury be.
27 Pre.
Take thou no care how to defer thy death,
And give more respit to this Mortal breath.
Would thou live long? the only means are these
'Bove Galens diet, or Hippocrates.
Strive to live well; Tread in the upright ways,
And rather count thy Actions then thy days,
Then thou have lived enough amongst us here,
For every day well spent I count a year.
Live well, and then how soon so e're thou die,
Thou art of Age to claim Aeternitie.
But he that out lives Nestor, and appears
TO have past the date of gray Mathusalem's years.
If he his life to sloth and sin does give,
I say he only Was, he did not Live.
28 Pre.
Trust not a man unknown he may deceive thee;
And doubt the man thou know for he may leave thee.
And yet for to prevent exceptions too,
It Is best not seem to doubt although you do.
29 Pre.
Hear much but little speak, a wise man fears,
And will not use his tongue so much as ears.
The Tongue if it the hedge of Teeth do break
Will others shame, and its own Ruin speak.
I never yet did ever read of any
Undone by hearing, but by speaking many.
The reason's this, the Ears if chaste and holy,
Do let in wit, the Tongue does let out folly.
30 Pre.
To all alike be courteous, meek, and kind,
A winning carriage with indifferent mind,
But not familiar, that must be exempt,
Grooms saucy love, soon turns into contempt.
Be sure he be at least as good as thee,
To whom thy freindship shall familiar be.
31 Pre.
Judge not between two friends, but rather see
If thou can bring them freindly to agree.
So shall thou both their Loves to thee increase,
And gain a Blessing too for making Peace;
But if thou should decide the cause in the end,
How e're thou judge thou sure shall loose a friend.
32 Pre.
Thy credit wary keep, it is quickly gone;
Being got by many Actions, lost by one,
33 Pre.
Unto thy Brother buy not, sell, nor lend,
Such Actions have their own peculiar end;
But rather choose to give him, if thou see
That thou have pow'er, and he necessity.
34 Pre.
Spare in thy youth, least Age should find thee poor
When time is past, and thou can spare no more.
No coupl'd misery is so great in either,
As Age and Want when both do meet together.
35 Pre.
Fly Dunkennesse, whose vile incontinence
Takes both away the reason and the sense.
Till with Circaean cups thy mind possessed
Leaves to be man, and wholly turns a Beast.
Think whilst thou swallowest the capacious Bowl,
Thou let'st in Seas to wrack and drown the soul.
That hell is open, to remembrance call,
And think how subject drunkards are to Fall.
Consider how it soon destroys the grace
Of humane shape, spoiling the beauteous face.
Puffing the cheeks, blearing the curious eye,
Studding the face with vicious Heraldry.
What Pearls and Rubies does the wine disclose,
Making the purse poor to enrich the Nose?
How does it nurse disease, infect the heart,
Drawing some sickness into every part!
The stomach overcloyd, wanting a vent
Does up again resend her excrement.
And then (o see what too much wine can do!)
The very soul being drunk spews secrets too.
The Lungs corrupted breath contagious air,
Belching up fumes that unconcocted are.
The Brain o'rewarm'd (loosing her sweet repose)
Does purge her filthy ordure through the nose.
The veins do boil glutted with vicious food,
And quickly Fevers the distempered blood.
The belly swells, the foot can hardly stand
Lamed with the Gout; the Palsy shakes the Hand.
And through the flesh sick waters sinking in,
Do bladder-like puff up the dropsi'd skin.
It weaks the Brain, it spoils the memory;
Hasting on Age, and wilful Poverty.
It drownes thy better parts; making thy name
To foes a laughter, to thy friends a shame.
It Is virtues poison, and the bane of trust,
The match of wrath, the fuel unto lust.
Quite leave this vice, and turn not to it again,
Upon Presumption of a stronger brain.
For he that holds more wine then other can,
I rather count a Hogshead then a man.
36 Pre.
Let not thy Impotent lust so powerful ^ee
Over thy Reason, Soul, and Liberty,
As to enforce thee to a married life,
E're thou art able to maintain a wife.
Thou can not feed upon her lips and face
She cannot cloth thee with a poor embrace.
My self being yet alone, and but one still,
With patience could endure the worst of ill.
When fortune frowns, one to the wars may go
To fight against his foes, and fortunes too.
But (o) the grief were trebled for to see*
Thy wretched Bride half pined with Poverty.
To see thy Infants make their dumb complaint
And thou not able to relieve their want.
The poorest beggar when he is dead and gone,
Is rich as he that sits upon the Throne.
But he that having no estate is w^d,
Starves in his grave, being wretched when he is dead.
37 Pre.
If e're I take a wife I will have one
Neither for beauty nor for portion;
But for her virtues; and I Will married be
Not for my lust, but for posterity.
And when I am wed, I Will never jealous be,
But make her learn how to be chaste by me.
And be her face what 'twill, I Will think her fair
If she within the house confine her care.
If modest in her words and cloths she be,
Not daubed with pride and prodigality.
If with her neighbors she maintains no strife,
And bear her self to me a faithful wife;
I Would rather unto such a one be wed,
Then claspe the choicest Helen in my bed.
Yet though she were an Angel my affection
Should only love, not dote on her perfection.
An Elegy.
LOve, give me leave to serve thee, and be wise
To keep thy torch in, but restore blind eyes.
I will a flame into my bosom take,
That Martyrs Court when they embrace the stake:
Not dull, and smoakie fires, but heat divine,
That burns not to consume, but to refine.
I have a Mistress for perfections rare
In every eye, but in my thoughts most fair.
Like Tapers on the Altar shine her eyes;
Her breath is the perfume of Sacrifice.
And where soever my fancy would begin,
Still her perfection lets religion in.
I touch her like my Beads with devout care;
And come unto my Courtship as my Prayer.
We sit, and talk, and kiss away the hours,
As chastely as the morning dews kiss flowers.
Go wanton Lover spare thy sighs and tears,
Put on the Livery which thy dotage wears,
And call it Love, where heresy gets in
Zeal's but a coal to kindle greater sin.
We wear no flesh, but one another greet,
As blessed souls in separation meet.
Were possible that my ambitious sin,
Durst commit rapes upon a Cherubin,
I might have lustful thoughts to her, of all
Earths heavenly Quire the most Angelical.
Looking into my breast, her form I find
That like my Guardian-Angell keeps my mind
From rude attempts; and when affections stir,
I calm all passions with one thought of her.
Thus they whose reasons love, and not their sense,
The spirits love: thus one Intelligence
Reflects upon his like, and by chaste loves
In the same sphere this and that Angel moves.
Nor is this barren Love; one noble thought
Begets an other, and that still is brought
To bed of more; virtues and grace increase,
And such a numerous issue never can cease.
Where Children, though great blessings, only be
Pleasures repriv'd to some posterity.
Beasts love like men, if men in lust delight,
And call that Love which is but appetite.
When essence meets with essence, and souls join
In mutual knots, that's the true Nuptall twine:
Such Lady is my Love, and such is true;
All other Love is to your Sex, not You.
An Apology for his false Prediction that his Aunt Lane would be delivered of
a Son.
(...) The best Prophets are but good Guessers. ARe then the Sibils dead? what
is become
Of the loud Oracles? are the Augurs dumb?
Live not the Magi that so often reveald
Natures intents? is Gipsisme quite repeald?
Is Friar Bacon nothing but a name?
Or is all witchcraft braind with Doctor Lamb?
Does none the learned Bungies soul inherit?
Has Madam Davers dispossessed her spirit?
Or will the Welchmen give me leave to say
There is no faith in Merlin? none, though they
Dare swear each letter creed, and pawn their blood
He prophesied, an age before the flood,
Of holy Dee; which was, as some have said,
Ten generations ere the Arc was made.
All your predictions but Impostures are,
And you but prophecy of things that were.
And you Celestial Iuglers that pretend
You are acquainted with the stars, and send
Your spies to search what is done in every sphere,
Keeping your state intelligencers there.
Your art is all deceit; for now I see
Against the Rules of deep Astrology,
Girls may be got when Mars his power does vaunt,
And boys when Venus is Predominant.
Nor does the Moon though moist and cold she be
Always at full work to produce the she:
Had this been true I had foretold no lie,
It was the Art was in the wrong, not I.
Thence I so dully erred in my belief,
As to mistake an Adam for an Eve:
O gross mistake, and in the civil pleas
Error Personae, Mr Doctor says,
And may admit divorce, but farewell now
You hungry star-fed Tribe, hence forth I vow
Talmud, Albumazar, and Ptolomie,
With Erra*Pater shall no Gospel be.
Nor will I ever after this I swear
Throw Dice upon the shepherds Calender.
But why do I to excuse my Ignorance
Lay blame upon the Art? no, no, perchance
I have lost all my skill: for well I know
My Physiognomie two years ago
By the small Pox was marred, and it may be
A fingers loss has spoild my Palmistry.
But why should I a gross mistake confesse^
No I am confident I did but guess
The very truth: it was a male child then,
But Aunt you staid till 'twas a wench again.
To see the unconstancy of humane things,
How little time great Alteration brings!
All thing are subject unto change we know,
And if all things, then why not sexes too*
Tyresias we read a man was borne
Yet after did into a woman turn.
Levinus a Physician of great fame,
Reports that one at Paris did the same.
And devout Papists say certain it is,
One of their Popes by Metamorphosis
Endured the same; else how could Joan be heir
To the succession of Saint Peter's chair.
So I at Chairing cross have beheld one
A statue cut out of the Parian stone
To figure great Aloides; which when well
The Artist saw it was not like to sell;
He takes his chissell, and away he pares
Part of his sinewy neck, shaving the hairs
Of his rough beard and face, smoothing the brow,
And making that look amorous; which but now
Stood wrinkled with his anger; from his head
He poles the shaggy locks, that had over spread
His brawny shoulders with a fleece of hair,
And works instead more gentle tresses there.
And thus his skill exactly to express,
Soon makes a Venus of an Hercules.
And can it then impossible appear,
That such a change as this might happen here.
For this cause therefore (Gentle Aunt) I pray
Blame not my Prophecy, but your delay.
But this will not excuse me; that I may
Directly clear my self, there is no way
Unless the Jesuits will to me impart
The secret depth of their mysterious art.
Who from their halting Patriot learn to frame
A Crutch for every word that falls out lame.
That can the subtle difference discry
Betwixt aequivocation and a lie.
And a rare escape by sly distinction find
To swear the Tongue, and yet not swear the mind.
Now armed with Arguments I nothing dread,
But my own cause thus confidently plead.
I said there was a boy with in your womb,
Not actually, but one in time to come.
Or by Antiphrasis my words might be
That ever understands the contrary;
Or when I said you should a man-child bear,
You understood me of the sex I fear,
When I did mean the mind; and thus define
A woman but of spirit masculine.
Or had I said it should a girl have been
And it had proved a boy you should have seen
Me solve it thus; I meant a boy by fate,
But one that would have been effeminate.
Or thus I had my just excuse begun,
I said my Aunt would surely bring a son
If not a daughter; what we seers forsee
Is certain truth unless it falsehood be.
Or I affirm because she brought forth one
That will bring boys, she has brought forth a son.
For do not we call Father Adam thus,
Because that he got those that have got us.
What ere I said by simple Affirmation,
I meant the right by mental reservation.
An Epithalamium to Mt F. H.
Frank, when this Morn the harbinger of day
Blushed from her Eastern pillow where she lay,
Clasped in her Tythons arms red with those kisses
Which being enjoyed by night, by day she misses:
I walked the feilds to see the teeming earth,
Whose womb now swells to give the flowers a birth.
Where while my thoughts with every object taken,
In several contemplations rapt my brain,
A sudden luster like the Sun did rise,
And with to great a light eclipsed mine eyes.
At last I spyed a Beauty, such another,
As I have sometimes heard call the^ her Brother.
But by the chariot, and her teame of Doves,
I guest her to be Venus, Queen of Loves.
With her a pretty boy I there did see,
But for his wings I'had thought it had been thee*
At last when I beheld his quiver of darts,
I knew it was Cupid Emperor of our hearts.
Thus I accosted them, Goddess divine,
Great Queen of Paphos and Cytherian shrine:
Whose Altars no man sees that can depart
Till in those flames he sacrifice his heart;
That conquerst Gods, and men; and heaven divine,
Yea and hell too: Bea^e witness Pr^serpine.
And Cupid, thou that can thy Trophies show
Over all these, and over thy Mother too;
Witness the night which when with Mars she lay,
Did all her sports to all the Gods betray:
Tell me great Powers; what makes such glorious beams
Visit the lowly banks of Ninus streams?
Then Venus smiled, and smiling bid me know
Cupid and she must both to Weston go.
I guest the cause; for Hymen came behind
In saffron robes, his Nuptial knots to bind.
Then thus I prayed: Great Venus by the Love
Of thy Adonu; as thou hop'st to move
Thy Mars to second kisses; and obtain
Beauties reward, the Golden fruit again:
Bow thy fair ears to my chaste prayers, and take
Such Orisons as purest Love can make.
Thou, and thy boy I know are posting thither
To tie pure hearts in purest bonds together.
Cupid thou know the maid: I'have seen thee lie
With all thy arrows lurking in her eye.
Venus thou know her love, for I have seen
The time thou would have feign her Rival been.
O bless them both! Let their affections meet
With happy omens in the Geniall sheet.
Both comely, beauteous both, both equal fair,
Thou can not glory in a fitter pair.
I would not thus have praid if I had seen
Fourscore and ten, wed to a young fifteen.
Death in such Nuptials seems with love to play,
And January seems to match with May:
Autumn to wed the Spring; Frost to desire
To kiss the Sun; Ice to embrace the fire.
Both these are young, both sprightfull, both complete,
Of equal moisture, and of equal heat:
And their desires are one; were all Loves such
Who would love solitary sheets so much*
Virginity (whereof chaste fools do boast;
A thing not known what, it is till it be lost)
Let others praise; for me I cannot tell
What virtue, it is to lead Baboons in hell.
Woman is one with man when she is brided*
The same in kind, only in sex divided.
Had all died maids, we had been nothing then;
* Adam had been the first, and last of men.
How none O Venus then thy power had seen*
How then in vain had Cupids arrows been*
My self whose cool thoughts feel no hot desires,
That serve not Venus flames, but Vestas fires;
Had I not vowed the cloisters, to confine
My self to no more wives then only nine
Parnassus brood; those that hear Phoebus sing*
Bathing their naked limbs in Thespian spring.
I Would rather be an Owl of Birds, then one
That is the Phoenix if she live alone*
Two is the first of numbers; one naught can do,
One then is good, when one is made of two.
Which mystery is thine great Venus, thine;
Thy union can two souls in one combine.
Now by that power I charge thee bless the sheets
With happy issue where this couple meets.
The maid's a Harvy, one that may compare
With fruit Hesperian* or the Dragonscare.
Her Love a Ward; not he that awed the seas,
Frighting the fearful Hamadryades.
That Ocean terror, he that durst outbrave
Dread Neptunes Trident, Amphitrites wave.
This Ward a milder Pirat sure will prove,
And only sails the Hellesp^nt of Love,
As once Leander did; his theft is best
That nothing steals but what is within the breast*
Yet let that other Ward his thefts compare,
And ransack all his treasures, let him bear
The wealth of worlds, the bowels of the West
And all the richest treasures of the East.
The sands of Tagu^, all Pactolus ore,
With both the Indies; yet this one gets more
At once by Love; then he by force could get,
Or ravish from the Merchants; let him set
His Ores together; let him vainly boast
Of spices snatched from the Canary coast;
The Gummes of Egypt, or the Tyrian fleece
Died in his Native purple, with what Greece,
Colchos, Arabia, or proud China yields,
With all the Metals in Guiana feilds.
When this has set all forth to boast his pride
In various pomp; this other brings his Bride,
And I Will be judged by all judicious eyes,
If she alone prove not the richer prize.
O let not death have power their Love to sever!
Let them both love, and live and die together.
O let their beds be chaste, and banish thence
As well all Iealousies, as all offense!
For some men I have known, whose wives have been*
As chaste as Ice: such as were never seen
In wanton dalliance, such as until death
Never smelt any, but their husbands breath.
Yet the Good Man still dreamed of horns, still fearing
His forhead would grow harder; still appearing
To his own fancy, bull, or stagge, or more,
Or Ox at least, that was an Ass before.
If she would have new clothes, he straight will fear
She loves a Taylour; if she sad appear
He guesses soon it is 'cause he is at home;
If jocund, sure she has some friend to come.
If she be sick, he thinks no grief she felt,
But wishes all Physicians had been guelt.
But ask her how she does, sets him a swearing,
Feeling her pulse, is love tricks past the bearing.
Poor wretched wife, she cannot look a wry
But without doubt it is flat adultery.
And jealous wives there be, that are afraid
To entertain a handsome Chambermaid.
Far, far from them be all such thoughts I pray,
Let their Loves prove eternal, and no day
Add date to their affections, grant (o Queen)
Their Loves like nuptial bays be always green.
And also grant -- But here she bid me stay,
For well she knew what I had else to say.
I asked no more, wished her hold on her race
To join their hands, and send them night apace.
She smiled to hear what I in sport did say,
So whipped her doves and smiling rid away.
To Mr Feltham on his book of Resolves.
IN this unconstant Age when all men's minds
In various change strive to outvie the winds.
When no man sets his foot upon the square,
But treads on globes and circles; when we are
The Apes of Fortune, and desire to be
Revolved on as fickle wheels as she.
As if the planets, that our rulers are,
Made the souls motion too irregular.
When minds change oftener then the Greek could dream,
That made the Metempseucos'd soul his theme;
Yea often to beastly forms* when truth to say
Moons change but once a month, we twice a day.
When none resolves but to be rich, and ill;
Or else resolves to be irresolute still.
In such a tide of minds, that every hour
Do ebb and flow; by what inspring power,
By what instinct of grace I cannot tell,
Do thou resolve so much, and yet so well?
While foolish men whose reason is their sense,
Still wander in the worlds circumference:
Thou holding passions raines with strictest hand
Do firm and fixed in the Center stand.
Thence thou art settled, others while they tend
To rove about the circle find no end.
Thy book I read, and read it with delight,
Resolving so to live as thou do wright.
And yet I guess thy life thy book produces,
And but expresses thy peculiar uses.
Thy manners dictate, thence thy writing came,
So Lesbians by their work their rules do frame,
Not by the rules the work; thy life had been
Pattern enough, had it of all been seen,
Without a book; books make the difference here,
In them thou liv'st the same but every where.
And this I guess, though thou art unknown to me,
By thy chaste writing; else it could not be
(Dissemble ne'^e so well) but here and there
Some tokens of that plague would soon appear;
Often lurking in the skin a secret gout
In books would sometimes blister, and break out.
Contagious sins in which men take delight
Must needs infect the paper when they write.
But let the curious eyes of Lynceus look
Through every nerve, and sinew of this book,
Of which it is full: let the most diligent mind
Pry thorough it, each sentence he shall find
Seasoned with chaste, not with an itching salt,
More favoring of the Lamp, then of the malt.
But now too many think noe wit divine,
None worthy life, but whose luxurious line
Can ravish Virgins thoughts. And is it fit
To make a pandar, or a baud of wit?
But tell'em of it, in contempt they look,
And ask in scorn if you would geld their book.
As if the effeminate brain could nothing do
That should be chaste, and yet be masculine too.
Such books as these (as they themselves indeed
Truly confess) men do not praise, but read.
Such idle books, which if per chance they can
Better the brain, yet they corrupt the man.
Thou have not one bad line so lustful bred
As to dye maid, or Matrons cheek in red.
Thy modest wit, and witty honest letter
Makes both at once my wit, and me the better.
Thy book a Garden is, and helps us most
To regaine that, which we in Adam lost.
Where on the Tree of knowledge we may feed,
But such as no forbidden fruits does breed.
Whose leaves like those whence Eve her coat did frame,
Serve not to cover, but to cure our shame.
Fraught with all flowers, not only such as grows
To please the eye, or to delight the nose.
But such as may redeem lost healths again,
And store of Hellebore to purge the brain.
Such as would cure the furfet man did take
From Adams Apples: such as feign would make
Man's second Paradise, in which should be
The fruits of life, but no forbidden Tree.
It is a Garden; have I thus did say:
And maids, and Matrons blushing run away.
But maids reenter these chaste pleasing bowers;
Chaste Matrons here gather the purest flowers.
Fear not: from this pure Garden do not fly,
In it does no obsceane Priapus lie.
This is an Eden where no serpents be;
To tempt the woman's imbecillitie.
These lines rich sap the fruit to heaven does raise;
Nor does the Cinnamon bark deserve less praise,
I mean the style, being pure and strong and round,
Not long but Pythy: being short breathed, but sound.
Such as the grave, acute, wise Seneca sings,
That best of Tutour to the worst of kings.
Not long and empty; lofty but not proud;
Subtle but sweet, high but without a cloud.
Well settled full of nerves, in breife it is such
That in a little has comprised much,
Like the Iliads in a Nutshell: And I say
Thus much for style; though truth should not be gay.
In strumpets glittering robes, yet ne'rethelesse
She well deserves a Matrons comeliness.
Being too brave she would our fancies glut;
But we should loath her being too much the slut.
The reasonable soul from heaven obtained
The best of bodies; and that man has gained
A double praise; whose noble virtues are
Like to the face, in soul and body fair.
Who then would have a noble sentence clad
In russet-thread-bare words, is full as mad
As if Apelles should so fondly dote,
As to paint Venus in old Baucys coat.
They err that would bring style so basely under;
The lofty language of the Law was thunder.
The wisest' pothecary knows it is skill
Neatly to candy over the wholesome pill.
Best Physique then, when gall with sugar meets,
Tempring Asbinthian bitterness with sweets.
Such is thy sentence, such thy style, being read
Men see them both together happ'ly wed.
And so resolve to keep them wed, as we
Resolve to give them to posterity.
Amongst thy resolves put my resolves in too;
Resolve who is will, thus I resolve to do:
That should my errors choose another line
Whereby to write, I mean to live by thine.
In Natalem Augustissimi Principis Caroli.
PRimatibi pertit soboles (dilecta Maria.)
Elusitque uterum moesta Diana tuum.
Tunc Coelo, nunc and terris foecunda fuisti,
Quae potes and reges and peperisse deos.
Thy first birth Mary was unto a tomb,
And sad Lucina cheated thy blessed womb.
To heaven thou then were fruitful, now to earth,
That can give Saints as well as Kings a birth.
Upon his Picture.
WHen age has made me what I am not now;
And every wrinckle tells me where the plow
Of time has furrowed; when an Ice shall flow
Through every vein, and all my head wear snow:
When death displayes his coldness in my cheek,
And I, my self in my own Picture seek.
Not finding what I am, but what I was*
In doubt which to believe, this, or my glass:
Yet though I alter, this remains the same
As it was drawn, retains the primitive frame,
And first complexion; here will still be seen
Blood on the cheek, and Down upon the chin.
Here the smooth brow will stay, the lively eye,
The ruddy Lip, and hair of youthful dye.
Behold what frailty we in man may see,
Whose Shadow is less given to change then he.
An Ode to Mr Anthony Stafford to hasten him into the Country,
Come spur away,
I have no patience for a longer stay;
But must go down,
And leave the chargeable noise of this great Town.
I will the country see,
Where old simplicity,
Though hid in gray
Does look more gay
Then foppery in plush and scarlat clad.
Farewell you City-wits that are
Almost at Civil war;
It Is time that I grow wise, when all the world grows mad.
More of my days
I will not spend to gain an Idiots praise;
Or to make sport
For some slight Punie of the Innes of Court.
Then worthy Stafford say
How shall we spend the day.
With what delights,
Shorten the nights?
When from this tumult we are got secure;
Where mirth with all her freedom goes,
Yet shall no finger loose;
Where every word is thought, and every thought is pure.
There from the tree
We Will cherries pluck, and pick the strawbery.
And every day
Go see the wholesome Country Girls make hay.
whose brown has lovlier grace,
Then any painted face,
That I do know
Hide-Parke can show.
Where I had rather gain a kiss then meet
Though some of them in greater state
Might court my love with plate,
The beauties of the Cheap, and wives of Lumbardstreet.
But think upon.
Some other pleasures* these to me are none,
Why do I prate
Of women, that are things against my fate
I never mean to wed,
That torture to my bed.
My Muse is she
My Love shall be.
Let Clownes get wealth, and hairs; when I am gone,
And the great Bugbeare grisly death
Shall take this ^le breath,
If I a Poem leave, that Poem is my Son.
Of this no more;
We Will rather taste the bright Pomona's store.
No fruit shall escape
Our pallats, from the damsen, to the grape.
Then full we will seek a shade,
And hear what musique's made;
How Philomell
Her tale does tell:
And how the other Birds do fill the quire;
The Thrush and Blackbird lend their throats
warbling melodious notes;
We will all sports enjoy, which others but desire:
Ours is the sky,
Whereat what foul we please our Hawk shall fly;
Nor will we spare
To hunt the crafty fox, or timorous hare*
But let our hounds run loose
In any ground they will choose,
The Bucke shall fall,
The stagge and all:
Our pleasures must from their own warrants be,
For to my Muse, if not to me,
I Am sure all game is free;
Heaven, Earth, are all but parts of her great Royalty.
And when we mean
To taste of Bacchus blessings now and then,
And drink by stealth
A cup or two to noble Barkleys health.
I Will take my pipe and try
The Phrygian melody;
Which he that hears
Lets through his ears
A madness to distemper all the brain.
Then I another pipe will take
And Dorique music make,
To Civilize with graver notes our wits again.
An answer to Mr Ben Iohnso^'s Ode^o persuade him not to leave the stage,
BEn do not leave the stage
Cause it is a loath some age;
For Pride, and Impudence will grow too bold,
When they shall hear it told
They frighted thee: stand high as is thy cause,
Their hiss is thy applause.
More just were thy disdain,
Had they appov'd thy vain.
So thou for them, and they for thee were borne,
They to incense, and thou as much to scorn.
Will thou engrosse thy store
Of wheat, and power no more,
Because their Bacon-braines have such a taste
As more delight in mast?
No; set'em forth a board of dainties, full
As thy best Muse can cull;
While they the while do pine
And thirst, midst all their wine.
What greater plague can hell it self devise,
Then to be willing thus to tantalize?
Thou can not find them stuff
That will be bad enough
To please their pallats; let 'em thine refuse
For some Pye-corner Muse;
She is to fair an hostess, 'twere a finne
For them to like thine Inn:
'Twas made to entertain,
Guests of a nobler strain,
Yet if they will have any of thy store,
Give 'em some scraps, and send them from thy door.
And let those things in plush,
Till they be taught to blush
Like what they will, and more contented be
With what Broom swept from thee.
I know thy worth, and that thy lofty strains
Write not to clothes but Brains:
But thy great spleen does rise
Cause moles will have no eyes;
This only in my Ben, I faulty find
He Is angry, they 'le not see him that are blind.
Why should the Scene be Mute
Cause thou can touch a Lute
And string thy Horace? let each Muse of nine
Claim thee, and say thou art mine.
It Were fond to let all other flames expire
To sit by Pindar's fire:
For by so strange neglect,
I should my self suspect
The Palsy were as well, thy brains disease;
If they could shake thy Muse which way they please.
And though thou well can sing,
The glories of thy King;
And on the wings of verse his chariot bear
To heaven, and fix it there:
Yet let thy Muse as well some raptures raise,
To please him, as to praise.
I would not have thee choose
Only a treble Muse;
But have this envious, ignorant Age to know,
Thou that can sing so high, can reach as low.
A Dialogue. Thirsis. Lalage.
Th. MY Lalage when I behold
So great a cold,
And not a spark of heat in thy desire,
I wonder what strange power of thine,
Kindles in mine
So bright a flame, and such a burning fire.

Lalag. Can Thirsis in Philosophy
A truant be,
And not have learned the power of the Sun?
How he to sublunary things
A favor brings,
Yet in himself is subject unto none?

Th. But why within thy eyes appear
Never a tear,
That cause from mine perpetual showers to fall?

La. Fool it is the power of fire you know
To melt the snow,
Yet has no moisture in it self at all.

Th. How can I be, dear Virgin show,
Both fire and snow?
Do you that are the cause, the reason tell;
More then miracle to me
It seems to be,
That so much heat with so much cold should dwell.

La. The reason I will render thee;
Why both should be.
Audacious Thirsis in thy love too bold,
'Cause thy sauciness durst aspire
To such a fire,
Thy love is hot; but it is thy hope is cold.

Th. Let pity move thy gentle breast
To one oppressed;
This way, or that, give ease to my desire;
And either let Loves fire be lost
In hopes cold frost,
Or hopes cold frost be warmed in loves quick fire.

La. O neither Boy; neither of these
Shall work thy ease.
I 'le pay thy rashness with immortal pain,
As hope does strive to freeze thy flame,
Love melts the same:

Th. As Love does melt it, Hope does freez't again
Come gentle swains lend me a groan
To ease my moan.

Chorus. Ah cruel Love how great a power is thine?
Under the Poles although we lie
Thou make us frye:
And thou can make us freeze beneath the line.

A Dialogue betwixt a Nymph and a Shepherd.
Nymp. WHy sigh you swain? this passion is not common;
Is It for your kids, or Lambkins?

Sh: For a woman


Nymp. How ^aire is she that on so sage a brow
Prints lowering looks?

Shep: Just such a toy as thou.


Nymp. Is she a maid?


Sh: what man can answer that?


Nymp. Or widow?


Sh: No.


Nym: what then?


Sh: I know not
Saint-like she looks, a Siren if she sing.
Her eyes are stars, her mind is every thing.

Nymp. If she be fickle, Shepherd leave to woo
Or fancy me.

Sh: No tho^ art woman too*


Nymp. But I am constant.


Sh: Then thou art not fair.


Nymp. Bright as the morning.


Sh: Wavering as the Air.


Nymp. What grows upon this cheek?


Sh: A pure Carnation.


Nym. Come taste a kiss


Sh. O sweet, o sweet Temptation!


Cho. Ah Love, and can thou never loose the field?
Where Cupid lays a seige, the town must yield.
He warmes the chiller blood with glowing fire,
And thaws the Icy frost of cold desire.

A Pastoral Ode.
COy Coelia do thou see
Yon hollow mountain tottering over the plain,
Over which a fatal Tree
With treacherous shade betrays the sleepy swain?
Beneath it is a Cell,
As full of horror as my breast of care,
Ruin therein might dwell;
As a fit room for guilt and black despair.
Thence will I headlong throw
This wretched weight, this heap of misery;
And in the dust below,
Bury my Carcass, and the thought of thee:
Which when I finished have,
O hate me dead, as thou have done alive;
And come not near my grave
Least I take heat from thee, and so revive.
A Song.
Music thou Queen of souls, get up and string
Thy powerful Lute, and some sad requiem sing,
Till Rocks requite thy Echo with a groan:
And the dull clifts repeat the duller tone:
Then on a sudden with a nimble hand
Runnne gently over the Chordes, and so command
The Pine to dance, the Oak his Roots forgo,
The holme and aged Elm to foot it too;
Mirtles shall caper, lofty Cedars run;
And call the Courtly Palm to make up one;
Then in the midst of all their Jolly train,
Strike a sad note; and fix 'em Trees again.
The Song of Discord.
LEt Linus and Amphions lute,
With Orpheus ^itterne now be mute.
The harshest voice the sweetest note;
The Raven has the choicest throat.
A set of Frogs a quire for me,
The Mandrake shall the Chaunter be.
Where neither voice, nor tunes agree;
This is discords Harmony.
Thus had Orpheus learned to play,
The following Trees had run away.
To one Overhearing his private discourse.
I Wonder not my Laeda far can see,
Since for her eyes she might an Eagle be,
And dare the Sun; but that she hears so well
As that she could my private whisperings tell,
I stand amazed; her ears are not so long,
That they could reach my words; hence then it sprung:
Love overhearing fled to her bright ear,
Glad he had got a tale to whisper there.
Epigram: 47 ex decimo Libro Martialis,
THese are things that being possessed
Will make a life that is truly blessed:
Estate bequeathed, not got with toil;
A good hot fire, a grateful soil.
No strife, warm clothes, a quiet soul,
A strength entire, a body whole.
Prudent simplicity, equal friends,
A diet that no Art commends.
A night not drunk, and yet secure;
A bed not sad, yet chaste and pure.
Long sleeps to make the nights but short,
A will to be but what thou art*
Naught rather choose; contented lie,
And neither fear, nor wish to dye.
In Grammaticum Eunuchum.
GRammaticam Diodore doces Eunuche puellos,
Credo Solaecismum tu Diodore facis,
Cum sis exectus quam nec Sporus ille Neronis,
Nec mersus liquidis Hermaphroditus aquis.
Non unam liquit tibi saeva novacula testem;
Propria quae maribus cur Diodore legis?
Quae genus aut sexum variant, Heteroclyta tantum*
Posthac si sapias tu Diodore legas.
To the Virtuous and noble Lady, the Lady Cotton.
It Is not to force more tears from your sad eye,
That we write thus; that were a Piety
Turned guilt and sin; we only beg to come
And pay due tribute to his sacred tomb.
The muses did divide his Love with you,
And justly therefore may be mourners too.
Instead of Cypress, they have brought fresh Baies
To crown his Vrne, and every dirge is Praise.
But since with him the learned tongues are gone,
Necessity here makes us use our own.
Read, in his praise your own, you cannot miss;
For he was but our Wonder, you were his.
An Elegy on the death of that Renowned and Noble Knight Sir Rowland Cotton of
Bellaport in Shropshire.
RIch as was Cottons worth, I wish each line;
And every verse I breath like him, a Mine.
That by his virtues might created be
A new strange miracle, wealth in Poetry.
But that invention cannot sure be poor,
That but relates a part of his large store.
His youth began, as when the Sun does rise
Without a Cloud, and clearly trots the skies.
And whereas other youths commended be
From conceived Hopes; his was maturitie.
Where other springs boast blossoms fairly blown,
His was a harvest, and had fruits full grown.
So that he seemed a Nestor here to reign
In wisdom, Aeson-like, turned young again.
This, Royal Henry, whose majestique eye
Saw thorough men, did from his court descrye,
And thither called him, and then fixed him there
One of the prime stars in his glorious sphere.
And (Princely Master) witness this with me,
He lived not there to serve himself but thee.
No Silk-worme Courtier such as study there
First how to get their clothes, then how to wear.
And though in favor high, he never was known
To promote others suits to pay for's own.
He valued more his Master, and knew well,
To use his Love was noble; base to sell.
Many there belive in the Court we know
To serve for Pageants, and make up the show;
And are not serviceable there at all
But now and then at some great Festival.
He served for nobler use, the secret-cares
Of commonwealths, and mystique State affairs;
And when great Henry did his Maxims hear,
He wore him as a Jewel in his Ear.
Yet short he came not, nay he all out-went
In what some call a Courtiers complement.
An Active body that in subtle wise
Turns pliable to any exercise.
For when he leapt, the people dared to say
He was borne all of fire, and wore no clay.
Which was the cause too that he wrestled so,
It Is not fires nature to be kept below.
His course he so performed with nimble pace,
The time was not perceived measured the race.
As it were true that some late Artists say,
The Earth moved too, and run the other way.
All so soon finished, when the match was won
The Gazers by asked why they not begun.
When he in masque used his harmonious feet,
The Spears could not in comelier order meet;
Nor move more graceful, whether they advance
Their measures forward, or retire their dance.
There be have seen him in our Henry's Court
The glory and the envy of that sport.
And capring like a constellation rise,
Having fixed upon him all the Ladies eyes.
But these in him I would not virtues call,
But that the world must know, that he had all.
When Henry died (our universal woe)
Willing was Cotton to dye with him too.
And as near death he came as near could be;
Himself he buried in obscurity,
Entombed within his study walls, and there
Only the Dead his conversation were.
Yet was he not alone; for every day
Each Muse came thither with her sprig of Bay.
The Graces round about him did appear,
The Genii of all Nations all met there.
And while immured he sat thus close at home,
To him the wealth of all the world did come.
He had a language to salute the Sun,
Where he unharnest, and where is teame begun*
The tongues of all the East to him 'twere known
As Natural, as they were borne his own.
Which from his mouth so sweetly did entice,
As with their language he had mixed their spice.
In Greek so fluent, that with it compare
The Athenian Olives, and they ^aplesse are.
Rome did submit her Fasces, and confes^e
Her Tully might talk more, and yet speak less.
All Sciences were lodged in his large breast,
And in that Palace thought themselves so blessed
They never meant to part, but he should be
Sole Monarch, and dissolve their Heptarchie.
But o how vain is man's frail Harmony!
We all are swannes, he that sings best must die.
Death knowledge nothing makes, when we come there,
We need no Language, nor Interpreter.
Who would not laugh at him now, that should seek
In Cotton's Vrne for Hebrew or for Greek?
But his more heavenly graces with him yet
Live constant, and about him circled sit
A bright Retinue, and on each falls down
A robe of Glory, and on each a Crown.
Then Madam (though you have a loss sustained
Both infinite, and never to be regained
Here in this world) dry your sad eyes, once more
You shall again enter the Nuptial door
A sprightly bride; where you shall clothed be
In garments weaved of Immortality.
Nor greive because he left you not a Son,
To Image Co^ton forth now he is gone.
For it had been a wrong to his great Name
TO have lived in any thing but Heaven, and Fame.
Ausonit Epigram 38.
She which would not I would choose:
She which would I would refuse.
Venus could my mind but tame;
But not satisfy the same.
Inticements offered I despise,
And denied I slightly prize.
I would neither glut my mind,
Nor yet too much torment find.
Twice girt Diana does not take me,
Nor Venus naked joyful make me.
The first no pleasure has to joy me,
And the last enough to cloy me.
But a crafty we^ch I Would have
That can sell the act I crave.
And join at once in me these two,
I will, and yet I will not do.
On the Death of a Nightingale.
Go solitary wood, and henceforth be
Acquainted with no other Harmony,
Then the Pyes chattering, or the shreeking note
Of bodeing Owls, and fatal Ravens throat.
Thy sweetest Chanters dead, that warbled forth
Lays, that might tempests calm, and still the North;
And call down Angels from their glorious Sphere
To hear her Songs, and learn new Anthems there.
That soul is fled, and to Elisium gone;
Thou a poor desert left; go then and run,
Beg there to stand a grove, and if she please
To sing again beneath thy shadowy Trees;
The souls of happy Lovers crowned with blisses
Shall flock about thee, and keep time with kisses.
In filium Manlii insepultum.
IN terra condivetuit Pater improbus, at Te
In tumulo patitur nobiliore tegi.
Pars canis est tumuli, tumuli pars altera Tigris,
Altera pars Lupus est, and Leo for san erit.
Marmoreos Regum tumulos contemn, sepulchra
Sunt aliis tantum mortua, viva tibi.
Upon the report of the King of Swedens Death.
I Will not believe 't; if fate should be so cross
Nature would not be silent of her loss.
Can he be dead, and no portents appear?
No pale Eclipse of the sun to let us fear
What we should suffer, and before his light
Put out, the world inveloped in Night?
What thundering torrents the flushed welkin tare?
What apparition killed him in the air?
When Caesar died there were convulsion fits;
And nature seemed to run out of her wits.
At that sad object Tybers bosom swelled,
And scarce from drowning all, by Jove withheld.
And shall we give this mighty Conqueror
That in a great and a more holy war,
Was pulling down the Empire which he reard,
A fall unmourn'd of Nature and unfear'd;
A death (unless the league of heaven withstood)
Less wept then with an universal flood?
If I had seen a Comet in the air
With glorious eye, and bright disheveld hair,
And on a sudden with his gilded train
Drop down; I should have said that Sweden's slain,
Shot like that star; or if the earth had shook
Like a weak floor, the falling roof had broke;
I should have said the mighty King is gone;
Fel'd as the tallest tree in Libanon.
Alas if he were dead; we need no post,
Uery instinct would tell us what we lost.
And a chill damp (as at the general doom)
Creep through each breast and we should know for whom.
His German conquests are not yet complete,
And when they are, there is more remaining yet.
The world is full of sin, nor every Land
Over grown with schism has felt his purging hand.
The Pope is not confounded, and the Turk,
Nor was he sure designed for a less work.
But if our sins have stopped him in the source,
In midst Careere of his victorious course.
And heaven would trust the dullness of our sense
So far, not to prepare us with portents.
It Is we that have the loss, and he has caught
His heavenly garland e're his work be wrought.
But I, before I Will undertake to greive
So great a loss, will choose not to believe.
On Sr Robert Cotton the Antiquary.
POsterity has many fates bemoaned,
But ages long since past for thee have groaned.
Times Trophies thou did rescue from the grave
Who in thy death a second burial have.
Cotton, deaths conquest now complete I see,
Who never had vanquished all things but in thee.
An Elegy.
Heaven knows my Love to thee, fed on desires
So hallowed, and unmixt with vulgar fires,
As are the purest beams shot from the Sun
At his full height; and the devotion.
Of dying Martyrs could not burn more clear,
Nor Innocence in her first robes appear
Whiter then our Affections; they did show
Like frost forced out of flames, and fire from snow*
So pure the Phoenix when she did refine
Her age to youth, borrowed no flames but mine.
But now my days o'recast, for I have now
Drawn Anger like a tempest over the brow
Of my fair Mistress; those your glorious eyes
Whence I was wont to see my day star rise,
Threat like revengefull Meteors, and I feel
My torment, and my guilt double my hell.
'T was a mistake, and might have venial been,
Done to another, but it was made sin,
And justly Mortal too by troubling Thee,
Slight wrongs are treasons done to Majesty.
O all ye blessed Ghosts of deceased Loves,
That now live Sainted in the Elisian groves
Mediate for mercy for me; at her shrine
Meet in full quire, and join your prayers with mine.
Conjure her by the merits of your kisses,
By your past sufferings and present blisses.
Conjure her by your mutual hopes, and fears;
By all your intermixed sighs, and tears,
To plead my pardon; go to her and tell
That you will walk the guardian sentinel,
My souls safe Genii, that she need not fear
A mutinous thought, or one close rebel there.
But what needs that, when she alone sits there
Sole Angel of that Orb; in her own sphere
Alone she sits, and can secure it free
From all irregular motions, only she
Can give the balsome that must cure this sore;
And the sweet Antidote to sin no more.
(...): Arist.
FRom witty men and mad
All Poetry conception had.
No sires but these will Poetry admit
Madness or wit.
This definition Poetry does fit,
It is a witty madness, or mad wit.
Only these two Poetique heat admits,
A witty man, or one that is out of's wits.
Ad Amicum Litigantem,
WOuld you commence a Poet S^, and be
A graduat in the thredbare mystery?
The Oxes ford will no man thither bring,
Where the horse hoof raisd the Pegasian spring.
Nor will the bridge through which low Cham does run,
Direct you to the banks of Helicon.
If in that art you mean to take degrees,
Bedlam's the best of universities.
There study it, and when you would no more
A Poet be, go drink some Hellebore.
Which drugge when I had tasted, soon I left
The bare Parnassus, and the barren cleft;
And can no more one of their Nation be,
Because recovered of my lunacie.
But you may then succeed me in my place
Of Poet, no pretense to make your grace
Denied you, for you go to law, it is said;
And then it is taken for granted you are mad.
Felicem Anticyram! nullos ibi credo Poetas
Insanos tumido cord fovere modos.
Hanc, fama est tantum sanos admittere cives.
Exulat hinc vester, (turba molesta) furor!
Nullus in hac Elegis, nullus jugulatur Iambis;
Incola non Satyram, non Epigramma timet.
Nullus in hac tener as recitator verberat aures;
Non hic judicium, non petit ille tuum.
Non hic te Chloris, non hic laudata fatigat
Coelia; nulla tuam mordet hirudo cutem.
Putida nec medias disrumpunt carmina mensas;
Mucida nec quisquam vina legendo facit.
Nusquam aliquis, terrae securior errat, ob unum hoc
Grates Helloboro quin agat ille suo.
In Corydonem and Corinnam.
AH miser, and nullo felix in amore! Corinnam
Cum rogat illa, negas; cum negat illa, rogas.
Ambos urit Amor, quid sit f^licius* ambos*
Tempore non uno sed tamen ^rit amor.
Cum flagras Corydon, frigescit fibra Corinnae
Cum tua frigescit fibra, Co^inna calet.
Cur aestas Corydonis* hyems sit facta Corrinnae?
Quidve Corinnae aestas sit Corydonis hyems?
Vnde ignis glaciem* glacies unde efficit ignem?
Desine crudeles, s^e Cupido, jocos!
Desine! sed nec te Corydonis tollere flammas,
Tollere nec castas Virginis oro nives.
Ure duos, extingue duos, and pectus utrumque
Aut calor, aut teneat pectus utrumque gelu.
Paraphrased.
AH wretch in thy Corinna's love unblest!
How strange a fancy does torment thy breast?
When she desires to sport thou say her nay;
When she denies then thou desir'st to play.
Love burns you both. (o'tis a happy turn!)
But it is at several times love both does burn.
When scorching heat has Corydons heart possessed,
Then reigns a frost in cold Corinnas breast.
And when a frost in Corydon does reign,
Then is Corinnas breast on fire again.
Why then with Corydon is it summer prime,
When with Corinna it is winter time?
Or why should then Corin^as summer be
When it is winter Corydon with thee?
Can lce from fire, or fire from Ice proceed?
Ah jest not Love in so severe a deed!
I bid thee not Corydons flame to blow
Clean out; nor clean to melt Corinnas snow.
Burn both! freeze both! let mutual Ferv our hold
His and her breast, or his and here is a cold
Ad ^assum.
Nostri, (Basse) solent pretio conducere stultos
Quos in deliciis Aulicus omnis habet.
At si quis cuperet sapientem vendere praeco,
Rarus erit minimo qui velit ass virum.
Vsque adeo nocet ingenium, tantoque putatur
Quo minus est cerebri, charius esse caput.
Vnde tot ignari veneres? cur stultus amatur?
Hei mihi! cur tanti non sapuisse fuit?
Haec ratio est, paribus gaudet Venus atque Cupido;
Et nunquam similes non sibi iungit Amor.
To one admiring her self in a Looking-glass.
Fair Lady when you see the Grace
Of Beauty in your Looking-glass*
A stately forhead, smooth and high,
And full of Princely Majesty.
A sparkling eye no gemme so fair,
Whose luster dimmes the Cyprian star.
A glorious cheek divinely sweet,
Wherein both Roses kindly meet.
A cherry Lip that would entice
Even Gods to kiss at any price.
You think no beauty is so rare
That with your shadow might compare.
That your reflection is alone,
The thing that men most dote upon.
Madam, alas your Glass does ly e,
And you are much deceived; for I
A beauty know of richer grace
(Sweet be not angry) it is your face.
Hence then o learn more mild to be,
And leave to lay your blame on me;
If me your real substance move;
When you so much your Shadow Love.
Wise nature would not let your eye
Look on her own bright majesty;
Which had you once but gazed upon,
You could, except your self, love none:
What then you cannot love, let me,
That face I can, you cannot see.
Now you have what to love, you will say
What then is left for me I pray?
My face sweet heart if it please thee;
That which you can, I cannot see:
So either love shall gain his due,
Yours sweet in me, and mine in you.
An Eglogue occasioned by two Doctors disputing upon predestination.
Corydon. HO jolly Thirsis whither in such have?
Is It for a wager that you run so fast?
Or past your hour below yo^ hawthorne tree
Does longing Galatea look for thee?

Thirsis. No Corydon, I heard young Daphnis say
Alexis challenged Tityrus to day
Who best shall sing of Shepherds Art, and praise;
But hark I hear 'em, listen to their lays.

Tityrus. Alexis read, what means this mistique thing;
An Ewe I had two lambs at once did bring:
The one black as Iett; the other white as snow:
Say in just providence how it could be so?

Alexis. Will you Pan's goodness therefore partial call,
That might as well have given thee none at all?

Tityrus. Were they not both eand by the self same Ewe?
How could they merit then so different hew?
Poor lamb alas; and could thou, yet unborne,
Sin to deserve the Guilt of such a scorn?
Thou had not yet fowl'd a religious spring,
Nor fed on plots of hollowed grass, to bring
Stains to thy fleece; nor browz'd upon a tree
Sacred to Pan or Pales Deity.
The Gods are ignorant if they not foreknow;
And knowing, it is unjust to use thee so.

Alexis. Tytir with me contend, or Corydon;
But let the Gods, and their high wills alone.
For in our flocks that freedom challenge we,
This kid is sacrificed, and that goes free.

Tityrus. Feed where you will my Lambs, what boots it us
To watch, and water, fold, and drive you thus.
This on the barren mountains flesh can gleane,
That fed in flowery pastures will be lean.

Alexis. Plow, sow, and compass, nothing boots at all,
Unless the dew upon the Tilth's do fall.
So labor sylly shepherds what we can
All Is vain, unless a blessing drop from Pan.

Tityrus. Ill thrive thy Theves if thou these lies maintain:


Alexis. And may thy Goats miscarry saucy swain.


Thyrsis. Fie, Shepherds fie! while you these strifes begin,
Here creepes the woolfe; and there the fox gets in.
To your vain piping on so deep a reed
The Lambkins listen, but forget to feed.
It gentle swains befits of Love to sing,
How Love left heaven; and heavens immortal King,
His Coaeternall Father. O admire,
Love is a Son as ancient as his fire.
His Mother was a Virgin: how could come
A birth so great, and from so chaste a womb!
His cradle was a manger; Shepherds see
True faith delights in poor simplicity.
He pres'd no grapes, nor pruned the fruitful vine,
But could of water make a brisker wine.
Nor did he plow the earth, and to his Barn
The harvest bring, nor thresh, and grind the Corn.
Without all these Love could supply our need;
And with five L^aves, five thousand Hungers feed.
More wonders did he, for all which suppose
How he was crowned, with Lilly, or with Rose?
The winding Ivy, or the glorious Bay,
Or myrtle, with the which Venus, they say,
Girts her proud Temples? Shepherds none of them
But wore (poor head) a thorny Diadem.
Feet to the Lame he gave; with which they run
To work their Surgeons last destruction.
The blind from him had eyes; but used that light
Like Basy lisques to kill him with their sight.
Lastly he was betrayed (o sing of this)
How Love could be betrayed! 'twas with a kiss.
And then his Innocent hands, and guiltless feet
Were nayl'd unto the Cross, striving to meet
In his spread arms his spouse, so mild in show
He seemed to court the Embraces of his foe.
Through his pearc'd side, through which a spear was sent,
A torrent of all flowing Balsame went.
Run Amarillis run: one drop from thence
Cures thy sad soul, and drives all anguish hence.
Go sunburnt Thestylis, go, and repair
Thy beauty lost, and be again made fair.
Lovesick Amyntas get a Philtrum here,
To make thee Lovely to thy truly dear.
But coy Licoris take the Pearl from thine,
And take the blood shot from Alexis eyne.
Wear this an Amulet against all Sirens smiles,
The stings of snakes, and Tears of Crocodiles.
Now Love is lead: Oh no, he never dies;
Three days he sleeps, and then again does rise
(Like fair Aurora from the Eastern Bay)
And with his beams drives all our clouds away:
This pipe unto our flocks, this sonnet get.
But hoe, I see the Sun ready to set,
Good night to all; for the great night is come;
Flocks to your folds and shepherds hye you home.!
To morrow morning, when we all have slept,
Pan's Cornet's blown, and the great Sheepshears kept.

An Eglogue to Mr Johnson.
Tityrus Under his Beech why sit'st thou here so sad
Son Damon, that wast erst a joviall lad?
These groves were wont to Echo with the sound
Of thy shrill reed, while every Nymph danced round.
Rowse up thy soul, Parnassus mount stands high,
And must be climbed with painful industry.

Damon. You Father on his forked top sit still,
And see us panting up so steep a hill;
But I have broke my reed, and deeply swore
Never with wax, never to joint it more.

Tit. Fond boy* 'twas rashly done; I meant to thee,
Of all the sons I have, by legacy
To have be queath'd my pipe, thee, thee of all,
I meant it should her second Master call.

Dam. And do you think I durst presume to play
Where Tityrus had worn his lip away!
Live long thy self to tune it; it is from thee,
It has not from it self such Harmony.
But if we ever such disaster have
As to compose our Tytirus in his grave;
Yonder upon you aged Oak, that now
Old trophies bears on every sacred bow,
We Will hang it up a relic, we will do it,
And learned swains shall pay devotion to it.

Tyt. Can thou farewell unto the Muses bid?
Then bees shall loath the Thyme, the new weaned Kid
Browze on the buds no more; the teeming ewes
Henceforth the tender sallows shall refuse.

Dam. I by those Ladies now do nothing set;
Let 'em for me some other servant get:
They shall no more be Mistresses of mine,
No, though my pipe had hope to equal thine.
Thine which the floods have stopped their course to hear;
To which the spotted Linx has lent an ear.
Which while the several Echoes would repeat,
The Music has been sweet, the Art so great
That Pan himself amazed at thy deep aires,
Sent thee of his own bowl to drown thy cares.
Of all the Gods Pan does the Pipe respect.
The rest unlearned pleasures more affect.
Pan can distinguish what thy Raptures be
From Bavius loose lascivious Minstralsie,
Or Maevius windy Bagpipe, Maevius, he
Whose wit is but a Tavern Tympanie.
If ever I flock of my own do feed,
My fattest Lambs shall on his Altar bleed.

Tyt. Two Altars I will build him, and each year
Will sacrifice two wel-fed Bullocks there.
Two that have horns; that while they butting stand
Strike from their feet a cloud of numerous sand.
But what can make thee leave the Muses man,
That such a Patron have as mighty Pan?
Whence is thy fury? Did the partial ear
Of the rude Vulgar, when they late did hear
Aegon, and thee contend which best should play,
Him Victour deem, and give thy kid away?
Does Amarillis cause this high despair?
Or Galatea's coyness breed thy care?

Dam. Neither of these, the Vulgar I contemn;
Thy pipe not always Tytirus wins with them:
And as for Love, in sooth I do not know
Whether he wears a bow, and shafts or no.
Or did I, I a way could quickly find,
To win the beauteous Galatea's mind,
Or Amarillis: I to both could send
Apples that with Hesperian fruit contend:
And on occasion could have quickly guest
Where two fair ring-doves built their amorous nest.

Tyt. If none of these, my Damon then aread
What other cause can so much passion breed!

Dam. Father I will, in those indulgent ears
I dare unload the burden of my fears.
The Reapers that with whetted siccles stand,
Gathering the falling ears 'ith' other hand;
Though they endure the scorching summers heat,
Have yet some wages to allay their sweat:
The Lopper that does fell the sturdy Oak
Labors, yet has good pay for every stroke.
The Plowman is rewarded: only we
That sing, are paid with our own melody.
Rich churls have learned to praise us, and admire,
But have not learned to think us worth the hire.
So toyling Ants perchance delight to hear
The summer music of the Grassopper,
But after rather let him starve with pain,
Then spare him from their store one single grain.
As when great Iunos beauteous Bird displaies
Her starry tail, the boys do run and gaze
At her proud train; so look they now adays
On Poets; and do think if they but praise,
Or pardon what we sing, enough they do:
I, and it is well if they do so much too.
My rage is swelled so high I cannot speak it,
Had I Pan's pipe, or thine I now should break it!

Tit. Let moles delight in Earth; Swine dung hills rake;
Crows prey on Cartion; Frogs a pleasure take
In slimy pools; And Niggards wealth admire;
But we, whose souls are made of purer fire,
Have other aims: Who songs for gain has made,
Has of a liberal Science framed a Trade.
Hark how the Nightingale in yonder tree,
Hid in the boughs, warbles melodiously
Her various music forth, while the whole Quire
Of other birds, flock round, and all admire!
But who rewards her? will the ravenous Kite
Part with her prey, to pay for her delight?
Or will the foolish, painted, prattling Iay
Now turned a hearer, to requite her play
Lend her a straw? or any of the rest
Fetch her a feather when she builds her nest?
Yet sings she never the less, till every den
Do catch at her last notes: And shall I then
His fortunes Damon 'bove my own commend,
Who can more cheese into the market send?
Clowns for posterity may cark and care,
That cannot outlive death but in an Heir:
By more then wealth we propagate our Names,
That trust not to successions, but our Flames.
Let hide-bound churls yoke the laborious Ox,
Milk hundred goats, and shear a thousand flocks;
Plant gainful Orchards, and in silver shine;
Thou of all fruits should only prune the Vine:
Whose fruit being tasted, might erect thy brain
To reach some ravishing, high, and lofty strain;
The double birth of Bacchus to express,
First in the grape, the second in the press.
And therefore tell me boy, what is 't can move
Thy mind, once fixed on the Muses Love?

Dam. When I contented lived by Cham's fair streams,
Without desire to see the prouder Thames,
I had no flock to care for, but could sit
Under a willow covert, and repeat
Those deep and learned lays, on every part
Grounded on judgment, subtil'ty, and Art,
That the great Tutour to the greatest King,
The shepherd of Stagira, used to sing:
The shepherd of Stagira, that unfolds
All natures closet, shows what e're it holds;
The matter, form, sense, motion, place, and measure
Of every thing contained in her vast treasure.
How Elements do change; What is the cause
Of Generation; what the Rule, and Laws
The Orbs do move by; Censures every star,
Why this is fixed, and that irregular;
Knows all the Heavens, as if he had been there,
And helped each Angel turn about her sphere.
The thirsty pilgrim traveling by land,
When the feirce Dog-starre does the day command,
Half choked with dust, parch't with the soultry heat;
Tired with his journey, and overcome with sweat,
Finding a gentle spring, at her cool brink
Does not with more delight sit down and drink,
Then I record his songs: we see a cloud,
And fearing to be wet, do run and shroud
Under a bush; when he would sit and tell
The cause that made her mystie womb to swell;
Why it sometimes in drops of rain does flow,
Sometimes dissolves her self in flakes of snow:
Nor gazed he at a Comet, but would frame
A reason why it wore a beard of flame.
Ah Tytirus, I would withal my heart,
Even with the best of my carved mazers part,
To hear him as he used divinely show,
What it is that paints the divers-colour'd bow:
Whence Thunders are discharged, whence the winds stray,
What foot through heaven has worn the milky way!
And yet I let this true delight alone,
Called thence to keep the flock of Corydon.
Ah woe is me, another flock to keep;
The care is mine, the master shears the sheep!
A flock it was that would not keep together;
A flock that had no fleece, when it came hither
Nor would it learn to listen to my lays,
For 'twas a flock made up of several strayes:
And now I would return to Cham, I hear
A desolation frights the Muses there!
With rustique swains I mean to spend my time;
Teach me there father to preserve my rhyme.

Tyt. Tomorrow morning I will counsel thee,
Meet me at Faunus Beech; for now you see
How larger shadows from the mountains fall,
And Corydon does Damon, Damon, call.
Damon, it is time my flock were in the fold,
More then high time; did you not erst behold
How Hesperus above yo^ clouds appeared,
Hesperus leading forth his beauteous heard?

A Pastoral Courtship.
BEhold these woods, and mark my Sweet
How all the boughs together meet!
The Cedar his fair arms displayes,
And mixes branches with the Bays.
The lofty Pine deignes to descend,
And sturdy Oaks do gently bend.
One with another subt'ly weaves
Into one loom their various leaves;
As all ambitious were to be
Mine and my Phyllis canopie!
Let Us enter, and discourse our Loves;
These are, my Dear, no tell-tale groves*
There dwell no Pyes, nor Parrats there,
To prate again the words they hear,
Nor babbling Echo, that will tell
The neighboring hills one syllable.
Being entered let us together lie,
Twined like the Zodiaks Gemini!
How soon the flowers do sweeter smell*
And all with emulation swell,
To be thy pillow? These for thee
Were meant a bed, and thou for me;
And I may with as just esteem
(...) thee, as thou may lie on them.
And why so coy? What do thou fear?
There lurks no speckled Serpent here.
No Venomous snake makes this his rode,
No Canker, nor the loath some ^oad.
And yo^ poo^ spider on the tree,
Thy spinster will, no poisner be.
There is no Frog to leap, and fright
Thee from my arms, and break delight;
Nor snail that over thy coat shall trace,
And leave behind a slimy lace.
This is the hallowed shrine of Love,
No wasp nor hornet haunts this grove,
Nor pismire to make pimples rise,
Upon thy smooth and ivory thighs.
No danger in these shades does lie,
Nothing that wears a sting, but I:
And in it does no venom dwell,
Although perchance it make thee swell.
Being set, let us sport a while, my Fair,
I will tie Love knots in thy hair.
See Zephyrus through the leaves does stray,
And has free liberty to play;
And braids thy locks: And shall I find
Less favor then a saucy wind*
Now let me sit, and fix my eyes,
On thee that art my Paradis*
Thou art my all; the spring remains
In the fair violets of thy veins*
And that it is a summers day,
Ripe Cherries in thy lips display.
And when for Autumn I would seek,
It Is in the Apples o^ thy cheek.
But that which only moves my smart,
Is to see winter in thy heart.
Strange, when at once in one appear
All the four seasons of the year!
I Will clasp that neck where should be set
A rich and Orient Carkanet:
But swains are poor, admit of then
More natural chains, the arms of men.
Come let me touch those breasts, that swell
Like two fair mountains, and may well*
Be styled the Alps, but that I fear
The snow has less of whiteness there.
But stay (my Love) a fault I spy,
Why are these two fair fountains dry,
Which if they run, no Muse would please
To taste of any spring but these.
And Ganymed employed should be
To fetch his love Nectar from thee.
Thou shall be Nurse fair Venus swears,
To the Next Cupid that she bears.
Were it not then discreetly done
To open one spring to let two run?
Fie, fie, this Belly, Beauty's mint,
Blushes to see no coin stamped in it.
Employ it then, for though it be
Our wealth, it is your royalty;
And beauty will have current grace
That bears the Image of your face.
How to the touch the Ivory thighs
Veil gently, and again do rise,
As pliable to impression,
As Virgins wax, or Parian stone
Dissolved to softness, plump and full,
More white and soft then Cotsall wool;
Or Cotton from the Indian Tree,
Or pretty silkworms huswifrie.
These on two marble pillars raised
Make me in doubt which should be praisd;
They, or their Columns must; but when
I veiw those feet which I have seen
So nimbly trip it over the Lawns
That all the Satyrs and the fawns
Have stood amazed, when they would pass
Over the leyes, and not a grass
Would feel the weight, nor rush, nor bent
Drooping betray which way you went.
O then I felt my hot desires
Burn more; and flame with double fires.
Come let those thighs, those legs, those feet
With mine in thousand windings meet.
And woven in more subtle twines
Then woodbine, Ivy, or the vines.
For when Love sees us circling thus
He Will like no Arbor more then us.
Now let us kiss, would you be gone*
Manners at least allows me one.
Blush you at this, pretty one stay,
And I will take that kiss away.
Thus with a second, and that too
A third wipes of, so will we go
To numbers that the stars out run,
And all the Atoms in the Sun.
For though we kiss till Phoebus ray
Sink in the seas, and kissing stay
Till his bright beams return again,
There can of all but one remain:
And if for one good manners call,
In one good manners grant me all.
Are kisses all? they but forerun
Another duty to be done.
What would you of that minstrell say
That tunes his pipes and will not play?
Say what are blossoms in their prime,
That ripen not in harvest time?
Or what are buds that never disclose
The longed for sweetness of the rose?
So kisses to a Lover's guest
Are invitations not the feast.
See every thing that we spy
Is fruitful, saving you and I:
Veiw all the feilds, survey the bowers,
The buds, the blossoms and the flowers*
And say if they so rich could be
In barren base Virginity.
Earth's not so coy as you are now,
But willingly admits the plow.
For how had man or beast been fed,
If she had kept her maiden head?
Coelia once coy as are the rest
Hangs now a babe on either breast;
And Chloris since a man she took,
Has less of greenness in her look.
Our ewes have ean'd, and every damme*
Gives suck unto her tender Lamb.
As by these groves we walked a long,
Some Birds were feeding of their young,
Some on their eggs did brooding sit,
Sad that they had not hatched them yet.
Those that were slower then the rest,
Were busy building of their nest.
You will not only pay the fine,
You vowed and owed to V^lentine.
As you were angling in the brook
With silken line and silver hook,
Through Crystal streams you might descry
How vast and numberless a fry
The fish had spawned, that all along
The banks were crowded with the throng.
And shall fair Venus more command
By water then she does by land?
The Phoenix chaste yet when she dies,
Her self with her own ashes lies.
But let thy Love more wisely thrive
To do the act while the art alive.
It Is time we left our childish Love
That trades for toys, and now approve
Our abler skill; they are not wise
Look Babies only in the eyes.
That smooth red smile shows what you meant,
And modest silence gives consent.
That which we now prepare, will be
Best done in silent secrecy.
Come do not weep, what is it you fear?
Least some should know what we did here.
See not a flower you pressed is dead,
But re-erects his bended head;
That who soever shall pass this way
Knows not by these where Phyllis lay.
And in your forehead there is none
Can read the act that we have done.
Phyllis.
Poor credulous and simple maid!
By what strange wiles art thou betrayed!
A treasure thou have lost to day
For which thou can no ransom pay.
How black art thou transformed with sin!
How strange a guilt gnaws me within!
Grief will convert this red to pale;
When every Wake, and whitsund-ale
Shall talk my shame; break, break sad heart
There is no Medicine for my smart,
No herb nor balm can cure my sorrow,
Unless you meet again to morrow.
Upon a very deformed Gentlewoman, but of a voice incomparably sweet.
I chanced sweet Lesbia's voice to hear,
O that the pleasure of the ear
Contented had the appetite;
But I must satisfy the sight;
Where such a ^ace I chanced to see
From which good Lord deliver me.
Is It not profane if I should tell
I thought her one of those that fell
With Lucifers Apostate train
Yet did her Angels voice retain?
A cherubin her notes descried,
A Devil every where beside.
Ask the dark woods, and they will confess
None did such Harmony express
In all their bowres from May to June,
Yet nere was face so out of tune.
Her Virginal teeth false time did keep,
Her wrinkled forhead went too deep.
Lower then Gammath sunk her eyes,
'Bove Ela though her nose did rise.
I Will trust Musicians now that tell
Best music does in discords dwell.
Her airs enticed the gentle quire
Of Birds to come, who all admire,
And would with pleasure longer stay,
But that her looks frights them away.
Which for a good Priapus goes
And well may serve to scarre the crows.
Her voice might tempt the immortal race,
But let her only show her face,
And soon she might extinguish thus
The lusting of an Incubus.
So have I seen a lute ore worn,
Old and rotten, patcht and torn,
So ravish with a sound, and bring
A close so sweet to every string,
As would strike wonder in our ears,
And work an envy in the Spheres.
Say monster strange, what may thou be?
Whence shall I fetch thy Pedigree?
What but a Panther could beget
A beast so foul, a breath so sweet?
Or thou of Sirens issue art,
If they be fish the upper part.
Or else blind Homer was not mad
Then when he sung Ulysses had
So strange a gift from Aeolus,
Who odour-breathing Zephyrus
In several bottles did enclose,
For certain thou art one of those.
Thy looks, where other women place
Their chiefest Pride, is thy disgrace.
The tongue, a part which used to be
Worst in thy Sex, is best in thee.
Were I but now to choose my dear
Not by my eye, but by my ear,
Here would I dote; how shall I woo
Thy voice, and not thy body too?
Then all the brood I get of thee,
Would Nightingalls, and Cygnets be:
Cygnets betimes their throats to try,
Borne with more Music then they dye.
Say Lesbia, say, what God will bless
Our Loves with so much happiness?
Some women are all tongue, but o
Why art not thou my Lesbia so!
Thy looks do speak thee witch; one spell
To make thee but invisible,
Or dye; resign thy self to death,
And I will catch thy latest breath;
But that the nose will scarce I fear
Find it so sweet, as did the ear.
Or if thou would not have me coy,
As was the selfe-inam our'd Boy,
Turn only Voice, an Echo prove,
Here, here, by heaven, I fix my Love:
If not, you Gods, to ease my mind,
Or make her dumb, or strike me blind;
For grief, and anger in me rise,
Whilst she has tongue, or I have eyes.
The milk-maids Epithalamium.
Joy to the Bridegroom and the Bride
That lie by one another side!
O fie upon the Virgin Bedds,
No loss is gain but Maiden heads.
Love quickly send the time may be
When I shall deal my Rosemary!
I long to simper at a feast,
To dance, and kiss, and do the rest.
When I shall wed, and Bedded be
O then the qualme comes over me,
And tells the sweetness of a Theme
That I never knew but in a dream.
You Ladies have the blessed nights,
I pine in hope of such delights.
And silly Dam'sell only can
Milk the cowes teats and think on man:
And sigh and wish to taste and prove
The wholesome Sillibub of Love.
Make have, at once twin-Brothers bear;
And leave new matter for a star.
Women and ships are never shown
So fair as when their sails be blown.
Then when the Midwife hears your moan,
I Will sigh for grief that I have none.
And you, dear Knight, whose every kiss
Reapes the full crop of Cupids bliss,
Now you have found, confess and tell
That single sheets do make up hell.
And then so charitable be
To get a man to pity me.
An Eglogue on the noble Assemblies revivedon Cotswold Hills, by M. Robert
Dover.
Collen, Thenot.
Coll. What Clod-pates, Thenot, are our British swains,
How lubber-like they loll upon the plains?
No life, no spirit in 'em; every Clown
Soon as he lays his Hook and Tarbox down,
That ought to take his Reed, and chant his lays,
Or nimbly run the winding of the Maze,
Now gets a bush to roam himself, and sleep;
It Is hard to know the shepherd from the sheep.
And yet me thinks our English pastures be
As flowery as the Lawnes of Arcadie;
Our Virgins blithe as theirs, nor can proud Greece
Boast purer air, nor sheer a finer fleece.

The. Yet view their outside, Collen, you would say
They have as much brawn in their necks as they
Fair Tempe braggs of; lusty arms that swell
With able sinews, and might hurl as well
The weighty sledge; their legs, and thighs of bone,
Great as Colossus, yet their strength is gone.
They look like yonder man of wood, that stands
To bound the limits of the Parish lands.
Do thou ken, Collen, what the cause might be
Of such a dull and general Lethargy?

Coll. Swain, with their sports their souls were taken away,
Till then they all were active, every day
They exercised to weild their limbs, that now
A renumb'd to every thing, but flail and plow.
Early in May up got the jolly rout
Called by the Lark, and spread the feilds about:
One for to breath himself, would coursing be
From this same Beech, to yonder Mulberie.
A second leapt, his supple nerves to try,
A third was practicing his melody.
This a new Iigg was footing, others were
Busied at wrestling, or to throw the Bar:
Ambitious which should bear the bell away,
And kiss the Nut-brown Lady of the May.
This stirr'd'em up; a Jolly swain was he
Whom Peg, and Susan after Victory
Crowned with a garland they had made, beset
With Daisies, Pincks and many a Violet,
Cowslip, and Gilliflower. Rewards though small
Encourage virtue; but if none at all
Meet her, she languisheth, and dies, as now
Where worth's denied the honor of a bough.
And, Thenot, this the cause I read to be
Of such a dull and general Lethargy.

The. Ill thrive the Lowt that did their mirth gainsay,
Wolves haunt his flocks, that took those sports away*

Coll. Some melancholy swains about have gone
To teach all zeal their own complexion:
Choler they will admit sometimes I see,
But Fleagme, and Sanguine no Religions be.
These teach that Dancing is a Iezabell;
And Barley-break, the ready way to Hell.
The Morris Idols, Whitsun'-ales can be
But profane Relics of a Iubilee!
These in a Zeal, to express how much they do
The Organs hate, have silenced Bag-pipes too;
And harmless May-poles, all are railed upon
As if they were the towers of Babylon.
Some think not fit there should be any sport
In The Country, it is a dish proper to t'h Court.
Mirth not becomes 'em, let the saucy swain
Eat Beef, and Bacon, and go sweat again.
Besides, what sport can in their pastimes be
When all is but ridiculous fopperie?

The. Collen, I once the famous Spain did see,
A nation glorious for her gravitie;
Yet there an hundred Knights on warlike steeds
Did skirmish out a fight armed but with Reeds;
At which a thousand Ladies eyes did gaze,
Yet was no better then our Prison-base.
What is the Barriers but a Courtly way
Of our more down right sport, the Cudgell-play?
Football with us may be with them Baloone,
As they at Tilt, so we at Quintaine run.
And those old Pastimes relish best with me,
That have least Art, and most simp^itie.
Collen, they say at Court there is an Art
To dance a Ladies honor from her heart;
Such wiles poor shepherds know not, all their sense
Is dull to any thing but Innocence.
The Country Less, although her dance be good,
Stirs not another Galliard in the Blood.
And yet their Sports by some controlled have been,
Who think there is no mirth but what is sin.
O might I but there harmless Gambols see
Restored unto an ancient liberty,
Where spotless dalliance traces over the Plains,
And harmless Nymphs jet it with harmless swains!
To see an age again of Innocent Loves
Twine close as Vines, yet kiss as chaste as Doves,
Me thinks I could the Thracian Lyre have strung,
Or tuned my whistle to the Mantuan song.

Coll. Then tune thy whistle boy, and string thy Lyre,
That age is come again, thy brave desire
Pan has approved; dancing shall be this year
Holy as is the motion of a Sphere.

The. Collen, with sweeter breath Fame never blew
Her sacred Trump, if this good news be true!

Coll. Know thou not Cotswold hills?


Th: Through all the land
No Finer wool runs through the spinsters hand.
But silly Collen, ill thou do divine,
Can thou mistake a Bramble for a Pine?
Or think this Bush a Cedar? or suppose
Yo'n Hamlet, where to sleep each shepherd goes
In circuit, buildings, people, power and name
Equals the Bow ^ring'd by the silver Them?
As well thou may their sports with ours compare,
As the soft wool of Lambs, with the Goats hair.

Coll. Last evening Lad, I met a noble swain,
That spurred his springhtfull Palfrey ore the plain,
His head with ribbands crowned, and decked as gay
As any Less upon her Bridal day:
I thought (what easy faiths we sheapheards prove!)
This, not the Bull, had been Europa's Love!
I ask't the cause, they told me this was he
Whom this days Triumph crowned with Victory.
Many brave steeds there were, some you should find
So fleet as they had been sons of the wind:
Others with hoofs so swift, beat over the race
As if some engine shot 'em to the place.
So many and so well winged Steeds there were,
As all the Brood of Pegasus had been there.
Rider, and horse could not distinguished be,
Both seemed conjoined a Centaure's Progeny.
A numerous troop they were, yet all so light
Earth never groaned, nor felt'em in their flight.
Such Royal Pastimes Cotswold mountains fill,
When gentle swains visit her glorious hill:
Where with such packs of Hounds they hunting go,
As Cyrus never did wind his Bugle to!
Whose noise is musical; and with full cries
Beats over the feilds, and Echoes through the skies.
Orion hearing wished to leave his Sphere,
And call his Dog from heaven, to sport it there.
Watt though he fled for life, yet joy'd withal
So brave a dirge sung forth his funeral.
Not Sirens sweetlier rill, Hares as they fly
Look back, as glad to listen, loath to die.

The. No doubt but from this brave Heroic fire
In the more noble hearts, sparks of desire
May warm the colder Boores, and emulous strife
Give the old Mirth and Innocence a new life.
When thoughts of fame their quickened souls shall fill
At every glaunce that shewes'em Cotswold hill.

Coll. There shepherd, there, the solemn games be played,
Such as great Theseus, or Alcides made:
Such as Apollo wishes he had seen,
And love desires had his invention been!
The Nemean, and the Isthmian pastimes still
Though dead in Greece, survive on Cotswold hill.

The. Oh happy hill! the gentle Graces now
Shall trip over Thine and leave Citherons brow:
Parnassus clift shall sink below his spring,
And every Muse shall on thy frontlet sing.
The Goddesses again in strife shall be,
And from mount Ida make appeal to thee;
Olympus pay thee homage and in dread
The aged Alps shall bow his snowy head;
Flora with all her storethy Temples Crown,
Whose height shall reach the stars: Gods looking down
Shall bless the Incense that thy flowers ex hale
And make thee both a Mountain and a Vale.
How many Ladies on thy top shall meet,
And press thy tresses with their odorous feet?
Whose eyes when wondering men see from a far,
They Will think thee Heaven and each of them a star,

Coll. But gentle Collen say what God or man
Fame we for this great work, Daphnis or Pan?

The. Daphnis is dead, and Pan has broke his Reed,
Tell all your flocks it is Ioviall Dover's deed.
Behold the shepherds in their ribbands go,
And shortly all the Nymphs shall wear'em too:
Amazed to see such glory met together,
Bless Dovers pipe, whose Music call'd'em hither.
Sport you my Rams at sound of Dovers name;
Big-bellied ewes make have to bring a Lamb
For Dovers fold: Go maids and Lillies get
To make him up a glorious Coronet.
Swains keep his holy day and each man swear
To Saint him in the Shepherds Calendar.

Ad Medicum.
HEu, quae me Cholchis, magico quae Thessala cantu
Sic cruciat miseru^, and tantis coquit ilia flammis?
Aut quae cer a meas torret liquefact a medullas?
Mitius in Lybiam Phaebijubar antra leonis
Ingressum furit, and Vulcania mitius Aetna
Saeviit, ardentes cineres, multamque favillam
In Calabros iaculata sinus: Heu, quis mihi vestes
Induit Herculeas? nam sentio virus, and omnes
Ebullire meas Nessaeo sanguine venas!
Mill licet pas^as fibra crescente volucres,
Felicem Titium, multo quem frigore stringit
Caucasus! O liceat mihi tecum monte sub illo
Aeternum tractare gelu, glacieque perenni
Demulcere animum, nivibusque extinguere flammas!
Aut tecum sitiam, gelidis modo detur in undis
Stare, tuisque meum lymphis solarier aestum,
Tantale; namque uror misere miser, aestuat intus
Indomitus, totosque ignis depascitur artus.
Dum gliscit calor, and saevo coquit igne cruorem,
Intumet extemplo cutis, exurgitque tumescens
Purpurea macula, and multo distincta rubore;
Non aliter quam de caelo cum decidit imber,
Plurima (vidi etenim) medio natat aequore bulla;
Aut quale in nostris (saepe est videre) culinis
Cum primum verubus stridet caro: Belides in me,
In me per petuam diffundite, Belides, urnam.
Gens est, humanos, quae dicitur, impia, carnes
Condere visceribus; me, me, petat, and voret ore
Iam tostum iecur: heu, fervent mea and omnia membra
Apta Thyestaeis vivunt convivia mensis.
At cum flamma satis totos bacchata per artus
Len ius ardescens deferbuit, illico turgens
Descendit cutis, and paulo nunc mitius uror.
Tandem omnis calor expirat, videorque repent
Taygeti montis, gelidive in vallibus Haemi
Ramorum densa requiescere tectus in umbra;
Et tandem revocata suas redit, improba, vires,
Flamma, premitque iterum, solitisque caloribus urit*
Tunc mihi scintillant oculi; tremulumque videntes
Imbelli spectant acie, binaomnia, bina
Conspicor, and binis exurgit mensa lucernis;
Tum videor Stygiis undis, ipsoque Acharonte
Immergi, videor flagranti claudier aere,
Inque Perillaeo mugire incendia Tauro.
Sum meus ipse Rogus: quae tantas pabula possunt,
Quo valeam tantas nutrire bitumine flammas?
Si qua est herbarum virtus (quae maxima certeest)
Extinguas plusquam Phaebeos, (Phaebe) calores:
Extinguas, precor, and cocto mihi read salutem,
Vt semel annosum reparaverat Aesona Colchis:
Vtque Aries iuvenem rediit grandaevus in Agnum.
The Song of Orpheus.
Hail sacred Deserts, whom kind nature made
Only to shelter with a loving shade,
The now neglected Music, glad to see
Lions afford her hospitality,
And Tigers bid her welcome, with the rest
Of savage beasts accept her for a guest,
Since Men refuse her, and scarce daigne an ear
To her high notes; or if they please to hear,
It Is all; amongst my Pupills, you may see
The birds that learned their sweetest lays of me;
Those that chant Carols in this thanklesse age
To pleasure men, rewarded with a Cage.
A Mask for Lydia.
SWeet Lydia take this mask, and shroud
Thy face within the silken cloud,
And veil those powerful Skies:
For he whose gazing dares so high aspire,
Makes burning glasses of his eyes,
And sets his heart on fire.
Veil, Lydia, veil, for unto me
There is no basiliske but thee.
Thy very looks do kill:
Yet in those looks so fixed is my delight,
Poor soul (alas) I languish still
In absence of thy sight.
Close up those eyes, or we shall find
Too great a luster strike us blind:
Or if a Ray so good
Ought to be seen, let it but then appear
When Eagles do produce their brood'
To try their young ones there.
Or if thou would have me to know
How great a brightness thou can show;
When they have lost the Sun;
Then do thou rise, and give the world this theme,
Sol from the Hesperides is run,
And back has whipped his teame.
Yet through the Goat when he shall stray,
Thou through the Crab must take thy way;
For should you both shine bright
In the same Tropic, we poor moles should get
Not so much comfort by the light,
As torment by the heat.
Where Is Lydia now? where shall I seek
Her charming lip, her tempting cheek
That my affections bowed?
So dark a sable has ecclipst my fair,
That I can gaze upon the cloud,
That durst not see the Star.
But yet me thinks my thoughts begin
To say there lies a white within,
Though black her pride control:
And what care I how black a face I see,
So there be whiteness in the soul,
Still such an Ethiop be.
A parley with his empty Purse.
PVrse, who will not know you have a Poets been
When he shall look and find no gold herein?
What respect (think you) will there now be shown
To this foul nest, when all the birds are flowne?
Unnatural vacuum, can your emptiness
Answer to some slight questions, such as these?
How shall my debts be paid? or can my scores
Be cleared with verses to my Creditors?
Hexameter's no sterling, and I fear
What the brain coins goes scarce for current there.
Can meeter cancel bonds? is here a time
Ever to hope to wipe out chalk with rhyme?
Or if I now were hurrying to the jaile
Are the nine Muses held sufficient bail?
Would they to any composition come,
If we should morgage our Elisium,
Tempe, Parnassus, and the golden streams
Of Tagus, and Pactolus, those rich dreams
Of active fancy? Can our Orpheus move
Those rocks, and stones with his best strains of love?
Should I (like Homer) sing in lofty tones
To them Achilles, and his Myrmidons;
Hector, and Ajax are but Sergeants names,
They relish bay salt, 'bove the Epigrams
Of the most seasoned brain, nor will they be
Content with Ode, or paid with Elegy.
Muse, burn thy baies, and thy fond quill resign,
One cross of theirs is worth whole books of mine.
Of all the treasure which the Poets hold
There Is none at all they weigh, except our gold;
And mine is returned to the Indies, and has swore
Never to visit this cold climate more.
The^ crack your strings good Purse, for you need none;
Gape on, as they do to be paid, gape on.
Upon Love fondly refused for Conscience sake.
NAture, Creations law, is judged by sense,
Not by the Tyrant conscience.
Then our commission gives us leave to do
What youth and pleasure prompts us to:
For we must question else heavens great decree,
And tax it with a Treachery;
If things made sweet to tempt our appetite
Should with a guilt stain the delight.
Higher powers rule us, our selves can nothing do;
Who made us love, made't lawful too.
It was not love, but love transformed to vice
Ravished by envious Avarice,
Made women first impropriate; all were free,
Enclosures man's Inventions be.
In The golden age no action could be found
For trespass on my neighbors ground:
'Twas just with any Fair to mix our blood;
The best is most diffusive good.
She that confines her beams to one man's sight,
Is a dark Lanth orne to a glorious Light.
Say, does the Virgin-spring l^sse chaste appear
Cause many Thirsts are quenched there?
Or have you not with the same odours met
When more have smelt your violet?
The Phoenix is not angry at her nest,
Cause her perfumes make others blessed:
Though Incense to the eternal Gods be meant,
Yet mortals Rival in the sent.
Man is the Lord of creatures, yet we see
That all his vassals loves are free:
The severe wedlocks fetters do not bind
The Pard's inflamed, and amorous mind;
But that he may be like a Bridegroom led
Even to the Royal Lions bed.
The birds may for a year their loves confine,
But make new choice each Valentine.
If our affections then more servile be
Then are our slaves, where is man's sovereignty?
Why then by pleasing more, should you less please,
And spare the sweets being more sweet then these?
If the fiesh Trunk have sap enough to give
That each insertive branch may live;
The Gardner grafts not only Apples there,
But adds the Warden and the Pear,
The Peach, and Apricock together grow,
The Cherry, and the Damson too.
Till he has made by skillful husbandry
An entire Orchard of one Tree.
So least our Paradise perfection want,
We may as well inoculate as plant.
What Is Conscience but a Beldams midnight theme?
Or nodding nurses idle dream?
So feigned, as are the Goblins, Elves, and Fairies
To watch their Orchards, and their Dairies.
For who can tell when first her reign begun?
In The state of innocence was none:
And since large Conscience (as the proverb shows)
In the same sense with bad one goes,
The less the better then, whence this will fall,
It Is to be perfect to have none at all.
Suppose it be a virtue rich, and pure,
It Is not for Spring, or Summer sure,
Nor yet for Autumn; Love must have his prime,
His warmer heats, and harvest time.
Till we have flourished, grown, and reaped our wishes,
What Conscience dares oppose our kisses?
But when times colder hand leads us near home,
Then let that winter-vertue come:
Frost is till then prodigious; we may do
What youth and pleasure prompts us to.
FINIS.
THE MUSES LOOKING-GLASS.

By T. R.



OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, for Francis Bowman. 1638.

THE MUSES LOOKING-GLASS.
ACTVS I.
SCEN. 1.
Enter Bird a Featherman, and Mrs Flowrdew wife to a Haberdasher of small
wares; the one having brought feathers to the Playhouse, the other Pins and
Looking-glasses; two of the sanctified fraternity of Blackfriars.

Flo. SEe Brother how the wicked throng and crowd
To works of Vanity! not a nooke, or corner
In all this house of sin, this cave of filthiness,
This den of spiritual thieves, but it is stuffed,
Stuffed, and stuffed full as is a cushion
With the lewd Reprobate.

Bird. Sister, were there not before Innes,
Yes I will say Inns, for my zeal bids me
Say filthy Innes, enough to harbor such
As traveled to destruction the broad way;
But they (...) more and more, more shops of Satan.

Flowrd. (...) abounds, though pure zeal
Teach, preach, huffe, puff and snuff at it, yet still
Still it abounds. Had we seen a Church,
A new built Church erected North and South,
It had been something worth the wondering at.

Bird. Good works are done.


Flowrd. I say no works are Good.
Good works are merely Popish and Apocryphal.

Bird. But th'bad abound, surround, yea and confound us*
No matveile now if Play-howses increase,
For they are all grown so obscene of late
That one begets another.

Flowerd. Flat fornication!
(...) wonder any body takes delight
To hear them prattle.

Bird. Nay and I have heard
That in a -- Tragedy, I think they call it,
They make no more of killing one another,
Then you sell pinnes.

Flow. Or you sell feathers brother.
But are they not hanged for it?

Bird. Law grows partial,
And finds it but Chance-medly: And their Comedies
Will abuse you, or me, or any body;
We cannot put our moneys to increase
By lawful Usury, nor Break in quiet,
Nor put off our false wares, nor keep our wives
Finer then others, but our Ghosts must walk
Upon their stages.

Flow. Is not this flat conjureing,
To make our Ghosts to walk ere we be dead?

Bird. That's nothing Mrs Flowrdew, they will play
The Knave, the Fool, the Devil and all for money.

Flow. Impiety! O that men endued with reason
Should have no more grace in them!

Bird. Be there not other
Vocations as thriving, and more honest?
Bailies, Promooters, Iaylors, and Apparitours,
Beadles, and Martialls men, the needful instruments
Of the Republique; but to make themselves
Such monsters? for they are monsters, they are monsters,
Base, sinful, shameless, ugly, vile, deformed
Pernicious monsters*

Flow. I have heard our Vicar
Call Play Houses the Colledge^ of Transgression,
Wherein the seven deadly sins are studied.

Bird. Why then the City will in time be made
An University of Iniquity.
We dwell by Blackfriars College, where I wonder
How that profane nest of pernicious Birds
Dare roost themselves there in the midst of us,
So many good and well disposed persons.
O impudence!

Flow. It was a zealous prayer
I heard a Brother make, concerning Play Houses:

Bird. For Charity what is it?


Flow. That the Globe
Wherein (quoth he) reigns a whole world of vice,
Had been consumed! The Phoenix burnt to Ashes.
The Fortune whipped for a blind whore: Blackfriers
He wonders how it scapd demolishing
In The time of reformation: lastly he wished
The Bull might cross the Thames to the Bear-garden,
And there be soundly baited!

Bird. A good prayer.


Flow. Indeed it something pricks my Conscience,
I come to sell 'em Pins and Looking-glasses.

Bird. I have their custom too for all their feathers:
It Is fit that we which are sincere Professors
Should gain by Infidels.

SCE. 2.
Enter Roscius a Player. Mr Roscius we have brought the things you spoke for.

Rosc. Why it is well.


Flow. Pray sir what serve they for?


Rosc. We use them in our Play.


Bird. Are you a Player?


Rosc. I am Sir, what of that?


Bird. And is it lawful?
Good sister lets convert him, will you use
So fond a calling?

Flow. And so impious?


Bird. So irreligious?


Flow. So unwarrantable?


Bird. Only to gain by vice?


Flow. To live by sin?


Rosc. My spleen is up: And live not you by sin?
Take away vanity and you both may break.
What serves your lawful trade of selling pins,
But to joint gew-gawes, and to knit together
Gorgets, strips, neck-cloths, laces, ribbands, ruffs,
And many other such like toys as these,
To make the Baby Pride a pretty Puppet?
And you sweet Featherman, whose ware though light
Oreweighs your Conscience, what serves your Trade
But to plume folly, to give Pride her wings,
To deck vainglory? spoiling the Peacocks tail
T'adorne an Idiots Coxcombe! O dull ignorance!
How ill it is understood what we do mean
For good and honest! They abuse our Scene,
And say we live by vice: Indeed it is true
As the Physicians by diseases do,
Only to cure them: They do live we see
Like Cooks by pamp'ring prodigality,
Which are our fond accusers. On the stage
We set an Usurer to tell this age
How ugly looks his soul: A prodigal
Is taught by us how far from liberal
His folly bears him: Boldly I dare say
There has been more by us in some one Play
Laugh't into wit and virtue, then has been
By twenty tedious Lectures drawn from sin
And foppish humors; Hence the cause does rise
Men are not wonn by the ears so well as eyes.
First see what we present.

Flow. The sight is able
To unsanctify our eyes, and make 'em Carnal.

Rosc. Will you condemn without examination?


Bird. No Sister, let us call up all our zeal,
And try the strength of this temptation:
Satan shall see we dare defy his Engines.

Flow. I am content.


Rosc. Then take your places here, I will come to you
And moralize the plot.

Flow. That moralizing
I do approve, it may be for instruction.

SCE. 3.
Enter a deformed fellow. Defor. Roscius, I hear you have a new Play to day.


Rosci. We want not you to play Mephostopholis.
A pretty natural vizard!

Defor. What have you there?


Rosci. A Looking-glass, or two.


Defor. What things are they?
Pray let me see them. Heaven, what sights are here!
I a've seen a Devil. Looking-glasses call you them?
There is no basilisque but a Looking-glass.

Rosci. It Is your own face you saw.


Defor. My own? thou lie:
I Would not be such a Monster for the world.

Rosci. Look in it now with me, what ^eest thou now?


Defor. An Angel and a Devil.


Rosci. Look on that
Thou callst an Angel, mark it well, and tell me,
Is it not like my face?

Defor. As twere the same.


Rosci. Why so is that like thine. Do thou not see,
It Is not the glass but thy deformity
That makes this ugly shape; if they be fair
That view the Glass such the reflections are.
This serves the body: The soul sees her face
In Comedy, and has no other Glass.

Defor. Nay then farewell, for I had rather see
Hell then a Looking-glass or Comedy.

Exit Defor. Rosci. And yet me thinks if 'twere not for this Glass,
Wherein the form of man beholds his grace,
We could not find another way to see
How near our shapes approach Divinity.
Ladies, let they who will your glass deride,
And say it is an Instrument of Pride:
I will commend you for it; there you see
If ye be fair, how truly fair yeebee:
Where finding beauteous faces, I do know
You Will have the greater care to keep them so.
A heavenly vision in your beauty lies,
Which nature has denied to your own eyes;
Were it not pity you alone should be
Debarred of that others are blessed to see?
Then take your glasses, and your selves enjoy
The benefit of your selves; it is no toy,
Though ignorance at slight esteem has set her,
That will preserve us good or make us better.
A Country slut, (for such she was, though here
Ith City may be some as well as there:)
Kept her hands clean, (for those being always seen
Had told her else how sluttish she had been)
But ^ad her face as nasty as the stall
Of a fishmonger, or a Usurers Hall
Daubed o^e with dirt: One might have dared to say
She was a true piece of Prometheus clay,
Not yet informed: And then her unkemb'd hair
Dressed up with cobwebs, made her hag-like stare.
One day within her paile (for Country Lasses
(Fair Ladies) have no other Looking-glasses:).
She spied her ugliness, and feign she would
Have blushed if through so much dirt she could:
Ashamed, within that water, that I say
Which showed her filth, she washed her filth away.
So Comedies, as Poets do intend them,
Serve first to show our faults and then to mend them*
Upon our Stage two glasses often there be,
The Comic Mirror and the Tragedy:
The Comic glass is full of merry strife,
The low reflection of a Country life.
Grave Tragedy void of such homely sports
Is the sad glass of Cities and of Courts.
I Will show you both, Thalia come and bring
Thy Buskined sister, that of Blood does ^ing*

SCE. 4.
Comedy. Tragedy. Mime. Satyr.
Comed. Why do you stop? go on.


Trag. I charge him stay.
My robe of state, Buskins, and Crown of Gold
Claim a priority.

Come. Your Crown of Gold
Is but the wreath of wealth; It Is mine of Laurel
Is virtues Diadem: This grew green and flourished,
When nature pitying poor mortality,
Hid thine within the bowels of the earth:
Men looking up to heaven found this that's mine,
Digging to find out hell they li't on thine.

Trage. I know you'have tongue enough.


Come. Besides my Birthright
Gives me the first possession.

Trag. How, your Birthright?


Come. Yes sister, Birthright: and a Crown besides,
Put on before the Altar of Apollo
By his dear Priest Phenomoe, she that first
Full of her God raged in Heroique numbers.

Trag. How came it then the magistrate decreed
A public charge to furnish out my Chorus,
When you were feign to appear in rags and tatters,
And at your own expenses?

Come. My reward
Came after, my deserts went before yours.

Trag. Deserts? yes! what deserts, when like a gypsy
You took a poor and begga^ly Pilgrimage
From village unto village; when I then
As a fit ceremony of Religion
In my full state contended at the Tomb
Of mighty Theseus.

Come. I before that time
Did chaunt out Hymns in praise of great Apollo
The shepherds Deity, whom they reverence
Under the name of Nomius, in remembrance
How with them once he kept Admetus sheep.
And 'cause you urge my poverty, what were you?
Till Sophocles laid guilt upon your Buskins
You had no ornaments, no robes of state,
No rich and glorious Scene; your first Benefactours
Who were they, but the reeling Priests of Bacchus;
For which a Goat gave you reward and name?

Trag. But sister who were yours, I pray, but such
As chaunted forth religious, bawdy sonnets,
In honor of the fine chaste God Priapus?

Come. Let age alone, merit must plead our Title.


Trag. And have you then the forehead to contend?
I stalk in Princes Courts, great Kings, and Emperors*
From their close cabinets, and Council Tables
Yield me the fatal matter of my Scene.

Come. Inferior persons, and the lighter vanities,
(Of which this age I fear is grown too fruitful,)
Yield subjects various enough to move
Plentiful laughter.

Trag. Laughter! a fit object
For Poetry to aim at.

Come. Yes, Laughter is my object: it is a property
In man essential to his reason.

Trag. So;
But I move horror; and that frights the guilty
From his dear sins: he that sees Oedipus
Incestuous, shall behold him blind withal.
Who views Orestes as a Parricide,
Shall see him lashed with Furies too; The Ambitious
Shall fear Prometheus Vultur; Daring Gluttony
Stand frighted at the sight of Tantalus:
And every Family great in sins as Blood
Shake at the memory of Pelops house.
Who will rely on Fortunes giddy smile
That has seen Priam acted on the stage!

Com. You move with fear, I work as much with shame,
A thing more powerful in a generous breast.
Who sees an eating Parasite abused;
A covetous Bawd laughed at; an ignorant Gull
Cheated; a glorious Soldier knocked, and baflle'd;
A crafty servant whipped; a niggard Churl
Hoarding up dicing-monies for his son;
A spruce fantastique Courtier, a mad roarer,
A jealous Tradesman, an overweening Lady,
Or corrupt Lawyer rightly personated,
But (if he have a blush), will blush and shame
As well to act those follies as to own them.

Trag. The subject of my Scene is in the persons
Greater, as in the vices; Atheists, Tyrants,
O'redaring Favorites, Traitors, Parasites,
The Wolves and Cats of state, which in a language
High as the men, and loud as are their crimes
I thunder forth with terror and amazement
Unto the ghastly wondering Audience.

Satyr. And as my Lady takes deserved place
Of thy light Mistress, so yield thou to me,
Fantastique Mime.

Mime. Fond Satyr why to thee?


Sat. As the Attendant of the nobler Dame,
And of my self more worthy.

Mime. How more worthy?


Sat. As one whose whip of steel can with a lash
Imprint the Characters of shame so deep,
Even in the brazen forehead of proud sin,
That not eternity shall wear it out.
When I but frowned in my Lucilius brow,
Each conscious cheek grew red, and a cold trembling
Freez'd the chill soul; while every guilty breast
Stood fearful of dissection, as afraid
To be anatomized by that skillful hand,
And have each artery, nerve, and vein of sin
By it laid open to the public skorne.
I have untruss'd the proudest, greatest tyrants
Have quaked below my powerful whip, half dead
With expectation of the smarting jerke,
Whose wound no salve can cure: each blow does leave
A lasting scar, that with a poison eats
Into the marrow of their fames and lives;
The Eternal ulcer to their memories!
What can your Apish-fine-gesticulations
My manlike-Munkye Mime, vie down to this?

Mime. When men through sins were grown unlike the Gods,
Apes grew to be like men; therefore I think
My Apish imitation, Brother Beadle,
Does as good service to reform bad manners
As your proud whip, with all his ferkes, and jerkes.
The Spartans when they strove to express the loathsomeness
Of Drunkenness to their Children, brought a slave,
Some captive, Helot, overcharged with wine
Reeling in thus; -- His eyes shot out with staring,
A fire in his nose, a burning redness
Blazing in either cheek, his hair upright,
His tongue and senses faltring, and his stomach
Oreburden'd ready to discharge her load
In each man's face he met. This made'em se^
And hate that sin of swine, and not of men.
Would I express a complementall youth,
That thinks himself a spruce and expert Courtier,
Bending his supple hams, kissing his hands,
Honoring shoo-strings, s^uing his writhed face
To several postures of affection,
Dancing an entertainment to his friend,
Who would not think it a ridiculous motion?
Yet such there be that very much please themselves
In such like Antique humors. To out own sin^s
We will be Moles, even to the grossest of 'em,
But in another life we can spy forth
The least of faults, with eyes as sharp as eagles,
Or the Epidaurean serpent: Now in me,
Where self-love casts not her Egyptian mists,
They find this mis-becoming ^oppishnesse,
And afterward apply it to themselves:
This ( Satyr) is the use of Mimique Elves.

Trage. Sister let us lay this poor contention by,
And friendly live together; if one womb
Could hold us both, why should we think this room
Too narrow to contain us? On this stage
We Will plead a trial; and in one year contend
Which shall do best, that past, she then that shall
By the most sacred and impartial judgment
Of our Apollo, best deserve the Bays,
Shall hold the entire possession of the place.

Come. I were unworthy if I should
Appeal from his tribunal; Be it so:
I doubt not but his censure runs with me:
Never may any thing that is sad and tragical
Dare to approach his Presence; let him be
So happy as to think no man is wretched,
Or that there is a thing called misery.

Trag. Such is my prayer, that he may only see.
Not be the subject of a Tragedy!
Sister, a truce till then; that vice may bleed
Let us join whips together.

Come. It Is agreed.
Mime, let it be your office to prepare
The Masque which we intended:

Mime. It Is my care.


Exeunt. Flow. How did she say? a Mass? Brother fly hence,
Fly hence, Idolatry will overtake us.

Rosci. It was a Masque she spoke of, a rude Dance
Presented by the seven deadly sins.

Bird. Still it is a Mass, sister, away, I tell you
It is a mass, a mass, a mass of vile Idolatry.

Rosci. It Is but a simple Dance, brought in to show
The native fowl^esse and deformity
Of our dear finne, and what an ugly guest
He entertaines, admits him to his B^est!

Song and Dance.
Say, in a Dance how shall we go,
That never could a measure know!
How shall we sing to please the Scene
That never yet could keep a mean?
Disorder is the Masque we bring,
And Discords are the Tunes we sing.
No sound in our harsh ears can find a place
But highest Trebles, or the lowest Base.
Flow. See Brother, if men's hearts and Consciences
Had not been seared, and cauterized, how could they
Affect these filthy harbingers of hell!
These Procters of Beelzebub, Lucifers Hinch-boyes!

Rosci. I pray ye stir your selves within a while.


Exeunt. Roscius Solus.
And here, unless your favorable mildness
With hope of mercy do encourage us,
Our Author bids us end: he dares not venture
Neither what is past, nor that which is to come
Upon his Country, it is so weak, and impotent
It cannot stand a trial, nor dares hope
The benefit of his Clergy; But if rigor
Sit Judge, must of necessity be condemned
To Vulcan or the Sponge: All he can plead
Is a desire of Pardon; for he brings you
No plot at all, but a mere Olla Podrida,
A medly of ill-plac'd, and worse penned humors.
His desire was in single Scenes to show
How Comedy presents each single vice
Ridiculous, whose number as their Character
He borrowes from the man to whom he owes
All the poor skill he has, great Aristotle.
Now if you can endure to hear the rest,
You Are welcome; if you cannot, do but tell
Your meaning by some sign, and all farewell.
If you will stay resolve to pardon first;
Our Author will deserve it by offending.
Yet if he miss a Pardon, as in Justice
You cannot grant it, though your mercy may,
Still he has this left for a comfort to him,
That he picks forth a subject of his Rhyme
May loose perchance his credit, not his time.
Exit. Finis Actus 1.
ACTVS 2.
SCENA I.
Roscius. Bird. Flowrdew.
Rosc. REceive your places. The first that we present are the Extremes of a
virtue necessary in our Conversation, called Comitas or Courtesy, which, as all
other virtues, has her deviations from the Mean. The one Colax, that to seem
over Courteous falls into a servile flattery, the other (as fools fall into
the contraries which they shun) is Dyscolus, who hating to be a slavish
Parasite grows into peevishness and impertinent distaste.


Flow. I thought you taught two vices for one virtue!


Rosci. So does Philosophy, but the Actors enter.


Colax. Dyscolus.
Colax. How far they sin against humanity
That use you thus! Believe me it is a Symptom
Of Barbarism, and rudeness so to vex
A gentle, modest nature as yours is.

Dysco. Why do thou vex methen?


Colax. I? Heaven defend!
My breeding has been better; I vex you?
You that I know so virtuous, just, and wise,
So pious and religious, so admired
So loved of all?

Dysc. Will thou not leave me then
Eternal Torture? could your cruelty find
No back but mine that you thought broad enough
To bear the load of all these Epithites?
Pious? Religious? he takes me for a fool.
Virtuous? and Just? Sir, did I ever cheat you,
Cozen, or gull you; that you call me just
And virtuous? I am grown the common scoff
Of all the world; the scoff of all the world.

Colax. The world is grown too vile then.


Dysc. So art thou.
Heaven! I am ^un'd ridiculous!

Colax. You ridiculous?
But it is as impious Age; There was a time,
(And pity it is so good a time had wings
To fly away,) when reverence was paid
To a gray head; 'twas held a sacrilege
Not expiable to deny respect
To one, Sir, of your years and Gravity.

Dysc. My years and gravity! Why how ol d am I?
I am not rotten yet, or grown so rank
As I should smell oth'grave: O Times and manners!
Well Colax, well; go on: you may abuse me,
Poor dust, and ashes, worms meat, years and gravity:
He takes me for a Carcass! what see you
So crazy in me? I have half my Teeth:
I see with spectacles, do I not? and can walk too
With the benefit of my staff: mark if I cannot! --
But you sir at your pleasure with years and gravity
Think me decrepit.

Colax. How? Decrepit sir!
I see young roses bud within your cheeks;
And a quick active blood run free and fresh
Through your veins.

Dysco. I am turned boy again!
A very stripling schooleboy! have I not
The Itch and kibes? am I not scabb'd and mangy
About the wrists and hams?

Colax. Still Dyscolus*


Dysc. Dyscolus! and why Dyscolus? when were we
Grown so familiar? Dyscolus! by my name
Sure we are Pylades and Orestes! are we not?
Speak good Pylades.

Colax. Nay worthy Sir
Pardon my error, 'twas without intent
Of an offense. I Will find some other name
To call you by --

Dysc. What do you mean to call me?
Fool? Ass? or Knave? my name is not so bad
As that I am ashamed on it.

Colax. Still you take all worse then it was meant,
You are too Jealous.

Dysco. Jealous? I have not cause for it: my wifes honest;
Do see my horns? Do? if thou do,
Write Cuckold in my forehead; do, write Cuckold
With Aquafortis, do. Jealous! I am jealous*
Free of the Company! wife, I am jealous.

Colax. I mean suspicious.


Dysc. How, suspicious?
For what? for Treason, Felony, or Murder?
Carry me to the Justice: bind me over
For a suspicious person* hang me too
For a suspicious person* O, O, O
Some courteous plague ceazeme, and free my soul
From this immortal Torment! every thing
I meet with, is vexation, and this, this
Is the vexation of vexations,
The Hell of Hells, and Devil of all Devils.

Flow. For pity sake fret not the good old Gentleman.


Dysc. O! have I not yet torments great enough,
But you must add to my affliction?
Eternal silence ceaze you!

Colax. Sir we strive
To please you, but you still misconstrue us.

Dysc. I must be pleased! a very babe, an infant!
I must be pleased! give me some pappe, or plummes:
Buy me a rattle, or a hobbyhorse,
To still me, do! be pleased? would have me get
A Parasite to be flattered?

Col. How? a Parasite?
A cogging, flattering, slavish Parasite?
Things I abhor and hate. It Is not the belly
Shall make my brains a captive. Flatterers!
Souls below reason will not stoop so low
As to give up their Liberty; only flatterers
Move by another wheel. They have no passions
Free to themselves. All their affections,
Qualities, humors, appetites, desires,
Nay wishes, vows, and prayers, discourse and thoughts
Are but another Bondsman. Let me tugg
At the Turks Galleys; be eternally
Damned to a Quarry: In this state my mind
Is free: A flatterer has nor soul nor body
What shall I say? -- No I applaud your temper,
That in a generous bravenesse take distaste
At such whose servile nature strives to please you.
It Is royal in you Sir.

Dysc. Ha! What Is that?


Colax. A feather stuck upon your cloak.


Dysc. A feather!
And what have you to do with my feathers?
Why should you hinder me from telling the world
I do not lie on flockbeds?

Colax. Pray be pleased.
I brusht it off for mere respect I bare you.

Dysc. Respect! a fine respect, Sir, is it not,
To make the world believe I nourish vermin?
O death, death, death, if that our graves hatch worms
Without tongues to torment us, let 'um have
What teeth they will. I meet not here an object
But adds to my affliction! Sure I am not
A man; I could not then be so ridiculous:
My ears are overgrown, I am an Ass;
It is my ears they gaze at. What strange Harpy
Centaure, or Gorgon am I turned into?
What Circe wrought my Metamorphosis?
If I be beast, she might have made me Lion,
Or something not ridiculous! O Acteon,
If I do branch like thee, it is my fortune!
Why look they on me else? There is with in
A Glass they say, that has strange qualities in it;
That shall resolve me. I will in to see
Whether or no I man or Monster be.

Exit. SCEN. II,
To them Deilus, Aphobus. Bird. Who be these? They look like Presumption and
Despair.


Rosc. And such they are. That is Aphobius, one that out of an impious
confidence fears nothing. The other Deilus, that from an Atheistical distrust,
shakes at the motion of a reed. These are the Extremes of Fortitude, that
steeres an even course between over much dar^ing, and overmuch fearing.


Flowr. Why stays this reprobate Colax?


Rosc. Any vice
Yields work for Flattery.

Flow. A good Doctrine mark it.


Deilus. Is it possible? did you not fear it, say you?
To me the mere relation is anague.
Good Aphobus no more such terrible stories;
I would not for a world lie alone to night:
I shall have such strange dreams!

Apho. What can there be
That I should fear? The Gods? If they be good,
It Is sin to fear them; if not good, no Gods,
And then let them fear me. Or are they Devils
That must affright me?

Deilus. Devils! where good Aphobus?
I thought there was some conjureing abroad.
It Is such a terrible wind! O here it is;
Now it is here again! O still, still, still!

Apho. What Is the matter?


Deilus. Still it follows me!
The thing in black, behind; soon as the Sun
But shines, it haunts me! Gentle spirit leave me!
Cannot you lay him Aphobus? what an ugly looks it has!
With eyes as big as sawcers, nostrills wider
Then Barbers basins!

Apho. It Is nothing Deilus
But your weak Fancy, that from every object
Draws arguments of fear. This terrible black thing --

Deil. Where is it Aphobus?


Apho. -- Is but your shadow Deilus.


Deil. And should not we fear shadows?


Apho. No! why should we?


Deil. Who knows but they come learing after us
To steal away the substance? Watch him Aphobus.

Apho. I nothing fear.


Colax. I do commend your valor,
That fixes your great soul fast as a Center,
Not to be moved with dangers, let slight cock-boats
Be shaken with a wave, while you stand firm
Like an undaunted rock, whose constant hardness
Rebeats the fury of the raging Sea,
Dashing it into froth. Base fear does argue
A low degenerate soul.

Deil. Now I fear every thing.


Colax. It Is your discretion. Every thing has danger,
And therefore every thing is to be feared.
I do applaud this wisdom: It Is a symptom
Of wary providence. His too confident rashness
Argues a stupid ignorance in the soul,
A blind and senseless judgment; give me fear
To man the fort, it is such a circumspect
And wary sentinel*

Flow. Now shame take thee for
A Luke warm formalist.

Colax. -- But daring valor
Incapable of danger sleeps securely,
And leaves an open entrance to his enemies.

Deil. What are they landed?


Apho. Who?


Deil. The enemies.
That Colax talks of.

Apho. If they be I care not.
Though they be Giants all, and armed with thunder.

Deil. Why do you not fear Thunder?


Apho. Thunder? no!
No more then squibs and crackers.

Deil. Squibs and crackers?
I hope there be none here! slid, squibs and crackers!
The mere Epitomies of the Gunpowder Treason,
Faux in a lesser volume.

Apho. Let fools gaze
At bearded stars, it is all one to me
As if they had been shaved -- thus, thus would I
Out-beard a Meteour, for I might as well
Name it a prodigy when my candle blazes.
Deil. Is there a Comet say you? Nay I saw it,
It reached from Paul's to Charing, and portends
Some certain imminent danger to the inhabitants
Twixt those two places: I Will go get a lodging
Out of its Influence.

Colax. Will that serve? -- I fear
It threatens general ruin to the Kingdom.

Deil. I Will to some other Country.


Colax. There Is danger too to cross the Seas.


Deil. Is there no way, good Colax,
To cross the Sea by Land? O the situation!
The horrible situation of an Island

Colax. You sir are far above such frivolons thoughts.
You fear not death.

Apho. Not I.


Col. Not sudden death.


Apho. No more then sudden sleeps: Sir I dare dye.


Deil. I dare not; Death to me is terrible:
I will not dye.

Apho. How can you Sir prevent it?


Deil. Why I will kill my self.


Col. A valiant course;
And the right way to prevent death indeed.
Your spirit is true Roman! -- But yours greater
That fear not death, nor yet the manner of it,
Should Heaven fall --

Apho. Why then we should have Larkes.


Deil. I shall never eat Larkes again while I breath.


Col. Or should the earth yawn like a sepulcher,
And with an open throat swallow you quick?

Apho. It Would save me the expenses of a grave.


Deil. I'had rather trouble my Exequutors by 'the half.


Apho. Canons to me are pot-guns.


Deil. Potguns to me
Are Canons; the report will strike me dead.

Apho. A rapier's but a bodkin.


Deil. And a bodkin.
Is a most dangerous weapon; since I read
Of Julius Cesars death, I durst not venture
Into a Tailors shop for fear of Bodkins.

Apho. O that the valiant Giants would again
Rebel against the Gods, and besiege Heaven,
So I might be their leader.

Col. Had Enceladus
Been half so valiant, Jove had been his prisoner.

Apho. Why should we think there be such things as dangers?
Scylla, Charybdis, Python are but fables.
Medeas Bull, and Dragon very tales.
Se^ monsters, serpents, all Poetical figments.
Nay Hell it self, and Acheron mere inventions.
Or were they true, as they are false, should I be
So timorous as to fear these Bugbeare Harpyes,
Medusa's, Centaurs, Gorgons?

Deill. O good Aphobus.
Leave conjuring, or take me into the circle.
What shall I do good Colax?

Col. Sir walk in,
There is they say a Looking-glass, a strange one
Of admirable virtues, that will render you
Free from enchantments.

Dei. How a Looking-glass?
Do think I can endure it? why there lies
A man within't in ambush to entrap me.
I did but lift my hand up, and he presently
Caught at it.

Colax. 'Twas the shadow Sir of your self.
Trust me a mere reflection.

Deil. I will trust thee.


Exit. Apho. What Glass is that?


Colax. A trick to fright the Idiot
Out of his wits, a glass so full of dread
Rendering unto the eye such horrid spectacles
As would amaze even you. Sir I do think
Your optic nerves would shrink in the beholding*
This if your eye endure, I will confess you
The Prince of Eagles.

Apho. Look to it eyes, if ye refuse this sight,
My nails shall damn you to eternal night.

Exit. Col. Seeing no hope of gain, I pack them hence,
It Is gold gives flattery all her Eloquence.

SCEN. 3.
Acolastus Anaisthetus.
Rosci. Temperance is the mediocrity of inioying pleasures, when they are
present, and a moderate desire of them being absent; And these are the
extremes of that virtue. Acolastus a voluptuous Epicure, that out of an
immoderate, and untamed desire seeks after all pleasures promiscuously,
without respect of honest or lawful. The other Anaisthetus a mere Anchorite
that delights in nothing, not in those legitimate recreations allowed of by God
and nature.


Acolast. O now for an eternity of eating!
Fool was he that wished but a cranes short neck.
Give me one, nature, long as is a Cable,
Or sounding line, and all the way a palate
To ^ast my meat the longer. I would have
My senses feast together, Nature envied us
In giving single pleasures; let me have
My ears, eyes, palate, nose, and touch, at once
Enjoy their happiness; lay me in a bed
Made of a summers cloud; to my embraces
Give me a Venus hardly yet fifteen,
Fresh, plump, and active; she that Mars enjoyed
Is grown too stale: And then at the same instant
My Touch is pleased, I would delight my sight
With Pictures of Diana, and her Nymphs,
Naked, and bathing drawn by some Apelles;
By them some of our fairest Virgins stand;
That I may see whether it is Art or nature
Which heightens most my blood and appetite.
Nor cease I here. Give me the seven Orbs
To charm my ears with their celestial lutes,
To which the Angels that do move those spheres
Shall sing some amorous ditty; nor yet here
Fix I my bounds; The sun himself shall fire
The Phoenix nest to make me a perfume,
While I do eat the Bird, and eternally
Quaffe of eternal Nectar. These single, are
But torments, but together; O together!
Each is a Paradise. Having got such objects
To please the senses, give me senses too
Fit to receive those objects: Give me therefore
An Eagles eye, a bloodhounds curious smell,
A staggs quick hearing, let my feeling be
As subtle as the spiders, and my taste
Sharp as a Squirrils. Then I Will read the Alcoran,
And what delights that promises in future
I Will practice in the present.

Bird, Heathenish Glutton!


Flow. Base belly-God, licentious Libertine!


Anai. And I do think there is no pleasure at all
But in contemning pleasures; Happy Niobe
And blessed Daphne, and all such as are
Turned stocks and stones: would I were Laurel too,
Or marble, I, or any thing insensible.
It is a toil for me to eat or drink,
Only for natures satisfaction;
Would I could live without it. To my ear
Music is but a mandrake. To my smell
Nard sents of rue, and wormwood; And I taste
Nectar with as much loathing, and distaste
As Gall, or aloes, or my Doctors potion.
My eye can meet no object but I hate it.

Acola. Come Brother Stoique be not so melancholy.


Anai. Be not so foolish Brother Epicure.


Aco. Come we will go see a Comedy, that will raise
Thy heavy spirits up.

Anai. A Comedy?
Sure I delight much in those toys; I can
With as much patience hear the Mariners
Chide in a storm.

Aco. Then lets go drink a while.


Anai. It Is too much Labor; Happy Tantalus
That never drinks.

Aco. A little Venery
Shall recreate thy soul.

Ana. Yes like an itch,
For it is no better, I could wish an heir;
But that I cannot take the pains to get one.

Aco. Why, marry, if your conscience be so tender,
As not to do it otherwise; Then it is lawful.

Ana. True Matrimony's nothing else indeed
But fornication licensed, lawful Adultery.
O Heavens! how all my senses are wide sluices
To let in discontent and miseries!
How happy are the moles that have no eyes;
How blessed the Adders that they have no ears.
They neither see, nor hear ought that afflicts them.
But happier they that have no sense all;
That neither see, nor hear, taste, smell, nor feel
Any thing to torment them: souls were given
To torture Bodies, man has reason too
To add unto the heap of his distractions.
I can see nothing without sense, and motion,
But I do wish my self transformed into it.

Colax. Sir I commend this temperance; your armed soul
Is able to contemn these petty baits,
These slight temptations, which we title pleasures;
That are indeed but names; He'ven it self knows
No such like thing; the stars nor eat, nor drink,
Nor lie with one another; and you imitate
Those glorious bodies, by which noble abstinence
You gain the names of moderate, chaste, and sober;
While this effeminate gets the infamous terms
Of Glutton, Drunkard, and Adulterer;
Pleasures, that are not man's, as man is man,
But as his nature sympathies with beasts.
You shall be the third Cato. This grave look
And rigid eyebrow will become a censor.
But I will fit you with an object Sir,
My noble Anaisthetus that will please you.
It is a Looking-glass, wherein at once
You may see all the dismal groves and caves,
The horrid vaults, dark cells, and barren deserts,
With what in Hell it self can dismal be.

Anais. That is indeed a Prospect fit for me.


Exit. Acol. He cannot see a stock or stone, but presently
He wishes to be turned to one of those.
I have another humor, I cannot see
A fat voluptuous sow with full delight
Wallow in dirt, but I do wish my self
Transformed into that blessed Epicure.
Or when I view the hot salacious sparrow
Renew his pleasures with fresh appetite,
I wish my self that little bird of Love.

Colax. It shows you a man of a soft moving clay,
Not made of flint; Nature has been bountiful
To provide pleasures, and shall we be niggards
At plenteous boards? He Is a discourteous guest
That will observe a diet at a feast.
When Nature thought the earth alone too little
To find us meat, and therefore stored the air
With winged creatures, not contented yet
She made the water fruitful to delight us.
Nay I believe the other Element too
Does nurse some curious dainty for man's food,
If we would use the skill to catch the Salamander:
Did she do this to have us eat with temperance?
Or when she gave so many different Odors
Of spices, unguents, and all sorts of flowers,
She cried not -- stop your noses: would she give us
So sweet a quire of winged Musicians
To have us deaf? or when she placed us here,
Here in a Paradise, where such pleasing prospects
So many ravishing colors entice the eye,
Was it to have us wink? when she bestowed
So powrefull faces, such commanding beauties
On many glorious Nymphs, was it to say
Be chaste and continent? Not to enjoy
All pleasures, and at full, were to make nature
Guilty of that she nere was guilty of,
A vanity in her works.

Acol. A learned Lecture!
It Is fit such grave and solid arguments
Have their reward -- here -- half of my estate
T'invent a pleasure never tasted yet,
That I may be the first shall make it stale.

Col. Within Sir is a Glass, that by reflection
Does show the image of all sorts of pleasures
That ever yet were acted, more variety
Then Aretines pictures.

Aco. I Will see the Jewel;
For though to do, most moves my appetite,
I love to see, as well as act delight.

Exit. Bird. These are the things indeed the stage does teach,
Dear heart, what a foul sink of sins run here!

Flow. Insooth it is the common shore of lewdness.


SCEN. 4.
Asotus. Aneleutherus.
Rosc. These are Aneleutherus an illiberall Niggardly Usurer, that will sell
heaven to purchase Earth. That, his son Asotus, a profuse Prodigal, that
will sell earth to buy Hell. The extremes of Liberality which prescribes a
mediocrity in the Geting and Spending of Riches.


Aneleu. Come boy, go with me to the Scriveners, go,


Asot. I was in hope you would have said a Bawdy house.


Anel. Thence to the exchange.


Asot. No, to the Tavern Father.


Anel. Be a good husband boy, follow my counsel.


Asot. Your counsel? No dad, take you mine
And be a good fellow -- shall we go and roar?
Slid Father I shall never live to spend
That you have got already -- Pox of atturneys,
Merchants, and Scriveners, I would hear you talk
Of Drawers, Punks, and Panders.

Anel. Prodigal child!
Thou do not know the sweets of getting wealth.

Asot. Nor you the pleasure that I take in spending it.
To feed on Caveare, and eat Anchoves!

Anel. Asotus, my dear son, talk not to me
Of your Anchoves, or your Caveare.
No, feed on Widows, have each meal an Orphan
Served to your Table, or a glibbery heir
With all his lands melted into a morgage.
The Gods themselves feed not on such fine dainties,
Such fatting, thriving diet.

Asot. Trust me Sir,
I am ashamed la -- now to call you Father,
Never trust me now I Am, come be a Gentleman:
One of your haveings, and thus carke and care?
Come, I will send for a whole coach or two
Of Bankside Ladies, and we will be Ioviall!
Shall the World say you pine and pinch for nothing?
Well do your pleasure, keep me short of moneys,
When you are dead, as dye I hope you must,
I Will make a shift to spend one half at least
Ere you are coffined, and the other half
Ere you are fully laid into your grave.
Were not you better help away with some of it?
But you will starve your self, that when you are rotten,
One -- Have at all of mine may set it flying.
And I will have your bones cut into dice,
And make you guilty of the spending of it:
Or I will get a very handsome bowl
Made of your scull, to drink't away in healths.

Aneil. That Is not the way to thrive! No sit and brood
On thy estate, as yet it is not hatched
Into maturity.

Asot. Marry I will brood upon it,
And hatch it into chickens, capons, hens,
Larks, thrushes, quails, wood-cocks, snites and phesants
The best that can be got for love or money.
There is no life to drinking!

Anel. O yes, yes,
Exaction, usury, and oppression.
Twenty in the hundred is a very Nectar.
And will thou, wastfull lad, spend in a supper
What I with sweat and labor, care and industry
Have been an age a scraping up together?
No, no Asotus, trust gray-head experience;
As I have been an ox, a painful ox,
A diligent, toyling, and laborious ox
To plow up Gold for thee; so I would have thee --

Asot. Be a fine silly Ass to keep it.


Anel. Be a good watchful Dragon to preserve it.


Colax. Sir, I overheard your wise instructions,
And wonder at the gravitie of your counsel.
This wild unbridled boy is not yet grown
Acquainted with the world; He has not felt
The weight of need, that want is virtue's clog;
Of what necessity, respect and value
Wealth is; how base and how contemptible
Poverty makes us. Liberality
In some circumstances may be allowed;
As when it has no end but honesty,
With a respect of person, quantity,
Quality, time and place; but this profuse,
Vain, injudicious spending speaks him Idiot.
And yet the best of liberality
Is to be liberal to our selves; and thus
Your wisdom is most liberal, and knows
How fond a thing it is for discreet men
To purchase with the loss of their estate
The name of one poor virtue liberality.
And that too only from the mouth of beggars.
One of your judgment would not I am sure
Buy all the virtues at so dear a rate.
Nor are you sir, I dare presume, so fond
As for to weigh your gains by the strict scale
Of equity, and Justice; Names invented
To keep us beggars! I would counsel now
Your son to tread no steps but yours, for they
Will certainly direct him the broad way
That leads unto the place where Plenty dwells,
And she shall give him honor.

Anel. Your tongue is powerful:
Pray read this Lecture to my son; I go
To find my scriv'ner, who is gone I hear
To a strange Glass wherein all things appear.

Exit. Asot. To see if it can show him his lost ears.
Now to your Lecture.

Col. And to such a one
As you will be a willing Pupil to.
Think you I meant all that I told your father?
No, 'twas to blind the eyes of the old Huncks.
I love a man like you that can make much
Of his blessed Genius: Miracle of Charity!
That open hand becomes thee; Let thy Father
Scrape like the Dunghill cock the dirt, and mire,
To find a precious Gemme for thee, the Chicken
Of the white Hen to wear. It is a wonder
How such a generous branch as you, could spring
From that old root of damned avarice!
For every widows house the father swallows,
The son should spue a Tavern. How are we
Richer then others, not in having much,
But in be stowing;
And that shines glorious in you. The chuff^ crowns
Imprisoned in his rusty chest me thinks
I hear groan out, and long till they be thine,
In hope to see the light again. Thou can not
Stand in a flood of Nectar up to the chin,
And yet not dare to sup it; nor can suffer
The Golden Apples dangle at thy lips,
But thou will taste the fruit. It Is generous this!

Asot. Gramercy, thou shall be Doctor of the chair.
Here -- it is too little, but it is all my store,
I Will in to pumpe my dad, and fetch thee more.

Exit. Colax. How like you now my art? is it not a subtle one?


Flow. Now out upon thee thou lewd reprobate!
Thou man of sin, and shame, that sowest cushions
Unto the elbowes of iniquity.

Colax. I do commend this zeal; you cannot be
Too fervent in a cause so full of goodness.
There is a general frost has ceased devotion,
And without such like ardent flames as these
There is no hope to thaw it. The word, Puritan,
That I do glorify, and esteem rev'erend,
As the most sanctified, pure, and holiest Sect
Of all professors, is by the profane
Used for a name of infamy, a byword, a slander,
That I sooth vice I do but flatter them,
As we give children plums to learn their prayers,
TO entice them to the truth, and by fair means
Work out their reformation.

Bird. It Is well done,
I hope he will become a brother, and make
A Separatist!

Flow. You shall have the devotions
Of all the Elders. But this foppinesse
Is weary some, I could at our Saint Antlings,
Sleeping and all, sit twenty times as long,

Rosc. Go in with me to recreate your spirits,
As Music theirs, with some refreshing song,
Whose patience our rude Scene has held too long.

Exeunt Finis Actus 2.
ACTVS 3.
SCENA 1.
Roscius. Bird. Flowrdew.
Bird. I will no more of this abomination.


Rosc. The end crowns every action, stay till that.
Just Judges will not be prejudicate.

Flow. Pray sir continue still the moralizing.


Rosc. The next we present are the extremes of Magnificence, who teaches a
Decorum in great expenses, as Liberality in the lesser: One is Banausus, out of
a mere ^tent ation vaine-gloriously expensive; the other Microprepes one in
glorious works extremely base and penurious.


Banausus. Microprepes.
Banau. Being borne not for our selves but for our friends,
Our country and our glory, it is fit
We do express the majesty of our souls
In deeds of bounty and magnificence.

Micro. The world is full of vanity, and fond fools
Promise themselves a name from building Churches
Or any thing that tends to the Republique,
It Is the Re-private that I study for.

Banau. First therefore for the fame of my Republique.
I Will imitate a brave Egyptian King,
And plant such store of onions, and of garlike,
As shall maintain so many thousand workmen,
To the building of a Pyamid at Saint Albons,
Upon whose top I Will set a hand of brass,
With a scrowle in it to show the way to London,
For the benefit of Travelers.

Colax. Excellent!
It Is charity to direct the wandering Pilgrim.

Micro. I am Churchwarden, and we are this year
To build our steeple up, now to save charges
I Will get a high crowned hat with five Low-bels
To make a peale shall serve as well as Bow.

Colax. It Is wisely cast,
And like a careful steward of the Church,
Of which the Steeple is no part, at least
No necessary one.

Bird. Verily it is true.
They are but wicked Synagogues where those instruments
Of Superstition and Idolatry
Ring warning to sin, and chime all in to the Devil.

Banau. And 'cause there is such swarms of heresies rising:
I Will have an Artist frame two wondrous weathercocks
Of Gold, to set on Paul's, and Grantam Steeple,
To show to all the Kingdom what fashion next
The Wind of Humor hither means to blow.

Micro. A wicker chair will fit them for a Pulpit.


Colax. It is the Doctrine sir that you respect.


Flow. In sooth IN have heard as wholesome instructions
From a zealous wicker chair, as e're I did
From the carved Idol of wainscoat.

Banau. Next, I intend to found an Hospital
For the decayed Professors of the Suburbs,
With a College of Physicians too at Chelsy
Only to study the cure of the French Pox;
That so the sinners may acknowledge me
Their only benefactor, and repent.

Colax. You have a care sir of your countrie's health.


Micro. Then I will sell the lead to thatch the Chancell.


Ban. I have a rare device to set Dutch windmills
Upon New Market Heath, and Salisbury Plain,
To draine the Fens.

Colax. The Fens sir are not there.


Ban. But who knows but they may be?


Col. Very right:
You aim at the prevention of a danger.

Micro. A Porters frock shall serve me for a surplice*


Flow Indeed a Frock is not so Ceremonious.


Ban. But the great work in which I mean to glory,
Is in the raising a Cathedral Church:
It shall be at Hoggs-Norton, with a pair
Of stately Organs; more then pity 'twere
The Piggs should loose their skill for want of practice!

Bird. Organs! fie on them for Babylonian Bagpipes!


Micro. Then for the painting, I bethink my self
That I have seen in mother Red-caps Hall
In painted cloth the story of the Prodigal.

Cola. And that will be for very good use and moral.
Sir you are wise; what serve Egyptian Pyramids,
Ephesian Temples, Babylonian Towers,
Carian Coloss'es, Traians water-workes,
Domitians Amphitheaters, the vain cost
Of ignorance and prodigality!
Rome flourished when her Capitol was that ch'd,
And all her Gods dwelt but in Cottages.
Since Parian marble and Corynthian brass
Entered her gaudy Temples, soon she fell
To superstition, and from thence to ruin.
You see that in our Churches, glorious Statues
Rich Copes, and other ornaments of state
Draw wandering eyes from their devotion,
Unto a wanton gazing, and that other
Rich edifices, and such gorgeous toys
Do more proclaim our countries wealth then safety,
And serve but like so many gilded baits
T'entice a foreign Foe to our invasion.
Go in, there is a Glass will show you sir,
What sweet simplicity our Grands^res used,
How in the Age of Gold no Church was gilded.

Exit. Micro. Banau. O I have thought on it, I will straight way build
A free school here in London, a free school
Forth'education of young Gentlemen
To study how to drink, and take Tobacco,
To swear, to roar, to dice, to drab, to quarrel:
Twill be the great Gymnasium of the Realm,
The Phrontisterium of great Britayny.
And for their better study I will furnish them
With a large Library of Drapers books.

Colax. 'Twill put down Bodlies, and the Vatican.
Royal Banausus! how many Spears fly you
Above the earthy dull Microprepes!
I hope to live to see you build a stews
Shall out-brave Venice; To repair old Tiburne
And make it Cedar. This magnificent course
Does purchase you an immortality.
In them you build your Honor to remain
Th-example and the wonder of Posterity.
While other hidebound Churles do grutch themselves*
The Charges of a Tomb.

Ban. But I Will have one
In which I Will lie embalmed with Mirthe and Cassia,
And richer unguents then the Egyptian Kings.
And all that this my precious Tomb may furnish
The Land with Mummye.

Colax Yonder is a Glass
Will show you plots and models of all monuments
Formed the old way, you may invent a new
'Twill make for your more glory.

Ban. Colax true.


Exit. Rosc. These are the extremes of Magnanimity. Caunus a fellow so highly
conceited of his own parts, that he thinks no honor above him; the other
Micropsychus a base and low spirited fellow* that undervaluing his own
qualities, dares not aspire to those dignities, that otherwise his merits are
capable of.


SCEN. 2.
Caunus. Micropsychus.
Cau. I wonder that I hear no news from Court!


Colax. All hail unto the honorable Caunus.


Cau. The honorable Caunus? It Is decreed
I am a Privy Counselor; our new honors
Cannot so alter us as that we can
Forget our Friends, walk with us our familiar.

Micro. It puzles me to think what worth I have,
That they should put so great an honor on me.

Colax. Sir I do know, and see, and so do all
That have not wilful blindness, what rare skill
Of wisdom, Policy, Judgment and the rest
Of the state-vertues sit within this breast,
As if it were their Parliament; but as yet
I am not Sir the happy Messenger
That tells you you are called unto the Helm;
Or that the Rudder of great Britany
Is put into your Hands, that you may steer
Our floating Delos till she be arrived
At the blessed Port of Happiness, and surnamed
The Fortunate Ifle from you that are the fortunate.

Cau. It Is strange that I the best experienced
The skilfulst and the rarest of all Carpenters,
Should not be yet a Privy Counselor!
Surely the State wants eyes, or has drunk opium
And sleeps; but when it wakes it cannot choose
But meet the glorious beams of my deserts
Bright as the rising Sun, and say to England,
England behold thy light!

Micro. Make me a constable!
Make me that am the simplest of my neighbors
So great a Magistrate! so powrfull an officer!
I blush at my unworthiness: a Constable!
The very Prince of the parish! you are one Sir
Of an ability to discharge it better,
Let me resign to you.

Cau. How? I a Constable?
What might I be in your opinion Sir?

Micro. A Carpenter of worship*


Cau. Very well;
And yet you would make me a Constable.
I Will evidently demonstrate that of all men
Your Carpentes are best Statesmen; of all Carpenters
I being the best, am best of Statesmen too:
Imagine Sir the Commonwealth a Logge,
Or a rude block of wood; your Statesman comes,
(For by that word I mean a Carpenter)
And with the saw of Policy divides it
Into so many boards or several orders,
Of Prince, Nobility, Gentry, and the other
Inferior boards called Vulgar, fit for nothing
But to make styles, or planks to be *trod over,
Or trampled on: This adds unto the Logg
Called Commonwealth at least some small perfection:
But afterward he plains them, and so makes
The Commonwealth, that was before a board,
A pretty Wainscoat; some he carves with Titles
Of Lord, or Knight, or Gentleman; Some stand plain,
And serve us more for use then Ornament,
We call them Yeomen; (Boards now out of fashion.)
And lest the disproportion break the frame,
He with the peggs of amity and concord,
As with the glew-pot of good Government
Joints 'em together, makes an absolute Edifice
Of the Re-publique: State-skill'd Machiavell
Was certainly a Carpenter; yet you think
A Constable a Giant Dignity.

Micro. Pray Heaven that Icarus-like I do not melt
The waxen plumes of my ambition!
Or that from this bright Chariot of the Sun
I fall not headlong down with Phaeton,
I have aspired so high: make me a Constable
That have not yet attained to the Greek tongue!
Why it is his office for to keep the peace,
His Majesty's Peace: I am not fit to keep
His Majesty's Hoggs, much less his Peace, the best
Of all his jewels: How dare I presume
To charge a man in the Kings name! I faint
Under the burden of so great a place,
Whose weight might press down Atlas: Magistrates
Are only Sumpter-horses. Nay they threaten me
To make me Warden of the Church.
Am I a Patriot? or have I ability
To present Knights-Recusant, Clergy-Reelers,
Or Gentlemen-Fornicators?

Colax. You have worth
Richly enameled with a modesty.
And though your lofty merit might sit crowned
On Caucasus, or the Pyrenean mountains,
You choose the humbler valley, and had rather
Grow a safe shrub below, then dare the winds,
And be a Cedar: Sir you know there is not
Half so much honor in the Pilots place
As danger in the storm. Poor windy Titles
Of Dignity, and offices that puff up
The bubble pride till it swell big, and burst,
What are they but brave nothings? Toies called Honors
Make them on whom they are bestowed no better
Then glorious slaves, the servants of the Vulgar:
Men sweat at Helm, as much as at the Oar.
There is a Glass within shall show you sir
The vanity of these filke-wormes, that do think
They toil not, 'cause they spin so fine a thread.

Micro. I Will see it. Honor is a babies rattle,
And let blind Fortune where she will, bestow her;
Lay me on earth, and I shall fall no lower.

Exit. Cau. Colax what news?


Col. The Persian Emperor
Is desperately sick.

Cau. Heaven take his soul!
When I am the Grand Sophie, as it is likely
I may be, Colax thou art made for ever.

Col. The Turk they say prepares again for Poland.


Cau. And I no Basshaw yet? Sultan repent it!


Col. The State of Venice too is in distraction.


Cau. And can that State be so supinely negligent,
As not to know whom they may choose their Duke?

Col. Our Merchants do report the inhabitants there
Are now in consultation, for the settling
The Crown upon a more deserving head
Then his that bears it.

Cau. Then my fortunes rise
On confident wings, and all my hopes fly certain.
Colax be bold: thou see the Prester John.
Well England, of all Countries in the World
Most blind to thy own good. other Nations
Woo me to take the bridle in my hands
With gifts and presents; had I lived in Rome
Who durst with Caunus stand a candidate?
I might have choice of Aedile, Consul, Tribune,
Or the perpetual Dictators place.
I could discharge 'em all: I know my merits
Are large, and boundless: A Caesar might be hewed
Out of a Carpenter, if a skillful workman
But undertook it.

Colax. It Is a worthy confidence.
Let Birds of night and shame, with their owls eyes
Not dare to gaze upon the sun of Honor;
They are no presidents for Eagles: Bats
Like dull Micropsychus; things of earth, and lead,
May love a private safety; men in whom
Prometheus has spent much of his stolen fire,
Mount upwards like a flame, and court bright honor
Hedged in with thousand dangers! What Is a man
Without desert? and what is desert to him
That does not know he has it? Is he rich
That holds within his house some buried chests
Of Gold, or Pearl, and knows not where to look the^?
What was the Lodestone, till the use was found,
But a foul dotard on a fowler Mistress?
I praise your Argus eyes, that not alone
Shoot their beams forwards, but reflect and turn
Back on themselves, and find an object there
More worthy their intentive contemplation.
You are at home no stranger, but are grown
Acquainted with your virtues, and can tell
What use the pearl is of, which Dunghill cocks
Scrape into dirt again. This searching judgment
Was not intended to work wood, but men.
Honor attends you. I shall live to see
A Diadem crown that head. There is within
A Glass that will acquaint you with all places
Of Dignity, authority, and renown,
The State, and carriage of them: Choose the best,
Such as deserve you, and refuse the rest.

Cau. I go, that want no worth to merit honor;
It Is honor that wants worth to merit me.
Fortune, thou arbitresse of humane things
Thy credit is at stake: if I but rise
The Worlds opinion will conceive thou have eyes.

Exit. SCEN. 3.
Orgylus. Aorgus.
Rosc. These are the extremes of Meekness. Orgylus an angry quarrelsome man,
moved with the least shadow, or appearance of Injury. The other in defect,
Aorgus, a fellow so patient, or rather insensible of wrong, that he is not
capable of the grossest abuse.


Org. Persuade me not, he has awaked a fury
That carries steel about him. Daggs, and Pistolls!
To bite his thumb at me?

Aor. Why should not any man
Bite his own thumb?

Org. At me? wear I a sword
To see men bite their thumbs -- Rapiers and Daggers!-
He is the son of a Whore.

Aor. That hurts not you.
Had he bit yours, it had been some pretense
To Have moved this anger -- he may bite his own,
And eat it too.

Org. Muskets, and Canons!-eat it?
If he dare eat it in contempt of me,
He shall eat something else too that rides here;
I Will try his estridg stomach.

Aor. Sir be patient.


Org. You lie in your throat, and I will not.


Aor. To what purpose is this impertinent madness?
Pray be milder.

Org. Your Mother was a whore, and I will not put it up.


Aor. Why should so slight a toye thus trouble you?


Org. Your Father was hanged, and I will be revenged.


Aor. When reason dorh in equal balance poize
The nature of two injuries, yours to me
Lies heavy, when that other would not turn
An even scale; and yet it moves not me;
My Anger is not up.

Org. But I will raise it;
You are a fool!

Aor. I know it, and shall I
Be angry for a truth?

Org. You are besides
An arrant knave!

Aor. So are my betters sir.


Org. I cannot move him -- O my spleen! -- it rises,
For very anger I could eat my knuckles.

Aor. You may, or bite your thumb all is one to me.


Org. You are a horned beast, a very Cuckold!


Aor. It Is my wives fault, not mine, I have no reason
Then to be angry for another finne.

Org. And I did graft your horns, you might have come
And found us glewd together like two goats;
And stood a witness to your transformation.

Aor. Why if I had, I am so far from anger
I would have e'ne fallen down upon my knees,
And desired heaven to have forgiven you both.

Org. Your Children are all bastards, not one of them,
Upon my knowledge, of your own begetting.

Aor. Why then I am the more beholding to them
That they will call me father; it was lust
Perchance, that did beget them, but I am sure
It Is charity to keep the Infants.

Org. Not yet stirred?
It Is done of mere contempt, he will not now
Be angry, to express his scorn of me.
It Is above patience this, insufferable.
Proclaim me coward, if I put up this!
Dotard you will be angry, will you not?

Aor. To see how strange a course fond wrath does go!
You will be angry 'cause I am not so.

Or. I, can endure no longer, if your spleen
Lie in your breech, thus I will kick it up.-

Aor. Alpha. Beta. Gamma. Delta. Epsylon. Zeta. Eta. Theta. Iota. Kappa. Lamda*
Mu. Nu. Xi. Omicron. Pi. To. Sigma. Tau. Vpsilon. Phi. Chi. Psi. Omega.


Org. How? what contempt is this?


Aor. An antidote
Against the poison, Anger: 'twas prescribed
A Roman Emperor, that on every injury
Repeated the Greek Alphabet, that being done
His anger too was over. This good rule
I learned from him, and Practice.

Org. Not yet angry?
Still will you vex me? I will practice too?

(Kicks again) Aor. Aleph. Beth. Gimel.


Org. What new Alphabet
Is this?

Aor. The Hebrew Alphabet, that I use
A second remedy.

Org. O my Torment! still?
Are not your Buttocks angry with my toes?

Aor. For ought I feel your toes have more occasion
For to be angry with my Buttocks.

Org. Well,
I Will try your Physic for the third assault;
And exercise the patience of your nose.

Aor. A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. K. L. M. N. O. P. Q. R. S. T. V. W. X. Y. Z.


Org. Are you not angry now?


Aor. Now sir, why now?
Now you have done.

Org. O it is a mere plot this,
To jeere my tamenesse: will no sense of wrong
Waken the lethargy of a cowards soul?
Will not this rowse her from her dead sleep, nor this?

Aor. Why should I sir be angry; if I suffer
An injury, it is no guilt of mine;
No, let it trouble them, that do the wrong;
Nothing but peace approaches innocence.

Org. A bitterness o'reflows me; my eyes flame,
My blood boyles in me, all my faculties
Of soul and body move in a disorder;
His patience has so tortured me: Sir villain
I will dissect thee with my rapiers point;
Rip up each vein, and sinewe of my storque,
Anatomize him, searching every entraile,
To see if nature, when she made this ass,
This suffering ass; did not forget to give him
Some gall!

Cola. Put it up good Orgylus,
Let him not glory in so brave a death,
As by your hand; it stands not with your honor
To stain your rapier in a cowards blood.
The Lybian Lions in their noble rage
Will prey on Bulls, or mate the Unicorn;
But trouble not the painted butterflye;
Ants crawle securely by him.

Orgy. It Is intolerable!
Would thou were worth the killing.

Colax. A good wish,
Savouring as well discretion, as bold valor:
Think not of such a baffel'd ass as this,
More stone, then man: Medusa's head has turned him.
There is in ants a choler, every fly
Carries a spleen: Poor worms being trampled on
Turn tail, as bidding battle to the feet
Of their oppref^ors. A dead palsy sure
Has struck a desperate numnesse through his soul,
Till it be grown insensible: Mere stupidity
Has ceaz'd him: Your more manly soul I find
Is capable of wrong, and like a flint
Throws forth a fire into the strikers eyes.
You bear about you valors whetstone, anger;
Which sets an edge upon the sword, and makes it
Cut with a spirit: you conceive fond patience
Is an injustice to our selves, the suffering
One injury invites a second, that
Calls on a third, till wrongs do multiply
And reputation bleed: How bravely anger
Becomes that martial brow! A glass within
Will show you sir when your great spleen does rise
How fury darts a lightning from your eyes.

Org. Learn anger sir against you meet me next;
Never was man like me with patience vexed.

Exit. Aor. I am so far from anger in my self,
That it is my grief I can make others so.

Colax. It proves a sweetness in your disposition,
A gentle winning carriage -- dear Aorgus
O give me leave to open wide my breast,
And let so rare a friend unto my soul;
Enter, and take possession: such a man
As has no gall, no bitterness, no exceptions,
Whom nature meant a Dove, will keep alive
The ^ame of amity, where all discourse
Flows innocent, and each free jest is taken.
He Is a good friend will pardon his friends errors,
But he is a better takes no notice of them.
How like a beast with rude and savage rage
Breathed the distempered soul of Orgylus?
The pronenesse of this passion is the Nurse
That fosters all confusion, ruins states,
Depopulates Cities, lays great Kingdoms wast;
It Is that affection of the mind that wants
The strongest bridle; give it raines it runs
A desperate course, and drags down reason with it.
It is the whirlwind of the soul, the storm
And tempest of the mind, that raises up
The billows of disturbed passions
To shipwreck Judgment. O -- a soul like yours
Constant in patience! Let the North wind mee^
The South at sea, and Zephyrus breath opposite
To Eurus; let the two and thirty sons
Of Eolus break forth at once, to plow
The Ocean, and dispeople all the woods,
Yet here could be a calm, it is not danger
Can make this cheek grow pale, nor injury
Call blood into it. Their's a Glass within
Will let you see your self, and tell you now
How sweet a tamenesse dwells upon your brow.

Aor. Colax, I must believe, and therefore go;
Who is distrustful will be angry too.

SCEN. 4.
Alazon. Eiron.
Rosc. The next are the extremes of Truth, Alazon one that arrogates that to
himself which is not his, and Eiron one that out of an itch to be thought
modest dissembles his qualities; the one erring in defending a falsehood, the
other offending in denying a truth.


Alaz. I hear you're wondrous valiant.


Eir. I! alas,
Who told you I was valiant?

Alaz. The world speaks it.


Eir. She is deceived; but does she speak it truly?


Alaz. I am indeed the Hector of the age;
But she calls you Achilles.

Eir. I Achilles?
No, I am no Achilles: I confess
I am no coward: That the world should think
That I am an Achilles! yet the world may
Call me what she please.

Alaz. Next to my valor,
Which but for yours could never hope a second,
Yours is reported.

Eir. I may have my share;
But the last valor showed in Christendo^e
Was in Lepanto.

Alaz. Valor in Lepanto?
He might be thought so sir, by them that knew him not;
But I have found him a poor baffel'd snake:
Sir, I have writ him, and proclaimed him coward
On every post in the City.

Eiron. Who?


Alaz. Lepanto,
The valor sir that you so much renown.

Eir. Lepanto was no man sir, but the place
Made famous by the so-much mentioned battle
Betwixt the Turks and Christians.

Alaz. Cry you mercy!
Then the Lepanto that I meant, it seems
Was but that Lepanto's namesake. I can
Find that you are well skilled in History.

Eir. Not a whit; A novice, I! I could perchance
Discourse from Adam downward; but what is that
To History? All that I know is only
The original, continuance, height, and alteration
Of every Common wealth. I have read nothing
But Plutarch, Livy, Tacitus, Suetonius,
Appian, Dion, Iunius, P^terculus,
With Florus, Iustine, Salust, and some few
More of the Latin: For the modern, I
Have all without book Gallo-belgicus,
Phillip De-Comino, Machiavele, Guiccardine,
The Turkish and Egyptian Histories,
With those of Spain, France, and the Netherlands.
For England, Polydore Virgil, Camden, Speed,
And a matter of forty more, nothing
Alas to one that is read in Histories.
In the Greek I have a smack or so, at
Zenophon, Herodotus, Thucidides, and
Stowes Cronicle.

Alaz. Believe me sir, and that
Stowes Cronicle is very good Greek; you little
Think who writ it! Do you not see him? are
You blind? I am the man.

Eir. Then I must number
You with my best Authors in my Library.

Alaz. Sir, the rest too are mine, but that I venture '^m
With other names, to shun the opinion
Of arrogance; so the subt'le Cardinal
Calls one book Bellarmine, 'nother Tostatus,
Yet one man's labor both. You talk of numbering;
You cannot choose but hear how loud fame speaks
Of my experience in Arithmetique:
She says you too grow near perfection.

Eir. Far from it I; some in-sight, but no more.
I count the stars, can give the Total sum,
How many sands there be in the sea, but these
Are triflles to the expert, that have studied

Pen. keth-mans president. Sir, I have no skill
In any thing, if I have any, it is
In languages, but yet insooth I speak
Only my mother Tongue; I have not gained
The Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriack, or Arabic;
Nor know the Greek with all her Dialects.
Scaliger and Tom Coriate both excel me.
I have no skill in French, Italian, Spanish,
Turkish, Egyptian, China, Persian Tongues*
Indeed the Latin I was whipped into;
But Ruscian, Slavonian, and Dalmatian
With Saxon, Danish, and Albanian speech,
That of the Cossaches, and Hungarian too,
With Biscays, and the prime of languages,
Dutch, Weltch, and Irish are too hard for me
To be familiar in: and yet some think
(But thought is free) that I do speak all these
As I were borne in each. But they may err
That think so; It Is not every Judgment sits
In the infallible chair. To confess truth
All Europe, Asia, and Afric too;
But in America, and the newfound world
I very much fear there be some languages
That would go near to puzzle me.

Alaz. Very likely.
You have a pretty pittance in the Tongues;
But Eiron, I am now more general;
I can speak all alike, there is no stranger
Of so remote a nation hears me talk
But confidently calls me Countryman-
The witty world giving my worth her due
Surnames me the Confusion* I but want
An Orator like you to speak my praise.

Eir. Am I an Orator Alazon? no;
Though it has pleased the wiser few to say
Demosthenes was not so eloquent;
But friends will flatter, and I am not bound
To believe all Hyperboles: something sir
Perchance I have, but it is not worth the naming*
Especially Alazon in your presence.

Alaz. Your modesty Eiron speaks but truth in this.


Colax. I need not flatter these, they will do it themselves,
And cross the Proverb that was wont to say
One Mule does scrub another, here each Ass
Has learned to claw himself.

Alaz. I do ^urpasse
All Orators. How like you my Orations?
Those against Catiline; I account them best,
Except my Philippicks; all acknowledge me
Above the three great Orators of Rome.

Eir. What three Alazon?


Ala. Marcus, Tullius,
And Cicero, the best of all the three.

Eir. Why those three names are all the self same man's


Alaz. Then all is one. Were those three names three men.
I should excel them all. And then for Poetry!

Eir. There is no Poetry but Homers Iliads.


Alaz. Alas it was writith' nonage of my Muses.
You understand The Italian?

Eir. A little sir,
I have read Tasso.

Ala. And Torquato too?


Eir. Their still the same.


Ala. I find you very skillful.
Eiron, I err only to found your judgment.
You are a Poet too.

Eir. The world may think so,
But it is deceived, and I am sorry for it.
But I will tell you sir some excellent verses
Made by a friend of mine; I have not read
A better Epigram of a Neoterique.

Ala. Pray do my eyes the favor sir to let me read 'um.


Eir. Strange sights there late was seen, that did affright
The Multitude; the Moon was seen by night,
And Sun appeared by day: -- is it not good?

Ala. Excellent good, proceed.


Eir. Without remorse
Each star and planet kept their wonted course.
What here could fright * them? (mark the answer now) O sir ask not that:
The Vulgar know not why they fear, nor what.
But in their humors too inconstant be,
Nothing seems strange to them but constancy.
Has not my friend approved himself a Poet?

Alaz. The Verses sir are excellent, but your friend
Approves himself a thief.

Eir. Why good Alazon?


Alaz. A Plagiary I mean, the verses sir
Were stolen.

Eir. From whom?


Alaz. From me, beleeu't I made 'um.


Eir. They are alas unworthy sir your owning.
Such Trifles as my muse had stumbled on
This morning.

Alaz. Nay, they may be yours: I told you
That you come near me sir. Yours they may be.
Good wits may jump: but let me tell you, Eiron,
Your Friend must steal them if he have them.

Col. What pretty Gulls are these? I Will take 'um off;
Alazon, you are learned.

Alaz. I know that.


Col. And virtuous.


Alaz. It Is confessd.


Col. A good Historian.


Alaz. Who dares deny it?


Col. A rare Arithmetician.


Alaz. IN have heard it often.


Col. I commend your care
That know your virtues! why should modesty
Stop good men's mouths from their own praise? our neighbors
Are envious, and will rather blast our memories
With infamy, then immortalize our names:
When Fame has taken cold, and lost her voice,
We must be our own trumpets; careful men
Will have an Inventory of their goods,
And why not of their virtues? should you say
You were not wise, it were a sin to truth.
Let Eirons modesty tell bashful lies,
To cloak and masque his parts; he is a fool for it.
It Was heavenly counsel bid us know our selves.
You may be confident, chaunt your own encomiums,
Ring out a Panegyrique to your self*
And your self write the learned Commentary
Of your own actions.

Ala. So I have.


Col. Where is it?


Ala. It Is stolen.


Col. I know the thief, they call him Caesar.
Go in good sir; there is within a Glass
That will present you with the Felons face. Exit Alaz.
Eiron, you hear the news!

Eir: Not I, what is it?


Col. That you are held the only man of Art.


Eir. Is It current Colax?


Col. Current as the air,
Every man breaths it for a certainty.

Eir. This is the first time I heard on it in truth.
Can it be certain? so much charity left
In men's opinion?

Col. You call it charity
Which is their duty: Virtue sir, like yours
Commands men's praises. Emptiness and folly,
Such as Alazon is, use their own Tongues,
While real worth hears her own praise, not speaks it.
Other men's mouths become your trumpeters,
And winged fame proclaims you lowdly forth
From East to West, till either Pole admire you.
Selfe-praise is bragging, and begets the envy
Of them that hear it, while each man therein
Seems undervalued: You are wisely silent
In your own worth, and therefore 'twere a sin
For others to be so: The fish would loose
Their being mute, ere such a modest worth
Should want a speaker: yet sir I would have you
Know your own virtues, be acquainted with them.

Eir. Why good sir bring me but acquainted them.


Col. There is a glass within shows you your self
By a reflection; go and speak 'em there.

Eir. I should be glad to see 'em any where*


Exit Eir. Rosc. Retire your selves again, for these are sights
Made to revive not burden with delights.

Exeunt omnes. Finis Actus 3.
ACTUS IV.
SCENA 1.
Flowrdew, Bird, Roscius.
Bird. My indignation boileth like a pot,
An overheated pot, still, still it boyleth,
It boy leth and it bubleth with disdain.

Flow. My Spirit within me too fumeth, I say
Fumeth, and steemeth up, and runs ore
With holy wrath, at these delights of flesh.

Rosc. The Actours beg your silence -- The next virtue, whose extremes we
would present, wants a name both in the Greek and Latin,


Bird. Wants it a name? it is an unchristian virtue.


Rosc. But they describe it such a modesty as directs us in the pursuit, and
refusal of the meaner honours^ and so answers to Magnanimity, as Liberality to
Magnificence: But here, that humor of the persons, being already forestalled,
and no Pride now so much practiced, or countenanced as that of Apparel, let me
present you Philotimia, an overcurious Lady too neat in her attire* and for
Aphilotimus, Luparius a nasty sordid sloven.


Flowr. Pride is a vanity worthy the correction.
Philotimia* Luparus* Col^.

Phil. What mole dressed me to day? O patience*
Who would be troubled with these mop-eyd Chambermaids?
There Is a whole hair on this side more then the other,
I am no Lady else! -- come on you sloven!
Was ever Christian Madam so tormented
To wed a swine as I am? make you ready.

Lupa. I would the Tailor had bin hanged for me
That first invented clothes -- O nature, nature!
More cruel unto man then all thy creatures!
Calves come into the world with dublets on;
And Oxen have no breeches to put off.
The Lamb is borne with her Freeze-coat about her;
Hoggs go to bed in rest, and are not troubled
With pulling (...) their hose and shoos i'th'morning,
With gar^ing, ^rdling, trussing, buttoning,
And a (...) that afflict humanity.

Phil. To (...)! she has made this cheek
By much too (...), and has forgot to whiten
The natural redness of my nose, she knows not
What it is wants dealbation! O fine memory!
If she has not set me in the self same teeth
That I wore yesterday, I am a jew.
Does she think that I can eat twice with the same,
Or that my mouth stands as the Vulgar does?
What? are you snorting there? you will rise, you sluggard
And make you ready?

Lupa. Rise, and make you ready?
Two works of that, your happy birds make one;
They when they rise are ready. Blessed birds!
They fortunate creatures sleep in their own clothes,
And rise with all their feather beds about them:
Would nakedness were come again in fashion;
I had some hope then when the breasts went bare
Their bodies too would have come to 't in time.

Phil. Beshrew her for it, this wrinkle is not filled!
Youll go and wash -- you are a pretty husband*

Lupa. Our Sow never washes, yet she has a face
Me thinks as cleanly, Madam, as yours is*
If you durst wear your own.

Col: Madame Superbia*
You'are studying the Ladies library,
The Looking-glass; it is well! so great a beauty
Must have her ornaments -- Nature adornes
The Peacocks tail with stars; it is she attires
The Bird of Paradise in all her plumes;
She decks the fields with various flowers; it is she
Spangled the Heavens with all those glorious lights;
She spotted th'Ermine's skin; and armed the fish
In silver male: But man she sent forth naked
Not that he should remain so, but that he
Endued with reason should adorn himself
With every one of these. The silke-worme is
Only man's spinster, else we might suspect
That she esteemed the painted Butterfly
Above her masterpiece: you are the Image
Of that bright Goddess: therefore wear the Jewels
Of all the East; let the red sea be ransacked
To make you glitter, look on Luparus
Your Husband there, and see how in a sloven
All the best characters of Divinity,
Not yet worn out in man, are lost and buried.

Philo. I see it to my grief, pray counsel him.


Col. This vanity, in your nice Ladies humors
Of being so curious in her toies, and dresses,
Makes me suspicious of her honesty.
These Cobweb-lawnes catch spiders sir, believe it*
You know that clothes do not commend the man,
But it is the living; though this age prefer
A cloak of Plush, before a brain of art.
You understand what misery it is to have
No worth but that we owe the dra^er for;
No doubt you spend the time your Lady looses
In tricking up her body, to cloth the soul.

Lup. To cloth the soul? must the soul too be clothed?
I protest sir, I had rather have no soul
Then be tormented with the clothing of it.

Rosc. To these enter the extremes of modesty, a neer^ kinswoman of the
virtues, Anaiskinthia or Impudence, a bawd; and Kataplectus an over bashful
Scholar* where our Author hopes the women will pardon him, if of four and
twenty vices he presents but two (Pride and Impudence) of their sex.


SCENA 2.
Anaiskintia. Kataplectus.
Philo. Here comes Anaiskintia too; -- O fates!
Acolastus, and Asotus have sent for me,
And my breath not perfumed yet! Kat. O sweetmother,
Are the Gentlemen there already?

Anais. Come away,
Are you not ashamed to be so bashful? well,
If I had thought of this in time, I would
As soon have seen you fairly hanged as sent you
To' the University.

Phil. What gentleman is that?


Anais. A shamefast Scholar Madam* -- look upon her,
Speak to her, or you loose your exhibition:
-- You Will speak I hope, wear not away your buttons*

Kata. What should I say?


Anaisk. Why tell her you are glad
To see her Ladyship in health -- nay out with it!
Katap. -- Gaudeo te bone valere --

Phil. A pretty Proficient!
What standing is he of in the University?

Anais. He dares not answer to that question Madam. --


Philo. How long have you bin in the Academy?


Katap. Profecto Do -- Domina sum Bac -- Bac -- Bac^halaureus Artium.


Phil. What pity it is he is not impudent!


Anais. Nay all my cost I see is spent in vain;
I having, as your Ladyship knows full well,
Good practice in the Suburbs; and by reason
That our Mortality there, is very subject
To an infection of the French Disease,
I brought my Nephew up 'ith 'Vniversity,
Hoping he might (having attained some knowledge)
Save me the charge of keeping a Physician;
But all in vain: he is so bashful Madam,
He dares not look upon a woman's water.

Colax. Sweet Gentleman, proceed in bashfulnesse!
It Is virtues best preserver --

Kata. Recte dicis, sic inquit Aristoteles.


Col. That being gone
The rest soon follow, and a swarm of vice
Enter the soul, no color but a blush
Becomes a young man's cheek: pure sha^efastnesse
Is (...) to the ^ps; and ears, that nothing
Might enter, or come out of man, but what
Is good, and modest: Nature strives to hide
The parts or shame, let her, the best of guides,

Katap. Natura dux (...).


Colax. Teach us to do so too in our discourse.


Katap. Gratias tibi ago.


Philo. Inure him to speak bawdy.


Anais. A very good way; Kataplectus here is a Lady,
would hear you speak obscenely:

Katap. Obscen^m est, quod intra scenam agi non ^portuit.


Anais. Off goes your Velvet cap! did I maintain you
To have you disobedient? you will be persuaded?

Katap. Liber is operam dare.


Anais. What Is that in English.


Katap. To do an endeavor for children*


Anais. Some more of this, it may be something one day.


Katap. Communis est omnium animantium coniunctionis appetituus procrea^ causa.


Phil. Construe me that.


Katap. All creatures have a natural desire or appetite to be joined together
in the lawful bon^s of Matrimony, that they may have sons and daughters.


Anais. Your Landresse has bestowed her time but ill*
Why could not this have been in proper terms?
If you should Catechize my head, and say,
What is your name, would it not ^ay, a head?
So would my skin confess it self a skin;
Nor any part about me be ashamed
Of his own name, although I ^atechiz'd
All over. Come good Nephew, let not me
Have any member of my body (...).

Colax. Our Stoique, the gravest o^ Philosophers,
Is just of your opinion, and thus argues;
Is any thing obscene, the fil^hinesse*
Is either grounded in the things themselves,
Or in the words that signify those things;
Not in the things, that would make nature guilty,
Who creates nothing filthy, and u^cleane,
But chaste, and honest; if not in the things,
How in the words, (...) shadows of those things?
To ma^re ground, (...) a cha^t honest (...);
Another word that signifies the same,
Unlawful: every man endures to hear,
He got a child; speak plainer, and he blushes,
Yet means the same. The Stoique thus disputes,
That would have men to breath as freely down'ward,
As they do upward.

Anais. I commend him Madam,
Unto your Ladyships service, he may me^d
With counsel! let him be your Gentleman Usher;
Madam you may in time bring down his legs
To the just size, now over grown with playing
Too much at football.

Phylo. So he will prove a Stoique;
I long to have a Stoique strut before me:
Here kiss my hand. Come what is that in Latin?

Katap. Deo^culor manum,


Phylo. My lip; -- nay sir you must if I command you.


Katap. Osculorte, velosculor ate.


Phylo. His breath smells strong.


Anais. It Is but of Logic Madam.


Phylo. He will come to it one day -- you shall go with me
To see an exquisite glass to dress me by.
Nay, go! you must go first; you are too mannerly.
It is the office of your place, so -- on*.

exeunt. Colax. Slow Luparus rise, or you will be metamorphos'd;
Acteon's fate is imminent.

Lup. Where Is my wife:


Cola. She Is gone with a young Snip, and an old baud.


Lup. Then I am cuckolded; if I be my comfort is
She'has put me on a cap, that will not trouble me
With pulling off, yet Madam I Will prevent you.

Exit. Rosci. The next are the extremes of Justice.


SCEN. 3.
Enter Justice Nimis, Justice Nihil. Plus and Minus their Clerks. Nim. Plus!


Plus. What says your worship?


Nim. Have my tenants
That hold their lease of lust here in the suburbs,
By copyhold from me, their Lord in chief,
Paid their rent charge?

Plus. They have, and't please your worship;
I Receiver general gave 'em my acquittance.

Parum. Sir I resign my Pen, and Inkhorn to you,
I shall forget my hand, if I stay here.
I have not made a Mittimus since I served you.
Were I a reverend Justice as you are,
I would not sit a Cipher on the Bench,
But do as Justice Nimis does, and be
The Dominus-fac-totun^ of the Sessions.

Nihil. But I will be a Dominus fac miserecordian*
Instead of your Totums: People shall not wish
To see my spurs filled off, it does me good
To take a merciful nap upon the Bench,
Where I so sweetly dream of being pitiful,
wake the better for it.

Nim. The yearly value
Of my fair manor of Clerken-well^, is pounds
So many -- besides New years capons, the Lordship
Of Turnball so -- which with my Pick-hatch grange --
And Shoreditch farm, and other premises
Adjoining, -- very good, a pretty maintenance
To keep a Justice of Peace, and Coram too:
Besides the fines I take of young beginners, --
With harriots of all such as dye, quatenus whores,
And ruined bauds, with all Amercements due
To such as hunt in Purly; this is something,
With mine own Game reserved.

Plus. Besides a pretty pittance too for me,
That am your worships Bailey.

Parum. Will It please your worship sir, to hear the Catalogue
Of such offenders, as are brought before you?

Nihil. It does not please me Sir, to hear of any
That do offend; I would the world were innocent!
Yet to express my mercy you may read them.

Par. First here is one accused for Cutting a purse,


Nihil. Accused, is that enough? if it be guilt
To be accused, who shall be innocent?
Discharge him Parum.

Parum. Here Is another brought
For the same fact, taken in the very Action.

Nihil. Alas it was for need, bid him take warning,
And so discharge him too; It Is the first time.

Nimis. Plus, say, what hopes of gain brings this day's sin?


Plus. Anais kyntia Sir was at door
Brought by the Constable.

Nimis. Set the Constable by the heels.
She Is at certain with us.

Plus. Then there is Intemperance the baud.


Nim. A Tenant too.


Plus. With the young Lady, Madam Incontinence.


Nim. Search over my Doomes-day book; is not she^ Plus
One of my last compounders?

Plus. I remember it.
Then there is jumping Jude, Heroique Doll,
With bouncing Nan, and Cis, your worship's sinner.

Nim. All Subsidy women, go free'em all.


Parum. Sir, here is a known offender: one that has
Been stockt, and whipped innumerable times,
Has suffered Bridewell often, not a Iayle
But he is familiar with, burnt in the hand,
Forehead, and shoulder, both his ears cut off,
With his nose slit, what shall I do with him?

Nih. So often punished? nay, if no correction
Will serve his turn; even let him run his course.

Plus. Here Is Mistress Fraylty too, the waiting woman.


Nim. For what offense?


Plus. A sin of weakness too.


Nim. Let her be strongly whipped,


Plus, An't please your worship
She has a noble man's letter.

Nim. Tell her, Plus, she must
Have the Kings Picture too.

Plus. Besides
She has promised me I should examine her
Above in the garret.

Nim. What Is all that to me?


Plus. And she entreats your worship to accept --


Nim. Nay, if she can entreat in English, Plus,
Say she is injured.

Par. Sir here is Snip the Tailor
Charged with a riot.

Nihil. Parum, let him go,
He is our Neighbor.

Parum. Then there is a stranger for quarrelling.


Nihil. A stranger! o'tis pity
To hurt a stranger, we may be all strangers,
And would be glad to find some mercy Paru^.

Plus. Sir here is a Gentlewoman of S. Ioanes 'his
Charged with dishonesty.

Nim. With dishonesty?
Severity will amend her, and yet Plus
Ask her a question, if she will be honest?

Plus. And here is a cobblers wife brought for a scold.


Nim. Tell her of cooking-stooles, tell her there be
Oyster queanes, with Orange women,
Carts, and coaches store, to make a noise;
Yet i^ she can speak English
We may suppose her silent.

Par. Here Is a Batchelour
And a Citizens wife for flatt Adultery;
What will you do with them?

Nih. A Citizens wife!
Perchance her husband is grown impotent,
And who can blame her then?

Par. Yet I hope you will bind o're*the Batchelour.


Nih. No: enquire
First if he have no wife, for if the Batchelour
Have not a wife of his own, 'twas but frailty;
And Justice counts it venial.

Plus. Here Is one Adicus,
And Sophron, that do mutually accuse
Each other of flat felony!

Nim. Of the two which is the richer?


Plus. Adicus is the richer.


Nim. Then Sophron is the thief.


Plus. Here is with all,
Panourgus come with one called Prodotes,
Lay treason Sir to one another charge;
Panourgus is the richer.

Nim. He Is the Traitor then.


Plus. How Sir the richer?


Nim. Thou art ignorant Plus;
We must do some injustice for our credit,
Not all for gain.

Plus. Eutrapeles complains Sir,
Bomolochus has abused him.

Nim. Send Eutrapeles to th'Iayle.


Plus. It is Eutrapeles that complains Sir.


Nim. Tell him we are pleased to think 'twas he offended.
Will must be law: were not for Summum Ius,
How could the land subsist?

Colax. I, or the Justices
Maintain themselves -- go on -- The Land wants such
As dare with rigor execute her Laws:
Her festred members must be lanc't and tented.
He Is a bad Surgeon, that for pity spares
The part corrupted, 'till the Gangrene spread,
And all the body perish; he that is merciful
Unto the bad, is cruel to the good.
The Pillory must cure the ears disease;
The stocks the foots offenses; let the back
Bear her own sin, and her rank blood purge forth
By the Phlebotomy of a whipping post:
And yet the secret, and purse punishment
Is held the wiser course; because at once
It helps the virtuous and corrects the vicious.
Let not the sword of Justice sleep and rust
Within her velvet sheath; preserve her edge,
And keep it sharp with cutting. Use must whet her,
Tame mercy is the breast that suckles vice,
Till Hydra like she multiply her heads.
Tread you on sin, squeeze out the Serpents brains,
All you can find -- for some have lurking holes
Where they lie hid. But there is within a glass
Will show you every close offenders face.

Nim. Come Plus let us go in to find out these concealements;
We will grow rich, and purchase honor thus --
I mean to be a Baron of Snmmum Ius.

Exit. Ni. Plus. Parum. You are the strangest man, you will acknowledge
None for offenders, here is one apprehended
For murder.

Nihil. How!


Par. He killed a man last night.


Nih. How cam't to pass.


Par. Upon a falling out.


Nih. They shall be friends I Will reconcile'em Parum.


Par. One of them is dead.


Nih. Is he not buried yet?


Par. No Sir.


Nih. Why then I say they shall shake hands.


Col. As you have done
With Clemency, most Reverend Justice Nihil;
A gentle mildness thrones it self within you.
Your Worship would have justice, use her balance
More then her sword; nor can you endure to dye
The robe she wears, deep scarlet, in the blood
Of poor offenders: How many men has rigor
By her too hasty, and severe proceedings
Prevented from amendment, that perchance
Might have turned honest and have proved good Christians?
Should Jove not spare his thunder, but as often
Discharge at us, as we dart sins at him,
Earth would want men, and he himself want arms,
And yet tire Vulcan, and Pyracmon too.
You imitate the Gods! and he sins less
Strikes not at all, then he strikes once amiss.
I would not have justice too falcon-eyed;
Sometimes a wilful blindness much becomes her;
As when upon the bench she sleeps and winkes
At the transgressions of Mortality:
In which most merciful posture I have seen
Your pitiful Worship snorting out pardons
To the despairing sinner: there is within
A Mirror sir like you! go see your face
How like Astreas it is in her own Glass.

Par. And I Will petition Justice Nimi's Clerk
To admit me for his under officer.

Exeunt. SCEN. 4.
Agroicus.
Rosc. This is Agroicus, a rustique clownish fellow, whose discourse is all
Country; An extreme of urbanity, whereby you may observe there is a virtue in
jesting.


Agro. They talk of witty discourse, and fine conceits, and I ken not what a
deal of prittle prattle would make a Cat piss to hear 'em. Cannot they be
content with their Grannams English? They think they talk learnedly, when I
had rather hear our brindled curre howl, or Sow grunt. They must be breaking
of jests with a murraine, when I had as live hear 'em break wind Sir
reverence! My zonne Dick is a pretty Bookish Scholar of his age, God bless
him; he can write and read, and makes bonds, and bills, and hobligations, God
save all. But by'r lady, if I wotted it would make him such a Iacksauce, as to
have more wit then his vore-vathers, he should have learned nothing for old
Agroicus, but to keep a Tally. There is a new trade lately come up to be a
vocation, I wis not what; they call 'em -- Boets, a new name for Beggars I
think, since the statute against Gypsies. I would not have my zon Dick one of
those Boets for the best Pig in my styeby the mackins: Boets? heaven shield
him, and zend him to be a good Varmer; if he can cry hy, ho, gee, hut, gee, ho,
it is better I trow then being a Poet. Boets? I had rather zee him remitted to
the jayle, and have his twelve God-vathers, good men and true contemn him to
the Gallows; and there see him vairely persecuted. There is Bomolochus one of
these Boets, now a bots take all the red-nose tribe of 'em for Agroicus! he
does so abuse his betters! well 'twas a good world, when I virst held the Plow!


Col. They cared not then so much for speaking well
As to mean honest, and in you still lives
The good simplicity of the former times:
When to do well was Rhetorique, not to talk.
The tongue disease of Court spreads her infections
Through the whole Kingdom, flattery, that was wont
To be confined within the virge, is now
Grown Epidemicall, for all our thoughts
Are borne between our lips: The heart is made
A stranger to the tongue; as if it used
A language that she never understood.
What is it to be witty in these days,
But to be bawdy, or profane, at least
Abusive? Wit is grown a petulant waspe,
And stings she knows not whom, nor where, nor why;
Spues vinegar, and gall on all she meets
Without distinction -- buys laughter with the loss
Of reputation, father, kinsman, friend;
Hunts Ord'naries only to deliver
The idle Timpanies of a windy brain,
That beats and throbs above the pain of childbed,
Till every ear she meets be made a mid wife
To her light Bastard-issue, how many times
Bomolochus sides, and shoulders ache, and groan!
He Is so witty -- here he comes -- away --

Agro. His wit is dangerous and I dare not stay.


Exit. SCEN. 5.
Bomolocus.
Rosc. This is the other extreme of Vrbanity; Bomolocus a fellow conceited of
his own wit, though indeed it be nothing but the base dreggs of scandal, and a
lump of most vile and loathsome scurrility.


Bird. I, this is he we looked for all the while!
Scurrility! here she has her impious throne,
Here lies her heathenish dominion,
In this most impious cell of corruption;
For it is a Purgatory, a meerc Limbo,
Where the black Devil and her damme Scurrility
Do rule the roast; foul Princes of the air!
Scurrility! that is he that throws scandalls,
Sows, and throws scandalls, as 'twere dirt
Even in the face of holiness, and devotion.
His presence is contagious, like a dragon
He belches poison forth, poison of the pit,
Brimstone, hellish and sulphurous poison:
I will not stay, but fly as far as zeal
Can hurry me -- the roof will fall and brain me,
If I endure to hear his blasphemies,
His graceless blasphemies.

Rosc. He shall vent none here;
But stay, and see how justly we have used him.

Flow. Stay brother, I do find the spirit grow strong.


Col. Hail sacred wit! -- Earth breeds not Baies enough
To crown thy spacious merit.

Bomo. Oh -- Oh -- Oh.


Col. Cratinus, Eupolis, Aristophanes,
Or whatsoever other wit did give
Old Comedies the raines, and let her loose
To stigmatize what brow she pleased with slander
Of people, Prince, Nobility -- All must yield
To this Triumphant brain!

Bomo. Oh -- Oh -- Oh.


Col. They say you will loose a friend before a jest;
It Is true, there is not a jest that comes from you,
That is the true Minerva of this brain,
But is of greater value then a world
Of friends, were every prayre of men we meet
A Pylades and Orestes.

Bomo. Oh -- Oh -- Oh.


Col. Some say you will abuse your Father too,
Rather then loose the opinion of your wit;
Who would not that has such a wit as yours?
'Twere better twenty Parents were exposed
To scorn and laughter, then the simplest thought
Or least conceit of yours, should dye abortive,
Or perish a braine-Embrio.

Bomo. Oh -- oh -- oh. --


Col. How Is this? that tongue grown silent that sirens
Stood still to admire?

Bomo. Oh -- oh -- oh. --


Cola. Twere better that the spheres should loose their harmony,
And all the Choristers of the wood grow hoarse!
What wolf has spied you first?

Bomo. Oh -- oh -- oh --


Cola. Sure Hermes envying that there was on earth
An eloquence more then his, has struck you dumb!
Malicious deity!

Bomo. Oh -- oh -- oh-oh. --


Cola. Go in sir there is a Glass that will restore
That tongue, whose sweetness Angels might adore.

Bomo. Oh -- oh -- oh -- oh -- oh -- oh --.oh --


Exit. Rosc. Thus Sir you see how we have put a gagge
In the licentious mouth of base scurrility;
He shall not Ibis-like purge upward here,
To infect the place with pestilentiall breath;
We Will keep him tongue-tide; you and all I promise
By Phoebus and his daughters, whose chaste zones
Were never yet by impure hands untied
Our language shall flow chaste, nothing sound here
That can give just offense to a strict ear.

Bird. This gagge has wrought my good opinion of you


Flow. I begin to think 'em lawful recreations.


Cclax. Now there is none left here, whereon to practice,
I Will flatter my dear self -- o that my skill
Had but a body, that I might embrace it,
Kiss it; and hug it, and beget a brood,
Another brood of pretty skills upon it!
Were I divided I would hate all beauties,
And grow enamored with my other half!
Self-love, Narcissus, had not been a fault,
Had thou, instead of such a beauteous face,
Had but a brain like mine: I can guild vice,
And praise it into Alchymie, till it go
For perfect gold, and cozen almost the touchstone.
I can persuade a toad into an ox,
Till swelled too big with my Hyperboles
She burst a sunder; and it is virtues name
Lends me a mask to scandalize herself.
Vice, if it be no more, can nothing do;
That art is great makes virtue guilty too.
I have such strange varieties of colors,
Such shift of shapes, blew Proteus sure begot me
On a Camelion, and I change so quick
That I suspect my mother did conceive me,
As they say Mares do, on some wind or other.
I Will peep to see how many fools I made
With a report of a miraculous Glass.
-- Heaven bless me, I am ruined! o my brain
Witty to my undoing, I have jested
My self to an eternal misery.
I see le^ne hunger with her meager face
Ride poast to overtake me, I do prophecy
A Lent immortal: Phoebus I could curse
Thee and thy brittle gifts, Pandora's box
Compared with this might be esteemed a blessing.
The Glass which I conceived a fabulous humor
Is to the height of wonder proved a truth.
The two Extremes of every Virtue there
Beholding how they either did exceed,
Or want of just proportion, joined together,
And are reduced into a perfect Mean:
As when the skillful and deep learned Physician
Does take two different poisons, one that is cold
The other in the same degree of heat,
And blend's them both to make an Antidote;
Or as the Lutanist takes Flats and Sharpes,
And out of those so dissonant notes, does strike
A ravishing Harmony. Now there is no vice
It Is a hard world for Colax: What shift now?
Dyscolus does expect me -- since this age
Is grown too wise to entertain a Parasite,
I Will to the Glass, and there turn virtuous too,
Still strive to please, though not to flatter you.

Bird. There is good use indeed-la to be made
From their Conversion.

Flow. Very good insooth -- la
And edifying.

Rosci. Give your eyes some respite.
You know already what our Vices be,
In the next Act you shall our Virtues see.

Exeunt. ACTVS* V.
SCEN. 1.
Roscius. Flowrdew. Bird.
Flow. Now verily I find the devout Be
May suck the honey of good Doctrine thence,
And bear it to the hive of her pure family,
Whence the profane and irreligious spider
Gathers her impious Venom! I have picked
Out of the Garden of this Play, a good
And wholesome salad of instruction!
What do you next present?

Rosci. The several Virtues.


Bird. I hope there be no Cardinal Virtues there!


Rosci. There be not.


Bird. Then I Will stay; I hate a Virtue
That will be made a Cardinal: Cardinal virtues,
Next to Pope-vertues, are most impious;
And Bishop-vertues are unwarrantable:
I will allow of none but Deacon-vertues,
Or Elder-vertues.

Rosci. These are Moral virtues.


Bird. Are they Lay-vertues?


Rosci. Yes!


Bird, Then they are lawful,
Virtues in Orders are unsanctified.

Rosci. We do present them royal, as they are
In all their state, in a full dance.

Bird. What dance?
No wanton Iig I hope, no dance is lawful
But Prinkam Prankam!

Flow. Will Virtues dance?
I hate a Virtue in a Morrice-dance!
O vile, absurd, may pole -- maid-marrian virtue

Rosci. Dancing is lawful.


Flourish.
Enter Mediocritie. Flow. Who Is this?


Rosc. It is the mother of the Virtues.


Flow. Mother of Pearl I think, she is so gaudy


Rosci. It is the golden Mediocritie.


Flow. She looks like the Idol of Cheap Side.


Mediocritie.
Med. I am that even course that must be kept
To shun two dangerous gulfes; the middle tract
'Twixt Scylla and Charibdis; the small Isthmus
That suffers not the' Aegean tide to meet
The violent rage of the Ionian wave.
I am a bridge o'rean Impetuous sea;
Free, and safe passage to the wary step!
But he whose wantonness, or folly dares
Decline to either side falls desperate
Into a cetaine ruin. -- Dwell with me,
Whose mansion is not placed so near the Sun,
As to complain of's neighborhood, and be scorched
With his directer beams: nor so remote
From his bright rays as to be situate
Under the Icy Pole of the cold Bear;
But in a temperate zone: it is I am she,
I am the golden Mediocritie:
The labor of whose womb are all the virtues,
And every passion too commendable:
Sisters so like themselves, as if they were
All but one birth; no difference to distinguish them
But a respect they bear to several objects:
Else had their names been one as are their features.
So when eleven fair Virgins of a blood
All Sisters, and alike grown ripe of years,
Match into several houses, from each family,
Each takes a name distinct, and all are different'd!
They are not of complexion red or pale,
But a sweet mixture of the flesh and blood,
As if both roses were confounded there.
Their stature neither Dwarf nor ^yantish,
But in a comely well disposed proportion!
And all so like their mother, that indeed
They are all mine, and I am each of them.
When in the midst of dangers I stand up
A wary confidence betwixt fear and daring,
Not so ungodly bold as not to be
Fearful of heavens just anger when she speaks
In prodigies, and tremble at the hazard
Of my Religion, shake to see my Country
Threatened with fire and sword, be a stark coward
To any thing may blast my reputation:
But I can scorn the worst of poverty,
Sickness, Captivity, Banishment, Grim death,
If she dare meet me in the bed of honor;
Where, with my Countries cause upon my sword
Not edged with hope or anger, nor made bold
With civil blood, or customary danger;
Nor the fools whetstone, Inexperience;
I can throw valor as a lightning from me,
And then I am the Amazon fortitude!
Give me the moderate cup of lawful pleasures,
And I am Temperance. Take me wealths just steward,
And call me Liberality; with one hand
I Will gather riches home, and with the other
Rightly distribute 'em, and there observe
The persons, quantity, quality, time and place:
And if in great expenses I be set
Chief Arbitresse, I can in glorious works,
As raising Temples, Statues, Altars, shrines
Vestures, and ornaments to Religion, be
Neither too thrifty nor too prodigal.
And to my country the like mean observe,
In building Ships, and Bulwarks, Castles, walls
Conducts, Theaters, and what else may serve her
For use or ornament: And at home be royal
In Buildings, Gardens, costly furniture,
In entertainments free and hospitable,
With a respect to my estate, and means,
And then I may be named Magnificence;
As Magnanimity, when I wisely aim
At greatest honors, if I may deserve'm,
Not for ambition, but for my Countries good,
And in that virtue all the rest do dwell.
In lesser dignities I want a name;
And when I am not over patient,
To put up such gross wrongs as call me coward,
But can be angry, yet in that observe
What cause has moved my anger, and with whom,
Look that it be not sudden, nor too thirsty
Of a revenge, nor violent, nor greater
Then the offense, know my time when, where
I must be angry, and how long remain so;
Then then you may surname me Mans^ude.
When in my carriage and discourse I keep
The mean that neither flatters nor offends,
I am that virtue the well nurtured Court
Gives name, and should do being -- Courtesy.
Twixt fly dissembling and proud arrogance
I am the virtue time calls daughter, Truth.
Give me my sword and balance rightly swayd,
And Justice is the Title I deserve.
When on this stage I come with innocent wit,
And jests that have more of the sait then gall,
That move the laughter and delight of all,
Without the grief of one, free, chaste conceits,
Not scurrile, base, obscene, ill^berall
Or contumelious slanders, I am then
The virtue they have termed, Vrbanity:
To whom if your least countenance may appear.
She vows to make her constant dwelling here.
My daughters now are come --

The Song -- SCEN. 2.
The Masque, wherein all the Virtues dance together. Medi^. You have seen all
my daughters, Gentlemen,
Choose you wives hence; you that are Batchelors
Can find no better; And the married too
May wed 'em, yet not wrong their former wives.
Two may have the same wife, and the same man
May wed two Virtues, yet no Bigamie:
He that weds most is chastest; These are all
The daughters of my womb; I have five more,
The happy Issue of my Intellect,
And thence syrnam'd the intellectual Virtues.
They now attend not on their Mothers train,
We hope they Act in each spectators brain!
I have a Necce besides, a beauteous one
My daughters dear companion -- lovely Friendship
A royal Nymph; her we present not to,
It is a virtue we expect from you.

Exit cum Chorocantantium.

SCEN. 3.
Bird. O Sister what a glorious train they be!


Flow They seem to me the Family of Love,
But is there such a Glass; good Roscius?

Rosci. There is! sent hither by the great Apollo,
Who in the worlds bright eye and every day
Set in his Car of light, survaies the earth
From East to West: who finding every place
Fruitful in nothing but fantastique follies,
And most ridiculous humors, as he is
The God of Physique, thought it appertained
To him to find a cure to purge the earth
Of ignorance and sin, two grand diseases,
And now grown Epidemicall: many Receipts
He thought upon, as to have planted Hellebore
In every Garden -- But none pleased like this.
He takes out water from the Muses spring,
And sends it to the North, there to be freez'd
Into a Crystal -- That being done, he makes,
A Mirror with it: and instills this virtue,
That it should by reflection show each man
All his deformities both of soul and body.
And cure 'em both --

Flow. Good Brother lets go see it!
Saints may want something of perfection.

Rosc. The Glass is but of one days continuance,
For Pluto, thinking if it should cure all,
His Kingdom would grow empty, (for it is sin
That Peoples hell) went to the fates and bid 'em
Spin it too short a thread: (for every thing
As well as man is measured by their spindle.)
They, as they must obey, gave it a thread
No longer then the Beast's of Hyppanis
That in one day is spun, drawn out, and cut.
But Phoebus to require the black Gods envy,
Will when the Glass is broke transfuse her virtue
To live in Comedy -- If you mean to see it
Make have --

Flow. We will go post to reformation.


Exeunt. Ros. Nor is the Glass of so short life I fear
As this poor labor -- our distrustful Author
Thinks the same Sun that rose upon her cradle
Will hardly set before her funeral:
Your gracious and kind acceptance may
Keep her alive from death, or when she is dead
Raise her again, and spin her a new thread.

SCEN. 4.
Enter Flowrdew and Bird. Flow. This ignorance even makes religion sin,
Sets zeal upon the rack, and stretches her
Beyond her length -- Most blessed Looking-glass^
That did instruct my blinded eyes to day,
I might have gone to hell the Narrow-way!

Bird. Hereafter I will visit Comedies,
And see them often, they are good exercises! --
I Will teach devotion now a milder temper,
Not that it shall loose any of her heat
Or Purity, but henceforth shall be such
As shall burn bright although not blaze so much.

Exe^nt. EPILOGVS.
Roscius solus.
You Have seen The Muses Looking-glass, Ladies fair,
And Gentle-youths; And others too who ere
Have filled this Orb: it is the end we meant
Your selves unto your selves still to present.
A soldier shall himself in Hector see,
Grave Counselors, Nestor, view themselves in thee.
When Lucrece Part shall on our Stage appear,
Every chaste Lady sees her shadow there.
Nay come who will, for our indifferent Glasses
Will show both fools, and knaves, and all their faces,
To vex and cure them: But we need not fear,
We do not doubt but each one now that is here,
That has a fair soul and a Beauteous face,
Will visit often the Muses Looking-glass.
FINIS.
AMYNTAS OR THE IMPOSSIBLE DOVVRY.

A PASTORAL ACTED before the KING and QUEEN at White Hall.

Written by THOMAS RANDOLPH.

Pastorem, Tityre, pingues Pascere oportet oves, diductum dicere Carmen.

OXFORD,

Printed by Leonard Lichfield, for Francis Bowman. 1638.

Drammatis Personae.
Pilumnus. The high Priest of Ceres: Father to Damon and Urania. Medorus.
Father to Laurinda. Claius. A wild Sylvan, father to Amyntas and Amaryllis.
Corymbus. An under Priest. Two Rivalls in Laurinda's Love.
Damon. Alexis.
Amyntas. A mad Sheapheard. Laurinda. A wavering Nymph. Urania. A sad Nymph,
enamoured on Amyntas. Amarillis. A distressed sheapheardesse, in love with
Damon. Thestylis. An old Nymph, sister to Claius. Iocastus. A fantastique
sheapherd and fairy Knight. Bromius. His man, a blunt Clown. Mopsus. A foolish
Augur enamoured on Thestylis. Dorylas. A knavish boy. Echo.
Chorus of Priests. Chorus of Sheapheards. Chorus of Nymphs.
Quorum fit mentio.
Philaebus. Lalage. Mycon.
The Scene Sicilie, in the holy Vale.

The time an Astrologicall day from Noone to Noone.

PROLOGVS.
Nymph. Shepherd.
Nym. I Will speak the Prologue.


Sheap. Then you do me wrong.


Nym. Why, dare your Sex compare with ours for Tongue?


Sheap. A Female Prologue!


Nym. Yes, as well as Male.


Shep. That Is a new trick;


Nym. And the other is as stale.


Shep. Men are more eloquent then women made*


Nym. But women are more powrfull to persuade.


Shep. It seems so; for I dare no more contend.


Nym. Then best give ore the strife, and make an end.


Sheap. I will not yield.


Nym. Shall we divide it then?


Sheap. You to the Women speak.


Nym. You to the Men.


Sheap. Gentlemen, look not from us Rural swains
For polished speech, high lines, or Courtly strains:
Expect not we should bring a labored Scene,
Or complements; we ken not what they mean.

Nym. And Ladies, we poor Country Girls do come
With such behavior as we learned at home.
How shall we talk to Nymphs so trim and gay,
That nere saw Lady yet but at a May?

She. His Muse is very bashful, should you throw
A Snake into her Cradle, I do know
She is no Hercules to outlive your Ire:

Nym. One Hiss would make the fearful fool expire,
Without a sting.

Shep. Gentlemen do but you
Like this, no matter what the Women do.

Nym. It was a saucy Swain thus to conclude!
Ladies, the Gentlemen are not so rude,
If they were ever schooled by powrefull love,
As to dislike the things you shall approve.
If you but like him 'twill be greater praise
Then if each Muse of Nine had fetched him Baies.

AMYNTAS.
ACTVS I.
SCENA 1.
Laurinda. Dorylas.
Dor. It Is news Laurinda that will ravish you!


Laur. How, ravish me? if it be such desperate news
I pray conceal it*

Dor. So I will.


Lau. Nay Dorylas,
Pray tell it though.

Dor. It Is desperate news,


Laur. But prithee do.


Dor. I must conceal it.


Laur. Do not.


Dor. Mistress, you have prevailed: I will relate it.


Laur. No matter though whether you do or no.


Dor. No? then I will not tell you.


Laur. Yet I care not
Much if I hear it.

Dor. And I care not much
Whether I tell't or no.

Laur. What is it?


Dor. Nothing.


Laur. Sweet Dorylas let me know.


Dor. What pretty weather-cocks
These women are? I serve a Mistress here
Fit to have made a Planet: she will wax and wane
Twice in a minute.

Laur. But good Dorylas
Your news.

Dor. Why excellent News!


Laur. But what?


Dor. Rare news!
News fit,

Laur. For what?


Dor. To be concealed: why Mistress
The Rivalls, those on whom this Powerful face
Does play the tyra^t. --

Laur. Dorylas what of them?


Dor. Now, now she wanes: O for a dainty Husband
To make her a full Moon. The amorous couple!
Your brace of sweet hearts Damon and Alexis
Desire your audience.

Lau. Is this all your news?
You may conceal it.

Dor. Now you have heard it told
I may conceal it! well I thank thee Nature
Thou did create me Man, for I want wit
Enough to make up woman: but good Mistress
What do you think of Damon?

Laur. As a man
Worthy the best of Nymphs:

Dor. What of Alexis?


Laur. As one that may deserve the fairest Virgin
In Sicilie.

Dor. What Virgin?


Lau. Proserpine,
Were she yet Ceres daughter.

Dor. And what Damon?


Lau. He? Ceres self, were she not yet a Mother:


Dor. Creet, Creet! There is no Labyrinth but a woman^
Laurinda, gentle Mistress tell me which
Of these you love?

Lau. Why Damon best of any.


Dor. Why so, that is well and plain.


Lau. Except Alexis.


Dor. Why then you love Alexis best?


Lau. Of any.


Dor. I am glad ont.


Lvu. But my Damon.


Dor. Be this true
And I Will be sworn Cupid is turned a jugler?
Praesto! you love Alexis best but Damon,
And Damon but Alexis! Love you Damon?

Lau. I do.


Dor. And not Alexis?


Lau. And Alexis.


Dor. She would ha'both I think.


Laur. Not I by Ceres.


Dor. Then you love neither?


Lau. Yes, I do love either.


Dor. Either, and yet not both, both best, yet neither;
Why do you torture those with equal Racks,
That both vow service to you? If your love
Have pre fer'd Damon, tell Alexis of it;
Or if Alexis, let poor Damon know it,
That he which is refused, smothering his flame,
May make another choice, now doubtful hope
Kindles desires in both.

Lau. Ah Dorylas,
Thy years are yet incapable of love!
Thou have not learned the mysteries of Cupid!
Do thou not see through all Sicilia,
From gentlest sheapheards to the meanest swains,
What inauspitious torches Hymen lights
At every wedding? what unfortunate hands
Link in the wedding ring? Nothing but fears
Iarres, discontents, suspicions, jealousies,
These many years meet in the Bridal sheets.
Or if all these be missing, yet a Barrenness,
A curse as cruel, or Abortive births
Are all the blessings crown the Geniall bed*
Till the success prove happier, and I find
A blessed change, i will temper my affection
Conceal my flames, dissemble all my fires
And spend those years I owe to Love and Beauty
Only in choosing on whose love to fix
My Love and beauty.

Dor. Rare Feminine wisdom:
Will you admit 'em.

Lau. Yes, go call them hither.
Yet do not, now I think on it: yet you may too;
And yet come back again.

Dor. Nay I will go.


Lau. Why Dorylas.


Dor. What news?


Lau. Come back I say.


Dor. Yes to be sent again.


Lau. You Will stay I hope.


Dor. Not I by Ceres.


Lau. Dorylas.


Dor. No good Mistress
Farewell for I at length have learned to know
You call me back only to bid me go.

Exit. Lau. It Is no great matter sirrah: -- when they come
I Will bear my self so equal unto both,
As both shall think I love him best, this way
I keep both fires alive, that when I please
I may take which I please. -- But who comes here?

SCEN. 2.
Laurinda. Thestylis.
O Thestylis you are welcome!

Thest. If Laurinda,
My too abrupt intrusion come so rudely
As to disturb your private Meditations,
I beg your pardon!

Lau. How now Thestylis?
Grown Orator of late? has learned Mopsus
Read Rhetorique unto you, that you come
To see me with Exordiums?

Thest. No Laurinda;
But if there be a charm called Rhetorique;
An art, that woods and forests cannot skill;
That with persuasive magique could command
A pity in your soul, I would my tongue
Had learned that powerful art!

Lau. Why Thestylis,
Thou know the breasts I sucked were neither wolves
Nor Tigers, and I have a heart of wax,
Soft and soon melting; try this amorous heart; it is not
Of flint or marble.

The. If it were, Laurinda,
The tears of her, whose orator I come
Have power to soften it. Beuteous Amaryllis,
She that in this unfortunate age of love,
This hapless time of Cupids tyranny
Placed her affection on a skornfull sheapheard,
One that disdaines her love.

Lau. Disdaines her love!
I tell thee Thestylis in my poor judgment,
(And women if no envy blind their eyes,
Best judge of women's beauties) Amaryllis
May make a Bride worthy the proudest sheapheard
In all Sicilia: but wherein can I
Pity this injured Nymph?

The. Thus she desires you,
As you desire to thrive in him you love;
As you do love him whom you most desire,
Not to love Damon! Damon alas repaies
Her love with skorne! It Is a request she says
She knows you cannot grant, but if you do not
She will not live to ask again.

Lau. Poor Nymph.
My Amaryllis knows my fidelity;
How often have we sported on the Lawnes,
And danced a roundelay to Iocastus pipe?
If I can do her service Thestylis,
Be sure I will: Good wench, I dare not stay
Least I displease my Father; who in this age
Of hapless lovers watches me as close
As did the Dragon the Hesperian fruit.
Farewell.

Exit Laur. Thest. Farewell Laurinda! Thus poor ^oole
I toil for others; like the painful Be
From every flower cull honey drops of love
To bring to others hives: Cupid does this
Cause I am Claius sister. Other Nymphs
Have their variety of loves, for every gown,
Nay every petticote; I have only one,
The poor fool Mopsus! yet no matter wench,
Fools never were in more request then now.
I Will make much of him, for that woman lies
In weary sheets, whose Husband is too wise.

SCEN. 3.
Thestylis. Mopsus. Iocastus.
Mop. Iocastus, I love Thestylis abominably,
The mouth of my affection waters at her.

Io. Be wary Mopsus, learn of me to skorne
The mortals; choose a better match: go love
Some Fairy Lady! Princely Oberon
Shall stand thy friend: and beauteous Mab his Queen
Give thee a Maid of Honor.

Mop. How Iocastus?
Marry a puppet? Wed a mote in the Sun?
Go look a wife in nutshells? woo a gnat
That Is nothing but a voice? No no, Iocastus,
I must have flesh and blood, and will have Thestylis.
A fig for Fairies!

These. -- It Is my sweetheart Mopsus,
And his wise brother: O the twins of folly!
These do I entertain only to season
The poor Amyntas madness.

Mop. Sacred red and white,
How fares thy reverend beauty?

The. Very ill
Since you were absent, Mopsus! where have you
Been all this live-long hour?

Mop. I have been
Discoursing with the birds.

The. Why, can birds speak?


Io. In Fairy land they can: I have heard 'em chirpe
Very good Greek and Latin.

Mop. And our Birds
Talk better far then they: a new-laid egg
Of Sicilie shall out talk the bravest Parrat
In Oberons, Vtopia.

The. But what languages
Do they speak, servant?

Mop. Several languages,
As Cawation, Chirpation, Hootation.
Whistleation, Crowation, Cackleation,
Shreekation, Hissation.

The. And Fooleation.


Mop. No, that is our language, we our selves speak that,
That are the learned Augurs.

The. What success
Does your Art promise?

Mop. Very good.


The. What Birds
Met you then first?

Mop. A Wood-cock and a Goose.


The. Well met.


Mop. I told 'em so.


The. And what might this portend?


Mop. Why thus -- and first the Wood-cock -- Wood and Cock,
Both very good signs. For first the wood does signify
The fire of our love shall never goeout,
Because it has more fuel: wood does signify
Morefuell.

The. What the Cock?


Mop. Better then the other:
That I shall crow ore those that are my rivalls,
And roost my self with thee.

The. But now the Goose?


Mop. I, I the Goose, that likes me best of all,
Thou Have heard our gray-b^ard sheapherds talk of Rome,
And what the Geese did there: The Goose does signify
That I shall keep thy Capit^ll.

The. Good gander!


Io. -- It cannot choose but strangely please his highness!


The. What are you studying of Iocastus, ha?


Io. A rare devise, a Masque to entertain
His Grace of Fairy with.

The. A Masque? what is it?


Io. An Anti-masque of fleaes, which I have taught
To dance Currantoes on a spiders thread.

Mop. An Anti-masque of fleaes? brother me thinks
A masque of Birds were better, that could dance
The morris in the air, Wrens and Robin-redbrests,
Linnets, and Titmise.

Io. So! and why not rather
Your Geese and Wood-cocks? Mortal hold thy tongue,
Thou do not know the mystery.

The. It Is true
He tells you Mopsus, leave your Augurie,
Follow his counsel, and be wise.

Mop. Be wise?
I skorne the motion! follow his counsel and be wise?
That Is a fine trick in faith! is this an age
For to be wise in?

The. Then you mean I see,
T'expound the Oracle.

Mop. I do mean to be
Th'interpreter.

Io. -- And then a jig of Pismires
Is excellent.

Mop. What to interpret Oracles?
A fool must be th'interpreter.

The. Then no doubt
But you will have the honor.

Mop. Nay I hope
I am as fair for it as another man.
If I should now grow wise against my will,
And catch this wisdom!

The. Never fear it Mopsus.


Mop. Twere dangerous ventring. Now I think on it too
Pray Heaven this air be wholesome! is there not
An antidote against it? what do you think
Of garlic every morning?

The. Fie upon it,
'Twill spoil our kissing! and besides I tell you
Garlick's a dangerous dish, eating of garlic
May breed the sickness, for as I remember
It Is the Philosophers diet.

Mop. Certainly
I am infected, now the fit's upon me!
It Is some thing like an ague, sure I caught it
With talking with a Scholar next my heart.

The. How sad a life live I,

Betwixt their folly and Amyntas madness!
For Mopsus I Will prescribe you such a diet
As shall secure you.

Mop. Excellent she Doctor!
Your women are the best Physicians,
And have the better practice.

The. First my Mopsus,
Take heed of fasting, for your hungry meals
Nurse wisdom.

Mop. True! O what a stomach have I
To be her patient!

The. Besides, take special care
You wear not threadbare clothes: 'twill breed at least
Suspicion you are wise.

Io. I marry will it.


The. And walk not much alone; or if you walk
With company, be sure you walk with fools,
None of the wise.

Mop. No, no I warrant you,
I Will walk with no body but my brother here,
Or you, or mad Amyntas.

The. By all means
Take heed of Travel, your beyond sea wit
Is to be feared.

Mop. If ere I travel hang me.


Io. Not to the Fairy land?


The. Thither he may.
But above all things we are no beards, long beards
Are signs the brains are full, because the excrements
Come out so plentifully.

Io. Rather empty,
Because they have sent so much out, as if
Their brains were sunk into their beards: King Oberon
Has never a beard, yet for his wit I am sure
He might have been a Giant. Who comes here?

Enter Dorylas. Dor. All hail unto the famed interpreter
Of fowls and Oracles!

Mop. Thanks good Dorylas.


Dor. How fares the winged cattle? are the woodcocks,
The jayes, the dawes, the cuckoes, and the owls
In health?

Mop. I thank the gracious stars they are!


Dor. Like health unto the president of the jigs;
I hope King Oberon and his joyall Mab
Are. well.

Io. They are, I never saw their Graces
Eat such a meal before.

Dir. E'ne much good do it em!


Io. They Are rid a hunting.


Do. Hare or Dear my Lord?


Io. Neither, a brace of snailes of the first head.


The. But Dorylas, there is a mighty quarrel here,
And you are chosen umpire.

Dor. About what?


The. The exposition of the Oracle:
Which of these two you think the verier fool.

Dor. It is a difficult cause, first let me pose'em!
You Mopsus, cause you are a learned Augur,
How many are the seven Liberal Sciences?

Mop. Why much about a dozen.


Dor. You Iocastus,
When Oberon shaved himself, who was his Barber?

Io. I knew him well, a little dapper youth,
They call him Periwinckle.

Dor. Thestylis,
A weighty cause and asks a longer time.

The. We Will in the while to comfort sad Amyntas.


Exeunt The. Mop. Io, SCEN. 4.
Dorylas. Laurinda.
Lau. I wonder much that Dorylas stays so long,
Feign would I hear whether they will come or no.

Do. Ha? would you so?


Lau. I see in your own messages
You can go fast enough.

Dor. Indeed forsooth,
I loiter'd by the way.

Lau. What, will they come?


Dor. Which of them?


Lau. Damon?


Dor. No.


Lau. Alexis will?


Dor. Nor he.


Lau. How, neither? am I then neglected?


Dor. Damon will come.


Lau. And not Alexis too?


Dor. Only Alexis comes.


Lau. Let him not come.
I wonder who sent for him, unless both
I Will speak with none.

Dor. Why both will visit you.


Lau. Both? one had been too many. Was e're Nymp^
So vexed as I? you saucy rascal you,
How do you strive to cross me?

Dor. And sweet Mistress,
Still I will cross you, it is the only way
Truly to please you.

SCENA 5.
Enter Medorus. Medo. So, you will all please her,
I wonder who will please me? you all for her
Can run on errants, carry lovesick letters,
And amorous eglogues from her howling suitors,
To her, and back again, be Cupids Heralds,
And point out meetings for her.

Dor. Truly Sir,
Not I, pray ask my Mistress: Do I call
Your sweet-hearts -- speak, nay speak it if you can,
Do I?

Lau. Why no.


Do. Nay say your worst I care not,
Did I go ever?

Lau. Never.


Dor. La-you now!
We were devising nothing but a snare
To catch the Pole-cat,
Sirrah get you in;
Take heed I do not find your haunts.

Dor. What haunts?


Med. You Will in!


Dor. I know no haunts I have but to the Dairy,
To skimme the milke-bowles like a lickorish Fairy.

Exit Dor. Me. He that is a woman's keeper, should have eyes
A hundred more then Argus, and his ears
Double the number: Now the news, what letters?
What posy, ring or bracelet wooes to day?
What Grove to night is conscious of your whispers?
Come tell me, for I know your trusty squire,
Your little closet blabbes into your ear
Some secret, let me know it.

Lau. Then you fear,
Least I should be in love.

Me. Indeed I do,
Cupids a dangerous boy, and often wounds
The wanton roving eye.

Lau. Were I in love,
Not that I am (for yet by Dian's bow
I have not made my choice,) and yet suppose it,
Suppose I say I were in love, What then?

Me. So I would have thee, but not yet my Girl,
Till loves prove happier, till the wretched Claius
Has satisfied the Gods.

Lau. Why Claius, Father?


Me. Have thou not heard it?


Lau. Never.


Me. It Is impossible.


Lau. How should I sir? you know that my discourse
Is all with walls and pictures, I nere meet
The Virgins on the downs.

Me. Why I will tell thee,
Thou know Pilumnus?

Lau. The high Priest of Ceres?


Me. Yes: This Pilumnus had a son Philaebus,
Who was, while yet he was, the only joy
The staff and comfort of his fathers age,
And might have still been so, had not fond love
Undone him.

Lau. How did love undo Philaebus?


Me. Why thus; one Lalage, a beauteous Nymph
As ever eye admired, Alphestus daughter,
Was by her father promised him in marriage.

Lau. Why hitherto his love had good success.


Me. But only promised: for the sheapherd Claius,
(A name accursed in Sicilian fields!)
Being rich, obtained the beauteous Lalage
From sweet Philaebus: he sad heart being robbed,
Of all his comfort, having lost the beauty
Which gave him life and motion; seeing Claius
Enjoy those lips, whose cherries were the food
That nursed his soul, spent all his time in sorrow,
In melancholy sighs and discontents;
Looked like a witherd tree oregrowne with moss,
His eyes were ever dropping Iceacles.
Disdain and sorrow made Pilumnus rage,
And in this rage, he makes his moan to Ceres,
( Ceres most sacred of Sicilian powers;)
And in those moanes he prosecutes revenge,
And that revenge to fall on Lalage.

Lau. Would Ceres hear his prayers?


Me. Silly maid,
His passions were not causeless; and with what justice
Could she deny Pilumnus? how often has he sprinkled,
The finest flower of wheat, and sweetest myrrh
Upon her Altars! Lalage ru'd the time
She flowted brave Philaebus. Now she was great
With two sweet twins, the fair chaste Amaryllis,
And mad Amyntas; (an unlucky pair!)
These she brought forth, but never lived to see them:
Lucina caused her sorrows stop her breath.
Leaving this matchless pair of beauteous infants,
In whom till now she lives.

Lau. After her death,
How fared the sorrowful Philaebus?

Me. Worse
Then ever: She being dead whose life was his,
Whose looks did hold his eyes from shutting up,
He pined away in sorrows, grief it was
To see she was not his, but greater far
That she was not at all. Her Exequies being past,
He casts him down upon that turfe of earth,
Under whose roof his Lalage was housed,
And parlied with her ashes, 'till his own lamp
Was quite extinguished with a fatal dampe.
Here ended th'noble sheapheard.

Lau. Unhappy lover!
It Is pity but the Virgins once a year,
Should wash his tomb with maiden tears! but now
Both Lalage being dead and her Philebus,
How comes it other loves should prove unfortunate?

Med. Pilumnus having lost this hopeful Son,
Though he had two more children, fair Urania
And noble Damon; yet the death of Lalage
Sufficed not his revenge, but he a new implores
His goddess wrath against Claius: -- Does Ceres prize me thus?
Shall Claius tread upon the flowery Plain,
And walk upon the Ashes of my boy?
Will I be Archyflamen where the Gods
Are so remiss? let wolves approach their shrines;
Their howlings are as powerful as the Prayers
Of sad Pilumnus! -- Such disgusts at last
Awakened Ceres: with hollow murmuring noise
Her Ompha like a thunder'gins to roar.
(The Ompha if it menace speaks at large
In copious language, but perplexed terms.)
And laid this curse on all Trinacria.
Sicilian swains, ill luck shall long betide
To every bridegroom, and to every bride:
No sacrifice, no vow shall still mine Ire,
Till Claius blood both quench and kindle fire.
The wise shall misconceive me, and the wit
Scornd, and neglected shall my meaning hit.

Lau. Angry and Intricate! Alas for love!
What then became of Claius?

Me. Why the Ompha,
Having denounced against him, and he knowing
The hate of old Pilumnus fled away,
I think he is sailed to the Antipodes.
No tidings can be brought what ground receives him,
Unless Corymbus make a happy voyage;
Corymbus that will search both East and Occident
And when he finds him spill his captive blood.
Which Ceres grant he may! Tender Laurinda
Now do thou see the reason of my care,
And why my watchful eyes so close observe
Thy steps and actions.

Lau. And I promise, father,
To temper my affections, 'till the Goddess
Do mitigate her anger.

Med. Do so then:
For now you see with what unfortunate choice
Pilumnus daughter, delicate Urania loves
The mad Amyntas: for the angry Goddess,
Though she repaid the wrong done to Philaebus,
Yet not approving the reuengefull mind
Of great Pilumnus, scourged him with his own asking,
By threatening an unhappy marriage
To his Urania, unless he that wooes her
Pay an impossible Dowry; for as others
Give Portions with their daughters, Ceres Priests
Use to receive for theirs. The words are these,
That which thou have not, may not, can not have
Amyntas, is the Dowry that I crave*
Rest hopeless in thy love, or else divine
To give Urania this, and she is thine:
Which while the poor Amyntas would Interpret,
He lost his wits. Take heed of love, Laurinda,
You see th'unhappinesse of it in others;
Let not experience in thy self instruct thee.
Be wise my Girl: so come and follow me.

Exit. Lau. I Will make a Garland for my kid and follow you.
What a sad tale was here? how full of sorrow?
Happy that heart that never felt the shaft
Of angry Cupid!

SCEN. 6.
Damon Alexis.
-- Damon and Alexis?
Their presence quickly puts these cogitations
Out of my mind: Poor souls, I fain would pity them,
And yet I cannot, for to pity one
Were not to pity the other, and to pity
Both were to pity neither. Mine old Temper
Is all the shift I have; some dew of comfort
To either of them. How now bold intruders,
How dare you venture on my privacy?
If you must needs have this walk, be it so!
I Will seek another: What? you will let me go?
Da. Cruel Laurinda (if a word so foul
Can have so fair a dwelling.) seal not up
Thy eats, but let a pity enter there
And find a passage to thy heart.

Alex. Laurinda,
(The name which but to speak I would not wish
For life or breath.) Let not thy powerful beauty
Torment us longer: Tell us which of us
You value most.

Da. And the other, for old freindship
Strangling his bitter Corrasive in his heart,
Has promised to desist from further suit.

Alex. Or if he cannot so, as sure he cannot,
Yet he will rather choose to dye then live
Once to oppose your liking.

Lau. Since you are
Grown so importunate, and will not be answered
With modest silence; Know I wish you well.

Alex. How, me Laurinda?


Lau. Why I wish, Alexis,
I were thy wife.

Da. Then most unhappy me!


Alex. That word does relish immortality.


Lau. And I do wish thou were my husband, Damon


Alex. Still more perplexed: what do you think I am?


Lau. My head, Alexis.


Da. And what I?


Lau. My heart.


Da. Which hand am I?


Lau. Damon, my right.


Alex. Which I?


Lau. My left, Alexis.


Alex. Thus you scorn my love.


Lau. Not I, Alexis: thou art my only hope.


Da. Then I am all despair, no hope for me.


Lau. Why so my Damon? thou art my desire.
Alexis is my flame; Damon my fire.
Alexis does deserve my nuptial Bed,
And Damon's worthy of my Maidenhead!

Exit Lau. Alex. Damon, desist thy suit or loose thy life;
Thou heard'st Laurinda wish she were my wife.

Da. Thy wife, Alexis? But how can it be
Without a Husband? and I must be he.

Alex. I am her head: That word does seem t'impart
She means my marriage.

Da. How without her heart?
For that am I: besides you heard her say
I was the right hand you the left, away,
Desist Alexis, mine is the upper hand.

Alex. But, Damon, I next to her heart do stand:
I am her hope, in that you plainly see
The end of her intents does aim at me.

Da. But I am her desire, in that it is shown
Her only wish is to make me her own.

Alex. I am her flame.


Da. It Is true, but I her fire.


Alex. The flames the hotter, therefore her desire
Most aims at me.

Da. Yet when the flame is spent,
The fire continues; Therefore me she meant.

Alex. She promised now I should enjoy her Bed.


Da. Alexis do, so I her Maidenhead.


Alex. I see she still conceales it, and with speeches
Perplexed and doubfull masks her secret thoughts.

Da. Let Us have another meeting, since her words
Delude us thus, we will have a pregnant sign
To show her mind.

Alex. I go that way a hunting,
And will call for her.

Da. I Will the while retire
Into the Temple, if I linger here
I am afraid of meeting Amaryllis,
Who with unwelcome love solicites me.

Alex. And would she might prevail!


Da. Till then farewell.


Alex. All happiness to Damon be
Except Laurinda.

Da. All but her to thee.


Alex. Thus we in love and courtesy contend.


Da. The name of Rival should not loose the Friend.


Exeunt. Finis actus I.
ACTVS 2.
SCEN 1.
Pilumnus Urania.
Vra. FAther persuade me not! The power of heaven
Can never force me from Amyntas love;
It Is rooted here so deep within my heart
That he which pulls it out, pulls out at once,
That and my soul together.

Pil. Fond Urania,
Can ignorant love make thee affect the seed,
The hateful seed of cursed Lalage?
Did I for this beget thee?

Vra. Father, you know
Divinity is powerful, Cupids will
Must not be questioned: When love means to sport
(I'have heard your self relate it) he can make
The Wolf and Lamb kiss friendly; force the Lion
T'forget his Majesty, and in amorous dalliance
Sport with the frisking Kid. When Venus rides,
She Will link the ravenous Kite, and milder Swan
To the same chariot, and will yoke together
The necks of Doves and Eagles; when as she
Commands, all things loose their Antipathie,
Even contrarieties: can I alone
Resist her will? I cannot, my Amynt as
Shall witness that!

Pil. I blame thee not so much
For loving him, while yet he was Amynt as.
But being mad and having lost himself,
Why should not thou loose thy affection too*

Vra. I love him now the rather; he has lost
Himself for me, and should he loose me too?
It were a sin he should!

Pil. What can thou love
In his distempered wildness?

Vra. Only that,
His wildness; it is the comfort I have left
To make my tears keep time to his distractions;
To think as wildl^ as he talks; to marry
Our griefs together, since our selves we cannot.
The Oracle does ask so strange a Dowry,
That now his company is the only bliss
My love can aim at: but I stay too long
I Will in to comfort him.

Pil. Do not Urania.


Vra. Do not?
I must and will; Nature commands me no,
But Love more powerful says it shall be so.

Exit. Pil. The Gods did well to make their Destinies
Of women, that their wills might stand for law
Fixed and unchanged; who is this? Corymbus? he.

SCEN. 2.
Pilumnus. Corymbus.
Pil. Corymbus -- welcome!


Cor. Sacred Pilumnus -- hayle!
And fruitful Sicilie I kiss thy dust --

Pil. What news Corymbus? Is our Countrie's Mischief
Fettered in chains?

Cor. Thrice the sun has past
Through the twelve Inns of heaven, since my diligence
Has been employed in quest of him, whose death
Must give poor lovers life, the hateful Claius;
Yet could I never hear of him: -- The mean while
How fare the poor Sicilians? Does awful Ceres
Still bend her angry brow? Find the sad Lovers
No rest, no quiet yet?

Pil. Corymbus none!
The Goddess has not yet deigned to accept
One sacrifice, no favorable Echo
Resounded from her Omp^a; All her answers
Are full, and doubtful.

Cor. The true sign, Pilumnus,
Her wrath is not appeased.

Pil. Appeased say you?
Rather again incensed so far, Corymbus,
As that my self am plagued; My poor Urania
Dotes on Amyntas.

Cor. First shall our hives swarm in the venomous yew,
And Goats shall browze upon our myrtle wands!
-- One of your blood, Pilumnus, (is it possible)
Love Lalage and Claius brood?

Pil. The chain of fate
Will have it so! And he loved her as much.

Cor. That makes it something better.


Pil. Ah, thou know not
What sting this waspish fortune pricks me with!
I seeing their loves so constant, so inflexible,
Chid with dame Ceres if sheus'd me thus.
My words were inconsiderate, and the heavens
Punished my rough expostulations:
Being Archiflamen of Trinacria
I did demand a Dowry of that sheapheard
That asks my daughter: -- Set the price said I,
Thou Goddess, that do cause such hateful loves;
If that Amyntas be thy darling swain,
Ask thou, and set a Dowry for Urania:
With that the Altar groaned, my hair grew stiff,
Amyntas looked aghast; Urania quiver'd,
And the Ompha answered

Cor. With an Echo;


Pil. No.


Co. Then I presage some ill!


Pi. This dark demand,
That which thou have not, may not, can not have,
Amyntas, is the dowry that I crave:
Rest hopeless in thy love, or else divine
To give Urania this and she is thine.
And so he did, but the perplexed sense
Troubled his brains so far, he lost his wits;
Yet still he loves, and she, -- my grief Corymbus
Will not permit me to relate rest!
I Will in into the Temple, and express
What Is yet behind in tears.

Exit. Corym. Sad sad Pilumnus!
And most distressed Sicilians! Other nations
Are happy in their loves, you only are unfortunate!
In all my travelles never a spring but had
Her pair of lovers, singing to that music
The gentle bubling of her waters made.
Never a walk unstor'd with amorous couples,
Twind with so close embraces, as if both
Me ant to grow one together! every shade
Sheltred some happy loves, that counting dazies
Scor'd up the sums on one another lips,
That met so often and close, as if they had
Changed souls at every kiss. The married sort
As sweet and kind as they: at every evening
The loving husband and full* brested wife
Walked on the Downs so friendly, as if that
Had been their wedding day. The boys of five,
And girls of four, e're that their lisping tongues
Had learned to prattle plain, would prate of love,
Court one another, and in wanton dalliance
Return such innocent kisses, you would have thought
You had seen Tur les billing.

SCEN. 3.
Mopsus. Corymbus.
Mop. What air is that? The voice of -- Turtles billing!
Of Turtles! a good Omen! she is chaste --
And billing, billing, o delicious billing!
That word presages kissing. --

Co. Who is this?
Mopsus, my learned Augur?

Mop. Stand aside,
-- The other side; I will not talk to thee
Unless I have the wind.

Co. Why, what is the matter Mopsus?


Mop. Thou Art infected;


Co. What with the Plague?


Mop. Worse then the Plague, the Wisdom!
You have been in travel, and that is dangerous
For getting Wisdom.

Co. Then nere fear it, Mopsus,
For I come home a fool just as I went.

Mop. By Ceres?


Co. Yes.


Mop. By Ceres welcome then!


Co. But Mopsus, why do you walk here alone!
That Is -- dangerous too!

Mop. I: but I come to meet
The Citizens of the air; you have heard my skill
In augury?

Co. Why I have heard your name
Not mentioned any where in all my Travailes.

Mop. How? not mentioned?


Co. -- Yo'are to hasty Mopsus,
Not -- without admiration.

Mop. I know that.


Co. How should you know it?


Mop. Why some birds or other,
Fly from all countries hither, and they tell me.

Co. But how dare you converse with birds that travel?


Mop. With an antidote I may: but my Corymbus
What strange birds have you seen beyond seas?

Cor. Brave ones:
Ladies with fans and feathers! dainty Fowls!
There were brave taking Augury.

Mop. But, Corymbus,
Are those fine Lady-birds such pretty things?

Co. As tame as sparrowes, and as sweet as Nightingals.


Mop. Is the Cocklady-bird, or the Henlady-bird
The better?

Co. All are hens.


Mop. O admirable!
Would you had brought me one! but what is the Fan?

Co. A fan's a -- wing of one side.


Mop. Delicate!
And what is their Feather?

Co. Like the copple-crowne
The Lap-wing has:

Mop. The Lap-wing? then they 'l -- ly.


Co. With men they will;


Mop. Delicious Lady-birds!
But have they such brave trains, such curious tails
As our birds have?

Co. Like Peacocks, there is the head
Of all their pride.

Mop. Nay it is the tail, Corymbus,
Surely these things you call the Lady-birds
Are the true birds of Paradise!

Enter Corymbus's carriages. Co. Very right --
Mopsus, I cannot stay, I must attend
My carriage to the Temple: gentle Mopsus
Farewell!

Exit. Mop. Farewell Corymbus! By my troth
I never longed for any thing in my life
So much as Lady-birds; dainty Lady-birds!
I would fetch one of them; but I dare not travel
For fear I catch the wisdom. O sweet Lady-birds!
With copple crowns, and wings but on one side!
And tails like Peacocks! curious Lady-birds!

SCEN. 4.
Amyntas. Urania. Amaryllis. manet Mopsus.
Amyn. That which I have not, may not, cannot have! --
It is the moon! Urania, thou shall wear
The horned Goddess at thy beauteous ear.
-- Come hither Pegasus, I will mount thy back,
And spur thee to her orb.

Mop. Oh good Amyntas!


Amyn. -- Why, art thou foundred Pegasus? Amaryllis,
Fetch him a peck of provender.

Vra. Sweet Amyntas!


Amy. What says my Cytherea? would thou eat
A golden Apple? if thou will, by Venus
I Will rob the Hesperian Orchard.

Mop. Ha ha he!


Amyn. Ha? do thou laugh old Charon? firrah sculler,
Prepare thy boat!

Ama. For what? dear brother speak!


Amyn. Art thou my sister Helen? were we hatchd
In the same egshell? -- Is your cock-boat ready?

Mop. It is, an't please your Worship.


Amyn. Very well!
Row me to hell! -- no faster? I will have thee
Chained unto Pluto's galleys!

Vra. Why to hell,
My dear Amyntas?

Amy. Why? to borrow money!


Ama. Borrow there?


Amy. I there! they say there be more Usurers there
Then all the world besides: -- see how the winds
Rise! Puff -- puff Boreas. -- what a cloud comes yonder?
Take heed of that wave Charon! ha? give me
The oars! -- so so: the boat is overthrown,
Now Charons drowned: but I will swim to shore --

Vra. O Ceres, now behold him! canthy eyes
Look on so sad an object, and not melt
Them and thy heart to pity?

Ama. How this grief
Racks my tormented soul? but the neglect
Of Damon more afflicts me: the whole Senate
Of heaven decrees my ruin.

Vra. And mine too.
Come Amaryllis let us weep both together,
Contending in our sorrows!

Ama. Would to Ceres
That I were dead!

Vra. And I had nere been borne!


Ama. Then had not I been wretched!


Vra. Then Amyntas
Might have been happy.

Mop. Nay if you begin
Once to talk wisely, It Is above high time,
That I were gone: farewell Bellerophon!
I must go seek my Thestylis; she is not here.

Exit. Amy. My arms are weary; -- now I sink I sink!
Farewell Urania. --

Ama. Alas what strange distraction,
Toss his distemperd brain!

Vra. Yet still his love to me
Lives constant.

Amy. Styx I thank thee! That curld wave
Has tos'd me on the shore. -- come Sysiphus.
I Will roll thy stone a while: me thinks this labor
Does look like Love! does it not so, Tysiphone?

Ama. Mine is that restless toil.


Amy. Is It so, Erynnis?
You are an idle huswife, go and spin
At poor Ixions wheel!

Vra. Amyntas.


Amyn. Ha?
Am I known here?

Vra. Amyntas, dear Amyntas --


Amyn. Who calls Amyntas? beauteous Proserpine?
It Is she. -- Fair Empress of the Elysian shades,
Ceres bright daughter intercede for me,
To thy incensed mother: prithee bid her
Leave talking riddles, will thou?

Vra. How shall I
Apply my self to his wild passions!

Ama. Seem to be
What he conceives you.

Amy. Queen of darkness,
Thousupreme Lady of eternal night,
Grant my petitions! will thou beg of Ceres
That I may have Urania?

Vra. It Is my prayer,
And shall be ever, I will promise thee
She shall have none but him.

Amyn. Thanks Proserpine!


Vra. Come sweet Amyntas, rest thy troubled head
Here in my lap: -- Now here I hold at once
My sorrow and my comfort: Nay ly still.

Amyn. I will: but Proserpine --


Vra. Nay, good Amyntas. --


Amy. Should Pluto chance to spy me, would not he
Be jealous of me?

Vran. No.


Amy. Tysiphone,
Tell not Urania of it, least she fear
I am in love with Proserpine: do not Fury!

Ama. I will not.


Vra. Pray ly still!


Amy. You Proserpine,
There is in Sicilie the fairest Virgin
That everblest the land, that ever breathed,
Sweeter then Zephyrus! did thou never hear
Of one Urania?

Vr. Yes.


Amy. This poor Urania
Loves an unfortunate sheapheard, one that is mad, Tysiphone,
Can thou believe it? Elegant Urania
(I cannot speak it without tears) still loves
Amyntas, the distracted mad Amyntas.
Is It not a constant Nymph? -- But I will go
And carry all Elysium on my back,
And that shall be her jointure.

Vra. Good Amyntas,
Rest here a while! --

Amy. Why weep you Proserpine?


Vr. Because Urania weeps to see Amyntas
So restless and unquiet.

Amy. Does she so?
Then will I ly as calm as does the sea,
When all the winds are locked in Aeolus jayle:
I will not move a hair, not let a nerve
Or Pulse to beat, least I disturb her! Hush, --
She sleeps!

Vra. And so do you.


Amy. You talk too loud,
You Will waken my Urania:

Vra. If Amyntas,
Her dear Amyntas would but take his rest,
Urania could not want it.

Amy. Not so loud!


Ama. What a sad pair are we?


Vra. How miserable?
He that I love is not! --

Ama. And he that I
Do love, loves not; or, if he love, not me.

Vra. I have undone Amyntas!


Ama. And my Damon
Has undone me.

Vr. My kindness ruined him.


Ama. But his unkindnesse, me; unhappy me!


Vra. More wretched I, for Damon has his reason,
And he may love.

Ama. But does not: thy Amyntas
Returns thee mutual love.

Vra. True, Amaryllis,
But he has lost his reason; mine has love,
No reason.

Ama. Mine has reason, but no love.
O me!

Vra. My Amaryllis, how thy griefs
Meet full with mine to make the truest story
Of perfect sorrow that ere eye bedewed
With tears of Pity!

Ama. Come Urania:
Let Us sit together like two marble monuments
Of ever weeping misery --

Enter Damon. Da. Minds in love,
Do count their days by minutes, measure hours
By every sand that drops through the slow glass;
And for each vie a tear.

Ama. If so, my Damon,
How many times has thy unkindnesse ruined
Sad Amaryllis? every frown is mortal.

Dam. Ill luck, to seek my love and find my hate!


Ama. Be not so cruel to me! Gentle Damon,
-- Accept this witness of my love, it is
The story of poor Ech^, tha^ for love
Of her Narcissus pined into a voice.

Da. Do thou so too!


Ama. Damon, suppose I should,
And then the Gods for thy contempt of me
Should plague thee like Narcissus.

Da. Amaryllis,
They cannot do it: I have fixed my love
So firm on my Laurinda, that for her
I e're shall hate my self?

Ama. --. Prithee love accept it,
'Twas wrought by mine own hand

Da. For that I hate it!


Vra. Fie Brother, can you be of the same stock,
Issue, and blood with me, and yet so cruel?

Da. Nor can I, sister, dote like you on any
That is the cursed brat of Lalage.

Amy. Say thou so Centaure? --


Vra. Good Amyntas hold,
This is the Sacred Valley: here it is death,
For to shed human blood.

Da. Still idly you complain
To cross me, Amaryllis, but in vain!

Exit. Ama. O, I am sick to death!


Amy. What a brave show
The monsters brains would make?

SCEN. 5.
Thestylis. Mopsus. Amyntas. Amaryllis. Urania.
Ama. My grief over weighs me!


The. How fares my Amaryllis?


Ama. Like a Taper
Almost burnt out: sometimes all a darkness,
And now and then a flash or two of comfort,
But soon blown out again. Ah Thestylis,
I cannot long subsist. For thee vain's labor;
Away! I hate thee cause my Damon does,
And for that reason too I hate my self,
And every thing but him!

Vra. Come my sad partner,
Poor rival of my sorrows: Go with me
Into the Temple; I Will entreat my Brother
To use thee kindly: if in me it lie,
I Will help thee.

Ama. Do Urania, or I dye.


Exeunt Urania, Amaryl. Amyntas. Thestylis. Mopsus.
The. What a strange thing is Love!


Amy. It is a madness:
See how it stares? -- Have at thee thou blind Archer!
-- O I have mist him! -- now I Will stand thee Cupid!
Look how the rascal winkes a one eye, Thestylis!
Nay draw your arrow home boy! just in the heart!
-- O I am slain!

Thest. Amyntas.


Amy. Do not see?
My blood runs round about me, I lie soaking
In a red Sea, take heed! see Thestylis,
Whata fine Crimson it is?

Mop. Where?


Amy. Here you puppet!
Do thou not see it?

Mop. Yes I see it plain,
But I spy nothing.

Amy. Then thou art a mole.


Mop. Now I look better on it, I see it plain;
Does it not not hurt you?

Amy. Strangely! Have at thee --
How think you now?

The. Be quiet good Amyntas.


Mop. You Will fright away the birds else, and clean spoil
My augury.

Amyn, Go about it, I am quiet!


Mop. Now for some happy Omen!


a Cuckoe Cries. Amy. Ha, ha, he!


Mop. Why laughs the madman?


Amy. Who can choose but laugh?
The bird cried Horns!

The. What happiness portends it,
Sweet Mopsus?

Mop. Constancy in Love, my Thestylis,
This bird is always in a note.

The. Most excellent.


Mop. Bird of the spring I thank thee! Mopsus thanks thee.


Amy. This is a man of skill, an Oedipus,
Apollo, Reverent Phoebus, Don of Delphos.

Mop. What a brave man am I?


Amy. Thou can resolve
By thy great Art all questions: What is that,
That which I have not, may not, cannot have?

Mop. That which you have not, may not, cannot have?
It is my skill, you cannot have my skill.

Amy. Where lies that skill?


Mop. Lies? here within this noddle.


Amy. Fetch me my wood-knife I will cut it off,
And send it to Urania for a dowry.

Mop. No, no I am deceived, it is not that.


Amy. You dolt, you ass, you cuckoe:


Mop. Good Amyntas.


SCEN. 6.
Dorylas. Mopsus. Iocastus. Thestylis. Amyntas.


Io. Is It not a brave sight Dorylas? can the mortals
Caper so nimbly!

Dor. Verily they cannot!


Io. Does not King Oberon bear a stately presence?
Mab is a beauteous Empress.

Do. Yet you kissed her
With admirable courtship.

Io. I do think
There will be of Iocastus brood in Fairy.

Mop. You Cuckold-maker, I will tell King Oberon
You lie with Mab his wife!

Io. Do not good brother,
And I Will woo Thestylis for thee.

Mop. Do so then.


Io. Can thou love Mopsus, mortal?


The. Why suppose
I can sir, what of that?

Io. Why then be wise,
And love him quickly!

Mop. Wise? then I Will have none of her, that is the way
To get wise children, 'troth and I had rather
They should be bastards.

Amy. No, the children may
Be like the Father.

Io. True distracted Mortal:
Thestylis, I say love him he is a fool.

Dor. But we will make him rich, then it is no matter.


The. But what estate shall he assure upon me?


Io. A Royal jointure all in Fairy land.


Amy. Such will I make Urania!


Io. Dorylas knows it,
A curious Park.

Do. Pal'd round about with Pick-teeth.


Io. Besides a house made all of mother of Pearl;
An Ivory Teniscourt.

Dor. A nutmeg Parlour.


Io. A Saphyre dary-roome.


Do. A Ginger hall.


Io. Chambers of Agate.


Do. Kitchins all of Crystal.


Am. O admirable! This is it for certain!


Io. The jacks are gold.


Do. The spits are Spanish needles.


Io. Then there be walks


Do. Of Amber.


Io. Curious orchards.


Do. That bear as well in winter as in summer.


Io. Bove all the fishponds! every pond is full,


Do. Of Nectar: will this please you? every grove
Stored with delighfull birds.

Mop. But be there any
Lady-birds there.

Io. Abundance.


Mop. And Cuckoes too
To presage constancy?

Do. Yes.


The. Nay then lets in
To seal the writings.

Amy. There boy, so, ho, ho.


Exeunt. Do. What pretty things are these both to be borne
To Lands and Livings, we poor witty knaves,
Have no inheritance but Brains: -- who is this?
Enter Alexis. -- One of my Mistress beagles.


Ale. Dorylas,
I have had the bravest sport.

Do. In what, Alexis?


Al. In hunting, Dorylas: a brace of Grayhounds cours'd a stag
With equal swiftness till the wearied dear,
Stood bay at both alike: the fearful dogs
Durst neither fasten.

Do. So, and did not you
Compare the stag to my fair mistress? ha!
Pursued by you and Damon, caught by neither?

Ale. By Cupid thou art in the right.


Dor. Alas poor whelps,
In troth I pity you! Why such a hunting
Have we had here: Two puppies of a litter,
Mopsus and wise Iocastus hunting folly
With a full mouth.

Alex. I much wonder, Dorylas,
Amyntas can be sad, having such follies
To provoke mirth.

Do. And to that end his sister
Keeps them about him; but in vain, his Melancholy
Has took so deep impression.

Enter Damon. Da. My Alexis
Well met, I'ave been at your cottage to seek you.

Alex. But I am never at home; Thou and I, Damon,
Are absent from our selves.

Do. Excellent application!
To see the wit of love!

Da. Let us go seek her,
To have a final judgment.

Alex. That may end
One of our miseries, and the others life!

Do. O lamentable! who would be in love?


Da. Content.


SCEN. 7.
Laurinda. Dorylas. Alexis. Damon.
Da. Here comes my joy or death.


Do. O pitiful!


Al. My sweet affliction.


Do. Pitifully sweet!
Nere fear your father, Mistress, kiss securely,
I Will be your Mercury, and charm a sleep
Old Argus.

Lau. Do.


Do. But if he chance to spy
You and your sweet-hearts here, I know not of it.

Lau. You do not!


Do. Nay you know if I had seen them,
I should have told him.

Lau. You Are a trusty servant.


Do. Poor Dorylas is blind, he sees not here
Damon, no nor Alexis.

Lau. No not he!


Do. Alack I am innocent: if the belly swell
I did not fetch the poison.

Lau. No, begone.


Exit Dorylas. Da. Laurinda now for mercy sake give period
To our long miseries.

Alex. Now you are like cruel
To both, and play the tyrant equally,
On him you hate as much as him you love.

Da. Depriving one the comfort of his joy.


Ale. The other the sure remedy of his death!


Lau. Damon you have a Love, fair Amaryllis,
Content your self with her.

Da. I Will rather kiss
An Ethiops crisped lip: embrace a Viper!
Deformity it self to her is fair.

Al. Damon thou have thy answer.


Lau. And Alexis,
There be in Sicilie many Virgins more
Worthy your choice: why did you placed on me?
Go seek some other.

Alex. O those words to me
Are Poison.

Da. But to me an Antidote.


Al. Thus she gave life to me to take it away:


Da. And me she slew to raise me up again:

You shall not slight us thus, what do you think
Of me?

Lau. Thou art the glory of the woods.


Alex. And what am I?


Lau. The pride of all the Plains.


Ale. These your ambiguous terms have now too often
Deluded us.

Da. Show by some sign which of us
You have designed for happiness.

Lau. So I will.

She takes Damon's Garland and wears it on her own head: and puts her own on
Alexis. Damon, as I affect thee, so I vow
To wear this Garland that adornes thy brow.
This wreath of flowers, Alexis, which was mine
Because thou love me truly, shall be thine.
This is plain dealing; let not Cupid's wars
Drive your affections to uncivil jarres!

Exit. Exit.

Da. Now happy Damon she thy Garland wears
That holds thy heart chained in her golden hairs!

Alex. Most blessed I! this Garland once did twine
About her head that now embraces mine.

Dam. Desist Alexis, for she deignes to have
The Garland that was mine.

Alex. But me she gave
That which was hers.

Da. It Is more to take then give.


Alex. I think it is greater kindness to receive.


Da. By this your share's the less, you but receive.


Al. And by your argument, yours you did but give*
Love is the Garland.

Da. Then she did approve
Of my affection best, she took my love.

Ale. Fond Damon, she accepted love from thee,
But what is more, she gave her love to me;
In giving that to me, she proves my right.

Do. Why took she mine, but meaning to requite?


Alex. I will dispute no more.


Da. Then let our spears
Plead for us,

Alex. And determine of our fears.
Come Damon, by this argument let us prove,
Which it is of us Laurinda best does love.

Da. Yet it is, Alexis, clean against our oath.


Ale. True, Damon, and perchance may ruin both*


Da. So neither shall enjoy her.


Ale. Cruel breath!
Besides this is the Sacred Vale, it is death
To stain the hallowed grass but with one drop
Of humane blood.

Da. So both should loose their hope!


Ale. And which is more, it is against her commands.


Da. Whose every breath has power to stay our hands.


Ale. We Will have her answer make a certain end.


Da. Till then, Alexis, let me be thy friend.


Ale. Come Damon, lets together seek relief.


Da. It Is fit, being Rivalls both in love and grief.


Finis Actus secundi.
ACTVS 3.
SCEN 1.
Damon. Alexis. Laurinda.
Dam. LAurinda, by thy self, the sweetest oath
That can be sworn,

Ale. By those fair eyes, whose light
Comfort my soul;

Dam. Whose heat inflameth mine;


Ale. Unless you deigne at length to end our strife,


Da. We both have vowed to sacrifice our life,


Ale. On one another spear.


Lau. What shall I do?
I find an equal war within my soul,
My self divided; now I would say Damon,
Another time Alexis, then again
Damon, and then Alexis: like a sheapheard
That sees on either hand a ravenous wolf,
One snatching from his ewe a tender Lamb,
The other watching for a gentle Kid,
Knows not poor soul which hand to turn to first.
Now he would save his Lamb; but seeing his Kid
Half in the jaw of death, turns back in have
To reseue that, where viewing then his Lamb
In greater danger, runs to that again;
As doubtful which to save as which to loose:
So fares it now with me. But love instruct me!

Da. Resolve.


Ale. Or we will resolve.


Lau. No trick left yet?


Enter Dorylas. Dor. If ever one was peppered look on me!


Lau. Why what is the matter?


Do. You talk of Love and Cupid,
I have been plagued with a whole swarm of Cupids.

Ale. what should this mean?


Do. I know not, but I am sure
I have a thousand natural rapiers
Stick in my flesh!

Da. The meaning of the riddle?


Ale. The moral?


Do. In plain terms I have been driving
One of your swarms of Bees, gentle Laurinda;

Lau. The purest wax give Damon: and, good swain,
The honey to Alexis: This is plain.

Do. Now will the honey and the wax fall together by the ears.


Da. Alexis, this plain sign confirms her grant,
She gave me wax to seal the covenant.

Do. Well argued for the wax, now for the honey.


Ale. To me she gave the honey, that must be
The sweetest, and the sweetest sweet is she.

Do. The honey is the sweeter argument.


Da. But by the wax she says that she from none
But me will take true loves impression.

Do. The wax is very forward to the bargain;
He would be sealing of her.

Ale. But plain the honey speaks, no other guest
But I, shall taste in her a lovers feast.

Do. Delicious reason, my mouth waters at it*


Dam. The wax must make the Taper that must light
The wedded pair to bed on Hymen's night:
Besides it is virgins wax, by that you see
To me she destinies her virginity.

Do. Two excellent twin-arguments borne at a birth.


Ale. And honey shows a wedding; that must knead
A cake for Hymen ere we go to bed.
Take you the wax; the honey is for me,
There is no honey in the world but she.

Dor. His disputation still has some good relish in it.


Da. I see, Alexis, all Laurinda's bees
Serve but to sting us both.

Dor. Now, what is the matter?
The moral?

Lau. See what it is to live a maid!
Now two at once do serve us and adore,
She that weds one, serves him, served her before.

Da. Alexis come!


Al. Come Damon!


Da. Cure my fear.


Al. There Is no help left but in a Pelian spear!


Lau. O stay your hands, for by my maidenhead; --


Dor. Happy the man shall quit her of that oath.


Ale. Most happy Dorylas!


Do. I knew that before!


Lau. I have protested never to disclose
Which it is that best I love: But the first Nymph,
As soon as Titan guilds the Eastern hills,
And chirping birds, the Saints-bell of the day,
Ring in our ears a warning to devotion.
That lucky damsel what so e're she be
Shall be the Goddess to appoint my love,
To say, Laurinda this shall be your choice:
And both shall swear to stand to her award!

Both. By fair Laurinda's hand we swear.


Lau. Till then
Be friends, and for this night it is my pleasure
You sleep like friendly Rivalls arm in arm.

Both. Thanks to the fair Laurinda!


Al. Come Damon, you this night with me shall rest.


Da. Were thou but my Laurinda I were blessed.


Exeunt Damon. Alexis. Dor. Mistress, if they should dream now. --


Lau. And they should?


SCEN. 2.
Amaryllis. Urania. Doryllis. Laurinda.
Vra. Sweet Amaryllis!


Ama. Stay me not Urania!


Do. More Cupids, more bees, more stinging yet!


Ama. Disheveled hair, poor ornament of the head
I Will tear you from my crown! what do thou here?
Weak chains! my pride presumed you had a power
To fetter Heroes! and in amorous Gives
Lead any sheapheard captive!

Vra. Amaryllis.


Ama. But Damon breaks thee like a spiders loome!
And thou poor face that were so often beli'de
For fair and beauteous, by my flattering glass;
I Will tear those crimson roses from my cheeks,
That but my self nere yet enchanted any.
My will is fixed!

Lau. Where go you, Amaryllis?


Ama. Since Damon hates my life I Will go and see
If I can please him in my death: if he will but deigne
To kiss me, and accept my latest breath,
I shall salute the Gods a happy soul.
-- This dart I Will give him; and upon my knees*
Beg till I have obtained to dye by him:
Death from that hand is welcome.

Lau. I will show you
A way most probable to redeem his love.

Ama. I shall wrong you, Laurinda! No enjoy him,
The treasure of the Earth: my latest words
Shall be prayers for you: mild Urania,
Sister in blood to Damon, not in affection,
Nymph take this whistle, 'twas a Tritons once,
With which I call my Lamb-kins when they stray;
It Is Amaryllis last bequeathment to you.

Vra. Live happy sheapheardesse and wear it still!


Ama. Laurinda, my great legacy is yours,
Gentle-ungentle Damon.

Lau. I re*bequeath him to my Amarylis:
Come therefore amorous maid, be ruled by me;
This night we will sleep together.

Do. And she too
Should dream of Damon. --

Lau. Dorylas, go to Thestylis
^*excuse her this nights absence, Amaryllis
Wenches are nere so witty as a bed,
And two together make a statesmans head.
-- Begone to Thestylis.

Do. So, I am sure
Still Cupids factor: well ere long I see
There will be many an heir the more for me.

Vra. My Bellamore you are under good protection;
The Temple gates will close unless I have.

Lau. Urania, a happy night unto you!


Vra. The like to her that ipitties the distressed Amaryllis.


Exeunt Lau. Ama. Urania. Dor. So so, this honey with the very thought
Has made my mouth so lickorish that I must
Have something to appease the appetite.
Have at Iocastus orchard! dainty Apples,
How lovely they look! Why these are Dorylas sweet-hearts.
Now must I be the Princely Oberon,
And in a royal humor with the rest
Of royal Fairies attendant go in state
To rob an orchard: I have hid my robes
On purpose in a hollow tree. Heaven bless me!
What Pucke, what Goblins this?

Claius. Dorylas.
Cla. Thrice Sacred Valley,
I kiss thy hallowed Earth!

Do. Another lover,
Enamored of the Ground!

Cl. Feign would I speak
And ask for Amaryllis: but my fear
Will not permit me.

Do. Slid; I think he takes me
For Oberon already.

Cl. Youth, can you tell me
How I may speak to night with Amaryllis?

Da. Age, by no means to night: this night she lodges
With fair Laurinda, old Medorus daughter.

Cl. Can you instruct me then how I may meet Amyntas?


Do. Who, the madman? Every evening
He walks abroad into the vallie here
With Thestylis. Farewell old walking Ivibush.

Exit Dor. Claius solus. Cla. I see the smoke steame from the Cottage tops,
The fearful hus wife rakes the embers up.
All hush to bed. Sure no man will disturb me.
O blessed valley! I the wretched Claius
Salute thy happy soil, I that have lived
Pelted with angry curses in a place
As horrid as my griefs, the Lylibaean mountains,
These sixteen frozen winters, there have I
Been with rude out-lawes, living by such sins
As run of the score with justice against my prayers and wishes.
And when I would have tumbled down a rock,
Some secret power restrained me: There I lately heard
By a disconsolate Pilgrim that sought death,
That my Amyntas wits (ah me!) were marred.
It Was not a time to think to save my self
When my poor boy was lost. Lost said I? -- O Phoebus,
If there be sovereign power in juice of herbs,
And that the teeming earth yield medicinal flowers
To cure all maladies, I have sought the skill;
No leaf no root has escaped me: I may boast it,
I have been natures diligent Apothecary.
Be lucky my emplaister! I have tempered
The surest Recipe the worlds garden yields;
'Twould put Orestes in his wits again.
I know I step upon my death: the Oracle
Desires my blood for sacrifice, and Pilumnus
For his old hate still seeks it: make long stay
I dare not, only I desire t'apply
My medicine and be gone. Who Is this I spy?

SCEN. 3.
Thestylis. Amyntas. Mopsus.
-- I do remember now that countenance;
It is my sister Thestylis, I Will stand close
T'observe their actions.
The. Would to Ceres
She would be pleased at length to end her anger,
And pity poor Amyntas!

Cl. So pray I.


Amy. I have the bravest spaniell in the world,
Of a sharp sent and quick. so ho ho, so ho ho!
Ringwood, Iowler, Whitefoot, so ho ho! so ho ho!

Mop. I shall be a whole kennell of dogs anon.


Amy. Juno, Vulcan, Venus! so ho ho, so ho ho!


Mop. Lord what a heavenly puppy he makes me now!


Amy. There Lady there!


Mop. Ha? be their Lady-dogs as well as Lady-birds too!


Amy. Beauty, Beauty.


Mop. Slid I was never called that name before:
Thestylis, Amyntas calls me Beauty,
I prithee come kiss me.

The. Thus I spend my life
Laughing amidst my tears.

Amy. Now Virtue Virtue!


Mop. Is that a dogs name too? would I were hanged
If I Will have any of it for that trick.

Amy. Do thou not sent it yet? Close, close you rogue!
By Pan the curre hunts counter.

Mop. Oh good master! Bow wow, bow wow wow --


Amyn. So now he has't again.
What at a fault you mungrell? will you never
Start me this Oracle?

Mop. Start an Oracle?
As if an Oracle were a hare?

Amy. So it is,
And skuds away so swift we cannot take it.
Start me this Oracle.

Mop. Start it who is will for me,
For I Will not start it.

Amy. Then unkennell it.


Mop. Vnkennell it?


Amy. I, it is a Fox a Fox,
A cunning crafty rogue: no body knows
Which way to find him. ha? what sent is this?
Do thou not smell?

Mop. What?


Amy. The meaning of the Oracle?
Vnkennell it, or I will lease thee.

Mop. Good sir,
I have no skill in starting or unkennelling,
But if you will have me spring an Oracle. --

Amy. And will thou do it? spring me then this Oracle!


Mop. I that I will, my skill lies all in birds,
Whose flight I fear I have observed so long
That I am metamorphos'd to a spaniell.

Amy. Look how my hawke of understanding soars
About the Partridge Oracle! -- ill luck!
It Is at retreat again.

Mop. O shall I never
Rid me of this misfortune! (thanks good omen)
Cras, cras she says, tomorrow 'twill be better.
Black bird I thank thee!

A Crow cawes. Claius to them. The. Little thinks the wretched Claius now
How sad a life his poor Amyntas lives!

Cl. Too well unto his grief. -- I Will go unto him
And follow him in his humor: -- You have got
A dainty spanniell, sir.

Amy. I think the world
Cannot afford his equal.

Cla. What breed is he?


Amy. True Spartan I Will assure you.


Cl. Was the sire
Of the same Country?

Amy. No, as I remember
He was an Irish Greyhound, but the damme
Came of Acteons brood.

Cl. As how I pray?


Amy. Why thus; Melampus was the sire of Laelaps,
Laelaps to Lagon, Lagon to Ichnobates,
Ichnobates to Pamphagus, and Pamphagus
To Dorceus, he to Labros, that was sire
To Oresitrophus, Oresitrophus
To fleet Theridamas, Theridamas
To swift Nebrophonos, Nebrophonos
To the quick-nos'd Aellus; he to Dromas,
Dromas to Tygris, Tygris to Orybasus,
Orybasus to Pterelas, he to Nape,
The damme of Mopsus.

Mop. So then Orybasus
Was my great grandfather. Though I be a Dog,
I come of a good house. My Ancestors
Were all of Noble names past understanding*
What a brave man's my Master! where learned he
All this? Never stir now I could find in my heart
To leave my Augury and study Heraldry;
A man I think may learned as well as the other,
Yet never fear of growing too wise upon it.
And then will I record the pedigree
Of all the dogs in the world. O that I had
The Arms of all our house byth' Mothers side!

Cl. Sir I have brave things in a Basket for you.
Give me your Dog, and you shall have 'em all.

Amy. Take him.


Mop. O heavens! and shall I change my master,
One mad man for another?

Amy. Curre be quiet,
I have said it, and my will shall be a law.

Mop. O good sir, for Melampus sake, and Dorceus
Laelaps, Ichnobates, Lagon, Melanchetes,
Labros, Nebrophonos, Oresitrophus,
Tygris, Orybatus, Therydamas,
Aellus, Dromes, Nape, and the rest
Of all my Noble ancestors deceased,
Be merciful unto me! Pity pity
The only hope of all our family.

Cl. Sir, can he fetch and carry?


Amy. You shall see him.
Fetch sirrah: -- there: -- the curre is run away,
Help me to catch my dog: you will bring you mungrell?

Mop. Yes much! the birds will not advise me to it.


Exit. The. Sylvan why gaze you on us? would you frolike
With poor Amynta's madness; 'twould ill beseem you
To make our grief your pastime.

Cl. Not I by heaven!
My joys are counterfeit, my sorrows real:
(I cannot hold from weeping) ah you know not
What grief lies here within, (tears you will betray me!)
Give me my eye full of this noble sheapheard!
Who has not heard how he has chased the boar!
And how his spear has torn the panch of wolves.
On the bark of every tree his name's ing^aven.
Now Planet struck, and all that virtue vanished.

The. Thy looks are fierce, thy words bespeak thee Gentle.


Amy. Why wep't he Thestylis!


The. I did not mark him.


Amy. It was a mote in's eye: I Will kiss it out;
I Will curle thy shackl'd locks, and crispe thy hair
Like the streight-growing Cypress. Come let us put
Our heads together. Thou art more then mortal,
And shal't expound to Ceres what she asks.
It is a gallant Sylvan, Thestylis.

Cl. I am not skilled in riddles, no interpreter
Of Divinations, but dare contend
With any Empyrick to do a cure,
Whether the body or the mind be sick.
That is my study, I but crave the leave
To try the power of art upon this sheapheard.
If Aesculapius be propitious to him,
After the dew of one nights softer slumbers,
I dare be bold to say he shall recover.

Amy. My dog again? do read it in the stars?
What a strange man is this?

Cl. Thy wits, Amyntas,
I mean; O cast thy arms in my embraces,
Speak careful Nymph how came he thus distracted?

Amy. I do you mean? with a very-very-very mad* trick* --
By making verses.

Cl. Rest rest deluded fancy!


The. There was a time (alas that ere it was.)
When my poor sheapheard fell in love.

Cl. With whom?


The. The star of beauty, Pilumnu's much admired Urania.


Cl. O the cross darts of fate!


The. She sweet Nymph inlodged
The casket of his love in her own bosom,
But Ceres set a Dowry* Out alas!
Would she had asked our flocks, our kids, our groves!
Would she had bid us quench the flames of Aetna
In Arethusa's streams, it had been easy.
We fight with words and cannot conquer them;
This her Imperious Ompha asked, and Thundered
That which thou have not, may not, can not have
Amyntas, is the Dowry that I crave.
To find out her commands, he lost himself.

Cl. Your storie's pitiful: It Is my profession
To wander through the Earth, and in my Travel,
I am inquisitive after the sick to heal 'em;
Their cure and kind acceptance is my pay.
You will not fear to lodge me for a night?

The. We have but homely hospitality.


Amy. I Will feast thee with some Venison, brave Montano.


Cl. Thy restitution is my feast Amyntas;
Your curdes and chestnuts and your country fare
Is bounteous for so mean a guest as I:
But send for that Urania her sweet voice
Must sing a Lullaby to drown his senses,
And charm soft sleep upon his troubled fancy.
And before the gray-eyd morn do peep, be confident
I Will put the music of his brains in tune.

Col. You Will call Urania.


The. Doubt not sir, I will.
Or send my servant Mycon by the Vale.

Amy. Come Sylvan, if the dogs do bark I Will brain 'em;
We Will sleep to night together, and to morrow,

Cl. Will end I hope thy madness, not my sorrow.


Amy. We Will go a hunting, so ho ho! so ho ho!


Exeunt. Mopsus from the Orchard. Mop. Are the mad dogs gone yet?
A little more would have persuaded me
Into a spaniell: and I may be one
For any thing I know: yet sure I am not
Because methinkes I speak; but an this speaking
Should be but barking now: If I be a dog
Heaven send me a better Master then the former.
Ceres defend me, what strange Elves are there!

SCEN. 4.
Dorylas with a Bevy of Fairies. Dor. How like you now my Grace? is not my
countenance
Royal and full of Majesty? Walk not I
Like the young Prince of Pigmies? Ha? my knaves,
We Will fill our pockets. Look look yonder, Elves,
Would not you apples tempt a better conscience
Then any we have to rob an Orchard? ha!
Fairies, like Nymphs with child, must have the things
They long for. You sing here a Fairy catch
In that strange tongue I taught you: while our self
Do clime the Trees. Thus Princely Oberon
Ascends his throne of State.

Elves Nos beata Fauni Proles,
Quibus non est magnamoles,
Quamvis Lunam incolamus,
Hortos saepe frequentamus.
Furto cuncta magis bella,
Furto dulctor Puella.
Furto omnia decora.
Fur to poma dulciora.
Cum mortales lecto jacent,
Nobis poma noctu placent,
Illa tamen sunt ingrata,
Nisi furto sint parata.

Iocastus. Bromius.
Io. What divine noise fraught with immortal harmony
Salutes mine ear?

Bro. Why this immortal Harmony
Rather salutes your Orchard: these young Rascals,
These pescod*shalers do so cheat my Master:
We cannot have an apple in the Orchard,
But straight some Fairy longs for it: well if I
Might have my will, a whip again should jerk h'em,
Into their old mortality:

Io. Dare thou schreetch-owle
With thy rude croaking interrupt their music;
Whose melody has made the spheres to lay
Their heavenly lutes aside, only to listen
To their more charming notes?

Bro. Say what you will,
I say a cudgel now were excellent Music.

Elves. Oberon descend citus,
Ne cogaris hinc invitus.
Canes audio latrantes,
Et mortales vigilantes.

Io. Prince Oberon? I heard his Graces name.


Bro. O ho: I spy his Grace! Most noble Prince
Come down, or I will pelt your Grace with stones,
That I believe your Grace was never so pelted
Since 'twas a Grace.

Do. Bold mortal, hold thy hand.


Bro. Immortal Thief come down, or I will fetch you:
Methinks it should impair his Graces honor
To steal poor mortals apples: Now have at you!

Dor. Iocastus, we are Oberon, and we thought
That one so near to us as you in favor,
Would not have suffered this profane rude groom
Thus to impair our royalty.

Io. Gracious Prince,
The fellow is a fool, and not yet purged
From his mortality.

Do. Did we out of love
And our entire affection, of all Orchards
Choose yours to make it happy by our dances,
Light ayry measures, and fantastique rings!
And you ungrateful mortal thus requites us.
All for one Apple!

Io. Villain thou have undone me:
His Grace is much incensed.

Do. You know, Iocastus,
Our Grace have Orchards of our own more precious
Then mortals can have any: And we sent you
A Present of them the other day.

Io. It Is right,
Your Graces humble servant must acknowledge it.

Bro. Some of his own I am sure.


Do. I must confess
Their outside looked something like yours indeed;
But then the taste more relished of eternity,
The same with Nectar.

Io. Your good Grace is welcome
To any thing I have: Nay, Gentlemen
Pray do not you spare neither:

Elve'. Ti-ti-ta-te.


Io. What say these mighty peers, great Oberon?


Do. They cannot speak this language, but in ours
They thank you, and they say they will have none,

Elves. Ti-ti-ta-t^-Tititatie


Io. What say they now?


Do. They do request you now
To grant them leave to dance a Fayry ring
About your servant, and for his offense
Pinch him: do you the while command the traitor
Not dareto stir, not once presume to mutter.

Io. Traitor, for so Prince Oberon deignes to call thee,
Stir not, nor mutter.

Bro. To be thus abused!


Io. Ha? mutter'st thou?


Bro. I have deserved better.


Io. Still mutter'st thou?


Bro. I see I must endure it.


Io. Yet mutter'st thou? Now Noble Lords begi^
When it shall please your honors.

Do. Ti ti tatie.
Our noble friend permits, Tititatie:
Do you not sir?

Io. How should I say I do?


Do. Ti ti ta tie.


Io. Ti ti ta tie my Noble Lords.


Elves Quoniam per te violamur
Vngues hic experiamur.
Statim dices tibi datam
Cutem valde variatam.

They dance. Io. Tititatie to your Lordships for this excellent music


Bro. This it is to have a coxcombe to on's master.


Io. Still mutter'st thou?


Exit Bromius. Dorylas from the tree: Iocastus falls on his knees. Do And rise
up Sir Iocastus, our dear Knight.
Now hang the hallowed bell about his neck,
We call it a mellisonant Tingle Tangle,
(Indeed a sheep-bell stolen from's own fat wether.)
The ensign of his knighthood. Sir Iocastus,
We call to mind we promised you long since
The President of our Dances place; we are now
Pleased to confirm it on you: give him there
His Staff of Dignity.

aside. Io. Your Grace is pleased
To honor your poor leigeman.

Do. Now begone.


Io. Farewell unto your Grace and eke to you,
Tititatie my Noble Lords farewell.

Exit. Dor. Tititatie my noble fool farewell:
Now, my Nobility and honored Lords,
Our grace is pleased for to part stakes; here Iocalo
These are your share; these his, and these our Graces.
Have we not gulled him bravely! see you Rascals,
These are the fruits of witty knavery.

Mopsus enters barking. Dor. Heaven shield Prince Oberon, and his honored
Lords!
We are betrayed.

Mop. Bow wow wow.
Nay nay since you have made a sheep of my Brother
I Will be a dog to keep him.

Do. O good Mopsus!


Mop. Does not your Grace, most low and mighty Dorylas,

Fear whipping now?

Do. Good Mopsus but conceal us,
And I will promise by to morrow night
To get thee Thestylis.

Mop. I will ask leave
Of the birds first. An owl? the bird of night; An owl
That plainly shows that by to morrow night, shreekes.
He may perform his promise.

Do. And I will.


Mop. Why then I will conceal you. But your Grace
Must think your Grace beholding to me.

Do. Well:
We do^.

Mop. And thank the owl, she stood your friend.
And for this time my witty Grace farewell.

Do. Nay be not so discourteous; Stay and take
An apple first: you Iocalo give him one,
And you another, and our Grace a third.

Mop. Your Grace is liberal: But now I fear
I am not he that must interpret the Oracle.
My brother will prevent me, to my grief
I much suspect it, for this Dorylas
A scarre-crow cozend him most shamefully,
Which makes me fear he is a more fool then I.

Exit Mopsus. Dor. So, we are clean got off: come noble Peers
Of Fairy, come, attend our Royal Grace.
Let Us go and share our fruit with our Queen Mab,
And the other Dary maids: where of this theme
We will discourse amidst our Cakes and Cream.

Elves* Cum tot poma habeamus,
Triumphos laeti iam canamus.
Faunos ego credam ortos
Tantum ut frequentent hortos.
I domum Oberon ad illas
Quae nos manent nunc ancillas.
Quarum osculemur sinum,
Inter poma, lac, and vinum.

Finis Actus tertii.
ACTVS 4.
SCEN 1.
Mopsus, The stilis.
Mop. I would have you to know The stilis, so I would,
I am no dog, but mortal flesh and blood
As you are.

These. O be patient gentle Mopsus.


Mop. Slid, fetch and carry!


These. Nay good sweet heart
Be not so angry.

Mop. Angry? why 'twould anger
A dog indeed to be so used, a dog!
I would not use a dog so: bid a dog
That comes of a good house to fetch and carry!
Discourteous! ^et him get dogs of his own,
For I have got my neck out of the collar.
Let him unkennell's Oracles himself
For Mopsus, if I starte or spring him one
I Will dye the dogs death, and be hanged: mad fool!

These. But Mopsus, you may now securely visit
Me and my house: Amyntas, heaven be praised,
Is now recovered of his wits again.

Mop. How? and grown wise!


These. Ceres be praised as ever.


Mop. Shut up your doors then; Carduus Benedictus
Or Dragon water may do good upon him.

These. What mean you Mopsus?


Mop. Mean I? what mean you
To invite me to your house when it is infected?

These. Infected?


Mop. I, Amyntas has the Wits.
And do you think I Will keep him company?
Though, as I told you still, I am suspicious
Iocastus is the man that must --

The. Do what?


Mop. It grieves me to think of it.


The. Out with it man.


Mop. That must interpret; I have cause to think
(With sorrow be it spoken) he will prove
The verier fool, but let him; yet now my Aug^ry
That never fails me, tells me certainly
That I shall have thee, Thestylis, yet ere night;
It was an owl --

SCEN. 2.
Claius. Amyntas.
-- And -- see see, Thestylis,
Here comes the Ivy bush. I Will stand aside,
For I am still most bodily afraid.
Amy. What Deity lives here? the soul of Phoebus
Breaths in this powerful man: sure Aeculapius
Revisits earth again; and in this shape
Deals health amongst us! I before was nothing
But brui^ and beast: O tell me by what relics
Of heavenly fire have you inspired me with
This better soul of reason! worthy sir,
If you are some God (as less I cannot deem you)
That pitying of my miseries, came down
From heaven to cure me, tell me, that I may
With sacrifice adore you.

Mop. Adore him?
Are there such Ruffian Gods in heaven as he?
Such beggarly Deities?

Amyn. If you will conceal it,
And I by ignorance omit to pay
Those sacred duties that I ought, be pleased
To pardon me.

Mop. Heighday! well Thestylis,
You may be glad your house is not infected;
Hee'sten times madder now then ere he was,
To deify this rude ill-favored Silvan,
This fellow with the beard all over: Thestylis,
I dare not stay; unless my heels maintain
My safety I shall turn a dog again.

Exit Mopsus. Clai. I am as you are, mortal; it is my skill
In Physic, and experience in the rare
Virtue of herbs, that wrought this miracle;
No Divinity, or power in me.

Thest. Amyntas, when shall we requite this kindness?


Amynt. Never, I would willingly
Have sacrificed unto him, but his modesty
Will not permit it: though he will not suffer us
To Adore him as a God; yet we may pay
A reverence to him as a father.

Claius. O those words do touch the quick!


Amyn. For if he be
A father that begot this flesh, this clay,
What Is he to whom we owe our second birth
Of soul and reason? Father, I must call you
By that name, father.

Claius. Now the floudgates open,
And the full stream of tears will issue out:
Traitors, you will betray me!

(aside Thest. Sir, why weep you?


Claius. To think of this man's father -- O I loved him
As dearly as my self (my words and all
Break out suspicious!) has ^e not a daughter?
As I remember well, he said her name was --

The. Amaryllis.


Cla. Yes, I had almost
Forgot it, I would feign have seen her too.

Thest. You cannot now, because to night she lodged
With one Laurinda.

SCEN. 3.
Urania.
Amy. O my Urania, welcome,
Amyntas bids thee so, I that 'till now
Was not Amyntas: come my joy, and meet me
Full of our happiness!

Vra. Grant Ceres now
My hopes be faithful to me: my Amyntas,
How come your thoughts so settled?

Amyn. O Urania,
Here, here he stands, to whom I owe my self,
And thou owe me: we reverence in our Temples
Marble, and brass, whose statues serve for nothing
But to hang cobwebs on: oh! how much rather
Should we adore this Deity, that bestowed
Such happiness upon us!

Vra. Would we knew
How to deserve it.

Cla. So you may Urania,
If you will grant me one request.

Vra. Command it.


Cla. I would entreat you presently to vow
Virginity to Ceres, that Amyntas
No more may toil his brain in thinking what
To give you for a Dowry.

Vra. Sir, I will
Presently about it, I Will only first
Get some unknown disguise.

Claius. I dare stay here
No longer, for I must begone ereyet
The light betrays me.

Vra. Happiness attend you!


Cla. Remember it Urania.


Amyn. Farewell father.


Exeunt Vran. Amynt. Thestyl. Claius Solus. Clai. Thus like a bat, or owl I
spend my age
In night or darkness, as ashamed of day,
And fearful of the light: the sun and I
Dare never be acquainted. O guilt, guilt,
Thou and thy daughter fear are punishments
Perpetual, every whistling of the wind
Does seem the noise of apprehenders* shadows
Affright me more then men. Each step I tread
Is danger. Life? why to live longer should we
Not live at all: I hear a noise: false timorousness
Deceive me not, -- my eyes instruct me too,
Heaven shield me --

SCEN. 4.
Alexis. Damon.
Fain I would enquire of them
For Amaryllis, but if one of these
Be Damon, I am lost.
Alex. How early, Damon, do lovers rise?


Cla. It Is he, I hear his name, good mole away.


Exit. Dam. No Larkes so soon, Alexis.


Alex. He that of us shall have Laurinda, Damon,
Will not be up so soon: ha! would you Damon?

Dam. Alexis, no* but if I miss Laurinda,
My sleep shall be eternal.

Alex. I much wonder the Sun so soon can rise!


Da* Did he lay his head in fair Laurinda's lap,


Alexis. We should have but short days.


Alex. No summer, Damon.


Dam. Thetis to her is brown.


Alex. And he does rise
From her to gaze on fair Laurinda's eyes.

Dam. O now I long to meet our Arbitresse.


Alex. On whom depends our only happiness.


Dam. It must be the first Virgin that we greet
From Ceres Temple.

Alex. Yes, the first we meet.


Dam. I hear no noise of any yet that move.


Alex. Devotion's not so early up as love.


Dam. See how Aurora blushes! we suppose
Where Tithon lay to night.

Alex. That modest rose
He grafted there.

Dam. O heaven, it is all I seek,
To make that color in Laurinda's cheek.

Alex. The virgins now come from the Temple.


Dam. Appeal unto the first.


SCEN. 5.
The virgins pass over the stage with wax candles in their hands, Amaryllis
goes the first, but she is staid by Damon, as unknown to be Amaryllis, she
being veiled and having on her head the garland that Laurinda took from Damon.
Chaste beauteous Nymph,
Ceres so grant your prayers, as you determine
Justly our cause!
Amar. Ceres has heard my prayers,
For all my morning orisons begged no more
Then one kind word from Damon.

Dam. Amaryllis!


Alex. That name breaths life and soul to poor Alexis.


Amar. The same; -- why startle you? you have not met
A poison, Damon.

Dam. Yes, a thousand vipers
Have stung my soul.

Alex. As many joys crown mine
With happiness.

Dam. Would I had met this morning
Infectious vapors nursing plagues, not thee;
No curse but that had power to ruin me!

Alex. No other blessing has preserved me.


Amar. What should this mean, my Damon? how have I
Displeased you, sweet? heaven knows it is my prayer
More then for heaven, to please you.

Da. O my torture!
Fly hence as far as hell, and hide thy head
Lower then darkness; would thou had been acting*
Incest or murder, when thou came to pray:
Thou had in any thing sinned less then this:
Unseasonable devotion!

Amar. Can it be
A sin to pray for Damon?

Dam. Thou had blessed me
Had thou sat all this while in some dark cell
Loading my head with curses.

Ama. Innocence
Let me not understand you.

Da. I Will not stand
To her award, she is a partial judge,
And will decree unjustly.

Ama. How, to Damon?
To him she loves so dearly?

Dam. That Is the reason;
She does confess, Alexis, that she loves me,
That Is argument enough against het.

Amar. Ceres, these obscure passions move me.


Alex. I Will instruct you,
Take here the paper, pen and ink.

Ama. Why yet sir
I know no more.

Alex. You are to pass your censure,
Being the first Nymph that we have met this morning,
Which of us two must have the fair Laurinda.
Write your award; our mutual oaths do bind us
Not to deny't.

Da. It Is a mere plot contrived
Betwixt this cursed Nymph, and you* Alexis.

Alex. Damon you wrong us both.


Dam. Where did you steal
This Garland? it was mine.

Amar. For that I love it,
Because it once was thine.

Da. For that I hate it,
Cause it is thine, had it been true to me*
Me thinks as soon as it had touched thy head
It should have withered.

Amar. So it would have done
Had it not first touched yours. Laurinda gave me
This Garland, but nere told me of this accident.

Da. Alexis, you deal false, it is a conspiracy
'Twixt you and her.

Alex. How can it? you know, Damon,
I have not been one minute from your presence.

Da. You took your time while I was sleeping.


Alex. Neither,
Nor I nor you could sleep one wink this night,
The expectation of this morning trial
Did keep us both awake.

Da. I do not know,
But there is some trick in it, and I Will appeal
From her too partial se^ence.

Ale. I Will the while go fetch Laurinda, she shall force you stand
Unto her trial.

Exit. Amar. Damon, thy harsh language is more then death
Unto me.

Da. I do charge you to tear the paper,
And refuse to judge between us.

Amar. No, I am resolved to write what I determine.


Da. Now thou have indeed a time wherein thou may
Revenge my scorn. Take it, but I Will prevent thee.

he strikes her. Amar. Welcome death!
From him all things are so. Damon, fly hence,
Thou have shed blood here in the Sacred Valley,
Make have away or thou art lost for ever.

Dam. Thy counsell's good, no matter whose the guilt.


Exit Damon. Ama. What was it he said last? -- Thou have indeed
A time wherein thou may revenge my scorn.
-- With love, no otherwise: and there thou shall not
Prevent me, Damon. I will write -- This ink
Deserves not to record the name of Damon,
It Is black and ugly; thou thy self have furnished me
With that of better color. It Is my blood
That Is truly Cupids ink: love ought to write
Only with that; --. This paper is too course;
O that I had my heart, to write it there!
But so it is already. Would I had
A Parchment made of my own skin, in that
To write the truth of my affection,
A wonder to posterity! -- Hand make have
As my blood does, or I shall faint I fear
Ere I have done my story. --

SCEN. 6.
Enter Dorylas. Dor. These milkemaids are the daintiest rogues* they kiss
As sweet as sillibubs, surely Oberon
Lives a delitious life! Ha! who lies here?
A Nymph? If It were but now in Oberons power
To steal away her maidenhead, as she sleeps:
O 'twould be excellent sport, to see how she
Would miss it when she wakes: what misery it is
To be a boy; why could not my good father
Have got me five years sooner? here had been
A purchase: well, it is but five years longer
And I shall hope to see a merrier world.
No body near too! Slid the very thought's
Enough to make me man oath sudden, well
I Will kiss her though.

Amar. Oh I faint.


Dor. She dreams;
Now shall I know all secrets: These same women
Are given so much to talk when they are awake
That they prate sleeping too.

Ama. My blood congeales
Within my quill, and I can write no more.

Dor. Love letters? she was troubled yester night
About inditcing, and she dreams on it now.
Poor sleepy secretary!

Ama. I will fold it up
And send it; who is that is here? my eyes
Are dim, ha, Dorylas!

Dor. Now she dreams she gives it me to carry;
I half fear I use to carry letters in my sleep,
Wearying my self all night, and that is the reason
I am so loath to rise in the morning.

Ama. Dorylas, carry this letter for me.


Dor. I thought so,
That Is all that I can do, carry their letters,
Or run of errands: well, come five years hence
They may employ me better. Unto whom is it?

Amar. Unto Laurinda, take it.


Dor. How, a red letter?


Amar. Say I wish all health to her and Damon;
And being not able for to bear my griefs,
I sought a remedy from mine own spear and died.

Dor. How dead? oh me,
See how her blood has stained the holy Valley!
Well you have done me wrong to kill your self,
Only to have me sacrifis'd on the Altar,
I nere deserved it.

Amar. Fear not Dorylas.


Dor. Fear not, to dye so like a calfe? oh Dorylas oh --


Ama. Good Dorylas be gone, whilst yet my breath
Will give me leave to say it was not you.

Dor. See that you do, and so farewell.


Exit* Amar. Farewell!
How fearful death is unto them; whose life
Had any sweetness in it! my days have all
Been so oreworne with sorrow, that this wound
Is unto me rather a salve then fore,
More physic then disease: whither my journey
Shall lead me now; through what dark hideous place;
Among what monsters, hags and snake-hair'd Furies,
Am I to go, I know not: but my life
Has been so spotless, chaste, and innocent,
My death so undeserved, I have no reason
(If there be Gods) but to expect the best;
Yet what does most torment me, is the thought
How long 'twill be ere I again enjoy
My Damon's presence: until then, Elysium
Will be no place of pleasure; and perchance
When he comes thither too, he then may slight me
As much as now. -- That very fear does make thee
Dye, wretched Amaryllis!

SCEN. 7.
Enter Claius. Cla. How no fear
Can make me loose the father! Death or danger
Threat what you can; I have no heart to go
Back to the mountains, 'till my eyes have seen
My Amaryllis!

Amar. O was ever love
So cros'd as mine! was ever Nymph so wretched
As Amaryllis?

Cla. Ha! I heard the sound
Of Amarillis; where is that blessed creature,
That owes the name? are you the Virgin?

Ama. Yes,
That fatal name is mine. I shall anon
Be nothing but the name.

Cla. O speak, what hand,
What barbarous Tigers issue, what cursed whelpe
Of Bears or Lion, had the marble heart
To wound so sweet a Nymph?

Amar. O sir, my blood
Calls none but fortune guilty. I by chance
Stumbled on mine own dart, and hurt my self.*

Clai. Then I have herbs to cure it: heaven I thank thee
That did instruct me hither! still the blood
Flows like a scarlet torrent, whose quick stream
Will not be checked: speak Amarillis, quickly,
What hand this sin has stained, upon whose soul
This blood writes murder; till you see the man
Before your eyes, that gave the hurt, all hope
In Physic is despair: -- She will not speak,
And now the cure grows to the last. Yet here
I have a Recipe will revive her spirits, Applies a medicine and rubs her
temples.
And 'till the last drop of her blood be clean
Exhausted from those azure veins, preserve her;
But then she is lost for ever! Then, O Ceres,
If there be any in these groves, men, virgins,
Beast, bird, or trees, or any thing detesting
This horrid fact, reveal it! Sacred grass
Whose hallowed green this bloody deed has stained,
Ask nature for a tongue to name the murderer!
I Will to the Temple: -- If this place contain
Any Divinity, Piety, or Religion,
If there be any God at home, or Priest,
Ompha, or Oracle, Shrine, or Altar, speak
Who did it: who is guilty of this sin,
That dies the earth with blood, and makes the heavens
Ashamed to stand a witness?

SCEN. 8.
Enter Pilumnus. Corymbus, Pilum. What sad voice
Disturbs our pious Orgyes?

Cor. See, Pilumnus,
A virgin all in gore.

Pil. Ceres defend us,
The Sacred Valley is profaned.

Cor. The place
So dear to Ceres, all defiled with blood.

Pil. By Ceres, and her holy Ompha, he
That did it, with his blood shall satisfy
The Goddess anger; who by blood offends
By his own sacrificed, must make amends.

Cla. I durst presume upon the power of art,
Did I but know the murderer.

Pil. How soever
It Is death to him that did it.

Cor. Speak his name
Fair virgin.

Ama. O -- if it be death to him
That did it, I have not the power to live
Behind him.

Cor. Why, who was it then?


Ama. My self,
And therefore in my death your law is satisfied,
The blood and act both mine.

Cla. It is not so,
For had it been by her own hand, my skill
Could have preserved her life.

Amar. It was my self,
Or one as dear.

Cla. Who Is that?


Ama. I Will rather dye
Then name him, though it be a name I use
Often to repeat, and every repetition
Is a new soul unto me: it is a name
I have taught the birds to caroll, every
Laurel and Cedar bears it registered
Upon his tender bark; it is a name
In which is all the life I yet have left;
A name I long to speak; yet I had rather
Dye all the several sorts of death twice over
Then speak it once.

Clai. I charge thee by that duty
Thou ow'st to me, Amarillis, that thou owe to me
Who gave thee life. --

Pil. What should this mean Corymbus!


Cl. And by the womb that bare thee, by the breasts
Of thy dead mother, Lalage,

Cor. This is strange.


Cla. Conceal him not! in plain, I am thy father
Thy father, Amarillis, that commands thee
By these gray hairs to tell me. I am Claius.

Pilum. How, Claius! and so fortunatly found!


Claius. I, glut your hate, Pilumnus; let your soul
That has so long thirsted to drink my blood,
Swill till my veins are empty; and carowse
Deep in my heart, till you grow drunk, and reele,
And vomit up the surfeit, that your cruelty
Quaft off with so much pleasure; I have stood
Long like a fatal oak, at which great Jove
Levels his thunder; all my boughs long since
Blasted and withered; now the trunk falls too.
Heaven end thy wrath in me!

Pilum. Blessed be Ceres!
What unexpected happiness is here?
Rejoice Sicilians; miserable lovers,
Crown all your brows with roses, and adore
The Deity that sent him: he is come
Whose blood must quench the fire of Ceres wrath,
And kindle more auspitious flames of love
In every breast.

Cla. I, do, I fear not death.
Let every Virgins hand when I am slain
Ring me a knell of Plaudits: let my Dirges
Be amorous Ditties, and in stead of weeping
Dance at my funeral! It Is no grief for me
To dye to make my countrymen some sport.
Here Is one in whom I only wish to live
Another age.

Amar. What joy have I to live,
That nere lived yet: the time that I have spent
Since first I wept, then, when I first had entrance
Into this world, this cold and sorrowful world,
Was but a scene of sorrow; wretched I!
Fatal to both my parents! For my birth
Ruined my mother, and my death my father.
O Tragic life! I either should have been
Nere borne, or nere have died. When I began
To be, my sin began, why should it then
Out live me? for, though now I cease to be,
That still continues: Eyes, flow forth a pace,
And be ashamed to see my wound run blood
Faster then you drop tears --
Enter Damon. See, here he comes.
His absence never until now I wished.

Dam. My Conscience brings me back, the feet of guilt
Go slow and dull, it is hard to run away
From that we bear about us!

Cla. The Murderer
Is in this place, the issue of her blood
Is stopped oth' sudden. Cruel man, it is thou
Have done this bloody act, that will disgrace
The story of our nation, and imprint
So deep a blemish in the age we live in
For savage Barbarism, that eternity
Shall nere wear out: Pilumnus, on my knees
I beg the justice of Sicilian laws
Against this monster.

Pilum. Claius, it is your hate,
And old revenge instructs you to accuse
My Son: you would have fellows in your death,
And to that purpose you pretend, I know not
What mysteries of art!

Cla. Speak Amaryllis
Is It not this wolf?

Pilum. Say, virgin, was it he?


Ama. O, I am angry with my blood for stopping!
This coward ebb against my will betraies me;
The stream is turned, my eyes run faster now.

Pilum. Can you accuse my son?


Amar. By Ceres, no;
I have no heart to do it: does that face
Look cruel? do those eyes sparkle with hate,
Or malice? Tell me, Father, looks that brow
As if it could but frown? Say, can you think
It Is possible Damon could have the heart
To wound a Virgin? surely barbarous cruelty
Dwells not in such a breast: mercy, and mildness,
Courtesy, love, and sweetness breath in him,
Not Anger, wrath, or murder; Damon was not
Fed at a Thracian teat, Venus did send
Her Doves to nurse him, and can he be cruel?
Whence should he learn so much of barbarism
As thus to wrong a Virgin? if he wound me
It Is only from his eyes, where loves blind God
Whets his pil'd arrows; He besides, you know,
Had never cause to wrong me, for he knows
Always I loved him: Father, do not wrong
An innocent; his soul is white, and pure,
It Is sin to think there lives a sin in him;
Impiety to accuse him.

Clai. In his looks
He carries guilt, whose horror breeds this strange
And obstinate silence: shame, and his conscience
Will not permit him to deny it.

Amar. It Is, alas,
His modest, bashful nature, and pure innocence,
That makes him silent: think you that bright rose
That buds within his cheeks, was planted there
By guilt or shame? no, he has always been
So unacquainted with all act of sin,
That but to be suspected strikes him dumb
With wonder and amazement. For by Ceres
(I think my oath be lawful) I my self
Was cause of this.

Cla. Still I am confident
'Twas he.

Pilum. It is your envy makes you so.


SCEN. 9.
Alexis. Laurinda.
Lau. -- I will Alexis,
And so he must if oaths be any tie.

Alex. To lovers they are none, we break those bonds
As easily as threads of silk: A bracelet
Made of your maidens haire's a stronger chain
Then twenty cobweb oaths, which while we break
Venus but laughs: it must be your persuasion
That works him to it.

Lau. Damon, you must stand
To what you promised, how shall I believe
Those other oaths you swear, if you respect
This one no better: It was my device
To have her judge, was it not, Amarillis?
How, all in blood!

Cla. Yes, this unmercifull man
(If he be man that can do such a crime)
Has wounded her.

Amar. Indeed it was not he.


Pil. You see her self frees him.


Lau. When last we left her
She was with Damon.

Ama. Pray believe her not,
She speaks it out of anger, I nere saw
Damon to day before.

Alex. And when we left 'em
He was incensed.

Amar. You are no competent witness;
You are his Rival in Laurinda's love,
And speak not truth but malice, it is a plot
To ruin innocence.

Lau. O ungrateful man!
The wolf that does devour the breast that nursed it
Is not so bad as thou: here, here, this Letter
The eternal Chronicle of affection,
That ought with golden characters to be writ
In Cupids Annals, will (false man) convince thee
Of foul ingratitude: you shall hear me read it.
The Letter.
Laurinda, you have put it unto me
To choose a husband for you, I will be
A judge impartial, upright, just and true,
Yet not so much unto my self as you.

Alex. Now I expect to hear my blessed doom.


Lau. Alexis well deserves, but Damon more;
I wish you him I wished my self before.

Alex. O, I am ruined in the height of hope.
How like the herb Solstitiall is a lover,
Now borne, now dead again, he buds, sprouts forth,
Flourishes, ripens, withers in a minute.

Lau. Take him, the best of men, that ever eye
Beheld, and live with him for whom I dye.
Amarillis.
Here look on it. --

Dam. Writ with blood? o let me kiss
My bill of Accusation! here my name
Looks like my soul, all crimson, every line,
Word, syllable, and letter, wears the livery
Of my unnatural action. Amarillis
That name of all is black, which was alone
Worthy so precious ink; as if disdaining
The character of cruelty, which the rest
Were cloathd in: for as if that word alone
Did wear this mourning color, to bewail
The funeral of my virtue, that lies buried
Here in this living tomb, this moving sepulcher.

Lau. Know murderer I hate thy bed, and thee,
Unkind, unthankful villain.

Ama. Nay, Laurinda,
You have bound your self to stand to my award;
The sentence now is past, and you must love him,
It cannot be reversed; you are deceived,
He is not guilty of this sin, his love
To me, for mine, makes him against his conscience
Seem to confess it, but believe him not.

Lau. Nor will, he is all falsehood, and ingratitude.


Da. Laurinda, you may spare in this harsh language
To utter your dislike: had you a beauty
More then immortal, and a face whose glory
Far outshind Angels, I would make my choice
Here, and no where but here; her virtue now
Moves a more noble flame within my breast
Then ere your beauty did; I am enamored
More of her soul, then ever yet I doted
Upon your face: I do confess the fact;
Pardon me virtuous maid, for though the action
Be worthy death, the object most condemns me!
Take me to death Corymbus; Amarillis,
I go to write my story of repentance
With the same ink, wherewith thou wrotes before
The legend of thy love, farewell, farewell.

Exeunt Corymb. Dam. Pil. Laurinda, and Alexis, do you call
The Sheapheards, and the virgins of Sicilia
To see him sacrificed, whose death must make
There loves more fortunate; this day shall be
Happy to all Sicilians, but to me.
Yet come thou cursed Claius, the sweet comfort
Which I shall take when my revenge is done,
Will something ease the sorrow for my son.

Clai. Amarillis, prithee call Amyntas to me,
And Thestylis: I feign would have mine eye
Behold them once again before I dye.

Ex. Pil. Cla. Ale. Come my Laurinda, through how many chances,
Suspicions, errors, sorrows, doubts, and fears
Love leads us to our pleasures; many storms
Have we sailed through my Sweet, but who could fear
A tempest, that had hope to harbor here.

Ex. Alex. Lau. Amarillis sola. Amar. All, all but the distressed Amarillis
Are happy, or less wretched; fair Laurinda
Is ready for a wedding, old Pilumnus
Has lost a son, yet mitigates his grief
In Claius death, my father Claius dies
Yet joys to have the son of his old enemy
A partner of his sorrows; my father looses
Only himself; and Damon too no more;
Amyntas but a father, only I
Have lost all these; I have lost Claius, Damon,
And my self too; A father with Amyntas,
And all the rest in Damon, and which more
Affects me, I am cause of all; Pilumnus
Had not else lost his son, nor had Amyntas
Wept for a Father, nor poor Thestylis
Bewailed a brother; Damon might have lived,
And Claius but for me; all circumstances
Concurreto make my miseries complete,
And sorrows perfect: for I lost my father
As soon as I had found him, and my Damon
As soon as I had found he loved me: thus
All I can find is loss; o too too wretched,
Distressed virgin! when they both are dead
Visit their Ashes, and first weep an hour
On Claius Vrne, then go, and spend another
At Damon's; thence again go wet the tomb
Of thy dead father, and from thence return
Back to thy lovers grave; thus spend thy age
In sorrows; and till death do end thy cares
Betwixt these two equally share thy tears.

Finis Actus quarti.
ACTVS 5.
SCEN. 1.
Dorylas, and a Chorus of Swains. Dor. COme neighbors, let us go see the
sacrifice
Must make you happy lovers: oh 'twill be
A fortunate season! Father Coridon,
You and old mother Baucis shall be friends.
The sheepe-hooke and the distaffe shall shake hands.
You lovely freeze-coats, nothing now but kissing,
Kissing and culling, culling and kissing, heighday!
In hope it will be one day so with me
I am content to live. Now let us ascend.

SCEN. 2.
Alexis. Laurinda. Medorus.
Alex. Now my Laurinda, now (o happy now!)
All lets that stood between my joy and me
Are gone and fled.

Lau. Long, o too long, Alexis,
My doubtful fancy wavered whom to love,
Damon, or you; in both was happiness,
But double happiness was my single misery:
So fared it once, Alexis, (for I well
Remember it) with one of my poor ewes,
Equally moved between two tufts of grass,
This tempting one way, that enticing to other,
Now she would this, then that, then this again,
Until poor fool (true emblem of her mistress)
She almost starved in choosing which to feed on;
At last (so heaven pitied the innocent fool)
A western gale nipt one, which being blasted
She fed upon the other.

Ale. Pretty fool! lets now no more defer our nuptial (joys.


Med. How sweet a folly is this love? But rash youth, Alexis,
(As youth is rash) runs indiscreetly on
While mature judgment ripened by experience
Stays for loves season.

Alex. Season? why, can love
Be ever out of season?

Med. Yes, Alexis,
Nothing's borne ripe, all things at first are green,

Alex. Lau. And such shall our affection still be seen.


Med. You are to hasty reapers that do call
For Sickles in the spring:

Alex. Loves, harvest shall;
(Lovers you know) his harvest ought to be
All the year long.

Lau. In Cupids husbandry,
Who reapes not in the spring, reapes not at all.

Med. Women indeed too soon begin their fall.
Yet till cursed Claius dye, as now he must,
Alexis, and Laurinda, let my counsel
Assuage the heat of youth; pray be persuaded
A while for to defer your nuptial bliss;
It Is but a while.

Alex. A while in lov's an age.


Lau. Maids in a while grow old.


Med. Temper loves fire.


Alex. It Is but cold love that is temperate in desire.


Med. Yet, loving pair, stay 'till a fayrer gale;
He deserves shipwreck, ('it is the Mariners flout)
And justly too, that in a storm sets out.

Lau. I will suppress my flame, (ah still it glowes.)


Alex. And I, but how unwilling Cupid knows!


Med. It Is well; now let us go take our place, to see
For our sad griefs a sadder remedy.

SCEN. 3.
Amyntas. Amarillis.
Amar. -- Yes, it was he: he is in the temple brother,
A place wherein he does deserve a shrine,
Yet is to him a prison; can you Gods
Suffer the place that is reard unto your honors
Be made so vile a thing?

Amyn. Pray give me entrance:
I am not mad, (and yet I would I were)
Am I not mad to wish so? Let me come
And see him, sure you had your self a father.
Did you not wish to see him ere he died?
If he be dead: we will only pray a while,
And weep; will tears pollute the hallowed Ompha?
For we must shed them, yes, we cannot choose:
Come sister, he will let us, for though Lalage
Was our sad mother, yet the Gods will let us
Weep for her: come, come Amarillis, come.

Exit. SCEN. 4.
Mopsus. Iocastus.
Iocast. Brother, aread, what means his graces favor?


Mop. It signifies you bear the bell away,
From all his Graces nobles.

Io. Divinely Augur'd;
For this I Will make thee Augur to his grace.

Mop. Belwether of Knighthood, you shall bind me to you.


Io. I Will have't no more a sheep-bell; I am Knight
Of the Mellisonant Tingle tangle.

Mop. Sure one of my progeny; tell me gracious brother,
Was this Mellisonant Tingle tangle none
Of old Actaeons hounds?

Io. Ignorant mortal,
Thou do not understand the terms of honor.

Mop. How should I sir, my trees bear no such apples:


Io. As mine, th'Hesperian fruit are crabbs to mine,
Hence came the Knighthood, hence.

Mop. The fame whereof rings loud.


Io. We know it.


Mop. Four such knight-hoods more
Would make an excellent peale.

Io. I Will have 'em so.


Mop. But you must get a squirell too.


Io. For what?


Mop. To ring your Knight-hoods.


Io. I Will have any thing,
His grace will not deny me, o sweet orchard.

Mop. To see the fruit that came of such an orchard!


Io. But shall we not see Claius sacrificed?


Mop. Oh by all means.


Io. But how deserved he death?


Mop. No matter for deserving it or no;
It Is fit he suffer for example sake.

Io. And not offend?


Mop. It Is fit he should offend.


They take their places. SCEN. 5.
Pilumnus with a sacrificing knife, fire laid on the Altar, a Priest holding a
Taper ready to kindle it, another Priest pouring water on Claius head, who was
bound: Corymbus leading out Damon bound. Pil. Sicilians, Nature and religion
Are at contention in me: my sad soul
Divided 'twixt my Goddess and my son,
Would in her strange distractions, either have me
Turn Parricide or Apostate: Awefull Ceres,
For whom I feed the fattest of my Lambs,
To whom I send the holiest of my prayers
Upon the smoaky wings of sweetest myrrh,
Instruct thy doubtful Flamen! As I cannot
Forget I am thy priest: for sooner shall
Our Lambs forget to feed, our swains to sing,
Our Bees forget first, from the fruitful Thyme
To cull them baggs of Nectar: everything
Forget his nature, ere I can forget
I am thy Priest: Nor can I but remember
That Damon is my son: yet take him Ceres!
You need not power water upon his head,
I Will do it with my tears. Ceres, I hope
Thy anger will not bind the Fathers eye
To look into the Bowels of his son,
I Will therefore first spill on thy hallowed Altar
This Captives blood; and then retire my self
Not to be present at my Damons death
Least nature might turn Rebel to devotion.
Song.
Ceres, to whom we owe that yet
We do not Mast and Acornes eat:
That did provide us better meat,
The purest flower of finest wheat.
This blood we spill at thy desire,
To kindle, and to quench a ire.
O let it quench thy flame of fire,
And kindle mercies more entire.
O let this guilty blood atone
For every poor unlucky one;
Nymph, or Swain, who ere do groan
Under sad Loves imperious throne.
That Love a happier age may see
In thy long tortured Sicily.
That blood which must the Atonement be
Thus Goddess, thus, we pay to thee!

Amyntas. Amarillis.
Amy. Stay, stay that impious hand, whose hasty zeal
Thinks murder can appease the Goddess wrath!
If it be murder must appease her wrath,
What is it can move her anger? Do not then,
Do not pollute her Altar, least it keep
The crimson stain of blood, and blush for ever,
At this too cruel, ignorant devotion.

Pil. Avoid the mad man.


Amyn. Why Pilumnus, Why?
By the dread Ompha, spare this guilty blood,
And I Will expound the Oracle.

Amyn. What fire has yet his blood or quenched or kindled?


Pil. Why it has quenched the sadder flames of love,
And more auspitious fires begin to move.

Amyn. Where? in what breast? No love in all Trinacria
But under Cupids scepter faints and groans
More now then ever. Thy unfortunate Damon,
And more unfortunate Amarillis stand
A sad example; Thy Urania
(O sad sweet name!) may with her poor Amyntas
Witness his tyrannous reign: here in Sicilia
Turtles grow jealous, Doves are turned unchaste,
The very Pellica^s of Trinacria^ woods
Are found unnatural, and thirst the blood
Of their young brood, (alas who can believe it?)
Whom they were wont to suckle with their own.
O wretched season! Bitter fruits of love!
The very Storks with us are Parricides.
Nay even the senseless trees are sensible
Of this imperious rage: the gentle Vine
(The happy emblem once of happier Lovers)
That with such amorous twines, and close embraces
Did cling about the loved-loving elm,
With slacker branches now falls down and withers:
If then to add more fuel to the flame,
To power in oil and sulphur be to quench it,
The flame is quenched. Nor are you he, Pilumnus,
That must expound the Oracle, It Is a wit
Such as mine is neglected, that must hit
The Goddess meaning: you, the living Oracle
Of Sicilie, the breathing Ompha of the Kingdom
Will misconceive the Goddess; you are wise
Skilled in the virtues of all herbs, and flowers,
What makes our Ewes ean best, what keeps the^ sound;
Can tell us all the mysteries of heaven,
The number, height, and motion of the stars;
It Is a mad brain, an intellect, you scorn
That must unty this riddle.

Pil. But I know
The wrath of Ceres cannot be appeased
But by the blood of Claius.

Amy. So it is.


Pil. How can that be? yet his accursed gore
Has not imbrued the Altar.

Amyn. But his blood
Has been already shed in Amarillis:
She is his blood, so is Urania yours,
And Damon is your blood; That is the blood
The Goddess aims at, that must still her ire,
For her blood has both quenched and kindled fire.

Pil. What has it quenched or kindled?


Amyn. Love, the fire
That must be quenched and kindled. Damons love
To his Laurinda in that blood extinguished,
Is by that powerful blood kindled anew
To Amarillis, now grown his desire:
Thus Claius blood has quenched and kindled fire.

All. Amyntas, Amyntas, Amyntas, Amyntas.


Pil. And is the fire of my Damon kindled
But to be quenched again: Ceres! a frost
Dwell on thy Alters, ere my zeal renew
Religious fires to warme'em.

Amyn. Spare these blasphemies,
For Damon is acquitted and affoil'd
Of any trespass.

Pil. How Amyntas? speak!
Thou that have saved a Father, save a son.

Amyn. Thus, Amarillis is the Sacrifice
The Goddess aimed at: and the blood of Sacrifice
(As you all know) may lawfully be spilt
Even in the Holy vale, and so it was;
Besides your Damon is a Priest by birth,
And therefore by that Title, he may spill
The sacrifized Amarillis blood.
If this interpretation be not true,
Speak you Sicilians, I Will be judged by you.

All. Amyntas, Amyntas, Amyntas, Amyntas.


Pil. Amyntas, thou have now made full amends
For my Philebus death; Claius all envy,
Envy the viper of a venomous soul
Shall quit my breast: This is the man, Sicilians,
The man to whom you owe your liberties;
Go Virgins, and with Roses strew his way,
Crown him with violets, and lilly wreathes;
Cut off your golden tresses, and from them
Weave him a robe of love: Damon, pay here
The debt of duty that thou ow'st to me;
Hence was thy second birth.

Da. Or hither rather:
The Balsame of Sicilia flowed from hence,
Hence from this scarlet torrent, whose each drop
Might ransom Cupid were he captive taken.

Amaril. How much owe I my Damon, whose blessed hand
Made me the public sacrifice! could I shed
As many drops of blood, even from the heart,
As Arethusa drops of water can,
I would outvie her at the fullest tide,
That other Virgins loves might happy be,
And mine my Damon be as blessed in thee.

Clai. O what a shower of joy falls from mine eyes!
The now too fortunate Claius! my Amyntas,
My Amarillis, how shall I divide
My tears and joys betwixt you!

Pil. Lovers come,
Come all with flowery chaplets on your brows,
And singing Hymmes to Ceres, walk around
This happy village; to express our glee
This day each year shall Cupids triumphs be.

Amyn. Still my impossible Dowry for Urania
Leaves me unfortunate in the midst of joy;
Yet out of piety I will here a while
(Though blessed I am not 'till she be my bride)
In public joys lay private griefs aside.

Exeunt cum Choro cantantium* Io. And I Will go fetch the youngsters of the
town,
The mortal Fairies, and the lasses brown,
To bring spic'd cakes, and ale, to dance and play,
Queen Mab her self shall keep it holy day.

Exit. Mop. Ah Dorilas that I could not have the wit
To have been a mad man rather then a fool.
I have lost the credit.

Dor. It Is no matter
You shall have Thestylis,

Mop. Shall I, Dorylas,
I had as live interpret her as Oracles.

Dor. And here she comes, give me your quail pipe, hark you. --


Exit. Enter Thestylis. Mop. Now, Thestylis, thou shall mine Oracle be,
Hence forth I will interpret none but thee.

These. Why have the birds (my Mopsus) councel'd so?


Mop. They say I must, whether you will or not.


These. How know I that?


Mop. The birds do speak it plain. Dorilas with a quail pipe.
Hark, Thestylis, the birds say so again.

These. I understand them not.


Mop. Will you be judged
By th'next we meet?

These. Mopsus, I am content,
So you will stand unto it as well as I.

Mop. By Ceres, Thestylis, most willingly.


Enter Dorylas. Mop. Ah Dorilus, heard you what the birds did say?


Dor. I Mopsus, you are a happy man to day.


Mop. What said they boy?


Dor. As if you did not know.


Mop. But Thestylis.


Dor. Why sure she understands it,
Have you to her this language never read?

Mop. No, Dorylas, I can teach her best in bed.


Dor. The Birds said twice: (as you full well do know)
You must have Thestylis whether she will or no.

These. And am I caught? It Is no great matter though;
For this time Mopsus I will marry thee;
The next I wed, by Pan, shall wiser be!

Mop. And have I got thee? thanks my witty boy.


Do. Hark, Thestylis, the birds do bid you joy.


These. For fooling Mopsus, now it is time give ore.


Mop. Mad man I may, but will be fool no more.


These. Mad after marriage as a fool before.
For he is a fool that weds, all wives being bad;
And she is a fool makes not her husband mad.

SCEN. 6.
Iocastus with a Morris, himself maid Marrian, Bromius the Clown. Dor. See,
Mopsus, see, here comes your Fairy brother,
Hark you, for one good turn deserves another.

Exeunt Dor. Mop. Iocast. I did not think there had been such delight
In any mortal Morris, they do caper
Like quarter Fairies at the least: by my Knighthood,
And by this sweet Mellisonant Tingle tangle,
The ensign of my glory, you shall be
Of Oberons Revels.

Bro. What to do I pray?
To dance away your Apples.

Iocas. Surely mortal,
Thou art not fit for any office there.

Enter Dorylas like the King of Fairies. Mopsus. Io. See, blind mortal, see,
With what a port, what grace, what majesty
This princely Oberon comes, your Grace is welcome.

Do. A beauteous Lady, bright, and rare,
Queen Mab her self is not so fair.

Io. Does your grace take me for a woman then?


Do. Yes beauteous virgin; Thy each part
Has shot an arrow through my heart;
Thy blazing eye, thy lip so thin,
Thy azure cheek, and crystal chinne,
Thy rainbow brow, with many a rose;
Thy saphyre ears, and ruby nose,
All wound my soul, O gentle be
Or Lady you will ruin me.

Io. Bromius, what shall I do? I am no woman!
If geelding of me will preserve your grace,
With all my heart.

Bro. No master, let him rather
Steal away all your orchard Apples.

Io. I and shall,
Beauteous Queen Mab may loose her longing else.

Do. How Is this? are you no woman then?
Can such bright beauty live with men?

Io. An't please your grace I am your Knight Iocastus.


Do. Indeed I thought no man but he
Could of such perfect beauty be.

Io. Cannot your Grace distill me to a woman.


Do. I have an herb, they Moly call,
Can change thy shape (my sweet) and shall.
To taste this Moly but agree,
And thou shall perfect woman be.

Io. With all my heart; nere let me move
But I am up to the ears in love.
But what if I do marry thee?

Do. My Queen Iocasta thou shall be:


Io. Sweet Moly! pray let Bromius have some Moly too,
He Will make a very pretty waiting maid.

Bro. No indeed forsooth, you have Ladies enough already.


Do. Half your estate then give to me,
Else, you being gone, there none will be,
Whose Orchard I dare here frequent.

Io. Sweet Oberon, I am content.


Do. The other half let Mopsus take.


Io. And Thestylis a jointure make.


Bro. Why master, are you mad?


Io. Your mistrisse sirrah.
Our grace has said it, and it shall be so.

Bro. What, will you give away all your estate?


Io. We have enough beside in Fairy land.
You Thestylis shall be our maid of honor.

These. I humbly thank your Grace.


Io. Come Princely Oberon,
I long to taste this Moly: pray bestow
The Knighthood of the Mellisonant Tingle tangle,
Upon our brother Mopsus, we will raise
All of our house to honors.

Mop. Gracious sister!


Io. I always thought I was borne to be a Queen.


Do. Come let us walk, majestique Queen,
Of Fairy mortals to be seen.
In chaires of Pearl thou placed shall be,
And Empresses shall envy thee,
When they behold upon our throne
Iocasta with her -- Dorilas.

All. Ha, ha, ha!


Io. Am I deceived and cheated, guld and foold?


Mop. Alas sir you were borne to be a Queen.


Io. My lands, my livings, and my orchard gone?


Dor. Your grace has said it, and it must be so.


Bro. You have enough beside in Fairy land.


These. What would your Grace command your maid of honor?


Dor. Well I restore your lands: only the orchar'd
I will reserve for fear Queen Mab should long.

Mop. Part I Will restore unto my liberal sister
In leiw of my great Knighthood.

These. Part give I.


Io. I am beholding to your liberality.


Bro. I Will some thing give as well as do the rest,
Take my fools coat, for you deserve it best.

Io. I shall grow wiser.


Dor. Oberon will be glad on it


These. I must go call Urania that she may
Come vow Virginity.

Exit. SCEN. 7.
Pilumnus. Amyntas. etc.
Amyn. Ceres, I do thank thee,
That I am author of this public joy:
But is it justice (Goddess) I alone
Should have no share in it? Every one I see
Is happy but my self that made 'em so,
And my Urania that should most be so.
I thirst amidst the Bowls; when others sit
Quaffing off Nectar, I but hold the cup;
And stand a sadder Tantalus of love,
Starving in all this plenty; Cere's Demand
Feeds me with gall; stretching my doubtful thoughts
On many thousand racks: I would my Dowry
Was all the gold of Tagas, or the ore
Of bright Pactolus channel: -- But, Urania,
It Is hid, alas I know not what it is.

SCEN. 8.
Urania. Thestylis.
My Thestylis, since first the Sea-gods Trident
Did rule the small three pointed piece of earth
Of this our conquering soil, it has not been
A place of so much story as to day,
So full of wonders: O 'twill serve (my Thestylis)
For our discourse when we go fol'd our Ewes,
Those Sheapheards that another day shall keep
Their Kiddes upon these mountains shall for ever
Relate the miracle to their wondering Nymphs,
Of my Urania; it will fill their ears
With admiration.
These. Sir, Vrania's here.


Amyn. How! in this habit! This me thinks befits not
A Lover, my Urania.

Vra. Yes, Amyntas.
This habit well befits a Virgins life.
For since my Dowry never can be paid
Thus for thy sake I Will live and dye a maid.

Amyn. O is it just, so fair a one as you
Should vow Virginity? must the sacred womb
Of my Urania fit to have brought forth
A fruitful race of Gods, be ever barren?
Never expect Lucina? shall this beauty
Live but one age? how cursed is our posterity
That shall have no Vrania's! can one Tomb
Contain all goodness? Ceres rather blast
The corn thou gav'st us: let the earth grow barren;
These trees, and flowers wither eternally;
Let our Plowes toil in vain; and let there be
No more a harvest: Every loss is small,
Yea though the Phaenix self should burn to ashes
And nere revive again! But let there be
Some more Vrania's --

Pilum. It Is necessity,
We must obey.

Amyn. But yet Urania,
I hope we may sometimes come pray together;
It Is not profane, and midst our sacred Orisons
Change a chaste kiss or two; or shall I too
Turn Virgin with thee? -- But I fool my self,
The Gods intend to cross us, and in vain
We strive ( Urania) to cross them again.

Urania kneeling before the Ompha. Vran. Great Ceres, for thy daughter
Proserpines sake
Ravished by Pluto from Sicilian plains
To reign with him Queen of Elysian shades,
Accept the sacrifice of a Virgin, for
It is thy Pleasure, thine, by whom the earth
And every thing grows fruitful, to have me
Be ever barren: Thy impossible Dowry,
Makes me despair to be Amyntas bride;
Therefore that cold chaste snow that never should
Have melted but betwixt his amorous arms
I vow unto thy Cloister (Awful Goddess!)
Almighty Ceres, is not this life holy

Echo. Folly.


Better then live in an unhappy love?

Ec. Happy love*


Be judge ye woods, and let Amyntas speak.

Ec. Amyntas, speak.


Pil. The Goddess is well pleased, she daines to answer
By gracious Echo's; go Amyntas speak.

Amyn. Why, will she answer me before Urania?
No, 'twas the music of her Angels voice,
Whose heavenly Accents with such charming notes
Ravished the Goddess ears, she could not choose
But bear a part in that harmonious song;
Yet if she will after such melody
Endure to hear the harsh Amyntas speak.

Ec. Amyntas, speak.


When will thou think my torments are enough?

Ec. Now.


Alas, how is it possible I should hope it?

Echo. Hope it.


How shall I pay the Dowry that you ask me?

Echo. Ask me.


I ask a Dowry to be made a Husband.

Echo. A Husband.


Answer directly to what I said last.

Echo. What I said last.


A Husband, Ceres? Why is that the guess?

Ec. Yes.


That which I have not, may not, cannot have, --
I have not, may not, cannot have a Husband.
It Is true, I am a man, nor would I change
My sex, to be the Empress of the world.
Urania, take thy Dowry, it is my self;
A Husband, take it.

Vran. It Is the richest Dowry
That ere my most ambitious prayers could beg*
But I will bring a portion, my Amyntas,
Shall equal it, if it can equaled be:
That which I have not, may not, cannot have
Shall be thy portion, it is a wife, Amyntas

Amyn. Should greater Queens woo me in all their Pride,
And in their laps bring me the wealth of worlds,
I should prefer this portion before the best*
Thanks Ceres, that have made us both be blessed.

Echo. Be blessed.


Clai. Pilumnus, let us now grow young again,
And like two trees robbed of their leafy boughs
By winter, age, and Boreas keener breath,
Sprout forth and bud again: This spring of joy
Cuts forty years away from the gray sum.
Once more in triumph let us walk the Village!

Pilum. But first I will entreat this company
To deigne to take part in this public joy.
Pilumnus Epilogizes.
All Loves are happy, none with us there be,
Now sick of coyness, or unconstancy.
The wealthy sums of Kisses do amount
To greater scores then curious art can count!
Each eye is fixed upon his Mistress face,
And every arm is locked in some embrace.
Each cheek is dimpled; every lip does smile:
Such happiness I wish this blessed Isle,
This little world of Lovers: and least you
Should think this bliss no real joys, nor true,
Would every Lady in this orb might see
Their Loves as happy as we say they be!
And for you gentle youths, whose tender hearts
Are not shot proof against love and Cupids darts;
These are my Prayrs, (I would those prayrs were charms)
That each had here his Mistrisse in his arms.
True Lovers, (for it is truth gives love delight)
To you our Authors only means to wright.
If he have pleased (as yet he doubtful stands)
For his applause clap lips instead of Hands.
He beggs nor Bays, nor Ivy; only this,
Seal his wished Plaudite with an amorous Kiss.

Exeunt Cantantes. FINIS.

