A TREATISE ENTITLED, BEWARE OF M. JEWEL. BY John Rastel MASTER OF ART AND
STVDENT OF DIVINITY.

Math. 7. Beware of false Prophe^^, which come unto you in the cotes of sheep,
but inwardlye are Raven ^^g wolves. etc.

RESPICITE VOLA^ILIA COELI. ET PVLLOS CORVORVM.



ANTVERPIAE Ex officina Ioannis Fouleri^. M.D.LXVI.

To the Indifferent Reader.
THE Worthiness of a certain book, lately set forth in the name of M.
IeVVel, does in England perchaunse, make it to be precious Unto many, but Unto
Us that are in these parts of beyond the Seas, the Raritie only thereof, gave
a Price and Value Unto it. Inso much that receiving one of them for my self,
two months (at the least) after they had been abroad in England, I could not
keep the whole altogether to my self, but was feign to divide it in the
middle. And yet there was no loss therein, because a frind was gratified with
that half which I might spare, and the other remaining with me would keep
me so long occupied, Until both of Us might ^hainge parts one with the other,
and I (if I thought good) continue my reading forward as I had begone without
any Interruption or stay at all, But I savv such gear and such store thereof,
in the one half only, that I had little mind to go through the other. And now
that dividing of the Fooke into two parts which the Rarietie thereof
occasioned me to make not altogether so willingly, but that I could have
wished it better, that same now fell out so happily and agreably to my
purpose, that although I might consider and see, what stuffing were in the
whole, yet, of free choice and for good causes, I would meddle with no more
then the half. And truly, to choose who can let me, except some such
unreasonable* Heretic as takes all free will away, from a man^* Mary to
choose any one way, of two that may be taken, that may be reproved in the
Chooser, except the causes which he followed, be alovvable. In the seeking of
which, least any man should extend his wit so much, that by long discoursing
he should make it the lesser and weaker, and imagine with himself, upon
Secret Conferences, Policies, Conclusions and Orders made among the
Catholics, for the answering of their Adversaries: I will therefore shortly
and faithfully tell them my self.

First in four Articles only, which occupy well nere half the Reply, I found
so much matter vvorth the brief noting, that it would fully serve to the
making of a just book. Concerning then the quality of those things, it was
so corrupt and infectuous, that it required some present and spedy preservative
against it. I provided also that the reader should not be vvearied through any
long process or discourse. Furthermore, if M, Ievvel himself, in this vacation
and leisure of his until D, Harding come upon him again, or if any other of
the right Iannizers in deed which have fled from the Catholic faith, would
make me an Answer: I thought good so to measure out my Book unto them, that
they should not put the fault in the greatness thereof, when they do not in
convenient time say their mind unto me for it. Byside this, the chief points
which I did mind to speak of are such, that if I would have perused the
whole Reply, yet I should have brought but more Examples only to the proving
of those my Objections against M. Ievvel, which already are declared by enough
and sufficient. And to Conclude I say only BEWARE OF M. JEWEL, that is, I show
good causes to the Indifferent Reader, wherefore he should try him thrice,
before he trust him once: Other are coming, which shall bring him to more
ieobardy, and strike directly at that crafty head of his, as if they should
say, NOW M. JEWEL BEWARE.

Other causes therefore contrary to these, who so ever shall name, he shall
not expound my intent and meaning, but open his own evil mind and
suspicions. And I trust, as these seemed probable enough unto me, wherefore I
might and should ^ather certain things (what I would my self) out of M.
Jewels book, and dispose them as I have done, so may any Reasonable man be
content with this, which for his warning sake I have noted and never think
that M. Ievvel is not touched because every Article of his is not by me
discussed: Or that, for all this which yet is said, he must not be mistrusted,
because every line and sentence of his book is not Ansvvered.

For every man, as he is well disposed, so may he do: and what so ever way,
close or Open, frequented or Solitary, Short or Long, Direct forvvard, or
about, Easy or Intricate, what so ever way be taken, if we come to one end,
and meet together in the discovering of Craft or Heresye, the cause of the
Catholics is the stronger, the hearts of the Protestants may be the fainter.

Some one (perchaunse) has a patient mind to follow M. Ievvel, Sentence by
Sentence: An other will not be bound to go after him upon every trifeling
Occasion, but leaving bymatters and impertinent, gathers out his Sense and
confuteth it: Some again chooses one Special Article out, and spedely
Answers it, An other is not content with so sevv as one or two, and
therefore is longer a doing. There is that thinks it enough to Iustifye the
untruths that D. Harding is charged vvithall. That seems not enough to an
other, but he notes M. Ievvel for his plain lies, and them out of measure.
What shall I say more of other? My self have followed an order much different
from any the forsaid, and no doubt, but an other may come after all that is
hitherto reckened, and find more matter against M. Ievvel with a peculiar
disposition thereof.

Let the way therefore, which any man takes be never condemned, but the end
to which he brings processes, let that be considered.

M. Ievvel (I speak it without flattery) has a Rare gift in writing, he
must not be proud of it. He ventereth so boldlye, he fights so openly, and
is armed so singlely, that if tvventye Catholics should at one time encountre
with him, no one should need to strike in the same place that an other
does, nor fail so to strike him that his credit and cause should be
vvounded. Yet, to them that stand a far of from the sight of the matter, he is
harnessed so finely, he handeleth his vveapon so cunninglye, he changes from
one hand to an other so readely, yea shrinketh and geaueth back so
Artificiallye, that he may well seem to have done a great Act, and to make
it doubtful at the least, who has the victory.

And so concerning these two points, because of the first, I may lavvfully
take my vantage: And though in most places I leave him untouched, in other yet,
(except he be insensible) I do enough to make him feel it. Then because of
the second, I give thee (Indifferent Reader) lavvfull warning, that of all men
that ever hitherto have vvryten, he is the most Bragging, Deceitful and
Impudent.

How true this is, it shall appear by my profes: And the profes how ready
they are, it is evident in this present Treatise, and shall further appear by
an other which is forth cumming. Concerning this which is Printed:

In the first book thereof, I have brought into a short Table or Sum, (as it
were) the State of the Question contained in every of the four first
Articles: The Art of M. Ievvel, in saving himself from Subscription in every
one: And the Issue of the Co^trouersy, upon which a more direct Answer is to
be required, and more Just reply to be inferred. And in perusing of this part,
it will be quickly seen, whether I slander M. Ievvel, in charging him with
Shifting, Falsifing, Corrupting, and Desperate handeling of such matters as
come against him, Or no.

In the second book, I come to more particular points, And declare in several
Chapters, by most manifest Examples:

That he has ouercharged his Book with Common

That he starteth into Digressions, Impure and

That he troubles Consciencies with other Common

That he peruerteth D. Hardinges meaning.

That he disgraceth his Authorities.

That he vvrangleth with him.

That he dissimbleth or Butteth with him.

That he refelleth one Truth by an other.

That he reports of him very discourteously,

By all which Evidences, if it be not sufficiently proved, that he is a man of
little Modesty, Truth and Conscience, I will shortly set forth a third book
against him. In which, the abusing of sundry Doctors and vvryters
Authorities, to the maintenance of his falseheade and Heresy, etc. shall be so
plainly exemplified, that (I trust) it will be considered as a true and
profitable Conclusion: BEVVARE OF M. IEVVEL.

But now, after all these pains taken, sometimes gladly, sometimes
patientlye, but alvvayes faithfully and that to this end, that Truth might be
known, And falsehead detected, And that the nevve Doctrine of the late
Gospel might, either best of all be forsaken, or else be better examined: Are
there none or very fevve, that will take the pains to read our Books? Or if
there be, that would gladly read them, or with indifferencye judge of them,
is it not lavvfull to bring some in for the^? What have the Catholics done of
late, so unnaturally, or vnreasonablye, that from hencefurth they must write
no more against the Chalenger? Or fear, that if they do write, the Vates
shall be searched which bring in the Books, and the Books not examined, that
bring in the Arguments? Is it for our person sake or our cause sake that we
are so excluded? Is the place from whence we write, or the matter which
we write, condemned of you.

It is objected unto us, that we are young Dyuines. The Objection were good if
we followed the devises of our own heads, and not the learned Commentaries
of most Ancient Fathers. But now the person is young, the Conclusion is old.
And again, the youngest dyuine among us that have vvryten, might five years
sense, have proceeded (without Grace asking) and have gone for a Doctor (if it
had so liked him) in any of this Ages heresies for any exception that vvoulde
have been made, against his Age or lerning. Not only as Doctors are made in
the Country abroad, where he that can Read best, Or say without Eoke most Or
Rovvle in Terms most fast, Or Rail (in deed) most loud, is Created a Doctor
for his labor: but as Doctors also are made at these days in Universities by
Disputing, Answering and Grace taking.

But we are not the wisest of all the Catholics. We may borovv then of our
own Company, and never be in your danger for lending us any. And yet that
alone which we have, is not so simple but we are able well to perceive,
vvher the best of your Arguments fails.

But we are the disconted of Louane. If Louane it self be contented with us,
the Testimony of such an University, should be no reproach unto us. As again,
who ca^ blame any Catholic in all the world, for misliking the procedings of
heresy?

It vvil be said we are fugitives. We are not of that kind, of the which it
is vvrytten, Fugit nemine persequente, Prou. 28
he flees when no man pursues him. Again, we are not fled so far yet, as
Geneua is. Nor fled in heart or behavior from the Catholic Faith of all
christendom, Or from one heresy unto an other.

And further it vvil be objected, we live in disorder. In deed we live not
under an hedor vvarde^, deprived of our Collegies, without any our fault
against the Statutes: neither are there here such Offices, Charges, Romes, or
Places Vacant, by taking of which the persons which in England fulfilled the
like very vvorshipfully and vertuouslye, might declare how they be able to
rule the^ selves, and also to keep other in Order: yet we live under the Rule
of the holy Commandments of God, and the approved Canons of the Catholic
Church, And the lavvdable Customs or policies of the places where we remain.

And further yet, we shall be said to write for corrupt and private gain.

But we are not (we trust) so il frynded that we need it, or so il disposed
that we mind it. Again, they which have forsaken great and sure liuinges in
England, of one, two, or three hundred pound yearly, they thought not (I
believe) to set up a shop beyond sea, and by making of new books, and selling
them for x. pence, or xij. pence a piece to rear up both Private and Corrupt
gain unto themselves.

To be short, we shall be accounted unnatural, whether for saving our head,
when a blovv is coming at it? Or, for leaving our Commodities utterly? Or
chainging of the less for the Greater? Or for Loving and Fearing of God more
then Man? Some are so kind to their Country that rather then abide the lack of
it, they care not how far they go from God. And there have been in times
past some so faithful to their Princes, that (whether in Sport or Ernest)
they have said it, he is not worthy of the favor of his Prince, that would
stick to go to Hell for his Prince. But he believed, perchaunse there was no
Hell at all. And so night venture boldlye, where (by his judgment) there was
no danger. Otherwise if he had so much light of Eaithe, as to confess an
Hell, and yet so great blindness of Affection, as to love any Creature so much,
that he would cast away his own soul for ever the propprely was
unnatural, and his saying is Intolerable.

As for us, God be merciful, and geaue us the Grace to love him best, nay to
love him without comparison. And after him to love them best, which come
nighest unto him, either by Image of Virtue, or Similitude of Power and
Office, every one yet in his degree and place.

But all these Objections (I suppose) are Personal, and may be made either of
Idle heads for their fantasy, or by Adversaries, for some Anger, Or of
Gentlemen merchantes for their pleasure, or of men right worshipful, upon sad
report made unto them. But yet, what is any of these unto the question:
whether in the six hundred years after Christ, there were any Sole Receiving or
Receiving under both kinds: And so forth in any other of the Challengers
Articles? nothing at all undoubtedly. For be they true, be they false, (because
we vvil not spend much time about it,) they concern private men's
Conditions, and not the Catholic Religion. And they are (as it were) a
spotted Cote upon a Reasonable man's back, but they prove not, that he has
no Reason at all which vveareth the Cote. Wherefore it becomes not us, so
basely to think of their judgments that consider of our Books, that because
of the Authors small favor, the book it self should be out of favor, or
because the person is Condemned, that immediately the Book is ansvvered.

Some cause therefore undoubtedly there is, in the Books themselves, for which
they are misliked? But what is that? Is it for the Untruths sake which are
contained in them? Is it for the Wreasting and Racking of the Scriptures? Is it
for misalleging, Jewel in his Preface to the Reader.
misconstrueing, corrupting, or altering the holy Fathers etc. These things in
deed are directly objected, to D. Harding, by M. Ievvel but (I trow) the
Search is not therefore appointed, that no Answer should come in against them.
Yet except this only be the cause, wherefore else is the bringing in of them so
dangerous?

Is there any thing in them, against the Obedience and Fidelity due to a
Sovereign? Is there any one blast in them against the Government of women? Do
they move the Commons to take weapons against the Nobility? Or do they
instruct the Nobility how to let the Commons of their liberty? In one word
to speak it, do we meddle with the proper matters of VVeastminster Ilaule,
Parleament house or Cyuile Policy, and not only entreat of Articles proponed
in Schools, meet for Conuocations, and General to all Christendom? Take (for
example) any one, what so ever you vvil, of the Articles proponed by M.
Ievvel. He denies: we affirm. He contrarieth us: we again resist him.
Before any man encountered with him, he Reigned in peace and was Magnified. It
was thought, no man was ever hable to match him, and therefore for very
despair of any succor, many submitted them selves unto him. But now, sense
there have been found, which have met with him, it is perceived that he had no
certain victory. And if it seemed so before, yet now the battle beginning a
fresh, there is sturred up a closer attention in every man's mind, to mark
how truly it is fought.

And in marking diligently, he is now and then found to be justly noted of
Hypocrisy, Folly, Heresy, and other faults, Now they which read not the Books
can not mark so much: Yet they also, of others that have reader and
considered, may learn. It cummeth then at length to the knowledge of many.
And, the very nature of Truth or dispositions of men so giving it, many are
confirmed, many are warned, many are troubled, every one is moved. Some see it
manifestly, M. Jewel is confuted, other look not so narovvly but say, I will
better think of these matters, Other be loathe to chainge their opinion and are
grieved to hear of ought said against him: So that somevvhat is wrought, I
think in every man one way or other about these matters.

This by likelihode then, is the Sedition, which our Books are said to move:
They confirm some in the Truth, that they be not lightly removed from it:
They direct other unto the Truth, that they pretend not lack of Instruction:
they confound and confute other by the Truth, that they may take less pride
in their Chiualry: and they stir up a General attention, to mark on whose
side the Truth shall stand, and who shall most Faithfully behave himself in
the matter.

Are the Authors then of this manner of Sedition* to be punished? Or the books,
by which Lies, Deceiptes, and Heresies be detected, are they to be condemned?
If Protestants may be suffered, to write as largely as they will, shall they
be permitted also to write as falsely as they will? Or if no Privilege, be
it never so Special, does license them to print any Slanders or Lies yet if
afterward they be found out, and marked in their Books, may no man freely
tell them of it, but he shall incur the danger of the Law, and further
displeasure? Surely this case is very hard, to call first, into Question, those
Truths of which the Catholic Church vvoulde have no doubt feared: And then,
to grant the Protestant such favor, that he might always deny and still
drive the Catholic to prove, And further (as long as the Catholic made a
stay of yelding so much to his Adversary) to dravv that to an Argument of a
vveake cause and a faint heart, and to incline to the nevve Gospellers side: And
now last of all, (when the Catholics answer them, and so answer, that they
make the other, every day more and more to be taken in their craft and heresy)
now, (I say) to forbid the Catholics to Answer for themselves, Or to speak
any more against such faults as they find, this surely is a case very
strainge and hard: So hard undoubtedly, that what to answer unto it we can
not tell.

For if our Adversaries will have the matter tried by Lerning, our Divinity
(the end shall declare it) is much truer than theirs: but if they will now
defend themselves by force of Authority, One extraordinary Argument made by a
nevve and fresh Sercher, shall more dissvvade, then a whole shiplode of our
Books can move, when the reading of them it taken away.

But is it not possible, to find favor in his sight, which has the
Ordering of these matters committed unto him? Yeas verily possible inoughe, if
the Suer for it be notus Pontifici, and favored of the Superintendents?
Louanians then must hold their peace, but the Apology of England (I trow) may
be heard. Why: what says it? Mary, for men to be careless what is spoken
by them and their own matter etc. is the part doubtless of dissolute and
Rechlesse persons, The Apology of England.
and of them which wickedly wink at the Injuries done unto the name of God.
Again. Al Laws and Natures own voice, do command us to defend our own
Cause and Innocencye. Again. The Ancient Christians. etc. put up
Supplications, and made means to Emperors and Princes, that they might defend
themselves and their fellows in open Audience.

Lo, how well the makers of that Apology could speak for themselves, and
how well it serves our purpose at this present? Yet the Odds is exceeding
great. For the Catholics having continued time out of mind, in a consent and
certaintye of their Faith, might well take order, that no man at all should be
suffered to speak against those things which were so generally received
and alovved: but these men which bring a new and vpstart Religion into the
world, neither commending it by Authority of any their Predecessors, nor
concluding it by Reason, nor Confirming it by Miracle, how should they forbid
a man to consider and vevv their Opinions, and require him first to build upon
them, before he see the sure ground of them?

If therefore unto them it be an unlawful and unnatural matter, that it
should be denied to any man to defend his own cause, it seems that we may
well be suffered to make our Answers unto our Adversaries: And it seems
also, that those may Read our Answers, whose loss and peril it vvil be,
to be kept, by any means, away from the hearing of the cause examined.

But perchaunse they vvil not be known which made the Apologye: and cumming
out without a Privilege, who can tell whether it be of any Authority?
Especially D.Harding having ansvvered it, and confounding the great boast and
crakes set upon it.

What say we then to M. Ievvel himself? might not he be in^reted, to speak
in his best manner, for us? Of the Readiness of his good will, we have
already a Testymonie. For unto D. Cole alleging a Recognisance, which so
bound him in, that he was not at liberty to dispute and reason with him, I
would wish (says he) the Queen's Majesty would not only set you at liberty,
Jew. in the second answer to D. Cole.
but also command you to show your grounds. Bysides this, he has so
required, so desired, so provoked, so ernestly sued unto the Catholics, to
have their Answer unto his Articles, that if it should now stand with his
good will and Conscience, yet it agrees not with his honor and worthiness,
to see in his life time such books, as to the writing of which his provoking,
gave a necessary occasion, to be so condemned, that they should never be
examined or Ansvvered.

To you therefore M. Ievvel I speak it, as in this case one of the Indifferent
Readers. Why provoke ye us to write? Why consent you to this policye of
forbidding our books, that we should not write? Why suffer ye not the Truth
to have her full course? Why constrain you them by fear, whom ye should
better persuade by lerning? Why foresee you not that except our books be
suffered to be Readen, you shall be judged to be afraid, or ouercummed? Why
Consider you not politikely, that except the Papists do keep you occupied,
you will fall to greater battles between your selves, and utterly desye one
the other? You said in the Preface of your Reply: Blessed be the name of God
that has offered this Occasion. For I have no doubt, but of this necessary
conflicte, through his mercy, there shall issue some sparkle to the Glory of
his name. Why suffer you then the matter of Gods glory and your victory to be
taken away? Why pretend you, as though you were sure of vvinning and glad
of the Occasion, by which your gospel, the more it is impugned and stands,
the more it is glorified, and yet hear of the prohibition of our Books, and
have not to say against it? If you had not challenged the Catholics, the case
had been more tolerable, but now it can never stand with your or your
Religions honesty, not to defend your self but by terror.

But (to return again unto the Indifferent Reader) let our sayings, if they
come properly and directly from us, be straitvvaies condemned: Let no Reason
and Argument be good for us, though the very same in our Adversaries case,
must be admitted who so ever say nay: And let M. Ievvel forget his old
Charity, and vvishe now, that we might be constrained to hold our hands
and tongues, which wished before, that we should be constrained to write
and Speak: Let all these Injuries be patiently suffered: Yet who can let us
to vvishe thee well, and tell thee of thy Souls danger when Heresy is
flattering with thee: And note the very places unto thee, in which her lying
Sprite is covered, And be glad to have things for thee in a Readiness, if the
vvinde should happily turn, to send them in to thee? Now if this be an
unnatural or Seditious mind, have me excused I pray thee, I never thought it
so, nor feared, it would so be taken. And I can not promise such Obedience, or
vvarrant to my self such perfection, that if a Rebel and Adversary against
God and his Church should openly blaspheme and deceive, I would not speak
against him, and trouble his procedinges with my Objections. Yet, if, as many
other mysteries, unheard of before, be reveled in these days, so it should
likewise now be brought unto light, that allthough a Thief were espied to
do his feate in any house, no man for all that should cry out against him, for
fear of troubling them in the house, which are at their books, at their meat,
at their game, at their rest, or any such like: then truly as we might be so
astonished at this strainge Revelation, that for a time we could not speak,
yet nevertheless (I trust) we should turn unto God and pray. And so in like
manner, when that is perceived and confessed that in no kind of case, any
more may be vvryten against M. Ievvel, then shall we pray God, as he has
wrought by our speaking, so that he will continue and work by our silence.
And as the silence of the Catholics when they were excedingly provoked to
speak, did more harm perchaunse then all the other arguments of the Heretics,
so the letting of the Catholics to speak, whereas through the importunity
of the Adversary, they have been moved thereunto shall by Gods Grace, more
sensibly make others to consider what Faith they have forsaken, and what
opinions they follow, then if our Books should freely come in and be Readen.
Amen. Fare well, Reader, and be Indifferent. At Antvverpe the.10. of May.

REgiae Maiestatis Priuilegio permissum est Ioanni Rastello Anglo, vt librum
inscriptu^, A Treatise entitled, BEWARE OF M. JEWEL, Typis mandare, ac impune
distrahere liceat. Datum Bruxellis. 8. Martij. Anno Domini. 1565.

Subsig. De la Torre.
Opus istud perlectum est and approbatum a Viris Anglici Idiomatis and sacrae
Theologiae peritissimis, quibus tuto hac in re credendum esse iudico. Idcirco
operaepretium fore censeo, vt imprimatur.

Ita testor Cunerus Petri, Pastor S. Petri.
Louanij. 7. Martij. 1565.
THE FIRST ARTICLE.
THE question of the first article, is: Whether any private Mass were in the
whole world, for the space of six hundred years after Christ.

What call we private Mass? A private Mass? (say the Catholics) is that,
which is not solemn. And other byside this, of that name, they have none.

But what mean ye Heretics by it? Mary, whereas the priest receives the
Sacrament him self alone, Ie. pa. 4.
that we call (says M. Jewel) private Mass, yea allthoughe the whole parish
be present. Ergo, this term so taken, is not in the proper books and schools
of Catholics, but is altogether of the devise of Protestants.

To what end is the mouinge of this question about private Mass? Or what
has any Divine to do with it? The conclusion is, that if it can be proved, M.
Jewel is content to yield and subscribe.

But what if it can not be proved? Forsoothe then is M. Jewel, I trow, a true
man of his word. Is this all? And has this great fighting, and writing on
both sides no further end, but to the commendation or dispraise of one man,
and him not so wonderful? No truly, it is not for the learned or studiouse so
to do, such specially as have, or take charge of religion, but rather to
direct all their oppositions and answers unto that end, by which somewhat may
be concluded, either duly, to the honor of God, or profitably, to the defense
of the Church.

Have both sides then, done so for their part? That now is to be considered.
First concerning the Catholic, he goes directly to some purpose, and
brings the question unto that state, in which the adversary is so answered,
that the Church also is defended. The Protestant, he, at the beginning seemed
also to mean plainly, but now, he has brought the question unto such
points, as by which neither his adversary is any thing hurted, nor the
Church, which he impugnethe, any thing touched.

By which it appears, the one to have labored to some end, the other to have
craked to no purpose.

As in example: D Harding conceyueth the matter thus:

If private Mass, in respect only of that it is private, Mayor.
after your meaning, be reproueable: Hard. 39
it is for ye single Communion, that is to say, for yt the Priest receives the
Sacrament alone,

But the single Communion is lawful, Minor.
yea good and godly:

Ergo the private Mass, Conclu.
in this respect, that it is private, is not reproueable.

It follows then, that Christ's institution is not broken, The Catholic
resoneth to some purpose.
when the Priest receives alone: And consequently, the Catholic Church is
not to be condemned, for allowing that manner of receiuyng.

Thus has D. Harding, and every other Catholic, learned to refer his
reasoning to some purpose, that others may be edifified by it.

But now on the other side, what say you, M. Jewel, to the matter? what
importe you with all your preparaunce? Whom provoke you? What conclusion seek
ou? you ask a question of private Mass, whether any such were, six hundred
years after Christ. A strange question unto Catholics, and therefore you must
expound your meaning unto us.

1. I demand ( say you) of the open Church Ie. p^. 59
2. I demand of Priests. 3. I demand of the Mass. 4. I demand of the
right use of the holy supper that ought to stand. 5. I demand of the usage
that the^ was ordinary.

Five great demaundes, and somewhat terrible unto the unskillful, as a visarde
unto a child, that can not judge what is within it. But mark, M. Jew else
great a do about nothing.
good Reader, how little he shall make of them. Let me grauut unto you, M. Jewel,
that I can not prove any priest, to have SAID MASS ORDINARILY, in OPEN
CHVRCH, and to have received alone. What infer you hereupon? Or how does this
further your procedings, or disprove the present doings of the Catholic
Church? This sure is an idle question, which makes so much a do about that,
which the contrary side may grant without any prejudice to the cause.



The second: women, boys, and lay me^,

As for the third: I answer, that your question private Mass. And if you will
make the question of Mass, tell us of it, and you shallbe provided for.

To the fifth: that which may be but over

Only now therefore, the fourth demand he swarueth from that he has taken in
hand. Jew. 5^.
But if ye will not reason about sole receiving, but stand upon your
circumstancies and demanndes nothing substantial, then do I answer, as I did
before, that I can not prove private Mass after such solemn manner as you
require: that (I mean) it was ORDINARY, and in OPEN CHVRCHES: contenting my
self with this, that although by evident example, I find not, it was so, yet
by most necessary principles I can prove that it might have been so. And
further rejoicing in this, that although I do yield in your demaundes unto you
(the fourth only excepted, which only is worth the asking, and in which you be
sufficientlye answered) yet you may not look, that the Ladies of Israel with
their Lutes and Timbrels will receive you in triumph, because with all your
strokes hitherto, you have hurted no body.

Your questions therefore, M. Jewel, being altogether so vain and fruteles, yt
they neither touch us nor profit you, let us return unto D. Hardinges
argument or resolution, to give thereby unto the indifferent Reader, The true
state of ye question about private mass
the true meaning of this first Article: and to put before him, ye Catholic
belief of the Church in this matter.

The state of the question, as Catholics have conceived it, is comprehended in
this one foresaid argument:

If private Mass, Mayor.
in respect only of that it is private, be reprouable, it is for the single
Communion,

But single Communion is not reproueable: Minor.


Ergo private Mass, in this respect that it is private, Conclu.
is not reproueable.

This argument is good, The proof of the co^seque^ce in this argument:
and holds of that common rule: A destructione consequentis, ad destructionem
antecede^tis. That is, to make it plain, when we make a conditional or double
proposicion, the denial of the former part, does well follow upon the
denial of the later. As in example:

If M. Jewel be a lawful Bishop, (this is the former part) he was duelye
consecrated, (this is the later part. And both these joined together do make
one Proposition.

Take away now the later part, and ye shall conclude the taking away of ye
former, as:

But M. Jewel was not duly consecrated:

Ergo he is not a lawful bishop.

The argument therefore, which D. Harding has proponed, is of a very good and
right making. But what thinks M. Jewel of it? He frames it after his own
likinge, Here begins M. Jewel to work his seat in alteri^g things to his
purpose.
and that, which the author himself would have to be Hypothetical, he makes
it altogether Cathegorical, in this sort:

The private Mass is single communion. Single communion is lawful: Ergo
private Mass is lawful.

Then does he not answer neither this argument, but by another which shallbe
folish, and of his own making, he would have this to be judged. As, The
ministration of private Mass is a single communion, Single communion is
lawful for a woman: Ergo, the ministration of private Mass is lawful for a
woman.

No no M. Jewel, you can not go invisible. We se well enough how you cast in
the term Ministration, to make a sport, or Absurdity. Of which folly or
sutteltie you will be told in due season. But concerning D. Hardings argument,
it is an hypothetical Syllogismus: and these which you make are altogether
Cathegorical, so that they be of far other kind and making. Which geaueth me
to suspecte, that your wits were not in their natural place in your head, when
you were so much occupied, (as your book declares) in consideration of Medius
Terminus, Ie. pa. ^9
Subiectum, and Praedicatum: least your reader might be deceived by that
argument of D. Hardinges, which had neither direct Medius terminus, nor
Praedicatum, nor Subiectum, to be feared, as being not made in Mode and
Figure, but concluded out of that rule or consequence, A destructione
consequentis, etc. Of which I have spoken.

The form therefore of D. Hardinges argument being proved good, let us
consider the matter and truth of every proposition in it. The Mayor is
declared after this sort.

If private Mass be not reproueable, The proof of the mayor in the foresaid
argument.
in this respect only, that it is private and has single Communion: the^ do
you M. Jewel digress from the purpose, The proof of the Mayor in the forsaid
argument.
and ask more, then one question, at one time. But we could not suspecte, that
you would iumble with us so confusely. Ergo it is said with good reason, that,
if private Mass be reproueable, it is in this respect only, that it is
private and has single communion.

The form hereof is good a destructione consequentis etc. as above.

The Mayor I will declare. For if you will not be bound to rest upon the term
and sense of private, but be at liberty to comprehend within your meaning, all
that is imported in the name of Mass, then may you require of us, by virtue of
this question to make answer unto you, not only of sole receauinge, but of
receuinge in both kinds, of the service in the latiue tongue, of the real
presence of Christ in the Sacrament, of the sacrifice, and many other matters
bysides. Because all these are included within the compass of these two words
Private, and Mass. Now to the Minor.

But we could not suspecte that ye would so iumble with us.

For distinct articles being put forth by you, of Communion under both kinds,
Service in the vulgar tongue etc. Ye signify thereby, that ye look for a
several answer unto each of them, and that, within the question of private
Mass, ye intended not to pass the bounds and sense of this word Private,
For of Consecration (we may be sure I trust) you moved no question, whether it
be proper to the Priest, or whether the people may also do it. Yet the Mass
does extend it self unto consecration. If therefore, neither we are so
suspicious as to fear it, neither you so folish as to say it, that in asking
us a question of private Mass, ye douted or demanded, whether ye Priest alone
does consecrate and not the people, or, whether one Priest alone may
consecrate by him self, without help or assemble of other Priests, (if this
one point which properlye pertains to the Priests office and the substance
of a Mass) was not respected of you in the question of private Mass: you
must needs confess and yield, that you referred this first article of yours,
to some one special and singular matter, and that ye extended it not, unto all
questions that might be moved upon the Mass. And that special thing what
it should be, besides sole receiuinge, it was not, nor could not be perceived:
Ergo it is said with good reason, that if the private Mass be reproueable, it
is for the single communion.

Yet knowing so much as we do, if all were to begin again, we would not use
these Ifs and discourses, to find out what you did mean by private Mass,
but we would rather will you, to proceed against us in order, and not to cover
many Articles under pretense of one question, that in sifting from one to the
other, ye might seem to tarry still in one place, by keeping the self same
terms ( private Mass) and yet ever skip from one point to another, because
ye provide to be at your own proper choice, what one sense of many, ye will
have to be conceived by private Mass, and, at pleasure, to pass from any one
sense to the other. But who would have thought it, that they affected to make
confusion, which promised to bring all truth into order and sight? Or that
they which pretended to require good profes for Sole receiving only, would
afterward bind the answerer to prove the sole receiuynge at MASS, M.
Ie^wels large walks in plain matter, and one direct question.
and then, the SAYING of Mass and after that, the saying of it in OPEN CHVRCH,
and yet farther, the ORDINARY saying and receiving in open Church and (to be
short) bind him to prove CONSECRATION, OBLATION, ELEVATION, ALTAR, VES^^MENT,
or any other thing to the Mass belonging? By which words we may see how many
questions M. Jewel would say (for a nead) to be comprehended and meant of him
in these. ij. words private Mass. D. Harding therefore which knew not so much,
or could not suspecte so much (as, y^ M. Jewel did at one time, and with one
breathe, ask of so many distinct matters in one plain proposition, without
giving thereof any warninge) made that conditional and Mayor proposition, to
that his argument, of which I have spoken, The minor of D. Hardings argume^^^
declared.
which Mayor being so reasonable and allowable, I come now to the proving of
the Minor of ye same argument, which is this:

Single communion is allowable.

Here, because M. Jewel is content to be tried, by the examples of the six
hundred years after Christ, and because this kind of persuasion is most
sensible, I will bring two or three of them, for our purpose.

The Byshopes of Rome, Eccl. His lib. 5. Ca. 24. Har. fo. ^2.
when any Catholic Byshopes came thither from other countries, used to send
them the Sacrament to receive: Ergo single Communion is allowable.

What answers M. Jewel unto this? Or how concludes he (as it were) in D.
Hardinges name?

Ergo (forsooth says he) there was Mass, and adds further: Jew. P. 41.
This conclusion is far fet and hangs losely. Behold, in another example. M.
Jew. feate.
For I might demand which of the three said Mass? He that sent the
Sacrament, or he that received it, or else the messenger that brought it? It
were a strange matter to see a Mass and yet no man to say Mass. Lo how
closely M. Jewel keeps his wits together. He is opposed with Single
Communion, and he demands of the Mass: the objection goes upon the
receauinge the Communion, and he asks (without answer making) who said the
Mass. But to another example.

Tertullian dehorting his wife from mariyng to an Infidel after his death: Har.
fo. 3^.
will not thy husband know (says he of the sacrament) what thou eatest
secretly before al other meats. etc. Ergo single Communion is alloweable.

But M. Jewel takes it not so. how the^? Jew. 46. The same feate again
followed.
Mary. Ergo Tertullians wife said private Mass. And hereupon then will rise a
great dout, whether a woman might say Mass, or no, or who helped her if she
said it. Yet saving for M. Jewels pleasure, that neaded not, because D.
Harding speaks directly not, of saying Mass, but only of receiving the
single Communion.

Another example: Har. fo. 34.
Serapion lyeng at the point of death, Eccl. Hi. lib. 6. Ca. 34.
ye Priest whom he sent for, being sick him self, sent the sacrament unto him
and he received it and departed. Ergo single Communion is aloweable.

I pray you M. Jewel, is not this spoken plain enough? no truly, not to such a
wra^gler. For, as though it were to be marked in this story, not, how Serapio^
receued ye sacrament, but only who brought it unto him, so seeks M. Jewel for
the bringer of it, and findinge that it was Serapions boy, All of like
pretiesent and of like small honesty.
to whom the priest delivered it, he lays hands upon him and concludes:
Ergo Serapions boy said private Mass.

Thus does M. Jewel handle D. Harding through the whole first article, either
like an hypocrite dissembling it, that we understand by private Mass or single
Communion, not the saying and celebratinge of Mass, or Communion, but that
only act, of who soever it be, which receaueth the Communion alone: either
like a dull or distracted person not perceauing it, that all the Arguments,
Examples, and Authorities are, to that only end, referred. But he has not so
little wit, as not to perceive whereabout D. Harding went. For, in the answer to
the 23. Division, where D. Harding shows in what sense he takes the question
of private Mass: Jewel 56
he confesses that D. Harding has taken pains to prove Sole receauinge, and
single Communion that was never denied. And again. Now he demands whether I
reprove the Mass, or the private Mass. What means this, that private Mass
and sole receiving be so suddenly grown in one?

See then, he confesses that D. Hardinge does understand by Private Mass,
sole receiving. And therefore he misliketh it, saying, what Means this etc.
And then he laboreth to prove that it must not be his meaning, and why?
forsooth, because:

Surely M. Harding well knows that the nature of the words is not one. Jew.
57.
Neither who so ever receaueth alone, does therefore of necessity say Private
Mass.

True it is, M. Jew. and therefore D. Hardinge knowing right well ye Private
Mass, might diuersely be taken, and that you would make it to signify the
SAYING of Private Mass, and he not so, but the Single Communion and Sole
Receiving: therefore he warued you of it, that the question might be distinctly
handled. You therefore confessinge so much, that he went about to prove Sole
Receauinge only and not to meddle in this article with the Mass, either you have
played the very hypocrites part, in pretendinge a talk to the purpose which
in deed you knew to be otherwise: Either you have showed a shameful and
hateful vilany, in burdeninge a man of good estimation and lerninge with so
many, and folish consequences as you attribute unto him. And further you have
abused great numbers of your Readers most wickedly, in drawinge their souls
after you into pervition, by making them believe that you speak as you know,
your knowledge being contrary to your utterance.

For suppose that your meaning, in the question were, as you say, and that
your demand was, to be satisfied in all these points: Whether a Priest did
SAY MASS, in OPEN CHVRCH, ORDINARILY, and receive alone, in the six hundred
years after Christ, and that, if any of these Circumstances were left
unproven, ye would not be bound to subscribe, suppose I say, that this were
true, yet seeinge your Aduersarye followed another sense, ye should have
considered, if, not him, yet your self, your learned Counsel, your Secretarye
and Scribes, your Prynter, and Reader, and have made a better answer with less
cost and labor, declaringe in sewe words, how Doctor Hardinge had mistaken
you, and expoundinge in plain words, how your own meaning should be
concerned.

But now, whereas Doctor Hardinge followed the right sense in deed of the
question, and your sense, M. Jewel, thereuppon, has no end or purpose to
which it serves: why ask you so importunately for the Mass? why demand you?

IF here be a Mass, which of the two is it, Jew. 32.
that says this Mass? Is it the sick man, or the Priest?.

Why trifle you?

That the question is moved not of any other man or woman, 33.
but of the Mass, The some of M. Jewels answers in this first Article.
and only of the Priest that says the Mass.

Why lie you?

M. Harding has brought forth these Fathers for his Mass.

Why wrangle you? 42


That for lack of Priests M. Harding allegeth Tertullians wife, 44.
Certain women out of Cyprian, and Serapions boy, not the fittest persons that
might have been found to say Mass.

Why pity you him of your pure compassion?

Alas does M. Hardinge think it was the manner in old times, 59.
that lay people should say Mass?

Why describe you the matter so cunningly, and say?

M. Hardinge shall not find here any Mass spoken of at all, 76
neither bread nor wine, nor Consecration, nor Oblation, nor Elevation, nor
Altar, nor Vestiment, nor any thing to the Mass belonginge? And to be short,
(D. Harding intendinge to speak not of the Mass, or saying of it, but only
of sole receiving) Why triumph you and why crake you, 91
that The Mass which we must neades believe, is so Ancient, so universal, so
Catholic, so holy, so Gloriouse, ca^ not be found neither in Churches nor
Chapels, nor in secret Oratories, nor in Private howses, in Town or City,
but must be sought out in some Petie parish in the country, and that by
conjecture only.

To this effect then, comes the first article. M. Jewel dalieth still, yt D.
Harding she weth not any Private Mass, that is (by his interpretation) where
any Priest SAID mass, ORDINARILI, in OPEN CHVRCH and received alone: D.
Harding proves Private Mass, that is to say, single Communion, or Sole
receiving.

Of M. Jewels mening, no purpose follows.

For when it is granted, for example that we are not able to prove against him
(with all those Circumstances) what is his cause the better for it? Of D.
Hardinges conclusion this commodity grows, that sole receiving is allowable
by the crample and Testimonies of the Primative Church.

Ergo it stands well with Christ's institution. From henceforth therefore,
let no Heretic crake of Christ's institution, as though that could not admit
Sole receiving. So shall the Church have some peace, and the Catholics be
quieted in this sure truth, that Sole Receiving is not against Christ's
institution.

This ground now and verity standing, let M. Jewel (if he dare) come visiblie
forth, and show an open face and intent, without all dubling. And then shall it
be plainly perceived, whether he must yield and subscribe or no. Here for
example are six questions.

Whether a sick man having no penance to

Whether a sick man which is not yet

Whether a sick man being not in danger

Whether a man in good health and good life may receive alone.





Betwixt these six, each of them toward an other, there is some difference,
and therefore they make two several questions.

The truth which is confessed on both sides, is:

That Christ's institution does stand with Sole Receiving in general.

For he which is put from the Communion, and lies at the point of death may
receive alone, even by Master Jewels confession: which yet is impossible to be
true, if Sole Receiving were absolutely against Christ's Institution.

Therefore, in what other special kind of Sole Receiving his Institution is
violated, therein must, of right, be the question. And therein let M. Jewel
join, (if he think him self able) with the Catholic.

As, whether a sick man being not put from the Communion for some fault of
his, may at the point of death receive alone or no, and so forth, in any of
the six foresayed questions.

Now when it shall be put forth in one special case, if he shall then fetch
his vagaries about, and run over his Common Places, That Christ's Institution
is to be observed, That the Primitive Church had a Communion, and prove it by
sundry wais, Out of holy Fathers, Out of M. Hardinges own Doctors (as he will
term them) and Out of the very Mass book it self. etc Let it be
understood, that if he speak so in general, and applies it not to the
special case proponed, he falls within danger of his own sentence. Vanitas
vanitatum. Jew. 16.
And, that it is a great token of idleness, to be earnest and copious in
proving that thing, that no man denies.

Again, It is a lewed kind of Logike, stoutely to prove that thing, that
needs no proof, and to leave the thing that should be proved.

On the other side, if he will deal sincerelye and vprightely in deed, and,
leave to use such fears as he has in this his first Reply practiced, then
shall it quickly be perceived, that either he must yield and subscribe, or else
crave a license to be loosed from y^ bond, into which he cast him self,
through his own hastines, in his Challe^ge.

The second Article. (*)
IN this second Article, the question is, 96
whether there was then (understand six hundred years after Christ) any
Communion ministered unto ye people under one kind.

Is this al? It seems to be al, because in the uttering of the Challenge,
there is no other form of words concerning this question. Yet least perchance
we shall be handeled here, as we have been in the first Article, let us ask M.
Jewel what he intends and what he demands in this question.

Sir, and please you, what if we prove unto you, that some have received the
Sacrement under one kind at home in their own houses as Serapion did: Ecc.
hict. lib. 6. (...) 34.
is not the question concluded against you? No says M. Jewel. The question is
of the usage and order of the CHVRCH. Jew. (...) The first shift of M. Jew.
M. Hardinges answer is of Serapions death bed, as though there had been no
CHVRCH yet erected in those days.

Yes verily there were, but as we may say with S. Hierome: In Apdlogia
aduersus Iouin
Christ is not one at home in the house, an other in the Church, and that which
is not contrary to Christ's institution and commandment, may be done without
the Church, of building which, he gave no commandment. But let us go further.

If I may prove unto you, that some certain persons as sick men and faintye,
have received under one kind: shall that stand us in any stead against you? No
says M. Jewel. Jew. 13^. The second shift.
This is the only thing that I denied, that ye are notable to bring any one
sufficient example, or authority, that ever the WHOLE PEOPLE received the
Communion in open Church under one kind. Surely you be an hard man to deal
withal, which will measure your witnesses by quantity, and not by quality, and
sike there, for a number, where a few and honest examples were to be credited.

Well, I will not yet leave you so. What if I can prove that receiving under
one kind, was to be found in close Chapels and Oratories, in Wilderness and
Canes, whyther contempt of the world, or auoydinge of persecution drove the
Christians: go we not directly unto the question, and bring you into necessity
of subscribing and yelding? No says Master Jewel again.

The question that stands between us, The third Shifte. Jew. 96.
is moved thus, WHETHER THE HOLY COMMUNION. etc. were ever ministered OPENLY in
the Church. Yet he lies, for neither OPENLY, neither CHVRCHE is specifyed in
the question.

How say ye to infantes, if I prove that they in old time received in one kind,
OPENLY, The ^^urth Shifte.
and in the CHVRCH, does not this make against you? No says Master Jewel.
Master Harding makes his whole plea upon an infant, and yet of infantes as he
knows I spoke nothing. No more did ye of OPEN CHVRCH, Jew. 139.
WHOLE PEOPLE, LAY MEN, Priests or others: But ye made an universal and
indefinite negative proposition, which is by all reason sufficiently reproved,
if but in one particular, the contrary be proved.

But let us consider the compass of your inuentiou a little further. What if we
prove that the two Disciples whom Christ ouertoke in the way to Emaus, received
the Sacrament under one kind? Or that S. Ambrose and S. Basile received
likewise under one? is not all this plain contrary to your assertions? No
says M. Jewel.

For the question is moved of LAY PEOPLE. Jew. 12^. The fifth Shifte.
M. Harding brings examples of Christ and two disciples, who were of the
number of Seventy and two, and therefore it may well be thought they were
ministers and not of the lay sort.

And again:

I demand of the lavitie, he answers of Saint Ambrose and Saint Basile
which were Bishops.

In deed M. Jewel you must pardon him, for he thought that a good argument
for Communion under one kind might have been taken of Christ and his two
disciples, or of S. Ambrose, or S. Basils authority alone. But seeing you have
now so conueighed the matter, that all that will not serve, where might a man
find examples to please you? If it were by one example to be showed that the
laitye and WHOLE PEOPLE received OPENLY under one kind, and in the CHVRCH,
would this satisfy you? No not this. For the thing denied by M. Jewel, The
sixth shifte. Jew. 14^
is this. That the Sacrament was ever ministered unto the people in one kind
openly in any congregation, or in the OPEN ORDER and usage of any CHVRCH

And again: It will not follow that this was the COMMON ORDER of the Church.
Jew. 133.
By which words ORDER, and USAGE, we see one or two evidences would not be
taken, because so few prove not an USAGE.

How now then? When will this fellow leave his flying back? You should (M.
Jewel) come nearer and nearer, or stay at the least in some Conclusion. But ye
add still more and more to the question, and seek to come out of the straits,
into which through folish hardiness you are cast by your own glorious Sermon.
Surely ye be gone a great way, from those plain and few words, which, this
question of Communion under both kinds, had at the beginning. Yet will I
follow you, if perchance I may see some end.

Therefore if I were able to prove, that the WHOLE PEOPLE (without mentioning
of Bishops, Priests, or Infants) did receive under one kind OPENLY, in any
CONGREGATION, or in the OPEN ORDER and USAGE of any Church: Then I trust, you
would give over all contention. No, you will never leave till you have brought
it to an endless controuersye. The Negative of our side, (say you) which so
much troubles him is this. Jew. 14^ Che. vij. shift.
That for the space of six hundred years after Christ, it can not be found in
any old Doctor or Council, that ever the holy Communion was ministered to the
people, in the Church, or in any open assemble, in one kind only, AS IT IS
NOW MINISRED IN THE CHVRCH OF ROME. You be safe M. Jewel, I warrant you, you
be safe. All the Catholics in the whole world, are not able to take you. For
what ecceptions will not you make, and what Extensions will not you devise,
under pretense of these words: AS IT IS NOW MINISTERED IN THE CHVRCH OF ROME.
Come who will, let him bring what he can: If from the Priests crown down to
his foot: And from Confite or to lte Missa est, he prove not the like to have
been used then, as is now: in Amice, Albe, Stole, Girdle, Praying, Blessing,
Eleuating, Breaking, Communicating and distributing. etc. who shall let M.
Jewel to say, that he demanded of such order of ministering, as is now in the
Church of Rome? For as well he may in this matter of Receiving under both
kinds, make question of the Priests vestiuentes, and of his soft speaking: as
in the question of Private Mass, which concerns nothing else but Sole
Receiuinge, draw the state of it unto saying of Mass, and thereupon show many
feats of his Cheualry. And when shall he then come to the point of the
controuersye, which has chosen such compasses to wander about in? Therefore
M. Jewel if you hold your self here, you be safe enough I warrant you.

But are ye not ashamed so to trifle, and to fight for nothing with such
contention? We can not prove against you so formallye and demonstratiuelye as
you require, neither can we answer your challenge as now you have expressed
it. But what then? Where is the profit of your victory? What spoils bring ye
to your company?

This is your fault Master Jewel, The vain contention of M. Jewel.
as in the former Article, so now again in this, that you make a mighty show,
and are not hable to fasten one blow, you labor with hand and tongue, as
though you would conquer some, and free passage being granted you, ye can
take nothing away from us.

For let not the receiving under both kinds be found in, OPEN CHVRCH, and,
USAGE OF THE CHVRCH, and, in the WHOLE PEOPLE, And, AS IT IS NOW MINISTERED IN
THE CHVRCHE OF ROME: Yet for so much as by Christ and his two Disciples, by
Saint Ambrose, Scrapion and others, we prove that it is not contrary to his
Institution, we confound your lying tongue, which speaks so lowdely and
earnestly thereof, as though the Catholic Church did not keep it, because the
Laietie now, receaueth under one kind in most. places.

If it be true (as your self confess either voluntariely or constrained by
the Catholics) that Receiving under one kind, has Examples for it in the
Primitive Church, The Catholic has his purpose.
and those years which you were content to be tried by, then is it aloweable.
And then surely, it is not against Christ's Institution. And then, does the use
of the Church now, stand with Christ's Institution: and then should not you so
shamefully abuse your Adversary, Jew. 119
with how can M. Harding warrant the manifest breach, of Christ's INSTITVTION?
343
Again: The causes that moves the Church of Rome to break Christ's
INSTITVTION are not great. 150
Again: M. Harding, thus maintaining the open abuse of the holy mysteries
offends against Christ's INSTITVTION. ^^9
Again: what? troweth he there is no difference between obeing Gods
COMMAVNDEMENT, and breaking gods COMMAVNDEMENT? Again:

With what indifferent judgment then can M. Harding thus compare these things
together, 116
an INSTITVTION with no INSTITVTION? Again, 114
the best stay that these me^ ca^ lay hold upon, is to deny Christ's
INSTITVTION. Again, 110
M. Harding thinks that the people may safely break Christ's INSTITVTION
etc: As though either he, or any other Catholic went about it. But if it be so
in deed, and if you will abide by it, that Christ's Institution is broken,
when any receaueth under one kind alone: go not then from that state of the
question. and before this be tried, troble not us, and others with matters
impertinent.

Wherefore did you moan this question, whether within six hundred years after
Christ, any Communion was ministered unto the people under one kind; did ye it
not to this end, that you might conclude there upon, (if no man would answer
you) that Christ's Institution is now broken of the Catholics, which minister
otherwise then they did in the Primitive Church? Ergo, the mark which you
look unto, is Christ's Institution: which to prove to be with us, or against
us, we therefore consider the doings of the Primitive Church. And because
examples are found ene^ in ye age, and such records, as your self dare not yet
deny, by which we know, ye receiving under one kind was many times used: we
conclude in ye principal, yt it is not against Christ's Institution to receive
under one kind. Do you deni ye co^seque^t? How ca^ you, which have so appeled
to the primitive Church, as though you would be co^te^t and quiet, if good
testimonies of that time could be alleged against you? What say ye the^ to ye
Antecede^t? ye confess it in plain words ye some received then under one kind,
Jew. 132.
saying: Neither did I deny that ever any one man receued the Communion in one
kind. But yet (you reply) it was an abuse. I here you well. But that is another
question. The. viij. shift.
And it is another shift also, much fouler the^ any of the fornamed. Remember
your self M. Jewel, I pray you, and let us conclude our matters in order.

The first question should have been* Whether Christ's Institution does stand
with receiving under one kind.

The first with you, but the second rather with us, is: whether any Communion was
then ministered unto the people under one kind. We prove, and you confess y^
some has hen ministered. Ergo it is time ye yield and subscribe. A iij. question
now, and if you will, shall be: whether it were an abuse in ye primi tiue Church
to receue under one kind.

And so forth in many other, according to the circumstancies of Persons, time,
and places. But before we come to the^, do you in the mean time as you
promised: for we have proved yt which you denied. Either yield or take better
hold fast, and begin again.
If you strive, and say ye me^t yt it was not OPENLY received under both kinds,
and ORDINARIly: Tha^ what a trif^er or wra^gler be you, to challenge us about
circu^sta^ces, before we were agreed upon ye substance of ye matter. yet if you
will needs have OPENLY with his fellows put in, the^ begin again, and speak more
plainly. for as ye have proponed ye matter, ye ace ouerco^me. And yet before ye
begin with those ciru^sta^ces, I warn you, it will be to no purpose, because our
selves may confess unto you, yt we ca^ not gain say it: and you shall conclude
nothing against us, by it. For ye churches cause is sufficiently defended, if
receiving under one kind may be proved, by any au^cie^t example, without any
exception made by you. Thus it may be again seen, how M. Jew. speaks, in all
this second Article, to no purpose, if he make the question so circumstantiall,
as he has labored to have it. On the other side, the Catholic cause is
sufficientlye defended, both by our own witnesses, and by confession of our
Adversaries, because it is proved sundry ways, that receiving under one kind
was known and used in the Primitive Church, and therefore undoubtedly it is
not repugnant to Christ's Institution.

The third Article. (*)
COncerning this question of the Common Prayers, whether in the six hundred
years after Christ, they were in a strange tongue which the People did not
understand: what can any Catholic of these parts of the world say more, then
that they were in the Greek tongue or Latin tongue only? For whereas neither
Authority of Scripture commands it, neither verity of Tradition confirms
it, neither report of History witnesses it, neither yet any Token or Memory
signifies it, that the Public Service of the Church East or Weaste, was
within the compass of the first six hundred years, in any other tongue then
Greek or Latin: what lightness must it be, to forsake the orders which we
have, and take others, I can not tell what? 1. Cor. 14.


The Apostle makes an express distinction Idiote and him that supplieth the
place. It is no wisdom to change that We have, for an other thing, no man is
sure What.
Of the Idiote (concerning the Common Prayers) he gives no precept, of the
other he says, how shall he, that supplieth the place of the I^iote, answer
Amen, upon thy blessing? Now by Tradition, we have received no other, but
Latin Ergo how should a reasonable man condemn that which him self sees so
generally used, and follow another unknown manner, to which he is uncertainly
referred?

S. Augustine says it but of Ceremonies, August. ad Ianuar. ep. 118.
that, If the whole Church throughout the world, do observe any thing: to
dispute thereof it is a point of most insolent madness. And if it be so in
ceremonies, is it not much more so in public Service? For in Ceremonies
(because of indifferency of the^ in them selves, and infirmity of some
persons, which be over curiouse against them) many points might be reasoned
upon, and (If manifest need require) be omitted. Yet, If the whole Church use
them, there ought to be no question. But in public Service, which perteyneth
to the state of the Church, and in which, the moving of any dout causes the
whole Religion to be shaken: how is it to be suffered, that she should be
apposed? Or that any Private persons without reason or authority, should call
that into question, which is generally received?

The Heretics of this age say, that the Latin Service (for example) in all
the West Church, has not come from the six hundred years after Christ.
From whence came it then? Who were the planters of it? Who were the
mainteyners? If they did it with consent of all the Weast Countries, that is a
great prejudice against your contentionsnesse. How unlikely.
If they did it by force or violence, would no man complain of it presently?
Or put it in writing, for instruction of the posterity? Surely, this can not
be but a great wonder, yt the Common Service of the West Church, was not
generally in Latin every where at y^ beginning: And, that so many thousand
Churches, in so many several and diverse Countries thereof, should altogether,
most faithfully, hold and keep the same: And no man yet tell, of what
beginning. But what should a Catholic be trobled in his mind or give ear to
Peekers of quarells?

If the just and quiet Possessours of Ancient and good Lands, should be made
to bring forth Euidencies, and, either answer to all demaundes which it
pleases the Adversary to move, or else to be quyte and clean thrust out of
all, without any further judgment: would it not be accounted so unreasonable
and iniuriouse, that no wise man or honest man, could allow it or suffer it?
What cause then is there, why the troblers of quiet possessouts in Religion,
should be praised and houore^, as ghostly S^ru^yers (I trow) of all
Christendom? How hold you this, quod he? Mary, what is that to thee? Thou
see I hold it. Yea but how came you by it? First who gave you the authority
to ask me that question?

Then spare not, Enchroching and busy heretics.
but lay it to my charge, if thou have any evidence against me. It was not so
in the Primitive Church. Yes forsooth was it. Bring me then (says he) any
sufficient authority of Doctor or Council. Folish fellow, will thou put me to
my proofs, which am in possessyon, and have long dwelt here, as it can not be
denied, thy self being not able to show from whence I had it, except it were of
the first Lords and Patrones? What right I have, the same I have received. And
those that delivered it to me, took it of others before them. And they again,
received it of their forefathers. Neither can you prove any change of Titles
to have come in between, from the first Apostles and Fathers, to their children
which now do live. Is it not therefore a sufficient defense to us, that thou
can not deny, but the West Church does use, and has (for hundred of years
together) spoken Latiu generally in her Service, and art not able to show,
where she ever used English, Dutch, French, or Spanish? Thy silence in this
question does answer for us. And it should be a demonstration to all reasonable
men, that undoubtedly the public Service here in the Weast was in Latin from
the beginning, Trafitio^ for the (...)
because, no other beginning thereof can be showed, nor the ceasing of those
vulgar Tongues, which (as M. Jewel gets) were once used, can any where be
found, or espied. Thus much should and would be said, if the right way might be
allowed.

But now, present possession makes nothing. And therefore is D. Harding
constrained, to follow ye pleasure of y^ Extorciotier, and to prove, that to be
ours of ancient right: ye long possession whereof without any disturba^ce,
concludes it to be our right. Wherein though he has done very well, yet he
brings nothing, but M. Jewel turns it to a guess, a likelihode, a
conjecture. Which phrases are so common with him, through all this Article, as
though he would admit no Authority or Argument, but such as is taken out of the
Scriptures, or such as should be so evident and invincible, that he could have
no power to answer them. His Phrases are these: M.Harding is not able to prove
this with all his gesses. Jewel.
Again: 160
The Minor he warranteth but by a guess only. 166
Again: Reply is made and that by gesses and likelihods. 180
Again: This guess stands upon two points. And so in other places more.

For this cause, that it may be perceived, whether he also uses not Gheasses,
and that he may learn in time, to be good to others, when he is favorable to
him self: before I speak of D. Hardinges reason, let us a while hold our
peace, and put M. Jewel to answering.

Tell us, I pray you, Sir, for truths sake, you which are so well seen in
Antiquities, and can appose, and press others so ernestly with obscure
questions about the Primitive Church: Is it not reason that you give better
instructions, which find fault with the Catholics opinions? And i^ the
judgment and answer of the whole Church that now is, can not satisfye you:
should you, with any conscience, require your opinion to be received, except ye
bring Demonstrations for it?

Tell us therefore I beseech you, without Gesses, Conjectures, and Like
lihodes, (which you can not away withal,) was the public Service of the
Church, within the six hundred years after Christ, Harding Pol. 74.
in the Syriacal, or Arabike, in the AEgiptian, Ethiopian, Persian, Armenia^,
Scythia^, French, or Britain tongue? Here you may answer unto us:

This is no indifferent dealing. Jew. 165
And again: Suddenly he alters the whole state of the cause, and shifteth his
hands and requires me to show. But, that it may appear you deal plainly,
and seek nothing but truth: Answer I pray you thoroughly and directly. In one
example or two, you are content, but why not in examples for all? For the
Syriacal tongue you speak the most, but why bring you not somewhat for each
of the other? You will refer the rest to an other place (unto which straighte
waits we will follow you) but presently thus you say.

At Paulaes funeral, all the multitude of the City of Palestine met together.
Hierony mus in Epitaphio Pan (...)
The Psalms were song in order, in Hebrewe, Greek, Latin, and Syrian tongue.

Well, here in deed is mention of the Syrian Tongue, and of Psalms song in it.
But how prove you, these Psalms to infer the Common Service in the same
tongue: For, by Psalms, I understand Hymns, Songs, and Praises, made to the
houor of God, and memory of S. Paula. For Theodoretus reports (as you bear
me Lib. 4. cap. 10.
witness) that Ephrem made Hymns and Psalms in the Syrian tongue, And that
the same were song at the solemn Feasts of Martyrs. Lib. 4. ca. 29. Jew. 157
All Psalms therefore, were not the Psalms of David (for Ephrem made new of
his own) and the synginge of Psalms at Paulaes funeral, Here begins M.
Jew. with his ^^sses.
prove not, but by Gheasse, that they were part of the Common Service. And
therefore, though ye have brought forth a place where mention is made of
Psalms in the Syrian tongue: yet do ye not satisfy our demand and
expectation, which ask of Public Service, and look to be, plainly and
evidently answered.

Ye add unto this, a testimony out of S. Augustine, where he wills the
priests to correct the errors of their Latin speech: That the people unto
the thing they plainly understand, may say Amen. And what of this? Jew. 156
This (say you) of S.Augustine, seems to be spoken generally of all Tounges.

To whom seems it? To your self (I think) and your cumpanie only. An other
guess of M. Jew.
And if to any other beside, it should likewise seem so, yet Seeming hangs
but upon Gheasses and lykelihoodes. And therefore is, neither to be used of
you, which are to resolute to allege them: neither to be named against us,
which seek now after your Evidences and perfect Instructions, and must not be
served with Lykelihoodes.

But ye refer us to another place. To that place then will we come, and repete
our question again.

Whether your side is able to show, that the publik Service of the Church in
any nation was (in the Syriacall, or Arabike, or AEgyptia^, AEthiopia^,
Persian, Armenian, Scythian, French, Britain tongue, or) in any other then in
Greek and Latin.

Here you may again find fault as you did before and say: Jew. 15*
He alters cunningly the whole case, and wills me to show. But we shall
desire you again, to be content and yield to our request: If there be such
goodness and pregnancie of your cause, as you speak of, and specially if ye
speak for the better contentation of the Good Christian Reader. But remember
that ye must exidently answer us without Gheasses, and Likelihodes. Go to then,
where begin you?

Eckius says, Jew. 175
the Indians had their Service in the Indian tongue. Durandus says, the Jews
that were Christened had their Service in the Hebrewe tongue.

Call ye this, A contentation of a good Christian Readers mind, to prove unto
him a Conclusion, by those men's sayings, whom, by your example, the better
and perfiter Christian he is, the less he must accept for witnesses? What tell
ye us now, of Eckius and Durandus, whom you make us not to pass upon? More
weke (after M. Jew. mind) the^ (...)
This kind of resoning of there authority, whom you would have us think to be
of no Authority, is more weak and uncertain, then if ye should aim only and
guess at the matter, which we look to be fully quieted in, by your much
reading and learning. Eckius also says no more, Eckius in Locis communibus.
but it was permitted. And he speaks of that which was done a this side the
six hundred years, to the which only, your answer should be referred. And
Dura^dus makes no mention of Jews, as though the celebration of the
mysteries, had been for their sakes done in Hebrew, but of the beginnings of the
primitive Church, in which not only Jews but Gentiles also in great number
came to the faith of Christ, he says generally: In the primitive Church,
Lib. 4. cap. 1.
the Divine Mysteries were celebrated in the Hebrew tongue. Of which we may
justly gather, that every Christian understood not the Service, because more
then Jews were then Christened, and the Hebrewe tongue was not vulgar to any,
saving Jews. So that the tongue which they used in the Divine mysteries, was
strange and unknown unto many, which from Paganisee were converted to Christ.

But Nycolaus de Lyra, Jew. 17^ An other gheasse of M. Jew.
and Thomas of Aquine say (authors whom you think worthy of small credit) the
Common Service, in the Primitive Church, was in the Common vulgar tongue.

This is true, though it were but in the Greek or Latin tongue only. And so
does it not answer our question thoroughly.

But what if D. Harding him self have in plain words confessed, Jew. 17^.
that Common prayers were pronounced in the primitive Church in a Common tongue
known to the people? (...)


But when he shall answer you, that he takes not Common praite^ and Common
Sernice both for one thing, (which without what if I am sure he will do) what
is that, to the question which we put forth* Or how have ye answered, to the
Contentation of your good Christian reader? Thus then, all this hitherto is
little or nothing worth. And we look for stronger arguments at your learned
hands. And therefore perchance you say:

Yet Good Christian Reader for thy better satiffaction, Jew. 176
it may please thee to know, that in the Primitive Church, Far from the
question.
the Common Service was not ministered, by one man alone, but by the Priest and
whole Congregation, altogether.

But was it in any other tongue, then Greek or Latin? This is demanded, to
this you have to answer. And remember here your bluid Senator, Jew. 327
which talked and pointed to the higher end of ye table, ye Mullet which he so
much praised, being far beneth, at the lower end.

Clemens Alexandrinus says, In the Common Prayers they have all, Jew. 176 An
gother ^esse of M. Jew.
as it were, one voice and one mind.

So may they, though it be out of public Service. Also where he talks of
Prayers indefinitely, you add the word (Common) unto them, falthode.
least it should be any thing doubtful. What call you that, a Gheasse, or a
Ieaste?

S. Chrysostom says, Jew. 176 An other Gheasse of M. Jew.
not only the Priest geaueth thanks, but also all the People.

That is, because he is a public Minister, to whose prayers all the people
must join their consentes, so that they are not excused if they think of
other matters when ye priest prays, but are bound to apply their devotions
to his, as in whom they all do serve God. But what is this to the vulgar
Tongue in Public Service?

Isydorus writes thus: Jew. 176 More Gheasses.
when they singe they must singe all togeher, when they pray, they must pray
all together.

He speaks of the Clergy only, that ye need not extend it to the lay
people. And therefore, if you have no better then this, we may well put you to
other proofs. Which are not far of.

For, Jew. 176 More Gheasses.
out of y^ old father Origin, you tell us: That al several nations, pray unto
god and praise him in their mother tongue.

This may be done in Prinat prayers, And our request is, to have sure
arguments for Public Service.

Out of S, Ambrose, There were Jews (say you) which in their Sermons and
Oblations, Jew. 176 More Gheasses.
used sometime the Syrian tongue and some times the Hebrew.

This pertains then to Sermons and Offeringes, not to Common prayers. And it
was, you may perceive, no appointed and set order of Common service, in which
they changed their tongues so, at their pleasures.

Out of S. Basil, ye tell us, of Such, as offered up to the lord the Psalm of
Confession. Jew. 176.
And again, ye number out of him, Egyptians, and both the Countries of Lybia,
and the Thebanes, More Gheasses.
Palestines, Arabi^ns, Phenicians, Syrians, and the borderers of Euphrates, and
generally all, that have VVatchinges, 177.
and Prayers, and Common Psalmodie in estimation.

But to what purpose name ye, al these diverse countries. To make that clear,
which we doubted of? and to prove, y^ the public Service was, at those days,
in so many tongues? By what reason or argument? because al these, had common
Psalmodie in estimation? And who, emonge us, estemeth in not? Take you rather
heed to this, of whose Psalmodie it may be doubted, which have so little
Prayinge, and no watching. But what mean you here, by Common Psalmodie? Think
you that al these countries so several, met in one Place, and song Psalms
together? that is incredible. How then? will you gather this sense of it, that
the same Psalms were read and song every where? Tell us then in what tongue
they were used? And consider, whether one tongue, (as the Greek for example)
might not have served to that purpose? For in the weast now, we know the self
same Psalms, yea and text also, every where to be used. Basil. in epist. ad
Cler. Neocae.
But was not this S. Basiles meaning, that the manner of Watchinge, Prayinge,
and singinge Psalms, should not seem strannge and newly invented, because it
is allowed and practiced in so many and several countries? yes verily this
only is his meaning. for, certain heretics there were then, which stirred up
the minds and stomakes of the Clergy of Neocaesaria, perswadinge them, that
the old manner and Custom of synging Psalms was changed, and saying: At non
erant haec tempore Gregorii Magni. But these things were not in Gregory the
Great his days. Unto whom S. Basil answers, that ye manner of psalmodie which
he uses, is not his particular, but common to him and Egiptians, and both
Contries of Lybia, and the Thebanes etc. But where find you here (M. Jew.)
that these psalms were in the peculiar tongue, of every of these countries,
or that they were of the public Service? S. Basile speaks no further, but
concerning the order of vsinge them, and you make him to bear you witness, in
what tongue those psalms were uttered.

Out of S. Hierome you prove to us, Jew. 177 An other Gheasse of M. Jewels.
That the voices and letters of all nations, do sound out Christ his passion
and Resurrection.

As who shoud say, that, in King Henry the seauenths time, the public Service
in England was not in the Latin tongue, because many English books did entreat
of Christ's passion and Resurrection, and because the people in their vulgar
tongue did speak much of it.

Out of Aeneas Syluius, less then a Gheasse for the Service in the primity^e
Church. Jew. ^77
you say, A voice washeard, as it had been from heaven ^ (And now you begin,
devoutly to hearken to Revelations, though never written in go spell, nor six
hundred years after Christ) Let every spirit praise the lord, and let every
tongue acknowledge him. And that thereupon, the Sclauons we suffered to use
their own tongue in their Common Service.

When chaunsed this? About the year of our Lord eight hundred and three skore.

That is to say, ye come to late by two hundred and threskore years or
thereabout, to prove what was done in the six hundred years after Christ.
Again, such suit, for the Sclauons, as you speak of, to have the Common
Service in their moother tongue, proves what was ordinarily used then to the
contrary in all Christendom. The great stay of the Pope and Cardinals in
grauntinge it, declares how Strange, Needelesse, or daungerouse, the Rulers
of y^ Church, 800. and odd years sense, thought that request to be. The voice
from heaven imports, that it neaded a special sign and testimony to
obtain a dispensation in a matter so extraordinary.

Out of Innocentius, you bring, ye can not tell what. But first what was this
Innocentius? A Pope of Rome. when lyned be? About 300. years sense. And dare
you confirm your cause, with Popes decrees, of so late years? But where,
dehreed ^e this? In the Council of Lateran. That Council, which of all other ye
most detest, as in which Transsubstantiation, was in express terms declared,
and in which the kyngedome (as you will say) of ye Popish Church was defended.
Is it possible then, (to go no further) that, out of that world and Council, a
Decree should be alleged by the which, M. Jewels Schismatic opinion should
be confirmed?

Consider by this one example, (indifferent Reader) how this fellow abuses thy
vnskillfulnesse, or lack of leisure to examine the places, which he allegeth
out of the Ancient fathers, Who so bold as Jewel.
or practice of the Primitive Church: which dares, as it were, at high noone,
and in ye very sight of y^ world, to make men believe, that Innocentius
(forsooth) the third, was a fauorer of their procedinges? And so to interpret
his words and set them forth in great letters, as though he had decreed,
that if (for example) English men, Douch men, French men, Italians, Spaniardes
etc. were mengled together in one City, the Bishope thereof, should provide
meet men, to minister the holy Service, Jew. 177.
ACCORDING TO THE DIVERSITY OF THEIR MANNERS AND TONGVES, which sold be to
say, In English, Douch, French etc.

But does Innocentius mean so? Nay does he say so? for if ye dare to set forth
his words in Latin as though your fidelity should be seen, and yet, in the
Englisshinge of them, corrupt the same words: who may trust you in your
Comment and construction upon them? Prouideant (says he, of the Bishopes of
such Cities or dioceses, where sundry nations dwelled together) viros idoneos
qui secundum diuersitates rituum and linguarum diuina ILLIS offica CELEBRENTET
ECCLESIASTICA SACRAMENTA administre^t, That is, we straightly command, yt the
Bishope of such Cities, provide meet me^, which according to the diuer sitie
of Rites and Tongues, may celebrat ye divine Service unto the^, and minister
the Sacraments of the Church.

But, M. Jew. leaves out quite the interpretation of Illis celebrent may
celebrate unto them: And, M. Jewels falsehoode, and that to (...) but ^ Gheasse.
Ecclesiastica Sacramenta, The Sacraments of the Church making of two verbes
but one, and of two Accusative cases but one: and applienge ye verb to ye
former Accusative case, which should govern y^ later only: and leauinge the
later accusative case, not only without the proper verb to rule it, Jew. 177
but altogether leauinge it out. As in example. We do therefore straightly
command that the Bishopes of such Cities or dioceses provide meet men to
minister (he should have added ye proper accusative case: The Sacraments of
the Church, but it leeketh him not, he leaves it out quite) The holy Service
(he should have put before it the proper verb belonging to it: To celebrate
unto them, the divine or holy Service. for, by saying unto them, the Pope,
signifies, that the people said not the service, but the priest.) ACCORDING
to the diversity of their manners (more plainly it would have been said, their
Rites or Ceremonies) and tongues.

If any man think this omission to be of small importance: I answer, that in
him, which is so curiouse to note in the Margen Rituum and Linguarum, and to
english them in y^ text with great letters, the better to be considered, in
him, it is no small fault to place and construe words at his pleasure, and to
conueygh those away out of the sentence, which being left alone, do open and
expound the whole matter. For interpretinge ye Cano^ truly, your great doub^^
M. Jewel (of According to the University of their manners and tongues) will
easily be answered. for the Bishopes (to make it plain) are commanded, to
provide meet men, to celebrate the divine Service unto the^, According to the
diversity of their manners or Rites, and to minister the Sacraments of the
Church unto them, according to the diversity of their tongues. For as it is
not enough, to bring a simple Italian, (if he (...) be confessed and abso^^ed)
to a priest of the Latin Church, but to such a (...), as understands and
speaks ye Italia^ tongue: So in saying of Service to the same man, it is
enough to keep the Rites and Ceremonies which he has been used unto, in his
own country, and it is not required that it should be said in the Italian
tongue, because in Confession respect is had to singular persons, but in publik
Service ye whole state of the Church is considered. In confession also the
priests go down to men, but in public Service (...) ascend upward to God.
In talking with men our tongue should be known unto them, in praieinge to God
the thief care is of denotion. And therefore, it was not sincerely done of M.
Jew. so to turn, and leave out, the words of this decree: neither are little
omissions in this kind, little faults.

Who then may trust him with expoundinge the words? or what hope might he
have, so to handle the matter, that Innocentius the third, might seem to
condemn his own Church of Rome: and straightly command, that according to
the diversity of manners and tongues the holy Service should be ministered? Was
this law ever put in execution in Rome it self? Was it not an easy matter,
for him being Pope, to do it? Did not sundry nations of diverse tongues mete
in that City together, to geaue him occasion to do it? yet has he not done
it. and the Romans tontinew still their Service in the Latin, though their
vulgar speech be Italian. It appears then that Innocentius had no such
meaning as you devise.

And note the words of the decree. Let meet men be provided, to celebrate and
minister to People of diuers^ Countries, According to the diversity of their
Rites and tongues. Here I would ask, what diversity it speaks of? Such as
was not yet extant in the Church, or such as was presently used? If ye mean
the first: that can not be. for of those Rites which are not yet, who can say,
Let them be served according to the diversity of their Rites! If ye mean the
second, that is, If ye understand, that such diversity of Rites and tongues as
was then all ready found in the Catholic Church, should be used toward ye
people of every country, where diverse nations met together, within one
City or diocese: this proves not, that the English men dwellinge at Rome,
should have a new English Service made for them, but only, The right meaning of
Innocentius decree.
that the like Rites and tongue, as were used in their Country at home, in
their Common Service, should be enjoyed of them in Rome. After the which rate,
the Italians abidinge in Constantinople, should have the Latin Service, and not
the Greek: And the Greeks in Venice, should have the Service after their own
manner, and not after the Latin.

But what is this to our question? for to make it playner, let us suppose yt, a
French man dwellinge then in Rome, with other his country men, would require to
have his Common prayer in the French tongue. To him would I say, by what reason
or consequent do thou require it? Here, let his answer be, how Innocentius
decreed, that every nation should be provided for, according to the diversity
of their manners and tongues. I would ask him again, what manner or tongue
haste thou, in the Church Service in France? If he answered, we have the
French: he should be taken in an open lie, because none was than thought upon.
If he answered, (as ye truth was) we have it in Latin but we have other
fashions in it, then these of Rome have: then should he perceive Innocentius
and the Councels meaning. which was that the celebratinge of public Service,
and ministration of Sacraments, as it was then presently used, in several
Countries: so should it be in a readiness for the men of ye same Countries
(when they met together in one City) according to y^ diversity of their
Rites and tongues.

Therefore if you (M. Jew.) can show by any means, that the Church Service of
England was, at that time, in the English tongue, then may I grant unto you, yt
when ye go to Rome or Constantinople, you may claim the benefit of
Innoce^tius decree to be served English wise. But if you can not find, that in
any of so many several Countries, as may be rekoned, the Service was then in
any other tongue then Greek or Latin, then shall you see it plainly and
necessarily concluded, that every of them was provided for According to the
diversity of Rites and tongue (Tongue, you must mean, which they used in
publik Service, and in Churches, and not in open Market Place, or Pryuate
howses) and yet no one of them all should have other tongue then Greek or
Latin. And therefore, this testimony does nor serve you, nor satisfy us. And
byside this, I must tell you, that were it never so good and fit for your
purpose, yet is it byside your Glory, to use Popes decrees of so late making.

Now to conclude: M. Jew. signifies unto us, that he might allege much more,
even out of Addias him self, Jew. 17*
whom M. Hardinge so much estemeth. But I will only note the complaint of one
John Billet. Whom (I believe) you as much esteem as you do Abdias. A
lamentation of some of histr^^des upon M. Jewel would serve here well, for
Complainte the (...) of John Billet. Jew. 176
But wherein will ye note his complaint? Concerning this case? What case?
whether that, The Common Service was not ministered, by one man alone, but by
the Priest and the whole Congregation together, which is ye thing ye promised
to show? Or that the public Service was, in the six hundred years after
Christ, in any other tongue then Greek or Latin, which question was only
demanded, and unto which, you were content to answer, for the better
Contentation of minds, and better satisfaction of the Reader?

Go to then, what eyleth that, One John Billet, Jew. 178
as you call him, and whereof complayneth he? Mary what shall we do (says he)
in our days, when as there is, either none at al, or very seldom, that
reads or hears, or understands

Understands what? the public Service? no but the Gospel which was readen
in the Service. for the words next before, are, that whereas in the Primitive
Church no man should speak which tongues, unless some were present to expound
them: here of (says he) grew a laudable Custom yt after ye Gospel was read
literally it should straight ways be expounded in the vulgar tongue. And
there upon follows his Complaint: what shall we do in our days etc. He
complains therefore of lack of learning in the Reader or hearer: not of the
unknown Tongue in which the Gospel was read. for if the exposition of it do
follow in ye vulgar tongue, the Custom is laudable. And so hereby is
presupposed, that the Gospel was then in another tongue then vulgar.

But now if the exposition follows not, and few either readers or hearers
understand the Gospel: what is to be done? Verily the suerest way is, to set
more Children to schole, and to make better provision for Scholars, and to
chouse out of Scholars, in to the Clergy. But what is your advise M. Jew.?
mary, yt the Service (I trow) should be in the vulgar tongue. But ye find not
this, in John Billets complaint. And except you gather this Conclusion, how
make ye an end of your process with his testimony? Mark, I pray you (M.
Jewel John Billets conclusion upon his own Complaint. It (seems says he)
It were better now to hold their peace, then so to singe. Lo, he talks of
holdinge their peace in the Church, not of cryenge out in the vulgar tongue.
Neither wisssheth he nor allows he y^ taking up of a new tongue and Service,
but of amending the ignorance of hearers and readers concerning the old. Also
he says, yet more Gh^sses of M. Jewel.
It seems: but determines nothing. And therefore it is a wonder that you
espied not that Gheasse of his, whereby, we (though it made for your purpose)
are not satisfied. And, to be as exact as your self are, he was not within the
first six hundred years after Christ. Therefore you have said hitherto, with all your Gheasses nothing to the purpose, nor proved, that the Service was in
the Primitive Church in some other tongue, then Greek or Latin.

But perchance the nearer you come homeward, y^ better you be instructed. and
therefore leauinge to ask you of the Syrian, Ethiopian, Persian and Armenian
with y^ like, what say you to the French tongue? Was the Service of Gallia,
(now France) in the vulgar tongue, within the six hundred after Christ? It was
not said (you will answer) in such order as M. Harding Gheasseth. Jew. ^84


Do you then tell us without Gheasses I pray you, how it was.

But in a known tongue unto the people. Jewel.


What was that? Speak M. Jewel. Tell us of some certainty, for of al things
you love no Gheasses

That it was in a tongue known unto the people it is evident by Seuerus
Sulpitius. Jewel.


To all or some? for herein consists the very point. To some, we grant, and
that helps you nothing. To all, how prove you, out of Sulpitius, or any
other? Here again you be at a stay. But go ye forth with Sulpitius.

The Reader was shut out, by mean of the thronge. One of the company took the
Psalter, Moregesses for the service in yt vulgar tongue. Jewel.
Read the verse of the Psalm: Out of the mouth of Infantes and Sucklings, thou
have wrought praise. And as soon as that verse was read, the people made a
shout, and the contrary part was confounded. Here we see the practice of the
Church of Gallia.

A proper practice I promise you, that as soon as the verse of the Psalm was
read, the people made a shout. Think you, that this Psalm, and Readinge, of
ye which Sulpitius speaks, was any part of the Public Service? Or think
you, the people to have been so wyld and dissolute at those days, that they
made shoutes, when they were in their Service? But this is enough for you, that
they made a shoute. By which you gather, that they understood what was readde.
Yet do ye not satisfy our question, which is of Public Service, and whether
all the people understood it or no.

But M. The historye which Sulpitius tells, M. Jew. mangleth.
Jewel, if it had pleased you, to have reported this History as Sulpitius
tells it, neither we could wonder at the peoples shoute: neither you make an
argument thereof, that they understood the Church Service. For to add, to
your tale that which lacks, when S. Martyne stood to be Bisshoppe, one of
the chief Bysshopes of the Country (whose name was DEFENSOR) was his
greateste Aduersarye. Sulpitius lib. i. de vita D. Marti.
For which cause, the People being offended with him, when that verse, of
which you speak was readen, in the end of the which, these words are
(according to an old Latin translation) Vt destruas inimicum and defensorem
they hearing the word DEFENSOREM, some for joy (I believe) that it alluded so
rightely to the name of their Aduersarye, and other perchance of Symplicitie,
thinkinge that the Psalm did speak^ of DEFENSOR the Bisshope, made a shoute,
And signified or agreed, that it was happelye spoken. Which, I see not how it
proves the public Service to have been in a known tongue, and all the People
to have understood it. But this I might gather, that the Psalms were then
openly readde in the Latin tongue.

In which thing what is your opinion, M. Jewel? In what tongue (think you)
was the Common Service of the Church of France? You answer: Jew. 148
Whether it were in the vulgar Tongue or in the Latin Tongue, it was a Tongue
known to the People.

But does this answer, agree with your absolute intelligence, which would be
compted to know the state of the Primitive Church so perfectlye: that what so
ever others bring against you, it must be taken for Conjectures only, and
Gheasses? See now, in what darkness of understanding, your self are. And
how much you be to seking, when you be partycularly apposed?

You say of France, that they had their Service in a known tongue: M. Jew. at
a stay.
but what tongue that was, you can not readily tell. And why so? Can ye say
precisely, that all the people understood it (for of all the people our
question is) except ye be sure what tou^ge it was? And if it were in any other
then ye vulgar French, can ye warrant that the whole Congregation understood
it* And mark, that they must not only understand it simply, but also turn it
to their purpose cunnyngly. Except you think, that it was an easy matter for
every body to do (^t the reading of the foresaid verse of the Psalm) to
perceive the allusion and conueyghance, which might be made, from defensorem
the word of the Psalm, to DEFENSOR the Bysshope that resisted S. Martine. And
that in one instant, every man did make the sense of the Psalm to answer and
serve his just indignation against DEFENSOR the Bisshope, and so gave an
uniform shout, for that they goodwills, and the meaning of that verse of the
Psalm, did so happily meet both together.

And if, as I do now tell it, there be thousands which will not perceive it,
forlacke (not of English) but of quick understanding or close attention: who
man think, that all the vulgar people, understood the grace of that fact not
looked for, which Sulpitius declares? Or that they being not able to contain
them selves, for the greatenes and agreablnes which they saw in it, brake out
into a shout or acclamation?

But herein is your craft and subtlety M. Jewel y^, under the generality or
indefitenes of words, ye provide to keep some gappes always open, by which
you may shift from sense to sense, and prolonge the time of your taking. For
where ye can safely say it without espying, that, the service was in the vulgar
tongue: there will you mean by a Strange tou^ge, that which is not vulgar, in
which sense, the Latin tou^ge, in England, is a strange tongue. And where it is
like to be plainly proved against you, that the Common Service was in another
tongue then the vulgar: There, by a Strange tongue, you will understand, not a
contrary to the vulgar, but a contrary to the known tongue, and so in this
sense the Latin is not a Strange tongue in England, because it is
understood of the inhabitours, though not generallye of all.

And so by this kind of Shiftinge in the question of the Common Service of
Gallia, Present shifts at a nead.
where it appears, by that one verse of the Psalm which Seuerus Sulpitius
reherseth, that it was in Latin, there, ye care not for the distinction: but,
whether it were in the vulgar tongue or in the Latin, it was (you say) in a
Tongue known to the people. Jew. 184


But, when we shall come to our own Country of England, and begin to
prove, that Service there, was in Latin: You can not abide to hear it, but
you will needs have it to be in the vulgar Tongue.

Yet ye need not so to answer (if it pleased you) because, if the Latin Tongue
were granted, to have been in the Public Service of England, when Saint
Augustine converted it: Yet might ye as well answer, that the Latin was a
known Tongue there, as you seem easy to be persuaded, that it was a known
Tongue, to all the people in France.

By which your handlynge of the matter, it is most euidente, that you are sure
little or nothing, of the state of the Primitive Church concerning the
Particulars of it, but, that you frame your conclusion to your knowledge.

And where you find, that the Service was in the Latin Tongue, there will you
make, that the Latin was a known Tongue: And where your self can find
nothing, nor your Aduersarye bring for his purpose plain evidence: there
will you rest, and say, that the Common Service was in the Vulgar Tongue
only.

Against which your Determination, if it should be proved hereafter that the
Latin Service was used, even there, where you thought otherwise: then would
you (without all doubt) return to your foresayed place of Evasion, that
Whether it were in the Vulgar Tongue, or in the Latin, it was a Tongue known
to the People.

Now to leave all other Churches of the world, and for your readiness M. Jewel,
and our shortness sake, to speak to you of England only: In what tongue was
the Service there at the beginning? That beginning I mean, when we were first
converted to the faith by S. Augustine? Whom your Simplicity, and holiness, and
mercifulness, and humility above measure, is so good as to judge, to be
unworthy to be called a Saint, Is this your Te Deu^ Laudamus, for S.
Augustines coming in to England, and co^uerting it.
but an Hypocrite, a Superstitious man, Cruel, Bloody, and Proud above
measure, and that by the report of them, which saw him and knew him. As who
should say, that such men were meet vessels, for God to dwell in, and work
the conversion of Idolatours, such as our forefathers (according to the flesh)
were: Or, as though S. Gregorye, which sent him, saw him not, and knew him
not, yea and tried him not better before he sent him, Jew. 185
then any Britains could do, which stomaked and envied his doings, when he
was come nerer unto them: Or, as though this were an high point in your
Schools, when a question is asked of the Service which any Country had at the
first conversion thereof, to defame and slander that Person, which first
converted it, and put forth, to be marked of others, or lightly believe it your
self, the worst that the malice of the enemy could speak against him, without
any counterpoysing of it, with the just and true comme^dations, which, the best
men then living, or the general voice of the world afterward, gave unto him.
To say no more unto you for this blabbing or slaundering, then God reward you
for it, I continue in my question, asking you:

What manner tongue was used in the Common Service of England, at the first
conversion of it? The Latin you will not grant to have been used, though S.
Augustine with other Monks, planted then by likelihoode, no other then the^
selves knew: except you think that they stayed from public Mynistration,
until them selves had learned our English, or ^aught the people with all
speed to understand their Latin) and though S. Gregory reioysed that Alleluya
was song in England.

But, Jew. 185
these be but gheasses, 185.
you say. And Master Harding should not thus mock the world. 186
He knows well a Child would not make such reasons. 188
Again: God wot he might have made it better.

Well Sir, for this purpose I am desirous to hear your answers because ye wot,
they need to be absolute and excellent, which come from your gravity and
learning. If then our Common Service were not in the Latin: was it in ye
Hebrew, or Greek, or any unknown tongue? For ye seem to incline to the
surmises of ye British Chronicles concerning Joseph of Arimathaea, and to the
report of Theodoretus, 167
that S. Paul came into this Island, now called England. So that it is hard
to say, what Antiquities you have in store, concerning this matter.

Yet because y^ greatest part hereof is like to be proved by Surmises, I believe
rather that your final answer will be, that the Service in England, was in
the vulgar English tongue. But how prove you this? So common a thing, as the
public Service, So far and widespred a broad, as the Realm of England is
long and round, So generally planted as you suppose, So diligently remembered
and marked, as people must do, which (by your read) must say Amen, and
understand the Priest when he celebrateth: This to be so taken away, that you
can show no token whether ever it was or no, is it credible, or is it possible?

Can ye the^ blame us, if we ask for some Monumentes and Books, to be showed
out of one place or other, Or if none at all be found, (for no doubt you have
searched and labored) can ye blame us if we doubt of the matter? Yet say you:

O what folly is this?

What to do? Jew. 187 How loath or unable rather M. Jewel is to show any
evidence. Jew. 187
to ask for witnesses in a doubtful matter? And to look for some step of a
foot or token of high way, which thousand thousands have Ordinarily, and
Openly passed by?

But, who is able to show any Book written in English a thousand years a
go?

If ye can not show a whole book, yet show but a piece of the leaf of one:
Or some token or testimonye thereof, that ever any such book was used.

It follows: Or if it could be showed, yet who were able to understand it?

You may see then, how vain it is, to think that the Apostles or their
successors did commit the word of God to vulgar tongues, which being so
subject unto cha^ges could not well be trusted with the preserving of the true
Scriptures. For if the English Service (which undoubtedly, if any such had
been consisted of the holy Scriptures) if it should have had the scriptures
translated into it, there to be kept for the Christians: in what case should we
have been now, being not able to understand that English? Or in what case
should the Scripture it self have been, if, as the propriety of the tongue
was altered, so it should again be interpreted to the capacity of every
generation? Yet ye proceed further.

There is no book to be found of the prayers, Jew. 187
that the Druides made in France, or the Gymnosophistae in India. And will M.
Harding thereof conclude, that therefore the Druides or Gymnosophistae prayed in
Latin?

Druides and Gymnosophistae were Idolatours: and no marvel therefore, though
all their books and Superstitions be gone and consumed. But the Christians
Service in the Vulgar tongue, pertains (you will say) to the substance of
true religion, and could not therefore be so brought to naught, that no
mon^ment thereof should be remaining. Or the Druides also, and the
Gymnosophistes, we know some what, the names (at the least) of them be
preserved, and what men these were, we find it expounded. But of the Service
in English, before now of late, who ever read, who ever heard, who ever thought?

Neither does Doctor Hardinge reason with you after this sort:

There is no old book to be found of the Service in English: It is his manner,
not so good as common.
ergo it was in Latin.

This is but a trick of your Logike M. Jewel, to alter the sense of your
adversary, and form his arguments after your pleasure. But this rather is his
reason. If the Service had been in English, considering the multitude of
books and Churches, some memory would be left of it: But none is found, Ergo
by good consequence there was never any such Service. And you, to shift your
hands of this argument, do make as though his only Demand were, to have
English books of the ancient Service brought forth: and as though his
conclusion should be, if ye showed not ye plain books, Ergo yt service was in
Latin.

But that you may not escape so, I will not ask you for Books, nor Monuments
nor Relikes, nor tokens of the English service: But in this one, and
reasonable, and easy question to be answered, I would feign perceive, what sense
you have or understanding. When you were borne, and long before that, the
Service in England was in the Latin tongue: If therefore it had not ben so, from
the beginning: when began the Latin? when ceased the English?

Doubtless (says D. Harding) some mention would have been made of the time
and causes hereof. Harding Fol. 88.
For, if in the smallest matters of the Church Service, there have been found,
which have noted the particulars, as that Damasus caused the Psalms to be so^g
by sides, and Thelesphorus made Gloria in excelsis to be song, and that S.
Gregory added ye Anthems and Alleluya, and so in every part of the Mass: Is it
possible, yt so great a change of the public Service from English into Latin,
should not be marked of any man, or put in record by any writer?

Was it done suddenly in the night, when al were a sleep? Or in the morning,
did every man forget him self? Or were there no writers then? Or were all
corrupted? Or was there no Heretic, to leave behind him a note of it: but yt
such an evident, and wonder full change of the whole Service, from English, (as
you M. Jewel think) into Latin, should either not be espied, or not committed
to memory? What answer ye now unto this?

Ye answer not one word, ye make, M. Jew. duin, and yet would not be known of
it.
as though ye did not see it, ye pull ye reader from yt matter, to the Druides
of France, and Gymnosophistes of India, ye speak as though D. Harding framed a
direct argument for y^ Latin tongue, and asked you no question of the English
Service. Ye cry out, O what a folly is this. And as though al me^ were foles
(for ye answer not one word to ye principal point) You do not bring so much as
a guess, a conjecture, a likelihode. You steal away though you be eied, and
the question being so reasonable you answer not one word to it. When began yt
Latin Service M. Jewel? when ceased the English? If there be any thing in
record of it, bring it forth: if there be nothing, the^ do I prove yt you are
blind in these matters, and yt al y^ grace of your reply, and force of your
lerning, consists in ri^eling of other men's arguments (an easy matter in
Rhetorike) not in co^firming any of your own, which should not be to sekinge
in a new Gospeller.

Thus have I then discoursed with M. Jewel, about the public Service in the
Syriacall, Egyptian, Ethiopian, Persian, Armenian, Scythian, French or Britain
tongue.

I have asked, whether he could prove any of these to have been used within
the six hundred after Christ.

I have required sure demonstrations, because he contemns Conjectures and
Gheasses.

I have considered both those common places of his, pa. 155. 175. in which he
brings the best and most that he can say for the Co^tentatio^ and
Satisfaction of his reader.

I find no mention of Public Service in any tongue in the primitive Church,
byside Greek or Latin.

He proves his matters by Gheasses, he alleges Authorities and Examples
which were long sense the first six hundred years: to which time we bound him
as he does us.

I bring him to the question of our own country, and leave him not one likely
word which he might answer.

And so (I trust) he will be taken, as he is, for a mouer of contention, about
other men's right and possession, him self hable to bring forth no one scrap
never so little, of any old Evidence to make expressly for his purpose. As for
us, this only, is a very good and sufficient answer, to say: We found at our
coming unto the faith of Christ the Latin Service, of ye Englissh we never
herd before now of late: And surely, A chainge from Englisshe into latin,
could not be but noted in some place: And without evident demonstration to the
contrary, we ought not to be moved with any wind: and so we needed not to
troble our selves any further, but put them to show.

Yet, because D. Harding has not dealt so sparingly, but has been content to
bring good Reason and Authority for that, which was and is sufficiently
defended, with the force and worthiness of Tradition, by which it has been
commended unto us: I therefore also, will put forth and declare, that his
argument, which he prosequuteth most in this Article. That by conferryng the
order and weight of reasonynge on both sides, it may the sooner and better
appear which of y^ two, uses more uncertain Gesses, Co^iectures, and
lykelyhoodes. M. Jewel, who^ I have proved to show nothing for Public Service
in ye vulgar tongue, or D. Harding, which shall be perceived to conclude
directly for y^ public Service in Greek or Latin, and not every vulgar tongue.
First the^, The question is, Jew. 1^1
whether, for the space of 600 years after christ, the people had their Common
prayers i^ a strange tongue, yt they understood not.

D.Hardinge, to make his own purpose plain, answers with a distinction,
that, If M. Jewel means by ye peoples Common Prayers, Hard. 72.
such as they made Como^ly to God in private devotion, he thinks they uttered
the^, in yt tongue which they understood: A distinction of common prayers.
but if he mean by the^, ye public service of ye Church (whereof the most part
has been pronounced by the Bishops, Priests, Deaco^s, and other
Ecclesiastical ministers) he grants yt some of the people understood the
langage thereof, and some understood it not. And so upon this later point
consists yt question. Yet M. Jew. has a quarrel to ye former saying. This
distinction of Common Prayers, is both imperfect and nedeles.

Nay, distinctions can never be nedelesse, where, some Reader, is like to be of
small and plain understanding, and where, ye Adversary is full of words, full of
shifts, full of digressions, full of craking and va^tage making, full of
equiuocatio^s. For see but this one short example. D. Harding grants, Hard.
94
y^ Prayers in the Primitive Church were in a known tongue.

M. Jew. lays hold upon yt word, 175
and reports y^ M. Hard. confesses, that the Common prayers were pronounced,
in a common known tongue. Falsely.
Here therefore, would not a distinction do good yt of Prayers some be Common,
some be private and that D. Harding spoke of private: but M. Jew. draws it to
Common Prayers? yet this is no great matter, (saving for M. Jewels boldness in
addition) because D. harding will in an other place, not refuse yt term of
Common prayers, but confess yt they were, at ye beginning, in a Common tongue.
Jew. 175
But now if upon this grant M. Jewel will begin to triu^ph and say, althoug he
have wa^to^li denied Christ, yet I trow, he will not deni himself. And again M.
Hard. confesses that the common Prayers were pronounced in a Common known
tongue. etc. Now quite contrary, as a man that had vtterli forgotten himself, he
says: The Common service was never said, but either in the Greek tongue, or in
the latin. And again (auouching it with his warrant verily) Verily his
sainges can not stand both together.

After all these sharp spiteful, glorious and bragging words, is not a
distinction needful to declare ye truth of D. Hardings cause and meaning? For,
Common Prayers may be understood two ways First, that Concerning the first
sense, Common prayer was in a tongue known to the people, were they Jews,
Greks, Latins, Aphricans, Frenchmen or Englishmen. Concerning the second it
was in no other tongue, than Greek or Latin: and some understood it, some
understood it not.

How think we then? was it not needful to put this distinction, in the very
beginning of this Article? For by this mean, One distinction (...) M. Jewels
(...).
neither D.Harding has utterly forgotten him self, neither M. Jewel meanly
remembered himself. The plain dealing of the one, is evidently defended, the
blind bragging of the other, is justly abhorred. The liberty of making
distinctions is with reason to be granted, the licensiousnes in confounding of
words and senses, is with conscience to be stopped. And now may D. harding
confess, that the Common Prayers (as they are distinct from Common Service)
were said in a known tongue: neither can M. Jewel gather any special
conclusion thereof, which quite overthrows our whole purpose. Now for the
other part, Jew. 15^.
if the foresayed distinction be imperfect, do you then, M. Jewel, add
somewhat unto it: for take away from it you can not well, as having two
members, and unity being indiuisibill. But what is the reason, where fore you
mislike the distinction?

For the secret Prayers, 15^.
that the faithful make severally by them selves, have ever more ben called
Private, and never Common.

In deed as you utter this matter, there appears no likelihode of cause, why
the Secret Prayers, which the faithful make severally by themselves, should be
called Common. But add this one word Commonly, (which D. Harding expresses,
and on which, the strength and consequence of his saying rests) and then, if
your self can not be ashamed of your craftines, yet other may be warned, by ye
example, to take heed of you. As The secret prayers that the faithful made
Commonly by the^ selves be called Common. What absurdity in this? Or what
va^tage to be taken against it? none surely at al. Yet because it stood not with
your pride and co^te^tiousnes, to let your adversaries distinction freely pass,
with out so^e disprofe, and iustli speak against it you could not, as he proponed
it: therefore ye made as though ye did not see ye place and force of y^ word,
(co^mo^li) but quite leuing it out, ye in fer your reply, as though D. Har. had
said, Secret Prayers be called Common. But percha^ce, though ye disse^ble ye
word (commonly) yet your answer goth rightly against his mening. What answer is
yt? Mary that the secret prayers of the faithful, Jew. 152.
have evermore be^ called common and never private. What if they have been
alwais so called? Is yt a good argument in your conscience? Do ye not your selves
vsurp, such a^ authority and supremacy over al christe^do^, yt ye dare both
speak and do, ye contrary to yt, which has be^ ever more said and practiced?
for what if private prayers have never ben called common? yet yt shall not let,
but you will at your pleasure name the^ so, when you be disposed. And therefore D.
Harding as it seems to me, spoke very warely, in referring the matter to your
meaning only, saying: (If you mean M. Jew. by ye peoples common prayers. etc.
Again: But if by ye common prayers you mean ye public service etc As if he
should say: M. Jewel has ye upper ground above us: what he denies, y^ must we
prove: what he affirms, yt is well proved etc and therefore I will put this
matter to his own meaning and make my distinction accordingli. Byside this they
may for some cause, continuing private, be called common although (which
negative is very hard for you to prove) they were never heretofore so named.
For in England now at this present, i^^ne should say, The Aue Maria is a Common
Prayer, (as at rehearsal whereof thousa^ds among ye people do lift up their
minds toward God) though it be not commonly used in your public service
(for special and pure fear percha^ce lest our Lady should be to much remembered
and Christ less regarded) yet does he not speak truly and proprely y^ does so
say? you think not, I trust, y^ it is a Salutatio^ and Prayers for holy dais
only, or Church only, or Lords and Ladies only: and what fault the^ is it in
speech, when it is Commonly used, to call it a Common prayer? I will say more,
not only Private prayers being commonly said may be and are called common
prayers, and differ from publik service: but also those self same prayers,
which are made openly, in the hearing and sight of other, and unto which they
answer Ame^, are of an other sort and kind, tha^ the Common prayer, as it is
taken for public Service. As, when the Apostles, in the cumpany of a hundred
and twenty persons together, Act. 1.
prayed, that God would show, whether of the two, Joseph or Matthias, he would
choose to take the place of ye ministry and Apostleship, from which Judas the
Traitor had falsely departed: was not that a Common prayer? yet ca^ you not
prove (I believe) that it was a part of their Ordinary and Common Service.

Byside this also, when the Christians met together in the Primitive Church,
among other gifts, which were ple^tifully the^ given by the holyghost, ye gift
of Prayer was one. That is, some one of the cu^pany (and he not always of the
Clergy) graciousely inspired, uttered in the audience of the rest, that form
or matter of Prayer, which the other should learn and follow, being yet to
seking how to do by them selves. And this was in true speech a Common prayer,
yet was it not their Common Service. For in public Service, the Ecclesiastical
ministers do go before and pronounce it, but this was such as lay men
sometimes did utter. Also in Public Service the order is appointed and set,
but in this case of which I speak, the Prayer was not known, before it was
geauen: and they were not every day sure of the giving, the Holyghost always
disposing it by more or less, according to his blessed inspiration.

Seeing therefore, that these kinds of Common Prayers are so distincted, first
in respect

How ca^ he deny y^ first? How does he nor consider y^ second? How much abuses
he his Adversary and his Reader in the third?

For whiles he would have it believed, that Common Prayer is no other thing to
say, then Common Service of the Church: what so ever either Scriptures and
ancient Fathers do prove, Craft in double understanding of a word.
concerning Common Prayer, that it was in the Primitive Church in a known
Tongue: that he draws to Common Service of the Church. And against all
forewarning, and distinction, and reason, he will triumph thereupon, and
crake, that it was every where in a Tongue known to all the people.

For which cause this distinction is the better to be marked, least M. Jew.
through his confusion, trouble the clerenesse of the matter.

Now therefore concerning the other part of D. Hardings distinction, in which
he declares unto you, whereupon he minds to join with you in this third
Article, what say you thereunto? His words be plain:

If you mean by Common prayers the Public Service, Hard. 72.
some understood it, and some understood it not.

Here unawares he implies a repugnance in reason, Jew. 15^
and a manifest contradiction.

Why so? may not both there propositions stand together?

When your felfe do preach, M. Jewel, some, I believe, understand you not,
and some understand you: (for many stand a far of and some nerer unto you) and
some understand not all fine English, yet some understand it well enough.

I will say, further. Your self I think, sometimes understand your self, and
some times ye do not. Yet here is no necessity of contradiction. For they
need not to be contrary sayings one to the other, in which sometimes ye
know where ye be, some times ye speak, you can not tell what.

As, in the Declaming against the Sellinge and Byinge of Masses, you know what
you speak: but in declaring of Christ's Presence in the Sacrament, to be
Reallye, Verily, Substantially, not by imagination etc. and yet by faith Only:
M. Jewel himself understands not M. Jewel. Yet, this is no Contradiction,
neither should that be the fault, which I would therevppon, obiecte unto
you: but this rather that ye go about to destroy the Religion it self, because
of the evil manners of them which profess it: or, that you, which have no
Masters worth the hearing whom ye can or dare name unto us, presume to reach
the Catholic Church, Divinity.

How prove you then, a Contradiction to be implied herein, and a Contradiction
of M. Hardings, where he says: Some understood the Common Service, some
understood it not? For even in England it self when the Latin Service was of
late used, as it had continued hundreds of years together, it was true in
lesser Cities by many degrees than London or Yorck: that some understood it,
some understood it not: yet Latin is not so Common now in England, as it was,
in ye Primitive Church, through all these weast parts, where the Emperor of
Rome had chief jurisdiction and government.

But let us consider, how M. Jewel proves y^ foresaied co^tradiction. For if
some of the people understood it not, how could al ye people say Amen? ^^orthie
(...) Jew. 52.
Ask ye how? I will tell you. The ignorant sort of the people, which for
their lack of lerning, knew no more than their own tongue, and yet for
Ch^rities sake at the least, should think the best of the Churches Service,
they, when the learned began, might join to, their voices and declare by Amen,
that they pray and wish and assent, as their betters do before them. And is
this unlikely or impossible? What shall we then think of ye Amen, which
sounds at Paul's Cross, when some famous and fervent Brother preaches? Does
every one that cries Amen, hear his Prayer? And can ye reprove one for his
good will, in helping forward to make the shoute greater, though he know not
what the matter is: but only believes, that it is well said, what soever that
man of God utters? If there have been found among your peuish Martyrs, which
would dye, they knew not for what, but only that some one whom they loved, died
before them: may not the faithful people answer to the Quiers Amen, them
selves understanding not what was spoken, but trusting the others knowledge and
Authority?

Again, what necessity that all the people should say, Amen* Or who makes a
conclusion so general? Surely not D. Harding. And therefore he for his part
uttered no Contradiction. Who then? M. Jewel by likelihode will tell us. Jew.
152.


S. Paul's words be plain. How shall the unlearned say Amen to thy thanks
giving? For he knows not, what thou say. This renneth directly against M.
Harding. All the people gave their assent and said Amen etc.

How have you proved, that All? By S. Paul's words? First he has not this word
All. The Apostle falsify to by M. Jewel.
The^ you falsify him, because he should not make directly against your
purposse. For his words are not, how shall the unlearned say Amen. But how shall
he that SVPPLIETH the PLACE of the Idiote and unlearned say Amen? He speaks
not therefore generally: nor of al ye people? but, he notes by special words
so^e distinct persons, which stood and answered in the place and stead of ye
people. It is rather and trulier gathered by this place of S. Paul, (if you
corrupt him not) yt all ye people did not answer Ame^ ordinarily: but y^ others
there were appointed, to supply their place. And so may D. Harding repete his
proposition again, (as he does) and say without reproach of co^tradictio^:

Isaye, that the Service was in a tongue, which some people understood and some
understood not:

And M. Jewel in reproving him for it has done nothing else, but showed his
egernes and his feebleness.

But what means D. Harding by it, yt the Service was in a known tongue:
which some people understood, and some understood not? Whether intends he
some subtlety, and will play such a part as M. Jewel often times does, in
hyding his purpose under y^ generality of terms: that ye may not be sure where
to find him? No truly. The thing it self does testify the contrary. For
concerning the, Hard. 7^.
Tongue I mean (says he) the Greek tongue and ye Latin tongue. Concerning
those Some, Hard. 77.
which understood it, he means (as it is easy to be perceived) Learned men,
Gentilmen, Merchantes, al of liberal education. Concerning the other Some.
which understood it not, he means, al vplandishe people, Tillers of ground,
heard me^ and women. ^hn^ does he deal plainly and sensibly, And not only
that, but modestly also and quietly. I never read (says he) neither, I think,
M. Jewel etc. that the Common service was in any other barbarous, and vulgar
tongue within the six hundred years after Christ. And here, least error should
rise, by mistaking of terms: I call (says he) al tongues barbarous byside the
Hebrew, Greek, and Latin.

So that it may be well noted, that D. Harding seeks, by distincting of duble
and doutfull words, and by his naming of y^ sense on which he inte^deth to
reason, to have the truth openly known, and shortly to have ye question
perceyned. But M. Jewel works by a contrary sprite, and as before he misliked
with the distinction of Common Prayers: so now he is offended with the
distinction of Tongues, M. Jewel lyketh not distinctions.
where D. Harding places on the one side, Hebrew, Greek and Latin, and on the
other, Barbarous and Vulgar tongues. Of whom he says.

All other tounges byside Greek and Latin he condemns for Barbarous, Jew.
155
by what authority I can not tell.

See the malice of the man, and of the word. Falshode intepeting of words.
He condemns (you say) all other tounges for barbarous. where find ye this?
And if ye find it not, how dare you affirm it, except by Authority, your
self cannot tell what?

I call (says D. Harding) al tounges barbarous and Vulgar etc. Hard. 73.


And that ye might not gather thereof, that he spoke so in reproach and
condemnation of any tongue, he puts before the reason of it, saying:

To be the better understood, I call all tounges barbarous etc.

He sowght not therefore to CONDEMN any Tongue, but to declare, what he would
mean by a Barbarous tou^ge. Neither makes he himself a Controller and Judge
over other men's opinions herein: but an Interpretour of his own. Yet does M.
Jewel so take him up for ye matter, as thought this gear did savor of heresye.
And therefore like a Divine) for con^utation thereof, he goes to ye highest
cause, that is God him self, saying:

For in respect of God there is neither Jew nor Gentile, nor Greek, nor
Barbarous.

If you aleage this as out of the Scripture (as it appears that ye do by the
quotation in the margin and by the distinct lettre in which it is printed)
then must I tell you, that the Apostle names in deed Jew and Greek: but
Gentile or Barbarous he names not, neither speaks he of their diversity in
tounges, but, in religion and affections. But if you allude only to that
place, and by accommodation make a further meaning of it: let it be written
then, in the cursiue letter of your own words, so much as is not expressly
in the Scripture. Yet your saying is true, though your doing be suspicious, and
it makes to this purpose: that one should not condemn an other: But, that
one might not call an other after the proper name of the Country where he was
borne, think you that it is forbidden? Or is it against the blessede and
uniform will and mind of God, to call one Tongue Greek, an other Latin: Or
one pure and ^yne, an other ragged and Barbarous? In respect of God, there is
neither Jew nor Gentile: ergo (you shall see a merueilous conclusion gathered
out of Diuinitye) who soever calls some Jews and some Gentiles, speaks, by
what Authority M. Jewel can not tell. Or else thus, In respect of God there is
neither Greek nor Barbarous: Ergo who so calls one a Greek Tongue, an other
Barbarous, speaks, Master Jewel can not tell by what Authority.

Again, In respect of God, all is one: but in respect of men are not some
Tounges Eloquent, and other Barbarous? And do not your self confess, in this
very place, M. Jew. forgets himself.
of which we speak, that S. Paul, making a full Division of the whole
world, names some Greeks and some Barbarous? Yet in respect of God there is
neither Greek nor Barbarous. pa. 155.
Truly, if D. Hardinge would have made this distinction of his own head
only, you should not yet so curiously have reproved him for it, consideringe
that he says no more but: I call tounges Barbarous etc. And makethe no rule to
the world, And that you have his meaning, thereby expressed unto you. But
least you think him to be singular herein, you shall find in Contradus
Gesnerns (no Papiste I warant you) that:

Barbarae sieve Barbaricae linguae, Con^in suo Michridatis
praeter Graecam and Latinam, omnes dicuntur. Nos etiam Hebraeam excipimus. All
tounges are called Barbarous or barbaricall byside the Greek and Latin: but
we also do except the Hebrew tongue.

I note therefore this much, that you may consider with what Sprite ye proceed:
which will not suffer a Learned man, to separate by commodious distinction, the
three most principal known and learned Tounges, Hebrew, Greek and Latin,
from other baser and Ruder tounges. And that you fetch a far of, such a reason,
to overthwart only his sayings as may serve against the Apostle himself, for
calling some Greeks and some Barbarous.

These things thus presupposed, that Common Prayers and Common Service of the
Church are not al one, and that some there were within the six hundred after
Christ, which understood not the Public Service, and, that all Tounges are
Barbarous and Vulgar, byside Greek and Latin: D. Harding begins to make
arguments for proof of his purpose.

Whereof it may begathered, Jew. 159 How gredye.
that hitherto he has proved nothing.

Much better it might be gathered, that hitherto he has made a plain way to
the matter, by putting aside such doubts, as might come in between through
occasion of words mistaken and misunderstanden. What needs therefore this
bravery? Or what means this hastines? Or why triumphs he, not only before
the victory, but also before battle? Will not M. Jewel suffer a man to make a
preface unto his treatise, And speak some general things pertcining to the
question, before he make his principal argument against it? but he must show
forth his winninges (I can not tell what) and say: hereof it may be gathered,
that he has hitherto proved nothing? There is neither Wit, nor Gravity, not
Commodity, in it, so to hall and put unto him, out of no occasion, that which
may sound to disgracing of the Adversary, and magnifyinge of his own cause.
But to the point of the question.

The chief Argument that D. Harding makes, is of one sort, as if he should
say: The inferior Countries and Churches, followed the same tongue in public
Sernice, which their Mother or Principal Church had: But those inferior
Churches had sundry and several Languages: ergo the vulgar people of the^,
could not understand that general and uniform tongue, of the Principal
Church. This Argument he prosecuteth in order: first by Example of the Greek
Church, then of the Latin: and, before he brings the Examples, he does in
both places signify, what he intends to prove, and by what means or
Propositions he will prove it. And first therefore these are to be considered,
either because they serve to the openinge of the state of this question: either
because it will be perceived by them, what trust is to be given to M. Jewel:
which so desperately (as I may say) does put to and take away from D. Hardings
words, yt to know his falsehoode and Craftines, it should be a good lesson, to
such as love their salvation.

D. Harding, before he shows particularly, what he can say of the Service in
the Greek Church, has these words:

If Ica^ show, yt the people of some countries of ye Greek church which al had
their prayers and Service in ye Greek tongue, The princip^es out of which D.
Harding will deduce his Conclusion, in the question of Public Service.
for ye more part understood not the Greek tongue: the^ have I proved, that I
promised.

In which sentence he declares his intent and purpose, and shows what ye
propositions are, which being proved, will serve that purpose. The first is
this.

The people of some Countries of the

The second is. All the people of those countries had their Common prayers in
the Greek tongue.

This is y^ most, y^ any man ca^ peeke out of those words: except it be an
other as M. Jewel is, which as he can make of nothing somewhat, so does he make
of somewhat al: for thus he gloseth upon the text of D. Hardinges words.

Two proposito^s M. Hardi^g has here chose^ to prove. Jew. 1^9.
the one is that ALL the greek church, had the common Service, More falsho^e of
M. Jewels.
WHOLLY and THOROVGHLY in the Greek tongue.

Here first you lie, For in D. Hardinges sentence, these words, WHOLLY and
THOROVGHLY, are not found at al: and the, WHICH AL, that you seem to take as
spoken of the whole Greek Church, is not thereto referred of D. Harding, but
to the people only of those some Countries, which he mentioned the line before.
And therefore as much difference as there is, between a General and a Special
proposion, Or the people of al Greece, and All the people of some Coutries of
Greece: so great and evident odds there is, between true meaning and M.
Jewels dealing. Now to the other proposition as M. Jewel reherseth it:

The other proposition is, That some whole Countries in the Grekee Church
understood not the Greek tongue. Yet more craft.


Before, you were blamed for addinge, here now are you to be noted for taking
away. But what is that? No small thing surely, nor such as may be spared: but
those very words, which declare the truth and reasonableness of the
proposition. For it is to absolute and unlikely to say, Some whole Countries of
the Greek Church understood not the Greek tongue, but that, for the more
part, (which words M. Jewel suppressed), they understood not the Greek
tongue, that will be true in their judgment, which can consider, how many
Simple, Rude, and Ignorant there are, in every Country, which know no other
then their vulgar tongue: And of the better sort, how many there are, which so
know an other tongue beside their own, that they are not much the wiser for
it. You may see then how dangerous and sore a fellow M. Jewel is.

Now concerning other two propositio^s (which M. Jewel has with like Art
gathered out of D. Hardinges words, about the Latin tongue, as he has done
about the Greek) to make his craft more sensyble, let D. Hardings own words be
plainly set forth.

After that these Countries, Harding Fol. 59.
( says D. Harding speking of ye west church had been instructed in the
Faith, as things grew to perfection, they had their Service accordingly. No
doubt such, as was used in the Churches, from whence their first Apostles and
Preachers were sent. And because, the first Preachers of the Faith came to
these weast parts from Rome, directed some from S. Peter, some from S.
Clement, some others afterward from other Bishops of that sea Apostolic:
they planted and set up in the Countries by them converted, the Service of the
Church of Rome, or some other very like, and that in the Latin Tongue only,
for ought that can be showed to the contrary.

Hereof may be gathered two Propositions.

Propositio^s serving to the question of Public Service.
the weast Churches had such Service, as was used in the Churches, from whence
their first Apostles and Preachers came.

The second, the first planters of the Faith came to these weast parts from
Rome.

But, how does M. Jewel conceive these matters?

His proof (says he) for the Latin Service hangs upon two points. The
first is, that all the Faith of the weast part of the world, came only
from the Bishops of Rome.

First, you be deceived in your numbering, Jew. 167 M. Jew. busy in changing and
sh^fting, and altering and adding.
but the second Proposition by D. Hardinges account. Then, in that second of
D. Hardinges, ye find not these words, ALL THE FAITH OF THE WEST: or these,
CAME ONLY FROM ROME. For that had been nothing else, but to give you an
occasion to slip away from the Principal question, and to enter into an
endless and nedelesse talk, about, ALL THE FAITH to come from, and to come
ONLY from Rome. Which because it was not given, therefore you make it to your
self of your own wit, And reason strongly in ye matter: yt the faith came not
into these quarters, ONLY from because S. Paul planted the faith in England,
Nedelesse proves, of M. Jew. and full of ^heasses.
and also Joseph of Aramathea, (as is surmised by the Brittishe Chronicles: And
because we (the Welshmen you mean) being your self borne in Deuonsheere)
followed the Church of Grecia in keeping of Easter, with such other mighty
Arguments.

The^, for the other part, that AL FAITH came not from Rome, ye press us sore
with Tertullians authority, that Jerusalem was the mother and the Spring of
Religion: as who should think, that Jacob was not father of Joseph, because
Jacob himself was begoten of Isaac: and that Rome could not be mother of the
Weast Churches, because she her self had her Parents out of Jerusalem: Or, as
though D. Harding had stayed upon the question of AL FAITH, and that, ONLY from
Rome, which at, all makes no mention of, AL, or Only: So loosely you have
behaved your self in your first point. let us now consider your second.

The second is, Jew. 167
that the Planters of the same faith ministered the Common Service EVERY WHERE
IN THE LATIN TOVNGE.

This is the first of D. Hardinges Propositions, though M. Jewel make it the
second point: and in D. Hardinges words there is special mention neither of
LATIN TOVNGE, More cha^ging and altering of M. Jew.
neither of EVERY WHERE. But generally he said it, that such Service was in
these west parts: as was used in the Churches from whence their first Apostles
and preachers were sent.

And this might stand, whether they came from Jerusalem, Greece or Rome.
Wherefore he specified nothing, until his second Proposition: where, out of
this Principle, he gathers, that because the faith came in to the Weast from
Rome, and they had the Latin Service: therefore, it should follow by good
reason, that it was also delivered in Latin, where they planted the Christian
Religion.

Consider now (indifferent Reader) how shamefully M. Jewel had disordered these
matters. Of four plain and credible propositions, he has made such a
conueyaunce, by Adding: by Taking away: by making of Particulars General: by
Drawing the General to special points: by Making that first which is second:
by Promoting ye inferior unto ye Superiors place: yt he has left nothing as he
found it, but, as it were of set purpose, labored to make confusion. The su^me
of M. Jewels conueiaunce in ^oure Propositions only.
Al ye people of some countries had their service in Greek, says D. Harding.
He will prove, says M. Jewel, that ALL the Greek Church had it WHOLLY and
THROVGHLY in the Greek tongue.

Some whole Countries for ye more part understood not Greek, quod D. Hard.

Some whole Countries understood not Greek, quod M. Jewel by his gathering.

The faith came into the west from Rome, quod D. Harding.

All the faith came only from Rome, says M. Jewel upon it.

The pla^ters of ye faith set up, in the Countries by the^ converted, such
Service as the^ selves used quod D. Harding.

The planters of the same faith, (quod M. Jewel upon it) ministered the Common
service EVERY WHERE in the LATIN tongue.

What miserable shifting and changing is this? What boldness in ventering?
What Ordinary course in deceiving? Yet this, in deed, is ye way to save himself
from taking, if he ca^ bring the question to such a Generality: yt if he be
driven from one place, he may flee to an other, to make y^ adversary weri of
following, and the Reader weary of loking. For suppose, ye Latin Service were
used in Aphrica, ye vulgar people not understanding it, yet that is not EVERy
WHERE. Suppose it were used in France, yet neither ye proves EVERy WHERE. Come
nearer home to England, and prove it to have been used there, yet very much
lacks of EVERy WHERE. And so may M. Jewel like a bishop in deed not of Sarum
but of the West Church, go from Country to Country, in a strange Visitation,
and never make an end of Interrogatories and Inquisitio^s: until D. Harding
shall satisfy his Lordship in all points, and prove y^ EVERy WHERE IN THE WEST,
the Service was ministered in ye Latin tongue. Which thing I do not say, yt the
Catholics are not able to declare, (but be yt as it may be,) I note ye craft
and cunning of M. Jew. which would draw all things to such a generality or
preciseness of terms, ALL FAITH, ONLy FROM ROME, EVERy WHERE, etc. and in any
part alter, an other man's Propositions.

Thus having declared what the chief Propositions were, which D. Hardinge
thought upon in this Controuersye, and which M. Jewel has so handled, as
though no body would think upon them: Let us now return to that Argument, in
showing of which, the most of this Article consists: And which, if it be
proved accordingly, shall constrain M. Jewel to subscribe. Which although it may
be exemplified in both Churches, Greek and Latin, yet for so much as being
ended in one, it may very easily be applied to the other, and also because I
have already been to long in this Article: I will make it no further, then to
ye Greek church: After this manner.

The less Asia had the Service in the Greek tongue: D. Hard. argument,
against this third Article of M. Jew. Fol. 75.


But sundry Countries of the same Asia understood not the Greek tongue,

Ergo they had their Service in a tongue, which they understood not.

Take heed good Reader ( says M. Jewel) Unless thou eye him well, Jew 160
M. Harding will steal from thee. Again: Here is a fair gloss, but be not
deceived. M. Harding knows well enough, it is but a fallacy, that is to say a
deceitful argument, named in the schools ex meris particularibus, or, A non
distributo ad distributum. Unless he amend the Mayor and make it an universal
and say thus: Al Asia she less had the Service in the Greek tou^ge.

Concerning D. Hardinges knowledge, I believe he puts nothing in print, that
he thinks to be a fallacy. But why, is it a deceytfull Argument? Because it
is named in Schools, ex meris particularibus. Yet the Schools, M. Jew. Logike
more harder then that of the Schools.
I trow, speak not of D. Hardinges argument, neither do they condemn all
Arguments, which consiste of mere particulars. For the Syllogismus, named in
Schools expositorius, is of that making, and therefore your rule (M. Jewel)
has exceptions.

But you find fault with it an other way saying: Or, a non distributo ad
distributum, as though it were to be suspected, that D. Harding (in sayeing,
Asia the Less had the Service in the Greek tongue) had meant to except some
countries thereof: and that therefore it should be need to bid him to put in All,
and amend the proposition. Whereas, within six lines before, Neadlesse fear.
he doubted not to say (All the Greek Church had their Common Service in the
Greek tongue) to put you out of fear (M. Jewel) that he would not deny it of
the less Asia being but a part of the Greek Church, that which he granted of
the whole, and which also you specially marked. marked. How say you also to
this argument? England has the Service in the English tongue, Wales the same
Service that England has: ergo Wales has the Service in the English to^g.

Surely it seems good enough. And though some Protestant of other countries,
(thinking perchance that in the reformed Church of England, every part thereof
is provided for, According to the diversity of Rites and Tounges, as
Innoce^tius has by his understanding, decreed) though he (I say) would tell me,
that it is a deceytful argument named in Schools ex meris particularibus, or, a
non distributo ad distributu^: Yet would I not chainge my mind, but think it
still a good reason, which I see proved so evidently to my face, by the practice
and use of our country, that I can not deny the consequence. Therefore
perchance you are to scrupulous or to curious, M. Jewel in these schole points
of which you speak, or rather, if ye matter should be examined to y^ uttermost,
I think you would be proved obliuious, or worthy to be set again to schole to
learn more Logik. But for shortness sake let ye Mayor be reformed as you
require, as

Al Asia ye less had ye common service in the Greek tongue,

But sundry nations in Asia the less understood not the Greek tongue:

Ergo sundry nations in Asia the less understood not the Common Service.

The argument being now amended in ye point, for which only ye bid your Reader
take heed and eye him well, if both propositions may be proved, the^ shall it
behoue M. Jew. to subscribe. Therefore, to the Mayor and first of the two, what
say you?

That Asia the less had the Service in greek, it is doubted of no man, nor
lernd nor vnlernd. Jew. 160


See, what a good will can do? Now, when you be disposed, you are so fre,
Bountefutty.
y^ rather then fail, the unlearned also shallbe supposed to know y^ Asia the
less had their Service in Greek: which yet, being unlearned, know not what
Asia ye less is, and much less what tongue was there used, a M. years a go.
For how should they come to ye knowledge? by seeing and hearing? they are not
the^ alive now which so do know it. By reading and considering ye books and
records of those days? They are not the^ unlearned which can so do. By
gessing it and gathering it by their own reason, or of an other ma^s talk?
That could not put the^ out of doubt in ye matter. That could not put them out
of doubt in the matter. Yet says M. Jewel, It is doubted of no man, nor
learned nor unlearned. It follows.

But that al Asia the less had throughout in all parts the same Service (why
add you) THROVGHOVT, In all parts, the same Service? Shifts in a readiness
This signifies, that ye have your terms and shifts in a readiness, if
need be. But go ye forward.

If it be denied, M. Hardinge with all his learning, is not hable to prove it.

But you, I trow, are able, and that may be perchance the cause, why you say,
If it be denied. Contentions.
Sparinge, as it were for conscience sake, to deny that which may be proved:
and yet taking that praise away from your adversary, that he should be able to
do it. But what shall we do with your If? A great stir you have kept, in
bidding the Reader take heed. And to eye D. Harding least he steal away, in
examininge the argument, in amending the Mayor: and now when it is, as you
wisshed, and the proposition is full and universal, you steal away in deed
by an If, and can not be certainly eyed, whither ye go or what ye intend.
Yet, because the presumption is very good, that you would not spare your
adversary, if opportunity served, or leese any vantage that might be taken: we
may conceive, that you permit ye Mayor to stand as granted. But yet again,
least hereafter you should drive him in your a^ger to prove it, and flatly then
deny that, which now favorably ye remit unto him, signifyeing only by an If,
the liberty which you have to use more rigor and extremity, but not following
the vantage to the vttermoste: therefore will I tell you sumwhat before hand,
how ye Mayor shall be proved, that you may well think upon a direct answer.

I prove it by this consequence. The first proof of ye Mayor in the principal
argument before said.
All Asia the less was of the Greek church: Ergo they had ye Service in the
Greek Tongue.

The consequence if you will doubt of it follows of that Rule, A definitione
ad definitum. For after ye have declared, What the Greeks church (...).
what this word, Church means, and found, that it includes without
exception all the number of the^, which through ye whole world confess and
profess, one God one faith and one Obedience: after this, I say, when you come
to ye particulars, and define unto us, what ye Greek Church is: you shall be
constrained to mean y^ society and cumpany of the faithful, whose public
Service is in ye Greek tongue.

The antecede^t I neade not prove, Jew. 164
least M. Jewel should call it vanitas vanitatum, and tell us, y^ it is not
denied neither of learned nor unlearned. And yet least he should interpret
this my opinion to be but for a shift and evasion, I will show him good cause,
wherefore I take it. 159.
For, if M. Jewel find no fault with D. Harding, for comprising within the name
of the Greek Church:

That country which properly is called Graecia, Macedonia, Thracia, Asia ye
less and countries adioining, ye provinces allotted to ye Patriarch of
Alexandria in Egypt and of Antiochia in Syria:

I can not fear, yt he will be less indifferent and quiet toward me: which
speak so much within my bounds, and mention no other Countries belonging to the
Greek Church, but only the less Asia.

Beside this, your self, M. Jewel, divide the Church, not only into the Greek
and the Latin: but also in to the Churches of Aethiopia, Scythia, India,
Arabia, Syria, Persia Media, Armenia, and a great number of other countries. In
which part then of al these, is Asia the less? Not in the Latin Church, not in
the cumpasse of Aethiopia, Scythia, India, Arabia, Syria, Persia, Media,
Armenia or any other of ye great number of Countries which you signify. If it
be in any, name it unto us, and show your Authority: yt and if it be not (as in
deed it is manifest by ye borders which learned and expert Writers do note
to be attributed and made unto them) then must all Asia the less be of the
Greek Church.

And again, if throughout al ye less Asia, ye Public Service had not ben in
one common and current Greek, it must have followed, y^ according to ye
diversity of tounges and countries thereof, a distinct interpretation of the
Scriptures, was also provided for the^. For the Public Service consists
chiefly of the Scriptures, as the proper books of Christians (which are to
be, either instructed, Or furthered, Or perfited in the law of God) and as
most proper for that place, where all Profane things set a side, the
Divine Hystoryes, Psalms, Gospels and Lesso^s are to be rehearsed and
considered. Will M. Jewel deny this: how can he? which is so redye to grant
it, M. Jew. a falsifier of councils. 153.
that the belieth two Councels (of Laodic^a and of Carthage) sayeing them to
have decreede, that nothing must be read in the Church to the people, saving
only the Canonical Scriptures. Yet the Council is not so, but, in providing
that no other books should be red there, as in the name of Scriptures, but
only the Canonical Scriptures, it declares, what a singular estimation and
use of them was in the Common Service of the Church.

This Service then, consisting chiefly of Scriptures, must not the people
understand it? By M. Jewels Divinity they must. Ergo the tounges, in which
the Scriptures were then written, should be known unto them. And to bring this
to pass, look how many several Countries were in the less Asia: so many
interpretacions of the Scriptures were made correspondent unto them. But what
shall we now say? Of the interpretation of scriptures into Greek.
For many skore years after Christ there was in all the world but one Greek
interpretation of the Scriptures, and that was made by seauentie Elders of ye
Jews in y^ time of Ptolomeus Philadelphus. After which, there followed six
interpretations: the first of Aquila, the second of Symmachus, y^ third of
Theodotio, Euthymius in praesatione in Psalmos.
ye fourth had no certain Author, and was found in Hiericho. The fifth, was
(without Authors name) found in Nicopolis. The sixte, was made by Lucianus the
Heremite and Martyr, and found in a tower of Nicomedia.

Consider now by this, indifferent Reader, how little store and copy of
Interpretations of Scriptures, was then, when of vij. only so great account is
made: And how little haste was made to set them abroad, which were so kept in
by the Authors: and how great price was then made of them, the finding of
which is so singularly noted.

But let us stay our selves upon those first years, in which there was no
other interpretation of the Scriptures in ye Greek Tongue, but that of the
Septuagintes.

In this case then, did all Churches of Asia the less, use that
Interpretation? They must have used it, or else have none.

Did all understand it? How is it possible, the several Countries and Tounges
in Asia the less, being at the least. xiiij. in number. Forth then: had some
Churches no Service at all, because they understood not the Greek of the
Septuagintes? Or Or had they such Service, Here let M. Jew. show his knowledge.
in which n^ Scripture was read? Either ye must admit this absurdity, either
ye must hold your peace (M. Jewel) for lack of answer, either ye must
subscribe and yield to the Catholics. For, if the Scriptures were then in no
other Greek tongue, then that of the Septuagintes: And if the vulgar people of
diverse Countries and Languages in the less Asia understood not that Greek:
And if without the Scriptures, the Public Service be not made: either the
Service was in that tongue which all the Vulgar people of the less Asia did
not understand, (and then you must subscribe) Or else in some Churches they had
no Service, because they had no Scriptures turned into the Vulgar tongue,
(which is most absurd and unreasonable) Or else you must secretly confess
it, that you can not find, what tongue they used in their Service, or what you
may answer to this Argument.

Thirdly I prove the Mayor, The. iii. pro^e.
by an Induction.

In Smyrna, in Pontus, in Cappadocia, in Lycaonia, in Caria or Thracia, ^t Sic
de singulis, and so in each other Country of the less Asia the Service was in
the Greek tongue:

Ergo (the Mayor follows,) that all the less Asia had their Service in the
Greek tongue.

The Induction is good and lawful, as consisting of a sufficient Enumeration
of particular Countries in the less Asia, with Importing, or Supplying, or
Making good, the rest vnrehersed, by this clause, Et sic de singulis, and so in
each of the rest.

The Antecedent I prove, Jew 161.
concerning those Countries which I named. And I prove it by your warrant (M.
Jewel) because it is surest. Verily, say you, Polycarpus was Bishop of Smyrna,
Gregorius Bishop of Pontus, S. Basil was Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia,
Amphilochius B. of Iconium in Lycaonia, Gregorius S.Basiles brother B. of Nyssa
in Caria or Thracia after your reckoning: All these in sondrye Countries in
Asia preached openly in the Greek tongue, and the vulgar people understood
the^.

I take your Confession, and prove there by, in your Judgment, and every
other Protestants, that the Service also was in the Greek tongue in those
Countries: except you would answer, that they preached in the Greek and known
Tongue, but ministered in an other then Greek or known. And herein I use the
vauntage of your grant, to prove that the Service was in Greek: but that it
was known unto all ye Vulgar people, therein we agree not with you. Yea ye very
Sermons and Trearises of S. Basile, Gregory Nazianzene and Gregory Nissine, as
they are now extant, were not surely understood of the Common people of
those Countries, where they sat Bishops: but were pronounced, to the capacity
of the vulgar audience, in terms most familiar and known, and afterward
penned in the learned Tongue, as well for other Nations as their own
Countries. For the Service being written in the Common Greek, as appears by S.
Basiles Liturgy or Mass, and their books also keeping the same Tongue: it is
impossible, by common reason, that the Vulgar people of Cappadocia, Po^tus and
Caria should understand it, whose language shall be straitewaies proved (in
declaring of the Minor proposition) to have been either Barbarous, that is no
Greek at all: either so corrupt and unclean Greek, that in comparison of the
Tounges, used in the foresaid Liturgy or Sermons, they were (at the least) as
far to seking, what was said: as a vulgar Italian or Frenchman is, when he
hears a Latin Oration.

Concerning now the other Countries which I have not named, you can not
require it of me, to go particularly through them: but your part is to give
an Instance and to name any one, that had not the Service in the Greek tongue:
until which time the Mayor stands in good force, and may well be used of us
for certain, which can not suspect the contrary. Now therefore let us come to
the Minor proposition.

Sundry Nations (says D. Harding) in Asia the less understood not the
Greek. Harding Fol. 75.


But to what end? Jew. 160
for neither this is denied by any of us, nor is it any part of the question.

If ye deny it not, then follows the Conclusion, that sundry Nations in Asia
the less understood not the Common Service: and so the end is, that you must
subscribe. Subscribe
If it be no part of the question, how could you by force thereof, be driven to
yield? But consider what follows.

And yet notwithstanding, Jew. 160
is not M. Harding able to prove it with all his gheasses.

Lo, What a stomach?
he confesses the Proposition to be true, and yet (so contentious he is) he
will stand against D. Harding, that he is not able to prove it. Which stomach
being once taken, what foul shifts will not a man invent, rather then he will
take a double foil: The one, in yelding unto his Aduersarye, the other in not
defending that, which he took upon him to say. But for so much as M. Jewel is
so set, let us prove the Minor, and consider his Answer thereunto.

The Minor is thus declared by ye Acts of the Apostles. Sundry Countries of
Asia the less understood not the learned Greek?


The inhabitors of Cappadocia and Pa^philia are within Asia the less, and each
of them had a distinct and peculiar language. For S. Luke reports, as of
others so also of these, y^ when the Apostles began to speak in diverse tounges,
they were astonished and wondered at ye matter, Act. 2.
saying: A see, are not all these that speak, men of Galilee? and how does
every one of us, hear our Tongue, in which we were borne? The Lycaonians also
are of Asia the less. And S. Luke notes, that the people of Lystris spoke
Lyeaonice, Act. 14.
that is, after the proper and peculiar tongue of the Country of Lycaonia,
whereof Listris was one of the Cities. Ergo, sundry countries of Asia the less
understood not the Greek. What answers M. Jewel? Mary to the first of these
two authorities he says:

What if answer be made, Jew. 16^
that all these rehearsed in the Acts of the Apostles were not diverse Tounges
but rather certain differencies in one Tongue?

Yet more what ifs? Contentious if sing, and striving of M. Jewel.
And are ye not yet at a point, to answer directly neither to Mayor nor to
Minor, but, that in both you must hang upon Ifs? Here may we see, what a
sprite can do. He said that M. Harding is not able to prove his Minor (which he
said to try mastries) and now rather the^ he will seem not to abide by his
word, he neither will hold his Tongue, nor yet speak any thing to the
purpose: but by a what if, he provides that if he be taken tardy, he may not
leese all, but say, I affirmed nothing, but only put forth a case: and if no
man reprove him, that then, his What if, may stand for a perfect Resolution.

But let us consider your saying better. What if answer be made. etc. as
before.

Mary without peradventure, it will be an idle answer and to no effect.

For, to let it pass that S. Luke expressly says, Every one heard them
speak Lingua sua, in his own Tongue, and to grant unto you, that all the
toungs mentioned in the Acts, were not diverse, but that some were distincted
from other, only by certain differencies: Yet those differences were so great,
that the Vulgar people of one Tongue, understood not them of an other: For (I
trust) you mean not such differencies, as are made by reason of Swiftness,
Slownesse, Smothnesse or Hardness, and so furthe of Tounges: but such only as
consist in the variety of Letters, Words and Dialect. In which respect, though
the Tongue of Saxony, Flanders, England and Scotland be one: yet because of a
peculiar Property and Dialect which is in them, the Vulgar Saxons are not only
Strangers to English men, but also to the Flemminges their neighbors: and the
Vulgar Scottesman not only understands not the Flemming, but of the
Sowtherland so nigh unto him, he knows not the words and meaning.

There be about three skore several Countries, that use the Tongue named
Illyrica, but though the kind of the Tongue be one, Gesnerus in Mithridate.
and the difference consiste in Dialecte and propriety only: yet they
understand not one the other, as in example: Hungarians, Moscouites, Polonians,
Sclauons, Bohemians, and caet.

Also, if you will conclude upon this, because the kind of tongue was one, of
some of them which are rehearsed in the Acts of the Apostles, that therefore,
they understood one the other: What miracle call you this to make men astonished
at? And that Cappadocians and Bythinians, hearing the Apostles speaking unto
them in their own Tongue, understood them both at once? Or how could S. Luke
so forget himself, that to commend and set forth the great work and gift of
God showed by ye tounges of the Apostles, he would make a great matter of it,
and say, that: the inhabitants of Po^tus, Cappadocia, Phrygia, Pamphilia, and
Asia were amassed and astonished asking: how do we every one of us here our tongue,
in which we were borne? if in deed these had one natural tongue, and
understood one an other, sauinge for certain odd differences. Cartainly if ye
difference were small, the miracle must needs be small, which S. Luke tells for
great.

If an English man, knowing no other tongue byside his own, and a Welshman, of
ye like knowledge in his natural tongue only, should come together to
Diuinitye Schole in Oxforde, and both of them understand ye Kings Reader, this
were much to be wondered at: but if there come to Paul's Cross, out of each
Sheer in England, several persons, and understand the Preachers English, do
they look one upon an other for it? do they wonder at the working sprite in
him, and say: how do we hear, every one of us, this fellow, which is borne
an English man, to speak our Vulgar tongue? Yet no doubt there is a difference
of speech, between English men of diverse Sheers. But it is not so great, as to
make a miracle when they, English men borne, understand the self same tongue
in an English Preacher.

Now, that in the Acts of the Apostles was a wonderful Strainge and Divine
matter, and ye grace and strength of it consisted herein, that they (whom for
y^ purpose S. Luke rekeneth up) understood at one time, a third person
speakinge unto them, and could not yet understand each the other, speaking
together. Wherefore you may as well confess, M. Jewel, y^ al there expressed
had a diverse language: as ye some had, M. Jew. what if hepeth nothing.
but a certain difference only from other, therein. Because, y^ difference
helps you so little, that we prove thereby ye tongue of Cappadocia, Pontus,
and Asia, to have been so much distinct one from ye other: that the Common
and learned Greek tongue, which was used in the Churches of those selfsame
countries, could not be understood of every vulgar man woman and child, of
those countries.

But let us consider M. Jewels answer, to the other Authority of the Acts of
the Apostles, that we may al under one confute his often repeted Iffinge and
shiftinge. To that of the Lycaonians thus he says:

The people of Lycaonia spoke unto Paul and Barnabas Lycaonice: Ergo, Jew. 164
says M. Harding, they spoke no Greek.

This is one common trik, of your Logike, to peruerte and alter the intent of
your adversary. A common trick of M. Jew.
D. Hardings co^clusio^ will be this: Ergo they understood not the learned Greek
tongue: for to this purpose he allegeth all his Authorities.

Therefore, whether they spoke Greek or no, that is not the matter: but whether
they spoke or understood such Greek, as the Scriptures and Church Service
were then contained in, Or such as we read now in the works and Liturgies of
S. Basile, Gregory Nazianzene, or Chrysostom. Considertherfore (M. Jewel) how
properly ye proceed and argue.

But what if S. Luke had said, they spoke Ionice, Jew. 164
Aeolice, or Dorice, which tounges were adjoining fast upon Lycaonia. would he
therefore conclude they spoke no Greek?

Here lo is a what if, to further the cause. But what seek you by it. M. Jew.
much deceived in his auni^g
M. Jewel? Subpose, go to, that S. Luke, in place of Lycaonice, had written
Ionice, what then? would he therefore (say you of M. Harding) conclude they
spoke no Greek? No forsooth: for he sought not after ye co^clusio^. And Alas
therefore (to take more just pity of you then you can do of others) here has
M. Jewel lost a good Argument.

Again, he knows, that the Greek tongue is divided by the learned therein,
in to five Dialectes: of which Ionica, Aeolica, and Dorica, are three, and
therefore he speaks Greek that speaks in them, but we have no such warrant
for the Lycaonicall Tongue.

Thirdly he might conclude, ye al though they spoke Greek, yet not that which
is Attica or the pure and Common Greek tongue: in which two the Scriptures,
and old Fathers writings, are set forth.

But what talk you of that, which S. Luke might have said, and do not answer
to that, which he has written? These town-(ges say you, meaning Ionica, Aeolica
Dorica) were adjoining fast upon Lycaonia. An Idle reason or talk of M. Jew.
I find no fault with your Cosmographie, but I see not, what end ye bring it
to. For Spain is adjoining fast upon France, yet Spanish and French, are two
sundry languages. And Lycaonia though it should stand in the myddest of Ionium
or Aeolia, it needs not yet, forget it felse and become Ionical or A^olical.

Verily (say you) if a man by way of contention would say, the Lycaonical
tongue was a Corruption or difference of the greek tongue and not a several
tongue of it self (M. Harding should have much a do to prove the contrary.

So should he, to prove that S. Peter was ever at Rome. For what is so plain
or testified, that a Contentious fellow can not say or suppose somewhat, against
it. But this way (one would think) you follow not your self, and therefore you
go warely and wisely forward, with Verily if a man and caet. Yet ye seem to
take, as it were, some cumfort of it: that M. Harding should have much ado with
a Wrangler, if one would contend with him. And suddenly your self begin to
play that part in proving, that the Lycaonians should speak Greek, saying:

Doubtless they whorshipped Jupiter: Here is to be learned how one might go^
inthe way of concention. But M. Jew. does as (...) If (...) etc.
And they had the Greek Sacrifice as it appears by the words of S. Luke.
And it may be credibly gathered that Paul and Barnabas spoke to them in Greek.

Doubtless you have well declared and pith^ly, what a man would say, by way of
Contention. Otherwise, ye might by these reasons prove that ye Romans also
spoke, after a certain corrupt kind of Greek, because they worshipped
Jupiter the God of the Greeks: Alex. ab Alexand genidl. dier, li. 6
And had Greek Sacrifice also, as much as they of Lycaonia, and because S.
Paul wrote to the^ in Greek. and, as it may be credibly gathered, spoke also
unto them in Greek.

Howebeit (say you) whether it were so or otherwise, it imports nothing (why
then reason you so mighte^y about it) saving that M. Harding makes the matter
so certain.

I per^ey (...) then it is one of your cares, A Great (...), and set to resist
how to overthwart D. Harding: And, sauinge that he says it, otherwise you
care not to grant, that the Lycaonians had a several tongue by them selves.
For whether it were so or otherwise, it inporteth nothing, you say. Yet neither
this is, is true, y^ you say: Because, it imports does way^.

For if their tongue were a corrupt Greek (as ye Italia^ or Spanish is a
corrupt Latin) the^ did they not understand psalms and chapi^ters of Scripture
in their Service, which were translated into true and clean Greek only. And if
they had a several Tongue by themselves, much less the^, did they understand,
what was said in the Church.

The question also, is not herein whether, they spoke greek or no: but whether
they understood the learned Greek or no. So y^ understanding therefore al to be
is. And whereas we see by experience at th^^e days, that every Englishman
venderstendeth not ye Scot, nor ye lower countries th^e speak Duch, understand
the high (...) (which yet differ but in (...) we think, y^ every one in Asia y^
spoke greek, un derstode also the proper and our greek: For the pure Greek,
which holy Fathers have written, and in which the Scriptures be preserved, is
comprised within a small cumpasse of Countries, and continues after one manner
still: but the Corrupt and Barbarous Greek extends it self far and wide,
and is, by sundry occasions, altered, every day, wandering further and further
of, from the likeness and vicinitie to the clean and Learned Greek. And
therefore, Ioannes Grammaticus writing purposly of ye Greek Dialectes, him self
being a Greek writer, says, that if ye will take into the number, y^ Dialect
called Co^munis: then are there five of them, Ionica, Attica, Dorica, Aeolica,
Communis. But the barbarous Dialectes (says he) being of great number and far
out of reach, it is not easy to declare. (...).

Yea rather we must not call them Dialects, but tounges. So unlike they were
to other Greek Tounges, not only the Common but also ye peculiare four
Dialectes.

So that if the Lycaonians had a Several tongue, utterly distincted from
Greek, so much will be imported thereby: ye al understood not ye greek Service,
nor yet ye Sermons of Amphilochius, or any other Bishop there if they spoke, as
they write. And if on the other side, they spoke Greek, but yet corruptly and
barbarously, that it self imports so much, that they understood not their
service, which was written in the learned Greek. And as I have said now for
Lycaonia, so may I reason of Cappadocia, Po^tus, Thracia, and prove that
whether the people of that Country spoke Greek or otherwise: yet undoubtedly
they understood not (all of them) the Greek of the Church Service.

Wherefore the Mayor being presupposed as evident, that all Asia the less had
the Service in Greek, (until M. Jewel bring an instance) and M. Jewel helpinge
forward to the proving of it by his grant, that these Countries within it,
Smyrna, Po^tus, Cappadocia, Lycaonia, Caria, had their Sermons and (by
consequence) Service in Greek: The Minor being also abunda^tly proved by D.
Harding, and by me suffcie^tly declared, that sundry Countries in Asia the
less understood not the learned Greek. The Conclusion follows, y^ some
Countries had the Service in that tongue, which was unknown and strainge unto
them, and that Master Jewel mus yield and subscribe. And thus much concerning
the Greek Church.

To speak now of the Latin Church, and to prosequente the forsayed argument by
it also, I think it nedlesse. Either because that which has been spoken of ye
Greek Church, y^ it had ye public Service in ye greek tongue, may easily be
applied to ye Latin Church, to prove the Latin Service there (which once
admitted, M. Jewel will not deny, but that sundry Countries of the same Church
understood not Latin, nor had it as their Vulgar tongue, where upon his
yelding must follow) either because my intent is, not to speak so much, as the
matter geaueth occasion, but shortly to comprehend the Some of that which is
done: Either because the Adversary will be so unable and impotent to answer
that which allreadye is said: that, to troble him with more, were lost lavor.
I may also most iustlye say it, that he is so wilfully disposed and set,
not to yield, and has so many ways, through much Practice of his own, and
help of other Subtle ^eades, To Disso^ble the right Objections, To make
long Answers to Things that were not moved, (...) Authorityes alleged, To
bring all things into plain doubt, or S^^pition thereof: that nothing
shall be brought which he will not (...), except it be very sensible.

For which cause, it had not been evil, never to have mentioned, so much as
I have done of D. Hardinges Arguments, but, by a more compendious way, to
have left them pass by, in silence, and to have stayed in the myddle of this
Article, where, I left Master Jewel, without any good Argument or
Lykelyhoode for his Assertion, Requiringe him to show, what sure Euideneies,
he or his Fryndes could bring forth, in the cause.

Yet for so much as I spared not to declare also, how D. Hardinge has
reasoned, now it remains, not only to consider his Arguments, but also to
compare them: that is, not only to attend and mark what strength they have by
the^ selves, but also how much more force and certayntie they have in resepte
of M. Jewels surmises. Consider it by it self and say:

The Latin Church is therefore called Latin, because of the tongue which is
common and current through it.

Again, in all Italy at the least, the Service was in true Latin, but
undoubtedly the vulgar speech of the whole Country was not pure Latin.

Again: If there had been in the Weast Church any other Tongue then Latin, it
could not, but by some token be apparent and evident, and some fragmentes or
portions, of the Service in the Vulgar tongue would have been preserved, if by
no other means, yet by History.

Consider I say these things in them selves, and it may become a right good
and wise man, not to mistrust, at this present, the use of the Latin Tongue in
Public Service, which he may by so good reason gather to have been used at
the beginning in such Churches, where they that were present, understood it
not. But compare now with this, that on the other side which M. Jewel
alleges, that in Old time they had in their prayers, al, Jew. 176
as it were one voice and one mind: and, that al several nations prayed unto
God and praised him in their own natural and Mother tongue: and, That
watchinges, Prayers and Common Psalmodie, was in estimation in iu^drie
countries, and, That Christ is now the voice of the whole world: Compare, I
say, these allegations with the Authorities of D. Harding, and thou shall
synde, that the odds is so great, that in these of M. Jewels there is no
Testimonye or Reason at all, for Public Service. Yet if this shall not seem so
to his Favorers, and if they will needs defend it, that M. Jewel has spoken
like a Great Clerk to no little purpose, may it please them, to entreat him
to satisfy us a little more, y^ we may understand but of our own Country (to
troble him with no other) when the Englisshe Service ceased, and when the
Latin began.

And if he shall never be able to bring any Token or Argument, that ever it was
in any other Tongue then Latin, Reasonable.
saving of late in King Edward the vj. days, can it with any conscience be
required of a Catholic, to forsake that Order of which the Adversary, with all
his Search or Curiosity, can give no other beginning, but from the founders
of our Christian faith in England? Or will he enforce us to subscribe to his
newly invented manner of Service, which neither we, nor he, did ever Read or
hear, that it was used in any time these fiuetene hundred years?

All other Arguments may be let pass, This one of Tradition being so
available and sufficient, Tradition
that, except we would of set purpose and against all conscience follow new
devises and inventions, we ought not to forsake the Ancient and received Order
in Service.

And therefore to the overthrowing of this third Article, and strieng of a
faithful and Catholic heart, let it be answered to all busy peekers of
quarrels about other men's right: I hold the Latin Service by Tradition, I
believe it came from the first planters of the faith in our country. If I he
deceived, tell me, from whom else, And when, And how, I received it? And show,
by whom, when, And how, the English Service was first received, and
afterward how it decayed?

And if thou can not in these two points, neither speak against the
first, nor show for the second: hold thy peace then like a wise man, and
blame not them which hold advisedly the Latin Service, because they have
received it, And will not Yield rasshly to ye chainging of it into English,
because no Example makes for it.

The fourth Article *
Whether the Bisshope of Rome was, within six hundred years after Christ,
called an Universal Bisshope and head of the Church.
BY what name foeuer, the B. of Rome was then called, if it be plainly proved,
that his Supreme power and Authority over the whole Church, was then
acknowledged and confessed: there is no more to be required or sought for in
this Article. Is not this true? And shall not every quiet and reasonable man,
be contented herewithal? Yes verily. Except we would be brought to that folly,
we must not pass upon the things themselves, but seek only after the names
of them: And discredit the Truth of the matter, for lack of finding the word
which betokens it. Will it please then M. Jewel. to be contented and
answered, if we prove to him the Popes Supreme Authority over the Church:
though we allege not the very terms of Universal Bisshope or head, which he
asks for.

I would some indifferent man would persuade with him, A reasonable requesto
to remit somewhat of ye rigor of his, and extreme hard dealing, that if the
Thing it self be found, and the Term of it to seekinge, yet, he obey the
approved Authority and confound not al order for lack of significant words
to express it by. Yet, he shall have Terms significa^t enough: as
Principality, Primacie, Chief Rule, and such others, as the Fathers use, in
speakinge of the Sea of Rome. Mary, for those two which he requires, he must
not be to hasty upon us, consideringe, that it is not the word that makes a
Thing, but the will of God or act of man. And again, that one Thing may, by
sundry ways of like force, be expressed, y^ if some one lack, some other may
supply it.

Like as therefore in cominge to some one place, that has many ways leadinge
thither, he, should lack either his sight or his reason, which would wrangle
and contend with me, that I am not there, because I know not, or followed not,
that way which he would have taken, and yet I chose (I trow) a good way enough,
which brought me directly to my purpose: So in ye seeking out of the Truth
which is in the things themselves, unto which we are conducted many ways by
variety and copy of words, he that could not deny it me, but that I have the
Matter I sought for, and yet would ask me where is the special word, Head of
the Church which signifies the Popes Supremicie, does by all reason declare,
not, that I am far from my purpose, but that him self is desirous to peeke
quarrels and seek digressions.

Let us be judged then with tolerable indiffere^cie. Has not D. Hardinge
followed a reasonable and allowable order, which, in this question of the
Supremicie, proves the Thing it self, and counts it of no great
importance, to seek for the special words which M. Jew. requires? Is not so
much enough for a quiet Reader? And ye end being attained unto, have we to go
any further? I could prove no. But I do not mistrust, so little Judgment or
Conscience, to be in honest natures. And first therefore I desire this, well to
be remembered and noted, yt ye heretic has no va^tage against ye Catholic,
for his goinge to ye matter, and passinge over Names, and Titles, and words.

Secondly it follows to be marked well, that D. Harding (not, because ye
question it self required it of necessity, but, for that he would satisfy to
the uttermost M. Jewels, or some others, curiosity) he shows out of good
authority the very self names which M. Jewel requires: (Universal bishop
and Head of the Church,) to have been spoken of the B. of Rome, within the
compass of the six hundred years after Christ. But mark it (I pray thee good
Reader) perfitely, that by the conferringe of Person with person, Behauior with
behauior, Chalenger with defender, and Answer with Argument, the triflinge or
earnest dealinge may the better appear, the more nigh these contraries, be in
sight the one of the other.

Now then in the third place, consider, how unreasonably M. Jew. craketh, in
this Article, against him, which by all right was not bound to Names, and
Titles, prouinge the Things them selves, and which afterward, brought forth
the very Names so much asked for: least perchance by M. Jewels triumphinge
there upon, many should certainly believe, we had lost ye victory. Whosoever
therefore will have some examples, where a great show is made of nothing, to
beware in him self of yt folly, let him mark these that follow.

The chief Authority being acknowleged and confessed, ^at. fo. 101.
whether the^ he were called, by either of those names that you deny, or no: it
is not, of great importance.

M. Hardinge seems in part willingly to yield. Jew. 220
Again:

It was as easy a matter for Christ, to give Peter the Power and Title both
together, as to give him the power alone, without the Title.

Here, I can not choose but answer some what, though for desire of shortness I
have and must let many things pass, which might be stayed upon. Who doubts,
but Christ in deed might have given the Title (which M. Jew. finds lackinge)
together with the power and Authority over the Church? yet for so much as he
has not done it, it becomes not us to find any imperfection in his doings:
but to honor them with all Reverence, though we see no reason for them, or with
all humility to think upon them, whether good causes may be brought forth and
alleged for them or no.

And truly, concerning this matter of which we speak, we may rightly judge,
yt because weight and worthiness is in the Things them selves, therefore he
gave the power to S. Peter. As for Names and Titles, because they are so easily
geueu (as appears by styles of Noble men and Princes) his majesty was not
over curiouse in them. Yet, he left not S. Peter without a name of honor also,
saying: Thou shall be called Cephas, Io. 1.
which is interpreted Petrus, a rock or Stone.

Which Title, duly considered, is of more weight and worthiness, than either
the name of Head, Rector, Governor, Prince, Christ gave S. Peter a Title of
dignity and power.
or universal Bishope. Which as they signify a Preeminence above others, so do
they not warrant, a Continuance, a Stedfastnes, a sure Ground to buyld upon,
and a Principal and Chief Stone in the house of God, as Cephas or Petros
(which are to say a Rock) do. for our Savior expressed it, in the hearing
of the twelve, and said to S. Peter only and specially:

Thou art Peter or a Rock, Mat. 16.
and, upon this rock, will I buyld my Church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it. And to thee will I give, the keys of the kingdom of
heavens, and what thing soever thou byndest upon Earth, shall be bound in
heaven: and what thing soever thou loosest upon Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven.

Mary this Title of Universal bishope or Head of the Church, he gave not him
in plain Terms. But what of that? He instituted effectual Sacraments: yet
he never called any of them by the name of Sacrament. He taught men to believe
in the Trinity, yet the word is not found in all scripture. The prophet David
calls the Apostles Princes of all the Earth, Psalm. 44.
yet Christ which gave them Authority over al, says no more but: Go and
Preach the Gospel to al creatures. Mar. 16.
And again, I send you forth as sheep among wolves. Mat. 10.
Again: your master is one, Christ, and al ye, are Brethern: Mat. 23.
and never called them Princes.

How then? Does M. Jew. find an imperfection in Christ's doings? And thinks
he secretly in his heart, that a Power is not well given without a Title? And
that, if him self might have ordered the matter, To anger or troble the
Catholics M. Jewel mak^th objections against God himself.
the Name and Office should have been given, both together? from whence comes
this, that a wretched and a vile creature, has to say any thing against his
Maker? The Catholic Church is co^te^ned, The judgment of ye highest Bishope
in the earth is condemned, and to hinder y^ Pope, And a^ger y^ Catholics, he
is not afraied to dally with Almighty God him self, And to ask of us,
whether it was not an easy matter for him, to give Peter the Power and Title,
al together. That when we shall confess the Title was not given, Either
foolish or blasphemous.
he may infer: Ergo neither the Power. Which argument, If your self M. Jewel
think to be naught, what a wise man are you, so trimly to set it forth? If it
be good, what a Miserable fellow are you, which dare so to speak of him, that
is Alwyse, and Almighty? As though it should not be agreeable, to give a Power
and not the Title. Confess that you have ouershot your self, in making so
much, of a weak reason: Or look to be Answeered accordingly, when him self
shall come in Judgment for such purpose. But let us go forward.

To this Church of Rome, D. Har. Fo. 106.
it is necessary, all that be faithful to repair and come together: for the
mightier Principality of the same. Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3.
Again:

Andrew re^eiued not the Primacie, but Peter. Amb. 2. Cor. 12.
Again,

The Primacie or Principality of the Apostolic Chair, Aug. epi. 162.
has evermore been in force in the Roman Church.

Now mark what M. Jew. concludes. He answers after his manner unto every
one, but he triumphs not therein, but in this, saying:

M. Hardinge trippinge (as he says) so nicely over the Doctors, has not yet
once towched, Jew. 254 Here begins the he and (...).
the thingethat was looked for, and that he has only, and with such affiance,
take in hand For, notwithstanding a great Po^pe of words and the Names of
many holy Fathers, yet has he not hitherto showed, that the Bishope of Rome
within the space o^ six hundred years after Christ, was ever called the
Universal bishope, Or the head of the universal Church, Which thing i^ he
could have showed, I believe he would not so lightly have tripte it over.

See, how ernest he is, upon the name of Universal Bishop. And how sore him
self stumbleth, at one simple word (Tripping.) And how much he craketh, before
the end, that the word he looks for, is not yet showed. But see in an other
place.

D. Harding, from the 108. leaf to the 119. of his book, proves the
necessity of one head, and authority of the Bishope of

By natural reason. By Appeals And then goeinge forward in this matter,
Although it be a childish thing (says he) to stick at the name, any thing
is called by, yet I will bring good witness for these names, UNIVERSAL
BISHOPE and HEAD of the CHVRCH.

This, I trow, should cause M. Jew. to be more calm and quiet, consideringe
that he shall not tarry long, but have the very Names brought forth, which he
craves so much for. But, he must make somewhat of nothing, and seem to be a
Winner, before his adversary join with him. And therefore, he takes him self
to Conjectures and Gheasses, saying:

Here M. Hardinge secretly confesses, Jew. fol. 295. An other copy of
unreasonable crakinge.
that in all he has hitherto alleged, he has not yet found, that the bishop
of Rome was known in the world, within the space of the first six hundred
years after Christ, by the Name, either of the Universal bishop, or of the
Head of the Church.

Well, because you are so importunate and hasty with us upon the foresaid
Titles: I can not stay now, to tell you here again of your crakinge, but will
make speed, to the places which might satisfy your expectation.

D. Hardinge therefore, from the 119. leaf, to the 124. proves, by S.
Gregory, that the Council of Chalcedon called the Bishop of Rome the
universal Bishop: And by S. Chrysostom, S. Hierome, S. Cyrill, and others, he
proves that Peter was called the Head of the Church. Now between he says,
that every where almost, this Name is attributed to S. Peter either in Terms
equivalent, or expressly. Har. fo. 110.


Thereupon, M. Jewel triumphs. Thus he doubts at the matter and stammereth
and faltereth at the beginning. Jew. 30^
But if the B. of Rome were the Head of the Church in deed, More crakinge.
so allowed and taken in the whole world: why was he never expressly and plainly
Named so? Was there no man in the world then, for the space of six hundred
years, able to express his Name; Again. It had been the simpler and plainer
dealinge for M. Hardinge to have said, This Name can not yet be found: and so
to have taken a longer day.

What will you do when you overcome in deed, which although ye stroke be but
cominge, make rekeninge of your gains, And account it half a Victory, for
that it is not more quickly given? But D. Hardinge, before he brings forth
the express Term (Head) to diminish the needeles curiosity of some persons,
he says:

What forces it, Har. fo. 1^1.
whether that very term (HEAD) be found in any ancient writer, or no? And it
follows, But to take away occasion of cavil, I will allege a few places,
where the express Term (HEAD) is attributed to Peter the first B. of Rome.

Here now should M. Jew. be attent, in harkeninge to the Objection. But, as
though all the matter were like to be lost, for lack of a good face to set upon
it, he looks merrily upon the cause, And turns his eye away from that which
is coming against him, And is glad for a thing past and gone, I can not tell
what: Saying.

Gentill reader, Jew. 306
I beseech the, mark well this dealinge. This Name the (Head) of the universal
Church is the (very Thing) that we deny, Fol. 77.
And that M. Hardinge has taken in hand to prove, And boldly avouches, that
he has already plainly showed and proved the same: yet now, in the end,
finding him self destitute, Lycinge and.
he turns it of, as a thing of naught. Again: Within the space of the
first six hundred years, there were in Rome 68. Bishops, Jew. 20
for their Constance in faith, for their virtue and Lerninge, far exceedinge the
rest that have been ^ithence. The Number of them being so great, Bragg^ge out
of measure.
their Learning so no table, their Life so holy, it is marvel M. Hardinge
should not be able to show that any one of them al, in so Long time, was once
caled the (Head) of the Church, and therefore should thus rest upon S. Peter,
who, when he received these Titles was not bishop of Rome, And of whom there is
no question moved.

Here lacks (I confess) no Invention or Exornation. A Title only or two are
sought for. The finding of which, is made to be of Great Importance.

The omnipotency of Christ is considered

The disposition of the Aduersarye (because

The space of six hundred years (whether in that time no man was hable to
express them.)

The number and worthiness of 68. Bisshopes of Rome, (with a special marvel,
y^ M. Hardinge should not be hable to show that any one of them al, in so Long
time was once called Head of the Church.) And all this (with much more, which I
let pass) is considered and Amplified to the most Vantage, As though it would
be said: Good Lord what a fellow is he, that has so opposed all the world? And
how can that be, but of Great force to salvation, about which, so Notable a
Clerk does keep so grievous a Stur?

Yet in very deed, those his Sentences are not Arguments of his well saying,
but rather Copies, of his foul crakinge. Which how vain and insensible it is,
let it now be tried, by indifferent Readers. For, if it had been plainly
Answered unto him, at the beginning: That these forsaied Titles could not be
found, he might (I grant) have Concluded as he does: Jew. 306
Ergo mie assertion is true, (understand verbo tenus, that is, concerning the
outward sound of ye word only) But Crake thereof he could not by any right:
Because he wins no more, but that no such Name was then used: and comes not
to the Thing it self, and Substance of the question. Yea rather, he might be
ashamed, To Look so bygge, And Speak so lowdly, And Provoke so generally, And
Stur about so busily, And geaue great hope of victory, And when all that he
asks, is Granted, to be able to make no other vantage, but only this: Ergo
mie assertion is True. Yea forsooth A worthy Assertion, To prove that, And
stand upon yt, And brag on that, which the Adversary may easily grant,
without any loss of the cause, and you having it yielded unto you, ca^ infer
nothing against ye Popes supremicie.

Take it unto you M. Jew. that the name, Universal Head, is not found: We are
content with y^ sense or Meaning of the name. A Great victory and nothing
taken.
Return you home, from your Great fight, with certain bare Titles and
Letters: And the adversary has not much to complain, keepinge the Thing it
self with him, under other words and Letters.

You have done valiantly, (I trow) to stand against al me^ alive upon two names
and Titles: And we are not much hurted, when, for all your Cost, and Charges,
you have come nothing nigh to ye matter, which by those Names or other, is
imported.

Thus, if D. Hardinge would make short, and grant unto M. Jew. his Assertion:
Yet should he so little make any Bost or Triumph thereof, that the might rather
be ashamed, to leave the Things them selves, and strive upon the bare Names of
them. But, on the other side, now, whereas D. Harding has, not only so
declared the cause of the B. of Rome, that, without seekinge or caringe for the
Names of Universal Bishop or head, he has, plainly proved his Supremicie:
But also has condescended unto M. Jewels Infirmity or Curiosity, And has
brought forth, in convenient place, the very Names themselves which M. Jew.
demands: What modesty or honesty is this, Consider M. Jewels be hauiour.
so, to Triumph, and Crake, as though they were not at al found out and recited?

If he Answered D. Hardinge before he had Read what he had said: he Answered
by happ and not by cunninge: If he Read over this Article, before he began to
Reply against it, how did he not mark, that in the later part thereof, the
very Names which he asks for, are alleged out of the Ancient Fathers? And
then further, how should he, so, either dissemble or trifle, as, to press in
still upon his adversary, with Importunate and Impertine^t askinge for those
Titles, (the place of shewinge the which follows afterward) and thereupon so
solemly to Triumph, as though no such Title were to be found at all, because
they were not found Immediately in the beginning of the Article, but in the
latermost part only thereof?

But here now let us consider, whether M. Jew. as he was hasty in askinge for
those foresaied Titles, whiles the place was not yet come where D. Hardinge
appointed to utter the^: so now, when they are brought forth against him let us
see whether he Shifteth not as fast away from them, as ever he was Inquisitiue
for them, And whether he do not in deed Trip nicely over the Doctors:

Leo the great, Har. fol. 119.
B. of Rome, was called in the Council of Chalcedon by the Name of VNIVRSAL
BISHOP. And this Council was within the six hundred years after Christ: Note
the seven fetches or flinges, or vagaries, or delays or trials how to escape,
Ergo your Assertion M. Jew. is false.

In answeringe to this Argument, first you comfort your self, that this is the
first Testimony of D Hardinges, for proof of the Name it self: with, which M.
Jewel here najetg vefire ge cine (...) Jew. 295
Ergo hitherto, he has nor found it. Much good may it do you if you can make
any thing of it, saving a Beggarly and an Idle Brag.

Then, you signify, that you will stick at the Name it self. Because D.
Hardinge warned you, That ye Thing sufficiently proved, to stick at ye Name
it self was but a Childish point. 3. After this, you cast the Account, Hard.
fol. 119.
that the Council of Chalcedon was holden in the year of our lord 488. Ergo
of the whole number of the six hundred years, Jew. 296.
M Hardinge freely even at the sight, has yielded us back, four hundred eight
skore and eight years (written out at length and not in figures of Arithmetike,
to make the more show) toward the rekeninge. As who should say, he shall not
go back again, And glad I am that there remain but 112. years to account
upon, for the which I will Shift well enough.

Fourthly, He adds that Leo Accuses that whole Council of Ambition, and
that the Apostolic See of Rome, in part allowed it not By which you may
gather, that the Pope the^, much within ye 600. after Christ, took him self to
be of Greater Authority then the whole Council: the Acts whereof, he either
Confirmed or Disalowed by his final sentence.

After this you come to What If, and say: Jew. 297
Again: Why does not M. Hardinge allege, either y^ Place or the Cano^ or the
words? Again. Why geaueth he no Note in the Margin? etc. Mary, because he
went not about to prove his saying by any Canon or decree of ye Council, but
by other sufficient authority.

Now a man would think that by this Jew. 297.
with: Perhaps he will say, this Canon was burnt by some heretics. etc. No M.
Jew. he will not say so: Yet you, as though he were like to say it, do make a
Solemn and Curiouse Confutation of it: How that it were much for him to say
so. And concludinge with a victorious Epiphonema and Acclamation, ye Vaunt and
say. M. Hardinge has no other Council, within 600. years after Christ to
hold by, but only this: and yet the same can not be found.

Well sir, what have ye more to daly upon? Will ye now at length come to the
matter? You have perchance forgot your self, And therefore I will put you in
memory, what you must answer unto.

D. Hardinge, to prove that the B. of Rome has been called by the Name of
Universal bishop, allegeth S. Gregory. You have asked where it is to be found
in the Council, And you would make him to be laughed at, Jew. 198
Or discredited, that He allegeth a Counsel without a Cano^. But he speaks
it expressly yt, you shall look for it, not in ye Counsel, but in S.
GREGORY. What answer ye now?

This is an untruth to beguile the reader. Jew.


Then I beshrew the liar. But, how do you prove it?

For Gregory says not, ^97. Shift.
the bishops in that Council, Saluted, Entitled, Proclaimed, or Called the
bishop of Rome by that name: only he says, the Name of Universal bishop was
Offered by the Council of Chalcedon to the B. of Rome. S. Gregory shameful^
interpreted.
He says they Offered to Call him so, but that they Called him so in deed,
he says not.

What mean you bear by, They OFFERED to call him so? Is OFFERED taken there,
for making a Profer, Or for goinge about to call him so? If it be, how might
this Ridle of yours be perceived? or how might I conceive, that they made such
an Offer? First, they stood up perchance, They looked one upon another, They
turned them selves to yt Presidentes of that Council, They held forth their
hands as if they had somewhat to geaue, They bowed with their bodies, They gaped
and breathed, like me^ very desyrouse and willinge to Offer some what: but
speak they durst not. Who then can tell us, of their Meaning? or who can say,
that those Bishops, by these Gestures, do Intend to call the B. of Rome, an
Universal bishop? For, A thousand other matters there are, which may lie in
the heart of man, before the vtteringe of which, these Profers and Signs do go.

How can M. Jew. then, make us understand it, that the Offers which the Fathers
of the Chalcedo^ Council made, were Proper and Special tokens of the Title
Universal bishop, which they were ready to call him by, And not of some other
thing? Or how can he say, that not Calling him so in deed, they went yet
about it to Call him so? Thinks he, that they had respect so long before, to
his Honesty, And feared to let the Title of Universal bishop to pass their
Lips, least M. Jew. should be constrained to yield and Subscribe, and that
therefore they Offered (no man I believe can tell how) to Call him so, but Called
him not so in deed.

Suppose it M. Jewel (which is probable enough, least by deuienge my case, you
should crst, Alas, then has he lost a good argument) suppose I say, that A
Catholic were before you, And consideringe your owtward Behauior, with
Relation had to your Books, Or otherwise taking Occasion or Indignation,
would think you in his conscience, to be an Hypocrite and A wrangler, And
therewith Offer to call you so: except he veter so much by express word or
writing of his own, Or consent unto it, by sa^e other man's mouth or hand,
could you, with all your Learned Council, be able to change (...) therewithal,
and say that In deed he Called you not so, but yet Offered so to do? No
surely, except ye had A Familiar (which through his subtilitie of Nature, is
able to (...) better of a man's intent and meaning, than the quickest person of
sight and wit in all the word) no mortal Creature is able to know what is
within a man.

Return then, with your consideration, unto the fathers of the Chal^edon
Co^^cell. If they Offered to Call ye B. of Rome universal Bishop, either that
was perceived by their words, either by their writing, or some other plain
Sign. If (...) writing, that confirms the Popes Supremicie better, then if
they had but spoken it, because it tarieth longer, and testifies plainer. If
by words, then undoubtedly they Called him so. But, if they made but a Profer,
and did it not in deed, who could tell you, that their Profer had such a Sense
and Meaning in it? whereas it is impossible to know particularly, what an
other thinks, except it be uttered of the party him self, by some word, Or
Sign as good as his word? And bysides this, If you can say, that their Secret
mind and will was so bent and disposed toward the B. of Rome as you imagine, how
so ever you came by ye knowledge, Yet this is manifest, ye it must not be
absurd for us to geaue him a Singular Reverence and (...), who^ so Great and
Grave a Council thought in their hearts, to excel in authority above others,
and therefore should Offer (to signify their good will) to call him Universal
bishop though in deed they Called him not so.

But who is the Author of this false tale^ M. Jewel. where had he it? Of S.
Gregory, as he says. But does S. Gregory say so? be not these his very
words: Nomen OBLATVM est, the name was OFFERED? Does it not serve the purpose
of which he speaks in those Epistles, that the Name was in deed geauen to
his Predecessors? For he says, that they never consented to reaceue it. But
how could this be, except that very Name, which they refused, had been Offered?
for if they did but Offer to call him so: then did they not yet so call him. and
not calling him by the name, The forsayed shift utterly taken away.
how could the other well refuse, that, which at all was not uttered? But that
this shift of Interpretation may not serve you, mark what S. Gregory writes
unto the Bishop of Constantinople. Lib 4. epist. 38.


Were not the Bishops (as your holiness knows) of this Apostolic see, The
B. of Rome called universal. Oblato honor.
(which by Gods disposinge I serve and attend) called (by the reverend Counsel
of Chalcedo^ VNIVERSALES UNIVERSAL, by an Honor or Name (not sought for, but)
Offered?

Here M. Jewel ye have, that the B. of Rome were called so. S. Gregory
testifies it, his Authority you seem to regard and honor, especially in this
matter of Universal Bishop. Ergo your Assertion is false, following the very
word and Title, which so Cowhartly, and yet Braggingly allwaies you drive us to
find. And now therefore you must Subscribe. Except you will flee from the
word, upon which you have hitherto so much sticked, unto your Meaning upon the
word. Which we would said have you to do: but the^, you could not crake as
you have done, by setting forth your self, under this bare Title of universal
Bishop or Head. etc. which now being found out against you, you begin to seek
more rome because you are pinched, and to extend this word CALLED to signify,
SALVTED, ENTITLED, PROCLAIMED, but this Shift is not yet so current. Howbeit,
great fear there is, least after an other book set forth as big as this
which already is made, by much turning of words, y^ will more often use
ENTITLED and PROCLAIMED in stead of Called, that the question may be, not what
was the^ ^one, but what OPENLY and Ordinarily was ENTITLED and PROCLAIMED.

But let us consider a plainer place against you, and so discover an other
manner of shifting. You stick upon the bare F^ame, and as long as the
Equivalent, and not ye same which you specified, is brought forth, ye insult
still and egg your Aduersarye. What will you say now then, when it shall be
plainly showed? Athanasius, Ischyrio^, Theodorus saluted S. Leo in three sundry
Epistles, by the name of Universal Patriarche: Ergo your Assertion is false
and you must Subscribe. How avoid you? Mary ye confess it to be true.

But of that whole number of six hundred and thirty Bishops, Jew. 298
there assembled, I trow M. Harding is not well able to show, that any one ever
Saluted or Called him so.

Why do you take your question so, that three honest men's Testimonies are not
sufficient, What a (...) and (...)
but you must have a whole Counsel to call the Pope Universal Bishop, Or else
ye will not be consuted? You asked, whether the B. of Rome was then called
universal Bishop. Jew. ^^0
And you limited it not within the compass of General Council. Therefore if
ye will stick to the words, you must Subscribe, Or else confess, that this
was one of the shifts which you kept in store.

But why should you refuse the Testimonies of Athanasius, Ischyrion, and
Theodorus, supposing that it were true, ye in the Council of Chalcedon, no one
called the B. of Rome Universal Bishop? The one of them, Athanasius, was a
Priest, the other two were Deacons. But what of that? You make light of them as
though they were some abiectes of the world, and say:

A strange Priest, Jew. 298
and two poor Deacons in their Private Suits for their Goods and Legacies,
named Leo the Universal Bishop.

Ergo, within six hundred years (...) Christ, there were that Called and
(...) the B. of Rome Universal Bishop. B. (...) ye except against Priests,
and Pore Deacons, and such as have (...) and (...) ye will allow none of the
Clergy for a witness, except he be a Bishop, and sit in a general Council.
Or a (...) and (...) Prelate. Ergo, here again ye stick not to the words of
your question, but (...) a Copy of another kind of your (...).

How say ye now then to S. Peter? He was Bishop of Rome, and he was called
Head of the Church: Ergo, a Bishop of Rome was called Head of the Church.
Have ye any shift for this argument?

But M. Harding knows the case is moved Jew. 308
not of S. Peter, but specially and namely of the bishop of Rome.

But Master D. Harding infers, that S. Peter was Bishop of Rome: ergo your
Assertion is false, if you stick to the bare Letter of your question, and
invent not some otherway to eskape by. But when will M. Jewel be to seeking? For
I dout not (says he)

But M. Harding does remember, Jew. 309
that the question that lies between us, rises not of any Extraordinary Name
once or twice given upon some special Affection: Shiftinge and lying.
but of the usual and known Title of the Bishop of Rome.

How should he remember that, which you were not so Gentle or Wise, to tell
him of? Have ye not always pressed him, with bringing forth of the Name of
universal Bishop* Have ye not misliked with him for it, that he would not be
bound to show the Name, though he brought as much in sense as the Name
imports?

This have ye done through your whole Answer with extreme Craking and
Insultation. And now, when to satisfy your fantastical request, he has
alleged the very Names and Titles, which you vaunted your self so much upon,
as though they were never able to be found in any writer: ye flee to the
Interpretation and Limitation of your question, and stick not to ye plain and
Grammatical construction of it.

And now (see the vanity) your self are able to bring forth good Authority,
where some Bishop of the world was called universal Patriarch, Jew. 30^
Hipocrite.
and that, not by shifting of Terms one for another, but in plain, manifest
and express words, and such as in no wise, may be denied.

Say you so? Why then have you, all this while, made such a matter of findinge
out these Terms universal bishop, and head. etc. as though you would straight
ways subscribe and yield, if you might therein be answered. And why say you so
constantly in an other place, This Name is the very thing that we deny. If
your self have the places for that purpose already prepared and gathered
(undoubtedly to the Great Praise of Jew. ^06.
your Note Book) why do you with such bravery demand them of your
Adversaries? Or with extreme Iniquity, make a Tumult and Stur in men's
consciencies for that word, in which your self do know you are but a Bragger?
For, if the Bishope of Constantinople were called an Universal Patriarch and
caet. how could you mistruste, but as much and with more reason, might have
been said of the B. of Rome, which was (as you confess) the Chief of the
four Patriaches? Or how could you be so earnest, in reprouinge of that Title,
which your wisdom confesses (for a Surplusage to show your great learning
and study) to have been given to baser persons then the B. of Rome is?

If your Conscience were open, through your own sincere and true Dealing, Or
if by the Authorities, which we should allege, you were constrained, outwardly
to express, what ye conceive and co^cele within: then should it be evident in
sight, that ye pass no more for the Names of Universal Bishope, Or Head of
the Universal Church, though a thousand Fathers had geauen them to the B. of of
Rome: then you do regard the Terms, Realy, Verily and truly with such like,
M. Jew. seeks not peace and concord, but con^e^tion and s^^ite.
when they are by Catholic writers attributed to Christ's body in the
Sacrament. And like as when these words, Principality, Primacy, Chief Rule or
Ruler, are proved to have been spoken by old Fathers of ye See of Rome, or B.
there: you turn your self to some dictionary or Etimologico^ of your own or
others, Jewel. 244
and say, A Principal Church, is sometime used of the Fathers in this sense, to
signify a Civil dominion or principality of a City. Again, Primatus is used
for any superioriti or preferme^t above others: Again, Princeps, in the latin
tongue is often used for a man, 245
that, for his virtue or rome, or any singular quality, is to be had in
estimation above others: 246
To be short, whereas you say, being pressed to S. Ambrose authority which
called Damasus y^ B. of Rome, Jew. 306
The Rector and governor of ye church. Let us consider whether the self^ame
form of speech, have be^ applied to any other in like sort. By which shift, you
satisfy ye common readers, until you be again answered to your greater
co^fusio^: so, having in your boso^, Iam sure, lik distinctio^s and
expositio^s, where Universal B. and Head of the church, are sundry ways used,
you would never (if you had been aquiet (...) and lover of truth) so long have
continued, in requiring those very Terms to be allege^, which, as you do
expound them, prove not to you sufficiently ye Popes Supremicy.

You affirm, 194
that, in deed in a kind of speech, both Rome and Antioche, and other great
Cities, famous for Religion, may be called the Head and Spring of the Gospel.
And what shall let you then to turn the^ to phrases, whatsoever Titles be found
attributed to the B. of Rome: and so, by a kind of speech, to make that Common
which is Singular? Whereby it is manifest that ye maintain Contention, and put
those things forth, which you know to be Nedelesse and Weak, and Feeble, only
to try perchance the strength of your Adversaries, to the Comme^dation of your
own Learning, Or Uttering of yt Notes which ye have gathered, Or to oppress
your Answerer with multitude of words and quarrels, yt for the very heaps of
them, being either not Answered at all, Or answered not so speedily, you might
triu^ph i^ y^ mean space, with some probability. For, when y^ Catholics allege
Terms of like force and Equivalent, then will you have no other but the Names
of Universal Bishop and Head etc and then the Name is the thing that you deny.
From o^e corner to an other.
And when those selves same very NAMES are brought before you, then ye make as
though it were no hard matter to have found them out, but then bring you the
like of your own Motion: and then you run to Limitations upon your question,
and to Shiftinge from one point to another, declaringe thereby, that your
sense only is to be considered, although ye peeked the quarrel against the
Word. But where will you stay your self?

For if it were proved, in most ample manner, with all Conditions and
Circumstances (as you by Shiftinge, have now added to the Principal question)
that, the B. of Rome was not called, but Entitled and Proclaimed, not of Priests
and pore Deacons, but of some Rich Prelates sitting in GENERAL COUNCEL, and
that, not once or twice upon favor, but by an Usual and known Style: All this
would not convert M. Jewel. For in the end of this Article these be his words,
Or rather his difinitiue sentence:

Although that which the Pope claymeth, Extre^^ shi^^.
were his very right, yet by his own Judgment, he is whorthie to lose it. For
Pope Gregory says: Priuilegium meretur amittere, qui abutitur potesta^e.
Jew. 31^
He that abuses his authority, is worthy to lose his privilege. And Pope
Siluerius says: Etiam quod habuit amittat, qui quod non accepit, vsurpat. He
that usurps that he received not, let him loose that he had.

Be it so. He, for his own part deserves. Like as the Temporal heads and
Princes of the world, when they do not their office, are worthy of losinge
it. But who shall depose them? It must be done by Law, and not by Insurrection.
And until lawful process against them be ended, the Common Wealths are bound
to obey them, be they never so unworthy. Yet the Princes are made by men, and
raceaue Authority, not immediately from God, but of the Common Wealth which
does choose them. But the Pope, whom Christ him self (without Consent of men
goinge before, or voice of y^ world) has made Head of his Church, throughout
the whole world: who shall take his Privilege from him, if he should be
thereof unworthy?

For the Prerogative and chief Authority geauen by God, must continue, what
soever the party his merits are, The Apostle also saying:

There is no power except it be from God: and obey you, Romans 13.
Prepositours and such as are set over you. Heb. 13.


And if the chosen of God, 1. Reg. 24
King David having Saull at a vantage, besought God to stay his hands, that
him self might not kill him sweringe, that, As trewlye as GOD lives, except
God stroke him, or his time were come to dye, or he should be destroyed in
Battle, he would not lay hands upon the Anointed of God: And if our Savior
Christ commanded the Jews,

To do that which the Scribes and Pharisees did say unto them, though their
living and behavior otherwise was so evil, that he charged them, not to do
as they did,

who dare be so bold, as hurt Or dissobeye, the Anointed of God, The Highest
Bisshoppe in all Christendom, the Successor of S. Peter, lawfullye sutttrg in
Chair and Place, of Instructinge and governing the Faithful? Will the
Superintende^tes of the Church of England do it? By what law and reason? Mary,
y^ Canon law shall be brought forth, 11. quaest. 2. p^iuilegium. and 25. quaest.
2. Sic decet and caet. And M. Jewel shall allege a Gloss or make a Gloss upon
it, Of which the whole Fraternity must conclude, that if it were never so much
proved, that the B. of Rome, was Called in the six hundred years after Christ,
Head of the Universal Church, And though it were his very Right: Ye^, for as
much he abuses his Privilege, he deserves to leese it, And we will have him no
more Obeyed. Fare well he. And so breketh out this fourth Artitle, into
Presumptuons Contempt of Lawful Authority.



word of mouth.

Thirdly, poor Priests and Deacons,

Fourthly, though S. Peter, the first

Fyfthly, if it were given but once Or Usual Style. So must we bring forth a
Proclamation (I trow) Or Scale for it, Or else nothing is done.

Sixthly in a kind of Speech the B. UNIVERSAL. So shail it be but a Phrase
only, and of no weight Or Substance, what so ever be alleged for these Titles
aforsayed.

Last of all, if it were the Popes Right, By which way of violence and force,
if the cause of Religion may be followed, ye will be to strong (M. Jewel) not
only for Oppressed Catholics in these your prosperous days, but also
against quiet Catholics, where they live with the love of their Sovereigns.
But if this must needs seem unreasonable in Professors of a new Gospel,
which take upon them to direct us by the express word of the Lord in the
Right knowledge of all Truth and Honesty: I will trust, that this Detection
of you their Chief man of War, Shifting, Striving, Craking, Dissembling,
Lying, Triumphing. etc. will cause the Indifferent Reader, to Beware of M.
Jewel. ()

Thus ends the First Book.
THE SECOND Book, Declaring by more Special Detection of M. Jewels behavior,
that it is needeful to BEWARE of him.
THE proper Conueiaunce and Art, which M. Jewel has used in the foresayed
Articles, I have for the special points of those questions, shortly and
sufficiently discovered.

For which his conueyance, allthough the Iudifferent or Waueringe minds,
should wisely BEWARE of him, and his own friends and dear brothers the
Protestants, might with a good zeal require of him, either to begin a New
Challenge, Or defend him self better in the Old: And though I my self
might, for these causes, think enough to be already said against him: Yet
because Affection and Love is not only blind in it self, but darkeneth also
the sight of understanding and Reason, that his Favorers will not lightly
perceive his foul fasshions, except they appear both Many, and Great, and
Notable: And because the weaker and doubtfuller in such matter, are not
satisfied with suffiente, but require abundauce and euidencie: I will for these
two sorts of men's sakes, declare yet further and plainer, what Worthiness is
in M. Jewels Replye.

Of the Common Places which M. Jewel has ouercharged his book withal, in the
first four Articles. CAP. I.
FIrst, concerning the outward show only and face of his book, it is so great
in quantitye, so fair in sight, and so Lively (as I may say) by reso^ of many
Allegations and Authorities, out of Councels, Fathers, Histories, Law Civil and
Canon, and the Gloss also thereupon: that it cummeeh very quickly into ones
mind, to think: that, a matter of nothing, should not increase to such
bygnes, nor an evil favored cause so well be set forth, nor Ancient witnesses
be so thickly brought out to no purpose.

And this I take to be one knacke of his cunning, that he provided to make his
Reply in such a form, as might dehort some from the Reading (because of the
length thereof not agreinge with their great business) And amase other in
reading (because it cumbreth the memory with so many matters) And get some
renoune and praise to his own side, though there followed no Reading (because
it will be commonly believed, that, I trow) in making so many words, he is not
to seeking of an Answer.

And if he will not have me to call it, a knacke of his Cunning, then surely
will it be proved to be, a Lack of discretion: so that he shall not escape
just reproach, either for his craftines, if he perceived it, either for his
dullness, if he did not consider it. For the biggnesse of a book is not
reproueable, if according to the nature of the matter, the handeling of it be
proportioned. But, whosoever increases his work above mesure, by taking in
that which is not agreeable: either he is to wise for the Simple, by making them
conceive much of that which is little: Or he is not wise enough in the
judgment of the Learned, by puffinge that up to a great quantity, which
would, by reason, be less in Sight and more in Substance.

But let us, first, make our Objection and also prove it, and then,
afterward, consider whether it does argue, a Craftines rather, or a dullnes
to be found in M. Jewels Invention.

I lay it then unto your fault, that ye have ouercharged your Book, with
Common Places and Impertinent.

And, because I would be, mye self, the better perceived, and you also
thereby, should be directed, the more Orderly to make your Answer: I take your
Common Places to be of two kinds.

The one consystethe of Things, which we may use as well as you: And to the
using of which, you do peeke an Occasion out of the Question it self,
though you need not yet to use it at all, or else more Discretelye, should
have used it.

And these I call Common Places.

The other consists of such Matters, as we can not, or may not use, and
which you also should, at no time, follow, though it be most familiar with
you. And if at any other time you might, yet in the case of these Articles
which are proponed, you had no occasion to use them.

And these I call digressions, not because the foresayed places might not run
under that Title: but because in them, you may pretend some excuse, and here
you can bring none.

To begin therefore with your Common places, you are surely no niggard of them.
Out it gothe, upon never so little occasion, that which you have gathered, and
if none at all be expressly offered, yet you will make one, rather then not
utter your cunning. Will you have a few notes of them? I could serve you, with
a hundred and odd, gathered out of one half only of your book and no more.
But these few, which I shall reckon may be sufficient, both to prove my
objection true, and cause you to amend that fault hereafter.

Jewel. Page 15 Every man ought to prepare himself,before he come to God.
Jewel. Page 25. The example of Christ must be followed. Jewel. Page 28 The
company of Communicantes was called Communio. Jewel. Page 28.The wicked
Communicate together. Jewel. Page 45. Small faults are not to be contemned.
Jewel. Page 52. Heretics have alleged Custom. Jewel. Page 66. Deceauers
blase their doings by the names of famous men. Jewel. Page 89 The company of
Priests was great in the old time. Jewel. Page 94 The people in old time did
Communicate. Jewel. Page 101 We must be obedient to God. Jewel. Page 107 We
must not hang upon the authority of mortal men. Jewel. Page 111 Christ's
institution must be kept. Jewel. Page 118 Gods holy spirit blows, where it
thinks good. Jewel. Page 127 The fewer places must be expounded by the more.
Jewel. Page 131 The mysteries were kept in both kinds. Jewel. Page 141 Many
abuses have been about the mysteries. Jewel. Page 143 Having Gods word we
want no authority. Jewel. Page 162 All the East spoke not one tongue. Jewel.
Page 167 Religion came not first from Rome. Jewel. Page 171 God looks not for
utterance of voice. Jewel. Page 181 The people of Hyppo spoke Latin. Jewel.
Page 204 Appeal is to be made to the Church in doubtful cases. Jewel. Page
210 Great profit in reading of Scriptures. Jewel. Page 216 Ignorance is the
mother of errors. Jewel. Page 229 One Bishop must be in one City. Jewel. Page
230 Vniuersa Fraternitas, the whole brotherhoode, signifies the company
within every several and particular Diocese. 241 Princes have been favorable
to Bishops. Papa in old time signified Father, and was given generally to all
Bishopes. 242 The prerogative to sit before other, is called (...). 259 In the
old times, men that stood in doubt, sought unto the best learned. 263 The
Bishopes of other Countries called the Bishope of Rome brother, or fellow. 280
It is lawful for Bishopes, to exco^municat. 281 Bishopes have the alowing, of
the Election or consecration of Bishops. 295 Every great Metropolitan City
within her own Province, may be honored with the Title of Mother Church. 300
The Title (Universal) has been given to some Bishops.
These be your Common places, M. Jewel: but these, by the third part, are not
all that I do find in half your book. And if they were all, yet they might
have occupied, by very many parts, less room in your Book, then they do.
What cause then, why you dilated them so much?

Let us come to one or two particulars. That Christ's Institution is to be
kept, is one of your Common places. An other is. That the people of old time
did Communicate with the Priest.

The first of these you speak much for, and allege to that purpose:

Jew. 25 S. Paul. 1. Cor* 11. Jew. 60 S. Hierom in. 1. Cor. 11. Jew. 91 S.
Matthe. 26. Jew. 111 S. Chrysostom. Ho. 61 Ad Po. Antioch. Jew. 143 S. Cyprian.
li. 2. Ep. 3. and, ad Iubaianum. Jew. 144 And again, S.Cyprian. li. 2. Ep. 3.
Jew. 150 S. Hierom ad Galat. li. 3. ca. 5. S. Hylar. ad Constable. Augustum. S.
Augustine. de vnitate Ecclesiae. And, S.Cyprian once again: lib. 2. Epi. 3.
Besides Indignations and Inuectiues of your own against the Catholics in
this matter, as though they could not abide Christ's Institution.

In following of which Place, if you had spared your self and bestowed that
Time and Labor in defynyng of Christ's Institution unto us, which you wasted to
no purpose in proving that it must be observed, it had been well spent of you and
as we Looked for: but to prove that which is not doubted of, and to leave the
doubt unresolved, which only is moved, it serves to make the Reply Great,
but not to make it perfect and full.

The second you prove by S. James Lyturgie, Jew. 11.
Abdias in vita S. I homae, 30.
and S. Matthei, Justinius Mart. Apol. 2. 37.
Dionys. Eccl. Hist. cap. 3. S. Basil. Lyturgie, 38.
S. Chrisostomes Lyturgie. 42.
S. Ignatius ad Philad. S. Paul. 2. Cor. 10. 78.
S. Hierome 1. Cor. 11. S. Chrysostom. 1. Cor. Hom. 27. 94.
S. August. In Joan. tract. 26. S. Chrysostom 1. Cor. Hom. 24. S. Cyprian ad
Magnum. S. Cyril in Joan. lib. 11. cap. 26. S. Hierom in Eccl. cap. 3. Iusti.
Martyr Apol. 2. Council Agathe^se cap. 60. epist. Decret. Syricij. S.Hierom in
1. Cor. 11. S.Ambro. 1. Cor. 11. Canon Apost. cap. 9. And by the Canon law it
self, the authority whereof you do despise: De Consecr. distin. 2. Peracta.
distin. 2. Episcopus distin. 2. Si non. distin. 2. Si quis.

Bysides these you allege. S. Clement Ep. 2. S. Augustine. lib. 2. de sermon.
Dom. in monte. S.August. in psalm. 16. Clemens. Stro. lib. 1. S. Chrysos. 1.
Cor. Hom. 27. S.Chrysostom. 2. Cor. Hom. 18. S. Gregori Dialog. lib. 2. cap. 23.
And when you have al done, no man doubts of it.

What means it then, that you in so Many Places, so Abundantly, and so
Exactly, have commended and set forth these two Conclusions? Thought you the
Catholics to be so wicked, that, they would contemn, Of al naught chose the
least, and it would be amended. 1
either you hoped thereby to make some think well of your Cunning (and that
was a crafty Invention) Or else without further respect to any your Vantage, you
busied only your self in a Needelesse Matter: And that was a plain Vanity.

Now, if it was not, neither for lack of Conscience in you, nor for lack of
Intelligence, that you have taken so great a pain to prove most undoubted
and clear Conclusions: it remains that you Answer my Objection by some
likely cause and reason, And show, wherefore you have been so Long and
Tediouse in copiouse and often repeted prouinge of a plain Conclusion. Until
which time it is casie to be perceived: that these Common Places of yours keep
a Vain and Superfluous sturr in your Reply to D. Harding.

*Note. COncerning this later Common place so lernedly proved by M. Jewel,
beware of this One Argument.

There was always a Communion in the Primitive Church: Ergo there was no Mass.

For as the world goes now, this word A Communion, does signify, either the
act of some receiving together, either that proper kind of Service, which is
now used in England at the Ministration of the Lords Supper.

In the first of these, two senses, true it is that A Communion was I can not
say, always, but no inconvenience will follow if it be granted that it was
always in the primityue Church. And that it was very Common and Ordinary, the
heap of the Authorities by M. Jewel rehearsed, do make for it.

In the second: It was never known in the primitive Church: And no One of all the places which M. Jewel has gathered, does conte^e so much. Again,
concerning the first: The Argument is very false. For even at these days, A
Mass and A Communion do agree in sight together, at such times as the People
receive with the Priest at the Altar.

Concerning the second: the Argument is good but the Antecedent can never be
proved: that in the Primityue Church such (a Single and Simple, and Irreuerent,
and Dead) Ministration of the Dyuine Mysteries was used then, as is taken up in
the Englisshe Communion at this present.



Of M. Jewels Digressions. CAP. II.
Concerning now ye other kind of your common places, which I do rightly call
Digressions, they are so frequented of you, as though ye found some special
Cumfort in them, after werinesse taken in other things: And they are so
Outrageous, as though you went not for a Bishope of Sarisburie, but were some
Slau^derous, Fumisshe, And unlearned Protestant: And to the matter proponed they
are so Impertinent, that you may Lawfully be charged with the fault, of
increasing your Reply with them. Have you so much Leisure (M. Jewel) to spend
your labor, in Extrauaga^tes? Or if your Leisure served you never so much,
have you so little discretion, to occupy your time in naughty and idle talk?

In your Answer, to D.Hardinges Preface, straitewayes you peeke out of ye
Gloss, (which is nor Scripture nor Canon, Jew. fol. 1 page 1
nor Doctors sentence) A Slander against the Pope: And to make yt matter more
odious, you utter it, as spoken by the Pope him self with his own mouth, I can
not err. etc. Which in deed neither he ever said, neither they which spoke it
of him, took in such sense as you do imagine.

Fol. 2. page 2. In the same answer, you put D. Harding again, in remembrance
of the Pope, and you speak your pleasure of him, alleging A Gloss for your
authority.

Pagina 2. and 6. Of your Reply, Again you be up with the Pope.

To what great Purpose, Or upon what Occasion, your self perchance do know:
but unto us, it seems an unreasonable and shameful matter, to Accuse any
Person, out of the Lawful Court, Out of Season and Reason.
And to speak against the Pope, Cardinals, Priests etc. when other questions
are to be handeled.

Your part and duty had been, to answer unto D.Hardinges Arguments: And not to
turn your mind to finding of Faults. Remember yet, how often ye use that Lewd
figure, of speaking against Things and Persons out of place: As,

Page 11 Against. The Clergy. Page 16 Against. Confession, and Priests. Page
18 Against. The Scholemen. Page 24 Against. The Ceremonies of the Church. Page
39 Against. The B. of Rome. Page 40 Against. The B. of Rome. Page 52 Against.
S. Hierome, Tertullian, Origin, and against Relics. Page 56 Against. Pope,
Cardinals, Priests. Page 83 Against. Miracles. Page 92 Against. Devout answers
of Priests. Page 189 Against. The Pope. Page 195 Against. Aultars of stone.
Page 204 Against. The Clergy and Church. This makes your Sermons plausible,
and re^ysheth al your writings
Page 220 Against. The Pope. Page 221 Against. The Pope. Page 225 Against. The
Pope. Page 234 Against. Bishopes and Priests. Page 236 Against. The Pope. Page
248 Against. The Pope. Page 249 Against. The Pope. Page 258 Against. The Popes.
Page 259 Against. The Pope, and Scholemen. Page 262 Against. The Pope. Page 274
Against. The Pope. Page 275 Against. The Pope. Page 277 The Pope. Page 278
Against. Bonifacius the Pope. Page 288 Against. The Pope. Page 289 Against. The
Bishope of Rome. Page 297 Against. The Pope. Page 310 Against. The Pope. Page
317 Against. Scholemen. Page 313 Against. The Pope.
How think we then, may this be called a Reply, (which is presupposed to
follow the sayings of yt adversaries with a just answer) Or an Infamous Libell
rather (which the lighter the head is, yt sooner it inuenteth to make, and
utter abroad at all adventure?

Again: Is it, think we, a little space in a Book, which is hable to conteyne
so many Excursions, or Digressions? These surely, which I have noted here, I
find within ye cumpasse of four Articles only: Out of which, I know, I might
gather many mo^. If these digressions then, which have a Special fling against
the Pope of Rome, and sometimes against the Clergy, amou^t to so Great a
number, And if these, by them selves alone, must needs grow to some bigness,
(for Some of them continue half y^ side, some y^ whole, and Some almost a
leaf, altogeatherout of the matter) I need not to reken up any more, to
confirm my Objection: and by these few, in respect, the wise may sone gather,
what manner of old ends and Shreddes, M. Jewels new Book is stuffed withal.

But now, as in the foresaied Common Places, it was straitwaies perceived with
out further declaration, yt they were common in deed, and might serve the
Catholics, as well as the Protestants: So in these, of which we speak, though
I say it, yet that does not prove it, that they be digressions. How then? must
I go through all and show, how they belong not to the question proponed? That
would be to long and tedious. Shall I refer all to the Readers Diligence? Yet
would not that satisfy either M.Jewel (if he disdained it not) Or Some other,
whosoever would take it upon him, but that it should be answered: I bring in my
Objections in A Mummery, and Dolosus versatur in generalibus, He that walks
in Generalities, Jew. ^61
walks not plainly. Briefly therefore, I will bring forth four or five
Examples, that if M. Jew. ca^ prove the^ to be no digressions, I may be
licensed to Reply: And if he can not honestly deny the^ to be so, yt then he
amend that fault, and speak more to the purpose hereafter.

D. Har. by way of natural reason says thus in effect, Har. fol. 109.
yt if God had ordained, yt in ye Church should be sundry heads and Rulers,
and none to be constituted to be over other, then he should seem to have set
up a Confusion and an Anarchie, (which is, the destruction of all Commonweals) But he is most wise, and most tender also over his Church: ergo, he
has (by all likelihode) appointed her one Head and Governor. Ergo the
Supremicie of one man the successor of S. Peter and Chief of all Bishopes,
must not be thought absurd. What answer you to this reason, M. Jew?

You tell us of A special Gloss of Petrus Bertrandus upon the Decretales, Jew.
258 The first Example of an Absolute Digression.
that: Non videretur Dominus discretus fuisse etc. Our Lord should have seemed
not to have been discrete and puident (that I may say it with reverence of him)
except he had left one such vicare behind him.

You gather further, out of ye same Gloss, Christo data est omnis potestas etc.
Al manner power in heaven and earth is geauen to Christ: therefore the highest
Bishope which is his vicare, has the same power.

Again, ye add more Gloses, that: Papa potest facere omnia, quae Christus ipse
potest. the Pope may do, what so ever Christ himself may do. And, Papae and
Christi vnu^ est tribunal, ye Pope and Christ have one Co^sistorie.

And not content with this, you allege an extrauagant, that speaks of a
Closet in the Popes breast, and you tell us of one: Whose pleasure may stand in
steed of a Law, unto whom what so ever he do, no man may say: Domine, cur
ita facis? sir, why do you so?

And last of all, when you had ended now, with Gloses and Canons not
understood of you, Ye neded not to have gone out of your Say to (...) so
^urth at length in (...) most Shameful and open (...).
you bring, out of ye closet of your own breast, a certain description of a
strange Officer: that neither does exhort nor teach nor minister Sacrament,
nor exercise discipline, nor does ye duty either of Bishop, or of priest Or
of deaco^, or any other the meanest officer of ye Church: but only takes upon
him to Rule and Govern the whole Church. And so, with much a do, ends yt
Digression, without any beginning at all made to the answer of y^ argument.
Which, I pray you to consider.

Is it not reason, M. Jew. yt for avoiding of Confusion, which quikly arises
in a multitude, where no Order is, y^ One be Chief over all? Jew. 25^.
Bertrandus (sae you) has a Special gloss etc. What have Divines to do with
Bertrandus gloss? Answer you the text of the Argument.

Likewise they say, Jew.
Papa potest facere omnia etc. That is an other gloss, but why tell you us
thereof, and utter not rather a part of your advise concerning ye quiet
Governing of ye Church? Jew.
Again, Papae and Christi v^u^ est tribunal etc. They ye say it, know in what
true sense they say it. But what is all this to our question? Now, as for ye
Closet in ye Popes breast, and Domine, cur ita facis, except your self be he, to
whom no man must say, Sir, why do you so? We may justly oppose you in it, Sir
why made you this digression? And because ye ca^ g^ue no reason for it, think,
yt a Closet would do you good in your breast, to keep your wits (...)
together.

An other Example of a needless digression is to be seen pagin. 288. The
second example.
For, whereas D. Harding had said, that Athanasi^s and Paulus, being deposed
by the Arrians assisted with the Emperor Constantius, were restored to their
rooms again by Julius ye Pope, M. Jew. ^ppealeth to ye judgment and
discretion of his Reader, yt it is unlikely. And why so? He answers:

For neither was Bonifacius the 8. Yet borne, Jew. 288
yt determined, Fine for Jewels.
that the Emperor should be inferior to the Pope: Nor Pope Innocentius the
third, or his Gloss, that rated the matter by good Geometrical proportion, and
pronounced, that the Pope, is fyfty and seven degrees above the Emperor, even
just as much, as the Son is above the Moon: Nor Pope Alexander the third,
that set his foot in the Emperors neck.

A fine digression, a gross Reason. Have you not readen, Hist. Ec. lib. 9. ca.
30. Chrysostom. li. 3. de Sa^^rd.
M. Jewel, that S. Ambrose controlled the Emperor? Does not S. Chrysostom
say, that as the Soul excels the Body: so does a Priest pass in dignity,
a Temporal King? Yet was neither Bonifacius the 8. nor Pope Innocentius the
third borne at those days. What new kind of Logike is this? Gonifacius was
not borne, when Julius lived: ergo it is not likely, ye Julius did restore
Athanasius to his room, from which heretics, with y^ Emperous favor, had pulled
him down.

Again, New found L^gyke.
there was no Gloss then to rate y^ degrees of y^ magnitude of the Son above
y^ Moon, and apply it to ye Pope and Emperor: ergo ye Pope and ye Emperor
are not of unlike quantity, just (I trow) as the Son and Moon are both of
one bigness. If this be true, the^ have you directly a^swered: but seeing it is
false, then have you Idelly wandered.

But let us see an other Example. Jew. 251 A third Example.
When I hear) says M. Jewel) M. Hardinge to give unto the Bishope of Rome a
power peerlesse (what do ye then? Prepare your self, by liklyhode, to Answer
him. No, no, you have other matters to think upon) me thinks (say you) I
hear Doctor Durandus say: Hic est Melchisedech etc. This is Melchisedech
whose priesthode is not comparable unto others. He is the head of all Bishopes,
from whom al they descend, as members from the head, and of whose fullness al
they receive. Me thinks I hear, that is written by the Canonistes? Dominus
Deus noster Papa, Our lord God the Pope.

In this point I believe you well M. Jew. For, Hier^.
as to S. Hierome and other (whose thoughts and minds were still upon God)
that Trumpet of the last day seemed to have sowned always in their ears: so
to you, which have such affection to y^ Gloses upon yt Canon law, as though
your Chief Armor and Treasure were in the^ in making war against y^
Supremicie, Doctor Durand, or Hostiensis, Whether does M. Jewel meditate upon
Gloses for devotion or knowledge Or Charities sake.
or Petrus Bertra^dus, or yt Gloss upon Vnam sanctam de Maioritate and
obedientia, are so nigh at heart with you and so ready in your memory: y^ for
respect of them you forgett ye present question: And D.Har. speaking unto you,
it seems to you it is Doctor Durand. Verily M. Jewel, this is but your
thinking, And whether it be through your much S^udie, and emptiness of head,
Or through egrenesse of Stomach and abundance of Choler, that you be so
distracted: the truth is, D. Har. neither said it. nor alluded in any part
unto, Dominus Deus noster Papa, that you might thinck your self to hear in him
the Canonistes speaking. But you had a fancy to bring in those words: And for
that cause, no Occasion being given by D.Har. your own Thought was your Guide
and Warrant, that you might seem yet to have some mention made unto you of D.
Durand and the Canonistes: lest your digression should have been to manifest.

Now one Example more, and then an end of this Chapter. D. Harding to prove
that the Public Service of England was in Latin, when it was converted first
unto the faith, he brings forth one John Archechaunter of S. Peter's Church at
Rome: which was therefore interteined in England, that he should teach the
course of Service for the whole year, as it was done at S.Peter's in Rome. Of
which this must follow by all reason, that if the Church Service in England had been in English: An Archechanuter of Rome, so great A Stranger, had been nothing
a meet Person to teach natural Englisshm^n, to Singe, Write and Read in
their own Natural Tongue. But this witness, says M. Jewel, comes to
Late. How much to late? Mary four skore years. For John the Archechaunter
Lived in the time of Pope Agatho in the year of our Lord 680.

Well this is hard dealing: but hereof we shall speak in an other Place. In
the mean season, Judge thou now indifferent Reader, and speak freely, has
M.Jewel any occasion given here unto him, to meddle with the Popes Decrees or
Gloses upon them? None at all. For the Argument against him comprehends no
more, but, that the Latin Service was in England at y^ beginning: and his
answer stretches no further, then to the plain refusal of the witness
brought in, hecause he lived without the cumpasse of the six hundred years
after Christ. And this once said he is at an end.

Yet see, what a tale he will tell thee. Jew. 189
For John the Archechaunter (says he) lived in the time of Pope Agatho, in
the year of our Lord 680. in whose name this decree is written. Sic omnes
sanctiones Apostolicae Sedis etc. As much to the matter as the making of a
Canon to the taking of a journey Or the singinge at york to the sense of a
Rubrike in Law.
All the constitutions of the Apostolik see must be received so, as the if they
were confirmed by the very heavenly voice of S.Peter. Unto such a tyranny the
Church of Rome at that time was grown. And the gloss upon the same says:
Papa sanctitatem suam recipit a Cathedra. The Pope receaueth his holiness of
his Chair. Therefore herein M. Harding somewhat misrekened him self.

Wherefore I pray you? Because of the forsayed Decree written in Pope Agatho
his name? Or the saying of the Gloss thereupon? No, it is plain that you
conclude, D. Harding to have misrekened him self, because that Pope Agatho
lived in the year of our Lord 680. and John the Archechaunter was of the same
time. How now then? Do you prove, by the decree and Gloss which you full
solemly have alleged, that Pope Agatho lived in the year of our Lord 680? But
there is no mention of such matter in them. Wherefore then have you brought in
the Decree and the Gloss? You dissemble your Art, or else the consequence and
hanginge of this gear together (if any at all had been) would have appeared.

But in deed, there lacked a point of plain deling. For when you had once named
Pope Agatho, you should have used a Therefore or some such like saying: Because
I have mentioned Pope Agatho, therefore I will tell the (gentle Reader, what Decree
was written in his name, and what the Gloss upon the same says. In like
phrase, as a certain Preacher, after he had declared the fall of Adam, taken
by the eatinge of an Apple: Now good people (said he) because I have told you
of an Apple, which is an Indifferent thing: let us speak of the fast in Lent.

Now, if you disdain (M. Jewel) to use this Therefore of my prompting, and tie
your tale together with it: there is no cause why we may not infer a worse
against you. I mean this: You have therefore gone so often byside the right
way, to speaking of Gloses and Ca^onistes, either of a fervent Pas^ion of
Malice against the Catholic Faith, which made you always greedy of
disgracing it, Either of a vain love toward your own praise, which itched
you forward, to utter your much reading.

Again, the Places which you, so often and thick, Expound your own meaning,
if we M. (...) have missed.
do bring against the Pope, are odious at the first hearing: but when they
shall be Considered and Answered, either they shall he found not to be so as
you report, either else to have a true and Christian sense in them. Therefore
to press us with them, out of Place and Season, that we should not intend to
answer the^, that they, so (...) away, for the present, without Answer, might
hinder our cause in the judgment of many a Reader, it was craftily done and
vnhonestlye. As, on the other side, if you (God wot) meante no harm at all,
but without all immoderate Affection or Crafty cumpasse, went plainly and
directly forward in your matters, only that your Reply might be full: then
have you done grosselye and unorderly. To be short, whatsoever, and howsoever
the causes be, the Indifferent Reader may judge of ye Effect, and perceive that
they are undoubted Digressions, which you have made from the question, to
Canons and the Gloses upon the^, and which I burden you withal.

And I burden you herewithall, so much the more justly and ernestly, M. Jew.
fin^^th fault with digressio^s
because your self are so Rigorous, upon less Occasion or none at all,
against D. Hardinge.

For when he, in the Article of Private Mass, did put it as a sure Ground:
that the Mass or Vnbloudye Sacrifice, was so many ways to the Proved, that
you could not withstand the Catholykes therein, Hard. Fol. 25.
And towched shortelye in a Leaf and a half, the Authorities which did serve
that Purpose, of which he might have made A Just Treatise, and never have
gone byside his Purpose: yet that little which he spoke greeueth you so much,
that you say:

It is a simple kind of Rhetorike, Jew. p 12
to use so large digressions from the matter, before ye once enter into the
matter.

As who should say, that the Author of a Treatise might not take what Order he
would: Or that to speak of the Mass, were an Impertinent thing to Private
Mass, Or that in the discussing of a compound it were not lawful, to open the
nature of ye simple: Or, when two things are at one time (yet covertly)
impugned, to show that the one of them stands upon sure ground, thereby to
discumforte the Adversary.

After like sort of quarrelling, whereas D. Harding concluded, that:

Single Communion was not only suffered in time of persecution, Hard. 38.
but also allowed in quiet and peaceable times even in the Church of Rome it
self, where true Religion has ever been most exactly observed and caet.

M. Jewel greatly offended herewith all, and merueilinge (as it were) at the
Matter:

But why does M. Hardinge (says he) Jew. 5^
thus out of reason, rush into the Church of Rome that was long ago?

But, why say you so M. Jewel? Does not the Argument, which he makes, require
that he should commend that See?

For Rome itself allowed (says he) pai^ate Mass: ergo it is the less to be
douted of. Which Argument because it will at these days seem the worse, the
more that it depends of the Authority of that See: could he do less, then
bring one testimony in the praise thereof? and call you this a Russhing in
thereto out of season? But what should he have done by your fine advise?

Mary, say you: See the malice to speak il of Rome, he takes it to be to some
purpose, and to speak well thereof he co^pteth it out of season.
It had been more to the purpose to have vewed the state of the same Church as
it stands now.

Had it so? And you being so Maliciously and wickedly disposed, would the
Authority thereof, as it is now, have prevailed with you? Let any
indifferent man be Judge, whether it had been aptlye done of D. Harding, in
warrantinge of Sole Receauinge as allowed in Rome, to commend y^ Consequence by
telling the faults which may be found in that City now, rather then the
testimony of the Bishopes of all Gallia: which within the six hundred years
after Christ, acknowleged, that from thence came the Fountain and spring of
their Religion.

Again, let any Indifferent man judge, whether M. Jewel has Answered this
praise of the Bisshoppes of Gallia geauen so long ago unto the Church of
Rome, by his Accusinge of Bisshoppes, Cardinales, and Priests: Or by
Lamentinge the case of Rome as S. Bernarde did, Or by making of Proverbs
upon it, as Euripides sometime did of the City of Athens.

Surely in this very place, Is this the liberty of the Gospel, or the Charity
of your Sprites?
where without cause he reproves his Adversary for commendinge out of season
(as he judges) the Sea of Rome, it is a great shame to Rushe into
Discommendation of Bisshoppes, Cardinals and Priests attendinge upon that
See: And to like it better to Examine and Judge the Present (...) of Rome, then
to remember the Ancient Dignity and Virtue thereof, to confirmation of such
points, as in those days were by it allowed,

Other places and Signs th^re are, out of which I do gather, that M. Jewel
can not abide Digressions, as when he says:

This Question is out of course. Jew. 149


We may well suffer M. Hardinge to wander at large in matters that relieve him
nothing. 153.
I^ it were lawful for others so to do, it were no great Masterie to write
Books.

Again These be none of the matters, that lie in Question.

M. Harding makes a long discourse of the Apostles and caet. 155.
If he had showed to what end, we might the better have known his purpose.

But to what end? 160.
For neither, it is denied of us, nor it is any part of our question.

Which thing neither is denied by me, 180.
nor any wise touches the question.

By these I am persuaded, that he would have ye matter it self followed, and
loves not to have the time idelly bestowed.

Now though I am hable to declare, that Doctor Hardinge in these points has
done no otherwise then he lawfullye might: Yet to let that pass, I Conclude
against (...) Jewel, that of all things it is most Absurd in him that is so
Precise with other, Unequal measure.
to be wide and large toward him self in the self same kind of thing, for
which (though unjustly) he reproves other.

And if, Jew. 153.
as M. Jewel confesses, it be no great mastery to write books, if it be
lawful to wa^der at large in matters that relieve not: Let no man wonder at the
worthynesse of him, which has written so mighty a Reply, considering that he
runs so far into Common Places, and Rusheth so fowlye, into dispraise of
Popes, Cardinals, Priests and Church of Rome: which neither makes the new
Gospellers the honester me^, neither destroieth the Present and Ancient faith
of the Catholic Church.

Of a third kind of Common Places, worse then any of the foresaid two. CAP.
III.
TO prove by examininge of sundry wintesses, A Truth which is either plain
by it self, Or else by the Adversary confessed, it is an idle spending and
prolonging of time, to the shame of the party that uses it: And no hurt at al
to the understanding of the Judge or the Court, by troubling them with some
dout or error. For in laboring to persuade but a Truth, which every man
ought to cleave unto, be the understanding never so closelye united thereunto
by fullness of persuasion, it can be no sin or danger to stand fast by that,
which not to assent unto, were reproueable. And therefore, saving for other
tircumstances, of Subteltie or Vanity used therein, M. Jewel is not hurtful
to any point of true Faith and Religion, in his following of those Common
Places, of which I have spoken all ready.

On the other side, when an Heretic goes from the matter that he has taken
in hand, to Accuse, and Condemn, and bring into harred, Popes, Cardinals,
Priests. etc. by gathering in of Ruinors, by following of Suspicions, and
setting open unto the world the worst that he can speak of the Clergy: This,
although it be Unjustly, Proudly, and Uncharitably don, yet does it not greatly
touch in any part our Faith or Religion. For if all were true that is fained
upon Popes, Cardinals and Priests: Or if nothing be false, of that which their
Enemies report, of some of them, what follows then? No more surely, than that
such Persons are offenders, and that the faults of the Clergy are to be
Corrected. And I pray God be merciful unto his Church, that either no Crimes
be found among the worthier members of it, Or just Canons and laws may be
executed, such as already are made for the purpose.

But let these things be, as they may or will be, who has made Englishmen
Judges over Romans? Or who but the cursed Children, do tell tales abroad of
their Fathers Priuities? Again, why should there not be Praying for Souls
departed, because Some have taken money for it? Or why due honor not given to
Sacraments, because some Sir John's are irrenerent? It is not safe to leap out
of the Arc, into the maine waters, beeause of some evil sent of men or bcastes
therein. Or to leave the following of Christ, because Publicanes and lypnners
went in his company.

The Apostleship is honorable, though Judas be a Traitor: And the Doctrine of
him that sits orderlye in the Chair, is pure and good, though the breathe
which comes from him do sauoure.

These things therefore considered, let M. Jewel make Impure digressions, not
sparinge to beraie his own clothes in a foul way and intent, so that he may
get some dust or dirt, to hurl after ^e heels of Popes and Cardinals. Yet all this concerns but manners only, and should not in any Indifferent judgment
or mean discretion, remove a Christian from the s^edfastnes of his faith.

But now A third kind of Common Places which I find resorted unto of M.
Jewel, Yea rather pointed out unto us by him, is so wide and so dangerous,
that a man shall not only go quickly out of his way in folowinge them by him
self, but also when God shall send him a Guide to conducte him in the way,
(...) be uncertain and doutful (...) means as M. Jewel (...).

It seems that now (...) long since intended Purpo^es of the (...) almost come
to their (...) there lacks no more now, but that, by Open Apostasy, he make
the faith of Christ to be forsaken: and that, not so much as the name thereof,
shall be suffered in the world.

Speak I this without cause? Let any Indifferent man be Judge. For take the
fundations away from an house, and can it continue any space together? Take
all credit away, betwixt man and man in this trade of life, and will there
be left any Occupying to and fro? If no Authority and law be in a Common
wealth, can the state thereof endure? What is that among Christians which has
brought them unto the Faith, and Stayed, and Governed them in it? Is it not the
Authority of the Church, Commending the Doctrine of Christ unto us, By
Fathers, By Councels, By Custom and Tradition, And by Succession of Bishops
even from S. Peter hitherto? Preparation for y^ Antichrist
Among all which, if no one, may safely be leaned unto, what remains in all
the world worthy of credit? And except there be an Authority and Order,
which we may and must follow, what Faith can we have at all?

But who is he, that prepares such ways for the Antichrist? Or who shakes
the Hearts and Consciencies of Christians, even from the very botome and
foundations of them? Mary, except you BEWARE of him, M. Jewel emonge other, is
he. And either he keeps yet still in store, some secret Reuelatio^s, by
which perchance he will persuade the world, (which is incredible) Or else (As
far as we may gather by his Reply) neither him self has any Faith, neither
will suffer any other to be quiet in it.

Like a Rhetorician, which for Glory or Gain sake, fears nothing so much as
to be found Tongetied in any matter, especially professing to speak aptly and
copiously in every matter, And to that end provides his Common places to be in
a readiness.

For witnesses and Against witnesses. For Rumors and against Rumors, For
trying out a matter by Racking, and Against racking:

So has M. Jewel done. Diuinitye brought to Rhetoric
He has brought Divinity down to Rhetoric, And, as though the kingdom of
God consisted in Talk, and not in Virtue and Power, so does he show unto his
diligen^ Readers, the Art how to weake^ the Adversaries stays and
Authorities, and in answering all other men, yet for their own parts never to
be answered. And to this end, serves this worst kind of Common Places, of
which I gene thee (Indifferent Reader) fair warning. As in example, For
Custom, against Custom: For Fathers, against Fathers: For Councels against
Councels: For Unity, against Unity: For Ceremonies, against Ceremoni^s: For
Miracles, against Miracles. In which how M. Jewel has furnished him self,
let it first be declared, and then afterward Considered.

For Custom.
If he doubt S. Paul, Jew. 101.
yet the very practice and continual Order of the primitive Church, fully
declares what Christ mente.

And they say:

Consuetudo est Optima Interpres Legum.

Custom is the best Interpreter of the Law.

Si De Interpretatione legis quaeratur. etc.

If question happen to be moved, touching the meaning of a Law, first of all we
must see, De legibus et Se natusco^ sulto and Longa Consue. Si de.
what order has been used in the like Cases in times past. For the Custom
and practice of the people, is the best expounder of the Law.

Against Custom.
THe Reason that S. Basile makes of Custom and continuance, Jew. 49.
being well considered is very weak, both for many other good and Just causes,
and also the same Custom, as it was never Universally received, so upon
better advise by Order of the Church, it was clean abolisshed. For wise men
in Gods cause have evermore mistrusted the Authority of Custom. The
Heretics in old time named Aquarij, that in the holy Ministration used Water
only, and no Wine, It is utterly untrue: for in his Epistles, ad Iubaianu^,
Qui rinum, Po^peiu^.
notwithstanding they manifestly brake Christ's Institution as our Adversaries
do now, yet they vphelde their doings therein, by Long Custom. But S.
Cypriane being then alive, wrote thus against them.

Victi ratione Opponunt Consuetudinem quasi Consuetudo sit mayor Veritate. and
caet. he speaks not against aquarios but against the Catholics, which by
Custom and Tradition consuted his Opinion concerning Rebaptizing of them,
whom He (...) had baptized before 97


Being overcome with Reason, they defend them self with Custom, as though
Custom were better then the truth. We may not prescribe of Custom, but we
must overcome with reason. Custom without truth is the Mother of error.

Consuetudo, Initium ab aliqua Ignorantia vel simplicitate sortita, in vsu^ per
successionem corroboratur. Sed Dominus noster Christus veritate^ se, non
consuetudine^, cognominanit etc. Custom either of simplcitie, If ye allow
Tertullia^, whi go your maidens with open ^ace: If ye allow him not, why use
you his (...)
or of Ignorance, geating once an entry, is inured and hardened by succession,
and is defended against the truth. For Christ our Lord called himself Truth,
and not Custom, Let them take heed therefore, unto whom the thing seems
new, that in it self is old. It is not so much the Novelty of the matter, as
the Truth that proves an Heresye. Whatsoever sauoreth against the truth, it is
an Heresy, be the Custom thereof never so old.

These foresayed Places are Pro and Con. This that follows, I can not tell
where to set it. Whether, among those that make for Custom, or against it. But
as I find it, so shall you have it.

S. Augustine in this Caseys very reasonable his words be these: Jew. 143
Vbi Authoritas desinit, ibi Consuetudo Maiorum Pro lege tenenda est: Where
Authority fails. This seems in some Case to make for Custom. But Consider
what follows in M. Jewel. But having Gods word and Christ's Institution, we
want no Authority. In what steed then shall any Custom stand us, where the
rudest Protestant in A whole Country, will crake and bost of it, that Gods
word is his warrant in all his procedinges? But let us go to an other place.

For Fathers.
COncerning Ancient Fathers we commend them sufficiently, when we defend them
ernestly, Or speak of them reuere^tly. And there needs not a Text for their
praise, out of the Scriptures or Ancient History, when our selves do
actual? tender their Integrity of Estimation, And speak many fair and good
words of them. So does M. Jewel:

Sometimes Complainyng or sorowing that they are not rightly alleged. As,

For proof hereof M. Harding allegeth the Authority of Dionysius wherein he
does Jew. 26.
Great wrong to that GOOD OLD FATHER, etc. Hypocrite


Sometimes requiring the^ to be brought forth and believed: As,

The matter being so weighty, and not yet thoroughly believed, Jew. 23.
it had been good for M. Harding, to have made proof thereof, by the authority
of S. August. S. Hierome or some other OLD CATHOLIC Doctors.

At an other time, Gentelly intreatyng the Reader to consider the place of the
Doctor, and so sweetly leading him by reasoble request, that he can not choose
but conceive much of the worthiness of the Father. As,

Good Christian Reader, If thou have Chrysostom peruse this place, Jew. 269
and weigh well his words: If thou have him not, yet be not ouerhastie of
belief.

At an an other time again: Vehemently inueighing against his Adversary, as
though he did not esteem the Fathers. Which although D. Harding in that place
do not, yet M. Jewel, in taking him up for it, as if he had done it, declares
thereby his Zealous Affection toward them: As,

I alleged the saieing of S. Basyle: Jew. 169
That the Church etc. The saieing of S. Hierome: That the noise etc. Likewise
the saieing of Chrysostom: Common Petitions etc. But WHAT THEN. says M
Harding. Why WHAT THEN? Thinks M Harding that the Authority of Arnobius, S.
Ambrose. S. Augustine. S. Hierome. S. Chrysostom, And other holy Fathers is
so light, that he is hable to blow them al away, with these two vain
Sillables, WHAT THEN?

To be short, when himself directly estemeth them, it moves the Reader to
think also well of them: As in Example,

S. Augustine is very REASONABLE. Jew. 14.


Verily Gregory's Authority in this case were right good, 188.
if he would say the word.

It is S. Ambrose Interpretation. 199.
With other like Phrases.

To this place it may also be referred, when he craves ernestly for the
express words of the Fathers: As.

If the holy Fathers had so belewed, Jew. 148.
they had words, and were hable to utter it.

Was there no man then in the world, 302.
for the space of six hundred years, hable to Express his name?

As though he would say: All the old Fathers of the Church, 306.
both Greeks and Latins wanted words and Eloquence, and either they could
not, or they durst not Call the Head of the Church by his own peculiar name.

As who should say that M. Jewel is so addicted to the Fathers, that if any
one of them say the word, he Subscribeth and yeldeth.

Against Fathers.
FAthers, because they are many in numbers, therefore to make the matter more
easy for the Conquering of them, it is politikely done, to set forth a General
Exception against them except they appear by a certain day, which is, before
the 600. year after Christ, shall be gone or Expired. for in deed how M. Jewel
takes the six hundred year, I can not yet redily tell. As: Jew. 123


Dionysius, one of late years, and therefore Lead away with many errors.

S. Bernard is A Doctor but of Late years: 116.
Therefore his authority We must weigh the Lighter.

An other policy is, to cause the Alleging of Fathers to be generally
suspected: As,

There is no way so easy, to beguile the simple, Jew. in his preface to the
reader.
as the name and countenance of Ancient Fathers. The Arian Heretics alleged
for themselves, the Ancient Father Origen^ the Nestorian Heretics alleged
the Council of Nice: The Donatian heretics alleged S. Cyprian: The Pelagian
heretics alleged S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, and S. Augustine.

And Dioscorus the heretic, alleged Gregorius, Cyrillus, and Athanasius, and
compleined openly in the Council, even in like sort, and as justly, as M. Jewel
does now: Ego defendo dogmata sanctorum Patrum: In Con. Chalc. Act. 1.
Ego illorum habeo testimonia, no^ obiter nec in tra^scursu sed in ipsoru^
libris posita. I maii^teine the Doctrine of the holy Fathers. I have their
witnesses, not uttered by Chance, or by the way, but written in their books.

Also to deny the Authority of the testymonie is one way: and is done
sometimes boldly and iestingly. As, Concerning the Epistle of Athanasius to
Felix, and certain other Epistles, that be extant in his name.

A scarcrow (says M. Jewel) stuffed with straw, Jew. 332.
and set upright, may Seem a far of to be A Man. Even so a forger of lies and
fables, pricked up in the apparel of Ancient names may seem to the Ignorant
An old Catholic Father. Again:

The manner of his utterance is childissh, 133.
and babbling, empty of matter, and full of words without measure. The substance
of the whole is nothing else but flattering. etc.

Sometimes again covertly and courteously: As,

The Decretal Epistle, Jew. 264
that is abroad under the name of Julius seems to savor of some corruption

Likewise: 212.
This Exposition of Chrysostom is very strange, 303.
and agrees with few others. Again: Although this place of Chrysostom import
not greatly (as who should say, I would not care much to grant all that he
writes) Yet being well shifted and considered, it may seem very suspicions,
as nothing agreeing, either with that went before, or with that follows after,
but altogether sauering of some corruption.

Furthermore though the person of the Father can not be denied, yet the
Estimation of by in may be hyndred. As:

This Augustine, whom M. Harding calls Saint, Jew. 185
and some others, the Apostle of England, was not that Great Learned Father S.
Augustine etc. but an Hypocrite, a superstitious man, Cruel, Bloody, and
proud above measure.

Again: He wrote to Rome for resolution of certain questions etc. so
Childisshe and so Rude that a man may well doubt, Yet S. Gregory answered them
with out any such rusly king. 310.
whether Augustine were ruder, or the people.

Item: Touching Victor that wrote the story of the Vandals, he is neither
scripture, nor Council, nor Doctor, nor writes the Order or Practice of the
Primitive Church.

Again. Unto this superstition S. Hierome himself gave great Occasion, many
times, both writing and speaking unseemly of the state of Marriage. Now to make
this matter more likely, Jew. 52.
M. Jewel does cunningly, to number him among other that were gyltie: As, In
this error were diverse of the Old learned Fathers.

Tertullian says, I Allow not Marriage. Origin says, No man can offer the
continual sacrifice, unless he be a Virgin. S. Hierome says: It is not good
to touch a woman, Therefore it is il to touch a woman. Upon occasion of which
error the people sometimes forbear the Churches, where Martyrs were buried.

To conclude, there is a certain figure of Replyinge, when in granting unto
some matter, you secretly take it away again? As,

I may not disgrace the credit of this story, Jew. 136.
albeit in Sozomenus and Nicephorus, of both whom, the same is recorded,
there be sundry things that may be well filed.

By these helps then, A young Divine shall meetly well be furnisshed to keep his
tongue occupied withal, least a sudden silence should cast him into a
Confusion.

For Old Councels.
Touching the Authority of Councels, because they seem often times to vary,
Jew. 124
Gelasius thought it best to take up the matter thus: In gestis Conciliorum etc.
When so ever Contrariety of sentence, Did. 50. Domi. sancto.
is found in the Acts of Councels, Let the sentence of that Council be taken,
that has the elder and better Authority.

For Prouincial Councels, against the General.
GOD has oftentimes restored his Church, Jew. (...)
and reformed Abuses and Heresies, by particular conference, within several
Realms and Countries. As we see by these private Councels holden at Carthage
under S. Cypriane: At Neocesaria in Pontus: At Ancyra in Galatia. And by other
like without any consent of a General Council. So likewise says S. Ambrose,
against Secundus and Palladius: The Bishopes of the East part, and so the
Bishopes of ye weast, have ever used severally to assemble themselves together
as occasion was offered, Not in contempt of the whole world.
And to reform their churches by themselves, without trobling of the whole
world.

Si prouocandum putauerint. etc. If they think it needeful to appeal from
their own Bishopes, Jew. 235 Conc. Aphric. cap. 6.
Let them not Appeal, but only unto Councels to be holden within the country
of Aphrica.

Against Councels.
TIb being Emperor, when he heard of the wonderful works yt were wrought by
Christ in Jury, Jew. 18.
thought therefore, he was a God, and promoted A Bil unto the Council, that
Christ might be proclaimed, and taken for a God. But the Council was otherwise
bent, and would allow him for no God. Tertullian laugeth at their folly: his
words be these: In Apolog.
Apud vos de humano arbitrio Diuinitas pensitatur etc. Among you the divinity
and state of God, is weighed by man's Judgment. Except God please man, God
(among you) shall be no God. Now therefore, man must be Good and favorable unto
his God. The Like folly seems to be in them, that think Gods Truth to be no
truth, unless the consent of a Council allow it for truth.

At this might be true, if the Holyghost had not promised unto the Church to
carry with it for ever, and to instruct it. Again, Gods Truth is truth in it
self: yet unto us it is not known, but by means. Now among those means,
which is the most worthy? The text of the Scripture, which except some body
tell me, I shall not know, in what estimation to have it: ye repor of a few men
of our own parish or Country? Or y^ determination and consent of a general
or prouincial Counsel? I should think, yt, seeing we come to faith by means of
me^ who^ we credit, it were not amiss to harke^ Chiefly after ye voice of a
general Counsel, where, As great authority and as worthy of credit is
represented, as may be possibly found in all the world. But M.Jewel is afeard
o^ a folly. and like a wise man, and such as works surely, he cares for none
but for God him self: and Let men tell him wha^ they list, he hangs not upon
the Authority of any of them al, Or of al together, receuing of Gods own
mouth (I trow) immediately, that which confirms him in his faith and religion.
Jew. 207.


Cicero says very well of himself: Nihil nobis opus erat lege, de quibus nihil
esset actum legibus. To restore me from exile, I needed no Law, against whom
there was nothing done by law. If the Saxon Like one way and the Palsgraue an
other, may both defend them^elfs by these Examples and contemn what so ever
Authority in Christendom? Iosue ca. 24.
So may we likewise say, we need no Council to restore Gods Truth, that was
taken away from us without a Council. Every prince is bound in the whole, to
see the reformation of his own Church and Countri. Neither will God hold him
excused, if he say, I will tarry til al other Princes, and the whole world do
the Like. Iosue that noble prince, when he had assembled all the tribes of
Israel before him, thus he spoke unto them. Si malum vobis videtur etc. If ye
think it il to serve the Lord, ye shall have your choice, But I and my house
will serve the Lord. Is it Lawful then, to refuse the Nicene Council. even in
this respect only as it consisted of Chief heads and Governors of al
Christendom. Tertul. aduersu^ Praxe^.


It pleased God to plant his Church in this Realm. three hundred years, before
the first General Council was holden at Nice. The Lords hand is not shortened.
He is likewise hable now, to reform, the same by his holy word, without
tarieing for a General Council.

For Antiquity.
TErtullian says: Hoc aduersus omnes Haereses valet, id esse veru^,
quodcunque prius etc. This mark preuai leth Against al Heresies: That is the
Truth, that was used first: That is false and corrupt, that was brought in
afterward. And therefore the holy fathers in the Council of Nice made this
general shoute, and agreed upon the same, (...). Let the Ancient orders hold
still, referring themselves thereby, to the use and order of the Primitive
Church. Contrarywyse, Valentinus Marcion, and other Like Heretykes, thought
themselves wisest of al others, and therefore utterly refused, (as M.Harding
and his fellows do now) to stand to the Apostles orders. Thus Ireneus writes
of them: Irenaeus lib. 3. ca. 2.
Dicunt se, non solum presbyteris etc. They will say, yt they are wiser not
only then other Priests, but also then the Apostles, and that they have found
out the perfect truth.

Against Antiquity.
NOtwithstanding it appear by S.Augustine, S.Cyprian, Jew. 12^
and others, that Infantes in the primitive Church in sundry places, were
admitted to the holy Communion, yet AFTERWARD upon good advise, they were
justly removed from it, because that benig in that age, they were not thought
hable to examine and prove themselves, according to the doctrine of S.Paul, 1.
Cor. 11
and so to eat of that Bread, and Drink of that Cup.

By this rekening then, they of the primitive Church, understood not S. Paul
so well as the aftercummers. And so has Tertullians sai^ing little effect, how,
That is the Truth that was used first. It will serve also in this place, all that M. Jew. has gathered: Against Fathers and custom, as above is declared.

For Unity.
GOD has other ways and means (says M. Jew.) then by the Government of
the Bishopes of Rome, whereby he has ever governed his Church, and preserved
Unity. How proves he this? Mary. S. Cyprian says, Ideo plures etc.
Therefore there be many Bishopes in the Church, Jew, 260
that one running, into heresies y^ rest may help e and again: Cypr. lib. 3.
epi. 13. lib. 4. epi. 9.
The Church is preserved in. Unity by ye consent of bishopes agreing in one.
And to this end S. Hiecome says, as is before alleged: Nouerint Episcopi etc.
Let Bishopes under stand, In epi. ad Titum cap. 1.
that they ought to rule ye Church as al in one.

Against Unity.
Immediately upon yt forsaied words, follows a Common place against Unity. As
if M. Jewel would plainly protest, that when it makes any thing for his side,
then it shall be allowed and praised, And yt when the adversary would turn it to
his purpose, then shall it be little or nothing worth. As in example: Jew. 260
Hieron. contra Luciferianos.


S. Hierome says: Nomine vnitatis and fidei, Infidelitas scripta est.
Infidelity has been written, under the Name of faith, and Unity. So likewise
says the wise man. In tanto viuentes ignora^tiae bello, Sap. 14.
tot and tanta mala Pacem appellabant. Whereas they Lived in such a war of
ignorance so many and so great mischiefs they called Unity.

What remains then now to be followed of certainty? Or what stay shall there
be for a right meaning affection and trobled conscience? If no such hold is to
be taken of Fathers, Councels, Custom etc. but that the Enemy will make it to
be forsaken utterly, or daungerously doubted of: what Refuge is there left, or
what Authority? Shall the Bishopes which are for the time, rule in the causes
of Religion? That surely is already so appointed by God, and that if it were
otherwise, should chiefly be wyshed for and procured. But what hope is there
to have this granted of M. Jewel? Or if at one time he will yield unto it, at an
other he will deny it. For sometimes he will have all Bishops equal: And what
order then can be set there, where no one is better then an other? Sometimes he
will have differencies and distinctions of Authority among them. Yet then how
little shall that prevail, when he will not be obedient to that Authority? As
in example.

For aequalitie of Bishops.
S. Hierome writes thus unto Euagrius. Jew. 2^


Si Authoritas quaeritur. etc. If we seek for Authority, the world is greater
then the City of Rome. Wheresoever there is a Bishop, whether he be at Rome,
or at Eugubium, or at Constantinople or at Rhegium. etc. he is of like
worthiness and of like priesthode.

Because we are not only led inwardly by Gods Spirit, Jew. 257.
but also outwardly by our senses, therefore has Christ appointed not one man
to be his Vicar General over all, but every of his Apostles, and so every
Priest, to be his Vicar within his division. So says Eusebius B. of Rome.

Caput Ecclesiae Christus est. Epist. 3
etc. Christ is the head of the Church. And his Vicares be the Priests, that
do their Message in the Church, in the steed of Christ.

Every Bishop has a portion of the Flock allotted unto him, Jew. 266. Cyp li.
1. Epi. 3.
which he must rule and govern, and yield account unto the Lord for the same.

For distinction among Bishops.
The Decrees of the Council of Nice, Jew. 336. Conc. Aphric. Ca. 105
have committed both the inferioure clerks, and also the Bishops, unto
their Metropolita^es.

The Fathers of the Council of Aphrica have decreed thus, that the B. of the
first See, Jew. 240 Ca. 6.
be not called the chief of Priests, or the highest Priest, or by any other
like title, but only the Bishop of the first See.

In the Council of Constantinople it is written thus: Jew. 245 Constable. 1. Ca. 2.
Let the Bishops of Alexandria have the charge only of the East, the honor of
primaci ever reserved to the church of Antioch.

More to this place might be brought, out of M. Jew. works, especially Pa.
250. 267. and. 286. But by what Primate, Patriarche, or high Bishop would he be
ruled, which puts the Spiritual Government of the Church, in the hands of
Temporal Princes, and makes every Bishop the Vicar of Christ? In such sort,
as if there were no higher or better person then he, for Authority, in all the
world. And therefore i^ these points hitherto, there will be no hold or stay.

For Succession.
But perchance all things shall be determined by Succession. Jew. 277.
For Irenaeus says: Presbyteris illis. etc. We ought to obey the Bis^ops in
the church that have their succession from the Apostles, which together with
the succession of the Bishoprike, have received the certain gift of the
Trnthe, according to the will of the Father. This in deed would serve, if it
were considered, but M. Jewel likes it not. For in the next side before, he
says of yc Pope. etc

Against Succession.
THey Feast and cheer them selves, Jew. 276.
and Smothe the world with vain talk. But S. Ihon says:

Nolite dicere. etc. Matthew. 3.
Never say (Peter or) Abraham was our Father. S.Paul speaking of his
Successors says thus: Act. 20.


Equidem Scio. etc. I know, that after my departure from you, there shall
Ravening wolves come amongst you, that shall not spare the flock.

And S.Hierome says: Did. 40. No^ est fa.
Non sunt sanctorum filij. etc. They be not evermore the Children of holy men,
that sit in the rooms of holy men.

But notwithstanding all these foresaid perplexities and doubts, at length I
trow we shall come to some Resolution and quietness. For the word of God and
the scripture shallbe the Judge. And yet, here also is a great uncertainty. For
M. Jewel, for the most part appealeth to ye express word in the Scripture.
His Reply is full of his bragges therein, and with such fair promises the
greater sort is seduced. One example in a matter so manifest is sufficient. As:

For the Word of God or Scripture.
SPeaking, of the Scholemens conclusyons about Christ's presence under the
forms of bread and wine, he says:

We may not here account, Jew. 99.
what may be in either of them, by drift of vain fantasy: but rather we ought
to consider, what Christ in the first Institution thereof did, and what he
commanded to be done.

Here lo, he refuses to have the sense discussed, but sticks to the bare
text. But it will not be allwaies so, as appears by these Examples.

Against the Word of God or Scripture.
CHrist did not therefore so abase himself to wash his Disciples feet, Jew.
117.
to the intent they according to the letter, should do the same, but in
himself to show them a perfect Example of humility. etc.

In like manner, Math. 18 10. and. 8
Christ set a Child before his Disciples, and willed them all to be as
Children. He bad them to shake of the dust from their Shows, and to carry
neither Rod, nor Scrip, about them, and to salute no man upon the way: not,
that they should practice these things according to the rigor of the
words, but to the intent, that by the same, they might be induced to a deeper
understanding:

And S. Hierome says. Jew. 150.


Whosoever understands the Scriptures, Hieron. ad Gal. li. 3. ca. 5.
otherwise then the sense of the holy Ghost requires, by which holy Ghost
the Scriptures were written, although he be not yet departed from the church,
yet he may well be called an Heretic.

The sense rather and the meaning of the Scriptures is to be taken, Jew. 198.
Orig. ad To. ca. 3. li. 3. Jew. 211.
then the words.

To say, The word of God, only because it is written or spoken, is available of
it self without understanding, is a Superstitious and Iewishe kind of folly.

Let us make now an end of this Chapter, for there is no end of questionynge
and altering, as far as is to be learned of M. Jewel. And my Deduction or
Argument is short. When the Son of man comes, shall he find think you,
faith upon the earth. Lucae 18.
If the sense of the Scripture, be the thing that is to be honored and
followed: And if that Sense is not to be perceived of every one that
understands the Grammatical construction and exposition of the words: we
must learn it of some body biside our own selves. And they of whom we
learn it, must be such, as upon whose Authority we may build and never
change: But neither by Fathers, nor Councels, nor Customs, nor present state
of Bishops, nor by the text it self of the Scripture, that Authority can be
established (for by Master Jewels account, never a one of them does fullye
satisfye in any matter) ergo we are left upon this reckening altogether
unquiet, and to seeking where to stay our Consciencies.

Is not this a perfect Religion? Or is not this a skillful Professor of it, by
whom it is brought to pass that no Faith at all, can be appointed unto us?

The Catholic yet, may sone be in quiet. For obeying that visible Church, of
which the Pope is a visible head, he leaves to the determination of it, all
things perteining to Councels, Customs, Fathers and Scriptures. But these
fellows, that know not, What to follow or forsake, but by the Testimonye of
Councels, Customs, Fathers. etc. and yet dare not fully trust those self same
things or persons which are their guides: what a miserable case are they in,
concerning them selves, and how Artificially, do they take Faith, clean away
in some, and weaken it exceadingly in other?

BEWARE therefore of them by time (Indifferent Reader.) And concerning the
steadfastness which should be of Faith, be not made alltogeather Indifferente,
through this last and worste kind of M. Jewels Common Places.

Thus having declared evidently, that M. Jewels great book in Quantity, is
of simall matter in substance, and, that his Common places and Digressions are
so many, that his strait following of the question, and his direct Answers to
the purpose must be sone rekoned: I trust, the Indifferent Reader will BEWARE
of him, and not much marvel at that Bo^lke, where little Corn is sure to be
found: Nor think those vessels to be full, whose bourdes are long, and whopes
of great cumpasse. Now, to make his behavior more plain yet and manifest,
let us come to certain other Specialties, and look more particularly into his
book. And first, it shall be worth the while to consider, how M. Jewel has
ordered D. Harding:

In Perverting his meaning,

In disgrating his Authorities,

In Wranglinge with him,

In Dissimbling and butting with him,

In Refelling one truth by an an other,

And in Courteous (as they say) Reportinge

Which ended, I wilcome, in ye third book, to other men: as, Ancient Fathers,
Later Doctors, and so forth, shortly proving it unto thee (Indifferent Reader)
that M. Jewel has so abused him self, And thee, And them all, more or less,
one way or other: that he will never be able to save his honesty. First then
concerning the first point.

That M. Jewel peruerteth D. Hardinges meaning CAP. 4.
I Will leave it to thy further consideration (Indifferent Reader) leisuerly to
examyne it by thy self, how much it makes to the ending of controversies, or
bringing of these matters to some Issue, that such as be Doers therein, should
diligently intend unto the sense of the Aduersarye, and apply thereunto a just
and direct Answer. For if it be otherwise, the Objection first of all,
remains unanswered: And then, new matter of disputation and talk is
ministered, through the peruersitie of the Answerer. Stomakes also do rise,
Books are multiplied, Readers weeried, And the further men go foreward, in the
way, as it were, of finding out the point of the question, the more intricat^
it is daily made unto them, by making and seeking of bypathes without the
question. If I would conclude that we are moved and warned not only by words
but also by other Signs, And to that purpose would make mention of the bell,
which warns us, either to come to Sermons, either to atte^d more devoutly at
some special time of the Service: If my Adversary in this case, would tell the
Readers, that my meaning is to teach the people by a Bell rope, and to make one
of the great Bells in the Steple, A Preacher, and a les^er one in the Quier a
Deacon, to what purpose were our reasoning, or what end were like to be, of
such a beginning? But as I said, these things I leave to thy further
consideration, choosing rather by Examples to verify my sayeinges, then (as
the indignity of the matter requires) to inueigh against this foul Demeanure
of perverting the Sense of any man's sayings, which M. Jewel uses.

We are bound to follow Christ's Examples, Hard. 28
Quoad substantiam, non quoad externam ceremoniam. For the substance not for
the outward Ceremony.

Here is great pain taken, Jew. 22. The first Example.
to prove that Christian men, in the ministration of Christ's supper, are not
bound to follow the Example of Christ. Again: Why does he defend his Sole
Receiving, contrary to his own wisshing, 33.
and contrary to the Example of Christ, as him self confesses.

You say not truly. But contrariwise D. Hardinges conclusion is, that we are
bound to follow Christ's Example, And that we are not yet forbydde Absolutely,
from Sole Receiving, though Christ him self Received with cumpanie. Because he
did not that, for an Example, as being a mere Accident touching that which he
then intended, no more then he meant to charge us with Receiving in a Parlor,
Or Chamber, Or at Night time only, Or Sittinge at supper, because all these
things are found to have been observed of Christ, and therefore (as some
froward Heretic might say) that we should follow his Example.

The Communion has his name of the, Jew. 27 another Example.
effect, for that it joins us to God: Ergo says M. Harding, if signifies
not the Communicating of many together.

No he says not so, but thus rather: Hard. 2^


Ergo you can not think your self to have an Argument against, Private
Mass, of the word (Communion) as though the Sacrament were called a communion,
in consideration of many receauers together.

In which sense in deed, if it be a Communion, then is it no Private Mass.
But, as the Truth is, and as D. Harding takes the word, it stands well
inoughe with Sole Receiving. And the party receiving alone, is joined to God,
and Communicates with Christ the Head, and his whole body.

Note further, that D. Harding made his forsayed Argument, to Answer yours (M.
Jewel) which are so deceived, that wheresoever you find mention of Communion,
thervpo^ straitewayes ye co^clud against Sole Receiving, Or Private Mass.
Whereby it is evident, that you have abused him much, and defiled your self not
a little, in reasoning, as it were in D. Hardinges name, after this fasshion.

Jew. 30* It is called Communion. Ergo it may be Private. Jew. 30* It is
called Communion. Ergo it may be received of one alone. Jew. 30* It is called
Communion. Ergo the Priest may receive it without Communicates.
Again: Jew. 37.
By the Communion all faithful are joined together: Ergo the Priest may say
Private Mass.

Serapions boy ministered the Sacrament to his Master: Jew. 46. The iij. Example.
Ergo Serapions boy said private Mass.

D. Hardinge says not so, but:

Ergo the Example of Serapion (which Hard. Fol. 34
received alone) confirms our purpose of Single Communion.

And note, that in this kind of Peruersion, M. Jewel continues through the
whole first Article, turning ye to saying of Mass, which D. Harding alleged
for proof of Sole Rerceauing only, either in all convenient times and places,
Generally: either at Mass time and in the Church, Consequently.

D. Harding, The iiij. Exampl^.
in translating a testimony of S. Hierom making for Sole receiving, englisshed
also a piece of Persius ye Poets Verse, as he found it in the Text of his
Author. Wherein, though he did but as faithful Interpretours do use, yet M.
Jewel, not only takes it so, as if D. Hardinge of his own head, had put it
in, but also, as though he meant to apply it to his purpose in the question of
private Mass. His words be these:

Here, M. Harding interlaceth (no, Jew. 51.
he interprets only S. Hierome, and adds nothing of his own) other matter
of the office of wedlock, the words of Persius the Pagane Poe^e, and the
superstitious ceremony of the Heathens, as I take it, little perteining unto
his Mass.

True it is (M. Jewel) Such gear pertains no more to the Mass, then yoke
fellows do to Priests, except both should be set to the Carte. And wherefore
then do you so speak, as though it were any part of D. Harding^s meaning?

It is a Sacrament of Unity: therefore if it be abused, we may seek no
Redress.

It is nothing like: but thus he concludes: Ergo let them take heed who
moved by slender reasons for both kinds, do rashly and dangerously condemn
the Church, for geuinge of it under one. For this in deed, is a manifest
breach of unity.

The fruit of the Sacrament depends not of the ^ourmes of bread and wine.
Jew. 99. The sixth Example.
Therefore we may break Christ's Institution.

The more Impiouse this conclusion is, the more wicked are you, to lay it to
his charge, which at all has none such. For thus he Reasons.

The fruit of the Sacrament, Hard. fo. 50. pa. 2.
depends not of the outward forms of bread and wine, but redoundeth of the
Virtue of flesh and Blood of Christ, which under either kind is wholly and
verily present. Ergo the church stands upon good grounds, in Minisstring
the Sacrament, under one kind unto the people, by which no less fruit comes
unto them, then if they received under both.

The Priest consecrateth the Sacrament, and offers the Sacrifice: Therefore
the people is not bound to Received in both kinds. Again: The Church has her
liberty: ergo she is not bound to Christ's Institution.

Be not ashamed (M. Jewel) to read D. Hardinges words again: And mark then
whether you deal like an honest man with him, or no. The some of his
discourse, is this: The Sacrament may be considered 2. ways: Either as it is
a Sacrifice, Or as it is a Sacrament.

Concerning the first, the forms of bread and wine both, are necessary,
Sacrifice.
that the shedding of Christ's blood, And separating of his life from his
body, Har. 51.
may the better be represented. And in this part, D. Har. speaks nothing, of
the peoples Recea^ing: though in deed out hereof, as out of A Principle, it
could afterward be deducted, that ye people are not bound to receive in both
kinds. But it makes much to the purpose, to place every thing aright: as,
though your head be part of your body, yet to set that and your heel together,
were no good fasshion.

Concerning the second, because it is respected as meat, Sacrament.
which the people do^ receive, to Preparation or Preservation of Body and Soul
into everlasting life, in which meat the Substance, and not the Form is
sought for, therefore the Church is at her liberty, (not to break Christ's
Institution as you M. Jewel do iangle) but to serve them, either with both
kinds, either one alone, as it shall seem expedient.

Some men do loathe wine, Some people ca^ hardly geat, Jew. 113. The 8. Example.
some ca^ hardly keep wine ergo. there must be made a law general, y^ ye whole
world shall Communicate in one kind.

D. Har. words are these, after ye forsaide causes alleged: Har. 56.
Ergo, it had been byside reason, to have bound al to ye necessity of both
kynds. For there be two extremes, in the middle of which is the truth: Al must
receive in both kinds, Is yt Protesta^tes heresy: Truth in the middle of
Extremes.
Against which, D. Har. in his place concludes. The whole world must receive
in one kind, Is an other heresy, which M. Jew. forces here, upon D. Har. and
yet he neither spoke it, nor thought it, I am sure. ye middle and Catholic way
is, yt, It is an indifferent thing in it self, the Lay people to receive in
one or both kinds, And yt ye Churches order and counsel herein is to be
solowed, without any further vain bragging of Christ's Institution, as though
yt heretics were yt expounders thereof. Judge therfeore whether M. Jewel has
not in his place done like a ioly clark, so to mysconster a plain sense and
meaning.

M. Har. would have us put Gods word to daving, The 9. Example. Jew. 121.
Slanderously.
And none otherwise to be obedient to Christ's Commandment, then if a few
Bishopes gathered at Trident, shall allow it

Who would not think, upon this report of M. Jew. y^ D. Har. had spoken
blasphemy against God himself. Yet he said no worse then this: Har. 60.
We condemn not the Commnnion under both kinds but confess, it might be
restored again, by ye Authority of the Church lawfully assembled in a General
Council etc.

And is there any harm in this? Specially being proved sufficiently yt ye Lay
people to receive in one or both kinds, is not commanded precisely and
necessaryly by God? But this is a General peruersitie of M. Jew. through this
whole Article, to burden the Catholics with the Contempt of Gods word, and
Christ's Institution, in y^ they minister unto ye Laity, under one kind
whereas, to speak Indifferently, the matter is yet in controversy, between us
and him with his fellows: Or if it be certain unto them, that it is against
Christ's Institution, the contrary is as certain also with us. So that it is
very peuisshly done, to frame the Catholics Arguments, not according to that
Principle which they followed in making them (As, that to Receive in one kind
or both is Indifferent) but according to the measure of that heretical
conclusion, in which the Catholics do withstand them, As, that, it is
Christ's Commandment, y^ people to receive in both kinds.

The bread which Christ blessed at Emaus, The 10. example.
and gave unto his two Disciples, was the Sacrament, And, as soon as they knew
him in breaking of the bread, Har.
he vanished away from their sight, er yt he took the cup into his hands:

Ergo, says D. Harding, they received in one kind. But how takes M. Jewel the
Antecedent here? He makes an Exclamation, Or he takes an Indignation, Or he
falls into a Lamentation, Or surely he speaks with much Affection. O
(says he) what miserable straites these men be driven into. Jew. 125 Schoffer.
To make up their tale, they are glad to say, that Christ lackt leisure.

Sir, if you find any such blasphemous word, in D.Hardinges book, I will
thank you for geauing us warning: but seeing there is none such, what haste
were you in, to be so perverse and impudent? Surely, there is some occasion,
why you cry out first, And then accuse D. Harding, for speaking so of Christ.
And in deed in your Reply, y^ Reader will not perceive but you inueighe most
justly, with, O what miserable etc. For the words, which immediately go before
written in a distinct letter, as if they were al D. Hardinges, are these: But
Christ straight way vanished from their sight, Falsifier
upon the breaking of the bread: And therefore had NO LEISVRE to deliver the
other portion: neither is there any mention made of the Cup.

These you attribute to D. Harding, but that which you put in the middle of,
Christ's Lack of LEISVRE, is not at al in D. Harding. Why cry you then upon
the miserable streictes that we are driven into, whereas ourselves made them
not? Or what a miserable Iuggler are you, to number it as in D.Hardinges own
text, yt Christ lackt leisure, which at al is not there: And afterward to
Cry out against him, for saying that, which is of your own putting in only,
and not of his?

The sick man's mouth was dry: The 11. Example. Jew. 134 Scof^er.
Ergo he could not receive the Cup. Who would make such reasons but M.
Harding?

But M. Har. makes the^ not: Ergo, who would be so blind or Wilful, in
conceiving an other man's reason, but M.Jew? For D. Harding gathers his
Argument thus: Bassus the Archepriest, washed the mouth of Simeo^ lyinge sick
and feeble, Har.
before he gave him the divine Sacrament, And, such procuring of moisture had been needless, if Simeon should have received the holy Cup: Ergo he received
under one kind only. Where find you here M. Jew. y^ he could not drink,
because he was dri^? It appears y^ your self at this place had taken of some
Cup to much, which could either mock in an ernest matter so drilie, or
understand a reasonable argument so dro^ke^ly.

I ca^ not see what necessity is in this reason. Jew. 140 The 12. Example.
The man is frentike, Or lies Speechless: Ergo he ca^ not receive the
Sacrament bread.

In deed your eyes herein serve you well. and every reasonable man will bear
you witness, that no necessity, is in this Argument. But what necessity was
there, why you should not rightly, either perceive Or report D. Hardings
reason? For thus it is: The Sacrament was powered into the mouth of him, Har^
which in his sickness demanded his housel, And er he dyed, fell into phrenesie,
or became speachlesse: Ergo it was geauen, under onekynde and in form of wine.
For how think you, M. Jewel, have you seen or read, that when men have been
extreme sick, Bread has been Powered into their mouths? by reason the^, it
was wine which is said to have been Powered. Consider also what follows in
D.Harding, out of the Council of Toledo: where you shall find it proved, that
Some sick men are so unable, to take the Sacrament in form of bread, yt they
received only A draught of our Lords Cup. Therefore, you are much deceived,
which think D. Har. to be as mad as you, and of phrenesie or lack of Speech
to gather, that they received in Form of bread.

If the Manichees would not believe Leo or Augustine, Jew. 147 The 13. Example.
Wickedly.
that Christ had one body, how much less would they believe M. Harding, that
Christ has two bodies, the one in the Bread, the other in the cup, And each
wholly in the other?

Where says D. Harding so? In no place at all, you may be assured. but this
is that which you carpe at, M. Jewel. The Catholics believe, and D. Harding for
his part confesses, that under either kind, whole Christ is verily present.
Har. Fol. 50.


Christ therefore is not divided, by one, Or two, Or more, as your blasphemous
In^ention dare make, but, the selfsame Christ, is by diverse and sundry ways
dispensed. For in A natural and lesser Example: Your Anima, Life, Or Soul, is
but one: the same is Whole in your little finger, Whole in your thumb, and in
every part of your body, Whole. Yet, you have not (I trow) so many lives by
tale, as you have toes and fingers. Now, if your brethern, Or other unlearned,
will not perceive this true Principle, that, Anima est tota in toto, and tota in
qualibet part, which yet your self, I trust, do admit, how little can they
comprehend of Christ's whole presence, under either kind of the Sacrament? And
how desperate are you, to make some believe, that D. Hardinges opinion is, that
one body of Christ, is in the Bread, An other in the Cup? Whereas you can not
be ignorant, of the Catholic and Received Faith herein.

M. Hardinge, The 14. Example. Jew. 158 Fancy.
seems to reason thus: Ephre^ made homilies in the Syrian tongue: And S.
Hierome translated the Bible into the Slauo^ Tongue: Ergo, the Common Service,
was in the Latin or Greek tongue.

Many things seem unto you M. Jew. which are not so in deed. For D. Harding
in these places which you allege, susteineth the person, not of an Opponent (as
to you it seems) which makes argument for his own side, But of a Respondent
(As his book declares) which puts away the objections of his adversary.
Har. Fol. 74. (...) 75.
As in Example: The homilies which Ephrem made in the Syrian Tongue, and the
scripture which S. Hierome translated into the Slauon tongue, were not part of
the Public service, nor served to that purpose: Ergo, It is to no purpose to
prove by them, that the Publik service was in the mother tongue.

To this effect D. Har. answers: And does not at all gather by holy Ephrem Or
S. Hierom, that the Service was in the Latin or Greek tongue. There is a
proper Place to do every thing in, And the Opponent and Respondentes parts,
are distinct one from the other.

Here M. Hardinge takes in hand, The 15. Example. Jew. 158
to Answer the Authorities by me alleged, And that with this special note of
Remembrance in y^ margin, M. IVELS ALLEGATION SOLVTED. It appears his
Solutions be very short. For what so ever be alleged, it is sufficient for him,
to say, WHAT THEN? For whereas I said etc. What a do^ upon no ^ccasi^^ saugng
M. Jew. (...).
All this is sone Answered. For M. Har. says, WHAT THEN? (...) alleged the
saieing of S. Basile, That the sound etc. The saieing of S. Hierome, THat y^
noise etc. Likewise of Chrysostom, COmmon petitions etc. But WHAT THEN? says
M. Harding, why WHAT THEN? Thinks M. Harding, that the Authority of
Arnobius, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Basile, S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom and
other holy fathers is so light, that he is able to blow the^ all away, with
these two vain syllables, WHAT THEN?

Here lacks no Invention, here lacks no Amplificatio^, but only a Just
cause to bestow them upon. For in deed, D. Harding says unto M. Jewel
(rolling in his Authorities) WHAT THEN? but he adds further, No man denietb
you this. How then, M. Jewel? Does D. Har. think, the authority of holy
Fathers to be light? Or, that he is able to blow them all away, with two vain
syllables? No verily his Sprite is not so mighty. But he directs his (WHAT
THEN) only to you, no Father yet, nor Holy one, askyng, to WHAT END you be so
ernest, in that which no man denies you? Because he reuereuceth the holy
Fathers, therefore does he admit their Authorities: but because it greeueth him
to see them brought forth, for a show only and countenance to be made on your
side, without any just occasion or purpose: therefore he demands of you, by a
WHAT THEN, to show the cause wherefore you alleged the^. You draw a fair length
M. Jewel, but you shoot at a wrong mark, Or at none rather at all.

But he says, The 16. Example. Jew. 199 Needelesse Fear.
The place of S. Paul, is doubt full etc. S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Chrysos.
etc. understood it diversely. And will he therefore conclude thus: These Fathers
mistook S. Paul's Sense, Ergo S Paul had no sense? Or, diverse Doctors,
touching this place, had diverse Judgments: Ergo, we must have no Judgment.

Troble not yourselfe M. Jewel, with any of these doubts. for he geaueth you
no occasion. But in answering your argument, and not in forming any of his
own, he requires of you, 1. Cor. 14
that, S. Paul's sense, where he speaks of the blessing, and speaking with
Spirit, being so doubtful as it is, you should not so precisely conclude that
he means by Praing in Spirit, ^ar. Fol. (...)
ye prayeing with a noise of strange words, after your strange Interpretation:
Or crake before the people, that S. Paul's words, are most manifest, that al
public Service, should be in the Vulgar Tongue.

Now let us consider M. Hardinges reasons.

The state, says he, The 17. Example, Jew. 204. Slanderously.
of the primitive Church was far unlike the state of the Church we be now in:
Ergo we are not bound to S. Paul's Commandments.

For shame of your self, why make you D. Harding to speak so Contemptuously
of the Apostle, and so proudly of him self? Har. 95.
His mind rather is, that, It is no Commandment at al of the Apostle, because
there were necessary occasions, to geaue it in the primitive Church, which are
not so necessary now: And so it cease to be a Commandment unto us. As, that
women should go covered, it was his express Commandment, yet now, I trust,
you make noe conscience of it, 1. Cor. 11
to suffer your Sisters to go with open face. Not because you Reason thus: we
are not bound to the Apostles com maundement, but, because the state of this
time, and that, being diverse, you would interpret, that it continues no more
to be ^ Commandment.

Again he says: The 18. Example. Jew. 204
Some one or other in a parisshe understands somewhat of the Latin tongue:
Ergo they owght to have the Serulce in a strange Tongue. Har. fol 95.
Not so M. Jewel, but: Ergo the latin tongue is not utterly Strange and
unknown, And therefore not forbidden by S. Paul. The People is sufficiently
i^structed in Religion: The 10. Exemple. Jew. 204 (...).
They come together now, not so much to be instructed, as to pray: ergo, they
ought to have the Service in a Strange tongue.

Neither is this so, M. Jewel, but Ergo there is no necessity, wherefore it
should be in the vulgar. As, for this Absolute conclusion, that it ought to be
in Latin, how can any Catholitie make it, Whereas it is confessed, that the
Pope has dispensed with the Slauons to have their Service in the vulgar
Tongue, And may, if cause so require, permit it also unto other Countries.

It were good (says M Harding) the people understood the Service. The 10.
Example. Jew. 206
Forgette not this good Reader, that the People understood their Service M.
Harding himself confesses it were good. And why so?

Yea but remember, good Reader, or else mark D. Hardinges own words, in
which, he speaks not absolutely of the people, but of people having humble and
Reverent hearts. And such to understand their Service it were (he grants)
good. but see what follows in M. Jewel.

And why so? doubtless because is forced to see and say, that it would redound
to the Glory of God, And to the great Cumfort and Profit of the people.
Therefore he faieth, it WERE GOOD. whereof we may gather this argument, of the
contrary: Then, that the people in this brute sort, is kept still in ignorance,
Much making of nothing.
not understanding any portion of their Common Service, by M. Hardinges
confession, It is il. And is it not lawful to do that is Good, to Redress
that Is il, to seek Gods glory, And the cumfort of his People, without
consent of a General Council? etc.

It were Good M. Jewel, every man to know, The Rules of Physik, (to have
thereby how to help himself) The Statutes of the Common Law, (the better to
keep them,) The Counsel of God in working owr Redemption: And may you then,
well gather this Argument of the contrary, that it is il to be ignorant of
Phisike, Law, and Divinity? Surely, least you should take this advantage, And
show after a wise sort your folly, Shameful Craft or Error.
D. Harding provided very well, but that you divide his sentence, which is but
one. For, after he had said: It were good the people having humble and
reverent hearts understood ye service: Har. I deny not: Although you make, not
only a full point there, but also an end of your 31. division, as who should
think, D. Har. had said as much as he will in this sentence: Yet there
follows immediately this aduer satiue, yet al, stands not in understand dinge.
By which he means expressly, that though it were Good, the people to
understand their service, yet it is not il, to be unskillful thereof, because al
stands not in under standinge, as he proves out of two places of S.
Augustine.

Now (see your fidelity M. Jewel) this Aduersatiue YET, which opens the
matter, And should go together with ye former part of the sentence, you cut
awai^ clean from it, And begin your 32. division with it: that you might seem
not to have Reasoned al in vain, in saieing: This is good, ergo the other is
il. Whereas if you take D. Har. whole meaning, you shall find him to say no
more in Effect, but, This is good: yet ye other is not to be mislyked. Have you
any Privilege thus to pervert right Senses at your pleasure?

Out of Origin M. Harding gathers this Reason: The 21. Example. Few. 210
The Angels are delited to hear us read or Pray although we of our weakness
know not thoroughly what we speak: Ergo the people in Origens time had the
Common Service in a strange tongue. Not so M. Jewel, although the Conclusion be
true. but if you add further to the Antecedent as you should do, that the
Reading of Psalms though not under standed, do provoke the Angels to help us,
then follows the right consequent in deed, Ergo there comes profit to the
Reader and hearer of the service in the Latin tongue, Har. 97*
though it be not understood.

The people, The 22. Example: Jew. 214
says M. Harding, is gross and simple, And can not understand the
scriptures, by hearing the same in the Mother tongue: Ergo, they must hear it
pronounced in the Latin tongue. This seems to be a very simple Argument.

It is so in deed, yet it is of your own making which myslike it. For D. Har.
concludes after an other sort, saieing: Ergo, if our new masters will condemn
the Latin service in the Latin Church, Had. Fol. 98.
for that the people understand it not, they must also condemn, for a great
part, ye English service, Which, the common people, for ye greatest part of
the Scriptures read therein, do not understand.

Service in the vulgar Tongue, The 23. Example. Jew. 216
is cause of Schisms and errors: Ergo, within 6. hundred years afte^ Christ,
it was ministered in some place, in a tongue unknown unto the people. Falsely.
The force of this conclusion is evident. A very child may sone see through it.

Much more then, you see through it your self. And do ye not then perceive,
y^ it is of your own subtle making, and none of D. Hardinges, whose Reason is
this:

The people of those countries, Har. 99.
where the service was in the vulgar tongue have continued in schisms and
Errors: Ergo, example is not to be taken of them, for the service in the
vulgar Tongue.

Of S. Ambroses words, M. Harding reasons thus: The 24. Example. Jew. 246
Peter, was the Chief of the Apostles, Ergo, the Pope is Head of the universal
Church. This Argument would be better considered. for as it is, it holds but
weakly.

Verily this is a weak Solution. But let the Argument be better considered,
and formed in those terms which D. Harding uses.

S. Androw followed our Savior before ye S. Peter did, Amb. 2. Co. 12. Har. 106.
And yet Androw received not the Primacie, but Peter: ergo, the Apostolic see
and Church of Rome has the Primacie.

Consider you now what Answer you may devise. For this Argument does not
meddle, with the question of the Apostles Preeminence among themselves, unto
which only you bring it: but of Primacie in yt Church of Christ, over which
though other Apostles were general officers, yet the supremacy was singularly
in S. Peter.

Paul went up to Jerusalem to visit Peter The 25. Example. Jew. 253.
Ergo, the Bishope of Rome, is Head of the Church. Folishely.


Is it not time, M. Jewel, either that some Physician, or God himself visit
you, either to purge you of that cuil humor which occupies your head: Or to
take vengeance of you, which do so abuse your Readers in matters of so Great
weight? D. Harding himself makes no other Argument in this place, but of
Authority. and the reason which he brings, and you pervert is Theodoritus an
Ancient Bishopes: who writing to Pope Leo says thus: Har. 108.
If Paul, the preacher of truth and trumpet of the Holy Ghost ran to Peter
to bring from him A determination And declaration, for them who at Antioche
were in Argument and contention, concerning living after Moses Law: much more
we, which are but small and vile, shall run to your Throne Apostolic, that of
you we may have salve for the sores of the Churches.

Do you then, M. Jewel, call this goeing for determination in a doubtful
question nothing else but S. Paul's visiting of S. Peter? And would you have it
conceived, either, that S. Peter was sick there and il at ease, Or that for
good wills sake and courtesy only, S. Paul went to visit him? Byside this,
D. Harding grounded not his Conclusion upon this argument, but that rather
which follows in Theodoritus, which is this:

For in all things it is meet, that you have the chief doings: Ergo it
follows well of Theodoritus authority, that the Pope is supreme.

The Church of Christ is one:

Ergo, the Pope is an universal Bishope. The 26. Eyample. Jew. 255


That is an other question, Which D. Harding went not about to prove by Natural
Reason, but his present conclusion is this: A multitude can not continue ONE,
Har. 108.
unless it be contained and holden in, by ONE: But the Church continues ONE,
Ergo: it must have ONE Head or Governor.

Now, whether the Bishope of Sarum or London, or Rome, or Constantinople etc.
shall be that One Head, over al ye members of Christ's mystical body in earth,
that may be afterward considered: but in yt mean time D. Har. goes no
further then Natural reason does lead him, that, in A great multitude and
cumpanie, it is meet to have One over the rest, if they shall be kept in Unity.

Mankind depends most of sense: The 27. Example. Jew. 257 Insensible.


Ergo the Pope is the Head of the Universal Church. Here is a very insensible
Argument* nor sense nor reason can make it good.

Why make you it then? For D. Har. concludes not so. But, whereas you in
sayeing Christ only to be the Head of the Church, would infer that the Pope
is not any Head at al: in Answering this your objection, he declares that,
mankind depends most of sense, and receives al lerning and instruction of
sensible things: Har. 108.
Ergo notwithstanding Christ be the chief Head, yet because he lives not
visiblie among us, 109.
the Church has need of a man to be her Governor, whom she may perceive by
owtward sense. Which man, whether he must be the Pope or no, he comes not so
low in this place.

M. Hardinges reasons proceed thus: The 28. Example. Jew. fol. 260.
God is careful and has special Providence for his Church: Doubtful places of
yt scriptures must be expounded: General Councels must he summoned: Bishopes
being at variance must he reconciled: Ergo, the Bishope of Rome is Christ's
General Vicar, and Head of the Universal Church.

Ergo, Indirectly.
(says D. Har.) by natural reason there must be One Head in ye Church and
one chief servant in ye howsehold of Christ. Mary yt y^ Pope is he: yt is out
of the cumpasse of natural Reason. which although it attain unto it, that by
most perfect way of Government, there should be One head: Yet yt this or yt
man should be he, by her own power she ca^ not bring it to pass. and
therefore, it was not directly so concluded of D. Har. in this place, as M.
Jewel full peruersly gathers.

This is a very poor help in deed. The 29. Example. Jew. 274. Fautlesse.
M. Harding here is feign to resemble the Bisshopes of Rome, touching their
doctrine to False.
they

The first is false, through your reporting: the second is fautlesse, in D.
Har. saieing. Concerning doctrine, he says: that the Sea of Rome has this
singular Grace, that he which sits in it, is compelled to teach truth, like
as Balaam and Caiphas were made to fulfill the blessed will of God,
notwithstanding their falsehode and wickedness. The comparison therefore is
not Ignominious to the Catholics, but must Glorious to the praise of God, and
most comfortable to the consciences of true Christians. And it consists, not
as you report it (M. Jewel) spitefully enough, in resembling the doctrine of
the Bishopes of Rome, to ye Persons of Balaam and Caiphas: but in resembling
the Providence, Assistance, and Grace of God, Sophistry.
in directing their doctrine unto the like Spirit of Truth and Prophecy, as
God himself uttered by Balaa^ and Caiphas, withowt their good wills. In
resembling also the doctrine of the B. of Rome, not unto the matter of a leadden
Scale, but unto the Form of a Seal, which is as true in the basest metal, as
in the purest. And so let the Bishop of Rome be as he will, his doeinges shall
not let the working of God: but as perfect a printe of his Truth, shall be made
with a Leaden Seal, as a Golden.

Concerning now the other point, of lamps withowt light, he makes not a
General Rule, nor says that ye Bishopes of Rome are so, (which word you M.
Jewel do use) but, sometime (says he) the sea has failed in Charity, and
it has been in case as it might truly say: Our lamps be without light. And
this may be said, either charitablie enough, naming no persons, and sorowing
ye case: either very discreetly against Heretics, which so object unto us the
evil lives of Popes, as though it were an Article of our faith, that a Pope can
never sin: or our cause were utterly destroyed, if so much were confessed or
granted, which is so far otherwise, that it proves rather the providence and
mercy of God toward his Church to be exceeding sure and great in assisting
the Sea of Rome, in which evil men are constrained to tell Truth, yt ye hope of
ye faithful might be steadfast in God, August. epi. 166.
and not come and go at the good or evil life of any Pope.

These Examples (I trust) are sufficient and plain enough of themselves, not
only to prove, that M. Jewel has very dissorderly behaved himself, in
repeting of D. Hardings Arguments, but also to warn every Indifferent and
Gentle reader of the Danger which needs must follow, if without further search
or Consideration of the matter he take that for a Truth and Certainty, which
M. Jewel once commits unto printing.

Note also, that al these forsayed Arguments which M. Jewel has thrust out of
their right way, to find fault with the^: continue yet still in their true
sense and meaning, without any just Reply or Answer to the contrary. And so
must those points of the Controversies, between him and us, remain as well
proved on the Catholykes side, which are touched specially in these forsaied
arguments and Examples, unto which he has geauen no direct or clear Answer.

How M. Jewel disgraceth D. Har. Authorities. CAP. V.
IT follows now shortly to declare, how M. Jewel Disgraceth and extenuateth,
the Authorities of D. Har. For among Sophistes, it is one of the kinds of
Answering, when they can not directly or sufficiently put away the argument: to
deface then, by A crooked word, and a wrie mouth, Or a Lip (as it were) the
whole matter. Which, the more ungracious it is, the deeper it is printed in the
minds of to many: And the viler it is, the more it needs to be discovered,
that ernest and sad Truth, may not be so easily outfaced.

Surely if in temporal matters, where the things that men strive upon are
sensible, this manner of dealing (of which Examples shall follow out of M.
Jewel) be used, the Stomakes do so increase, y^ it makes men quickly to let
go Words, and to come to blows. Yet God forbid, that I should wisshe for any
such Conclusion: but this do I mean only, that if so great offense be taken
of a Temporal Injury: much more it should grieve us to see matters of Religion
depraved. And truly in Temporal causes, men oftimes are to quick, but
concerning the State of right faith and understanding, they need not mistrust
least they be to deuont and diligent. Let the Examples declare, whether I
burden M. Jewel rightly, or no.

D. Har. after other causes which moved him, not to discredit y^ Treatise of
Amphilochius upon S. Basiles life and miracles, he says at the last, that
this Treatise, is to be see^ in the Library of S. Nasarius, in the City of
Verona in Italy, Written in Veleme, for three hundred years past, bearing the
name of Amphilochius Bishope of Iconium. (...)
But, A Calves skin (quod M. Jewel) is no sufficient warrant of truth.

In deed who can deny it? Neither does D. Harding Conclude that it is to be
credited, because it was written in veleme: but because it was written so long
ago, and kept to this day in a Library at Verona.

D. Harding puts a case of four or five, Another Example.
which in time of sickness should be desirous to Receive: And, if neither the
Priest be able, neither other be willing to Communicate with them, may not
(says he) they Recei^e severally? And do not they Communicate together? See
now, M. Jewels demeanure.

Alas (says he) must he leave all the old Doctors and holy Fathers, and beg
at deaths door, to geat sumwhat to help his Mass?

Alas M. Jewel, are you so insensible, Jew. 31. Kind heart.
that you think it to be a leaning of all Old Doctors, to make an Argument of
A Sick man's case? And, as you have allreadie made a Rule, that no Authority
against you shall stand, but that which is taken, just out of the next six
hundred after Christ: will you so now perchannce contemn all Reasons as
beggarly, which are not without a certain precinct of Deaths Door? I permit
it to your Conscience, whether this your (Alas) became your State, Or can be
suffered in an ernest Question.

An other Example. A Third Example.
Here first I would ask the Indifferent Reader, whether an English man borne
might not use in his writings the Authority of S. Basile? And whether, S.
Basile reporting it, y^ they which lyned in wilderness, Or in Alexandria, Or
in Egypt, had the Communion at home, And kept it with the^ selves, And Received
it of them selves: it were not lawful to speak it again, and to use that
Testimony? Yet M. Jewel says:

Verily, Jew. 138.
if M. Harding could find any thing in the Church, he would not thus hunt the
Mountains: neither would he flee for aid into Egypt, if he could find any
near at home.

What would this fellow call the Living it self of holy men in Mountains, which
nicknameth the diligent gathering of Arguments out of their living a hunting
of Mountains: And calls the using of the Fathers of Egypts Authority, a
fleeing for aid into Egypt? How far I pray you, will you suffer us to go for
an Argument, without Obiecting of fleeing, unto us? Yet what ask I you Leave
Or Counsel in this matter, which am sure, y^ Truth is not found only in Europe:
but in every place of the world, where Christ is confessed.

Again, Who goes farther? He that goes in his Answer beyond Reason, Or he
y^ Reasons upon a fact done beyond the Sea called Mediterraneum, And
applies it to his purpose? Keep your self warm at home M. Jewel, as long as
you may: for if you be once out of your own Country, your Religion is so
Universal and Catholic, that many miles before ye come to the Mountains or
Egypt, you will be taken for a Renegate.

He has alleged (says M. Jewel of Doctor Harding) two women, The fourth
Example. Jew. 142 Disdainefully.
three sick folk in their death beds: Persons excommunicate, Infantes,
Phrenetikes, and Madd men: He has alleged Napkyns, Chestes, Chambers,
Mountains and wilderness.

He alleged these in deed, to prove Sole Receiving. And if your Mastership
contemn the persons, because they were Women, Sick folk, Infantes,
Phrenetikes: Or the things themselves, because in telling of the^, mention is
made, of Napkins, Chestes, Chambers and Mountains: Yet let the Indifferent
Reader consider, that these base Persons and Things were not, by or for
themselves respected of D. Harding: but the Authority of Tertullia^, Eusebius,
S. Cyprian, S. Basile, S. Ambrose, and other (out of whom these Examples of
Women, Infantes, Mad men, Napkins and Chestes, were taken) was only regarded
and followed. By such Eloquence as M. Jewel uses, the professed enemies of
Christ's Gospel, might furnisshe their wickedness. Matthew. 8. 9. 12.


Saint Matthew (all faithful believe) did write a True Gospel, the Authority
thereof is most undoubted and holy. Would M. Jewel then think it sincerely
done to scoff out the matter, And to deprave the whole, by telling us, that all
the discourse or the most that he makes, is of, Lazares, Boys, Old women's
Agues, Sick folks, Blind beggars, Du^me persons, Mad men, Lunatikes, Old
Nets, Barley Loaves, two Fisshes, and Great Store of Hey.

S. Augustine testifies of the Peoples affection in his time, that for
Reverence toward the Sacrament, they were careful to have a clean Lynen
Clothe to carry it therein home with them, Hard. fo. 54.
And receive it, when they were disposed. S. Cyprian witnesses, that the
Sacrament was kept in a woman's chest, and that when she being unworthy, would
have opened and Received it: fire came forth and fraied her away. And in this
sort could I rehearse other authorities, to prove, that Sole Receauinge was not
only used, but Reverently also used, in the Primitive Church. And will M. Jewel
so Extenuate these matters, as though it were no more worth then a chest, or a
Napkin, that which is alleged of the report of S. Augustine, and S. Cyprian?

If it lothed those Holy and Reverend Fathers to speak of Chestes and Napkyns,
when the narration and history so Required: may it freely be skorned at, to
rehearse ye self same fact after them again, and to make mention of Chestes and
Napkyns? But here also, let any Indifferent man be Judge, whether it stands
with the Gravity of an high Minister, so co^temptuously to speak of the
Testimonies of Ancient Fathers.

D. Harding alleges the Councels of Agatha, The fyfth Example. Hard. fol. 42.
43.
of Auerna, and Constantinople, which make mention of private Oratories and
Chapels to say Mass in. Here upon says M. Jewel:

In his former allegation, he sought his Mass in little Towns and Villages:
now he hunteth for it, in private men's houses. Jew. 73. Much in his pastim


Was the last Supper of Christ, Or his Institutinge there of the Sacrament,
and Sacrifice of the new Law, any point the worse, because it was but an
obscure Parlor, where he wrought those Mysteries? And call you this A Huntinge
for a Mass in Private houses, to Reason out of the open decree of three
Ancient Councels? If you would use less barking and biting, then to hunt
after Ancient Records, we would not mislike it in you.

D. Hardinge proves out of Leontius a Bisshope in Cypres, that:

John the holy Patriarche of Alexandria, The sixth Example. Hard. fol. 43.
said Mass, and Received alone.

M. Jewel infers:

A strait case for M. Hardinge to run to Alexandria, A thousand miles
beyond al Christendom, to seek his Mass, and that not in Open Church
neither, but in Private Oratories.

Why is it a strait case? May not a Learned man as sone come from England to
Alexandria, Jew. 78. Childisshly
as he may turn from one book to an other, and think now of one thing, then
of an other? Alexandria is not so far in miles beyond al Christendom, as
you be far in your degrees beyond all Gravity. For if the Authority of
Leontius does not weighe with you, it is A plain answer to refuse it: but to
obiecte the bringing of an Argument out of an History reported for done in
Alexandria, and to Term it A Runninge beyond all Christendom, it may be
found in children which in their Declamations are permitted to use what so
ever Figure they can, Or in the Vices part upon the Scaffolde, Or in Iesters
months at the tables of Secular men: but in their Writings, which would seem
to follow the Spirit of Christ, and Zeal of Truth, it can not be suffered.

S. Basile (Amphilochius writes) was thought of Christ to celebrate Mass, in
which he divided the Sacrament into three parts, and Receiving one by him
self alone, the other two he Reserved. And so by this Testimony, Private
Mass is sufficiently proved. Or, if it prove nothing to him which refuses
the Authority of Amphilochius by whom it is written, yet to him which would
take it for a true historye, no doubt but it serves for Private Mass. M.
Jewel then supposing it to be true, let us see how he tranaileth to disgrace
it. His words are these:

But if all this (that Amphilochius reports of S. Basils Saicing of Mass)
were good record, and matter of truth: yet and caet.

What intend you by this Yet? Would ye not believe it? Would ye not embrace it?
Would ye not be ruled by it? Would ye not yield and Subscribe? Considering that
Amphilochius lived wtin ye six hundred after Christ? No surely, you would not.
For you have so many ways to deprave things, yt you may grant our asking
unto us, and keep your self still to the winninge side. Which how cunningly
you do in this place I will take the pains to consider.

If all this were good record etc. Yet were it but a Miracle.

Do ye make a But at a Miracle? And such a Miracle, Mark to the (...) of this
place the exquisi^e excep^ions against the witness.
as stands with a Truth? I ^oked, that you wuld have diminisshed somewhat of
the price of the Good Record of which you ^oake, and to that end your YET did
lead us: but you have so forgoten your slfe, that you make it the stronger, by
that very thing, which you brought to weaken it by. For a Record may be true
and good, and yet it follows not the fact to be allowed: but if a Miracle be
wrought about it, it is not only to be compted as True, because of the thing it
self and witness of Man, but also to be allowed as Good, because of the
testimony of God geauen to it by Miracle. It follows in M. Jewel:

But a Vision.

As who should say, that an History were the worse, because it consiseth of a
Vision from God, and not of the external sight and Record of man. What wise
man would ever say: Let it be true, that Jacob saw Angels goeing and cumming up
and down upon the ladder between Heaven and earth, yet were it but a Vision.
Is this your sight in Divinity, to diminissh a Truth by the manner of
Representing it. It may be proved that to see things in a Vision, when the
mind is elevated from bodyly senses, is perfiter in degree of dignity, then to
see them with corporal eyes, where more means and more gross are occupied.
Yet (says M. Jewel, contemptuously) it were but a Vision. It follows in him:

And perhaps a Dream.

Wisely said, I promise you, and agreably to your former words. For how can
these two Propositions stand together? If it were a matter of truth, yet
perhaps but a Dream. Do not these, the one plainly hinder the other? Or can
ye grant yt one, and fear the other? Nay, if it were of good Record and
matter of truth, then undoubtedly it was no Dream. But you, of a great
confidence and courage do permit us the first, And yet of a miserable
forgetfulness or fearfulness, are not resolved in ye second. In sayeing: If
all were good Record: you permit us to take it, and your self, by puttinge the
case, do grant it: In addinge, Yet were it perhaps but a Dream, you take
away from us that which you granted, and your own self are contraried by
your self. For (to say it again) if it were matter of truth, it was no
dream: and if perhaps it were A Dream, you should not then have been so
absolute or bountiful, as to let us receive it for a matter of Truth. It
follows:

But one man's fact.

You asked but for any one sufficient example, when you challenged us. The
fault therefore can not be in that it is One, but if you dare answer that S.
Basils fact allowed by Christ himself, is not sufficient, then say you
somewhat. It follows.

But once done.

Once done is truly done, and so much is enough against the^ which deny y^ it
was at any time done. Again, Once done in the presence of Christ, and by his
apointement, is for ever done, to confirm the faith of the Catholics. I
follows:

Not in the day time, but at midnight.

What think you then M. Jewel, that there is no Truth, when the Sun is
down? Or that evil Sprites only do occupy the world at midnight? Or that
God is A God of the day, and not of the Night? Is not this A worthy cause to
set loss by S. Basiles Mass, for that, when other were asleep, he waked And
that Christ made him not tarry till broad day, but strait ways to rise and
Say Mass at midnight? What fault you find with midnight I can not tell: but
your Literal sense in this place being so foolisshe, either you have some
pure and fine Mystical sense, Or else you take so little rest in the night, that
in the day time your wits be not your own. It follows:

And that without cumpanie, and without Witness.

Concerning the company, Christ and his Angels were present: concerning the
Witnesses, take away Eubulus which saw it, yet as many were present, as were
at the Annuntiation of our Lady, Or the Resurrection of Christ our Savior. at
which though no man was present, yet by the event of things, and credit of
the^ which have reported it, it is as true as an Article of our faith. Again,
what need witnesses, your self permitting the Record of Amphilochius to be
good, and the matter true? How hangs this together M. Jewel? If all were
true, yet was it done without witne^se For what would you say I pray you? mean
you this, that if it were true, yet it was false? Or, if the Record were good,
yet is it not to be credited? For to what other purpose ye complain of lack
of witness, I can not tell, but for that you judge the Record without it, not
to be good. Otherwise if you will not pluck back your Liberality, nor take
away that which you have granted, but let it stand that the Record is good,
why disgrace you it by saying, yet it was without witness? And so by
consequence, no good Record. Thus in this Testimony also, it appears, what
wisdom and Art M. Jewel has in defacing of Authorities: and that after, him
self (all circumstancies considered) has permitted them to stand for true and
good.

D. Harding, The vi^^. Example.
out of S. Bid, does make report of one James a Deacon of York, a very
cunning man in song: and of Cednom a Divine maker of Dities, Hard. fol. 88 90.
whom M. Jewel calls Cedname (For so his name is read in Beda written in
parchement says he, forgetting him self that a sheepeskynne can be no more
sufficient warrant* of truth, then a calfeskinne) but (be it Cednom or Cednam)
what says he to him, Or to James the Deacon?

I little thought, M. Harding would so much have bewrayed his want, 18^. Blind
Harper.
to prove his matter by Pipers and Poets.

Make you no more account, of Musicians and Versifiers? Many a Minstrel is in
your Ministry, and many A Twanger upon his harp A: and whom venerable Bede
commends to the posterity with singular praises, are they but Pypers and
Poets with you? Asaph, Heman and Idithu^, because they made, and song praises
unto God, might a sober Panyme call them Pipers and Poets? Iuuencus, Sedulius,
Prudentius, ought they to be of little price or estimation, because they were
makers of Verses? Cednom (says Bid) made songs, containing matter of the
holy Scripture, with such exceeding sweetness, and with such a grace: that many
feelinge their hearts compuncte and prickte, with hearing and reading of them,
withdrewe them selves from the love of the world. Speak not therefore M.
Jewel against the Grace of God: And these sweet means, which he has
provided, to allure men thereby to his Love, term them not Pypinge or Poetrye.

Perchance, if ye had some such pyper as Cednom was, to sing and play before
you, when the Sprite trowbleth you, there might be hope, that you would be more
quiet and reasonable. Hope, I say, there might be, but no assurance, because
sometimes you are so taken, that I fear, if King David him self should play
before you, though you would not be so furious, as to cast your spear at him:
yet you would be so madly meryly disposed, as to call him a Piper.

By these few Examples then, let it be tried, whether M. Jewel has followed
an honest fashion, in his Replieng. And whether it becummeth him, which would
be compted vprighte in his Do^inges, so to play the Childs, the Woman's, the
Madmans, the Phrenetykes, Or the Mynstrels part, in Toyinge, in Iestinge, in
Imagyninge, and in Harpinge so as he has done, about D. Hardinges Testimonies.
For what is there now left, which may not be (after M, Jewels Rhetorike)
contemned?

If the Authority of such as have written at any time these nine hundred years
be alleged, it is (says M. Jewel straitewayes) out of the cumpasse of the
first six hundred years.

If we bring the Example of such as lived solitarilie within those six hundred
years: Ye flee (says he) for aid into Aegipt, or ye hunt the Mountains.

If the Example of populouse Cities far distant from us be alleged, then ye
go (says he) A thousand miles beyond Christendom.

If ye speak of their case, which are nigh their death, Alas (says he) ye
beg at deaths door.

If the Ancient Fathers, S. Cyprian, S. Basile, S. Ambrose, and others, be
brought in, to confirm your purpose, you must take heed, that no mention in
their testimonies be made of Boys, women, Infantes, Phrenetikes, Cheastes,
Chambers, wilderness etc? For then all the whole shall be disgraced, because of
those base things and Persons.

Beside this, a confessed Truth is not to be esteemed, if it were either but
once, Or without cumpanie, Or done at midnight.

To be short, no Musician shall be allowed, because he is a Piper, and no maker
of verses, never so good, because he is a Poet. And so the conclusion will be,
that nothing almost shall be brought so worthy and evident: but M. Jewel, by his
art and policy, will make it obscure and simple. If this be tolerable, the^ is
D. Harding answered: but if this be unreasonable, then has not M. Jewel used
a necessary point of discretion Or modesty.

Of M. Jewels wrangling with D. Harding. CAP. 6.
THis, which already I have specified, is to much for a sober man to use: but
this yet is not all that M. Jewel abuses himself in, against D. Harding. For
byside perverting or defacing of his Authorities, he wrangleth also, very
contentiously with him. And that, not after a general sense only or meaning of
this word, but after a Singular and proper fasshion. For (to speak in
general) All the deprauing of D. Hardings Arguments, all the disgracing of his
witness, all the turning and shifting from one point and state of the question
to an other, which (as I have showed) M. Jewel uses in the first four
articles: all this (I say) may well go under the name of contention and
quareling: and in this sense, the whole Reply, is stuffed therewithal. But,
in this place, I note that singular kind of co^te^tiousnes, by force of which,
any man drives his adversary to proving of that, which is either so possible,
that a thousand experiencies declare it: either so credible, that they them
selves which ask for proof of it, do openly and plainly confess, that they
do not deny it. As in three or four Examples:

What if four or five (says D. Harding) of sundry houses in a sickness
time, being at the point of death, in one Parisshe, require to have their
rightes er they depart?

This case, is not only possible by course of time, but also common through
infection of co^tagious aiers. But yet M. Jew. replieth.

What if no man happen to be sick? Then has M Harding lost a good Argument.

But what if some happen to be sick? Then have you (M. Jewel) found a Rude
Objection. For of the two, which is more possible? To have in a plage time,
four or five Sick: Or to have a time of Sycknes, and none at all Sick in it?
For, of a time of Sycknes, D. Hardinge did speak. And if you will put (A what
if) against the time it self, and suppose that there is no plage at all: as
this I grant is possible, so is, by like Reason, the other also. Neither can
you by putting your case, so distroie the contrary supposition, that you might
seem to make it frustrate and void: Or disapointe thereby your Adversaries
purpose.

What if four or five Principal Protestants should be connerted by Reading
the Books of Catholykes: could not they utter many secret Devises of yours,
for Open professing of which you lack but a better world?

Yea, but say you again, what if such ways be taken for lettinge of
Catholyke Books to come into the Realm, that by Readinge of them, none shall
see what is Answered? In deed, you have put me a case, Jew. 3^.
which is lykely enough, and I could sone Answer unto it, that it is a hard
Case also, to Provoke, and Challenge, And bid men speak, and make as though we
should have commendation for our freenes. And at yt very beginning, to let the^
yt wuld and should, or read or hear what we say. But yet, what were this to
y^ answer of my question? For it is possible enough, that although you make the
search never so diligent, yet some wise men of your own side will be desirous
to understand our answers, and not be hasty to condemn us before judgment.
Therefore, when a likely or possible case is put, to make a clean contrary unto
it, as though it were the^ fully refelled, what other thing is it, but to fight
upon anger, and not for truth: And to procure troble only to ye adversary, and
not to manifest and open your own doctrine.

Of what affection and humor shall I say it cu^meth, y^ you dare permit ye
history which Amphilochius writes of S. Basile to be true, Jew. 91.
and yet will not be ruled by it? Does not this prove, y^ you have a sprite of
contention within you, and that you shift to make exceptions against the
Truth? Jew. 89.


That you mislike not daily preaching, and yet y^ you reprove D. Harding for
saieing y^ in Antioche ye scripturs were daily expounded and preached, does it
not argue a conte^tio^s stomach? for suppose yt it were not true, yet no harm
cu^ming thereof unto ye reader, what need was there of a special and solemn
refelling of it? No dout but if you were disposed (M. Jew.) you could quickly
find it out, that daily exposition of the scripture might be in Antioche, and
yet ye common people be called thereunto but once a week, as S. Chrysostom
says. For it might be throughowt the Churches of Antioche by course, and in
that course, the sermon might be one day in S. Chrysostomes church. Also there
might be daily expounding of the scriptures to ye Clergy though not to the
people: And the Proposition containing in it nothing against good manners, or
truth of doctrine, a quiet man in so much matter byside, requiring in deed a
full Answer, would not have troubled himself with this question.

When you say in an other place, that, Jew. 16^
It is neither denied of you, nor any part of your quaestion, that sundry
nations in Asia the less understood not the Greek, and yet notwithstanding,
is not M. Harding hable to prove it with all his Gheasses do ye not signify by
these words, that your good will is not, plainly and peaceably to declare the
Truth of your doctrine: but your Stomach is against ye person of your
adversary, and that ye seek to contrary his saieinges?

When you say: Verily if a man by way of contention, would say, the
Licaonical tongue was a corruption or difference of the Greek tongue, and not
a several tongue of it self, M. Har. should have much a do, Jew. 164
to prove the contrary: And in saieing so, when yourselfe by, and by, do
contrary D. Har. therein, is it not straitewaies manifest, yt you follow the
way of contention?

More might be brought against you, M. Jew. in this kind: but if by these few
Examples it be perceived, that you have wrangled and striued, where no cause
was offered, I trust that although yourself be so affected, yt you will never
submit yourselfe, And yield to the Catholic and Roman Church, yet other, which
love truth and Sincerity, will take heed how they commit the settling of
their minds and consciencies, to the Positions and Answers of a man so
contentiouse. As on the other side if these so manifest Examples, prove not
plainly what you are, it profits not to bring more copy, where store
sufficient is not considered.

Of the Buts Which M. Jewel uses with D. Harding. CAP. VII.
THe mark, that M. Jewel shoots at, is to Refel D. Hardings answer: which
how many ways he has pricked and roued at, as also how artificially he has
bestowed his strength therein, I have, by example, declared. And now I think
it good to show, what buts he uses. Such buts of his I mean, which like an
Hypocrite he would seem to have set up of his own motion, where as in deed D.
Harding had made them unto him before, that he should not, al at pleasure, Roue
or hobbe abroad at every mark yt liked his fancy. As in Example D. Har.
thought it good, (before he should speak of Sole receiving or private Mass)
shortly to allege such authorities, by which y^ Mass or Sacrifice of ye new
testastament, was confirmed. Against which, M. Jew. speaks his worst, and
proves three leaves together, ye either the witnesses be not lawful, either
that they prove not Private Mass. Now the Truth being this, y^ D. Har.
brought the^ not in, to confirm Private Mass, M. Jewel therefore least he
might seem to have taken his Mark amiss, so long together as three leaves
are in his Reply, he comes (as I say) from Rouing abowte the matter, to the
very state thereof, saieinge:

BUT he will say, The first Example. Jew. 12. well shot.
he alleged al these doctors to an other purpose, to prove the Sacrifice.

Will he say so M. Jewel? and has he not rather said it already? Are not
these his express words: that, although you in a printed Sermon, Har. 24.
and preached at Poules Cross, pretend enemitie against Private Mass in word,
yet in deed, that you exte^d your whole wit and cunning, utterly to abolisshe
the unbloody and daily Sacrifice of the Church? And hereupon, does not he name
shortly the Authorities, by which he might prove the unbloody Sacrifice? In the
end of which makes he not a transition saieing, Now this presupposed, that the
Mass stands upon good and sufficient grounds, let us come to our special
purpose, and say somewhat o^ Private Mass? What vanity then was it of yours,
(M. Jewel) to make so great a talk against the witnesses alleged that they
prove not Private Mass, for which yet they were not brought, and how like an
Hypocritie come you in with your, But he will say he alleged al these Doctors
to an other purpose, whereas D. Harding so plainly declared it, that in deed
he used them not for proof of private Mass, but only of the daily and unbloody
Sacrifice.

After a like sort, The 1. Example.
concerning the number of Canons which were made in the first Nicene Council,
you ask this question, and to seeming, oppose your Adversary with it, saieing:

What leads M. Harding to say, Jew. 239
The bishope of Rome has these three score and ten Canons in safe keeping? Why
does he thus dissemble and mock the world? Certainly the bishope of Rome
himself disclameth it, and says he has them not. for thus he writes
touching the same: There are in the Church of Rome only twenty Canons of the
Council of Nice, By what negligence the rest are lost, it is not known. The
Pope says there are but twenty Canons extant: M. Harding says, there are
three score and ten Canons. I trow, it is no reason we should believe M.
Harding, and leave the Pope.

It is no reason in deed. Yet if they speak not contrary one to the other,
then is it no Reason, that you should in such sort handle the matter, as though
they were repugnant. For true it is, that as ye Pope said, there are but
twenty Canons exta^t, yet yt there were once more then twenty, it appears by
these words which follow immediately: By what negligence the rest are lost, it
is not known. Also that there were in Time Past three score and ten Canons of
the Council of Nice, Har. 104.
true it is, and so it is said of D. Harding: but that there are at this
Present Time so many, he says it not, though you boldly report it of him, to
make A Contradiction, between him and the Pope.

Now, may we think, that you perceived not this much by yourselfe? Yeas
without al doubt you did. and therefore not ignorant that you had ouershott
your self, and that the Catholic would bring you from your Rouing, to
certain and set Marks, yourselfe come welfauoredly to them, and say:

BUT Steven the Bishope of Rome says: there were sometime in Rome the full
three score and ten Canons.

O M. Jewel, do you see, that this will be your Answer? Or rather that so much
is included in the words of Pope Stephanus, And yet did you bring his
Testimony in, to prove D. Hardings report false, which said no more, then
that the whole number, of these three score and ten Canons, was kept diligently
in the Church of Rome?

Tell us now, who dissimbleth? Or who mocketh the world? And therefore was not
this BUT of yours first considered, before you did so sharply inueigh against
D. Harding? For both the Pope and he, speaking of the Time Past, it is true
that three score and ten Canons of the Nicene Council were in Rome: And the
Pope speaking of the time Present, that twenty only are extant is not
contrary to him that speaks of yt Time Past, saying that, three score and
ten Canons were kept in Rome.

And therefore it may be justly returned upon you again M. Jewel, that, Non
satis commode diuisa sunt temporibus tibi Daue haec. Jew. 237


Let us bring an other Example. The third Example.
To prove the Souerantie of the Church of Rome, D. Har. allegeth S. Iren.
saieing: Iren. lib. 3. cap. 3.
Ad hanc ecclesiam propter maiorem principalitatem etc. To this Church (of
Rome) it is necessary all the Churches, that is to say, all that be faithful
any where, to repair and come together, for the mightier Principality of the
same.

Irenaeus speaks not of the Supremacy. Rouing.
Then, says M. Jewel again: Irenaeus writes only against Valentinus, After
this, he tells us y^ Ireneus rests specially upon the Example of the Church
of Rome, and by this rouing, he would have it thought, that he has not
Answered nothing. And then it follows:

Jew. 244 Hypocrite


Have ye found it now at length? and did ye not perceive at the first alleging
of Ireneus, y^ y^ force of D. Hardinges Argument consisted in these words,
propter maiorem principalitatem, because of the greater principality of ye
Church of Rome? Why dissimble you then? And why play you the hypocrite so
artificially, in keeping that back, which should have been at the very first
Answered: And in delyuering it when it cummeth, after such a sort, as may
cause the Reader to conceine, that it is of your own pure Invention, and not
of your adversaries objection: And that you do freely of your own will and wit
increase ye strength of the witnesses brought against you, and speak more for
your Aduersarye, then he has done for himself?

They will (you say) Reply. Will they? Naie they do: And not Reply, as though
it would depend of a former argument, but Object, without any preambles, that,
The Greater or mightier Principality of the Church of Rome, which Irenaeus
speaks of, does prove the Supremacy thereof above al other Churches. Yet you
But only, at it.

There is also a very plain Testimony The fourth Example.
of S. Ambrose, alleged by D. Har. for the Supremacy of the sea of Rome: And
the strength of the argument consists in this yt the Chieftie of the
Apostolic priesthood is affirmed by him to florisshe there. Amb. lib. ^. cap.
6.
Note ye words, Chieftie, and priesthood. For until answer be made to the^,
al besides is but Rouing. As in Example out of M. Jewel.

Al byside ye marcke.
He increases the matter, by the testimonies of S. Augustine, and S.
Chrysostom, and leaves it as a most plain and manifest Truth, that Rome was
more noble for the Gospel of Christ then the Empire of the world. And whereas
he is not so dull, but perceaueth well enough, that all this gear cummeth not to
the point of ye argument, then he cummeth to his familiar BUT, saieing:

But S. Ambrose says, Jew. 248
Apostolici sacerdotij principatum: The principality of the Apostolic
Priesthood.

Yea forsooth M. Jewel, of the Principality of Priesthood, S. Ambrose
speaks. And we may well wonder, that all this while, you have dissembled, as
though you had not seen the mark which we set before you, to direct your
answer there unto. Now how well you have Replied concerning these two
Testimonies. of S. Iren. and S. Ambrose, it shall be examined in the place
proper for it, which will be in the third Book. At this present, I note your
Craft only and Hypocrisy, by which you conueigh the matter so, that you may
first wander abroad, withowt scope in deed, yet not withowt some appearance of
direct Answer, and that, afterward, you come with A BUT to the very point of
the argument, and make it seem that this BUT was set up of your own self, and
not of the adversary.

Of which kind, he that will require more examples, may for the seking, easily
have the^. And when he finds the^, let him remember, that it is but a lewd
kind of Rhetorike, either so to daly with the Adversary, either so to delay
the right Answer unto the matter proponed. And now to an other point.

Of M. Jewels Refellyng one Truth by an other. CAP. VIII.
IT is A common thing with you (M. Jewel) in Answering, to put away one Truth
by an other: Or by adding one to an other, so to confou^de them both, that no
certainety shall be found in the question. Which surely is a good provision, yt
you may have sumwhat always to Reply: but except there follow a better
Application, it should not in any part satisfy. As in Example,

When Ireneus witnesses that Bishopes of the Greek Church cummyng to Rome, The
first Example. Eccl. Histor. lib. 5. ca. 24.
had the Eucharistia sent unto them, to signify their mutual Communion in
Sacrament, notwithstanding their Diversity in keeping of Easter: though you
should bring never so many Examples, that, Paulinus sent at one time a loaf of
bread to S. Augustine, Jew. 40.
at an other, five loves, and them in token of good will: yet do ye not prove
hereby, that the Eucharistia, which S. Ireneus speaks of, was not, as the
Catholics expound it, the Sacrament. For neither is the bread which S.
Paulinus sent, called Eucharistia, neither do such Presents from one to
other, prove a consent in Religion: And yt which S. Ireneus speaks of is
called Eucharistia, and the cause for which it was sent (which was to signify
their unity, Eucharistit.
in the Substance of our Religion) does require that it should be ye Sacrament.
And so I say, true it is that Bishopes presented Bisshopes, with tokens of
mutual frindship: but this Truth must not destroy or confound an other
Truth, of the Custom in the Church of Rome, to send the very Sacrament to the
Bishopes that came from the East Church. And in this place (M. Jewel) you
lack not Invention, but Application: And you bring forth in deed fair loves,
but you match them not rightly with the Sacrament.

The sum of M. Jewels Answer is this: The loaf which Paulinus sent unto S.
Augustine was not the Sacrament: Ergo, the Eucharistia which S. Irenaeus
witnesses to have been sent to bishopes of the East cummyng to Rome, was not
the Sacrament.

Leontius a Breeke writer, The 2. Example.
reports of the Patriarch of Alexandria, yt he said Mass (fecit Missas) in
his Oratorie. yet will it not necessarily follow (says M. Ieu.) Jew. 78. Missa.
that Missa in this place, imports the mass. For, as I have already proved
by sundry Authorities, Missa is oftentimes used for any kind of prayer.

But what then? If it be oftentimes so used, must it not be otherwise used in
this place df Leontius? How prove you this Consequence? Or how Apply you ye
one place to the other? Briefly then to repete it, M. Jewels answer is this:

Missa is often times taken for any kind of Prayer: Ergo the Mass, which holy
John the Almener said, was not properly mass.

In the same history of Leontius, D. The 3. Example.
Harding expounds (cum benedixisset sancta) thus in English: when the
Patriarch had consecrated. Benedicere sancta.
Which proves (by the way) that (missa) the Mass, of which the Story
speaks, is not taken for any kind of Prayer, because, blessing of the holy
things or consecration is not used generally in every kind, but in Special
matter, Time, and place. But to note, what M. Jewel concludes, of Benedicere
sancta:

These words do no more signify (faieth he) the consecration of the
Sacrament, Jew. 78.
as M. Harding has translated it, then these words, Extollite manus vestras
in sancta, do signify the lifting up of hands to the Sacrament. And why so?
Chrysostom in his Lyturgie uses the same manner of speech, to a far other
purpose. What is yt? He allegeth the words, and then infers: It may
appear, that Chrysostom by these words, meant a solemn prayer to conclude
ye whole.

But how apply you now these things to yonr purpose? because, S. Chrysos.
means by Benedicere Sancta, a prayer to conclude his liturgy, does Leontius
understand, just ye same by those words? In what Logik find you that
Consequence? Or, by what manner of likelihoode, make you it probable? Mark it
better (M. Jew.) and you shall perceive, yt which you would conclude not only to
be unlikely, but also impossible. For, ye benediction of which S. Chrysostom.
speaks, was you say a solemn Prayer to conclude ye whole: but ye
Benedictio^ of which Leo^tius tells you, was before the Pater noster, of the
mass, which Prayer is used, when the Mysteries are not yet Received. Therefore
undoubtedly the meaning is not one in them both, concerning Benedicere Sancta,
which is referred to so distinct Times and Conditions, And your Craftines may
be espied which would destroy one Truth by an other.

The Answer which M. Jewel makes is this: Benedicere Sancta, signifies in S.
Chrysostom a solemn Prayer made to conclude the whole: Ergo, benedicere
Sancta, that is, to bless the holy things, does not signify in Leontius
History, Consecration.

Let us come to an other Example. The 4. Example. Matthew. 16. Petra.
Our savior said unto S. Peter, Thou art Peter, A Rock, and upon this Rock
will I build my Church: Ergo, S. Peter was most fast set above all other in
worthiness, and he was a most sure and Principal person in the building of
Christ his Church: Such, as by which, all the faithful should be stayed.
Which proves his singular Prerogative.

But (says M. Jewel) Christ is the Rock. Jew. 222.
Who denies it? Again, The confession of S. Peter, is the Rock. Neither this
is denied. And to prove this, that no Catholic denies, he lacks no
Authorities. But how follows this, that because Christ is the Rock, therefore
S. Peter is not the Rock? Or because ye Church is builded on the faith of S.
Peter, therefore it was not builded upon the person which had that faith? By
like Reason you might conclude, By such arguments al religion has been
confuted.
God is our King and our Father: Ergo, we owe not supreme Reverence in their
kind, to our Prince, Or our Parents. Which is nothing else, but by one Truth,
to destroy an other: And for lack of Understanding, And abundance of
Presuming, neither to distinct duties and offices accordingly, neither to
refrain from determining, that which we know not, over hastily. Otherwise it
were quickly to be perceived, that Christ is the Rock by merit, S. Peter by
mere mercy: Christ by Absolute Authority S. Peter by means of Legacy: Christ
before and above all other, S. Peter above al other, but yet after, and not
before Christ. By which commodity of distinctions, those propositio^s which
Protestants feign to be contrary, one to ye other, will stand and agree well
together.

The brief Argument of M. Jewels is this. The Rock which Christ spoke of to
S. Peter, signifies the confession of S. Peter's faith: ergo it signifies not
S. Peter confessing it.

An other Example. The. v Example. Ambr. 2. Cor. 12.
S Androw followed our savior before S. Peter. And yet (says S. Ambrose)
Androw received not Primatum, the Primacie, but Peter.

But, Jew. 245
M. Jewel Auswereth: It is easy to be showed, that Primatus among the old
fathers, is far otherwise used, I mean, for any Superiority or preferment
before others. primatus
And this he proves at large by Phrases of Speech used about Esau, about the
Heretic Abbate Eutyches, Or toward any of the four Patriarchs. But what
concludes he?

Thincketh he* because the Primacy that Esau lost for a dish of pottage, was to
wear a better cote then his fellows, Or to sit highest at the Table, Or to have
thrice or five times more meat for his part, then an other, Or any other such
thing belonging to the honor of the first borne: that the primacy which S.
Ambrose attributes to S. Peter, may have the very self same sense in it? Or,
because Eutyches had a Primacie in his Abbey, may it therefore be lawful for us
to imagine, that all the Apostles lived in one Cloister together, and that S.
Peter was no more then an Abbate among them?

Beside this, if Primatus does signify any Preferment, it serves also to
signify the Supremacy. And so, as you wish that it should be taken in your
sense, so should you justly have provided for it, least it were taken in an
other sense. And this truly had been your part, (M. Jewel) to prove that S.
Ambrose does not mean by S. Peter's Primacie, the General Government over all the world. As for the bare showing of it, y^ Primatus has diverse senses, it
is mete and convenient for a Scholemaster or maker of Dictionaries: but in an
Answerer it is not reasonable, except there follow an Application thereof to his
purpose. You love allwaies to drine the Catholics to the proving side, knowing
it to be safest and easyest for you, to stand still at the denial of every
thing. And who so folishe that can not do so?

If (say you) this word Primatus must signify that power and Government,
Jew. 145
that M. Harding fantasieth: then must it follow of necessity, that Esau,
Eutyches, the bishop of Antioche, and the Bishop of Alexandria, had the
Universal power and Government of the whole world.

As who should say, that the question had been, whether Primatus has any more
significations then one: Or that D. Harding had taken upon him, to prove that
Primatus where so ever it be found, must needs signify the Supremacy of the
B. of Rome.

No, (M. Jewel) let Primatus have as many diverse significations, as you have
devises to confound A truth, D. Harding obiecteth you, the testimony of S.
Ambrose where it is plain, that S. Peter had a Primacy. To this now make a
direct answer, not by telling a long Tale and True enough of the Significations
of Primatus, but in Applying them to the Purpose, and Instructing us, in what
one sense it is to be taken in S. Ambrose. And if you dare say, that he meant
such a Primacy, as Esau lost for a dishe of Pottage, Or such, as the Heretic
Eutiches had in his Abbey, then shall we provide an Answer for you. But whereas
the very words themselves do give it, that it could not be so Simple a
matter, (for S. Androw, as every other of ye Apostles, had Authority given him
in the whole world, and yet the Primacie was bestowed upon S. Peter only, of
which it follows, that among the chiefest he was the chief) What helps it
you, to the Answering of S. Ambrose, to declare that Primatus is taken for any
Superiority or Preferment?

Again whereas you can not deny it, but S. Peter had a Dignity and
Preferment above other, how well should you have don to Specify wherein it
consisted? But you think it enough perchance, to show that you are not
altogether unlearned, and that you have in your days, Heard, Read, and Seen
many things. Which in deed were enough to do, if Christians might seek for
their own Praise only, and not the setting forth of the Truth, but the case
being other wise, content not your self herewith (M. Jewel) to play the bare
part of a Grammarian: nor think the office of an Answerer fulfilled, if in
telling one Truth, you destroy an other.

The Answer that M. Jewel makes is this: Primatus does signify any
Preferment, Ergo, it signifies not in S. Ambrose the Supremacy of S. Peter.
Again: Esau lost his Primacie for a mess of pottage, Ergo S. Peter's Primacie
was not an universal Government.

Now as I have said of this word Primatus, The. vj. Example.
so might I also of this word Principatus, Principality, Principatus.
which S. Augustine uses to Bonifacius Bishop of Rome in these words: Who is
he that knows not, that, that Principality of Apostleship, (which
undoubtedly was in the Sea of Rome) is to be preferred before any Bishoprike
that is? August. de Bapt. cont Do^. lib. 2.
which place proving so evidently, that the Sea of Rome passes in Dignity
what soever Bishopric in the world, yet M. Jewel answers, that it
signifies not here a Supreme Government. Ask him the cause why, and he can
say no more but that,

Socrates is called Prince of Philosophers, Jew. 249
And Plato Prince of Orators, And Pompeius Prince of the world, And Elias head
of the Prophets. In which places, Princeps is taken, not for a Prince or
Governor, but only, for A man that for his qualities is to be esteemed above
the rest. And in this sense S. Augustine calls the Sea of Rome, as it was in
his time, principatum sedis Apostolicae.

Well Sir, that, Princeps is often used for A man had in estimation for his
virtue, rome, or any singular quality, every Grammarian can witness. But that
it is alwais so used, who tells you? And except you prove that it has no
other Signification bisyde, how can you infer, that because Socrates is
called Prince of the Philosophers in respect of his knowledge, so the Sea of
Rome should be called Princeps or chi^fe in respect of some quality only,
(you tell not what) and not of Supreme Government. For Supreme Government it
self, is it not a certain quality? And Pompeius whom your self name as
Prince of the world, though he were so in deed: in respect either of Virtue or
Office, yet was he not Supreme Governor. How hangs this Tale then together,
that Princeps is not taken for a Chief Governor, Like Germans Lips.
because it is often used to signify an Estimation above others in virtue.
etc? Or who would ever so confound a Truth by a Truth, but he that loves
not the Truth?

I would ask you also (M. Jewel) what quality that should be in the
Apostolic See of Rome, for which it should be preferred above other
Bishoprics of all the world? It is not (you say) for Supreme Gouernme^ts
sake. Wherefore then? Is it for Estimation of virtue, Gloquence, Philosophy or
any such like? Name the quality if you can but you can not.

Only you stay upon the Negative, that it had not the Principality because of
Supreme Government: And to that you add that Princeps is taken, in the places
which you allege, only for a man that for his qualities is to be esteemed. As
well you might prove, (M. Jewel) that Socrates was not Prince of Philosophers,
because Princeps is taken oftentimes for A Chief Governor in A country, which
Socrates never was.

See then (indifferent Reader) whether this be an honest and plain manner in
answering, to refell one Truth by an other, Or so to deny one Sense of A word,
that he can not tell, what other Sense of the same word, to follow? Surely
where M. Jewels senses in this matter should be, I can not tell. For like as
when we say, Socrates is the Prince of Philosophers, we are understood to
make the Comparison between him and other Philosophers, and not to meddle with
Orators, Captains, Artificers, Or any of a diverse state and condition: So,
when S. Augustine witnesses, that the Principalitye of the Apostleship (which
is in the Sea of Rome,) is to be preferred before all other what so ever
Bishoprikes, what wise man doubts, but that ye Comparison here is to be made,
between the degrees of Power and Charge that are lesser or greater in that
kind of Office? Now by a Bisshopricke, what is imported? Is not a Spiritual
Function and Charge over Souls understood thereby? And in this Charge are
not Archbysshoppes above Bisshopes, and Patriarchs above Archebisshopes? But
in what thing above? In Jurisdiction undoubtedly, and Government, larger then
their Inferior have.

Therefore, if the Sea of Rome, do pass in Principality, all other
Bisshoprikes (as S. Augustine witnesses) And if the Superiortie or Inferiortie
in Bisshoprikes must be considered according to the greatness or smalnesse of
the Jurisdiction which is appointed to them (as the Definition of the Name will
declare) how should not the Sea of Rome have an universal Authority or
Government over al Christendom, which has such a Principality geauen it,
that all other Bisshoprikes are not comparable unto it?

Not comparable, I mean, in those things, that perteine to Authority and
Government, such as is annexed to the Condition, Substance, or Nature of
Bisshoprikes. For in Virtue, Policy, Eloquence, Favor of Emperors, Abundance
of Riches and lyuinges, and many other like things which are Personal or
Temporal, the Bisshoppes of Constantinople may far excel the Pope. Yea, in
such Bisshoply and Spiritual things also, as concern their Character and
Order, every Bisshope in the world, does Baptize, Confirm, Absolve and
Consecrate as perfitely and excellentely as the B. of Rome. But yet for all
this, concerning the examininge and practicing of these self same things
which by Virtue of their order they may do, and concerning the power of
Jurisdiction, As, to plant and to pull up, to Cite, to dipense, To Forbid, to
Command, To prescribe Orders, To determyne doutes, and so forth: what so ever
Bisshoprike it be, The Principality of the Apostleshippe, that is in Rome,
must be preferred. And what lacks then here, to Supreme Government
concerning causes Ecclesiastical? How lilte also must it be, to pass all
others in Degree of Bisshoprike, if any one were exempted from him?

The greater and fouler is your fault therefore (M. Jewel) which would make
your Reader believe, that the Principalytie of ye Apostolic See of Rome, in
respect of other Bisshoprikes, consists in any other Qualytie (what, you can
not tell) and not in Supreme Government. Whereas, in Comparinge of Bysshoprike
with Bysshoprike, the Authority of Government is directly to be considered.

The Answer of M. Jewel is this. Princeps is often used for a man had in
estimation for any Virtue, Room, Or Singular Quality: Ergo, the Principalytie
which S. Augustine attributes to the Apostolic See consists not in Supreme
Gouer^ment.

It would be over long and tedious, to teken up all Examples, by which I
might evidently confirm, this objection of mine, that Master Jewel uses the
settinge further of one Truth, to the disgracinge or dissanulling rather of an
other. As when the Catholics say, to prove the Supremacy of the Bisshope of
Rome: Julius restored Athanasius: The.vij Example. Jew. 290
M. Jewel Answers: Maximus also restored unto him, his Communion.

When they say: The viij. Example.
Touching faith and Religion the Sea of Rome has always been consulted:

He Answers: Jew. 294
Marcellinus, Dulcitius, Bonifacius, Euodius and other sent their questions to
S. Augustine.

When they say: The.ix. Example.
S. Peter was called, Princeps or Chief of the Apostles:

He Answers: So we reed in Scriptures, Princeps Familiae, Princeps
Legationis, Princeps Coquorum, that is, the Chief of the house or stock, Jew.
302.
the Chief of the Embassage, the Chief of the Cooks.

When the Catholics say: The.x. Example.


S. Peter the Master of the whole world appointed S. James to be Bisshope of
Jerusalem: Jew. 303


He Answers: That unto Michael is committed the nation of the Jews. But,
Land and Sea, and all the habitation of the world, is committed to S. Paul.

When they say, The.xi. Example.
that Rome is the most notable and chief Church of the world:

He Answers that, Cicero to blase the nobility of that City, calls lucem
orbisterrarum, at^ue arcem omnium Gentiu^, Jew. 304
the light of the world and the Castle of all nations.

To make an end, when they say out of S. Ambrose, The.xii. Example.
That Damasus the Pope is called the Rector and Ruler of the house of God:

To put the matter out of al doubt, see what he answers thereunto.

But to put the matter out of doubt, let us consider whether the self same
form of Speech, Jew. 306
have been applied to any others in like sort. And then he tells where other
Bisshopes have been said to be Rulers in the Church.

But does this kind of Auswer, either satisfy the Objection, Or Determine the
Truth, Or quiet a doubtful mind? Does not this kind of Reasoning bring us
rather into perplexities, that it may not be known, how to be resolved in any
matter? Is there any fitter way for the Antichrist to work by, Antichrist high
way for (...)
then, by Form and Phrases of Speech, to confound all Faith and Religion?

Do you believe (M. Jewel) that Christ is the Son of God? But do you believe
that he is the natural Son of his Father, of the same Substance and Eternity
with him? If you do so in deed, what say you to this Argument, that Judges in
ye Scriptures are called Gods, Ex. 22
and that, the frindes and Servants of God, are called Gods? psalm. 81.
Would this put the matter out of doubt, that Christ is not the Son of God (I
mean by Nature) because you could find it out (after you had considered it)
where the selfsame form of speech is applied to others in like sort? And where
such, as are not the natural Children of God, are called yet the Children of
God?

Christ saves us, and in Form of Speech S. Paul says to Timothy: Doeinge
so, thou shall save thy self, 1. Tim. 4.
and them that hear thee. And would you conclude hereupon, that the Power of
sauinge is all one in them both, because the Form of the word, is all one?
Or that it is not properly and worthily veryfyed of Christ, because it is but
improperly attributed to S. Timothy?

Consider then I pray you (M. Jewel) whether this will put the matter out of
doubt, if in Refelling the Sense of some one place which pleases you not, you
bring a like Form of Speech used in an other place: And without further
probation, require to have the understanding which your Aduersaie gathers of
his witness, to be reformed according to the meaning of the Sentencies which
you allege: As, because Princeps, that is Chief, is used in both places,
whether you say Princeps Apostolorum, or Princeps Coquorum: Therefore to
conclude, that the Chieftie of S. Peter Emonge the Apostles, was no other
thing then the Chieftie of N. emonge the Cooks.

Beware therefore (Christen Reader) of M. Jewel, And especially in those
places: which as they make most for the Catholyke Faith, so has he no other
refuge for sauinge him self from Subscribinge unto them, but this very Simple
one and Feeble, to seek where like Phrases may be found of an other Sense yet
and meaning, thereby to bring in to doubt (or as he supposes) to putre out
of doubt, that the Sense of the Catholykes Objection can not continue. Which,
in few words, is no other, then to show himself A Grammarian only, And to
destroy one truth by an other, as though. One phrase might not have two good
Senses, each one agreeing with the place in which they are appointed to serve.

The sum of M. Jewels Argument is this: The like form or phrase of speech is
to be found in an other sense: Ergo, to put the matter out of doubt, this
Present place (of which the question is) has not a different or sundry sense
from that other.

The Sum of my meaning, is this: that no man be deceived through this kind of
M. Jewels Answering, wherein, he so tells one Truth, that he disswadeth an
other. This practice of the Protesta^tes has already done harm enough. let
them begin rather to amend, their former iniquites, then to add fresshe unto
them.

They have answered: God must be worshipped in Spirit: Which is most true, and
have thereby taken away an other truth, that, God is also to be worshipped
with our body and bodily things.

They have answered: The true Fast is to abstain from Sin. Which is
vndoubteely True: but by that fair show of pure holiness, they have Destroyed
an other Truth that, Together with the fasting from sin, we must also take
pains in our body, and abstain now and then, from meat and drink.

They have Answered: We must receive the body of Christ by faith, which in
some sense is most true. But they have there withal taught the people, not to
believe the Real presence of Christ in the Sacrament: which presence yet is as
true, as the other is certain.

In other cases more, they have done the like. It is to much that they have
already done: let them not therefore continue in this trade of Answering, nor
of dealing in matters of Religion. Specially when they bring the matter, to
Phrases of Speech, and Signification of words, and by one Sense take away an
other, whereas both in their several places do agree with Truth: this kind
of handeling or Tumblyng rather of things, the more further of it is, from the
Common Capacity and judgment of the Reader, yt sorer it trobleth his
conscience, and ye harder it is to be remedyed. For the less he is able to
examine it, the more he mistrusteth, when he sees many words made on the
contrary side about it: and by yt same reason, because he lacks the lernyng
and Intelligence, he will not so easily conceive what is told him, or perceive
what is what in the question.

For, like as you M. Jew. have now instructed us, in the significations, of
Missa, Princeps, Principality, and Rector: so, if an other would teach us, as
concerning the Motherheade of our blessed Lady, The excellency of Christ, the
Resurrection of our flesh, yt A Mother, Christ, and flesh, signify not
always a natural mother, Or the Saluiour of the world, or this sensible and
palpable flesh: would it not cost us so many words in yt refelling of it,
and cause us so narowly to examine, every circumsta^ce about it, yt y^ common
reader should either not inte^d, for slewth or wearynes, to consider it, Or not
be hable to perceive it, or if he did, to say yet to himself, Byr Lady, this
gear is not so clear and manifest, but arguments may be found out against
it? To what purpose then is it, to peeke up phrases only, and to give us the
sundry significatio^s only of words? Surely to no other end, the^ to bring in
a confusion. In so much, yt a man shall not be able to affirm any thing almost,
be it never so manifest, but by y^ like feat a Reply will be made against it.
Is it not true at this present, that you (M. Jew) stand for a Bishop of Sarum?
Let so much then be written unto Geneua, And let the brothers there, Rejoice,
and Praise the Lord for it, that so learned and Fervent a Minister is set over
the congregation. But in the beginning of their joy, if it should be said
sadly unto them, that they were not best to be so glad before they be sure
thereof, because A Bishope is not always taken for a preacher of the word, or
minister of the Sacraments, but signifies sometimes a man which for any
singular Qualities sake, has a Charge and sight over any thing committed unto
him etc. would not this objection, let y^ forth goeing and course of their
gladness? No doubt thereof. For by that time his needless talk were answered,
and he for all y^ would reply again, that it follows not Necessarily, M. Jew.
to have any spiritual office in yt he is reported to be a Bishope, because
Cicero himself in his Epis. uses a lyk word to a far other sense, it would
make some to doubt of ye matter, and other to marvel at ye putting up of ye
doubt, and every one to be trobled with some affection either with it or against
it, the end therefore will be co^fusio^.

I speak not here against distinctions: neither can I mislyke with his
diligence, that when one word is taken sundry ways, does set every sense of
the word in his proper Place. But this is that, which would be amended in M.
Jewel, that in Reasoning against us, he be not content to tell us Barely, that
Princeps, or principatus, or Rector is used dyuersly: but that he declare, in
what one sense it must be taken, concerning that place about which our question
is, Or in what other sense, then that which we do take it in Otherwise: If the
question were, Whether any Mass be, at this day, said in Rome: we
affirmyng, that there is: He Replieth in deed, when he Answers, that, Missa
is taken for any kind of Prayer. but, if he add no more, and if he ca^ not
say, in his conscience that the Mass at Rome is such a kind of Prayer only,
he Replieth but like A Sophist, and mainteyneth only a Co^tradiction, to y^
increase of Contention. And, neither will he yield to our proposition, because
he replieth against it, neither does he veny our proposition, because it is but
a Truth which he says, and therefore nothing contrary to that of ours:
Neither will he apply his own sense of the word Missa (or what so ever other
it be) to the question proponed, but like a man not only Amassed himself, but
that would have al other to be uncertain in every matter, so he leaves it as
he found it in some note book or Lexicon, that Missa, Princeps, Principatus,
are taken not always in one Sense. Beware therefore of him.

Of the Courteous, Mylde and Gentle, behavior of M. Jewel toward D. Harding.
CAP. IX.
YOur frindes (M. Jew.) believe it, and your self do also acknowledge it: y^
you have dealt in this Conflict with D, Har. very honestly and modestly. And, if
they think so, I marvel not, because a good will is so ready, to allow y^
Praises of him whom it likes, y^ of every occasion, it does admit ye
persuasion, y^ leads there unto. In so much, y^ without further Loking into
your Book, and Considering of ye Specialties, it is unto some a plain
Demonstration, yt you are of a very Quiet and Gentle Sprite, because you have
charged your adversary only with Untruths, and abstained from the Term of
Lies.

Wherein, though they be greatly deceived (because in deed, in doing your
worst, you could never have rightly called them Lies, which shall be shortly
proved, to be not so much as, Untruths) yet are they easily to be pardoned,
because it is A common matter in good Natures and dispositions, quickly to be
moved with the show of Virtue and honesty, without long tarying and further
trial, whether it be true or Counterfaite. But:

As for you, M. Jewel, it is great wonder, not, that you speak Sweetly and
mean bitterly, or speak sharply and think it Truly: but, yt you do pretend
Modesty and practice Extremity, showing in words, as though either you had
no Choler at all, either kept it down from Inflammations, And in deeds
expressing such passions, as declare exceeding copy of bitter humors. Jew. ^:
Gentle M. Jew.
I will not (you say at the beginning) Answer heat for heat, but in such kind
of Eloquence, will rather geaue place.

And again: 42.
No, No, M. Jewel triu^pheth not, but gives al triumph, victory, and glory
unto God. 79.
and inan other place: Of my arguments I make no Vaunt. If they sound well In
Gods ears, they are well in tuene.

Do not these phrases and ye like declare, the man to be much mortified, that
uses them? And, that he is so far of from geauing Reproach or Taunt of his
own making: that he will not so much as use the occasion, when it is offered,
or requite like with like, being Provoked?

And who is he so perfect by his own Testimony? Forfoth M. Jewel. And that M.
Jewel, which (bysyde those forsaied behauiours, of which I have spoken) spares
not to call men Innizers, Renegates, Jew. pa.
Robbers of the people, 2.
and deceivers of them in all cumfort, 3
Blind Guides, Sovereign Heretics, Wilful Deuisers, Modest M. Jew.
Against their own knoulege, violently to repel y^ institution of Christ, 55
Deniers of Christ's institution, Improuers of Gods commandment, 96
Men that use scorneful and sclaunderous tales. 114
That M. Jewel, 118
which charge them with Wilful malice, 2
Hatred of truth, 3.
Childissh fables, Lies and sclaunders, Vain folly, and Manifest falsehoode.

Even yt Jewel, which says of the Bishopes of Rome (to let go other, as
favorable and gentle words toward the^) yt as Iulianus ye Emperor in his
phrenesie, some times imagined y^ yt great Alexa^ders soul was come by
succession to dwell in him: eue^ so now the bishopes of Rome Imagine by like
pha^tasie or phrenesie, yt S. Peter's soul comes by succession to dwell in
the^. Such Privilege and grace he has boldly to set forth so Incredible and
Slanderous Lies: and yet to be taken for a Quiet and Peaceable man.

But against Strangers and Foreners, he is (you will grant) somewhat Ernest and
zealous: Marye toward D. Har. his old acquaintance and countriema^, he is very
sober So I trow,and te^perate. Jew. page 1.
as by these his familiar Terms it will appear. 4


He laith to D. Har. charge, 5
Cauils, Into^ perat humors of speaking evil, See what store He has kept un to
himself for all his leaving such kind of Eloquence unto his adversary.
Inflaming 14
of his choler, 19
Villainy, Dishonest cou^tena^ce, wicked wilfulnes, Wa^to^ folly, 23
Well broking of his own lerning, 73
Bringing of blind Geasses, 79
Skorning, and yt as his manner is, Wilful renou^cing of gods known truth, 84
Presuming of his own wit and eloquence, 85
Bravery, 129
Ostentatio^ of lerning, Gross error, Po^pe of words, 165
New fantasy, Kind of lerning not only peuish, but also fa^tastical and mere
fra^tike, 149
Refresshing himself with one pore syllable, 254
leuing his lerning utterly, 39.
and holding by bare Gheasses as he commonly does, 106
Speaking only by authority and proving nothing, 112
as his manner is, Narow seking to find some covert for his error: 122.
Leaving ye whole rout of his company, 127
and gladness to run alone, 145
Blindness, Bitterness of talk inflamed (...) Malice, 172
whereof it seems he wants no store: 174
Wantonly denying of Christ, 175
Amasing of the ignorant Reader with a countenance of great learning: Faction, 181
Co^te^tio^, 217
Mainteyning of untruth, contrary to his own knowledge, 219
Doctrine serving only to maintein Ignorance and the kingdom of 231
darkness, 269
Liking of those authorities above al others, 284.
which are most vain and shamles above al others. Manifest corruption and
falsifie^g of Doctors, Purposely corrupting both the Greek and the Latin of
Socrates.

These words be yours, M. Jew. not only for yt they be uttered by you: but
also, for that they perteyne directly and properly unto your self. With these
and other like pearls (As a Ieweller abunding in such Pretiousnes) ye have
thoroughly besett your whole book, yt it might ye more glitter in ye eye of
your reader. Here (...) your Stage is fully freight. Some man would think, it
were Vetus Comoedia: But it is not Absolutely so, because ye admit unto your
Stage the Nouam also. And like A cunning and wise Plaier, ye temper one humor
diuersely, keeping still y^ sharpenes of your sense and meaning, but expressing
it not always discourteously. For like a good natured and nurtered adversary
you order sometimes D. Harding manerly and shamefastly, As: This argument is
very weak, Jew. pa. 27. Jew. 104 Tender Compassion.
I will not say it is unlearned or proceeds of ignorance. Again: if it be,
either ye violence of nature, or the manner of his Catholic doctrine, that
dryueth M. Harding thus to taunt, he must be borne withal. 204
And again: O what means M. Harding thus to deal? Loathe I am to make the
co^parion, 225.
but true it is: very children do not use to reason in so Childissh sort.
Again: If I List to use his own terms, I might well call this, foisting or
cogging, or I know not what.

Lo what a kind heart here is? He will not say yt he may say, he will bear with
his adversary. Loath he is, to do yt he does. If he List, he could he sharper.
As who should think, M. Jew. of himself surely is of A Sweet and Gentle
disposition, he inflameth not his Choler, not because he has none: but either
he will not, either he is loath, either he lists not. He answers not heat
for heat, not only because he promised so: but even of very pure mildenes of
Sprite, and Moderation. Yet saving for the civility in utterance, al in effect
is one: Whether one say, he lies, or saving his reverence he lies. And I like
M. Jew. no better when he says:

Loath I am to make the Comparison, Jew. pa. 204
but true it is, very childrene do not use to reason in so childisshe sort: 164
than when he goes plainly to work without dissimulation, 245
calling it, 60.
Lewed Logike, Where now is Loath I am, and he must be borne withal.
that D. Har. uses, And with these Phrases disgracing his sayings: This
Argument is much acrase^, It is utterly insensible and void of reason, It
halteth down right of one side, It hangs only upon lack of carriage, A very
Child may ^one see through ht it, It is a good Frydayes Argument: 166. 129 216.
Again: This conclusion is faint, It is single sold etc. 135. 65. 137. 263.
For both ways the adversary is grievously touched. Yea rather, where by other
Signs it is plain and evident, Jew. 308.
that D. Harding is nothing at all spared, there to pretend A Good Countenance
and a Quicte Affection: it is the more bitter and odious.

What mean you by these words M. Jew? here by y^ way, I must put M. Har. in
remembrance, notwithstanding for his estimation sake, he would feign have his
forth in these matters: Yet should he not therefore thus beguile the eyes of
the simple, and thus mysreporte and falsi^ie the words of the ancient
Fathers? Do you not herein charge him with high Pride, extreme Cruelty and
wicked falsehoode? When you call him Somewhat short witted, 198 29.26 54.143
and object against him wicked wilfulness, Wanton folly, Broking of his own
lerning, and tell him that His word is not yet Canonized, And, that his word
is no Charter: do ye not Accuse him, by these words, unto yt world and
condemn him or conte^ne him in your own heart, for a Solemn, arrogant, high
minded, Folisshe, Light and Unskillful man?

This being then so evident, yt you nothing regard him, when so ever you
speak so Courteously as though in deed you had no Disdain or Choler: it is,
to ye betraieing of your Craft and Hypocrisy, and no proof at all of your
Sincerity or modesty. Neither do you mistike the sharp and bitter Terms,
because of an inward humility of your own, and ernest Imitation of Meeknes:
but because you shall make your adversaries sayings appear yt more Fervent, ye
more quietness in Answering your self do Pretend and Counterfaiete.

I marvel (say you) M. Harding being so grave a man, Jew. 173.
would borow Ruffians Terms to scof withal. M. Jew. Marvel.
This you say, because he used the Terms of Cogging and Foisting yt die. And
to make this more odious, you extol the Gravity of your adversary on ye one
side, and increase ye vileness of ye terms on ye other side: as though they
could never have been learned but of Ruffians. And between these Extremes, your
self stand a marueyling, as if you should think: Surely if it were to me, I
would never use such Methaphores, as are taken of Shameful Occupations.

But, If these Terms offend you (M. Jewel) why call you them out of season to
memory? Jew. 22^
Why are you not content with once noting of so Grave A man for them, but again
and again repete them, out of Time and Place: 235.
I might (say you) call this Foisting or Cogging. Likewise, Here might M.
Harding well bestow his terms, here might he truly say, the pope coggeth and
foisteth. Does this Cogging of your Adversary, become your Modesty? Or, is it
for love of Meeknes and Purity, that you can not abide the words which are
used in some Art or Feate of small Honesty? I would or might conceive so much,
if your self practiced not the contrary. For when you say:

He heweth and Mangleth Chrysostomes words, Jew. 65. Jew. 225.
He Mangleth and Maimeth S. Gregory's words, 269
He Shuffleth in words, Now have an eye Good Reader to M Har. 124
fingers, 160
And mark how he Iuggleth with S. Augustines words, Marvel at your self 198
M. Jew.
Unless thou eye him well, he will steal from thee, He Plaieth round about,
merely, with his own pha^tasie, 221
Here M. Har. says, 225
he will trip and Dance lightly over the Doctors, 237
Was he stayed with the Choinecough? 240
Non satis commode diuisa sunt te^poribus tibi Daue haec. 299
He brings in Councels in a Mummery, 302.
O what Ranging and Hunting here is to beat up that thing, that will not be
found? He cummeth in only with ioly Brags and Great vauntes as if he were
Playing at Post, and should win al by Vieinge: When you say all this (M.
Jewel) in half your Book only, bysides that which I have already spoken, and
that which I have left untouched: Into what cumpanie shall I say you have
fallen, to borow these Terms of them to skof withal? What Hewers, Ruffians,
Shufflers, Iugglers, Tumblers, Dau^cers, Dauyes, Mummers, Rangers, and
Cardeplayers Have you met withal: of whom you should borow fit Terms for
expressing of your Gentle Affections?

Doubtless (you say) such kind of dealing, Jew. in ye answer to D. Har.
preface. Matthew. 11. An Holy Lesson.
as is without gal or bitterness, as it is most commendable in it self: so it
seems most sitting in them, that travail in Gods cause. Christ says,
Learn of me: for I am meek and Gentle. You therefore which know so much: with
what Sprite have you multiplied your Reprocheful Metaphores, against D.
Harding? Or how speak you, against Ungentle and Sharp Terms: your self in
this very foresaid place (where of purpose you frame your talk to a singular
form of modesty) calling by craft, a man of Professed gravity, as your self
acknowledge, A SCORPION, Quickly forgotten.
and obiecting unto him, his younger IANNIZERS? And in ye next leaf, that He
thinks all the world sings SANCTVS, SANCTVS, andreceaueth him with OZANNA.
Is this your Remembering of that Good Lesson of Christ, which you teach D. Har.
Learn of me, for I am meek and gentle? Comes this, of your Smoth and Calm
Affections? Do you stand fast and quiet upon the Shore? Think you D.
Harding, for calling you Goliath, Thersires etc. to be blown out by the
tempests of his affections and to be tossed from the shore: And were you in
no storm at all, when the Sprite moved you to say, that with those words he
Solaceth himself, and Refressheth his Sprites?

Your self (M. Jewel) are not a meet man to geaue Rules, Or to geaue sentence
in these matters, being so Eger and Light of mind: that neither ye have any
stay of your self, Nor yet do refrain, from commending your self of
Modesty. But, if there be among your brothers any so perfitt, that can tell,
When, Where and in What sort etc. the Adversary may be sharply spoken unto,
And can show us an Example thereof, in his own writinge^: let him put his
Couclusions, and we shall (...) be at a point, to know what behavior we may
boldly follow, when the cause it self geaueth us to reprove you. As for such
humblenes and Meeknes that a man should not in any (...), an Heretic an
Heretic, Or an Hypocrite an Hypocrite: Well it may be perchance ye counsel of
some indifferent man, which neither loves y^ one opinion^ nor hates the
other: but precept and Commandment of God, it is not. Our Savior him self
without any Inflaming of his Choler, using the Terms of Hypocrite, Math. 1^.
13. and 23. Tit. 1. Phil. 3 Iud. epis. 1. Io. 2.
Blind Guides, Fox, and Dalbed Sepulchers: And the Apostles after him, not
sparinge to name such as deserved it, Naughty Beasts, Idle Belies, Dogs,
Clouds without water, Antichrists and caet.

Perchance therefore, if the mind be Simple, and the heart uncorrupted, and
if the Reproach which we geaue, be truly occasioned of our Adversaries
sayeinges or doeinges, and not invented of our selves: our whole Act, is out
of danger. But this I am sure of, that it becummeth not him, which will be
Exact against others in such matters, and take upon him the Countenance of a
Quiet, Gentle, Courteous, Patience, and holy man: to offend more extremely in
ye same kind of thing, for which he misliketh with others. And because, you are
so Reported and Praised (M. Jewel) to deal in this your Reply, very Modestly
and Charitable, like A man that says less then he could, And that favors
the ^stimation of his Adversary, choosing rather to diminisshe somewhat of
that fire which is enkindled, than to add more matter unto it: I thought it
expedient to declare A Part of such Notes and Signs, by which it may be
perceived, that for all the fair show of a good Complexion inwardly, yet you
be full of ill humors. And that, notwithstanding the sweet Sprite, that favor
reports to come from you, you are so bitter and sower in Experience, that the
Reader needs advertisement, To BEWARE Of you.

It follows now, shortly to declare, in what sort M. Jewel has abused many
other, with whom he has to do in his Reply. I mean, not only Ancient
Councels or Fathers within the First six hundred years, but any kind of
writer, whose Testimony he uses or Refuses. His Contradictions also, his
Gross Errors or Heresies, And the Places or Arguments, which for all his
Great Reply, he has not Answered, they would not be left untouched. But,
because these points, though I mind, but shortly, to note them, will occupy
more time and Paper, then, at this present, I think good to tarry, or this
Book will commodiously bear, being already of a sufficient bigness: I will
therefore put it over to A Third Book. Which if it should, either not come forth
at all, Or more slowly come forth, then either my intent surely and purpose is,
Or thy desire perchaunse and expectation will be: yet do I leave this, in the
mean time, sufficiently proved, that M. Jewel is, in deed, such a man, as of
whom thou oughteste to BEWARE, though in word, he seems to be one of the
most vprighteste Protestants, that in these days, laboreth in the Englisshe
Vineyarde.

For Who so zealous as he, for settinge forth of the Procedinges? who so copious
as he, in alleging Ancient Fathers and Councels? Who so stowte in challe^ging
and bragginge? Who so sweet in alluringe and flatering? What he is in Sermos
by lively utterance, I never hard, or I have forgotten: but what he is in his
writings through a sad and loving countenance, I see, and am both weary of
it, and sorry for it. For I find in his words so great reverence and remembrance
of God, so tender compassion and care of his Reader, that except I did
certainly know it, by all his writtinges, yt he deals unjustly, I might
easily think it, yt he fears God, and regards men.

I speak not this (says he) in vehemence of sprite, Jew. in his Sermon.
or heat of talk, but even as before GOD, by the way of simplicity and
truth. Again: As truly as GOD is GOD and caet. And again in an other place of
the same answer, In the 1. answer to D. Cole. (...).
I proteste before God. And in this Reply, When I read these words of M.
Hardinges, I am strike^ with horror, to consider the terrible Judgment of
God: It is much to be feared that he that is lead away of this sort,
offends not of Ignorance, for so were the fault more pardonable, but
against the manifest known truth, and against the spirit of God.

Here lo in these phrases is expressed the similitude of A right good man,
which continually walks in the sight of God, and has suth consideration of
his maiesrie that the mind sometimes being attentively se^ thervpo^, draws (I
can not tell how) much of ye corporal Spirit and sense with it, and ieaueth the
body in an horror.

Concerning then his affection toward men: God grant (says he) unto all
his people the Spirit of wisdom and understanding and caet. Again. O good
Reader, they deal not simple, they dissimble, they mean it not. Again, Alas
this was no part of S. Augustines mind. Jew. pa. 5. 3^. 124. 117.
Beware good Reader, this man seeks ways to deceive thee. Again. O good
Christian Reader, mark the dealing of this man, and Beware of him. Again.
Take heed good Reader, M. Hardinge has here thrown A great Miste of
learning, to dasle thy sight.

Here lo again such Charity and Conscience is pretended, as though M. Jewel
(good man) did hate nothing more then deceauing of the Reader, and castinge of
any myste before his eyes: And that he so intends the Glory of God, In his
(...)
and w^a^the of Souls, as though without any request made unto him, he did,
for his part, utterly deny his learning, deny his Bishoprike, deny his
estimation, deny his name, deny^ himself: Only The Faith of Christ and the
Truth of God he could not deny.

Yet, all these devout Affections, and Earnest sayings notwithstanding, thou
shall find him in deed so contrary unto them, as though he cared neither for
God nor for man. Remember (if thou have read this book) or Consider (if thou
will he assured) what Hvpocrisie and Injury, he uses in the first Article,
of private Mass? For whereas D. Harding reasoned only about Sole receiving, he
draws mast violently and wrongfully, al his arguments to saieing of Mass, of
Receiving under both kinds.

In the second Article, what A Trifler, and Shifter, and wrangler does he show
himself to be? First he stoutly says, The Communion in the primitive Church
was not ministered unto the people in one kind. If you prove the contrary by
some Examples, yea, says he, but it was not ministered so unto the WHOLE
PEOPLE: Again, not in the OPEN CHVRCH. further yet, NOT ORDINARILY, and last
of all, NOT AS IT IS NOW USED and caet.

In the third Articie, of the Public Service in the vulgar tongue? How
Contentious and weyward is be? Nothing ca^ please him or satisfy him. Al yt D.
Harding does allege is but Conjectures and Gheasses.

In yt fourth Article of the Supremacy, he calls for the name of Universal
Bishop or Head of the Church. And A name as good as y^, shall not suffice: the
very Name it self, he must have, or else the Catholics (let them be sure
thereof) shall here of it. As long then, as the Name comes not, he braggeth:
when it cummeth in deed, be contemns it, and shows how it was no great
maestrie to find it. So contentiously and so shamefully, as though (...) were
not A God which beholds (...) judges our secret thoughts, or as tho^ (...)
it should not perteine to any man's C^^^ science, to care or pass much upon
the (...) matters, but only to have some what to (...) always for him self,
least he should (...) at any time to his Adversary.

How, for the second book, his Common Places and Digressions, his Abusing of D.
Harding so many ways, as I (...) specified, do meetly well prove (I thank)
that he follows not the plain way of Simpliciti of Truth. If they do not,
then (...) some Charitable Protestant, deliver me of my opinion therein by
answeringe my Examples and Arguments. If they do, I pray the^ to remember
themselves, and either to move M. Jewel to ye amending of his faults, and ye
Correcting yet once more Again, of his Reply: or to make no more of this which
he has done, then it deserves.

But to make here an end: If my (...) do bring any profit unto thee
(Indifferent Reader) I am sufficiently recom^^^sed for them, by the vantage
(...) take of thy profit: If they (...) al, they yet ca^ not be al lost
because of (...) (...) considers my Intent, and knowet^ (...) for just causes
in^ued to take these (...). Being theerfore myself out of all (...) of loss
by this bargaine^, for the^t, I (...) him, yt thou also may win (...) or if
thy occupieing be not hitherto (...) yt thou should look to win, yet I ^ay
God heartily, yt thou may not le^se, (...), to speak it more plainly unto
thee, yt thou may BEWARE OF M. JEWEL.

Faults escaped in the Printing.
Folio. Page. Line. Fault. Correction. 60. 2. 2 the he 70. 1. 12. left let 86.
2. 4. the he 104. 2. 20. put out (the) 116. 1. 6. shifted sifted 128. 2. 23.
Received Receive. 141. 2. 17. must most 75. 1. 24. Cogging. Egging.

Faults in the Margent.
Pa. ^^. ying lying


