A MIRROVR of Monsters:

Wherein is plainly described the manifold vices, and spotted enormities, that
are caused by the infectious sight of Plays, with the description of the
subtle slights of Satan, making them his instruments.

Compiled by Will. Rankins.

Magna spes est inferni.

Seen and allowed.



AT LONDON Printed by I. C. for T. H. in Anno. Do. 1587.

A MIRROVR of Monsters.
MAGNA SPES est inferni.
DEsirous in youth (not satisfied with Maps) to confer the nature of my native
soil, with the common condition of other countries, I found it a sprig,
budding from the withered plant of virtue, by equal comparison of contraries,
to decerne good from bad: and choosing accordingly with sincerity to embrace
the one, A troubled mind is tossed with worldly waves.
and avoid the pernicious path of the other. Traveling thus in mind, and
tossed with worldly waves, as my body was endangered in the billows of the
raging sea, whereby occasioned to behold manis countries (though I continued in
none) I noted their manners so far as my capacity could conceive, or the
shortness of my abode instruct me in the same. The happiness of England.


At the last, happily (or rather by the divine powers) as I may term it, I
arrived in a country named Terralbon, situate in the Western parts, and
contained in the compass of Europa, the only report whereof was sufficient
to win a mind perticularlie led in security in h^s own native country, to be
an eye witness to the rareness of that peaceable place. So godly in
government, so politic in proceedings, so walled for war, and fortified
with friends, that it is hard to be censured* whether the place be more
blessed, for the plenty of all things, necessary for a flourishing
commonwealth, or for the tranq^^llous peace it continually enioieth, at both
which all christendom woonders, and wishes (as a head to their flowing
streams) that plenty of ^ile and wine, store of milk and honey, anoint the
heads and chearish the hearts of such happy governors.

Amongst which blessed benefits, That place is said to be celestial where a
virtuous prince rules the realm.
and heap of celestial graces, there is above the rest a most virtuous and
godly princess, whose fame spreddeth to infidels, whose noble virtues are
woondered at amongst the Heathen, whose peaceable government Pagans do adore,
Urged contrary to nature, a woolfe should tremble at a lamb: but such is the
force of virtue to compass impossibilities in the judgment of man.
no less feared of foreign enemies, then beloved of natural subjects. At whose
clemency (but a Lamb) the Woolfe does tremble, nor dares the Fox bark on
the ^^^unts of Terralbon, where Saba beholds the f^eding of her Lambs.

This blessed Lady, whom God has anointed, whom Angels do guide, and
Archangels defend from the secret sting of the Aspis, that lurketh under the
lips of the ungodly, is adorned with so many vertu^us gifts of the mind, God
delivers a virtuous prince from the wicked conspiracies of the ungodly.
Virtue and wisdom shall never waine.
that the rudeness of my quill would rather diminish the full and fertile
spring of her flourishing praises, then m^rltorious^ie commend the singularity
of the same, only this may I say, Sacra est Regina, iusta diserta po^ens,
What wants there then (object what may be) to say she is sacred, just,
wise, and mighty, the fullness whereof furnishing the heavens shall never
waine.

But yet speak I more largely of the famous state of her Terralbon. The
corruption of our age, that vice must needs be coupled with virtue.
In whose flour^shing fields amongst the stately trees cleaves consuming
Caterpillars, and as the tallest Caedar has his water boughs, and winters
blasts (were it of Libanus) the sweet Rose his pricks and concealing Canckers
(grew it in Paradise) the cleanest stream his mud, and gravel stones (sproong
it from the head of Ganges.) So Terralbon has places and people beyond the
view of virtue, yet by regard to be redressed, and care clean to be
confounded, such as live by others loss, laughes, at others languishing,
Plaiers are Caterpillars and Canckers, that cleave to the branches of forward
wits.
flourish by others fading, sing at others sorrow, consuming caterpillars
cleaving to forward branches, canckers that canterize Roseall youth, and muddie
motes that trouble the cleerest springs: so may I term them, whose Term has
continued too long a time. What men are these? (naie rather monsters) that thus
corrupt so sweet a soil: They are Monsters.
such are they, as in outward show seem painted sepulchers, but dig up their
deeds, and find nothing but a mass of rotten bones.

Some term them Comedians, other some Players, many Pleasers, They color
their vanity with humanity.
but I Monsters, and why Monsters? Because under color of humanity, they
present nothing but prodigious vanity. These are wels without water, dead
branches fit for fuel, cockle amongst corn, unwholesome weeds, amongst
sweet herbs, and finally, feends that are crept into the world by stealth,
and hold possession by subtle invasion.

But some of their society may fortune to object, that I chatte beyond my
charge, and speak more than probability or ground (of searched and
experienced troth,) nay will not stick to say. I am malicious without
measure, proud with presumption, and allege more then I dare auouche, to
speak against them that are privileged by a Prince, nay more sworn servants
to the anointed, allowed by Magistrates, and commended by many. The coat of a
prince cannot alter the condition of the corrupted.
I easily answer: Most men liked the masking Apes of Egypt, whose golden
cotes, could not cover their brutish states, for Simia simia erit etiam si
aurea gestet insignia. Nor can the coat of a mighty and puissant prince,
privilege a subject to wander in error, The coat of a prince cannot alter the
condition of the corrupted.
naie to build their habitations under the Caeders of Saba. Princes are as
Gods, and may command, subjects inferior creatures, and must not offend. What
reason has the foot to say, my head recreates himself with pleasure, A
subjects selfewill must not be grounded on the pleasure of a Prince.
therefore may I walk at leisure, for this is no consequent: The Prince must
be pleased, therefore the subject be diseased. For that is poison to some,
which is medicinable to other, and of a particular good, by abuse may spring a
general evil. Abuses are no uses.


But set we aside this cauelling obiector, and view we more narrowly from what
spring these serpents first sucked their unsavory sap (for men do then
transform that glorious image of Christ, Plaiers transform their bodies which
is the image of Christ into the shape of brute beasts.
into the brutish shape of a rude beast, when the temple of our bodies which
should be consecrate unto him, is made a stage of stinking stuff, a den for
thieves, and an habitation for insatiate monsters.) First they are sent from
their great captain Satan (under whose banner they bear arms) to deceive
the world, They are sent from Satan.
to lead the people with intising shows to the devil, to seduce them to
sin, They are the members of Satan to practice for him in the kingdom of
this world.
and well tuned strings, to sound pleasing melody, when people in heaps
dance to the devil. But rather seem they the limbs, proportion, and members
of Satan.

First are they his head that study to deceive the people with intising
shows, which (if Hydraes) the sword of justice might soon cut. They are his
toongs, which roar out pleasing (but yet damnable) tales into the ears of the
people, Justice may break the ioints of Satan.
easily pulled out by Justice. They are his arms that stretch out ot catch the
poeple within the compass of his chain, whose ioints Justice may break. They
are his cloven feet that plod in damned paths, in whose steps spring up sundry
seeds of deadly desires. Such are they, and such will they be (as long as they
be.) Plaiers began to profane the Sabbath.
When first these monsters came into Terralbon, such was their proud
presumption, that they feared not to profane the Sabbath, to defile the Lords
day, to scoff at his word, and to stage his wrath. But when the King of kings
saw his scepter broken, his crown trod under the feet of the ungodly, his
roabes rent, nay the glory of his Son darkened with the head of this
monstrous Beast: Bearish garden fell upon the prophaners of the Sabbath.
he stretched out his mighty arm, and with the rod of his Justice bruised the
bones of them that profaned his Sabbath, defiled his sacred day, and scoffed
at his holy word. Then Justice pulled off her veil, and with a clear
foresight (beholding the same) so ordained it, that these monsters dare no
longer roar on the Sabbath of the Lord.

What sight then so bleared with fond affection, Self-will may be blinded with
affection.
but may easily decerne, Satan brought them into the world, nurssed them in
the world, and nourishes them in the world, instructs them in the world, and
will destroy them in the world, except in time they shadow themselves under
the wings of Angels. For as the power of God is inscrutable, Repentance may
reclaim them to the mercy of God.
so is his mercy manifold, his wrath inkindled, is quenched with petition,
humility, and a repentant soul. Such is his power, such is his unspeakable
mercy. In which my incepted course, I am to desire the reader, that I may
refer his pacient advise to this consequent, containing the sum of my
Mirror: wherein if it please him to read with deliberation, and ponder with
judgment, he shall find such as I promised to be faithfully performed. Wherein
is contained the perfect description of such enormities and heinous offenses,
that these monsters continually carry with them, easy to be decerned in the
dark without a candle, were they covered with the obscurest cloud to hide
their hydeous shapes. For spitting fire from their mouths, they are to be
discovered by their deeds.

In this country of Terralbon, whereof I have somewhat spoken, is a place
famous for filthiness, well known of many, for the most part noted of all,
whose name as necessary we must not forget: By interpretation from the Greeks
Hollow well.
called (...) a place well situate in sin, senced with frawde, built by
briberie, whose paths are well beaten, as the perfect way to wickedness, the
entry easy, for less price then I^das bought his damnation, where my self
luld in the lap of Security, A man may buie his damnation there for two pence
not long since was brought a sleep by Careless cogitations* where either by
the nature of the place (whether enchanted by charms) or by my own darkesome
disposition (ignorant of mine own harms) I know not, but there restless I
rested without regard, and plunged my self in the depth of folly.

This Laborinth, where lodged these monstrous Minotaures, had many winds, and
turns fit for a mind (as they term it) Malecontent, to walk never content:
The grace of God may guide any man from this monstrous Laborinth of Plays.
wherein viewing many things able to entice a pleasant eye to behold, or an
open ear to delight, by the line of grace, at length I got out, when I vowed
to my guide unspotted love, hearty zeal, and continual praise, that brought
a soul almost sunk in sin to the brinke of mercy. Wherein (as our proverb
says) none can better describe the fury of fire, then he which has been
scorched with the flame) I shall tell you of things strange to consider, but
more strange to behold, no less true then strange, yet not so strange as
damnable.

In this place (...) not long since was solemnized a marriage, between two
ancient and amiable lovers, having long lived in (...) (and yet but young) in
so much that by the common consent of the whole inhabitants, nothing was more
talked off, provided for, nor more diligently waited on then those loyal
lovers of no small authority, Pride and Leacherie caused by Plaiers.
named Fastus and Luxuria. The one has reigned Rector, since the first
foundation of that blessed building. The other as Lady of the world, (in that
Palace best beseeming her state) strives to rule in the hearts of most men,
This marriage determined by Destiny, The devil is adored as God amongst them,
whom they make their idol as the Isralits did by their golden calfe in Horebbe
or rather by the infernal powers, (...) there rule all, and serve for Calves
to worship in Horebbe, was began by Mischief (one of the states of that Stage)
and shall end by Beggerie, that has already obtained the reuertion of that
office, so time the ender of all things has concluded.

Which when I viewed, with great desire to behold the end (as the seaf^^ing
Sailer seeing himself in danger to lose his life* ^ wishes himself at his
voyage end.) So sought I (for fear I should sink) to get me from this
painful Palace, yet loath to leave it till time led me to the final
conclusion I determined (as I liked the cheer) to take part of the banquet.
Which I will describe in such order as I found it.

And first to show you how finely the Lady trickt up her selfs to meet the
Bridegroom in the chapel Adulterinum, They think their buildings so strong,
that God cannot destroy them.
firmly built for falling, underpropped with pillars that Sampson cannot bend:
near adioining to (...), least the Bride should wet her feet in going too
far, whose niceness in the morning I may not omit.

Rising from her bed of Security, hanged with Curtins of Carelesnes, Lechery
spends her time, in thinking best to please.
with valances of Uanitie, she dressed her head with such costly Calls,
Earings, Jewels, Per^wigs and Pearls, as if for variety of attire, she had a
store house of trumperie. Nor was there any thing left undone, but that which
should be done. Amongst ye rest to make her seem more amiable to her best
beloved she painted her fair face with spots of shadowed modesty: not from
Apelles shop, whose colors are cou^terfeit, nor yet from Zeuxes famous in
portratures. But sent from Proserpina wife to Pluto. A welwisher to this
wedlock: better colors then Psyches carried to Venus quickly decayed, but
these last longer then they should. After she had hanged at her ears many
costly favors of folly far set from the Indians of Anglia, Wherein is
noted the pride that is caused by plaiers, the beholders framing themselves to
their leude life.
she embrodered her hair with embossed brouches of beastly desire, then
gazing in her glass of vaineglorie, she concluded as fine as may be.

Her handmaid Concupiscence ready to attend the pleasure of her Lady,
clothed her in a coat of Satin of subtlety, when she seemed unto her self
a second Narcissus, for beauty, favor, and lovely looks. She loved not to
be praised, for that was vain, if Concupiscence had said Jupiter in hi^ deity
might behold her, then might you decerne the shameless blood strive to appear
in her immodest face.

Now wanted there nothing that this Lady might be led (as the custom is of
brides) to the chapel Adulterinum, The Theater and Curtine may aptly be
termed for their abomination, the chapel Adulterinum.
but only this: she wished for some of Medeas charms, that she might
continually be young for the love of her Lord. Now goes she led to the
chapel by secure sufferance, Licentia enim fenestram ad nequitiam aperit.
Where we will leave the bride attending the coming of her Lord. And return to
describe the manner of his state.

(...) could hardly contain the magnificence of this mighty man, had it not
been determined by the provident appointers, who wisely foresawe that the
majesty of the place, agreeing with the state of this marriage, Men are very
easily seduced to wickedness.
was fit to receive them. For as the stately Piramides in Greece, as the
adamant drew men with desire from far to behold the same. So no less famous
for report of practice, cunning in all things and bravery of building, is the
castle of (...). Whether men strive to go first to possess a place to behold
their pageants.

This King (as I may term him) for that he reigns over the hearts of most
men, to immitate Mars, Pride reigns as a king over the hearts of me^.
to whom sometimes he sent his service: thought it best in complete Armor
richly wrought in martial manner to march to the Chapel. Then again he
seemed not so content, The variable mind of pride, how he may be best attyred
to please.
but in milder manner in honor of Hymaeneus to carry Torches by day light, to
add (as he thought) more glory to the day. This mis^ikt him more then the
rest, being ye common custom of every Swain to offer Incense to Hymaeneus
But this in conjecture better fitted his purpose, to imitate Pyrithous with
cups of wine to honor Bacchus, and to sprinckle the Chapel with y^ sweet
sacrifice. But that in a while seemed too profane, and better befiting the
Country Chorle.

Whilst thus he bethought himself, craving counsel of his confederates,
Chiefly to please his Lady Lechery, he thus cont^ded with himself.
to solemnize his marriage with as much honor as might be. As well to please
the bravery of his bryde, as to feed his private humor, there crept into his
head this conceit. It was not thought amiss, amongst them, for that Venus was
the Goddess, they did most adore Sceleratis Dea, pijs vero D^mon. Though
(least seeming too carped) they sometimes called on Mars to carry Cupid on
their shoulders: adding thereby honor to Venus. Lust lives and flourishes
amongst Players.
As the Apul^ians used to carry their lying Goddess Syria, to deceive the
people with vain prophesies, which accordingly was straight performed.

For this noble Lord, being mounted on his stately Courser, nothing inferior
to Bucephalus, he rode with no less royalty, then when Aeneas hunted with
Dido, saving that his Dido was not present, being otherwise busied in the
Chapel Adulterinu^, set forward to the same place, this manner they observed
to carrye their God. Lust is honored as a God.


First they caused some Lysippus to carue him out of Alablaster, so exquisite
as might be. Phidias set colors upon his face, best fitting their fancy.
Then they caused him to be clothed in light Taffata ^tte for carriage, in
color white, though some what different from the Gods condition.

Next Curiosity crowned him with Myrtle, made in a Garland, They offer their
souls as Sacrifice to lust.
stuck full of Roses, and waxed his wings with Oil of Narde, and Spike of the
sweetest savor: in the one hand he carried a Darte, in the other a firebrand,
whereby they present the puissance of his power. It reigns but in the hearts
of wicked men.
This God by the greater, is but limited his authority. Malorum nisi animos
occupat. Further he claims no title of government. But these men live in his
land and therefore must be ruled by hie might, yielding his Image the honor
due to his person, They are superstitious.
they carried this God upon their shoulders to the Chapel. To honor whose
coming, Drums and Trumpets to calmenne to Plays.
the Banners were displayed, the Drums struck up, and the Trumpets sounded.

Being now in the Chapel, the Bridegroom showed that courtesy to his Bride,
which the custom craved. Then clarkly Confusion knitte them in one, and
married this couple together, insomuch that they are no longer two, Take away
the cause and the effect cease.
but one, continually to inhabit ye courtly Castle of (...), the fee simple
whereof they hold as long as the building lasts. But pull down their
building, Satan would not have his members cut off.
and their honor decays. Therefore beware to offend the Serpent by hurting
his head.

Being thus wedded together, with all the pomp that might be, and honor
expedient for such an exployt, with wine of the best in the honor of Bacchus,
Wafers for Ceres, Laurel for Apollo, Torches for Hymaeneus, and Cupid for
Venus. Least he should seem partial in his Sacrifice to dedicate his
service to one, and not to all: And so purchase displeasure of some of the
Gods. With this manner of reverence he returned to his Castle. Where I must
show you the rest that remains.

By this time Fame (that brings abroad secrets dug from the very depth of
darkness) had manifested to most men the manner of this marriage, and
proclaimed as well the estate, as then unknown, as the future happiness should
thereby ensue, Players by sticking of their bills in London, defile the streets
with their infectious filthiness.
so far forth that the streets of Terralbon were stuck with their bylles,
and almost every post was a witness to these pompous proceedings. Which done,
the nature of most men being desirous of novelties, and greedy of news.
Like heardes of Goats they flocked with desire to feed in that pleasant
pasture, where like young Kiddes they wantonly disported themselves in these
pleasant Meadows, Most me^ think their pleasure will not turn to pain.
and grazing tenderly on the Green grass, they deemed it rather a Celestial
Paradise then an habitation of hell hounds. Such is the nature of man, to call
good evil, and evil good. Folly so bleareth men's eyes, that they take plays
to be profounde Scripture.
Then Folly that stretches forth her wings to shadow the senses of the
besotted, to the intent that their swollen eyes should not behold their
deformed minds: chose out paths, erected places, and built Skaffoldes in
(...) for his darlings to behold these dainty devises. When they preparing
their thirsty ears, Plays make me^ sin against their own souls.
enclyning to harken to the trompe of Defame, were soon sommonde to the peril
of this place, and addressed in complete sin to bear Arms against their own
souls. Where human minds might easily behold Virtue dismembered, Virtue is
defaced amongst Plaiers.
her Towers thrown down, her bulwarks battered, her walls wasted, her stately
buildings beaten down with these barbarous minded mates: her Trees bereft of
leaves, and now against Nature inhabited rather by beasts of the field, and
fowls of the air, then by the minds of men, such enmity is there sworn
between Virtue and Folly.

But now return we to our former charge, to tell without tediousnes the
bravery of their banquet. By this time were they returned to their Castle, no
ceremony ouerslipt behoofull for the same. The exercise that some practice at
Plays.
Where with amorous embracings, loouing looks, and sweet salutations the
Bryde and Bridegroom greeted one an other. Like as Mars when he had been
wearied with warlike exployts, used to entertain his Lady Venus, when contrary
to their lyking unlooked for, they were taken in a Net. No less was their
love.

After setting themselves down in a Chair of unchaste thoughts, hand in hand
they began to parle, whose secret talk as unnecessary or immodest I omit,
but let them judge that know and mean to admonish themselves by this Mirror.
The honor they owe to lust.
The Parlour of pain was provided for them and theyrs, there to feast till
they surfetted, to drink till Bacchus bid them stay, and to disport
themselves in honor of Cupid, whose Image was erected in a place of purpose
built, painted with coy conceits, and covered with costly colors. Which place
being somewhat near a window, How God laugheth to scorn the folly of these
men.
was sometime shaken with a Northren wind, when the God made them admire by
his moving, whether he were discontent, desirous to be amongst them, or with
his nodding silence by signs cheered his servant.

Their servant, with no less diligence then beseemed their obedience, These
are door keepers, and boxeholders at Plays Tartara is taken for hell.
provided for the banquet such rare confections as their Lord and Lady were
wont to love, who being set at their Table Tartara, compact by a cunning
Carpenter, with their friends fickle folly, leude laughter, and filthy
fornication, were served as follows.

A crew of counterfeit companions, such as sometimes were banished the Theaters
at Rome, for presenting the vileness of Venetian Curtizans, Players were
banished from Rome for their beastly enormities.
with their wanton words, and paltry parasites with Apish toys, were appointed
to serve in this balefull banquer, to please the better, as well to dissemble
disposition as outward habit: How they transform themselus so far to the
condition of every man, that there is no vice but they are well seen i^ the
same.
some trans-formed themselves to Roges, other to Ruffians, some other to
Clownes, a fourth to fools, in the fifth place Lovers and Leachers, nor feared
the wyldie Woolfe to play fast and loose with the Lion in the wyldernes of
these brutish Beasts. So well these loyterers liked these pleasant pastimes,
yt in short time they grew exquisite in these exercises, and singular in these
subtle sleights, as if in derision of nature to scoff their maker, they were
more cunning then their Creator. The Roges were ready, the Ruffians were rude,
Players ought not amidst (...) folly present the persons of Princes.
their Clownes cladde as well with Country condition, as in Ruff russet, their
Fools as fond as might be, their Lovers and Leachers leude at the least
saving that the Woolfe marde his imitation with the Lions clawe, whose skin
paid ransom for his saucy speech.

First Presumption clothed inaspyring Purple, brought in a dayntie dysh of
damnable desires, and set it on the Table Tartara. Next Contempt brought in
conficts of continual care, Their counterfaite cogging.
with counterfeit courtesy of an humble heart. Hi enim externa specie sunt
humiles animis vero fastidiosi. The manner of their balefull banquet^e.
Then followed Subtlety with sucket of sighs, and shameful sorrows, thus
followed they, till in order every dishe, after the best manner that might, was
solemnly set before this company, with such cost, as the like in Terralbon
has not often been seen.

Then drinking of the wine of forgetfulness, Plays make the^ forgette GOD.
which seemed unto them more sweet then Nectar, and far more pleasant then
Manna from Heaven, to digest the diversity of their dainty dyshes, they
tempered their tongues, and outward gesture with such talk, that their action
might be uniform to the rarenes of their banquette, which was such, and so
great together, with the conjunction of this couple, Satan rejoices at the
wickedness
that the Ruler of the infernal powers, Pluto himself conceived such joy
thereat, that he devised by what means he might best congratulate these loyal
Lovers, thereby to express how well he likt of this wedlock.

Proserpina put into his head, the wonted custom of worldlings. That when Love
linked any together, their study was to consummate their marriage with Maskes,
Common enormities at weddings when the espoused ought to rejoice in GOD.
mummeryes, and other such shows, as might cause lyking in the Lovers, and
breed a continual content in the beholders. She therefore counseled pluto
to send to Fastus and Luxuria, They cloak their villainy with visards of good
pretense.
a Mask those from the most famous fellows of all his dominion, with visards
to vale their vices, and apparel to cover their deformed conditions.

This seemed so pleasing to pluto, that with his Charmed Mace, wherewith he
inflicts the guilty conscience of his careless creatures, from the deepest
dungeons, and hollow va^tes of his infernal prison, being bound with the
Chains of dyrefull Death, The reward of wickedness.
with a majesty no less terrible then to be trembled at, with a voice as when
the wind entered the vautie and hollow earth, with roaring noise, ouerturnd the
presumptuous Tower of Babell, The devil ruled the hearts of those me^ that
builded the Tower of Babell.
erected to dare the King of Kings, and to view the reach of his raygne. He
called his Porter with his threefolde bark, whose command being at a beck,
caused him forthwyth to obey, to whom he gave the keys of his pitiless
prison, to set at liberty for a season, these Maskers that ensue.

This dyrefull Dog, whose triple head was to be feared of the beholders, was
of no less force in his regiment, The fearefulnes of hell.
then the head of the Monster Gorgon, that trans-formed the beholders into a
stone. Who taking the keys given to his charge by his Lord and master,
entered the Dungion where ^ damned souls were inflicted with unspeakable
torments.

First opening a vastye vaute of huge, and massye substance, whose stincke was
able to infecte a mortal man, repleate with loathsome worms, and hidious
Serpents, with venomous Snakes and hyssing Adders, with foul black swealth
and foggy mist, forming a Chaos of congered substance, over which flies no
Foul but presently dies with the infectious stinck of this hidious hole,
Idleness is the root of mischief, and therefore deserves a torment in hell.
he called forth Idleness, from his boiling Caldron of insatiate liquor,
thereunto enjoined by satan himself for reward of his wickedness, in whose
steps, who so treades, shall be pertaker of his pain, whose woe never wastes,
whose care consumes, but never ends. Such is the pain of Idleness, the root
of mischief, and original of vices, from whence the rest, somewhat inferior
to this, do budde and blow, whose nature I must describe, to the intent you
may the better judge of the iustnes of his reward, and inflicted torment.

Divine Plato, The description of Idleness.
amongst all other of his learned lessons (for which he deserves to be honored
of al ages) has breefely set forth, to al such as mean to be warned by his
wisdom. That no idle person meriteth any good reward, wherein he justly
reprooueth such, as reicecting the care of virtue, and refusing pains (which
must be endured before we can obtain the possession of wisdom, and honor)
do give themselves over to idleness, and covet rather to walk in the open and
broad pathe of pleasure (the end whereof is wretched misery* deceived with
the false delight of a poisoned sweet) then to follow the hard and narrow way
of Virtue, conducting them to the plotte of joy and heavenly happiness.
Pythagoras Y might warn men to avoid such folly. Idleness makes a man forget
God*
But the infection of this vice is so contagious, that as the River Laethes
makes him that drynketh thereof, presently to forget his own condition and
former deeds, so this damnable vice of idleness, so besotteth the senses, and
bewitcheth the minds of men, as they remembered not the profitable fruits of
virtuous labor. The idle manne deserves no reward.
Nor will see that ye bitterness of Gall makes the taste of Honny more
pleasant. The cowardly Soldier that fears to skale his enemies Forte,
deserves not any part of the spoils. Nor will reason consent that the
sleeping Senator, shall according to the Roman custom, be crowned with
Laurel. Justice, in token that she hates Idleness (whose blindness might excuse
leisure) is painted with a pair of ballaunce in one hand, exercised with
waights, a sword in the other to cut down vice, and abal at her feet to
exercise those parts, thereby noting that no part of Virtue should be secure.

So hateful was this vice to Heathen Princes, Idleness was hated amongst
Heathen mean.
that lived in former ages, that the Emperor Domitian was said to catch Flies.
The Persian Kings sometimes shaued sticks. And Phillip of Macedon, fearing he
should be overcome with sleep, had continually a ball of brass in his hand,
with a basin by of the same metal, that when forgetfulness caused him to
sleep, his nodding head forcing the ball from his hand, he was thereby
awaked, so hateful seemed idleness to this puissaunt Prince.

Surely the providence of God manifests how sorely he is displeased with
idleness, The idle man is punished with ignorance, beggary and a miserable end.
when as he punishes such as delight therein with ignorance, beggerie, and a
miserable end. But contrariwise, how much he tendereth such as are addicted
to virtuous study, it appears, Diligence is crowned with understanding.
in that he crowns them with understanding and honor. This is the guerdon of
wary diligence, that, the reward of blind and loathsome sloth.

What moved Lycurgus to make a Law, Lycurgus law against idleness.
that no youth in Lacedemon, should receive any sustenaunce, before he had
given account to have done some work profitable to the common wealth. But
because he abhorred idleness, Themistocles renowned for his virtuous labor.
as the spoil of young men, and nursse of wickedness? What made Themistocles
so renowned, but because he could net sleep quietly in the night, for desire
he had to travail for the increase of honor and knowledge.

Even as in the games of Olympia none received any reward of glory, The Games
of Olympia ordained rewards for labor.
but such as fought manfully. And as the lasie husbandman lurking at home, and
leaving his ground untilled, has for his reward in har^est naught else but
weeds and brambles. The lasie husbandman gathers weeds.
Or as the Merchant, who to lead a secure life at home, never ventereth the
danger of the seas abroad, makes small gain of his merchandise: so idleness
weakeneth the senses and members of men, Idleness never profits his country.
that they shall never be able to profit their country or themselves, either
by conquest to get renown, by sowing the ground, to reap desired profit, or
by venturing their lives on the seas, inritch their cosers, and increase their
credit. For he that delights in the sweet savor of Roses, must not refuse
them because of their prickels.

Consider if Aristotle had given his mind to idleness, Aristotle by learning
and labor came to honor.
he had never ascended to so high a degree of learning and honor, as to be
termed Princeps Philosophorum, Cicero had never deserved to be called Pater
Patriae, but by shunning idleness. Cicero was called the father of his
country.
Remember what honor poor Cleanthes got, Cleanthes diligence.
who all night accustomed to carry water, that in the day he might have
maintenance to study the liberal Sciences.

How came Alexander to be conqueror of the world, but by flying idleness?
Idleness might have hindered Hercules in accomplishing his haughty and
honorable labors? But that his manly breast was never possessed with such an
ignoble mind. Ulysses detesting the delays of idleness, in a moment finished
the ten years war betwixt the Graecians and the Trojans. Apelles had never
proved so cunning a Painter, if he had not every day drawn a line with his
pensile, Wisely therefore said the Greeks, (...).

Quisquis en^m dur^s casus virtu^ is amore
Vicere^, The Gods sell honor for labor.
Ille sibi laudemque decusque parabit.
At qui Desidiam luxumque seq^etur ^nertem.
Dam fugit opposi^os, incauta m^nte, labores
Turpis in^psque si^ul miserabile transigit aeuum.
How accurssed then are those who neither diswaded with the examples of times
passed, nor deterred with the view of our own age, ouergrowne with this vi^e
like a fertile piece of ground, for want of weeding choked with tares, will not
themselves too good in the commonwealth, The nature of the currish dog.
but seek by their vicious example to defile other. As the Dog whose currish
nature will neither permit the silly horse to eat hay, nor yet himself
feed in the manger^ such horses would be bound with chains to Plough in the
furr^wes of Labor, or else their bodies taught to endure pains on the earth,
to save themselves from Idleness torture in hell.

Of which sort of men (the more to be lamented) are these Players, Plaiers are
ministers of Idleness.
who do not only exercise themselves in all kind of Idleness, but minister
occasion to many to incur the like, if then (as sure it is) idleness be the
root of evil, and these men the root of Idleness, it were pity but such a
root should be fuel for the fire, Commit the root to the fire.
to the intent the branches may flourish no longer. Therefore seeing Idleness is
so vile a vice, and so much detested both in the sight of God and man, as the
only enemy to virtue, The just punishment of Idleness.
unjustly was he not punished in that boiling lake, and filthy furnace of
all abomination, to whose description I must return again, to set forth his
misery agreeable to his merit, and place him the chief masker in this
marriage before spoken of. Whose shape must needs, Idleness couer^ his
deformity.
in respect if marches amongst men, having some vale to cover his deformity
least being easily decerned, it be not so well allowed, especially, since
that the nature of men (though not so soon deceived) with plain inormities)
is quick^lie seduced with colored pretenses, This maske^ must have a vi^ard.
and as these maskers (as custom requires) cease not to seek the fairest
visards to cover their foul faces, the better to smoothe the poison that
lurketh in their minds: Honest recreatio^ is a visard for Idleness.
So Idleness least his filthy spots should bewraye the foulness of his
face, does cover the same with the vizard of Honest recreation, Plaiers are
ministers of Idleness.
so far, that minds seduced by self-will to ignorance, can hardly say this
is Idleness. As if it should be said Plays are Honest recreation, and
therefore plaiers are not ministers of Idleness. They that persecuted Christ
and his members were not idle, but how well imploide let reverent minds
cenceiue. The Temple of God defiled.
The money changers that made the temple of God a den of thieves, were not
idle. Satan when he tempted Christ was not idle. They that stoned Steven were
not idle, but far better had it been for these men to have slept securely
in their droonken desires, armed in idleness, then to have bin ministers of
such monstrous matters. For far better is it to sleep with Peter, then to wake
with Judas: to be drunk with Lot, then busied with Dinah: to be gazing with
David on the top of a Tower, though Bethsaibe causd him to sin, then with Caine
to incur the wrathful indignation of the Almighty.

If these men then (though they be not idle) be ill imploid, Their honest
recreation is proved cusled damnation.
what is their honest recreation, but curssed damnation, when they wake with
Judas, dally with Dinah, and kill with Caine, practicing all things prohibited
by the laws of God, and disanulled by nature her self, then must we needs
conclude, that this visard is counterfeit like the cormorant O^teriche, whose
feathers are fair, but her flesh rank, what other thing is Idleness then,
but the root of evil, and original of sin, and this visard of so curssed a
masker, counterfeit to cover deformity, fly therefore this as most damnable,
that as a deceitful seducer. Fly Idleness.


Idleness masking after this manner, with all things necessary provided by his
master, especially not forgetting his visard of honest Recreation, is
appointed foremost, as well deserves his dignity. Flattery comes from hell,
being the second masker.
Next from a lake, little inferior in lothsomnesse to the other, this porter
fetched Flattery, to place him the second in the same charge, which Idleness
had undertaken, whose plague was little inferior to the other, especially,
considering, that he was a branche sprung from the same tr^e, Flattery a
bra^ch of Idleness.
for what other thing may we expect then impossibility, to gather Grapes of
Thorns, or Figs of Thistels, the taste of this fruit depriving a man of his
senses, I will set down physic for him which has already tasted thereof,
and admonitions to the willing to eschew the same.

Of all the stinking weeds that choke sweet flowers growing in the garden of a
flourishing commonwealth. The description of flattery.
I find none sooner rooted nor more p^stilent then the sensual seed of
flattery, whose branches spread, and are nourished with the moist sap of
traitorous devises, The fair show of Flattery.
whose leaves are fresh and green, and whose blossoms ga^e and gorgious to
dazzle their eyes, which peradventure might decerne the secret poison and hidden
harms, that lurketh under the deadly shadow of so beautiful a tree. The
fruits whereof in outward show pretend love, The nature of Flattery.
and by the sweet melody of sugared words, banish all fear of mistrust, but
inwardly they are filled with hatred, contempt, and unnatural revenge.

Flattery, by his golden pretense of unfeigned affection, entrappeth the
simple, betraieth the innocent, corrupts justice, and peruerteth the wise,
and good disposition to uncivil brutishness. What may be more contrary to
the ground of human society (which is faith in words and constancy in our
deeds) then this pernicious vice of Flatterers, which seem to be that they are
not, and are that they seem not to be, whose face is friendly, whose tongue
deceitful, and whose lips are smoothe to give kisses with Judas. Judas kisses
seem friendly.
What shaddoweth vice with the color of virtue but flattery? what makes men
suppose themselves in surest safety (when they are in greatest danger)
Flattery shadoweth vice with the color of virtue.
but fawning Parasites? what urges to security a soul drowned in sin, but
the pleasant bait of flattery? what disquieteth the peaceable estate of a
country well governed, but hearkening to a glosing tongue? what pricketh the
desire of youth to be lewd, but soothing Subtlety? what is the spoil of so
many godly matrones and chaste virgins, but rash trust to fly, and subtle
dealings.

But it may be he which is well furnished with this damnable quality,
Flattery a Gnatonical^ exercise
and whose delight consists only in flattery, will object, that by this
Gnatonicall kind of exercise, his calling is elevated, his credit advanced, and
his wealth well augmented, therefore the best kind of fowling. Oh heinous
practices, oh devilish opinion, and oh thrice curssed man, which in contempt of
God and his law, studieth to thrive by loss of his own soul.

In vain is the building where the Lord is not the foundation, hapless are
those attempts, that are not measured by the line of Grace, and curssed is the
seed sown in iniquity. For the Lord is truth it self, and such as resist
the truth, resist the high majesty of God. The reward of the simple.
Happy then are the simple, whose ways are righteous, whose heart abhors
flattery and deceit, him the Lord shall anoint with that precious oil of
Aaron, and on his head power down the heavenly dew of everlasting felicity,
his tree shall be planted by the water side, his leaf shall never wither, and
his fruit continually ^^rish.

Let us therefore beware of such pernicious Gnatonists, Admonition to beware.
who taking us friendly by the one hand, have in the other a naked blade to
shed our blood, and smiling in our faces, seek to betraie our souls, far
woorsse I judge them then open enemies, for of these we may beware, the other
we fear not.

Touching which point I hepe it shall not seem absurd, to rehearse a pleasant
fable, the words whereof (though fained) yet the effect presents a sense of
true meaning.

The Sheapheard s^metime (belike wearied with his charge, A fable of a secr^t
enemy under pretense of friendship.
and desirous to recreate his pain with some pleasure) committed the keeping
of his flock to the diligent survey of his Dog, whom because he thought a
profitable servant, he fed every day with good meat, but the Dog like a
currish creature, not content with his fare at home, often times spoiled a sheep
abroad, the better to satisfy his insatiat appetite, which the Sheapheard
perceiving, contrary to his woonted manner, not like a friend but a foe, came
and would have hanged him. ^latteries ^mooth tale.
Alas quoth the Dog why are you desirous to destroy me, I am your friend,
and one of your household servants, rather extend such cruelty on the Woolfe,
who daily lies in wait to devour your flock by me vigilantlie protected, A
flatterer hurting privily, is worse then an open enemy.
nay said the Sheapheard, I deem thee more worthy death, for his deeds
declare him to be my open enemy, but thou under the color of freendship, and
deceitful diligence, do every day diminish my sheep.

Hereby may we decer^e, that far more heinous is their fault, and greater
their punishment, which under pretense of human courtesy, do us injury. We
see then that all is not gold that glistereth, nor every one to be esteemed a
friend that speaks fair, the deadest water has the deepest channel, from
the finest Flower is gathered as well poison as Honye. The tears of the
Crocodyle*
The pitiful tears of the dissembling Crocodyle, are quickelie turned to
outrage and savage cruelty. So flattering mates, carry Sugar in their
mouths, and Gall in their hearts, The flattery of the Crocodyle.
their tears are full of tyranny, and their sighs seasoned with barbarous
severity.

They cleave to the coats of highest in authority, Flatterers are like Iuie.
not unlike the Iuie, which creeps up the body of the mighty Oak, and being
come unto the top thereof, ouershadoweth his boughs with his twined branches.

The many mischeefes that ensue by flattery, would fill whole volumes, and my
skill unable to decipher them. Yet that the weakest capacity may conceive how
mortal the effect is of so vile a cause. I judge it not impertinent to unfold
an example or two of ancient memory.

If the flattering tongue of subtle Synon, Synons subtlety confounded Troy.
had been cut off, before it song sweet hermonie of pleasing tales, into the
ears of the credulous Trojans, then had that famous City never felt the
force of fire, then had not the silly men, like Sheep been slaughtered in
their beds, nor then had not the flourishing estate of aged Pryamus been
crossed with a miserable end.

If Aristippus famous in that Art, Aristippus a flattering Philosopher.
had been banished the Court and confines of Cor^^th, then had not the noble
mind of Dionifyus been infected with so great tyranny, whose hands still
bathed themselves in the blood of guiltless souls. Flattery corrupts the
minds of Princes.
For flattery corrupts the minds of Princes, dismembreth their authority,
and wastes their treasure. We read that Thymon a Noble man of Athens, Thymon,
miserable by Flattery.
who by enterteining a crew of soothing servants, became of a wealthy
courtier, a poor labourer.

Antisthenes that learned Philosopher, Antisthenes his opinion of Flatterers.
was wont to say, that he had rather have croking Ravens in the house with
him, then clawing Parasites, for Ravens said he devour but the dead carcass,
but flatterers eat up body and soul alive. Crassus murdered by the flattery
of Carenus.
Crassus was murdered amongst the Parthians by flattering Carenus, Brutus and
Cassius that soothed Caesar in all his actions were the first men that wounded
him in the Senate.

Thimandra the harlot by her alluring inticements Thimandra over came
Alcibiades a virtuous Prince by flattery.
retained that noble and vertueus Prince Alcibiades so long in her company,
that his enemies so near approached, as they set fire on the house wherein he
lay^ luld in the lap of that filthy strumpet, and then constreined unarmed to
venture forth, was without resistance murdered.

But this weed should quickly wither, and this sect be soon defaced, Princes
must punish flatterers.
if Princes would punish them, Nobles reject them, and generally all men
abhor them.

The wise Prince Augustus the emperor so much detested flattery, Augustus
detested flattery.
that he loathed any of his servants should kneel unto him. Tyberius would
not be called Lord, Tyberius abhorred flattery.
for fear such titles of dignity should puff up his mind, Cato Censor
banished flatterers.
and fill him with ambition. Cato Censor banished from Rome certain Athenian
Orators, least by their pleasing speeches they might pervert the people.
Tymagoras punished for flattery.
Notable is that example of Tymagoras, who being sent Ambassador to King
Darius, for that he flattered him, was at his return beheaded by his own
countrymen.

Let us therefore arm our selves against the damnable enticinges of these
hellish feendes, Ulysses policy to suoide flattery.
with the wise regard of prudent Ulysses, (who for fear least he should be
moved with the pleasant harmony of singing Sirens, bound himself and his
Mates, to the mast of their Ship. And let us invent such remedies, to prevent
the deceypt of these Flatterers, as we read that young Egiptian did, The young
Egiptian refelled flattery.
whose wit and gracious demeanor, obtained such favor in the sight of
Valerius, that persecutor of Christians, that being loath to spill his blood,
and having assayed all means possible to remove the faith of Christ grounded
in his heart, (but all in vain) at last caused a sumptuous Chamber to be
prepared, with all kind of sweet savors, and costly furniture, a Bed of
Down, The flattery of a Con^ubine.
and Clothes richly wrought with Gold, in which he placed him, and by his
side, the fairest C^ncubine in all his Court, with her embracings and sweet
persuasions to alter his opinion: but he, seeing himself mightily assailed by
the power of deadly delight, The Egiptian bitte of his own tongue.
least the frailety of flesh should assent, suddenly bitte of his own tongue,
the intolerable grief whereof, so quayled the heat of pleasure, that as
before, so still, he continued the faithful servant of his Savior.

What is he then whose mind is not altogether drenched in this puddle of
sin, seeing himself thus endaungered to loose the liberty of his soul,
Flatterers Sicophants.
but will sh^^nne the snares of these flattering Sicophants, and so whette
their tong^es with good admonitions, that they shall be as sharp Ares, to cut
down those deadly branches, and rather send them to the fire, then preserve
them for building.

Let the wise then infence their minds, with such grave advice, and bulwark
their souls with godly examples, that though Flattery be sent from satan
himself, Satan a cruel enemy to man.
a cruel enemy to mankind, yet his force may represent the weakness of a
Reed, with the breath of ones mouth to be wagged every way.

Of which sort of men are these Players, who pynne Cushions under the elbowes
of young wits, Players are flatterers.
to make them snorte in security, and present before their eyes, as well in
life as continual exercise, such inchaunting Charms, and bewitched wyles, to
alienate their minds from virtue, The inconvenience of Plays.
that hard will it be for a wit well stayde to abide the same. But only by
this means to eschew the cause, that the effect may cease, view not their
exercise, and then fall not to their vice, abandon their presence, then cease
their power, blow not with the bellows of desire, Satan sends in vain to
the admonished.
then cease the furye of their flame. That satan may send in vain, and
this masking mate for all his visarde of human courtesy to cover the pretense
of his coming, be descerned by the regard of reason.

This damned feende, attyrde to be the second in this Mask, Human curtesy
the visarde of flattery.
appointed to seduce men's seules, had for his Uysarde appointed human
courtesy, the colloure whereof is such, as would deceive a good eye sight, yea
though be were skilled in the art of paynting.

How shall we then know this visarde to avoid the peril. How to descerne
flattery from curtesy and so to discover his painted face.
Thus compare the nature of flattery, and the manners of human courtesy
together, and then may we easily descerne if they assent. Again, flattery
says filthy fornication is but a youthful delight, human courtesy
admonishes us, and says it is damnable desire. Flattery says, that murder is
a mind impatient of wrong, Flattery vpholdeth wickedness.
human courtesy says, God has abhorred it from the beginning. Flattery
says Plays are pleasant, honest, Plays are per^itious.
and allowable, human courtesy says, Plays are pernicious, vile, and
reprochefull.

Such is the nature of flattery, and such is the condition of human courtesy:
Let then secureles men say, that human courtesy is but a covert for
flattery, and that flattery so vailde is plain hypocrisy, thus may it be
descerned, vice, and virtue, flattery and human courtesy be two contraries.

Easily then is white discerned from black, To descerne the one from the other
a vile offense from a godly pretense, salvation from damnation, and flattery
from human courtesy. Let the eyes then be ^essengers to the heart, and say
flattery is crowned with courtesy, The falsehood of flattery.
the Woolfe lurketh in the skin of the ^illye Lamb, to deceive the
sheepe^^lde of Christ.

The next that was deemed fit to possess a place in this Pagea^nt, was
Ingratitude, whose manners as monstrous, is accounted one of the deadlye
branches of that reprobate root, Cerberus brings Ingratitude from hell.
whom Cerberus (observing our course to continue) fetched from his place, a
puddle no less filthy then the rest, a hole hydious, full of stinking
vapors, tortures and torments to inflict his soul, and worms of bitter ball
to gnaw his conscience. Whose terriblenes was such, that uneath might mortal
eyes be able to endure so sorrowful a sight, allowing him the third Masker to
make up this melody, whose colors I must descry, to make him the better
known to the world, that no virtuous mind be over shadowed with so vile
vice.

Freendshyppe, the band wherewith men are lincked in love, The description
of Ingratitude.
and knytte with a firm knott of loyal faith, the force whereof erecteth
Commonweals, compasses Cities, inuenteth Laws, and so tempereth the nature
and effects of men, as they willingly submit themselves to the sovereignty
of our supreme Governor, has no greater an adversary then Ingratitude.

For as the one gathers together, so the other scatters abroad, as the one
builds, so the other causes ruin, and utter overthrow. As the one is the
original of good orders, so the other confounds all things with disorder.

It so much restrayneth the power of Nature, which is always upright, and
indifferent, that it blinds her with a desire to count what may be had, and
a negligent regard what should be done. Ingratitude has the eyes of Argos.
It has the eyes of Argos, to gase every way for promotion, but blind to
remember whence sprung preferment. Ingratitude has the hands of Briarius.
It has the hands of Briarius, ready to receive commodity, which way soever
it is offered, but like senceles parts benumbed when restitution is expected.

Ingratitude with the Cormoraunt deuoureth all, but feeds n^ne, Ingratitude
like the Cormorant.
loves to be pitied, yet hates compassion, being made happy, thinks not on
others misery: Exempt from mourning, says none shed tears. At liberty,
forgets bondage: and advanced to authority, disdaineth the mean condition
of inferioritie. Whose tyranny is such, as will affoords death for life, hate
for love, and injury for a benefit, fraud for faith, and treason for trust.

If we ask why so many Princes do daily exclaim upon Traiterous and disloyal
Subjects, Princes exclaim on ingratitude.
they will answer, for ingratitude. If we demand why the kind Parent
breaks his heart with sighs, The father exclaymeth on a thankles son.
and consumes his days in sorrow, his answer will be, for a graceless and
unthankful Child. If we seek the cause why Magistrates lament their labor,
Citizens unthankful.
it is for the unthankful minds of lewd Citizens.

Lastly, we may soon imagine what moves Masters to repent their favor
shown toward unthankful Servant. Servant ungrateful to their Masters.
But as he which forgets the benefit of a good turn, reapeth no other
fruit in his barren field of ingratitude but hate, and reproach, so
contrariwyse, a mind detesting to be drowned in y^ black poole of Oblivion,
receives the good rewards of love and lasting honor.

Cicero setting down the ready way to happiness, Cicero teaches to be
thankful.
amongst such duties as are required in a perfect Man, finds none more
necessary then to be thankful. For says he, if with Hesiodus we be commanded
to restore such things as we received for our own use, with greater measure
and more plenty, what shall w^^ then do, being provoked by undeserved courtesy?

Ought we not like fruitful grounds yield more a thousand fold, The fruit
of a grateful mind.
then we received? for if we doubt not to express the love of a willing heart,
toward those of whom we hope for some benefit, how much more ought we to be
thankful to those, which already have bountifully pleasured us, and by whom
we have been great lie profited. Two ways are we said to be liberal in
giving, and requi^ing that which was given. The one consists in our own
power, the other no good manne may neglect. Pernicious therefore is this
monstrous ingratitude, and whatsoever he be, in whose heart it is firmly
established, and thoroughly grounded, he is far inferior in glory, nature, or
condition, to a savage and brutish Beast. An ungrateful man is worse the^ a
brutish beast.
For as the venomous brood of the Uiper, does destroy her damn that did
nourishe her: or the cruel Tiger, that kylleth the old Tygresse that brought
her to life, Ingratitude like to a Viper.
so does the ungrateful person, not only enuenome his benefactor or releeuer,
with poisoned ingratitude, but likewise seek to kill him that saved his life,
destroy him that nourished him, and let him perrish for relief, that whilom
saved him from danger.

And as the ungrateful mind of the Snake (when the Husbandman saved his life
from the Snow, The ingratitude of the husbandmans Snake.
and cherished him by his fire, appeared by stinging him with his venomous
feeth: So, whatsoever he be, yt either nourishes an ungrateful man, or
cherishes him, eue^ so far as life or death can extend, he will requite him
with ill for his good, and with despite for his former favor. He is compared
And to nothing better may an ungrateful man be compared (though it be somewhat
familiar) then to a dog, aptly to a dog.
that when his master offered him meat, for reward bitte him by the fingers.

How loathsome may this vice appear in the Carthagenians, Carthagenians were
ungrateful to Han^iball.
who most unjustly, and against all good descrte banished their noble and
victorious Captain Hanniball (whose deeds, had he deserved death, had been
sufficient to have pleaded for life) by whose continual toil in bloody
conflicts, valiant exploytes, and excelient atchieuings, even from his youth,
increased their confines, advanced their honor, endoubled their dominions, and
almost quite extinguished she furious flame of their daring enemies the
Romans.

And much do I bewail, that noble Emperor Augustus Caesar, Augustus Caesar
slain in the Senate.
who for all his gracious benefits, plentifully powered upon the Common wealth
of Rome, at last was recompensed by vile ingratitude, with the reward of four
and twenty wounds, whose damned daggers will witness against their
ungrateful minds.

Rosilius, Rosilius cut the throat of Cicero
that vile ungrateful wretch, whom Cicero by the rhetorical force of his
eloquence, had freed from the hate, and death pretended by the Laws of Rome,
most villanously with his own hands, with butcherly blade did cut his aged
throat.

My heart lamenteth with remorse, to think how that Tyrant Nero, Nero
butchered him mother and Scholemaister Seneca.
spared not to bathe his hands in the lukewarm blood first of his own
natural mother, and next of his learned Master Seneca, who was always ready
by art to have suppressed his vice being then but green, had not nature
ordained him to so damnable a life. A pesaunt ready to execute Ca^o whose life
he saved.
Who was so ready to execute Cato Mayor, being by law condemned to die, for
the supposed death of the young Emperor Octauius, as that wretched pesaunt,
whose throat not long before he delivered from the strangling haltar. Cyclops
killed king Ninus.
No less monstrous then the rest, was the ungrateful mind of Cyclops,
bastard son to Ninus, king of Babylon, who having disinherited his lawful son
and heir, (a Prince no less virtuous then puissaunt) only to crown him
King, (and yt whilst nature yet permitted himself to reign) was afterward by
him, most traitorously murdered in his bed. So soon had his aspiring mind
ungratefully forgot, his duty and allegiance to so gracious a Sovereign. But
leave we profane Histories, and look a while into the sacred Book of God,
where we may consider the harror of this vice, by the manifold examples.

The Isralites, The Isralites ungratefully tempted GOD.
after our mighty God had delivered them from the bondage of Egypt, and guided
them by night with a Pillar of fire, and in the day shadowed them with a
Cloud, dividing the Seas for their safe passage, reigning Manna from Heaven to
feed them, and sending streams of water out of the hard Rocks, yet such was
their ingratitude, as they not only forgetting his gracious benefits, repined
at his providence, but with their grudging minds tempted his divine majesty,
for which, such was his wrath conceived against their unthankfulness, that (but
for his servant Moses sake) he would worthily have banished them the Land of
promise. David and Saul.
After that David that kingly Prophet, and anointed of God, had diverse times
so nearly approached the presence of his deadly enemy Saul, as without
resistaunce he might easily have bereaved him of life, but spared him, was
notwithstanding continually pursued by Saul (as a witness of his ungrateful
mind) who sought the death of him that spared his life. So many are ye examples
written in the holy scriptures, as would (...) whole volumes of admonitions, for
an ungrateful person to avoid this vice. Examples showed by brute be^stes to
avoid ingr^^^de.
By so much ought this vice to be accounted detestable amongst me^, by how
much it is lothed of brute beasts themselves, for proof of which Aulius Gellius
writes this example. Androgeo (...)


One Androgeo, a slave to a Roman Senator, weary of the yrkesome cruelty of
his Lord, Senator of Rome
ran from him, and lived as one forlorn amongst wild Woods, and hydious
Mountains. One day amongst the rest, sore wearied with travail and heat of
the parching Sun, he entered into a Cave to rest, and ease his weary limbs,
whither (when he had slept a while) came a monstrous and ougly Lion, The
grateful disposition of a cruel Lion.
whose sight so appalled him, that he expected naught cls but present death.
But the Lion not minding to hurt, but seeking for help at his hand,
(contrary to nature) came gentlye to him, laid his head in his lap, and
held out his foot with pitiful gronings, in so much, that Androgeo (setting
fear aside) moved with compassion, Androgeo pulled a thorn from the Lions
foot.
diligently serched for that wound that so much molested him, and at last,
perceiving a Thorn deeply pierced in the bottom of his foot, he gladly
pulde it out, and eased the Lion of his pain, for which deed, the Lion not
only defended him from the harms of other Savage beasts, but every day
brought him store of victuals to relieve his needy want. But Androgoe weary of
his solitary life, Androgeo taken by his master.
and desirous to travail further for better fortune, was (by wandering out of
his way) vnhappyly apprehended, and brought back to his cruel Master, who
prosecuting the Romish law, Androgeo condemned to die.
condemned him to be devoured of Lions. And being thrown into the Den
amongst them. It happened that that Lion, whose foot he lately healed, was
ready as the rest, with their greedy chaps to have torn him peecemeale, but
that he remembered as well his favor, as the freendshippe in curing of his
wounded foot, The Lion gratefully s^ueth his life.
and therefore not only fauned on him, but saved him from the tearing tuskes
of those insatiate Lions. At whose grateful remembrance, as well the young
Babes, as the aged Senators of Rome admired: and therefore ordained a Law
inviolable to their posterity, that such as encurred the blame of ingratitude,
should without remorce die that death which was once ordained for Androgeo. A
shame is it therefore to humanity, Beasts teach men to be grateful.
that brutish beasts, wanting reason, should instruct men to be grateful to
their benefactors. But such is the nature of some men, that those gifts of
reason and understanding, which God has bestowed on them, (thereby to make
them excel all other creatures) they convert by their vicious life, and
ungodly inclination, to the unreasonable scence of brutish beasts.

Of which sort are these Plaiers, Plaiers are ungrateful vipers.
that like the Uiper forget them that feeds their venom with their poison,
thereby to increase their stings, and to hurt the world which they are borne to
offend, and vngratefullie reward them, that will spend their time for their
profit, labor for their lust, and painful travail to please them, whose
pleasure as poison spreddeth it self into the veins of their beholders,
representing the filthy poole of Auernus, which strikes dead those which come
within the sent of the same. They are like the poole of Auernus.
For none of the beasts of the field dare drink in the river after the dragon,
except the Unicorne purge the same from poison with her horn, such is the
infectious poison of these men, and such danger is it to be near the view of
their vicious exercise, he therefore that fears the sting, let him avoid the
hissing of the harmefull Adder. Fly the hissing of the Adder.
This masker ready with a trice to perform his office, amongst the rest
wanting nothing but his visard, which he may not miss, least he miss of his
purpose, was not so soon thought upon as presently provided. Then with
pretended shadows to cover so deformed a substance, Ingratitude masketh under
the visard of hurting harms.
to the intent his face might not be known by his leopord like spots (the
marks of Satan) he masked under the vizard of Hating harms, to delude those
which through an ignorant spirit are no less willing to follow his vice, then
he is ready to seduce them to the same. Such is the nature of those Plaiers,
whether grounded by nature, Plaiers were the same maskes.
or insinuated by some preposterous education I know not, but when the chief
of their mischief is put in practice, More unnatural are they then the Tygre.
they hate harms, when in effect they deceive themselves, more unnatural then
the cruel Tygre, yet hate they harms, and loath are they to do good to one
man to whom they are all most bound, least they should hurt another, there
unto enioined by their virtue of ha^ing harm. And thus far do I persuade my
self, that nature has marked these men with such monstrous marks, that they
would neglect the goods of their dearest friends, by pretending that they hate
harms, and therefore are loath to do good to one, least it should hurt another.

But some man will not stick to object, Ungrateful minds are not human.
that such minds as I talk of cannot be human, therefore do I much injury
those men, to censure so hardly upon bare suppositions, for there is no man so
ungrateful, but if he can do good without prejudice to himself, or
disparagement to his own estate, to another his benefactor, he will do it.

I answer hereunto that this obiector is deceived. They will do good to none
of their benefactors, least they hurt other.
for such is the impartial sincerity of these men's minds, that they are loath
to do good to some, yea their helpers, and chief coadiutors, least they
should hurt another, and so thereby endammage their own credits, and be found
such as they are not, but what they are, if men delight not to sit in
darkness, which comprehends their hearts, or would see that which easily
they might, They are exquisit in all kind of vice.
they shall see no vice either commonly used at home, or brought as rich
merchandise from foreign countries, but they will be as exquisite in the same as
if nature had honored them so much, as they should have been the first
inuentors of such notable actions.

Amongst which Ingratitude is no less loved amongst them, What Ingratitude is,
then that which is most f^mous of all, for qualities or good deserts. And the
rather for that so many examples out of holy scriptures, are presidents for
those men to do the like, for that which God punishes they delight in, Their
examples hurt more then venom of the Dragon.
to whose protection I commit them, to amend them, or else to end them, whose
examples hurt more then the venomous Dragon does with her poison.

Ingratitude the third masker is thus set out by their lewd and chief
domination, after such order as already I have told. Next to make up a fourth,
was brought up by y^ hellish keeper Ougly dissension, Ouglie Dissension.
whose eyes sparkled with fire in token that his heart was inflamed with hate,
still gnashing his filthy teeth, and biting his lips, in token that his head
was exercised in all kind of villainous exploits. In his hands he bare two fire
brands, wherewith he inflicted and scourged his own miserable carcass,
Dissension tormenteth himself with fire brands.
having no other to exercise the infamy of his art, which adds such torture
to his tormented body, and such anguish to his vexed soul, that there
appeared in his face such tyranny, as if he only were the man to confound
with mischief the whole world. And soothe to say, such is the ambition of
dissension, that it sets Princes at debate, kings at war, and
commonwealths are wrackt and rent by the outrage of this hellish feend, the
wretchedness of which vice I will note, to the intent the wise may avoid the
same.

This pernitions vice of dissension so barketh continually at peace and
virtuous proceedings, Dissension barketh at Peace.
that where his currish qualities are, there civil government is clean
dashed, policy prevented, virtue extinguished, happy estate inthralled, and
finally all floorishing things so confounded, that it rather represents a
wilderness inhabited of hideous and sauadge beasts, then a commonwealth
governed by wisemen, or a people surprised with law and equity.

So venomous are the teeth of this barking Dog, This barking Dog has
venemons teeth.
that wheresoever he biteth he leaves behind him extirpation, continual
Iarres, contempt of equality, and an aspiring mind of superiority, nay such
is it, that in what common wealth so ever it be, heretofore flourishing, naught
now is to be expected, but ruin, desolation, mourning and wringing of hand,
with no less pitiful outerie, A pitiful cry when Babylon was fallen.
then when it was said great Babylon is fallen. For even as the ship that is
tossed with suddeine tempests in the raging sea, when his masts are shiuered,
his sails rent, and his tacklings torn, so far that the master himself is
past all hope of safety, and expects naught but present death. So dissension
reigning in the hearts of men, What d^^^ention procures,
procures such hurly burley, and outrageous swelling of puffed minds, as
present nothing but slaughter, bloodshed, and most unspeakable massacres. No
otherwise then the thunder of angry Jupiter, does dissension terrify the
most courageous minds, and make the pillars of the whole earth to tremble.

The better to explain the nature of so damnable a fury, The fruits of
examples.
it shall not be amiss to consider the fruits of many excellent examples.
Amongst which I find none more effectual to diswade the rest from this
mischeeuous contention, then that was fostered betwixt the founders of Rome,
Romulus and Remus.
Romulus and Remus, whose dissension was so great, inflamed with fury, that no
spark of reason or good order might extinguish the same, before the curssed
hand had shed the quiltlesse blood of the other, so far does dissension
incense men, that they forget both love and nature. Catiline his disse^tious
mind.
How did the dissentious minds of Catiline and his confederates, dismay the
whole state of Rome with their brutish conspiracies, so that had not Cicero
imploide his grave counsel, and approved wisdom in timely season, Rome had
been ruinated, and those sauadge men like wool^es had rent the bowels of their
native country. That Gretian mirror Ajax, Ajax and Ulysses.
by the dissension that was betwixt him and Ulysses, so far forgot reason,
that he most unnaturally murdered himself*

What incurable dissension was that caused betwixt Me^elaus and Paris, Menel^u^
and Paris at vile dissension.
that the flames thereof gave so large a blaze, as both Greece and Troy
thereby were almost quite consumed. Strabo sets down a notable example of a
fellow that not only sowed dissension at his own native home, Function a
dissentious wretch.
but abroad made it a practice to set Kings at dissension. One Fun^stion
subject to Horatius, having lewdlie spent his living, and therefore not
regarded of the King as he would, went to Morettus heir unto the crown, and
informed him that the king his uncle fearing his aspiring mind, did intend to
send for him and commit him to prison, with a pretense of a supposed treason,
who unkindly taking the supposed ill of the king his uncle, gathered a
mighty army to contend with him, and rewarded Funestion with the charge of
two hundred men, who liking not his reward, disdeining the same, came back to
the king, and informed him of the disobedience and pretended treason of
Morettus, which caused the king to leauie an army, and to meet his kinsman,
who having spent much money, munition, and men, and wearied with wars.
Fun^stion makes a mutiny in the kings camp, and carries away five thousand
of his best men and came to an Island called Taxos, informing the king that the
two kinsme^ were confederat to come together against him, and beat him out of
his country, who presently fortified himself, and rewarded Fun^stion
bountifully, giving him the charge of his men at arms. But he forgetting the
King, fell in love with the Queen, and because she would not consent, accused
her of adultery to the King, but such was the judgment of God to confound
this dissentious wretch, that he was suddenly kilde with a thunderboult. Such
is the upright judgment of God, that he will not permit any dissentious
person to live upon the earth unpunished.

Most terrible and to be lamented is that Britain example of the two brothers,
The example of Dissension between Porter and Ferre^.
Po^rex and Ferrex, whose dissentious minds caused Porrex to kill his brother
being a king, and urged the Queen Videna for revenge to kill her natural
son Porrex, who afterward was by her subjects justly murdered, for the
death of that most virtuous Prince.

Almighty God in the sacred scriptures has set down, how much he loatheth
this heinous offense committed against his divine majesty, by the punishment
which he allotted to proud Hammon, Wicked Hammon dissentious with Mardocheus.
that he was hanged on the self same gallows his dissentious mind caused to
be erected for Mardocheus, so falls it out that the dissentious fall into the
pits they dug for others, and their own mischief reboundeth upon their
own hateful heads.

These be the thornie fruits of Dissension, proceeding from the choked
thoughts of ambitious minds, Dissension his punishment cannot aptly be
described.
worthily therefore was this devouring dog plagued in hell with the furious
flames of never quenching fire, as he was a wicked instrument to inflame men's
hearts upon earth, Brymstone, Pitch, and Tar, continually burn the never
wasting body of dissension with such fury, as his least pain is impossible
to be aptly described.

This vile vice reigns likewise amongst Plaiers with no less authority then
Beelzebub reigns in hell: for such is their dissentious minds, that like
Dogs striving at a bone, they gnarre one at another, one hates another, and
seek by all means possible to work mischief by their dissentious minds. But
these matters can they finely cloak, with the visard of friendly favor,
Their visard is Friendly favor.
and color their pretenses with love they owe to them, they set them at
debate, the self same visard that s^rued Dissension to mask under.

For when it may be said by their mischeeuous minds, they set other together
by the ears, they can color it by saying, they were my friends, and therefore
was I loath to see them so much backbite one another. Thus do these dissentious
persons paint their pretenses with fine colors, They paint their pretenses
with fine colors.
to the intent the simple may not perceive their damnable drifts, but be
overcome with their subtle sleights, and cleanly conueiance of their pure
pract^ses.

But tell me how ^an that be friendly favor, Their visard of Friendly fauo^.
that when they have procured by their reports dissension to acrue amongst
any, they disport themselves in their harms, laugh at their dangered
practices, They laugh at mischief.
in seeking to entrappe one another by secret invasion, so does dissension,
laughing at mischief, and sorrowing at others freendship, drinking blood to
quench his insatiate thirst with the greedy desire of the devouring Lion. But
well did this visard of friendly favor become Dissension to avoid suspect of
his inward ils, and to shadow the deformity of external harms. Therefore was
he very aptly placed the fourth masker to congratulate so famous a marriage.

For the fifth place Cerberus brought forth out of a filthy den, Blasphemy
comes from hell.
(wherein was bound damnable beasts and vipers to add torments) the most
wicked and pernicious helhound Blasphemy, who spends his time in throwing out
throbbes of damnable desires, and breathing out mischief that lurketh in his
inward heart, and bellowing out the beastly blasphemy of his inward mind,
feeds upon his one soul, and sits gnawing the bones of his own flesh,
bound there with pinching yrons of everlasting wrath.

For so great is the judgment of God toward the blasphemers of his name, The
great judgment of God.
that he permits the devil to have power to place them in the very deepest
nooke of his hollow migne, where no punishment so perrilous but is executed on
them, no grief so great but possesses them, no tormente so terrible but is
inflicted on them. The majesty of God suffers hell to punish the wicked.
And what so ever hell it self can devise, to torture and torment so damnable
a creature, the majesty of God will permit, though his mercy be great, yet
his celestial word is past, that no wretch which blasphemeth his name shall
live, but perish in the indignation of his wrath. For as the Majesty of God is
impacient of any aspiring mind to be partaker of his deity, The majesty of
God is impatient of blasphemy.
so does he with a sharp whippe scourge those blasphemers, that attribute
any dignity belonging to heaven his head, or the earth his footstool to any
other but himself, his honor will not be defaced, his majesty mangled, and
his holy name blasphemed.

For when that blasphemous wretch Herod Blasphemous Herod.
in a solemn oration before his subjects, attributed the honor to himself,
when the people affirmed him to be a God, and of heavenly power, he was
pres^ntlie by his majesty, stricken down dead in his chair, as an example to
terrify the rest of that quality. Peruse the Pageant of Popes, The Pageant of
Popes.
and there shall you find for the most part of all those that took upon them
(without sin) the inscrutable power of God to forgive sin, The inkindled
wrath of God against blasphemers.
that none of them but perished by the judgment of God, with one spark or
other of his inkindled wrath.

The monster Arius that affirmed himself to be Messiah, The punishment of
Arius.
and took upon him the Majesty of God, supposing his throne to be the
heavenly seat of his Majesty, then the mighty Iehoua inkind^ed his wrath,
and sent worms to devour the guts of this Arius, with such intolerable
grief, that his miserable carcass was eaten to pieces. Even as God sent his
worms, frogs, and venomous beasts upon the blaspheming Egyptians, when curssed
Pharao and his host, Pharao plagued for blasphemy.
with his power of horssemen and chariots, of force were overthrown in the
sea, when his blasphemous tongue said: What is God that I should obey him, or
what is the Lord of hosts that I must hear him: the Israelits by the sundry
punishments of God, knew what it is to blaspheme his heavenly name.

And Dionisius Aropagita, Dionisius Aropagita a blasphemer.
for blaspheming the name of God, suddenly sunck into the earth, whose tongue
at that instant ceased not to say: What can this God do unto me, or who is he
that I ought to honor? The unhappy wife of Job, Jobs blasphemous wife.
that willed him to curse God and die, with her children, and all the rest of
her substance, was suddenly wasted and consumed. What men then are given over
into so reprobate a sense, that will not cease seeing the wrath of God so
heavy upon the blasphemers of his name, The wrath of God upon blasphemers.
but will take example by such hurts least they themselves be presented as
Actors in this Tragedy.

For when God looks down from Heaven, and beholds any exercised to
blaspheme his name, or breathe from their swelling hearts hateful words upon
his divine majesty, he stretches out the mighty arm of his power, Angels
power forth Gods wr^th upon the wicked.
and commands his ministers the Angels to power forth whole vials of wrath
and blood upon those accursed caytifes. What were those where the Locusts did
devour, but the blasphemers of ye majesty of God. And the Revelation
witnesses, that those whom the Angel marked with his pen on the forehead for
the elect of God, were saved: the other, being blasphemers of his name, were
bound in the pit of darkness. Why was that mighty Captain Holofernes
Holofernes his blasphemy.
given over into the hands of a woman, but for blaspheming the eternal
majesty of God? So much does God hate this blasphemy, that he has not only
punished such which have blasphemed his own name, but such as have derided the
name of his Prophets. As when the holy Prophet Elias preached the message of ye
Lord, and young Infants mocked him, calling him baldpate, he cursed them, The
Children ^o Elias.
when Bears came out and devoured the^, according to ye saying: the posterity
of blasphemers shall perrish for ever. Gods indignation is heavy to bear.
Such is the monstrous condition of this blasphemy, that nothing sooner does
inkindle the wrath of God, nor makes him more terrify the inhabitants of the
earth, when the heat of his indignation and anger causes the Heavens to melt,
and drop revenge upon the heads of all blasphemous wretches. Woorthely
therefore was blasphemy punished thus in hell. Many and terrible examples of
our own present age, Examples of late days for blasphemy are many
has of late been done amongst us, which I will omit, because I hope their
remembrance is not clean extinguished, and that so lately done, cannot be so
soon forgot. Of which sort of men in the chief place, may be placed Players,
Players are blasphemers of God.
when they take upon them the persons of Heathen men, imagining themselves (to
vaineglory in the wrath of God) to be the men whose persons they present,
Players vainglory in the wrath of God.
wherein, by calling on Mahomet, by swearing by the Temples of Idolatry
dedicate to Idols, by calling on Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and other such petty
^ods, they do most wickedly rob God of his honor, They blasph^eme his name.
and blaspheme the virtue of his heavenly power. Oh men in worse condition then
brutish beasts, yet can they cover their deformity in this point with the
Masker blasphemy, in shrouding themselves under the visarde of godly learning.
They shroude themselves under the visa^de of godly learning.
And that this is no blasphemy, but the opinion of the learned, conformable to
the former manners of men, which makes the^ confirm their souls to damnation.
What color I pray of godly learning can be in this, when they approach the
devil so near in condition, They present the devil in shape and condition.
that they can cunningly present his person, and nothing can there be so
damnable, either in Heathen, Pagans or Infidels, but they can present the same,
in as ample manner as if it were then in doing. Trust me, I am sure that these
men more offend God by deriding him with these beastly sacrifices, Their
sacrifice is beastly.
then those men which did first commit such censuall, and unnatural deeds. No
doubt but there is amongst the^ can play Judas, Some c^n play Judas.
as naturally as if he were the very man that betrayed Christ, They crucify
Christ a new.
and verily think yt the visarde of godly learning, is so far from good living,
that under these pretended colors, these goodlesse men crucify Christ a
new, when they thus seek to deface his glory, to mangle his members, and rent
in pieces his sacred body. What other thing is it, when in the midst of all
their villainy, they make inuocations to his majesty, They mock God with their
inuocations.
and ballet with beastly traditions of men, terms of pompous pride the
magnanimity of his power. What other thing is it, Commit them to their own
consideration.
then to scorn his wrath, rent his members, and blaspheme his name. Consider
then of this, and find what I have said.

This Masker blasphemy thus well provided, but that his visard was scarce
current, masketh amongst the rest of his mates. The sixth Masker, The sixth
Masker, Impudency.
(which must be last to obseru^ a decorum in their task) was Impudency, whose
brazen face shameth the beholders, and whose graceless members no wise man but
hates. Him Cerberus fette from his hellish habitation, upon whose body was
written the names of all kind of vices, acceptable to satan, and hateful to
^od, as if there were the man whose marks bewrayed his condition, yet never
shamed he to show his face.

This Impudency is of ancient authority amongst many, Of ancient authority.
and rather taken for a noble mind, or an audatious heart, then an impudent and
shameless vice. Such was the pleasure that almighty God conceived in this
audacity, that he plagued the offenders with more then ordinary punishment.
Iezabell, that accursed and impudent Queen, for her shameless and unseemly
behavior, was justly by the rigorous judgment of God, devoured of dogs. When
it was spoken by the mouth of the Prophet, the dogs shall lick the blood of
Iezabell Impudent Iezabell.
in the fields of Israel. No less shameless was the lust, and the accusation
impudent, which ye wicked Judges maintained by ye chaste Susanna, The shamele^
Judges.
when God by his mighty power, by raising up young Daniel, confounded their
impudency, and delivered them into the hands of men, to be destroyed with ye
same stones that were provided for that chaste Lady. The impudent lust of
Tarquine who ceased not to pursue the chaste Lucrece even to ye death cost him
the price of his kingdom, The impudent lust of Tarquin.
banishment from his Country, and afterward a miserable end. The Revelation
describing the whore of Babylon sitting on the seven headed Dragon, The whore
of Babylon.
with a cup of poison in her hand, calls her shameless and impudent.

The impudency of the Damsels mother yt tempted Herod, Herod.
to ask the head of John, and causde it to be cut off, was little inferior to
the other, such instruments by wickedness, God rayseth up to try his elect, but
yet thryce woe be to them that are made the instruments of Gods wrath, and
unhappy are they by whom God lays his cross upon his children, either gently
to correct them, A woman's impudency.
or mildly to try them. What impudency was that of the mother in the Gospel,
to demand of Christ that her two sons might sit in his kingdom, the one upon
his right hand, the other on his left. No less rediculous then that, was a
profane point of Aristodemus, whom when the king Antigonus advanced to high
preferment of his counsel, Aristodemus to Antigonus.
being but a base Cooks son, he shamed not but impudently persuaded him
not to be liberal, then which there cannot be a greater blot to the fame of a
royal Prince. If Princes then, the Uizegerents of God, Princes are vizegerents
of God.
would punish such impudent wretches as insert themselves into their secrets to
undermine, nor shame to fleare in the face of a Prince, bedecked with modesty,
(though the poisoned bayte of treason lurketh in their hearts.) No doubt but
this vice should be less practiced, and virtue sooner embraced. Worthily then
deserved this impudency her continual torment in hell, Impudency is tormented
in hell.
in whose fruit appears the pathe of shameless, and impudent enormities. The
visard appointed for this hellish feende, was called modest audacity, Their
visarde is modest audacitie
wherein Players do much delight, for albeit their impudency appears so
openly, yt every man by their continual practice does decerne their visard to
be rather immodest impudency, yet so currantly can they carry it away, that he
with his Net as expert as themselves, is counted but a sheep, a simple sot,
and a plain Innocent. The opinion of Players.
But on the contrary, he that can set upon each vice a face of brass, and
with his countenance bear out the matter, that is the fellow can do all, and
he it is that shall be counted the modest audacious man.

With what tyranny does vice then hold possession of these men's hearts, when
their eyes are so obstinatlie blinded that they decerne not good from bad, They
are singular in sin.
but headlong run into their own destruction, called mischiuous exercises
honest recreations: when such it is as presents murders, mischiefs,
adulteryes, ingratitude, idleness, dissension, impudency, and all kind of
villainy, that either can be thought upon or practiced in a Common wealth, I
wish these men not to sooth them selves in their folly, but to repent in time.
This Mask thus ended, with visardes accordingly appointed, there were certain
petty fellows ready, as ye custom is in Maskes, to carry Torches, The
Torch-bearers.
to inflame the hearts, and inkindle their minds to contend with virtue, and
wholly to be guided and lighted by vice. Whose names are these, What they are
Unthriftines, Deceitful diligence, Secret hate, Insolent contempt, Malice,
and Makebate, whose visards are these, an honest mind, good husbandry, a
humble heart, good regard, temperaunce, and contempt of the world, whose Torches
as I said, are the firebrands of satan, Their Torches are the firebra^ds of
satan.
to conduct men to hell, whose way is plain and broad, without let or
hinderaunce. Not one of these Torch bearers but are as well known amongst
Players, They are known amongst Players
and their vices put in ^re, to make their practice known, as well as satan
knows his own, and can cull out these Mates which are under the compass of
his regiment. This pleasing Mask being thus prepared, with a few words given
them in charge from their master Beelzebub, Beelzebub sends the^ to Fastus and
Luxuria*
thither were they sent, to the place appointed to (...). to Faustus and
Luxuria, and to grief them from their king, with that gift. Whether when they
were come, with entertainment no less pompous then the marriage was
solemnized. Fastus, to the intent his education might appear correspondent to
his comely person, welcomed them with these words. This courteous favor,
renowned servant to our mighty King, The Oration of Fastus.
sent from him, works a means to redouble y^ former duty which we ought
him, and although the unworthiness of our estate, could not admit the presence
of his person, yet does our hearts so much honor him (whose power is great) that
we continually with vehemence of spirit, call upon his name. Neither as justice
wylled, hitherto has wanted any thing that might pleasure us, or glorify the
worthy title of his dignity. But at this instant, considering the general
joy, that we and our servant have received by the sweet contentation, and
solemnizing of the marriage between my Lady, and me, my good Lord has
herein amplified my former reverence, and sharpened in my mind a deeper
desire to proceed in his obedience, then heretofore has ever been inserted
in my heart. Certify him therefore I pray at your return, that wherein duty may
gratify or requite this large benefit and favor, it shall be extended to the
highest degree. Therefore, for the love I bear you, sent from my Lord, you
are heartily welcome to my Castle of (...). After he had ended his speech, his
Lady Luxuria, spoke as follows.

My Lord and espoused husband Fastus, The Oration of Luxuria.
(you inhabitants of y^ infernal world) has already shown you the zeal of
his loving heart, the Simpathy of whose mind, consists in my self, that
whatsoever he shall seem to allow, of duty and love I bear him, besides the
favor I owe unto you, confirms the same in me, so far, then wherein the
power, or duetifull service of a sillye woman consists, or may offer
requital, let it be expected, for duty wylls so much, and your courtesy
commandes no less, you are therefore heartily welcome to our Castle (...).

After these several Orations were ended, a sudden joy was stricken in the
hearts of the beholders, The wicked joy in sin.
as well by reason of these speeches, as to view the manner of the Mask,
wherein they received such contentation by how much more it came unlooked for,
that they were almost driven into an ecstasy, such was the joy they conceived
thereof. When Fastus and Luxuria, and the rest of the company had well
recreated their minds with dancing and disporting amongst these Maskers
beholding them at large (whose custom was not to speak) they commanded them
to be led into ye Hall of Misery, Their banquet in the Hall of misery.
and there to be feasted with delicate dyshes, of continual vexation, guilty
conscience, worlds of woe, and never dying torments. where drinking of the
accursed wine of forgetfulness, they returned to Satan from whence they came.

Since then such is the wicked exercise of these Players, give me leave a word
or two to tell you in exhortation, how happy it is to avoid their presence, and
to banish them from the entrayles of their hearts.

Whatsoever is contrary to the word of God, Plays are contrary to the word of
God.
is not agreeable with God, Plays are contrary to the word of God, therefore
agree they not with God. First GOD with his own sacred mouth has pronounced,
yt whatsoever proceeds from the wicked nature of ma^^^, is imperfect,
pollute, and defiled, such then are Plays, imperfect, Feigned colors.
pollute and defiled. Why then should the nature of man be so blinded with
error, as to run desperately into the damnable sincke of sin, (or as they
term it) in seeking to expel the mischief of Melancholy, do run into a
thousand miseryes, and whatsoever he be that feels himself surprised with
this passion, shall find that pleasure does increase the same, and Plays
rather inflame the fury thereof, the^ quench the flame by any rest. But
whatsoever he be that feels this passion of melancholy, to have fast hold of
his heart, shall by no means sooner expel the same, A medicine for melancholy.
then by reading of the Scriptures, conferring the mercyes of God with his
sinful soul, and by firing still before his eyes, the bitterness of that
passion of Christ, endured for us, who was bound to set us free from satan,
scourged to rid us from strypes, derided to deliver us from the scorn of the
devil, crowned with thorns to glorify us with a crown of majesty, and
finally for us, shed his most precious blood, yea for us unworthy wretches,
that rather fly to vanities to unload our heavy hearts, then come to him to be
unladen of our bond, whose word (sweeter then the honey or the honey comb)
calls us that are grieved. When he says: Come unto me all ye that are
heavy and laden, The conclusion.
and I will ease you of your burden. What can we have more of so sweet a
Savior. Eschew therefore this evil to win heaven, tread this mischief
under feet, to be extolled into heaven, and finally say, Lord grant us
heaven. Amen.

FINIS.

