A BRIEF SHOW Of the false VVares packt together in the named, Apology of the
Church of England.

By John Rastell M. of Art and student of Divinity.

Qui nititur Mendacijs, hic pascit ventos, Idem Prob^^^ autem ipse sequitur
aues volantes.

He that leans to lies, feeds ye winds:
and the self same follows ye fleyng birds.


LOVANII, Apud Ioannem Foulerum. Anno D. 1567.

REgi^e Maiestatis Priuilegio concessum est Ioanni Rastello Sacrae Theologiae
studioso, vt librum inscriptum, A brief show of the false Ware, etc. per
Typographum aliquem iuratum imprimere, ac impune distrahere liceat.

Datum Antuerpiae, die 9. Iulij* 1567. Subsig. Prats.

To the Reader.
THE Church of England (Gentle Reader) was never so defended, is now, we hear
say, it is like to be. For M. Jewel, being the Scribe, or Secretary, and the
Superintendentes with others, being coadiutors and gatherers: what is it so
little, that they so many will not find out, or what is it so much, that he
alone will not put in? By likelyhoode then, the Book will be great: marie
whether it will be so good or no, therein is the question. For trial of which,
I have gathered into certain chapiters, the chiefest matters (as it seemed to
me) by which their charge might be set before them, and to which, the account
that they can make, might be considered, whether it will answer.

The first of which, conteyneth the false and naughty Arguments of the
english Apology.

The second, The Absurdities thereof.

The third, The lies in tellinge of Stories.

The fourth, the lies upon the Ancient Fathers.

The fifth, the lies upon councels.

The sixthe, the lies upon the Scriptures.

The seventh, the flat lies.

The eighth, the Rhetorical lies.

The nynth, the Examples of facing a lie.

The 10. the Problematical lies.

The 11. a blasphemous lie.

The 12. Contradictions.

The 13. False Interpretations.

These be the sommes of the debte which they are in, to God, and to the world:
which if they can discharge with arownd and true answer, as it were a good and
lauful paime^t, ^^ey may be the better trusted hereafter: but because such
Merchantes of this world are ex^eeding crafty and false in their mysteries,
therefore (Ge^^le Reader) before thou deal with the Gross ^Booke, weighe any
of these small pieces which I have gathered for thee, out of the confutation of
the Apology of their Church in England, made by D. Harding, and consider with
the Balance of Indifferency, whether this Answer of theyrs that is coming,
be able to make any of them good or no. So shall thou save a great deal of
labor, which else the reading and examining of the whole book would cost thee:
and I shall think my labor well bestowed, which does by any way bring thee a
commodity.

Fare well.

From Louan. Augusti. 21.
Liber hic de Mendacijs Apologiae falso nominatae Ecclesiae Anglicanae lectus
est and approbatus a viris anglici idiomatis and Theologiae peritissimis,
quibus tuto crede^dum esse iudi^^: quamobrem etiam secure imprimi and euulgari
potest.

Cunerus Petri, P. S. Petri Louanij
7. Iulij. Anno. 1567.
A BRIEF SHOW OF CERTAIN NAVGH^ tie and false Arguments made in the Apology
of the Church of England.
The first Chapter.
Truth does redely find enemies and slaunderers, Apolog.
Mayor.


We find enemies and slaunderers. Minor.


Ergo we ought to bear it quietly, Concl^^ion
if we be at this day tormented, only because we teach the truth.

TO show the faults of this argument, Confut. p. 6. 7. ^. 9.
by rules of logike, it were an easy matter: but it would not be so easily
understood of the common Reader. For his sake therefore, leaving the mode and
figure of a logical answer, I will show the Absurdity thereof, in that it may
be made to serve for the Catholics also, their Adversaries. For, Truth does
redelye find enemies and slaunderers: But the Catholics at this day, find
enemies and slaunderers, Ergo they have the truth. That the Catholics have
presently their enemies and slau^derers, it may be proved by the whole Book of
Acts and momuments, by M. Jewels Sermon and Reply, by this very Apology of
the Church of England. By all which it apereth, how sharply the Protestants are
set, against the Catholics, and how little regard they have what they write or
report of them. Ergo if they which find enemies have the truth: wherefore then
are so many Catholics, either in prison within the Realm, either in hatred of
their own Cou^trieme^, out of the Realm? And if the having of enemies proves
not, the parties that are hated to be of a good and sincere religion: it
concludes nothing for the Protestants, though they show themselves to have
enemies. Yea it makes against them, that by likelihod their doctrine should
not be good and credible: because they now the Professors of it, have all the
favor that may be showed in England. The right form of this argument would
be this.

Truth finds Enemies:

We have the truth:

Ergo we find enemies.

But now the second proposition can never be proved.

So many thousands of our brethern Apolog.


Princes desirous to restarine the Gospel

The whole world now does begin to

Ergo our cause already is sufficiently declared and defended.

Death for a religion does not make a Martyr, Confut..13. to the first.
As in example of Seruetus the Arrian, whom Calvin procured to be burned at
Geneua* and of Joan of Kent that filth. And the Anabaptists, which to this day
suffer death willingly.

So they do make laws against thieves, to the second.
and yet the gallows are daily occupied. So do weeds arise and grow, be the
ground or garden never so well tilled. Yet neither thieves nor weeds may crake of
it, that not withstanding the laws or diligence of me^, they continue still and
maintein their race.

The more like it is, that Antichrist is at hand. For concerning the Gospel of
Christ, it does not begin now to be known: but every day more and more it
should wax more obscure toward thend of the world.

This Gospel therefore, which, to behold, the whole world now does begin to
open their eyes, cu^meth so late, that we must look now for the wicked man to
be reveled, 2. The^. 2.
and Charity to wax cold, and faith not to be found perchance upon the earth:
Math. 24 Luc. 18.
and not to have any increase of faith, hope or Charity, to be brought into the
world.

Our religion is come at lenght even to Kings courts and palaces: Apology.
Ergo God him self does strongly fight in our quarrel.

It came not thither, Confut. 15.
before it was sent for. Neither do you properly turn princes to your
Religion, but Princes turn all your preachinges, and procedinges, to serve
their affections. So was Peter Martyr at his first cu^ming to England a
Lutheran only, but perceiving afterward, the Superior powers to fancy an
other way, he followed also them with all the wit he had, and became an open
Zui^glian. Again, you do well to resort to Princes palacies for argument,
because in deed thence is your cheifest aid and succor.

Let the Scripture (says S. Ambrose) be asked the question, Apolo.
let the apostles be asked, let the Prophets be asked.

Ergo we must use no other force, but only Scriptures.

It follows not: Confu^tion. 3.
for after al them, I may ask also, what S. Ambrose himself thinks upon the
Scripture, Apostle, or Prophet. And where as by many means, one in order above
an other, a way is prepared to any knowledge, the using of the chiefest, must
not exclude all the inferior from their places. Again, why has M. Jewel
stuffed his Reply with so many allegatio^s of phrases of doctors: and left it
so void of express Scripture, if no other force, but of scriptures, is to be
used?

Apolog.
to assist his Church.





Ergo there neither is, neither can be any one man, which may have the whole
superiority in the Church.

He is present in deed by his power, Conf. 45. To the first.
and truth, and grace: but to the external eye he is not present, and sensible
men require a sensible Governor.

Christ needs nothing, To the. 2.
yet for because of his wisdom and mercy, he co^municateh his Office and Glory
with men, and does not al things i^mediatly by himself: although he be of such
almightines, that he needs no help.

It is as false as God is true. To the 3.
For in deed the powers of the mind (as the will, memory, and understanding) are
by nature of that making and capacity, that nothing under God himself can
fully replenishe it. Yet if one man alone were not hable by himself to
co^prehende in his mind all the parts of the world, nevertheless by his
officers he may do it, though the whole were as big again as it is.

Last of al, to stop your mouths with fear, whom reason does not persuade
ye may, by these arguments, pluck the Croune from the heads of al Kings and
Princes. For Gods providence (you may say) is over the whole world. And he
needs no helper, And no Prince is hable to comprehend in his mind al parts of
his Dominion, how little so ever it be.

The Bishop of Rome does not his duty, Apolo.
as he ought to do. Ergo, we say he ought not once to be called a Bishop, or
so much as an elder.

The person and the office which any person bears are distinct things:
Confut^tion. 5^.
And the vocation of Bishop or King is to be honor^d, though the co^ditio^s of
the^ should be co^te^ptible for their lust and idleness. Scrua^ts are commanded
to obey their masters, not only when they be good and modest, 1 Pet. 2.
but also if they be froward. And further, what are you that judge, I will not
say, an other ma^s servant, but your own lauful head and Bishope? And if you
refuse his Authority for your part: why judge you yet the Chief Bisshope of
the Catholics? To be short, if it shall be considered, how greauous the
Heretics, and Turks, and unruly Christians, are to the Church of Christ, and
what has been done by Popes even in our days, for calling of a general
Counsel, and for defense of Christendo^ against the Infidels, and for
suppressing of evil manners: there will be little occasion left, to reprove the
Pope for not doing his duty.

A wonderful uncleanness of life and manners has followed upon the law,
Apolog.
which commanded pristes to live single. Ergo marriage is holy and honorable in
all sorts and stats of persons, and it was no good law which did forbid
priests to mary.

This disproueth not the law, Coufntation 78.
but it betraieth the foul and corrupt inclinations of them, for whom the
law was made. Without the Law, sin was dead (says the Apostle) And I had
not known (says he) what concupiscence had been, Romans 7.
except the law had said, thou shall not lust. So is it, in the acts of
parliament, which are wisely and profitably made for taking away the excess and
costlynes of apparel. For, Thou shall wear no sylke (says the law) except
thou may spend yearly by office or lands a certain Sum. And by this, one
would think, that poor serving men should not spend so much in their
apparel, as before they did. Less robbing then and filching must follow, and
the commonwealth shall be quiet and rich. But the event declares, that it is
bestowed now upon the making of the cote, that which is diminisshed in the
sylke that should go to the cote. And superfluities are not diminished, but
increased, and the matter of them is not taken away, but the form is altered.
Do not therefore put any fault in an holy or goo^ law, if sin* by occasion
thereof should en^^crease and multiply: but reproves the coneupiscence and lust
of them, which call not for the grace of God, that they may be able to keep the
good law.

We affirm, Apolog
that Christ does truly and presently give his own self in his Sacraments.
Ergo we mean not to abase the Lords supper.

This does not follow. Con^ut. 1^9.
For whereas the mind of Christ is, that in the open house which he keeps, his
own precious body should be given under form of bread, and that so freely and
bountifully, that come who would, either frind or foe, he would not change his
word and gift for that matter (although he would have a saying unto the^, that by
their unworthy receiving did frustrat his gracious benefit) he that in this
case says, that Christ gives hi^ self truly, really* substa^tially* yea
bodily and corporally unto the^ that do receive him by faith and charity, he
speaks undoubtedly a great and a true word. But if he add, that to the^ that
have no faith and charity he does not geaue his true and real body, he abuses
the excellency and worthiness of the provision that is made. For the gift were
not certain, and perfect, and consisting of the geuers own power only and
goodness, if the faith of the receauer should either make it, or mar it. You
therefore that ca^ speak excelle^tly and substa^tially of the sacrament, do for all that abase Christ's bou^tefulnes, because ye believe not, that absolutely
without respect had to any persons he geaueth himself truly in his
Sacraments, but that he gives him self truly and presently only to the
faithful receauer of hi^.

The Law of God is perfect, Apol.
and requires of us full obedience: Ergo we are able by no means, to fulfill
that Law in this wordely life.

The Answer is easy. Confut.
For the holy doctors do note two kinds of perfections. The one of the way,
in which we walk: August. de p^cca. me^^tis
The other of the Country, to which we go. etremiss. lib. 2^ C 13.
The one of this life, the ^ther of the life to come. The one consisting in
deniyng consent unto co^cupisce^ces, notwithstanding we feel many of them^^
the other consisting in a perfect peace of body and soul, without any motion
to evil. To fulfill the law so, that no motion of evil come to our thoughts,
it is for an other world: but not to obey the Concupiscencies, that is such a
perfection, as many in this life do come unto. and that is a fulfilling of the
law of God, in respect of our pilgrimage.

Paul sharply rebuked Peter: Apolog
Barnabas departed from Paul, etc. Did Catholic Fathers striued one against an
other. Ergo we should not be so greatly noted for dissensions which are found
among us.

The Apostles and holy Fathers have so striued, Con^ut. ^39.
that they kept unity of faith and religion. And they were not so set, that
they would live and dye in the quarrel. But your Strifes are in principal matters
of Religion, and you be so obstinat each of you in his opinion: that no
Authority shall make you give over and yield: which is not so, emonge the
Catholics, whereas al are obedient unto one head.

Iustine the Martyr is witness, Apolog.
that al Christians were called, (...), Godless. Ergo this ought not to
trouble us, that they call us wicked and ungodly men.

The cause is not like. Confuti^^tion. 151.
For if infidels speak evil of us, it is no matter, because they are not our
Ordinaries or Judges. But when the Catholics, from who^ ye receued the faith,
and without whom ye can not be sure of the Articles of your faith, when these
that have be^ and should be your Fathers and Rulers do condemn your deeds: it
should be a very simple comfort unto you, that Infidels of old time did speak
against Christians. Of the same kind of argument it is, where you say.

Haman accused the Jews as a people that used certain new laws. Fol. 228.
The Athenia^s said to S. Paul: may we know what new doctrine this is? Celsus
writing of purpose against Christ: what, says he, has God after so many ages
now a^ last and so late bethought him self? Eusebius writes, that Christian
religion was called new and strainge: Ergo t^^y b^ wicked m^n, spiteful against
the religi^^^ of God, which call us new fangled.

These arguments are naught. For the testimony of Infidels against Christian^
is nothing worth: but the Sentence old Catholics upon newfangled
Protestants, has much authority in it.

Paul the Apostle found faults and falls cue^ in ye prime and chief of ye
Gospel: Apolog.
so that he was compelled to write sharply to the Galathians and Corinthians.
Ergo the Church may fail and go amiss.

I answer: Confut. 200.
faults may be committed, either in life^ either in faith. Again particular
churches may err both in life and faith. The Church of Rome may err in life,
but never in faith: because the whole church then should be deceived, as which
is bound to obey the chief pastor, like as he is pri^cipally bound to feed and
instruct it. But this is impossible, Mat. 16. Ioa. n 14.
the promises of God standing, and the presence of the Holyghost assisti^g it.
Ergo though S. Paul found errors in particular Churches, this cannot i^port,
that the whole Church may be deceued, or that One Church of Rome, upon the safty
and trust of which the health of the whole depends.

Pighius finds fault with many abuses brought in, Apolog.
eue^ into y^ very Mass: Gerso^ co^plaineth of a nu^bre of most fond
ceremonies: Ergo the Church may err.

You might well say: Confut. 206.
Ergo a particular Church may err in a ceremony or such like thing about the
Mass it self. But this is nothing to the purpose, to prove, that the whole
Church may err, or that the chief Church of al, which is in Rome, may err in
faith. Now as Pighius found fault with abuses: so have the Heads of the
Churches given charge, Sess. 6.
that they should be amended. As in the very last Counsel at Tre^t. By which you
may perceive, that although fauts be found in the church, yet ar they not
allowed generally of the Church.

Bernard was no heretic, Apolog.
he had not forsaken y^ Catholic Church: yet nevertheless he did not let to
call the Bishops that then were deceivers, begylers a^^^ Pilats. Ergo the Church
may err.

As he let not to call some deceuers, Confutation..209.
et^ so he testifies for other, that they we^^ good and faithful Officers in
the Church As Martianus the Cardinal and Gaufri^ Carnotensis, Bernard. de
consideratio^e.
both of them, Legates o^ the Pope, the one into Dacia, and the other into
Aquitania. He prayseth also Eugenius the Pope, excedingly, and yet without
flaterie. Whereby it is easy to perceive, that all were not like them, whom he
reproves. And therefore the whole Church was not deceived, though some were
Pilates, and not Prelates. An other answer is, that this Objection does not
prove error in faith (of which the question is) but of manners, which God
amend, and which hurt not the good men, no more than the chafe and straw does
the pure corn.

The Greeks have neither private Mass, Apolog^.
nor mangled Sacraments, nor purgatories, nor pardons, Ergo they hold a still
number of those things, which they received from the Apostles. Confut^ 267.


First the antecedent is stark false. Then concerning the Argument, it is not
only false, but folishe also. For it concludes an Affirmative of one kind, of
a plain and pure Negative of an other, as if a man would say. The Church of
England has neither Crosses in their churches, neither order of Monastical
life in their Religion, neither Latin tongue, lights or ornaments in their
Service: Er go it holds still a number of those things, which it received of
S. Austin the Monk.

It is madness to think, y^ the Holygost takes his flight from a general
Counsel to ^un to Rome: Apolog.
Ergo y^ Pope may err. Confut. 281.


It is madness in deed so to think. And where then had you the wit to imagine it?
For what place ca^ you apoint to a Spirit, and especially what bounds unto
God? Beware of it, least whiles ye seek so gredily to flout your adversary, ye
blaspheme in your foul terms and Ironies, the holy Ghost our Creator.

Item, Apolo.
what needed so many Bishops, with so great charges, and so far iourneis have
assembled their convocation at Trident: if the Bishop of Rome must determine al
matters: Ergo he may err.

If you had been so obedient, Confut. 281.
or if other were so wise as they should be, General Councels should not need.
But because the world is now come to that Infirmity and curiosity, that matters
must be defended against al objections of heretics, and brought again unto
examination, after they have been already determined and believed: therefore has
the charity and wisdom of the Pope^ stood to the charges of calling a
general Council, which fact of his does not prove, that he may err (which
the holy Ghost will not suffer for his presence sake in the Church) but that he
does so reasonably and discreetly order those matters that shall concern our
Faith, that he will not err as much as man's wit can provide: but have also the Advice, Consent and Judgment of other, which are of most authority and
lerning in the Church of Christ.

Let the Bishope of Rome alone, Apol.
be above al Counsels: Ergo one part is greater than the whole.

No Sir, Confut. 284
not part greater than the whole, but part shall be greater than part, and
one member worthier than an other. The body and head together, make the
whole: and take away the head ye take away a part of the whole. Ye can not
therefore make a division of the church into the whole and the head: but into
the head, and the reast of the parts of the whole. And then it is no
absurdity at all, that the head should be greater in price and honor, than all the other members beside.

Athanasius denied to come to y^ council at Cesarea: Apolog.


Athanasius went away from the Counsel at Syrmium:

Iho^ Chrysostom kept himself at home, although the Emperor commanded him to
come to the Arrians Council:

Maximus and Paphnutius depa^ted from the Council at Palestine:

The Bishops of the East would not come to the Council of Heretics named
Patropassians.

Paulinus and many others more refused to come to the Counsel at Milane:

Ergo we are not to be blamed for not coming to the Council at Trent.

You mutiply examples al in vain, Confut. 293.
and there is no proportion at al, between the holy Fathers constancy, and your
disobedience. For they refused to be at the commaundent of heretics and their
Favorers, but you contempne the lawful Authority of Catholic Bishops. If ye
could truly say it, that the Fathers gathered of late at Trent, were Arria^s,
Patropassia^s, or heretics of any sort: then might you laufully use the
examples of Athanasius, Chrysostom, Maximus, Paphnutius, and other. But for as
much as it is impossible, that they could be heretics, which held no strainge
and singular opinions, contrary to the Catholic, common, and received faith in
the whole world: you have no excuse left for your pride and disobedience. That
Cathalike Bishopes have refused to come to the conspiracies of heretics, ye
never need to have proved it. But if ye can show by any example, that ever any
good man yet, did refuse to come to a Counsel lawfully called by the Pope: then
may that example make for you: but there is none such to be found.

None of us can be suffered to sit in y^ Council. Apolog.


The Popes Legates, Patriarchs, Archebishopes, Bishopes and Abbates do

And they will have al their opinions

Princes and Embassadoures are but

The Apostles never made such arguments. Confut. 294
And you if ye had in deed the holy ghost, and if ye were chosen vessels, to
carry the name of God abroad: ye would never so childishely either without caus^
fear, or if ye had a just cause, complain^ and whine, that you shall not sit,
when^ you come to the general Council, or that then ye shall have a number of
Bishope^ and Abbates against you, or that al shall be referred to the Pope, or
that they will mock you, if ye go thither.

For none of all these things should have let you from telling your
opinion^ and for the rest you should have referred al to the will of God, what
success your words should have had. But either ye be so proud, that except
you may be of the chiefest, you will not come into the presence of reverend and
learned Fathers: or ye be so fainteharted, that except the Prince be on your
side, ye dare non trust the warrant of a safeconduct.

A Christian Prince has the charge of both tables committed unto him: Apolog.
Ergo not only temporal matters, but Ecclesiastical also pertain to his office.

He has the Charge of both tables so far forth, Confut..303.
that he must defend the external geauing of due honor unto God, and outward
exhibiting of charity toward our neighbor. But to offer up Sacrifice, to
minister Sacraments, or to judge of Murder, Adultery, Theft, or any thing that
is committed only in heart, has he any power? Every man sees, that worldly
Princes meddle not with such matters. And therefore their charge is baser and
narower, tha^ the charge of Bishopes and Priests: whom God has appointed to
be his Officers in the inward Court of Conscience.

The prophets of God commanded the Kings to break down altars of Idols,
Apolog.
and to write out the books of y^ Law, for them selves: Ergo Ecclesiastical
matters perteine to the jurisdiction of Kings.

You see, Confut. 303.
then that the Princes are not Supreme, but that between them and God, the
Prophet is the greater Officer. For the Prophets co^mau^d: the princes obey.
The Prophets geaue charge: the princes do execute it. The prophets declare
what an Idol is, the Princes destroy it according to the prophets instruction.

Moses ^ Civil Magistrate recieued from God, Apolog.
and delivered to the people all the order for religion and sacrifices, and gave
Aaron a sore rebuke for making the golden calfe: Ergo ecclesiastical matters
perteyne to the office of princes.

This example agrees not, Confut. 05.
because Moses was not a Civil magistrate only, but also a priest. And he was
made also by God the supreme governor and captain over all the number of the
children of Israel, were they temporal or Spiritual persons, in figure of
Christ. If ye can show that our Savior left any such power unto any king in
the world, and that his Apostles were not immediately next unto hi^, the chief
governors of his church: then shall that temporal King have the power whach ye
labor to geaue him.

Iosue received commandments towchinge Religion and the service of God.
Apolog.
Ergo Ecclesiastical matters perteyne to their Jurisdiction.

He received commandment, Confut. 305.
to meditate in the book of the law, which God had geauen by Moses, and to
keep it. But this was so sar of from a Supremacy in matters Ecclesiastical,
that it is expressly said in the book of Numeri, Cap. 17.
that Eleazar the priest should ask council of God if any thing were to be
done for Iosue, and that Iosue should go forth and come in at the word of
Eleazar.

And this one answer serves all the Examples which ye bring in of King David,
Solomon, Ezechias, Iosaphat, Josias, Ioas, Iehu. By which ye would prove, that
they had jurisdiction in matters Ecclesiastical. For they did no more then, than
Christian princes do now, even those princes that are obedient to the Sea of
Rome. For they buyld Churches, and find Singingmen and Priests to keep daily
service, they geaue Bishoprikes, they put Bishops byside their offices (as
Queen Marie did put Cra^mer an^ Ridly) and twenty things more they do about
matters of religion, not as Supreme Governors, but as devout and faithful
Princes, being glad to do for the Church, whatsoever the Spiritual heads
thereof, shall move them unto, and being ready to defend the faith of the
Church, as they shall learn it of their Bishops.

It remains then, that you show, not that the kings in the old law did set
forth the Service of God, displace Priests, commanded the temple to be
cleansed, destroyed Idols etc: but that they did these things by their absolute
power, without aski^g advise, leave or instruction of the priests.

Constantine called the Council at Nice: Apolog.
Theodosius the Council at Constantinople: Theodosius the second the Counsel at
Ephesus: Martian the Council at Chalcedo^: Ergo Ecclesiastical matters perteine
to the Office of Princes.

They called these Councels, Confut..308.
not by virtue of their supreme authority, but by the asse^t of the B. of Rome.
And so Princes have to do with the matters of the Church, at the second hand
only.

The Emperor Constantine gave in y^ Counsel of Nice his advise to y^ Bishops,
Apolog.
how it was best to try out ye matter by y^ Apostles and Prophets writings:
Ergo he bare a great stroke with his Authority in their consultation.

As great stroke as he bare, Confut..313.
he struck not the head of the Church from the body, nor made himself Supreme.
Euse^ius in vita Constant. lib. 3. Theodor. lib. 1. c. 7.
But that ye may understand, how little he took upon hi^, he came in last into
the Council with a small company, and sat not down before he had desired the
Bishops to permit it. and then also he sat but in a low chair. As for giving
of advise, how things were best to be done, it is lauful for the least ^rier,
Abbate or Doctor in a Council, to do the like: and yet every Friar that
speaks in a general Counsel, is not supreme head of the Church: nor of the
vocation and Authority, to define or geaue sentence on any Canon.

In the third Council at Con^^antinople, Constantine a Civil Magistrate did
not only ^itte among the Bishops, but did also subscribe with them.

In the Council called Arausicanum, Apolog.
the Princes Ambassadors gave their consent, and put to their hands: Ergo
eccles^iastical matters pertein to Princes.

So likewise to subscribe unto the Decrees of a Council, Confut. 316.
and to give their consent unto matters there determined, it is and may be
perermitted unto mean layemen: but to define, determine, decree and give
Authority unto a Canon, it is neither for Ambassadors, nor Civil Magistrates,
nor Emperors of the whole world, but for Bisshops only, whom God has appointed
to govern his Church.

Gods grace is promised to a good mind, Apolog
and to one that fereeth him. Ergo not to the Sees and Successors.

This would follow, Confut. 334.
if God used to give but one kind of Grace, such as makes the receauer good.
But now there is a Grace of faith, hope and charity, and it is not an evil
mind, that has it. There is the grace of preaching, working of miracles,
healing of diseases etc. and he may be evil that has it. To be a King, it is
by the grace of God, and that grace continued until a certain time in the Seed
and Succession of David: yet were not all they of a good mind that were kings
of Judah. By which it appears, that your Argument is false, and that the grace
of Authority and continuance, is geauen not only unto the good, but the evil
that follow in the race and succession.

Peter when he was at Rome, Apol.
never taught the Gospel, never fed the flock. etc. sat him down only in
his castle in S. Ihon Laterane, and poynted out with his finger the spaces of
Purgatory, gave orders to say private Masses, etc. consec^ated with his holy
breath oil, wax, wolle, belles etc. mainteyned wars, set Princes together
at variance etc. Ergo Peter did all things like unto the Pope.

Of whose devising is this Argument? Confut. 335.
Undoubtedly no Catholic has the (...) to make it. Do the Protestants then
speak^^^^ all this of S. Peter, in sad ernest: '^ thinke^^ not so evil of them,
although they can be^^^ sometimes desperate. How then? Do they speak it but in
sport, and dalie only with their Adversaries? The cause is to great to use in
so large wise, such mockery. Set him upon the Stage with a furd cap and a motly
cote, he will play the vice without a vizarde, and make gaie sport to the
cumpanie.

Men say, Apolog.
that one Cobilon a Lacedemonian, when he was sent Ambassador to treat of a
league, and found by chance, them of the Court playing at dice, he returned
straytewayes home again, leaving his message undone. For he said, it should be
a great reproach to his Common wealth, to make a league with dycers: Ergo it
should be a great blot to our name, to return to the Pope.

Cabilo^ might be parchaunce a wisema^ in his own generation: but in these
days, Confutation. 337.
he should not be much better, than an impatient or Solemn Fool. For to play
at (...) it is not absolutely and in all times, ^laces and persons, evil. And
to let that ^vndone upon private co^ceipt and iudge^e^t, which is put upon any
man, by common consent and authority, it is not in most cases alowable. But
such now is the perfection of the new Gospellers, they will not be at any league
with dycers or evil lyuers, and in their co^gregatio^s and fraternities there
is (I trow) no blot of infamy to be feared. With what countenance then look
they, when they come into the Courts of Princes or noblemen? Do they fin dno
dycing ^here, and no evil living? I have so good opinion of these men's holiness,
that if the Pope with all his Cardinals would take themselves to Wives (so to
call harlotes) and in other things do accordingly to the form of the new
Gospel, he should not only have a league made with him, but also be maintained
in his supremacy which he has in Christendom. And the Cobi^on that should be
sent Ambassador for the purpose would never return again, ^^^uinge his message
undone, though (...) played at dice never so much.

The Popes would needs make (...) the realm tri^utary to them: Apolog.
Ergo (...) most justly have forsaken them.

It is not for Divines to allege an^ such temporal cause, Confut. ^49.
of money matter, (...) their defense in departi^g from the churc^^ For seeing
that the Popes Authority ^^meth from God, what discharge of my (...) is that to
me, if he do more, than (...) should by right and Conscience? Do no^ temporal
princes sometimes oppress their Subjects, and yet continue in their place and
authority above their subiects^ Your Argument therefore and fact is naught. And
if the argument were true, yet have you no occasion to depart from the Sea of
Rome: unto which in Queen Mary's time you were reconciled, considering that no
tribute was required of you, no not so much as the restitution of the Abbey
lands.

The Second Chapter, containing certain Absurdities of the English Apology.
They be not mad at this day, Apolog.
so many free cities, so many Kings, so many Princes which have fallen away
from the seat of Rome, and have rather joined themselves to the Gospel of
Christ.

HOW think you then, Confut..16.
by common reason? May any Protestant say, that AL free Cities, AL Kings, AL
Princes, and AL Christen men and women, from the highest to the lowest, were
mad in these last ix. hundred years (in which you disdain, and yet confess,
the Pope to have been obeyed of all Christendom) and him self in so saying be
nothing mad? Or can you reprove your Adversaries, if they be so unmannerly
and hasty in their terms, as to call yours so many free Cities etc. mad,
where your selves judge that all your Forefathers, for hundred of years
together, have been mad, when they all follow* with one consent Papistrie.

If it were a sin in the Heluetian^ to deliver their own country from fore^
government, Apolog.
specially when they were (...) proudly and tyranniously oppressed: yet to
burden us with other men's faults, or them with the faults of their
forefathers, it is against all right and reason.

Why then do you object against the Catholics the evil lives and deeds of
Popes, Confut. 177.
Cardinals, Monks, Friars, Priests, which may be found in any sort or
condition of men, after some continuance of time and age? And why tell you,
abiding in England, tales upon Italy, Spain, or other countries, of
Aloisios, Casios, Diasios, and others, to burden thereby the known and
ancient Church?

In times past, Apolog.
where the first Christians our forefathers in making their prayers to God, did
turn them selves toward the East, there were that said they worshipped
the Sun, and reckened it as God.

And you, Confut..191.
to prove your selves the sweet Sons, and exact folowers of Antiquity,
have altered the old manner and custom of the Catholic Church by charginge
your Ministers, to pray toward the sowth, and that in the chiefest time and
place of all your devotion and Religion. If you knew whether to turn your
selves, after the putting away of the old faith and ceremonies thereof, why
chose you the south rather than the East? And why remembered ye not the first
Christians usage? Except (notwithstanding the remembrance of it) you regarded
not what they had don and practiced. How absurdly then call you them the first
Christians and your forefathers, whom ye disdain, or be ashamed to follow in the
manner of their praying?

That old Father Augustine denies it to be leefull for a monk to spend his
time slouthfully, Apolog.
and under pretensed holiness to live all upon others. And who so thus lives,
an old father Apollonius likeneth him to a thief.

See the pity which these men take of the old Fathers, Confut. 239.
because their sayings are not regarded: and see the pityful absurdity in
which themselves are taken, whiles they would seem to allow the old Fathers.
S. Augustine likes not the idleness of Monks: but ydlenes put away, did he not
allow the order of them? His book is De opere Monachorum, of the labor of
Monks, proving that none of them must so think him self addicted to the
service of God, in praying, reading, or in spiritual exercises, that he should
not set his hands to corporal labor. And he makes it not a case of
necessity, that every Monk must labor: but he impugneth their sayings,
which made a necessity of it, not to labor with the body for their living,
but to serve God and man by the labor of mind only, as in praying, preaching,
and such like.

Now therefore, if S. Augustine would have had the very Order it self and
profession of Monks destroyed, he should have made short and said, not that
such monks as would hold the opinion, that they should not labor bodily, ought
to be set thereunto: but simply and plainly he would have concluded, that
all Munkerie should be taken away.

And then, how could he make a whole Book, De opere Monachorum of the labor
of Monks, except he would find some what where nothing is, and build a house
without laborers?

But you, whom the idleness of Monks offends, and the neglecting of the old
Fathers orders: show to us, I pray you, your reformed Monasteries. Let
Heretics show their monasteries.
And if your factes have declared before, and yet hitherto your railing tongues
can testify, that ye hate the very Order and Rule of Monks, nor would abide
a laboriouse and a virtuous Monk in your company, how vnsensiblie do you
confess the old Fathers to have spoken against idle Monks, (whereby they
signify no abomination to be in the Order it self) your selves always so
mockingly and spitefully handeling, not distinctly idle Monks, but (without
all addition) Monks? As may appear by John Foxes no little book of Acts and
Momuments (to name one for all) and by your great muse in the next sentence
following these words of which I speak, where, you wot not whether to name
them droues, or heardes of Monks, as though no other title might be given unto
them, besides that which is proper for brute beasts.

Concerning the old Father Apollonius, if idle Monks be thieves, what call you
them which do robb and spoil, not only the idle, but the laborious and holy
Monks? And rob them, not of their house, land, and goods only, but of their
fame and estimation: and rob again, not only the Monks, but the just and
true owners of such goods as were bestowed upon Monasteries.

But put the case, al Monks had been thieves. He that robs a thief, is he
not him self a thief? And if by stelth a true man's lands be taken from him,
should it not return in conscience unto him again, if truth and Justice were
sought for, and not gain or private lust? How well therefore your Procedinges
agree with truth and honesty, Apolog.
let it be judged by the spoil of Monks and Monasteries.

The old Council at Carthage commanded nothing to be readde in Christ his
Congregation, Conf. 243
but the Canonical Scriptures.

The Homilies which you apoint to be read in your Congregation, be they, think
you, Canonical Scriptures? Truly for so much as they are not, you must either
leave them vnreade^ in the Congregation, or confess, that ye have mystaken
this oulde Council at Carthage. And in the mean while ye have done very
fondelye to complain of transgressinge that commandment, which your selves
do not keep.

As for their religion if it be of so long^ continuance as they would have me^
wen^ it is, Apolog.
why do they never prove it so by the examples of the Primitive Church, and by
the Fathers and Councelles of old times?

This is not resonably required of you. Conf. 231.
For where as you without blushing, dare confess, that your Gospel began to
spring about fifty years sense, and whereas unto us, you grant nine hundred
years, in which our religion has continued: if nothing more could be alleged
for us, yet against you, this alone were a sufficient argument: And no man
should be so hasty upon us, as out of hand to require of us testimonies out of
the Primitive Church, to whom we make it evident by the practice of nine
hundred years, and that by confession of our adversaries, that we be no
vpstartes nor starters.

But now, whereas the late printed books of Catholics (unto which you make
no great speed to answer) do show the Primitive Church and ancient Fathers
to make for our Religion, and you, on the contrary side, have never ^roued yet
your new Ghospel by any old Example, Father or Council: ye are in one
sentence to be twice noted of absurdity, either requiring of us proufes for
our Antiquity, your selves so convicted in your own consciences, to be of
fewer years than the Papists are by eight hundred and odd: either thinking it
meet and necessary that whosoever says his religion to be most Apostolic
and ancient, should prove it immediately, your selves not remembering to declare
s^ much in your own cause all this while.

We in Gods cause desire to stand to Gods only judgment. Apolog.


By the cause of God you understand, Confut. 272.
I think, the due worshipping of God, in true Religion. But what mean you, by
God his only judgment? Would^ refer the whole matter to him only, the his will
should come unto you, neither (...) the means of Angels, nor men, (...) any
other whatsoever creature?

And when would ye look to (...) so much performed unto you? In (...) world,
or in the life to come? If in (...) world: remember what was said to (...)
desiring to see God his face: Exo. 33.
No (...) shall live, and see me. And consider, (...) the brightness and
incomprehensiblen^ of God is such, as the wekenes of ma^s soul compassed yet
with infirmity, flesh and (...) can not without somewhat put between,
apprehend or behold immediately*

If in the world to come: so might (...) save in deed your selves from burning
or fleyng, and ye should have all the thieves and whores in the world, most
willing to ratify that conclusion, of which there is none to be thought so
faithful or fearfulin the sight of God, but he would stand to his only
judgment that is to come, upon the ^ope that by such a glorious protestation
(...) might escape the present Judgment of (...)? A protestation that vvil
save thieves, heretics, and al malefactors if it may be admitted
And therefore meani^g by your standing (...) Gods only judgment, such an
hering (...) perceiving of Gods will, as is wrought by (...) own essence
i^mediatly without any (...) of angel, man, or any other craeture, (...) is for
this present life impossible to be ^bteined, and argues a bli^d and folish
mi^d (...) be in the wisher: and referring it to the world to come, it is
spoken so unreasonably, that it may quikly be taken up, to serve al wicked and
desperate psons, and to save the^ (...) shame and punishment in this world:
which how absurd it would be i^ the commonwealth (if such an appellatio^ or
protestation ^^er allowed) every simple soul may perceive. ^et when a the^e not
thi^king percha^ce his (...) to be theri^ unreasonable, shall protest, for (...)
shift to say somewhat, or only to save somewhat (as his goods, or an opinion of
i^noce^cy (...) the unwise and ignorant) Y^ he will stand (...) Gods only
judgment, he utters a si^ple (...), or a tolerable policy: mary when a
preacher or prelate shall solemly (...) and take a glory in his bold words,
(...) make his folowers conceive a (...) weight to be in them: that forsooth
Gods cause he will stand only to (...) judgment, meaning that until (...) day
come, he will forbid al judgment me^ upon his doctrine, he falls into a (...)
absurdity, partly because he (...) the trial of that which presently must
determined, unto a time which is so (...) of from us: and partly because, he
(...) also of so idle and vain a prot^^station.

But now, if ye mean not, to (...) your standing to God his (...) judgment, A
vain bragg of the Prostants, if they take the^ selves only. to stand to Gods
only judgment.
so precisely and absolutely but that his Judgment, which (...) call HIS
ONLY, must and (...) comme to you by some means (either of Angels, or of men,
or of other things then do I note unto you, first your (...) and bragging
sound of words, as though^ you did hear almighty God his sentenc^ which he
geaueth upon matters of faith and Religion, after a more familiar and truer
sort, then the Catholics do (for they also stand to Gods only judgment).
Upon which point yet being examined, ye can not but confess, that you hear
him not i^mediatly, but by means of other things which it pleases his
majesty to use, so that other poor men may hear him, and stand to his only
Judgment, as well as you.

Therefore, I do ask now further, by what means God only speaks unto you?
God speaks not to the heretics by the ministry of Angels*
(For I trust without his uttering of his mind ye are not so well acquainted,
or so excellent of understanding as to know it) does he utter his Judgments
to you, by the ministry of Angels? But how shall we believe it, except ye
prove it? And because ye have not yet craked of it, surely I can not yet think
it.

Well, Nor by means of men.
can you declare that he has showed his will unto you, by the means and
mouths of men? If ye dare say so, (...) the persons, that they may be
considere^^ And further instruct us, how ye did per^ceaue those worshipful
fellows to speak unto you, God his only judgments and not their own
fantasies?

But you have an other way perchau^c^ to come to the understanding of Gods
plea^sure. Not by means of dreams.
What is that? Consists it in dreams, imaginations, mouings of your sprite
within you, and other such pretty means? Nay surely, ye be not so dreamish, as
to crake of these things, which are ready to depart as lightly as they came,
and return back again as quickly as they went away.

Or does it consist in true visions and revelations? Not by means of
revelations.
That is much. Yet they also should be referred to the judgment of the Rulers
in Christ's Church, before full credit might he geaue^ unto them, because there
may be just fear of illusions.

The case therefore being so hard with you (as we take it) name that mean,
which reioyseth your heart so much, by which, above the rate of other poor
souls, you understand the Judgment of God, and stand to it, only.

The Scripture forsooth you will run unto, and there lo God him self speaks
unto you. But how? Immediately by him self, or by means of inferior things?
If immediately: why go ye then to the Scripture, Ergo by the means of the
Characters and letters of the scripture. and then the crake is very absurd.
which is needless in that kind of immediate talk? But if he speak to you,
and you hear him* by means of these visible characters and letters of
Scripture, of which visible letters, words and sentences be made, and in which
words intelligible senses are concluded, and if: his be all, that so stoutly ye
(...) of* that ye stand unto Gods only judgment, it has a show of a great
matter, and in deed it is of no value, and it makes the reader believe, that
you are wiser then other in your procedings: yet whosoever will consider them
earnestly, shall perceive that your crakes are most unreasonable.

For in the means, which Almight^ God uses in uttering his blessed will unto
our gross understandings and sensible natures, there be diverse degrees* and
not all of like dignity or worthiness. As when he declared his mind to the
Fathers in the old law, by sending of Angels in form of men, and when he sent
afterward his only begotten Sonn^ in the truth of our nature, To understand
the vvil of God bimeanes of vvriting is one of the basest.
And when this blessed Son of his declared what he was by sundry miracles,
and further, chose certain simple men and unlearned to send them into the world
to conquer all the pride and knouledge of the world, and to be short, when these
Apostles of Christ, sent unto diverse places the will of God contained in their
epistles or Gospel: In all these degrees, the lowest and basest mean to
derive by it unto us the will of God, is by Scripture and letters.

You therefore which by your standing to Gods only judgment, do mean his
judgment uttered by means, and not immediately by himself, you also which do
signify thereby, that you follow a better and more excellent way, than other
do: you (I say) being proved to take the will of God uttered in scripture and
writing, for that most excellent way (which by all reason, is a more imperfect
and base mean, tha^ the appearing of Angels, preaching of men, or working of
miracles) what do you else, but crake of that as the chiefest which has his
better, and refer your self to that as principal, which requires other
things to go before it. If you will hear more certainly and principally that
which God commands, ye must go not to the scriptures immediately: but to them
that shall tell you what the Scripture is, and read it after a Catholic tune,
unto you.

The Pope is appeached by us of heinous and foul enormities, Apol.
and has not yet put in his answer.

In what court? Confut. 218.
before what judges? What year of our Lord? for what foul enormity? Your selves
may be well enough Phariseis. But where are your scribes, your sumners, your
apparitors, for this matter? Is not th^s an exceeding absurd folly, to appeach
(which imports an order and form of law by you observed) him with who^ you
have nothing to do? And to complain that he puts not in his answer, whom
you can not appeach? And which if he would, knows not where any consistory
of yours is to answer you in it? Your selves would not appear, being summoned
to the late general Council, where out of al Christendom there were your
betters, both for spiritual and temporal gouerme^t, and therefore ye would not
because they have (as you must now think) nothing to do with you: and now your
worshipful wisdoms have appeached the Pope, as though you had jurisdiction
over him.

Besides this, if the Popes enormities of which you speak concern the private
li^e and manners of the Pope, may an English magistrate, whatsoever he be,
require by law and conscience that cause to be brought before him? On the other
side if ye have appeached, not Pius Quintus now Pope (a most nolie and innocent
Father) nor any of his late predecessors, in this respect as they were
private men, but as heads of the church, then have ye called into judgment al
Christians which obey them, as accessories to their enormities. And so besides
the Pope, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Priests and others of the clergy,
either ye have* or by as good law you may appeach the King of Spain, France,
Scotland etc. with all the princes, Dukes, and States of Christendom. and yet
not accuse them for fear but be shrew the^ (for your office sake) that they do
not put in their answer. Such judges as you be* such a king was captain Kete,
or if that similitude be not fit, you be like to the mad frontike prince, of
whom it is readen, that he took care and joy over all the ships of strangers
which passed in great number down by his palace, having in deed (poor king)
very few good vessels of his own to crake of.

Truly, whether the Pope will put in his answer, or whether he has received
your Judgment, I will not strive upon it, but, for desire to see the end of
your process against him, ye should have don exceading well (me thinks) to
send your Officers, some to Rome, there to watch when the Pope with all his
Cardinals sits in the Consistori^: other some to the Emperor, wheresoever
he be in Camp or in Court, and when each of them is occupied about matters of
the Church and the Empire, sodaynlie let your Officers come and arrest (I can
not tell yet in whose name, except it be of the Apology of the Church of
England, but it is no matter for the name) let your Officers do as you
command them, and l^tte them first arreste the Pope an^ his Cardinals, as
principal, with all the Bishops about him: And then afterward the Emperor
as accessorie, with all his Dukes and nobles, and bring them closely to London
before high commissioners, and until they will be ruled, and put in their
answer, set them fast, here and there, through all the gates and prisons in
London. For either you have no law, or possibility, to appeach the Pope, or
else surely ye may by these means constrain him to bring in his answer. The
one is as reasonable as the other.

Although the modesty and the myldenes of the Emperor Ferdinande, Apolog.
be so great, that he can bear this, because peradventure he understands
not the Popes packing, yet ought not the Pope of his holiness to offer him that
wrong, nor to claim as his own an other man's right.

A lykelie matter, Confut..313.
that the Emperor should not understand the packinges, if any be made, of the
Pope, having a wise Council assisting him, and the world round about sownding
of heretics books and practices, him self also having (as ye will not I think
deny) as much judgment and discretion as your ministers, of whom yet every
one makes himself to know much of the Popes packing, and goes with his
fardell about him, and (like a spiritual peddler) sets forth his small wares
in open pulpittes, and among all other points, utters those of the Popes
behavior, as most gay gear for the brothers and sisters.

Note besides this, how artificially they praise the Emperor for his modesty
and mildnes: because (say they) peradventure he understands not the Popes
packing. Think ye then, that if without peradventure he understand it not,
that the hearing thereof does prove a mildnes to be in him? So may ye praise a
deaf man for his meekness, when that not hearing the evil words that are
spoken against him, he is never moved or troubled with them.

If so be they whom God has placed in greatest dignity, Apolog.
did see and perceive these men's practices, how Christ's commandments be
despised by them etc. no doubt they would never so qui^^lie suffer them selves,
neither to be disdayned after such a proud sort, nor so dispitefullie to be
scorned and a^used by them.

No doubt, Confut..32^.
but if you for your no little wit or learning, were worthy to be in any great
dignity: you should quickly perceive, that the Princes and Rulers of the
world have and do understand as much of the state of Religion, as any of the
Brotherhood. either because they are wise of them selves, and are set in an
high place, from which they may better see what is done in the world, than
other of base degree: either because Kings and Princes have commonly about
them, either wise Cou^celers to instruct them of all things, Or Courtly
Discoursers which will be ignorant of nothing, Or dissolute lyuers, which are
ready to speak against the Ancient faith for love of the late Gospels
liberty and novelty.

Ireneus often times appealed to the oldest Churches, Apolog.
which had been nearest Christ's time, and which it was hard to believe had
erred: but why at this day is not y^ common respect and consideration had?

See how properly you will have appeal made to the oldest Churches, Confut. ^23.
which aba^do^ the Church of Rome, which was in S. Ireneus time, so truly the
chief, that unto it (as he says) al Churches must resort because of the
greater pri^cipality, Lib. 3. c. 3.
and which at this day is without all question the oldest: and from which you
have so strayed, unto seeking of the ouldest Churches, that falling upon a
young congregation of three score year old at the most, ye pass not very
much upon any church new or old, but only the pure and plain scripture.

For so much as we were ascertened of Gods will, Apolog.
and compted it a wickedness, to be careful and ouerco^med about the judgments
of mortal men, we could no longer stand taking advise with flesh and blood.

Have ye receued your Gospel by revelation, Confu^..317.
as S. Paul says of himself that he did? Are you the Apostles of Christ
neither through man, neither from man? If ye will be ashamed of such
arrogancy, then have you to confess, that ye have learned the Ghospel of ^od,
at the mouth of men. If ye will still glory in it, and never blush, then walk as
ye are, and show us your Revelation: or tell what contrary Advertisement you
have received, why ye should not thoroughly follow their judgments, of whom ye
received the Ghospel at the beginning?

John Chrysostom, Apolog.
although the Emperor Constantius commanded him by ^o were sundry letters to
come to the Arrians co^ncel: yet kept he him self at home ^^ill.

How is the Prince then Supreme head? Confut. 3^^.
Or how do you bring S. Chrysostomes example for defense of your fact? For if
the King be chief Governor in all causes spiritual and temporal, surely he
was no good and obedient subject, which would not come at four times sending
for. On the other side, if ye dare reprove S. Chrysostom, for his not yelding
to the supreme powers commandment, what meant you to allege S. Chrysostom
in defense of your doings, allowing not the fact of S. Chrysostom?

The third Chapter, containing the lies that are made in telling of Stories
with Folies in crediting of vain tales.
Were al things then pure and holy in Rome, Apolog.
when Iohane, a woman rather of perfect age tha^ of perfect life, was Pope there,
and bare her self as the head of the Church? And, after that for two whole
years in that holy See, thee had played the naughty pack, at la^t going in
Procession about the City, in the sight of all the Cardinals and Bishops,
fell in travail, openly in the streets?

THere was never any such woman Pope in Rome. Confut..154.
Anastasius, an historiographer of that time, and master of the Popes Library,
which was himself present at the creations of Sergius 3. Leo 4. Benedictus 3.
and other Popes after them, makes no mention of any such. And yet the makers
of this woman Pope* do place her* between Leo 4. and Benedoctus 3. Other
historiographers also, both old and late, of the best sort make no account
of her.

Then he that tells the tale of thi^ Pope Iohane, tells it with such
probab^litie, that he must be of small wit and discretion, which should geaue
any credit unto it.

For he speaks first by hear say only.

Then he tells, that she was an English woman borne, at Magunce: and Magunce
is high Doutchelande.

Further he says, that she was brought to Athenes by a lover of hers. And
therefore by likelihood she was more than a Child.

Now, what should she do at Athenes but learn a Gods name. And Athenes, at
that time, was not for learning, as being altogether barbarous.

And yet she not only learned, but profited also in diverse sciencies, and so
profited, that none was found to be compared with her. And yet it is (...) to
say, whether women in men's (...), and kept purposelie for the (...) of their
Lovers, should have the (...), the will, the wit, the leisure, the grace to
pass all other of the Vni^rsitie. But let the tale go forwards.

How came she to Rome, by what fa^ur, by what hope, by what lovers cost^ (...)
fancy? Well, this is not told but as though, that there were no more in the
(...), but that as soon as any fine and excellent Scholare came to Rome, he
should straitewaies be appointed out to be the next Pope: so the Sea being
vacant, this for said Iohane was (no man knows how) inthronizated: and yet
it is not only bysides the practice of the Church of Rome, but also against
common sense and reason, that any should be chosen unto that Office, whom they
should not know by many years experience, and by commendation of worthy
persons: And also perceive by the face it self, to be a man lykelie to
govern the Church discretly.

But now says the tale further, be^ing in the Popedom, she is begote^ with
child of her servant. For ye (...) understand, that her old lover was (...)
dead, or that either she was weary him, or he of her, and that she kept h^ self
an honest woman, until the secon^ year of her Popedom, at which tim^ her
servant begot her with child.

It is very credible she was past child bearing, which had a lover before she
went to Athenes, and lived there (...) long (not without lovers, I trow) til
she was the best scholar in the University* And ^aried then afterward in
Rome til she was thought worthy to be Pope But the grace of the tale were lost,
an^ all the short of the heretics were marred, except she had a child.

And (...), say they, not knowing the time of her deliverance, as she went from
S. Peter's to Latera^, she brought forth, and dyed. How incred^ble* that a
woman, and so honest a woman as from ^er youth had been an harlot, and so learned
that none was found to be compared with her, should not know the time of ^er
delyuerance, or not make so nigh a (...) at it, that she would never ven^er
abroad, when ieobardie might arise of betraying her self? How unlikely also,
that before the matter was opened in procession, she could keep it so close,
that none of the curiouse Italian eyes, could perceive it, either that she
looked not like a man, or did not so be have her self as men do, or were
nothing chainged, in body or countenance, from that pleight she was in eight
or nine months before?

But I will leave to make further conjectures: this is certain, the best
Historiographers make no mention of any Iohane, Ioannes Polonu^ a monk
and he whom the heretics at this time follow, and which is their first author
in this tale, is such a one, as is altogether unworthy of credit.

To whose ears has it not come, Apolog.
that N. Diasius a Spaniard, being purposely sent from Rome into Germany,
(...) shamefully and diuellishly murder (...) own brother Thon Diasius, a
most innocent and a most godly man, only because he had embraced the Gospel
(...) Jesus Christ, and would not return again to Rome.

How prove you, Confutation. 1^7.
that he was purposely sent from Rome? As though the Pope or any of the
Cardinals had so great care, what the poor correctour John Diasius the
Spaniard did, in his masters shop in Germany.

How prove ye also, that Diasius his brother did murder him? For he did not
only not murder him, but not so much as know of it, before it was done. The
whole matter was brought before Judges, Diasius was delivered, and he that in
deed committed the murder, was condemned.

How unjustly then do you, to condemn him for a murderer, whom his lawful
Judges have absolved? You will, I trust, repent, or else you will answer for
it, when it shall be to late to repent.

Who hurled under his table, Apolog.
Frauncis Dandalus the Duke of Uenice, King of Creta and Cypres, fast bound
with chains, to feed of bones among the dogs?

No body. Confut. 186.
But tell us now again, who has made five lies in so few lines?

First Dandalus was not hurled under the table, Sabellic. Decad. 2. lib. 1.
but, he came of his own accord. And to move the Pope unto pity, creeped
upon all four to his table, and there laid him self down.

Secondly, he was not then Duke of Venice. (For their Dukes use not to be
Ambassadors, nor to go out of the City) nor King of Creta, nor Cypres. For
the Venetians have no Kings in their State.)

Thirdly, he was not fast bound in chains, saving that one chain which he
put about his own neck, and which he might have taken of, and gone away at
his pleasure.

Fourthly, he was not hurled under the table to feed of bones. For neither the
Pope does make any fare so hard, neither sets he any man to diner under his
table.

Last of all, that he should be hurled down to feed among dogs, I think
that either the Pope has none at all, either that he has other places for
the^, or that he makes not man and beasts commensales together.

Tell me then now, who has made so vile, so spiteful, so doggish and so many
lies within iij. or four lines together?

And all this shall ye find in the very History of Sabellicus, Decad. 2. lib. 1.
col. 1220. And the Quotation is true, although M Jewel in his Sermon of late,
did tell it for a worthy point to be noted, that Sabellicus never wrate Decades,
but Enneades. Which if it had been true, the mistaking yet of the Title of a
book was not much to be spoken of, as long as it is found to be true, that
which is reported, as out of such a book. But thanks be to God, there is no
harm done to D. H^rding, because Sabellicus has in deed written Decades of
the Story of the Venetians, although there be extant also Enneades of other
Stories which he intitleth Rapsodia. And M. Jewel in pressing his Adversary so
earnestly with such a trifle, and yet failing therein also of his purpose, does
prove himself to be driven very sore unto his shifts, and that he is much to
be pytied, that he has not like good success unto his great courage.

Who set the Imperial Croune upon the Emperor Henry the Sixths head,
Apolog.
not with his hand, but with his foot? And with the same foot again, cast
the same Crown of, saying withal, he had power to make Emperors, and to
unmake them again at his pleasure?

You by likelihood can tell which ask the question? For unto us it is not only
a fable, but a foolish one also, and absurd and malicious.

Who put in arms Henry the Sonn^ against the Emperor his Father, Apolo.
Henry the fourth: And wrought so, that the Father was taken prisoner of his
Son, and being shorn and shamefully handeled, was thrust into a Monastery,
where with hunger and sorrow, he pyned away to death?

The Pope did none of all these things. Conf. 187
But the Son himself, after a great foil and overthrow, which his Father
had taken at the Saxons hands, seeing him to be so strooken with fear, that he
durst not appear abroad, he took upon him self the administration of the
Empire, and fought afterwades against his own Father, which would have had him
to surrender the Empire. And taking his Father prisoner, he committed him to
straight custody, without any motion of the Pope thereunto, as with whom
also he was at Variance. Then, as touching the Shearing or thrusting him into A
Mo^asterie, or famishing of Henry the fourth, let him that made these
shameful lies, show his Author, and defend him self.

Who, Apolog.
so ilfauouredlie and monstrouslie put the Emperor Frederikes neck under his
feet, and as though that were not suffyciente, added further this Text out
of the Psalms: Thou shall go upon the Adder and Cockatrice, and shall tread
the Lion and Dragon under thy feet?

Who this should be, Conf. 188
your selves can not tell, which are the only mainteiners of the tale. For
sometimes ye lay it to Innocentius the third: sometimes to Innocentius the
eight: sometimes to Alexander the third. And the fact being so strainge and
singular, that it could not be but notorious, yet ye have so little certeintie
thereof, that ye know not who should have done it. But the truth is, no grave
writer makes any mention of such behavior of the Pope.

The Emperor Theodosius, (...).
as Socra^es says, did not only sit emongs the Bishopes, but also ordered the
whole argui^g of the cause.

Here you speak of sitting, (...)
as though Th^od^sius had then ben at some General Council. You speak also of
ordering the whole arguing of the cause, as though him self had been a
moderatour of some disputation.

The plain story is, Hist. (...) 9 ca. 19
Theodosius con^erred familiarly in his own palace, with the Bishope of
Constantinople, how his people might be brought to an unity in faith. And
when the heretics refused one good way (which was, to be tried by the
testimonies of Ancient Fathers) he went an other way to work with the^:
which was, that each of them should bring furthe in writing, that which he had
to say for his faith. Which being don, the Emperor read over their writings,
and rejected the Arria^s, Macedonia^s and Eunomians heresies, and embraced and
commended the judgment of the Nicene Council, touching the consubstantiality
of God the Son with his Father. So that this history serves nothing to the
matter of a General Council, nor proves, that an Emperor may sit there, as
Judge among the Bishops, nor that Theodosius did upon his own head, and as
Supreme Governor, that which Socrates here reports of him, but that he
followed the Council of his Bishope Nectarius, and the former decrees of the
Nicene Council.

Justinian put down from their Papal Throne two Popes, Apolog.
Syluerius and Vigilius, notwithstanding they were Peter's successors, and
Christ's Uicars.

No, Conf. 3.
it was not Justinian, but his Lady Theodora, which was a great mainteiner of
heretics, and when women, their husbands being alive, be so fervent in
sprite, that they must have such Popes as please them selves, no wounder if
Peter's Successors be shamefullie handeled.

Charles the great being Emperor held a prouincial Council in Germany,
Apolog.
for putting away Images, contrary to the second Council at Nice.

This is so false, Confut. 327
that the contrary is most true. For whereas the heretics, named
Imagebreakers, Abbas Vrsper. Anselm. Ryd. Pe^cerus. Carrion. Pantal^o
had holden a Counsel at Constantinople, for abrogating of Images: directly
against this impiety of theyrs, Pope Adrian and Charles the great held an
other Council at Frankeford in Germany. So much it lacks, that Charles the
great should be a favorer of Imagebreakers.

The fourth Chapter conteinyng the lies made upon the Ancient Fathers and
other VVriters.
S. Augustine, Apolog.
when he disputed against Petilia^ an heretik of the side of the Donatistes:
let not these words, Aug. de vnitate Eccl. c, 30
quod he, be heard between us: I say, or you say: let us rather speak in this
wise, thus says the Lord: there, let us seek the Church, there let us boult
out the cause.

THe question between S. Augustine and the Donatistes was this: Conf. 29.
where the Church should be? Now, to prove that the Church was not with the
Catholics, the Donatistes were busy always, in rehersing, how the Catholics,
had burned the holy books, and had offered incense to Idols, and had
persequuted Innoce^tes, like as the protesta^tes in these days, when the
question is of the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, they use to make a long
tale, how such a Pope was a Necroma^cer, and such a one a leachero^s man, and
some other proud and ambitious.

Now although S. Augustine might (and did also in sundry places) say truely^
that the objections of the Donatiste^ were false, Augu. de unit. Eccles ca. 2.
Ide^ lib. 2. co^t epist. petil. c. 8.
and though he might brin^ forth against them also, greater examples of their
faults: yet considering, tha^ such oiections taken out of the evil life of the
one side or the other, do not perteine to the question proponed: And seeing,
that altercation and strife only wa^ maintained thereby, whiles each part^
would say* the other lied, and would no^ cease to tell what they could one of
the other, being not credited yet one of the other: S. Augustine therefore not
desirous to chide, but earnest to prove the Church to be on his side, uses
these words: De unit. Eccl. c. ^.
Let us not hear, This I say, or, This thou say; but, let us hear, this
says our Lord* After which words, these follow which the Apologi^ should
not have omitted, Truly there b^ extant our Lords books, the authority of
which we both do agree with all, we both believe, we both serve and obey: There
let us seek the Church, there us boult out our cause.

For the Church it self to prove it self by her own words, is not
convenient: And to credit her at the report and co^me^dation of a baser and
vnworthier witness then her self, is very dishonorable. It remains therefore,
that her cause be examined by the Scriptures, as which have so great
authority, and are so generally received. And truly it is exceading well
provided of God, that, in their several causes, the Church should declare the
scriptures, and the scriptures the church. And so, when any man believes the
church, and strives with me upon a text of the scripture, I would say unto
him, let us have no more these words, I say, or you say, but let us hear
rather, this says the Church.

On the other side, when one believes the scriptures (as heretics think they
do) and would reason with me about the Church, where it should be, I would
answer: Let not these words be hear^ among us, I say, or you say, but let us
hear, This says the Scripture. Therefore in this principal question between
the Catholics and the Donatists, which was, where the Church should be, the
best way was, only to appeal to Scriptures.

Again, the Donatistes admitte^ the Scriptures: but other things which S.
Augustine alleged out of laufull records, either of the Ecclesiastical, or
the Temporal Court, to encounter them withal, they did not believe. And so, I
say, and thou say, went to and fro between them, without any conclusion or
profit. To drive therefore the matter to some Issue, let us hear no more
(says he) I say, or thou say, but, this says our Lord, his books we
both believe, we both obey. there let us seek the Church.

Now in other Kinds of question, as, of fasting, receiving the Sacraments,
keeping of holy days, and other traditions, S. Augustine would never bind us to
Scripture only, him self saying of these and the like, in his Epistle ad
Ianuarium. August. ^ epist. 116. ad ^anuarium.
What so ever the whole Church thorough the world does keep, thereof to
dispute, it is a most insolent madness.

Likewise also, toward such kind of Adversaries, as would be tried hy
testimonies of old Fathers together with Scriptures, or without express
Scripture, he would never charge us to use these words only, This says our
Lord: but well would have been contented, that we should say* this says
Cyprian, Ambrose, Basile, etc. him self speakinge of Ancient Fathers before
and in his time after this fasshion: Quod credunt, Contra Iulianu^, Pelagianu^.
lib. 1. ca. 2.
credo, that which they believe, I believe, that which they say, I say, etc.

Therefore ye have abused very much your Reader, and S. Augustine both,
making the one to think, the other to testify, that, we should not fight
against Heretics, but with express Scripture only.

Fulgentius ad Thrasimundum says, Apolog.
that Christ, though he be absent from us concerning his manhood, yet is ever
present with us concerning his Godhead.

The form of a servant is one thing, Confut. 3^.
and manhood is an other. The form pertains to shape and figure, which
covers our substance, and makes it visible: the manhood pertains to the
inward nature, and is, only intelligible. The first is not granted nor taught
of the Catholics, that Christ is with us now in earth, after the form of a
servant. The second yet they confess and believe, that he is with us really in
his manhood. The first is Fulgentius true saying, to the king Thrasimund: The
second is your deprauing of Fulgentius, in face of the world.

Sozomenus says of Spiridion, Apolog.
and Nazianzene says of his own Father, that a good and diligent Bishop
does serve in the ministry never the worse for that he is married, but rather
the better and with more hablenes to do good.

It will never (I fear) be better with you, Confut. 76.
but always worse and worse. Would ye make Gregory Nazianzene, contrary to
the Apostle? And S. Paul so expresselie pronouncyng, that he which has a
wife, is careful for the things of the world, 1. Cor. 7.
and is divided, think you, that any Ancient Father or writer (whose
testimony your self do trust) were likely to say, that a Bishop does serve
the better in the ministry, for that he is married?

I am glad ye give credit to Sozomenus and Nazianzene, using them for
witnesses, that we may see whether ye will regard their own very words, and
cry them mercy for abusiug them. Sozomenus says thus, speaking of Spiridio^.
(...) Lib. 1. c. ^^
(...). This Spiridion wa^ an husband man, having wife an^ children, but he was
not therefore the worse to Godward.

How think you then, does he praise Marriage? Does he say, He served God the
better, and with more hablenes by reason thereof? Does he not rather note it,
as a rare and a singular grace in him, that having such occasions of diuidyng
and distracting his mind, he nevertheless was nothing abated in his diligence
and attention toward God?

Nazianzene likewise speaks of S. Basiles Fathers perfect life in marriage
with A (but yet) saying: Although he put himself in bonds of marriage, yet he
lived so therein, as he was let no whyt therefore, from the attaining of
perfect virtue, and following of wisdom. As who should say, it comes most
times so to pass, that when students or holy men are married, they look but
seldom on their books, but wait upon the business of the world: yet was it
otherwise with Basiles Father. For he, although he put himself in bonds of
marriage, yet he was no whit let therefore etc. In which words he commends
his virtue, and gives no example to unmarried Priests, that if they will be
furthered to perfection, they should not be without a bedfelow: no more tha^ he
which should report of an other, that he sits at a table full of delicats,
and yet never surfeiteth upon them, that prove that it is a right way to
temperance, always to be at many and fine dishes. Whereas contrariwise, in all
things that are delectable unto the senses, and hurtful, by excess, unto
moral virtues, the safest way is, to flee from occasions of evil, until by
long custom, an habit be obtained in the virtue. And then, as it is an
argument of great perfection, to live with a woman and nothing to be hindered
in devotion by her, so, it is so rare a virtue, and needelesse (though it be
in a man) to be practiced, that as it may sometimes come to pass, that one is
not the worse, yet there was never yet any man so blind and insensible, which
would think it to be a preferment toward perfection, to be at bed and at board
with a woman.

The more you have then to answer for, which have fathered such a sense on S.
Gregory Nazianzene.

S. Hierome: Al these things, says he, which without ye testimony of the
Scriptures, Apolog.
are holde^ as delivered from the Apostles, be thoroughly smitten down, by the
sword of Gods word.

He says not generally (al those things, Conf. 30
oi^a) but, In ^rin^u^ cap. Aggaei.
Sed and alia, that is, and other things also. And he says not, which are
holden, asseru^tur, but, which they find and f^ncie, meaning heretics, of whom
only he speaks in that place. And therefore he makes not a general rule
against Traditions, but a special provision against the deceits of heretics.

It was ryghtly said by Pius the second a bishop of Rome, Apolog
that he saw many causes, why wives should be taken away from Priests, but
many more and more weighty causes, why they ought to be restored to them again.

His words, Conf. ^0.
as Platina reports, are these, that marriage has been taken from Priests
with great reason, And that it seems, it were to be restored again with
greater. Note (it seems) not (it ought) and note (greater reason) and not,
many more and more weyghtie. And if he had so ernestly spoken, as you suppose,
yet does he not allow the marriage of priests, which he confesses to have
been taken away for great cause: but so much he seems to be greaued with
the loosenes of the^ in his time, that he thought the causes why they might be
permited to marie, were much greater.

After which manner, a very discreet and sad Merchante of London might say
unto you, that for great good cause, Apology would be so much ouerseen? mary,
aut integra percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur, either (says he) let them
receive the whole, De cons. did. ^ ca^ Co^peri.
eihter let the^ be kept from the whole. Of receiving therefore he speaks,
not of giving.

Why, is it not al, in a manner, one? and can both be received, except both be
given? No, they cannot. But who shall constrain the Priest to give both? Or who
shall co^pel the Bishopes (whom God has set to govern his church) who shall
compel the^, to make a law that both be geaue^? For as they s^al see it
expedient for the present state of the people, over which they have authority,
so may they, to some give both, to some give one: to some in form of bread, to
other in form of wine: and some also they may keep from receiving in any kind
at al, like as by their discretion they shall see the diversity of cases to
require. And if ye could i^pugne this by any means, yet could ye not i^pugn it
by Gelasius, and prove by him, that both kinds ought to be given.

Secondly I note against you, that neither the peoples receiving in both, is
proved by Gelasius to be of absolute necessity, under peril of committing
sacrilege. For he speaks but of one certain ki^d of persons. How prove I that?
By his own words. For in his co^muandement, that they, which were noted unto
him, should either receive the whole, or abstain from the whole he lays in,
this cause between. Quonia^ nescio etc. Because they be staid with a
superstition, I ca^ not tell what: ergo take superstition away, and the case of
the Receiver is altered. And he does not forbid a virtuous and right believing
man to receive in one kind, upon good co^sideratio^s. Show ye now* that the
sacrament ought to be geaue^ in both kinds* and that some sort of people might
not receive under one alone: or confess, that ye have made a duble lie upon
Gelasius.

What can be said more plainly then yt which Ambrose says, Apolog.
bread and wine remain still the same they were before, and yet are chaynged
into an other thing.

As plain as he speaks, Confut. 94.
you understand him not: and if you do (because nothing can be said more
plain) then do ye abuse him most shamefully. The beginning of the sentence or
periode, out of which you take certain words for your purpose, Lib. 4. de
Sacr. c. 4.
is this in english. If there be so great power in the word of our Lord Jesus,
that things which were not, should begin to be: how much more, is it
effectual and workinge, vt sint quae erant and in aliud commutentur, that
things which were, be, and be changed into an other thing. Upon the
construction of which latin words our present question consists. The
Apology co^strueth thus* vt, that (understand, say they* panis and vinu^,
bread and wine) Sint, quae erant, should remain still the same they were
before: and co^mutentur in aliud, and should be changed into an other thing.
Now the true interpretation is thus to be made. Vt quae erant, that the things
which were: Sint, be, and in aliud commutentur, and be changed into an other.
So that quae era^t, is nominative case to the verb sint, and not panis and
vinu^, as the Apology faineth.

For in S. Ambrose argument there is this antithesis or opposition: from not
being to being, and from being to an other being. As, if God has made nothing
somewhat, much more of somewhat he may make another thing. Before the world
began, the Heavens, waters, and Earth had no existance or being at al. God
spoke the word, and so of nothing he made the^ to have a beginning and being:
but bread had a being, when it was yet unconsecrated, and after the words of
consecra^^on it keeps still a being (because it is not annihilated, and
utterly made nothing) yet it keeps not still the same being it had before,
because it is no more natural bread, but is turned by the omnipotency of Gods
word, into the body of Christ.

As in example of the meat which we eat, be it fish or fleash, it had a
being in it self before we did eat it* an^ after it is once digested it has
a being, (for we are not fed with nothing, and our meats are not annihilated
in us, but converted into our bodily substance) yet they keep not the same
being which they had before. For then should their bodies which fed always
upon veale, mutton, capons, wodcockes etc. consist not of man's fleash, but of
calueflesh, shepes flesh, etc. And such men were quickly to be set to schole,
or reformed in their opinion least by much using of the foresaid meats, they
might prove (in their own concepte) as wise as Calves, Capons or Wodcockes.

This example well considered, it will appear, that S. Ambrose says right
lie, that, quae erant, sint, the things which were, keep a being (as bread
does when it is consecrated) but not (as the Apology abuses S. Ambrose)
that, Sint quae erant, they should remain still the same they were before. For
bread is converted by consecration into the body of Christ, and so keeps
still a being, but not the same, which it had before.

Cyrill says, Apolog.
when we come to receive these mysteries, all gross Imaginations must quite be
banished.

Gross Imaginations in S. Cyrill, Confut. 107.
do signify, not the Catholic belief of the Faithful, which confess
them selves to receive under the form of bread, perfect God, and perfect
man, One Jesus Christ: but the carnal thoughts and opinions of Nestorius,
and like Heretics, which divide Christ, that is but one, and imagine, that
the Blessed Virgin was Mother of Christ man, not of the word God, as though
the manhood had any personal subsistence, separate from the Godheade. Of
which false principle it would follow, that the body of Christ, which
Christians receive in the Sacrament, should be the body of a pure man. And
therefore he inueigheth against him, and says.

Number hominis comestionem etc* what, do thou pronounce this ou^ Sacrament to
be the eating of a man, and do thou drive irreuere^tly the mind of the
faithful to gross imaginations? etc. Now the Catholics, which believe that
they receive, not the fleash of a bare man (which could not but minister very
carnal and gross thoughts) but the fleash of God and man, that by
consideration of the presence of such (...) majesty, our understandings
should yeld^ unto his words, by faith, and put away all carnal Imaginations
concerning the mysteries: judge you, whether we be guilty of gross
imaginations, and whether you have rightly understood S. Cyrill, or no.

As Chrysostom very aptly writes, Apolog.
we say, that the body of Christ is y^ dead ^^rcas, and we our selves must be
y^ Egles, ^eaning thereby, that we must fly high, if (...) will come to the
body of Christ.

We must fly high in deed, Confutation. 109.
which is, (...) Chrysostom him self expounds it, ^o have nothing to do
with the earth, In 1. Cor. cap. 10. Ho. 24.
neither to be drawn dounwarde to ^ase things. And again: wype away (says
he) al filth from thy soul, prepare thy mind to receive these mysteries. No^e
the word, mysteries, and mark, that he does not mean fleeing up by faith
unto heaven, in which place only ye would have Christ's body to be: but rather
a fleyng by devotion and good mind to the Altar here beneth on earth, where
the body, of which he speaks, does lie. He flies high, which co^temneth the
Judgment of his own senses, which subdueth his reason to Faith, which
despises the things that the world estemeth highly, which conformeth his
life to the life of Christ, which prepares him self to the mysteries. No doubt
but we must flee high, not changing of place but conditions: not by only
co^ceiuing of Christ that he is our Mediator in heaun, but also believing of
Christ, that by his body he works our salvation in earth: hat by spiritual
imagination, to feed on his body at his fathers hand al above, but with
faithful and humble devotion, to receive his real body at the priests hand here
beneth: not by light esteming of the sacrament as though there were no real
presence, but by dilligent preparing of our selves toward it, as containing the
body of God our Savior.

Of which two kinds, ye choose the first with refusal of the second, and would
have your reader or herer believe, that he must not look to have the natural
sleash of Christ in the mysteries on the altar, nor believe any tra^substa^tion,
nor make any adoration: for then we should have Christ within our sight, our
reach, our body, and have our maker p^sent among us in earth, and this will not
stand (say you then) with the fleing high of which Chrysosto^ speaks: But
because you abuse S. Chrysostom herein, therefore I tell you of it, and bid you
^eme^bre, that the high fleing of which he speaks, is to be referred unto the
forsaking of earthly, vile, and base manners, and not to the drawing away of our
mind from the belief, and reverence of the mysteries.

For thus he expounds our fleing high: If the kings child araied in purple
and diadem were delivered unto thee to bear, would thou not cast down on
the ground all that thou hold, and receive him? But now when thou receiuest
not the Kings child, but the only begotten Son of God, Chrysostom in 1. Cor.
cap. 10. Ho^. 24.
tell me, I pray the, art not afraid? And do thou not cast away al love of
worldly things, and garnish thyself with him only, but do thou look down on
the earth? Art thou yet in love of thy money? art thou yet given to the earth? If
it be so, what forgeuenes, what excuse shall thou find?

And of real presence he writes thus, that we have in earth that very body
which was nailed, beaten, which was no^ overcome by death, which the Son^e
seeing crucified, turned away hi^ beams, for which the veil of the Temple
was rent a sunder, stones an^ all the earth quaked, the body that was made al
bloody, and being thru^^ in with a spear, powered forth fountains of blood and
water, healthful^ to all the world. You therefore ar^ much deceived, and have
greatly missevsed S. Chrysostom, by fleeing so high, that ye see not his
plain Text and meaning.

How shall I hold him (says A^gustine) which is absent? Apolog*
How shall (...) reach my hand up to heaven, In Joan. Tract. 50.
to lay (...) upon him that sits there? He answers, Reach thither thy
faith, and tho^ have laid hold on him.

He speaks not in that place, Confut..^^0.
to the faithful about their receiving of Christ* but to Jews which believe
not in Christ. And them he teaches, not to seek (...) Christ as their fathers
did (which was to kill him) but (as the faithful do) which is to keep him.
But how may ^ne keep him, except he take him? Or how may one take him,
except he come to him? Or how may one come to him which is in heaven so far
from him? Mary (says S. Austine) reach forth thy faith, and thou have hold of
him. Thy fathers held him in fleash, hold thou him in heart, for Christ absent
is also present.

Upon which place I would note for my own part, that he says not, reach
thither thy faith, but, mitte fidem, reach forth or put forth thy faith. For
this mi^chiefe may come to the reader of this word Thither, that taking S.
Austine to speak there, to the^ that already have faith and believing his words
in that place, to perteine to the question of the Sacrament, he concludes
straitway, that Christ's true and real body must not be sought for in the
mysteries upon the altar, because S. Austin bids us reach our faith thither,
that is, to heaven. Yet the place is neither referred to perfect Christians,
but only to Jews, neither does it specify, reaching hither or thither, but
only requires plain^ geauing of faith.

Yea there is so great odds betwe^ S. Austin as he is in his own work, and as
he is made to stand in the Apology, that the word thither, which the Apology
so gladly reports, is expressly refused of S. Austin. For to the Jews
question, asking how he might reach to heaven, and take hold of Christ, he
answers, put forth faith, and thou have hold of him, and adds after a few
words this cause: For Christ absent is present. As if he should say, when I
bid thee (o Jew) to apprehend Christ which is in heaven, I require faith of
thee, and do not bind Christ to a certain compass and circuit, nor make it
needful for thee, to clime up to heaven. For Christ, as comprehended by faith,
is i^ earth as well as in heaven, and think no^ therefore, of chainging of
place, but chaynging of heart, knowing that by faith Christ is in men's hearts,
and is continually here to them that will believe in him.

As touching the multitude of vain and superstitious Ceremonies, Apolog.
we know that Augustine did grievously complain of them in his own time.

What said he of them? Confut.
How sore did he complain? What one example did he bring of them, that you
might gheasse, the Ceremonies which you have abrogated, to be of like sort
with those of which he complained? Why make ye the Reader to suppose or believe,
that S. Augustine did love as few ceremonies as ye do? Or why teach you him
not, out of S. Austin, how to discern what is vain, what is fructful? Let the
truth be opened, and your vanity will sone appear.

S. Augustine does so greuouslie complain, and he is so ready to diminsh the
number of Ceremonies, that the greatest papist in the world, would not ask
more favor in the question and cause of the^.

By so many ways, and for so many causes, a ceremony may well continue, as ye
shall find in that very epistle of S. Augustine: Epi. 119. c. 18. and 19.
And had you the face so to allege this holy Doctors complaining of
ceremonies, as though he would have as few as you? What Sacrament have you,
about which ye do occupy oil? What think you of the fast of lent? What of
Alleluia betwixt Easter and Witsontide? What use have you of any Octaues? Cap.
7. 15. 18.
Yet of these Ceremonies, he makes mention in the foresaied Epistle, and
reckons that they are to be used and regarded.

Gregory etc. if the Church, says he, shall depend upon one man, Apolog.
it will at once fall down to the ground.

Ye belie him shamfully, he has no such words at al. Conf. 203
Yet the protestant may think this impossible, that you should have no more
regard of your honestye. Let him seek then, if he be learned, and judge by
his own senses, whether any such proposition is there to be found. But is there
not a like unto it? Ye as, so like as Rome is to Constantinople, or Gregory S.
Peter's successor, to Nestorius of Constantinople an heretic. For if a man
should seek for his life, to find in that epistle, but some resemblance of
that which the Apology reports, he finds no more but this which I shall
declare for th'vnlerned sake.

John Bishope of Constantinople affected the title of Universal Bishope. S.
Gregory then Pope of Rome, co^plaineth thereof to Mauritius the Emperor,
declaring good causes and reasons, why such presumption should not be suffered.
Among other he makes this argument. Lib. 4. epist. 3^.
Surely we have known many Prelates of the Church of Co^sta^tinople, to have
fallen into the goulfe of heresy, and to have been not only heretics, but
archeheretikes also. Now for example, he names Nestorius and Macedonius: then
brings he in, thereupon this conclusion. If therefore in that church (
undoubtedly of Constantinople) any pull unto himself that name ( of Universal
Bishope) ergo (which has been the judgment of all good men) the whole church
(which God forbid) falls from her state, when he falls which is called
Universal.

An excellent argument undoubtedly. For if the only or Universal Bishope
should be at Co^sta^tinople, that see having no privilege of continuing still in
the right faith (as appears by the archeheretikes, which sat there) and all the
world being bound to obey the Universal Bishope, this one absurdity granted,
a thousand would follow, and that one Bishop erring, all the whole Church
should go a straie. Lo this is all that may seem to give any occasion of
reporting that which the Apology has attributed to S. Gregory.

And where find we here, that if the church depend upon one man* it must at once
fall down to the ground? Will they yet defend their lying? Or dare they yet still
abuse the old fathers? ^s the Church, and that Church, al one in co^cluding? Is
depe^ding upon one man, and that man, al a like? The successor of S. Peter, and
Bishop in that chair, in which never yet was found any archeheretike to set
forth naughty doctrine, is he al one with a Bishope of Constantinople* which
neither succedeth any Apostle, and has been a defender of heresies? let us see
now therefore whether you will confess your error in mistaking S. Gregory: Or
maintain your impudency in misusing of him.

The bish^ps (says Bernard) who now have y^ charge of Gods church, Apolog.
are not teachers, but deceauers, they are not feders, but begilers, they are
not prelates but pilates. These words spoke Bernard of y^ B. who names him self
the highest Bishop of al, and of y^ other Bishops, likewise which then had the
place of government.

How then? Confut.
Did S. Bernard forsake al papistrie and abandon the Pope, because of those
fa^ltes which he found? If he did, why tarried he in his monks cote unto his
death? If he did not, what unwise me^ be you, to for sake the Church for evil
manners sake?

But consider further. Who^ called he deceauers* beg^^ers, pilats? All the whole
order of Bishopes and gouernoures of the Church from the Pope dounward? Or
spoke he of some certain only? If he noted but some certain, and ^he^ worthily:
those other some, which were not infected might well preserve the state of the
Church in truth of manners and doctrine, that ye need not to fear an utter
destruction (...) it, and so through wretched folly depart out of it. If he
spoke generally of al, then will I confess that ye are not so much to be
blamed; for your departing from that Church, nor for any your applieyng of S.
Bernardes Authorie to that purpose. But because I am sure this is false,
therefore I charge you, and blame you.

How prove I this? I prove it by those very books, in which (as you say) the
foresaid words, against the Pope and Bishopes, are. For concerning Eugenius
him self, he says in the third book, after much complaint or reproufe made
of the evil manners of the Court of Rome, Haec ad te, Berna. de Co^s. lib* 3
no^ de te scribo. I writ this unto thee, not of thee. And immediately, he
declares by example, how Eugenius refused bags of money, which came out of
Germany and condemned a great rich bishop (by likelyhode) notwithstanding
his money. And how he gave of his own unto an other poor bishop to give unto
the officers in the Court, least the bishop should seem niggish and
discourteous, if he should have nothing rewarded them. Now Does it greaue thee
to hear this? And I (quod S. Bernard) do tell it so much the more gladly, by
how much thou hear it the more greauously. The Pope the^ him self was none
of those deceauers, begilers or pilates, whom you mention.

Forth then: were all the Cardinals and Bishops, deceivers etc. No, neither al
they, as you may read it proved in the fourth book of that work, by the
examples of two great Legates. The one was Cardinal Martine, Cardinal Martin.
which being sent legate into Dacia, a country full of gold and silver,
returned yet so poor, that for lack of money and horses, he could scarce
reach unto Florence. The Bishope of which place gave him an horse, without
mention making of any matter to be done for it. Yet the legate and Cardinal
Martin, was (...) sooner at Rome, but the bishop of Florence came also thither:
And seeking the fau^^ of his frinds in a certain cause of his ow^ at length he
comes to Cardinal Martin. Yea (says he) Decepisti me. Nescieb^tibi imminere
negotiu^. toll equu^ tuu^^ ecce in stabulo est. you have deceued me, I knew
not ye had any suit in hand. Take your horse to you, lo, yonder he is in the
stable. This is one, and he, I trust no deceauer or Pilate.

An other, Cardinal Gau^rid.
is Gaudfridus Bishope of Cartres, which many years together was at his own
charges Ambassador and legate from the Pope in the costs of Gascoigne. Of who^
he tells, that there was a sturgeo^ brought unto him by a certain priest, but
I will not take him (said the Cardinal) except I pay for him. Again, a Lady
of the town where he lodged, brought unto him for devotion and good will, three
treen disshes with a towel, he beh^ld the^, he praised the^, but in any case he
would not take them. And at both these times S. Bernard was present. And says
herevpo^ unto Eugenius: O that we might have store of such me^ given unto us,
as these were, who^ I brefly have spoken of.

If therefore the Pope him self was good, and some Cardinals and Bishopes
were holy men, how can you witho^ impudency draw S. Bernard to such (...)
sense, as though he should condem^^ the whole See and Church of Rome^ And if
(as I said before) you think him not to speak generally, what helps it
your cause, in departing from the Church, to prove that some Prelates be Pilats?

Secondly, I might well and truly say, that S. Bernard speaks against the
manners of the Court of Rome, and not against the faith of the Church of Rome.
And though he should name the Pope for his evil behavior, which he does not,
a Pilate: yet concerning his Authority and office, he gives unto him all the
titles of excellency, that are found in the Scriptures, from Abel to Christ.
Affirming besides, him to be the shepherd, not only of sh^pe, but of all other
Shepheardes also* and, Others to have been called to take part of the cure,
but him to have fulness of power, with other such words more, of like sense.

Thirdly I answer, he never spoke so irreverently of the Pope in all his
works. And that the testimony which you allege, is not in the books ad
Eugenium.

The old Father Epiphanius says, Apolog.
it is an horrible wickedness, Epiph.
and a sin not to be suffered, Haere. 61.
for any man to set up any picture of Christ him self.

See how these fellows ca^ amplify and ^et forth a lie? Confut..^35.
Epiphanius, they think, ^aketh for the^, and therefore they dress ^im in
their own colors. Ye find not in hi^ neither these greauous and mighty
ter^es, horrible wickedness, and Sin ^ot to be suffered. Neither these precise
^onclusions, that any man shall not set ^p any picture: Neither this
aggraua^ing addition, of Christ him self. He spea^eth quietly, and he speaks
not gene^ally, but against a certain kind of Ima^es, or honor done to them, as
appears by the words istiusmodi vela, such kin^ of veiles. And he prescribes
nothin^ against the Image of our Savior Christ^

If ye will not leave this place, but pro^^ that it makes against Images,
Pluck^^ out first these lies, and repair the testimony, making it neither
better neither worse then Epiphanius does permit you, and then shall you be
otherwise answered.

The old fathers Origin and Chriysos^^ exhort y^ people to read ye scriptures,
Apolog.
to bye them books, to reason at home betwixt themselves of divine matters,
wi^es with their husbands, and parents with their children. These men condemn
y^ scriptures as dead ^leme^ts, And, as much as eue^ they may, bar the
people from them.

Ye join these two Fathers together as though they both confirmed your lies.
Confut. 236.
But Origene neither speaks of byeing books, Ho. 9. in Leuit ca. ^16.
nsither of reasoning at home (...) the scriptures, but of comi^g to church a^^
heari^g the scriptures, and of thinking afterward at home, upon the keeping of
them in mind, and fol^wing them.

Then as concerning S. Chrysostom, he speaks against such as neglected the
reading of Scriptures, and thought this to he a sufficient excuse, for them
that they were no Monks: Ho. 2. in Matthew.
as who should sa^e, we have wife, children and household, with other things
besides to think upon, and therefore it is not our vocation to look in the
law of God, and by that to amend our lives.

He speaks likewise against other, which loved to have faier and trym books
of the Gospel, for ostentation sake, not to read them and profit by them. Of
which sort there may be found, at this present, some in the world, which living
loosly, and regarding their souls health slenderly, carry yet the testament or
some part thereof bound up in golden forel, and hang it about their necks like
a Jewel. But as for the biyng of Scriptures, he spaketh it by occasion only, in
reproui^g such as had books in their cupbords, and no understanding or sense of
them in their mind.

For after he had said: Hom. 3^. in loan.
This having of books comes of the Jewish ambition and craking, unto whom
the commandments were given in letters, and unto us not so, but in the
tables of our heart, which are of fleash, least he should sem to derogate somewhat
hereby unto the written Scriptures, he adds: yet I do not forbid it to get
books, yea rather I pray you most ernestly get them, but so, that we may
repere often in our mind, both the letters and sense the of them. He was not
therefore so careful of it, that every man should bye the scripture: but this
he studied for, that every man should be dilligent in bearing away of the
scriptures readen* or preached in the open church.

Prove ye now that S. Chrysostom exhorted all and singular of his people, to
bye them books, especially in the vulgar tongue. And judge ye whether he had
so little discretion to mo^e al thereunto, which very few could bring to
pass, the raritie and price of the written books being considered.

Now as concerning the other lie, that wives at home with their husbands, or
children with their parents should reason betwixt themselves of divine matters:
either I understand not your english, or else ye abuse S. Chrysostom most
shamefully. For if ye mean, that all that reasoni^g (which you imagine)
signifies no more, but that the father should instruct his son, and the wife
give ear to her husbands good counsel, then surely you must pardon me, I
never understood this much before, that reasoning of divine matters should have
so little question in it. But if reasoning betwixt parties does importe an
argueing to and fro, with objections, solutions, replies, resolutions, diuises,
suppositio^s, etc. And if reasoning of divine matters, does signify the
question proponed not to be of so small gear, as the childs education, or the
woman's silence which she ought to keep at home, but of the Trinity,
Incarnation of Christ* value of Sacraments, Justification, predestination,
etc. Do ye make S. Chrysostom so unlike himself, that ye would permit a
disputation of Divinity, betwixt the man, his wife, and his boy?

Such Schools in deed kept the Waldenses, and as though it had been nothing
worth except the world did know it, Act. and Monu^e^ts. 673
they brought forth their young children so well instructed in Divinity, tha^
they were able to appose and answer one the other in no triflyng questions.
But S. Chrysostomes meaning is altogether otberwises: and he would have lai^
men to read the Scriptures at home, in manner of repeating, not of readi^g or
making a lesson. And that they should remember and call to mind such things
as they had learned of the Bishope, and not study themselves upon any text at
al, as though they must be preachers, T^ edifiel also themselves and others by
following a good life, not by seeking a new conclusion of Doctrine.

How prove ye also, that he speaks of the whole Bible, to be bought and
reade^? For the easy parts thereof, may be put into the peoples hands, but
the whole in no wise. The Greek text also was not nor is not so corrupt, as
your english tra^slations. And to be short the people are now more proud
and bold, then at those days they were. For then, with vnwasshed hands they
were afraied to touch only the Scriptures: and now they take upon them to
interpret them in shoppes, alehowses, wagons, and feariebotes.

The ancient Fathers, Apolog.
Cyprian, Epiphanius, and Hierom say, it is better for one, who, perchance,
has made a vow to lead a sole life, and afterward lives unchastly, and can
not quench y^ flames of ^uste: to marie a wife and live honestly in wedlock.

Concerning S. Cyprian, Conf. 237
by his own words I will prove that ye misconstre him. If they (says he
speaking of virgins in general) have by faith and promise dedicated themselves
unto Christ, Lib. 1. Epist. 11.
let them continue honestly and chastely, that no tales be made of the^. And so
being strong and steadfast, let them look for the reward of virginity. But if
they will not or can not continue, better it is that they mary, than fall,
through their lusts and delights, into the fire.

This is the place, and how do ye now understand it? If ye refer it to virgins
in general, that is truly said in deed: ^ary it serves not your purpose, to
prove by S. Cyprian, that Nonnes may marie. If ye refer it to virgins already
professed, th^^ does the one part of the sentence destroy the other, and it
is impossible, tha^ both should hang together.

For if, according to your sense, virgins after vow made, might laufulli^
marie: how stands the former parte^ the sentence, defining, that if they hau^
dedicated themselves unto Christ, le^ them continue? And when this precept is
to be observed of virgins professed, how can it follow by any reason, that the
self same persons, should have it so suddenly granted unto them: That if they
can not or will not continue, better it is to mary? S. Cyprian therefore
speaks of such, as are free to choose either this or that, and not of such as
are past choosing.

And again, if the place were understood as you say, then might No^nes
marie, not only when they can not quench the flames of their lust, but also
if they will not. For if they can not or will not (says S. Cyprian) better it
is that they marie, then fall through their lusts and delyghtes, into the
fiere. But this is incredible, that so good a man would geaue a license so
evil: ergo you do mistake S. Cyprian.

Concerning S. Hierome, Ad Demetriade^ ^e virginitate ^er ^anda.
whom in like manner ye have abused: his words are. The name of certain, which
behave not themselves well does defame the purpose of holy virgins, and of the
heavenly and Angelical company. Unto whom (which whom? Undoubtedly such as
lived among virgins, not yet professing virginity, but intending and purposing
it only) it must be plainly said, that either they mary if they ca^ not
co^teine, or co^teine if they will not mary.

Now that there is such a distinction of virgins to be made, it appears most
euidenly by S. Hieroms own words not twenty lines before this place, saying.
But let this perteine to those virgins which have not yet chosen virginity, and
need exhortation, that they may know what it is, that they ought to choose.
(this is, to virgins not yet professed: but in the person of the professed, it
follows) OF US, the things, which we have chosen, are to be kept. Therefore ye
know, what follows: that ye have abused S. Hierome, because he permits
not marriage to such as have already made a vow of virginity.

Last of all, as touching Epiphanius, these be his words: Epipha, haere^^..71.
The holy Apostles of God have leaft this tradition unto us, that it is a syn
to turn to marriage, post decreta^ virginitate^, after virginity decreed and
determined. And the Apostle writes: 1. Cor 7.
If a virgin mary, she has not sinned. How then agrees this with that? That
is to say, if this be true, that a vrigin may mary, how agrees it with the
Tradition of the Apostles, that It is a sin for a virgin to turn to marriage?
Epiphanius answers by expounding the Apostle in these words.

Illam dicit quae non est Deo dicata, The Apostle (in saying, that if a virgin
marie, she does not sin) speaks of that virgin, which is not dedicated unto
God. Ergo he is not contrary to the foresaied Tradition of the Apostles, by
which such virgins are forbidden to marie, as have vowed their virginity.
Ergo, to say further: They which account marriage to be unclean (as the
Apostolici did, against whom Epiphanius there writes) agree not with the
Apostle. And further, they that say, a virgin may marie after she has made a
vow, (as the compilers of the Apology do falsely gather) are contrary to the
tradition of the Aposples, and to Epiphanius most evident resolution, which I
have shortly declared.

By this it will appear, whether the ancient fathers be well used of the
Apology, whereas S. Cyprian, S. Hierom and Epiphanius, who^ so closely they
name, for witnesses, do so manifestly testify against the^ that none must marie
after they have dedicated their virginity unto God.

The ancient Emperor Iustinia^, commanded, Apolog.
yt in ye holy administration al things should be pronu^ced with a clear, loud
and treatable voice, yt the people might receive some fruict thereby. These me^
lest y^ people should understand the^, mu^ble up al their service, not only
with a drouned and holowe voice, but also in a strange and barbarous tongue.

First you make the Emperor to speak of Con. 242
the holy administration, not telling us either what or whereof? For there is an
holy adminstratio^ of all the seven sacraments, and in other things also which
the church observes, as halowi^g of churches, of paschal taper, of palma, of
ashes, and in bu^iyng of the dead. But the decre is referred to the holy
oblation or sacrifice, the truth of which as ye will not believe, so the very
s^u^d of the word ye ca^ not well abide. Secondly the emperor speaks not of some
fruit as you say (as though no profit come of th'oblation, if the priest spoke
not aloud) but of more devotion to be stirred thereby. Geui^g us to understand
that al is not lost, though nothing be hard, but somewhat is won, when the sense
is more stirred. Thirdly your surmise that we therefore speak with a holow
voice, lest the people should understand us, is insensible. For neither the
clergy should lose any thing, if the people were learned: Nor the people should
understand much, spoke they latin never so loud. And heretics would utter the
secrets of our service were we never so wary: And no charitable man will
suspecte it of the whole Church, that they envy the peoples commodity. Then,
as for mumbling up the Service, the Catholics do in their most chiefest
Churches, sing and say more distinctly and treatably, then any protestants
do. And (I fear) if Service were so song in England, as the Dominicans,
Augustines, Franciscanes, and Carthusians do use, many of the most feruente
in sprite, would complain upon the leisure and treatablenes, that were taken
in it.

Fourthely the Latin is no strange or barbarouse tongue, as being the most
common in this west part of the world, and one of the three principal and
learned tongues.

Pope Julius does evidently forbid, Apolog.
that a Priest in ministering the Communion should dippe the bread in the cup.
These men contrary to Pope Julius decree, divide the bread and dip it in the
wine.

He does it so evidently, Confut. 243.
that it is not at all, to be seen in his decree. Show it, that he forbids
the Priest to dippe the bread in the Cup (as we use in our mysteries) and ye
shall be honest me^. But he speaks, De co^sec distin. 2. cu^omne
not of the manner of the Priests using or receiving the Sacrament, but only of
ministering of the host dipped in the blud, unto the people, which neither at
this day is allowed. You must serve us no more with such soppes dipped in
lies.

Pope Clement says, Apolog.
it is not lawful for a Bishop, to deal with both swords. For if thou will
have both, says he, thou shall deceive both thy self and those that obey
thee. Now a days, ye Pope chalengeth both swords, and uses them both.
Wherefore it ought to seem less maruail, if that have followed which Clement
says, that is, that he has deceived both his own self, and those which
have given ear unto him.

It is not laufull for you so desperately to make lies. Con. 245
For how is not this desperately done, to say that of any man, which (...) not
be proved by him? The Pope says, Si mundialibus curis fueris occupatus, if
thou be occupied in worldly cares. And the Apology makes him to say, (...)
vtrumque habere vis, if thou will have both swords. If Cura signify a sword,
and mundialis signify two, Or if Occupari curis be, to occupi two swords, then
has the Apology given a great blow to the Papists. But whereas no such
construction can be made, it has fought, in this place, not only without (...)
sword, but also without a scabberd: because there is no such word in Pope
Clement, in which they may put any of the two swords that they draw out of
his testimony.

Nazianzen pronounced openly y^ he never had seen any good end of any counsel.
Apolog.


He spoke of the prouincial Councels. And he spoke also of his own time,
Confut. 278.
i^ which, heretics did commonly deceive princes, and by force set up their
new devices. But he was not so unwise, as to mislike with General Councels, or
to geaue an example to the posterity, of extreme and unreasonable disobedience.

In old time when the Church of God (if we will compare it with their Church)
was very well governed, Apolog.
both elders and Deaco^s, as says Cypria^, and certain also of the common
people were called unto Councelles, and made acquainted with ecclesiastical
matters.

What were these, certain of the people, who^ ye would prove, by S. Cypria^, to
have been called to Councils? By this word certain, you signify, that there
was an order taken, who should come, who should not come. And you make your
Reader to conceive, that out of the common people, some were chosen, which
should be present at Councils, as though that had been material in the
Primitive Church.

But S. Cypria^ says no such thing, that any at al of the people, Cypr. in
Sententiis Con. Carthagine^sis.
were called to the Council, but only this, that when many Byshopes, at the
first day of September, were assembled together at Crathage, with their
Priests and Deacons, the most part of the people were also present. But who
sent (...) them? Or who thought their presence necessary? or how make you, the
presence of the most part, to be, a calling o^ certain of the people? By like
reason you might say, that in all causes, where either a spiritual or temporal
lord is examined, the people are called to the hearing of it, because they are
very prone to understand news, and are not forbydde^^ to stand by, and here
what is done in open Court.

At the coming of Christ, Apolog.
of God his word, of the ecclesiastical doctrine, and of the full destruction
of Niniue, and of that most beautiful harlotte, then shall the people which
heretofore had been cast in a ^raunce under their masters, be raised up, and
shall make haste to go to the mountains of Scripture.

I note, Confut..331.
in this testimony of S. Hierom, your lieing sprit^, and sprity she spite. For
whereas he speaks, not of the Church of Rome, but of the universal state of
the world which is signified by Niniue, and whereas you care not what come of
the world, so that the church of Rome may be defaced: of that, which was but
one in S. Hierome, you have made two things, and turn that one, which is
altogether of your own making, to the setting forth of your procedinges.

For S. Hierom speaks of the destruction of Niniue, In com. in Nah. cap. 3*
speciosissimae quonda^ meritricis, of Niniue which was once a most beautiful
ha^lot: and you make him to speak of Niniue, and speciosissimae meretricis, of
Niniue, and the most beautiful harlot, as though that Niniue were one thing,
and the beutiful harlot were an other. Yet because this was not plain enough
for your purpose, you give S. Hierome the spirit of prophecy. And verily you
think he meant to foretell of the most Gorgeouse harlot Babilo^: So that the
beutiful harlot must not be understood now of Niniue peculiarly (as S.
Hierome applies it) but of the whore of Babylon. Which by the interpretation
of the whorish heretics is the Sea of Rome.

Judge now whether this be to interpret S. Hierom, or to make a tale of their
own, by the gift of their lieing Sprite.

From thence says S. Cypria^ spring schisms and sects, Apolog.
because me^ seek not y^ head, and have not their course to the Fountain of
the Scriptures, and keep not y^ rules geauen by the heavenly teacher.

Where has S. Cyprian these words? Or where speaks he of the fountains of
the Scripture? Confut..347
Or the Original of truth: Of seeking to an head: Of the doctrine of the
Heavenly teacher. He speaks in the treatise De simplicitate Praelatorum, or
vnitate Ecclesiae, and he brings al those three points to this end, that
Christ made Peter the head of his Church. But of those fountains of
Scriptures, we ca^ not tell when he speaks, and we know you so well by this
time, that we can not believe you, except ye show it.

The Evangelists and the Apostles and Prophets sayings show us sufficiently,
Apolog.
what opinion we ought to have of the will of God.

This is a true saying, Confut..313.
yet Theodorete speaks not of the will of God generally, but, lib. 1. ca. 7*
(...), of the Godhead. For the controversy was then, between the Catholics
and Arrians, about the Consubstantialitie of God the Son with his Father: And
therefore interpret him better, or use not his Authority.

The 5. Chapter, declaring how Councels are belyed and abused in the Apology
of the Church of England.
According to the judgment of the Nicen Council, Apolog.
we say, that the Bishop of Rome has no more jurisdiction over the Church of
God, than the rest of the Patriarchs of Alexandria or Antiochia have.

The Canon is: Conf. 50.
Let the ancient custom continue in force, which he is it Egypt, Libya and
Pe^tapoli, that the bishope of Alexa^d^ia have power over them all, for as much
as the Bishope o^ Rome has thus used. In these words, (for as much as the
Bishop of Rome has thus used) appears manifestly the prerogative of the
Bishop of Rome, as from whose manner and custom they take an example of their
doeinges.

For if it should be so understood, that because the Bishop of Rome has
power over the country about him, therefore the Bishope of Alexandria, and not
the Bishope of Antiochia, should ^ule Egypt, Libya, and Pentapoly: that hangs
no better together, than if you should say, let the Bishop of Canterbury be
Archbishop of Yorkshire or Ireland, because the Bishop of Rome has power
over the Countreies about him. And allthoughe this Argument may seem to
conclude a Simili, thus (as, the Bishop of Rome rules his Country, so let
every Metropolitan in like manner bear rule over his own Country) yet to
appointe by name, either Eygpte to the Bishope of Alexandria, or Ireland to the
Bishop of Canterbury, that must depend of some other cause, and not of this,
that the Bishop of Rome has jurisdiction in Italy.

Now consider the matter as the truth is, that the Bishop of Rome has supreme
authority among al Bishopes, and then it follows by good reason, that the
Bishop of Alexandria shall rule Egypt, because the Bishop of Rome has so used.
That is, because it is so appointed and so received at Rome, that Aegypte, Libya
and Pe^tapolis should perteine to the Bishop of Alexandria: therefore let
that order continue.

And this is the meaning of the Nicene Council, and this makes for the Popes
Supremacy, and this proves you to belie the Nicene Counsel, which has not at
al, any such words as you mention, that he has, no more Jurisdiction over the
Church, than the rest of the Patriarchs.

The Council of Carthage, Apolog.
did circumspectely provide, that no Bishop should be called, either the
high Bishope, or Chief Priest.

The Council does not say (No Bishope) but, Conf. 53.
A Bishop of a first See, shall not be called Chief of Priests or highest
Priest. For whereas there be other priests besides in the world, which are not
subject unto his see: reason it is, that his title extend it self to no more
than those that are under his Jurisdiction. Also this Canon was for the
Bishopes of the provinces of Aphrica. And last of all it extends it self,
only to the first sees, which are many according to the number of Countries,
and not to the Apostolic See, and chief above all, which is but one.

The Council of Nice, Apolog.
as is alleged by some in greek, plainly forbids us to be basely
affectiouated or bent toward the Bread and Wine, which are set before us.

This disproueth nothing at all the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament,
Conf. 108
especially if you would have added that which follows in the very self
same sentence, and not have clipped so worthy a Council. For it follows
thus: But lifting up our mind, let us by faith, understand, on that holy
table to be laid the la^be of God, that takes away the sins of the world,
which is sacrificed of Priests, vnbloudelie: and receiving his preciouse body
and blood verily, let us believe these to be the pleadges of our resurrection.

Therefore the Council in forbidding us to be baselie affected, intended not to
make us believe that Christ is in heaven only, and not also upon the Altar.

The old Council at Rome decreed, Apolog.
that no man should come to the service said by a Priest well known to keep
a Conucbyne.

We find no such Canon in the old Roman Councels. But Nicolaus and Alexander
Popes, have willed, that none should hear the Mass of that Priest, whom he
knows undoubtedly to keep ^ Concubine, whereby ye may understand the mass
allowed, and the lusts of the Clergy punished, and your mistaking of the
Council corrected.

The old council Gangrense, Apolog.
commands, that none should make such difference between an unmarried Priest
and a married Priest, as he ought to think the one more holy than the other for
single life sake.

The words be these, Confut. 240.
If any make a difference of a Priest who has been married, as though when he
sacrifices, a man might not communicate with his oblation, accursed be he. The
Council therefore speaks of such as were first married, and afterward took
Priesthode upon them, and not contrariwise, of such as were first of all
pristes, and then afterward did fall to marriage. In which point the objection
of Catholics against you, consists.

The Council at Carthage commanded, Apolog.
nothing to be read in Christ's congregation, but the Canonical Sciptures.

Why read you then Homelies of your own making? Conf. 24^
But to the matter. The words of the council are these. It has seemed good
unto us, that besides the Canonical Scriptures nothing be red in the Church
under the name of the holy Scriptures. Therefore it forbids not the reading
of other things, but in that sort, as they should be commended and uttered for
Scripture it self. And strait ways it follows in the same decree. Let it be
lauful also for the passions and deaths of Martyrs to be read, when their
yearly feasts are kept. Do you see your lie now, and will ye lowly confess it?
Or are ye so froward, that ye will not see it, or are ye so cunning, that ye ca^
defend it? Your confession or defensio^ we are content te hear, but if you
will be blind, let others behold and consider, that nothing but Canonical
Scripture, and the, deaths of Martyrs to be readen also in the Church, can not
both be true and stand together.

And behold whiles I thought this objection could not possibly be refelled, it
was for certainty reported unto us here by some that were present at M. Jewels
sermon at Poules Cross the fiftenth of July last, that he complained that M.
Doctor Harding wrongfully charged the authors of the Apology with this place,
as being a manifest abusing and mangling of the third Counsel of Carthage.
For, said he, we allege not this out of the Counsel of Carthage, but of the
Council of Hippo.

Did ye so in deed? Is not your Apology therein against you? Is not the
Counsel of Carthage both named in the Text, and noted in the margent thereof?
Your Latin is thus. In Apol. Ecclesi. Angl.
Vetus Concilium Carthaginense iubet, ne quid in Sacro coetulegatur, praeter
scripturas Canonicas, and in the marge^t, thus it is noted. Tertiu^ Carth. ca.
47. And the English interpretation has thus: The old Council at Carthage
commanded nothing to be readen in Christ's co^gration, but the Canonical
Scriptures: and there likewise in the margent ye put Council. Car. 3. cap. 47.

How dare ye then so loudly to lie, that ye alleged the foresaied place out of
the Council of Hippo, and not the Council of Carthage? It appears well, that
Doctor Harding has ye upon the hippe, when to save your selves from the fall,
ye deny your own words. In his reply to D. Cole.
And wonder it is, that M. Jewel would ever be the reporter of such an answer,
In his reply to D Harding.157.
whereas himself has used this very place of the Counsel of Carthage to like
effect and purpose, as ye have used it in your Apology. Especially whereas there
is no Council of Hippo extant at al, unto which yet ye refer your selves.
Consider therefore (Indifferent reader) of this place, and suffer not thy self
so to be abused, that they shall make thee believe, that they alleged not that
Council, which thou may see with thy own eyes to be named and quoted in
their Apology, and that they followed the Canons of the Council of Hippo of
which they can show no Canons at all, that are extant.

In the Council at Chalcedone, Apolog.
and Civil Magistrate condemned for Heretics by the sentence of his own
mouth, the Bishops, Dioscorus, Iuuenal, and Thalasius, and gave judgment to
put them from that promotion in ye Church.

In what part of that Council, Conf. 315.
may one find this which you report? In the third Action we do read, that
Paschasius with his two fellows the Legates of the Pope of Rome, pronounced the
sentence of condemnation against Dioscorus, the form whereof is fully there
expressed. How then? Shall we think, that one of the Popes Legates was a
Civil Magistrate? Or that the Civil Magistrate condemned Dioscorus ageine by
the sentence of his own mouth, when he was sufficiently judged, by the whole
Council of Bishopes? Ye have many fetches, yet you can not but be convinced in
this place of an impudent lie, or extreme folly.

The most that ye might say (as far as we can reach) is, that the Civil
magistrate subscribed unto the sentence of the Council, and by his voice also
condemned Dioscorus for an heretic. But this is not inoughe for you, to save
your honesties. For you must declare, that the civil magistrate, not only
condemned them, by his testimony or assent, but also by his sentence, and not
such a sentence only as might concur with the iudgme^tes of the Superiors
(like as every bishop in a general Council gives sentence in causes
Ecclesiastical. But it is included within that one sentence which the chiefest
in all the Council do allow and give) but you must prove, that the civil mgistrat
gave the sentence with his own mouth. For so ye speak as though he had been the
the best man in the place and president of the Council.

To this of Dioscorus that ye may answer the more fully, I will not troble yo^
with Iuuenal and Thalassius, whom ye have also belyed in this matter, Bishopes
of an other sort than Dioscorus was, although you have condemned them together.

The Sixth Chapter wherein is noted, how the Apology belieth and abvseth the
Scriptures themselves.
It was said indifferently to all the Apostles, Apolog.
Feed eye.

YOu mean, Conf. 48.
I am assured, the one and twenty of S. John, in which chapter yet, there is
no mention at al, of the plural number, with Feed ye: but, to S. Peter alone
feed thou (says Jesus) my lambs, feed thou my sheep. Whether have you a
Gospel not yet known to the world, in which Christ says indifferently to
al his Apostles, feed ye?

Woe unto you Scribes and Pharseis, Apol.
which have taken away y^ keys of knowledge, and have shut up the kingdom of
heaven before men.

The Scripture saying, Conf. 72.
that one jot or title of the law shall not pass, until all be fulfilled, a
changing of the number in any place of the Gospel, must not be thought to be
vnworth the noting. Lu^^. 11.
Of the keie of knowledge Christ spoke, and not of keys in the plural number.

Paul says, Apolo.
that the time should be, when men should not away with wholesome doctrine, but
be turned back unto ^ables and lies, and that within the very Church.

And that within the very Church? Conf. 20^.
Where find ye these words in S. Paul? That men should not away with wholesome
doctrine, it is to be found in the fourth chap. of the second to Timothe.
And it is verified in all heretics: but that S. Paul should refer those
words to the very Church it self, it is impudently attributed to the Apostle.

And to grant unto you as much as might be, for excuse of your words, that
in some sense it might be true, that even within the very Church men should
not away with wholesome Doctrine: that is, that although many, for their
understanding dissented not from it, yet in their living they should impugn
it: Yet, to say as you do, that S. Paul does expound his words of the
very Church, it is altogether boldly, and falselie affirmed.

God, Apolog.
by his Prophets often and ernestly commands the King etc. To write out the
book of the Law for him self.

Ye bring this place to prove, Conf. 303
that temporal Princes have as much to do with Religion, as Bishops and
Priests. For the King (say you) must write out the Law. Deuteronomy. 17.
But why leave ye out that which follows, accipiens exemplar, taking the
Copy of the Priests of the Trybe of Levy? By which words it is clearlie
perceived, that it is not in the Kings hands to meddle with Scriptures, but
as he receaueth them of his betters (in that authority) the Priests.

King Ioas bridled the riot and arrogancy of the Priests. Apol.


We find no such words in the text, Conf. 307
4. Reg. 12.

Iosue received commandments, Apolo.
specially touching religion.

We have readen the whole Chapter Iosue 1. Confut..305.
and we find no such specialities there, but only that he should pass over
Iordane, And divide the land of Promise, and be of good cumforte and strength,
with other like words, all to the Temporal Government of the people: but,
of Religion, Sacrifice, Praying for the people, expounding the Law etc. no one
sentence. Yea rather (as it appears in the first setting of him, in his
office) the scripture says expressly, (...) any thing be to be done for this
Iosue, Eleazar the Priest shall ask counsel (...) the Lord. Nu, 27.
At his word (undoubtedly at the Priests) he shall go forth and come in etc.
Which of the two then (...) nerer to God, and worthier by his office? He that
speaks himself with God, or he that hears God his word by any
interpretatour? He which geaueth the commandment, or he which must obey it?

Do no more so, with the scriptures, and if none shall let you, to make your
own sense upon them: yet never take so much upon you, to put in the text it
self, which is not of the Scripture. And further consider, whether this be not
to add and take away from the Scripture, to make that of the plural number,
which is of the singular only: To suppress those words which being put in,
do dissolve the kno^ of the question: To put that in, which is not at al in
the text: To allege sayings that can not be found: And to misconstrue
sentences that are found. And then, when you have considered all this,
confer therewith, that which ye find in the Apocalipse of S. John, that, If
any man add unto these things, Apo vl.
God shall lay upon him the plagues that are written in this book. And if any
man diminishe of the words of the book of this prophecy, God shall take his
part out of the book of life, and out of the holy City, and from these things
which are written in this book.

The 7. Chapter, containing the flat lies of the Apology.
There have been wittely procured by the Bishop of Rome certain persons of
eloquence enough, Apolog.
and not vnlcarned neither, which should put their help to his cause now
almost desperate.

NAme the Pope which has procured them: Confut. 9
Name the Person which have been procured, and ye shall either confess your
faults, or stand gyltie for two lies.

Prove also, that he wylely procured any me^ to help his cause: because this
word wylely makes your lie and slander more grievous. For either you mean,
that he did it in d^de, and that he would not be seen to do it, either that he
did it boldly and manifestly, but yet used a witty and subtle mean unto it.

Concerni^g the first, he neded not to be ashamed to defend his cause. He might
boldly without reproach choose any of the learned and eloque^t Catholics for that
purpose. For, the faith which the whole Church openly confesses* what
dishonesty at al is it, to command aloud, that the best learned should declare
it, and by declaring of it co^me^d it, that when just cause is given of it, it
may be known for a truth sufficiently, pued.

Concerni^g the second, it were a small part of policy, to labor by a fancy to
persuade the whole world in a falsitie.

Princes desirous to restrain ye gospel sought many ways, Apolog.
but prevailed nothing: and now almost ye whole world does begin to open their
eyes to behold y^ light.

What place has your gospel in Spain? Conf. 1^
What place in Italy? What success has your gospel in France? When Lady Marie
was once proclaimed Queen, how prevailed your preachi^g? Did ye not flee
beyond sea into free Cities? And why into those more tha^ into any other? but
because ye prevail not with Princes, but such as call you to their favor, of
who^ yet there are so few, and so weak in all Christe^dom that in the rekning
they make a little sum. And now (say you) the whole world almost, does begin
to open their eyes. A worshipful beginning after xv^ yearis. But why say ye not
(without almost) that all the whole world begi^neth to open their eyes? You have
a conscience (I trow) in making a lie and therefore you add almost. How much
the^ lacks I pray you? If Lo^a^, Paris, Bonony, Padua, Salama^ca, Co^plu^u^
and other great Universities, but small ^ortio^s of the whole, if these were
lightened by your gospel, would ye put out your almost?

What mean ye by this almost? Perchance all is ouercomed with you, saving
Rome itself, and the small Cities about it. Nay, have ye not great and
Princely states, (as of Florence, Vrbine, Genua, Ferrara, Millaine, Venice,
Treuers, Mentes, Colone, Salisburg, and the Catholic Cantones) And sundry
Countries (as Bauarie, Sauoy, Burgundy, Loraine, Brabrant, Flaunders, Holland,
Artoys, Henaut, Friseland, Guelderland, Cleueland, Prussia, Carinthia,) And
many Islands, (as Sicilia, Corsica, Sardinia, Maltha and the Zela^ds) And many
kingdoms (as Naples, France, Spain, Pole, Bohemie, Hungary, and Portugale) and
the Empire it self, which see well enough how dark your gospel is? But no
matter for these small pieces.

What say you then to the new Indians, which alone are greater, than all, whom
we have rekened? If you lack but them alone, have you all the world all most?
No: This is so great a lie, that ^ might turn it backward, and say: the whole
world almost does defy your Gospel.

All their travail has in a manner come to naught. Apolog.


How say you to the late general Counsel, Conf. 15*
which had so wonderful good success, and which is so executed in Rome it
self, that not only the Bishopes, but Cardinals also are sent to their cures,
and go obediently unto them.

No body driving it forward, and without any wordly help.

King Harry the eygth then, is no body with you, the Duke of Saxony, Lantgraue
of Hesse, King Edward the sixth, the Villains of Boheme, the Hugonites of
France. etc. Al these then are no body.

On the other side our cause against the will of Emperors.

If Charles alone had not given more to clemency (which overcomes, most of
all, noble personages when they have the greatest victory) tha^ to justice:
where had the Dukes of Saxony and other your defendours been?

From the beginning against the wills of so many Kings.

Every Anabaptist in Braba^t or Scotland, lives against the Princes will,
because he generally wishes every heretic out of the way, for fear of
infecting the good Chistia^s: yet there is another will in Princes, which if they
would follow, no heretic could have peeped up in all Christe^dom, but he should
have been quikly dispatched.

In spite of the Popes.

That is true in one sense, because in deed very spite has moved diverse me^ to
refuse his authority: but in an other it is false. For if he (for example) had
stomaked the matter, he had held them for excommunicate which should have the
name of King Henry in their books, like as on the contrary side it was high
treason to have the name of Papa in any writing or Cale^der.

And almost maugre the head of al men, has taken increase.

Here again comes in almost. No, if men had resisted it in deed, it had
never ben received. But partly through couetise of Church goods, partly through
werines of straight living partly through hatred of superior powers, and
partly through curiosity to hear what news came out of Germany, the
merchandise of heretics had an open vent.

And by little and little spread over into al countries, and is come at the
length eue^ to princes Courts and palaces.

Never say at length. For even from the beginning thereof it was in the Courts of
Princes, as of King Henry the viij. Duke of Saxony etc. And by plain force of
law, the greater part of our own country is kept yet still in it.

The holy Fathers did always fight against the heretics with no other force,
Apolog.
then with the holy Scriptures.

It is false, Confut. 27.
as it appears by the first Nicene Counsel, declaring the co^substantiality
of God the Son with his Father. The second Council at Constantinople,
resorting to the writings of their for fathers for proof of the Godhead of the
holy Ghost. The Council at Ephesus, defining our blessed Lady to be Deiparam,
the Mother of God, and not only Christiparam, the mother of Christ: And the
Council at Calchedon where the fathers cried out aloud against Eutyches
(denieing the two natures in Christ, and asking in what Scriptures lay the
two natures) Ea quae sunt Patrum teneantur. Those things which the Fathers have
thought, let them be kept.

If there had been any which would be but a looker on and abstain from the
holy Communion, Apolog.
him did the old fathers and Bishops of Rome in the Primative Church, before
private Mass came up, excommunicate as a wicked person and as a Pagane.

How prove ye this? Con. 92.
Marie out of a decree of Calixtus, or as ye should say Anacletus. Yet he
speaks not of all the people, but of the clergy only* which he apointeth to
attend upon the Bishop at the altar: which are to say, seven, five, or three
Deacons, likewise, Subdeacons, and other ministers. Neither are they
excommunicated if they do not receive, but willed to be kept without the
Church doors: a far less punishment, so far furthe at the least, that it
proves you a liar.

Our adversaries at this day have violently thrust out and quite forbidden the
holy Communion. Apolog.


They have so forbidden it, Conf. 9^.
that seeing the slewth of the common people, they have made an express law,
that whosoever does not communicate at Easter, shall not be taken for a
Christian.

And bysides, if it be to far for you to go to Rome it self, whereas the
examples of the primitive Church continue in their best practice, you may
ask of the Churches of Fla^ders and Braba^t, and if there be not more
receiving at every principal feast in the year, tha^ is church for church, in
the whole year with you, then let me be reproved. And this often receiving of
Catholic people, can not stand with a violent thrustyng out, and a forbidding
the holy communion, as you belie the Clergy.

Now, if by the holy communion ye mean not, the receiving of the Sacrament as
Catholykes use, but receiuinge under both kinds, neither in that sense speak
you truly. For no violence was used whiles one kind only was ministered, no
commandment driving the Christians at the first unto it, but their own
wills and devotions allowing it: neither, by any later Canon of the Church
are both kinds so quite forbidden, but that upon good advise and charitable
consideration, both may be granted.

The Bishops of Rome do carry the Sacramental bread about, Apolog.
upon an amblyng horse whither so ever them selves journey.

What if he would ride twelve miles or seven miles out of Rome, Confut. 111.
does he carry the Sacrament with him upon an horse? No forsothe. Ergo not
whether so ever he iourneieth.

Again, how does he carry it? In like sort, as noble men carry their
necessaries with them upon Su^pter horses, or pack up in casketes tru^kes or
males any of their singular and pretiouse iewelles? Surely the simple and
plain Reader, may think upon the credit of your words, that the Pope when
he rydeth out of town, carries the Sacrament enclosed up with him, and set
upon some horse, as though it were perteyninge to his household provision.

Yet the truth is far otherwise: for in solemn and great processions
only, the Sacrament is cariede about.

But, I trust, a Procession, is none of the Popes iourneys, neither must his
holiness be said to ride out of town, when he goes about the City in his
Bishoppelie Ornaments for prayers sake only and devotion.

Now when such high feasts do come, the mo^stra^ce or pix for the Sacrament
being very great and massy, is set in deed upon an horse, not as a carriage
of the Popes, but as containing a Sacrament of the Christians. Which, that it
might be the better in sight, and with more ease carried about, therefore has
it pleased the devotion or invention of no evil me^, to prepare a fair horse
to carry upon his back the pix in which that body is kept under the form
of bread, which disdayned not to ride upon an Ass, Matt. 21*
when it came into Hieruselem in visible form of fleash.

They say, Apolog.
and sometime do persuade fools, that they are able by their Masses to
distribute and apply to men's commodity all the merits of Christ his death,
yea although many times the parties think nothing of the matter, and understand
full little what is done.

Name them that do say so, Confut. 115.
and you shall be discharged of a lie, and they punished for their words. For the
Catholics allow not these phrases: we are able to distribute by our Masses etc.
As who should say, the Priest were no more a sinful man, nor an high minister,
at the most under God, but were in deed a certain God, and had in his own
power to pleasure whom he lists: which is nothing so. For if we shall consider
the act of the Priest as it is his own Psonal, so does he according to his
devout intention, not by authority, but by supplication, obtain a virtue and
influence to come from Christ, to them for whom he specially offers. ^ But
himself also being a poor wretch and compassed with infirmity, he never
learned of the Church so proudly to speak as, that, I am able to do this by my
Mass.

Again, if it were true, and if the Church did so teach, that the Priest is
able of his own self without asking leave, to make applications of Christ's
merits, (which in deed is not so) yet to say, that he may apply all the
merits of Christ's passion, is altogether impossible. For whereas there is no
proportion between a finite thing and an infinite: the Priest which has a
limited Authority, and such a power as has an end, how can he stretche it to
the distributing of all the merits of Christ's death, which are endelesse and
infinite? Therefore I say discharge your selves.

And concerning that absurdity by which you would increase your readers
indignation against our cause, saying, that we distribute and apply Christ's
merits when the parties think nothing on the matter, that is not so
unreasonable, as the unwise brother would think it. Whereas the prayers of the
English congregation (if in deed God accepted them) may procure strength in
the Lord, unto the brothers of France or Germany, although they were either a
sleping or drinking.

It is a shameful part and full of infidelity, Apolog.
that we see every where used in the Churches of our Adversaries, that they
will have innumerable sorts of mediators.

Innumerable. Conf. 12^
This is one plain lie. For the Church knows but two, the one when the
party which comes in between to entreat and make peace, may by equalytie
or Authority, have to do with both, of which sort Ihesus Christ alone is a
mediator, being perfect God nothing inferior to his Father, and perfect Man,
nothing disdaining a man: The other when by way of request only and by
intercession, the freindes and acquaintance of both sides speak a good word
and favorable, for the party distressed, unable by them selves to commmaunde
or work any thing, but by the favor and especial grace of him which has
the better. Of this sort are all the Saints of heaven and al good men in
earth.

And poor men can not tell to which Saynct it were best to turn them first.
Apolog.


Blessing to your heart, that you care for the poor, among whom I never hard of
any, which was in the doubt, of which you speak. But if it be so in any, it
may quickly be told him, that he study not long about the matter, but pray
generally in short words, and say: O all ye Saints of God pray for me.

What would these men have said, Apolog.
when in all Councels new ordres and new decrees continually were devised?

Marie we would have stood to the Catholic Councils, Confut. 186.
in which new Credes from the old were never made, but the old made more
plain, by expounding in plainer words the faith that was before.

Some of the Friars, Apolog.
and Monks, put a great holiness in eating of fyshe, and some in eating of
herbs, some in wearing of shows, and some wearing of Sandales, some goeing
in a linen garment, and some in woollen.

If by some ye mean special persons, Confut..143.
I can not tell what, nor where: When ye name them to us, or will send your
charitable letters to them, I warrant you they shall be spoken withal. But
whereas this appertains not to the common cause of the Church, or the
controversy and question between us, what Friar Tucke, or Don Roger do think
privately, therefore if by the word one, ye mean the whole orders of Friars
and Monks, and make this sense, that some orders of Friars put a great holiness
in fish, and some in flesh etc. Then do most shamefully and vilie slander them.

For S. Bernardan Abbate instructs his Monks after this sort: Corporum
conuersio si sola fuerit, Sermon. 2. in capit^ Ieiunij.
nulla erit: that is, the conversion of the bodies if it be nothing but that,
it is nothing. And by conuer^ion of the bodies, he means (as it follows in
the sermon) the shauing of Monks, the cote^, the Rule of their fastes, and
appointed hours of singing. And Petrus a Soto, the divinity Reader in Oxforth,
in Queen Mary's times, himself being a Dominican Friar, and keeping himself
faith^ully within his order, yet he made no such account of external things,
as you falsely sclaunder Monks and Friars to make. But as all learned men do,
when they write of the true worshipping of God* so he expressly says with the
Apostle, Tract. de inst^ Sac. Iect. 5.
That Corporal exercise is profitable to little but Piety and devotion is
profitable to al things. ^. Tim. 4.
And again. Romans 14
The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, b^t Justice and peace, and joy in
the ^olygost. Bring you forth now on the (...) side that Religious me^ put an
holiness in such external ceremonies or rules, a^ you specify.

Zuinglians and Lutherans vary not betwixt them selves upon the principles and
fou^dations of our Religion* (...) God, Apolog. 1.
nor Christ, nor the Holygost, nor of the means to justification, nor yet
everlasting life, but,





But they will shortly be agreed.

They vary about the body of Christ, Confut. ^
the one confessing a true presence thereof in the Sacrament: The other
withstanding it, and faining, Christ to be present by figure only: This is
one.

Neither in the Sacrament only do Nicolaus Gallus in the sibus and hypo.
but also in questions of the law, of the Ghopel, of justification and of good
works, as Nicolaus Gallus a Lutherane protests against them.

Now, whether the question of Christ's Nisi manducaueritis, Joan. 6.
except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, ye shall
not have life in you, etc. This is the third.

This which follows I note not as a lie, made agree together. How full of
vain hope are you, which have so little doubt of their concord, that ye trust
they will be agreed shortly?

They have throwe^ us into prison, Apolog.
into water, into fire, and have embrued themselves in our blood, not because
we were either Adulterers, or Robbers, or Murderers, but only for that we
confessed the Ghospel of Ihesu Christ, and put our confidence in the living
God.

To speak of the holiness and honesty of your behavior, Conf. 152
I trust to have a better time, in the mean season, I ask you quietly, was
W. Flower put to death only for his confidence put in the lyuinge God, Act. and
Monuments. pa. 1129.
and not for striking and wou^ding a Priest, as he was ministering the Sacrament
unto the people?

Our purpose here is not to take in hand at this present to bring to light and
open to the world, Apolog.
those things which were meet rather to be syd and buried with the workers of
them. It be seems neither our Religion, nor our modestye, nor our
shamefastenes.

Ye lie like hypocrites as ye are: Conf. 154
do ye not tarry longer in speaking the worst ye can of the Catholics, than
in any other common place of your modest and shamefast book? Do ye not put in
writing most shameful things, either not done at al, or done so long a go,
that now they were hid and buried? Do ye not bring to Englishmens ears the
unknown pra^kes of foreners? Do ye not often repeat Diasios and Cassios, as
though it stood with modesty, to iterat, and exaggerat such tales? But such
is your Religion* your modesty, and your shamefastenes, that it beseems you
well enough.

Let the Uicar of Christ and the Head of the Church remember, Apolog.
that they be of his canonists which have tought y^ people that fornication
between single folk is no sin.

It will be hard for him to remember it, Confut.
because he never heard it or read it. And as hard it will be to hear or read
that, which was never spoken or written of a Canoniste, prove ye now, that ever
any Canonist has taught as you report.

Iohannesde Magistris, to whom you refer us in your margent, can not be found
to have any such words. Perchance ye would say, Martinus de Magistris,
which vas no Canoniste, but after the fasshion of Scholemen, asking the
question whether simple fornication be a deadly sin, makes objections first
against the truth, and afterward refelling them, concludes most expresslie
thus: Simple fornication excludes from the kingdom of God: Ergo it is a
mortal sin.

Now if any Johannes de Magistris, unknown yet to the world, can be
brought forth of you to save your honesty in so impudent a lie, yet except ye
can prove, that he was one of the, Popes own Canonistes, ye can not but be
guilty of one ^ie at the least in this place, which yet I dare say shall be
forgiven you, if ye ca^ but prove, that ever any Canonist has so concluded.

Go to now, and prove your selves true me^: and burden the Popes Canonists
with alowing of that which is expressly condemned by them. Apolog.


Let him remember they be of his own which have decreed, y^ a Priest ought not
to be put out of his cure for fornication. Confut.


You must bring him the place, or it is not possible he should find it. for your
marginal note wills him to seek can. 3. 9. 7. where no such thing is, and the
paragraph, Quia, which speaks of such only as are not to be promoted to holy
orders, because of their Bygamie. But the truth is, that by all Canons old and
new, Can. Si quis Ep*
the fault is punished. For by the old, were he Bishop, Priest, Dit. 81*
or Deaco^, he was deposed and put to penance: by the later the party
offendi^g had tene years penance enjoined him.

Let him remember also, Apolog.
how Cardinal Campegius, Albertus Pighius, and others many more of his own,
have taught, that y^ Priest which keeps a concubine does live more holily and
chastely, then he which has a wife in matrimony.

If ye were Cardinals to his holiness, Confut.
no doubt ye would do him great service, which being so far out of office, and
far from Italy, take such care to bring things to his remembrance. But do
not ye not forget your selves in the mean time by affirming so boldly, so many
^yes? Campegius and Pighius do not say that, which you report of them.

For of two euilles, there is no one the better, both being evil, but one is
less evil than the other. A co^cubine with a priest is naught, and an open
harlot (no matter though ye call her his wife) is worse. They say not, that to
keep a co^cubine is more holily and chastely done (as though any holiness were
in it at al) neither that to have a wife in matrimony is evil (as though
marriage were not honorable) but of these two foul faults, a Priest to keep a
secret harlot, which goes under the name and pretense of a necessary
servant, or the same to profess that she is his yoke fellow, and to take the
parish to witness, that she is his, at bed and at board: the first is evil, the
second is worse: the first has not put al shame aside, the second is
impudent: the first may come of infirmity, the second will have it allowed by
Authority.

I trust he has not yet forgotten, Apolo*
that there be many thousands of harlotes in Rome, and that him self does
gather yearly of the same harlotes upon a thyrtie thousand durkattes by the
way of annual pension: Neither can be forget, how him self does maintain
brothel houses, and by a most fylthie lucre does fylthylie and lewdely serve
his own lust.

Speak ye by report of others, Confut.
or by experience? If by report, were they that reported it, somewhat skilful
in the matter or no? If they were not, but spoke also by report, stands this
with your purpose? and does this beseem your Religion, your modesty, your
shame fastness, which ye acknowledge in your selves, so absolutely to obiecte
so great a matter, to so great a Bishop, upon an hear say only.

But if they spoke of knoweledge, how came they by it? Sat they in commission
in Rome it self, and called the harlottes before them by authority? But how
were that either tolerable or reasonable; in a strange City to play the
Magistrate, or to labor in the numbering of harlottes?

Or went they from house to house with a pryuie search, making a worthy
occupation for Ghospellers to be curious in? Or through acquaintance with
whores and bawdes, was the whole account without further labor brought unto
them? They are not to be accepted for honest witnesses, which are so well
acquainted, or so much favored of those naughtypackes. Perchance as they went
up and down in the streets, they nu^bred certain scores of harlottes. There
was a simple eye then I trow, and a devout purpose in the marker of such
occurrentes. Yet if it were so, how gather they, that many thousands of
harlots are in Rome, because they observed many here and there to go in the
City?

What so ever shall be answered, it will be replied, that they them selves are
not far from harlottes, which being no Commissioners for the purpose, so
diligently observe such proceedings, and that they which couete after such
knowledge, do feed in their minds upon no better than carren. And as it
may be seen by their apparel, distinct from honest women, that Curtesans
are in that populous City, so to beable to say it constantly, that many
thousands of them are therein placed, it must proceed of experience, And it
should not be reported in the heari^g of Christians, except it were evidently
declared. Yea neither the^ also, if we rightly understood our Savior sayng:
Joan. 8.
Lethim which is without syn among you cast a stone first at her. Wherefore this
of many thousand harlots in Rome shall stand for only, and he which dare come
forth and prove it in deed, shall stand to defense of his honesti.

Now concerning the yearly pension which the Pope (you say) gathers of
them: how great is it? Mary upon a thirty thousand duckates. And how many
harlotes are there? Many thousands you say. But I ask how many? Make a
gheasse as you do upon the annual pe^sion gathered of them. Are there think
you, thirty thousand harlottes or thereabout? Nay are there three or four
thousands of So many as you would have seem to be there? Surely within this
number you can not welcome, because ye affirm that many thousands are there.

Go to then, if there can not by your account be less than three thousand
(for of two thousand only no man ever says there are many thousands) every
one paieing ten ducketes by the year, the whole pension may easily be made
up. And think you, that any man disposed to make a va^tage, would gather no
more of such persons, as so lightly come by their money? If but three thousand
tippling houses were in any City, a very favorable Prince would not make so
little of them (for excises etc.) as thirty thousand duckates by the year. But
if he were a covetous and greedy Prince, having such a foul company in his
City of whom he might take large exactions even for justice sake, would he be
contented with an yearly pension of so little value? So few thousand duckattes
agree not with so many thousand harlottes: and therefore ye shall do well to
make areuew, and mend the lie where it is.

You proceed further as it were to a greater matter: which if it be so, ye make
a third lie, although in deed I suppose, that it is but the second lie in this
place, set more abroad and dilated. For he maintayneth (you say) brothel
houses, etc. How prove ye that? I think ye will tell us here again of the thirty
thousand ducats, specially because ye speak also of a most fi^thy lucre, to
which ducats we have a^swered before. And now we say further, that he takes
no annual vantage of harlotes at al, but such as comes from every one that
dwells in the City, by ancient tribut and custom.

But you say further, he maintains them (I would ye were so maintained) But
by what means? Defends h^ their cause, as he would the causes of honest
persons? Does he provoke them by immunities and privileges to tarry? Is he
offended when any good man either mercifully does convert them to a better
kind of life, or justly punish them, for offending against the Law? Will ye
see how they be maintained?

They must not dwell in haunted or great places, but in bycorners and lanes.
They must not ride abroad in coches or chariotes, but walk a foot in the
streates. They must not go in apparel all like other women, but wear a
shoorte veil of one certain color upon their heads, that they may be
known, for harlottes. And if they like strumpets do offend against any of
these orders, they pay a great forfait.

Of which point if ye will gather, that the Pope serves therein his own
lust and lucre: what men are ye so to peruerte that, for which praise is due
unto him? Should he not punish them at all? Or in punishing them, should he
not do it to the terror and example of others? Ye will answer perchance,
that he should have none such in the City. Obiecte then only that against
him, and slander him no more with procuring advantage in maintaininge of
whores, nor defame him no more that he seeks his own lucre by settinge
great Forefaites, or trybutes upon he^.

And then concerning the permitting of the^ in the City, If Canel^ and sinkes
beco^mendable, the^ let M. levvel cry on (as he did in his ^ast sermon against
him) that M. Harding vvil defend (...) cause of harlottes.
I answer you, that in temporal gouermente it is not evil in respect of a
worse which else would follow, to let harlottes and bawdes * lie with dishonor
and shame in the sinkes of great Cities like as Minstrels, Daunsers, Iugglers,
Usurers, and other of unhonest and vile behavior of life are suffered to
remain even in London it self, and that when all the Superintendents of
England shall be at their convocation.

And this I speak touching civil policy: for concerning the spiritual
government, there is in Rome daily and vehement preaching against them.

In the beginning of Lent, and before Easter the Pope does solemly accurse the^.

Besides this, they shall make no testament before their death, nor afterward
be buried among Christians, except they did repent in time of their life. How
say you then? Prove not these things in the judgment of an indifferent man,
that the Pope will have no harlots at al in Rome, if either experience of civil
policy should persuade it, or force of his spiritual sword and sentence, could
win it? And yet dare you so lewdly to write, that he mainteineth brothel
houses. etc.

Of a monastery, made by the blessed Pope Pius Quartus charges and charity, in
which the Harlottes converted from their wicked trade of evil life, through
public preaching or private exhorting, should be received and kept in all
honesty: of such a house and maintenance of them to such a life, we have
heard, and they which have been at Rome, are certain. But of any procuring of
their contynuaunce in their filthe and harlotrie, you have heard perchance,
but you should not have so stoutly objected it, before ye had been more sure of
it.

Bring forth your Author, that we may see whether ye be not light of credit, Or
prove your own sayings true, if your selves be the Authors, that ye be not
convicted of impudency.

If these things would have pleased us (that is, Apolo.
harlottes, brothel houses. etc) we needed not to have departed from these men's
fellowship, among whom such enormities be in their chief pride and price.

I would this were true. Confut, 170.
For then no doubt, but if ye were in company of good Catholics, such as be as
sorry as you for enormities, and complain thereof as heartily as you, though
not so indiscreetly: ye would repent you of your lying and slandering, and
hear Mass with a good will and devotion, and pray to Saints, and pray for the
souls departed, and obey the B. of Romes authority* Which Bishop, at this
present, is a man so divine and excellent, (as appears most evidently, by his
expelling of devils out of possessed bodies, by expelling the Courtesans out of
the City, by correcting al disorders in the Court of Rome, by prouidi^g for
those parts of Christendom, which either have no Bishops, and then he se^deth
them some, as of late he did into the Indians: or had Bishops, and enjoyed them
not, in which case he has sent them home to their Countries) that if in deed,
ye had the mi^d to return to the Catholic Church, ye might never better do
it, than now, when the head thereof is so wonderful for his holiness, fortitude
of mind, vprightnes, and Charity.

But ye have a mad fancy to belie your selves and say, that ye had no cause to
depart from us, if enormities of life would have pleased you: whereas in deed
as long as the mass and the Pope be regarded, you cannot abide our company,
though the manners of the Catholics were never so well amended. Now if ye dare
be bold with your selves and say, that ye be so persuaded as ye be not: take heed yet, what ye report of others, and think not, it is enough to say it, and
never to prove it, that such enormities are with us, in their chief pride and
prince.

Paul the fourth not many months sense, Apolog.
had at Rome in prison, certain Augustine friars, many Bishops, and a great
nu^bre of other devout m^n, for religions sake, he racked them, and tormented
them.

The truth is, Con. 171
he caused a Public Edict to be made, charging all such as were gone out of
their religion and habit, to return again to their house and Order. This
commandment prevailed with many, which considering their dissolute lives,
came willingly under obedience and order. Others which passed not for the Popes
commandment or their former vow, being apprehended were put in prison, that
vexation might give them understanding, and that disobedience should not
escape unpunished even in their bodies. As for racking and tormenting them,
that is one: and that many Bishops were so handled, that is an other: or that
they suffered for religions sake and not for their own disobedience, that is a
third foul lie.

Although we be not ye men we ought and profess to be, Apolog.
yet whosoever we be, compare us with these men, and even our own life and
innocence will sone prove us true, and condemn their malicious surmises.

Concerning your lives, Con. 127
the great ado which you make for wives, proves what gift of continency is
among you. And they being in deed no wives but concubines, either one sin
defended and maintained, draws not an other with it (which is i^possible)
either else one may justly collecte and gather, that in the other matters
besides incontinency, ye be not innocent. I report me also to your railing
upon the Pope, whom ye know not: Your belying of honest men which yet live:
Your slaundring of whole orders and companies, either upon hearesay only, or
for the peculiar faults of some few persons. etc.

Call ye this innocence? Let the world judge, where more disordre of life is,
among Catholics, or heretics.

We have overthrown no kingdom, Apolog.
we have decayed no man's power or right, we have disordered no commonwealth.
Confut. 173.


The hundred thousand bands of Germany, which by tumult and uproar armed
themselves against the nobility, and died al in it, be witness against you.

The Duke of Saxony and Lant grave of Hesse, he witnesses against you, because
they stood in field against Charles the v. whom ye can not deny to have been
their true Sovereign and Emperor.

The Sacramentarie Zuitzers of Berna, who robbed the Duke of Sauoie of his
towns and Cou^tryes from the farther side of the Lake of Geneua unto the Alps,
they shall be brought against you.

Geneua it self, which is neither in the power of the Duke of Sauoie, nor
under their lawefull Archebishoppe, but has taken all jurisdictions from them,
into her own hands, may prove somewhat against you.

The Hugonotes of France, your brothers, and others in Scotland which have and
do yet continue in their rebellious stomakes and enterprises, shall testifye,
that some man's right is decayed by you. But if you think all these witnesses
to be far of, and that they can not be well examined, ask (I pray you) and
I think ye shall find, that the Brothers of England have furthered the cause
of the Hugonotes of France and Knokes men in Scotland.

And to be short, go into your own bosoms, and consider what compassion ye
have over the afflicted congregation of the low countries, where their
co^spiracies and enterprises, are so clearlie betrayed and broken. Or consider
what joy ye have had in it, when not only against lawful Authority, but also
common honesty, and order, they spoiled Monasteries, expelled the Religious,
threw down Churches, and played other such parts, as sprites of hell do
sometimes in great tempests.

The B. of Rome to feed his ambition and greedines of rule, Apolog.
has pulled in pieces ye Empire of Rome, and vexed and rent whole
Christendom a sunder.

Merciful God, Con. 17^
what mean ye? Are ye offended, that the empire was placed in the Weast, to
the defense of Christe^dom? And the suppressi^g of the Lo^bards power which
the^ was grievous to Italy, does that of fend you? Charles the great, so
blessed and valiant a Prince, shall his acts not only be called now into
question, but utterly be condemned through you?

If you call this, a pulling of the state in pieces, that an Emperor was set up
in the Weast, because the Emperor of the East was both unable and unready to
help the Weast church, the^ is this present Emperor with all his predec^ssours
gilty of unjust possession and accessory to the Popes ambition, as you term
it. For if at the beginning the title was not good, he can not with safe
conscience abide in it. And if that were pulling the Empire in pieces, you
perchance will set it together again, and help to put down the Emperor now
living with all that state, that ye may make al full and perfect, as it was
under one Emperor over the whole.

Again he did not feed his ambition, being as great in authority before as
after. Neither pulled he it in pieces, but where there was no whole and good
piece left, there he placed a perfect state of government. And it lacked so
much that al Christendom was rent a sondre by it, that except by that means
provision had been made for defense of the Church, the Lombardes even at those
days and the Turk sense that time, had spoiled and rent al Chris^tendome.

He put Chilpericus the French king being no cuil prince, Apolog.
beside his realm, only because he fansied him not, and wrongfully placed
Pipine in his rome.

Chilperike was so good a Prince, Confut.
that He was commonly called stupidus, a dolt. He was also wholly given to belly
chere, and love of women. And therefore the whole realm of France made ernest
suit to the Pope, that they might be loosed from their oath made unto him:
whereby it appears, that the Pope followed not an only fansy of his own, but the
request and advise of a whole Country.

Now as for placing of Pipine wrongfully, I know not how they could make it
probable, except he were made king against the good wills of the nobility,
and communaltie of France. For whereas every common wealth is greater tha^ the
Prince which governs it, and may depose the same upon lawful cause, and
whereas riot and doltishnes are causes sufficient so to does (as making the
prince unable to govern it well) it follows co^seque^tly, that if the whole
state of France deposed Chilperike and erected Pipine, there was not fault
co^mittedin so doying.

He utterly destroyed the state of the most flourishing City and common wealth
of Florence, Apolog.
his own native country.

How great words, utterly destroyed, and, Confut.
flourishing City? It was never more quiet, tha^ it is now under the Duke. For
by natural reason under one certain head, peace is better maintained, then
in number of families and factio^s, be they never so small. And by experience
they do feel, that they have less stur and vprising, tha^ they have known:
whereas unto forty (...) which they had before about the (...) place, they
have not one as now.

All these were Popes, Apolog.
all Peter's suces^^, all most holy fathers: whose several ^^oordes we must take
to be as good as (...) Ghospels.

Who told ye so? Con. 184
Where find ye it so? Who (...) taught you to lie so? For not only the ^opes
words, but also his private writings (...) taken to be subject unto errors and
^gnorance, as other men's doings are: but ^ot his definitive sentence upon any
ma^^er to be generally believed.

The self same me^ which have led their (...) at Rome, Apolog.
in y^ holy city, in ye face of ye most holy father, who also were able to se
(...) their secrets, and at no time departed from (...) catholic faith: as for
example, Laure^tius ^alla, Marcilius Patauinus, Frauncis ^etrarke, Hierom
Sauanorola, Abbote (...) ^oachim, Baptist of Mantua, and before al ^hese
Bernard ye Abbat, have many a time and much complained of it, geauing y^ world
(...) ^lso sometime to understand, that the Bi^hop of Rome him self, by your
leave, (...) very Antichriste.

Five lies I will note at the least (...) this one sentence. Confut. 207.


First, of al these who^ ye name, no one (...) did lead his life in Rome, but
Laurence Valla.

Secondly, they were not well able to see the Popes secrets which lived (...)
in the City with him familiarly.

Thirdly, concerning your lie, that (...) no time they departed from the
Catholic faith: Laurentius Valla was (...) fangled, Marcilius was a plain
heretic* Abbate Ioachim uttered heresy, which was condemned, but submitting
himself to the Catholic Church, he escaped for his own person.

Fourthely, of the faults of Rome, (...) Bernard has complained, but never
(...) the Popes tyranny, and barbarous pryde^

Fifthely, it was the special grace (...) Luther, and the blindness or folly
of the foresaid persons, to give you to vnde^stand that the Pope should be very
An^tichrist. For the making of which lie, (...) (...) will never so much ask
our leave, we have no such Authority to give it unto ^ou, and therefore I
pray you quiet your selves, and never trouble us more hereafter with such
requests.

We, Apolog.
says Hosius, will bid away with (...) same scriptures, etc. It behooves not
(...) man to be expert in the law and scripture, (...) to be taught of God. It
is but lost about yt a man bestows upon the scriptures. For the scripture is
a creature and ^ bare letter. This is Hosius saieing.

This is not Hosius saying. Conf. 21^
Nay, of set purpose he reherseth it for an heresy: to declare how the new
Ghospellers of this (...), have proceeded still from naught to worse, and are
now come some of them, to such a divine spritishnes, that they contemn the
study of the Scriptures as a carnal thing and unprofitable, and will not have
any man use the testimony of them.

But God forbid (says Hosius) that we should ever so much as think these
things, Hosius de expr. ver. Dei.
which belong not to a Christian man. For we hold with S. Hilarious who judged
heresy to come from the understanding, not from the scripture Seeing therefore
that Hosius has so expresselie declared him self, to (...) from Zwenkefeldius
heresy, which would not have the Scripture to be (...) credit, what
impudency is it, so bold^^ lie to chardge him with it, as thoug^ it were his
opinion, to have the (...) put away.

Yet this, so great impudency, (...) how it shall be maintained? For
allthough it be perceived, of the Authors (...) the Apology, that Hosius will
sone (...) against them, and say, that they do (...) wrong: yet rather than
they will (...) seem to eat their word, and to (...) unable to defend
that, Note the stomach.
which (...) had once said in the first edition (...) the Apology, they
increase their (...) and shame in the second edition. (...) whereas in
conscience, they should have cried Hosius mercy, and (...) confessed their
mistaking of him (which had been a token of good natures, and such as
especially should be in the professors of an holy Ghospel) yet in their
second Edition and further deliberation upon the matter, they not only do not
revoke their slander, but make Arguments to defend it.

And first, to that which Hosius might truly say unto them, that they do
him wrong, and that the words which they obiecte against him, are not his
own words, but the words of the Heretic Zwenkefeldius: they answer.

But how then, Apolog. In the second edition.
if Zwenkefeldius make Exclamations on the other side and say, that the same
very words are not his, but Hosius own words? Confut.


If he will be so shameless, as to obiecte that unto Hosius, as Hosius own,
for which Hosius expressly reproves him: Or if he will be so folish as to
profess that opinion, which he will put await from himself, when he is
challenged of it, he is a meet witness for the Apology. But how is it likely
and probable, that Zwe^kefeldius might so do? It follows.

For tell me, Apolog.
where has Zwenkfeldius ever written them.

What if so much be not told you, Confut.
will it follow, that because you know not, where to find them in
Zwengelfeldius, therefore they are not in him at all? Or because it is not told
you where Zwe^kfeldius has written the^, therefore Hosius does allow them? For
herein is the point, whether Hosius aloweth them for his own words, or no.

Or if he have written the^, Apolog.
and Hosius have judged the same to be wicked, why has not Hosius spoken so
much as one word to confute them?

By like reason you might make S. Augustine a great heretic, because in (...)
book ad Quoduultdeum, he (...) shortly the heresies that were in (...) world,
and does not also confute them (...) he tells them. But the cause of Hosius
fact is evident, for that his principal purpose in that place, was to show the
heretics procedinges, and not to tarry about the confuting of their sayings.
And whereas he compteth Zwenkfeldius an vptars^t heretic for those foresaid
words, is it not manifest, that he him self has no lyking of those words?
Verelie although Hosius in noting Zwenkfeldius for those words, has not
straitewaies answered his arguments: yet he sufficiently proves himself to
be of a contrary opinion, and thereby answers your fond objection, by
which your would seem to make Hosius a Zwenkefeldian, in that he judged
Zwenkfeldius words to be wicked, and yet spoke not so much as one word to
confute them. As though it were not to speak some word at the least against a
position, to say no more but this of it, that it is an heresy. But see what
follows in the Apology.

How so ever the matter goes, Apolog.
allthough Hosius peradventure will not allow those words, yet he does not
disalow the meaning of the words.

This, Confut.
how so ever the matter goes, of which you speak, has this sense in it,
that there is no remedy, but you must, one way or other, make Hosius to be a
Zuenckefeldian, least you should seem to recant and revoke that, which most
unjustly and blindly ye have laid unto his charge.

And therefore, whereas it is most manifest, that Hosius aloweth not those
heretical words, which he attributes unto Zuenkefeldius, and whereas ye can
never purge your selves of the slander made upon him in that behalf: ye
depart from the matter, neither proving sufficiently your obiecton, neither
confessing honestly that you have mistaken him, but leaving it with a
peradventure Hosius will not allow those words, ye proceed to prove, that how
so ever the matter goes, Hosius disaloweth allows not the meaning of those
words.

In which point, ye discharge not you^ honesties, but show partly your fond
invention, in burdening your Adueruersarie with the sense of those words, the
speaking or writing of which, ye can not prove against him, his open fact and
denial standing to the contrary: partly your wretched disposition, in
mainteyning a lie by impudency, as though never to confess your fault, were
the next way to be delivered. I add further, that ye be less sure of Hosius
meaning, than of his speaking or writing. For words and letters are sensible,
but the meaning without some external sign ^ade, is not intelligible.

If therefore you will leave to press Hosius with the foresaied words, (...)
peradventure he will disallowe (...) should ye not much more have (...) your
selves, from laying the (...) of them unto his charge?

Except you be so folish, as to think, that he will not put away from him the
sense of those words, the very form of which ye guess he will disalowe.

But let us see further how substantially ye will prove Hosius to be of this
mind that the Scriptures are to be rejected. It follows.

For well nere in all controversies. Apolog.


Your slander is to general: Confut.
come to some special point or other.

And namely touching the use of the holy communion under both kinds: Apolo.
although the words of Christ be plain and evident, yet does Dosius
disdainefully reiecte them, as no better tha^ cold and dead Elements.

What mean ye by, disdainfully reject them? Confut.
Does he scrape them out of his book? Does he call the^, not worth a straw, as
Luther calls S. Ioannes epistle stramineam, a strawen epistle? Does he say
that they are crepte into the text out of the margen, Beza ia Anno. in Luc. 22.
as Beza reports (like a blindebuzzarde) the words of S. Lukes Ghospel,
which shall be shed for you, to have been infarced? What has Hosius don to the
text of the Scripture, that ye shoud so lowdly obiecte it, that he does
disdainefully reiecte them? Bring in your arguments, that they may be
considered: And show us some evidence, that ye seem not to light and
slanderous of your tongue.

There is no doubt, but Hosius and you, will not agree upon the sense of many
textes: but concerning the words them selves of the Ghospel, Hosius can not
possibly reiecte them, being a Catholic. For in such cases he can do nothing
of him self, but must follow the Catholic church. And the Catholic Church is
so religious toward Scripture, that as she has received it, so she
mainteineth and keeps it still.

Note therefore this place (gentle Reader) and mark whether the Authors of
the Apology, have either the ability to prove that, by which they have
defamed a right Catholic and Reverend Bishop: Or the humility and honesty,
to confess their fault, and to ask forgeauenes for their obiecting of that
which they are not hable to prove.

The Canonistes of this day, Apolog.
for they^ bellyes sake use to say of the Pope, that for as much as he is Lord
of al benefices, though he sell for money Bishopriks, Monasteries, Priesthod,
Spiritual promotions, and parts with nothing freely: yet, because he co^pteth
al his own, he c^n not commit simonie though he would never so fame.

How prove ye, that the Canonistes, Confut. 259.
of this day, have such a conclusion as you speak of? The author of Summa
angelica, or Theodoricus, whom ye name in the margen, for the proof of this
matter, are dead many days ago, and serve not to prove, that the Canonists of
this day now liui^g, have this or that opinion. Therefore I will be so bold as
to charge you with one lie in accusing the Canonistes of this day.

An other lie shall be, that you slander them, to speak (what soever they be
of whom ye mean) for their belies sake. For (God knows) all the lawiers which
you ever have seen or had to do withal, fare little the better for the Popes
table.

The third lie, (and that most notable) is, that ye make them to conclude it
absolutely and generally of the Popes prerogative, which they mean but in a
certain case, and one certain respect only. For, the distinction and
determination of this question, by the very Summam Angelicam it self is, that
concerning such punishementes and pains, as are set upon Symonie by the
positive Law, the Pope is not subject unto them. But for the other things,
which are Symoniacal, and punishable by the Law of God: In ijs quae sunt
Symoniaca de iure diuino, the Pope is not exe^pted from the fault and p^^ne due
to it.

The Greeks have neither private Masses, nor mangled Sacraments, Apolog.
nor purgatories, nor pardons.

An instance in any one of these, u sufficient to prove you a liar. And
therefore to let pass Asia, Syria, Assyria, and Armenia, countries too far to
go unto and see whether we say true or no: In Venis at this day, in the Greek
Church, the priest receives alone at the altar, which is (by your
interpretion) to say a private Mass: and of this you may be fully persuaded,
if (because ye mistrust the Catholics report, which have seen it) you will but
ask of the Reverent Father Shire, or some of your own Merchantes which have
travailed thither, or send some letter of yours by their frendeship to any
false Christian, and faithful brother there, to know whether you have not
spoken more, than you are able to prove.

We turn y^ scriptures into al tongues: Apolog.
they scante suffer them to be had abroad in any tongue.

Have ye turned them yet into welsh and Irishe? Confut.
but for lieing upon yourselfe I leave you to your self.

Concerning the Catholics, if your saying be true, who then maintains the
Hebrew Readers of the old testament in Rome, the expounding the same in latin
in every Catholic University, the open selling of Bibles, Hebrew, Greek and
Latin^, in all Printers shoppes, the continual reading of Scriptures in
Monasteryes, not only in open Church and secret Celle, but eue^ in the
Refectories, at diner and supper? Who do all this but Papists? Your lie
therefore is very notorious.

Peter verily whom the Pope has oftence in his mouth and more reverently uses
to speak of, Apolog.
then he does of Ihesu Christ, did boldly stand against the holy Council.

If ye loved, Con. 274
either God or man so truly and justly as ye would be thought to do, it were
impossible for you, so suspitiousely to interpret the honor geauen to the
Servant, to be a diminishing of the honor and reverence due to his Master. For
the charity of God, the greater as it is in us: so it makes us to rejoice
still more and more, the more that any is praised or remembered, whom he
favors. And to murmur, grudge, cast down the head, or make a lip at it,
when S. Peter, or any other of the glorious and blessed in Heaven, is daily and
reverently spoken of: what is it else, but maliciously or blindelie to think,
that S. Peter has already honor enough, or rather to much service done unto
him, and that God him self is like to fare the worse, if his Saints be
continually magnified?

On the other side, 1. Cor. ^^.
concerning our neighbor, Charity being patient gentill, not suspicious etc.
how might a man full of spirit (except it be of the hot sprite of Hell)
judge by a man's reverent speaking of S. Peter, that he would not speak, so
reuerentelie of Ihesus Christ?

Besides this, ye which live in England, and make such reports of the Pope,
whose abode is in Rome, being neither of privy chamber, nor householde, no^ of
the same City or Country with him: how can ye (by any likelyhode) be other
then false liars in judging so particularly of his ma^ers, until ye bring
the Authonr of this your saying: or light beleuers of tales, when ye have named
the Authors?

Yet truly we do not despise councels, Apolog.
assemblies and conferences of Bishops and learned men, neither have we done
that we have done, altogether without Bishopes, or without Council. The matter
has been treated in open Parleame^t, with long consultation, and before a
notable Synod and Connocation.

Yeas, Con. 275.
altogether without Bishops and without a Council. For in that notable
Parleament, the first of our Sovereign Lady that now is Queen (in which that
was don for you that was done) ye could have no Bishops in the plural number
to stand for you: because ye had not so much as one in the Singular number.

Albeit afterward in deed one ye had, and he being deceived or ouercummed did
bear with the procedinges more proprely, then support them.

This is one. Now, as for the treating of the matter in open Parleament, it was
so open, that your voices had no place in it. This is an other.

Thirdly, concerning the long consultation that was used, the Parleament began
after Christmas, and without any great arguing to or fro, the maydenbill (as
it was called) of the Princes Supremacy was ready to have passed about the
beginning of Lent. Then stood one up that spoke against it, with such liberty
that he was examined upon it, and lost his own liberty 30. days together,
and with such truth and gravity, that for so many days after, the matter also
of the Supremacy was suppressed. Yet about Easter, for the word head, came in
the word Governor. And so was the Supremacye admitted, when the Parleament so
little thought of such a fetch, that an earnest fa^orer of the Gospel took
indignation at it, and said, that if men were ashamed of the word it self
head, they should also refuse the Supremacy it self which was imported by it.
And call you this a long consultation? This is a third.

Last of all touching the notable Synod and co^uocation, it put up to the
Parleame^t an express bil of informatio^ against your procedinges. So far of
it was from helping you. This is the fourth great lie, in this one little
sentence of yours.

From which four, if ye will defend your selves, by referring your meaning,
not to the first Parleament of the first year of Queen Elizabeth (in which ye
were Sirs out of office) but unto the other that followed (the Catholic Bishops
now being safely kept in prison) then as ye debate the poyse of your former
(...) for all that ye do augment (...) your folly. For your matt^^^ (...) to
pass for you, in the first Parleame^t, in which none of you were p^sent,
though the Parleament following, had been open the co^sultation long, the
co^uocation notable (albeit this might be proved to be an open, long and
notable lie) yet note, I pray you, the folly and lie which in this sentence
go together. For your matters being don to your hands, in the first
Parleament, where no place was made for you: it is a very lie to say: We have
not done, that we have done, altogether without Bishops. And the first
Parleament serving your purpose so fully, that ye needed not an other, what
wisdom was it to have a long consultation and notable Synod upon that;
which was before concluded for you, and by you was not to be removed, for all
your notable convocation?

Continually for the space of five hundred years, Apolog.
the Emperor alone appointed the Ecclesiastical assemblies.

Where begin you to reckon? Con. 311.
Three hundred years af^tr Christ, there was no Emperor in the world, openly
professing him self a Christian: and yet Ecclesiastical assemblies were
appointed and kept in Jerusalem by the Apostles, In Palestina when Victor was
Pope, At Rome by Fabian etc. Then if ye will begin at Constantin the first, and
take the five hundre years following, how make you it true? For the first
Council of Nice it self, was called by Syluester the Pope.

Temporal men subscribe and geaue sentence, Apolog.
in general Councels.

Subscribing we grant: Con. 318.
geauing of sentence we utterly deny, and you can never save it from a lie.
Except by such a figure as shall make two diverse things in degree and
perfection, to be all one with you, and that it is as lawful to give sentence
in a matter, as to subscribe to it, after it is geauen.

The Popes would needs make all the realm of England tributary to them, Apolo.
and tracted thence yearly most unjust and wro^gful taxtes. So dear cost us y^
frindeship of the City of Rome.

Was the Realm so unable to resist him, that you may truly s^ie, the popes
would needs have it so? Through your over much study on the book of the Lord,
ye may be perdoned, for not knowing the history of our Realm: which if you
will take the leisure to consider, will teach you, that the taxes or
Peterpence of which you speak (or else ye must perdone me, if I understand you
not) were so freely given by King Ihon to the Popes for evermore: that except
his conscience had moved him unto it, there was no force of arms, nor will in
the Pope, to make him of necessity to do it.

And because you make it a fault as it were general of all Popes, that needs
they will have taxes of you: remember Paulus the fourth his dealing with you,
at the coming of Queen Marie to her reign: at which time having Princes on
his side, and by his own strength some what able to he^pe forward, yet he
neither required Peterpence (a small matter in respect of our Realm, or his
charges upon Christendom) neither absolute restoring of religious houses to
the former and laufull holders of them, a great matter without all
controversy, yet such as he might have brought to pass if Popes were the men,
as you make the^ to be. Whereby it appears, that although ye might freely make
lies upon the Ambition and couetis^ of Popes in old time: yet these Popes
which of late have in deed been so much able, and yet through charity so little
willing to take of you, do in all men's eyes and judgments, convince you of
lying and slanderous tongues.

Men following God his bidding, Apolog.
of their own free will resorted unto y^ doctrine of Jesus Christ.

As for example, Con. 345
in our own country: In King Harry the viij. days, who so would not have
abandoned the Authority of the Bishop of Rome, should be hanged, drawn, and
quartered. To have but the name of a Pope in a matins book was treason,
permitting men to pray to S. Gregory which was a most holy Pope, and
punishing the^ for having that name Pope standing by him in their kale^der etc.

In king Edward his time, the procedinges increasing, it was punishable to
hear Mass, etc. And at this present, it is so odious and dangerous, not to
come unto your Ghospel, that your selves provoking the Catholics to answer
you* or alowing the bragging manlynes of such a challenger: yet now when
answers are provided for you, ye stop by all fear that ye can make, first
that none be brought in, and afterward that none be reade^, upon pain of the
commisioners dispeasure. And, were not the judgment of our Princess greater,
than to suffer such an absurdity, as that you should provoke and crake, when
none is willing to fight, and when the enemy is coming forward, then call
upon the temporal Arm to drive him back, that you might triumph in your
manner without the victory, surely had not the goodness of our Princess misliked
this cowardnes, ye had by this time made it death, to have any book of the
Papists making in Louane. And call you this, Men of their own will to resort
to your doctrine?

And for our parts truly we have sought hereby neither glory, Apolog.
nor wealth, norpleasure, nor ease: for there is plenty of al these things
with our adversaries.

It is hard to trust you, Con. 34^.
especially whee as this nedelesse sayi^g (that you have not sought for glory)
proves that you are content to be thought to have the contempt of glory:
which is but a base and sorry argument of humility. As for your desire of
wealth, although Luther, the man reised of God, had not for couetise preached
against pardons, and if Peter Martyr (chaynging his opinion with which he came
to Oxforth, and from his Lutheranisme turni^g himself to Zuinglianisme for love
of so sweet a living did not make it probable (as he said unto Julius his man
after a great feast made to him in Oxford, O Iuli, bonum est nos hic esse, O
July, it is good being here) And although your miserable misery and banishment
in which you were at Geneua, that in condition the popish Religion might be
displaced, you would be content to conform your selves to the Princes
Religion and orders, which (in the article of supremacy) Calvin your master
could not abide, And although your selling of stone, lead, slat etc. your
woodsales, your bying of Copyholds, your begging of money and wheat toward
household, your breeding of swyne with the over sight of the Superintendent
himself in that kind of cattle: although (I say) all these matters might make
it not incredible, that you had the desire of wealth in your poverty, which be
so greedy thereof yet daily still in your plenty: yet because in these
foresaid points the fault may be laid not upon religion, but on the persons
professing it, I shall therefore bid you consider one principal end and
conclusion of your Gospel, to see thereby whether ye seek not for ease and
pleasure, or (if your selves be better disposed) whether the course of your
Religion does not draw men to that affection.

For running out of Cloisters, breaking the vows of poverty, of obedience, of
chastity, no rising at midnight, short prayer, contempt of prescribed
fastings, yoking of Priests and their women together etc. and such an
Apprehension of Christ's merits by Faith, as makes the hands to let go all
meddling with good works etc. these being the effects of your religion, and
part of the greatest points of your profession: let it now be judged, whether
these men say true or no, in glorying that they seek not ease and pleasure,
except you will say, ye be not inclined after the ways of your own religion.

The 8. Chapter containing the Rhetorical, Slily, and Frumping lies.
We can not away in our Churches with the shows, Apolog.
and sales, and byeing, and selling of Masses.

AS who should say, Con. 111.
we your Adversaries do abide it. No verelie, we no more allow the sellinge of
Masses, than the Inceste of the renegate Friars and Sisters: And yet there have been in the Catholic Church Religiouse persons so fowlie disposed. As does
appear by the chief Apostles of the new Gospel, Luther, Oecolampadius,
Peter Martyr, Bale, Barc^let, Barlowe, Scorie etc. Which departed out of the
Church on their own head and peril, and lived not well in the Church
whiles they were interteined in it. And so, although some faithless and
wretched fellows, might be proved to have sold their Masses in the Church:
that conuinceth them to be naught, and not that the Church consents unto it.

We verelye, Apolog.
because we know the shedding of Christ his Blood upon the Cross to be the
only Sacrifice, are well content with it alone, and look for none other. And
forasmuch as yt was to be offered but once, we commau^d it not to be renewed
again.

You would (I perceive) have the Catholics compted exceading covetous and
insatiable, Conf. 123.
as though they should think the shedding of Christ his Blood upon the
Cross to be vnsufficiente to salvation.

But yet how think you? Notwithstanding ye are so well content, (as ye say)
with Christ his Passion alone: do ye not think it necessary for you, to
obey the Church, to obey your Prince, to abstain from lying, from adultery,
from Simonie etc? If besides the passion of Christ, you must also keep the
Commandments, and do as many good works as ye may, then as you are
content, so are we: And you are no wiser (by this rekening) than other poor
folks are.

But, if Christ his Passion does so content you, that ye seek not to suffer
also with him, after your degree, in a certain proportion: then does it
plainly appear, that you are quickly satisfied. And in such sort to be well
content, is for such as never think to ascend after Christ, and are very
unlike unto him.

Why has he his Legates (as much to say as most subtle spies) lying in wait
in all Kings Courts, Apolog.
Councelles and privy chambres? Why does he, when he list, set Christian
Princes one against an other, And, at his own pleasure, trouble the whole
world with debate and discord?

First, Con. 178
let it be proved, that the Pope does it, and then afterward ask the cause
why? And consider also, whether it becomes the Church of England, that such
an Apology should go forth in the name of it, as meddleth with the legates,
whom other Princes of Christendom do interteyne? And which obiecteth to a
person of much Authority, at the least, such an heyg^nous and shameful crime,
as, that at his pleasure he should trouble the whole world. If the Pope were no
more quiet and peaceable, than ye make him: had England all this while
continued in schism and heresy, and not ben made a pray to some that would
have taken it?

What is he that commands the Emperor to go by him at his horse bridle,
Apolog.
and the French King to hold his stirope?

Some Pope by lykelihode of your own making. Con. 185.
For the Catholics know of none such at al. Yea, Paulu^ Iouius.
when Charles the fifthe, of worthy memory, would have held Pope Clements
stirope, he was not suffered so to do, the Popes modesty over coming the
Emperors devotion.

Why do they hyde, Apolog.
why do they keep under, the Gospel, which Christ would have preached
alowde from the house top?

We believe, Con. 222.
it is not hydde^, that which is openly readen in the Church, Catholikelie
expounded in Universities, Ordinarily readen in Religiouse houses, And
commonly sold in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, to all that will study it. This
lie is dilated by the Authors of the Apology. Fo. 264. this also is among the
flat lies.

Why do they not prove their Religion, Apolog.
by the examples of the Primitive Church, and by the Fathers, and Councels of
old times?

Our books do answer for us, Conf. 231.
that this is a lie.

Why be they afraid to take a pattern, Apolog.
of the Apostles and old Fathers?

We be never afraied, Con. 20^
but when we come to such heretics, as will not admit the old Fathers, nor
their interpretatio^s upon the Apostles: then in deed we allege not so
thick their Testimonies, whose Authorities the lofty and proud minds, do
easelie contemn.

Why did John, Apolog.
1. Clement, a Country man of ours, 2. but few years paste, 3. in the
presens of certain honest men and of good credit, 4. tear and 5. cast into
the fyere, certain leaves of Theodorete the most, 6. Ancient Father and a,
7. Greek Bishop, wherein, he playnlie, 8. and evidently taught, that the
nature of Bread in the Communion was not chaynged, abolyshed, or brought to
nothing. And this did he of, 9. purpose, because he thought, 10. there was no
other copy thereof to be found.

Ye have done well so particularly to set forth this matter, Con. 231.
declaring by many circumstances, that Doctor Clement should Tear, and
Cast into the fire, certain leaves, of such an Author, of such a matter,
before men of good credit, and for such a purpose and (...)* as you specify.
And now, as though the matter needed no further (...) ask, why John Clement a
Coun^rieman of yours did so?

But I will tell you first, (...) he did not so. For, as him self has (...)
me and other asking this very qu^stion of him, that you appose us withal, he
never had any part of that book in Greek or in Latin in written hand: And
therefore could not well burn that which he never had. Now, if the honest men
that you speak of, did not only se him cast certain leaves into the fire, but
did read also, the contents of those leaves before they were cast into the
fire, and understood upon what intent D. Clement did it etc. name them that
they may be known for their honesty.

When they did of late put in print, Apolog.
the ancient Father Origenes work up on the Ghospel of John, why left they
quite out, the who^e sixte chapter, wherein it is lykely, yea rather of very
suerty, that the (...), had written many things con^^rning the Sacrament of the
holy Communion contrary to these men's minds?

We could not leave that Chapter out, Con. 233.
which was not found in any Copy. But if you can bring any such chapter
forth, ye shall make it lykely and probable, that we are to blame for not
putting it in. And, if you can not, you prove your self to be very
suspitiouse and slaunderouse, which reprove the Catholics, for not putting
that in, which is not, as far as we or you do hitherto know, to be found in
any place extant. Yet you have such a grace, as in speaking, so also in
reading without book, that you further say it to be, not only lykelie, but
rather of very suertie, that such and such things should be in that place of
Origin, which yet you never saw in all your life, that you might be able to
report any thing of it.

Which of all the Fathers have at an^e time called you by the name, Apolog.
of the highest Prelate, the universal Bishop, or the head of the Church?

S. Hierome ad Damasum: Con. 247
The Council of Chalcedo^* and Victor de persequutione Vandalica these have
geauen the for said titles unto the Bishoop of Rome.

Which of them ever said, that both the swords were committed to you? Apolog.


S. Bernard saiteth it, lib. 4. de consideratione ad Eugenium. Con. 247


Which of them ever said, that you have an Authority to call Councels? Apolog.


There follow a broune dosen more of such which of them? Con. 248
Which either need no answer, because the Catholic Church has no such
Articles, as you ask question of, Or because it is not bound to answer every
gentleman controllers busy questions, although it be able, either by express
Authority, or else by necessary consequence to declare good and sufficient
cause and reason for every thing that it aloweth. But touching this present
question, Socrates Hist. Tripart. lib. 4. ca. 9. does plainly testify against
you.

What one error have they amended? From what kind of Idolatry have they
reclaimed the people? Apolog.


Here is a suspicio^ reised of more tha^ one error, Con. 291.
and of more tha^ one kind of Idolatry to be in the church, and there is no
probatio^ annexed to prove that which is said. But herein your bli^dnes and
ignorance, does utter it self, that ye know not what is truth, and right
worshippi^g of God, which object errors and Idolatry to th'church of God, in
which church the techer of truth the holy Ghost, Joan. 14^
is always president, and shall be unto the worlds end.

Again, if you consider, what has been don of late in general councils, and
what is don daily both by p^ching, and writing against evil life and heresy,
you can not justly find fault with the heads of the Church, as though they
had no regard what the people did believe and follow.

Then further I say, if you willo biect ignorance unto the Catholykes that,
they know not what is true Religion: then does it remain, that you tell your
own minds, and answer their Confutations and Replies. Before which time to
insulte upon them and to crow out a loud, from what kind of Idolatry have
they reclaimed the people? is, to triumph before the victory, and to go
merely away with the sentence, whiles the matter is a hearing yet in the
consistory.

But if you obiecte this crime to the Catholics, that they know well enough
what Idolatry is, and see the kinds of it, and yet reclaim the people from
no kind thereof: this truly is so heighnous and so vile a fault, that ye
should have evidently proved it, before ye had so artificially concluded it.

For a plain answer to which foul suspicion, let any reasonable man be
judge, whether it be lykelie and possible, that they which with great pains
and danger of body, have provided, very Idolatours in deed, to be converted
unto our faith, would wittingly suffer an Idolatry to be at home before their
eyes, and yet not take a little pain to open their mouth but once against it.
The Fra^ciscans, and they of the society of Ihesu, have and d^e take exceeding
great pains about the barbarous people in the East and Weast India, and with
hazard of their temporal life, they venture to bring the Infidels, to the
knowledge of the life everlasting. Therefore surely it is bysides al reason and
likelyhod, that of so many of the same order and profession, as live here in
Europe among us, no one should be found so honest, so hardy, or so faithful, as
to reclaim the people from their Idolatry, if any were in them at all.

Why do they so discourteously or with such spite, Apolog.
leave Princes out, and as though they were not either Christen me^, or else
could not judge, will not have the^ made acquainted with the cause of Christian
Religion, nor understand the State of their own Churches?

And why do you so openly and so licentiously r^yse a foul suspicion, Con. 297
against the Clergy, where no cause is? The temporal princes, are solemly
warned before, of the general council, when so^uer it is to be kept. Their
Legates have honorable and meet places for them, in the Counsel house, that
they may not be ignorant of that which is done, in debating and examining the
cause of religion: They be humbly and hartly thanked, for their helps and
assistance and presence, made in the cause of the Church: They be sent home
with peace: And say you, that princes are so left out, as though they were no
Christen men, whose Ambassadors you may understand to be interteyned and used
so honorably?

What is the Pope, Apolog.
I pray you, at this day, other than A Monarche, Or A Prince? Or what be the
Cardinals, who must be none other now, but princes and Kings Sons?

We never heard any wise man call Con. 299
the Pope A Monarche. But a Prince he is in deed, either as the word Prince
may signify the Chief in all Priestelie function, either as it signifies a
man so endued with Temporalties, that he may worthily be a Kings fellow.

But say you, what other is he than a Monarche, or a Prince? As who should
think, that he sat imperiallie under his clothe of Estate, and heard
Ambassadors out of all quarters of the world, and gave kingdoms or took them
away at his pleasure, and after such matters of weight dispatched, then that he
went to hunting, hauking, plaieing, dau^sing, feasting, etc. as worldely
Princes do. For such a thing do the common people imagine a Monarche or prince
to be, one that rules al, and lives in all pleasure.

That you therefore may be corrected of your lie, and the simple Reader of his
error, I say that the Pope is no Monarche at al. And I confess boldly, that he
is a Prince, by reason of the Temporal, and great Jurisdiction which he has
over S. Peter's patrimonies, but as Pius the fifthe that now lives, did answer
agreably to his holiness, and wisdom, Licet Princeps sum, antiquius tamen
Pastoris quam principis nomen agnosco: so (to say the like in English) I give
you to understand, that although the Pope be a prince, yet he acknowledges and
takes, the office of a Pastor to be the more former and principal with him,
than the Office of a Prince.

By this office then of a pastor, he governs, and f^deth his flock: he
sends non residents, home to their cure: he apointeth out Preachers and
Bishopes for the new found lands: he calls Councils, ends Councils when it
shall please him he goes in visitatio^ (as this last year he did through althe
parish churches of Rome) he excommunicateth such as will not repent (as he does
Courtesanes, expelling them bodyly also out of the City) he succoureth such as
will convert (for which purpose, his predecessor Pius the fourth of blessed
memory, built a peculiar Cloister or house) he preaches unto his flock, (as
he did thrice the last year, first in S. Peter's Church, after that in our
Lady Church, which is called Maria Mayor, thyrdly in S. John Laterane) he
ministers the Sacraments, he confirms Bishopes, he binds, he loses, he
charge, he dispenses, and by virtue of his Authority and Priestehoode, he
expels the dyuels themselves out of the possessed bodies.

Now if Princes and Monarchs have the Office and power to do these
spiritual functions, which I have short^lie and in part noted: then shall
they also be holy Fathers, and take unto them the title of Supreamehead under
God in earth. But if no man be so foolish as to hold it, that a Prince is a
Priest: then are you answered, that the Pope at this day is some other thing
than a Monarche or a prince. And so we pray you to be content, and not to sue
unto us for answer of that, which is in plain sight, so evident against al
truth.

As for Cardinals, who (you say) must be none other now but Princes and
kings sons do ye think, that of Princes and Kings Sons, one may look
for no other thing, but wildnes youthfulnes and ignorance? Cardinal Pole, the
Cardinal of Loreine, Hercules Gonzaga, Gaspar Contarenus, Fregosius: Nauagerus
These I trow (if any be) are the ^ardinalls whom you will number among the
Sons of kings and princes. And what think you of them, or what shall ye find
in them? Shall ye not find every one of them more notable and famous for their
learning and virtue, tha^ for their family and Parentage?

If ye think then, that the Princes Sons that are made Cardinals, are
nothing else but unlearned Courteours, you shall show your selves to be very
simple Scholars, which can judge no better of the foresaied Cardinals. On
the other side, if ye confess them to have been, and yet to be men very wise
and learned: then may ye mistruste your wits and judgment, in obiectinge
that, as an Infamy to the Sea of Rome, that the Noble men which th^re are
Cardinals, are Princes Sons. Whereas the same be great Divines also and
Doctors.

But it greiueth you, that Cardinals must be none other now, but Princes and
Kings Sons. There is no must in the matter: For the pooreste of you all, if
his poverty consisted in birth only, and not in wit and honesty, he
might be not only a Cardidinall, but also A Pope. Like as of Adrianus the
sixthe, we not only read, that he was borne at ^ltreicht^, of very poor
Father and Mother: but also we hear of the Ancient in Louane, that he lived
here by begging very much at the beginning.

But ye affecte not to be Popes: Cardinals perchance ye could like to be, if
that let it not, that Cardinals must be none other now, but princes and
kings Sons. As who should say, that no man knows, that Hosius, Seripando,
Amulio, Sirlettus, and he de ara Coeli in Rome, are Cardinals by authority, and
mean men's Sons by nativity.

But to conclude, it appears that you are very base borne childerne, which
so beggarlie and ignorantly talk of matters out of your knowledge, and would
seem to have no little intelligence of the state of the court of Rome, of which
ye so speak as pedlars, that make discourses in Alehouses of Reformation in
Religion, and war or peace between Princes, and not as grave men, which should
be sure first of that which they say, especially when they speak in the
name (as it were) of A whole Realm or Country.

The 9. Chapter, Of an impudent and desperate manner of lying, which may well
be called, facing of a Lie.
As for those things which by them have been laid against us, Apolog.
in part they be manifestly false and condemned so by their own judgments
which spoke them.

Show, Con. 10.
where, when, and by whom.

If they perchance will not see that, Apolog.
which they see in deed, but rather will withstand the known truth.

You do well to add (perchance) and yet you be to suspicious without very
good argument, Conf. 19.
to think that any Catholic will withstand the known truth.

Lord God thou know, Apolo.
that our Adversaries were the very foes to the Gospel, and enemies to
Christ's cross: who so wittingly and willingly did obstiuately despise Gods
commandments.

In this you have done politikely, Con. 151.
to appeal to the knowledge of God, with Lord God thou know. For in the
judgment of men, which know not what is within an others breast, except it be
uttered by some external sign, it is impossible, that you should with any
reason object it unto us: that wittingly and willingly and obstinately we
despise Gods commandments, having no word or writing of ours, by which ye are
hable to show it. And if you have any, let that rather be brought forth, than
a naked slander only exhibited, without any confirmation or likelyhode.

Our enemies do see, Apolog.
and can not deny, but we ever in all our words and writings have diligently
put the people in mind of their duty, to obeie their Princes and
Magistrates, yea though they be wicked.

If we can not deny it, Conf. 175.
how is it, that we do deny it? Yea rather how could we deny that, which
is to be seen so openly? Are you only strangers in the affairs of the new
Ghospel, and do ye not know, how it has proceeded hitherto?

Tell me, I pray you, whose counsel the Duke of Saxony and the Lantgraue of
Hesse did follow, when they stood in Arms against their laufull Emperor
Charles the fifth?

Of what Gospel was Luther, when he wrote, that the Emperor and Catholic
Princes were proditores scelesti, vanique nebulones, traitors, wicked men and
vain knaves?

How came the Caluinists by Geneua, a den now of the Gospellers, and unto
what Prince should it be subject, if right and conscience could prevail among
them?

By whom was Pultrone chosen unto that ministry, to kyl the Duke of Guise, the
chief Captain of the French King? Was not Beza the preacher, one of them that
promoted him to that office?

And to be short, were your ears only (...)(...) not, those things which they
bost they have etc. and though they have a desire rather to dissemble: yet they
them selves are not ignorant thereof, yea and sometime also they let not to
confess it openly.

See, Con. 252.
how devoutly these fellows can make lies. They talk with God about the
matter, and they comfort themselves with this (I trow) that he yet is their
witness, that we have not Antiquity, Universality and Consent, which we say we
have. And it follows, that we our selves are not ignorant hereof, but the
proof hereof (as I suppose) is to be referred to the knouledge of the good Lord
only. For concerning the knowledge of me^, whereas it is manifest by all our
doings and writings, that we have those three things for us, Antiquity,
Universality, Consent, and that against al our adversaries we prove, that
these three be so with us that they are not with them: it is unreasonably and
impudently set forth in print, where he that will may judge of it, that we
should be of any other mind, than can be proved by evidence of some external
signs.

We are come to that Church, Apolog.
wherein they themselves can not deny (if they will say truly, and as they
think in their own conscience) but all things be governed purely and
reverently, and as much as we possibly could, very nere to the order used in
the old time.

Here again our own conscience is brought forth against us, Conf. 269
as though they did see by their sprite, what we think in wardly: though we
outwardly show all signs to the contrary. Many Catholics live out of their
Country, other many lie in prison within their Country, some write whole
books against the procedings, And al (I think) do speak against them, when
they may do it without danger of displeasure. What should we do more, to
declare that the new Gospel is damnable? Yet all this notwithstanding we think
in our conscience (say the Authors of the Apology) that al things be governed
purely and reverently among them etc. Have they any honesty, which set such
faces upon matters?

Let us see in all that while (of the first six months in which the Council
sat at Trente) of so many, Apolog.
so manifest, so often confessed of them, and so evident errors, what one
errorhaue they amended?

But what are they first, Con. 291.
that we may know them?

These men use of course, Apolog.
to deny all things, be they never so clear: yea, the very same, which they
presently see and behold with their own eyes.

This lie is of the same suit with his foresaied fellows, Conf. 317.
because it lays such things to our charge, as our doeinges prove to be most
false and incredible. For, all the Scriptures we have received, and except we
had commended them, no protestant could ever have trusted them. The old
Councels and Fathers we more esteem than Protestants do, we refuse no laufull
testimony of any age. That which we see with our eyes we do never deny, though
we understand such things as come under our senses, otherwise than the
heretics do.

To whom therefore may I compare these Adversaries, which will make us believe,
that we see well enough that, which we do deny, and sometimes deny that, which
we do see. I think they are disposed only to make sport, and so to play in
matters of religion, like as idel spe^ders of their wit and time do, in the
devising of mad merry games. For when half a dosen such are agreed together,
one of them (for example) lays hands upon a quiet man that passes by: And
while the innocent looks back upon him, in comes an other that helps to
hold him, so fast, as though it should be for the kings auantage, to have such
a one made sure. With that, he that without cause is so apprehended, wondreth
at the matter and asks what they mean and stretches his power to break away
from them. But he begi^neth no sooner to resist, but straitwaies they cry, help
Sirs, help for the Lords sake, this fellow is mad: see how his color
changes, see how he pants etc. And with that, the rest of the brotherhoode
sore moved with bitter compassion, make in to him, and for lack of other
sprites, there they possess him, and hold him, and cry unto him, and keep
such a stir about him, as is able to bring many a man half out of his
wits, and to persuade with other that stand by and consider the thing, that
undoubtedly the fellow that suffers the violence is mad, and not that they,
which go so sadly and constantly to the holding of him, should be any thing
mad.

After which sort if the Authors of the Apology have concluded to cry out
upon us, that we can not deny, that, we know in our own conscience, that, we
know for a truth, such and such things as we lay against them, to be false,
and if they will needs enforce it upon us, that we can not deny, but all
things are governed purely and reverently among them, what remedy but
patience, and to suffer them to carry us into Bedlem with so many holy and
learned men our forefathers, as already they have condemned, if they will not
be answered with our open confession in word and deed? But if this be
unreasonably done of them, to burden us with such a Conscience as can not be
gathered of any our external act: Judge thou Indifferent Reader, whether this
be not properly facing of a lie.

The 10. Chapter, containing the Problematicall or Hypotheticall lies, with,
how then, what ifs, and put case. Not so impudent and open faced as other, but
not unworthy to be noted, and no less shameful than the worst of all.
But, I put case, Apolog.
an Idol be set up in the Church of God. And the same desolation, which Christ
prophesied to come, stand openly in the holy place.

It should not long continue, Con. 192.
I believe, to grant your case. For when Antichrist him self shall come, he
shall be quickelie destroyed, and never have any successor openly to sit in
his Chair after him.

What if some thief or Pirate invade and possess Noah's Ark? Apolog.


I think the Arc would sink. Conf. 192
And whereas God him self keeps the Arc his Church, and provides it to be a
place of safety in which the just seed shall be preserved: to let a Pirate and
Thief to possess the Arc, were as much to grant, as to let there be no
honesty, no Faith, no laufull Authority in the Church: Yea it is as much to
say, as, I put the case there were no God.

How then if I call furthe those for witnesses, Apolo.
whom them selves have used to honor? What if I say, that Adriane the Bishop
of Rome did fra^kly confess, that all those myscheefes braste out first fr^^
the high throne of the Pope?

Mary ye lie, Con. ^06
if ye say so.

But how then if Zwenkeseldius make exclamation on the other side, Apolog.
and (...), that the same very words be not (...), but Hosius own words.

If he will be so wise as to recall his own words, Con. 217
the Church is merciful to all that repent. If he will be so desperate, as to
deny that which is in sight: that shall help him nothing in their judgment,
which know Hosius to be a Catholic.

But how if the things which these men are so desirous to have seem new,
Apolog.
be found of greateste Antiquity? Contrariwyse, how if all things well nie,
which they so greatly set out with the name of Antiquity, having been well
and thoroughly examined, be at length found to be but new and devised of very
late?

Verily they will be strange cases, Con. 230.
when any such fall.

But I put case these Abbates and Bishops have no knowledge? Apolog.
What if they understand nothing what religion is, nor how we ought to think
of God? I put case the pronouncing and ministering of the law be decayed in
Priests, and good counsel fail in the Elders, as the Prophet Micheas
says, the night to be unto them instead of a vision, and the darkness instead of prophe^siyng? Or, as Esaias says, what if all the watchmen of the
City are become blind?

What if y^ salt have lost his propre strength and sauerines? And, as Christ
says, be good for no use, scant worth the casting on the dunghill?

The less knowledge you would make the bishops and Abbats to have, Con. 280.
the more miracle it will be, that without knowledge they have such learning, as
their books, and preachings, and doings do testify. Take for an example the
Catholic Bishops of England. Is there among them all any one against whom you
may come with your textes of Micheas, Esaias, or Christ our Savior? Yet, you
put the case they have no knowledge: I answer, that your case is a very hard
one. But yet to remedy somewhat this matter, if our Bisshops should be so
unlearned and ignorant, I think it were better for the common wealth to set
them to Schole, than to put them in prison. Or if they be nothing mete for
lerni^g, to set them rather at liberty, being such as can hurt the
procedinges nothing for lack of good life and knowledge, than to keep them in,
so preciselie and politikely, as though every word that they should speak,
were able to confound an heretik.

How then if the Pope have seen none of these things, Apolog.
and have never read either the Scriptures, or the old Fathers, or yet his
own Councels?

I answer* but first, Con. 284
I will also put a case. What if there were no shame in a man? What if there
were no regard of the sight of God? What if in all things he should seek for
this only, how to fill the peoples ears, and to make them gather of an
exceading great word somewhat at the least? W^^ld there be any discretion or
stay in such a one of putting cases, of deniyng most manifest truths, of
slaundering worthy persons, and goeyng against sense and reason? So is it with
the Authors of the Apology. For, how the^ (say they) if the Pope have never
readen, either the scriptures, or the old fathers, or yet his own Councils?
How then? Are ye not ashamed to put such a case, as neither ever yet happened,
nor ever is like to come to pass by any reason? Show the occasion of this your
suspicion and fear? Declare your self to be of greater experience and
consideration than those are, which quake for fear where no cause is? Name
any one Pope that has not been so learned, that you might welthink him to
have readen the Scriptures? Ye can name none at al. You put only a case with,
how then if he has never readen the Scriptures? And I answer, that if it be
so, it is a great miracle. And that except you bring forth some certificate of
it, it is not to be believed. But neither you meant it (I suppose) to affirm
it: only ye thought it enoughe, to speak much, as though you could bring
forth somewhat, And to leave it to your Reader to suspect somewhat, although you
proved nothing.

I confess unto you: I can not tell what to say to such What thens? and What
yfs? But if you have any art in judging of them: I pray you, if the sky
should fall, were not many larkes like to be taken? And if such kinds of What
yfs? as you have put, might be followed in other examples: were not many fools
like to be made and preferred by it, and many Will Summers would they not be
found in England, which would quickly say: what if all the Council be
unlearned? And what if poor knaves have as great a gift of wisdom, and
knowledge, as the Noble and Learned of the world? Thus far concerning this
matter.

The 11. Chapter, confuting a blasphemous Lie.
BY many small practices, at length an habit is gotten, and he that refrayneth
not his tongue, and thought in the less, shall make it so fond and slipperie,
that it will offend in the greater: And the Apology of England whiles it took
not good heed enough, to speak truly of men, it is come to that blind
audacitie, that it belieth God him self. For this cause therefore, that the
Authors thereof may the better consider of their rashness, and the Indifferent
Reader may the more plainly see, that he must not trust every Sprite: I
place this lie by it self as a singular one, without fellows and without
comparison, and I call it as it deserves, a Blasphemous lie For thus they say
in defense of their discession from the Catholic Church.

Though we have departed from that Church which these men call Catholic,
Apolog.
and by that means get us envy amongst them, that want skyl to judge: yet this
is enough for us, and it ought to be enough for every wise and good man, and
one that makes account of everlasting life, that we have gone from that
Church, which had power to err, which Christ, who can not err, told so long
before, it should err.

Where find ye this in any Ghospel? Con. 322
Or why tell ye not your Reader of it, that he also might perceive it? Or why
direct ye him not to the place, at the least, where he might seek it? Can it
be any other than wicked impudency, to make Christ say that which he never
said? If Christ has fore^old it in deed, that our Church should err,
show us that, and there is nothing to be replied. Fathers, Councels, Stories,
Apologies, Replies, Reioynders, al other labors may be spared: only that
place were to be showed, where Christ has so plainly confounded us. For this
you may be sure, if ye can prove that our Church may err, you shall persuade
all the sort of us, to forsake it, and get us to an other of which we may be
sure it can not err.

But forasmuch as ye can bring furthe no such word of Christ: why make ye such
a wretched crake, as though ye were departed from a church that may err to a
better congregation, or as though Christ should bear witness unto the goodness
of your doeynges by his foretelling, that our Church should err?

Here ye are to be pressed, and here should ye be enforced to answer. For by
this place it will quickly be seen, who has wo^ne, or who has lost. For if
it were S. Ambrose, or S. Augustine that did affirm any thing, the Catholic
would so far accept it, as he should see other Fathers to agree to it: and
the heretic would so little make of it, that if all the fathers bysides did
say with them, he would not be bound to follow their authority, because they
al were me^. But if Christ once say the word, both parts will submit
themselves unto it, because it is impossible that he should speak any
untruth.

His authority therefore being, for so good cause, so great with us: either ye
can prove that Christ has fortold as ye report of him, or ye can not prove it.
If ye can not, what an impudency is it against Christ himself, so to belie
him, and what an injury ^s it to the Reader, so to abuse him by the name of
Christ? But if ye can show it, where Christ has foretold, that our Church
should err: do so then, and speak not so mighty words against us,
without any proving of them at all.

But, how is it possible, that ye should prove them. Christ has a Church.
For this first ye will not deny, that Christ has a Church: otherwise his
Incarnation and Passion has been in vain, if he have not her, for who^ he
took flesh, The Church (...) visible.
and shed his blud. This church the^ of Christ, is it visible, or no? Visible
it must needs be, because it consists of me^, and me^ are creatures
consisting not of pure and simple souls, but of souls and bodies together.
And Christ says of it, Math 5.
The City can not be hid that is set upon an hyl.

Being then visible, The Church has order in it Sap. 11.
shall ye see good order in it, or no? Undoubtedly he that has made al things
by number, weight, and measure, must not let that to be without order, which
he estemeth most of al other things. For (...) is the body of Christ, Ephesians. 4.
compacted and knit together through every joint, wherewith one ministers to
an other, having in it distinction of offices, and duties, to rule, to obey, to
preach, to hear, to minister, to receive.

This Order then, The order in the Church must continue. Dan. 7.
shall it for any time be lacking in Christ's Church, or shall it continue to
the worlds end? It must needs continue, because the kingdom of Christ is
everlasting, and no power is hable to destroy the order which he takes. The
Apostle also most expressly telling us, that Christ has given Apostles,
Prophets, Evangelists, Pastoures and Teachers, ^ph. 4.
to finish and perfect the holy, to work in the ministry, to build up the
body of Christ. Which body whereas it ca^ not be perfited, until al they be
borne that shall be saved souls: it follows, that this Order which I speak of,
must continue so long until all meet together in unity of faith and knowledge
of the Son of God, which will not be, til al be borne that shall so meet
together, and that is at domes day, and not before.

These grounds then so standing, I say unto you: for as much as the Church of
Christ consists of a visible cumpanie of men, which is kept in order and
unity, by reason that every one knows his place and keeps himself within
his bounds least he loose his place: and for as much as this cumpanie and
order must continue to the worlds end without dissolution or destruction: I
say therefore unto you, that either our Catholic Church is the true Church of
Christ, or else that Christ has no Church at al. For besides our Church there is
none that has bensene to continue in any form of religion ever sensth'
Apostles time hitherto. As in example, before Luther brake out from his
cloister and Rule, there was not in all the world anyone cu^pany, of Luther a^s,
Zui^gli a^s Caluinists, or any other sect, that braggeth at this day of the
light and knouledge of the gospel. Well there might be in corners some faithles
me^ and women, that in heart were heretical (like as at this present if hearts
were seen, many should be found eue^ in England it self, to dout of
th'i^mortality of the soul, and the Incarnation of Christ, etc) but there was
no open congregation of the^, nor approved form of ministratio^ among the^, nor
any face or show of a Church. For yourselues do say, that Martin Luther, and
Hulderik Zui^glius were the first that came to the knowledge and preaching of
the Gospel, so that if they were first. it follows that before they came, there
was no congregation of protestants in all the world, or if it were, it was not
visible, or if it were visible, it had no true preachers, or if it had true
preachers, Luther, and Zuinglus need not to be praised of you, for most
excellent me^ eue^ sent of God to give light to the world, because there were
in the co^gregatio^s of the sincere in the Lord, as illumined preachers of the
word, as they. But where as the truth is, as you say, that Luther, and Zui^glius
were the first that came to the knoulege and prechi^g of the Gospel (which is
none in deed) and where as it remains to this day, not only in the books that
are written, but in the memories of me^ that knew those days, that before
Luther and Zui^glius made a tumult in Religion, there was not in all Christe^do^
any other profession of faith, tha^ was seen in our Church which we know to be
Catholic: it follows that your church ca^ not possibly be the Church of
Christ, the co^tinua^ce of which your church ca^ so little be perceived, that
yourselues know, it began to com forth in Friar Luther and Sir Zui^glius time.

In which Church there was so little order, that ye can name neither
Superintende^t, nor minister, nor preacher, nor bro^her of it that lived before
the most excellent me^ Luther and Zuinglius: and which Church was so
invisible, that ye never saw so much as any form of communion table pulpit,
vestiment, or other thing used in it.

Yet, we see this by experience, that when a cumpany of heretics does mete
together, they will not be long without their preacher (every one is so
ready to be preacher) and they can not be without some place, and they will
make hard shifte but they will have a good place: which is the cause, that so
many requests have been made to Governors of certain Countries, and so many
Religious houses and Churches have been hewed and squared for the receiving of
the new Ghospel.

Therefore if there was any congregation extant of this your Church, before
Friar Luther lay with Nonne Katerine and begat many foul and filt hic
opinions of his own brain: and if that Church was the true Apostolik Church,
and had so continued from the beginning: the^ had they places to resort unto,
and they used such order, as they had received of their Forefathers, and you
are hable to name the place and tell us their Order.

But we can he are of no such thing: ergo there was no Church of yours at all
as then. Add then now unto this, that Luthers Church began with Luther, and so
forth every Church sens Luther has begone with the Diuiser of it: And consider,
that the true Church of Christ can have no such discontinuance or
interruption, as that it should be said after many hundred years coming in
between, in which one form of Religion was used: now is Luther or Zuinglius
sent of God to geaue light unto the world: Gather, I say these things
together, and ye shall perceive, that either Christ had no church hundred of
years together, and that yet he has none: or else that our Catholic Church is
the one and only church of Christ. For alother Churches have either
disco^tinued, either they have not been sensibly perceived, either they have been within memory erected, and so they lack Succession, visiblenes,
Antiquity.

Of which three points, the Church that Luther and Zuinglius went unto, when
they departed from the Catholics, had not one. But afterward when they
became them selves builders of A new Church, and that upon theyrown heads and
Authority (for they acknowledged no creature then living for their superior
in that matter) the^ in deed, it was not long but they got one of the forsaied
three points. For they kept such a sore stir against all Christendom, that
it was most evident, that they were a visible Congregation. But as for
succession, and antiquity, they can never get it, because they can never prove
it: for why, they never had it. Yet for Antiquity they will strive, and crake
(as the Authors of the Apology do) that they do come as near as they
possiblye can, to the Church of the Apostles and of the old Fathers. But in the
point of Succession, they can not tell, what to answer for them selves.

For how, Let the heretics show their succession.
think they is it possible, that the Church of Christ should be without the
lauful succession of the Apostles? Could his wisdom not for see it, that for as
much as he minded continually to call in gheasts unto his feast: therefore it
was necessary to provide servants, one after another, for that purpose? Would
his chartie suffer it, that together with the Apostles deaths his compassion
upon the poor souls of the world, should die, and that there should not be for
every age unto the worlds end, like officers (for their authority) as the
Apostles were, to dispe^se his graces and mercies? Could not his power perform
it, that come who would, none should be hable to stay the succession of his
Lieutenants and Vicars?

What then can the heretic now say, why he has not a succession? A thing so
necessary for the wisdom of God to provide, and so natural for his Charity,
to geaue, and so proper, for his almightines to maintain. Verily were it not,
that he is almighty, it is impossible by natural power and reason, that the
Bishop of Rome, whom heretics have always hated, at whom the greatest
Bishopes in the East Church have envied, with who^ Lords and Ladies of the
world have been so much offended, whom the Barbarous have so often assaulted,
whom the Christians at home have so trobled: that he yet, should continue
still, and always have a successor, it passes al cu^passe of man's wisdom and
provision, but that he that made him his Vicar in earth, is God almighty in
^eauen and earth.

In some other things the heretics may so contend with the Catholics, that
it will be hard for the indifferent man certainly to know whom he may
follow. They will allege the same letter of the Scriptures as the Catholics
do, they will use the same councils, and fathers, They will challenge
Antiquity, and say that they have descended from the Apostles (like as Parking
Warbecke said he came of king Edward the fourths blood, and what so easy as
to say a word, if one will be desperate, and die rather in field than vnsaie
it) but when they are brought to the matter of succession, in which they lack
the very bare names, and much more the Acts and Monumentes of such as they
should show to have descended lineally and orderly from the Apostles, down
unto them: then lo they are at a stay, and have not one wise word left to
them, by which they might answer a question so principal and so reasonable.

And yet they crake still that they are come to the Church of the Apostles, and
of the old Catholic Bishops and Fathers, which Church (say they with
exceeding blindness or impudency) we know has hitherunto ben sound and perfect,
Con. 322.
and (as Tertullian terms it) a pure Virgin spotted as yet with no
Idolatry, nor with any foul or shameful fault. Note (Gentle Reader) that
they speak of their knowledge, and except their knowledge be so divine and
ineffable, that neither we can conceive it, nor they well utter it: desire the^
to be so good, as to make us also know it.

For if they know the Apostolic Church, to be hythervnto sound, perfect,
and pure: let them tell us where it was in the year of our Lord 1500. or,
1400. or, 1300. The Church of Rome is known, to have stood in those years:
but all the sort of them hold it for A Principle, that many errors and
faults were found then in it. Ergo if (by their saieing) that Church had
errors: what other Church was there, in those days which they know to have
been sound, perfect, and pure? They can reken none at all. For all these Weast
parts of Christendom followed the Church of Rome: and they themselves
confess, that the Greek Church does err. Ergo, if the Church of Rome was
not sound, and perfect, in those foresaied years, and if the Greek Church
be notorious for the errors of it: how do these Fellows know, that the
Apostolic Church has hitherunto been sound and perfect?

For what signifies hitherunto, but even unto our time? And if the Apostolic
Church has been found and perfect even unto our time: there was such a Church
undoubtedly in the years of our Lord 1500. 1400. and 1300. and that Church
was not (as they hold) the Church of Rome: Ergo some other. But there was no
other that they know to have been sound, perfect, and pure: Ergo they speak
more then they know, and join themselves close to the Apostolic Church
without any succession from the Apostles, and crake of a pure and perfect
building without any foundation. Such is their miserable and blind braggyng.

How much more truly should ye conclude, that for as much as the Apostolic
Church not only has been hitherto sound and pure in doctrine, but must also
continue sound and pure unto the world end: and for as much as no Church has
continued so, but only the church of Rome, therefore he that makes account of
everlasting life, can not possibly attain unto it, except he come to that
Church, in which only the succession continues, by which it is easy to
ascend up even to the chief of the Apostles. For to S. Peter our Savior
says: Math. 1^.
Thou art ^eter or a Rock, and upon this Rock I will build ^y church, and the
gates of hell shall not ^reuail against it. ^uc. 2^^
Again for thee ^eter I have prayed, that thy faith should not ^aile and thou
being once turned confirm thy brethren. Again, to S. Peter he commits his
whole flock, saying, Joan, 21.
feed my lambs feed my sheep. To S. Peter then as the singularly chosen the
promises are made, and the privileges are by prayer obtained, and the charge by
express word is committed.

Now, for confirmation of these words, consider the effects that have
followed, what heresy was ever maintained by the Sea of Rome? What question was
there ever in the Church of Christ, and not referred to that See, and
determined or pacified by it? What See has continued in all tempests, but
only the Sea of Rome? Who can show their succession from the Apostles, but
only the Bishopes of Rome? What See is preferred in the writings of holy
Fathers, but the Sea of Rome only? That is the Chair, unto which
perfidiousnes can have no access, (...)
That is the chair of unity, in which God has put the doctrine of verity,
(...)
That is the Chair, in which evil men are constrained to speak good things,
that the faith of the Christians may be out of doubt with them, whiles it shall
depend upon the infallible promises of God, and not upon the deceiptful
conjectures of men.

This Church therefore being the Church which we call Catholic, in which the
chief Master of the work laid S. Peter as the first stone next to himself,
and in which there is a continual rue of Bishops one upon an other to the
marvelous strengthening and beautifieng of the whole building, against which
Church it is impossible, that any wind or weather should so prevail, as it
might ouerturne it (for it is builded upon a sure Rock) in which Church also
there is the presence of the Holyghost sent of our Savior to teach it all
truth, and to tarry with it for ever: these things being most evident and
consequent, what a blasphe^ouse lie is it, to say, that Christ has told long
before, that this Church should err? For what other thing is that to say, but
to blaspheme either the wisedo^ of God, as though he had not erected a church
that should not err: or his power, as though he could not bring it to pass:
or his Charity, as though he would not: or his verity, as though he had not
said, poynting to S. Peter, Math. 1^.
upon this Rock I will build my Churc^e, and again, I have prayed for thee
Peter, Luc. 22.
that thy Faith might not fail?

But for this time this is enough, to note only the blasphemy: he that will see
is more largely betrayed and convinced, let him read Doctor Saunders book
lately set forth of the Rock of the Church.

The 12. Of the Contradictions.
Martin Luther and Hulderycke Zuinglius, Apolog. ^74. a
being most excellent men, even sent of God, to give light to the world,
first came unto the knowledge of the Gospel.

ERgo before their time, Confut.
there was a general darkness in the world.

I wysse it is not so hard a matter to find out Gods Church: Apolog..24.
for the Church of God is set upon an hill and glistering place.

Ergo Luther and Zuinglius could not be the first that should see the Church,
Confut.
except either Christ had no Church at all in the world when Luther was borne,
or except a City set upon an hill (and for that purpose undoubtedly set, that
it might be seen) should not yet be seen, before Luther came in with his
lanthorn.

We say we have no meede at all, Apolog. 125.
by our own works and deeds.

Ergo it booteth not to labor, Confut.
except it be for nothing.

God has plucked us out from the power of darkness, Apolog. 225.
to serve the living God, to cut away all the remanents of sin, and to work
out Salvation in fear and trembling.

Ergo that is not without some meede and reward, Confut.
by which we work our salvation.

Our Adversaries must be heaued from their mother, Apolog. 194.
that is, from this vain color and shadow of the Church.

Ergo ye should utterly d^spise the Church, Confut.
especially as it is now, if your adversaries mother be of no substance, but a
vain color only.

To say truly, Apolog. 192.
we do not despise the Chu^che of these men, how so ever it be ordered by them
now adays.

^rgo the Catholics Church is no vain color of a Church, Confut.
seeing that your selves dare not despise it.

(...) popes had never hitherto leisure to (...) and earnes^^^e of those
matters. Apolog 19.
(...), some other cares do let them and ^iuers ways pull them.

Item, ^61.
they count these things to be but common and trifling studies, and nothing to
appertain to the Popes worthiness.

Ergo being so careless, Confut.
they would never have perceived the case of their Religion, nor procured men
to defend it.

There have been wylily procured by y^ Bishop of Rome, Apolog.
certain persons of eloquence enough, and not unlearned neither, which should
put their help to this cause now almost despaired of.

Item. In deed they perceived, that their own cause did every where go to
wrack.

Ergo it appears, Confut.
that the Popes have had care of the cause of Religion.

In this point (that is, lifting up the Sacrament) consists now all their
Religion. Apolog 250.


Ergo al is not in salt, Confut.
water etc.

In these things (they mean salt, water, Apolog. 255.
Oil, spittle, Palm) they have set all their Religion.

Ergo all is not in lifting up the Sacrament. Confut.


What fault have they once acknowledged and confessed? Apolog. 209.


Why burden ye then us with not amending manifest and often confessed faults?
Confut.


Of so many, Apolog 291.
so manifest, so often confessed by them, and so evident errors, what one have
they amended?

Why ask you then, Confut.
what fault we have once confessed?

For so much as we were most ascertened of God his will, Apolog. 327.
and comp^ed it a wicked thing, to be careful and ouercu^bred about y^
judgments of mortal men.

Therefore ye should have never called a Synod of mortal men. Confut.
Yet it follows.

Therefore we thought good to remedy our Churches by a prouincial Sinod.
Apolog.


But what neded a remedy by a Synod, Confut.
if mortal men's judgments are not to be cared for?

Our cause against the will of Emperoures from the beginning, Apolog..15.
against the wills of so many Kings, in spite of the Popes, and almost maugre
the head of al men has taken encreace etc.

You never need then, Confu..
to ask leave that your Gospel may proceed, if it be so victorious and
trium^hant, that maugre the head of al men almost, it take increase.

Let them give the Gospel free passage, Apolog 133.
let the truth of Ihesu Christ give his clear light, and stretche forth his
bright beams into all parts. Confut.


Ergo your procedinges are not so current and forceable, but that ye are feign
to ask leave, that no man stop you of your passage.

We might easily be brought to atonement touching all th^se matters, Apolo. 348.
were it not that ambition, gluttony and excess did let it. Hence comes
their whining, their heart is on their halfpeny.

How say ye then to the ignorance, Confut.
error, Superstition, and Idolatry, which ye lay to our charge, should there
be no odds between you and us for them? And is this only the matter that
causes dissension, that you contemn glory, and P^^^sts desire it: you live
temperatly, and Papists are gloutenous: you keep a measure in all things, and
Papists exceed? O where is your Charity, to bea^e with your even Christians
infirmity? Or where is your wisdom, to forsake the unity of a Religion for
the diversity of manners and conditions?

For our parts, Apolog. 19^.
if we could have judged ignorance, error, superstition, Idolatry, men's
inventions, and the same commonly disagreing with the holy Scriptures, either
pleased God, or to be sufficient for the obtaining of everlasting salvation etc
we grant there had been no cause at all, why we shoud have left these men's
company.

Say ye so indeed? Put the case then that in the Catholics ye might find the
faults of imbition and glotonie? I know the place where ye say, that such
causes did let your at one me^^ with the^ Whether your heart the^ also be not
upon your halfpeny? Peradventure it is. But without per adventure, either your
mind is not upon that which ye speak, either ye care not how ye agree with
yourselues when ye speak.

The 13. and last Chapter, Of the false Interpretations of the Latin Apology
of the English Church.
Apology. Confutation. All Bishops be of like Pre-eminence. 53. Correct, and
read. Be of like merit. Non de^init esse substa^tia panis, vel natura vini,
the substance of the bread or nature of y^ wine cease not so to be. 98. It is
not so in the Latin, And therefore leave out this So. Mystica symbola mane^t
in priori sua substa^tia, figura and specie. The my^^icall Signs remain in
their former substance, form and kind. 100. In their former substance, figure
and shape. Pauperes de Lug duno. The Friars of Ly^ns. 206. The poor brethren
rather, or Heretics of Lions. Aduocaba^tur ad Ecclesiasticaru^ causaru^
cognitionem. They were called and made acquainted with ecclesiastical matters.
279. They were called to the hearing and decreeing of Ecclesiastical matters.
Petrus a Soto. Petrus Asotus. 287. Peter of Soto. Cu^ vocatus esset ab
Imperatore ad Conciliu^ C^sarie^se. when he was called by the Emperor to his
Council at Cesarea. 297. To the Council of Cesarea. Videmus pios Principes
procuratione^ Ecclesiarum ab officio suo nun^ putasse aliena^. We see that good
Princes ever took the Administration of Ecclesiastical matters to perteine to
their duty. 304. The proctorship, or procuration, or providing for Churches.

NOW therefore to conclude, whether the Authors of the Apology in the Church
in England, can discharge themselves of so evident faults as they are burdened
withal by D. Harding, it may sone be t^ied by this brief show and
Recapitulation which I have made of their faults. If they clear themselves,
then shall we see wonders. If they fail in their defense, God geaue men the
grace to build upon surer ground, than such men's Authorities. So may they
return again unto the Church, from which they have departed very hastily, and
so may they have forgiveness of all their faulties, in the Church, that
hereafter they may live everlastingly.

Amen.

