THE FOUR SVMMONS OF THE SHVLAMITE.

A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross upon Rogation Sunday, the 5. of May. 1605.

By JOHN RAWLINSON, Bachelor of Divinity, and fellow of Saint John's College
in Oxford.

The morning comes, and also the night. Jf ye will seek, seek: return,
and come.

Isai. 21.12. Printed at Oxford by Joseph Barnes, and are to be sold in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the Crown, by Simon Waterson, 1606.

TO THE READER.
IT was my purpose (Gentle Reader) that these my sorry labors should rather
have slept in silence, and ben buried in the Churchyard where first they were
published, then by a second publicatio^ (more public) have stood to the mercy
of many merciless Censors.

Sure J am, it had been my safer and surer way, to have practiced the policy of
Antony in Tully, Cicer. orat. pro Cluen^.
who would never make his pen publike-Notarie to his tongue, that if ought had
at any time fallen from him superfluous or impertinent, he might safely deny
that to have been spoken, which written he could not so soundly warrant:

Especially, considering the condition of these times: wherein VVriters, and
Readers are both too-blame. For as there is more than Gods plenty of writers,
such as are at David's Dico ego opera mea Regi: Psalm. 45.1.
before they can say with David, Eructavit cor meum verbum bonum: More
careful to provide a worthy Patron for their work, than a learned work
worthy the Patronage: and so combring the Press with froathy and worthles
Pamphlets, that had it voice, it would hideously roar and cry, like a man now
almost presst to death: More weight; for the love of god, more weight: more
weight in your matter, but less of your paper. So is there a marveilous
paucity of Readers, (such as are well and charitably affected;) insomuch that
fevve there are of the more ingenuous sort, Qui malint eloquendo culpam
deprecari, Macrob. Sa^. l. 1.
quam tacendo culpa vacare: who had rather by divulging their endevors crave a
courteous pardon; than by suppressing them be out of gunshot of cavil and
exception; the very quintessence of many men's learning being nothing but a
carping at other men's labors; and yet some of those many such, as I know had
rather preach 20. Sermons, than print one, least their filching and purloining
should be tracked and detected.

But the Reasons that have wrought me, thus to venture upon the sharp of this
ages censure, are chiefly two;

One, The incessant importunity of friends, to whom J may say as Paulinus does
to his upon like occasion: Paul. epist. 9 ad Sulpit. Sever.
Sibi imputet famem, qui pauperis amici forem pulsat, and promptuariu^ inane
scrutatur. Let him thank himself, if he be sent away hungry, who knocks as
the door of his poor friend, and rifles his empty cupbord for victuals.

Another, The instant necessity of these days (these last, and evil days)
the sores whereof run and cease not, because the sins thereof cry, and stent
not; that by a deep and diligent consideration of the many saving lessons
herein contained, the men of this generation may unfeignedly and effectually
turn from their wicked ways, and so turn away from them, and from this
whole Land the angry viols of Gods dreadful vengeance, the dregs whereof else
they are likely to suck up.

These (with other the like) reasons, have so much the rather prevailed with me,
because I am for surety give^ to understand, that there pass abroad for
current, some maimed and disme^bred copies, (such as were cursorily taken from
my mouth) which J know not how far forth they may turn to my prejudice: And
have caused me to republish this Sermon, Joan. 11.44
like a Lazarus rediuinus, newly risen out of the grave of forgetfulness, bound
about not with napkins, but with paper-sheets; to preach not Viua v^ce, with
any liuelyhood of voice as before (which yet is the chief grace and vernish of
a Sermon) but with a dead and black letter: A killing letter to those that will
not turn, but a quickening letter to the penitent Convert; That what then was
sounded forth in the ears of a Great and Honorable assembly (the very
confluence of the whole Land) may now subject it self likewise to the eyes,
as well of the then absent, as of those that were present: Aug. tract. de
Epicur. (...) Stoic. ca. 2.
Vt nescientes instruantur, scientes co^monea^tur: illi cognoscant, illi
recognosca^t: that the ignorant may be instructed, the learned admonished, that
the one may learn what his duty is, the other recognize what he has learned:

That what then was confined with in the space of two hours, may now be Omnium
horarum: A sermon for every hour:

Lastly, That what the^, (by the blessing of God) was thought fruitful to
many, may now (by the same blessing) become profitable to all. It shall then be
thy part (Christian Reader) (such as it is) to take it in good part, naked, and
(J think) Verbatim as it was uttered: as imparted unto thee to no worse end,
than to make thee partaker of that blessed aspect, which is promised (and
should also have been handled) in the second general part of my Text, had not
the time intercepted my discourse.

Now if any shall ask (as in such a world of Busybodies, many of liklyhood
will) what the reason might be, that albeit I serve a Right-worthily Great and
eminent Father of the Church, the Lord Bishop of London, (sole prop and pillar
of my hopes and fortunes) to whom as (in part) J owe to the very prime
beginnings of that small preferment which J have (which since he has also
seconded by many gracious encouragments:) so J wholly vow (...), the very utmost
mite of my poor service: Yet J send forth this Sermon into the world, as our
Savior did his disciples, Mat. 10.10.
sine baculo et pera: without either the staff of protection, or the scrip of
dedication wherewith to beg patronage; My answer is ready, that as Minimum
maximi maius est maximo minimi. The least of that which is greatest is more
than the greatest of the least: so the least of his favors is more then the
greatest of my deserts: and to present his Greatness with so small a present,
were but assem Elephanto dare: as J may say, Macrob. Sat. l. 2. c. 4.
to give a dodkin to a Monarch.

I have therefore chosen rather to expose it as a poor patronlesse Orphan, that
so it may happily meet with many Patrons. Vide. Page 56.
J am sure one part of it has already met with some.

Or if it prove so unfortunate, to have none to patronize it, yet my trust is
that God (the father of Orphans) will accept it, Psalm. 68.5.
To whose blessed protection J commit both it and thee: as my self and al my
studies to thy godly and daily prayers: reciprocally prayeng unto God, for
thee, and thy souls good.

Thine in the Lord, JOHN RAWLINSON.
From St. John's Coll. in Oxon. Ian. 10.
THE FOUR SVMMONS OF THE SHVLAMITE.
THE TEXT.
Return, return o Shulamite: return, return that we may behold thee.

Cant. 6. ver. 13.
THis golden book of Ca^ticles (Right Honorable, Right worshipful, and right
dearly beloved in the Mirror of love Christ Jesus) endited by the wisest
Solomon, and for the excellency of it above other Songs, by some entitled
Canticum Canticorum, A song of songs: by others Cantica Canticoru^, The songs
of songs: Hugo Cardi. pref. in Can^
because (as Hugo Cardinalis yields the reason) and vnum est, and multa; it is
both one, and many; One, if we regard the unity of the dity^ the purport and
tenor whereof is Love which is the very bond of unity: and ye^ many, if we
regard the variety of the Singers, which are four: (the Bridegroom, and his
Bride: the Friends of the Bridegroom, and the Companions of the Bride) is not
carnally, but spiritually; no^ literally, but mystically; not properly but
figuratively to be understood.

For it is not as some phanaticall spirits, (deriders and despighters of the
spirit of grace) have no less calumniously than blasphemously termed it, A
lascivious Ballad, or wanton Sonnet, wherewith Solomon would court, and currie
favor with his Concubine: But it is (as Nicolaus de Lyra calls it)
Epithalamicu^ Carmen, Nicolaus de Lyra in Ca^t.
A spiritual Mariage-song: wherein is most graphically painted out unto us,
that sound, perfect, and unfeigned Love, wherewith our Savior Christ (a Greater
and wiser than Solomon) does dialogue-wise, and by intercourse of speech, woo
his wandering spouse, the faithful soul: not only calling her before she come
unto him, but eft soones recalling her, when she is parted from him.

Yet no where, either in this, or in any other book of Scripture, does he
more significantly and emphatically utter his strong and vehement affection
toward her, than in the words of my Text:

Return, return, O Shulamite: return, return, that we may behold thee.
She was gone a nutting into the garden of nuts, ver. 10. and to see the
fruits of the valley, to see if the vine budded, and if the pome-granats
flourished: that is, she was wholly set upon her pleasure, and minded nothing
but transitory delights.

Lest therefore by proceeding in the pursuit of such vanities, she might hap to
loose her self in the garden of nuts, as Adam lost himself in the garden of
apples: our Savior, Gen 3.17.
even in an ecstasy of love, here follows and as it were holla's after her,
once and again, and twice again:

Return, return, O Shulamite: return, return, that we may behold^ thee:
That so, in fine, if not his love, yet his importunity might reduce her from
her garden to his paradise: from her sweets which were tra^sient to his bliss
which is permanent: from the jaws of hell to the ioies of heaven: from the
Onyons of Egypt to the Manna of the wilderness: from the captivity of Babylon
to the liberty of Sion: from the corruption of the flesh to the purity of the
spirit: from the by way of error to the highway of truth: and from the
blindness of ignorance to the brightness of knowledge.

Here then by the Shulamite is tropically meant, the soul of every faithful
man, who is lapsed and fallen into any kind of infirmity: or (which in effect
is all one) The Church of Christ, the members whereof (by sin) have made a
revolt from God.

By the reduplication, or often repetition of this one word: Return; she is
summoned to that vnum necessarium, that only necessary duty of a Christian
repentance: which if she perform as seriously, as it is seriously enioined
her, it will present her pure and blameless, without spot or wrinckle, blot or
blemish in the sight of her husband.

By Beholding, is signified both Gods Approbation and notice of her, who as he
beholds the proud a far of, Psalm: 138: so has he respect unto the lowly: As
also her Reprobation of herself, who as by turning her back to Christ, she
lost the view of him (that glass which reflected her to herself) so by
returning back again unto him, she is brought to a due and diligent
consideration as well of what she was before she played the fugitive, as of her
present condition being now become a Convert.

So that the church of Christ, which Cant. 4.12. is called Hortus conclusus,
Cant. 4.12.
An enclosed garden, may fitly be rese^bled to that ancient paradise, wherein
our first parents first planted by God were after supplanted by the serpent.
Genesis 2.^^.


For as it was watered with four rivers (Pishon Gihon, Hiddekel, and Perah)
which refreshed all the trees thereof, and caused them to fructify, among which
was the tree of the knowledge of good and evil: so the Church is here watered
with the sweetest voice of her spouse Christ Jesus, whose voice is Tanquam vox
aquarum multarum as the voice of many waters, Apoc. 1.15.
Apoc. 1. even as the voice of 4. Rivers (4. Rivers of repentant tears) here
shadowed by a fourfold return: which besides other fruits will bring forth
in her the fruit of the knowledge of good and evil: whereof no sooner shall she
taste, but her eyes will by and by be opened, and she shall behold her self: Yea
her friends, (the blessed company of Angels) will the^ behold her, and beholding
her triumph in her conversio^. Yea the whole trinity will then behold her as
the work of their own hands, and therefore Christ her spouse must needs behold
her, as the lovely wife of his own bosom.

Return, return o Shulamite, return, return that we may behold thee. The
words shed themselves into two parts.

The one, An admonition, or Inuitatio^.

The other, A Reason, or Instigation.

The Admonition has in it 3 things worthy our observation.

1 The Matter, or tenor of the Admonition; Return. 2 The Form, or manner of
the Admonition; A double-double iteration of it. Return, return, return,
return. 3 The Party admonished; the Shulamite.
The Reason, though at a blush it seem to be but one, yet indeed Inclusiue, by
way of implication it is 3-fold, according to the 3-fold sense which it
bears, importing a 3-fold benefit.

1 That we may behold thee: that is,

That my father, my self, and the holy Ghost (all three persons of the
Godhead) may cast a favorable aspect on thee.

2 That we may behold thee: that is,

That my self, with the rest of thy friends and wel-willers (even the glorious
society of Angels) may respect thee.

3 That we may behold thee: that is,

That both J thy redeemer may look upon thee with a fatherly and compassionate
eye of mercy: and that thou may also look into thy self with a sincere and
single eye of simplicity.

These are the lists and landmarks, wherewith at this time J must bound the
procession of my discourse:

First then to begin with the Admonition, and therein first with the Matter it
self, Return:

Hebritians well tell you, that the Original word which the Vulgar Latin here
renders Reuertere, Return; is also rendered Convertere, Be thou converted. And
so reads both St. Ambrose lib. 3. de Virginibus: Ambr. lib. 3 de Virgeni^
Hiero. Epi^^ ad Algas.
and St. Hierom in his Epistle ad Algasiam.

And this reading being Passive, does (me thinks) better discypher unto us
the ground of our repentance, tha^ does the former, which is Active. Nos enim
non tam agimus, quam a Deo agimur, says Zanchius: Zanchius.
For we are not so properly said to do good, as to be compelled to do it, by
the good spirit of God. And the Apostle tells us, Romans 9.16.
Romans 9. That it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in
God that shows mercy: Non quia velle, and currere no^ de. bemus (says St.
Austin) sed quia ipse in nobis and velle operatur, Austin.
and currere: Not that we are exempted from willing, and running, but because
it is God that works in us both to will, and to run. For we can no more run up
the hill of God which is mount Sion (the mount of bliss) unless we be set on
running by the finger of Gods spirit, than a stone of it self can run down a
hill, without some impulsive power to set it on running.

True it is, that Christianity is not a licentious, or a Libertine-like
security: but a warring and agonizing trade of life, a pressing toward the
mark, a striving to enter in at the narrow gate, a day-labor for a penny, and
a violent surprising of the kingdom of heaven: and that Christians spiritu Dei
agunt, what good they do, they do by the spirit of God: But withal it is as
true, that as many as are the sons of God, spiritu Dei aguntur, Rom 8.14.
Romans 8. are led by the spirit of God: and it is the bountifulnes of that
spirit which leads us to repentance, Romans 2. Romans 2.4.


That which David says of man as touching his natural life, Psalm. 78.40.
Psalm. 78. that he is spiritus vadens, and non rediens, A spirit that passes
away, and comes not again, is no less true as touching his spiritual life.
He is spiritus vadens e^ non rediens: A spirit that passes awai^ and comes
not again. He passes away from God of himself, but of him self he cannot
return again.

When Moses cast the rod out of his hand Exodus 4. it was turned into a serpent:
Exodus 4.3
but no sooner did he put his hand to the tail of the serpent, but it by and
by turned again into a rod: So when God as it were casts us of for our sins,
we are turned into serpents, even a generation of vipers, Mat. 3.7.
Matt. 3. spawnes of that old Serpent the Devil: but when once it pleases God
to reach forth the hand of his grace unto us, then are we turned again into a
rod, and may say with David psalm: 74. Psalm. 74.3.
Redemisti virgam haereditatis tuae. Thou have redeemd the rod, or (as our
English has it) the tribe of thine inheritance.

Let not us then (my dear and Christian brethren) who of our selves are not
able so much as to think a good thought think so well of our selves, that we are
able (as of our selves) to return to God, but in a true sense and feeling of
our own insufficiency, let us pray with the prophet Jeremy Lament. 5. ^^m.
5.21.
Convert nos domine ad te, et co^uertemur. Turn thou us unto thee, o Lord,
and we shall be turned.

This briefly by occasion of the Passive reading of this word Return:
Convertere, Be thou converted.

Now the Circumstances to be considered in our Return are 5. which, because J
have many things to say unto you, J will rather touch, or taste, than handle.

1 The first, is Terminus a quo. whence. 2 Terminus ad quem wither, or to
whom. 3 Tempus in guo: when. 4 Modus quo. How. 5 Medium per good, which way.
whence, whether, when, How, and which way, these be the 5 circumstances to be
considered in our return.

For the first: If you ask me, whence you must return; J answer, from the
crooked and wicked waves of the world from the miry, and dirty ways of the
flesh: from the dangerous, and thieuish ways of the Devil.

In Genes: 12. the Lord gives this commandment unto Abraham; Genesis 12.1.
Get thee out of thine own country, and from thy kindred, and from thy fathers
house: So must all that will be the Sons of Abraham, get them out of their own
country, that is the world, and their kindred, that is the flesh: and their
fathers house, that is the house of the Devil.

When the Lord inuites them to return unto him, they must not excuse
themselves as they did Luc: 14. Luke 14.18.
J have bought a farm, and J must needs go see it: the farm is the world.
Or J have married a wife, and cannot come: the wife is the flesh: or J have
bought five yoke of Oxen and J must go prove the^: the five yoke of Oxen is
the Devil, who when he was asked his name, called himself Legion, or a
multitude. Luke 8. Luke 8.30.


Secondly, If you ask me whither, or to whom you must return: J answer, Not
with the Sow to her wallow, not with the dog to his vomit, ^. Pet. 2.22.
2. Pet. 2. that is, not to those sins, from which ye have once ben pur^ed
by repentance, and which ye have vomited out by confession: but to God alone,
who (as St. Austin speaks) Revocat errantes, Aug. medit. ^a. 2.
invitat repugnantes, expectat torpentes, amplexatur redeuntes; Recalleth them
that wander, inviteth them that resist, expects them that linger, and
embraces them that return.

O Jsrael, if thou return, return unto me says the Lord, Ierem 4.1.
Ierem. 4. Unto me, says the Lord: Quales ad qualem? says Hugo: Hug. de S.
^ictor.
what manner of men to what manner of God? Clausi ad ostium, aegroti ad
medicum, naus ragi ad portum. Return ye that are prisoners, to me that am the
door, ye that are sick, to me that am the Physician, ye that suffer shipwrecke,
to me that am the haven. The door that gives liberty, the Physician that
gives health, and the haven that gives safety.

Thirdly, Jf you ask me, when you must return: I answer, not to morrow, or
here-after, but to day. Heb. 3. Heb. 3.15.
For behold now the accepted time, behold now the day of salvation. 2. Cor. 6.
2. Cor. 6.2.
Now is that Tempus putationis, that time of pruning, spoken of by the spouse
Cant. 2. But hereafter is Tempus amputationis, Cant. 2.12.
a time not of pruning, but of cutting down. Now must we cut of the
superfluities of our sins, with the pruning knife of repentance, else will Christ
hereafter be sure to cut us down with the axe of judgment, Mat. 3. Mat. 3.1^.
Now is Tempus tuum, thy time, the time which God has lent thee for thine
amendment: (and therefore David, Psalm. 1. Psalm. 1.3.
co^pares the righteous man to a tree which brings forth fruit In tempore suo,
in his own time:) But hereafter it is not thy time, but Gods time: Not Dies
hominis, man's day; but Dies Domini, the day of the Lord, 2 Pet. 3. 2. Pet. 3.10.


Therefore thus says the Psalmist, Psalm. 106. O give thanks unto the Lord,
Psalm. 106.1.
for he is gracious, Quoniam in saeculum misericordia eius, because his mercy
endures for ever: Hi^^^^. ibid.
Videte quid dicat; In saeculum ait (says St. Ierom) Mark what he says, He
says for an age, or for ever: that is, for ever during the time of our present
life. In inferno, autem quis confitebitur domino? But who will, nay who can give
thee thanks in the pit? Psalm. 6.5.
Psalm. 6.

Our adversaries may dream of a Purgatory-penance, yet indeed after death
there is no repentance. O then now give thanks, or now confess unto the Lord,
because he is never merciful but now; Hic misericors, illic index est; Jn this
life he is a merciful father, but in the other life he will be a terrible
judge. Damas. sermon de defunct.
And (as Damasce^ excellently speaks) (...): Its too late to come to bargain,
when the fare is once dissolved. The other life is (as we say) a day after the
fare. Jts therefore then too late to sue for mercy.

Yet strange it is to see, how as if the fare of this life, and the tabernacle
of our flesh should never be dissolved, nay as if we hoped by da^cing daliance
to get the kingdom of God, as Herod promised the daughter of Herodias, eue^
the half of his kingdom for a dance Mark. 6. we procrastinate our return to
God. Mark. 6.23. Genesis 8.7.
And like Noah's crow, Gen: 8. tyring upon the rotten carrion of some earthly
delight, we care not for retiring back to God the Arc of our strength. And
whereas we should have vocem columbina^, the voice of a dove, mourning for our
sins like good Ezechias, Esa: Esa. 38.14.
38. our voice is vox corvina, the voice of a crow, crying nothing but Cras,
cras. to morrow, and to morrow, and many good morows: Exodus 8.10.
like Pharao Exodus 8. who when Moses bad him command when he should pray for
him, answered Cras, to morrow: Not considering that as S. Austin says. Manet
foris cum voce corvinaa, Austin.
qui non habet simplicitatem columbinam, He shall stand without doors with his
crows voice, who has not in him the doves simplicity.

Fourthly, Jf you ask me how yo^ must return, J answer, Non passib^^
corporis, sed passionibus cordis: Not b^ the paces of the body, but by the
pa^sions and affections of the hatt: even T^to cord, Joel. 2.12.
with all your heart; as it is Joel. ^.

The fathers call the affections Ped^^ animae, the feet of the soul. We mu^^
therefore be sure to look well to our fee^ Eccle: 4. and to see that our
affection run all one way, Eccl. 4.17.
all of them towar^ God. For woe to the sinner that goes t^^ manner of ways:
Eccl. 2.13.
Eccle: 2. whose affe^tions run some of them to God-war^ some toward Mammon,
Mat. 6.24.
Matt: 6.

It is noted of Pilat Joan: 18. that h^ asked our Savior this question, Joan.
18.38.
Qu^ est veritas? what is the truth? But h^ had no sooner asked the question,
b^^ he presently went forth again unto the Jews without his answer.

What was this but to come hoppin^ as it were to God upon one foot, and wi^^
another to hopp back again to the D^uell? He made the question, but he staid
not for his answer. The world is now adays full of such Questionists, whose
devotion is like an Asses gallup, soon at an end. They demand with Pilat, what
is the truth? while they are turned unto God by desire of verity, but they are
gone ere their answer come, while they are turned from God by desire of vanity.

Fifthly and lastly: Jf you ask me which way you must return J answer Per
via^ paenite^tiae, by the way (the straight and narow way) of repentance: of
which it is said Esa: 30. This is the way, Esa. 30.12.
walk in it. This though it be via anfractuosa ( as S. Bernard speaks in his
declamations) a hard, Bernard. in declam.
a rough and a craggy way, yet is it not via infructuosa, an inco^modious, or a
fruitless way, but the issues thereof are eternal life.

Eor as sin is (...), an Auersion, or the way by which we turn from God: so
repentance is (...), a Conversio^, or the way, by which we return to God: So
that the way by which w^ return from God, is one, and the way by which we
return again to God, is another.

There is the same way (says Aristotel) from Thebes to Athens, Aristot.
and from Athens to Thebes: (as we would say from London to Oxford, and from
Oxford to London) yet doubtless it is not the same way from heaven to hell,
and from hell to heaven. But as the man of God, 1. King. 13.9
1 King. 13. was charged not to return back by the way that he cam^ to Bethel:
and the wisemen that came to see Christ, Mat. 2.12.
Matt: 2. returned into their country another way than they came; So we that
departed from God by the highway of pride, must return to him again by the
lower way of humility: we that lost him by the way of sin, must recover
him again by the way of repentance.

Hugo de S. Victore has expresst it thus; Hugo de S. Victore.
Man (says he) at first was so created, that he might have proceeded Debono
innoce^tiae per bonum obedientiae ad bonum gloriae: from the good of
innoce^cie, by the good of obedience, to the good of glory. But changing his
statio^, and forsaking his innocence, he afterward proceeded, De malo
iniquitatis per malum mortalitatis ad malum damnationis: from the evil of
iniquity, by the evil of mortality, to the evil of damnation. Then came our
blessed Savior and showed him another way, by which he must return to his own
country, which is above. Per bonum paenitentiae, and bonum iustitiae, ad bonum
gloriae; by the good of repentance, and the good of righteousness, to the good
of glory.

Now lest we should hap to mistake the way, and think our selves in, when we
are out: as they do that afflict their soul for a day, and hang down the
head like a bulrush, as the Prophet Esaias speaks, Esa. 58. Esa. 58.5.
and after return again to their old bias; like lazy house-wiues, that strew
the house with bulrushes ere they have swept out the dust: we mus^ know, Luther.
that as Luther says, Noua vita^ optima paenitentia: A new life, is the best
repentance; and the only true conversion is a new conversation. Whenc^ J take
it to be, that the Greeks have thi^ one word (...), to signify both
conversion, and conversation.

It is a true rule in Philosophy, tha^ Corruption vnius est generatio alteriu^
the corruption of one thing is the generation of another. And it is as true i^
divinity, that Mortificatio vnius est vivificatio alterius the mortifieng of
the flesh is the quickening of the spirit. The spirit cannot be quickened till
the flesh be mortified, nor the new man inherit, till the old man be dead.

One compares the heart of man to (...) two-leafed book, wherein a man reads
all his own works. In one leaf read sinners: Jn the other read the truly
penitent. The sinner reads thus: Haec ego egi, recordor, et delector: These
things have J done, and the remembrance of the^ is pleasing unto me. The
penitent reads thus: Ego egi haec, recordor, et doleo: these things have J
done, and the remembrance of them is grievous unto me. We must not then stand
poaring upon the former lease, till we be even poare-blinde with sin: but we
must turn over a new leaf, that is, we must lead a new life: Sic plangentes
commissa, Bern. flor. li. 5. cap. 1.
vt non committamus plangenda, says Bernard: so lamenting for sins committed,
that we afterward commit not sins to be lamented.

For as the ordinary Gloss observes upon Matt: 19. that a Camel could not enter
into that gate at Jerusalem, Gloss ordin. in Matt. 19.
which for the streightnes of it was called Foramen acus, The ey of a needle,
Nisi deposito onere, et flexis genibus: till he had laid down his burden, and
bowed his knees: No more can we enter into the gate of the new Jerusalem (the
kingdom of heaven) which for the streightnes of it, is compared to a Needls
eye Matt: 19. Mat. 19.24.
till we have cast of the heavy burdens of our sins, and bowed even the knees
of our hearts unto God, humbly craving pardon and remission of our sins.

This of the first thing to be observed in the Admonition, namely the Matter,
or Tenor of it, Return.

The second is the Form, or Manner of the Admonition: which is a doubling and
redoubling of it: Return, return, return return.

Wherein (as in a map) is set before us, the Clemency of God, the Contumacy of
man: the Gratiousnes of God, the Gracelesnes of man: the willingness of God, the
wilfulnes of man: God often calling man to return; man still neglecting the
call of God.

Here have we one depth calling unto another; The depth of God to the the depth
of man: The depth of wisdom to the depth of ignorance: The depth of mercy to
the depth of misery.

He that is Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus, Holy, Esa. 6.3.
holy, holy, Esa. 6. cries unto man who is but Terra, terra, terra, Earth,
earth, earth: Ierem: 22. Iere. 22.29.
And what does he cry? Return, return, return. And why return? because
otherwise (as he threatens, Ezec. 21. He will ouerturne, Ezec. 21.27
ouerturne, ouerturne, as our English translation has it: but the vulgar Latin
reads it, Iniquitatem iniquitatem, iniquitatem ponam eam. that is as much to
say, Our Iniquity shall be our overthrow.

Nay, here are four Returns to three Ouerturnes: to show, that as John outran
Peter, Joan. 20.4.
Joan. 20. so the mercy of Christ outstripps his justice.

Christ coms unto us, not to ask a Grace for a degree of us (as we speak in
our universities) but to offer us the very highest degree of his grace: and
though we deny it a first, second, and third time, yet he corns unto us again
with a Supplicat quarto: He puts up as it were a supplication, or a request to
the whole Congregation of his people, that yet at the fourth time, they would
not deny it.

Here Is precept upon precept, and line upon line; mercy upon mercy, and mercy
upon mercy: because as the prophet David says. His mercy endures for ever,
His mercy endures for ever, His mercy endures for ever. It is the sweet
burden or the 136. ^sal. 136.
Psalm; seven and twenty times repeated in that Psalm.

It is a rule of common civility among me^; Si ter pulsanti nemo respondet,
abito. Jf after thrice knocking no man open unto thee, its manners to go thy
way, and knock no more. But here behold, God stands at the door of our hearts,
and gives not three raps only, but a fourth too. So that his rule is this:

Si ter pulsanti nemo respondet, abire
Non licet, vrgendum est.
Jf after thrice knocking, a man open not unto him, yet he will not go away,
but knock again; even so long, till his head be full of deaw, and his locks
with the drops of the night, as it is in the former chapter, Cant. 5.2.
saying, Open unto me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled.

And that we may be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the breadth, and
length, and depth, and height of his love, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 3. Ephesians.
3.18.
He calls us from all the four quarters of the earth; there is the breadth of
his love: And he calls even those that are Elongati, a long way removed from him
by their sins, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 73.26.
Psalm: 73. there is the lengh of his love. And he calls us even from the gates of
hell: there is the depth of his love. And he calls us to return to himself to
heaven there is the height of his love.

But here J find two rubbs, or stumbling blocks in the way, which would first
be removed, ere J proceed any further.

The one, how it is that our Savior here calls us four times to return, when
yet we read it five times repeated Amos: 1. Thus says the Lord. Amos,
1.3.6.9.11.13.
Super tribus sceleribus, et super quatuor, non conuertam eum. For three
transgressions of Azza, and for four, J will not turn to it. The like is
there said of Tyrus, and of Edom, and of the children of Ammon.

Which place while some have misunderstood, they have not stuck erroneously to
infer, that if a man offend twice or thrice in the same kind, his repentance
may procure him for giuenes: but if he offend a fourth time also, his offense
(say they) is utterly unpardonable.

But this doubt will soon be cleared, this error soon dispelled, if the words
of the prophet be rightly construed. For there a certain number is put for an
uncertain, like as here in my text.

Here Is 4 Returns for many returns: and so there 4 transgressions, or (as
some will have it) 7 transgressions (because 3 and 4. make 7.) for many
transgressions. So that the meaning is, as it the prophet had said: If
Damascus, if Azza, and the rest of those cities, had transgressed against me by
persecuting my people, only twice, or thrice, J could happily have borne it:
but because they have eased, but have persecuted them even a fourth or a
seventh time, (that is, many times,) J will not turn them unto me for their
amendment, but J will ouerturne them to their confusion.

But if with those heretics we should understand this scripture, as if the Lord
had said: Three transgressions J will forgive, but the fourth I will not the^
should we make one scr^pture to cross and co^tradict another, since we read of
Ma^asses, that he committed both idolatry and murder, more than four times,
and yet he finally obtained remission.

How be it J deny not, but that as our Savior says Mat. 12. there is a sin
which shall neither be forgiven in this world, Mat. 12.32
nor in the world to come, that is, which shall never be forgiven, and that is
blasphemy against the holy Ghost, a sin not of infirmity, but of
maliciousnes. And this is that which St John 1. Epist. ca. 5. calls (...), 1.
Joan. 5.1^
a sin unto death: because though death be (...), the wages not of one, but of
every sin, Romans 6.23.
Romans 6. yet the sin of blasphemy against the holy Ghost, is by aspeciall
prerogative called a sin unto death, because it better deserves his wages, than
any other sin.

The second rub, or stumbling block to be removed, is this: How it is true,
that the holy man Job says, Job. 33.14.
cap. 33. Semel loquitur Deus, and secundo idipsum non repetit: God speaks
once, and repeats it not a second time, when yet here we see our Savior speaks
not once only, but repeats it a second, third, and fourth time!

For the clearing of which doubt, we are to note, Hugo de S. Victor.
that (as Hugo de S. Victore teaches) that place of Job must thus be
understood: God speaks once for the time of this life, Praecipiendo,
prohibendo, promittendo, comminando: by commanding, by forbidding, by
promising, by menacing. But in the future life (says he) Non erit tempus
docendi, sed iudicandi: It will be no time of teaching, but of judging. It is
therefore Verbu^ quadripartitu^, a speech of 4 parts, which he speaks but once.
Praecipit bonu^, prohibet malu^, promittit gloria^, comminatur paena^. He
commands good, he forbids bad, he promises glory, and he threatens
punishment. And yet this foure-parted speech is said to be but one, because
it aims but at one end which is our conversion. His precept teaches how to
partake his promise; and his prohibitio^, how to avoid his threats. But
whatsoever he shall speak in another world, apperteineth not any way to
conversion, but only to retributio^. It is either Come ye blessed, or, Goye
cursed.

Let us therefore while we have time answer this foure-folde speech of his with
a fourfold duty of ours. His precept, by our obedience in doing good: his
prohibition, by our temperance in absteining from evil: his promise, by our
love: and his threatenings, by our fear: lest that place of Job be verified of
us in another sense: according to the original Quum semelloquitur Deus fortis,
etiam bis, non cernit illud mortalis. The mighty God speaks once, yea twice,
yet man sees it not that is (as Tremellius and Iunius expound it) such is the
dullness and sluggishnes of our nature, Tremell.
that though God do frequently and fervently solicit us, yet we will not give
him the ear of obedience. He has healed Babylon, yet Babylon will not be
healed, Ierem. 51.9.
Ierem. 51. Neither will we return, though here he bid us four times return.

But why 4 times? J will not be so superstitious, to say, because the number
of four is (...), a perfect number, Arist. Met. 1.
as the Pythagoreans called it Metap. 1 Yet because J think it any thing rather
than (...), a vain babbling or idle repetition of the same words to no
purpose, (such as our adversaries use, placing a kind of religion in their set
number of Pater nosters, and other prayers) I would gladly borrow your
honorable and Christian patience, while J guess at some reasons of this
fourfold repetition, and partly also follow the conjectures of others.

It may probably be thought, that he calls us 4 times because of that fourfold
duty that we ow him: As a king, as a Priest, as a Prophet, as a God. I ^^bute,
as a king honor, as a Priest love, as a Prophet fear, as a God. Jf we return,
we pay him tribute; Jf we return, we do him honor: Jf we return, we manifest
our love: Jf we return, we testify our fear.

Or, he calls us 4 times, because it is not one, but all ages that he calls
childhood, youth, middle-age, and old age: signified under the 4 watches, Merk.
13. Mark. 13 31
All have offended, none is exempted.

Or 4 times; because he calls not to one, but to all the 4 Climats, and
quarters of the world: that so they may come unto him, from the East, and from
the West, from the North, and from the South, and sit down with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of God. Luke 13.29.
Luke 13. All which 4 quarters, as they are included in the name (the Greek
name) of (...), Aug. tract. in Joan.
(as is noted by St Austin in Joan. tract. 9.) the first letter (A) standing
for (...), the East: the second letter (d) standing for, (...), the west, the
third letter (a) standing for (...), the North: and the fourth letter (m)
standing for (...), the South: So are they likewise al of the^ concluded under
the nature (the sinful nature) of Adam, and have therefore all of them need to
return.

Or 4. times because he calls not with one but 4 voices: eue^ Quadrisona voce,
per quatuor euangelia (says Aponius: Aponius in Can^ic.
) with a voice of 4 sounds, the voice of the 4 Evangelists; al sounding a
retreit, and calling us to repentance.

Which yet is not so to be understood, as if he called us only with these 4
voices. Aust. lib. 4. confess. c. 12.
For (as St Austin notes lib. 4. Confess. c. 12. Clamat dictis, factis, morte,
vita, descensu; a scensu clamat, vt redeamus. He calls unto us by his words, by
his deeds, by his death, by his life, by his descensio^, by his ascensio^: By
these, and many other voices does he call us to return.

Yea and because he knew that one mouth would not be sufficient, he sufferd the
scornful and deriding Jews, as to make mouths at him, so likewise to make
more mouths in him, Quot vulnera, tot ora. So many wounds, so many mouths,
calling us to return.

What shall J say more? Our Savior in his commission to his disciples, Mark.
16. says Go ye into all the world, Mark 16.15
and preach the Gospel to every creature: To every creature, that is, to man,
who is, as it were. A short Epitome of all the cretures of God: having in him
the being of lifeles things: the vegetatio^ of pla^ts: the sense of beasts: and
the reason of Angels. But now he gives co^missio^ to every creature; Go every
creature, and preach the Gospel unto man. All the creatures of God are as so
many preachers, so many John Baptists, so many voices of him that cries in the
wilderness of this world: Return. Exodus 9.28.
Prepareye the way of the Lord by repentance: as Exodus: 9. thunder and hail are
by an Hebraisme called the voice of God, calling Pharao to return.

Or 4 times, because he calls us, not from one, but from the 4 Cardinal vices:
Pride, avarice, gluttony, and luxury. Pride and Avarice care not how
vnlawfullly they get and scrape together: Gluttony, and Luxury, care not how
shamefully they misuse and waste what is gotten. It was pride that locked
heaue^-gates against Lucifer. It was avarice that ope^ed hel-gates to the rich
^a^. It was gluttony that turned our first parents out of paradise. And it is
luxury or intemperance, that at this day like a deluge overflowes the whole
earth.

Or 4. times (says St Bernard) because he calls us from a 4-fold pride: Bernard.
superbia cordis, superbia oris, superbia operis, superbia habitus. Pride or
heart, pride of mouth, pride of work, and pride of habit. Pride of heart, when
a man is great in his own eyes: pride of mouth, when a man not only thinks,
but speaks magnifically and highly of himself: pride of work, when a man not
only thinks and speaks prowdly, but his pride breaks forth into action: and
pride of habit, when a man's pride sits upon his skirts, and shows it self in
the gaudines of his attire.

Or 4 times (says Hugo Cardinalis) because he calls us from 4 peremptory and
dominiering affections, Hugo Cardinal in Cant.
wherewith wear miserably wreckt and tortured here in this life: Joy, sorrow,
fear, and hope: Joie for some present good, sorrow for some present evil, hope
of some future good, fear of some imminent evil.

Or 4 times (says Catetan) as if he had said: Ca^^^an.
Revertere relinquendo caecitatem intellect us: revertere relinquendo
pravitatem affect us: revertere adhaerendo veritati: revertere intendendo
bonitati. Return by forsaking thy blindenes of understanding: Return by
forgoing thy crookedness of affection: Return by adhering to the truth:
Return by addicting thy self to goodness.

Or lastly 4 times (says Hugo de S. Vict.) as if he had said; Hugo de S.
Victore.
Reuertere a meis, quia mirabilia sunt: a tuis, quia prau^ sunt: a te, quia
omnis caro faenum ad me, quia ego summum bonum. Return from my ways, because
they are deep and unsearchable, from thy ways, because they are wicked and
intolerable: from thy self, because al flesh is grass: to me, be cause J am
thy God, thy chiefest God.

Thus our Savior Christ, who for our sakes, was content to be not only Fabri
filius, Matt: 13.55 Mare. 6.3.
a Carpenters son, Matt. 13. but Faber, a Carpenter, Mar. 6. is here (as ye
see) become a maker of Chariotts. For these are indeed the Chariotts of Israel,
or (if you will) Quadrigae salutis, the Chariotts of salvation; like that fiery
Chariott, wherein Elias was taken up into heaven, 2. Reg. 2.11.
2. Reg. 2.

O how happy a thing were it for this city, if she were as full of these
Chariotts, as she is not only of material coaches and Chariotts, but even of
other spiritual Chariotts: (such as S Bernard largely and excellently
describes, Bernard sermon. 39. in Cantic.
sermon: 39. in Cantic.) Chariotts of malice, and Chariotts of luxury, and
Chariotts of covetousness: but J will only name you their wheels, and their
horses

The Chariot of malice runs upon 4 wheels: Cruelty and Impatience; boldness,
and impudence: and it runns very swift to shed blood. The horses that draw it
are two, and those very light-footed: Earthly power, which does what it
lusts, and saecular pomp, which in its doings is applauded.

The Chariott of luxury has likewise 4. wheels. Pampering of the belly:
pronenes to venery garishnes of attire: and lazines of body. The horses that
draw it are 2. and they very slow. Prosperity, and Plenty.

The Chariott of Covetousness has likewise 4. wheels: Pusillanimity,
inhumanity, contempt of God, and forgetfulness of death: The horses that draw it
are 2. and they very iades. Ropacitas, et Tenacitas: Fast-hauing and
Fast-holding.

These and the like chariots go marching along every street of your city.
Wherefore as Jeremy wishes, Ierem. 9.1.
c. 9. that his eyes were turned into a fountain of tears: so my hearts desire
unto God for this city is, that her eyes were turned into a red sea of
tears: that as Pharao and al his chariots, were drowned in the red sea. Exodus
14.27
Exodus 14. so the spiritual Pharao, the Devil, with all these his chariots,
were drowned in the red sea of your tears. For as St Bernard says in the
place before cited) Illi in sluctibus, Bernard. ibid
isti in fletib': marini illi, amari isti. The Egyptian Pharao, and his
chariots, were drowned in the salt waves of the red sea: And so the spiritual
Pharao, and his chariots, must be drowned in the salt tears of our eyes, that
are red with weeping.

This of the second thing to be observed in the Admonition, which was the
Form, or Manner of it.

The third is the party admonished: which is the Shulamite: or (as others read
it) Sunamite: or (as others) Odollamite: All affording very good matter of
instruction.

Arboreus and Philo read it Odollamitis; Arboreus in Cantic. and Philo Carp.
Episcop.
which is expounded, Testimoniu^ in aqua: A testimony in the water. A name of
fit respondence and consonance, with the Christian soul, which being washed
and cleansed with the water of baptism, gives testimony in the water to the
faith of Christ, there confessing the trinity in unity, and unity in trinity
of divine substance.

Or secondly, she may be called A testimony in the water: because in the
waters of Marah, (even in the bitter waters of repentance) she gives
testimony of her hearty sorrow for her sins: there confessing with David, 2.
Sam. 24.17.
2. Sam. 24 Behold, I have sinned, yea I have done wickedly.

This eie-water of repentance is the only water able to quench the fire of
concupiscence in the house of the conscience. Aug. in Psa 94.


It is that holy-water-sprinkle that the Devil cannot away with. It is the
crystalline humor of the eye of faith. It is that Aqua-vitae, that must revive
the languishing Christian. It is that Aqua caelestis, which God keeps in his
flagon, lest a drop of it should be lost. It is that brine, wherewith both
flesh, and spirit must be kept from tainture, and putrefaction.

It is (as Lavater calls it, Lavat. hom. 6. in Ruth.
homil. 6. in Ruth) sanguis animae, the blood (the white blood) wherein the life
of the soul consists.

It is (as Gregory Nazanzen calls it) orat. 39. in Sanct. Lumina) (...) Greg.
Naz. orat. 39. in Sanct. Lum.
A second laver of regeneration, the only rebaptization allowed in Divinity.

Wherefore Leo (in his sermon de caen. domin.) speaking of the tears of St
Peter, Leo sermon. de can. domin.
who had grievously sinned by denying his Master with an oath: Happy (says
he) were thy tears (O thou blessed Apostle) Quae ad diluendam culpam
negationis, virtutem sacramenti habuerunt baptismi; which had the efficacy of
the Sacrament of Baptism, to wash away the sin of thy denial.

As is the water of baptism to the faithless soul, so is the water of tears
to the faithful. Peter was washed as clean from the steine of abnegation with
the water of his tears, as was Paul from the steine of persecution with the
water of baptism. The soul then of Peter was a good Odollamite: For it was,
Testimonium in aqua, A testimony in the water. His outward tears testified his
inward sorrow. His eyes were as cryars to proclaim his harts-griefe. He went
forth and wept bitterly, Mat. 26.75.
Mat. 26. till by crying he had outcried the cry of his sin.

So the soul of Mary Magdale^ was a good Odollamite: For it was Testimonium in
aqua: A testimony in the water. She was once possessed with 7 Devils, Luk 8.2.
Luke 8. Yet because she washed not her own face only, but the feet of our
Savior too with her tears, Luke 7.38.
Luke 7. as the question is asked concerning the woman that had 7 husbands,
Mat. 22.87.
Mat. 22. In the resurrection, whose shall she be of the 7? So if it be
demanded as touching her, that had 7 Devils; In the resurrection whose shall
she be of the 7? J answer, as there our Savior does concerning that other
woman. Surely, ver. 30.
none of all theirs: but she shall be, and already is, as the Angels of God in
heaven.

And so must we also be Odollamites, we must give testimony to God in the
waters. We must not think to go to heaven by land (as some of our great
landed-men do) but we must pass over: waters ere we can come thither: The
one, the Water of baptism: the other, the Water of repentant tears.

This of the first reading Odollamitis.

The second is Sunamitis. Hieronym. Bernard. Rupers. Anselm.
So reads St Ierom, St Bernard, Rupertu^, Anselmus, and diverse others,
paterning themselves by the Greek translation of the septuagint, and by the
vulgar Latin edition.

Rupertus and Anselmus expound it Captiva, which signifies a slave, or a
captive: as if our Savior had said: Return (O soul) poor soul, poorer the
very poverty it self, because the Devils captive under the yoke of sin.

For (as Hugo de S. Victore notes) Three states there are of the faithful
soul. Hugo de S. Victore.
Under the first, she is Captiva, a bondwoman: under the second, she is
Libera, a freewoman: under the third, she is Beata, a blessed Saint.

In the first, she is subject to the slavery of wickedness. In the second, she
fights under the banner of righteousness. In the third, she, has full
fruition of happiness.

As she is a bondwoma^, it is here said unto her, Return, return o Sunamite,
that of a bond woman thou may be made free. As she is a free woman, it is
said unto her Psalm: 27. viriliter age. Psalm. 27.16.
Play the virago: be stonge, and let thine heart cheer thee, and put thy trust
in the Lord, that of a free woman thou may become blessed. As she is in the
state of blessedness, it is said unto her, Psalm. 47.1.
Psalm. 47. Cantate domino in Sion. O sing unto the Lord in Sio^: O sing unto
God with the voice of melody.

In her first state, she is a servant, and fears. Jn her second state, she is
a daughter, and loves. Jn her third state, she is a spouse, and embraces.

Secondly, Hieronym. ad Nepotian
S Ierom in his epistle ad Nepotianum, expou^ds this word Sunamitis, Coccinea:
which signifies Crimsen-colourd: as if our savior had said. Return, o thou
crimse^, or scarlet-colourd sinner. Thou whose sins have transformed thee into
that color, which the whore had contracted by slaying the Saints of God, Apoc.
17.4.
Apoc: 17. Jf thou will but reuert, and turn from thy wicked ways, be thy
sins as crimsen, they shall be made white, as snow: be they red as scarlet, they
shall be as wool. Esa. 1.18.
Esa. 1.

I who once in derision, was my self put into a purple robe, J, even J will
cast thee into a new fatt, and die thee into another hew, a hew surpassing the
skill of the skilfulst diers. They indeed can change a thing into any color
save white: But I, from so deep a tincture of sin, as is crimsen or scarlet,
will transport thee into so pure a color of innocence, as is white. Thou shall
neither be so far from a ripe and perfect man in Christ, as to be but green:
nor so fraught, and ouerflowing with the gall of bitterness, as to be yelow: nor
so bloody with cruelty, as to be red: nor so deformed with any kind of impiety,
as to be black: but so snow, so lily-white, as to surmount not the curtines
only of Solomon in comelines, but his person too in roialty.

Thirdly, Lauretus in his Sylua, Lauret. in Sylod.
expou^ds this word Sunamitis, Dormiens, or Iteratio dormitionis, which
signifies A sleep, or an Iteration of sleep: as if our Savior had said,
Return (o thou sleeping and slumbring soul) thou that every foot fallest into
an heavy sleep of sin, and may therefore well be called an Iteration of sleep,
because thy whole life is nothing else, but a continual iteration of sleep
after sleep; O that yet at lengh after so many iterations of thy sleep, thou
would harken to so many iterations of my call.

For as philosophy teaches, that excess of bodily sleep, engenders three
dangerous diseases in the body. The first is Epilepsia, the falling sickness.
The second is Ephialtes, the nightmare. The third is Lethargia, the disease of
forgetfulness: So the sleep of the soul (I mean an excessive sleep in sin)
breeds three no less dangerous diseases in the soul, answerable to those
other three in the body.

THe first is Epilepsia, the falling sickness of, Pride: a disease that
causes a swimming and a giddines in the head, and so entoxicat's the brain,
that often times it maks a man fall down for dead: according to that of Solomon,
Pro. 16.18.
Prove. 16. Pride goes before destruction, and an high mind before a fall.

The second is Ephialtes, the nightmare of concupiscence: A disease which
makes a man think, that he sees an Old-woman lying hard upon him, and
pressing him down, ready to choke, and strangle him. This old-woman, is the
flesh, which if it be not subdued and mortified by abstinence, lies hard upon
the soul, and presses it down, even to the pit of hell: according to that of
Solomon, Sap. 9. Corpus quod corrumpitur, Sap. 9.15.
aggravat anima^: A corruptible body is heavy unto the soul, and the earthly
mansion keeps down the mind that is full of cares.

The third is Lethargia, the lethargy of covetousnes, which we may rightly
term the disease of forgetfulness: A disease that many times makes a man
sleep out his life, and die sleeping. For such, and so unthankful is the
nature of couetonsnes, that the more, and greater blessings she receives of
the Lord, the less she remembers them: such, and so deadly her sleep, that
whosoever is once possessed with it, seldom or never awakes, but dies sleeping:
according to that of Solomon, Eccl. 4. Eccl. 4.8.
There is one (says he) alone, and there is not a second, which has neither
son, nor brother, yet is there none end of all his travail, neither can his ey
be satisfied with riches, nither does he think, For whom do I travail, and
defraude my soul of pleasure.

Since then the sleep of sin is so dangerous a sleep, Awake thou that
sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light, as the
Apostle tells thee, Ephesians. 5. So shall thou never once be troubled, Ephesians. 5.14.
either with the Epilepsy of pride, which was the Devils sickness, or with the
nightmare of concupiscence which is the fleshes sickness, or with the lethargy
of covetousness, which is the worlds sickness.

Return, return o Sunamite. But here you will happily demand of me, sithence
this name Sunamite is Nomen patronymicu^, a patronimick nowne derived of the
City Sunam (a City in the land of promise) What Sunamite, or what woman of the
city Suna^ it was to whom my text may seem to have reference.

Two Sunamit's there were, of whom there is honorable mention made in the book
of Kings.

The one, was Abishag, fair and beautiful Damosel, which was brought to King
David, when he was stricken in years, to cherish his old and cold blood, and
to minister unto him: 1. King. 1. Carthusian, 1. King. 1.4. Carthusian. Mercer.
Mercer, and some others, think that allusion is here made to her.

The other, was that noble, devout, and well disposed Gentlewoma^, 2. King. 4.8.
2 Reg. 4. who gave so kind welcome to the Prophet Elisha, and that he might
be the more willing to come often to her, provided him a chamber, a bed, a
table, a stool, and a candlestick. The more part of interpreters think that
allusion is here made to her.

And had God then indeed so great rcgard of so small a favor conferred upon
his Prophet? Does he keep a Calendar, and a Register of her name that bestowed
it? Has he erected an everlasting trophae, and moniment thereof to all
eternity? Has he written her name as in heaven (no doubt) so in earth too,
and that in his own book, the sacred Bible? and has he also translated it
upon his Church, calling his Church Sunamite?

O come hither, and consider this, ye that are the great and wealthy ones of
this world: ye that have Promptuaria plena, eructantia ex hoc in illud, as the
Prophet speaks, Psalm. 144.13
Psalm. 144. ye that have the world at will, and your garners, and your
warehouses, and your counting-houses full-fraught with all manner of store:
upon whom the Lord of heaven has heaped earthly treasures, (...), in a
measureles measure, not that ye should be Co^di, Treasurers and hoard-masters
to lay them up, but Promi, Bursars, and Dispensers to lay them out; ye that so
love and long after the co^tinua^ce of your names, that lest they should die
together with you, ye call and christen your lands by your own names; How is
it, that loving to have your names durable, ye love not to use the means that
should make the^ durable? So far (many of you) from the mind of this noble
Sunamite, that ye count all but lost, that ye bestow upon the relief and
maintenance of Elisha: J mean, of the Prophets and Ministers of God, of
religious and learned men.

Where J cannot but condole the neuer-sufficientlie deplored estate of the
Clergy: who when they have wasted, and exhausted their days, and their
years, their strength, and their vigor, their bodies, and their spirits, their
health and their wealth, and whatsoever they either have, or themselves are, in
godly, wholesome, and religious studies, profitable both for Church and Common
wealth: yet are feign many times (as a learned writer complains) Cum egestate
and fame conflictari, Herma^. H^melman.
to make many a fray with poverty and hunger. And were it not, that God in
singular favor to his Church, has given us a gracious Prince, who is himself
(...), very learned, and therefore (...), a lover of learning in others; who
himself is truly religious, and therefore a cherisher of true religion in
others, it might justly be feared, that within a while, the state of the Church
would be as much to pitied, as is now the state of Churchmen: when men of the
best and rarest gifts, for want of due encouragement, shall be deterred from
turning their endeavors, to the propagating, and adorning of the Church of God:
And when they have served, J say not one, or two, but 3 prentiships, or
perhaps, more tha^ three, for a beautiful Rahel, they are at lengh put over to
some bleare-eyed Leah a living of some 20, or 30 pounds a year, or perhaps,
nor that neither: when Patrons of Church-liuings, who are bound in a stronger
ty of duty, tha^ other men, to be Sunamit's to Gods Elisha's, instead of
finding Elisha, a Chamber, a Bed, a Table, a Stool, and a Ca^dlestick, through
their indirect, unconscionable, and intolerable dealing (maugre all law and
statute to the contrary) do even stifle up the Chamber of Elisha's heart: Psalm.
4.4. Psalm. 7.6.
and suffer Simony to ly tumbling upon the Bed of his conscience: Psalm. 69.23.
and make the Lords table even a snare unto him: and allow him no stool, Psalm.
94.20.
but the stool of wickedness: and do not give but sell him the Candlestick of
the Church, Apoc. 2.5.
wherein they leave him only some litte snuff of the living* such as stinks in
the nostrels, both of God and men.

The veriest Corydon, and Lack-latin that ever served Cure for 20. nobles a
year, let him but have Entia, store of pelf, wherewith to demerit, and win the
Patron, and it ski^ls not how he be qualified, either with Scientia or
Conscientia, with learning, or with honesty. Gold and silver, are more precious
metals tha^ Latin.

Mean time, they either consider not, or regard not, that as

(...) the stealer and the receiver are theifes both so the selling Patron, and
buying Incumbent, are thieues both. The Patron, because he robbs the Church of
her inheritance: and the Incumbent, because he not only peepes in at the window
like a fool, Eccl. 21. but eue^ creeps in at the window like a thief, Eccl.
21.26. Joan. 10.1.
Joan. 10. And therefore he had but his right, if with the dog in the fable,
who came in by the window, he were thrown out by the door.

And as for those cruel and tyrannous Patrons, who will still have us ministers
to go with shaven crowns, (not the Crowns of our heads after the Rhomish
discipline, but the Crowns of our purses after the English cut) Let me tell
them, that the money which no less irreligiously, than sacrilegiously they get
and scrape together by the spoil and pillage of the Church, howsoever they may
convert it even In pios vsus, to good and charitable uses, as to the building
or enriching of Colleges, Schools, Hospitals, or the like (though it is not
often seen, that money so ill-gotten is so well bestowed) yet their purchase
is no better* than that which Judas made with the silver he had gotten by
betrayeng his Master, Act. 1.19.
Act. 1. wherewith though he bought a field, then commonly called the Potters
field, and that to no worse use, than to bury strangers in, thinking thereby
to have washed away the guilt of his treason: yet that bloody and lowd-voiced
sin of his, rung such a peale of vengeance in the eats of the Almighty, yea
and was so distastful to the very Jews themselves, that (God so appointing)
whereas he thought to have purchased a glorious name of immortality, his
purchase indeed was nothing else, but an ignominious name of perpetual
obloquy; that very field being to this day called Aceldama, which, by
interpretation, is the field of blood.

But ahlas, ahlas (beloved) it is not for me to hope, that J shall ever be able
as it were with one blast of a short, and weak breath, to blow down this
Magical and monstrous sin of Simonie, which has enchaunted and empoy^oned
the whole Realm: And notwithstanding that she has often ben even crucified
and nayl'd to this very Cross with the hammer of Gods word, as Jeremy
speaks, Iere. 23.29.
c. 23. yet for all that goes ietting it up and down, as fresh and frequent,
as lusty and lively in every part of this land, as if she had never ben
touched or talked of: her ha^t being of ^ron, her brow of brass, and her hands
of silver and gold.

Wherefore leaving her as desperate as J found her, J will now come a little
nearer home to this city. A city, as for wisdom another Greece, Lips. de
Co^st. b. 2. c. 21.
which Lipsius calls Sal and Solgentium: the salt and the sun of other nations;
So for plenty another Sicily, Aret. Chorog Sicil.
which Aretius calls Cell^ penuaria, the storehouse; or (it ye will) Mamma, the
teat or breast, whereou^ many other places suck no small advantage.

A city, which J know (and the College Whereof I am, must thankfully
acknowledge) is the mother of many a good Sunamite, many that are sincerely
and heartily devoted to learning and religion.

And yet (not so flatter her) the Lord has a controversy with many her rich
pinch-peny and close-fisted inhabitants: whose charity is so benumbed and
frozen, that as David says of himself in another case: Psalm 119.
Factus sum sicut vter in pruina: J am become like a bottle in the frost, Psalm.
119. so it may be truly also said of them, that they are become like a frozen
bottle. They hold al in, and let nothing run out.

They have withered hands, like the hand of Jeroboam, 1. King. 13.7
1. King. 13. and till it please the Lord in mercy to restore them, they
cannot once stretch them out to give a reward to Gods Prophet.

And as an oven, though the belly of it be full of loafes, yet the mouth of it
is still gaping til it be stopped with clay: So they albeit they have loafes their
bellies full (by loafes, J mean all temporal blessings) yet they are still
gaping after more and more gain, and never lin gaping, till their mouths be
stopped with claie.

There are others, that are frank enough in their spending, but yet Elisha's
share is least in their expenses.

Laertius in the life of Crates the Theban Philosopher, Laert. in vit. Cratet
Theb.
tells of a memorable (...) or day-booke, wherein that Philosopher had set down
the accounts of a great rich man: which accounts he there recites to have been
these.

(...), etc:
Inprimis for my Cook. ten pounds. Item for my Physician. four pence. Item
for my Flatterer. v. talents. Ite^ for my Cou^sailor. a pound of smoke. Item
for my Whore. a talent. Ite^ for my Philosopher. 3. halfe-pence.
Pardon me (dear Christians) if J be jealous over you with a godly jealousy.
J fear, there are some such rich men even in this city, whose (...) or
daybooke, if a man could come to pervse, he should find, if not the same, yet
the like accounts. It grieves them not to be at cost, with their Cooks, their
flatterers, and their whores, ten or twenty pounds thick: but Physicians,
Philosophers, and learned Divines, O its money welspared, that is not spent upon
them.

J know not, whither there be any place for persuasions in the hearts of
those, that are already so fully preoccupied with indevotio^. Notwithstanding,
either (if it may be) to reclaim them, or (if not) at leastswise to leave
them inexcusable, J hold it my duty to remember them of another, and that a
stricter account, to which when God shall summon them upon that great and
general audit-day of judgment, they will both shame and tremble to give up
such an account as this.

And secondly, of that amiable promise of our Savior, Mat. 10.41.
Mat. 10. that not so small a kindness as a cup of cold water bestowed upon a
Prophet in the name of a Prophet shall pass unrewarded.

And thirdly, of foreine examples of our Antichristian adversaries, who
provide so liberally for the Ministers of Antichrist, that they have not only
wherewith richly to find themselves, but over and above, wherewith to fee
their drabs, to feed their hounds, and to flesh their horses: when yet many of
the poor and true Ministers of Christ, have not wherewith to buy them meat for
their belly, clothes for their back, or books for their study.

Fourthly, and lastly, of ancient examples registered in holy writ, and left
upon record for a pattern of imitation to al succeeding ages. As namely, of
that poor widow, Mark. 12.42
Mark. 12. whose 2. small mites which freely and cheerfully she cast into the
treasury, were accepted of God, as a great largess, and with him were more
current, than all that all the rich men of their abundance cast in: Because (as
St Ambrose notes, Ambr lib. 1 de vid.
li. 1. de vid.) vberior est nummus ex parvo quam thesaurus ex maxim. A penie
or halfe-penie of that little which a poor man has, is more in Gods
reckoning, than a whole mass of money out of a rich man's treasure.

Of that other widow of Zarepta, 1. King. 17. who because she entertained the
prophet Eliah in the time of drowth and dearth, 1 King. 17.1^
her handful of meal in the barrel, and her little oil in the crewse, by
spending was not spent, neither any whit diminisht, till the tyranny of that
dearth were overpast.

Of Gaius, whom for his love and bou^ty to the Church and him, St Paul calls
Hospes meus, et vniuersae Ecclesiae: his host, and the host of the whole
Church Rom: 16.

Of Mary Magdalen, Romans 16.23 Mat. 26.13.
who because she loved much, and powered out the box of precious oyntme^t, upon
the head of Christ, her name is as an o^ntment powrd out persuming the whole
house, and (as our Savior protests, Mat 26. whersoeuer this Gospel shall be
preached throughout all the world, there shall also this that she has done
bespoken of, for a memorial of her.

Lastly, of this glorious and worthy Summite, who for her good devotion, and
respectfull usage of Elisha the prophet of the Lord, is here remembered in her
own name, but yet in another person, the person of the Church.

And albeit the Church (even the sinful members of the Church) be here called
by the name of Sunamite, yet is it not that the Sunamite should thereby be
dishonored, by giving her name to so sinful a person, but that so sinful a
person should the rather be allured, by this kind and honorable name of
Sunamite.

This of the second reading, according to the Greek septuagint, (...),
Sunamite.

The third is Shulamitis: so reads St Ambrose, Ambros. Ludov. Soto. Tremell.
Ludouicus Soto, Tremellius, and lunius, and our English Geneua with some
others deriuing their translation from the Hebrew fountain.

St Ambrose in his oration de obitu Valentiniani, expounds it Pacifica, Ambr.
orat. d^ obit. Valent*
Quiet, or Peaceable: and it is a patronymick nowne (as was Sunamite) deduced
of Shalem, the ancient name of Jerusalem, which also signifies Peace. And
therefore it is said psalm: Psalm. 76.2.
76. At Shalem is his tabernacle: where the vulgar Latin reads: In pace factus
est locus eius: where peace is, there delights God to dwell.

When therefore our Savior calls his Church Shulamite, it is as if he had said:
O thou Daughter of peace, or O thou Queen of Shalem, Queen of Jerusalem,
Queen of Peace, because my daughter, and my spouse, who am king of Shalem,
king of Jerusalem, Prince of Peace.

This, this should teach us (my dear and Christian brethren) that we must be
Shalemites, or Shalamti's men of peace and tranquillity, not of discord and
division.

It is the factious nature of that old makebate Satan, with all his Imps, and
impious adherents, to stir up strife all the day long, and therefore his
kingdom is Male diuisu^: a divided Kingdom Matt: 12. Mat. 12.26.
But our peacemaker Christ, left a great legacy of peace to his Church, ^oan
14.27.
peace, and his peace, Joan: 14. and therefore his kingdom is Been coniunctum:
an united kingdom, keeping the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Ephesians.
4.3.
Ephesians: 4.

If then we will have Christ to our father, who is (...), or Pacificus: a
chief Justice of peace, or a peace maker: and the Church to our mother, who is
also pacifica, a peacemaker, we must nor proceed A been coniuncto ad male
diuisum: from the Sion of peace to the Babylon of confusion: but we must be
Pacifici, peacemakers, and at peace: A threefold peace. At peace with God, at
peace with our selus, ^ernard. in ^est. omn. Sa^ct. ser^. 5
and at peace one w another.

But we must first be at peace with God by a true conversion, because our
peace with him, is the root of that other twofold peace.

We must not (if we will be the spouse of Christ) be so headlong and headstrong
in our iniquities, as if by our crying and scowling sins, we meant to chide and
rail him out of his own house, or (as once before) we did to hale him out of
heaven, and nail him to the Cross, and crucify again the Lord of life: for
then (assure we our selves) he will never mary us. No; the God of peace loves
his peace too well, to mary an unquiet and a scowling wife. Nay, he will be so
far from marying us, that he will arm al his creatures with vengeance to
persecute us. He will sharpen his fierce wrath for a sword, and the world shall
fight with him against the unwise, as the wisma^ speaks Sap. 5. Sap: 5.20.
Neither shall that man ever have Pacem a septe^ spiritibus, peace from the 7
spirits which are before the throne of God, spoken of Apoc: 1, Apoc. 1.4.
who has Pacem cum septe^ spiritibus, peace with the seven unclean spirits,
spoken of, Matt: 12. Mat. 12.45.


But if laying aside our former iniquities, we return to God, and so become
Shulamits at peace with him, the^ will he betroath and mary us unto himself* as
he promises Ose: 2. I will mary thee unto me for ever: Ose. 2.19.
yea I will mary thee unto me in righteousness and in judgment, and in mercy,
and in compassion. I will even mary thee unto me in faithfulness, and thou shall
know the Lord.

Secondly, we must be Shulamits, at peace with our selves, by an inward peace
of conscience. For

Conveniet nulli, H^rat.
qui secu^ dissidet ipse. He that cannot agree with himself, with who^ will he
agree? As we must not have a weight and a weight in our shops: so neither must
we have a word, and a word, in our lips. We must not have 2 faces under one
hood, like Ianus: nor 2 tongues in one head, like Judas; nor 2 hearts in one
breast, like Peter: but we must be Vnus, non Plures: singular, not plural:
one, and not many. For (as the Apostle tells us, 1. Cor. 9.24
1. Cor. 9. Vnus accipit brauium: One receives the price. One? who is that
one? Not such a one as Alcibiades, of who^ Aemilius Prob' writes: Aemil. Prob.
in vit. Alcib.
Nihilillo fuisse excellentius, velin vitijs, vel in virtutibus: that he was
excellent in both kinds, good and bad: excellently virtuous, and excellently
vicious: vt omnes admirarentur in vno homine tantam inesse dissimilitudinem,
tamque diversam naturam: so that al men wondered that there should be in one
man such disparitie, such diversity of nature.

Not such a one as St Origin speaks of writing upon Leuiticus: Origin. in
Levitic.
Agnosce in hominibus Chamaeleonte^: There are some (says he) just like the
Chamaeleon. For as the Chamaeleon is very easily changed into whatsoever color
almost is set before it: so there are many that desiring to please al, do
conform and fashion themselves to the wills of al: and because they fear al
colors, will easily be tra^sform'd into any color: Cum irascentibus
irascuntur, detrahunt cum detrahe^tibus. etc. Are others angry? So are they. Do
others back-bite? So do they. Do others discommend? so do they. Do others
commend? so do they. And (with reverence be it spoken to the words of the
Apostle) they become all things to al men, that by all means they may cozen
some.

In a word, not such a one, such a monster Holkot speaks of, Holkot. lect.
211. in Sap.
lect: 211. in Sap: that is Homo per naturam, Daemo^ per superbia^, taurus per
luxuria^. A man by nature, a Devil by pride, and a Bull by lasciuiousnes: but
such a one, whose soul is another Jerusalem, as a city that is at unity in it
self.

But Quomodo vnus est, qui nunc laeti, nunc tristis, nunc irati vultum, nunc
lenis, nunc avarri, nunc luxuriosicor habet? How is he one (says Hugo) or how
is he at peace with himself, Hugo de S. Victor.
that is one while pleasant, another while pensive? one while angry, another
while calm? one while covetous, another while luxurious? In quo tot personae,
quot mores: whose person is as manifold as his ma^ners: and so he makes
himself a Lunatik fool: for a fool is variable as the moon: Eccl: 27. which
though she be but one in substance, Eccl. 27.11.
yet by means of her often change, is never like her self. Yea, so he mak's
himself the Devils vassal, who as he calls himself Legio^, because he is many
Luke 8. so they that are his slaves and vassals, Luke 8.30.
howsoever they may seem to be but one, yet indeed they are not one but many:
yea their own Conscience is both the Accuser, and the Accused: the Witness,
and the Convinced: the Judge, and the Condemned the Hangman, and the Tormented:
the Hell, and the Damned. But on the otherside, they that are the servants of
Christ, are not only each in themselves one, having within them a sweet melody
and peace of conscience: but they are also all of them together ^^e: One by
unanimity, not by unity of person. For all that are in Christ are but as one,
Gal. 3.28. Act. 4.32.
Gal: 3, as it is said of the multitude, Act: 4. that they had all but one
heart, and one soul.

We must therefore, in the third place, be Shulamits, at peace with others, by
an outward peace of Conversation, having peace with all men, as the Apostle
wills us: Romans 12.18 Carthusian.
Rom: 12. that is (says Charthusian) a true, and a spiritual peace, not a
carnal, and a secular peace. For our Savior tells us Matt: 10. that he came not
to put this peace upon the earth, Mat. 10.34.
but a sword. A sword, to arm the son against the father, and the daughter
against her mother, and the daughter in law against her mother in law. Not that
he would simply and without exception have these to be at variance each with
other (as Theophylact well obseru's) but to testify unto us, Theophylact
that such is his iealously of his own honor, that though he have comanded us
to honor our father and mother, Exodus: 20. yet if father or mother, ^xod. 20.13.
kiffe or kin shall intend his dishonor, it is no dishonor for a man, nay
rather it is the honor of a man, (and the harder it is, the more honor it is)
so impartially to put by all by-respects of nature, as for the honor of God our
supernal and supernatural father, to dishonor our dearest natural friends.

And since we are rather to forsake our selves than Christ, Mat. 16.24.
Mat. 16. and the love of our selu's must be the rule and measure of our love
to others: (for we are to love our neighbor as our selves, Mat. 19.19.
Mat. 19. As ourselves, and not as God, for we are to love God more than
ourselves) what more can our best friends expect at our hands, than that if the
case stand betwixt God and them, so that of the two one must needs be
relinquisht, we should rather relinquish any, or al of them than God, who will be
unto us Vnus instar omnium. One for all, nay, One better than al, because
All-sufficient. And as himself pronounces of them that do the will of his
father, Mark. 3.35.
Marc. 3. that they are his brother, and sister, and mother: so if any do the
will of his father, he is their brother, and sister, and mother, and what not,
that else can once be desired?

Gods altar is like Hercules his pillar. The Inscription thereof is Non vltra.
Our peace may reach thitherto, but no further.

Wherefore as Aristotel said of his Mr Plato; so must we of our best and
nearest friends: Though Plato be my good friend, yet truth is my better friend,
and therefore if Plato give his farewell to truth, then farewell Plato.

We are not then (my dear and Christian brethren) we are not to tax and
censure our godly, zealous, and religious magistrates, as tyrannical, cruel, and
uncharitable, if as Jacob took Esau by the heel, Genesis 25.26
Gen: 25. so they take the Edomites, and Sons of Esau, (the Papists) sworn
enemies to the truth of Christ; crying, as did those Edomits in the day of
Jerusalem, Down with it, down with it, Psalm. 137.7.
even to the ground, Psalm: 137. and lay them fast by the heels, who so long as
they are sufferd to walk at large, are continvally kicking against Gods true
religion, so happily established in the days of Queen Elizabeth, our late
sovereign of blessed memory, and now (blessed be God, whose blessing it is) so
faithfully continued in this our Realm under the reign of King James, her
rightful and most renowned successor: who as he has already peaceably
conioined the 2 neighbour-kingdomes of England and Scotland, concluding both
under the name of Great Britain: so there is nothing (say misdeeming
Maleco^tents what they will) there is nothing that he so vehemently desires, as
the uniting of those other 2 kingdoms, the kingdom of Christ, and the
kingdom of Antichrist, by reducing and bringing back to the sheepefold of
Christ, the Great shepherd and Bishop of our souls, those silly wandering
sheep that so long have straied upon the 7 mountains of Rome.

Which religious work of his would (doubtless) prosper the better in his
hands, and take a much more speedy effect, were it not that Iannes also, and
Iambres resist Moses: were it not that the home-borne contentions of our
mutinous, turbulent, and dogmatical Novelists, are too-too-high-handed: and
that the soul of the Church is troubled Propter quadrigas Aminadab, by reason
of the chariots of her voluntary, and willing people, verse 11. Caietan.
as it is in the verse next before my text. J say not (as Caietan expounds that
place) by reason of the Scribes and Pharisees, who persuaded the Jewish
Synagogue to crucify our Savior Christ: but by reason of the true heirs and
successors of the Scribes and Pharisees; who may rightly be called chariots,
because they draw the people which way they lust: and the Chariots of Aminadab,
which signifies, Populus meus spontaneus, my ready or willing people, because
the people are (many of them) as willing to be led, as they to lead them.

These Chariots as they are drawn a maine with the wilde-horses of their own
headstrong fancies: so do they also draw whole multitudes after them, and
lead captive simple women laden with sin, and grosslie abuse the ignorance of
many honest and well-meaning Christians, to their own adva^tage.

These be they, that will not suffer the Church to sleep, nor the Heads of her
Temples (her Reverend and learned Prelates) to take any rest, unless they first
put of their seemly and decent ornaments, their surplisse, cope, cap and all,
to them.

J will not say (as perhaps J truly might) that their fond and newfound
opinions, are Satan's bals of wilde-fire vvherevvith they have set on fire the
Church of God, Valor. Man.
(as Herostratus fired the temple of Diana, only to get him a name, though it
were but a bad one) and that the smoke of this their fire has caused many
weeping eyes in the Church of God;

Nor will J liken them to a man (such a one as St Bernard speaks of in his
declamations) set upon the pinnacle of a temple, Bernard. declamat.
and with open mouth greedily sucking in the air, and lest it should not come
fast enough of it self, provoking and gathering it to him Flabello, with a
fan, Ac si totum speraret aerem deglutire: as if he meant to drink up the
whole element of air: and yet it is thought that their chiefest aim, is
either Aura popularis, the breath of the people, or Aurum populare, the wealth
of the people;

Nor would J wish them, for breaking the peace of the Church, to be thrust into
a Iakes, there to end their days, as Irenaeus, Andr: Hondorff: in Theatr. hist.
and Abundius were by Valerian quod Sanctae Concordiae corpus e templo
extraxissent: because they had haled the Image of Concord out of the temple:
But yet thus much J will be bold to tell them, that they are too-too-like
Antonius Alexandrinus in Suidas: Suidas hist.
who (as he says) (...): he was very il spoken of, not because he was greatly
injurious to other men, but because he was very much given to contention: and
that they live so vnpeaceably in the Church of Christ, as if Christ had died
intestate, and left no legacy of peace to his Church:

Yea (more than this) in Christ's sted, for Christ's sake, and for their own
sake, and for the Churches sake, in the bowels of our blessed Savior, J
heartily beseech them, that they would see even in this their day, the things
that belong unto their peace: that if by studiousnes of peace, they will not
turn their helmets into bee-hiues (as it is in the Emblem:) yet by furiousnes
of rage against the discipline of the Church, they would not turn the Church
(the helmet of salvation,) into a nest of waspes: that as Numa Pompilius is
said, Plutarch.
Martium loco deturbasse, to have displaced blustering March, which before was
the first month, et primas Iano detulisse, ut pote Pacifico, and to have
placed peaceable Ianus in his room: so they would prefer peace before discord,
and contentation before contention. Lastly, that as the Crete^sians, Plutarch.
who before were at civil war among themselves, yet when an enemy invaded
them, they would cease to have edge one against another, and jointly band
themselves against the Common enemy, (which practice of theirs was thereupon
prouerbially called (...), the ioining of the Cretensians:) so unless they
will be worse than evil beasts (for so the Crete^sians are called out of one
of their own Poets, Tit. 1.12.
Tit. 1.) They would lay aside their civil, or rather their uncivil war, and
join both hearts and hands with us, against those two mighty enemies of the
Church Papists, and Atheists: who like the Mirmaide, and the Dolphin, take
their pastime in the troubled waters, while the ship of the Church is beaten,
and tossed, and torn asunder with a tempest.

Thus far have our Novelists (the chariots of the people) drawn me. Happy
now, and thrice-happy should J think my self, if as the Prophet Ezechtel in
his vision, saw Rota^ in rota: One wheel in another wheel; Ezech. 1.16.
Ezech. 1. So J might see Currum in curru: one chariot in another chariot; to
wit, these chariots of the people in this chariot of repentance wherein our
Savior Christ would draw al men unto him, iterating and reiterating his
Admonition:

Return, return o Shulamite: return, return. J should now proceed to the
Reason of the Admonition, including (as J told you) a threefold promise:

1 That we may behold thee: that is, That my Father, my self, and the holy
Ghost may cast a favorable aspect on thee.

Secondly, that we may behold thee: that is, That my self with the rest of thy
friends and wel-willers, eue^ the glotious society of Angels may respect thee.

Thirdly, That we may behold thee; that is, That both J thy redeemer may look
upon thee with a fatherly and compassionate ey of mercy: and that thou may
also look into thy self with a sincere, and single eye of simplicity.

But neither will my out-worn strength give leave, nor the time (which is
already past it is limits) permit, nor (J think) the repining of your bellies
suffer me, to enter upon so copious a discourse, as this triple Reason would
require. Here therefore J make my full period.

Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout, and I pray God that your
whole spirit, and soul, and body, may be kept blameless unto the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ: To whom, with the father, and the holy Ghost, one
immortal, invisible, only wise, and al good God, in person three, in essence
one, be ascribed all power, dominion, and Majesty both now and for evermore.
Amen.

FINIS.

