A BOOK OF BERTRAM THE Priest, Concerning the Body and Blood of Christ,
Written in Latin to Charles the Great, being Emperor, above eight hundred
years ago.

Translated and imprinted in the English Tongue. Anno Dnj. 1549.

And now the third time published for the profit of the Reader. 1623.

LONDON Printed by John Dawson. 1623.

TO MY MVCH HONORED FRIEND, SR WALTER PIE, Knight, the KINGS Maties Attorney of
the Court of Wards and Liveries.
SIR;
I Have nothing of my own worthy of your love; but behold a great Work of
another Man's in this little Volume, I Dedicate unto you. It was presented to a
great Emperor, Charles the Great, and by him it was approved as heir general
to the ancient Fathers: The Author is now after 800. years questioned for his
birthright, and the Polemicall Writers of this Age are not as yet agreed
whether he spurious or legitimate. I hope the Preface following (his very
enemies being Judges) will free him from that imputation. His revennue is the
doctrine of the blessed Sacrament, ancient and hereditarie: His tenure is in
Capite of the Lord Paramount. My suite is an Information may be exhibited
against his accusers, and if you see no just cause whereof they do accuse him,
let your wonted Justice decree him for the right heir; if otherwise, let him
stand or fall according to your Wisdom, and his own worth, and in doing him
this right, you shall oblige me with the rest of your favors faithfully to
love you and yours.

HVMFREY LYNDE.

The Preface to the READER.
THE great contention that was betwixt the two Women, 1 Kings Chap. 3.
who should be the Mother of the living child, was by Solomon easily decided,
and the living child by his wisdom was restored to the right Mother. If
Truth and Peace had joined hands with Rome and us, Wisdom her self would
have justified her children, and our Adversaries would have resolved this
question (which without all question is to be resolved) that Bertram was the
true Author of this fruitful issue, and his Doctrine was the Tenet of the
ancient Fathers and the Church his Mother.

But such is the condition of the Church of Rome, that although the true son
may as easily be known by his voice as Jacob was from Esau; yet the Mother
that bred this child would make him an Esau, and supplant him of his
birthright; the womb that brought him forth disclaymes his Doctrine, the
Church that gave him suck out of her two Breasts, the two Testaments, denies
him entertainment: and yet behold the Mother of the child, and this Authors
Mother do sympathize: The Mother of the child although she were a strumpet, yet
would she by no means suffer her son to be divided, nor accept of a dead
child, although it was presented to her as her own. This Authors Mother
(although at that time of his birth she had lost much of her wonted modesty)
yet would she not agree, to have her blessed body of the Sacrament to be
divided and given by the halues, yea, although what was offered her, Christ
told her it was her body; yet by no means would she allow of the dead Letter
which kills, but of the quickening Spirit which gives life.

Here we see the Church of Rome is ancient, not her errors. We acknowledge
she was a Mother Church, and had sometimes Kings for Nursing Fathers, and
Queens for Nursing Mothers: yea, behold this man Bertram, had a King, a great
King, Charlemaine the Great, to his Nursing Father, and the Romish Church,
sometimes the fairest amongst women, gave him milk out of her sacred Breasts,
as a Nursing Mother.

If there be any remembrance left to Parents for their childrens merit. Mother,
behold thy Son.] If there be any means left for children to relieve their
blind and decayed Parents. Son, behold thy Mother.] Such is our charity to
the bondwoman and her children, that we pity them, we pray for them, yea, in
this Subject of the real presence; We heartily wish, that men had not studied
so much to be open where the Scripture is silent, and that curious wits had not
been wise above sobriety, to have searched into the ways of the Lord, which
are past finding out. B: Andrews against Bellar. cap. 1.
That which Durandus is reported to have said, does not dislike us; We hear
the Word, we perceive the sound, we know not the manner, we believe the
Presence, we believe (I say) the Presence as well as they, concerning the
manner of the Presence, we do not unadvisedly define, nay more, we do not
scrupulously enquire: no more then we do in Baptism, how the blood of Christ
cleanses us, no more then we do in the Incarnation of Christ, how the divine
nature is united to the humane, we reckon it amongst the mysteries, and indeed
the Eucharist is a mystery, the remaynders whereof should be consumed with
fire, that is, (as the Fathers do elegantly understand it) which should be
adored by faith, not debated by reason.

But to come to the Author and his Authority. Behold, after 800. years
silence in the grave, there is risen this Champion, to confute this newborn
Bratt Transubstantiation. All the credit that I have, or am like to have in the
Church of God, I will engage it upon the worth of this little Tract. A work
not powered forth upon Adventures, but composed with mature deliberation, being
required thereunto by Charles the Emperor, (neither was it likely, that so
great an Eagle as Charlemayne would consult with flies) in whom it was hard to
say whether Learning or Magnificence had the vpperhand: and for these later
times, let the judgment of that famous Bishop and Martyr, Dr Ridley inform
us, of whom I may truly say what Ierom did of Nepotian (Pectus suum
Bibliothecam fecerat Christi, Ierom ad Paulinum.
nec doleat Ecclesia quod talem amiserit, sed gaudeat quod talem habuerit,) who
publicly honored this Treatise in his Disputations at Oxford, and privately
bequeathed it as a Legacy to Dr Brooks, affirming it to be the first means of
his conversion, and reducement from the common error of the Roman Church.

But behold the Authority of this Man, and the dexterity of his subject, is
so great an eyesore to our Adversaries, that they cannot with any patience
reflect upon him: Here shall you see Ephraim against Manasses, and Manasses
against Ephraim, but both against Judah; here you shall see Jurors and Judges
reconciled, as Pilot and Herod, but both against Bertram: Will you have him
brought as Paul was before the Council, and set before them; Behold the Man.
The Judge does harken, the Councellers be silent, the Crier bids peace, all
the people are attentive to know the cause whereof they would accuse him.

Bellarmine the Foreman of the Inquest, he says, Bellarm: de script:
Ecclesiast. Tom. 7. fol. 121.
That Bertram the Priest lived above 800. years since, and was the first that
brought in question the Real presence, but says he, Paschasius Ratbertus, an
Abbot wrote fully and freely of that subject against him. So then we see him
here confessed for the Author, but opposed for his Doctrine, if Bellarmine have
spoken the truth, bear witness with him of the truth. Only let me tell you, I
have read that whole Tract of Paschasius, Printed by them, and there I find he
writes of the Real presence, he mentions two Sacraments, and maintains the
communion in both kinds, but of Bertram in his whole Treaty ne (...) quidem,
he makes not so much as mention of him: and this mine eyes have witnessed the
Truth against the Foreman.

In his Treatise of 3. Convers. part. 2. cap. 10.
The second is F: Parsons:] Bertram (says he) was wholly of the Roman Religion,
and so lived and so died above eight hundred years ago, though after his
death some of Berengarius followers, did forge a little Pamplet in his name
against the Real presence of Christ's body, as favoring the Berengarian
Heresy: Here then we have the man confessed but not this Doctrine: I wonder
these two Elders living so near together in Rome, were so far asunder in
opinion; Surely they agree like the two Elders against Susanna, both joined
together to accuse the Innocent, and both out of their own mouths must receive
the like judgment.

The third] About the year 806. Lib: consens: omniu^ atat: de verit: Chi: in
Euchar: centen: 9.
Delirarecoepit Bertramus (says Garetius). This man acknowledges Bertram for
the Author, but condemns him for an old Dotard.

The fourth:] Langdailius, Langd: lib. 3 Cath: confut:
He affirms, That though in some things he transgressed the form of words,
yet he holds correspondencie with the Catholic Roman Doctrine.

By this man's saying, I see no cause why Bertram deserved a Writ to privilege
his dotage.

De visib. Monarch. Eccles. lib. 7. An. 816. etc.
The fifth:] Sanders he says, That under the name of Bertram, there is a Book
extant of the Eucharist, which is said to have bin lately written, or devised
by some of Berengarius followers, for that there was no such Doctrine then
read, or known in that time of his living.

In his Treatise of the Sacram: cap. 1 fol. 23
The sixth:] Reynolds the Priest says, toward 800 years after Christ, one
Bertram, and a little before him one Scotus wrote darkly of the truth of this
Sacrament, but whatsoever the private opinion of Bertram was, his public
speeches and writings sounded so ill in the ears of the Catholics of that
age, that Paschasius an Abbot made a very learned Book in refutation of him.
These two hold together like a rope of Sand, the one says, Bertram did write
but obscurely, the other says, It was not Bertram, but some obscure Authors;
the one says, there was no such doctrine published in that age, the other
says, that Scotus at that time wrote darkly, as Bertram did on the Sacrament.

The seventh, and eight: Posseu: prefi ad Lect: tom. 1. apparat. Sixth: Sen.
prafat. in Bibl.
] Oecolampadius, under the name of Bertram wrote this book to Charles the
Great, says Possevinus and Sixtus Senensis.

The ninth: Greg: lib. 1. de praf. Chi: in Euch. c. 2.
] The Work is spurious, and tainted with the Leven of Berengarius heresy,
says Gregory de Valentia. These also might well agree, if they could reconcile
the times and their different opinions: for Berengarius lived about six hundred
years ago, and Oecolampadius about a hundred. But if either Berengarius
followers, or Oecolampadius himself wrote this Tract of Bertrams, it must
needs be that Paschafius Ratbertus, who wrote against this Treatise 800. years
ago (as Bellarmine and Reynolds do affirm) did write by the Spirit of
Prophecy against Berengarius followers, and Oecolampadius long before they
were borne.

In his Parliament of Christ. Sacr. in the Prologue.
The tenth:] Dr Heskius says, that Bertram in the time of Charles, wrote of the
Sacrament suspitiously, and yet in such sort, as no man could be certain, what
he assuredly meant.

De Ador: Euchar: cap. 19.
The eleventh:] Espencaeus says, That Bertram wrote a Book to Charles the
Emperor, of the Sacrament; yet in the judgment of those that favor his
error, he does entangle both his cause and the mind of the Reader, and
although he cites many of the ancient Fathers, yet one while he seems a
Catholic, another while of another opinion. These two are nere to
reconciliation, for they both agree upon the certainty of the Author, but
condemn the uncertainty of his doctrine.

The twelfth:] Trithenius, Tritenius de Bertr:
a man without exception, he says, That Bertram the Priest was exceedingly
skillful in the holy Scriptures, he was sharp in wit, famous in speech,
neither was he less notable in life then in learning; he wrote many famous and
excellent works unto Charles the Great, the brother of Lotharius the Emperor;
he wrote a praiseworthy Book, (to wit) one Book concerning the Body and
Blood of the Lord; he flourished in the days of Lotharius the Emperor, about
the year of Christ 840.

You have heard the great Enquest, what they can say against this Author. Yet
all this while the Trumpet has given an uncertain sound. Some (you see)
denies the man as a singular Novelist, others acknowledge the Author, but
affirm this Work to be suppositious, others say he held the catholic
opinion in the maine, but squared in the form of speaking, so that hitherto
you see the Jurors are not agreed among themselves, and therefore they cannot
give up their Verdict against him: Only this last witness does best resolve all
the former doubts, he shows, that Bertram was no dotard, he shows it could
not be written by Berengarius, or his followers, for he lived and wrote this
Work to Charles 200. years before his time, he shows he was not spurious but
the true Author, and by this his testimony does clearly exclude Oecolampadius
for the Author, whose writings were not extant when Tritemius made his
Catalogue of this and other Authors.

Certainly, if these men had been sworn to the Truth as well as to the
Church, the Foreman of the Inquest, and the last, would have reconciled all the
rest.

You have heard (Gentle Reader) the Popes tenants, his sworn servants, our
sworn enemies, their best witnesses, Bertrams worst accusers, bound by oath to
maintain the Papacy, divided amongst themselves. Now listen and hear their
sovereign Judges give sentence, and according to their agreement, let him
stand or fall in your judgment: And first let their Lord chief Justice, Pope
Clement the eight be heard; for, as he cannot err, so he may not be
contradicted. Ant. Posseu: Appar: Page 230. Tom. 1.
Let not Bertram be read (says he) but with leave of the Apostolic Sea, and
with this condition, that the Reader my confute the heretics by the errors of
that book. The next are the Roman Inquisitors, Ind: libr. prohibited Anno 1559
and Trident:
and the Trent Fathers; these also have decreed him to be included in the
number of Authors prohibited. So then you have two principal Judges, a Pope
and a late Council condemning him, and yet this may be thought a strange
thing, that without a legal proceeding, without trial of the party, without
hearing him, or his Advocate speak for him, to adiudge him? Is it worse with
the Church of Rome at this day, then it was with Heathen Rome in the time of
Caesar? Behold what Festus the Governor answers Paul's accusers in the like
case: Acts 25. verse. 16.
It is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to dye before that he
which is accused have the accusers face to face, and to have license to answer
for himself concerning the crime laid against him. If Bertram had been
arraigned and condemned when he was living; if his accusers had been brought
face to face before the Emperor, there might have bin some pretense, some
Plea, some Record against him; but after seven hundred years continuance to
give sentence, and to sit in condemnation against him as Plaintiff, Witness
and Judge that is neither allowable in Church nor State.

Well, what will Bertram do in this case? Surely, he will appeal ( as Paul
did to Caesar:) but to whom? Not to one man alone, but to a multitude: not to
an ignorant multitude, but to a learned; to a University, not on our side (for
they would be partial) but on theirs, the famous University of Doway in
France, there he was a free denison, bred and borne, and his request is to be
tried by his Country. Since therefore he has appealed to the learned men of
Doway, to Doway let him go. Now I pray what will these Judges do? They hear
the Popes sentence, the Councels decree, the Inquisitors severe Judgment, they
weigh soberly his accusers reasons, they examine diligently the Author
himself, and finding the former doom too heavy for so slight errors
committed by him, they repeal the sentence, and upon more mature deliberation
had of the Author, and his Doctrine, with the consent of Philip the second, and
the Duke of Alba to all the Romish Catholics in his behalf sends this
Greeting.

Ind. Expurg. Belgic: p. 5. edit. Antw. An. 1571.
Although we care not greatly for this Book of Bertrams, whether it be extant
or no, yet because it is often printed, and read of many, and the Heretics
know by a Catalogue of forbidden books, that he was a Catholic Priest, and
dear unto Charles the Great, and because we Comment upon other Writers of the
same age, and extenuate their errors oftentimes by a favorable construction of
them, by the same reason we may allow Bertram, and acknowledge him, for there
is nothing worthy of reprehension in him, setting aside a little obscurity in
his style, and his ignorance in using some dark words and sentences, which
with marginall notes affixed, may manifest the true sense and meaning of the
Author.

Here then is his last definitive sentence pronounced; they allow the Author,
and they allow the work, so that a right construction be joined to his right
meaning, and that no misprision may happen to the parties on both sides, the
Judges in the particulars have delivered their Observations. (Viz.) (...) di)
where he says, Lege in Iudia Expurgat: Belgic. edit. An. 1571. Visibiliter.
(1.) Invisibiliter. Substantia. (1) Accidens.
( folio 1137.) visiblie; that is to be read and understood, say they,
Invisibly: and where he says (infra) versu 36) the Substance of the creature
which was before consecration, remains after consecration, by the substance
is meant (say they) the Accidents do remain. Thus our Adversaries have a free
dispensation to read him with these and the like conditions expressed. It is
freely granted, let it be freely accepted. Now if I should question, how it
were possible that the substance of bread should be annihilated, and the
accidents remain without a Substance, it were no disparagement for me not to
understand it, for I doubt not, Ind. Expurg. Belg: Antw. An. 1571.
says the Index Expurgatorius, but Bertram in those times was ignorant, how
the accidents could exactly subsist, without any substance, which this later
age has most subtly and truly found out; De Transub: lib. 2. cap. 7. Breve
et simplex and sieve vllo incommodo responsum.
Neither is it to be maruailed, says Gregory de Valentia, that some ancients
have both thought and writ less consideratly concerning Transubstantiation,
and this is an answer (says he) brief and simple, and no way inconvenient.
The reason (as I conceive) is given by another of their side. The Doctors of
these latter times have attained more understanding in some things then the
ancient Fathers, Dominic. Bannes. 22. page 58. etc.
for they are like children (say they) standing on the shoulders of Giants, who
being lifted up by the tallness of the Giants, no marvel if they see further
then they themselves.

It is true indeed, that this doctrine in Bertrams time had not that full
stream and general current as it had in the ancient Fathers time before it,
as it appears in his Preface to Charles the Great.

Neither was this Doctrine broached by a Novelist, for then the Emperor would
have condemned it, or at leastwise have confuted him, neither did he alone in
this time hold this doctrine, for Scotus about that time wrote a Book of the
same subject. Alcui: lib. de divinis offic. Beda lib. 2. de Tabernac. cap. 2.

Carol. Magnas in Epist. ad Alcuinu^ lib. 2. de offic. pa. 100 Edit. Coloniensi.


Alcuinus, Tutor unto the Emperor, Venerable Bede, and Charles the Emperor
himself, did all savor one thing, and speak one thing at the same time with
the same Author. Neither did he in this opinion lean to his own wit, but did
pursue and tread in the footsteps of the holy and ancient Fathers. Such was
his answer to the Emperor, and such will his Doctrine manifest it self unto
the Reader. Neither could this Doctrine be heretical, Petigian: in 4. Sentent.
d. 10. 9. 1. art. 1. page 353.
for says Petigian for a thousand years after Christ and more, there was no
Heresy in the Church concerning the Real presence, as it appears (says he)
both by sacred Councels, and doctrine of the Fathers.

Besides, if this Author had bin single in his opinion, as he was singular, how
comes it to pass, that in these times he is so much opposed, and in former
ages, he was not confuted? To question the Writers, to obscure the Authors, to
mutilate their Books, argues a distrust of the truth and goodness of the
cause, and as Arnobius sometimes answered the Gentiles. To intercept our
Writings, Arnib: adversus Gentil. lib. 3.
and to drown our Authors, it makes no defense for your Gods, but rather it
argues your fear least the Truth should appear.

Besides, how comes it to pass, that there is such difference of opinions
concerning this man? how is it that their kingdom is so much divided against
it self, that they cannot by any glue of Concord (as Cyprian speaks) nor
bond of unity be conjoined? Cyp: lib. 3. Epist. 13.
Some hold of Paul, some of Apollos, some allow the Book, others deny the
Author: Is the Work man and the Work divided? Is the Author of the Book
commended, and the Book it self condemned? Is this the wisdom and policy
of the Church, to cry some one thing, some another, like the common Craftsmen
for their great Diana of the Ephesians? These things were much to be wondered
at, especially by one that wants perhaps the leisure, perhaps the knowledge, to
search into these doubtful disputes, but that the ingenuous confession of
Erasmus will satisfy a further jnquisition. It is plainly found (says he)
that many things in Luthers Books are condemned for heretical, which in the
Books of Bernard and Austen are read for holy and Orthodox. Agreeable to that
saying of Maldonats, Maldon: Comment. in Ioh. 6.
expounding a place of Scripture: Although I have no other Author (says he)
for my exposition, yet I allow it rather then that of Austens and others,
(though it be most probable) because this of mine crosses more the sense of
the Calvinists.

Thus then to end with the Church of Rome (with whom I began: Isid. Pleusit.
lib. 3. epist. 408.
) She is like a Woman fallen from her ancient happiness, and retaining only
some signs thereof: she has the Sheaths and Caskets where the Ornaments lay,
but the goods themselves she is spoiled off. Hence it is that we are departed
from their Church, as Moses sometimes departed out of Egypt, or as S. Austen
from the Maniches: Chrysostom. in Math. Homil. 49.
We have departed from them in body, they first departed from us in mind: we
from them by place, they from us by faith: we have left with them the
foundations of the walls; they have left with us the foundations of the
Scriptures: We are departed from them in the sight of man; they are departed
from us in the judgment of GOD. And as concerning this Author which I here
present unto you, Ierom: Epist. 126. ad Euagr:
I will say, as S. Ierom answered Euagrius, who desiring his opinion concerning
Melchisedec, whether he were the holy Ghost; S. Ierom, when he had showed him
the judgment of the ancient Fathers, of whom some thought Melchisedec a Man,
some an Angel: You have (says he) what I have heard, what I have read
touching Melchisedec, to bring forth the witnesses it was my part, let it be
yours to judge of the credit of the witnesses.

Behold (Gentle Reader) the Worke-man and the Work: I have cited the opinions
of the Modern Writers, and of the best concerning this Author, it is your part
to judge of the credit of them: it was my part to summon their appearance for
the trial of the party, it is your part to judge of the sufficiency of their
proof, and their good agreement amongst themselves. You have the Author above
800. years continuance, you have his doctrine above 1500. years: if his
proof make it not good, we will disclayme both the Author, and his Doctrine.

If such a light did so shine when the Church was so much darkened and obscured
with the mists of Ignorance, pity it were but this Lamp should receive a new
Light (by reprinting of him) which the Iniquity of the times has almost
extinguished.

Briefly, all that I can say of the Author, is this; That which Vincentius
Lyrinensis spoke of Tertullian, may very fitly be attributed to him; His words
are senses, his senses victories: and as concerning the Work, and the
exquisite performance thereof, I will say in two words: Exegit Monumentum: It
may stand, (and long may it stand a Monument to after Ages) that he may be
justified in his sayings, and clear when he is judged.

H. L.

Bertram the Priest, his Preface, concerning the body and blood of the LORD,
written to Charles the great, being Emperor.
I Am commanded by you (famous Prince) to declare unto your Highness, What
judgment I am of, concerning the mystery of the Body and Blood of Christ.
Certain it is, that as this commandment, does well beseem your magnificall
and Princely estate: so is it a most hard thing to be performed by my poor and
small power. For what is more meet for your Kingly Providence and government,
than in respect of your self to be universally wise, concerning his holy
mysteries, who has vouchsafed you worthy of the Kingly seat: and in respect
of your Subjects, not to suffer them to think diverse things, concerning the
body and blood of Christ, in which, doubtless, consists the whole sum of
Christian Redemption? For while some of the faithful affirm, that the
mystery or Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ (which is daily
celebrated and administered in the Church) is done under no figure, and under no
cover at all, but perf^^med under the naked manifestation and show of the truth
it self: and again, while other some testify, that these things are
contained under the figure of the mystery, and that it is one thing which
appears to our bodily senses, and another thing that our faith looks upon,
it plainly appears that there is no small diversity and difference amongst
them. And whereas the Apostle writes unto the faithful people, That all of
them should savor one thing, 1 Cor. 1.10.
and speak one thing, and that no schism should appear amongst them, we must
needs say, that they are by no small schism divided, and rent asunder, who not
thinking the self same things do speak diversely of the mystery of the body
and blood of Christ. Wherefore your Kingly Majesty and Highness being
provoked no doubt with the zeal of Religion (though perhaps not quietly and
indifferently considering of these things) and desiring also, that all men
should (according to the Apostles Commandment) think and speak one thing
does diligently search for the mystery and secret of truth, that so you may
call back such thereunto, as have wandered and strayed. Whereupon also it
comes to pass, that you disdain not, to demand and ask the truth of this
matter, even of very poor and base men, persuading your self, that the
mystery of so great a secret, cannot be known, but by inspiration and
revelation from God, who having no respect of persons, shows forth the light
of his truth, by whomsoever he himself has chosen to so great a matter. Now,
as it is very pleasant for me poor man, to obey your Commandment: so I
confess it is a very hard matter for me, to dispute and reason of a matter so
far estranged from man's understanding and senses, and into which a man cannot
pearse or enter, but by the instruction and teaching of the holy Spirit.
Wherefore, I being at this present subject, to your Highness commandment, and
yet trusting and cleaving to the aid and assistance of him of whom we will
speak, will assay by what words I can to open my judgment concerning this
matter, not leaning in the treaty thereof to mine own wit, but pursuing and
treading in the footsteps of the holy and ancient Fathers.

HERE Begins the Book of Bertram the Priest, touching the body and blood of
the Lord: which he wrote to Charles the Great, being Emperor.
YOur Highness Excellency demands, 1 Two questions.
whether that the body and blood of Christ, which in the Church is received by
the mouth of the faithful, be done in a mystery, or in truth and verity? that
is to say, whether it contain some secret thing, which is evident to the eyes
of faith only: or whether, without the veil or couerture of any mystery, the
bodily sight, do outwardly behold that, which the sight of the mind does
inwardly look upon, so that whatsoever is done appears manifestly or no? And
this is the first question. The other is whether it be that very body, that was
borne of the Virgin Mary, that suffered, that died, that was buried, and that
rising again, and asce^ding up into heaven, sits now on the right hand of
the Father or no?

Now let us look into the first of these two questions: and lest we be let
with ambiguity and doubtfulnesse, let us define what a figure is, and what the
truth is, that so beholding and perceiving some certainty, we may know,
whither we ought to defer the course of our reasoning.

A figure is a certain shadow, by certain vailes and couertures as it were,
that is to say, darkely declaring the thing, which it intends to manifest: as
for example, when we mind to speak of Gods Word, we call it bread: so in the
Lords Prayer we desire to have daily bread, given us. Also when Christ in the
Gospel speaks, Mat. 6.11
saying: I am the living bread which came down from heaven. Likewise, Ioh.
6.51.
when he calls himself a Vine, and his Disciples branches, saying, I am the
true Vine, Ioh. 15.1.5
and ye are the branches. For all these sayings, seem to speak one thing,
and yet mean another thing.

As for that which we call verity, or truth, it is the declaration of a
manifest and plain matter, which is not covered with any show of shadows, but
insinuated and delivered, with pure and open (or to speak more plainly) with
natural significations: as when it is said, That Christ being borne of a
Virgin, suffered death, was crucified, Mat. 1.25 1 Pet. 3.18 1 Cor. 2.2 Ioh.
19.40 etc.
dead and buried. Here verily is nothing shadowed, with figures ouercouering
the same, but the truth of the things declared, by the significations of
natural words or speeches: neither may we here understand any other thing,
than that which is spoken and expressed. But it is not so in the former
sentences, for neither is Christ the bread, substantiallly, neither is Christ a
Vine substantially, neither are the Apostles branches substantially: wherefore
in these latter speeches there is a figure, and in those former, the truth
(that is to say, a naked and open signification) is declared, by narration or
plain speech. Now let us return to those things (that is, to the body and
blood of Christ) for whose these points have been propounded and uttered. Truly
if that great mystery be celebrated and done under no mystery at all, then it
is not rightly called a mystery, because that cannot be called a mystery, or
secret, wherein there is no hidden thing, and wherein there is no matter
removed from our bodily senses, and wherein there is nothing covered, with
some veil or couerture. But that bread, which by the Ministry of the Priest,
is now become the body of Christ, does show one thing outwardly to man's senses,
and sounds another thing inwardly to the minds of the faithful: Outwardly
indeed the form of bread, which it had before, is set out, the color thereof
is showed, and the savor thereof received and tasted. But inwardly a thing
far differing, yea and much more precious, and excellently is showed and set
forth, and I say, it is much more precious and excellent, because it is
heavenly, and because it is divine: I meaning hereby that Christ's body is
manifested, which is either seen, or received, or eaten, not with the senses
and faculties, or power of the flesh, but with the eye and sight of a faithful
or believing mind. The wine also which by the Priest through consecration, is
become the Sacrament of Christ's blood, sets forth one thing outwardly, and
contains an other thing inwardly. For what other thing is superficially and
outwardly locked up, then the substance of wine? Taste it, and it savoureth and
smacketh wine: smell it, and it smells wine: look upon it, and thou may
behold the color of wine. But if a man do consider it inwardly, then it being,
not the liquor of wine, but the liquor of Christ blood, so savoreth to the
believers minds while it is tasted, and is so acknowledged while it is beheld,
and is so proved to be, whilst it is smelled.

It is manifest that these things are so, seeing no man can deny them to be
true, because the Bread and the Wine is figuratively Christ's body and blood.
For outwardly and according to that which is seen, neither is any kind or show
of flesh known to be in that Bread, nor any drop of blood showed forth in the
Wine, and yet for all that, after the mystical consecration, the Bread is no
more called Bread, nor the Wine Wine, but both of them together are called the
body and blood of Christ. For if (according to some men's minds) nothing were
in this matter taken figuratively, but the whole were considered and looked
upon in verity or truth, then should faith work nothing at all therein;
because that no spiritual thing should be performed, but look whatsoever the
thing it self were, even that wholly should be taken, according to the body,
and a man's fleshly understanding. Heb. 11.1.
And seeing that faith (as the Apostle says) is the argument and evidence of
such things as appear not, that is to say, not of such substances as are
seen, but of such as are not seen, we shall then in this action receive
nothing according to faith, because that we discern and judge of all that is
in it, according to our bodily senses. And what I pray you can be more absurd
then to take Bread to be flesh, and to affirm, that Wine is blood? And a
mystery that cannot be, in which there is no secret or hidden thing contained.
And how can it be said, to be Christ's body and blood, in which it is not known,
that there is any change made?

Now every alteration and change, He proves by three sorts of change, that
there is no change made in the elements of the Supper.
is either made from that thing which actually it is not, into that which
actually it is: or else when it is changed from that which it is, into that,
which it is not: or from that which it is, to wit, in respect of quality, to
that which it is, in respect of quality, though changed perhaps into another
quality. But in this Sacrament, if only the truth be considered in
simplicity and plainness, and not another thing believed, than that which is
beheld, no change can be known to be made. For neither has it passed from
that which it was not, The first kind of change.
into somewhat that is, as such a passage and change is many times made in
growing things: for whereas they were not before, they to the end they might be
passed, from not being, to that which is to be, or to being. But this passage,
or change falls not out here, because that the Bread and Wine, were, before
they passed into the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. The second
kind of change.
Neither yet can there be here, that passage or change, which is made from that
which it is, to that which it is not, which change falls out in things that
through defect suffer a decay or fall. For whatsoever does decay, was first and
had it being, because that thing can not suffer a decay or destruction, which
never was. And yet, neither can this passage or change be known to be made in
this matter, because that according to truth, that very kind or shape of
creature which is before, is known still to remain. Moreover, The third kind
of change.
that change which is made, from that which is, to that which is, which change
appears specially in things, that suffer diversity and variety of
qualities, as for example, when that which was black is turned into white,
neither can that change I say be known to be made here: for nothing can be
here found to be changed, either in touching, or in taste, or in color, or in
favor. Therefore if nothing be changed herein, it is not then any other thing
than what it was before. But it is another thing, for the Bread is become
Christ's body, and the wine his blood, for so he himself says: Take ye, Math.
26.26. etc.
and eat ye, This is my body: and speaking of the Cup, he says likewise: This
is the blood of the new Testament, which shall be shed for you.

Therefore they, that in this question, will take nothing figuratively, but
will have the whole to consist in the simplicity, and plainness of truth,
must be demanded, how, and in what respect this change is made, so that now
they be no more that, which they were before, to wit, Bread and Wine, but are
the body and blood of Christ? For according to the kind and show of the
creature, and the outward form of visible things, both of these, that is, the
Bread and the Wine, have nothing at all changed in them: and if they suffer no
change at all, then are they no other thing, but that which they were before.

Your Highness (most noble Prince) perceives, whether the understanding and
mind of those men that think otherwise, proceeds: for they deny that which
men suppose them to affirm, and they are proved to destroy that which they
believe. For they do faithfully confess it, to be the body and blood of
Christ, and in so doing doubtless, they do now protest, that the Bread and
the Wine be nor the same that they were before, and that if they be some other
thing than they were before, that then they have admitted some alteration and
change.

Seeing then that this cannot be denied, let them tell us, how, and in what
respect they are changed, for a man shall perceive nothing, to be bodily and
substantially changed in them. Therefore they must of necessity confess,
either that they are changed, otherwise than bodily and substantially, He
draws his reason from a double absurdity.
and so by that means that they are not that which in truth they seem to be,
but some other thing, which according to his own being, is not seen or
perceived to be: or else, if they will not confess this, they must needs deny
it, to be the body and blood of Christ, which thing is very wicked, not only
for a man to speak, but also to think.

But for as much as they do confess, both the body and blood of Christ to be
there: and that this cannot be, but by making a change into a better thing, and
that this change is made not corporally or bodily, but spiritually: it must
needs be, that they do affirm and say, that this change is made figuratively,
because that under the veil or coverture of bodily Bread, and bodily Wine,
there is the spiritual body of Christ, and his spiritual blood: not that they
are the existences and beings, of two several and diverse things, that differ
between themselves, that is to say, of the body and of the spirit: but
because, that the kind or show of Bread and Wine, is in one respect, one and
the self same thing, that is, Bread and Wine, and in another respect, it is
the body and blood of Christ. For in respect, that both of them are bodily and
substantially touched, they are the kinds and shows of a bodily creature, but
in respect of power, because they are spiritually done, they are the mysteries
of the body and blood of Christ. An argument taken, from comparing Baptism,
and the Lords Supper together.


Let us consider the fountain of holy Baptism, which is not without cause
called the fountain or welspring of life, because it reformeth them that be
partakers of it, to newness of a better life, and makes them, Romans 6.4.
to live to righteousness, Ephesians. 2.1.
which before were dead in trespasses and sin. Has it this power and force,
because, or in respect that, the element of water, appears, or is seen to
be? and yet notwithstanding, unless it had in it a virtue and power to
sanctify, it were not able to wash away, the spots and filthiness of sin:
and unless it contained the vigor and strength of life, it could at no hand
give life to them that are dead, dead I mean, not in the flesh or body, but in
the soul or spirit. And yet notwithstanding all this, if in that fountain, we
have respect to that thing only, which our bodily sense looks upon and
comprehends, we can see nothing, but a moist and thin element, to wit,
Water, subject to corruption, and that such a one, as that of and in it self,
has no other power in it, but to wash our bodies. But after that the power of
the holy Ghost, by the consecration of the Priest is come thereto, it is then
become effectual and powerful, to wash, not our bodies only, but our souls,
and made able also, by and through a spiritual power, to remove spiritual
filthinesses. Behold we see, that there are in one and the self same element
two things, resisting, and as it were, striving one of them against the other,
that is to say, we see a corruptible thing to give incorruption, and a thing
that has not life, to yield and give life also. Wherefore we know that in
this fountain and welspring, that is one thing, which the bodily senses may
touch and perceive, and therefore it is changeable and corruptible: and again,
that there is another thing in it, which only faith can behold, and that
therefore it cannot be corrupted, nor come into danger of decay. Wherefore if a
man would demand, What that is, which outwardly washes the body, I answer,
that it is nothing but the element: but if a man would consider that which
inwardly purges, I say, that it is a lively virtue, yea, a virtue, that is
able to sanctify, yea, a virtue and power that gives immortality. Therefore
the water in Baptism, is in it own property, a corruptible humor or liquor,
but in mystery and spiritual meaning, a wholesome and healthful power.

And even so verily the body and blood of Christ being outwardly considered, is
a creature, subject to change and corruption: and yet if a man consider, the
virtue and power of the mystery, it is life in deed, giving immortality to
such as be partakers thereof. Therefore the things, that are seen, and the
things that are believed, are not all one. For in respect that they are seen,
they feed the corruptible body, they themselves being corruptible: but in
respect that they are believed, they feed our immortal souls which shall live
for ever, they themselves being also immortal.

The Apostle writing to the Corinthians, says: Know ye not, 1 Cor. 10.1.2. etc.
that all our Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and
were all Baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea, and did all eat the
same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual drink? for they
drunk of the spiritual Rock that followed them: and that rock was Christ.
Hence we perceive, that the Sea and the Cloud both, did show forth the kind
and figure of Baptism, and that the Fathers of the former Testament, were
Baptized in them, that is, in the Cloud, and in the Sea. Could the Sea, as it
was seen and thought to be an element, have in it the power and force of
Baptism? or could the Cloud, as it showed forth, the grosenes of some very
thick air, sanctify the people? No verily: And yet we dare not, since the
Apostle spoke in Christ's name, say, that he spoke not truly when he said, That
our Fathers, were baptized in the Cloud and in the sea. And although that
Baptism, did show forth and set out, the form of Christ's Baptism, which at
this day is used and ministered in the Church, yet no wise man dare deny
(unless like a mad man he will presume, to gainesay the Apostles words) but
that it was Baptism, and that our Fathers were therein and thereby Baptized.
Wherefore neither the Sea nor the Cloud, in respect that they were bodily
substances, did show forth or give out the cleanness of sanctification, but in
respect that they did invisibly contain, the sanctification of the holy Ghost.
For there was in them, that is, in the Sea, and in the Cloud, both a visible
form, which appeared to the bodily senses, and that not in an image or show,
but in verity or truth? and inwardly there shined forth in them a spiritual
power, which appeared not to the eyes of flesh, but to the sight and light of
the mind or soul.

In like sort, the Manna that was given to the people from heaven, and the
water also that flowed out of the Rock, were corporal and bodily substances,
and did corporally both feed the people, and give them drink also, and yet
the Apostle, calls that Manna spiritual meat, and that Water spiritual
drink. And why does he that? Because there was in these bodily substances, a
spiritual power of the word, which did feed and give drink, rather to the
minds, then to the bodies of the believers. And though that meat and that
drink, did but show forth the mystery of that body and blood of Christ,
which was to come (which mystery the Church does at this day celebrate and
administer) yet the holy Apostle S. Paul affirms, that our Fathers did eat
the same spiritual meat, 1 Cor. 10.3.4.
and did drink the same spiritual drink.

A man will perhaps ask, What he means by this word (the same) I answer,
that he means the very self same thing, which the believing people do at
this day, eat and drink in the Church of Christ. For we may not understand
diverse things thereby, because it is one and the self same Christ, who with
his own flesh fed in the Wilderness, the people that was Baptized in the
Cloud, and in the sea, and then made them to drink of his blood, and that does
now in his Church, feed the believing people with the Bread of his body, and
make them to drink of the water of his blood. Which thing the Apostle minding
to declare, after that he had said, That our Fathers did eat the same
spiritual meat, 1 Cor. 10.4.
and did drink the same spiritual drink, he presently added, For they drank
of the spiritual Rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ. And this
he does, that so we might understand that Christ, was in the spiritual Rock
in the Wilderness, and gave unto the people there, the water of his blood: which
Christ afterward offered, even to the people of our age, that body that he
took of the Virgin, and was hanged upon the Cross, for the salvation of the
believers: from which body also he powered forth great abundanc of his blood,
by which we should not only be redeemed, but also made drink thereof.

This verily is a wonderful matter, seeing that Christ being incomprehensible
and inestimable, had not as yet taken unto him man's nature, nor tasted death,
for the salvation of the world, nor had redeemed us by his blood, and yet that
our Fathers, did in the Wilderness, by spiritual meat, and invisible drink,
eat his body, and drink his blood, as the Apostle is a witness, saying; That
our Fathers did eat the same spiritual meat, and did drink the same
spiritual drink. We must not here seek out our own reason or way, by which
this might be performed, but faith must be used, if we will know, what was
done. For he, that now in the Church, does by his Almighty power, spiritually
turn, the Bread into the flesh of his body, and the wine into the Water, as
it were, of his own blood, he then also invisibly made, the Manna that was
given from heaven to become his own body, and caused the water springing or
flowing out of the Rock, to become his own blood. Psalm. 78.25.
Which thing, when David did well perceive, he by the holy Ghost, protested and
plainly affirmed, saying; Man did eat the bread of Angels. For it were a fond
thing to think, that that bodily Manna, which was given to the Fathers, should
feed the heavenly armies and multitudes of Angels: or that they do eat any
such meat, who are fed and fatted, as it were, with the dainties of Gods word,
here on earth, I mean men. Verily the Psalmist, or rather the holy Ghost in the
Psalmist shows, either what our fathers received in that heavenly Manna: or
else what the faithful people should believe to be, in the mystery of Christ's
body. In both of them certainly Christ is signified and set forth: which
Christ both feeds the souls of the believers, and is the food and meat of
Angels: and yet neither of them are done in corporal taste, or bodily feeding,
but by the power of the spiritual word.

And we know, because the Evangelist has declared the same, that the Lord
Jesus Christ, before he suffered, Took Bread, and gave thanks, Mat. 26.26.
etc. 1 Cor. 11.23. etc.
and gave it to his Disciples, saying: This is my body which is given for you,
do this in remembrance of me. Likewise, he took the Cup, after he had supped,
saying: This Cup is the New Testament in my blood, which shall be shed for you.
We see that Christ had not as yet suffered, and yet for all that he wrought or
made, the mystery of his body and blood: for we think truly that any
faithful man doubts whether that Bread became Christ's body, which he gave
unto his Disciples, and said; This is my body which is given for you: or
whether the cup contains Christ's blood, of which cup our Savior Christ
himself said: This cup is the New Testament in my blood, which shall be shed
for you. Therefore as he could, even a little before he suffered, turn the
substance of the Bread, and the creature of the Wine, into his own body, which
should suffer, and into his own blood, which afterward should be shed: so
likewise was he able in the Wilderness, to turn the Manna, and the water that
issued out of the Rock, into his own flesh and blood, although that a long
time after, both his flesh was to be hanged on the cross for our sakes, and
his blood to be shed for the washing away of our sins.

Here also we ought to consider, how we must understand that which he himself
says: Ioh 6.53.
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye shall
not have life in you. For he does not say or mean, that his flesh, which
afterward hanged on the Cross, should be cut in pieces and parts, and so be
eaten by his Disciples, neither yet that his blood which he should shed for
the redemption of the world, should be given unto his Disciples for drink,
because it should be a most wicked and horrible thing, for his Disciples either
to drink his blood, or to eat his flesh, as the unbelievers did at that time
understand him. Therefore in the words following, he said to his Disciples, who
did not vnbeleevingly, but in some measure of faith receive Christ's words,
although they could not as then pierce and perceive how those words were to
be understood: to them, I say, he said: Does this offend you? Ioh. 6.61.62.
What then if ye should see the Son of man ascend up where he was before? As
though he should say: Think not I pray you, that you must either bodily eat
my flesh, or bodily drink my blood, or that my body must be divided into
parts to be eaten, or my blood distributed to be drunk, seeing that after my
resurrection, ye shall see me to go up into heaven, with the fullness of my
whole body and blood: and then shall ye understand, that my very flesh shall
not be eaten of the believers, as the infidels suppose, but that the bread and
the wine, being turned into the substance of my body and of my blood, the
substance thereof shall be in a mystery received by the believers. And
presently he adds. Ioh. 6.63.
The spirit is it (says he) which quickens, the flesh profits nothing. He
says that the flesh profits nothing at all, after such a form and manner as
the unbelievers understood it, otherwise it gives life, as the faithful do in
a mystery receive it. And why this is done, he himself does manifestly
declare, when he says: It is the spirit that quickens. Wherefore there is
in this mystery of the body and blood of Christ, a spiritual opperation and
working, that gives life; without the working whereof, these mysteries profit
nothing at all, because they may indeed feed the body, but they cannot feed
the soul.

Now then here arises a question, which while many propound, they say and
affirm, that these things are done, not in a figure or mystery, but in verity
and truth. Which while they affirm, they are found to go against, and to
gainsay the writings of the holy Fathers. Saint Augustine, Aug. de doct
Christ. lib. 3.
one of the chief Doctors of the Church, in his third book of Christian
doctrine, writes thus. Ioh. 6.53.
Except ye eat (says our Savior) the flesh of the Son of man, and drink
his blood, ye shall not have life in you. He seems to command a wicked
thing, and an ungodly act. Wherefore it is a figurative speech commanding us to
communicate in the Lords passion, and sweetly and profitably to lay up this in
our memories, that his flesh was crucified and wounded for our sakes. Here we
perceive, that this Doctor says and affirms, that the mysteries of the body
and blood of Christ, are under a figure celebrated and received of the
faithful: for he says plainly, that it belongs not to religion, but is
rather a wicked thing, carnally to eat Christ's body, or to drink his blood:
into which fault they fell, who, not spiritually but fleshly understanding the
Lords words in the Gospel, Ioh. 6.66.
Departed or went back from him, and went or walked no more with him. The same
Doctor writing in a certain Epistle to Boniface the Bishop, Aug. ad Bonifa.
epist.
amongst other things says thus. Truly we use oftentimes to speak thus, that
when Easter draws nigh, that to morrow, or the next day after shall be the
Lords passion, whereas he suffered so many years before, and verily that
passion or suffering was done but once for all. Also on the Lords day, that we
call Easter day, we usually say, this day the Lord rose again, whereas indeed
and truth, so many years are since he rose again, already past. And why is no
man so fond and foolish, as to reprove us speaking thus, as though we had lied,
but only because we name those days, according to the similitude and
likeness of these days, in which these things were done? Insomuch that it is
called the very same day, which yet is not in deed the very same, but in the
revolution and turning about of the time is like it: and so also, that is said
to be done upon that day, by reason of the celebration and administration of
the Sacrament, which is not done upon that day, but was performed long ago.
Was not Christ once offered about that time? And yet notwithstanding, he is
not only every feast of Easter, but even every day offered unto the faithful
people, neither is he to be deemed a liar who being asked of another man,
answers that he is offered. For if the Sacraments had not a certain
similitude and likeness of those things, of which they are Sacraments, they
could not at all be Sacraments: and in respect of this very likeness that they
have, they take the very names of the things themselves. Wherefore, even as the
Sacrament of Christ's body is after a certain manner Christ's body it self, and
the Sacrament of Christ's blood, is after a certain manner Christ's blood, so
the Sacrament of faith is faith.

Hence we perceive that Saint Augustine says, that the Sacrament is one thing,
and the things whereof they are Sacraments, is another thing. Now the body, in
which Christ suffered, and the blood that came out of his side, are the things
of the Sacrament: but the mysteries by which these things are represented, he
says, they are the Sacraments of the body and blood of Christ, which are
celebrated and administered, in remembrance of the Lords passion and suffering,
and that not only every year once, at or about the feast of Easter, but every
day in the year. And although the Lord had but one body, in which he
suffered once for all, and but one blood, which was shed for the salvation of
the world, yet the Sacraments or elements signifying these things, have taken
the names of the very things themselves, insomuch that they are called the body
and blood of Christ, being so called indeed for the similitude and likeness of
the things which they represent and show forth, even as the feast of Easter,
which is observed every year, is called the Passover, and the resurrection of
the Lord, whereas we know that the Lord did but once suffer, and but once rise
again, about that time. And albeit, that these very days, cannot now be
revoked or called back, because they are already past, yet by their name and
title are such days called, as in which, the memory of the Lords suffering
and resurrection is rehearsed and celebrated: and this is therefore done,
because they have a certain resemblance and likeness of these very days, in
which our Savior once suffered, and once rose again: Whereupon we say, this
day, or to morrow, or the next day, is the Lords passion, or resurrection, when
as these days, in which these things were done, were passed many years ago.
So we may say, that the Lord is offered, when the Sacraments of his suffering
are celebrated and administered, whereas indeed he was but once for all offered
up in himself, for the salvation of the world, as the Apostle says: Christ
has suffered for us, 1 Pet. 2.21.
leaving us an example, that we should follow his footsteps. For he says not,
that he every day offered himself, because he did it but once, but this he
says, that he has left us an example, which is daily presented and showed
forth to the believers, in the mystery of the Lords body and blood, to the end
that every one that shall come or repair thereto, may know that he ought to
be made a companion with him in his sufferings, the image and lively picture
whereof, he does, as it were tarry and wait for, to be exhibited unto him, in
the holy mysteries, according to the saying of the Wiseman in the Proverbes:
Pro. 23.1.
Come thou to a mighty man's table, mark diligently what things are set
before thee, knowing that thou thy self must another time prepare such like
things. To come to a mighty man's table, is to be partaker of the Lords
offering, or as we say, of the Lords Supper: and the marking or considering of
such things as are set before us is the sound understanding or knowledge of the
body and blood of Christ: whereof whosoever partaketh, he must know and
remember thus much, that he ought to prepare such precious things, that so he
may become a follower of Christ in dying with him, the remembrance of whose
death, he professes and acknowledges, not only in believing, but also in
tasting.

Again, Saint Paul writing to the Hebrews, says thus: Heb. 7.26.27.
Verily such an high Priest it became us to have, as is holy, harmless,
undefiled, separated from sinners, and become higher then the heavens: who
needed not daily (as those high Priests) to offer up sacrifice, first for his
one sins, and then for the peoples: for the Lord Jesus Christ did this once
for all, when he offered up himself. That which he did once, he does now
daily exercise and use. For he once offered up himself for the sins of the
people: and this very self same oblation or offering, is every day celebrated
among the faithful, but yet in a mystery, that so that very thing which the
Lord Jesus Christ offering up himself once for all, has fulfilled, may by the
celebration and administration of the mysteries, be daily performed and done,
for the remembrance of his death and passion. Neither yet is it falsely said,
that the Lord in those mysteries is either offered, or suffers, because they
have a certain similitude or likeness of his death and passion, whereof
indeed, they are true, and lively representations. Whereupon the very mysteries
themselves are called the Lords body, and the Lords blood, because they have
the name of that, or those things whereof they be the Sacrament.

Isodorus, Originum sieve Etymologiaru^. lib. 6. cap. de officijs. colu^ 143.
linea 28.
Isodorus in his books which he wrote of the true signification of words,
says thus: It is called a sacrifice, as though a man would say, a holy fact or
deed, because through mystical prayer, it is consecrated and appointed, to, or
for the remembrance of the Lords suffering. Whereupon, by his authority and
commandment, we call it the body and blood of Christ because that though it be
made of the fruits of the earth, it is yet notwithstanding sanctified, and so
become a Sacrament, Gods spirit working invisibly therein: the Sacraament of
the bred and cup, the Grecians do call Eucharistia: that is, if it be
interpreted, good grace, or thankesgiving. And what is better then the body and
blood of Christ? Now the bread and wine, are therefore compared and resembled
to the Lords body and boold, because that as the substance of this visible
bread and wine does nourish, and make cheerful the outward man: So the Word of
God, (which is the living or lively bread) being once rightly partaked of, does
recreate and refresh the minds of the faithful. And this Catholic Doctor
teaches us, that that same holy mystery of the Lords passion and suffering,
must on our behalfes, or in respect of us, be done for the remembrance of the
Lords passion. And in so saying, he declares that the Lords passion or
suffering, was only once done, but that the remembrance thereof is continually
represented unto us, in those same holy rites and solemnities. Whereupon, both
the bread that is offered, though it be taken, from amongst the fruits of the
earth, is yet notwithstanding, while it is sanctified, changed into Christ's
body: as also the wine, though it flow out of the Vine, is yet notwithstanding,
through the sanctification of the divine mystery, become the blood of Christ,
not visibly indeed, but (as the aforesaid Doctor affirms) the holy Ghost
invisibly working therein. Whereupon also they are called, both the body and
blood of Christ, because they are received, not as they are outwardly seen or
beheld, but as they are spiritually made, or become unto us, Gods spirit
working inwardly in us. And because, that through the invisible power and
grace, they are become a far other matter unto us than visibly they seem to
be, he therefore makes a difference, while he says, that the bread and the
wine, are therefore compared and resembled to the Lords body and blood, because
that as the substance of the visible bread and wine, does nourish and make
cheerful the outward man: so the Word of God (which is the living or lively
bread) being once rightly partaked of, does recreate and refresh the minds of
the faithful. Now in speaking thus, he most plainly confesses, that
whatsover outward thing is received in the Sacrament of the Lords body and
blood, all that is fitted and applied to the refreshing of the body. But the
Word of God, which is the invisible bread, being invisibly in the same
Sacrament, does through the partaking thereof, by quickening the minds of the
faithful invisibly feed them.

The same Doctor also says: Isidorus, loco supra citato.
It is a Sacrament, when it is celebrated or adminstred: as when a thing is so
done, that the self same thing may be understood or perceived to signify
somewhat, which thing must also be holyly received and taken. In saying these
things, he declares that every Sacrament, does, in holy things, contain some
secret or mystery: and that it is one thing which appears visibly, and that
it is another thing which must be taken or received invisibly: And what
Sacraments are to be celebrated amongst the faithful, he afterward shows,
saying: Now these are the Sacraments: Baptism, and Chrisme: and the Lords
body and blood: which are therefore called Sacraments, because under the veil
and coverture of bodily things, Gods divine power or virtue, does secretly
work the efficacy or power of the said Sacraments, Whence also it comes to
pass, that they are called Sacraments, of certain secret powers, or holy
solemnities in them. And afterward he says: In Greek it it is called a
mystery, because it has in it a secret and hidden disposition. What are we
taught by these words, but that the Lords body and blood are therefore said to
be mysteries, because they have a secret and hidden disposition, that is to
say, are one thing in respect of that which they outwardly show forth: and
another thing in respect of that, which invisibly they work within? And
hereupon also they are called sacraments, because that under the veil or
coverture of bodily things, Gods heavenly power and virtue does secretly, but
yet faithfully and effectually, dispense, procure and work, the salvation, of
all such as worthily and rightly receive them.

By all the things, The sum of this former Part.
that hitherto have been spoken, we have declared, that the body and blood
of Christ, which in the Church are received, by the mouth of the believers, are
figures, according to their outward show and visible form, but that according
to an invisible substance, that is, according to the power of the divine word,
they are verily and in deed, the body and blood of Christ. Whereupon we
conclude, that as they are visible creatures they feed the body, but that yet,
throw the power of a more mighty and excellent substance, they do both feed
and sanctify the minds of all faithful people.

And now let us look into the second question, and the purpose or drift
thereof, and let us see, whether that very body, that was borne of the Virgin
Mary, that suffered, that was dead and buried, and that sits at the right
hand of the Father, be the same which through the mystery of the Sacraments is
daily received in the Church, by the mouths of the faithful? Let us enquire
and see what S. Ambrose judges concerning this matter. Ambro. sacra. lib. 1.
In his Book of Sacraments, he speaks thus; Truly it is a marveilous thing,
that God did for the Fathers rain Manna from heaven, Psalm. 78.25.
and that they were daily fed with food from heaven: whereupon it is said, Man
did eat the bread of Angels. And yet for all that, all they which did eat
that bread in the Wilderness, Ioh. 6.51.
dyed. But as for this meat which thou receivest, yea, this living bread which
came down from Heaven, it ministers and yields unto thee, the substance of
eternal life: and whosoever eats of this bread, shall not die for ever,
because it is the body of Christ. Mark in what respect, this Doctor says that
that meat, which the faithful receive in the Church, is Christ's body, for he
says: This living bread, which came down from heaven, ministers or yields
the substance of eternal life. Does it, as it is corporally taken, or as it is
ground and chawed with the teeth, or as it is swallowed with the throat, or
received into the paunch, does it, I say, in these respects minister or yield
the substance of everlasting life? No verily; for so it feeds our flesh that
shall die, neither does it give any incorruption, neither can it in that sense
be truly said, that whosoever shall eat this bread shall never die, for that
which the body receives, is corruptible, and cannot by any means, perform
this pleasure for the body it self, that it should never die, the reason is,
because that look whatsoever is it self, subject to corruption, is not
powerful, or sufficient, to give eternity. Wherefore in that bread there is
life, but yet that life appears not to the bodily eyes, but is beheld with
the eye of faith: Ioh 6.50.51.
yea that is the living bread in deed, which came down from heaven: and of
which it is truly said, Whosoever eats it shall never die, and which is
also, the Lords body.

Again, the same holy Doctor, speaking of the almighty power of Christ, faith
thus; Ambro. sacra. lib.
Cannot the word of Christ, which was able of nothing, to make every thing that
is, be strong and sufficient enough, to change things that are, into that,
which they were not? for it is not a greater or harder matter to create and
give new things: than to change the natures of things. Saint Ambrose says,
that there is a change made in that mystery, of the body and blood of Christ,
and that it is done marveilously and wonderfully, because it is done divinely
and heavenly, and that it is done unspeakably, because it is of it self
incomprehensible. Now I would feign have them, that will in this mystery, take
and understand nothing, according to the hidden power that lies within, but
judge of the whole, according to that, which visibly and outwardly appears, I
would feign have these men, I say, to tell me, in what respect, the change is
made in this mystery? If they will say, that it is made in respect of the
substance of the creatures. I answer, that that cannot be so, for in respect
of the substance of the creatures, look whatsoever they were, before
consecration, they are even the same afterward: but they were Bread and Wine
before, and therefore they remain the same, which is proved because we see,
that even when they are consecrated, they remain in the same kind and form.
Wherefore that which our faith looks upon, is changed inwardly, by the
almighty power of the holy Ghost, and is it that which feeds the soul, and
ministers or yields the substance of eternal life. Again, the same Doctor,
a little after says: Why do thou here, Amb. loco supra citato.
in the mystery of Christ's body, seek for the order of nature, seeing that
he, being the Lord God himself, was beside, and without the course of nature,
borne of a Virgin? which is seen, and that, that is his blood which is drunk:
and that we must not inquire how it is made or become his body, but believe
and hold, that so it is become his body. 2 Cor. 5.7.
for we walk by faith, and not by sight. And again, if thou see it, thou
should say I see it to be Christ's very body and blood, and should not
say, I believe it, to be Christ's body and blood. But for as much as faith
beholds that whole thing, whatsoever that whole thing it self be, and the
eye of flesh apprehends or lays hold of nothing, the scholar or learned
shall understand (which is also the Doctors meaning) that those things which
are seen, are the body and blood of Christ, nor in kind and form, but in
virtue and power: whereupon also he says, that we must not in this matter,
consider or behold the order of nature, but reverence and esteem the high
power of Christ, which makes every thing, as he will, how he will, and into
what he will, and creates that which was not, and being created, changes it
into that which it was not before.

The same Author adds. Verily, Amb. loco eodem.
that is the true flesh of Christ, which was crucified, and which was buried:
and therefore this mystery, must be in deed, the Sacrament of that flesh:
which thing the Lord himself publishes, and proclaims, saying: This is my
body. O how diligently, and how wisely, is this distinction and difference
made? Of the flesh of Christ, which was crucified, and which was buried,
according unto which also Christ himself was both crucified and buried, the
Doctor says, that it is the very and true flesh of Christ: but of that which
is received in the Sacrament he says; It is indeed the Sacrament of that true
flesh. By these words, distinguishing the Sacrament of his flesh, from the
truth of his flesh, or very flesh, in as much as in respect of the truth of
that flesh, which he took of the Virgin, he said, that he was both crucified
and buried. And whereas he said, that the mystery, which is at this day
celebrated in the church, is the sacrament of that very and true flesh, in
which Christ was crucified, he does plainly instruct and teach the faithful
people, that that flesh, in which Christ was both crucified and buried, is not
a mystery or Sacrament, but the truth of nature: and on the other side he
teaches them, that this flesh, which now in a mystery does contain the
likeness of that flesh, is not that flesh in kind or form, but in a
Sacrament; for in kind and form it is Bread, but in a Sacrament it is Christ's
very true body, Mat. 26.26. Ambr. loco citat.
as the Lord Jesus himself affirms, saying; This is my body.

And the same Doctor in the words following, says; Mat. 6.31.
What these words should mean, mentioned in Matthew, what shall we eat? or
what shall we drink? the holy Ghost, has in another place, and after another
sort expressed by his Prophet, saying; Taste ye, and see, Psalm. 34.8.
how gracious the Lord is: blessed is the man that trusts in him. Does that
same Bread think you being tasted bodily, or that same Wine being drunk
corporally, declare and show forth how sweet the Lord is? No verily: for
whatsoever it savoureth it is bodily, and delights only the palate and
throat. Shall we think that this is, to taste the Lord, to wit, to feel and
savor some bodily thing? No verily: for the spiritual tasting and savouring
of the Lord stirs us up, to have little or no regard, yea to be void, as it
were of bodily savouring, and in that Bread, and in that drink, to imagine or
think of nothing corporally, but to feel and perceive the whole spiritually,
because the Lord is a spirit, Ioh. 4.24.
and blessed is the man that trusts in him.

And again afterward he says thus; Christ is in that Sacrament, Amb. loco
eodem.
because it is the body of Christ: wherefore it is not bodily meat, but
spiritual food. What could be spoken more plainly, more manifestly, or more
heavenly? for he says; Christ is in that Sacrament: and yet he says not, that
that Bread and that Wine is Christ, which if he should say, he should set forth
Christ, as though he were corruptible, and subject to mortality (which be it
far from us to think, much more to speak) for it is certain that
whatsoever in that meat, is either bodily seen, or bodily tasted, all that is
subject to corruption. The Doctor adds these words, Because it is the body of
Christ. But perhaps here some man will stand up and say: Behold he manifestly
and plainly confesses, that that Bread and that Wine is Christ's body. But
withal mark I pray thee, how presently he adds, That it is not bodily meat
but spiritual food. Bring not with you therefore the sense and feeling of the
flesh, for by that, nothing either is, or can be perceived in this mystery. It
is indeed Christ's body, howbeit, not his bodily body, but his spiritual body.
It is Christ's blood, but not his bodily blood, but his spiritual blood.
Wherefore nothing here is to be judged, felt, or perceived bodily, but
spiritually. It is Christ's body, but it is not his body bodily, and it is
Christ's blood, but yet it is not his blood, bodily.

Also afterward the same Father says: Amb. eodem loco. 1 Cor. 10.3.4.
Whereupon the Apostle speaking of the figure of Christ, says, that our
Fathers did eat the same spiritual meat, and did drink the same spiritual
drink: For the Lords body is a spiritual body, and the body of Christ is
the body of the divine spirit. For Christ is a spirit, as we read in the
Lamentations of Jeremy: Christ the Lord is a spirit before our face. He has
most plainly taught us, how we should understand the mystery, of the body and
blood of Christ. For when he had said, that our Fathers did eat spiritual
meat, and did drink spiritual drink, (whereas notwithstanding, there is
none that doubts, but that the Manna which they did eat, and the water which
they did drink, were bodily things) he adds concerning the mystery, which
is now administered in the Church, showing and determining in what respect it is
Christ's body: For the Lords body (says he) is a spiritual body. Christ
also is indeed God: and the body which he took of the Virgin Mary, the body
that suffered, that was buried, that rose again, was certainly a very and
true body, and the same also remained visible and palpable, that is to say,
might be seen and felt, but that body which is called the mystery of God, is
not bodily but spiritual: and if it be spiritual, then is it not visible or
palpable, that is, it cannot be seen or felt. Hereupon blessed Ambrose adds,
saying; The body of Christ is the body of the divine spirit: Now the divine
spirit is not any thing that is bodily, is not any thing that is corruptible,
or any thing that is palpable and may be felt. But this body which is
celebrated and administered in the Church, is, in respect of the visible kind
and form, both corruptible and palpable. Tell me then how it can be said, to
be the body of the divine spirit? Verily no other way, than in this respect,
that it is spiritual, that is to say, in this respect, that it cannot be seen
or felt, and therefore incorruptible.

To this very end, Amb. eodem loco.
in the words following, he adds, saying, Because Christ is a spirit as we
read, Christ the Lord is a spirit before our face. By which words he plainly
shows in what respect it may be counted Christ's body, to wit, in respect that
there is in it, the spirit of Christ, that is to say, the power of the divine
or heavenly word, which does not only feed the soul, but also purge it and
make it clean. Wherefore the same Author says afterward; To conclude, this
meat strengthens our hearts, and this drink makes man's heart merry and
joyful, Psalm. 104.5.
as the Prophet says. It cannot be denied, but that bodily meat, does after a
sort strengthen man's heart, and bodily drink make his heart merry. But that
the Doctor might show what meat it is, and what drink it is, of which he
speaks, he has plainly and particularly added this meat and this drink.
What meat does he mean, or what drink? Forsooth Christ's body, the body of
the divine spirit, and that it might be the more plainly uttered, he says,
Christ is a spirit, of whom it is read, Christ the Lord is a spirit, before our
face.

By all these places and speeches it plainly appears, that we ought not, or
cannot, take or perceive any thing bodily, in this meat, and in this drink:
but that the whole matter must be considered and weighed spiritually. For the
soul (which in the place presently alleged is meant by the heart of man) is
not fed with bodily meat, or bodily drink, but it is nourished, quickened, and
made strong, with the Word of God. Ambr. sacra. lib. 5.
Which thing the self same Doctor affirms more plainly in his fifth Book
of Sacraments. Not this Bread (says he) which goes into our bodies, but it is
that bread of eternal life, which ministers and yields substance unto our
souls. And the things following in that book or place, do most manifestly
declare that S. Ambrose spoke not this of the common bread, but of the bread of
Christ's body, for he speaks of that daily bread, which the faithful desire
might be given them, and therefore he adds; If it be daily bread, why do
thou receive it but once in a year, as the Grecians which dwell in the East,
are wont to do? Wherefore receive that daily, which may daily profit thee: and
live so, that thou may be found meet and worthy daily to receive it.
Wherefore it is manifest, of what bread he speaks, to wit, of the bread of
the body of Christ, which sustaineth and vpholdeth the substance of the soul,
not in respect as it goes and enters into the body, but in respect as it is
Bread of everlasting life.

Thus you see, that by the authority of this most learned man, we are taught,
that that body, in which Christ suffered, and that blood, which hanging upon
the Cross, he shed out of his side, does very much differ from that body,
which the faithful do daily celebrate and receive in the mystery of Christ's
passion, and from that blood, which is received by the mouth of the believers,
seeing it is but a mystery of that blood, in and by which, the whole world was
Redeemed. For this Bread and this Wine, are not Christ's body and blood, in
respect that they are to be seen bodily, but in respect that they do
spiritually minister and yield unto us, the substance of life. And as for that
body, wherein Christ suffered once for all, it showed forth no other kind or
form, than that, in which it consisted and was. For it was truly and indeed
the very self same, which it was when it was seen, which it was when it was
touched, which it was when it was crucified, and which it was when it was
buried. In like sort, the blood, that did gush and flow out of his side, did
not appear one thing outwardly, and cover or shadow another thing inwardly:
Wherefore the very blood of Christ, did flow from his very and true body: but
now the blood of Christ, which the faithful drink up, and his body which they
eat, are one thing in kind and form, and another thing in sigfication. They
are one thing in that they feed the body with bodily meat: and another thing,
in that they fat and feed the souls and minds of men, with the substance of
eternal life.

Of this thing Saint Hierom, Hieronim in epist. ad Ephesians.
in his Commentary upon Paul's Epistle to the Ephesians, writes thus: The blood
and flesh of Christ is understood two manner of ways: Ioh. 6.55.
For either it is that spirirituall and divine flesh and blood, of which he
himself says, my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed: or else
it is put for that flesh which was crucified, and for that blood which was shed
with the soldiers spear. This Doctor has made a distinction, concerning the
body and blood of Christ, and this he has done with a very great difference.
For whilst that he says, that the flesh and blood which the faithful do
daily receive, are spiritual things: and says on the other side, that the
flesh which was crucified, and the blood, which was shed with the soldiers
spear, cannot be affirmed to be spiritual or divine, he plainly declares,
that they differ so much as spiritual and corporal things, or visible and
invisible things, or as divine and humane, do differ one of them from another,
and that therefore for as much as they differ one of them from another, both of
them be not, neither indeed can be, one and the self same thing. Now that
spiritual flesh, which is received by the mouth of the faithful, and that
spiritual blood which is daily offered to be drunk of the believers, do
without doubt differ from that flesh, which was crucified and from that blood
which was shed by the soldiers spear, as the authority of this present person
alleged, does witness. Wherefore they be not all one: For that flesh that
was crucified, was made of the flesh of the Virgin, and was compacted or did
consist, of bones and sinews, and was besides distincted by the lineaments and
proportions of the parts and members of men's bodies, and was through the spirit
of a reasonable soul, quickened into his own life, and fit motions agreeing
thereto: But the spiritual flesh, which does spiritually feed the believing
people, in respect of the kind or form which it shows forth outwardly, does,
being made by the Artificers hand, consist of certain grains of Corn or
wheat, and is not compacted of any sinews or bones, nor distincted by any
diversity of members, nor made lively by any reasonable substance, nor able to
exercise any proper motitions (for whatsoever in it does minister or yield the
substance of life, pertains to a spiritual power, and belongs to an
invisible efficacy, and to a heavenly virtue or force) but is indeed, in
respect of that which is outwardly seen, far differing from that which is
believed in the mystery. Besides that flesh of Christ which was crucified, did
not show any other thing outwardly, then that it was inwardly, because it was
the very flesh of a very man, being also a very body in the kind and form of
a very body.

Furthermore we must consider, that there is figured by that bread, not only
Christ's own body, but also the body of the people that believe in him:
whereupon it is made of many grains of wheat, 1 Cor. 16.17
because the body of the believing people, is through the Word of Christ
increased, with many faithful ones. Wherefore, as the bread which is Christ's
body, is received in a mystery: so also, the members of the people, that
believe in Christ, are declared in a mystery. And as that bread is said to be
the body of the believers, not bodily, but spiritually: so must we needs
understand it to be Christ's body, not bodily, but spiritually. So likewise in
the wine, which is called Christ's blood, water is appointed to be mixed, and
the one is not suffered to be offered without the other, to declare, that the
people cannot be without Christ, nor Christ without his people, even as the
head cannot be without the body, nor the body without the head. Wherefore the
water in that Sacrament, bears the image of people, and represents them.
Therefore, if that wine, being sanctified by the office and service of the
Ministers, be turned bodily into Christ's blood, the water which is mixed
together with it, must of necessity be bodily turned into the blood of the
believing people. For where there is but one sanctification, and by consequent
one operation or working, yea, where there is but a like consideration, it must
needs then there follow, that that mystery is like. But we see, that in the
water, in respect of the body thereof, there is nothing turned, wherefore it
follows very well, that in the wine there is nothing turned bodily:
Whatsoever is set out in the water concerning the body of the people, the same
is taken spiritually. Wherefore, whatsoever is showed forth in the wine,
concerning Christ's blood, the same must of necessity be taken spiritually.

Again, the things which do differ one of them from another, be not all one.
That body of Christ which died, and rose again, and became immortal, Romans 6.9.
dies not now, neither shall death any more now bear rule over it, for it is
eternal and cannot now suffer any thing. But that which is celebrated and
administered in the Church, is temporal, and not eternal, is corruptible, and
not incoruptible, is in the way homeward, and not in it own country:
Wherefore they must needs differ one of them from another, and so by consequent
are not all one: and if they be not all one, how is it said to be Christ's true
body, and his very blood? For if it be Christ's body, and be truly so said to be
(as if it be Christ's body, it must be his body in truth) and if it be Christ's
body in truth or truly, then it must needs be that body of Christ's which is
incorruptible, and impasible, and so by consequent eternal: Whereupon also it
must of necessity follow, that that body of Christ's which is celebrated and
administered in the Church, must be incorruptible and eternal: but we cannot
deny, but that that thing is corruptible, which being changed is divided into
pieces, to be received, and being broken or ground with the teeth, passes
into the body and belly. And yet that is one thing, which is done outwardly,
and that is another thing which is inwardly believed through faith. That which
belongs to the senses of the body is corruptible, but that which faith
believes is incorruptible. Wherefore that which appears outwardly, is not the
thing it self, but the image or representation of the thing, but that is the
truth of the thing, and the thing it self, which is perceived and understood
by the mind.

Hereupon blessed Augustine, in his Exposition upon John's Gospel, speaking of
the body and blood of Christ, says thus: Moses also did eat Manna, Aug. in
Ioh. tract. 26.
so did Aaron, and so did Phiwees: yea many others did eat Manna in the
Wilderness, who also pleased God, and yet are not dead. And why so? because
they did spiritually understand, the visible food, they did spiritually hunger
after it, they did spiritually taste it, that so they might be spiritually
satisfied and filled. For even we also our selves, do at this day receive
visible food, but the Sacrament is one thing, and the virtue or power of the
Sacrament is another thing. Likewise in the words following: Aug. tract. eodem.
This is the bread which came down from heaven. Manna signified this bread:
the altar of God also signified this bread. They were Sacraments: and are
diverse or differing one of them from another, in respect of their signs, but
are equal and like, yea all one in the matter that is signified by them.
Hearken what the Apostle Paul says: 1 Cor. 10.1.2. etc.
I would not have you ignorant (brethren) that all our Fathers were under the
Clowd, and that all passed through the Sea, and were all baptized unto Moses,
in the Clowd and in the Sea, and did all eat the same spiritual meat, and
did all drink the same spiritual drink. Verily they had the same spiritual
both meat and drink, but another bodily both meat and drink, for they had
Manna, and we another thing, and yet they had the same spiritual thing that we
have. And the Apostle adds: and they did all drink the same spiritual
drink. They drunk one thing, and we another, but that was in respect of
visible kind or form, and yet they both signified one thing by spiritual
power. For how otherwise could it be the same drink. They drank (says he) of
the spiritual rock that followed them: and the rock was Christ. From thence
came the bread, from thence came the drink. The rock was Christ in sign and
figure, but the very and true Christ is in word and in flesh. Again, Aug.
tract. eodem.
in the same place: This is the bread that came down from heaven, so that
whosoever shall eat of it, shall not dye: but yet he must eat that, which
appertains to the virtue and power of the Sacrament, and not that only which
appertains to the visible Sacrament. And such a one is he as eats
inwardly, and not outwardly only: and as eats the same in his heart through
faith, and not that pearceth or presses it with his teeth.

And in another place of his said Exposition upon John, bringing in our
Saviors words, he speaks thus: Aug. in Ioh. tract 27.
Does this offend you, that I said, behold, I give you my flesh to eat, and my
blood to drink? What then if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up, where he
was before? What means this? Does he by this speech loose that which moved
them? Does he by so saying open that wherewith they were offended? Yea verily,
and that fully also, if they could have understood it. For they thought, that
he would have given his body, but he said that he would go up into heaven,
and that whole as he was: as though he should say: When ye shall see the Son
of man ascending up where he was before, at the least even then ye shall
know, that he will not give his body after such a manner and fashion, as you
imagine and fantasy: yea, and even then also ye shall understand, that his
grace is not consumed or eaten up by bytings and morsels. For the Lord himself
says: It is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing. And after
that he had uttered many words and sentences, he again adds: Aug. tract.
eodem. Romans 8.9.
Whosoever (says the Apostle) has not the spirit of Christ, the same is none
of his. Wherefore it is the spirit that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing.
The words that I have spoken unto you, are spirit and life. What means this
that they are spirit and life? That is to say, they must be spiritually
understood. Have thou understood them spiritually: then are they spirit and
life to thee. Have thou understood them carnally: yea even so are they spirit
and life, but not unto thee.

By the authority of this Doctor, handling the Lords words, concerning the
Sacrament of his body and blood, we are plainly taught, that those words of
the Lord must be understood spiritually, and not carnally, even as himself
says: Ioh. 6.63.
The words which I speak unto you are spirit and life: yea even those words
verily which he spoke concerning the eating of his flesh, and the drinking of
his blood: For he speaks of those words wherewith his Disciples were
offended. Wherefore, to the end they might not be offended, the heavenly Master
or Teacher, calls them back from the flesh to the spirit, and from bodily
sight, to invisible understanding. We see therefore in what respect that meat
of the Lords body, and that drink of his blood, are truly and indeed his
body, and truly and indeed his blood, to wit, in respect that they are spirit
and life.

Moreover: such things as be all one, are contained in or under one
definition. Now it is affirmed, of the very and true body of Christ, that he
is very God and very man: God as he was begotten of the father from before all
beginnings: and man, as he was toward the end of the world, conceived and
borne of the Virgin Mary. But these things cannot be said of that body of
Christ, which by a mystery is celebrated and administered in the Church, and yet
it is after a certain manner known to be Christ's body: now that manner is in
figure and representation, that so the truth, and the thing it self, may be
the better perceived.

In these prayers, which are said after the mystery of the body and blood of
Christ, and whereunto the people answer, Amen, thus it is uttered with the
Priests voice: We, that do take or receive the pledge of everlasting life,
do humbly beseech thee to grant, that we may with a manifest and plain
partaking receive that, which we touch, in the image or representation of the
Sacrament.

Now we know that a pledge and an image or representation, appertain to
another thing, that is to say, have respect not to themselves, but to another
thing. For a pledge is a pledge of that thing, for the pledging whereof it is
given, and not the thing it self, as likewise an image is the image of that
thing, the likeness whereof it does represent or show forth. For these things
do signify the thing it self, whose picture and pledge they are, and yet for
all that, they do not very manifestly declare the things themselves. Which
seeing it is so, it plainly appears, that this body and blood, are the
pledge, and (as it were) the picture, or representation of a thing that shall
be, to the end, that that which is now showed by a similitude, may in time
hereafter to come, be, by manifestation, or manifestly revealed. Whereupon, I
conclude, that if now they signify, and in time to come shall make manifest,
or lay open, that then, that is one thing, which is done and performed now, and
that that is another thing, which shall in time to come, be manifested and laid
open. Wherefore, that which the Church celebrateth and administreth, is both
the body and blood of Christ, but yet as a pledge, and (as it were) the
picture, or representation. But then it shall be the truth, when as now, not
the pledge, nor the picture, or representation of the thing shall appear, but
the truth of the thing it self.

Also in another place of the said prayers; We beseech thee Lord to grant
that thy Sacraments may work that in us, which they do contain, that look
what we now administer and receive in form, we may also receive it in the
truth of the things. He says, that these things are celebrated and done, in
show and form, and not in truth, that is, in similitude or likeness, and not
in the declaration of the thing it self. Now the form and show of a thing,
and the verity or truth of the self same thing, differ one of them from
another. Wherefore that body and blood, which is celebrated and received in the
Church, differs from that body and blood, which is known to be now glorified
in Christ's body, through his Resurrection. And the former of these two bodies is
a pledge and figure: and this latter is the very truth it self, for the former
is celebrated and administered, till such time, as we may come to the other: but
when we shall once come to this latter, the former shall be removed and taken
away. Wherefore it appreareth, that they are by a very great difference sundred
one of them from the other: yea, look what difference there is between the
pledge and thing for which the pledge is given, and between an Image, or the
thing whose Image it is, or between the form and show of a thing, and the
truth it self, so much difference there is, between the one and the other.
Thus we see, that that mystery of the body and blood of Christ, which the
faithful do now receive in the Church, does much differ, and is far
severed from that body, which was borne of the Virgin Mary, which suffered,
which was buried, which rose again, which ascended into heaven, and which
sits at the right hand of the Father. For that which is celebrated and
received, while we are in the way of this life, must be spiritually received
and understood; for Faith believes the thing which it sees not, and lays
hold of that which does spiritually feed the soul, and make glad the heart,
and gives eternal life, and incorruption, whilst we look not upon that,
which feeds the body, or is pressed with the teeth, or is broken in pieces,
but that only which is spiritually received in faith: whereas that body, in
which Christ suffered and rose again, is his own very body, which he took of
the body of the Virgin Mary, which also was palpable and visible, yea, and that
after his Resurrection; even as he himself says unto the Disciples: Luke
24.38.39.
Why are ye troubled? and wherefore do thoughts and doubts arise in your
hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, for it is I my self. Handle me and
see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me have.

Let us hear also what blessed Fulgentius writes in his Book of Faith; Look
that thou do most steadfastly believe, Fulgen. de fide.
and at no hand doubt that the only begotten Word of God became flesh, Ephesians.
5.2.
and offered up himself for us as an offering, and a sacrifice, of a sweet
smelling savor unto God. Unto whom, with the Father, and the holy Ghost, the
Patriarchs, Prophets, and Priests, did in the time of the old Testament,
offer up Beasts and sacrifice them: and unto whom also, with the Father, and
the holy Ghost (with whom he is of one and the self same Godhead) the holy
Catholic Church being dispersed throughout the whole world, cease not in
faith, and love, to offer up, the sacrifice of Bread and Wine. For in those
sacrifices of flesh and Beasts, there was a signification of Christ's flesh,
which even he himself being without sin should offer for our sins: and of
his blood also, which he should shed for the forgiveness of our sins: but in
this sacrifice of Bread and Wine, there is a thankesgiving for, and a
remembrance of that flesh of Christ, which he offered up for us: and of that
blood, which he himself, being very God, did shed for us: Act. 20.28.
of which S. Paul speaks in the Acts of the Apostles, and in the xx. Chapter
of the said book, saying: Take heed unto your selves, and to all the flock,
whereof the holy Ghost has made you Bishops or overseers, to govern the
Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood. Wherefore there was
in the former sacrifices figuratively signified, that that should be given to
us: but there is in this sacrifice evidently and plainly declared, what is
given unto us. Now the Doctor in saying, that there was in those sacrifices
signified, what should be given unto us, and that in this sacrifice, there was
declared what was given unto us already, he does plainly declare, that as
those sacrifices had the figure of things to come, so our sacrifice is a figure
of things that are past. By which speeches he has most evidently declared,
what great difference there is, between that body wherein Christ suffered,
and this body which is celebrated and administered in the remembrance of his
Passion, or death. For that body wherein he suffered, was his proper, and very
or true body, having no mystical or figurative matter in it: But this latter
is a mystical body, showing one thing outwardly in figure, and inwardly
representing another thing, through the understanding and apprehension of faith.

Moreover, let us add and put down one other testimony of that reverent
Father, Augustine, which shall both warrant the truth and credit of our
sayings, and make an end of our Oration and speech. In a certain Sermon, Aug.
de sacra. altar. Sermon.
which he made to the people concerning the Sacrament of the Altar, thus he
says. The thing which you see on Gods Altar, you saw the same the night that
is past: but as yet ye have not heard, what it is, what it means, and of how
great a matter it contains the Sacrament. The thing which you see is bread,
and the cup, which thing also your own eyes do declare unto you: but as
concerning that wherein your faith requires to be instructed, the Bread is the
body of Christ, and the cup is his blood. Truly this is shortly said, and it
may be perhaps sufficient for faith, but yet faith always needs instruction;
Esaias 7.9.
For the Prophet says, Unless ye believe, ye shall not understand. You may
peradventure say unto me; Thou biddest us believe, but yet we say, declare it
unto us, that we may understand. For such a thought may arise in some man's
mind: We know from whom our Lord Jesus Christ took his flesh, to wit, of the
Virgin Mary: he being an Infant, did suck, and was nourished, and did grow
and came to man's age, he suffered persecution at the Jews hands, he was
hanged upon a tree, he was killed, he was taken from the Cross, he was buried,
the third day he rose again, he ascended into heaven, even what day pleased
him, thither he carried up his body, from thence shall he come to judge the
quick and the dead, and he is there now sitting at the right hand of the
Father. How then is the bread his body? and the cup, or that which is contained
in the cup, how is it his blood? These things (good brethren) are therefore
called Sacraments, because one thing is seen in them, and another thing
understood: that which is seen, has a bodily kind, form, and show: but that
which is understood, has spiritual fruit. The reverend Author in speaking
these things instructs us, what we ought to think and hold, both concerning
the Lords own body, which was borne of the Virgin Mary, and sits now at
the right hand of GOD, and in which he shall come to judge the quick and the
dead: and also concerning that body, which is set on the Altar, and whereof the
people are partakers. That body is sound and whole, and is not divided by any
cutting, neither covered with any figures: but this body which is set upon the
Lords Table, is both a figure, because it is a Sacrament, and also as it is
outwardly seen, has a bodily kind and form that feeds the body, but as it
is inwardly understood, it has a spiritual fruit, which quickens the soul.

Aug. de sacra. altar. Sermon. 1 Cor. 12.27.
And the same Doctor, minding to speak somewhat more plainly and manifestly,
of this mystical body, in the words following, says thus; If ye will
therefore understand what Christ's body means, hear the Apostles, saying: Ye
are the body of Christ, and members for your part. If then ye be the body of
Christ, and members for your part, your mystery is set on the Lords Table, and
ye receive the mystery of the Lord. You answer: Amen, to that thing which you
your selves be, and by so answering, you subscribe and consent to the same.
Thou hear then Christ's body, and thou answerest, Amen: be a member of the
body of Christ, that so thy Amen may be true and right. But wherefore is this
done in bread? In this matter we will bring forth nothing of our own devise,
let us rather hear the Apostle himself utter his mind, when speaking of this
Sacrament, he says, we that are many, are one bread, 1 Cor. 10.17.
and one body, etc. This holy man Augustine does sufficiently instruct us, that
as Christ's body is signified by the Bread which is set upon the Altar, so
also there is thereby signified by the body of the people that receives it,
manifestly thereby declaring, that that is Christ's proper or own body, in
which he was borne of the Virgin, in which he sucked, in which he suffered, in
which be died, in which he was buried, in which he rose again, in which he
ascended into Heaven, in which he sits at the right hand of the Father, and
in which he shall come to judge the quick and the dead: Whereas that which is
set upon the Lords Table, contains the mystery of the other, even as it does
likewise contain, the mystery of the believing people, the Apostle himself
witnessing the same, and saying: We that are many, are one bread, 1 Cor. 10.17.
and one body in Christ.

Your wisdom (most noble Prince) may perceive and understand, that I have both
by the testimonies of the sacred Scriptures and by the sayings of the holy
Fathers, faithfully alleged and laid down, most evidently declared, and
plainly prooved, that that bread which is called Christ's body, and that cup
which is called Christ's blood, is a figure, because it is a mystery: and also
that there is no small difference, between that his body, which is so in a
mystery, and that his body, which suffer^^ and was buried, and rose again,
because in that was the very proper body of our Savior, neither was there in
it, any figure or or signification, but the manifestation and plainness of
the thing it self was known, as also the believers at this day, do desire
the sight thereof: for that is our head, and when we see it, Ioh. 10.30.
our desire shall be satisfied: for he and the Father are one, not in respect
that our Savior has a body, but in respect of the fullness of the godhead,
Col. 2.9.
which dwelt in Christ, as he was man. Whereas in this, which is celebrated
and administered by a mystery, there is a figure not only of Christ's own body,
but also of the body of the people, that believe in Christ: for it bears the
figure of both the bodies, that is to say, both of Christ body which suffered,
and rose again, and of the people, that are in Christ through Baptism borne
again, and quickened from the dead.

Hereunto let us add also, that this bread, and this cup, which is called the
body and blood of Christ, does lieuely represent or set out the remembrance of
the Lords passion or death, even as he himself has said in the Gospel: Luke
22.19.
Do ye this in remembrance of me: which the Apostle Paul expounding, says: 1
Cor. 11.26.
So often as ye shall eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, ye shall
show forth the Lords death till he come. Here we are taught by our Savior,
and by the holy Apostle Saint Paul, that that bread, and that wine, which is
set on the Altar, is there set for a figure or remembrance of the Lords death,
to the end it might call back to our remembrance, that which has been done in
time past, that so we being made mindful of that his passion, might by it be
made partakers of Gods gifts and graces, by which also we are delivered from
death, knowing this, that when we shall come to the sight and beholding of
Christ, we shall have no need of such instruments and means, thereby to be put
in remembrance, what his unmeasurable and infinite goodness has endured for
us: the reason is, because that When we shall behold him face to face, 1 Cor.
13.12.
we shall be put in mind, not by any outward admonition of temporal things,
but we shall behold him in the very contemplation and sight of the truth it
self, and to be instructed how we ought to give thanks to the author of our
salvation.

And yet I would have no man think, that because we speak thus, that
therefore the faithful do not in the mystery of the Sacrament, receive the
Lords body and blood, because faith receives that thing, not which the eye
sees, but that which the heart believes: for it is a spiritual meat, and a
spiritual drink, spiritually feeding the soul, and giving the life of
everlasting fullness, even as our Savior himself commending and setting out
this mystery, says: Ioh. 6.63.
It is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing.

Thus I being a man of very small gifts, and desiring to yield obedience unto
your Excellencies commandment, have presumed and undertaken to dispute, or
reason of no small matters: wherein I have not followed the presumption of mine
own thinking or judgment, but regarded rather the authority of the ancient
Fathers: which, if your Highness shall allow, as spoken Catholikely and
Christianly, impute it I pray you to the deserts and worthiness of your own
zeal and religion, which was not ashamed (having for a while laid aside the
glory of your Kingly magnificence) to demand an answer concerning the truth, of
such a poor and base person as I am. But if happily these things shall not
please and delight you, ascribe it unto my folly and unskillfulness, which
could not effectually declare that which your Highness wished, and I my self
greatly desired.

Here ends Bertrams Book, concerning the Body and Blood of the Lord.
Errata.
IN the Epistle] Whether he spurious, (read) whether he be spurious.

In the Preface next following.
PAge 2. Charlemayne the Great, (read) Charles the Great. Page 7. Trithenius
(read) Trithemius. Page 9. Sends greeting (read) send greeting.
In the Book of Bertram.
FOl. 5. Outwardly locked up (read) outwardly looked upon. Fol. 9. In color
or in favor (read) in color or in savor.

