QVI IN ME VIVIT PRO ME MORTUUS EST. ANNO SALUTIS NOSTRAE J616.

portrait of Aaron Rathborne

ARTIFEX

Arithmetica, Geometria

THE SVRVEYOR in Four books by AARON RATHBORNE

Thesauru^ and talentam ne abscondas in agro.

Inertia stremia

LONDON Printed by W: Stansby for, W: Burre. 1616.

W.H. fe.
engraved title page

TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES, Prince of WALES, Duke of CORNWALL,
YORK, ALBANY and ROTHSAY: Marquis of ORMONT, Earl of ROSSE; and Baron of
ARMANOCH: High Seneschall of SCOTLAND: Lord of the ISLES; and Knight of the most
noble Order of the GARTER.
IF in former ages (most noble Prince) the studies Mathematical were held meet
for Princes; I doubt not but in these, they may implore (by your favorable
admittance) the approbation and defense of your gracious patronage; which
emboldens me the rather, to presume the dedication of these my labors to your
Highness protection. Wisdom is defined by CICERO to be diuinarum atque
humanarum rerum scientia, of the former part of which definition (being the
most absolute) I will leave to speak unto those who can better write; yet will
thus much auerre, that no man shall obtain the absolute perfection thereof,
being absolutely ignorant of the rules, rudiments and principles of
Mathematical discipline, as the due consideration of that sacred and mystical
Unity and Trinity, may well approve. And how available and important they
are, for the attayning to that humanarum rerum scientiam, in Peace or War, is
worthily witnessed by PLATO, VEGETIVS, LIVIVS, and other Authors; who testify
of LYCVRGVS, and that famous Syracusean ARCHIMEDES; by the one, what excellent
Laws and Ordinances were established and ministered, in the time of peace; and
by the other, what more then wonderful devises and stratagems were wrought
against the invincible forces of MARCELLVS, in the time of War, which they
worthily impute to this their scientiae mathematicarum. But should my
weakness here undertake to illustrate the excellency of that worth, which all
worthy men admire; and that to your Highness, whose judgment is best able to
discern; were but to deprave the one and the other, and rest in mine own
reproach. Wherefore, assuring my self, of your Highness love and affection to
these Arts, and your respect to the Professors thereof; with your power and
ability of defense, against the malignant courses of malicious detractors, I
presume in all humility to entreat your Patronage of these my labors, which
in all duty I prostrate at your Highness feet; with continual invocation to
the Prince of Princes, ever to preserve your Princely dignity.

Your Highness most humble and devoted, AARON RATHBORNE.

THE HIGH and MIGHTY PR. CHARLES PR. OF WALES. D. OF CORN: YOR: ALB: and
ROTHS: MARQ: OF ORM: etc.

portrait of Charles I To whom great Prince can else this work be due.
Then you, now placed where All is in yo^ view
And being the rule of what the bcoble do.
Are both the Scale, and the Surveyor too.
HONEY SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

Fra Delaram Sculp.


The Preface.
I Am not ignorant (friendly Reader) that hitherto, in writing, never any man
pleased all; nor will I expect to be the first. To persuade the courteous, were
causeless, for they are naturally kind; and to dissuade the captious, were
bootlesse, for they will not be diuerted: Let the first make true use of these
my Labors, and they shall find much pleasure and profit therein; let the last
(if they like not) leave it, and it shall not offend them. To make apology or
exornation, in defense or commendation of the subject whereof I treat, were
needless; it being already, in the worlds opinion, of sufficient ability
and reputation, both to defend and commend it self: Only of my manner and
order in handling the same, I will say somewhat, as briefly as I may, for thy
better instruction and understanding thereof.

In general, I have disposed and digested the same into four Books; whereof,
the two former tend specially to the principles and rules of Geometry, with
performance thereby of many useful and necessary conclusions; and the two
later, to matter of survey, with many isntrumental conclusions, tending as
well to that, as diverse other purposes.

More particularly, in my first Book, I begin with the Matters, Grounds, and
Elements of GEOMETRY, as the definitions and terms of art belonging
thereunto; most fitting first by the Practicioner to be learned and well
understood: then next have I placed therein diverse Geometrical THEOREMES, as
the foundations, grounds, and reasons whereon the practike part depends.

In the second (having formerly laid the foundation) I show the means and
practike operation of many necessary conclusions and Geometrical PROBLEMES,
as the distinction, application, and division of Lines and Angles; and the
description, reduction, addition, inscription, transmutation, division, and
separation of all forms and kinds of superficial Figures, with their several
dimensions. And considering, that as well in the THEOREMES of the first Book,
as the PROBLEMES in the second, I wholly omit (for breuities sake, and avoiding
confusion to the learner) their several demonstrations, using only
explication and construction; I therefore express in the Margent against those
THEOREMES and PROBLEMES, where, how, and in what place of EVCLID, RAMVS, and
other Authors, to find their several demonstrations at large: and likewise, at
the end of each construction, I have inserted the like numbers and notes of
reference, from the THEOREMES in the first Book, to the PROBLEMES in the
second; and the contrary: whereby most plainly and readily is found, and had,
as well the reason and ground of any PROBLEM proposed, as the effect and
operation of any THEOREME delivered.

In the third Book I begin with the description of the several Instruments
fit and usual for Survey; and of their several uses: wherein somewhat have I
spoken (though too sparingly) concerning their abuse; being now grown
shamefully general, by the multitude of simple and ignorant persons (using, or
rather abusing, that good plain Instrument, called the Plain Table) who
having but once observed a Surueyor, by looking over his shoulder, how and in
what manner be directs his sights, and draws his lines thereon; they presently
apprehend the business, provide them of some cast Plain Table, and within
small time after, you shall hear them tell you wonders, and what rare feats
they can perform; yea, and will undertake (or I will for them) that for ten
groats a day, and their charges defrayed, they shall be able to undo any man
they deal with; or at leastwise, to do him such wrong and prejudice, as
perhaps he might, with more ease, and less loss, have given ten pounds a day
to one that would have spoken less, and performed more. But what should I say
more of them then thus, Monoculi inter caecos oculissimi sunt, and so will I
leave the blind, with tumbling the blind into the mire.

I further describe in this third Book, the composition and use of an
Instrument of mine own, which I call the Peractor, and of a Chain, which I
call the Decimall Chain, with the divisions and parts thereof: which rightly
understood and practiced (I dare boldly say without ostentation) is far more
useful and absolute for speed and exactness, then any yet ever used: And I
will maintain by sufficient demonstration, that no man (using not the same, or
the like) shall attain to the same or the like perfection, for precise
exactness in any dimension, as I will thereby perform.

And I further show therein, the best, speediest, and exactest means, for the
survey and isntrumental mensuration of a Manor, or any other superficial
content whatsoever, by diverse and several means; with many extraordinary
observations and courses, therein to be had and taken, not usually known or
practiced; as by the argument of that Book more particularly appears.

Wherein by the way J would advise the Reader, who desires to make use
thereof, and to profit himself thereby, in reading and practicing; to take the
Chapters before him as they lie in order; for that I have striued to place them
in such an orderly and methodicall form, as the one necessarily follow the
other in use and practice; well knowing that disorder and irregularitie in this
kind, breeds not a little trouble and confusion to the weak practicioner.

The fourth and last Book, consists of the legal part of Survey; wherein I
first show what a Manor is and the several parts thereof, with the appendants
thereunto; how the same is created and maintained, and how and by what means
destroyed and discontinued: also the several sorts and kinds of estates
whereby any lands or tenements may be holden, and the several tenures, rents
and services depending on those estates: I further show therein the order and
manner of keeping Courts of Survey, with the entry of the tenants evidence and
estates; and the orderly and artificial manner of engrossing the same, with
many other necessary rules and observations tending to those purposes, as more
at large also appears by the argument of the same Book.

And here, as before, would I advise the practicioner, to observe the like
course in reading and practicing the rules and instructions of this Book, as I
have formerly directed for the third, for that J have strictly observed the
like decorum in placing the Chapters each after other, as of necessity they are
to be used and practiced.

Now might I here much enlarge and protend this Preface, in explicating the
wonderful use of the two former Books, in the performance of infinite
conclusions Geometrical, so far passing this subject of Survey, as it in it
self exceeds the meanest matter of dispose, which (to avoid prolixitie) J
will here forbear, leaving the consideration thereof to thine own judgment,
when thou shall find therein by thy diligent practice the sweet and pleasing
taste of such sense-beguiling fruit.

And further might I amplify the same, not only in declaring the great and
infinite pleasure, with no less profit, which the true knowledge, use, and
understanding of the two later Books may bring (as well to Surueyors, as all
owners and occupyers of land in general) but also of the antiquity and
necessity of Survey; howsoever slighted by many, who will not bestow a penny
in points, or two pence in tape, or the like, but they will number the one, and
measure the other, before they pay for either, and yet will disburse many
thousands in a purchase, without the certain knowledge of either quantity,
quality, or value thereof: (and these are those which are called penny-wise,
etc.) whereby it often happens (as I have often known) that a valuable
purchase being made, within few weeks after, the money has been raised of
the woods, and the lands perhaps immediately sold for much more then the money
disbursed; and the same again vented at the third hand, has yielded a double
value: and all this unseen, and vnsurueyed, with what disadvantage to the
first vendor, I will leave to the consideration of my young Master, who has
thus offended in selling all, and rests now in repentance, with full
resolution not to offend in the like. And the like have I known of a purchase
made, when a moitie of the charge could scarcely be raised.

But to spend time to this purpose, were to little end, and therefore will I
end this purpose; only entreating thee gentle Reader, that as I have thus
employed mine idle hours, to find thee hours of employment; if thou reap
either pleasure or profit by these my pains, to afford me thy good opinion
(for Virtus laudata crescit, and honos alit arts) which is all I crave.

AARON RATHBORNE.
From my Lodging, at the house of M. ROGER BVRGIS, against
Salisburie-house-gate in the Strand, this sixth of November, 1616.
THE SURVEYOR The first Book.
THE ARGUMENT OF THIS BOOK.
THis first Book consists of two parts; the former whereof entreats only
of the first Matters, Grounds, and Elements of GEOMETRY, as the distinction of
Lines, Angles, Triangles, and other Figures, with their DEFINITIONS, showing
what they are: The second part contains diverse Geometrical THEOREMES,
tending chiefly and most fitly to the subject and matter prosecuted in the
subsequent Books, whereby the ingenious Practitioner may readily conceive and
apprehend the ground and reason of the Precepts, Rules, and Problemes therein
delivered.

THE FIRST PART.
DEFINITION I. A Point is that which is the least of all Materials, having
neither part nor quantity.
Between Unity in ARITHMETIKE, Euc. 1. Def. 1.
and this Point in GEOMETRY, there is a near resemblance: but that, more
simple and pure; this, material; and (although the least that can be imagined)
requires position and place, as this Point A.

DEFINITION II. A Line is length, without breadth-or thickness.
THis is the first quantity in GEOMETRY, Euc. 1. Def. 2.
and may be divided into parts, in respect of his length, but admits no
other division or dimension; and has for his terms and limits that
Geometrical point formerly spoken of. And of these lines are there two sorts;
namely right, as the line A. and crooked, or sphericall, as the line B.

diagram

DEFINITION III. A Superficies is that which has only length and breadth.
THis is the second quantity in GEOMETRY, Euc. 1. Def. 5.
having two several dimensions, namely, length and breadth, without depth or
thickness (for that belongs to a solid or body, being the third quantity in
GEOMETRY, and impertinent to this place, whereunto is attributed all three
dimensions, as length, breadth, and thickness.) And as a line is limited with
points, so is a Superficies with lines, and a Solid or Body with Superficies.
As the figure A. being a Superficies, has for his length B. C. or D. E. and
for his breadth B. D. or C. E. which four lines are the bounds, limits, and
terms of the same Superficies.

diagram

DEFINITION IIII. An Angle is the congression or meeting of two lines in any
sort, so as both make not one line.
diagram diagram diagram diagram

GEnerally of Angles (in respect of their lines) there are three sorts; Euc. 1.
Def. 8.
namely, right-lined, sphericall, and mixed. As the Angle A. is called a
right-lined Angle, being composed of two right lines; the Angles B. and C. are
sphericall, or crooked Angles; and the Angle D. a mixed Angle, being caused of
both.

DEFINITION V. Jf a right line fall on a right line, making the Angles on
either side equal, each of those Angles are called right Angles: And the line
erected is called a Perpendicular line unto the other.
AS in general there are three sorts of Angles, in respect of their lines,
Euc. 1. Def. 10.
as aforesaid; so in particular, of right-lined Angles there are three sorts,
in respect of their quantities; namely, an Orthogonall, or right Angle; an
Ob^use, or blunt Angle; and ^n Acute, or sharp Angle: whereof, ac^^rding to
this definition, the line A. B. ^^ling on the line C. D. and making the Angles
on either side equal, namely, the Angle A. B. C. on the one side equal to the
Angle A. B. D. on the other side; those two Angles are called right Angles: And
the line A.B. erected on C.D. without inclination to either side, is called a
Perpendicular, or Plumbe line. And here note further, that usually an Angle is
described by three letters; of which, the second or middle letter represents
always the Angle intended. PROB. 4.5.6.9.

diagram

DEFINITION VI. An Angle which is greater then a right Angle, is an obtuse
Angle.
Every Angle in general (not being a right Angle) whether greater or lesser,
is called an Oblique Angle: Euc. 1. Def. 11.
but particularly, if greater then a right Angle, it is called an Obtuse Angle;
if lesser, an Acute Angle: As the Angle B. D. C. (being greater then the right
Angle A. D. C.) is an Obtuse Angle; for it contains it, and also the Angle A.
D. B.

diagram

DEFINITION VII. An Acute Angle is that which is less then a right Angle.
THis Definition is manifest by the former Diagram, wherein the Angle A. D. B.
is an Acute Angle, Euc. 1. Def. 12.
being less then the right Angle A. D. E. for the same right Angle contains
it, and also the Angle B. D. E. being likewise an Acute Angle.

DEFINITION VIII. A Figure is that which is contained under one o^ many limits.
AS these three figures, A. B. and C. whereof the first is contained under one
limit; Euc. 1. Def. 14.
the second, under three; and the third, under four; and the like of others.
Wherein is to be noted, that of two right lines, no Figure can be contained.

diagram diagram diagram

DEFINITION IX. A Circle is a plain Figure, and contained under one line,
which is called the Circumference thereof.
A Circle, Euc. 1. Def. 15. R^m. 1.15.
of all other Figures, has the prioritie, being of all most perfect and
absolute; and therefore most fitting first to be defined: as the Figure A. in
the last Diagram.

DEFINITION X. The Center of a Circle is that point which is in the midst
thereof: from which point, all right lines, drawn to the Circumference, are
equal.
AS the point B. in this Figure is the Center thereof, Euc. 1. Def. 16.
from whence the lines B. A. B. C. and B. D. being drawn to the Circumference
(and as many others as are s^ drawn) are all equal, and are semidiameters to
the same Circle. PROB. 34.1.

diagram

DEFINITION XI. The Diameter of a Circle is a right line, passing by the Center
through the whole Circle, and divides the same into two equal parts: Either
half of which Diameter, is called the Semidiameter of the same Circle.
AS the line A. B. C. in this circle is the diameter thereof, Euc. 1. Def. 17.
for that it passes by the center B. through the whole circle, as from A. to
C. and also divides the circle into two equal parts, the one half toward D.
the other toward E. Either half of which Diameter, as A. B. or B. C. is
called the Semidiameter of the same Circle. PROB. 34.

diagram

DEFIN. XII. A Semicircle is a Figure contained under the Diameter of a Circle,
and the semicircumference of the same Circle.
AS supposing the circle A. B. C. the Diagram of the last DEFINITION, Euc. 1.
Def. 18.
to be divided into two equal parts by the diameter thereof A. C. whereby two
Figures are proiected, namely, A. D. C. and A. E. C. Now by this DEFINITION,
each of these Figures are Semicircles, for that the one of them is contained
under the diameter of the same circle A. C. and the semicircumference A. D. C.
and the other under the same diameter, and the semicircumference A. E. C.

DEFIN. XIII. A Segment, Section, or Portion of a Circle, is a Figure contained
under a right line, and part of the circumference, either greater or less then
the Semicircle.
AS the diameter of a circle passing by the center thereof, Euc. 1. Def. 19.3.
Def. 5.
divides the same into two equal parts; so any right line, drawn from any
one part diagram of the circumference to any other part thereof (and not
passing by the center) divides the circle into two unequal parts, which are
called Segments, Sections, or Portions of a circle: As in this circle, the
figure A. C. B. because it is contained under the right line A. B. and the
lesser part of the circumference A. C. B. is called a lesser Segment, Section,
or Portion of a circle; and the figure A. D. B. because it is contained under
the right line A. B. and the greater part of the circumference A. D. B. is
called a greater Segment, Section, or Portion of a circle. Here note also, that
these parts and such like of the circumference so divided, are commonly called
Arches, or arch lines. And all lines (less then the diameter) drawn and
applied as the line A. B. are called Cords, or cord lines, of those Arches
which they so subtend; or Subtenses, because they subtend both segments. THEOR.
73. PROB. 34.

DEFIN. XIIII. Equal Circles are such as have equal Diameters, or whose
lines, drawn from their Centres, are equal.
AS these two circles A. and B. are equal, Euc. 3. Def. 1.
their diameters being equal, namely, C. D. and E. F. or their Semidiameters,
(which, according unto this DEFINITION, are lines drawn from the centres unto
their circumference) as A. C. or A. D. and B. E. or B. F.

diagram diagram

DEFIN. XV. A right line is said to touch a circle, which touching it, and
being extended or produced, does not cut the circumference thereof.
AS the right line A. B. being drawn by the point C. does there only touch
the circle, Euc. 3. Def. 2.
and being produced unto B. cutteth not the circumference thereof. This line is
commonly called a Tangent, or Contingent line: whereof there is great and
infinite use, in many Conclusions, Geometrical and Astronomicall, especially
in the mensuration and resolution of Triangles, as well right-lined, as
sphericall, by the Canons and Tables of Synes, Tangents, and Secants, in that
behalf calculated.

diagram

DEFIN. XVI. An angle of a Section, or Segment, is that which is contained
under a cord line, and the arch line of the same Section.
AS the angles A. B. C. and B. A. C. in the lesser segment of this circle, Euc.
^. Def. 6.
are angles of a Section, because they are contained under the cord line A. B.
and the arch line A. C. B. Also the angles D. B. A. and D. A. B. in the greater
Segment are angles of the same Segment, by the like reason. And all angles of
this kind are called mixed angles, because they are contained under a right
line and a crooked. Of which two Segments, the lesser has always the lesser
angle; and the greater, the greater angle.

diagram

DEFIN. XVII. An angle in a Section, or Segment, is when two right lines are
drawn from any point in the arch line, to the ends or extremes of the cord
line; the angle in that point of the arch line is called an angle in a Section
or Segment.
AS the angle A. B. C. in the lesser Segment is an angle in a Section, Euc. 3.
Def. 7.
or Segment, by reason that the two right diagram lines B. A. and B. C. are
drawn from the point B. in the arch line to the ends or extremes of the cord
line A. C. And also the angle A. D. C. in the greater Segment is an angle in a
Section, or Segment, because the two right lines D. A. and D. C. are drawn
from the point D. in the arch line to the ends or extremes of the cord line A.
C. And here note, the greater Section has in it the lesser angle, and the
lesser Section the greater angle, contrary to the mixed angles in the prece^ent
DEFINITION mentioned. And here also is to be noted, by the declaration of this
and the former DEFINITION, the difference between an angle of a Segment, and
an angle in a Segment; the first being called a mixed angle, and this a right
lined angle.

DEFIN. XVIII. If two right lines be drawn from any one point in the
circumference of a Circle, and receive any part of the same circumference, the
angle contained under those two lines is said to belong and to be correspondent
to that part of the circumference so received.
AS the angle B. A. C. contained under the right lines A. B. and A.C. drawn
from the point A. and receiving the circumference B. D. C. by this DEFINITION
is said to belong, Euc. 3. Def. 8.
subtend, and pertain unto the circumference B. D. C. And if right lines be
drawn from the center to the former points B. and C. then is that angle said
to be in the center of a circle, as the angle B. E. C. Which angle likewise
subtendeth the same circumference B. D. C. and is always double in quantity
to the former angle, drawn from the circumference. And the circumference B. D.
C. is also the measure of the quantity or greatness of the angle B. E. C. in
the center.

diagram

DEFIN. XIX. A Sector of a Circle is a figure contained under two right lines,
drawn from the center of a Circle, and under part of the circumference
received of them.
AS in the last DEFINITION, Euc. 3. Def. 9. Ram. 16.3.
the figure B. E. C. is the Sector of a circle, because it is contained under
the two right lines E. B. and E. C. drawn from the center E. and under part of
the circumference, namely, B. D. C. received of them.

DEFIN. XX. Right lined figures are such, as are contained under right lines,
of what number soever, above two.
AS those which follow, Euc. 1. Def. 20.
being contained under three, four, five, or more sides, who take their
denominations, as well of the number of their angles, as of their sides; so a
figure contained under three lines, in respect of his sides, is called a three
sided figure; and in respect of his three angles is called a Triangle: and so
of the rest. Where is to be noted, that every right lined figure has as many
angles as it has sides.

DEFIN. XXI. An Equilater Triangle is that, which has three equal sides.
AS a Triangle is the first of all right lined figures (for under less then
three right lines can no figure be contained: Eus. 1. Def. 24. Ram. 8.8.
) So diagram of all Triangles, the Equilaterall Triangle is most simple and
absolute, having equal lines and equal angles; containing every of them a
Sextans of a Circle, which is 60 degrees. Triangles have their denominations,
differences, and appellations, as well of their angles as their sides: As this
Triangle A. in respect of his three equal sides, is called an Equilater
Triangle; and in respect of his sharp angles, is termed an Oxigontum, or
acute angled Triangle. But this appellation (in mine opinion) to this kind of
Triangle, is needless; for that the name of an Equilaterall Triangle does
imply the same, seeing it can contain no other but acute angles: for if in any
Triangle there be either a right or an obtuse angle, the sides cannot be all
equal, and therefore by this DEFINITION no Equilater.

DEFIN. XXII. An Isosceles is a Triangle, which has only two equal sides.
diagram diagram diagram

THis is the second sort of Triangles, Eve. 1. Def. 25.
and has two sides only of one length, the third being either longer or
shorter: As these three Triangles A. B. and C. have every of them two equal
sides, and are therefore called Isosceles. But in respect of their angles, the
Triangle A. is called an Orthigonium, or right angled Isosceles, for that his
angle at the point D. is a right angle. Also the Triangle B is called an
Ambligonium, or an obtuse angled Isosceles, for that his angle at the point G.
is a blunt or obtuse angle. And likewise the Triangle C. is called an
Oxigonium, or acute angled Isosceles, because all his angles are acute or
sharp. Also this Triangle is called an Equicrurall Triangle, in respect of his
two equal sides.

DEFIN. XXIII. A Scalenum is a Triangle which has all his sides unequal.
diagram diagram diagram

THis is the third kind of Triangles, Euc. 1. Def. 26.
and has all his sides of several lengths: As these three Triangles A. B. C.
have every of them all their sides unequal, and therefore called Scalena. But
in respect of their angles, the triangle A. is called an Orthigonium, or right
angled Scalenon, for that his angle at the point D is a right angle. Also the
triangle B. is called an Ambligonium, or an obtuse angled Scalenon, for that
his angle, at the point I. is a blunt or obtuse angle: And lastly, the triangle
C. is called an Oxigonium, or an acute angled Scalenon, because all his angles
are acute or sharp. It is to be noted generally in all Triangles, that in
comparison of any two sides of a Triangle, the third side is called the Base;
as of the Triangle A. in respect of the two lines E. D. and E. F. the line D.
F. is the base: In regard of the two lines F. D. and F. E. the line E. D. is
the base; and in respect of the two lines D. E. and D. F. the line E. F. is the
base.

DEFIN. XXIIII. A Square, or Quadrat, is a four sided figure, whose sides are
all equal, and angles all right angles.
AS the figure A. B. C. D. is a Square, Euc. 1. Def. 30. Ram. 12.2. 2. Con. 1.
or Quadrat, because all the lines thereof are equal, and all the angles right
angles. These four sided figures likewise, as well as Triangles, take their
appellation partly of their sides, and partly of their angles; as by their
several DEFINITIONS hereafter appears.

diagram

DEFIN. XXV. A long Square is that whose angles are all right angles, and whose
opposite sides only are equal.
THis figure differs little from the Square, Euc. 1. Def. 31. Ram. 1.13.
or Quadrat, last defined, having all equal angles like unto it; but the sides
are unequal. As in this figure A. B. C.D. all the angles are right angles, and
the opposite sides only are equal, as the length A. B. is equal to the
length C. D. and the breadth A. C. to the breadth B. D. but compare them
otherwise, and they are unequal.

diagram

DEFIN. XXVI. A Rhombus (or Diamond) is a figure with four equal sides, but
no right angle.
AS this figure A. B. C. D. is a Rhombus, having all his sides equal, and
likewise the opposite angles; Euc. 1. Def. 32. Ram. 8.14.
but the angles at A. and D. are acute angles, and those at B. and C. obtuse.
Between a Square, or Quadrat, and this figure, is much resemblance, either
kind having all diagram sides equal; and likewise their angles in general
quantity; but different in particular quality; that having four right
angles, this two obtuse; and two acute angles; yet are they in general
quantity equal to four right angles: for by how much the two acute angles
are defective or wanting of two right angles, by so much are the obtuse angles
abounding or exceeding. This figure is described by the connection of two
Equilater Triangles, by any two of their sides, as appears by the pricked
Diagonall line B. C. which being omitted and left out, this figure remains
perfect, and has his acute angles equal to those of an Equilater, namely, 60.
degrees, and the obtuse angles double thereunto. PRO. 57.

DEFIN. XXVII. A Rhomboydes (or Diamond like) is a figure, whose opposite sides
and opposite angles are only equal, and bath no right angles.
AS this figure A. B. C. D. is a Rhomboydes, Euc. 1. Def. 33. Ram. 9.14.
and has his sides A. B. and C. D. opposite and equal, and likewise A. C. and
B. D. but has no right angle: For the angles at the points A. and D. are
acute, opposite, and equal; and likewise the angles, at the points B. and C.
are obtuse, opposite, and equal.

diagram

Note here, that the four figures last before defined, namely, a Square, a
figure of one side longer, a Rhombus, and a Rhomboydes, are commonly called
Parallelograms; of which four, the two former are called right angled
Parallelograms. PROB. 90.

DEFIN. XXVIII. All other four lined figures, besides those formerly defined,
are called TRAPEZIA, or Tables.
AS all figures, of four sides, Euc. 1. Def. 34. Ram. 10.14.
which are made at adventure, without respect or regard of equality, or
inequality, or observation of order, either in their lines or angles; which
are therefore called irregular figures: as these figures A. and B. are.

diagram diagram

DEFIN. XXIX. Many sided figures are those which have more sides then four.
diagram diagram diagram

OF these, Euc. 1. Def. 23. Ram. 11.14.
may infinite sorts be described, by addition of lines: but if they contain
above four sides, they are generally called Polygona, but particularly
according to the number of their sides: As the figure A. is called a Pentagon,
because it is contained of five sides; the figure B. a Sexagon, being contained
under six lines; and C. is called a Septagon, because it is contained under
seven sides. And the like of others. PROB. 62.95.

DEFIN. XXX. Either of those Parallelograms, which are about the diameter of a
Parallelogram, together with the two supplements, is called a Gnomon.
RIghtly to conceive this DEFINITION, Euc. 2. Def. 2.
it is requisite first to understand, what those Parallelograms are which are
said to be about the diameter of a Parallelogram; and likewise, what
supplements are. For the first, those are said to be parallelograms about the
diameter, which diagram have for their particular diameters part of that which
the whole parallelogram has: And supplements are such, as are without the
whole diameter, the diameter passing between them, and cutting them not. As in
the parallelogram A. B. E. D. the particular parallelograms H. K. E. F. and A.
C. H. G. are said to be about the diameter, because they have for their
particular diameters part of the whole diameter A. E. as A. H. and H. E. And
the supplements are the two parallelograms C. B. K. H. and G. D. F. H. because
they are without the whole diameter A. E. which passes between them, and
cutteth them not. Now take away either of those particular parallelograms,
which soever it be, and the other remaining, together with the two supplements,
is that which by this DEFINITION is called a Gnomon. PROB. 101. THEOR. 5.

DEFIN. XXXI. That r^^ht lined figure is said to be inscribed in another right
lined figure, which has every angle touching every side of the figure
wherein it is inscribed.
AS in these two figures, the Triangle A. B. C. is diagram diagram said to be
inscribed within the Triangle D. E. F. because every of his angles A. B. and
C. does touch every side of the Triangle D. E. F. Likewise, the square G. H.
I. K. is said to be inscribed within the greater square L. M. N. O. because
every of his angles G. H. I. K. touches every side of the same greater
square. The like consideration is to be had of circumscribing one right lined
figure about another.

DEFIN. XXXII. A right lined figure is inscribed within a circle, when every
angle of the inscribed figure touches some part of the circles circumference.
ALl the angles of a regular right lined figure, inscribed in a circle, or the
sides of the like figure circumscribed about a circle, Euc. 4. Def. 3.
may easily touch the circumference thereof, by reason of the perfection and
uniformity of a circle. As the Triangle A. B. C. is inscribed in the circle A.
B. C. and also the square D.E.F.G. is circumscribed about diagram diagram the
circle A. for that every angle of the Triangle inscribed, and every side of
the square circumscribed, touches some one point of the circumference of the
circle. And the like consideration is to be had of circles inscribed or
circumscribed within or about any right lined figure. PROB. 112.113.

DEFIN. XXXIII. The altitude of a figure, is the parallel distance between
the top of a figure and the Base.
diagram diagram diagram

AS the height or altitude of this Triangle A.B.C. is the space or distance
between the line D.E. drawn parallel to the Base B.C. by the highest point
of the same Triangle, Euc. 6. Def. 4.
as by A. and the same Base B.C. which parallel distance is equal, and the
same thing with the perpendicular A. F. And the like of the rest.

DEFIN. XXXIIII. Parallel lines are such, as being drawn on any plain
Superficies, and produced either way infinitely, do never meet or concur.
AS these right lines A. and B. Euc. 1.35. Ram. 2.11.5.11.
which being produced and drawn forth infinitely, by reason of their equal
diagram diagram and parallel distance the one from the other, will never meet
or concur; and therefore are called parallel lines. PROB. 2.3.

DEFIN. XXXV. A right line is said to be divided by extreme and mean
proportion, when the lesser part, or segment thereof, is to the greater, as the
greater is to the whole line.
As the line A. B. being so divided in the point C. that the lesser part, or
segment, C. B. has the same proportion diagram to the greater part, or
segment, A. C. as the same greater part has to the whole line A.B. then is the
same line A. B. divided by an extreme and mean proportion. The means how to
divide a line in such sort, is hereafter taught by the 20. PROB. of the next
book. This line is of wonderful and infinite use in many Geometrical
operations, as appears manifestly almost through the whole thirteenth book
of Euclid. PROB. 20.

DEFIN. XXXVI. The power of a line is the square of the same line, or any
plain figure equal to the square thereof.
AS the power of the line A. B. is the square of the same line, namely, the
figure diagram A. B. C. D. or any other plain figure equal thereunto. And so
great power and ability is a line said to have, as the quantity of the square
it makes: As this line A. B. containing 4. the power thereof is 16. In this
kind is the Diagonall or diameter of a square (as the line A. D.) said to be
double in power to the side of the same square, for that a square made of the
Diagonall, is double in quantity to the square made of the side. And likewise
the line which subtendeth the right angle in an Orthigonall Triangle, is said
to be equal in power to both the containing sides: as the line A.D. which
subtendeth the right angle A. C.D. in the Triangle A.C.D. is equal to both the
squares made of the two containing sides, namely of A.C. and C.D. PROB. 23.

DEFIN. XXXVII. To divide a given line in power, is to find two other lines,
whose squares together shall be equal to the square of the given line, but the
square of the one to the square of the other, to be in any proportion required.
AS if A. B. were a line given, and it were required diagram to divide the same
line in power, according to the proportion of 2. to 3. It is hereby intended to
find two other lines, as C. A. and C. B. whose squares together are equal to
the square of the given line A.B. but the square of the one, namely C. A. is to
the square of the other C. B. in such proportion, as 2. to 3. that is, the
square of C. B. contains the square of C. A. once and a half. The means how
to perform the same, is hereafter taught in the 23. PROB. of the 2. Book.
PROB. 23.

DEFIN. XXXVIII. To enlarge a line in power, is to find another line, whose
square shall have any proportion required (of the greater inequality) to the
square of the given line.
AS suppose the line 2 B in the former Diagram were given to be enlarged in
power, as 3. to 5. It is hereby intended to find out another line, as the line
C. B. whose square shall bear such proportion to the square of the given line
2 B. These lines are of infinite use in many Geometrical Conclusions.
as 5 to 3. which is a proportion of the greater inequality, and is called
Superbipartiens tertias: that is, as 5 contains 3. so the square of C. B. the
line sought for, contains the square of 2 B. 1 ^ The working whereof is
taught in the 24. PROB. of the 2. book.

DEFIN. XXXIX. A mean proportional line is that, whose square is equal to
the right angled Parallelogram, or long Square, contained under his two
extremes.
A Mean proportional line diagram is so termed, in respect of the relation
it has to two other lines, which are called his extremes, for of a mean
without extremes, or extremes without a mean, there is no comparison. As in
this Diagram, the perpendicular A.C. of the right angled Triangle A. B. D. is a
mean proportional line between the two segments of the Base B.C. and C.D.
his extremes, because the square of the same line A. C. namely, A. E. F. C. is
equal to the long square, contained under the lines B. C. and C. D. (for the
line C. G. is equal to the line B. C.) for as B. C. is to A. C. so is A. C. to
C. D. Also the line A. B. is a mean proportional between B. C. the segment
of the Base lying next unto it, and B.D. the whole Base; for as B. C. the
lesser segment of the Base, is to B. A. so is B. A. to B. D. the whole Base.
And lastly, the line A.D. is a mean proportional, between C. D. the segment
of the Base, lying next unto it, and B.D. the whole Base; for as C. D. the
greater segment of the Base, is to A.D. so is A. D. to B. D. the whole Base.

DEFIN. XL. Like right lined figures are those, which have equal angles, and
proportional sides about those equal angles.
AS in these two right angled Parallelograms, Euc. 6. Def. 1.
the angle in the point diagram A. of the greater, is equal to the angle E. of
the lesser; likewise the angle B. to the angle F. and C. to G. and D. to H. And
moreover, the side A. B. has that proportion to the side A. C. diagram as E.
F. has to E.G. and A.C. to C.D. as E. G. to G. H. and so of the rest:
Wherefore these two Parallelograms are called like right lined figures: and so
of Triangles and all other figures, of what kind soever. PROB. 45.

DEFIN. XLI. Reciprocal figures are such, as have the sides of either to other
mutually proportional.
As the Parallelograms A. and B. have diagram their sides mutually
proportional; Euc. 6. Def. 2.
that is, as the side C. D. of A. is to the side G. H. of B. so is the side
G.I. of B. to the side C. E. of A. and therefore are they called Reciprocalls:
for as 20. is to 15. diagram an antecedent of A. to a consequent of B. so is
12. to 9. an antecedent of B. to a consequent of A.

DEFIN. XLII. The quantity or measure of an angle, is the arch of a circle,
described from the point of the same angle, and intercepted between the two
sides of that angle.
As in the Triangle A. B. C. the measure or quantity of the angle B. A. C. is
the arch B. D. or E. F. for the diagram circumference of every circle (whether
greater, or lesser) is divided into 360 equal parts, which are called degrees,
and every degree into 60 scruples or minutes, and every minute into so many
seconds, etc. Which parts or degrees are greater or lesser, as the circles,
whose parts they are, are greater or lesser; and those arches which contain
the same number of parts or degrees in equal circles, are equal; and in
unequal circles, they are called like arches; as the arches B. D. and H. G.
are equal; but the arches B. D. and E. F. are like arches: for as B.D. is 50
degrees in the greater circle, so is E. F. 50 degrees in the lesser circle. And
the like of others. PROB. 8.

DEFIN. XLIII. The Quadrant of a circle is the fourth part thereof, or an arch
containing 90 degrees.
AS the arch K. B. D. in the former Semicircle is a Quadrant of that whole
circle, or a fourth part thereof, and contains 90 degrees.

DEFIN. XLIIII. The Complement of an arch, less then a Quadrant, is so much as
that arch wants of 90 degrees.
As the Complement of the arch B. D. 50 degrees in the former Semicircle, is
the arch K. B. 40 degrees.

DEFIN. XLV. The Excess of an arch, greater then a Quadrant, is so much as the
said arch is more then 90 degrees.
AS the Excess of the arch H. K. B. D. 130 degrees, is the arch H. K. 40
degrees more then a Quadrant, that is more then K. D.

DEFIN. XLVI. The Complement of an arch, less then a Semicircle, is so much as
that arch wants of a Semicircle, or of 180 degrees.
AS the arch H.K. B.D. is an arch less then a Semicircle, and contains 130
degrees, and the Complement thereof to a Semicircle, is the arch H.G. 50
degrees, which is so much as the arch H. K. B. D. wants of a Semicircle, or
of 180 degrees.

DEFIN. XLVII. The Complements of Angles are as the Complements of Arches.
AS the arch K. B. is the complement of the arch B. D. to a Quandrant, and the
arch B. D. of the arch K. B. So the angle K.A.B. 40 degrees is the complement
to a right angle of the Angle B.A.D. 50 degrees; and likewise the same angle B.
A. D. of the same angle K.A.B. And in this sense is the third angle of any
Triangle said to be the complement of the other two, to two right angles, or a
Semicircle: For the three angles of any Triangle are equal to two right
angles; as is hereafter declared.

The second Part. Jnstructions concerning this Part.
THis second Part consists of diverse Geometrical THEOREMES, or approved
Truths; which are the Foundations, Grounds, and Reasons, whereon the Practike
part depends. For as in the general course and tract of all designs, before
the undertaking or execution of whatsoever action, the fittest means for an
orderly performance, is iudicially to consider; first, the Property, Passion,
Nature, and kind of the intended enterprise; then, the best and most immediate
means how to effect the same, and the Causes, Grounds, and Reasons, why, by
those means such effects may be wrought; and afterward, to put in execution:
So before we enter into the Practike part, I will first here premise diverse
THEOREMES concerning this subject, whereby the ingenious practitioner may most
evidently conceive and understand the ground and reason of all the Rules and
Problemes in the following Books contained. Wherein I use only Explication
and Construction, omitting (for brevity sake, and avoiding confusion to the
Learner) their several Demonstrations; yet with such ample notes of direction
in the Margent, as the Reader may readily find in EVCLID, RAMVS, and other
Authors, their Demonstrations at large. And for their further ease and help, I
have at the end of every Construction inserted the like notes of Reference from
these THEOREMES to the following PROBLEMES, and the like from those to these;
that having here the reason or cause, he shall there most readily find the
effect; or seeing there the effect, he may as speedily understand the cause or
reason thereof, Scire enim, proprie est, remper causam cognoscere.

THEOREME I. Jf any two right lines cut the one the other, the opposite or
vertical angles are ever equal; and both the angles, on one and the same side
of either line, are either of them right angles, or (being both taken together)
are equal to two right angles.
SVppose that B. E. and C. diagram F. are two right lines, Euc. l. 1. p. 13.15.
Ram. 5.8. Con 2. Ceul. 2.9.
which cut the one the other in the point A. Then I say, first, that the
opposite or vertical angles are equal, namely, the angle B. A. C. to the
angle F. A. E. and the angle B. A. F. to the angle C. A. E. for they are every
of them right angles: Si ouotcunque recte in eodem puncto m^^^o sese
in^ersecent omnes in communi sectione quatuor rectis aequabuntur.
and let the right line D. G. be likewise drawn, cutting the line B. E. in A.
Then I further say, that both the angles, taken together on one and the same
side of either line, is equal to two right angles, as the angles B. A. D. and
D. A. E. on the upper side of the line B. E. and also the angles B. A. G. and
G. A. E. on the nether side of the same line, are respectively equal to two
right angles; for they consist of the right angles formerly mentioned. And the
like of the angles on either side of the line D. G. PROB. 114, 117, 118.

THEOREME II. A right line, falling on two parallel right lines, makes the
outward angles on contrary sides of the falling line equal; and likewise the
inward and opposite angles on the contrary sides of the same line; and also
the outward angle, equal to the inward and opposite angle on one and the same
side of the falling line; and the inward angles on one and the same side equal
to two right angles.
LEt the right line E. F. fall on the diagram two parallel right lines A. B.
and C. D. Then says this THEOREME, Euc. 1. p. 29. Ram. 7.9. Pit. 1.38.
first, Lineae eidem parallelae inter se sunt parallelae.
that it makes the outward angles on contrary sides of the falling line,
namely, the angles A. H. E. and F. G. D. to be equal; and likewise the inward
and opposite angles on the contrary sides of the same line, as the angles A.
H. F. and E. G. D. And also, that the outward angle, as A. H. E. is equal to
the inward and opposite angle, on one and the same side of the falling line,
namely, to E. G. C. And lastly, that the inward angles on one and the same
side, as the angles E. G. C. and A. H. F. are equal to two right angles. PROB.
50.

THEOREME III. If a right line be divided into two equal parts, half the
square of that whole line is double to the whole square of half the same line.
SVppose A. B. to be a right line, and diagram let the same be divided into two
equal parts in the point C. Then I say, that half the square of that whole
line, namely, the Parallelogram A. B. D. E. (for the whole square is A. B. F.
G.) is double to the whole square of half the same line, namely, to the square
A. C. D. H. as is manifest by the Diagram.

THEOREME IIII. A right line being divided by chance, the square of the whole
line is equal to both the squares made of the parts, and also to two rectangle
figures, comprehended under the same parts.
LEt the right line A. B. be divided diagram by chance in the point C. Then I
say, Euc. 2.4.
that the square of the whole line, namely, A. B. D. E. is equal to both the
squares made of the parts, namely, to the squares A. C. G. H. and H. K. F. E.
(for H. K. is equal to C. B.) and also to the two rectangle figures,
comprehended under the same parts, namely, to the rectangle figures C. B. H. K.
and G. H. D. F.

THEOREME V. The Supplements of those Parallelograms which are about the
diameter in every Parallelogram, are always equal the one to the other.
SVppose the figure A. B. D. E. in the former THEOREME, Complementa sunt
aequalia. Euc. 1.43. Ceul. 2.81.
be a Parallelogram, whereof the diameter is A. E. and let the Parallelograms
about the same diameter (according to the declaration of the 30. DEFINITION) be
A. C. G. H. and H. K. F. E. Then I say, that the supplements of those
Parallelograms, namely, the supplements C. B. H. K. and G. H. D. F. are equal
the one to the other. PROB. 18.87.88.105.

THEOREME VI. In right angled Triangles, the square of the side subtending the
right angle, is equal to both the squares of his containing sides.
In triangulo rectangulo figura ad besin descripta aequatur fi^uris ad crura
similibus similiterque sitis.
LEt the Triangle A. B. C. be a diagram right angled Triangle, whose angle, at
the point B. is a right angle; and let the line A. C. be the side subtending
the same right angle, and B. A. and B. C. his containing sides. Then I say,
Euc. 1.47. Pit. 1.50.
that the square of the side subtending the right angle, which is the square A.
C. D. E. is equal to both the squares of his containing sides, namely, to the
squares A. G. F. B. and B. H. K. C. PROB.
23.24.25.30.36.38.52.65.99.100.101.102.104.106.

This former THEOREME, and the two next following, Nota.
are of infinite and wonderful use in most Geometrical Conclusions;
especially in TRICONOMETRIE, or the supputation of Triangles, by the Canons
thereof; as those excellent Tables of Logarithimes, or those of Synes,
Tangents, and Secants, in that behalf calculated; and therefore especially to
be regarded; and the most excellent properties and passions thereof to be well
understood and practiced.

THEOREME VII. In obtuse angled Triangles, the square of the side subtending
the obtuse angle, is greater then both the squares of the containing sides, by
two rectangled figures, comprehended under one of the containing sides (being
continued) and the line of continuation, from the obtuse angle to a
perpendicular let fall thereon.
LEt the Triangle A. B. C. be an obtuse angled Triangle, In triangulis
obtusangulis basis plus potest cruribus duplici rectangulo ex allero crure and
eius continuatione ad verticis perpendicularem E. 2. p. 12.
whose angle at the point C. is obtuse; and let the line A. B. be the side
subtending the same obtuse angle, and A. C. and C. B. his containing sides;
whereof, let A. C. be the side continued, and C. L. the line of continuation
from the obtuse angle at the point C. to the perpendicular let fall thereon B.
L. Now I say, that the square of the diagram side, subtending the obtuse angle,
namely, A. D. E. B. is greater then both the squares of the containing sides,
namely, B. K. C. H. and A. C. F. G. by two rectangle figures, (which is all
one, with one twice taken) comprehended under one of the containing sides
(being continued) and the line of Continuation, namely, C. L. G. M. being twice
taken. PROB. 44.

THEOREME VIII. In acute angled Triangles, the square of the side subtending
the acute angle, is less then both the squares of the containing sides by two
rectangle figures, comprehended under one of the containing sides (whereon a
perpendicular falls) and that segment of the same side which is between the
perpendicular and the acute angle.
Theorema generale est ad inuestigationem perpendicularis intra triangulum
cadentis data trium laterum quantitate.
LEt A. B. C. be an acute diagram angled Triangle, having the angle at the point
A. acute; let B. C. be the side subtending the same angle, and A. B. and A. C.
the containing sides: also let B. L. be the perpendicular, Euc. 2.15. Ceul.
2.84.
A. C. the side whereon it falls, and A. L. the segment thereof between the
perpendicular and the acute angle A. Now I say, that the square of the side
subtending the acute angle, namely, B. D. C. E. is less then both the squares
of the containing sides, which are F. B. G. A. and A. C. H. K. by two rectangle
figures (being all one, with one twice taken) comprehended under one of the
containing sides A. C. (whereunto A. H. is equal) and the segment A. L.
namely, A. L. H. I. twice taken. PROB. 41.

THEOREME IX. In rectangle Triangles, if from the right angle a perpendicular
be let fall unto the Base, it shall divide the Triangle into two Triangles,
like unto the whole, and also the one like unto the other.
LEt A. B. C. be a recte angle diagram Triangle, Euc. 6.8. Ram. 5.12.13.
whose angle at the point B. is a right angle; from whence, let the
perpendicular B. D. be let fall to the Base A. C. Then I say, the perpendicular
so falling, shall divide the Triangle into two Triangles, that is, A. B. D. and
B. C. D. like unto the whole Triangle A. B. C. and also the one Triangle like
unto the other; which is (according to the 40. DEFINITION) with equal angles,
and proportional sides about those equal angles. PROB. 19.23.24.25.30.38.

THEOREME X. An Isosceles, or a Triangle of two equal sides, has his angles
at the Base equal; and the equal sides being produced, the angles under the
Base are also equal.
LEt A. B. C. be an Isosceles, Euc. 1.5. Ceul. 2.3.4.
or a diagram Triangle, whose two sides A. C. and A. B. are equal, and let A.
C. be produced to D. and A. B. to E. I say then, that-his angles at the Base,
namely, A. B. C. and A. C. B. are equal; and that the angles under the Base,
as E. B. C. and D. C. B. are also equal, the one unto the other. PROB. 40.

THEOREME XI. All equiangle Triangles have their sides, containing equal
angles proportional, and their sides subtending equal angles, are of like
proportion.
Hoc Theorema praecipuum est totius Trigonometriae fundamentum.
SVppose diagram diagram A. and B. to be two equiangle triangles, that is, Euc.
6.4. Ram. 5.12.7, 9. Pit. 1.46. Ceul. 2.62.
having the angle D. equal to the angle G. and C. to F. and E. to H. Then I
say, they have their sides, which contain those equal angles proportional;
as D. C. and D. E. in the Triangle A. are proportional to G. F. and G. H. in
the Triangle B. because they contain equal angles, namely, D. and G. for as
D. C. is to D. E. so is G. F. to G. H. and the like of the rest: also their
sides subtending equal angles, are of like proportion, as D. C. and G. F.
subtending equal angles E. and H. and C. E. and F. H. subtending equal angles
D. and G. are of like proportion: for as D. C. is to C. E. so is G. F. to F. H.
And the like of the other sides and angles. PROB. 30.38.45.65.

THEOREME XII. In any two Triangles compared, if two sides of the one be equal
to two sides of the other, and the Base of the one to the Base of the other;
they shall also have the angles contained under their answerable equal sides,
the one equal to the other in either Triangle.
LEt A. B. C. and D. E. diagram diagram F. be two Triangles compared, Euc. 1.8.
having two sides of the one equal to two sides of the other, as A. B. and A.
C. of the one, equal to D. E. and D. F. of the other, and also the Base B. C.
of the one, equal to the Base E. F. of the other. Now I say, they shall have
their angles contained under answerable equal sides (as the angle A. contained
under A. B. and A. C. equal to the angle D. contained under the answerable
equal sides D. E. and D. F.) to be equal the one to the other. And the like
of the rest.

THEOREME XIII. If any side of a Triangle be continued, the outward angle made
by that continuation, is equal to the two inward and opposite angles: And the
three inward angles of any Triangle are equal to two right angles.
LEt A. B. C. be a Triangle, Euc. 1.32. Ram. 6.9. Pit. 1.48.49. Ceul. 2.20.
diagram whereof let any of the sides be produced, as B. C. to D. Then I say,
that the outward angle, made by that production or continuation, as the angle
A. C. D. is equal to the two inward and opposite angles, namely, the angles C.
A. B. and C. B. A. And also, that the three inward angles of any Triangle, as
C. B. A. B. A. C. and A. C. B. are equal to two right angles. PROB.
111.114.117.118.

THEOREME XIIII. In every Triangle, two of his angles, which two soever be
taken, are less then two right angles.
AS in the Diagram of the former THEOREME, take any two angles, Euc. 1.17.
as those at the points A. and C. or C. and B. or B. and A. and they are less
then two right angles; for by the same former THEOREME all three of them are
equal to two right angles.

THEOREME XV. In every Triangle, two sides thereof (which two soever be taken)
are greater (being joined together as one line) then the third side remaining.
LEt A. B. C. (the Diagram of the 13. THEOREME) be a Triangle, whereof take any
two of the sides, as A. B. and A. C. I say, Euc. 1.20.
those two sides being taken and joined together as one line, are greater then
the third side remaining, namely, B. C. And the like of any other two, taken
together. Whereby it is manifest, that under all three lines (without respect
of quantity) a Triangle cannot be contained. PROB. 42.

THEOREME XVI. Jn all Triangles, the greater side subtendeth the greater angle,
and the lesser side subtendeth the lesser angle.
Let A. B. C. be a Triangle, Trianguli maius latus subtendit maiorem angulu^s.
having diagram the side A. C. greater then the side A. B. and less then the
side B. C. Then I say, Euc. 1.18.19. Ram. 6.11. Euc. 1.47.48. Pit. 1.5. Ceul.
2.19.
that the angle A. B. C. being subtended by the greater side A. C. is greater
then the angle A. C. B. being subtended by the lesser side A. B. And also, that
the angle A. B. C. being subtended by the lesser side A. C. is lesser then the
angle B. A. C. subtended by the greater side B. C.

THEOREME XVII. If two sides of one Triangle be equal to two sides of another
Triangle, and the angle contained under the equal sides of the one, be greater
then the angle contained under the equal sides of the other; then the Base
also of the one (namely, of that which has the greater angle) shall be greater
then the Base of the other.
LEt there be two Triangles, A. B. C. and D. E. F. which have diagram diagram
two sides of the one Triangle, as A. B. and A. C. equal to two sides of the
other Triangle D. F. and D. E. and let the angle F. D. E. contained under the
equal sides of the one be greater then the angle B. A. C. contained under the
equal sides of the other. Euc. 1.24.
Then I say, that the Base F. E. of the one (namely, of that which has the
greater angle) is greater then B. C. the Base of the other.

THEOREME XVIII. If a Triangle be equicrurall, or having two equal sides; a
perpendicular let fall from the angle contained under those equal sides to the
Base, and continued, shall divide as well the same Base and angle, as also the
measure of that angle, into two equal parts: Et contra.
LEt A. B. C. be a Triangle, Pit. 1.23.
whose sides A. B. and A. C. are equal, and let fall a perpendicular from the
angle, included by those equal sides, as A. E. to the Base B. C. and let the
same be continued to D. Now I say, that a perpendicular fo let fall, shall
divide as well the same Base B. C. and angle B. A. C. as also the measure
thereof, namely, the arch line B. D. C. into two equal parts. PROB. 10.11.40.

diagram

THEOREME XIX. If a Triangle has two equal sides, the power of one of those
equal sides exceeds the power of the perpendicular let fall on the Base from
the angle it subtendeth, by the power of half the Base.
LEt A. B. C. be a Triangle, having diagram two equal sides, B. A. and B. C.
and let B. F. be a perpendicular let fall to the Base A. C. from the angle it
subtendeth A. B. C. Then I say, that the power of one of those equal sides,
namely, the square A. B. D. E. exceeds the power of the perpendicular, namely
the square B. H. F. G. by the power of half the Base, namely, the square F. C.
K. L. PROB. 36.40.41.64.

THEOREME XX. If the power of one side of any Triangle be equal to both the
powers of the other two sides, the angle contained under those two other sides,
is a right angle.
THis THEOREME is the converse of the 6 THEOREME, and therefore the explication
and construction thereof serves here. Euc. 1.48.


THEOREME XXI. If a right line divide any angle of a Triangle into two equal
parts, and if also the same line divide the Base, the segments of the Base
shall have such proportion the one to the other, as the other sides of the
Triangle have: Et contra.
LEt A. B. C. be a Triangle, and let the right line A. D. divide the angle B.
A. C. of the same Triangle into two equal parts; Euc. 6.3. Ceul. 2.61.
and also let the same line divide the Base B. C. Then I say, the segments of
the Base, namely, B. D. and D. C. shall have such proportion the one to the
other, as the other sides of the Triangle have, namely, A. B. and A. C. for
such proportion as B. D. has to D. C. the same has A. B. to A. C.

diagram

THEOREME XXII. If a right line be drawn parallel to any side of a Triangle,
the same line shall cut the sides of that Triangle proportionally.
LEt A. B. C. be a Triangle, Euc. 6.2. Ram. l. 6. p. 9.5. p. 13. Con. 1.2. and
3. Pit 1.47.45. Ceul. 2.27.
unto one of the sides whereof A. B. is drawn a parallel line D. E. Wherefore
the same line does cut the sides of that Triangle A. C. and B. C.
proportionally: for first, as A. E. is to E. C. so is B. D. to D. C. also, as
A. E. is to B.D. so is E. C. to D. C. and as A. C. is to A. E. so is B. C. to
B. D. PROB. 12.13.14.15.16.22.98.

diagram

THEOREME XXIII. The superficial content of every right angled Triangle, is
equal to half that right angled Parallelogram, which has his length and
breadth equal to the containing sides of the right angle; or whose length is
equal to the subtending side, and breadth to the perpendicular, drawn from
the right angle to the same side.
LEt A. B. C. be a rectangle Triangle, Euc. 1. D. f. 27. Ram. 8.2.
whose angle at diagram the point C. is a right angle, whereof the containing
sides are A. C. and C. B. the subtending side A. B. and the perpendicular
drawre from the right angle to the same side, is C. E. Now I say, the
superficial content or Area of this right angled Triangle is equal unto half
that right angled Parallelogram (namely, A. D. C. B.) which has his length C.
B. and breadth A. C. equal to the containing sides of the right angle; or
whose length A. B. is equal to the subtending side, and breadth A. F. to the
perpendicular line, drawn from the right angle to the same side, as the
Parallelogram A. B. F. G. PROB. 39.52.92.102.106.

THEOREME XXIIII. The Area or superficial content of every Equilater Triangle,
is equal to half that long square, whose length and breadth is equal to one
of the sides and the perpendicular.
LEt A.B.C. be an Equilater Triangle, and A. E. the perpendicular thereof. Now
I say, that the superficial content thereof is equal to half that long
square D. F. B. C. whose length B.C. and breadth B. D. is equal to one of the
sides, and the perpendicular. PROB. 37.

diagram

THEOREME XXV. All Triangles, of what kind soueur, are equal in their
superficial content unto half that right angled Parallelogram, whose length
and breadth is equal to the perpendicular, and the side whereon it falls.
Let A. B. C. be a Triangle, whose perpendicular is A. F. and the diagram side
whereon it falls B. C. I say, that this Triangle A. B. C. is equal in his
superficial content unto half the right angled Parallelogram D. E. B. C.
whose length B. C. and breadth B. D. are equal to the perpendicular, and the
side whereon it falls. PROB. 39.41.44.72.77.99.

THEOREME XXVI. Triangles which consist on one and the same Base, or on equal
Bases, and in the same parallel lines are equal the one to the other.
LEt A. B. C. D. B. C. and E. B. C. be three diagram Triangles, Triangula in
aequali besi and intra easem parallelas sunt aequalia.
consisting on one and the selfsame Base B. C. (or on equal Bases, Euc. 1.38.
which is all one thing) and in the same parahell lines A. E. and C. B. Now I
say, that all those three Triangles, A. B. C. D. B. C. and E. B. C. and as
many more as may be drawn on the same Base, or a Base equal thereunto, and in
the same parallel lines, are all equal the one to the other. PROB.
26.27.28.29.46.47.73.74.75.79.80.81.93.103.107.110.

THEOREME XXVII. If Triangles and Parallelograms have one and the same Base, or
equal Bases, and be in the same parallel lines, the Parallelograms shall be
double to the Triangles.
LEt B. C. D. and F. C. D. be two Triangles, Euc. 1.41. Ceul. 2.25.
and diagram let A. B. D. C. and B. E. D. C. in this same Diagram be two
Parallelograms, which Triangles and Parallelograms have one and the same Base
C. D. and are in the same parallel lines A. F. and C. D. Now I say, that
either of those two Parallelograms are double to either of those two Triangles.
PROB. 76.77.92.110.

THEOREME XXVIII. If a Triangle has his Base double to the Base of a
Parallelogram, and that they are both in the same parallel lines, then are
they both equal the one to the other.
LET A. B. C. D. be a Parallelogram, whose Base is C. D. and let A. E. D. and
B. E. D. be two several Triangles, whose Bases E. D. are double to the Base of
the Parallelogram (for E. C. and C. D. are equal) and who are within the same
parallel lines with the Parallelogram A. B. C. D. Then I say, that either of
those Triangles are equal to the same Parallelogram. PROB. 29.78.91.110.

diagram

THEOREME XXIX. The power of the side of an Equilater Triangle, is to the power
of the perpendicular thereof let fall from any angle to the subtendent side, in
proportion Sesquitertia, or as 4. to 3.
LEt A. B. C. be an Equilater Triangle, Euc. 13.12.
whose perpendicular is A. E. let fall from the angle B. A. C. to the
subtendent side B. C. Now I say, that the power of the side of the same
Triangle, namely, B. C. G. H. which is the power or square of the side B. C. is
to the power of the perpendicular thereof, namely, A. D. E. F. (which is the
power or square of the perpendicular A. E.) in proportion Sesquitertia, or as
4. to 3. For of what parts the line B. C. or B. A. contains in power 8. of
such parts B. E. (which is the half of B. C.) contains in power 2. Wherefore
the perpendicular A. E. being the residue, contains in power of such parts 6.
(for the squares of the lines A. E. and B. E. are by the 6. THEOREME equal
unto the square of the line A. B. whereunto B. C. is equal.) Now 8. to 6. is
Sesquitertia: wherefore the power of the line B. C. is to the power of the line
A. E. in Sesquitertia proportion. So is the square A. D. E. F. ^ of the square
B. C. G. H. PROB. 36.

diagram

THEOREME XXX. The Diagonall line, or Diameter of any Square, is double in
power to the side of the same Square.
LEt A. B. C. D. be a Square, whose Diagonall line, or Diameter, is the line A.
D. Now I say, that the same line A. D. is double in power to the side of the
same Square, that is, the Square A. D. E. F. is double to the Square A. B. C.
D. PROB. 99.102.106.

diagram

THEOREME XXXI. A Square, whose side is equal to the Diameter of any other
Square, is double in content or superficial quantity to that other Square.
THe explication hereof, is manifest by that of the last: For let A. D. E. F.
in the last Diagram be a Square, whose side A. D. is equal to the Diameter of
another Square, as the same line A. D. is the Diameter of another Square,
namely, A. B. C. D. Wherefore I say, that the Square A. D. E. F. is double in
content, or superficial quantity, to that other Square. PROB. 102.106.

THEOREME XXXII. All parallelograms have their opposite sides, and angles
equal one to another; and their Diameters divide them into equal parts.
AS these two parallelograms diagram diagram A. and B. have their opposite
sides and angles, Eu. 1.34. Ram. 10.6. Ceul. 2.25.
equal one to another, as in the figure A. the sides C. D. and E. F. are
opposite and equal, and likewise D. F. and C. E. Also the angles thereof at
the points C. and F. are opposite and equal, and likewise those at D. and E.
And moreover, their diameters divide them into equal parts, as the diameters
C. F. and D. E. do either of them divide the parallelogram A. into two equal
parts: And the like explication and construction is to be made of the figure B.
PROB. 115.116.

THEOREME XXXIII. Parallelograms which consist on one and the same base, or on
equal bases, and in the same parallel lines are equal the one to the other.
LEt A. B. C. D. and E. A. C. D. be two parallelograms, Eu. 1.35, 36.
which consist on one and the same base, namely C. D. (or on equal bases which
is one and the same thing) and in the same parallel lines, namely E. B. and C.
B. Now, I say, that those two parallelograms are both equal the one to the
other. PROB. 89.90.

diagram

THEOREME XXXIIII. Every Rhombus and Rhomboydes is equal to the long square,
whose length is one of the sides, and breath equal to the parallel distance.
LEt G. H. I. K. be a Rhombus, and A. B. C. D. a Rhomboydes. I say, the Rhombus
G. H. I. K. is equal to the long square G. H. L. M. whose length is one of the
sides G. H. and breadth the parallel distance diagram diagram H. M. And also
that the Rhomboydes A. B. C. D. is equal to the long square E. F. C. D. whose
length is one of the sides C. D. or A. B. and breadth, the parallel distance E.
C. or F. D. PROB. 58, 59, 60, 61, 89, 90.

THEOREME XXXV. Parallelograms and Triangles, within the same parallels, are in
such proportion the one to the other as their bases are.
LEt A. B. C. D. and B. E. D. F. be two parallelograms, Triangula vel
parallelogramma aequealta sunt vt basis. Eu. 6.1. Ram. 10.13. Ceul. 2.26.
diagram within the same parallel lines A. E. and C. F. and let also B. C. D.
and B. D. F. be two triagles within the same parallel lines. Then, I say, as
the base C. D. is to the base D. F. so is the parallelogram A. B. C. D. to the
parallelogram B. E. D. F. And so also is the triangle B. C. D. to the triangle
B. D. F. PROB. 29, 110, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129.

THEOREME XXXVI. A right line being first equally, and then vn-equally divided;
The square which is made of the part lying between those sections, together
with the right angled parallelogram, contained under the vn-equall parts of the
whole line; are equal to the square of half the whole line.
LEt A. B. be a right line divided, Hereby is demonstrated that equation, of
the greatest and least karectes or numbers, and their equal^tie to the midd^e.
Of great use is th^^ (...) in the rules of Algebar. Eu. 2.^.
first equally diagram in the point C and then vn-equally as in the point D.
The square, I say, which is made of the part lying between those sections C.
and D. namely the square E. F. G. H. together with the right angled
parallelogram A. D. F. I. contained under the unequal parts of the whole line
as A. D. and D. B. are equal to the square C. B. K. H. being the square of
half the whole line, as of A. C. or C. B.

THEOREME XXXVII. Two right lines being drawn in a circle, and the one
intersecting the other, either equally or unequally howsoever; The rectangle
figure contained under the parts of the one line, shall be equal to that,
contained under the parts of the other.
LEt A. C. and B. D. be two right lines drawn in the circle A. B. C. D. and
let the one intersect the other unequally at all adventures in the point E. I
say, The wonderful properties of a circle here by appears. And many strange
conclusions Geomertricall from hence may be gathered. Eu. 3.35. Ceul. 2.50.
that the rectangle figure contained under the parts of the one line, namely
under A. E. and E. C. being the parts of the line A. C. shall be equal to
that contained under the parts of the otherline, namely under the parts B. E.
and E. D. of the line B. D. And the like if those lines had intersected the one
the other equally.

diagram

THEOREME XXXVIII. In all right angled parallelograms, the length thereof being
infolded in the breadth, produces the Area or superficial content of the same.
LEt A. B. C. D be a parallelogram right angled, I say, the length there of A.
B. 40. being infolded in the breadth A. D. 20. produces the Area or
superficial content of the same 800. PROB. 51.55.

diagram

THEOREME XXXIX. Every regular Poligon is equal to the long square, whose
length and breadth is equal to half the perimeter, and a perpendicular drawn
from the center to the middle of any side of the same.
LEt the Sexagon A. B. C. D. E. F. diagram be a regular Polygon, whose three
sides (being half the Perimeter) contain 18. and the perpendicular 6. G. 5^
This Polygon is equal to the long square H. 6. G. I. whose length H. 6. or I.
G. is equal to half the Perimeter, and breadth H. I. or 6. G. to the
perpendicular 6. G. PROB. 64.95.

THEOREME XXXX. If two or more right lines, are cut by diverse parallel right
lines; the intersegments of those lines so cut shall be proportional the one
to the other.
LEt A B. and A C. be two right lines, Pit. 1.39.
being cut by diagram diverse parallel right lines as Q E. S H. T L. and the
rest; I say, the Intersegments of those lines so cut, as A F. and A G. A I. and
A K. F M. and G N. and the rest are proportional the one to the other; that is
to say, if A F. be ^ of A B. then is A G. ^ of A C. and if A M. be ^ of A B.
then shall A N. be ^ of A C. The reason is, because the right line S H.
cutteth off ^ of the whole parallelogram Q E P R and the right line V O. ^
thereof; and consequently the like parts, from all lines drawn ouer-thwart
those parallels. And the like consideration is to be had of all the other
intersegments so by those lines cut out.

THEOREME XLI. Three right Lines being proportional, a Square made of the
Mean, is equal to the right angled figure, contained under the Extremes.
LEt A. B. and C. be three right lines proportional in continual proportion,
Euc. 6.17. and l. 7.20. Ram. 12.4. Pit. 1.43.
so that as A. is to B. so let B. be to C. Then I say, that the Square, namely,
D. E. F. G. made of the Mean B. shall be equal to the right angled figure,
namely, H. I. K. L. contained under the two Extremes A. and C. as appears by
the Diagram. PROB. 79.83.84.85.86.88.95.99.109.129.130.131.

diagram

THEOREME XLII. Four right lines being proportional, the right angled
Parallelogram, contained under the two Means, is equal to the right angled
Parallelogram, contained under the two Extremes.
LEt A. B. C. and D. be four right lines proportional, Euc. 6.16. Pit. 1.42.
so that as A. is to B. so let C. be to D. Then I say, that the right angled
Parallelogram, namely, E. F. G. H. contained under the two Means B. and C.
shall be equal to the right angled Parallelogram, namely, I. K. L. M.
contained under the two Extremes A. and D. as appears by the Diagram. PROB.
49.56.87.88.93.

diagram

THEOREME XLIII. Of any three proportional right Lines, the Square which is
made of the Mean, and that which is made of either of the Extremes, have such
proportion the one to the other, as the two Extremes have.
LEt A.B.C.D. and E. F. be three diagram right lines, Eu. 12.2. D.P. 1. Ceul.
2.75.
in continual proportion: so that as A. B. is to C. D. so let C. D. be to E.
F. Then I say, that the Square (namely, C. D.I.H.) which is made of the mean
C.D. and that which is made of either of the extremes A. B. or E.F. have such
proportion the one to the other (respectively) as those extremes have: For the
same proportion as the greater extreme A. B. has to the lesser extreme E. F.
the same has the square A. B. G. H. to the square C. D. H. I. and that, to the
square E.F. I. K. which in this Diagram is Dupla sesquiquarta, as thereby
appears. And the like consideration is to be had of the proportion of
Circles, whose Diameters are so proportionable. PROB. 79.81.82.94.129.130.131.

THEOREME XLIIII. If a rational right line be divided by an extreme and mean
proportion, either of the segments is an irrational residuall line.
LEt the line A. B. be a rational right line, Euc. 13.6.
and let the same be divided by diagram an extreme and mean proportion in the
point C. Then I say, that either of the segments, namely, A.C. and C. B. is an
irrational residuall line. PROB. 20.

THEOREME XLV. If a right line be divided by extreme and mean proportion, the
whole line has the same proportion to the greater segment, as the same greater
segment has to the lesser.
LEt A. B. be a right line, divided by extreme and mean proportion, diagram
as in the point C. I say then, that the whole line A. B. has the same
proportion to the greater segment A. C. as the same greater segment has to the
lesser segment C. B. for as A. B. is to A. C. so is A. C. to C. B. PROB. 20.

THEOREME XLVI. If a right line be divided by extreme and mean proportion,
the Rectangle figure, comprehended under the whole line, and the lesser
segment, shall be equal to the Square made of the greater segment.
LEt A. B. be a right line, AB. 10.

AC. 15 -- {powerof2} 125.

CB. {powerof2} 125-5.

and let the same be divided by extreme and mean proportion in the point C.
Then, I say, the Rectangle figure, namely, A. C. G. H. comprehended under the
whole line A. G. (being equal to A. B.) and the lesser segment A. C. shall be
equal to the Square, namely, C.B.E.F. made of the greater segment C.B. DEF.
35. PROB. 20.

THEOREME XLVII. Two right lines being drawn in an equilater Equiangle
Pentagon, in such sort as they subtend any two of the next immediate angles,
those two lines by their intersections shall divide the one the other by an
extreme and mean proportion: and the greater segments of either of them shall
be equal to the side of the Pentagon.
LEt A. B. and C. D. be two right lines, Eu. 13.8.
drawn in the Equilater Equiangles diagram Pentagon, A. D. B. E. C. and let
the line A.B. subtend the angle A. D. B. and the line C. D. the angle C. A. D.
being two of the next immediate angles. I say then, that those two lines, by
their intersection in the point F. shall divide the one the other by an
extreme and mean proportion. And the greater segments of either of them, as
the segments F. B. and F. C. shall be either of them equal to the side of the
Pentagon A.D.B.E.C. PROB. 20.21.48.62.63.119.120.

THEOREME XLVIII. Like Triangles are one to the other in double proportion that
the sides of like proportion are.
LEt A.B.C. and D.E.F. be diagram two like Triangles, Eve. 6.19.
and let the angle A. of the one be equal to the angle D. of the other; the
angle B. of the one, to the angle E. of the other; and the angle C. of the one
to the angle F. of the other; and as the side A.B. is to the side B. C. so let
the side D. E. be to the side E. F. so are B. C. and E. F. sides of like
proportion. Now I say, that the proportion of the Triangle A. B. C. unto the
Triangle D. E. F. is double the proportion of the side B. C. to the side E. F.
PROB. 45.

THEOREME XLIX. All like right lined figures whatsoever, are the one to the
other in double proportion, that the sides of like proportion are.
LEt A. and B. be two diagram right lined figures like, Euc. 6.20.
having the angle at the point C. equal to the angle at the point H. and the
angle at the point D. equal to the angle at the point I. the angle E. to the
angle K. and so of all the rest. And also as the side D. E. is to E. F. so let
I. K. be to K. L. etc. so are the sides E. F. and K. L. sides of like
proportion. Then, I say, that the proportion of the figure A. unto the figure
B. is double, the proportion of the side E. F. to the side K. L. PROB. 45.

THEOREME L. All angles in equal circles, whether they are in the centers or
circumferences, have the same proportion one to the other as the circumferences
have wherein they consist: And so are the sectors, which are described on the
centers.
LEt A.B.C. and F. G. H. be two equal diagram circles whereof let D. and E. be
their centers; Euc. 6.33.
and let the angles which are in their centers be B. D. C. and H. E. G. and the
angles which are in their circumferences B. A. C. and H. F. G. and let the
sectors described on their centers be D. B. C. and E. H. G. Then, I say, that
the angles B. D. C. and H. E. G. in the centers, and the angles B. A. C. and H.
F. G. in the circumferences, have the same proportion one to the other, as the
circumferences have wherein they consist, that is, as the circumference B.C.
has to the circumference H. G. And the same proportion also has the sector D.
B. C. to the sector E. H. G.

THEOREME LI. If on the end of the Diameter of a circle, a perpendicular be
raised, it shall fall without the circle, between which, and the
circumference, another right line cannot be drawn to the Diameter, and the
angle within the circle is greater, and that without the circle is lesser, then
any acute angles made of right lines.
LEt A. B. C. be a circle, Euc. 3.16.
whose diameter is A. C. and on the same diameter diagram let the perpendicular
D.C. be raised. Then, I say, first, that the same perpendicular D. C. shall
fall without the circle; and that between the same perpendicular and the
circumference B. C. another right line cannot be drawn to the diameter A.C.
And also that the angle within the circle, namely A. C. B. is greater, and that
without the circle, namely B.C.D. is lesser then any acute angles made of right
lines.

THEOREME LII. If a right line be a tangent or touch line to a circle, and
another right line be drawn by the center to the point of touch, it shall be
a perpendicular to the tangent: And if a perpendicular be let fall from the
center to the tangent, it shall fall in the point of touch.
LEt the right line A. B. be a tangent, Euc. 3.18.
or touch line to the circle D. E. C. let the diagram point of touch be C. and
the center of the circle E. and let another right line, as D.C. be drawn by
the center E. to the point of touch C. Then, I say, that the same line so
drawn by the center to the point of touch, shall be a perpendicular to the
tangent A. B. And that the perpendicular E. C. being let fall from the center
E. to the tangent A. B. shall fall in the point of touch C. PROB. 31.33, 114,
115, 116, 117, 118.

THEOREME LIII. If a right line be drawn in a circle and not by the center
thereof, another right line bysecting the same by right angles shall pass by
the center of the same circle. And if from the center a perpendicular be let
fall on a right line drawn in the same circle not by the center; the
perpendicular shall divide the same line into two equal parts.
LEt A. B. D. C. be a circle whose center is E. and let B. C. be a right line
drawn in the same circle, and not by the center diagram thereof, and let
another right line as A. D. bysect the same by right angles in the point F.
Then, I say, that the same line A. D. shall pass by the center of the circle.
Also from the center E. let fall the perpendicular E. D. on the right line B.
C. drawn in the same circle not by the center; Then, I say, further that the
perpendicular E D. shall divide the same line B.C. into two equal parts.

THEOREME LIIII. If one angle be placed in the circumference of a circle, and
another in the center thereof, and are both subtended by one part of the
circumference. That angle in the center shall be double to that in the
circumference.
LEt A. B. C. be a circle, and let one angle be placed in the circumference
thereof, diagram Angulus in centro duplus est anguli in peripheria, in candem
peripheriam insistentis. Euc. 3.20.
as the angle B. A. C. and another in the center thereof, as the angle B. E. C.
and let them both be subtended by one part of the circumference as B. D. C.
Then, I say, that the angle B.E.C. in the center, shall be double to the angle
B. A. C. in the circumference.

THEOREME LV. All angles consisting in one and the same segment of a circle are
equal the one to the other; If in a semicircle, they are right angles; If in a
lesser segment, they are greater then a right angle; If in a greater segment,
they are lesser. And also the angle of a greater segment, is greater then a
right angle, and the angle of a lesser segment is less then a right angle.
Anguli in cadem sectione sunt aequales.
LEt A. B. C. D. E. F. be a circle, and let A. E. be the diameter thereof,
which divides diagram the same into two semicircles or equal segments; Then,
I say, that the angles A. C. E. and A. D. E. consisting in one and the same
segment, Eu. 3.21.31
are equal the one to the other, and being in a semicircle they are both right
angles: Ceul. 2.46.
Let also the line or cord A. C. divide the same circle into two unequal
segments, as A. B. C. the lesser segment, and A. F. E. D. C. the greater, Note
here the difference between an angle in a segment, and an angle of a segment,
See Def. 16.17.
I say, the angle A. B. C. in the lesser segment is greater then a right angle,
and the angle A. E. C. in the greater segment is less then a right angle. And
also F. A. C. an angle of the greater segment is greater then a right angle,
and the angle B. A. C. being an angle of the lesser segment, is less then a
right angle. PROB. 19.23.24.25.30.38.52.65.

THEOREME LVI. If a right line be a tangent to a cirle, and another right line
be drawn from the touch (crossing the circle) to what point soever in the
circumference; the angles caused by intersection or meeting of those two lines,
are equal to the angles consisting in the alternate segments of the circle.
LEt A. B. C. D. be a circle, and the right line E. F. a tangent to the same
circle; Euc. 3.32.
diagram and let another right line as B. D. be drawn from the touch, namely,
the point D. crossing the circle to what point soever in the circumference as
the point B. Then, I say, the angles caused by intersection or meeting of those
two lines E. F. and B. D. are equal to the angles consisting in the alternate
segments of the circle; that is, the angle B. D. F. shall be equal to the
angle B.A.D. and the angle B. D. E. to the angle B. C. D. in the alternate
segments. PROB. 32.33.111.

THEOREME LVII. If from a point without a circle, two right lines be so drawn,
that the one be a tangent to the circle, and the other divide the same circle
into two equal or unequal parts: The rectangle figure contained under the
whole line which divides the circle, and that part thereof lying between the
utter circumference and the point, is equal to the square made of the tangent
line.
LEt B. C. F. be a circle, and without the same, take a diagram point at all
adventures, as the point A. from whence let two right lines be so drawn, that
the one be a tangent to the circle, as A. C. and the other divide the same
circle, as A. B. F. Then, I say, that the rectangle figure contained under the
whole line A. F. and that part of the same line, lying between the utter
circumference and the point, as B. A. namely, the rectangle figure A. H. G. F.
is equal to the square made of the tangent line A. C. namely, to the square A.
E. D. C.

THEOREME LVIII. If from a point without a circle, two right lines be drawn to
the concaue circumference of the circle, they shall be reciprocally
proportional with their parts taken without the circle. And another right line
drawn from the point as a tangent to the circle, shall be a mean
proportional between either whole line, and the utter segment thereof.
LEt B. E. F. D. be a circle, and without the same circle take a point at all
adventures, as at A. and from that point to the concaue circumference of the
circle, draw the two right lines A.E. and A. F. And let another right line be
drawn from the same point as a tangent to the circle, as the line A.D. Then, I
say, first, that these two lines A.E. and A.F. are reciprocally proportional
with their parts taken without the circle, that is, as A. E. is to A. F. so is
A. C. to A. B. And moreover, that between the lines A. F. and A. C. or
between the lines A.E. and A.B. the tangent A. D. is a mean proportional.

diagram

THEOREME LIX. Every circumference of a circle, is more then triple his
Diameter, by such a proportion as is more then 10/71^ and less then 1/7 of the
same, the nearest rational proportion whereof is 22. to 7.
IN the former Diagram, Corol: Euc. 12.1.
let B. C. D. F. E. be the circumference of a circle, and C. F. the Diameter
thereof; I say, the same circumference is more then triple the Diameter C. F.
by such a proportion as is more then 10/71^ and less then 1/7^ of the same;
and that the nearest rational proportion thereof, is 22. to 7. Wherefore to
know the quantity of the circumference, multiply the Diameter by 22. and
divide the Factus by 7. the Quotient resolves the question. PROB. 34.67.

THEOREME LX. Every circle is near equal to that right angled Triangle, of
whose sides (containing the right angle) the one is equal to the semidiameter,
and the other to the circumference of the same circle.
Corol. Euc. 12.1.
diagram

The precise squaring of a circle was never yet found out; and therefore in this
and the 4. next Theoremes following, this word (Near) is used. But all
Conclusions hereby wrought, are without any apparent error.
LEt A. C. D. be a circle, and A. E. B. a right angled Triangle, whose angle at
the center B. is a right angle, and whose sides containing the right angle,
namely, A. B. and E. B. the one is equal to the Semidiameter, as A. B. and the
other to the circumference, as E.B. Then I say, that the Triangle A. E. B. is
near equal unto the same circle. PROB. 68.68.

THEOREME LXI. The Square made of the Diameter of a Circle, is in that
proportion to the circle (very near) as 14. to 11. And therefore every circle
is near 11/14^ of the square about him described.
LEt A. B. C. D. be a circle, Corol. Euc. 12.1.
and E.F.G.H. a square made of the diameter A. C. or B. D. Then, I say, that
the square E. F. G. H. is very near in the same proportion to the circle A. B.
C. D. as 14. to 11. And theree fore, the circle very near 11/14^ of the same
squar-about him described. PROB. 68.

diagram

THEOREME LXII. Every circle is near equal to the long square, whose length
and breadth are equal to half the circumference, and half the Diameter; or
to the whole Diameter, and 11/14^ thereof.
LEt A. C. D. be a circle; Corol. Euc. 12.1.
And let H. A. B. G. be a diagram long square, whose length H. A. is equal to
half the circumference, and breadth A. B. to half the diameter; And let also
K. A. D. E. be another long square, whose length is the whole diameter A. D.
and breadth 11/14^ thereof, namely, K. A. Then, I say, that either of those two
long squares are near equal to the circle A. C. D. PROB. 68.

THEOREME LXIII. Every semicircle is near equal to the long square, whose
length and breadth is equal to half the arch line, and the semidiameter.
LEt E. B. F. be a semicircle, Corol. Euc. 12.1.
whose semidiameter is the diagram line B. C. and the half of whose arch line
is equal to the line A. B. or D. C. Then, I say, that the long square, namely,
A. B. C. D. (whose length A. B. is equal to half the arch, and whose breadth
is B. C. the semidiameter) is near equal to the semicircle E. B. F. PROB. 69.

THEOREME LXIIII. Every sector of a circle, is near equal to that long
square, whose length and breadth is equal to the semidiameter, and half the
arch-line of the same sector; or the half semidiameter, and the whole arch
line.
LEt B. A. C. be the sector of a circle, Cor. Eu. 12.1.
and let D. B. A. E. be a long square, diagram whose length B. A. or D. E. is
the semidiameter or equal thereunto, and whose breadth D. B. or E. A. is
equal to half the arch-line B. C. And let also H. F. A. G. be another long
square, whose length H. F. or G. A. is equal to the whole arch-line B. C. and
whose breadth F. A. or H. G. is half the semidiameter, or equal thereunto.
Then, I say, that either of those two long squares is near equal to the
sector B. A. C. PROB. 70.

THEOREME LXV. All circumferences of circles, have the same proportion the one
to the other, as their diameters have.
LEt A. and B. be two circles, This Theor. is of excellent use in the forming
of Mill-wheels, clocks, cranes, and other engines for water-workes, etc.
whereof let C. D. and diagram E. F. be their several diameters, I say, that
the same proportion that the diameter C. D. of the circle A. has to the
diameter E. F. of the circle B. the same proportion has the circumference of
A. to the circumference of B. PROB. 65.66. Cor. Eu. 12.1.


THEOREME LXVI. All circles have the same proportion the one to the other,
Omnes figurae fimiles circulis inscriptae sunt, vt quadrata a diametris
circulorum quibus inscribuntur. Euc. 12.2.
as the squares of their Diameters have.
LEt A. and K. be two circles, and let the squares circumscribed about them,
be the several squares of their Diameters. Then, I say, that the circle A.
has the same proportion to the circle K. as the squares of their Diameters
have, namely, as the square B. C. D. E. has to the square F. G. H. I. PROB.
65, 66, 104.108.

diagram

THEOREME LXVII. If in a circle be described a quadrilaterall figure, the
opposite angles thereof shall be equal to two right angles: and being
intersected with two diagonalls, the right angled figure made of those
diagonalls, is equal to the two right angled figures, comprehended under the
opposite sides of the quadrilaterall figure.
LEt A.B.C.D. be a circle, Exempla illustrissima babebis, Pit. lib. 2. p.
32.33.35.36.37.38 Anguli oppositis sect onibus aequantur duobus rect^s.
and let therein be described the quadrilaterall figure A. B C. D. let also
the same figure diagram be intersected with the two diagonals A. C. and B. D.
Then, I say, first, that the opposite angles at the points A. and C. are equal
to two right angles, Eu. 3.22. Pit. 1.54.
and likewise the opposite angles at the points B. and D. And also that the
right angled figure made of the diagonalls A. C. and B. D. is equal to the two
right angled figures (taken together) comprehended under the opposite sides A.
B. and D. C. and under A. D. and B. C. This Prop. is of very great use in
trigonometric.


THEOREME LXVIII. The power of the side of an equilater triangle inscribed in a
circle, has to the power of the semidiameter of the same circle triple
proportion.
LEt A. B. E. C. be a circle, whereof F. B. is the semidiameter, and let A. B.
C. diagram be an equilater triangle inscribed in the same circle. Then, I say,
that the power of the side of the equilater triangle A.B.C. namely, the square
H. A C. G. has to the power of the semidiameter F.B. namely, the square
F.B.D.E. triple proportion, that is, as 3. to 1. For the square H. A. C. G.
contains the square F. B. D. E. three times.

THEOREME LXIX. A triangle inscribed in a circle, has every of his angles
equal to half the arch, opposite to the same angle.
LEt D. be a circle, Pit. 1.53.
and let A. B. C. be a triangle, inscribed at all adventures in the same
circle. Then, I say, that the diagram triangle A. B. C. has every of his
angles equal to half the arch, opposite to the same, as the angle at the
point A. is equal to half the arch B. F. C. opposite thereunto, the angle at
the point B. is equal to half the arch A. G. C. and the angle at the point C.
is equal to half the arch A. E. B. For, the whole of every circle is 360.
degrees, whereof the half is 180. and the three inward angles of every right
lined triangle, is equal to two right angles, which is 180. degrees. THEOR.
13. PROB. 48.119.120.

THEOREME LXX. If in a rectangle-triangle a perpendicular be drawn from the
right angle to the base, the same perpendicular is a mean proportional
between the sections of the base: And the side annexed to either section, shall
be a mean between the same section and the whole base.
LEt A. B. C. be a rectangletriangle, Euc. Coroll. 6.8. Ceul. 2.63.
right angled at B. from whence let the perpendicular B. D. be drawn to the
base A. C. Then, I say, that diagram the same perpendicular B. D. is a mean
proportional between the sections of the base, namely, between A. D. and D.
C. And also that the side A. B. annexed to the section A. D. is a mean
proportion between A. D. and the whole base A. C. and that the side B. C.
annexed unto the section D. C. is a mean proportion between the same section
D. C. and the whole base A. C. For, as A. D. is to A. B. so is A. B. to A. C.
etc. PROB. 17, 19, 23, 24, 25, 30, 38, 43, 65, 66, 109.

THEOREME LXXI. If in equal parallelograms, one angle of the one, be equal to
one angle of the other, the sides which contain those equal angles, shall be
reciprocal.
Parallelogramma aequiangula aequalia, sunt lateribus reciproca: and contra.
LEt A. B. C. D. and E. F. G. C. diagram be two parallelograms, equal the one
to the other, Euc. 6.14.
and let the angle B.C.D. of the one be equal to the angle E. C. G. of the
other. Then, I say, that the sides which contain those equal angles, are
reciprocally proportional, that is, as D. C. to C. G. so is E. C. to B. C.
PROB. 88.93.

THEOREME LXXII. In rectangle-triangles, the figure which is made of the
subtending side of the right angle, is equal unto both the figures made of
those sides, which contain the right angle, so as those three figures are
like, and in like sort described.
LEt A. B. C. be a triangle, Euc. 6.31.
whose angle at the point C. is a right diagram angle. Then, I say, Ceul. 2.79.
that the equilater triangle E. B. A. which is made of B. A. the subtending
side of the right angle C. is equal unto both the equilater triangles, made of
the containing sides B. C. and C. A. namely, to the triangles B. F. C. and A.
C. G. taken together: And the like of squares, and all other like figures, in
like sort described.

THEOREME LXXIII. In all plain triangles, the sides are in proportion the one
to the other, as the subtenses of the angles opposite thereunto; or as the
sines of the angles opposite to those sides.
LEt D. be a triangle, and let there be circumscribed about the same triangle
the circle A. B. C. by means whereof the diagram side A. B. is made the
subtense of the angle A. C. B. that is, of the arch A. E. B. which is opposite
to the same angle A. C. B. Also the side B. C. is made the subtense of the
angle B. A. C. that is, of the arch B. F. C. which is opposite to the same
angle B. A. C. and lastly, the side A. C. is made the subtense of the angle A.
B. C. that is, of the arch A. G. C. which is opposite to the same angle A. B.
C. Then, I say, that the side A. B. is in proportion to the side B. C. as the
subtense of the angle A. C. B. to the subtense of the angle B.A.C. for the
sides and subtenses, are one and the same. And likewise of the sines of those
angles; which sines are the one half of their subtenses, and what proportion
the whole has to the whole, the same has the half to the half. CHAP. 14.3.

THEOREME LXXIIII. Every right lined figure, or plat, consists of more sides
by two; then the number of triangles, whereof the same figure is composed.
LEt A.B.C.D.E.F.G. be a right lined figure, Ram. 10.1.
diagram and let the triangles, whereof it is composed, be 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5.
Then, I say, that the same right lined figure consists of more sides by two,
then the number of triangles, whereof it is composed. For the sides thereof are
seven, and the triangles five; as is apparent by the Diagram. CHAP. 37.3.

The end of the first Book.
THE USE AND OPERATION OF THE FORMER THEOREMES.
The second Book.
THE ARGUMENT OF THIS BOOK.
THIS Book consists of diverse Conclusions, or Geometrical PROBLEMES, here
duly placed, by observation of natural course; the cause being formerly, in
the first Book, amply expressed, and here the effect as fully made manifest,
having either to other due relation. This Book is divided into four Parts,
wherein most plainly, briefly, and methodically, is expressed the practicke
operation of the precedent THEOREMES; as the Distinction, Application, and
Division of Lines and Angles, and the Description, Mensuration, Reduction,
Addition, Inscription, Transmutation, Division, and Separation of all sorts and
forms of superficial Figures, according to their several kinds.

THE FIRST PART. Of the Properties, Passions, Dispositions, Applications, and
Divisions of Lines and Angles.
PROBLEM I. Two right lines given, being unequal; to take from the greater a
line equal to the lesser.
LEt a. and B. be two unequal right lines diagram given, Euc. 1.3.
whereof let A. be the greater; from which it is required to take a line equal
to the lesser.

First, join the two given lines together in such sort, as thereby they make
any kind of angle, as C. D. E. and making the center D. and the space D. E.
(the length of the line B.) describe the arch line F. E. which shall cut off
from the greater line, the line F. D. equal to the lesser line B. which was
required to be done. DEF. 10.

PROBLEM II. To a right line given, to draw a parallel line at any distance
required.
SVppose the right line given, Euc. 1.31.
to be A. B. unto which line it is required to have a parallel drawn: diagram
Open your Compass to the distance required, and setting one foot in the end A.
strike an arch line on that side the given line, whereon the parallel is to be
drawn, and the like in the end B. as the arch lines C. and D. and by the
conuexitie of those arch lines, draw the line C. D. which shall be parallel to
the given line, as was required. DEF. 34.

PROBLEM III. To perform the former Proposition at a distance required, and
by a point limited.
LEt A. B. be a right line given, Euc. 1.31.
whereunto it is diagram required to have a parallel line drawn at the
distance, and by the point C. Place one foot in C. from diagram whence take the
shortest extention to the line A. B. as C. E. at which distance, place one foot
in the end B. and with the other strike the arch line D. by the conuexitie of
which arch line, and the limited point C. draw the line F. G. which shall be a
parallel to the given line A. B. the thing required. DEF. 34.

PROBLEM IIII. To erect a perpendicular on any part of a right line given.
LEt A. B. be a right line given, diagram and let C. be a point therein, Euc.
1.11. Ceul. 2.7.
whereon it is required to erect a perpendicular, Open the Compass to any
convenient distance, and setting one foot in the point C with the other mark
on either side thereof, the equal distances C. E. and C. F. Then opening the
Compass to any convenient wider distance, with one foot placed in the points E.
and F. strike two arch lines, crossing each other, as in D. from whence draw
the line D. C. which shall be the perpendicular required. DEF. 5.

PROBLEM V. To raise or let fall a perpendicular to a line given, from a point
either above or beneath the same line.
LEt A. B. Euc. 1.11.
be a line given, and let D. be a point above the same line: It is required
from diagram the point D. to let fall a perpendicular line to the given line A.
B. At any indifferent distance placing one foot in the point D. describe an
arch line, intersecting the given line twice, as the arch line H. intersecteth
the given line, in the points E. and F. Then either with the same, or some
other convenient distance, by placing the one foot in those points E. and F.
strike two arch lines, crossing each other, as in G. By which point, and the
given point D. draw the line D. C. which shall be a perpendicular to the given
line. And the like construction is to be used, if the point were beneath the
given line. DEF. 5.

PROBLEM VI. Upon the end of a line given to raise a perpendicular.
LEt A. B. be a right diagram line given, and let B. be the end thereof,
whereon it is required to raise a perpendicular line. Open your Compass to a
convenient distance, and with one foot in B. draw the arch line F. G. D. Then
placing one foot in F. at the same distance mark the arch in G. and on G. draw
the arch E. D. Then on D. cross the last arch in E. still keeping the same
distance; from which intersection draw the line E. B. which shall be the
perpendicular required. DEF. 5.

To perform the same another way.

LEt A.B. in the former Diagram be a right line given, and B. the end thereof,
whereon a perpendicular is to be raised. From the end B. prick out any five
equal distances, and opening the Compass to 4. of them, with one foot in B.
strike an arch line toward C. Then opening the Compass to all 5. Divisions,
with one foot in the third Division, cross the same arch line in C. from
whence draw the line C. B. which shall be the perpendicular required.

PROBLEM VII. To divide a right line given, into two equal parts.
LEt A. B. be a right line given, Euc. 1.10. Ceul. 2.6.
which is to be divided diagram into two equal parts: Open the Compass to more
then half of the given line, and placing one foot thereof in either of the
ends A. or B. with the other strike an arch line toward D. and another toward
C. then place one foot in the other end of the given line, and with the same
distance cross the two former arches in D. and C. by which intersections, draw
the line D. C. which shall divide the given line A. B. as was required.

PROBLEM VIII. Upon a right line given, on a point therein limited, to make an
angle equal to an angle given.
LEt A. B. be a right line given, and C. diagram a point therein limited, and
let H. F. G. be an angle given: It is required on the right line A. B. and on
the point therein C. to describe an angle equal to the angle given H. F. G. At
any convenient distance setting one foot in F. the given angle, Euc. 1.23.
strike the arch line H. G. and at the same distance placing one foot in the
limited point C. make the arch line D. E. Then take the distance from G. to H.
and place that distance on the last drawn arch line from E. which ends in D.
by which point draw the line D. C. which shall include the angle D. C. E. upon
the given line A. B. on the point therein limited C. being equal to the given
angle H. F. G. the thing required. DEF. 42.

PROBLEM IX. To make a right angle upon a line given, and on a point in the
same line limited.
LEt A. B. be a line given, and let B. be a point therein limited. It is
required on the line A. B. and to the point in it limited B. to describe a
right angle. By the sixth PROB. on the point B. raise the perpendicular C. B.
which with the given line shall make the right angle A. B. C. on the line A. B.
and to the point therein limited B. which was required. DEF. 5.

diagram

PROBLEM X. To divide an angle given into two equal parts.
LEt A. B. C. be an angle given, diagram to be divided into two equal parts.
Euc. 1.9. Ceul. 1.5.
Having opened the Compass to any convenient distance, place one foot in B. and
with the other cross the two lines B. A. and B. C. in the points D. and E.
upon which two points, strike two arch lines, at any equal distance, crossing
one the other, as at F. From whence to the angle B. draw the right line B. F.
which shall divide the given angle into two equal parts, as was required.
THEOR. 18.

PROBLEM XI. To divide a right angle given into three equal parts.
LEt A. B. C. be a right angle given, diagram to be divided into three equal
parts. At any convenient distance, with one foot in B. cross the line B. C. as
at E. and at the same distance on the points B. and E. strike two arch lines,
crossing one the other in the point D. by which point, and the angle B. draw
the line B. G. Then, by the tenth last before going, divide the angle G. B. C.
into two equal parts, with the line F. B. So shall those two lines F. B. and
G. B. divide the right angle given into three equal parts; which was the thing
required. DEFINITION 21. THEOREME 18.

PROBLEM XII. To divide a right line given into diverse equal parts, as many
as shall be required.
LEt B. C. be a right line given, diagram and let it be required to divide the
same line into six equal parts. First from B. draw a line at all adventures,
making an angle of any quantity with the given line, as the line B. A. making
the angle A. B. C. Then by the 8. of this book make the angle D. C. B. equal
to the angle A. B. C. and from B. toward A. and likewise, convenient distance,
make 5. equal spaces (that is, one always less then the number of parts
required) and from point to point respectively draw lines, intersecting the
given line: So shall you divide the same into six equal parts required.
THEOR. 22.

PROBLEM XIII. To divide a right line given proportionally, according to any
proportion required.
LEt A. be a diagram right line given, Euc. 6.10, 11, 12. Ceul. 2.67.
and let it be required to divide the same into two such parts, that the
greater may be in proportion to the lesser, as the line B. is to the line C.
First, make an angle of any quantity, as E. D. F. whereof make the side F. D.
equal to the given line A. then place on the other side the line C. from D. to
H. and the line B. from H. to E. from E. to F. draw the line E. F. and lastly,
by the 3. of this Book, draw a parallel line to E. F. by the point H. as H. G.
cutting F. D. in G. So shall you divide F. D. (being equal to the given line
A.) in the point G. in such sort that the greater segment F. G. has the same
proportion to the lesser G. D. as the line B. has to the line C. which was
required. THEOR. 22.

PROBLEM XIIII. From a right line, given to cut off any parts required.
LEt A. B. be a right line given; Euc. 6.9. Ceul. 2.66.
diagram and let it be required to cut off from the same line 4/9 parts there
of. Make any angle on the end B. by drawing the line E. B. on which line from
the point B. make any 9. equal distances (or so many always as the Nomen
imports, which is here 9.) From the ninth distance, draw the line E. A. and
to that line by the fourth distance from B. draw the parallel line D. C. by the
3. of this Book, cutting the given line A. B. in C. So have you cut off the
segment C. B. which is 4/9^ parts of the given line A. B. the thing required.
THEOR. 22.

PROBLEM XV. To find a third line in continual proportion unto two lines
given.
LEt A. and B. be two lines given; and let it be required to find a third
line, to be in such proportion to A. as A. is to B. Make an angle of any
quantity, as H. E. C. then place the line A. from E. to D. and the line B.
from E. to F. and diagram draw the line D. F. place also the line A. from E. to
G. and lastly, Euc. 6.11. Ceul. 2.68.
by the 3. of this Book, by the point G. draw the line G. C. parallel to F. D.
So shall E. C. be a third proportional line to the two given lines, the thing
required. THEOR. 22.

PROBLEM XVI. To find a fourth proportional line to three lines given.
LEt A. B. and C. diagram be three lines given; and let it be required to find
a fourth line, having such proportion to A. as B. has to C. Make an angle of
any quantity, as D. G. K. And seeing it is the greater extreme, which is
sought, Euc. 6.12: Ceul. 2.69.
place first the lesser extreme C. from G. to H. and the lesser mean B. from
G. to F. then draw the line F. H. and place the greater mean A. from G. to I.
by which point I. draw the line E. I. parallel to F. H. which cutteth D. G. in
E. So have you E. G. the fourth proportional line required. THEOR. 22.

PROBLEM XVII. To find a mean proportional line between any two lines
given.
LEt A. and B. be two lines given, Euc. 2.14. and 6.13. Ram. 16.19. Ceul. 2.64.
diagram between which it is required, to find a mean proportional line.
First, join the two given lines together, so as they make both one right line,
as C. F. D. meeting in the point F. then describe thereon the semicircle C. E.
D. and on the point F. by the 5. of this Book erect a perpendicular to cut the
circumference in E as F. E. which shall be the mean proportional required.
DEF. 39. THEOR. 70.

Note here, that if from the two points C. and D. to any one point in the limb
be drawn two right lines ( which by the 55. THEOR. make a right angle) as the
lines C. E. and D. E. meeting in the point E. Then are those two lines mean
proportionalls, that is, the line C. E. between C. F. and C. D. and the line
D. E. between D. F. and D. C. THEOR. 70.

PROBLEM XVIII. To find two mean proportional lines, between any two right
lines given.
LEt A. and B. be two right lines given, Euc. 1.43.
between diagram which it is required to find two mean proportional lines.
On the end of the line A. by the 6. of this book place the line B.
perpendicularly, making a right angle, as the angle E. C. D. then draw the
Diagonall line E. D. whereon describe the semicircle E. G. D. making F. the
center, then enlarge the lines C. E. and C. D. toward L. and M and taking in
your compass the given line B. the lesser extreme, place one foot in D. and
with the other strike through the limb of the semicircle in G. and on the
point G. lay your ruler, turning it up and down on that point till by drawing
the line H. K. you may cut the two lines C. L. and C. M. equidistantly from the
center F. So shall E. H. and D. K. be two proportional lines, between the
given lines A. and B. as was required. THEOR. 5.

PROBLEM XIX. To find out in a line given, the two extremes of a mean
proportional given: So as the same mean be not greater then half the given
line.
LEt the mean proportional given be A. and the line given B. C. It is
required in the line B. C. to find two extremes, between which the line A.
shall be a mean proportional. Upon the given line B. C. describe the
semicircle B. F. C. then at the distance of the given mean, by the second of
this book draw a line parallel to B. C. (which diagram of necessity must
either touch or cut the semicircle) as the line D. E. cutting the semicircle in
F. From which point F. by the 5. of this book, let fall the perpendicular F.
G. which shall so divide the given line B. C. in the point G. that the line
given A. shall be a mean proportional between the two segments B. G. and G.
C. the thing required. THEOR. 9.55.70. PROB. 83.

PROBLEM XX. To divide a line given by an extreme and mean proportion.
LEt A. B. be a AB. 12.

CB. 12.

BD. 6.

EB. (...) 180. -- 6.

AE. 18 -- (...) 180.

line given to be so divided. Euc. 2.11.6.30. Ram. 14.10. Ceul. 2.36.
By the 9. PROB. make of the given line A. B. a right angle, as A. B. C.
setting C. B. equal to A. B. then increase the given line by half the length
thereof to D. and opening the compass to the distance C. D. with one foot in D.
strike through the given line at E. which shall divide the same line by extreme
and mean proportion, whereof the greater segment is E. B. and the less A. E.
As was required. DEF. 35.1. THEOR. 44, 45, 46, 47.

To perform the former Prob. arithmetically.

LEt the number given to be divided by extreme and mean proportion be 12.
First, infold the square thereof in 5. the factus is 720. divide that by 4. the
quotus is 180. from the square root whereof deduct half the given number, the
remainder is (...) 180-6. and this is the greater portion or section, which
being deducted from the given number, there remains 17 -- (...) 180. for the
lesser portion; both which taken together makes 12. the given number.

PROBLEM XXI. To find the lesser segment of a line, divided by extreme and
mean proportion, when only the greater is given; and consequently, to find
the whole line.
LEt A. B. be the greater segment given. Euc. 12.2.
It is required to find the lesser segment, and consequently, diagram the whole
line. With the give line A. B. and half the same line, by the 9. PROB. make on
the point B. the right angle A. B. C. Then continue the given line infinitely
toward D. and at the distance A.C. with one foot in A. cut the continued line
in D. from whence cut off D. E. equal to half the given line: So is E.A. the
lesser segment, and consequently, E.B. the whole line; as was required.

Or otherwise, thus.

LEt A. D. be the greater segment given, it is required to find out the
lesser, and consequently, the diagram whole line. On the given line A. D. by
the 63. PROB. hereafter expressed, describe the Pentagon A. D. B. E. C. and
against any two, the next immediate angles, draw subtending lines, which shall
intersect the one the other, as the lines A.B. and D. C. in the point F. So
shall F. A. or F. D. be the lesser segment; F. B. or F. C. the greater; and
consequently, A. B. or D. C. the whole line, which was required. THEOR. 47.

PROBLEM XXII. Having the greater or lesser segment of a line divided by
extreme and mean proportion given, to find the other segment, and so the
whole line.
LEt M. be the lesser segment of such a line given; Euc. 6.2.
It is required to find the other segment, diagram and so the whole line.
First, by the 20. PROB. divide any line by extreme and mean proportion, as
the line A.B.C. Then make an angle of any quantity, as E. D. F. and place the
lesser segment of the divided line A. B. from D. to K. and the greater B.C.
from D. to I. and draw the line I. K. Then place the lesser segment given M.
from K. to H. and so working forwards, as by the 16. PROB. is taught, you shall
produce I. G. the greater segment, which added to K. H. makes the whole line
required. And the like course is to be held if the greater segment were given,
and the rest sought. THEOR. 22.

PROBLEM XXIII. To divide a right line given in power, according to any
proportion given in two right lines.
LEt the right line given be C. D. and the proportion given, Eu.
1.47.3.31.6.4.6.8.6.20. Cor. 2.
that between the two right diagram lines A. and B. It is required to divide
C. D. in power, according to the proportion of A. to B. First, by the 13. PROB.
divide the given line C. D. in the point F. proportionally, as A. to B. Then on
the same given line describe the semicircle C. E. D. and from the point F.
raise a perpendicular, to cut the lymbe in E. from which point draw the lines
E.C. and E.D. which two lines together, shall be equal in power to the given
line, and the power of the line E. D. shall be in such proportion to the power
of the line E.C. as A. to B. which was required. DEF. 36.37. THEOR. 6.9.55.70.

To perform the same another way, according to any proportion required,
between two numbers given.

LEt A. B. be a right line given, and let it be required diagram to divide the
power thereof in proportion, as 2. to 3. First, add the two given terms
together, which make 5. wherefore divide the given line A. B. into 5. equal
parts, then describe thereon the semicircle A. C. B. and on the second part
erect the perpendicular 2. C. to cut the limb in C. from which point draw the
line C. A. which shall be 2/5^ parts of the power of the given line; and the
line C. B. which shall be 3/5^ parts of the power of the same given line A. B.
which was the thing required. DEFIN. 36, 37. THEOR. 6, 9, 55, 70.

PROBLEM XXIIII. To enlarge a line in power, according to any proportion
required.
LEt C. D. be a line given, Eu. 1.47.3.31.6.4.6.8.6.20. Cor. 2.
to be enlarged in power, according to diagram the proportion of A. to B.
Seek first by the 16. PROB. a line, which shall bear the same proportion to
the given line C. D. as B. to A. which will be found to be C. E. and thereon
describe the semicircle C. F. E. and, on the point D. erect a perpendicular, to
cut the limb in F. and lastly, draw the line C. F. which shall be in power to
the given line C. D. as B. to A. as was required. DEFIN. 38. THEOR. 6, 9, 55,
70.

To perform the same another way.

LEt A. B. be a line given; Euc. 10. Def. 5.1.47.
and let it be required, diagram to increase the same line A.B. in power, as 2.
to 5. By the ninth PROB. with the given line make the right angle D.A. B.
placing D. A. equal to A. B. Then draw the line D.B. and by the 23. PROB.
before going, take half the power of the given line, which is A. E. and place
it perpendicularly on the line D. B. as B. F. And lastly, draw the line D. F.
which shall have such proportion in power to the given line A. B. as 5. has to
2. as was required. DEFINITION 38. THEOREME 6, 9, 55, 70.

PROBLEM XXV. To divide the circumference, or find out all the cord lines of a
circle, not exceeding the tenth.
LEt A.B. C.D. be a circle given; whereof it is required to find the cord
lines. First, the Diameter A. B. being drawn, divides the circle into two
equal parts: The next is found by opening the Compass to the semidiameter, and
with one foot in A. strike through the lymbe at F. and E. and draw the diagram
line F. E. which will divide the circumference into three equal parts. Then
draw the line C. D. dividing the Diameter A. B. into two equal parts at right
angles, Euc. 1.47.2.6.4.6.4.15.13.9, 10.
and draw the line C.A. which shall be the side of an inscribed square. Then
setting one foot in I. and at the distance I. C. cross the Diameter in G. and
draw the line C.G. which shall be the fifth part, or the side of a Pentagon. The
sixth part, or the cord of a Sextans, is the semidiameter. The seventh part, or
the side of an inscribed Septagon, is half the third, as F.I. or I. E. The
eight being the side of an inscribed Octogon, is the line B.H. which is the
cord of half the Arch or Quadrant B.H.D. The ninth is a cord of the third part
of the arch F.L.A.E. as F.L. And the tenth is the line K.G. which is the
greater segment of the semidiameter, divided by extreme and mean proportion.
THEOR. 6, 36, 55. PROB. 118, 119, 121.

PROBLEM XXVI. To draw a line from an angle in a Plot given, which shall take
in as much as it cuts off.
LEt A.B.C.D.E. be a Plot given. It is required by a line drawne-from an angle,
Euc. 1.37.
in the diagram same Plot, to take in as much as shall be cut off by the same
line. Increase the line C. D. at pleasure toward F. Then from the point A.
draw the line A.D. making the Triangle A.E. D. and by the point E. draw the
line E.F. parallel to A.D. cutting the increased line in F. from whence draw
the line F. A. which shall take in the Triangle H. and cut off the Triangle G.
each equal to other, as was required. THEOR. 26.

PROBLEM XXVII. To draw a line in such sort, as to retain the superficial
quantity of a given Triangle, and yet alter the Base to any possible length
required.
LEt A.B.C. be a Triangle given, Euc. 1.37.
and let it be required to draw a line in such sort, as to retain the
superficial quantity of the same Triangle, and yet alter the Base to the
length of the line F. First, increase the Base B.C. to D. making B. D. equal
to the given line F. Then draw the line A. D. and by the 3. PROB. by the point
C. draw a parallel line to A. D. as E.C. cutting the side A.B. in E. And
lastly, draw the line E.D. including the Triangle E. B. D. which retains the
superficial quantity of the given Triangle A. B. C. and yet the Base altered,
to the length required. THEOR. 26. PROB. 47.74.

diagram

PROBLEM XXVIII. To draw a line in such sort, as to retain the superficial
quantity of a given Triangle, and yet alter the altitude to any possible
height required.
LEt A.B.C. in the former Diagram be a Triangle given; Euc. 1.37.
and let it be required to draw a line in such sort, as to retain the
superficial quantity of the same Triangle, and yet alter the altitude to the
height of the line G. At the distance of G. draw the line E. H. parallel to
the Base B.C. which shall cut the side A. B. in E. from which point draw the
line E.C. Then continue the Base at pleasure toward D. and from the point A.
draw a line parallel to the line E.C. as A.D. cutting the line of continuation
in D. from which point draw the line E.D. which shall make the Triangle E.B.D.
retaining the superficial quantity of the given Triangle A.B.C. and yet the
altitude altered to the height required. THEOR. 26.

PROBLEM XXIX. To find two right lines in such proportion as two figures given.
LEt the Trapezium, Euc. 1.17.6.1.1.38.1.41.
diagram A.B.C.D. and the Parallelogram F.G.K. H. be two figures given. It is
required to find 2. right lines in such proportion the one to the other, as
those two given figures are. By the 26. PROB. reduce the Trapezium A.B.C.D.
into the Triangle A. C. E. and let fall the perpendicular A.O. Then increase
the Base of the Parallelogram at pleasure toward M. and place on that
increased line K.L. equal to the Base K.H. and draw the line F. L. including
the Triangle F. L. H. equal to the Parallelogram F.G. K.H. Then by the 27.
PROB. reduce the Triangle F. L.H. to the Triangle N.M.H. making the Base
thereof M.H. equal to the Base C.E. of the first reduced Triangle; and lastly,
let fall the perpendicular N.P. So have you the two perpendiculars N. P. and A.
O. in such proportion the one to the other, as the Parallelogram to the
Trapezium given. THEOR. 35, 26, 28.

PROBLEM XXX. To find two right lines in such proportion the one to the other,
as two given Squares.
LEt A.B.D.C. and E.F. G. D. be two Squares given. It is required, Euc. 6.4.8.
Ac Cor. 19. Euc. 12.2. This Prob. is general for all figures reduced into
Squares. Which may also be thus wrought. Seek a third proportional to the
sides C. D. and D.G. which shall have such proportion to either of them, being
the other extreme, as the squares have the one to the other. Euc. 12.2.
diagram to find two right lines in such proportion the one to the other, as
the two given squares. Continue the side D. G. of the greater square given to
H. making G. H. equal to the side of the lesser square given: Then draw the
line F. H. subtending the right angle F.G.H. from which right angle let fall a
perpendicular, cutting the line F.H. in K. So shall H.K. and K.F. be two lines
in such proportion, as the two given squares, as was required. THEOR. 6, 9, 11,
55, 70.

PROBLEM XXXI. To draw a touch line to a circle given, from a point assigned.
LEt A. be the circle given, Euc. 3.17.
and B. the point assigned. It is required diagram from the point B. to draw a
touch line to the circle A. Draw the line A.B. from the center to the point
assigned, and divide the same into two equal parts in the point E. and at the
distance E.A. or E. B. cross the lymbe in C. by which point and the point
assigned B. draw the line B.D. which shall be a touch line to the circle A. as
was required. THEOR. 52.

PROBLEM XXXII. To apply a line unto a circle given, in such sort, as thereby
to cut off a segment, wherein may be placed an angle, equal to an angle given.
LEt A. be a circle given. Euc. 3.34. Ceul. 2.48.49.
It is required, to apply thereunto a line in such sort, as to cut diagram off
a segment from the same circle, wherein may be placed an angle equal to the
angle B. By the PROB. last before going, draw the touch line C. E. D. and on
the point E. by the eight PROB. make the angle F. E. D. equal to the given
angle B. by drawing the line F.E. So shall the segment F.G.E. contain an
angle, drawn from any point in the arch thereof, equal to the given angle B.
as the angle E. G. F. the thing required. THEOREME 56.

PROBLEM XXXIII. To describe, upon a line given, such a segment of a circle,
as shall contain an angle, equal to an angle given.
LEt the line given be A. B. and it is required to diagram describe thereon
such a segment of a circle, Euc. 3.33.
as shall contain an angle equal to the given angle F. To the end B. of the
given line A.B. draw the line G. B. making by the 8. PROB. the angle A. B. G.
equal to the given angle F. Then on the point B. erect a perpendicular to the
line G.B. by drawing the line D.B. and on the end A. of the given line make the
angle E.A.B. equal to the angle D. B. A. and draw the line A.E. which shall
cut the perpendicular D. B. in C. which shall be the center: Therefore on the
point C. at the distance C.A. or C.B. describe the arch A. D. E. B. which with
the given line shall make the segment of a circle, containing an angle equal
to the given angle F. For if two lines be drawn from any one part of the
circumference to the ends of the given line, they shall contain such an angle,
as those at the points D. and E. which was required. THEOR. 52.56.

PROBLEM XXXIIII. A segment of a circle being given; to find out the center,
and consequently the diameter and the whole circle.
LEt A. B. C. be the segment of a circle given. It is required to find out the
center thereof. Take a point at pleasure diagram with most conueniencie in the
arche A. B. C. as B. and on the point B. at any meet distance describe the
arch E. F. also one toward G. and another toward H. then remove the compass
to A. and with the same distance cross the next two arches in G. and E. and
with the same distance on the point C. cross the two next arches in H. and F.
And lastly, Eu. 3.25.
by those intersections, draw the lines G. P. and H. O. intersecting in D.
which shall be the center required; and consequently B. M. the Diameter, and A.
B. C. M. the whole circle. DEF. 10.11.13.

To find out Arithmetically the diameter of the whole circle, (the segment A.
B. C. being given) and consequently the other parts; work thus: Suppose the
cord line A. C. to be 12. and the perpendicular B. 2.4. Square half the cord
line, which makes 36. which divided by the perpendicular 4. quoteth, 9.
whereunto add the same perpendicular, which makes 13. the length of the whole
diameter, whereby the rest of the parts are easily known.

To find the extention of the arche line A. K. B. C. and to deliver the same
in a right line, work thus; Divide the cord A. C. into four equal parts,
and place one of those parts on the arche from A. to K. and from K. draw a line
to the third part in the cord line, as K. 3. which taken double, shall be
equal to the arche line, A. K. B. C. THEOR. 59.

The second Part.
OF the making and description of all sorts of superficial figures, with their
several and particular mensurations.

PROBLEM XXXV. To make an equilater triangle, the side thereof being given.
LEt A B. be a right line given, and it is required to diagram make an
equilater triangle, whose side shall be equal to the same line. Euc. 1.1.
At the distance A. B. setting one foot in A. strike an arche line toward D.
and at the same distance with one foot in B. cross the same arche line in D.
and from the intersection draw the lines D. A. and D. B. which with the given
line A. B. shall make the equilater triangle A. B. D. as was required. DEF. 21.
PROB. 36.

PROBLEM XXXVI. To find the perpendicular of an equilater triangle
Arithmetically, the side being given.
IN the former Diagram let the side be given 8. It is required to find the
perpendicular. By this Prob. the perpendicular of an Isoseeles is also found,
the side and base being given.
Square the side 8. makes 64. then square the half base, 4. makes 16. which
deduct from 64. rests 48. whose square root {powerof2}. 48. near rational 6.
9/10 is the length of the perpendicular D C. required. THEOR. 6.19.29.

PROBLEM XXXVII. The perpendicular and side of an equilater triangle being
given, to find the Area or superficial content.
IN the former Diagram the perpendicular {powerof2}. 48. and the side 8. is
given, and the Area is required, Multiply the whole of either by half, the
other as {powerof2}. 48. by 4. the product is {powerof2}. 768. near rational,
27. 39/54^ the superficial content required. THEOR. 24.

Or thus, without the perpendicular.

MVltiply 4. the half of one of the sides squarely, it makes 16. and the same
product by the former half, Ram. 8.8.
makes 64. and that by half the perimeter which is 12. the product is 768.
from whence extract the square root, which is near rational 27. 39/54^ the
superficial content as before.

PROBLEM XXXVIII. To make a right angled triangle, the two containing sides
being given.
LEt A. and B. be two right lines given, for the containing sides of a right
angled triangle required to be made. By the 9. PROB. of the two given sides A.
and B. make a right angle, as the angle C. F. E. then draw the subtending line
C. E. Euc. 3.31.
So have you included the right angled triangle C. F. E. with containing sides
equal to the given lines A. and B. which was required. THEOR. 9.6.11.55.70.

diagram

PROBLEM XXXIX. The perpendicular and base of a right angled triangle given to
find the superficial content.
IN the former Diagram the perpendicular F. G. 12. and the base C. E. 25. is
given, and the content required. Multiplle the whole of either by half the
other, as 12. by 12. ^ or 25. by 6. the product is 150. the superficial
content required. Or multiply the whole by the whole, the Product is 300.
whereof take half being 150. as before. THEOREME. 23.25.

Or thus, without the perpendicular.

MVltiply the containing sides 15. by 20. the product is 300. whereof take
half for your demand. Or multiply the half of the one in the whole of the
other, the Product is 150 as before. THEOREME. 23.

PROBLEM XL. To make an Jsoseeles triangle on a right line given.
LEt the right line given be A. B. whereon it is required to describe an
Isosceles triangle. Open the compass at pleasure, and placing one foot in A.
with the other strike an arch toward C. and at the same distance placing one
foot in B. cross, Euc. 1. Def. 25.
the former arch in C. and draw the lines C. A. and C. B. which shall include
the Triangle required. THEOR. 10.18.19.

diagram

PROBLEM XLI. The perpendicular and base of an Isosceles Triangle, given to
find the area, or superficial content Arithmetically.
IN the former Diagram, let C. E. the perpendicular {powerof2}. 336. near
rational 18. ^ be given (or found by PROB. 36.) and let the base given be 16.
It is required Arithmetically to find the content. Multiply the whole of
either by half, the other as {powerof2}. 336. by 8. the production is
{powerof2}. 21504. near rational, 146. 47/73^ the superficial content
required. Or multiply the whole by the whole, as {powerof2} 336. by 16. the
Product. is {powerof2} 86016. whereof take the half which is {powerof2}.
21504. and near rational 146. 47/73^ as before. THEOR. 8.19.25.

Or otherwise without the perpendicular, thus.

IN the same former Diagram. Add all three sides together, which makes 56.
whereof take half which is 28. then take the difference of each side from that
half, as 8.8. and 12. And infold those 3. each in other makes, 768. which
multiply by 28. the former half, the Product is, 21504. whereof take the
square root, which is near rational, 146. 47/73^ for the superficial
content as before, which rule is general for all right lined Triangles
whatsoever.

PROBLEM XLII. To make a Triangle of three unequal sides, the lines being
given, so as the two shortest together be longer then the third line.
LEt A. B. and C. be three lines given, whereof a Triangle is required to be
made. Euc. 1.22.
Place the line A. from E. to F. then taking in the compass, the line B. with
one foot in F. make an arch toward D. and at the distance of the third line,
and with one foot in E. cross the arch line in D. from which intersection to
E. and F. draw the lines D. E. and D. F. So shall you include the Triangle D.
E. F. whose sides are equal to the given lines A. B. and C. as was required.
THEOR. 15.

diagram

PROBLEM XLIII. To find the perpendicular of any Triangle Arithmetically, the
sides being given.
IN the former Diagram let the sides given be E. D. 6. D. F. 8. and F. E. 10.
It is required to find the perpendicular. Square the three sides severally,
which make 36. 64. and 100. then add the square of the base, E. F. 100. to the
square of one of the sides, as to 36. the square of the side F. D. which makes
136. from whence subtract the square of the other side D. F. 64. rests 72.
whereof take the half 36. which divide by the base 10. producing 3. ^ for the
lesser segment of the base E. G. Euc. 1.47.
The square of which segment 12 24/25^ being deducted from the square of E. D.
36. first added, the remainder is 23. 1/25 whose radix is 4. ^ the length of
the perpendicular D. G. required. THEOR. 70.

PROBLEM XLIIII. The perpendicular and base of any Triangle being given, to
find the area or superficial content thereof Arithmetically.
IN the same former Diagram let the perpendicular D. G. 4. ^ and the base E. F.
10. be given, and let it be required to find the Area or superficial content
of the Triangle D. E. F. Multiply the whole of either by half the other, as
the whole perpendicular 4. ^ by the half base 5. the Product shall be 24. the
superficial content required. Or multiply the whole by the whole, as 4. ^ by
10. the Product is 48. whereof take half, which is 24. as before the
superficial content. THEOR. 25.7.

Or thus without the perpendicular.

Add the three sides together 6. 8. and 10. making 24. whereof take 12. the
half, and then the difference of each side from that half, as 6. 4. and 2.
and infold those differences each into other, which brings 48. that
multiplied by the former half 12. produces 576. The radix whereof is 24. the
superficial content as before.

This Proposition holds general in all Triangles, and is the fittest and
most meet for the mensuration of all plots and irregular figures; Regula
generalis.
whatsoever, being first reduced into Triangles, by drawing lines from angle to
angle after the usual mannner.

PROBLEM XLV. To make a Triangle upon a line given, like unto another Triangle
given.
LEt the Triangle A. B C. and the line E. F. be given. It is required on the
line E. F. to make a Triangle like unto the Triangle given. Euc. 1.37. Ceul.
2.78.
Upon the point E. by the 8. PROB. describe an Angle equal to the Angle A. B.
C. and on the point F. describe another Angle equal to the Angle A. C. B. in
the given Triangle, whereby shall be included the Triangle D. E. F. upon the
line given E. F. like unto the Triangle given A. B. C. that is with equal
angles and lines proportional, as was required. DEF. 40. THEOR. 11.49.

diagram

PROBLEM XLVI. To make a Triangle equal to another Triangle given, upon the
same Base, having an Angle equal to an Angle given.
LEt A. B. C. be a Triangle given, whose base is B. C. and let the diagram
Angle given be D. It is required upon the base B. C. to describe a Triangle
equal to the Triangle given A. B. C. having an Angle equal to the given Angle
D. Euc. 1.28.1.37.
By the point A. by the 3. PROB. draw a parallel line to the base B. C. as E.
A. and on the point C. describe an Angle equal to the Angle D. whereof the
base to be one of the containing sides, and draw the line E. C. till it
intersect, the parallel line in E. And lastly, from the point E. draw the line
E. B. which shall include the Triangle E. B. C. equal to the given Triangle A.
B. C. upon the same base, and having the Angle thereof E. C. B. equal to the
given Angle D. as was required. THEOR. 26.

PROBLEM XLVII. To make a Triangle: equal to another Triangle given, with a
base or perpendicular limited.
Work this Problem in all respects according to the doctrine taught in PROB.
27. and 28. THEOR. 26. Euc. 1.37,


PROBLEM XLVIII. To make an Isosceles Triangle upon a line given, whose Angles
at the base, shall be either of them double to the third Angle.
LEt A. B. be a line given, whereupon it is required to describe a Triangle,
whose Angles at the base shall be either of them double, to the third Angle.
Suppose the given line A. B. to be the greater segment, Euc. 4.10.
of a line divided by extreme and mean proportion, and by the 21. PROB. find
out the whole line, at the distance of which line so found, with one foot in A.
strike an arch line toward C. and at the same distance with one foot in B.
cross that arch line in C. from which intersection, draw the lines C. A. and
C. B. which shall include the Triangle required. THEOR. 47.69.

diagram

PROBLEM XLIX. To make a Triangle equal to a Parallelogram given, upon a line
limited, and with an Angle equal to an Angle given.
LEt the Paralelogram diagram given be A. B. C. D. the line given E. C. and
let the Angle given be M. It is required upon the line given to make a Triangle
equal to the parallelogram given, Euc. 1.23.6.12.6.16.
having an Angle equal to the given Angle M. Take the given line E. C. for the
base, and by the 16. PROB. reason thus reciprocally. If half the given line
E.C. yield H. D. the breadth of the parallelogram: what gives A.B. the length
thereof: The answer shall be F. G. the perpendicular of the Triangle to be
made; at which distance by the 2. PROB. draw the line K. F. parallel to the
base E. C. and on the end E. by the 8. PROB. describe an Angle equal to the
given Angle M. and draw the line E. F. which shall cut the parallel line in F.
from which point of intersection draw the line F. C. which shall include the
Triangle E. F. C. equal to the parallelogram given, upon the line E. C. given
and having the Angle F. E. C. thereof equal to the given Angle M. as was
required. THEOR. 42.

PROBLEM L. To make a Square upon a line given for the side thereof.
LEt C. D. be a line given, whereon it is required to describe a Square. By the
6. PROB. on the end of the given line C. erect the perpendicular B. C. equal
to the given line C.D. at which distance, Eu. 1.46.
with one foot in B. strike an arch line toward A. then with one foot in D.
cross that arch line in A. And lastly, draw the lines A. B. and A. D. which
shall include the square A. B. C. D. upon the line given for the side thereof
C.D. as was required. THEOR. 2.

diagram

PROBLEM LI. The side of a Square being given, to find the Area or
superficial content Arithmetically.
LEt A. B. 16. be the side of a square given, whereof the superficial content
is required. Multiply the line given 16. in it self, the product is 256. the
superficial capacity of the Square A. B. C. D. required. THEOR. 38.

PROBLEM LII. To make two Squares which shall be equal the one to the other;
and also to two unequal Squares given.
LEt the right lines A. and B. be the two sides of two unequal squares given;
and let it be required to make two other squares, which shall be equal unto
them, and also the one of them equal to the other. By the 9. PROB. of the two
given lines A. and B. make a right Angle, Euc. 1.6.1.32.
as the Angle C. E.D. and draw diagram the subtending line C. D. on which line
describe the semicircle C. E. F. D. and on the middle of C. D. erect the
perpendicular F. G. to cut the lymbe in F. From which point draw the two lines
F. C. and F. D. which shall be the two sides of two squares, equal to the two
given squares, and also the one of them equal to the other; as was required.
THEOR. 6.23, 55.

PROBLEM LIII. To describe a Square in such sort as it shall pass by any
three points given.
LEt A. B. and C. be three points given, by which it is required to diagram
make a square to pass. First, by the two nearest points, Euc. 1.12.1.31.
as B. and C. draw a line at length as the line B. G. then by the third point
A. by the 3. PROB. draw the line D. E. parallel to the line B. G. and on the
point B. raise the perpendicular B. D. to cut the line D. E. in D. then at the
distance D B. mark the points E. and F. between which draw the line E. F.
which shall include the square D. E. F. B. passing by the three given points,
as was required. PROB. 3.6.

PROBLEM LIIII. To make a long Square or right angled Parallelogram, the
length and breadth being given.
LEt A. and B. be two right lines given for the length and breadth, it is
required to make a right Angled parallelogram, whose length shall be A. and
breadth B. By the 9. PROB. of the two given lines A. and B. make a right Angle,
as the Angle C. F.E. and at the distance of the line A. with one foot in C.
make an arch line toward D. and at the distance of the line B. with one foot
in E. cross, the former arch line in D. from which intersection draw the lines
D.E. and D. C. which shall include the right angled parallelogram C. D. E. F.
having the length and breadth equal to the given lines; as was required. THROR.
55.

diagram

PROBLEM LV. The length and breadth of a right angled Parallelogram or long
Square being given, to find the Area or superficial content thereof
Arithmetically.
IN the former Diagram let the length given be A. 20. and the breadth B. 10.
Multiply 20. by 10. the Product will be 200. for the Area or superficial
capacity of the Parallelogram, C. D. E. F. which is the thing required. THEOR.
38.

PROBLEM LVI. To make a Parallelogram, whose length is limited, equal to a
Triangle given, with two opposite Angles each equal to an Angle given.
LEt the Triangle given diagram be F. E. C let the length limited be D. C. and
let the Angle given be M. It is required upon the given line to make a
Parallelogram equal to the Triangle given, Euc. 1.23.6.12.6.16. Ceul. 2.82.
having two opposite Angles each equal to the Angle given. By the 16. PROB.
reason thus reciprocally; If the given line D. C. yield the perpendicular of
the Triangle F. G. what gives half the base E. C. the answer shall be H. D.
the breadth of the Parallelogram to be made; at which distance draw the line A.
B. Parallel to the given line D. C. then on the point C. by the 8. PROB.
describe an Angle as the Angle B. C. D. equal to the given Angle M. and draw
the line B. C. which shall cut the Parallel line A. B. in B. from whence mark
out the line A. B. equal to the given line D. C. and lastly draw the line A.
D. which shall include the Parallelogram, A. B. C.D. equal to the Triangle
given upon the line D. C. given, and having two opposite Angles, namely, A. and
C. each equal to the Angle given M. as was required. THEOREME 42.

PROBLEM LVII. To make a Rhombus, the side being given.
LEt the line given be A. B. whereon it is required to describe a Rhombus. Euc.
1.1.
At the diagram distance A. B. with one foot in B. describe the arch line D.
C. and at the same distance setting one foot in A. Cross, the Arch line in D.
on which point placing the compass at the former distance cross the arch line
in C. And lastly, draw the lines D A. D C. and C B. which shall include the
Rhombus, A. B. C. D. on the given line A. B. as was required. DEFINITIOM 26.

PROBLEM LVIII. The side of a Rhombus being given to find out the Area or
superficial content thereof Arithmetically.
IN the former Diagram, let the side A B. or D C. 16. be given, and let it be
required to find the Area or superficial content thereof. By the 36. PROB.
find out the perpendicular D. E. {powerof2}. 192. and near rational,
13.23/26^ and multiply the same by the given side, 16. the Product shall be
{powerof2}. 49152. and near rational, 221.311/442 for the superficial
content required. THEOR. 34.

PROBLEM LIX. To make a Rhomboydes the length and breadth being given in two
right lines.
LEt the length given be the line D. C. and the breadth, the line G. of which
length and breadth it is required to describe a Rhomboydes. At the distance of
the given breadth G. and from one of the ends of the given length, as from C.
choose a point as B. and diagram at the same distance with one foot on the
other end of the given length, Euc. 1.31.
as on D. strike an arch toward A. then at the distance of the given length
with one foot in the point B. cross the former arch in A. And lastly, draw the
lines A. D. A. B. and B. C. which shall include a Rhomboydes of the length and
breadth given. PROB. 3.

PROBLEM LX. To make a Rhomboydes with lines limited, having two opposite
Angles, equal to an Angle given.
LEt the limited lines for the length and breadth be D.C. and G. as in the
former Diagram, and let the Angle given be F.C. B. and let it be required to
make a Rhomboydes of such length and breadth, and with two opposite Angles
equal to that given. Euc. 1.23.1.31.
On the end C. of the given length D.C. by the 8. PROB. protract an Angle
equal to the given Angle, as D. C. B. making the line B. C. equal to the
given breadth G. And so work forward in all respects as in the former Problem.
PROB. 3.8.

PROBLEM LXI. A Rhomboydes given to find the superficial content
Arithmetically.
LEt the Rhomboydes given be that in the former Diagram, It is required to
find the superficial content thereof. Take the given length D. C. or A. B. 20.
and seek out (as has been formerly taught) the parallel distance or
perpendicular B. E. 12. which multiply the one by the other, the Product is
140. the Area of the given Rhomboydes required. THEOR. 34.

PROBLEM LXII. To describe a Pentagon, having sides and Angles equal.
LEt any obscure line be drawn as the right line A. B. and at any convenient
distance place thereon four equal parts or divisions, as from C. to 4. and at
the distance of two of them, on the second part, as a center, describe an
obscure circle, diagram on which center raise the perpendicular D. 2. to cut
the limb in D. then at the distance D. 1. with one foot in 1. cross the line
in K. and with the distance D. K. mark the limb of the Circle in the points
D. E.F. G. and H. And lastly, draw lines from point to point, which shall
include the Pentagon required. DEF. 29. THEOR. 47. PROB. 20.21.25.

PROBLEM LXIII. To describe a Pentagon upon a line given.
LEt A. B. be a right line diagram given, Euc. 13.8.
whereon it is required to describe a Pentagon. Suppose the line given, to be
the greater segment of a right line divided by extreme and mean proportion.
And by the 21. and 22. PROB. find the whole line; which let be A. C. and at
the distance of A. C. with one foot in B. strike an arch toward H. and another
toward K. and with the foot in A. strike one toward L. then take the
distance of the given line, and on A. and B. cross the Arches at H. and L. and
on H. or L. cross the Arch in K. And lastly, draw lines from each intersection
to other, which shall enclose the Pentagon, as was required. THEOR. 47. PROB.
20.21, 22, 25.

PROBLEM LXIIII. The side of a Pentagon being given, to find the superficial
content Arithmetically.
IN the former Diagram, let the given side be 10. It is required to find the
Area of that Pentagon. By the 36. PROB. (supposing an Isosceles described on
any side of the Pentagon, whose top is the center, as A. D B.) seek the
perpendicular D. G. 6.22/25^ which multiplied in half the perimetrie 25.
produces 172. the Area required. This rule is general in all kind of regular
polligons, A general Rule.
of how many sides so ever; as well for their superficial content, as finding
their perpendicular. THEOR. 19.39. PROB. 36.

PROBLEM LXV. To make two like Figures, bearing the one to the other, any
proportion assigned in two right lines.
LEt A. and B. be two right lines given, and let it be required to make two
diagram like Triangles, Squares, Circles or other like figures, having such
proportion the one to the other, Eve. 6.4.6.8.
as A. to B. make of the two given lines one right line, as D. E. and describe
thereon the Semicircle C.D.E. and on the point F. where the 2. given lines
meet, erect the perpendicular C. F. to cut the limb in C. from whence draw
the lines C. D. and C. E. which two lines shall be the sides of two equilater
Triangles, or of two Squares, or other like figures or the diameters of two
circles, bearing such proportion the one to the other, as the two given lines;
which was required. THEOR. 6.11, 55, 66, 70, 65.

PROBLEM LXVI. Two Circles being given, to make one Circle equal to them both.
LEt A. and B. be the Diameters of two Circles given. It is required diagram to
make one Circle equal to them both. With the lines A. and B. by the 9. PROE.
make a right Angle, as D. C. E. then draw the subtending line D. E. And lastly,
on the line D. E. describe the Circle D. C. E. which shall be equal to the
two given circles as was required. THEOR. 65.70, 66.

PROBLEM LXVII. The Diameter of a Circle being given, to find the
circumference thereof Arithmetically.
IN the former Diagram, let the Diameter given be 14. It is required to find
the circumference thereof. Multiply the Diameter given 14. by 22. the Product
is 308. which divided by 7. brings 44. the circumference required. Or
multiply 14. the Diameter by 3. 1/7^ the Product is 44 as before. THEOREME. 59.

If the circumference be given, and the Diameter required, It appears by
this rule, that the circumference 44. being multiplied by 7. and the product
divided by 22. brings 14. the Diameter.

PROBLEM LXVIII. The Diameter and Circumference of a Circle being given, to
find the Area, or superficial content thereof Arithmetically, diverse ways.
IN the former Diagram let the Diameter of the Circle D. C. E. be 14. and the
Circumference thereof 44. It is required to find the superficial content.
Multiply the Semicircumference 22. by the Semidiameter 7. the Product will be
154. the superficial content required. THEOR. 62.

Or multiply the whole Circumference 44. by the Semidiamenter 7. the Product
will be 308. whereof take half, which is 154. as before. THEOREME. 60.

Or multiply the square of the Diameter 196. by 11. the Product will be 2156.
which divided by 14 brings 154. as before. THEOR. 61.

PROBLEM LXIX. The Diameter and Arch-line of a Semicircle given, to find the
Area thereof.
LEt A. B. C. be a Semicircle given, A B. {powerof2}. 98.

A. E. {powerof2}. 24.^

E. D. {powerof2}. 24.^

F. E. 7. -- {powerof2}. 24.^

whose Diameter is A. C. and the Arch line A.B.C. It is required to find the
Area of the Semicircle. Multiply half the arch line 11. by the Semidiameter
7. The Product will be 77. for the Area required. THEOREME. 63.

PROBLEM LXX. The Semidiameter and Arch line of a Sector of a Circle given to
find the Area.
IN the former Diagram, let B. C. D. be the Sector of a Circle, whose
Semidiameter is D. C. or D. B. and the arch line B. C. and it is required to
find the Area. Multiply the Semidiameter 7. by half the arch line B. C. 5.^
the Product is 38.^ for the Area required. THEOR. 64.

PROBLEM LXXI. Any Segment or part of a Circle being given, to find the
superficial content thereof.
IN the former Diagram, let A. F. B. E. be the Segment of a Circle, the content
whereof is required. By the 34 PROB. find out the Center, and then draw the
lines D. A. and D. B. and cast up the whole Figure A. F. B. D. as in the last
Problem which will be 38.^ then find the superficial content of the
Triangle, A.B.D. by the 41. PROB. which is 24. and deduct the same out of the
whole content 38. rests 14. for the superficial content of the given Segment
as was required.

By this rule (observed with discretion) may all manner of Segments or parts of
a Circle, whether greater or lesser then a Semicircle, be easily measured
without further instruction.

But here is to be noted, that the precedent rules concerning the mensuration
of Circles, Note.
and their several parts, are not exactly true: for that the proportion
between the Diameter and circumference is irrational; and the squaring of a
Circle or the means thereof (other then mechanically) not yet discovered or
found out; yet of such sufficient preciseness as no notable or apparent error
can be made or found in the conclusions thereby wrought.

PROBLEM LXXII. An irregular plotte or Figure being given, to find the Area
or superficial content thereof.
LEt A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. be an irregular plotte or Figure, whose
superficial capacity is required. Reduce the same into as many Trapezias as
it will contain, as first the Trapezium A. B. C. D. Secondly, A. D E F.
Thirdly, A. F. G. I. and there remains the Triangle, I. G. H. In which three
Trapezias draw the Diagonals B D. D F. and F. I. which shall serve as diagram
the common bases to each Triangle on either side, on which bases let fall the
perpendiculars from the several Angles at A.C.E. and G. then in every
Trapezium take the length of the base by it self, and the length of the two
perpendiculars thereon falling, joined together in one number by it self, then
multiply the half of the one in the whole of the other, the Product is the
Area of that Trapezium, which reserve by it self, and working in the like sort
with the rest: And lastly, the Triangle I. G. H. collect all their Products
together, which shall show the superficial content required. PROB. 44. THEOR.
25.

This I hold the best manner of Mensuration of plots, as well for expedition, as
exactnes in avoiding errors, often happening by multiplicitie of numbers, and
many multiplications.

THus in this second part, have I taught the Description and Mensuration of all
manner right lined superficial Figures, according to the strict and precise
rules and precepts of absolute Art: yet seeing that dispatch and expedition in
business of import, is much more requisite then needless niceness; I would
not have my Surueyor ignorant or unfurnished of such other ready and perfect
helps (though more mechanike) as may yield him ease, and save much labor in
furthering his intents. To which end, for the speedy and exact mensuration of
all superficial figures, J would have provided a Protractor in Brass, whose
Scale should contain in length about 8. or 10. inches with equal Divisions on
the edge of either side, of 12 in an ynch on the one side, and 11. on the
other, being numbered by tennes after the usual manner of those kind of works
(which for mine own part is the Scale, I never use in all my first drawn
plots, whether the quantity be small or great, well knowing the inconueniencie
of smaller Scales) having placed thereon a Sextans of a Circle most excellent
for many uses, as the speedy laying down of any Angle required, or the ready
finding of any Angle given, etc. The order and making whereof is well known to
Master Elias Allen, who for my self and friends has made of them. By this
Scale with help of the middle line thereof, Orthigonally drawn to the edge;
you shall readily raise a perpendicular, and as instantly receive the length
thereof, and most speedily obtain the base of any Triangle, or the side of any
Figure given by applying the edge of the Scale thereunto: which is much more
facile and speedy then the former Precepts; and to be preferred for exactnes,
speed and perfection, before the ordinary course with Scale and Compass. But
doubting to exceed the Scale and Compass of my intended purpose, I will here
conclude the second part of this my second Book.

The third Part.
OF the Reduction and Translation of all manner of superficial figures, from
one form unto another, retayning still their first quantity.

PROBLEM LXXIII. To reduce one triangle into another, on the same base, but
having an angle equal to an angle given.
LEt A. B. C. be a triangle given, Euc. 1.37.
and let diagram the angle given be E. and the base of the given triangle B.C.
on which base it is required to reduce the given triangle to another, having an
angle equal to the angle E. From the point A. by the 3. PROB. draw a parallel
line to the base B. C. as the line A. D. then on the point C. by the 8. PROB.
make the angle D. C. B. equal to the given angle E. and draw the line D. C.
cutting the parallel line in D. and lastly, draw the line D. B. which shall
include the triangle D. B. C. equal to the given triangle A. B. C. upon the
same base B. C. and having an angle equal to the given angle E. as was
required. THEOR. 26.

PROBLEM LXXIIII. To reduce one triangle into another, upon a base equal to a
base given.
LEt the triangle given be A. B. C. and F. the given base, Eu. 1.37.
diagram whereon it is required to reduce the given triangle. Take the given
base F. and place it from B. to E. and from the point E. to the top of the
given triangle A. draw the line A.E. then increase the side A. B. of the given
triangle toward D. and from the point C. by the 3. PROB. draw a parallel line
to A. E. as D. C. cutting the increased side in D. and lastly, draw the line D.
E. which shall include the triangle D. B. E. equal to the given triangle A. B.
C. upon the base B. E. equal to the given base, as was required. THEOR. 26.
PROB. 27.

If the given base be greater then the base of the given triangle, work in all
respects, as is taught in PROB. 27.

PROBLEM LXXV. To reduce one triangle to another, of any possible height
required.
LEt the triangle A. B. C. in the former Diagram be given, Ceul. 3.5.
and let the height required be the line G. of which height it is required to
reduce the given triangle into another of the same quantity At the distance of
the given height G. by the 2. PROB. draw the line H. K. parallel to the base B.
C. then increase the side A. B. till it cut the parallel line H. K. in D. from
which point draw the line D. C. then by the point A. draw the line A. E.
parallel to D. C. cutting the base in E. and lastly, from the point E. draw the
line E. D. which shall include the triangle D. B. E. equal to the given
triangle A. B. C. and of the height G. as was required. THEOR. 26. PROB. 28.

If the given height be less then the height of the given triangle, work in
all respects, as is taught in PROB. 28.

PROBLEM LXXVI. To reduce a triangle given into a square.
LEt A. B. D. be a triangle given. Euc. 1.31.
It is required to reduce the same into a Geometrical square. By the 17. PROB.
find out a mean proportional line between the base B. D. and half the
perpendicular A. C. which shall be the line E. D. on which line by the 50.
PROB. describe the square E. F. G. D. which shall be equal to the given
triangle. THEOR. 25.27.

diagram

PROBLEM LXXVII. To reduce a triangle given, into a right angled parallelogram.
LEt A. B. C. be a triangle given. Euc. 1.42. Ceul. 2.28. and 2.80.
It is required to reduce the same into a right angled parallelogram. From the
angle A. let fall to the base B. C. the perpendicular A. F. then take half
thereof for the breadth, and the whole base B. C. for the length, with which
breadth and length by the 54. PROB. describe the right angled parallelogram D.
E. B. C. which shall be equal to the given triangle, as was required. THEOR.
25.

diagram

PROBLEM LXXVIII. To reduce a tringle given, into a parallelogram, having an
angle equal to an angle given.
LEt A. B. C. be a triangle given, and let diagram the angle given be D. It is
required to reduce the same triangle into a parallelogram, having an angle
equal to the angle D. By the 3. PROB. from the point A. draw the line E. A.
parallel to the base B. C. then divide the base B. C. into two equal parts in
the point G. on which point by the 8. PROB. describe the angle F. G. B. equal
to the given angle D. and draw the line F. G. cutting the parallel line in F.
from whence draw the line F. E. equal to G. B. and lastly, draw the line E. B.
which shall include the parallelogram E. F. G. B. equal to the given triangle,
having an angle F. G. B. equal to the given angle D. as was required. THEOR.
28.

PROBLEM LXXIX. To reduce a triangle given into a Rhombus.
LEt the triangle given be A. B. C. and it is required to reduce the diagram
same into a Rhombus. Euc. 1.37.
Cor. 6.19.
By the 3. PROB. draw the line A. H. parallel to the base B. C. then divide the
base B. C. into two equal parts in the point E. on which point at the distance
E. B. or E. C. strike an arch toward D. and on the point C. at the same
distance cross the former arch in D. by which intersection and the point C.
draw the line H. C. to cut the parallel line in H. then by the 17. PROB. find
out a mean proportional line between C. D. and C. H. which is C. K. upon
which line C. K. by the 57. PROB. describe the Rhombus G. K. C. F. which shall
be equal to the triangle given, as was required. THEOR. 26.41.43.

PROBLEM LXXX. To reduce a square given into a triangle, having an angle
equal to an angle given, and that on a line given.
LEt the square given be A. B. C. D. the diagram angle given E. and let the
given line be F. Euc. 1.37.
On which line it is required to reduce the given square in to a triangle,
having an angle equal to the angle E. First, continue the side of the given
square D. C. to G. making G. D. equal to D. G. and draw the line G. B which
shall include the triangle B. G. C. equal to the given square; then take the
given line F. and lay it down from C. to O. and by the 74. PROB. make the
triangle M. O. C. then by the third PROB. draw the line M. N. parallel to the
base G. C. and on the point C. protract an angle equal to the given angle E.
as N. C. O. and draw the line C. N. to cut the parallel in N. and lastly, from
the point N. draw the line N. O. which shall include the triangle N. O. C.
equal to the given square, having an angle as N. C. O. equal to the given
angle, and that on the line O. C. equal to the given line F. as was required.
THEOR. 26.

PROBLEM LXXXI. To reduce a square given into a triangle, with angles equal,
and lines proportional to a triangle given.
LEt the given square diagram diagram be A. B. C. D. and let the given triangle
be E. F. G. and let it be required to reduce the same square into a triangle,
Euc. 1.37. Cor. 6.19.
with angles equal, and lines proportional to the given triangle. According
to the first Part of the last PROB. make the triangle B. H. C. equal to the
given square, then continue the side A. B. of the given square toward K. and
on the point H. protract the angle M. H. D. equal to the angle F. in the given
triangle, drawing the line M. H. at length to cut the continued side A. B. in
K. then on the point C. protract the angle M. C. H. equal to the angle G. in
the given triangle, and draw the line C. M. to cut the line M. H. in M. which
shall include the triangle M. C. H. with equal angles to the given triangle,
but of greater content then the given square; wherefore by the 17. PROB. find
out a mean proportional line between H. K. and H. M. which is H. N. and from
the point N. by the 3. PROB. draw the line N. O. parallel to M. C. which shall
include the triangle N. O. H. equal to the given square, and having equal
angles and lines proportional to the given triangle, as was required. THEOR.
26.43,

PROBLEM LXXXII. To reduce a square into an equilater triangle.
LEt the square given be A. B. C. D. and it is required to reduce diagram the
same into an equilater triangle. Euc. 1.37. Cor. 6.19.
Double the side D. C. by increasing the same to G. and draw the line G. B. to
include the triangle B. G. C. equal to the given square, then at the distance
of the side of the square, with one foot in C. strike an arch toward I. and at
the same distance with one foot in D. cross the same arch in I. and by the
intersection and the point C. draw the line K. C. at length to cut A. B. in H.
and take C. H. and place the same from C. to E. then by the 17. PROB. find out
the mean proportion between C. E. and C G. which is C. F. at which distance
describe the equilater triangle K. F. C. which shall be equal to the given
square, as was required. THEOR. 26.^5.43

PROBLEM LXXXIII. To reduce a square given, into a right angled parallelogram
or long square, the length and breadth being limited in a right line: So as the
side of the square exceed not half the line given.
LEt the square given be A. B. C. D. and let the right line given be F. C. Euc.
1.47.6.13.
It is required to reduce the same square into a long square, whose length and
breadth together shall be equal to F. C. Upon the given line F. C. place the
given square, as in the Diagram, then describe the semicircle F. E. C. to cut
the side A. B. of the given square in E. from which point let fall the
perpendicular E. G. to cut the given line in G. So shall F. G. be the length,
and G. C. the breadth of the long square to be made, of which length and breadth
by the 54. PROB. describe the parallelogram F. G. H. K. which is equal to the
given square, and of the length and breadth required. THEOR. 41. PROB. 19.

diagram

PROBLEM LXXXIIII. To reduce a square given into a long square, whose breadth
is limited in a right line given.
LEt the square given be A. B. C. D. and let F. be the right line diagram
given. Euc. 1.47, 6, 13.
It is required to reduce the same square into a long square, whose breadth
shall be equal to the given line F. Continue the side C. D. of the given
square toward K. and place the given line F. from D. to G. and from the point
G. draw the line G. A. which divide equally in N from which point draw the
perpendicular N. H. to cut the line of continuance in H. on which point at the
distance H. G. describe the semicircle K. A. G. to cut the line of continuance
in K. so shall K. D. be the length sought for, with which length, and the given
breadth F. or D. G. by the 54. PROB. describe the parallelogram L. M. D. K.
which shall be equal to the given square, as was required. THEOR. 41. PROB. 19.

PROBLEM LXXXV. To reduce a square given into a long square, whose length is
limited in a right line given.
IN the former Diagram, Euc. 1.47, 6, 13.
let that square be the square given, and the length given the right line P.
First, continue D. C. as before toward K. and make K. D. equal to the given
line P. and draw the line K. A. upon the middle whereof S. raise the
perpendicular S H. to cut the line of continuance in H. on which point describe
the semicircle, as before, to cut D. C. in G. so shall D. G. be the breadth
sought, of which breadth and the given length, make the long square, as before.
THEOR. 41. PROB. 19.

PROBLEM LXXXVI. To reduce a long square given into a geometrical square.
LEt the long square given be A. B. C. D. and it is required to diagram reduce
the same into a geometrical square. Euc. 2.14. Ceul. 2.37.
Continue the side D. C. of the long square given toward H. and let the breadth
B. C. of the long square be placed on the line of continuation from C. to H.
then on D. H. describe the semicircle D. F. E. H. and increase the breadth of
the long square C. B. till it intersect the limb in E. so shall E. C. (being
the mean proportional between D. C. and C. H.) be the side of the square
sought, wherefore, on the line E. C. by the 50. PROB. describe the geometrical
square F. E. C. G. which shall be equal to the long square given, as was
required. THEOR. 41. PROB. 19.

PROBLEM LXXXVII. To reduce one long square given into another, whose length
or breadth is limited in a right line given.
LEt the long square given diagram be A. B. C. D. and let the breadth given be
E. and let it be required to reduce the long square given, Euc. 1.43.
into another long square of the given breadth E. Continue the breadth of the
given square D. A. toward F. making A. F. equal to the given breadth E. also
continue the length D. C. of the given square toward G. and by the point F.
and B. draw out the line F. G. to cut the line of continuance last drawn in G.
so shall G. C. be the length sought for, with which length and the given breadth
E. by the 54. PROB. make the long square K. H. C. G. which shall be equal to
the given long square, and of the limited breadth, as was required. THEOR. 5.

Or otherwise, thus.

IN the former Diagram, let it be required to reduce the long square there
given, into another long square, Euc. 6.1^.
whose breadth shall be the given line E. By the 16. PROB. reason thus. If E.
the given breadth give A. D. the breadth of the given square, what gives A. B.
the length thereof, the answer shall be G. C. or K. H. the length sought for,
with which length and the given breadth, make the long square K. H. C. G. as
before. THEOR. 42.

PROBLEM LXXXVIII. To reduce one long square given into another, whose length
and breadth shall have proportion the one to the other, as two given lines.
LEt the long square given be A. B. C. D. A B. 72.

B C. 60.

E F. 90.

E G. 48.

and let the proportion given be such, Euc. 6.12.13.14.
as that between the two right lines M. and N. It is required to reduce the
same long square into another long square, whose length and breadth shall have
proportion the one to the other, as those two given lines. By the 17. PROB.
seek out the mean proportion between the two given lines M. and N. which is
Q. seek also the mean proportion between A. D. and A. B. the breadth and
length of the long square given, which is the right line P. then by the 16.
PRO. reason thus. If Q. gives P. what gives N. the answer shall be E.F. for
the length sought; and again, if Q. gives P. what gives M. the answer shall
be E. G. for the breadth sought; of which length and breadth E.F. and E.G. by the
54. PROB. make the long square E. F. C. G. which shall be equal to the long
square given, and the breadth to the length, in such proportions as the line M.
to the line N. as was required. THEOR. 5, 41, 42, 71.

PROBLEM LXXXIX. To reduce a Rhombus into a geometrical square.
LEt the Rhombus given be A. B. C. D. and let it diagram be required to reduce
the same into a geometrical square. Euc. 1.36.
First, by the 17. PROB. find out a mean proportional line between D. C.
the side of the given Rhombus, and the parallel distance, or perpendicular line
B. E. which shall be the line F. C. upon which line, by the 50. PROB. describe
the geometrical square F. G. H. C. which shall be equal to the given Rhombus
A. B. C. D. as was required. THEOR. 33, 34.

PROBLEM XC. To reduce a Rhomboydes given, into a Geometrical Square.
LEt the Rhomboydes given be A. B. C. D. and it is required to reduce the same
into a Geometrical Square. Euc. 1.36.
Let fall the perpendicular B. E from the Angle B. to the Base D. C. between
which Base and Perpendicular, by the 17. PROB. find out a mean proportional
line, which shall be F.C. upon which line by the 50. PROB. describe the Square
F. G. H. C. which shall be equal to the given Rhomboydes as was required. DEF.
27. THEOR. 33.34.

PROBLEM. XCI. To reduce a Rhomboydes given into a Triangle, having an Angle
equal to an Angle given.
LEt the Rhomboydes given be A. B. C. D. and let the Angle given be E. F. G.
diagram It is required to reduce the same Rhomboydes into a Triangle, Eu. 1.41.
having an Angle equal to E. F. G. First, increase the line A. B. toward E.
and also the base D. C. toward F. and make C. F. equal to D. C. then on D.
protract the Angle E. D. F. by the 8. PROB. equal to the given Angle E. F. G.
and draw the line D. E. to cut the increased line in E. And lastly, from E.
draw the line E. F. which shall include the Triangle E. D. F. equal to the
Rhomboydes given, and having an Angle equal to the given Angle as was
required. THEOR. 28.

PROBLEM XCII. To reduce a Trapezium given into a right angled Parallelogram,
or into a right angled Triangle.
LEt the Trapezium given be A. B. C. D. which is to be reduced into a right
angled Parallelogram, or into a right angled Triangle. First, Euc. 1.41. Ceul.
2.29.
draw the Diagonall line B. D. then by the 2. PROB. by the points A. and C.
draw the lines E. F. and H. G. Parallel to B. D. and by the point B. and
diagram D. draw E. H. and F. G. to cut the two last lines Orthigonally, so shall
you include the Parallelogram E. F. G. H. which is double to the Trapezium
given, wherefore divide the same into two equal parts, by drawing the line K.
L. So have you the right angled parallelogram E. F. L. K. or K. L. G. H. equal
to the Trapezium given. And the Diagonall line E. G. being drawn, shall
include the right angled Triangle, E. H. G. or E. F. G. likewise equal to the
same Trapezium as was required. THEOREME 23.27.

PROBLEM XCIII. To reduce a Trapezium given into a Triangle, upon a line
given, and having an Angle equal to an Angle given.
LEt the Trapezium given be A. B. C. D. the given line E. and let the Angle
given be F. It is required to reduce the same Trapezium into a Triangle, Euc.
1.23.1.13.1.37.1.44.6.12.
on the given line E. and having an Angle equal to the given Angle F. First,
increase the base D. C. at diagram length toward H. then draw the line A. C.
and from the point B. by the 3. PROB. draw the line B. H. parallel to the line
A. C. to cut the increased line in H. and then draw the line A. H. which shall
include the Triangle A. D. H. equal to the Trapezium given, but not having the
Angle nor Base required; wherefore take the given Base E. and place it from D.
to Q. and by the 16. PROB. reason thus; if D. Q. the given Base gives D. H.
what gives A. G. the perpendicular; the answer will be the line P. for the
perpendicular of the Triangle sought, at which distance draw the line M. O.
parallel to the line D. H. then upon the point D. protract an Angle equal to
the given Angle F. as N. D. Q. and draw the line D. N. to cut the parallel line
in N. And lastly, draw the line N. Q. which shall include the Triangle N. D. Q.
equal to the Trapezium given, upon a line given, and having an Angle equal to
an Angle given, as was required. THEOREME 26.42.71. PROBLEM 3.8.16.74.

PROBLEM. XCIIII. To reduce a Trapezium into a Triangle, which shall be like
unto another Triangle given.
Euc. 1.37.1, 23. Cor. 6.19. Ceul. 3.1.
LEt the Trapezium given be A. B. C. D. and let the Triangle diagram diagram
given be E. F. G. It is required to reduce the same Trapezium into a Triangle,
which shall be like unto the given triangle E. F. G. First, by the 93. PROB.
last before going; reduce the Trapezium given into the triangle A. D. H. which
is equal thereunto, then by the 81. BROB. reduce the same triangle A. D. H.
into the triangle N. D. K. which shall be equal to the Trapezium given, and
like unto the given triangle E. F. G. as was required. THEOR. 26.43. PROB.
38.16.93.

PROBLEM XCV. To reduce an equiangled Poligon given, into a Geometrical
Square.
Euc. 2.14. Ceul. 2.30.
LEt A. B. C. D. E. be a Pentagonall Poligon given, to be reduced into a
Geometrical diagram square. By the 17. PROB. find out the mean proportional
line between half the perimetrie of the given Poligon, and the perpendicular
thereof M. N. being let fall from the Center to the middle of any side, This
rule is general for the reducing of all rectangle poligons.
which mean proportional is the line G. H. whereon by the 50. PROB. describe
the square F.G.H.K. which shall be equal to the given Poligon, as was
required. DEFINITION. 29. THEOREME 39.41.

PROBLEM XCVI. To reduce a plotte given into a Triangle, with lines drawn
from an Angle assigned.
LEt A. B. C. D. E. be a plotte given, and let the Angle assigned be A. It is
required from the Angle A. to reduce the same plot into a Triangle. First,
increase the side C. D. of the given plot, of convenient length both ways
toward F. Caeterorum polygonorum rectangulorum reductio and demonstratio buic
est similima: semper enim bac reductione sigillat im vnum latus detrabitur.
Euc. 1.37. Ceul. 3.1.2.
and G. then draw the line A. D. and by the 3. diagram PROB. by the point E.
draw the line E. G. parallel to the line A. D. to cut the continued line in G.
from which point, draw the line G. A. then draw the line A. C. and by the point
B. make B. F. parallel to A. C. to cut the line of continuance in F. from which
point, draw the line F. A. which shall include the Triangle A. F. G. equal to
the given plot, with the lines A. F. and A. G. drawn from the Angle A. assigned
as was required. THEOR. 26.

PROBLEM XCVII. To reduce a Figure given, into a Lunula or Figure of a Lunular
form.
LEt A. B. C. D. be a square given, and let it be required to reduce the
diagram same into a Lunula. Draw the Diagonall A. C. and on C. the end thereof
by the 6. PROB. erect the perpendicular E. C. equal to A. C. then continue the
side A. B. to E. and on the point B. at the distance B. A. or B. E. describe
the Semicircle A. F. E. And lastly, on the point C. at the distance C.A. or
C.E. describe the Arch line A.G.E. which shall include the Lunula A.F.E.G.
equal to the given square, as was required.

PROBLEM XCVIII. To reduce an irregular Figure given, into a greater or lesser
form, according to any given proportion.
LEt A.B. C.D.E.F. be an irregular diagram Figure given, and let the proportion
given be that between M. and N. It is required to reduce the same Figure into
a lesser, to be in such proportion to that given as M. to N. First reduce the
given Figure into Triangles, by drawing right lines from any one angle, as from
F. to all the opposite Angles, as B.C. and D. then by the 23. PROB. divide one
of the sides as F.E. in power, as M. to N. so that the power of F. L. may be to
the power of F. E. as M. to N. Then by the point L. draw the line L. K.
parallel to E. D. to cut F. D. in K. and in like sort proceed with the rest,
as K. I. I. H. and H. G. drawing them parallel to their answerable sides; so
shall you include the Figure F. G.H. I.K.L. being like unto the Figure given,
and in proportion to it, as the line M. to N. as was required. But suppose the
lesser plot were given, and let it be required to reduce the same into a
greater, according to the proportion of N. to M. then increase all the lines
from F. toward A. B. C. D. and E. and by the 24. PROBLEM enlarge the line F.
L. in power as N. to M. which set from F. to E. and by the point E. draw the
line E. D. parallel to L. K. to cut F. D. in D. and in like sort proceed with
the rest. So shall you include the irregular Figure A.B.C.D.E.F. like to that
given, and of the proportion, as was required. THEOREME. 22.

PROBLEM XCIX. To reduce an irregular Figure given, into a Geometrical Square.
diagram diagram

LEt A.B.C.D.E.F.G. be an irregular Figure given, to be reduced into a
Geometrical Square. First, draw the lines B. F. and C. E. dividing the given
Figure thereby into two Trapezias, and one Triangle, namely, A.B.F.G. B.F.E.C.
and C.D.E. then cross those Trapezias with the Diagonall lines B. G. and C. F.
and let fall perpendiculars thereon from the Angles A. F. E. and B. and likewise
from D. to the Base of the Triangle, then by the 17. PROBLEM find out the
mean proportional, between half the Diagonall B. G. and the two
perpendiculars thereon falling, which shall be the line P. Also the mean
proportional between half the Diagonall C. F. and the two perpendiculars
thereon falling, Euc. 2.14.6.13.1. 47.
which shall be the line Q. and likewise the mean proportional between half
the Base C. E. and the perpendicular thereon falling from D. which shall be the
line R. then by the 9. PROBLEM describe a right Angle at pleasure, as H. I. K.
and take the line P. and place the same, from I. to L. and also the line Q.
from I. to M. and draw the line L. M. which line place from I. to O. and also
the line R. from I. to N. And lastly, draw the line N. O. which shall be the
side of a Square, equal to the given Figure as was required. THEOREME
6.25.41.30.

Here might I fitly insert the Reduction and manner of translation of large and
spacious plots, from one Scale to another, diverse ways, with many other works
of this nature, fit to be known, which for some special reasons, I will
refer unto the later end of my next Book. And in the mean space will here
conclude the third part of this Second Book.

The fourth Part.
HOw diverse superficial figures, of several forms, are brought into one
figure, and one form: Also to subtract one figure from another, and thereby to
know how much the one exceeds the other in quantity; and likewise, hereby is
taught, the inscription and circumscription of one figure within and without
another; and the division and separation of figures, into any parts required.

PROBLEM C. Two Geometrical squares being given, to add them together into
one square.
LEt the two given squares diagram be A. B. C. D. and D. E. F. G. and let it be
required to add them together into one square. Euc. 1.47.
First take a side of either of the given squares, as A. D. and D. G. and by
the 9. PROB. make thereof the right angle A. D. G. (as they are already placed
in this Diagram) then draw the diagonal line A. G. and on that line by the 50.
PROB. describe the square A. K. H. G. which shall be equal to the two given
squares, as was required. THEOR. 6.

PROBLEM CI. Two Geometrical squares being given, to add them together in
such sort, as the one shall be a Gnomon unto the other.
LEt the two given squares be A. B. C. D. and E. F. G. H. and let it be
required to add them together, Euc. 1.47. Ceul. 2.38.
in such sort that the square E. F. G. H. shall be a Gnomon unto the other.
Increase the side C. D. of the greater square to M. making D. M. equal to the
side of the lesser square, then draw the subtending line A. M. which take and
lay down from C. to N. and thereon by the 50. PROB. describe the square O. P.
C. N. which shall perform what was required. DEF. 30. THEOR. 6.

PROBLEM CII. To add diverse squares together into one geometrical square.
LEt A. B. C. D. and E. be the sides of five squares given, Euc. 1.47.6.31.
and diagram let it be required to add them together into one geometrical
square. Diverse figures of what form or kind soever, being by the ^ormer rules
reduced into squares, may hereby instantly be added to gether into one.
First, by the 9. PROB. make a right angle at pleasure* as F. G. H. then
(beginning with the least sides first) take the line E. and place it from G. to
N. and the line D. from G. to O. and draw the line N. O. whose square shall be
equal to both the squares of E. and D. then take N. O. and place it from G. to
P. and the side C. from G. to M. and draw the line M. P. which line place from
G. to Q. and the side B. from G. to L. and draw the line L. Q. which line place
from G. to R. and the line A. from G. to K. and lastly, draw the line K. R. and
thereon by the 50. PROB. describe a square which shall be equal to all the
five squares, whose sides were given, as was required. THEOR. 6.23.30.31.

PROBLEM CIII. To add two given triangles together into one, which new
composed triangle, shall have his perpendicular, equal to that of one of the
given triangles.
LEt the two given triangles be A. B. C. diagram and E. F. G. and let it be
required to add those 2. triangles into one, Euc. 1.37.1.38.
which shall have his perpendicular equal to that of the triangle A. B. C. By
the 75. PROB. reduce the triangle E. F. G. to the triangle H. F. K. of equal
height to the other given triangle, then increase the base B. C. of the
triangle A. B. C. from C. to D. making C. D. equal to F. K. the base of the
reduced triangle H. F. K. and lastly, draw the line A. D. which shall include
the triangle A. B. D. equal to both the given triangles, and having the same
perpendicular A. N. as the given triangle A. B. C. as was required. THEOR. 26.
PROB. 28.

PROBLEM CIIII. Diverse Circles being given, to add them together into one
Circle.
LEt A. B. and C. D. be two Circles given, Euc. 1.47.12.2.
and diagram let it be required to add them both into one Circle, or to make
one Circle, which shall be equal to them both. Take the Diameter A. B. and by
the 6. PROB. raise it perpendicularly on the end of the other Diameter C. D. as
E. C. then draw the subtending line E. D. on which line as a Diameter describe
the Circle E. D. which shall be equal to the two given Circles as was
required. And in like sort, by help of the 102. PROB. may be added as many
Circles as shall be required; For Circles are added by their Diameters, as
Squares by their sides. THEOREME 6.66.

PROBLEM CV. Two long Squares being given, to add them together into one long
Square, whose breadth shall be equal to that of one of the long Squares given.
LEt the two given long Squares be diagram A. B. C. D. and E. F. G. H. and let
it be required to add those two Squares together into one Square, Euc. 1.43.
whose breadth shall be equal to the given long Square A. B. C. D. First,
increase the side G. F. of the greater long Square given toward K. making F.
K. equal to the breadth of the lesser given Square, and so working on by the
87. PROB. reduce the given long square E. F. G. H. into the long square M. N.
H. L. then on the Line M. L. by the 54. PROB. describe the long square O. M. L.
P. equal to the given long square A. B. C. D. So shall the long Square O. N H.
P. be equal to the two given long Squares, and the breadth thereof O. P. or
N. H. equal to the breadth of the lesser long Square given, as was required.
THEOREME. 5.

PROBLEM CVI. Two Geometrical Squares being given, to subtract the one out of
the other, and to produce the remainder in a third Square.
LET the two given Squares be A. B. C. D. and E. F. G. C. and let diagram it be
required to subtract the lesser out of the greater, Euc. 1.47.6.31.
and to produce the remainder in a third square. Continue out at length the
side C. G. of the lesser given square toward M. and at the distance of the
side of the greater given Square with one foot in the Angle F. of the lesser
square strike an Arch line through the line of continuance in M. And lastly, by
the 50. PROB. on the line G. M. describe the Square H. K. M. G. which shall be
the remainder of the greater given Square, the lesser being subtracted from the
same, as was required. THEOREME. 6.23.30.31.

PROBLEM CVII. Two Triangles being given to subtract the one out of the other,
and to leave the remainder in a Triangle of equal height to one of the given
Triangles.
LEt the two Triangles given be A. B. D. and E. F. G. Euc. 1.37.1.38.
And let it be diagram required to subtract the Triangle E. F. G. out of the
Triangle A. B. D. and to leave the remainder in a Triangle of equal height to
the Triangle A. B. D. By the 75. PROB. reduce the Triangle E. F. G. to the
triangle H. F. K. of equal height to the other given triangle, then take the
Base F. K. of the same reduced triangle, and place it from D. to C. And lastly,
draw the line A. C. which shall include and subtract the Triangle A. C. D.
(equal to the lesser given triangle E. F. G) from the greater given triangle
A. B. D. and leave the remainder in the triangle A. B. C. of the same height of
the given triangle A. B. D. as was required, THEOR. 26. PROB. 28.

PROBLEM CVIII. Two circles being given, to subtract the one out of the other,
and to produce the remainder in a third circle.
LEt the two circles given be A. B. and diagram B. C. and let it be required to
subtract the circle B. C. out of the circle A. B. and to produce the remainder
in a third circle. Euc. 1.47.12.2.
Take the diameter B. C. and by the 6. PROB. raise it perpendicularly on the
point B. as D. B. then at the distance of the diameter A. B. with one foot in
D. strike an arch through the diameter B. C. in E. then at half the distance
of B. E. describe the circle F. G. on the point B. So have you subtracted the
circle B. C. out of the circle A. B. and produced the remainder in a third
circle F. G. as was required. THEOR. 6, 66.

PROBLEM CIX. A geometrical square and a triangle being given, to subtract
the triangle from the square, and to produce the remainder in a square.
LET the Geometrical square given be A. B. C. D. and let the triangle given be
E. C. F. and let it be required to subtract the triangle from the square, Eu.
1.47.2.14.6.18.
and to produce the remainder in a square. By the 17. PROB. find out the mean
proportional, between the perpendicular of the given triangle E. N. and half
the base C. F. which shall be the line O. P. which place from C. to H. on which
point H. at the distance of the side of the given square, strike an arch
through the base C. F. as at M. and lastly, upon the line C. M. describe by the
50. PROB. the square G. K. M. C. So have you subtracted the given triangle
E.C.F. from the given square A.B.C.D. and produced the remainder in the square
G.K.M.C. as was required. THEOREME 6, 41, 70.

PROBLEM CX. A triangle and a long square being given, to subtract the long
square from the triangle, and to produce the remainder in a triangle of equal
height, to the triangle given.
LEt the given triangle be A.B.C. and diagram the long square given D. E. F.
C. and let it berequired to deduct the long square from the triangle, Euc.
1.38.1.41.6.1.
and to produce the remainder in a triangle, of equal height to the triangle
given. First, increase the side F. E. of the long square toward K. and placing
E.F. from E. to H. draw the line H.C. including the triangle H. C. F. equal to
the long square given; which triangle by the 75. PROB. reduce into the triangle
K.G.F. of equal height to the given triangle A.B.C. then take the base G.F. of
the last found triangle, and place it from C. to M. on the base of the given
triangle, and lastly, draw the line A.M. to include and subtract the triangle
A.M.C. (equal to the given long square) from the given triangle A.B.C. and
producing the remainder in the triangle A.B.M. of equal height to the triangle
given, as was required. THEOR. 26, 27, 28, 35.

PROBLEM CXI. Within a circle given to inscribe a triangle, with angles
equal, and lines proportional, to a triangle given.
LEt the circle given be A. B. C. and the triangle diagram diagram given D.E.F.
and let it be required within the given circle to inscribe a triangle, Euc.
3.32.4.2. Ceul. 2.53.
with equal angles and lines proportional to the given triangle By the 31.
PRO. draw the given circle, the right line G. H. touching the same in the point
C. upon which point unto the line C.H. describe the angle A. C. H. equal to
the angle D. E. F. and likewise on the same point, to the line G. C. describe
the angle B. C. G. equal to the angle E. D. F. and lastly, draw the line B. A.
which shall include the triangle A. B. C. inscribed within the given circle,
with equal angles and lines, proportional to the triangle given, as was
required. THEOR. 56, 13.

PROBLEM CXII. To describe a Circle about a Triangle given.
LEt the Triangle given be A.B.C. about which it is required to describe a
Circle, Euc. 4.5.
diagram upon the middle point of any two sides of the Triangle by the 5. PROB.
erect perpendiculars, which being produced will intersect each other, as E. D.
and F. D. in the point D. which point of intersection shall be the Center;
whereupon at the distance from thence to any one of the Angles describe the
Circle A.B.C. which shall circumscribe the Triangle as was required. DEF. 32.

Or otherwise the Center may be found as is taught in the 34. PROB.

PROBLEM CXIII. To inscribe a Circle within a Triangle given.
LEt the Triangle given be A. B.C. within which Triangle it is required diagram
to inscribe a Circle. By the 10. PROB. divide any two Angles of the given
Triangle into two equal parts as A. B.C. and A. C.B. by drawing the lines B.
D. and C. D. intersecting in D. which point of intersection shall be the
Center, Euc. 4.4: Ceul. 2.55.
whereon at the nearest distance from thence to any side of the Triangle
describe the circle D. which shall be inscribed within the Triangle, as was
required. DEF. 32. PROB. 10.

PROBLEM CXIIII. To describe a Triangle about a Circle given, which shall be
like unto a Triangle given.
LEt the Circle given be H. K. M. and let the Triangle given be E. F. G. It is
required to describe a triangle about the given Circle, Euc. 4.3. Ceul. 2.54.
like unto the given triangle. First, continue the Base F. G. of the given
Triangle both ways toward diagram diagram N. and O. making the two outward
Angles E. F. N. and E. G. O. then from the center D. of the given circle draw
to any part of the lymbe a semidiameter as D.M. to which line upon the center
D. describe the angle H. D. M. equal to the angle E.F.N. and also the Angle
K.D.M. equal to the angle E.G.O. then by the points H. K. and M. draw right
lines, (making right angles with the three semidiameters) which will intersect
each other in the points A.B. and C. including the triangle A. B. C. like unto
the given triangle, and circumscribed about the given circle, as was required.
THEOR. 1.13.52.

PROBLEM CXV. To describe a Square about a Circle given.
LEt the circle given be A. B. C. D. and let it be required to describe a
diagram square about the same circle. Euc. 4.7. Ceul. 2.57.
Draw the two Diameters A. C. and B. D. cutting each other at right angles in
the center 1. then by the 3. PROB. by the points A. and C. draw parallel lines
to the Diameter B. D. And likewise by the points B. and D. draw parallel lines
to the Diameter A. C. which shall intersect each other in the points E.F.G.H.
and include the square as was required. THEOR. 32.52.

PROBLEM CXVI. Within a Square given to inscribe a Circle:
LEt the square given be E.F.G.H. in the former Diagram, within which it is
required to inscribe a circle. Draw the Diagonall lines E. G. and F. H.
interfecting each other in 1. the center, on which point at the distance of the
shortest extention to any side, describe the circle A B C D. within the square
as was required. THEOR. 32.52.

PROBLEM CXVII. About a Square given to circumscribe a Circle.
LEt the Square given be A. B. C. D. in the former Diagram, about which it is
required to circumscribe a Circle. Draw the Diagonall lines A.C. and B. D.
intersecting each other at right Angles in the point I. the center, Euc. 4.9.
on which point, at the distance from thence to any of the points A.B.C. or D.
describe the Circle A.B.C.D. which shall circumscribe the Square as was
required. THEOREME 1.13.52.

PROBLEM CXVIII. To inscribe a Square within a Circle given.
LEt the Circle given be A.B.C.D. in the former Diagram, and let it be required
to inscribe a square within the same Circle. Draw the Diameters A. C. and B. D.
crossing each other at right Angles in the center I. then between the points
A.B.C. and D. draw the right lines A B. B C. CD. and D A. including and
inscribing the square A.B.C.D. within the given Circle as was required.
THEOREME. Euc. 4.6.
1.13.52. PROBLEM 25.

PROBLEM CXIX. To inscribe a Pentagon, within a Circle given.
LEt A. B. C. D. E. be a Circle given, Euc. 4.11. Ceul. 2.58.
within which it is required to inscribe diagram a Pentagon. By the 25.
PROBLEM Find out the fifth cord line of a Circle, at which distance passing
through the limb of the circle note five marks as at the points A. B. C. D.
and E. And lastly, from point to point draw five right lines, which shall
include and inscribe the Pentagon A. B. C. D. E. as was required. THEOR. 47.69.
PROB. 48.

PROBLEM CXX. About a Circle given to circumscribe a Pentagon.
LEt the Circle given be A.B.C.D. in the former Diagram, about which, it is
required to circumscribe a Pentagon. Let first a Pentagon be inscribed as
before, and from the Center N. draw right lines to every Angle of the
inscribed Pentagon, Euc. 4.12.
as to A.B.C.D. and E. on which five points, draw lines Orthigonally to those
lines issuing from the center, which will intersect each other in the points F.
G. H. I. K. and circumscribe the Pentagon about the given circle as was
required. THEOR. 47.69.

PROBLEM CXXI. To inscribe a Sexagon within a circle given.
LEt the circle given be A. B. C. D. E. F. Eu. 4.15. Ceul. 2.63.
within which it is required to inscribe diagram a Sexagon. By the 25. PROB.
find out the sixth cord of a Circle, which is always the semidiameter of the
same circle; wherefore at the distance of the semidiamenter; Divide the limb
of the circle into six equal parts, as in the points A.B C.D.E. and F. and
then from point to point, draw right lines, which shall include and inscribe the
Sexagon A.B.C. D.E.F. within the given Circle, as was required. PROB. 25.

PROBLEM CXXII. To circumscribe a Sexagon about a Circle given.
LEt the Circle given be A.B.C.D.E.F. in the former Diagram, about which it is
required to circumscribe a Sexagon. First, divide the limb of the Circle into
six parts, as was taught in the last PROB. in the the points A. B. C. D. E.
and F. and draw Diameters from each opposite point to other, making in all
three Diameters, then at every end of those Diameters draw lines Orthigonally
unto them, which will intersect each other in the points G.H.I.K.L. and M. and
include the Sexagon circumscribed about the given circle as was required. PROB.
25.

PROBLEM. CXXIII. To divide a right lined Triangle given, into any number of
equal parts required, from a point limited in any side of the same Triangle.
LEt A. B. C. be a right lined Triangle given; let the limited point be D.
diagram in the Base B. C. and let it be required from the same limited point D.
to divide the given triangle into five equal parts. First, divide the Base B.
C. into five equal parts, as in the points E. F. G. and H. (or into as many as
shall be re quired) then from the limited point to the opposite angle, draw a
right line as A D. unto which line, by the points E.F.G. and H. draw Parallel
lines, as E I. F K. G L. and H M. And lastly from the points I. K. L. and M. to
the limited point D. draw the lines I D. K D. L D. and M D. which shall divide
the given triangle into five equal parts from the limited point D. as was
required. THEOREME. 26.35.

PROBLEM CXXIIII. To divide a given Triangle by a line issuing from an angle
assigned, in diagram any proportion required.
LEt the Triangle given be A.B.C. the angle assigned A. and the proportion that
between the two right lines F. and G. Euc. 6.1. Ram. 10.13 Ceul. 3.8.
It is required to divide the same triangle into two parts by a line issuing
out of A. the one part having proportion to the other, as F. to G. By the 13.
PROB. divide the Base B C. as F. to G. the point of which division will fall in
D. From which point draw the line D. A. So is the given Triangle divided into
two parts, having proportion the one to the other, as F. to G. For as the line
F is to the line G. so is the triangle A. C. D. to the Triangle A. B.D. as was
required. THEOR. 35. PBOB. 13.

A. E. 64.

B. C. 80.



PROBLEM. CXXV. A Triangle being given, and the Base thereof known, to divide
the same into two parts by a line from an angle assigned, according to any
proportion given in two numbers.
LEt the triangle given be A. B. C. in the former Diagram, whose Base is B.C.
80. and the angle assigned A. and let it be required to divide the same into
two parts, the one in proportion to the other Sesquidtera, that is, as 3. to 2.
First, add together always the Termini rationis, which is 3/2^ makes 5. then
multiply the Base 80. by 3. the greater term, the factus will be 240. which
divided by the former 5. quoteth 48. for the greater segment of the Base D C.
Euc. 6.1. Ra. 10.13.
and that deducted from 80. the whole Base rests 32. the lesser segment B D.
from which point D. draw the line D A. which shall divide the given Triangle
into two parts, as 3. to 2. that is, the greater A C D. shall be 3/5^ parts,
and the lesser A B D. 2/5^ of the whole given Triangle, as was required. THEOR.
35.

PROBLEM CXXVI. To divide a Triangle of known quantity given, into any two
parts, from an Angle assigned, according to any number of Acres, Roodes and
Perches required.
LEt the Triangle be A B C. in the former Diagram, whose quantity is 16.
Acres; let the Angle assigned be A. and let it be required to divide the same
into two parts twixt H. and I. viz. to H. 9. Acres. 2. Roodes, 16. Perches: and
to I. 6. Acres, 2. Roodes, 24. Perches. First, measure the Base B C. 80.
Perches; then reduce the whole quantity of the Triangle into Perches, Euc.
6.1. Ra. 10.13.
by multiplying 160. (the number of Perches in an Acre) by 16. (the numbet of
Acres in the Triangle given) the Product will be 2560. Reduce also one of the
parts into Perches, as the greater part 9. Acres, 2. Roodes, 16. Perches; the
reduction will be 1536. Perches. And then by the rule of proportion reason
thus. If 2560. (the whole quantity) require 80. (the whole Base; whatpart of
the Base will 1536. Perches (being the part of H.) require. Multiply 1536. by
80. and divide the Product by 2560. the quotus will be 48. the part of the Base
sought, which placed from C. to D. and the line D A. drawn, will divide the
given Triangle into the parts required. THEOR. 35.

Or to lay out one of the parts given (whereby the other is known) work thus.

LEt it be required to lay out the lesser part, which contains 1024. perches,
divide that number 1024. by half, the perpendicular A E. 32. the quotus will
be 32. for the part of the Base to be cut off for that part; which placed from
B. to D. and the line A. D. drawn, performs the work. Or double the
quantity given 1024. and divide that double by the whole Base 64. the work
will be the same.

PROBLEM CXXVII. To divide a Triangle given into two parts by a line drawn,
from a point limited in one of the sides, in any proportion required.
LEt A B C. be the Triangle given, the point limited E. in the Base B C. and
let the proportion be that between I. and K. It is required from the point E.
to draw a line, which shall divide the same Triangle into two parts, having A
G. 40. Euc. 6.1. Lam. 10.13 Coul. 3.9.


B C. 42.

B D. 12.

D C. 30.

B E. 30.

F H. 16.

proportion the one to the other, as I. to K. First, from the given point E. to
the opposite angle A. draw a right line, as A. E. then by the 13. PROB. divide
the Base B. C. as I. to K. the point of which division will fall in D. from
whence draw the line D F. parallel to A. E. cutting the side A B. in F. And
lastly, from thence draw a right line to the limited point E. as F E. which
shall divide the given Triangle into two parts, and include and separate the
Triangle F E B. from the Trapezium A F. E C. having such proportion one to the
other, as the two given lines I. and K. as was required. THEOR. 35.

PROBLEM CXXVIII. To divide a Triangle given into two parts, according to any
propertion given in two numbers from a point limited in any side thereof,
Arithmetically.
LEt the Triangle given be A B C. in the former Diagram. Let the point limited
be E. in the Base B C. and let it be required to divide the same into two
parts, in proportion one to the other, dupla sesquialtera, which is, as 5. to
2. First, let the Base B. C. be divided according to the proportion given thus;
Add together the two given terms of the proportion 5. and 2. makes 7. then
multiply the Base of the Triangle B. C. 42. by 2. the lesser term, the Product
is 84. which divided by 7. the sum of the terms quoteth 12. for the lesser
Segment of the Base B. D. which deducted from 42. the whole Base rests 30.
the greater segment D. C. then (considering the lesser part is to be laid
toward B.) measure the distance from the given point E. to B. which admit 30.
and by the rule of Proportion reason thus: If the distance E. B. 30. gives B.
D. 12. Eu. 6.1. Ram. 10.13.
the lesser segment what gives A G. 40. the perpendicular of the given
Triangle, and multiplying 40. by 12. and dividing the Product by 30. the
answer will be 16. at which distance draw a parallel line to B E. cutting the
side A B. in F. from which point draw the line F E. which shall divide the
given Triangle in such sort that the Triangle F B E. shall be 2/7^ parts, and
the Trapezium A F. E C. 5/^^ parts thereof, that is the Trapezium, containing
the Triangle F B E. twice and a half, according to the proportion required.
THEOR. 35.

PROBLEM CXXIX. To divide a Triangle of any known quantity given, into two
parts, from a point limited in any side thereof, according to any number of
Acres, Roodes and Perches.
LEt the Triangle given be A B C. in the last Diagram, whose quantity let be
5. Acres, 1. Roode, 0. Perch. Let the limited point be E. in the Base B C. and
let it be required from the same point to divide the Triangle into two parts
between M. and N. viz. to M. 3. Acres, 3. Roodes, 0. Perches thereof, and the
residue to N. 1. Acre, 2. Roods, 0. Perch. First, reduce the quantity of N.
being the lesser, 1. Acre, 2. Roods, 0. Perch, into Perches, Euc. 6.1. Ra.
10.13.
which makes 24. Perches, then (considering on which side of the limited point
this part is to be laid, as toward B.) measure that part of the Base from E.
to B. 30. Perches, whereof take half, which is 15. and thereby divide 240. the
part of N. the quotus will be 16. the length of the perpendicular F. H. at
which parallel distance from the Base B C. cut the side A B. in F. from whence
draw the line F E. which shall include the Triangle, F. B. E. containing 1.
Acre, 2. Roods, 0. Perch, the part of N. and so shall the Trapezium A F E C.
contain the residene, namely, 3. Acres, 3. Roodes, 0. Perch, the part of M. as
was required. THEOR. 35.

PROBLEM CXXX. To divide a given triangle by a parallel line, to one of the
sides, according to any proportion given.
LEt A. B. C. A D. 48.

B C. 54.

B E. 24.

B F. 36.

E C. 30.

H G. 32.

be a triangle given, and the proportion that between I. and K. and let it be
required to divide the same triangle into 2 parts, Euc. 6.10.6.13. Cor. 6.19.
Ceul. 3.10.
by a line drawn parallel to the side A. C. the one to be in proportion to the
other, as the line I. to the line K. By the 13. PROB. divide the line B. C. in
E. as I. to K. then by the 17. PROB. find the mean proportion between B. E.
and B. C. which let be B. F. from which point by the 3. PROB. draw the line F.
H. parallel to the side A. C. cutting the side A. B. in H. which line shall
divide the triangle given into two parts, the trapezium A. H. F. C. having such
proportion to the triangle H. B. F. as the line I. to the line K. which was
required. THEOREME 43, 41. PROBLEM 13, 17.

PROBLEM CXXXI. To divide a given triangle by a parallel line, to one of the
sides, according to any proportion given in two numbers Arithmetically.
LEt the triangle given be A. B. C. in the former Diagram, and let it be
required to divide the same by a parallel line, Euc. 6.10.6.13. Cor. 6.19.
to one of the sides into two parts, to be in proportion the one to the other,
Sesquiquarta, that is, as 5. to 4. First, let the base B C. 54. be divided,
according to the proportion given, as is taught in the 127. PROB. so shall the
lesser segment be B E. 24. and the greater segment E C. 30. then find out a
mean proportional between B E. 24. and the whole base B C. 54. by
multiplying 54. by 24. whose product will be 1296. the squa e root whereof is
36. the mean proportional sought, which in the former Diagram is B F. then by
the rule of proportion, reason thus: If B F. 36. gives B E. 24. what A D. 48.
the answer is H G. 32. at which distance draw a parallel line to the base, to
cut the side A B. in H. from whence draw the line H F. parallel to A C. which
shall divide the given triangle into two parts, in such sort, as the trapezium
A. H. F. C. shall be 5/9^ parts, and the triangle H. B. F. 4/9^ thereof, that
is the trapezium, containing the triangle H. B. F. once and a quarter, as 5.
does 4. which was required. THEOR. 43, 41. PROB. 13, 17.

PROBLEM CXXXII. To divide a triangle of any known quantity, given into two
parts, by a parallel line, to one of the sides, according to any number of
Acres, Roodes, and Perches required.
LEt the triangle given be A. B C. in the last Diagram, Euc. 6.10.6.13. Cor.
6.19.
whose quantity is 8. Acres, 0. Roods, 16. Perches, and let it be required to
divide the same (by a parallel line to one of the sides, as the side A. C.)
into two unequal parts, between M. and N. viz) to M. 4. Acres, 2. Roods, 0.
Perches, thereof, and the residue to N. being 3. Acres, 2. Roods, 16. Perches.
First, reduce both quantities into perches, which will be 720. and 576. then
reduce both those numbers by abbreuiation into their least proportional
terms, which is 5/4^ and according to that proportion divide the base B C. 54.
of the given triangle, as is taught in the two last Problemes, which will be in
E. then seek the mean proportional between B E. and B C. as is taught in
the last Problem, which is B F. 36. of which 36. take the half, and thereby
divide 576. the lesser quantity of perches, the quotus will be H G. 32. at
which parallel distance from the base, cut the line A B. in H. from whence draw
the line H F. parallel, to the side A C. which shall divide the triangle given
into two parts; the trapezium A. H. F. C. containing the part of M. and the
triangle H. B. F. the part of N. as was required. THEOR. 41, 43.

HEre might I now much enlarge and amplify this latter part, for the dividing
of superficial figures of all forms and kinds: But seeing that all irregular
figures and plots are most conveniently to be reduced into triangles, before
the contents thereof can be had, or any division thereof made; and generally in
matter of Survey (whereunto my purposes chiefly tend) all figures are found
irregular; I will content my self (and entreat my Surueyor to be likewise
satisfied) with these few former instructions, which being well understood,
with due observation of the precedent rules, will serve his turn to whatsoever
purpose can be required. But who so desires further satisfaction, and more
variety in this kind, I refer him to M. John Speidels Book, entitled his
Geometrical Extraction, lately by him diuulged; (wherein he has taken more
pains to excellent purpose, then this age, I fear, can afford him recompense)
and to himself M. Henry Brigs, M. Thomas Bretnor, M. Io. Johnson, and others,
who are here amongst us Professors, and excellent Teachers of these Arts. And
thus, I conclude, this second Book.

The end of the second Book.
THE EXACT OPERATION OF INSTRVMENTALL DIMENSIONS BY DIVERSE MEANS.
The third Book.
THE ARGUMENT OF THIS BOOK.
THis Book tends chiefly to matter of Survey, wherein is first described and
declared the several Jnstruments, fit for that purpose (with their use in
practice) as the Theodelite, the Plain table, and Circumferentor, whereunto J
have added an absolute Instrument, which J call the Peractor, together with the
making and use of the Decimal Chain, used only by my self; then is taught the
use of a necessary Fieldbooke; the taking, protracting, and laying down of
angles diverse ways; the reducing of customarie measures into Statute measure,
and the contrary, showing their difference; the use of the table of Synes, and
the divided sights on the Circumferentor, withsupply of those defects in the
ordinary use of the Plain table, by ignorant persons; the means to take
Altitudes, Longitudes, Latitudes, and inaccessible Distances, as well by
synicall computation, as diverse other means; the Dimension and plotting
Instrumentally of all manner superficial figures, and irregular plots, by
diverse and sundry ways, with their several protractions accordingly: how
with the Plain table exactly to take a plot of the largest Forest on one
sheet of paper, without altering thereof: the means of Survaying and plotting
of a Lordship or Manor, with the orderly handling of the same: the ways and
means Instrumentally, to reduce Hypothenusall, to Horizontall lines, and the
contrary: with the best and exactest courses to be held in the dimension, and
plotting of Mountaynous, and uneven grounds: the manner of enclosing,
dividing, and laying out of Commons, wastes, or common Fields, into any parts
required: the ordering of a plot after the protraction thereof: the reducing of
plots from a greater to a lesser form, and the contrary: and lastly, the
speedy reduction of perches into Acres, and those again into perches: Most
exactly and artificially wrought, by the best and most immediate means for
those purposes.

CHAP. I. Of the several Instruments in use, meet for Suruaie; which of them
are most fit for use, and somewhat concerning their abuse.
BEfore we enter the fields to suruaie, I hold it necessary we provide us of
fitting furniture for the purpose, lest by our neglect therein, those by whom
we have employment receive no less loss and prejudice, then our selves shame
and reproach: Wherefore let us first consider what Instruments are most usual,
and then of those, what most fit for our present purpose. The Instruments now
most in use are the Theodelite, Plaine-table and Circumferentor, whereunto I
will add one more, which I call the Peractor, used only by my self, and
certain friends by my directions; Of all which I will hereafter make brief
and particular descriptions, as well concerning their several parts and
composition, as of their use in practice. Nor will I exclude or wholly neglect
the Familiar Staff of M. John Blagraue, and the Geodeticall staff and
Topographicall glass of M. Arthur Hopton (though now together dead) or any
other Instrument which are, or hereafter may be by the artor industry of any
man, artificially invented or composed for his own, or others use. For, as I
tie not my self to the use of any one Instrument, at all times, nor on all
occasions, but for a large and spacious business use the Circumferentor or
Peractor (as for many reasons most necessary and convenient) and for a lesser
(where many small Enclosures and Town-ships are) the Plaine-Table; although
either of the other will well serve for performance of either kind (and
therefore if possibly you may, in one and the same business, use ever one and
the same Instrument, for avoiding many inconveniences:) So will I not limit my
Surueyor to the use of any one Instrument, but refer him to all or any at his
pleasure, well knowing they are all composed and framed on one and the same
Theoricall ground: and although in performance and dispatch, one may be more
speedy then another (wherein I find much difference, with the same exactness)
yet all or any of them artificially handled, are to excellent use, as well in
survey of lands, as the performance of many other excellent conclusions
Geometrical. Wherein I cannot by the way but condemn the folly of diverse, who
(deeming themselves more wise and skillful, then any other shall have just
cause to conceive) having some small superficial use or insight into some one
of these Instruments, are only wedded to that, and ignorant of the others use,
will condemn them as unmeet and insufficient, the defect consisting in their
own understanding. But I must needs acknowledge (which could I as easily
reform, I should deserve well at the hands of many, who pay dearly for it)
that by the ignorance of diverse, using (or abusing) these instruments, infinite
gross and palpable errors and abuses are daily committed, to the great loss
and prejudice dice of many, who receive secret and insensible blows (found in
their estates, though unfelt in themselves) who for my part shall pass
vnpittied (save only for their weakness) the fault being chiefly their own,
when out of a penurious sparing, to yield better satisfaction to those which
better can; they can be well contented blindly to swallow frogs for flies,
and to pay treble damage (nay perhaps ten fold) another way, so they neither
feel nor find it in their open view. And thus much concerning the several
Instruments in general. Next of their Definitions, Parts, and Compositions
particularly.

CHAP. II. Of the Theodelite and his several parts, with the Description and
Composition thereof.
THis Instrument consists of four several parts; As first, the Planisphere
or Circle, whose limb is divided into 360. equal parts or divisions, called
degrees, without which it is fitting equidistantly to draw and describe six
concentricke lines or circles with cross Diagonals, by whose intersections are
had the parts of a degree: upon which Planisphere, and within the divisions
before specified, there is described the Geometrical square, being the second
part thereof both which together, or either of them severally serve to
excellent purpose, for the dimension of lengthes, bredthes and distances. The
third part is a Semicircle or Quadrant perpendicularly raised, and artificially
placed on the former Planisphere (or more properly on the Index thereof) to be
moved about circularly at pleasure on all occasions; which semicircle or
quadrant has the limb thereof equally divided into parts or degrees, with
like concentricke Circles and Diagonals to those of the Planisphere: And the
fourth and last part is a Scale, described within the same Semicircle or
Quadrant, whose sides are divided into diverse equal parts, the more the
better, and to best purpose; which two later parts serve chiefly for the
mensuration of altitudes and profundities; All which together composed, make an
excellent Instrument meet for many purposes, especially for the description of
Regions and Countries, or other spacious works. This Instrument would ask a
far more exact and particular description, which for three principal reasons
I will here omit; First, for that I hold it (although a general and fit
Instrument for all mensurations, yet in particular) for this our business of
Survey, not altogether so fitting and commodious as the rest before named, by
reason of the multiplicity of Divisions therein contained, which will be so
much the more troublesome in use and protraction: Secondly, for that M. Thomas
Digges in his Pantometria, has made a large and particular description
thereof: And thirdly and lastly, for that M. Allen, who makes of these and all
other Geometrical Instruments in metal, is so well acquainted with the parts
and composition thereof, that whosoever purposes to use the same, needs only
to bespeake it of him, without further instruction or direction to him. The use
and employment whereof shall be hereafter touched. And thus much for this
Instrument and the description thereof.

CHAP. III. The Plain table and his several parts, with the description and
composition thereof.
THis Instrument for the playnenesse and perspicuitie thereof, and of his easy
use in practice, receives aptly the name, and appellation of the Plain Table.
A most excellent and absolute Instrument, for this our purpose in Survey; but
with all, by reason of this his playnenesse (offering it self at first view,
in some measure, to the weak understanding of meanest capacities, inciting
them thereby to the practice thereof) is more subject to abuse, then all, or
any of the rest: For notwithstanding that these, by the common and ordinary use
and practice of this Instrument, may easily attain to a reasonable truth in
Dimension and plotting of regular and even Playnes; yet, if they come to
irregular and uneven forms, as Hills and Dales, they are so far unfitting
for the true mensuration thereof, that many using this Instrument, neglect the
means, and those proper parts of the same Instrument (being the sights
hereafter specified, whereof they know no use) which is their only help and
aid in this kind. But, lest this relation should be held digression, lets
return to the purpose. This Table it self is divided into five parts, or
small bords, whereof three are in the breadth, and the other two employed as
ledges in the length, to keep the rest together, whereunto a ioynted frame is
artificially applied, for the fastening and keeping plain thereon, an ordinary
sheet of paper for use in the fields; of which length and breadth, or rather
less, as 14^ inches in length, and 11. in breadth, the whole Table together
should consist. But for my purpose, I would have made of these three boords in
breadth, with help of ledges, to be thereon glued, to the backside thereof,
and strong joints or gemmowes, fastening them together, an artificial box;
which at any instant being opened, and the ledges fastened on, is fit for use in
the Fields, and afterward those ledges taken away, may be as instantly turned
back wards, and enclosed as before, fit for the keeping of loose papers and
small tools, till further occasion. Which if any desire to use, M. John
Thomson in Hosier-Lane, will artificially fit him. To this Instrument does also
belong a Ruler with two fights thereon, which by diverse men are used of diverse
kinds, but by the best Plain Table men (as occasion serves) those of M. JOHN
GOODWYNS invention, that excellent and honest Artist, whose living Name (though
himself be dead) I cannot remember without good respect. This Ruler is to
contain in length about 16. inches, or as long or longer then the table, for
drawing parallel lines on the paper fastened thereon, by the equal and opposite
divisions on the frame; it is likewise to contain in breadth about two inches
or upwards, and in thicknes half an inch; the sights thereof are double in
length the one to the other, the longer containing about 12. inches, and the
shorter half as much; on the head or top of which shorter sight, must be
placed a wire or brass pin; and to this sight there must be fastened a thread
and plummet, to place the Instrument Horizontally; through the longer sight
must be made a slit, extending almost the whole length of the sight. These two
sights thus prepared, are to be placed perpendicularly on the Ruler, by square
mortesses, made to that purpose through the same, in such sort as the brass
pin on the shorter sight, and the slit through the longer sight, be precisely
over the fiduciall edge of the Ruler; either sight being equi-distantly placed
from each end of the Ruler, and the space between the sights to be exactly the
just length of the longer sight, or to speak more properly of the divided part
of the same sight; (which is always to be understood when I speak of the
length thereof.) Upon this longer sight there is to be placed a vane of brass,
to be removed up or down at pleasure; through which a small sight hole is to
be made, answerable to the slit in the same sight, and the edge of the vane.

By these sights thus placed on the Ruler, there is proiected a Geometrical
square, whose side is the divided part of the long sight, or the distance
between the two sights. In the middle of which long sight, overthwart the
same, there is drawn a line called the line of level, dividing the side of
the proiected square into two equal parts, also the same side is on this sight
divided into 100. equal parts, which are numbered upwards and downwards, from
the line of level, by fiues and tens to 50. on either side, which divisions
are called the Scale.

There is also on the same sight expressed another sort of division,
representing the Hypothenusall lines of the same square, as they increase by
units, and are likewise numbered upwards and downwards from the line of leuel,
from one to 12. as 1, 2, 3, etc. signifying 101, 102, 103, etc. which declare
how much an Hypothenusall or slope line, drawn over the same square (that is,
from the pinnes head to any such division) exceeds the direct horizontall
line, being the side of the same square.

There is moreover a third sort of divisions on this sight, representing the
degrees of a quadrant (or as many as can well be expressed on the same sight
being 25.) which are (as those before) numbered, from the line of level upwards
and downwards, by fiues and tens to 25. which divisions are called the
quadrant.

Likewise there may be placed on the surface, or upper part of this Ruler, the
table of Synes, mentioned in the description of the Circumferentor, next
hereafter following; very necessary for use, as shall hereafter partly appear.

Yet would I further advise concerning this Instrument; that in plain and
level grounds, where is no use of reducing Hypothenusall lines; instead of
those long sights formerly expressed, to have used such double sights as are
hereafter mentioned in the description of the Peractor, which are far more
ready, and less cumbersome for use, especially in rough and boisterous
weather. And likewise, when occasion shall be offered, by irregular and uneven
grounds, to reduce those Hypothenusall lines, to use in stead of those long
sights, the quadrant hereafter likewise specified in the same description,
which when need requires may be easily fixed to the Ruler; and as soon laid
by, having no further use, for of all other means in taking of heights, and
especially for reducing of those Hypothenusall lines, I hold that quadrant
artificially handled to be most ready and exact, all conclusions being
speedily wrought therewith without Arithmetic, or other collateral
computation whatsoever.

To this Instrument belongs diverse other ordinary parts, whereof I shall not
need particularly to speak, seeing most men (if not too many) already know
them, being of ordinary use; as the Socket, the Box and Needle with the
staff or foot thereof, etc.

CHAP. IIII. The Circumferentor with his parts, description, and composition.
THis Instrument for expedition and portabilitie, exceeds far the rest, and
nothing inferior to any for exactness, if care and art be used; but not so
vulgarly used (though much more general for use) as the plain Table is; the
full and perfect use thereof, not lying so open and apparent to all men's
understanding, as the other is.

It is made and framed of well seasoned box, containing in length about eight
inches, in breadth half as much, and in thickness about 4/3^ of an inch; the
left side whereof is besyled, and divided into diverse equal parts, most fitly
of 12. in an inch, to be used as the Scale of a Protractor, the Instrument it
self serving well to protract the plat on paper, by help of the needle, and
the degrees of angles and lengths of lines, taken in the field, and entered into
your field Book, as shall be hereafter shown.

About the middle in the surface thereof, a round hole is to be turned of the
depth of half an inch, whereof the Diameter to be about 3^ inches, to place a
card and needle therein, to be covered over with clear glass. The best card
for this purpose is that, divided in the limb into 120. equal parts or
degrees, with a Dyall according to the Azimuths of the Sun, wherein the
hours are numbered, and the months named, serving very aptly to show the time
of the day.

Besides, on the surface hereof is placed the table of Synes, calculated from
the quadrant of a circle so divided, as the card before specified; the arch of
this quadrant being 30. degrees, and the semidiameter or total syne thereof,
is divided into 1000. equal parts, and numbers placed accordingly, answering
to every degree and half degree, serving to express the length of every right
syne for the Dimension and Supputation of Triangles, as shall be partly
hereafter shown, and in the mean space the Table is here expressed.

Tabula Sinuum.
26 334 609 824 959 1 52 7 358 13 629 19 839 25 969 78 383 649 853 972 2 104 8
407 14 669 20 866 26 978 130 430 688 879 983 3 156 9 454 15 707 21 891 27 987
182 477 725 902 991 4 208 10 500 16 743 22 913 28 994 233 522 760 923 997 5 259
11 544 17 777 23 933 29 998 284 566 793 943 999 6 309 12 588 18 809 24 951 30
1000

There is also hereunto belonging two sights, double in length, the one unto
the other, the longer containing about seven inches or upwards, being placed,
and divided in all respects, as those formerly mentioned in the description of
the plain Table; the shorter sight of these having one property and use,
which that (as needless) has not, being this, in the edge thereof, toward
the upper part is placed a small wire, representing the center of a supposed
circle, the semidiameter whereof is that part of the same sight, between the
wire, and a perpendicular point on the edge of the Instrument underneath the
same; which part is imagined to be divided into 60. equal parts, and according
to those divisions is the right edge of the Instrument, divided and numbered
from the perpendicular point by fiues and tens, as 5.10.15. etc. And also from
the same point on the surface and upper edge of the Instrument is perfected,
the degrees of a Quadrant supplying the residue of those which could not be
expressed on the long sight from 25, to 90. by tens, etc. For the use of these
Divisions is there also belonging hereunto an Index or small Rule, at the one
end whereof is a Center hole to place on the Wire in the edge of the shorter
sight, and at the other end a sight is placed, answerable to the fiduciall edge
of the same Index, which edge is likewise divided according to those divisions
on the edge of the Instrument. This short sight is to have a plummet of lead
hanging in a fine thread, serving to place the Instrument horizontally. Where
note, that these sights, and their several divisions serve only for
Altitudes, Profundities, and the reducing of Hypothenusall lines to
horizontall, which is to excellent purpose, and full of use. But when there is
no occasion or use of these (as seldom there is in respect of other use) I
would always have ready, such double sights as are hereafter expressed in the
description of the Peractor, which doubtless are of excellent use, as I there
explain; with this caution, that you always carefully keep one and the same
part of your instrument forwards, and reccon ever your degrees in one and the
same end of your Needle.

The foot of this Instrument is that with three staves ioynted in the head, and
to be taken a sunder in the middle with brass sockets, according to the usual
order, most fit for all Instruments, except in such cases, as in the
description of the Peractor is excepted. And these are the several parts of
this Instrument, and thus is it composed.

CHAP. V. The Peractor, with his several parts Description and Composition.
AS I will not with the cunning Wine-taster forbear commendations, fearing too
many partners; So will I refrain wooing any to use what I much affect, further
then reason, and their own judgment shall rule them therein. But thus much
will I boldly speak and maintain of this Instrument, that for general use,
perspicuity, speed and perfection, it may well compare with any hitherto in
use. It consists of a Planisphere in brass, much like unto that of the
Theodelite, but where the limb of that is divided into 360. parts or degrees;
this is only into 120. (so that each of these contains three of those) and
these subdeuided into halfes and quarters toward the limb thereof, without
which divisions, there are drawn and described three concentricke Circles,
being crossed with Diagonals, by whose intersections are exactly expressed the
third part of every degree; whereby, and by tripling the former degrees cut (if
occasion require) is had exactly the degrees of the Theodelite considering that
ten of these contain thirty of those, wherewith in matter of Survey we shall
little need to trouble our selves. And here have we large and spacious degrees
with their exact parts to ^ (which in others we want) by means whereof, and
with help of such a chain, as I always use (which shall be next hereafter
expressed) I will boldly approve and maintain, to work with much more
facility and exactnes, and come nearer the precise truth then any other can
possibly do, not using the same or the like, which will appear most manifest
in practice to all men's understanding.

There is also an Index hereunto belonging, fixed on the Center as that of the
Theodelite, with two sights thereon placed, with sliding loopes, either of them
alike, and of like length, and either of them double sighted, the one having a
slitte beneath, and a thread above, the other a thread beneath, and a slit above,
serving to look backwards and forwards at pleasure, without turning about or
stirring the Instrument, when the Needle is at quiet; whereby I save near
half the labor, and half the time that any man shall spend with other sights,
for that hereby I need plant mine Instrument but at each other Angle, which is
no small help for expedition, and such a means for exactness rightly
handled, as few will imagine without due proof; and that without trouble of
sending one before, and leaving another behind, as is usually accustomed.
Neither use I these sights with this Instrument only, but with all others as
the Theodelite, Plaine-Table, and Circumferentor.

These sights I always use in plain and even grounds; but if occasion serve
for the reducing Hypothenusall, to Horizontall lines; I then ever use this
diagram Quadrant here expressed most fit for the speedy taking of all manner
of altitudes and profundities, and the sudden reduction of those lines
without Arithmeticall calculation, or other collateral account, as is manifest
in use. This Quadrant (the other sights taken away) is on any occasion speedily
placed on the Index with scrue pinnes, and as suddenly taken off, if no
further use, and the sights replaced.

Then is there also hereunto belonging other usual parts, as a box of brass
on the Center to contain a Card and Needle therein, such as is formerly
expressed for the Circumferentor, to be likewise covered over with clear
glass, and close stopped with red wax about the edge thereof, to defend the
Needle from Wind, Wether, and Air, the only enemies thereunto.

Also a brass Socket to be scrued on with four scrue pinnes on the back of
the Instrument, which Socket ought to be precisely turned, and the head of the
staff therewith, (I mean the brass part thereof) which will never otherwise
turn euenly and nimbly about as it ought, the one within the other, without
iercking and starting, which much troubles the Needle in finding his natural
point and place of rest. And if any doubt the truth of his Needle, let him take
back sights for his better satisfaction therein.

And lastly, for this as for the rest the like staff is to be provided as
before is spoken of, which for all purposes is the absolute best, except only
for water leuels, and the works thereunto belonging, wherein it is necessary at
all times, and at each several stacion to keep the instrument at one and the
same horizontall distance, which otherwise may breed much cumber, and no less
incertainety in those conclusions; wherefore for those and the like occasions,
a foot with one staff, having three iron pikes therein, after the old order is
best, and to best purpose.

The making of this Instrument and the rest in brass are well known to M.
ELIAS ALLEN in the Strand; and of those in wood to M. JOHN THOMPSON in Hosyer
Lane.

And thus have I briefly described these several Instruments with their
particular parts, laying them before my Surueyor to take his choice as his
fancy leads him; But in mine opinion all are better then any; so shall he
best know what is best for his purpose.

And now let us consider, what other necessaries are yet to be provided,
before we begin our business, for fear we are to seek when occasion
serves for use. As the Chain, Protractor, Field-booke, and the Scale and
Compass whereof we will further speak.

CHAP. VI. The making and division of a Chain, called the Decimall Chain.
THis is the chain before spoken of in the Peractors description; which for
conueniencie in carryage, and avoiding casualties often happening to break it
(though made of a full round wire) I would advise should contain in length but
only two statute Poles or Perches, or three if you please at the most. In the
dividing whereof it is to be considered, that the statute Perch or Pole,
(which here we call an unite, or (Comencemente) contains in length 16 feet.
which is, 198. inches: This quantity is first to be divided into 10. equal
parts called Primes, so shall every of these Primes contain in length 19.
inches, and ^ of an ynch: And then these Primes to be every of them subdivided
into other 10. equal parts, which we will call Seconds: and so every of these
Seconds shall contain in length one ynch, and 49/50^ parts of an ynch. And
thus is the whole Perch unite or comencement divided into 100. equal parts or
linkes called Seconds.

Which Chain so divided is thus to be distinguished and marked: First, at the
end of every fifth Prime, or fiftieth second or lincke, which is the end of
every half Pole, let a large curtain ring be fastened, so shall you have in
the whole Chain (if but two Poles) three of those rings; the middlemost being
the division of the two Poles, which in a Chain of this length is easily and
readily discerned from those rings of the half Poles, though all of one
greatness. Then at the end of every Prime, that is, at the end of every tenth
second, or link, let a small curtain ring be placed, and not those rings of
brass wire, as is usual in other chains, which, with every bush and twig are
continually broken off, and lost.

By those distinctions this Chain is now divided into these three terms,
Unites, Primes and Seconds, whose Characters are these 0.1.2. So that if you
would express 26. Unites, 4. Primes, and 5. Seconds, they are thus to be
written 26 0^ 4 1^ 5 2^ or together thus, 26 0 4 1 5 2^ or more briefly thus,
26 4 ^ 5 ^. making pricks or points only over the Fractions, whereby the rest
may be conceived to be Unites, or Intigers, and the first point Primes, and the
next seconds.

But besides these divisions for mine own use, I always at the end of every 2
^ Primes, which is the 1/4 ^ of a Pole, sow on a small red cloth, or the like,
(thrust through the ring of the chain, and at every 7 ^ Primes being the ^ of
a Pole; the like of yellow, or some other apparent color, where with being
once acquainted, and thereunto inured, you shall most speedily at the first
view reckon the quantity of every ring, remembering that if it be the next
ring, short of the red, it is two Primes, if the next over, three, if the next
short of the yellow, it is 7. Primes, if the next over, 8. if the next short of
a great half ring, it is 4. the next over, 6. And lastly, if the next short of
the middle great ring, it is 9. and if the next over, 1. and so of the rest;
Wherein is to be noted that your Chain thus marked, is always to be used with
one and the same end forwards.

This Chain thus divided and marked, you have every whole Pole equal to 10.
Primes, or 100. seconds, every ^ of a Pole equal to 7 ^ Primes, or 75.
seconds, which is ^ of 100. every half Pole equal to 5. Primes, or 50.
seconds, which is ^ of 100. and lastly every ^ of a Pole equal to 2 ^ Primes,
or 25. seconds, which is ^ of 100.

And here is to be noted, that in the ordinary use of this Chain for
measuring and platting; I observe only Unites and Primes (but on necessity)
which is much more exact then the ordinary use; but having occasion to make
division or separation of lands, or for the dimension of common fields in their
several parts by furlongs or wents and rigges, I use my Seconds; wherein, what
exactnes and most excellent use I find, I will refer to those who can
descerne the difference between a portion less then two inches, the length of
my second, and that of 6. inches, and 3/^6^ of an ynch, the least part of the
best and exactest Chain now commonly used; but with those of the last of long
twelues I will not meddle.

But here me thinks I hear the Adversary question, to what purpose serves
this niceness of inches in Isntrumental observation, when coming to your
protraction with a small Scale, you are not able to distinguish feet? I answer
(and to purpose) thus: If by your ordinary Chain you take observation in your
Field-bookes of ^ ^ and ^ and few or none otherwise, (or if they do, to small
purpose, as they afterward handle the matter) then I say, I taking my
observation of 1. 2. 3. or 4. Primes, or of 6. 7. 8. or 9. Primes, can in my
Protraction with a small Scale and Protractor (yet mine I must confess is none
of the least) easily distinguish and express how much less or more then ^ ^
or ^ those quantities are, as may easily appear, with due observation of my
former notes. Yet may it be further said, What is all this to purpose, if
there be not as exact a means to obtain or get the true superficial content
in casting up the plat, it being thus exactly laid down? I may answer
again, Better one mischief then many; neither will I suffer this; for be well
assured, I will not be so careful in that, and altogether careless in this;
the means whereof in due time I may hereafter show, being unfit for this
place; having already enlarged my Chain in length more by a Pole, then first I
meant; and therefore purpose now to be no longer chained therein.

The making of this Chain is well known to M. CHRISTOPHER IACKSON at the
Sign of the Cock in Crooked-Lane, who by my directions has made of them for
me, and has the scantling thereof.

CHAP. VII. Of the Protractor and the Scale thereof.
diagram

Provide for this Protractor a fine thin piece of brass well polished, in
form of a long square, as the Figure E F K I. which (for conueniencie in use)
ought to contain in length from G. to H. about 5 ^ inches, and in breadth from
L. to B. somewhat better then 3 ^ inches, whereupon draw two lines as G H. and
L B. cutting each other precisely at right Angles in the point D. dividing the
Square into four equal parts, then on the point D. as a Center, at the
distance of D L. or D B. describe the Semicircle A B C. (for it is not
material, or of necessity, that the Diameter thereof should agree with the
Diameter of the Card in the Instrument, as M. Hopton would have it in the 62.
Chap. of his Top. glass) then divide the limb of the Semicircle A B C. into
60. equal parts or degrees, numbering them by fiues and tens in the outward
space to 60. and in the inward space from 60. to 120. as in the figure, the
first numbers serving for the East side, and the later (being the opposite
degrees) for the West side of the whole Circle, so is a labor saved of
dividing the other side which serves to no purpose; then let the edges of the
Scale as E G. E F. and F H. be somewhat besiled, and made very smooth, and
precisely parallel to the first drawn lines respectively, and above the rest,
let care be had that the line L B. be made exactly perpendicular to the edge E
F. of the Scale, or otherwise great errors may ensue in the use; then divide
the Parallel degrees at either end of the Scale, between E G. and F H. And let
the Scale of 12. be placed on the edge E F. and the sale of 11. on the edge of
the back side, which are most necessary and meetest for use of any other; and
lastly, cut out the square about the Center D. and likewise that between the
Semicircle and the pricked lines, having care that the line G H. be left
perfect, and even with the Diameter A C. being the meridian line, and the guide
of the rest. And so is this work finished.

Yet would I have besides in some spare place of this Protractor, or on the
back side thereof, the Sextans described, which is mentioned in the next Chap.

Here is it to be noted, that this PROTRACTOR serves without alteration or any
difference, as well for the PERACTOR as the CIRCVMFERENTOR. But if you would
have it for the THEODELITE, then must the limb of the Semicircle be divided
into 180. equal parts, and numbers placed accordingly, which is all the
difference.

And here also would I not have you forget to provide that long Protractor
formerly mentioned in the conclusion of the second part of my second Book,
which will stand you in good stead.

Also to these there belongs a protracting pin made of a needle (according to
the Center hole of the Protractor) to be placed in the end of a small turned
stick; or of Iuorie, as best likes you. And so are you thus far fitted:
wherefore to the rest.

CHAP. VIII. Of the ordinary Scale with the Sextans thereon described, very
necessary for use.
diagram

FOr this purpose let a Ruler of Brass or Box (but brass the better) be
provided, as the Figure A B C D. which let contain in length about 7. or 8.
inches, and in breadth about two inches, or somewhat less, whereupon on the one
side let be placed two Scales, the one of 11. the other of 12. in an ynch; and
on the same side, let there be also described a Sextans or the sixth part of a
Circle, whose chorde E F, (which is always equal to the Semidiameter of the
same Circle) let contain in length about two inches or less, and let the
limb be divided into 60. equal parts or degrees, and numbered by fiues and
tens, as in the Figure. On the other side thereof there may be placed (after
the order of these) diverse other Scales, as of 16. 20. 24, etc. as you think
fitting. So have you a necessary Instrument for many purposes. And this Sextans
also would I have described on some spare place of your Protractor.

To this must you have provided a neat pair of Compasses of brass, with fine
steel points, which must always be ready serving for infinite occasions.

Besides these ordinary Compasses, it is very fitting to be also provided of a
pair of Callem Compasses, with scrues to alter the one leg at pleasure,
wherein to fasten a pen, black lead, a steel point, or the like, very fit
for many purposes.

CHAP. IX. Of a Ruler, for the reducing of Plats.
ALthough we are not as yet fit for the use of this Rule, yet seeing our
business now in hand, is to provide us of necessaries: It is no ill rule to
take our business before us: Wherefore repair to Master JOHN THOMPSON in
Hosier lane, who without further Instructions will furnish you, only this
before you go: Let the Ruler be made of dry box, if you may, of a yard in
length, and let the equal divisions thereon be of 12. in an ynch, to be
numbered with double numbers, as he uses for me. So will it serve you to good
purpose, as well for casting up of large plats. etc.

CHAP. X. The order of making of a necessary and fitting Field-booke, serving
as well for the Peractor and Circumferentor, as for the Theodelite, with the
ordering and use thereof in the Fields.
THis Book may consist of half a quire of paper, to be bound (most aptly for
use) in a long Octauo: Let it be ruled toward the left margent of every side,
with four lines, so shall you describe three Collums, the first serving for
the degrees, the ^^cond (according to my Chain) for Units: and the third and
last for Primes; or according to the accustomed use, for degrees, poles, and
parts of a Pole.

The order of using it is thus: Suppose you are to survey the Manor of
Beauchampe, and are to begin with these five several parcels numbered in this
plat or figure, with 1.2.3.4.5. being several grounds of several Tenants, and
of several natures, whereof you are to make several observation, as
appears. First, for the title of your Book begin thus: Manner. de Beauchampe
in Com. Ebor. Pro Rege incip. 24. Iunij, 1616.

Then begin with the first field, at A. writing the Tenants name, the name of
the field, of what nature, and of what Tenure thus: Io: Iacksons Hall Close,
Meadow, Free: and express in the Margent of your Book No(1) signifying the
first Close, then having placed your Instrument at A. directing your sight to
B. you find the degree cut 65. which place in the first Collum toward the
left hand, then measuring the distance between A. and B. you shall find 20.
Unites, and 2. Primes, or 20. Poles, and a little less then a quarter, which
place severally in the two next Collums toward the right hand; then place your
Instrument at B. and directing your sight to C. observe and express the
degrees and length there found, as 6^ ^^16 0^6 1^ and considering that at C.
you are to leave the bounder you formerly went against, strike there a single
line overthwart your book, and above that line against the degrees and
quantities taken, write what was the bounder you went against, whether it be of
this or any other Manor, as here in this example thus, the Manor of Barnsey;
and thus proceed with the rest of this Field, till you come to enclose at A.
where you first began; and then strike a double line* and place this mark or
the like in your book, at the end of the enclosing line, signifying to
enclose. And so is that Field finished. Then consider which Close is next
sitting to be taken in hand, which let be (2.) and withal at what Angle
thereof it is meetest to begin, which let be at C. and here (for your help
when you come to protraction) you must express in the Title of this second
Close, at what Angle you begin the same (unless Manner. de Beauchamp. in Com.
Ebor. pro Rege incip. 24. Iunij. 1616. John Iacksons Hall, Close, Mead-Free. d
0 1 (1) 65 20 2 68 16 6 The Manor of Barnsey. (1) 36 22 5 North Breading. (2)
27 12 3 106 14 1 21 18 2 Upper barn Close. (3) 112 21 -- South-Field. 32 20 2
Where began. (2) William Bensons North-breading, Close, Pasture, Cop. from No.
(1.) 55 14 5 The Manor of Barnsey. 65 18 9 41 16 2 to 5 35 4 Upper Barn
Close, at (2.) (3) Thomas Brownes upper Barn Close, arr. Lease for years. 31
10 3 44 14 5 North Field. 20 16 2 4 34 6 Oak Close. 46 27 3 At (3.) East
garth. (4) His East garth, Meade, Free. 28 22 2 South Field. 46 16 6 to 78 23 2
Oak Close. (5) His Oak Close-Pasture, Lease for three lives. 26 18 5 South
field. 74 15 -- 63 20 4 East Field. 75 19 5 84 19 -- North Field. On upper barn
close. The Manor of Barnesey

The North field.

The east field

The south field

you had begun it where you ended the last, and then it is not material)
wherefore seeing now you are to begin at C. look in your book on the work of
your last Close, at what place the line B C. ended, as at the end of 68.
degrees, 16 0^ 6 1^ and there express No. (1.) on the right side of your down
right lines, and then write your title for this Close thus: W. Bensons north
breading close Pasture Copy from No. (1.) so shall you readily know when you
come to Protraction, where to begin with this Close, and in the Margent place
N. (2) for the number of this your second Close; and then work on as before is
taught for the last Close, till you come to K. where noting, that you want but
one line as K D. to enclose this second Close, and also that this Angle K. is
the sit place to begin your third close at, placing here your Instrument,
and directing your sight to D. where you are to enclose, write in the margent
of your Book against the degree here taken, this word, (to) as thus, to 5^
degrees, 35 0^ 4 1^ which serves to put you in mind, when you come to
Protraction, that you are to seek no other place, to begin your third Field
at, but where now you are at the Angle K. where you took your last sight. And
then having enclosed this second Close, proceed to the third, from K. in the
title whereof you need not make mention at what place you begin, for the former
reason, but working in that, and all the rest, as before is taught, you shall
with great ease, and without confusion, if there were infinite several
parcels, distinguish the work of the one from the other, and be able by the
only help of your Field book, thus formally ordered (if need were) to
protract, and draw a perfect plat thereof many years after: remembering always
that those numbers in the Margent of your Book, are to be placed severally in
your platte, in those Closes they severally represent; so shall you not need to
write in the plat the names of the Tenants, or of the Closes, nor the quality
or tenure thereof, but only the number, which will always direct you to your
book, where you may find it at large; for much writing in your plat (as is
always used in working with the Plain Table) breeds confusion, and causes
much cumber and trouble in casting up the contents.

But seeing that practice is much more instructiue (in works of this nature)
then many words; I will refer the rest to your own travel; which by
comparing those former notes of the Field book with the plat, and often
protracting the same according to those degrees and lengthes, the whole course
is very easily understood. The manner and order of which protraction is
hereafter taught in the 39. Chapter of this Book.

And here note further that in practice you shall find many helps, which are
too tedious here to express, as the taking in of diverse seuerals together,
when they lie in such sort divided with regular lines and hedges, that by only
taking true notice of their several ends, as you pass by them, you shall most
easily and speedily sever them on your plat: All which with many others (to
avoid prolixitie) I must refer to your own finding out by diligence and
practice.

And thus are we now reasonably well furnished of necessary implements for our
purpose, and therefore fitting to prepare us to practice: but yet before we
go into the Fields, we will consider of some necessary conclusions and
observations, fit to be known and remembered.

CHAP. XI. To lay down an Angle of any quantity required; or to find the
quantity of any Angle given, by the Sextans and the Scale.
SVppose it be required to lay down an Angle of 40. degrees. diagram First
draw any line at pleasure, as A B. then opening the Compass to the distance E
F. the chorde of your Sextans (described in the 8. Chapter) and placing one
foot in A. with the other, describe the Arch C B. cutting the line A B. in B.
then extend the Compass on the Sextans to 40. degrees, and with one foot in B.
cross the Arch line in C. and draw the line A C. So shall you describe the
Angle C A B. containing 40. degrees, as was required.

Again, suppose C A B. be an angle given, and let it be required to know the
quantity thereof. Extend the Compass to the chorde of the Sextans as before,
and at that distance with one foot in A. describe the Arch line C B. to cut
both sides of the given Angle, as in C. and B. then opening the Compass to C
B. and applying them at the same distance, to the degrees in the Sextans. It
will appear that the quantity of the Angle is 40. degrees, the thing required.

If the Angle given or required happen to be more then the whole Sextans, or
above 60. degrees, yet take still the chorde of the same Sextans, and describe
the Arch line as before; and first place the whole Sextans, (which is the
chorde thereof) on the Arch line from B. so far as it will extend beyond C.
and thereunto on the same Arch line, add so many degrees more as the Angle
given or required, contains degrees above 60. So shall you perform what was
required.

CHAP. XII. To lay down an Angle of any quantity required, or to find the
quantity of any Angle given, by the Protractor.
SVppose it be required to lay diagram down an Angle of 30. degrees with the
Protractor. First, draw any right line at length, as A B. then on any point
thereof, as on C. place the Center of the Protractor, on which point move it
about, by help of the protracting pin held in the Center, till the Meridian
line of the Protractor lie precisely on the line A B. (the semicircle of the
Protractor being upwards) and by the edge of the Semicircle at the division of
30. degrees, mark with the protracting pin the point D. and draw the line D
C. which shall include the Angle D C B. containing 30. degrees as was required.

Again, suppose D C B. in the former Diagram be an Angle given, and let it be
required to know the quantity thereof. Place the Center of the Protractor as
before in the Angle C. and the Meridian line thereof on the line C B. and
having the semicircle upwards, note what degree on the edge of the Protractor
is cut by the line D C. which you shall find to be 30. Showing that the given
Angle D C B. contains 30. degrees, the thing required.

But here is to be noted, that these degrees thus taken by the Protractor
belonging to the Peractor or Circumferentor, are not the true degrees of a
Circle; for one degree of a Circle, is but the 360. part thereof, and one of
these degrees thus taken are the 120. part, so that one of these contains
three of those; Wherefore if you are to take the quantity of an Angle
(according to the degrees of a Circle) by those Protractors, take always a
third part upon the Semicircle, of the number given or required; as in the
former example, where 30. is given, take 10. and so shall you find the Angle E
C. B. in the last Diagram, to be an Angle of 30. degrees, and to be a third
part of the Angle D C B. As may be proved, if you apply thereunto a Protractor
belonging to the Theodelite; yet notwithstanding these Protractors and degrees
in all our occasions in the use of the Circumferentor and Peractor are always
to be used, which will tend to one and the same purpose.

CHAP. XIII. The reducing of statute measure into Acres of any customary
measure required, and the contrary, showing the difference between them.
BY the Statute of 33. Ed. 1. It was ordained that an Acre of ground should
contain 160. square Perches, to be measured by the Pole of 16^ feet, which is
the measure now received, and generally allowed of, and is commonly called
Statute-measure: yet notwithstanding in many places of this Kingdom, there are
diverse other sorts retained and claimed as customary, whereof some are greater,
and some less then that by Statute. Wherefore I hold it very fitting, and a
maine point belonging to a Surueyor, readily to reduce these quantities from
the one to the other, whereby the difference may appear; whereof in practice
he shall find often use; which to effect work thus. Suppose there are 5.
Acres, 2. Roodes, 20. Perches, of 18. feet to the Pole given (called Wood-land
measure; and let it be required to know the quantity thereof by statute
measure, being of 16 ^ First, find out the least proportional terms,
between 18. and 16 ^ which by their abbreuiation, by 1 ^ you shall find to be
12. and 11. then reduce your given quantity into the lowest denomination, which
is Perches, so shall your 5. Acres, 2. Roodes, 20. Perches, be 900. Perches.
And considering that the same proportion which the square of 12. bears to the
square of 11. the like proportion bears the Acre of 18. foot Pole to that of
16 ^ therefore square those two terms 12. and 11. which produces 144. and
121. then multiply the given quantity 900. Perches by 144 the greater square
(because the greater measure 18. is to be reduced into the lesser 16 ^ the
Factus is 129600. which divided by the lesser square 121. quoteth 1071 9/121^
Perches; which reduced into Acres, is 6. Acres, 2. Roodes, 31. Perches, and
9/121^ parts of a Perch; for the quantity required in statute measure, whose
difference by deducting that from this, appears to be 1. Acre, 0. Roode, 11.
Perches 9/121^

But suppose the given quantity had been statute measure, and the same
required to be reduced into Wood-land measure; then should you have multiplied
the 900. Perches given by 121. the lesser square (because the lesser measure
16^ were to be reduced into the greater 18.) whereof the Product is 108900.
which divided by 144. the greater square quoteth 756 ^ Perches, which reduced
into acres, is 4. Acres, 2. Roodes, 36 ^ Perches, for the quantity by
Wood-land measure; whose difference by deducting this from that appears to be
0. Acre, 3. Roode, 23 ^ Perches.

And the like course is to be held in all respects, with all other quantities
of what proportion soever; as those of 12.20.24^ and 28. foot to the Pole, of
all which several sorts I have found in diverse places, whose difference; (...)
every Acre, from that of 16 ^ appears by this Breuiat following.

An Acre measured by the Pole of these feet, 12 18 20 24 24 28
Contains of Statute measure 0 -- 2 -- 4 76/121^ 1 -- 0 -- 30 50/121^ 1 -- 1
-- 35 85/1089^ 2 -- 0 -- 18 62/121^ 2 -- 0 -- 32 133/174^ 2 -- 3 -- 20 4/^^


And here is it not amiss to note the benefit and use of your two Scales of
11. and 12. in an inch formerly described in the 8. Chapter, which will serve
you now to purpose. For if in your Surueyes (as often happening) you meet with
Wood-land grounds, whose quantities are required to be of the Acre of 18. foot
Pole, and yet platted with the rest: In such case you may measure those
Wood-lands with the Pole of 16^ and likewise plat the same with the Scale of
12. as the rest, but to cast up the contents of those Wood-land grounds by the
Scale of 11. which will produce the desired quantity; By reason that if 11.
Perches be measured in a right line with the 18. foot pole, the same length
contains 12. Perches measured with the 16 foot pole. But if you are
constrained in the measuring of your Wood-lands, to use the Pole of 18. foot;
then must you protract and lay down the same in your plat by the Scale of 11.
which otherwise will not join with your other works; and the same likewise to
be cast up by the same Scale of 11. as before. So shall you obtain the true
quantity thereof in Acres, after the measure of the 18. foot pole required.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Table of Sines expressed on the Circumferentor.
THis Table (as is specifyed in the description of the Circumferentor (Chap.
4.) serves for the calculation, resolution and dimension of Triangles; not in
respect of the Area or superficial content thereof; but for the finding out of
the unknown sides and angles of the same; by means whereof, all manner of
quantities in mensuration of altitudes, profundities, longitudes and latitudes
are exactly known and discovered, considering that none of these can be had or
obtained instrumentally, without description of Triangles.

Wherefore let it first be considered, that by the 73. THEOREME of the first
book, the sides in all plain Triangles are in proportion the one to the
other, as the Sines of the Angles opposite to those sides.

And then that in every Triangle, there are six terms, that is, 3. sides and
3. angles, whereof any three being known (so one be aside) the other three are
had, by means of this Table, and the rule of proportion thus. Suppose B C. in
the Triangle diagram A B C. to be a Tower or perpendicular altitude given, and
let it be required to find the height thereof, and the length of the
Hypothenusall line A B. First, measure the distance from A to C. 40. then by
any Instrument planted at A. take the quantity of the Angle B A C. which let
be 10. degrees, then consequently by the 13. THEOREME of the First, the Angle A
B C. shall be 20. degrees, for that the Angle A C B, is a right Angle: So is
there here already had four parts or terms of the six before mentioned,
namely, the three Angles, and the length of the line A C. Wherefore now repair
to the table, and find there the Sines of those Angles which are these, of the
Angle A B C. 20. degrees, the Sine is 866. of the Angle B A C. 10. degrees, the
Sine is 500. and of the Angle A C B. 30. degrees the Sine is 1000. the total
Sine: Then by the rule of proportion reason thus. If A C. 866. the Sine of the
Angle A B C. gives B C 500. the Sine of the Angle B A C. what gives A C. 40,
and multiplying 500. by 40. the Product is 20000. which divided by 866. quoteth
23 49/433^ for the height of A C. required.

Again, if A C. 866. the Sine of the Angle A B C. gives A B. 1000. the Sine of
the Angle A C B. what gives A C. 40. and multiplying 1000. by 40. the Product
is 40000. which divided by 866. quoteth 46 82/433^ for the length of A B. the
Hypothenusall line, as was required.

And thus much for a small taste only of this little Table, which may serve to
induce and incite a willing mind, not only to the use and exercise thereof;
but to the further consideration and practice of the infinite use of those most
excellent Tables and works de BARTHOLOMAEO PITISCO GRVNBERG. now partly
translated into English by M. RAPH HANDSON; and of those Tables, and more then
admirable invention of LOGARITHMES, by that divine and noble Writer, the Lord
MARCHISTON, whose name and honor will never out.

CHAP. XV. Of the congruitie in use between the Peractor and Circumferentor;
and the means to find the quantity of an Angle by either of them.
THese two Instruments in use differ little or nothing, considering the degrees
of either are equally numbered, although those of the Circumferentor are placed
on the Card, and these of the Peractor, on the limb of the Planisphere,
whereby they are so much the larger, and thereby the fitter for use: only
herein they differ, the degrees observed and taken by the Peractor, are ever
cut by the edge of the Index, moved about till through the sights thereon, the
object be found, the Needle being always kept on one degree, and that most
fitly on the Meridian line in the Card, the North end (being that with the
Cross) lying ever over the Flower deluce, and the south end pointing to the
beginning of the degrees: and the degrees observed and taken by the
Circumferentor, are always cut in the Card by the South end of the Needle,
playing about at pleasure. whilst the Instrument and the sights thereof are
directed to the purposed mark. By means of which diversity, there is a
diverse means to be used, in taking the true quantity of an Angle, by these
two Instruments, as follows.

By the 49. DEF. of the First. The quantity or measure of an Angle, is the
Arch of a Circle, described from the point of the same Angle, and intercepted
between the two sides of that Angle, which is found by the Circumferentor thus.

Suppose A B C. be an Angle given in the diagram Fields, and let A B. and B C.
be two hedges or other lines, containing the same Angle; and let it be
required, to take the quantity thereof by the Circumferentor. First, place
your Instrument in the Angle at B. and turning the same about on the staff,
direct your sight toward A. to be always parallel to the line B A. where
observe what degree the south end of the Needle cutteth, which let be 40.
degrees, then direct your sight toward C. and there making like observation,
let the degree cut be 18. But yet have you not the quantity of this Angle,
but only the degrees cut at each observation. Wherefore now you are to deduct
18. the lesser from 40. the greater term, the remainder will be 22. the true
quantity of the given Angle. But had this remainder exceeded 60. (which is two
right Angles, or a Semicircle) then must you have deducted that remainder out
of 120. the whole circle, and the remainder of that last deduction had been
the quantity required; which circumstance in the Peractor needs not,
wherewithal work thus.

Place your Instrument at B. in the former Diagram. (the Index standing on the
Diameter where the degrees commence) then turn about the Instrument on the
staff (the Index remaining) toward A. till your sight be parallel to the
line B A. and there your Instrument fixed, remove the Index, directing your
sight toward C. to be likewise parallel to B C. where observe what degree the
edge of the Index cutteth, which will be 22. the quantity required. And here
note an exquisite dispatch.

CHAP. XVI. To take any horizontall distance at two stacions, by Sinicall
computation.
SVppose A and B. be two places diagram given, and let it be required to know
the distance from either of them to C. First, place your Instrument at A. where
directing your sight first to C. and then to B. take the quantity of that
Angle, as was taught in the last Chap. which suppose to be 26. degrees, then
measuring from thence to B. let the length there found be 20. where placing
your Instrument, take likewise the quantity of that Angle as before, which let
be 19. degrees. Now to find the quantity of the third Angle at C. (Forasmuch
as by the 13. THEOREME of the first, the three inward Angles of every Triangle
is equal to two right Angles) add together the quantity of those two Angles
at A. and B. already found, 26. and 19. which makes 45. and that deducted from
60. (which is two right Angles or a Semicircle) the remainder is 15. the
quantity of the Angle at C. So have you gotten the quantity of every Angle,
and the length of one of the sides, namely, the Stationary distance A B. Now to
every of those Angles in the Table of Sines, find out their several Sines,
whereof make collection in your Field book, or otherwise thus.

Then by the Rule of Proportion, reason thus. If A B. 707. the Sine of 15.
degrees yield 20. the stationary distance, what A C. 839. the Sine of B. 19.
degrees, and multiplying 839. by 20. and dividing the Product by 707. the
quotus will be 23. 519/707^ for the distance A C. And again, if A B. 707. the
Sine of C. 15. degrees, yield 20. the stationary distance, what B C. 978. the
Sine of A. 26 degrees, and multiplying 978. by 20. and dividing the Product by
d s A. 26 978. B. 19 839. C. 15 707. A B. 20. Perches. 707. the quotus will be
27 471/707^ the distance B C. required.

The Theoricall ground and reason of this work depends on the 13. and 73.
THEOREMES of the first book.

Where note in all works of this nature, that if any of the three Angles be an
obtuse Angle, containing above 30. degrees, then (seeing the Table of Sines
exceeds not 30.) deduct the excess of the obtuse Angle above 30. out of 30 (
as if it were 44. the excess whereof above 30. is 14. which deduct out of 30.
there remains 16. and of that remainder seek the Sine in the Table, which
serves the turn. The reason hereof is, because the right Sine of the Arch in
the greater or lesser Quadrant are all one and the same thing.

Likewise note always in your working by the golden Rule, that the Sine of the
Angle opposite to the Stacionary line (as in this example 707.) must be your
first proportional number; and most fitly ( though it may be otherwise,
transpositis terminis medijs) the distance between the two stacions the
second; and the Sine of the Angle, opposite to the side, whose length you seek
the third.

And note also, that not only this, but all other the like Propositions are to
be performed, as well by the Peractor and Theodelite, as the Circumferentor, the
Table of Sines being had in any void paper, or much rather those small Tables
of Logarithmes, or of Pitiscus, which are imprinted by themselves in small
volumes, being most excellent pocket-companions for infinite Conclusions, as well
Geometrical as Astronomicall.

And if any desire the performance of this Proposition, or the like by
protraction; let him diligently observe the doctrine of the next.

CHAP. XVII. To take the distance as well between diverse several places remote
from your place of being, as between your being, and those several places, by
the help of two stacions.
diagram

SVppose A.B. and C. be three places given remote from your place of being,
which let be at D. and let it be required at D. to find the several
distances, as well between A B. and B C. as between D A. D B. and D C. First
place your Instrument at D. and directing your sight to A. observe what degree
is there cut, either by the Needle of the Circumferentor, or by the Index of
the Peractor, which let be 32 ^ degrees, to be noted for your first
observation, the^ turning your sight to B. make the like, where you find 21.
degrees, and the like toward C. observing 15. degrees. Then your second
Stacion, (not being limited) make choice thereof with such discretion (if the
place will afford it, as at E.) that your Stationary distance be no less at
the least then ^ of the other distances from you, how much greater (with
reason) makes no great matter; and as near as you may, let it make a right
Angle with the first observation of your first Stacion, then for the last work
of that stacion direct your sight to E. observing the degrees cut 120. then
take up your Instrument, and leaving a mark at D. measure from D. to E. the
stationary distance, which suppose 48. then at E. plant your Instrument
precisely as at D. using the help both of your Needle and back sights herein,
looking back to your mark at D. whereof special care is to be had, or maine
errors may ensue: which done, direct your sight first (as at the first stacion)
to A. observing the degree there cut 45. the like to B. 31 ^ degrees, And
lastly, to C. 15. degrees. So have you finished; if you omit not the collection
of your several observations, which in your Field Book or otherwise are thus
to be expressed.

Then provide a clean sheet of paper, and according to these collections
laid before you, protract the several angles or degrees here observed, as is
taught in the next.

Obs. 1. St. d 1 32 2 21. 3 9^ 4 120. did. p. 48. 2. St. 1 45. 2 31 ^ 3 15.


CHAP. XVIII. To protract any number of Angles or degrees taken by the
Peractor, Theodelite or Circumferentor, at several observations.
LEt the Angles or degrees taken be those expressed in the former Chapter, and
let it be required to protract the same, whereby the quantity of each
several distance there sought for, may appear. First, on your paper provided,
draw a right line at pleasure, as F G. in the former Diagram; then laying your
Field-Booke before you, with the former observations, make choice of any point
in the line F G. to represent your first Stacion, as at D. then applying the
Scale of your Protractor to that line, lay down your stacionary distance 48.
Perches from D. to E. representing the place of your second stacion; and
placing your Protractor with the Center on the point D. (the Semicircle
upwards) turn it about thereon, till that degree on the Protractor which was
taken from the first to the second stacion (which in this example is 120.) lie
precisely on the line F.G. and then look in your Field-Booke for the degrees
observed at your first stacion, which were 32 ^ 21. and 9 ^ (for the fourth
120. that is supposed always to fall on the first drawn line F G.) and against
those several degrees on the limb of your Protractor, by the edge thereof
with your protracting pin, make several pricks or points, as at H. I. and K.
then by the point D. and those three several pricks with the scale of your
Protractor, and protracting pin, draw out at length the lines D H. D I. and D
K. so have you finished your first observations; then place your Protractor on
the point E. in all respects as before, at D. and there mark the degrees of
your second observations, as 45. 31 and 15. as before, at the points L. M. and
N. whereby, and by the point E. draw out at length the lines E L. E M. and E N.
till they intersect the three former lines, drawn from D. as in the points
A.B. and C. by which intersections from point to point, draw the lines A B. and
B C. So have you finished your Protraction. And by applying the scale of your
Protractor, (whereby the stacionary distance was laid down) to any line or
distance, the several quantities will appear to be as they are expressed in
the Diagram, on the several lines thereof, as was required.

But here is to be noted, that if those former observations were made and taken
by the Theodelite, then this Protraction is to be made and laid down by the
Protractor belonging to the Theodelite, being divided into 360. degrees, as is
before mentioned, which is to be performed in all respects, according to the
rules and instructions before delivered.

CHAP. XIX. To take any accessible altitude by the Circumferentor or Plain
Table with the divided sights.
SVppose A B. to be a perpendicular diagram height, and let it be required
from C. (whose distance to B. is accessible) to know the altitude thereof.
First, place your Instrument at C. precisely horizontall, by help of the
plummet hanging on the shorter sight; whereunto great care must be had as well
in this, as all other works of this nature, or maine errors will arise; then
move the vane on the longer sight upwards and downwards, till through the hole
therein, and by the pinnes head on the top of the shorter sight, you epsy
the Summitie of the given height at A. where note the equal divisions cut on
the longer sight by the edge of the vane, which suppose to be 40. then measure
the distance from C. to B. which let be 110. And the same proportion which 40.
the part cut has to 100. the side of the square proiected on the Instrument,
the like has the altitude A. B. to the measured distance, 110. Wherefore
multiply 110. the distance by 40. the parts cut, and divide the Product by 100.
the quotus will be 44. the altitude required.

But it happens oftentimes that the altitude required is of that height, that
you cannot produce the vane low enough, to see the summitie of the height, as
before. In which case you are to use the Index to be placed on the wyerpinne in
the edge of the shorter sight, and turning it up and down close by the right
edge of the Instrument, till through the sight thereof, and by the wire pin
you epsy the summytie of the given height, and then note the parts cut on the
same edge of the Instrument, by the fiduciall edge of the Index. For the same
proportion which the parts cut, bear to 60. (the imagined parts on the edge of
the shorter sight) the like has the measured distance to the altitude
required. Wherefore, multiply the same measured distance by 60. and divide the
Product by the parts cut, the quotus shows your demand. And if you desire to
know the Visuall or Hypothenusall line, multiply the measured distance by the
parts cut on the edge of the Index, and divide the Product by the parts cut on
the edge of the Instrument; the quotus shows what you desire. For what
proportion the parts cut on the edge of the Instrument, bear to those cut on
the edge of the Index, the like does the measured distance to the Visuall line.

And here is to be noted, that of this later work the plain Table has no
use; and therefore of all other Instruments most unfit for these purposes of
Altitudes and Profuncities, without help of the quadrant specified in the
description thereof, CHAP. 3.

Or with the Circumferentor, by Protraction, thus.

PLace your Instrument at C. as before, and there observe the quantity of the
Angle of altitude, which being gotten, protract and lay down the same as has
been taught, and on the base line from C. to B. lay down the measured
distance 110. at the end whereof, as on the point B. either by the 6. PROBLEM
of the second Book, or with help of your Protractor erect a perpendicular
line as A B. to cut the other side of the protracted Angle, as in A. and with
applying your Scale thereunto, the altitude appears, as was required.

CHAP. XX. To take any accessible altitude diverse ways, by the Peractor and
the Quadrant thereof.
SVppose M N. to be a perpendicular height given; and let it be required from
O. to find the Altitude thereof. Place your Instrument precisely Horizontall at
O. as before is taught, then move your Quadrant up and down, till through the
small round hole, in the end of the sight toward you at B. on the Quadrant (as
it is described in the 5. Chapter) and by the pin in the great round hole of
the other end at A. you epsy the Summytie M. of the given height, where
letting your quadrant rest, measure the distance O N. which suppose to be 48.
then look on the side C D. of the quadrant, for the 48. line, reckoning from
the Center P. and passing down by that line to the edge of the handle or Index
(which suppose to stand now on the line P F. drawn from the Center of the
quadrant) note what line (passing from the other side A.B. of the quadrant) the
former line 48. meets and intersecteth on the edge of the Index, supposed as
before the line P. F. and you shall find it somewhat more then 34. wherefore I
conclude, that the altitude A B. is so much: and noting what part of the Index
is there cut, you shall find it somewhat more then 58 4/5^ the length of the
visuall line, or hipothenusall O. M. Where is to be noted, that in all works
wrought with this quadrant, the side thereof A. B. represents the
perpendicular height, the side C. D. the horizontall distance, and the Index or
handle, the hipothenusall or visuall line.

diagram

Or Sinically thus.

Having placed your Instrument as before at O. By the degrees on the limb of
the quadrant, observe the angle of altitude MON. 35. degrees 19. and measuring
the distance ON. 48. as before (by the help of Pitiscus, or any other Canon)
Reason thus: If ON. the radius 100000. yield 48. the measured distance; what M
N. 70848. the tangent of the Angle MON. 35. degrees, 19. and multiplying the
tangent 70848. by 48. the measured distance, you shall produce 3400704. which
parted by the radius 100000. quoteth 34 704/100000 or in lesser terms, 34
22/3125^ the altitude M N required.

Again, if O N. the radius 100000. gives 48. the measured distance, what O M.
122554. the secant of the Angle M O N. 35. degrees, 19. and multiplying the
same secant 122554. by 48. and parting the Product by the radius 100000. you
have 58 ^2592/100000^ or in lesser terms, 58 2581/3125^ being somewhat more
then 4/5^ the length of the visuall or hipothenusall line O.M. as before.

Or by Protraction, thus.

PLacing your Instrument at O. as before, observe the Angle of altitude M O N.
and measure the distance from O. to N. And then proceed to protracting thereof,
as is taught in the later part of the last Chapter before going; and the work
is finished.

CHAP. XXI. To find out any inaccessible height by the Peractor, Theodelite, or
Circumferentor.
diagram

IT may oftentimes happen that inaccessible heights may be required, when by
reason of waters, trenches, danger of shot, or many other impediments, a man
cannot approach to the Base of the altitude required; yet of necessity to be
had and known, which to perform, in a most absolute and exact manner, work
thus.

Suppose B C. to be a perpendicular height given, unto the Base, whereof C. (by
some impediment) you may not approach nearer then D. yet the altitude is
required; wherefore place your Instrument at D. precisely horizontall, and
observe the Angle of altitude, as is before taught, which let be 53. degrees,
8. then looking backwards, make choice in a right line from C. by D. of a
second station, which let be A. and measure the distance from D. to A. which
suppose 40. then at A. place your Instrument as before, and, likewise observe
there the Angle of altitude, which suppose 36. degrees, 2. so is your
Isntrumental work already finished. Then repayring to your Canon of
Triangles, find the complements of the Tangents of those two Angles taken,
which of 53. degrees, 8. the angle first observed, is 74991. and of 36.
degrees, 2. the Angle of your last observation, is 137470. between which two
complements take the difference, by deducting the lesser from the greater,
which will be 62479. and then (for as much as the same proportion which the
difference of the complements 62479. bears to the radius 100000. the like
has the measured distance between your two stations D A. 40. and the required
altitude) multiply the radius 100000. by 40. the measured distance, the Product
is 4000000. which parted by 62479. the difference of the complements quoteth 64
1244/1000300^ for the required altitude.

And if it be required, to have the length of a scaling ladder to extend from
D. to B. or the length of the visuall line A B. or the inaccessible distance
between D. and C. by respective observation of what was taught in the last
Chapter, they are easily resolved.

To perform the same by Protraction.

Having taken both the Angles of altitude, and measured the stationary distance
A D. 40. as before; protract the same thus; Draw a right line out at length, as
E F. in the former Diagram, then on any point thereof, as at D. protract the
first Angle taken, 53. degrees, 8. (as before taught) then from D. toward E.
lay down the stationary distance 40. to end in A. on which point A. protract
your other Angle 36. degrees, 2'. and continue forth the upper sides of those
two Angles, till they interfect each other as in B. from which point B. by the
6. of the second, or by help of your Protractor, let fall a perpendicular, to
cut the line E F. as B C. in C. which line B C. shall represent the given
altitude, the height whereof, and the seueall lengthes and distances in the
whole work contained, is speedily had by applying thereunto the same scale,
whereby your measured distance was laid down.

And here is to be noted, that in all works of this kind, it is very requisite
to take your stationary distance as large as conveniently you may, for that
otherwise by reason of the acuitie of the Angle, as here of A B D. you shall
hardly discern the true point of intersection by the lines B A. and B D.
whereby, or from whence you may precisely let fall the perpendicular B C. as
before in his due place: by neglect whereof main errors may ensue.

Wherefore a most excellent, absolute and exact course is that in the former
part of this Chapter, for the performance of all manner of conclusions of this
kind, and to be preferred before all others.

And here now might I much enlarge this work, by inserting several
Propositions for the taking and finding out of distances in heights, with the
mensuration of profundities diverse ways; all which and infinite other
conclusions are fully included within the limits of these few former
instructions, and with diligent observation and practice thereof may be well
understood and performed; for whosoever can take one height artificially, may
perform another, and by deducting the one from the other, may decerne the
difference: and he that can skilfully take an altitude, by the same rule may
perform a profunditie, being the one a direct conversion of the other, without
alteration or any difference, either in the Theoricall ground, or practike
operation thereof: wherefore to make great shows, or accumulation of
needelesse varieties to one and the same purpose, were but expense of time unto
my self, and cause of confusion to the learner, seeing fewest Precepts (so
effectual) are fittest, as well for apprehension as retention.

But before I pass further, let this be remembered, that in all the former
observations in taking of heights: the height of your Instrument is always to
be added to the altitude taken.

CHAP. XXII. To take the plot of a Field at one stacion; taken in any part
thereof, from whence you may view all the Angles, and measuring from the
stacion to every Angle.
diagram

SVppose ABCDEFG. to be a Field, whereof it is required to take the Plot.
First, cause papers or other marks to be placed directly in every Angle; and
then make choice of some such convenient place within the same, as from whence
you may best view the several Angles thereof, and there as at X. Plant your
Instrument; if it be the Peractor, Theodelite, or Plaine-Table, fasten the
Instrument to the staff with the scrue-pinne, that it stir not till your
work be finished, the needle standing on the Meridian line of the Card, if
the Circumferentor, that care is already taken; but admit the Peractor; then
direct your sight, by turning the Index to any one Angle at your pleasure, as
first to A. and observe the degree there cut by the edge of your Index, which
let be 10. and with your Chain measure from your station to that Angle, which
suppose 30. then direct your sight to B. and perform the like, and so to C.D.
E.F. and G. till you have finished; still entering as you pass your seuerell
observations, as well of degrees as lines into your Field-booke, as was formerly
taught in Chap. 10. which when you have finished shall appear to be thus.

Which being laid before you, shall most speedily and exactly be protracted
and laid down, as is taught in the next.

d o 1 10 30 -- 26 33 2 39 41 -- 51 36 -- 66 47 5 81 18 8 105 41 5

CHAP. XXIII. To protract and lay down the observations made in the last
Chapter, or any other taken in the like sort.
TAke a clean sheet of paper, and draw a right line thereon at pleasure as P
Q. in the Diagram of the last Chapter, representing the meridian Line; and
laying your Field-booke before you with the former observations; First, place
the Center of your Protractor (the Semicircle upwards) on any point of the line
as on X. with the Meridian line of the Protractor directly over that on the
paper; where keeping your Protractor fixed, note all the degrees under 60.
taken in your Field-booke, as 10.26.39 ^ and 51. against which several degrees
on the limb of your Protractor by the edge thereof, make several pricks or
points with your protracting pin, as at H.I.K. and L. Then considering that
those degrees are under 60. and therefore to lie on the East side of your plot
or meridian line P Q. lay the edge of the scale of your Protractor on the
Center X. and every of those points H.I.K. and L. and draw from the Center X.
under the meridian line P Q. the several lines to A.B.C. and D. laying them
down of the several lengthes, belonging to them, according to your
Field-booke, as X A. 30 0 X B. 33 0^ 2 1^ X C. 41 0^ and X D. 36 0^ making
pricks or points at the end of every several length, as at A.B.C. and D. and
then from point to point, draw the lines A B. B C. and C D. so have you
finished the work on the East side of your Meridian. Then place again your
Protractor in all respects as before, and note all the other degrees being
above 60. as 66.81. and 105 which by the edge of the Semicircle mark out as
before, as at M. N. and O. and seeing they belong to the West side of your
work, draw your lines from the Center X. upwards toward those three several
points, laying them down with their several lengthes observed in your book,
as X E. 47 0^ 5 1^ X F. 18 0^ 8 1^ and X G. 41 1^ 5 1^ making points as before
at the end of every length; and lastly from point to point draw the lines A G.
G F. F E. and E D. So shall you enclose the Figure A B C D E F G. with equal
Angles and proportional lines to the measured field as was required.

CHAP. XXIIII. To take the plot of any Field at one stacion in any one Angle
thereof, from whence may be seen all the other Angles of the same Field; and
measuring from the station to every Angle.
diagram

SVppose A B C D E F G. to be a field, the plat whereof is required to be
taken. First, cause whites or marks to be placed directly in every Angle, then
make choice of the most convenient Angle, from whence you may best view all the
rest, as at A. where place your Instrument as before is taught, and directing
your sight to one of the next Angles on either hand as to B. observe the
degrees cut by the edge of the Index, which let be 24 ^ degrees and measure
that line A B. 33 0^ 4 1^ then turning your Index to the next, as to C. make
the like observation of 13 ^ degrees. and measure the length A C. 55 0^2 1^ and
in like manner proceed to the rest, as to D.E.F. and G. still expressing in
your Field-booke your several Angles and Lines as before is taught, which
having finished will thus appear.

And then protract, and lay down the same in all respects, according to the
instructions of the last Chapter. The order whereof appears by the Diagram, d
o 1 24 33 4 13 55 2 6 47 -- 116 69 2 104 65 6 95 41 6

CHAP. XXV. To take the Plot of a Field at one station in any Angle, from
whence the rest may be seen, and by measuring the sides of the Perimeter.
diagram

SVppose A B C D E F G. be a Field to be plotted. First; set up marks as
before, and choose an Angle fittest for your purpose, from whence you may see
all the rest, and there plant your Instrument as at A. then direct your sight
to one of the next Angles, on either hand, as to B. and note the degree there
cut, 24 ^ and measure the length of that line A B. 33 0^ 4 1^ then direct your
sight to C. and note the degree there cut 13 ^ and measure the line from the
Angle B. to the Angle C. 33 0^ and in like manner work forwards to D.E. and F.
and then note (having finished at F.) that you have yet remaining two lines to
measure, namely, F G. and G A. and but one degree to be taken, as from A. to
G. (The reason whereof depends on THEOR. 74.1.) wherefore measure the line F
G. 33 0^ 5 1^ and express the same in your Book without any degree; and
lastly, directing your sight to G. observe the degree cut 95 ^ and measuring
the line A G. place the length thereof in your Book 41 0^ 6 1^ against the
last degree taken. So have you finished your Field-worke, and your observations
stand thus.

Which are to be protracted and laid down as is taught in the next.

d o 1 24 33 4 13 33 -- 6 21 -- 116 36 5 104 41 8 -- 33 5 95 41 6

CHAP. XXVI. To protract and lay down the observations had, according to the
work in the last Chapter, or any other taken by the like means.
THe several degrees and lengthes so had and taken as before, and expressed in
your Field book, being laid before you, work thus. First, according to your
degrees taken, and as is taught in Chap. 23. draw out at length your several
lines A B. A C. A D. A E. A F. and A G. as in the former Diagram, then opening
your Compass on your Scale, take therein the first length 33 0^ 4 1^ at which
distance with one foot in A. strike with the other an Arch through the line A
B. cutting the same in B. then take your second length 33 0^ at which distance
with one foot in B. cross the line A C. in C. and draw the line B C. then take
the third length 21 0^ and with one foot in C. cross the line A D. in D. and
draw the line C D. and in this manner work forwards, laying down every
length, and drawing each line till you have enclosed the Figure A B C D E F G.
which shall be a like Figure to the measured Field.

CHAP. XXVII. To take the plot of a Field at two stations, where all the Angles
cannot be seen at one, and measuring as in the 22. Chapter.
diagram

SVppose this Figure be a Field to be plotted, which lies in such sort, as
from no one place all the Angles thereof can be seen. In such case make choice
of a place for your first station, where may be viewed as many Angles thereof
as possibly you may, which let be M. where you may see the several Angles at
A.B.C.D.E. and F. then plant your Instrument in M. and there observe all those
Angles, and measure the several lines, beginning from M. to A. and ending from
M. to F. as is taught in the 22. Chapter, so have you finished the work of
your first station. Then (before you remove your Instrument) make choice of
some other convenient place for your second station, from whence you may see
all the other Angles not formerly seen, as those at I.H. and G. which let be
N. unto which place direct your sight, and observe the degree cut 65. then
measure the stationary distance M. N. 40 0^ and leaving a mark at M. remove
now your Instrument to N. where place it precisely as it stood at M. with help
of your needle and back sight, then observe your several degrees, and measure
the several lengthes from N. your second station to I.H. and G. as before, and
your Field-worke is finished. So as you remember always to express your
observations in your Field-booke, which shall thus appear.

To be protracted and laid down as is taught in the next.

d o 1 83 ^ 29 -- 109 ^ 19 2 1. Sta. 10 ^ 26 8 28 ^ 30 8 41 ^ 31 5 55 ^ 16 4
sta. did. 65 40 -- 74 ^ 26 -- 2. Sta. 46 ^ 29 -- 33 ^ 27 5

CHAP. XXVIII. To protract and lay down any observations taken, according to
the work of the last chapter.
ON a fair sheet of paper draw a right line at length in any convenient place
thereof, as K.L. in the Diagram of the last Chapter, which line is not to be
taken as before for a meridian line, but supposed to be drawn according to the
degree taken from the first to the second station; and therefore call it the
stationarie line, and thereon lay down your stationary distance 40 0^ as from
M. to N. which two points shall represent your two stations, then on M. the
point of your first station, place the center of your Protractor (the
Semicircle upwards) turning it about till the degree 65. on the limb of your
Protractor (being the degree taken from the first to the second stacion) cut
precisely the stacionary line drawn, and there keeping it firm and
immovable, mark out the several degrees of your first stacion; according to
your Field-booke; and so work on in all respects as is taught in Chap. 23.
which effected, remove your Protractor to N. the point of your second station,
where placed precisely, as at the first, work forwards with the degrees and
lines of your second station, as before; and so have you finished.

CHAP. XXIX. To take the Plot of a Field at diverse stacions in diverse Angles,
where all cannot be seen from one, and to measure as in the 24. Chapter.
diagram

SVppose this Figure be a Field to be plotted, whose angles cannot be seen
from any one Angle thereof, wherefore imagine you are now standing in the Angle
A. from whence you view and consider what Angles may there be conveniently
seen and taken, which you find to be those at B. C. D. and E. then directly in
those Angles cause marks to be placed, and planting your Instrument as before
is taught in A. direct your sight first to B. then to C. after to D. and lastly
to E. noting the several degrees cut toward each several Angle, and
measuring as in the 24. Chapter, from your station to every of those Angles
severally, and your work of that station is finished. Now for that you ended
your last work at E. remove your Instrument to that Angle, and there plant it
precisely, as at the first stacion, using both your needle and backe-sight for
your help therein; And here consider what Angles from hence may be perfectly
seen and taken, which on view had, you find to be all the residue not
formerly taken, as F.G.H.I.K.L. and M. wherefore having your marks placed,
take your several observations and measure your several lines to every of
these Angles, as to those of the first station, taking them in order as they
lie, and you have finished. But suppose at this station, you could have seen
only those Angles at F. G. H. and I. then here must you have finished those,
and removed your Instrument to I. for a third station, and there to have
performed the rest, or as many as there you might, and if any remaining, to
take a fourth, and a fifth station, etc. till you have finished, wherein many
words are needless, the matter being apparent. Your observations of this work
are these.

A general Note.
And let it be noted, that where for brevity sake in mine instructions, as well
here as else where, I omit to express particularly, the several degrees and
lengthes observed and taken between each station and the several Angles,
(which would be no less tedious, then troublesome in breeding confusion) I
observe a due order in the placing of these observations of degrees and angles,
according to the order of the letters about the plot, as the first degree and
length 116 ^ 28 0^ 4 1^ belong to the first line A B. the second to the second
A C. and the like of all the rest, which are to be protracted and laid down,
as appears in the next.

d o 1 116 28 4 101 41 8 85 55 8 74 41 8 86 22 -- 75 32 8 69 1/^ 22 6 59 31 5
45 42 5 36 44 4 23 30 4

CHAP. XXX. To protract and lay down any observations taken, according to the
work of the last Chapter.
THe speediest and exactest course for protracting works of this nature,
consisting of diverse stations is thus. First, draw a right line at length on
your paper, to represent the meridian line, as N O. in the last Diagram,
whereon placing your Protractor, work in all respects as is taught in Chap.
23. for the observations of your first station; so shall you finish as much of
this work as is included by the lines A B. B C. C D. and D E. the work of
your first station; then by the point E. where you left, draw another meridian
line as P Q. which (by PROB. 3.2.) make Parallel to the first line, N O. and
then on the point E. place your Protractor in all respects, as at the first,
and work with the rest as before, whereby you shall finish the work of your
second station, and perfect the Figure A B C D E F G H I K L M. with equal
Angles, and proportional lines to the measured field. And if there were more
stations to be used in the Field-worke, then at the point where the work of
each station ends, you are to draw another meridian line parallel to the
rest. Or before you begin your protraction, you may draw diverse parallel lines
on your paper, representing so many meridians, and by help of your parallel
divisions, placed at either end of the Scale of your Protractor, you shall on
any point falling either upon or besides those Meridians place your Protractor
parallel as you please. And this kind of protraction may be used in stead of
that taught in the 28. Chapter, as the better, though either will serve, and
both tending to one end.

Hitherto have I taught after a perfect and exact manner the mensuration of
seuerals (by diverse means) where one field or close only is to be taken by
it self: But if many seuerals (as a whole Lordship or Manor) were to be
measured and plotted together: I hold not these former courses the fittest: but
rather those which shall be hereafter taught. But first I will deliver some
few directions and examples, for the dimension of seuerals after another order,
by intersection of lines at several stacions as follows.

CHAP. XXXI. To take the plot of any field at two stations, so as all the
Angles may be seen from both stacions, by measuring only the stationarie
distance.
diagram

SVppose A B C D E F G. be a Field, the plot whereof is required to be taken.
First, make choice of two such convenient places for your Stations, as from
whence you may see all the Angles about the Field; with these further
considerations, that the distance between your stations be of convenient
length, the longer the better, that they lie toward the middle of the field;
and that neither of them lie interposed in a right line between the other, and
any Angle of the Field; but to be chosen with such discretion, as all lines
drawn from either station to the several Angles, may intersect each other with
as large angles as you may, which let be the two points H. and I. and causing
marks to be placed in every Angle, plant your Instrument at H. as is before
taught, and directing your sight to A. observe the degree there cut; and the
like to B. C. D. E. F. and G. and also to I. the second station, then take up
your Instrument, leaving a mark at H. from whence measure the stationarie
distance to I. where placing your Instrument precisely as at H. observe
likewise all the degrees cut by your Index, directed to each several Angle as
before: Of all which several observations keep notice in your Field-booke as
has been often mentioned; wherewith on a clean sheet of paper by the
directions of the 18. and 30. Chapters, the plot thereof is speedily
protracted, and your business fully finished.

And here note the accuitie of diverse of those Angles in the Diagram, caused by
the intersection of the pricked lines, notwithstanding all care had therein;
and what inconveniences may hereby grow, without good regard; and yet are these
Angles usually drawn by many, who make a poor shift therewith.

CHAP. XXXII. To take the plot of any Field remote from you at two stations,
when either by opposition you may not, or some other impediment you cannot come
into the same.
SVppose A B C D E diagram F. be a Field, whereinto by no means you can be
suffered to enter, yet of necessity must the plot thereof be had. In such case
make choice of any two places, either near hand, or further off, all is one;
so from thence you may well decerne the several Angles of the same Field; and
let your stationary distance be the full length of the Field, at the least if
possibly you may; which two places let be G. and H. First plant your Instrument
at G. and by directing your sight in order one after other to A.B.C.D.E. and F.
the several Angles of the Field, observe the several degrees there cut, as is
before taught; then turn your sight to H. your second station, and note the
degree there cut; which done, take up your Instrument, leaving a mark at G.
and measure from thence to H. your stationary distance, and there plant your
Instrument in all respects as before, and make the like observations to all the
several Angles of the Field, as formerly at G. So have you finished your
Field-worke, which is to be protracted and laid down according to your
Instructions of the 18. Chapter.

And here note, by reason of the length of the stationary distance, how
excellently the lines issuing from thence, intersect each other, which of
necessity makes the conclusion absolute.

CHAP. XXXIII. To take the Plot of any Field by making observation at every
Angle, and measuring only one line, but no part of the perimeter.
SVppose A B C D E. be a diagram Field, and it is required to plot the same as
before. First, place your Instrument at A. and observe some notable mark
toward the middle of the Field; if there be none such, cause one to be so
placed as it may be seen from every Angle about the Field, which let be F.
then direct your sight to F. and note the degree there cut 109. and (your
Instrument remaining) measure the distance from A to F. 21 0^ 7 1 ^ (which
shall be all the mensuration you shall need to use in this work) then direct
your sight to B. observing there the degree cut 118 ^ then remove your
Instrument to the Angle at B. and there first direct your sight to F. taking
that degree 10 ^ and then to C. the next Angle 88 ^ which done, remone your
Instrument to the Angle at C. and there as before, first direct your sight to
F. taking that degree 106. and then to D. the next angle 74 ^ and so proceed
from angle to angle, first taking your sight to F. and then to the next angle,
till you have finished, Or take here the right degrees and protract the
opposite.
wherein by the way observe this course; when you take your degrees to F.
reckon those on the North end of your needle, and when you express them in
your Book, make in the margent against them a prick, or some other mark,
whereby it may be apparent, when you come to Protraction which are those
degrees, from the rest, which are to be reckoned on the South end of the
Needle, after the usual manner, and belong to the perimeter: so have you very
exactly finished your field-worke, and your observations are these.

d o 1 109 21 7 118 10 88 106 74 93 49 75 35

Which is to be protracted, as is taught in the next.

CHAP. XXXIIII. To protract and lay down any observations taken, according to
the work of the last Chapter.
THis kind of protraction is somewhat different from all the rest formerly
taught, wherefore observe it thus. First, draw diverse parallel lines over all
your paper, of convenient distance one from another (not exceeding the breadth
of the Scale of your Protractor) which shall represent the Meridians; then with
your observations laid before you, take a point in any convenient place of
your paper, whether upon or besides any parallel line, it is not material, as
at A. in the last Diagram, then thereon place the Center of your Protractor
(the Semicircle upwards) turning it about on your protracting pin, till you
find the match or opposite parallel divisions on either end of the scale, to
lie either precisely upon any one line, or equally distant over or beneath the
same; then look in your book what are the first two degrees, which is 109.
and 118^ against which two degrees, by the edge of your Protractors Semicircle,
make several pricks on your paper, whereby, and by the point A. draw the two
right lines A F. and A B. out at length, and from A. to F. lay down your
measured length 21 0^ 7 1 ^ then on the point F. place the Center of your
Protractor precisely as before, by help of your divisions on the end of the
Scale, and find in your Field-booke what degrees you have (more then the first
already done) marked with points or other marks in the margent (as was taught
in the Field-worke) which are 10 ^ 106.93. and 75 ^ against all which degrees
on your Protractor make several pricks as before, whereby, and by the point
F. draw out at length the several lines F B. F C. F D. and F E. remembering (as
you are taught in Chap. 23.) always to draw those lines proceeding from all
the degrees under 60. downwards or toward you from the point F. and those
above 60. upwards from the point F. Then note, that by drawing out the line F
B. you have intersected the line A B. (formerly drawn) in the point B. on
which point now place your Protractor as before, and find in your Book the
second degree unmarked in the margent (for the first A B. is already done, and
likewise all those which are marked) which is 88 ^ against which, on your
Protractor make a prick, and thereby, and by the point B. draw the line B C.
till it intersect the line F C. in C. then place your Protractor on the point
C. as before, and find in your book the next degree unmarked, which is 74 ^
and against that degree on your Protractor make a prick, whereby, and by the
point C. draw out at length the line C D. to cut the line F D. in D. and in
like manner proceed with the rest; so shall you include the Figure A B C D E.
like unto the measured Field.

Where note, that now the points in the margent serve you to purpose, at an
instant distinguishing those degrees taken at each angle toward the point F.
from the others unmarked, representing those of the Perimeter.

This kind of work well handled, is very exact and artificial.

CHAP. XXXV. To take the Plot of any Field at diverse stations, measuring only
the stacionary distances.
diagram

SVppose this irregular Figure to represent a Field, whose plot is to be taken.
First, cause marks to be placed in every Angle thereof, and then (remembering
those cautions and considerations in this behalf delivered in Chap. 31.) make
choice of your first station, which let be at N. where planting your
Instrument, direct your sight to as many Angles severally as lies there within
your view, as to A.B.C. and D. and take observation of the several degrees
there cut, and then (before you remove your Instrument) make choice of your
second station, from whence you may not only see all those former angles, but
as many more as possibly you may, which let be at O. then directing your sight
to O. observe the degree there cut, and taking up your Instrument, leave there
a mark, and measure the distance from thence to O. where again plant your
Instrument as before at N. and then directing your sight to those former Angles
A. B. C. and D. note severally what degrees are cut, and you have finished for
those Angles. Now consider what other Angles you can here epsy as those at E.
M. L. and K. and thither likewise direct your sight severally, and make your
several observations as before, which done (your Instrument remaining) make
choice of your third station, (from whence you may not only see those Angles
at E. M. L. and K. but as many other unfinished Angles as you may) which let be
at P. then directing your sight to P. observe your degree thither, leave a
mark at O. take up your Instrument, and measure from O. to P. where again
plant your Instrument, and make your observations of those former Angles E. M.
L. and K. so have you thus far wrought. And now again considering what other
Angles you can here epsy, you shall find within your view F. G. H. and I.
being all the residue unfinished; wherefore here also make your several
observations of these last Angles, and choice of your last station, as at Q.
whither directing your sight, and making observation, take up your Instrument,
and with a mark at P. measure the distance to Q. where lastly plant your
Instrument, and making your observations of those last several Angles at F. G.
H. and I. as before; your Field-worke is finished. And by the directions of the
18. and 30. Chapters, you may protract the same accordingly.

CHAP. XXXVI. To take the Plot of a Forest, or any spacious Common or Waste,
of whatsoever quantity, by the Plain Table, on one sheet of paper without
altering thereof.
diagram

SVppose A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. to be some large irregular ground, and it
is required to plot the same. First, a sheet of paper being placed on your
Plain Table after the usual manner, Take a point at all adventure about the
middle thereof as at Q. in the Diagram, and thereon describe four concentricke
Circles of convenient distance, the uttermost extending near the breadth of the
Table, whereby you shall produce three several circular spaces, which are thus
to be employed; In the uttermost, express the several lengthes of all such
lines, which in passing forward in your work shall be found declining or
extending outward, as the lines D E. G H. and I A. which lines always issue
from an Angle greater then a Semicircle, the inclination whereof causes the
declination of the line: the second which is the middlemost space, let serve
for the number of each line; and in the third and innermost space, express the
several lengthes of all such lines, as in passing forwards shall be found
inclining or extending inwards, as all the other lines in the figure not
formerly mentioned.

And these thus understood, proceed forwards in this manner. Plant your
Instrument after the usual order in the Angle, where you purpose to begin,
which let be A. and let the Center Q. on your Table, always in your whole
work represent your place of standing, then lay your Ruler on the Center Q.
and turning it about, thereon direct your sight to I. and by the edge of the
Ruler, draw the line Q. K. (which shall be your enclosing line) extending it to
the uttermost Circle, and in the middle space, on that line (which is to bear
no number) place the Ciphero. then keeping still the Center point Q. turn
about your Ruler, and direct your sight to B. and by the edge of your Ruler
draw the line Q N. and in the middle space on that line express the Figure 1.
the number of the first line you go on, so have you on the Table the Angle K Q
N. equal to the Angle I A B. in the field, then take up your Instrument, and
measure the line A B.29 0^ 2 1 ^ which length express on your first line Q N.
and for as much as the line is inclining, place the same in the innermost
space, as in the Diagram; then place your Instrument precisely at B. and turn
it about on the staff (your Ruler lying on your first line Q N. till you find
the same line to lie parallel with the line A B. of the Field, having Q.
toward you, and N. toward the Angle A. (for the Center Q. in every Angle must
represent the point of the same Angle) then your Table there fixed, direct your
sight to C. and draw your line which shall be the line Q R. and express
thereon in the middle space the figure 2. for the second line, so have you also
the Angle N Q R. on the Table, equal to the second Angle A B C. in the Field:
then take up your Instrument, and measure the line B C. 12 0^ 5 1^ which place
on the second line Q R. in the innermost space, and planting your Instrument at
C. direct your last line Q R. toward B. as you did, the first toward A. and
then take the quantity of this Angle, as before, and you shall have the Angle
R Q L. on your Table, equal to B C D. in the Field. And thus proceed from
angle to angle, making always the last side of the last Angle to be the first
of the next, with all their points concurring in the Center Q. and measuring
and expressing the several lengthes of each line, as before; you shall obtain
the quantity of every Angle, and the length of every line throughout the whole
work: whereby you may speedily protract and lay down the same, as is taught
in the next.

But in the mean space it is to be noted, that if in your former work it
happen at any time, that one line fall directly on any other, formerly drawn on
your Table (as in the former Diagram, the seventh line Q R. falls on the
second line formerly drawn) then in such case express the number of the same
last line in the middle space, where the first is numbered, with a stroke
between them; but place the numbers, expressing the length of the same last
line, without the uttermost Circle, if it be declining (as in the former
example 22 0^ 2 1^) and within the innermost, if it be inclining.

This kind of mensuration of spacious works with the Plain Table (which
likewise may be wrought with any other Instrument according to Chapter 15.) is
wonderful necessary both for speed and exactness, if artificially handled:
but if it be required to have notice taken of the several lands and grounds
abutting and confining hereon, you must then have provided a Field-booke for
that purpose.

CHAP. XXXVII. To protract and lay down any observations taken, according to
the work of the last Chapter.
Having before you the paper of your Field-worke as you wrought on the Table:
If you imagine that one sheet of paper will not serve the turn, you may with
mouth-glue, lay as many together as you please; and then (considering which way
your work will extend) draw a right line accordingly on your paper, whereon,
with your Scale and Compass, lay down the length of your first line Q N. 29 0^
2 1 ^ as the line A B. in the Diagram of the former Chapter, and then on the
end B. of that line, by PROB. 8.2. protract an Angle, equal to the Angle N Q
R. as the Angle A B. C. and on the side B C. of that Angle, place by your Scale
the length of your second line R Q. 12 0^ 5 1^ from B. to C. and on the point
C. where your last length ended, protract another Angle, equal to the Angle R
Q L. your third Angle taken, as the Angle B C D. and on the side C D. extended,
place the length of your third line L Q. 14 0^ 9 1^ from C. to D. And so
proceed from Angle to Angle, protracting your Angles equal (and in order by
the number of lines) to those answerable in your concentricke Circles, and
laying down duly by your Scale on each line, the length thereunto belonging,
you shall produce the Figure A B C D E F G H I. like unto the measured
quantity.

And having thus finished; if you doubt or make question, whether you have
wrought exactly or not, and desire to be resolved therein, make approbation
thus. Collect the quantity of all your Angles in your whole work, and adding
them together, note the total thereof; which in this former work is 1260.
then multiply 180. (the number of degrees in a Semicircle) by a number less by
2. then the number of Angles in your work, If your degrees be those of 120. as
observed by the Peractor, or Circu^ferentor, then in stead of 180. you must
take 60.
which here is 7. (for the number of Angles is 9. as appears by the line O Q.
which shows the number of the last line, and consequently of the Angles) and
if the product of that multiplication agree with the former total; then by
THEOR. 74.1. you have done rightly, otherwise not; as the Product of 180. by 7.
is 1260. agreeing with your first number; and therefore may you confidently
affirm to have wrought exactly, which rule is general for all other plottes,
and superficial figures whatsoever.

Thus hitherto have we dealt in the plotting and dimension of seueralls; and
that by such several, exact and artificial ways and means, as may most
sufficiently serve as well for the absolute performance thereof, as (if well
understood and practiced) of many other excellent conclusions. But were you to
survey and plot great quantities, and many seuerals together as a whole
Lordship or Manor, or to deal in mensuration of impassible wood-grounds,
wherein you are debarred from crossing over or working within the same; I
cannot advise you therein to the use of these former Precepts, (though
otherwise to excellent purpose) but rather to use and observe the means and
courses prescribed and taught in the next following Chapter, which of all other
is the most general, absolute and exact, for the mensuration of all manner
superficial Figures, of what form, quantity, or number soever; and therefore
to be observed with good respect.

CHAP. XXXVIII. To take the plot of a Lordship or Manor, consisting of diverse
seuerals, of what nature or kind soever, whether Wood grounds or other.
THe precepts and instructions taught, and delivered in the 10. Chapter of this
book, concerning the description and use of a necessary Field-booke, might
well serve with diligent observation for the performance of this work: But
seeing that there (according to the proposed matter) my chief endeavors tended
rather to the explanation thereof, then to the form and order of mensuration,
we will here make use of the Figure there expressed; and by inserting certain
necessary observations there omitted (as needless to that purpose) refer
you for a full satisfaction, to the consideration and due observation of those,
and these conjoined. Wherefore suppose that the figure or Diagram there
expressed, were a Manor, or part of a Manor to be measured and plotted.
First, write your Title, as there is mentioned then planting your Instrument in
A. direct your sight to B. and having observed the degree there cut, take up
your Instrument, and measure to B. entering your degree and length into your
book, then plant not your Instrument at B. but only measure from thence to C.
and there place your Instrument, and direct ypur sight backwards to B.
observing your degree; but with this special regard, that in taking your back
sights, you always reckon the degree cut by one and the same end of the Index,
as you reckon on, when you direct your sight forwards; or otherwise you take
the opposite degree to that you should, which will much trouble you in
protraction: then here consider, that you are to leave the bounder, which you
went against from A. where you began, to this place, and therefore draw a single
line, and as you are there taught, write the bounder past, as in the example of
your book; then direct your sight to D. and observing your degree, measure
thither, which having entered, make there another single line, for that here you
leave that bounder also, which let be expressed; then measure from D. to E. and
there plant your Instrument, and as before direct your sight backewards to D.
and observe the degree with the former caution, which done, turn your sight to
F. and having your degree, measure from E. to F. and likewise from F. to G.
expressing in your Book those lengthes severally, then plant your Instrument
at G. and taking your degree from thence backwards to F. as before, here strike
a single line, and write your third bounder, then take your degree to H. and
measure thither, where also (that being your last Angle) you must plant your
Instrument, and work as before to A. where you began, and then strike a double
line, signifying you have finished that Field. And in like manner proceed with
all the rest from one Close to another, till you have finished the whole work,
as you are most plainly directed in the 10. Chapter, remembering always to
measure every line; and to place your Instrument at each other Angle, taking
your backe-sights to that very point or mark, whereunto you directed your
sight last before. So shall you most exactly, and with great expedition
perform your desire. And your work is to be protracted as is taught in the
next.

CHAP. XXXIX. To protract and lay down a Plot of many seuerals, of what
quantity or number soever.
ACcording to the quantity of your plot, or the largeness you suppose it will
be of, glue papers together; but if very large, lay first together but 4. or 8.
sheets only, and rule them all over with parallel lines, representing
Meridians of such convenient distance, as they exceed not the breadth of your
Protractors Scale. Then laying your Field-booke before you, suppose you are to
protract the observations mentioned in the tenth Chapter, and considering
toward what point of the Compass your work will most incline or extend,
begin your protraction accordingly; as in that example; it inclines toward
the East, and North-east from the place of beginning; wherefore begin your
protraction toward the Southwest part of your plot; and there make a point,
whereon place the Center of your Protractor (with the Semicircle either upwards
or downwards, as you best fancy) and holding your protracting pin in that
point, move about your Protractor thereon, till you find one and the same
parallel division on either end of your Protractors Scale, to lie either
directly upon any one parallel line, or equidistantly above or beneath the
same; and there, with your left hand keep firm your Protractor, whilst you
find in your Field-booke the first degree 65. against which, on the limb of
your Protractor place the point of your protracting pin, and there keep it,
bringing the edge of your Protractors Scale thereunto with the first division
of the Scale on your chosen point, and then draw a line by the edge of your
Scale of your first length in the book 20 0^ 2 1^ as the line A B. But with
this respect, that (as before is taught) the lines belonging to every degree
under 60. be drawn from the Center point downwards, or inclining toward
you, and the lines belonging to every degree above 60. (as the last line A B.)
be drawn from the same point upwards, or reclining from you: Then place your
Protractor on the point B. (being the end of your last line) in all respects as
before at A. and finding your next degree and length in your book to be 68.
16 0^ 6 1^ against 68 degrees on your Protractor, place the point of your
protracting pin, and applying the Scale of your Protractor thereunto, with
the beginning of the divisions thereof on the point B. draw your line of the
length 16 0^ 6 1^ as B C. and here (considering you are to leave the bounder
you went against) make a small stroke or mark at C. with your pen, and
finding in your Book, at the end of your last length the figure (1) place that
at C. with black lead (the use whereof shall partly appear) then place your
Protractor on the point C. (the end of your last line) as before, and find your
next degree and length 36 ^ 22 0^ 5 1^ and against that degree on your
Protractor, place the point of your protracting pin, and bringing the edge of
your Protractor thereunto as before, from the point C. draw the line C D. of
the length 22 0^ 5 1^ which serving to a degree under 60. is to be drawn from
the point C. downwards as before. And so proceed with your several degrees
and lines, in order as you find them in your book, till you come to the point
A. where you first began, and having wrought truly, you shall there justly
enclose your first several. Then look in your Book where you are to begin
your next enclosure; and you shall be thereby directed to begin from No. (1.)
Wherefore seek in your last protraction where you placed that number, which
you shall find at C. and there you are to begin your second parcel;
wherewith, and with the rest proceed in all respects as with the first. Small
practice with good observation (whereunto I will leave you) is much more
available then many words. And therefore will I cease to spend further time
herein.

CHAP. XL. The order and means of measuring and taking the several and
particular quantities in common fields, with a brief instruction concerning
the use of my Chain.
THe whole plot and quantity of common fields are to be taken and plotted as
they lie among other the adjacent grounds, according to the directions of the
38. Chapter, without regard of the several and particular quantities therein
contained; which afterward are to be had and obtained after this manner.

Let a Book be purposely provided, which call your Common-Field-Booke to be
ruled as in the example, containing eight Collums. The first toward the The
West field art. Broad furlong.
Tenants names. Breadth. Length. Quantity 0 1 2 0 1 2 a. r. p. (1) Io. Woods
from the Church lane east wards free. 1 3 2 16 2 -- 0-0-21 (2) Will. Brown by
Copy. 6 8 2 16 2 -- 0-2-30- (3) Fra. Jacksons for 3. lives. 8 4 1 14 2 3 0-3-0
(4) Tho. Coakes for years. 7 5 2 15 4 2 0-2-36 (5) ^il. Jones at will. 5 6 3
15 4 2 0 2-7 left hand, serving for the Tena^ts names and the tenure whereby
they hold the same lands; the next three for the breadth of every parcel
entitled with these Signs, or Characters, 0.1.2. signifiing Unites, Primes
and Seconds, as is taught in the 6. Chapter of this Book; the next three for
the length with the like Title; and the eighth or last toward the right hand,
for the content of each several parcel, the length and breadth being
multiplied together. In this work there is no use of any other Instrument,
then your chain only: And beginning with any one furlong or went, express
first in your book the name of the field, and then of the same your first
furlong, and so the rest of the Title, as in the example, then in the first
Collum write the Tenants name, whose land you first measure, and withal from
what place you begin, and on what point of the compass you pass from thence,
whereby you shall be able afterward (observing the same course in the beginning
of every furlong) to abut and bound every parcel if need require, and likewise
in the same first collum, express by what tenure it is held, the^ consider how
the whole furlong lies if al of one length, then need you take the length but
once for all, although there were twenty Tenants lands in the same; but if
irregularly, as in some places shorter, and others longer; then at every second
or third breadth, (or oftener if occasion require) take the length thereof, and
express the same under your title of length, as for the several bredthes, you
may only cross over the whole furlong about the middle thereof, taking every
man's breadth, and entering the same as you pass, unless you find extraordinary
difference between the bredthes at either end; if so, then measure the breadth
of both ends, adding those two bredthes together, whereof take half for your
breadth, and enter it in your book, or you may enter both bredthes, and take
half thereof when you cast up the contents. And thus proceed from one furlong
to another, till you have finished the whole field. And when you have done (or
at any time after at your pleasure) by multiplying those lengthes and bredthes
together (which is most speedily and exactly performed, as hereafter follows
according to the order of decimall multiplication) you have your several
contents to be expressed in the last Collum. And lastly, number all the
several parcels in the whole book by Figures in the margent, from 1. forwards
as in the example, which will serve you to good purpose, in the collecting of
every man's parcels together, as shall be hereafter declared.

And here shall you find (and in all other works of this nature) most excellent
use of my decimall chain described in the sixth chapter of this book.

But lest you should be absolutely ignorant of the manner and order of casting
up of the several contents, according to the lengthes and bredths so taken and
observed as before, and consequently the chain with the several parts and
fractions thereof may stand you in little stead, I will here briefly touch the
order thereof, in two examples thus.

Suppose your length taken to be 16 0^ 2 1^ and your breadth 1 0^ 3 1^ 2 2^
being those first specified in the former example. First, let your numbers be
placed in all respects, as if they were whole numbers to be multiplied the one
by the other thus; but over every Fraction of your multiplicand, place a prick
or point, being in this example only one, as that over the figure diagram 2.
and at the end of your multiplier, place as many pricks or points as there are
Fractions in that number, being in this example two, then multiply the one
number by the other after the usual manner, as if they were whole numbers, and
your work will stand thus; The Product of your multiplication being 21384. and
considering there are belonging to diagram your two first numbers three
pricks, representing so many fractions, you are therefore to cut off from the
Product of your multiplication, with a stroke, three Figures toward your right
hand, which shall be the Numerator of a Fraction, whose denominater is so many
Ciphars, with an Unite placed before them, and the other two figures toward
your left hand are the Intigers of your multiplication: So shall the Product
thereof (being the content sought for) be 21. Perches, and 384/1000^ parts of a
Perch, which is somewhat more then ^ and your work stands thus. But to
express the quantity of these fractions, which you find in the Product of
your diagram multiplication, were needless niceness, in business of this
nature; yet having wrought your multiplication, if you find your fraction to
be near an unite, increase your entire number by an Unite, and let pass the
Fraction as not to be regarded.

Again for your better practice, let your measured length be 15 0^ 4 1^ 2 2^
and your breadth 7 0^5 1^2 2^ being the fourth sort expressed in your former
example in the beginning of this Chapter. Of which length and breadth you desire
the diagram content by multiplication: first, as before, place your numbers, as
if they were intigers to be multiplied, the one by the other thus, as in this
example: The product whereof is 1159584. and considering there are four points
or pricks belonging to the two first numbers, that is, to either of them two,
signifying so many fractions; you are therefore to cut off four Figures from
the Product toward the right hand, which is the numerator of your fraction as
before, and those three Figures toward your left hand are so many Perches: so
shall the Product of your multiplication (being the content sought for) be
115. Perches, and 9524/10000^ parts of a Perch, which being very near an
Unite, I therefore add an Unite to the former number of Perches, which makes
116. Perches; that is, by reduction 2. roodes. and 36. Perches.

And after this manner (with due observation) may you most easily and aptly
apply this chain, and the several parts and fractions thereof to all the
ordinary rules of Arithmetike, as Addition, Subtraction, Multiplication, and
Division, working any dimension thereby, as if they were Intigers, or whole
numbers.

And thus much for a taste only of the necessary and infinite use of this
Chain thus divided.

All this time hitherto in our former mensurations have we walked in plain
and even leuelles, wherein the Plain Table artificially handled, (whereof many
using it, are to seek) is an excellent Instrument. But suppose we are now
traveling into Wales, or any other place where are mountainous and uneven
grounds; then must we of necessity, either leave that Instrument behind us,
or use those means, or the like expressed in the description thereof, Chap. 3.
Unless we have insight in that excellent art, which many plain plain
Tablemen have (wanting those means) at an instant to convert the highest
mountains to plain and leuel grounds, pressing them down, and enforcing them
on a Plain sheet of paper to lie level with the rest; which they easily
perform by only thrusting out their bordering grounds from their due and
natural place, where, ab initio they have remained.

Yet let us consider of some better means for the performance thereof, which
shall be hereafter taught.

CHAP. XLI. To reduce Hipothenusall to Horizontall lines by the Peractor.
SVppose diagram A B C D. be a hill, or mountain to be protracted and laid
down in your plotte amongst your other grounds: It is apparent by the Figure,
that the hipothenusall lines A B. and B C. cannot be laid down exactly in a
right line between the other grounds which bounder on this hill at the points
A. and C. Wherefore we are to find the true level and horizontall distance
between A. and C. which is a right line, extending overthwart the ground
whereon the hill stands. Which to perform, work thus. Plant your Instrument
at A. the foot of the hill precisely horizontall, by help of your plummet
(wherein great care must be had) then cause a mark to be placed on the top of
the hill at B. to be of equal height from the ground, with the Center of your
Quadrant, whereunto direct your sight, moving the Quadrant up and down, till
you perfectly decerne the same, where letting it stand, measure the
Hipothenusall line A B. which suppose to be 6/30^ then seek 30. on the Index
of your quadrant, and note what line issuing from the left side C D. of the
Quadrant is cut by the same division or number of 30. on the edge of the Index,
which you shall find to be 18. and that number is to be observed, and kept for
the horizontall line A D. to be protracted and laid down in stead of the
hipothenusall A B. And if the same hill from B. continue not plain and
horizontall, but descends again on the other side, as this from B to C. then
must that hipothenusall line B C. be likewise taken, by planting your
Instrument at B. and causing a mark to be placed at C. as before, and then
direct your sight to the mark, and measure the hipothenusall line B C. which
suppose to be 40 0^ then note as before what line cutteth 40 on the Index, as
32. and take that for your horizontall line C D. which added to the former 18.
makes 50 0^ for the whole line A C. which is to be protracted and laid down
for the two lines A B. and B C.

And if at any time it happens (as often it may) that the measured distance of
the hipothenusall line exceeds the greatest number on the Index: In such case
take half, or a third part of the measured distance, and finding that number
on the Index, note what line from the left side of the quadrant intersecteth
therewith on the edge of the Index, and the double or triple of the number of
that line, is your horizontall line sought for.

CHAP. XLII. To reduce hipothenusall to horizontall lines by the
Circumferentor, or by the Plain Table, with use of those means expressed in
the description thereof.
PLant your Instrument as before, at the foot of the hill, and let a mark be
placed in the top thereof, in manner as is directed in the last, then
directing your sight to that mark, move the vane up and down on the longer
sight, till through the small hole thereof, and by the pinnes head in the
shorter sight, you epsy the mark, then note among the hipothenusall
divisions, what is then cut by the edge of the Vane, which suppose to be 7.
signifying (as is expressed in the description, Chap. 3) 107. Then measuring
the hipothenusall line, which suppose to be 40. by the rule of proportion,
reason thus. If 107. the hipothenusall in the Instrument, yield 100. the side
of the square thereby proiected, what 40. the hipothenusall measured and by
increasing 100. by 40. and parting the Product by 107. your answer will be 37.
and very near ^ the length of your horizontall line sought for. And the same
course in all respects which you have here held in this Angle of ascension,
the like is to be observed in all works whatsoever for Angles of descention.

Or otherwise it may be performed thus.

BY any Instrument take the quantity of the Angle, either ascending or
discending as before taught, and then by the 11. or 12. Chapter protract the
same Angle, and on the one side, from the point thereof, lay down the measured
length of your hipothenusall line, and from the point where those measures end,
by PROB. 5.2. let fall a perpendicular on the other side of the Angle; and the
Segment of that other side, between the intersection of the perpendicular, and
the point of the Angle shall be your horizontall line required.

And thus having showed the means for the reducing of these lines; let us now
consider of the application and use thereof; which for our present purpose is
to find and express the true content of irregular and uneven grounds, and
withal notwithstanding their irregularitie, in protraction to plot and lay
them down in such sort, as neither in themselves they exceed the bounds of
their own Perimeter (but may truly enclose though expressed in Plano) nor
displace or thrust out of order the grounds adjacent. And seeing it is
impossible, and against the rules of art and nature, precisely to express and
limit a solid, or body within the bounds or terms of one visuall superficies,
which is comprised and composed of many: It is therefore not to be expected,
we should truly express the irregular capacity of mountainous and uneven
grounds in a plain sheet of paper: for if the plot be exact and answerable
to the rest; the superficial content must needs be wanting, or if the true
content of lines and angles be expressed, the plot of necessity must be
erroneous: yet notwithstanding we are now to resolve of some direct and
immediate course, as well for the obtaining of the true superficial content, as
for the orderly expressing and laying down of such disordered Figures, which
shall be amply and plainly taught and delivered in the next following Chapter.

CHAP. XLIII. The best and exactest means for the dimension and protraction of
mountainous and uneven grounds, and the obtaining of their true Contents by the
Plain Table.
SVppose A B C D E F G. be a mountainous and vnleuelled ground to be measured
and plotted: First, plant your Instrument at A. and directing your sight to B.
and measuring the line A B. draw the same by the edge of your Ruler, and after
the usual manner finding the line Horizontall, place thereon your measured
length found, from A. to B. 10 0 8 1. then place your Instrument at B. where
finding an ascent to C. direct your sight to a mark there placed as is taught
in Chapter 40. and having drawn your line at length toward diagram C. as if
it were level ground, measure the Hypothenusal distance from B. to C. 16 0^ 2
1^ ^ but withal find out the horizontall distance as before is taught 15 0^ 6
1^ of which length lay down your line B C. but express thereon in figures your
measured Hypothenusall length 16 0^ 2 1^ so have you the horizontall truly as
it is laid down and your hypothenusal length, for the obtaining of the true
content expressed thereon; then plant your Instrument at C. and finding from
thence a descent to the next angle D. direct your sight thither to a mark
there placed as before, and drawing your line at length, measure the
Hypothenusall distance, which found to be 30 0^ 6 1^ express it on the line
drawn; but searching out the horizontal distance 21 0^ 4 1^ make your line C
D. of that length, and in like sort should you proceed if there were diverse
other ascending and descending lines: but seeing all the rest in this figure
are horizontall and level lines, proceed with your work in all respects as
is taught in Chap. 38. So shall you exactly enclose with your other grounds
this irregular figure.

But yet are we further to consider, that notwithstanding we have observed the
difference between the Hypothenusall and horizontall lines happening in the
Perimeter of this figure, whereby we are able to place the same in his due
situation, yet are there within the compass of this Perimeter many hills and
dales whereof we have hitherto taken no notice, saving only in co^passing the^
about: And if we should, with these lines already had, cast up the superficial
content after the usual manner, we should come far short of the true quantity
thereof; which to redress, work thus. Before you take your work from the
table, reduce the same into the largest Trapezium you may, by drawing the lines
A M. M H. H K. and K A. as in the former Diagram, then cross the Trapezium
with the diagonall line A H. and thereon let fall the Perpendiculars M N. and K
L. then by direction of your Instrument or otherwise let those lines be exactly
measured with the chain over Hills and Dales in a right extention* which by
reason of the unevenness of the ground you shall find to co^taine much more in
length then your lines already laid down; as the line A* H. in the plot
containing but 51 0^ 4 1^ by measure is found to be 60 0^ 2 1^ also M N in the
plot but 22 0^ 3 1^ by measure 24 0^ 4 1^ and L K in the plot but 24 0^8 1^ by
measure 28 0^2 1^ which several lengths so found by measure express in
figures severally on the lines in the plot whereunto they properly belong; and
by those lengths so expressed cast up (after the usual manner) the
superficial content of the Trapezium, whose true quantity you shall find to
be 9. Acres, 3. Roodes and 23. Perches. But let the same be cast up according
to those lines protracted it will contain thereby but 7. Acres, 2. Roodes, and
10. Perches. Whereby is manifest the usual errors committed by omission of
these means. Then cast up the several contents of those small triangles about
the Perimeter, adding those left out, and abating those taken in by the
Trapezium, and your work is finished.

Yet were it necessary to distinguish these from the rest in your plot,
shaddowing them off with Hills, etc. and likewise to express therein the true
content, with some note of instruction concerning the same, for that otherwise
a stranger not herewith acquainted, applying your Scale to the plot, may
causelessely tax you of errors committed.

And here note that notwithstanding I have directed this work to be wrought
with the plain Table; (by reason that these former courses and observations
are more usually omitted in the use of that Instrument then any other) yet I
doubt not but he who can perform the same by that, (with due observation of
what has been formerly delivered) will be able to effect the same by any
other Instrument. For your observations being had and taken in the field, and
then laid down accordingly; you shall thereby afterward measure your
Diagonall and perpendicular lines in the field; as before is directed.

CHAP. XLIIII. To divide a Common of pasture, or a common field into any parts
required.
SVppose A B C D E F G H be a stinted pasture, or a common field in the use
and occupation of three men, as A. B and C. and let it be required to divide
the same between them proportionally, either according to their several
stints (being a stinted pasture) or according to their several quantities,
being an arrable field in common: First measure and plot the whole quantity,
and as is taught in the second part of the second Book, find the superficial
content thereof which suppose to be 4268. Perches, or by reduction 26. acres
2. roodes 28. perches, then seek the content of the high ways A E and H E
passing through the same, which let be 341. perches to be deducted out of the
whole quantity: and there rests 3927. Perches, which to divide according to
their several portions, reason thus with the rule of proportion. If all the
whole number of beast-gates of A. B and C. together yield the whole quantity
3927. what the number of those belonging to A. and the answer will be his
part: and working thus severally for their three several parts suppose them
thus, to A. 924. Perches, to B. 1798. and to C. 1205. Then as diagram is taught
by the ten last Problemes of the second Book, divide your plot accordingly, by
the lines I M. and K L. laying every man's part in such place as they shall
mutually agree: which being performed on your plot, you are then to effect the
like on the ground, wherein you are only to lay out the lines I M. and K L. in
their due places, which is thus to be performed. Find out by your Scale the
distance on the plot between the next angle, and the beginning of your first
line as G M 3 0^6 1^ then find also the angle G. in the field, and with your
chain measure out that length from G. on the line G F. to end in M. where
place your instrument, and finding by your Protractor on what degree the line M
I. passes on the plot, on the same degree of your Instrument place the Index:
and looking through your sights, cause dooles and marks to be made and placed
in a rig^t line from M. to I. and for the more exactness, and your better
satisfactio, note in your plot also what angle is next unto the end I. of the
line M I. as A. from whence take your distance by the Scale on your plot to I
18 0^ 8 1^ and finding the Angle A. in the field, from thence measure by your
chain that length 18 0^ 8 1^ on the line A B. which if you find to end in I.
is an infailable assurance you have truly wrought; if not, reform it by
reducing the end I. of your line M I. to that place. And by the like means,
you are to lay out the line K L. and more, if more required. And after this
sort shall you lay out and divide any common or waste whatsoever; into what
parts soever the same is required, to be divided, and laid out.

CHAP. XLV. To know the hour of the day by the Peractor or Circumferentor with
the Sun.
PLace the Index of your Peractor on the Meridian line of the Planisphere, and
direct the North part of the Instrument toward the Sun, turning it about on
the Staff til the shadow of the third, or shining of the Sun fall directly
through the sight, on the fiduciall edge of the Index or Meridian line: then
observe in the Card the next concentrick circle above the present month, and
note what houre-line (which are those sphericall lines issuing from the center)
intersecteth that concentrick circle, under the North end of the needle; which
point of intersection, lying directly under that end of the needle, shows
directly the hour of the day, expressed at the upper end of that houre-line,
or being short or over, it shows how much the time of the day is short or
over that hour.

And the like is performed by the Circumferentor with turning the North end of
the Instrument toward the Sun, till through the sight, the Sun shines on
the Meridian line; and making your observations as before.

CHAP. XLVI. The ordering of a plot after the protraction thereof.
THe order and course of protraction and laying down of plots according to the
diversity of observations taken, is already in this Book sufficiently
declared; and likewise the means of obtaining the true superficial content of
all sorts of Figures by the Second part of the Second book; (the conclusion of
which part, I would advise you to make use of for your further ease therein.)
Now it rests (the plot being thus protracted and cast up) next to consider
whether it were fitting, to draw it fair of the same Scale and scantling
wherein it is, or first to have it reduced into a lesser form. If the
business be not so large, but that with conueniencie it may be drawn in the
first Scale wherewith it was plotted and cast up, then provide you a piece of
ordinary new linen cloth of a reasonable finenesse, and thereon paste you
clean paper, according to the order of Maps (but those for the most part are
too course) of the largeness of your plot; which being well washed with
Allome water, and dried, fasten your rough plot, slenderly thereon with mouth
glue at each corner thereof; and with a bodkin or pin of brass (which I hold
the best for these purposes) trace out all your lines with a reasonable hand;
for a light hand with discretion will make sufficient impression on your new
plot, whereby you may well discern to draw your lines either with Pen or
pensill as you please; and then express your houses, buildings, woods, rivers,
waters, ways, and all other remarkable things in their due proportion
perspectiuely; not placing your houses and trees every way, whereby here the
tops and there the bottomes shall seem standing upwards, as is usually
accustomed; and then garnish your plot about with some neat border, and within
with Copartments for your Scale and Title; and in some convenient place thereof
describe a Card, showing the situation according to the points of the
Compass; and then let it be neately colored about the several lines, lightly
washed off, and not dawbed all over, as some painting Surueyors use. But above
the rest, forbear much writing in your plots either of names or quantities
(being absurd and gross) but only numbers of reference to your engrossed
book concerning the same, if you make any; if not, then it may serve, as
Chalk on a trencher.

But if it be required to have your first plot reduced into a lesser or
greater form; use the help of the next Chapter.

CHAP. XLVII. To reduce any plot from a greater to a lesser quantity, and the
contrary.
IN the third part of my Second book I have at large declared the manner and
means as well of reducing and translating of all superficial Figures from one
form into another, retaining the same quantity; as one quantity into
another, retaining the same form. But those being of particular figures, are
not so meet or necessary for the Reduction or translation of a plot consisting
of many (being often in use.) Wherefore I will here deliver you a very speedy
and exact means for the performance thereof. According to the proportion
whereunto you would reduce your first plot, lay papers together with
mouth-glue; as if you would reduce it into a fourth part, make your new plot to
be in quantity a fourth part thereof. Then place your new made plot on your
rough plot in such sort, and with such discretion, as the middle of the one may
be about the middle of the other, whereby all the work of the one may be
reduced the better into the other, and there fasten the one to the other
slenderly at the corners with mouth-glue, in such sort, as when occasion
serves, any one of those glued places may be easily taken asunder, and the
paper folded in; then take your reducing ruler mentioned in Chap. 9. and fasten
the same with a needle or blue pin stricken into the table about the middle of
the plots through the center hole of the same rule, in such manner as both the
plots together may be turned about at pleasure upon the table; wherein you
must take great care of renting or tearing out your center point in the plots;
which to prevent, would require to be strengthened with a small piece of a
Card or past-boord, to be glued thereon, underneath the first plot. And being
thus prepared, you shall find good part of the work in your first plot, to
lie without the utter edges of your clean paper, which let be first reduced;
wherein (having resolved into what proportion you will make your Reduction, as
into ^ of the first) work thus; bring the edge of your Ruler to any Angle in
your first plot, and note what number of division on the edge of your Ruler is
there cut, which admit 40. then take half thereof which is 20. and against that
division by the edge of your Ruler make a prick on your clean paper, then
remove your Ruler to the next Angle in your first plot, and note the division
there cut, whereof take likewise the half, and against that half by the edge
of the Ruler make another prick; and between these two pricks draw a line,
which shall represent the line between those two Angles of your first plot;
and so proceed from Angle to Angle, and from Close to Close, till you have
reduced all the work on your old plot, lying without the edges of the new, or
so much as lies without the same toward any one side or corner thereof; and
then vngluing one of your corners or sides, fold in backwards toward your old
plot, that part of your new plot as is wrought; so shall you come to work that
which formerly lay under the same; and thus by folding in, and working one side
after another to the center; whilst the other sides are fastened together with
the old plot, you shall speedily reduce the whole plot into your desired
proportion: For in taking the half of every line in your first plot your new
by THEOR. 49.1. shall be of the old.

And this kind of Reduction hold I the speediest and exactest of all other:
Which by small practice, you shall much better find and understand, then with
many words of Relation.

And after this manner may you make your Reduction, into any other proportion,
or reduce your plot from a lesser to a greater form in any proportion
required; by increasing your second number, proportionally, as in this work
you decreased the same.

CHAP. XLVIII. To reduce any number of Perches given into Acres, and the
contrary.
SVppose 5496. Perches were given to be reduced into Acres. First after the
usual manner (considering that a Statute Acre contains 160. square Perches)
divide the given number by 160. the quotus will be 34. and the remainder 56.
which remainder divided by 40. (the number of Perches in a Roode) quoteth 1.
and the remainder 16. So is the whole Reduction 34. Acres, 1. Roode, 16.
Perches.

Or more briefly thus.

THis rule is much briefer in operation, though not in demonstration then the
former; which is thus. From your given number cut off with a stroke, the first
Figure toward the right hand thus, 54916. then divide the other three Figures
by 4. and your work will diagram stand thus. the 137. being so many Roodes,
and 16. Perches remaining, then divide likewise that 137. by 4 and your work
is finished and will stand thus. Where note that your first remainder with the
Figure cut off, are always the odd Perches; and the last remainder (if any
be) are Roodes.

And if you would reduce these Acres, Roodes, and Perches, into their least
Denomination, as into Perches. First multiply your number of Acres 34. by 160.
the product is 5440. then multiply the number of Roodes 1. by 40. produces 40.
which together with the number of Perches 16. added to 5440. makes 5496. the
first number. And the like of all others.

Here might I now much enlarge this work by showing many other necessary
conclusions fit for a Surueyor to know, as the mensuration of Timber, Boorde,
Glass, Pauements, and the like; also the several ways and means of plotting
of countries and large continents; of carrying of mines and trenches under
ground; of Water-workes, and the conueying of the water from any Fountain to
appointed places of whatsoever possible distance; of the taking and making of
the forms and models of Plot-formes, Forts, Castles, Houses, and the like. But
seeing that not only these, but infinite other Conclusions Geometrical, may
be easily performed and wrought by the former rules and instructions well
understood and practiced; and for that they are without the scope and limits of
Survey, whereunto I chiefly bend the subject of this Book; I will leave them
to your own endeavors, and diligent practice. And having thus performed at
large the Mathematical part of Survey in general; we will next consider of
the Legal; and in the mean space here conclude this Third Book.

The end of the third Book.
THE LEGAL PART OF SVRVEY.
The fourth Book.
THE ARGUMENT THEREOF.
I Would not be mistaken, or have it understood; that J here undertake (as a
Lawyer) to instruct or teach the rules or Jnstitutions of the Law (being out of
mine element) but as a Surueyor, briefly and truly to express and deliver
herein what J hold fit and meet for a Surueyor to know and understand. As
first what a Manor is, and the several parts and members thereof, with the
appendants thereunto: Next, the perquisites, casualties and profits of Court,
and their several natures: Then the diversity of estates, whereby any Lands
or Tenements may be holden, occupied or enjoyed; and the several tenures
depending on those estates; with the Rents and services incident and belonging
to those tenures: Also what reprises, paiments, and deductions may be issuing
out of a Manor, and the considerations thereof to be had: Likewise what
courses are to be observed and taken, before the beginning of a Survey: The
order and manner of keeping those Courts: The entry of the Tenants evidence
and estates; and the orderly manner of engrossing the same: with other brief
and necessary Rules, and Observations tending to those purposes.

CHAP. I. Of a Manor with his several parts, and of the name and nature
thereof: how made and maintained, and how discontinued and destroyed.
AS in my works concerning the Mathematical part of Survey, comprised in the
three former Books, I premise the definitions, principles and grounds thereof:
so in this Legal part I hold it answerable to order, and a good decorum,
(before we abruptly enter on the Survey of a Manor) first to consider what a
Manor is, and the several parts thereof (lest being questioned of our present
employment, we discover our own weakness in undertaking we know not what)
and then to inform our selves of the several natures, qualities and
conditions, of the estates, tenures, and services of land; and of the several
profits, rents, and commodities thereunto incident and appertaining; with such
other meet and necessary observations, as are most fitting for a Survey or to
know and understand, before he assume and take upon him the name, or at least
the office or function to a Surueyor belonging. Of all which in order; and
first of a Manor what it is, and of the parts thereunto belonging.

Manor whence derived.
Concerning the Deriuation or Etymology of the word, I will not stand, whether
it be of Maneo manner to remain in a settled place; or of Mano manare to
proceed or spread abroad out of the bounty of those Princes liberality who
in the beginning bestowed them; or of Manuarius gotten by labor of the hand;
which I hold the best; because there is more skill in getting then keeping; and
with Manerium I will not meddle, seeing (as I take it) Manors were created
before the word was made: But from whencesoeuer derived, A Manor is now that
which has thereunto belonging, What a Manor is. Parts of a Manor.
messuages, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Services and Hereditaments; whereof part
are Demeanes, being those which anciently and time out of mind, the Lord
himself ever used, occupied and manured with the Manor house; the residue are
Free-holds, Farms, and customarie or coppihold tenements; and these have
commonly diverse services besides their rents properly belonging thereunto,
whereof I will hereafter speak.

Parts of a Manor.
There is moreover belonging to a Manor a Court Baron, and to diverse a Court
Leere; which is of more worth and efficacy, and is always granted from the
King, or held by prescription. To these Courts, and consequently to the Manor
is there usually belonging; Fines, issues, amerciaments, heriots, waiues,
straies, excheates, reliefes and other perquisites and profits of Court;
whereof likewise I will further speak.

Appendants to a Manor.
Besides, those there are often appendant and belonging to a Manor (which are
not of necessity to be taken as the proper parts thereof) Wards, Marriages,
aduowsons, patronages, free-gifts or presentations of parsonages, Vicarages,
Chapels, Prebends, etc. also Commons of Pasture, Moors, Marshes, free
Warrens, Customs, Liberties, Franchises, and Privileges; likewise yearly
Rents, suites of Court, tenths and services issuing and reprised out of other
Manors. And of these, a Manor is neither made by them; nor destroyed or
marred for want of them; wherefore they are termed rather appendants then parts
of a Manor.

No present means to make a Manor.
Neither do those parts formerly named, properly of themselves make a Manor:
For should any man at this day alott and appoint out any competent quantity of
Land, and divide the same into demeanes and tenement Lands; in feoffing Tenants
in Fee of some part, and granting others by copy of Court-Roll, and perfecting
the rest which before is said to belong unto a Manor; yet all this will not
make a Manor; for that it is the office of time by long continuance to make
and create the same. Continuance of time may perfect a Manor.


How a manor may be destroyea and dismembered
But a Manor at this day may be dismembered, and utterly destroyed both in name
and nature, by escheating the Free-holds, and Copie-holds; for if of Free-holds
or Copie-holds there are not two at the least, then are there no Suitors, and if
no Suitors, no Court, and consequently no Manor, and then may it be termed a
Seigniorie, which can keep no Court Baron at all.

How one Manor may be divided, and made diverse Manors.
Also it is to be understood, that one Manor may be divided into diverse
Manors; whereof we have diverse examples at this day; as where a Manor
descends to co-heires, and they make division and partition thereof;
allotting to every of them demeanes and services; whereby every of them has a
several Manor, and may keep several Courts Baron thereon, as if anciently
entire.

How diverse Manors may be reduced into one Manor.
And in like manner two distinct and several Manors may be conjoined and made
one entire Manor, if formerly the one held of the other; and that Manor so
holding of the other do escheate; but otherwise not. And thus much concerning
the name, nature, and parts of a Manor.

CHAP. II. Of Perquisites Casualties and profits of Court, and their several
natures.
IN the former Chapter I declare, that (among other things) there is belonging
to a Manor a Court Baron at the least, and to some a Leete or Law-day,
commonly called the view of Frank pledge: Now herein will I show what
perquisites, casualties, and profits are incident and belonging to those
Courts; wherein I would have it understood, that it is not of necessity, that
all these hereafter mentioned, must be in every Manor, but that they may be in
any. And first of Fines.

Fines of Land.
Fines of post mortem.
FInes of lands are of diverse kinds; As first, if a man holding to him and his
heirs, or otherwise certain Lands and Tenements, by Copy of Court Roll,
according to the custom of the Manor dye, his heir upon his admittance by
the Lord, shall pay a Fine for such his admittance: And these Fines are of two
sorts, either certain, or arbitrable; if certain, as one or two years rent,
or the like; there is then no other question to be made, but the Lord by his
Steward is to admit him, and he to pay such certain Fine accordingly; if
uncertain or arbitrable, then is the Tenant to undergo what Fine the Lord
shall in reason impose or require; and these are called Fines of post mortem.

Fines of alienation.
Also a Tenant by Copy of Court Roll, has not power to Alien or sell his
estate or interest unto any other man, without he surrender the same into the
Lords hands to the use of him unto whom he shall so sell the same; for which
Alienation the Lord is also to receive a Fine, which in some Manors are
likewise certain, and in others arbitrable, but being arbitrable, they are
usually rated at a lower and more reasonable value then those after death, and
these are commonly called Fines of Alienation.

Likewise if a customarie Tenant let or set his lands unto another for any
term of years, not warranted by the custom, he is first to obtain license
of his Lord in this behalf; and is to pay a Fine in respect thereof.

And moreover if the Lord of a Manor grant a Lease of any lands unto a Tenant
for any number of years or for life or lives; and besides his annual Rent,
make composition for a Fine to be in hand paid; this is also a Fine of Lands.

Also in some places, the Custom is, that if a customarie Tenant alien and
make surrender of his whole estate he shall pay and yield unto the Lord the
best beast he has, Asarewell paid.
or a certain piece of money, in name of a Farewell. And in some places as
well Freeholders, as customary Tenants on every alienation shall pay a
certain sum of money for a Fine in name of Offare, Offare and onfare
and onsare, and all these and the like are Fines of Land.

Americiaments.
A Merciaments are also perquisites of Court, whereof there are diverse sorts;
which in general are such Fines, penalties, and amerciaments as by the homage
or afferers of the Court Leete, or otherwise are imposed on such Tenants as are
found offenders within the Manor; As if the Free suitors, Copie-holders, or
other Tenants, make default or be absent from the Lords Court, they are
therefore amerced. Wherein is to be noted, that many Free-sutors make
composition, Common Finet quid.
and are at their Fine certain in respect of their service of suite of Court;
and these are called common Fines.

Heriots.
AN Heriot is properly the best beast which any heriotable Tenantis possessed
of at the time of his death, whether it be Horse, Ox, Cow or the like; for
which in many places a sum of money is paid by ancient composition, and in
some places for default of live Cattle (or the best beast not being to the
Lords mind) it is in his choice to take the best of any other goods,
implement, or commodity the Tenant has at the time of his decease.

Of these Heriots there are two sorts, Service and Custom: Heriot Service.
Heriot service is commonly mentioned and expressed in the Tenants grant: and
therefore the Land answerable for satisfaction thereof; Heriot Custom.
and Heriot custom is that which time out of mind has been ever paid upon
and after the death of any Tenant dying seized of any such heriotable Lands:
And these Heriots of either kind, are by the homage of every Court to be
presented as they fall due; and seized by the Lords Bay liffe accordingly.

And it is to be understood, One Tenant may be chargeable with diverse Heriots.
that if a Tenant dies seized of diverse tenements or lands, which have been
anciently charged with diverse Heriots; the Lord at the time of the death of
such Tenant shall receive so many several Heriots, as those lands at any time
then-to fore were anciently charged or chargeable to yield.

Heriotable lands divided, are severally chargeable.
And moreover, if any heriotable Tenement shall be severed and divided into
diverse parts, amongst several Tenants; the Lord shall have of every such Tenant
particularly a several Heriot, for and in respect of those several heriotable
parcels; which the Lord may seize and take, Lib. Ass. 27.24.
wheresoever he shall find the best for his best advantage.

Reliefes.
REliefes are like wise accounted amongst perquisites of Court: but seeing it
is a special service tide to the tenure of Lands; I will here omit to speak
thereof; referring you for your satisfaction therein to the Title of Ward,
Marriage and Relief, in the 4. Chap. following.

Escheates.
Escbcates what they are.
THese are likewise perquisites of Court; and are such as if a Freeholder or
Copie-holder of inheritance, commit any manner of Felony, and be thereof
attainted; his Lands are escheated and forfeited to the Lord of the Manor of
whom they are holden; but the Lord shall not immediately enter thereinto; for
the King is first to have annum diem and vastum; after which time expired, it
then remains to the Lord and his heirs for ever.

Also if any such Tenant dye without heir general or special, all his Lands
and Tenements shall fall unto the Lord by escheate, to remain unto him and to
his heirs for ever.

Forfeitures.
Forseituret of diverse k^ndes.
FOrfeitures are of diverse kinds; As if a Copie-holder or customarie Tenant
deny, or will fully refuse the payment, doing or performance of his Rents,
Services and Customs; or if he fell or cut Timber on his Copie-hold Lands
contrary to the custom; or do or commit waste in the houses or otherwise; or
if he grant or sell his Copie-hold estate by deed; or alien or let the same
without license of the Lord, beyond limitation of the Custom; In all or any of
these, the customarie Tenant shall forfeite his Copie-hold estate into the
Lords hands: Which offenses are to be found and presented by the homage at the
next Court; and thereupon seizure made accordingly.

Also Tenant for term of years, life, or lives, may forfeit his estate for
making a larger estate of Freehold then he has, or for not performance of
such prouisoes and conditions, as are expressed in his Lease or Deed, if any
be.

Waiues.
IF any man feloniously steal or take any goods or chattels of what nature or
kind so ever; and by earnest prosecution he is enforced in flying to leave the
same behind him; these goods are called Waiues or waiued goods; and in what
place soever they are so left and waiued, they shall be taken and seized for
the use of the Lord of that Manor, if by his grant, charter or prescription,
they belong unto him (or otherwise they are the Kings) and being so seized by
the Bailiffe or other Officer, they are to be presented and found at the next
Court by the Homage there. Fresh suite. Waiued goods restored.
But if the right owner make fresh suite after the thief, and attaint him at
his suite for stealing thereof, he shall have his goods again, although they
be waiued. And the like in all respects is if any goods be taken by an officer,
from any whom he suspecteth to have stolen the same, though there be no
pursuit made or prosecuted.

Estraies.
EStraies are when a Horse, an Ox Sheep, or any other Cattle of what kind
so ever come into a Lordship or Manor, no man knowing from whence, nor the
owner thereof; such are to be seized to the Kings use, or to the use of the
Lord of the Manor who has the same by grant or prescription; and if the owner
come and make claim within a year and a day, then he shall have the same
again, paying for the charge thereof; or else after such time expired, the
property thereof shall be to the King; or the Lord of the Manor having the
same by grant or prescription; So that Proclamation be thereof made in the
next markets and the Parish Church, according to the Laws in that behalf.

Pleas and Process of Court.
THese are where the Lord of a Manor in the Court Leete, or Court Baron,
holds plea of his Tenants for actions of debt, of trespass or other causes,
not exceeding the value of xls. debt and damage.

And under this title of perquisites is comprised all other casualties
whatsoever, which may happen to grow or arise within any Manor; as profits
arising by mines of Copper, Tynne, Lead, Cole, and quarries of Stone; also by
sale of Woods, Turbarie, and Pannage; likewise profits of Fayres and Markets,
Fishing, Casualties may become certain.
Fowling and the like. All or any of which may become certain; by being
letten and disposed of for yearly rents.

CHAP. III. Of the diversity of estates, and their several natures.
Having already showed in the two former Chapters what a Mannoris, with the
several parts thereof, and the appendants thereunto: I hold it fitting here
now to consider of Estates; as how and by what means a man may be estated
either in a Manor or any other Lands or Tenements: wherein it is to be
understood that all estates in general consist of two principal kinds as
Free-holds and Chattels: which more particularly are sub divided into diverse
other parts or branches; as first Feesimple and Feetaile, which are termed
Free-holds of inheritance: also estates After possibility of issue extinct; By
Courtesy; In dower; and for term of life: Which four last mentioned, are
called Free-holds, but not of Inheritance: Likewise estates by Copy of Court
Roll, being claimed and held by custom, and are divided into the like parts,
as Free-holds at the common Law: and lastly estates For term of years, and at
will, which two last are Chattels. Of all which briefly in order as follows.

1. Fee-simple.
FEe simple of all other estates is the most large, ample, and absolute that
we have in this Kingdom, Desined.
or that can by our Laws be invested or made; and is that which is granted to
any man and his heirs for ever, without any further or other limitation of use
or uses; and therefore if such Tenant has issue of his body, the land
descends to him, if not, to the next of kin within the degrees of
limitation hereafter specified.

But if a man purchase in Fee-simple to him and his assigns for ever, omitting
this word heirs; here has he but an estate for term of life; for heirs is
the word which carries the inheritance.

Yet it is otherwise if lands be so devised by Will; for the Law intends that
learned counsel cannot always be present in such cases; and therefore is such
devise construed for the best, according to the Testators meaning and
intention, and not to the strict letter of the Will.

Also if Lands be granted to any man with a woman in Franke-marriage, this word
implies an estate of inheritance without mention or addition of the word
Heirs; Or to a man and to his blood the like.

And here is to be considered, who are those which are said to be within the
degrees of limitation before spoken of; that is, who are understood to be a
man's heirs by the common Law. Suppose A. B. dies seized of a state of
inheritance without issue of his body: Neither his brother, or sifter of the
half blood, The half blood. Abastard no beire. Lineall and collater all
descent.
nor their issue shall be his heir; nor his bastard; nor his father, mother,
grandfather, or grandmother; for inheritance may lineally or collaterally
descend, but by no means lineally ascend by our Laws; but the brother or
sister of the father of A.B. (which is called a collateral descent) shall be his
heir; and then they dying seized without issue, the father of A.B. shall have
the land as heir to his uncle or aunt, but not as heir unto him.

Likewise it is to be understood, that by the laws of this Realm the eldest
son is wholly to inherit; and he dying without issue, the second son, and so
of the rest; Coparceners.
and if no sons but daughters, they shall jointly inherit as coparceners;
but if no issue neither son nor daughter, then shall the eldest brother be
heir, for want of such all the sisters; and in default of them, the uncle by
the fathers side, if the Land came by the father, or be of the purchase of him
so deceased: But if there be no heir of the fathers side, the purchased lands
go to those of the mothers side; But if none such, then all those lands shall
Escheate to the Lord of whom they are holden. Escheate.


2. Fee Tail.
Fee tail of two kinds. General tail.
THis estate of Fee-taile is divided into two kinds or sorts General and
special. The first, being Fee-tayle general, is when Lands or Tenements are
granted unto any man, and the heirs of his body begotten without limitation,
or express mention made by what woman; wherefore if such Tenant marries
diverse wives, and has issue by them severally; they shall all be capable of
the Inheritance of those Lands. But if it be mentioned and expressed in the
grant by what woman, his Heirs shall proceed or be begotten, as if the gift be
made to A. B, and to the heirs of his body lawfully begotten on Chis wife,
this is an especial In-taile, for any of his issue begotten by another woman,
Special tail.
shall not inherit by force or means of this grant or tail. And the like in
all respects if Lands be granted to a woman in the like kind.

Also if Lands be granted unto AB. and C. his wife, and to the heirs of their
two bodies lawfully begotten; here are the man and his wife Ioyntpurchasers,
and this is also a special tail both in him and her.

Likewise if any man grant Lands or Tenements to another man with his Daughter
in Franke-marriage, this is also a special tail; Frank marriage.
and both the man and woman shall be here Tenants in the special tail, for
the word Frankemarriage implies as much.

Also if Lands be granted to a man and the heirs Males of his body; Descent
by beires males.
this is an estate tail, and here the Female shall not inherit.

3. After possibility of issue extinct.
IF Lands or Tenements be granted to a man and to his wife, Free-bolds.
and to the Heirs of their two bodies lawfully begotten, and either of them
dye without such issue between them; then is he or she suruiuing Tenant in
tail of those Lands, but are without all hope and past possibility of having
such Heir to inherit those Lands as was limited in the grant; and therefore
is he or she so suruiuing and ouer-liuing the other, called Tenant in tail
after possibility of issue extinct: and from and after the death of him or her
so suruiuing; the estate tail so made and granted unto them, shall be utterly
void, extinct and dead, as if the same were never granted; and the estate of
inheritance of and to those lands, shall reuert and turn unto the first Donor
thereof and his heirs.

4. By courtesy.
IF a man marry a wife, being an Inheritrix, and has issue by her, and she
die; by our laws he shall hold, occupy, and enjoy such lands as his wife died
seized of either in Fee-simple, or Fee tail, during his natural life; and he
is called Tenant by courtesy of England, because no other Nation admits the
like estate. Wherein the Law requires that such issue be vital, and brought
forth into the world alive, although it immediately die, and also it is
requisite that the husband be in actual and real possession of those lands,
and seized of them in the right of his wife, at the time of her death, or
otherwise he shall not be admitted Tenant by courtesy thereunto.

But if any such Tenant by courtesy commit or suffer any stripe or waste, he
is punishable in that behalf, by action of waste.

Also it is to be understood, that no man can be Tenant by courtesy of a
reuersion: for if a woman solye seized in Fee, grants a Lease to A. B. for
term of his life, and afterward marry and has issue, and then dye; the
Tenant or Leasee for life suruiuing; her husband in this case shall not be
Tenant by courtesy.

5. In Dower.
BY the common Law of this Kingdom, if a man marry a wife, and at any time
during the time of couerture he be directly and lawfully seized, either by
purchase or descent of any lands or tenements, either in fee-simple or
fee-tayle, and being so seized die, his wife shall be endowed of a full third
part of all those lands and tenements, during her life; Dower at the common
Law. Dower by custom.
and being thus endowed, she is called Tenant in Dower, and this is by the
common Law.

Besides this, there is Dower by custom, for in some places the woman shall
have a moytie, and in some places more, and in others less during her life, of
all the lands her husband was seized of at any time during the couerture,
according to the custom of the place.

But if the wife be not above the age of nine years, at the time of her
husbands death; the common Law will not permit her indowment.

A Woman shall have no dower.
And for diverse causes a woman may be defeated of her dower; as if she or her
husband, commit treason, murder, or felony, and be thereof attaynted (yea,
though they have their pardon:) also if she forsake her husband and live
incontinently; and be not again reconciled without constraint of law; or if
she detayne and withold the deeds and evidences from the heir, of those
lands, whereof she claymeth dower, and the like.

And some things there are, whereof a woman is not capable of indowment; as of
Commons, Annuities, Estouers sans number, Homages, Services, and the like.

There are besides these other kinds of dowers, as one called dowment, Ex
assensu patris: another termed dowment ad ostium Ecclesiae: and a third, de la
plus bell part: As appears at large by our common Laws; whereunto I refer
you.

6. For term of Life.
A Tenant for term of life, is he, who holds lands or tenements, either for
term of his own life, or for term of another man's life; but for distinctions
sake, he who holds for his own life, is termed barely Tenant for life, and
he that holds for another life, is called tenant for term d'autervie, that
is of another life.

And if either of these kind of tenants commit or suffer waste, Waste.
the leasor or he in reuersion, shall bring and maintain against him an action
of waste, and thereby recover treble damages.

7. By Copy of Court roll.
THese tenants are such, as in diverse Manors hold lands and tenements to them
and to their heirs, some in the nature of fee-simple, others in fee-tayle, or
for term of life or lives, at the will of the Lord, according to the custom
of the Manor; and in some Manors they hold by copy for term of years: And
all these have no other evidence to show concerning the tenure of their lands,
save only the copies of the rolls of their Lords Court; and therefore are they
called tenants by Copy of Court roll.

Alienation of estate.
And if any of these tenants alien or sell his lands or estate by deed, he shall
absolutely forfeit the same into the Lords hands: wherefore if he will alien
his copyhold estate, he must come into the Lords Court and there surrender the
same into the Lords hands, to the use of him unto whom he alienateth the same.

But in diverse Manors the surrender may be made out of Court, Surrender out of
Court.
unto any copyhold tenant, in presence of two of the homage (to the use as
aforesaid) who are to present the same unto the Steward at the next Court, and
admittance made accordingly.

And these tenants can neither sue or be sued, in any of the Kings Courts, by
writ or otherwise, for these lands so holden. But they must implead and sue for
the same, by way of plaint, in the Lords Court.

And some are of opinion that these tenants are but in the nature of tenants at
will of the Lord; who at his pleasure may displace them, Tenants at will.
and they without remedy, but by the Lords favor. Yet others are of a
contrary mind, who maintain, that if any such customarie tenant (but those
for years, their term being expired; Remedy for copyholder pat off.
paying and doing their services) shall without just cause be eiected and
displaced by the Lord; he may bring and maintain his action of trespass
against him, at the common Law.

And if any of these cut timber, growing on his lands, Waste.
without license of the Lord (but only for repair of his tenement) it is a
waste, and an absolute forfeiture.

And in most Manors if any such tenant shall farm or let out his land, for
any longer time then a year, without the Lords license, Forfeiture.
it is likewise a forfeiture unto the Lord. But of these and many other the
like, we are to be guided according to the custom of the Manor, where such
tenants are.

And generally these tenants, Base tenure.
for that they have no freehold at the common Law, but by custom, are termed
tenants of base tenure.

And thus much concerning free-holds and estates of inheritance; and next of
Chattels.

8. Term of years.
A Tenant for term of years, is he, unto whom an estate is granted of lands,
for any number of years agreed upon, between the Lord and Tenant; which term
is always expressed in the lease so granted.

On which lease there is usually reserved some annual rent, Rent reserved.
payable either half yearly or quarterly, according to their contract. For
the recovery and obtaining of which rent, if it happen to be ariere and
vn-paid, Distress or action of debt.
the leasor is at his choice; whether he will enter and distrayne, or bring his
action at the common Law for the same.

And in these leases for term of years, whether by writing or otherwise, No
livery of seisin.
there need no livery of seison, but the tenant may immediately enter by
virtue of his lease without further ceremony. But in leases for term of life
or lives, it is otherwise.

Also if this tenant commit or suffer waste; Waste.
the leasor may bring his action of waste against him; wherein he shall recover
locum vastatum, and his treble damages.

And if this tenant shall grant unto any other man a greater or larger estate
in those lands he holds, then he has therein himself; whereby he conueyeth
the fee-simple to himself, he shall forfeit his lease and the state, and
term of years therein granted.

9. Tenant at will.
A Tenant at will, is he, unto whom lands or tenements are granted, to hold at
the will of the Lord or leasor, by whom they are granted. And this tenant may
be displaced or put out at any time, Displaced at pleasure.
without further notice, at the Lords pleasure; yea, although he has tilled
and sown his grounds. Liberty to take his corn and goods.
Yet in this case the law allows him free liberty of ingresse, egresse, and
regresse, as well to take, cut, and carry away his corn when it is ripe; as to
take and carry away his goods, and house-hold-stuffe, within convenient time;
without punishment of committing trespass, or otherwise; for that be knew not
his Lords intention or time of entrance. But with tenant for term of years it
is otherwise.

Like remedy for rent.
And the Lord or leasor here has the like remedy against this his tenant at
will, for his rent, if it be behind and vn-paid, as he has against the tenant
for term of years, last before mentioned.

And it is to be noted, that this tenant at will is not by the law charged or
chargeable with reparations, No action of Waste.
as is the tenant for years; and therefore no action of waste lies against
him; unless he wilfully commits waste, by pulling down the buildings, or
felling of timber, etc. In which case it is held, Trespass.
that the leasor may bring his action of trespass, and recover his loss
sustained.

And thus much briefly concerning estates in land; whereof the two later kinds
are termed Chattells real; and all moveable goods are called Chattels
personal; as appears by this breuiate following.

An ANALYSIS or brief resolution of all estates in general.

They consist of Free-holds, At the common Law. Fee-simple, By purchase. By
descent.
Fee-tayle, General. Special.
Freehold, After possibility of issue extinct. Courtesy of Eng. Dower. Term
of life. Term d'auter vie.

By Custom. These are divided as free-holds at the common Law.

Chattells, Real. Term of years. Wardship of lands. Tenure at will.
Personal. Corn, Cattle, Money, Plate, House-hold-stuffe, etc.




CHAP. IIII. Of the diversity of Tenures, and their several natures, with the
services belonging.
Having informed our selves, as before, of the diversity of estates (for all
lands whatsoever, consist of some of those, formerly mentioned) let us here,
next, consider of the several tenures and services thereunto particularly
belonging; which are maine and principal observations to be had and used in
survey of a Manor, and most meet and necessary for a Surueyor to know and
understand. Whereof in order as follows.

1. Knights service.
THis tenure of Knights service includes Homage and Fealty, and commonly
Escuage; and whosoever holds any lands or tenements by this service, is bound by
the Laws of this our Realm, to do unto his Lord Homage and Fealty; Homage.
being a service of the greatest humility and respect, that can be performed
by a tenant unto his Lord: and for the most part, he is to pay Escuage, called
Scutagium, that is, service of shield; which is to be assessed by authority of
Parliament, as shall be hereafter declared.

How the tenant shall do homage
When the tenant shall do homage to his Lord, the Lord shall sit, and the
tenant kneeling down before him, on both his knees, and holding both his hands
between his Lords hands, shall say thus: I become your man, from henceforth,
of life and member, and of earthly honor, and to you will be faithful and
true, and faith to you shall bear for the lands I hold of you (saving my faith
which I owe and bear unto our Sovereign Lord the King) and then the Lord so
sitting, shall kiss him.

How fealty is to be done.
Fealty is as much to say, as Fidelitas, or fidelity. In doing whereof, the
tenant shall lay his right hand on a book, and say thus: I will be unto you my
Lord, faithful and true, and faith to you shall bear, for the lands and
tenements which I claim to hold of you, and duly shall do and perform unto
you the customs and services which I ought to do, at the terms assigned, as
help me God; and then he shall kiss the book. And it is to be noted, that
Homage must be done unto the Lord himself personally; but Fealty may be made
to the Steward of the Court, or to the Baylife thereof. Also, tenant for term
of life shall do Fealty, but not Homage.

What duty belongs to Escuage.
As concerning Escuage: he that holds his lands by a whole fee of Knights
service; when the King goes in person to the wars, he is bound to be with him
by the space of forty days, sufficiently appointed for the wars: and he
that holds by the moitie of the fee of Knights service, is bound by his
tenure to be with the King in such sort as before, by the space of twenty
days; and so proportionally, according to the quantity and rate of his tenure.

And it is to be understood, that after the Kings return from the wars, a
Parliament is usually called; Parliament.
by authority whereof, it is assessed, what and how much, in money, every man
that holds by a whole fee of Knights service (who was neither personally, nor
any man for him, with the King) shall pay unto the Lord of whom he holds his
land, by Escuage: and according to such assessement, every tenant shall pay to
his immediate Lord, What Escuage to be paid.
after the rate and proportion of his tenure: and this money thus assessed, is
called Scutage, or Escuage; for which, the Lord unto whom the same is due, may
distraine for non-payment thereof.

Yet some tenants by custom, Custom.
are not otherwise bound, but to pay a moitie or third part of what shall be
assessed, as aforesaid.

And in some places the custom is, that whatsoever be assessed by Parliament,
yet their Escuage is certain, and they pay neither more nor less, but such a
sum of money, Escuage certain
as five shillings, or the like; and this is called Escuage certain: and this
tenure is Socage tenure, and not Knights service; the Escuage whereof is
always uncertain, and so called. And this Escuage uncertain (belonging
always to Knights service) draws unto it Ward, Marriage, and Relief, as
hereafter appears.

2. Ward, Marriage, and Relief.
AS formerly appears, Knights service (the tenure last before mentioned)
draws unto it Ward, Marriage, and Relief; and therefore I hold it fitting
here next to treat thereof. Wherefore, first it is to be understood, that if a
man hold any lands or tenements by this tenure, and dies, his heir male being
within the age of one and twenty years; the Lord of whom those lands are
holden, shall have the Ward, that is, the custody and keeping of those lands
so holden of him, Ward.
to his own use and behoof, without account, until the heir come to the
full age of one and twenty years: for it is intended by the Law, that until
he attain to that age, he is not fit or able to perform such service, as by
this tenure is required.

And if at the time of the death of such tenant the heir be unmarried,
Marriage.
the Lord shall not only have the wardship of his body and lands, but the
bestowing of him in marriage.

And if a tenant by Knights service die, and leave an heir female, being of
the age of fourteen years, Heir female.
or upwards; then the Lord shall not have the ward of such heir, The full age
of a woman.
neither of her body nor lands; because a woman of that age may have a husband
able to perform the services required by this tenure.

But if such an heir be under that age of fourteen years, and unmarried at
the time of her ancestors death, then shall the Lord have the wardship of her
lands so holden of him, till she attain to the age of sixteen years; by
force of an act of Parliament, in the Statute of Westminster 1. Cap. 12.

And note here the great difference between the ages of Males and Females: for
the Female has these several ages appointed unto her by the Law. First,
Diversity of the ages of women.
at seven years of age the Lord her father may distrayne his tenants for aid
to marry her. Secondly, at nine years of age she is dowable. Thirdly, at
twelve years of age she is held able to assent to matrimony: Fourthly, at
fourteen she is able to have her land, and shall be out of ward, (if she be
of this age at the death of her ancestor.) Fifthly, at sixteen she shall be
out of Ward, though she were under fourteen years of age at the death of
her ancestor: and sixthly, at one and twenty years she is able to make
alienations of her lands or tenements. Men's ages.
But the Law limiteth to the Male, only two ages, that is, at fourteen years
to have his lands holden in Socage: and at one and twenty to make alienations.

As concerning Relief, Relief.
if a man hold his lands by Knights service and dies, his heir male being of
the age of one and twenty years, or his heir female of the age of fourteen
years, the Lord of whom such lands are holden, shall have relief of the heir.

Also it is to be noted, that all Earls, Barons, or other the Kingstenants
(holding of him in chief by Knights service) if they dye, their heir being of
full age, as aforesaid, they ought to pay the old relief for their
inheritance, What reliefes are to be paid, and how.
that is, the heir of an Earl for a whole Earledom an hundred pounds; the
heir of a Baron for a whole Baronie a hundred marks; the heir of a Knight
five pounds, and he that has less shall give less, according to the old
custom of Fees. And the like is to be understood and observed of all others,
that hold such lands immediately of any other Lord.

And also a man may hold lands of a Lord by two Knights fees, and then the
heir being of full age at the death of his ancestor, shall pay to his Lord for
relief ten pounds.

3. Castle guard.
IT is also to be understood, that a man may hold lands by Knights service,
Defined.
and not by escuage, nor pay escuage for the same: But he may hold by Castle
guard, which is to keep a tower or some other place of his Lords Castle, on a
reasonable warning, when the Lord hears of the approach of his Enemies.

This is likewise Knights service, and draws thereunto ward, marriage and
relief, in all respects as the common Knights service does, before mentioned.

4. Grand Sergeantie.
ALso there is another kind of tenure in Knights service, Defined.
which is called Grand Sergiantie, and this is where a man hold any lands and
tenements of the King, by some such certain services, as he ought to perform
in proper person, as to bear the Kings Banner, or his Spear, or to conduct
his Host, or to be Sewer, Caruer, etc. and such service is called Grand
Sergeantie, that is, a high or great service, because it is the most honorable
and worthy service that is: for whosoever holds by escuage, is not tied by his
tenure to perform any other more special service, then another holding by
escuage, but he that holds by grand Sergeantie, is tied to perform some
special service to the King.

And if a man hold land of the King by grand Sergeantie, and dye; his heir
being of full age, then shall his heir pay unto the King, not only five
pounds, as he that holds by escuage, but also the clear yearly value of
such lands, as he shall hold by grand Sergeantie.

And also in the borders of Scotland, diverse hold their lands of the King by
cornage, Cornage.
which is to blow a horn, to give notice to the Country of the Enemies
approach, which service is also a kind of grand Sergeantie.

No tenure in grand sergeantie, but of the King.
And it is to be understood that none can hold by this tenure of grand
Sergeantie, of any other Lord save only of the King.

5. Petie Sergeantie.
PEtie Sergeantie is, Defined.
where a man holds lands or tenements immediately of the King, and for his
service in respect thereof, is bound to pay unto the King yearly, a Bow, a
Spear, a Dagger, or some such other small thing belonging to the war. And
this service is in effect no other then Socage, because the tenant is not tied
to perform any personal service, but to pay somewhat yearly, as a rent is
paid. Wherefore this service of petie Sergeantie, No Knights service.
is no Knights service. Yet can it not be held of any other Lord save the King
only, as well as grand Sergeantie.

6. Homage Ancestrell.
IF a man and his Ancestors, whose heir he is, have holden lands or tenements
of another, and his ancestors time out of mind, by homage, and have done unto
him homage, this tenant thus holding, is called tenant by homage ancestrell, by
reason of the long continuance which has been by title of prescription,
as well concerning the tenancie in the blood of the tenant, as concerning the
Signiorie in the Lord.

This tenure extinct.
And it is to be noted, that if this tenant by homage ancestrell, shall at any
time alien those lands unto another, although he immediately, or at any time
after, purchase them again, he shall no longer hold by this tenure, because he
has discontinued, but shall from thenceforth hold it by the accustomed homage.

7. Socage tenure.
TEnure in Socage is, Defined.
where a man holds lands or tenements of a Lord by certain service, for all
manner of services; so as the service be not Knights service: As where a man
holds of his Lord by fealty and certain rent, for all manner of services;
or else, where a man holds by homage, fealty and certain rent, for all
manner of services; for homage by it self makes not Knights service. Also a
man may hold his lands by fealty only, which is likewise tenure in socage. For
every tenure that is not tenure in Chivalry, is tenure in Socage.

These tenants were tied in ancient time every of them with their ploughs by
certain days in the year, to plow and sow their Lords demeanes, for which
cause this tenure was called Socagium, or seruicia socae, Why so called.
which is the same with Caruca, one Soke or one plow land. But now that service
is by mutual consent, between the Lord and Tenant, in most places, Converted
to rent.
converted to an annual rent, yet the name of Socage still remains.

Escuage certain.
Also if a man holds by escuage certain, as is before spoken, he holds in
effect but by socage.

And further, it is to be understood, that when a tenant in socage dies, the
heir is to pay unto the Lord, of whom those lands are holden, a relief,
Relief.
that is to say, the value of one years rent, besides the yearly rent, for
the payment of which relief, the Lord may at his pleasure immediately
distraine.

8. Frank Almoigne.
THis tenant in Frank Almoigne, or free alms, Defined.
is where an Ecclesiastical person holds lands of his Lord, in pure and
perpetual Alms, which tenure began in ancient time, thus: If a man being
seized of certain lands and tenements in his demesne, as of Fee, should
thereof infeoffe an Abbot and his Covent, or a Prior and his Covent, or any
other Ecclesiastical person, as a Deane of a College, or Master of an
Hospital, or the like, to have and to hold the same lands to them and their
successors for ever, in pure and perpetual alms, or in frank alms, in these
cases the tenements should be holden in frank Almoigne. By force of which
tenure, Service to be done.
those tenants which hold lands thereby, were bound to make Orisons and
Prayers, and to do other divine services, for the souls of their Grantors and
Feoffors, etc. and therefore discharged by the Law, to do or perform any
other profane or corporal service, as fealty, or the like.

Otherwise since the statute.
But it is now otherwise, since the Statute called Quia emptores terrarum, An.
18. ED. 1. So as now no man can hold in frank Almoigne, but by force of such
grants as were made before that Statute.

9. Burgage tenure.
A Tenure in Burgage is, where an ancient Borough is, Defined.
whereof the King is Lord, and they which have tenements within the same
Borough, hold of the King, by paying a certain yearly rent, which tenure in
effect is but socage tenure. And the like is, where any other Lord spiritual
or temporal is Lord of such Borough.

And it is to be noted, that for the most part such ancient Boroughs and
Towns, have diverse and sundry customs and vsages, Diverse customs.
which other Towns have not. For some Boroughs have a custom that the youngest
son shall inherit before the eldest, which custom is commonly called Borough
English. And in some places the woman by the custom of the Borough there,
shall have all such lands and tenements in Dower, as her husband at any time
during the couerture stood seized of.

Diverse customs contrary to the course of common Law.
There are diverse other customs in England, which are contrary to the course
of the common law, which being probable and standing with reason, are good and
effectual, notwithstanding they are against the common law.

No custom without prescription.
But no customs are allowable, but those, as have been used by prescription,
or time out of mind.

10. Ancient Demesne.
THere is likewise another tenure, Defined.
called ancient demesne, and the tenants who hold by this service, are
Freeholders by Charter, and not by copy of Court roll, or by the verge after
the custom of the Manor, at the will of the Lord.

And these are such tenants as hold of those Manors, which were Saint EDWARDS
the King, or which were in the hands of King WILLIAM the Conqueror, which
Manors are called the ancient Demesnes of the King, or the ancient demesnes of
the Crown of England.

And to such tenants as hold of those Manors, the Law grants many large
privileges and liberties, Quit of toll.
as to be quit of toll and passage, and such like impositions, usually demanded
and paid of and by other men, for their goods and cattle, bought and sold in
Fayres and Markets by them; also to be quit and free of tax and tallage
granted by Parliament, Free of tax.
except it please the King to tax ancient demeanes, when he thinks fit, for
great and urgent occasions. And diverse other privileges are belonging to this
tenure, wherein I refer you to our Laws.

And if such tenant be at any time distrayned, to do and perform unto their
Lord any such other service or duty, which they or their ancestors have not
been accustomed to do, A wit of Monstrauerunt.
they shall sue out a Writ, called a Monstrauerunt, directed to the Lord,
commanding him that he distrayne them not to do other services or customs,
then they have been accustomed to do.

And it is further to be understood, that in the Exchequer there is a book
remaining, Doomes-day book.
called Doomes-day-booke, which book was made in the time of S. EDWARD the
King, and all those lands which were in the seisin and in the hands of the said
S. EDW. at the time of the making of the said book, are ancient demesnes.

And thus much concerning the diversity of tenures and services. Now next let
us consider of the rents thereon usually reserved, and the several kinds
thereof.

CHAP. V. Of Rents, and their several natures.
COnsidering that on every tenure there is usually some rent or other reserved:
I hold it not unfitting to say somewhat here concerning the same. And first, it
is to be understood, that as there are diversity of tenures, so likewise of
rents; as one sort which is called a Rent service, Diversity of Rents.
another Rent charge, and a third Rent seck, or Redditus siccus, a dry rent.

Rent service.
As concerning rent service, it fitly has the name, for that it is usually tied
and knit to the tenure; and is, as it were, a service, whereby a man holds
his lands or tenements, or at least, when the rents are unseparably coupled and
knit with the service. As for example; where the tenant holds his land of the
Lord by fealty and certain rent, or by homage, fealty, and by certain rent,
or by any other kind of service and certain rent, this rent is called rent
service.

Distress of common right.
And here is to be noted, that if at any time this rent service be behind and
unpaid, the Lord of whom the lands or tenements are holden, whether in fee
simple, fee tail, for term of life, for years, or at will, may of common
right enter and distraine for the rent, though there be no mention at all, nor
clause of Distress put in the Deed or Lease.

The nature of this rent service I say is to be coupled and knit to the tenure;
and therefore, where no tenure is, there can be no rent service: wherefore, if
at this day I be seized of lands or tenements in fee simple, and make a Deed of
Feoffement thereof unto another in fee simple, and reserve by the same Deed a
rent, this can be called no rent service; for that there can be now no tenure
between the Feoffor and Feoffee. But it is otherwise of Feoffements made
before the Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, Anno 18. Ed. 1.
formerly mentioned. For before the making of that Statute, if any man had made
a Feoffement in fee simple, and had reserved thereon unto himself a certain
rent, although it had been without Deed, here had been created a new tenure
between the Feoffor and Feoffee, and the Feoffee must have holden of the
Feoffor, who by means thereof, might of common right have distrained for such
rent: but since the time of that Statute, there can be no such holding or
tenure created or begun; and consequently, No rent service can be now reserved
on gift in fee.
no rent service can at this day be reserved upon any gift in fee simple;
except in the Kings case; who being chief Lord of all, may, and ever might,
give lands to be holden of him.

Thus it is apparent, that at this day no subject can reserve any rent service
unto himself, unless the reuersion of those lands, so by him granted, be
still in himself: as where he grants them in fee tail, or makes but a
lease for term of life, or for years, or else at will; for in all these
cases, the reuersion of the fee simple remains still in him: wherefore, if
any rent be here reserved, it is to be called a rent service; and of common
right is distrainable, although there be no clause of Distress comprised in
the Deed or Lease.

And if a man shall absolutely and wholly grant away in fee simple any lands
or tenements by him so holden, leaving no reuersion thereof in himself; and
yet shall reserve unto himself in his Grant an annual rent; with a clause of
Distress in his Deed indented, That it shall be lawful for him to distraine
for the same, if need require; this rent (in regard, that the land is therewith
charged) is called a rent charge: Rent charge.
But he cannot distraine for this rent of common right, as before for the
other, but only by force and virtue of his Deed indented.

And if there be no such clause of Distress contained in the Deed, then is
this rent so reserved called a rent seck. Rent seck.


Also, if a man standing seized of lands and tenements in fee simple, will
grant either by Indenture, or poll Deed, an yearly rent unto another, issuing
out of the same lands, whether it be in fee simple, fee tail, for term of
life, for years, or at will, with clause of Distress; then this rent is
called a Rentcharge, and he unto whom this rent is granted, may for default
of payment enter and distraine.

And it is further to be understood, that if a man make a lease unto another
for term of life, and reserve thereon unto himself an yearly rent, and
afterward grants that rent unto A.B. reserving the reuersion of the lands
unto himself; Rent seck.
this rent is but a Rent seck: for that A. B. who has the rent, has nothing
in reuersion of the land.

And if a man gives lands and tenements in tail, and reserve to him and his
heirs a certain rent; or else make a lease for term of life, reserving
certain rent; if he grant the reuersion to another, and the tenant attorne
accordingly, the whole rent and service shall pass by this word reuersion,
because the rent and service in such case be incident to the reuersion, and
pass by the grant of the reuersion; Rent charge.
and here is the rent a Rentcharge. But if he had granted the rent only, it
had been then a Rent seck.

CHAP. VI. Of Reprises and Deductions.
AS we have formerly understood, what several rents, profits, and commodities
may yearly arise or grow out of any Manor to the Lord thereof; so is it as
fitting to consider, what Reprises, Deductions, Payments, Charges, and Duties,
may be yearly issuing or going out of any Manor from the Lord thereof: For
otherwise, in the conclusion of our Survey, or in making a perfect Constat, or
Particular, (such duties not being reprised) the true value of the Manor may
oftentimes seem greater then in truth it is; which would tend much to our
shame and discredit.

These Reprises and Deductions are never certain, or in all Manors alike; but
in this more, and in that less: yet in one and the same Manor they are
commonly the same, and usually such as these here following.

Reprises are any manner of Rents, either in Money, Capons, Hens, Pepper,
Cummin seed, or the like, issuing and paid out of one Manor to another: also,
Suits of Court, or annual fines for the same; and the like may be issuing and
payable to a Sherifes Turn or Hundred; also Pensions or Portions to
Ecclesiastical livings: likewise a rent may be issuing for way-leaue, or some
particular Passage; also for Watercourse, or placing of Pipes for conueyance
of Water: likewise yearly Fees to Officers, as Stewards, Receivers, Baylifes,
Collectors, Keepers, etc. and also stypends, salaries, or annuities to
Chaplins, or the like: All which are ever to be deducted and reprised out of
the total value of a Manor.

And having thus furnished and informed our selves, first of the Mathematical
part of Survey, by the three former Books; and thus far of the Legal, as to
know what a Manor is, and the several parts thereof; and likewise of all
estates in general; and what Tenures, Services, and Rents are thereunto
incident, appertaining, and belonging; let us proceed in an orderly and formal
course; supposing we are now to undertake the survey of a Manor, which is to
be performed as follows.

CHAP. VII. Observations and courses to be held and taken, before the beginning
of a Survey.
IT is first to be considered, for whom the business we undertake, is to be
performed: if for the King, then are we to obtain Commission from his Majesty
out of such Court or Courts as is requisite, according to the tenure of the
lands to be surueyed, as the Exchequer, Duchy, etc. In declaring the form of
which Commissions, I need not spend time, for that they are usual, and of
ordinary course (in such cases) granted out of those Courts. Yet seeing, that
for the most part, those Commissions give power to the Surueyor, by reference
to certain articles annexed; and according to the efficacy and force thereof,
the power and authority of the Surueyor is limited; it behooves to have
those articles as ample, full, and forcible, as you may devise; not knowing
with what people you are to deal (who often prove obstinate) nor the nature,
estate, or condition of Tenancie (for the most part variable.) Which articles
let be these here following, or the like in effect.

Articles to be inquired of, and courses to be observed and held by A. R. in
this present Commission named, for the better effecting and execution of his
Majesty's service, in surueying of his Highness Honors, Lordships, or Manors
of A. and B. in the County of C. and of all Castles, Houses, Parkes, Mesuages,
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments thereunto belonging and appertaining.

1. FIrst, the said A.R. is to enter into the said Honors, Lordships, and
Manors, and all and singular other the premises, and every of them, and into
every part and parcel of them, and every of them, and to make a survey of the
quantity, quality, and yearly value thereof, and of every part, parcel, and
member thereof respectively.

2. Also the said A.R. is to call before him all such as now are or formerly
have bin Stewards, Baylifes, Reeues, or Collectors of all or any his Majesty's
issues, rents, revenues, and profits within the premises, and their deputies,
and every or any of them, and to charge them on their oaths to deliver in unto
him true and perfect Rentalls of all and every their several collections: and
likewise to call before him all and every such person and persons, as have or
are suspected to have any Evidences, Court Rolls, Rentalls, Books of Survey,
Couchars, Terrars, Escripts, Writings, or Mynuments whatsoever, touching or
concerning the said Manors, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments,
and every or any of them; and all and every such person and persons to examine
upon their oaths concerning the same writings, and every of them: and also to
demand, require, and receive of them, all and every such Books, Rentalls, and
other Writings, as he shall so find to be in their hands or custody: And if
any shall make refusal of the delivery thereof, to certify his or their name
and names, and the reason of such his or their refusal, to the Lord Treasurer
of England, and Chancellor of the Exchequer, that speedy and due courses may
be therein held and taken accordingly. But this is to be understood of Books
and Writings not being in the hands of the present Steward or Stewards of any
of the premises, nor in the custody of any of his Majesty's Officers of his
Highness Courts of Record at Westminster; whereof he is only to take and
extract notes, for his better instruction and information concerning the
premises.

3. Likewise he is to inquire, what are the several limits, butts, and bounds
of all and singular the premises, and to express the same accordingly; and
what Lord or Lords are conioyning or boundering thereon; and whether they or
any of them have or do intrude or incroach upon or within the limits or bounds
aforesaid, or the liberties or privileges comprised within the same.

4. Also, whether the premises, or any part thereof, does lie or extend into
any other Manor; and whether any other Manors, Messuages, Lands, or Tenements
do lie within the limits or bounds of the premises; whose, and what they are;
and to make perfect distinctions thereof particularly.

5. What Castles, and other Manor or Mansion houses his Majesty has within
the same; in what estate of reparations the same now are and be; and if decayed
or wasted, by whom the same has bin committed, and to what value; what
demesne lands now are, or heretofore have bin, belonging or appertaining to the
said Houses, and in whose tenure and occupation the same now are; by what right
or title they claim or challenge to hold; what several rents they pay in
respect thereof; and what is the true quantity, quality, and yearly value of
the premises.

6. What Forests, Parks, and Chases his Majesty has within the premises;
what number and store of Game are in them; what Officers are thereunto
belonging; what Fees they receive in respect thereof; in what estate of
reparations, the Houses, Lodges, Walls, Pales, and Fences are; what is the
quantity, quality, and yearly value thereof by the acre; what Iuistments, or
what Cattle, as Oxen, Kyne, Horses, or the like, are usually depastured within
the same; who has the disposal thereof; and what is the value of a Beast-gate
there.

7. Also, what Moors, Marshes, Heaths, Wastes, or Sheepewalkes, his Majesty
has of, in, upon, or belonging to the premises; what are the several
quantities thereof; how many Sheep may be kept on those walks; and what is a
Sheepe-gate worth.

8. He is also to inquire, what Freeholders there are within and belonging to
the premises; what Manors, Messuages, Lands, or Tenements they hold thereof,
and what are their several quantities; and likewise, by what several tenures,
rents, and services they hold the same.

9. Also, what other estates there are; as tenants for term of life, or lives,
years, or at will; what customarie or copyhold tenants, or what other tenants
there are within the premises; what lands they do severally hold, and the true
quantity, quality, and yearly value thereof severally, and what yearly
rents they pay for the same.

10. Also, what are the several customs concerning the customarie tenants;
whether their fines upon death or alienation be certain, or incertaine, and
arbitrable; and if certain, what Fines they usually pay on every death or
alienation of Lord or Tenant; and how, and in what manner, do those customarie
lands descend after the death of an ancestor.

11. What Reliefes, Heriots, Fines, or other duties are paid, or answerable,
upon or after the death or alienation of any Freeholder, Copyholder, or other
tenant within the premises; how and by whom are they usually collected and
disposed of; and what may be the value thereof in Communibus annis.

12. Whether any customarie tenants (whose lands are hariotable) have severed,
aliened, divided, or dismembered the same, who has the use and occupation
thereof, and what are the several quantities, qualities, and yearly values of
the same.

13. Also, what are all and every the customs in general of, within, or
belonging to the premises, and how, by what means or for what cause, may a
copyholder or customarie tenant, forfeit or lose his customarie estate.

14. What Commons there are, of, within, or belonging to the premises, whether
stinted or vnstinted; if stinted, then how, by what means, and according to
what rate and proportion, how many beast-gates they contain, the value of each
beast-gate, and the quantity, quality, and value of the whole.

15. What arable fields and meddowes there are, which lie in common, what are
their several names, and of the several furlongs and wents therein contained;
also how and in what manner they are kept and used; whether is it lawful for
any tenant at his pleasure to enclose any part thereof, without leave of the
Lord; how are they employed when the corn and grass is taken away, how
stinted, and what is the eatage thereof worth by the beast-gate, or sheepe-gate,
after the corn and grass is so taken off, as aforesaid.

16. What woods or wood-grounds his Majesty has within the premises, what
grounds have been heretofore wood, and now converted to other uses, how long
since and by whom, what wastes and spoils have been had or made of his
Majesty's woods, how long since, by whom, and of what value; whether may any
profit by pannage be made orraysed, by, or within the same woods, and what the
profit or value thereof may yearly be.

17. Also what tenants there are within the premises, who demise or let any
part or parcel of their lands or tenements unto vnder-tenants, either for
their whole term or any part thereof, and what fines and rents have or do
they receive for the same.

18. Likewise, what lands, tenements, rents, services, or other profits, are
concealed or detayned from his Majesty, how long since, by whom, and what the
yearly value thereof is.

19. What lands, tenements, leases, or other estates of, or in the premises,
have been or are escheated, or forfeited to his Majesty, by whom, when, for
what cause, and in whose occupation the same now are, and what is the value
thereof.

20. What fines, issues, amerciaments, perquisites of Court, heriots, waifs,
strayes, felons goods, and other casualties do yearly accrue and grow unto his
Majesty out of the premises, by whom the same is, or has been collected,
gathered, and received, and what is and has been the value thereof yearly in
communibus annis.

21. Also what enclosures and Incrochments have been heretofore made of, in,
or upon any of his Majesty's commons, wastes, or other grounds, how long since*
by whom, what rents are paid for the same, and what the yearly value thereof
is.

22. What Corne-mills, Fulling-mills, or other mills, his Majesty has within
the premises, who hold the same, what rents they pay, what is the yearly value
thereof, what customs are thereunto belonging, and in what estate of
reparations are all and every those Mills.

23. What Markets and Fayres are there within the premises, on what days
kept, what tolls are belonging to the same, by whom the same is collected and
received, and what yearly profit arises thereby unto his Majesty.

24. Also what Warrens, Fishings, Fowlings, Hawking, Hunting, or other
Royalties his Majesty has within the premises, by whom the same is occupied
or enjoyed, what rents are yearly paid for the same, and what is the yearly
value thereof.

25. What quarries of stone, mines of Tin, Lead, Cole, or other mines his
Majesty has within the premises, who has the use and occupation thereof,
what rents they pay for the same, and what the yearly value is.

26. What Mosses of peate or turffe, what Broom, Heath, Furze or Flagge, are
within the premises, belonging to his Majesty, what are the rents and yearly
values thereof.

27. What Aduowsons, Patronages, Free-gifts or presentations of Parsonages,
Vicarages, Chappells or Prebends, or what Impropriations, are appendant or
belonging to the premises, who is or are the present Incumbent or Incumbents,
who has the use of such Impropriation, what rent is paid for the same, and
what is the yearly value thereof.

28. Whether any Tenant or other person or persons whatsoever have plowed up,
cast down, removed or taken away any meere-stone, baulke, hedge-row, or
land-share, between the demeanes of the premises, and any other messuages,
lands, or tenements, or between any the freeholds, and the tenement or
customary lands, or between any of the premises, and the lands of other
Lords, by whom such offense was committed, and where, and in what place and
places those altered bounders ought to stand and remain.

29. Also what Officers his Majesty has within the premises, what fees do
they yearly receive in respect thereof, what rents, deductions, reprises, or
other payments or sums of money, are yearly paid, reprised, or issuing out of
his Majesty's reuennues of the premises, and to whom, for what cause, and to
what end and purpose are the same so paid.

30. And lastly, the said A. R. is to make all and every other such further and
other inquiry and inquisition of, for, and concerning all and every such
matters and things whatsoever, as in his discretion shall be held fit and
requisite, for the better effecting and execution of his Majesty's service, in
surueying of the premises.

These Articles or the like, being drawn and fair written in Parchment by the
Surueyor (the commission being to be taken out of the Exchequer) a brief
warrant is to be directed to one of the Remembrancers, and written under the
Articles to this effect.

M. I. O. These are to will and require you immediately to cause a Commission
to be made, and directed to A. R. for the survey of his Majesty's Honors,
Lordships, and Manors of A. and B. in the County of C. and of all Castles,
Houses, Parkes, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, thereunto
belonging or appertayning; whereunto is to be annexed the abouementioned
Articles. Whereof fail you not: and these shall be your warrant in this
behalf. From the Court, etc.

Which Warrant is to be signed by the Lord Treasurer, or Chancellor of the
Exchequer, and delivered to the Remembrancer accordingly.

But if the business undertaken, be not for the King, but for a private man,
then in regard that a Surueyor has no power by any authority of Surueyorship,
to be granted unto him by any such private man, to minister an oath, or
perform such other duties as are requisite, it is fitting either that the
Steward of the Manor, which is to be surueyed, join with him, in calling a
Court Baron, and Court of Survey, to be there held (wherein the Steward is to
give the charge and to deliver Articles, and minister oaths, as well concerning
the Court Baron as Court of Survey.) Or otherwise, the Surueyor is to have a
commission, grant, or deputation from the Lord of the Manor under his hand and
seal of the office of Steward and Surueyor of his Manors, Lands, and
Tenements, for a certain term, or during pleasure: And then may the Surueyor,
of himself execute all those offices and duties fit and requisite for a
Steward and Surueyor, to do and perform. Which commission, grant, or
deputation, let be thus, or to the like effect.

OMnibus ad quos hoc praesens scriptum peruenerit A. B. de C. Commit. E. Armig.
salutem. Sciatis me praefat. A. B. tam pro sincero amore and beneuolentia qua
iamdudum affectus sum, erga A. R. de cuius prouida circumspectione, pia
sedulitate, ac singulari in hac parie prudentia merito plurimum confido, quam
pro diuersis alijs causis and considerationibus, ex mera and spontanea
voluntate mea dedisse and per praesentes concessisse eidem A. R. Officium
Seneschall. sieve Seneschalciam omnium and singulorum Domin. Manner. and
haereditament. meorum quorumcunque in Commit. F. and custod. sieve officium
tenendi omnes and omnimodas Cur. Baron. Letar. Vis. franc. pleg. Dominior. and
Manner. praedict. and eorum cuiuslibet, ac gubernationem and superuisionem
eorundem. Ac ipsum A. R. generalem ac capital. Seneschall. ac Superuisorem meum
omnium Curiarum, Dominiorum, Maneriorum, and haereditament. meorum praedict.
facio, constituo, and ordino per praesentes. Habend. tenend. gaudend. exercend.
and occupand. Officia praedict. cum pertinentijs, a dat. praesentium durante
been placito meo. Mando insuper vniuersis and singulis Balliuis, Praeposit.
Firmarijs, tenentibus and occupatoribus meis praemissor. and eorum cuilibet,
quod praefat. A. R. de tempore in tempus, assistentes sint, obedientes, and
auxiliantes in omnibus prout decet durant. termin. praed. In cuius ret
testimonium huic praesenti scripto meo sigillum meum apposui. Dat. etc.

Or to the same purpose in English.

And being thus authorized, we may now proceed.

CHAP. VIII. What courses are first to be held in the beginning of a Survey.
COnsidering how precious time is, and withal, how chargeable these
employments are to those whom it concern; it behooves a Surueyor (respecting
his credit and reputation) so to appoint and dispose of his business in an
orderly course, as no time be idly lost, or vainly spent therein. Wherefore,
first let the Baylife of the Manor be called, and a Warrant or Precept
directed and delivered unto him, to summon as well a Court Baron (if need
require) as a Court of Survey; to this, or the like effect.

Branton. A. R. Seneschall. and Superuis. Manerij praed. Balliuo eiusdem,
salutem: Tibi praecipio pariter and mando, quod diligenter praemonere facias
omnes tenentes infra Manner. praedictum, tam residentes quam non residentes,
atque omnes tenentes custumarios Manerij praedicti, quod sint coram me in hac
part sufficienter deputato apud Branton pradictam, die Lunae secundo die
Septembr. proxime futuro post datum huius, Non solum ad faciend. sectam suam ad
Curiam Baron. and Superuis. sed etiam ad producend. and ostendend. omnes
Literas, Chartas, Instrumenta, Indentur. copias Cur. Rotul. ac al. euidenc.
vnde tenere vendicant seperal. terr. and tenement. suas de Manerio praedicto;
and omnia alia quae eis incumbent, and pertinebunt; and haec nullatenus
omittas, and habeas ibi hoc praeceptum: Datum sub sigillo meo vicesimo quarto
die Augusti, Anno Regni etc.

Or to the like effect in English.

Wherein let a convenient time be limited, as five or six days at the least
after notice given for the tenants appearance, that they may the better prepare
themselves, and be the more inexcusable, if they happen to make default.

Then are you to receive from the Baylife all such Rentalls as he has
concerning his whole collection, as well such as are ancient, and of former
times, as those of his last collection; which you are diligently to compare
together, noting the difference: and if the later be lesser, then what decays
of rent there are, and how occasioned; if greater, then what increment of rent,
and whereon raised; which you are carefully to note and express, when you come
to ingrosse your Rentall.

Next would I have you to reduce your Rentall to an Alphabeticall form:
wherein, use all the modern Tenants names; not omitting the ancient; which
will be a great help for the speedy dispatch of your entries; and the ready
finding of any Tenants name, or rent, as you are to use them: which would be
written thus, or in the like manner.

Atkinson Thomas, late Brownes, -- xxs. Armstrong William, late Tomlinsons, --
us. Bennet John, late Brights, -- xvs. Branthwait Edward, late Finches. --
xxijs.
And in this sort proceed Alphabetically with all the whole Rentall; which is
much available, where many Tenants are.

And having thus prepared your Rentall in a readiness, against you have
occasion to use it; you are to spend the residue of the time, until the day
appointed for your Court, in conferring with the Steward concerning the present
estate of the Manor; and in diligent view and search of the Lords Evidences
and Court Rolls; taking them orderly before you, and from year to year
briefly to express in a Book, for that purpose provided, the several
Customs, Estates, Tenures, Rents, and Services, and all other remarkable
things. So shall you be able fully to inform your self of the nature,
quality, estate, and condition thereof; and to understand, what articles are
now most fit and apt to be presented unto your Homage, or Jury, to be inquired
of, when you have given them their charge; which you have now also fit
opportunity to write in a readiness for them against that time. And these
articles would I have to be such as are expressed in the last Chapter, or so
many thereof as you hold fitting and necessary for the purpose; and (if need
require) to add and insert such others thereunto, as you shall find meet and
requisite, for as much as by the last article annexed to your Commission, you
have power and authority to make such further and other inquisition, as in
your discretion shall seem fitting.

Also, now have you convenient time, either to ride or walk abroad, and to
take a respective view of the situation and extent of the Manor; whereby you
shall be able to inform your self, where, how, and in what sort you may with
most conueniencie begin, continue, dispose of, and perform your Isntrumental
mensuration, either by your self or servants, whom you employ therein:
wherein, for many respects, I would have nothing done or performed, before the
first day of your Court be past; when as you have read and made known your
Commission, and settled an orderly course with the tenants, for their
attendance, aid, and assistance in that behalf.

And thus, and in this like manner, may you spend the time to good purpose,
till your Court day come.

CHAP. IX. The order of keeping a Court of Survey.
IF a Court Baron be kept with your Court of Survey, as is ever most fitting,
then are you first to enter the style of the Court in this manner.

Branton. CVria Baronis and Superuis. A. B. Armiger, ibidem tent. die Lunae,
videlicet secundo die Septem. Anno Regni IACOBI, Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae,
and Hyberniae Regis fidei defens. etc. xiiij. and Scotiae 50. tent. per A. R.
Seneschallum and Superuis.

After the style of the Court thus entered, you shall cause the Bayliffe, who
serves the Court, to make Proclamation by crying once Oyes, and then shall you
will him to say, thus; All manner of persons, who were summoned to appear here
this day, to serve the Lord of the Manor, for his Court now holden, draw near
and give your attendance, and every one answer to his name, as he shall be
called, upon the pain and peril that may fall thereon.

Then by your Rentall, call them all severally by their names, marking those
which are absent to be amerced. Which done, cause the Bayliffe to make another
Oyes, and willing them to draw near, and keep silence whilst the Commission
be read; let the same be read unto them, and likewise the Articles thereunto
annexed, if it be for the King.

Then out of those tenants which are present, make choice of the most
sufficient for your Jury, wherein your best course is, formerly to inform
your self, and to take special notice, who are most fitting for your purpose,
and to have their names ready written in a paper by themselves, which you may
now thereby call accordingly. But being for the King, you have always a writ
of assistance directed to the Sheriff of the shire, requiring him to return
you a sufficient Jury: yet may you without him by virtue of your Commission,
impannell any Jury at your own pleasure. Then direct the Foreman of the
Jury, to lay his hand on the Book, and swear him as follows, or to the
like purpose.

YOu shall diligently inquire and make true presentment of all such matters, as
on the Lords behalf of this Manor, shall be given you in charge, you shall
neither for favor, fear, affection, or other parciall respect whatsoever,
forbear to present what you ought to find, or find what you ought not to
present, you shall herein keep the Lords counsel, your own, and your
fellows, and in all things according to a sincere and upright conscience, you
shall present the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, as by
evidence and your own knowledge you shall be induced, to the best of your
power, so help you God, and by the contents of the Book, which he is to kiss.

And after the Foreman is thus sworn by himself, then cause three or four
of the rest of the Jury, to lay their right hands together on the Book, and
give them their oath, as follows.

THe same oath which A. B. your Foreman before you, for his part, has made
and taken, you and every of you, for your parts shall truly keep and perform
to the uttermost of your powers, so help you God. And cause them severally to
kiss the Book.

And in like manner swear all the rest. And all being sworn, cause the
Bayliffe to number them, as you read their names. Then cause him also to make
the third Proclamation, and say thus: All you that be here sworn, draw near
and hea^e your charge, and all the rest keep silence.

Then make your exhortation, and deliver the charge of a Court Baron, after the
usual manner. Which being finished, you are to address your speech unto them,
concerning the present business of Survey, as occasion shall be offered,
whereof to prescribe you any form or president, were to little purpose, seeing
it is to be framed and directed to such ends and purposes, as the present cause
requires, which you shall always find different and variable, and therefore I
refer the same to your own discretion, deeming you now able and fitting
sufficiently to perform the same in any kind.

And then deliver unto them the Articles which you have ready drawn,
according to the directions of the last Chapter, which is their charge
concerning the business of Survey, relating unto them, that as they receive
these Articles (whereof they are to inquire) in writing, so are they to answer
the same in writing under their hands and seals particularly by a day, now to
be limited and appointed, which for many reasons is most fitting to be, about
the time of your concluding the business. Which day is to be expressed under
their Articles, and your name subscribed thereunto.

And now are you to take order, and give special directions unto all the
tenants for their attendance, aid, and assistance, in your isntrumental
mensuration, appointing them by turns, how, when, and where you are to use
their help and assistance, wherein you are to deal with such discretion, as
you neither fail of their help, when occasion serves, nor oppress them with
grieuance by their overmuch attendance.

And having thus far proceeded, the rest of this day may be spent in entering
their several deeds, evidences, and estates, in manner as shall be hereafter
declared.

But before you discharge the tenants, you are to consider (according to the
number of them) in what time or how many days, you shall be able to enter
their estates, and if they consist of diverse Towneships, as large and spacious
Lordships usually do; then your best course is to appoint them several days
for their attendance, and bringing in of their evidence by several Towneships,
for it would be no less troublesome to your self, then distastefull to the
tenants, to require their general and daily attendance until the business
were wholly finished.

And now may you aiourne the Court unto the next day, (or such other time as
you think fitting) by causing the Bayliffe to make proclamation to that
purpose, and the like from time to time, till you have ended your business.

The next day you may begin your mensuration in the fields, either by your
self or those whom you employ to that purpose, according to the instructions
of the third Book. But it were fitting for your own part to be employed in
entering of the tenants estates, until you have finished, or you may spend
such time therein, as when the weather is not fitting to stir abroad, or in
the mornings and euenings, as you shall find meetest for your purpose.

CHAP. X. The order and manner of entering the Tenants evidence, and their
several estates.
FIrst, it is to be considered, that most Manors (as if formerly spoken)
consist of diverse Towneships or particular parts, and the tenancie of those
Towneships of diverse estates, as Freeholds, Copy-holds, etc. Wherefore, I hold
it sitting and an orderly course, that not only every of those Towneships, but
the several estates therein, be entered and taken severally and particularly
by themselves, that is, all of one and the same Towneship and estate under one
and the same title, for avoiding of confusion. As, suppose you are to survey
the Manor of Branton, which consists of these several Towneships or parts,
Branton, Bodley, and Sutton, and within those Towneships, are diverse tenants,
holding their lands by several estates, as Freehold, Copyhold, etc. Then
would I have you make your several entries under those several titles
whereunto they properly belong, as under the title of Branton towneship
Freehold, enter all those which are of that Towneship, and of that nature: and
under the title of Branton towneship Copyhold, enter all the Copy-holds of
that towneship, and the like of all the rest.

And these entries I would have made in loose sheets of paper at large, keeping
them always sorted, according to the several Towneships and estates, till you
have finished all your entries, and then to file them together orderly in a
Book, each Towneship following other.

In which several entries observe this course* having written your title as
before, in the head or top of the sheet, then enter the tenants name, and the
very words of grant, as they are in his Deed, Copy, or Leaf, which is to be
written from the margent the whole breadth of the sheet, leaving only toward
the right hand a space, wherein is to be expressed the rents, and services, and
in the margent always express the tenure.

And considering, that in few or no Deeds, Evidences, Copies, or Leases, the
lands are particularly expressed by particular names, closes, and quantities,
as the tenant now holds the same, and as you shall find them in your
isntrumental mensuration; having entered the effect of the Deed, Copy, or
Lease, according to the purport thereof: it is fitting to question with the
tenant, what several parcels he holds, for and under the services and rents
contained in every Deed, Copy, or Lease particularly; as, what Meadow, what
Arable, what Pasture, and their several names and quantities, as he esteems
them; and if he know not what acres they contain (as most tenants will seem
ignorant thereof) let him express of his Meadow how many days mowing, of his
Arable how many days plowing, and of his Pasture how many Beast-gates, and the
like: for although it be not greatly material for these their given
quantities, in respect you measure every particular; yet this kind of entry
will serve you to good purpose, as shall hereafter appear. Also, you are to
question him concerning his Pastures, as well those in several, as the
Pastures in common, what every Beast-gate is worth by the year in every of
them severally; whereof you may otherwise also inform your self, lest you be
deceived. The form of which entries let be in this manner.

BRANTON Towne-ship Freehold.

Socage,

ANTHONY BORNE holds freely to him and his heirs for ever, by deed
indented, bearing date 14. die Ianuarij, Anno Reg. Reginae Elizabeth. etc. 30.
made and granted by and from WILLIAM BATEMAN, of etc. All that Mesuage or
Tenement (expressing the very words of Grant) On which Grant is there a deed
of Feoffement of the same date, with liuerie of seisin thereon past
accordingly; by the yearly rents and services of Fealty, and iij.s.

Particular.
THe mansion house, outhouses, and site, consisting of two Orchards, three
Gardens, and two Yards or Garths. containing together -- 3. r.; A Close of
Meadow, called Broad Meade, containing -- 10. a. Another called White-thorne
close, containing -- 8. a. Meadow in the common Meadow, called Long meade,
three parcels containing -- 12. d. A Close of Arable, called Bennets,
containing -- 7. a. Another of Arable, called the High Close, -- 15. a. Arable
in the South field, in six parcels, which contain all together -- 4. a. 3. r.
Arable in the North field, five parcels containing -- 6. 2. 2. 1. One Close of
Pasture, called the Ox Pasture, containing 30. beast. gates, at 13.s. 4.d. le
gate, -- 30. gates. Another called the Calfe Close, containing 12. beast-gates,
at 8.s. le gate, -- 12. gates. In the great common Moore, at 2.s. 8.d. le gate,
-- 20. gates. In the common Cow-pastures, at 6.s. 8.d. le gate, -- 10. gates.
On the Downs depasturing, for 150. sheep, at 3.d. le gate, -- 150. gates.
Common sans stint on the Moors.
And in this order, and under this Title, enter all the Free-holds within the
Towne-ship of BRANTON: But withal, observe this course in all your entries;
that these particulars, in the entering of them thus in your rough Book, exceed
not, nor extend past half the breadth of every sheet or leaf, or little
further, because directly after the several contents, before specified, there
is particularly to be expressed afterward, the true quantities of every
parcel found by measure; and after that, the several and particular yearly
values thereof, as shall be hereafter shown.

In like manner, let your tenants for life or lives, in every Towne-ship, be
entered under their due and several titles thus.

BODLEY Towne-ship for lives.

THOMAS HOCKLEY holds by Indenture, bearing date 23. die Nouembr. Anno Reg.
Reginae Elizabeth. 32. made and granted by and from A. B. All that Mesuage or
Tenement (using the words of Grant) for the term of the natural lives of the
said THOMAS HOCKLEY now aged 50. years; of JANE his wife now aged 42. years,
and JOHN their son now aged 30. years, successively each after other: and
pays rent per annum -- xx.s.

Particular.

ANd here write the particulars in form as before.

Then under the foot of those particulars make a brief Memorandum of such
necessary observations as are to be noted, thus.

There is due unto the Lord on the death of every of them dying tenant in
possession, the best Beast Nomine Heriot. The tenant is to pay his rent
quarterly, or within one and twenty days, on pain of xx.s. Nomine poenae; or
within forty days, on pain of forfeiture by prouiso. To do all manner of
reparations (except great timber.) Not to let the whole, or any part, without
the Lords license. The Lord warranteth the premises against him and his heirs.

And the like notes may be expressed under all your other entries.

Where note, that special care is to be always had in the entrance of these
grants for lives, whether they are all joint purchasers, as all named in the
words of grant, or whether only granted to one during all their lives; wherein
there is great difference; which is to be noted, and the very words of grant
to be ever precisely expressed in your entries as before.

As concerning your Copihold Tenants let them be entered thus.

SVTTON Town-ship Copi-holds.

W. B. holds the Copy of Court roll bearing date viij. die Iunij Anno Regni
Regis IACOBI Angliae iij. of the surrender of C. D. One message or tenement
(according to the words of the Copy) late E. F. and before that G. H. To him
and his heirs at the will of the Lord according to the custom of the Manor.
For which he paid fine XLs. And pays rent per annum. XXXs.

Particular.

Then write your particular as before: and after that such brief Memorandums
as you shall find fitting, according to the former directions in that behalf.

And the like course are you to hold with Tenants for term of years, and at
will; and all the rest: until you have fully finished all your entries. Then
place all your leaves in order; and if you be assured that all are entered
(which will easily appear by your Rentall, if you always cross the same, as
you enter them severally) then write a new Rentall according to this your rough
Book, and join the same to the beginning of your Book, and file all
together; But let your Rentall be alphabeticall; or else if your book be
very large, make an alphabeticall Index or Table of all the Tenants names, to
be placed in the beginning of the Book, before the Rental, with numbers of
reference to the number of leaves; whereby instantly you may turn to any
Tenants name therein as you shall have occasion to use the same.

And thus have you finished with the Tenants concerning their several entries;
but have not yet fully perfected your rough Book; whereby you may be able to
ingrosse the same. Wherefore proceed therein as is taught in the next.

CHAP. XI. The means and order of perfecting the Book of entries last
mentioned, and the due placing therein of the several contents of every
particular found by measure through the whole Manor, with the valuation
thereof.
WE are now to suppose before we begin this work, that not only all the
Instrumental mensuration throughout the whole Manor is finished; but also the
first plot drawn; and the several contents thereof cast up, and expressed
therein; with the proper and particular numbers, severally belonging thereunto,
according to the instructions of the Third Book.

Which being effected, we are first to make an Index or alphabetical Table of
all the Tenants names; whereunto is to be added the Lords and the Parsons, the
one for Demesnes, the other for gleabe; which Index is thus to be composed. If
one sheet of paper will not serve, you are to take two, three or more, and with
mouth-glue fasten them end to end, making thereof a long scrole or schedule of
the breadth of the whole sheet. And with a small margent toward the left hand,
let it from thence be ruled with black or red Ink overthwart the whole paper,
of the distance of lines in ordinary writing; between which lines down by
the same left margent write all the Tenants names each under other
alphabetically, leaving all the rest of the ruled Paper to be thus employed.

First, take your Field-booke, and beginning where you first began your work
in the fields, take all the numbers before you expressed in the margent
thereof, as appears in Chap. 10.3. and noting to what Tenants name they
belong in your Field-booke, against the same name place them in your Index
between the ruled lines; whereby you shall speedily express and reduce the
several numbers representing the several fields and closes throughout the
whole Manor against every man's name in the Index to whom they properly belong.

Then take your common Field-booke (mentioned in Chap. 40.3. and with it
perform the like; but make a stroke or other mark for distinction between
these and the former numbers; so have you also every man's particular parcels
lying in the common fields expressed against his name. And thus is your Index
perfect and fit to be employed as follows.

Take now your rough Book of entries, and turn to the first Tenants
particular therein entered; and look in your Index what numbers are belonging
to that Tenant; also take your Field-booke, and comparing those numbers in your
Index with the same in the margent of your Field-booke, you shall find therein
the several names of the fields and closes belonging to that Tenant; and the
like names shall you find in your Book of entries, in that Tenants particular:
wherefore express those several numbers against every particular parcel in
the margent of your entries, whereunto they properly belong: and the like
perform in all respects with your common field-booke, for those parcels lying
in the common fields. Then lay your rough plot before you, and finding those
several numbers in your plot, note the several content and quantity of every
several parcel of ground, expressed in the plot represented by those numbers;
and those quantities express and write down in figures particularly in your
book of entries, to every parcel whereunto they belong next after the
quantities delivered by the tenant. As for the particular quantities in the
common fields, you shall not find them in the plot, but in your common
field-booke, according to the direction thereof in Chap. 40.3. before recited;
which let thereby be expressed accordingly.

And the like course in all respects is to be holden with all other the entries
throughout your whole book.

But it is to be considered, that one tenant may within this Manor hold lands
of several estates, and by several rents and services, as Freehold,
Copyhold, Tenement Lands, etc. yet are they all comprised and represented
within and by those numbers expressed in the Index. In such case you are to
compare these numbers with the particular names expressed in your field-booke,
and those with the entries; and you shall most easily distinguish the one from
the other, and express and assign to every of them their due and proper
number and quantity, as before.

Also, it is here to be considered, that we have not yet spoken of any means to
express each man's particular quantity in the common stinted pastures, or
sheepe-walkes, whereof only the general quantity is taken by measure, and
expressed in the plot. Which to perform, work thus.

Suppose there is in the Manor a stinted Cow-pasture, wherein every tenant
has a certain number of Beast-gates, some more, and some less, which are
usually rated and stinted, either according to their rents, or after their
quantities of known grounds, or their parts in the common arable fields: and
imagine this pasture is found to contain by measure 212. Acres, 3. Roods, 20.
Perches; first, collect out of your entries all the number of gates in the same
pasture; which added together, let contain in the whole 116. Then reduce your
measured quantity into the lowest denomination, as Perches (according to the
directions of Chap. 48.3.) whereby you shall find the same to be 34060.
Perches: and supposing the tenant, whose quantity you seek, has in the same
pasture 10. beast-gates; by the rule of proportion reason thus. If 116. the
whole number of beast-gates, give 34060. Perches, the whole quantity, what
gives 10. gates; and by increasing 34060. by 10. and parting the product by
116. your answer will be 2936. Perches, and a small quantity more, the
proportional quantity belonging to 10. gates; which reduced into acres (by
Chap. 48.3. before recited) is 18. Acres, 1. Rood, 16. Perches. And in like
manner work with all the rest. And here is to be noted, that having thus
gotten the proportional quantity belonging to a beast-gate, and truly
understanding the value of a beast-gate, you shall be able at pleasure, and
most certainly, to express by the acre the true yearly value thereof.

And thus have you perfected your entries, for the true and certain
quantities, according to measure; and now rests the valuation.

The best, speediest, and most certain means for your valuation, in mine
opinion, is thus: Let it first be considered, that all grounds generally
consist in quality of these three kinds, Meadow, Arable, and Pasture; and
supposing every of these kinds likewise to consist of three sorts in value and
goodness; as the first and best sort; the second and mean; and the third and
worst sort: In your isntrumental mensuration, when you write in your
field-booke the title of every field or close, consider with your self, which
of those three sorts the same field or close consists of; if of the best
sort, express in some place of your title the figure 1. if of the second sort,
the figure 2. and if of the third and worst sort, the figure 3. and having
informed your self by the best means you can (which I hold not fitting here
to relate) of the general value, what the best sort of Meadow, Arable, and
Pasture, is worth by the acre, and the like of the other sorts, throughout the
whole Manor; then, according to those rates, pass over your whole book of
entries, and value every particular parcel by it self; which, by finding in
each title of your field-booke of what sort they are, is most speedily and
exactly performed. And thus are your entries thus far perfected.

But yet, before we proceed to the engrossing hereof, or rather before we
finish with the tenants concerning their entries, it is to be enquired and
considered, what other profits and commodities, besides these lands and
tenements, are demised and granted by the Lord to any tenant within the Manor
for yearly rent, or otherwise; which likewise are to be entered and expressed
in your rough book, with the rents and yearly values thereof: as Mines of
Tynne, Lead, Copper, Coal, etc. Quarries of Stone, Fishing, Fowling, Hawking,
and Hunting, Iuistments, Herbage, and Pannage, free Warrens, Customarie works,
or Services, profits of Fayres and Markets, and mosses of Peat or Turfe; all or
any of which, and the like, may be within a Manor, and disposed and letten for
yearly rents, which by no means are to be omitted. All which premises, and
the several quantities, rents, and values thereof, are here to be summed up,
and their several totals expressed.

Then are you to express the several reprises issuing out of this Manor,
being such as are mentioned in the sixth Chapter of this Book. All which being
likewise summed up, the total thereof is to be deducted from the former value,
and the clear remainder expressed.

Next are you to consider, if any of those profits and commodities, last before
named, or the like, are within this Manor, and not letten by lease, or
otherwise, for any certain yearly rent; and if any such be, then are they to
be here mentioned and expressed as casualties, and the yearly value thereof
estimated, what they may or are likely to prove worth by the year.

Also, the names and quantities of the common Fields, common Meadows, stinted
Pastures, and all other vnstinted Commons, are here to be expressed; and of
those vnstinted Commons, how they are accustomed, held, and occupied; whether
peculiar to the Lord and tenants of this Manor; or whether any other Lord or
Lords, and their tenants, have rake, escape, eatage, or other interest therein;
and the butts, bounds, and limits thereof severally.

Also, what woods and underwoods are within the Manor, and their several
values.

Then would there be entered an abstract, in nature of a Custome-roll, showing
briefly all the ancient customs of and belonging to the Manor. And also a
Suit-roll of all the free suitors, etc.

And lastly, a true and perfect description of all the out-bounds and limits of
the whole Manor.

And having thus perfected your rough Book, you may now call your Jury, and
receive their verdict, as in the next.

CHAP. XII. The manner and order of receiving the Juries verdict, and the
courses therein to be observed.
WHen you are drawing toward a conclusion of perfecting your Book, according
to the directions of the last Chapter; it were not amiss, that you hasten the
Jury, in perfecting their verdict, lest you be forced to spend time idly in
attendance for the same: Which when they have effected, considering, that for
the most part they are unacquainted with matter of form, though in effect and
substance they may answer your desire and expectation, according to the
articles delivered unto them; you are to call them before you, and reading,
examining, and comparing the articles, with their several and particular
answers thereunto, reduce the same into an orderly form of an Inquisition,
observing still the substance of what they have found and presented: and then
having read the same unto them, with their approbation and allowance thereof,
cause your Clarke to ingrosse the same accordingly in parchment, and then let
them again consider thereof; and having set their hands and seals thereunto,
demand of them, if they are mutually agreed on this their verdict; which when
they have acknowledged, receive the same from the Foreman, and dismiss your
Court.

And here have you finished what here need to be performed: and now may you
leave the Manor of BRANTON; and repairing homewards, may there perfect your
plot, as you are formerly directed by the third Book; and ingrosse your
Survey, as is hereafter declared in the next.

CHAP. XIII. The form and order of engrossing a Survey.
TO prescribe and direct one certain and settled form and course herein for
all in general, were impossible, in respect of the variety of occasions
offered, according to the nature of the business, and the disposition of those
for whom the same is performed: wherefore, the performance hereof must mainely
depend upon the judgment, skill, and discretion of the Surueyor. For mine own
part, I never yet for any two Lordships or Manors limited my self to one and
the same form; but ever framed my course as the cause required: as in one
Manor, where I find a commixture of other lands and tenements within the same,
being holden of other Lords; here of necessity must I abutt and bound every
several particular thereof: but in another, which I find entire, I hold it
needless. Again, I find in one Manor diverse and several Towne-ships and
parts, and those to consist of several estates and tenures; in such case,
these are to be severally distinguished and divided, according to their
several parts. Another shall you find sole and entire, which is to be ordered
accordingly: and many other such like differences shall you find, which will
minister occasion to alter any settled form.

Besides, the will and disposition of him by whom you are employed, shall often
cause you to alter your course: one perhaps approving of the form you use;
another will have it in the nature of your ancient Terrars; a third, in order
of a Particular, or Constat; and a fourth, it may be, in a fourth form; for
Quot homines, tot sententiae. And again, one, for his own understanding, will
have it in English; and another, of better understanding, will require it in
Latin. And certainly it were very requisite, although your rough book be
drawn in English, that always your engrossed book be written in Latin;
unless the contrary be specially required. Yet in these mine examples and
directions following, I hold it most fitting to deliver the same in English,
for the better understanding of those who have most need; considering, that a
reasonable Surueyor may be lame of that leg.

But notwithstanding such varieties often happen; yet will we for a generality
propose these rules and directions following; which I hold most meet and
fitting to be observed and held in a formal and well ordered Survey.

To which purpose, let us now suppose we are to ingrosse a Survey of the
Manor of BRANTON; according to the rough book thereof, specified in the tenth
Chapter of this Book; wherein first begin with the title, which let be thus,
or to the like effect.

An exact and perfect Survey and view of the Manor of BRANTON, in the County
of D. being parcel of the possessions of A. B. who holds the same of our
Sovereign Lord the King, as of his Manor of G. in free and common Socage, and
by the yearly rent of xiij.s. iiij.d. Had, made, and taken there, as well by
Inquisition, and the oaths of a sufficient Jury in that behalf, as by the
view and particular mensuration of all and every the Messuages, Lands, and
Tenements, of, within, and belonging to the same. Anno Domini 1616. Annoque
Regni Regis IACOBI, Angliae, etc. 14.

By A. R. Superuis.

NExt after this, or the like Title, in the following leaf, are you to write
and express and Index or Alphabeticall Table of all the Tenants names (as has
been formerly taught) with numbers of reference against each name, in what
leaf or leaves of the Book each Tenants particular is to be found: But
notwithstanding, this Index is to be placed in your Book first and next after
the Title; yet is it most convenient and fitting, to collect and write the same
(and also the Rentall next hereafter following) after the whole Book be
engrossed; before which time, you shall not know how to place your numbers of
reference therein, according to the number of the leaves.

Then after this let next be placed a general rentall of the whole Manor, but
to be divided into such towneships and parts, as your Book is divided into;
wherein first express your rents of such demesnes, as are letten in lease,
then the rents and services of your free-holds of inheritance. Thirdly, of your
customarie or copyhold tenants. Fourthly, of the tenants for life or lives.
Fifthly, of those for term of years: and sixthly and lastly, your tenants at
will, wherein let every of these bear their several titles, and under the
foot of each kind, let the total thereof be collected and expressed, and in
the end or foot of the whole rentall, express first the total of every kind,
and after that the general and total sum of all together. And if any rents
or other reprises be issuing out of this Manor, you may here express them
particularly under the title of reprises, which let be deducted out of the
former total, and express the clear remainder.

And thus is our Rentall finished; but to be collected and written (as I
formerly noted) after the body and substance of the Book be engrossed.

And your rentall being thus finished, you may next place (if you please) the
out-bounder of the whole Manor; and if any of the towneships or parts thereof
lie dispersed and remote (as in many places you shall find them perhaps
twenty miles distant, from the chief and principal part of the Manor; and
sometimes in another County) it were very fitting and necessary, to express
severally the several out-bounders of those towneships and parts. And it is to
be noted, that in the expressing of these bounders, a maine and principal care
is to be had, that you use, observe, and keep the old and ancient names of
such meeres, marks, and bounds, as have been anciently used and accustomed;
for that innovation in this kind is very dangerous for many causes; yet if you
find the ancient meeres, marks, and bounds, to very few and slender; or any
of them decayed and worn out of knowledge, you may add as many more as in
discretion you shall find cause; but by any means omit not, or leave out any
of those which are ancient and noted bounds. If you think good, these bounders
may be placed after, or in the end of the book; which being no matter of
necessity whether (so it be had at all) I leave to your discretion.

And now are you to begin with the body and substance of the book; and first
of all with the Manor or mansion house, and the site thereof; wherein you are
to consider, whether the same be in the Lords own hands and occupation; or
whether letten by Lease, or otherwise unto any Tenant or Tenants, and to enter
the same accordingly, as follows under this Title.

BRANTON DEMESNES.

A B. Esquire is Lord of this Manor, and has at this present in his own
hands and occupation, the Manor or mansion house with the site thereof; and
so much of the demesnes thereunto belonging as are hereafter particularly
expressed. Which Manor with all and singular the appurtenances, he holds of
our Sovereign Lord the King, as of his Manor of G. in free and common Socage,
and by the yearly rent of xiijs iiijd

Particulars.

THe Manor or mansion house called Branton Hall, being fairly built with free
stone, and all offices thereunto belonging, with two Stables, one Oxe-house,
and a Doue-house; also the site consisting of three fair gardens, two
orchards, two courts, and three out-yards, lying all together between the high
street of Branton south, and the Oxe-pasture hereafter mentioned North;
abutting East, on Long meddow, and West on the site of the Parsonage. And
contains together five Acres, two Roodes, and twenty Perches. a. r. p. 5-2-20.

Valet per anum -- xxli.

Then next unto the house and site, express the Parkes (if any be) with the
number of Dear therein; what number of Aunteller, and what of rascal Dear;
also what number of beasts may be therein Iuisted without prejudice to the
game; and also what pannage; and these may you particularly aburt and bound as
before if need require; which is most easily and speedily done, having before
you the rough plot of the whole Manor, and in the conclusion hereof express
the quantity and yearly value as before.

Then after these Parkes, enter particularly all such several fields and
closes of the demeanes, as the Lord has in his own use at the time of this
Survey; which you may particularly abutt and bound as before, and express the
several quantities, and values thereof: But herein for orders sake it were
fitting first to enter all the meddow grounds particularly each after other,
then the enclosed arable grounds, and next the pastures; and if any of the
demesnes are lying in the common fields, then to express them particularly
with their quantities and values; also you are to express what woods the Lord
has; and what right or custom the Tenants have or claim therein, either for
depasturing or otherwise: and lastly, what wastes the Lord has within the
Manor. And at the foot of this particular, express the total quantity and
value thereof.

But it is to be noted, that all these particulars are to be collected (by help
of the numbers in your Index) out of your field book for the names, and out of
the rough plot for the several quantities, for that it is needless to enter
these lands which are in the Lords hands into your rough book of entries; and
the like course also is to be holden for your Glebe lands.

And if any of the Demesne Lands are in Lease, let them also be entered under
the former Title, in this manner.

C. D. holds by Indenture of Lease, bearing date the twentieth day of January
An. R. Regis Iacobi etc. secundo, made and granted by and from A. B. unto the
said C. D. All those lands, etc. (using the very words of grant) for the term
of one and twenty years, commencing from and after the Feast of the Birth of
our Lord God last past, before the date of the same Lease, for and by the
payment of the yearly rent of -- xxxli.

Particular.

THen here enter the several and particular Closes, which you may abutt and
bound, as before, expressing the particular quantity and value of every
several Close, and at the foot of the particular express the total quantity
and value, and if the yearly value exceed the rent reserved, deduct the rent
from the total value, and express the clear remainder, thus.

Valet ad demittend. -- x^.

And under this particular express a brief memorandum of the several
covenants, clauses, conditions, and prouisoes in the lease contained, after
this manner.

The Tenant is to pay his rent quarterly, or within one and twenty days after
every Feast, on pain of forfeiture, by prouiso to that purpose. He is to do
all manner of reparations (except great timber) not to let or set without
license of the Lord. The Lord makes special warranties against his father,
himself and his heirs, etc.

And the like course is to be held for all other Leases, after the particulars
expressed.

And here also under this title of Demesnes, are you to enter all such Mills,
Mines of Tin, Lead, Copper, Cole, etc. also quarries of Stone, Slate, and
the like; also Fishing, Fowling, Hawking and Hunting; likewise Iuistments,
Herbage, Pannage, free Warrens, customarie Works or Services, profits of
Fayres and Markets, and also mosses of Peate or Turffe, and the like, as are
letten and Markets, and also mosses of Peate or Turffe, and the like, as are
letten and demised by the Lord, to any Tenants within the Manor by lease for
yearly rent or otherwise: all which (being thus letten) are in the nature of
Demeanes, and are to be particularly entered and expressed accordingly, with
their several Rents and the yearly values thereof.

But all of those last mentioned (excepting Mills) are to be severed and
distinguished from the Demesne lands, because they are not matters of firm,
stable, and certain perpetuity: For notwithstanding, that during the terms
of the several leases thereof made and granted, the Tenants may be charged and
bound to pay several yearly rents for the same, which for the time being are
certain; yet perhaps at the end and expiration of those terms, they may be of
little or no value at all; or on the other side of far greater worth and
value then now they are, as often happens by those mines of Tin, Lead,
Copper, Coals, and the like. Wherefore notwithstanding they are entered under
this general title of Demesnes; yet for destinctions sake, let them pass more
particularly under this title of Casualties made certain.

And after all these demesnes are thus entered and engrossed, make a brief
conclusion thereof underneath the same, in this or the like manner.

Conclusion of the Demesnes.
The Demesnes of this Manor, consists of Lands, Tenements, and Mills in the
use of The Lord Quantity -- 1320 a. -- o r. -- o. p. Value -- 660 li. -- o s.
-- o. d.
The Tenants No. of Tenants -- 5. Quantity -- 163 a. -- 0 r. -- 0. p. Rent --
54 li. -- 6 s. -- 8 d. Value -- 81-10-0. Ad demitt. -- 27-3-4.

Casualties made certain. No. of Tenants -- 6. Rent -- 25 li. -- 8 s. -- 6. d.
Value -- 94-18-0. Ad demitt. -- 69-9-6.



And after the Demesnes are thus entered and engrossed, then next unto it place
the Rectorie or Parsonage, and then the Vicarage (if any be) under the proper
title thereunto belonging, after this manner.

The Rectorie of BRANTON.

A. B. Clarke, being Parson there, holds the Rectorie of the gift of the Lord
of this Manor (if it be so, and if otherwise, express it accordingly) who
has the gift, nomination and presentation thereof, as in the right of this
Manor, as often as the same shall happen to be void, which is valued in the
Kings books per annum. Lvi^

Particular.

THe Parsonage or Mansion House with the outhouses belonging thereunto, as a
Barn, Stable, Oxe-house, and a Doue-coate, with the site thereof, consisting
of two Gardens, an Orchard, and three out-Yards, which lie together between
the high street of Branton South, and a field called the Oxe-pasture North,
abutting toward the East on the site of this Manor, and West on a Lane there
leading out of the high street into the Oxe-pasture aforesaid, and contains
together, one Acre and three Roodes. 1 a. -- 3 r. -- 0. p.

Valet per annum -- iij li.

And in this sort let every particular parcel of glebe-Land be expressed
with the buttes and bounds thereof, which by help of the plot and field-Booke
lying before you (being directed thereunto by the numbers in your Index) is
instantly and exactly performed: For these glebe-Lands; and the Demesnes which
are in the Lords hands, are never entered in your rough Book of entries.
Wherein is always to be observed; that you express the true quantity and
yearly value of every particular parcel; and in the foot of the particular,
the total quantity and value as before. Yet is it not usual neither of these
nor the (...) holds of Inheritance to express any value at all; which I will
refer to your own discretion, and the will and disposition of those by whom
you are employed. And in like manner are you to express the Vicarage if any
such be.

And having thus finished your Parsonage, Vicarage and glebe-Lands, proceed
next unto the Free-holds within this Towne-shippe; which are to be entered and
engrossed after this order, and under this title following.

BRANTON Free-holds.

Socage.

A.B. holds freely to him and his heirs for ever by deed indented bearing
date xxviij. die Marcij Anno Regni Regis IACOBI Angliae, etc. Sexto made and
granted by and from C. D. All that message or tenement (expressing the very
words of grant) By the yearly rents and services of -- Fealty and v.s.

Particular.

THe Mansion house, outhouses and the site thereof consisting of one Garden,
two Orchards and three out yards, lying together between the high street of
Branton North, and the common field called the South-field South; abutting
Easton the Churchyard, and West on a lane leading into the South field. And
contains three roodes and thirty perches. a. 1. p. 0. 3. 30.

And thus proceed ^^h every parcel belonging to this freeholder; which being
finished, at the foot of this particular express the quantity and value
thereof: But as concerning the valuation of Free-holds, unless it be specially
required, by reason of some purchase thereof to be made; or a possibility of
escheat, or the like, you need not trouble your self therewith.

And having perfected your particular, express underneath the same, a brief
Memorandum of such necessary observations as you shall find fitting, as well
concerning the Tenants evidence, as what Heriots, Reliefes and other Duties and
Services the Tenant ought to yield, do and perform unto the Lord on every
death or alienation.

And in like manner under the same Title ^nter all other the freeholders
within this towneship; after which, collect and express together their
several quantities in one total sum, and likewise their values (if it be
required as before:) But in these and all others, as I have formerly noted, I
would always have an orderly course holden in placing the particular lands of
one and the same nature and quality together, as first (after the house and
site) all the meddow grounds, etc.

And thus having entered and engrossed your free-holds of this towneship, let
next be entered your copyholds or customarie Tenants, after this manner, and
under this Title.

BRANTON Copy-holds.

A. B. holds by copy of Court roll, bearing date 26 Februarij Anno Regni
Regis Iacobi Angliae etc. 4to. of the surrender of C. D. All that message or
tenement etc. (using the very words of the Copy) to him and his heirs at the
will of the Lord, according to the custom of the Manor. For which he paid
Fine on his admittance vli. And pays rent for the same per annum, --. xls.

Particular.

LEt your particulars here be entered in all respects as before with the
several buts and bounds thereof, expressing the quantity and value of every
several parcel: and in the foot of the whole particular express the totals
as before; then out of the total value (which admit to be xli.) deduct the
Rent, and express the remainder thus.

Valet in toto per annum xli.

Viz. ad dimittend viijii.

Then under this particular thus perfected, make (as before) a brief
Memorandum of such necessary observations as are sitting, as what herio^ (if
any be due on the death of the Tenant) what fines on death or aliena^^^; and
what other services the Tenant owes, etc. And after this order and under this
title enter all the rest of the copy-holds within this towneship.

And the like course in all respects is to be holden in entry of the Tenants
for life, or lives; for term of years; and those at the Will of the Lord;
whereof to make several demonstrations, and to deliver several examples, were
but great labor to small purpose, seeing they tend all to one and the same end.

Wherefore take this for a brief and general rule, that all lands whatsoever,
and the tenancy thereof, consist of one of these seven kinds, which in every
Manor where they are, are to be used as your several titles, and ought to be
placed in the engrossing of your Book, each after other, as here they are
expressed, viz. 1. Demesnes. 2. Gleabe-lands: 3. Free-holds. 4. Customarie. 5.
For lives. 6. For years. 7. At will.


And having after this form and order entered and engrossed the several Lands
and Tenements, lying within this Towne-ship of BRANTON, under the several
titles last before mentioned, collect your total of every kind, and in the
end of this Towne-ship make your conclusion to this or the like purpose
following.

Conclusion of the Towne-ship of BRANTON.
This Towne-ship consists of

Demesnes in the use of The Lord Quantity -- 1320 a. -- 0 r. -- 0. p. Value --
660. li. -- 0 s. -- 0. d.
The Tenants Lands No. of Tenants -- 5. Quantity-163 a. -- 0 r. -- 0. p. Rent
-- 54 li. -- 6 s. -- 8. d. Value -- 81 -- 10 -- 0. Ad demitt -- 27 -- 3 -- 4.
Casualties made certain, No. of Tenants -- 6. Rent -- 25 li. -- 8 s. -- 6. d.
Value -- 94 -- 18 -- 0. Ad demitt. -- 69 -- 9 -- 6.


Gleabe lands Quantity -- 56a -- 0-0. Freeholds of inheritance, No. Tenants.
-- 7. Quantity -- 230 a. -- 2 r. -- 0. p. Rent -- 13. s.6. d. -- 3. II.
pepper.
Customarie lands, No. Tenants. -- 16. Quantity -- 340 a. -- 3 r. -- 0. p.
Rent -- 17-16-5. Value -- 152-13-4. Ad demitt. -- 134-16-11.
Tenement lands. For lives No. Tenants. -- 12. Quantity -- 432 a. -- 2 r. --
0. p. Rent -- 143 li. -- 6. s. -- 3. d. Value -- 220-0-0. Ad demitt. --
76-13-9.
For years No. Tenants. -- 23. Quantity -- 624 a. -- 2 r. -- 0. p. Rent --
156 li. -- 13 s. -- 9. d. Value -- 310-18-0. Ad demitt. -- 154-4-3.
At will No. Tenants. -- 8. Quantity -- 120 a. -- 0 r. -- 0. p. Rent -- 42 li.
-- 5 s. -- 6. d. Value -- 58-10-0. Ad demitt. -- 16-4-6.


And having thus finished this Towne-ship, proceed in the like form and order
in all respects, with all other the towneships and several parts of and
belonging to the whole Manor, observing still after every towneship and part,
to make such or the like conclusion, as is last before specified; and in the
end of all a full and general conclusion of the whole Manor; not forgetting
first to enter all reprises, issuing, and going out of the same, which is to be
deducted out of the whole value, as is before declared.

And after this conclusion thus perfected, you are to remember and express all
such necessary observations, as are fitting, according to the directions in
that behalf delivered, in the latter end of the 11. Chapter of this Book, and
your work is finished.

Now might I here enlarge and amplify this work with many rules and examples,
tending to these purposes, but presuming that what I have formerly delivered
(being well understood and practiced) may sufficiently serve a reasonable
capacity; I will forbear to pester the practicioner in reading, or my self
in writing of needless varieties; and therefore will here conclude my labors,
and expose them to thy good liking.

FINIS.
Men's works have faults, since ADAM first offended,
And those in these, are thus to be amended.

ERRATA.
PAge 35 line 31. for C B. read C D. p. 38. lin. last, for cut out, r. cut. p.
42. l. 9. for equiangles, r. equiangled. p. 77. l. 19. for F D. r. E D p. 110.
l. 39. for draw the, r. draw to the. p. 118. l. 11. for 24. r. 240. p. 127. l.
17. for 4/3 r. * p. 133. l. 10. for 3/2^ or 5/4^ r. or ^ p. 146. l. 13. for 15.
r. 9 ^ p. 162. l. 38. for O Q r. X. Q. p. 204 l. 16. for every other such, r.
every such.

In the Diagrams.

Page 109. in Diagr. 109. place K. in the angle opposite to C. In Diagr. of
Chap. 29.3. near unto K. place O. opposite to N.


