THE ENGLISH APE, THE Italian imitation, the Footesteppes of France. Wherein
is explaned, the wilful blindness of subtle mischief, the striving for
Stars, the catching of Mooneshine: and the secret sound of many hollow
hearts. by W. R.

Nulla pietas prauis.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Robert Robinson, and are to be sold by Richard Jones
dwelling at Holborne Conduit at the sign of the Rose and Crown. 1588.

TO THE RIGHT HOnorable, and my singular good Lord Sir CHRISTOPHER HATTON
Knight, Lord Chauncellor of England, Knight of the most noble order of the
Garter, and one of her Majesty's most Honorable privy Counsel.
ALphonsus (right honorable) being asked what counselors he liked best:
answered books, for they neither flatter in security, sooth with subtlety,
contend in time of Controversy, grudge at Superiors, nor contemn Inferiors.
To confirm which, (says Cicero) Oh pleasant books, Oh harmeles books, the
harbourers of forsaken virtue, and the fosterers of Moral demeanor. These
sayings (right Honorable) caused me to presume that this simple Counselor
should be entertained by so worthy a Counselor. Whose wisdom is, as the best
is, and whose honorable courtesy matcheth the excellent type of authority,
wherein if I should strive to say what it does excel, I should exceed the
compass of my slender capacity, and so carry a burden heavier then I am
aware off, and in coveting unworthy praise, condemn mine own disabilitie.
But (right Honorable) having poysed the perfection of that my pen cannot
reach too, and remembering your honorable acceptance of my rough cast conceit of
HELL, unloading a complaint, and loading your ears with many frivolous
phrases, wherein with Alexander, you preferred good will before good wit, and
thought not how it was but what it was: I knew that what I brought were it the
deformity of a beast should be embraced as the best. And though Apes have no
reason yet your Honor I know would supply that want by saying: It is a Beast.

Your Honors in all humility most affectionate, W.R.

The English Ape, the Italian imitation, the footesteppes of France.
Mala clandestina, pessima.

HE whose capacity has caught things (almost impossible for humain reason to
reach) whose wit has won the perfection of excellent enterprises, The best
capacities may be sufficiently busied to beat but the path of secret
mischiefs.
and whose brains have been busied about the haughtyest attempts, may scarce
compass to contriue the subtle secrecy of this impugnancie: which, so
resists the proper operation of natures decree: that it blinds it self
with the hidden humors of unknown enormities. How may it then be, that he
whose weakness (every way wants the perseverance of such importance) should
naturally apply his pen, Things prodidigious preserve one uniformity.
to portray the right and formal proportion of so strange an Ape? Except in
this, that things of themselves composed prodigious, can hardly by the same
course be brought from their pristinate shape and former frame. Rightly then
may it be regarded, that reason may soon erect a thing, which yields of it
self no reasonable conformity, The partial and rash judgment of gross and
feeble capacities.

There needs no reprehension causeless where the enormitie is well known.
The simple bark but byte not.


but rather a preposterous enormitie. To what judgment may I then appeal the
indifferency of my intent? If to the general sort, (without an exception) the
dulnes of their silence has already condemned me. If to some in particular
(whose quality contains a judicial voice) I trust I shall neither (with the
Persean dogs) have my legs broken for barking before I espy a thief, nor my
endeavors infringed by the stinglesse tongues of the serpent Phisae, whose will
is good to hurt (though they want teeth to byte) Relying my self then upon the
challenged choice of my friendly Interpretors, I must take a little leave of my
Countrymen (who for the most part have travailed to Affricke, Lotos a tree in
Africa who so tastes thereof forgets his own country.
to taste of the tree Lotos (thereby as strangers to forget their own Country)
to tell them what scornful conceits, Nations of foreign condition harbor
in the entrayles of their heart. What scorching infamy their tongues (with
pleasant laughter) whisper in the vineyards of Venus: Strangers deride our
strangenes amiddest their daliance.

Englands imitation scornefully mocked of them who^ they endeavor to follow.

An English man Italianate.


when (as sacrificing Priests) they thither repair to perform the rites of
their ancient customs: To adorn their Idolatry with their perelesse
perfumes of their country condition, with the golden genimes of their usual
joys, with the fine fatness of their fleshly desires. When their minds are
tickled with these dayntie devises, their tongues vnrippe the secret closure
of their hollow heates. Then, tell they forth the Englishmans endeavor: Then
sound they forth the trumpe of defame to give an Alarm of our assaulted
security. Some term him then, an English Italian: Other some an Italian
Englishman. Some harp upon the cunning convey of his imitation in inward
disposition, and external habit, inuenting then to follow the footesteps of
other Nations. Forriners descrie the hate of our domisticall mischiefs.

The Ape kills her young ones with culling them.


A second displaies the hatred of his harmefull heart: that (growing in Odium
with his native soil) he seeks some other line whereby he may direct the
course of his life. Thus (imitating the Ape) the Englishman kills his own
with culling, and prefers the corruption of a foreign Nation, before the
perfection of his own profession. This secret mischief (seeming but a stem)
in time intends to prove a sturdie stalk. The appearance and evident
property of his secret mischief. Pliny writes that a Bull bound to a Fig
tree is deprived of his strength. The prodigious oblivion of England forgetting
their Country for which every man is borne.
This stalk adorned with the beauty of such painted blossoms (which Art has
graft: not Nature sprung) shall be found (in effect) as the Fig tree, which
is said to deprive a Bull (being thereunto bound) of his natural strength.
How hateful will it hereafter seem to our selves, when the bowels of that
place which brought us forth, our Country that nourisht us (for which every
member is borne to die) expecting help at our hands our condition then to be
so altered, our manners transformed, our estates so estranged, and our duties
so disguised with the spotted imitation of other Nations, that we shall clean
forgette to temper the proffered time, with the natural benefit of our own
common good. Then, may we mock at our own manners, and stand amazed at the
difference of our former demeanors. Such is the contemptuous condition of these
Imitators: that there is not any vice particularly noted in any Country, The
cunning conceit of an Englishman in framing himself to the form of all
fashions.
but ye Englishman will be therein as exquisite, as if he had Nature at
command for every enormity. If it be in Creete, he can lie, if in Italy,
flatter, if in France, boast, if in Scotland cloak the treachery of pretended
treason, which having gathered, and fraught himself full of this wealthy
treasure: He lovingly brings his merchandise into his native Country, and
there storeth with instruction the false affectors of this tedious trash.

Hence comes it to pass that our Englishmen blinded (with an Italian
disguise) and disfiguring themselves (with every French fashion) corrupt their
natural manners, (by their climate created perfect) with the peeuysh pelf of
every Peacokes plume, (and like as Aesopes Dawe) bedecke them selves with
others deformity. The English man deckes himself with every ones deformity.
Thus continual strife to frame a uniformity of inward condition to external
habit breeds such intolerable inconvenience: that we seem rather the men,
which nature has marked for a prodigious spectacle of her contrary opinions,
then a people, where pollitique proceedings, and peaceable government swayeth
with law, and equity. Look we a while into the manners of Heathen men:
Heathen men righteously abhor that which Christians vainly embrace.
into the disposition of Infidels, whose rudnesse might privilege such
barbarous besottednsse, and whose wit (grosely composed) yields not the
perseverance of every ill, and whose sensual appetite dulleth the conceit of
decerning of every secret mischief. Where we shall find such an hatred of
incest, such a love of temperance, such a despising of delicacies and such a
contending of moderation in manners that they may rather seem the chief
cherishers of virtue, The temperate and civil disposition of Hippias a heathen
Philosopher.
then men ignorant of their saving health: Apuleius writes in his second book
entitled Floridorum, that one Hippias a Philosopher (marvelous temperate in
his life) came unto the triumphs of Olympium (a place of great estate and
therefore fit for sumptuous show of rich attire, and gorgeous apparel) his
clothing (being by profession a Philosopher) of his own making: adding, that
glory consisted in the virtues of the mind, The glory of virtue consists in
the mind.
not in the gorgeous show of external pride (chiefly expressed) in the delecate
sight of costly attire. Touching which Pomponius Mela a notable antiquarye
writing amongst many things of the regiment of the great Chaam speaks of
certain Infidels given to the bloody exercise of war, Infidels delighting in
blood may reach us temperance.

They abhorred pride punished it with banishment.


and greedily lead with an intent of all ignomeous endeavors, that whatsoever
he was, that amongst them ordered his estate, above the ability of his
calling, should (as a chief offender) be reputed an exile from his native
home, and ever be recounted ignoble, both he, and the rest of his kindred, and
posterity for ever.

Phraortes a King of the East Indies bent to the cruel execution of the sword,
The reverent conceit of their feigned gods.
gave (notwithstanding) such reverence to the senseless opinion of their gods,
that (having plenty and store of gold, and precious stones) he ordained that
none should be therewith adorned, but ye Images which they did adore, They
adorned their images with gold refrayning to wear it them selves.

They advanced their ignorant Idols before any oath private pride.


ascribing it to the honor they ought their gods, and the humility of their
own disposition (though otherwise led with an ignorant spirit of senseless
ceremonies) not unlike to this were the customs of the Caffrani, who carrying
their Gods called Colossi from the temples to their sacrificing altars used to
gather all the Jewels belonging to their noble men and women, and therewith to
deck the deceitful bodies of their honored Images, debasing themselves, and
extolling the ignorance of their Idols.

If those men (led with an ignorant spirit of deceit) could decerne the
unspeakable mischeefes, the intolerable inconveniences, How odious may it
seem that peace dwells with strife, honny with gall, and poison with
Physic.

This strangenes is more prodigious then the monsters of Egypt.


and the most hidden hurt held in security, that covertly cloketh it self in a
flourishing common wealth: and by their harms arm themselves to resist such
wretchedness. How odious may it then seem unto us which inhabit ye heavenly
tabernacle, sleep safely under the palms of peace, and enjoy a land flowing
with milk and honny, that such weeds (of purpose sown in the land) should
through self will choke the fruitful sap of other wholesome herbs. Let us
but a while look into the condition of such, as thus alternate the course of
their country, alienate the manners of our men, and transeforme themselves into
shapes, more strange then any monster naturally bred in Egypt.

Discover their conditions, A new creation made by English men. Studious in
secret mischief.
and you shall find them such as abhor nature, and her divine creation, and
seek by some new found art to Italianate the course of their new led life.
These Machauillians, studious in their destruction, and men seeking snares to
entrappe the health of their own souls) undermine by policy, practice
covertly, cloak cunningly, and willingly would confound all quickly: The
policy of wisdom and the warines of Justice.
But that wisdom espieth and yet dissembleth, Justice decernes, and yet
defers, till further proof bring these new found people to behold a massacre
of their decyphred purposes, and discovery of their hoped intent.

But setting this aside, They gaze in their own deformity taking a pride to
behold the same.
(and tying glasses at their girdles to behold their own deformity) when their
often gazing expects some show of beauty, give me leave to ask where our
English men first learned their Choice of Change, in what Country they have
ever beheld the fantastical fashions used, and their own inventions
neglected. If in Italy: Italy abhors every fashion but his own invention,
and scorneth to imitate the folly of other men. We borrow fashions of France
least they prevent us of folly.

The happiness of the government contrary to the disposition of the governed.


I answer that albeit they are carried away with a vision of vanity, with an
external show of glory, yet do they continually keep one stay of state,
neither transforming their manners nor altering their demeanors. There external
habit continually keeps one form, contemning others as folly, and
preferring their own as infallible. If we say in France, our selves are
witnesses to the contrary, having borrowed of them for fa^ling, least they
should prevent us of our intended purpose. Uiew we the Estate of all
Christendom, and we shall never see the blessed stay of peace to be the
author of disse^tion, A government for policy to be wondered at, for changeable
affection to be laughed at, and a people trained in all virtuous living, and
godly conversation, in all heavenly happiness and celestial knowledge to exceed
in vice, to practice uncivil conversation, Virtue loses her natural strength,
by those peremptory practices.
and to lead themselves (of purpose) into the darkesome pit, and lothed lake
of bitter and ignominious ignorance, enfeebled with folly and loosing the
natural strength of virtue.

The Goths notable belligods that sometimes inhabited Denmark.

The aptnes of England to learn the enormities of vice.

The great Epicurisme of Heliogabalus It was told him he should die a violent
death.


The rudenes of the ignorant, and Bellygodded Goths that sometimes inhabited
these parts of Christendom has so stuffed England with their Epicurisme, and
so replenished it with careless cogitations, declining from the proper estate
of their natural good that it may be thought that England (in carrying the right
proportion of vice, and in imitating the infamous examples of passed times)
has brought more away, and pondered better of their neighbors news, then
any corner of all Christendom, besides. That monstrous Epicure Holiogabalus,
that prepared rivers of rosewater to bath his carren Carkase to strangle
himself, ropes of silk and to cast himself on (when his enemies should
pursue him) boarded flowers of beaten gold, who wished his throat so long as a
Cranes, thereby to take the large pleasure of his delicate vyands may well be
termed a forerunner of our careless estate.

A fore runner of our estate. Cleopatra the great Epicure in favor with Anthony.

The pearl was esteemed in value 50000. l. of our English money.


Cleopatra, the Egyptian Epicure, the very miraculous monster of all her sex,
dissolved in vinegar a pearl of inestimable price, and marvelous great
account, and in glorious pride of her ambitious thought did eat the same. And
although her life were strange, and her death worthy to be noted, yet lives she
still, and has left in England some faithful followers of that peerless
profession. So excellent may our countrymen be counted in this imitation: The
pride of our time exceeds the pompous show of any Nation.

The aspiring of ambition.


so learned in these lawless exercises (though not altogether in quantity yet
answerable in quality) that neither the vain desires of Mydas (whose own
wishes confounded his happiness) the incomparable riches of Craessus, (that
contemner of Solon) Nor yet the mighty pomp of proud Darius (exceeding in
number, and excelling in costly provision) can match the ambition of many
english minds who fear not to heap up hills (with the giants) to reach into
the secret of the King of Kings, Princes are as Gods.
(much less do they then spare to prye into that, which is nearer their
view) though in effect ought to be as far from their reaching thoughts the
one a Majesty celestial, the other (by nature earthly) treated as God. And
some of them (though base by the appointment of Fortune) yet are so puffed with
the excess of a proud and disdainful mind, The extreme folly of insolent
pride in the baser sort of people, and men of smallest desert. Clodius the
son to a player in tragedies a notable Epicure. He gave pearls relented to
those which supped with him. Some private of new condition exceed the Prince
in many things in despite o^ temperance. The discommoditie of such an inferior
condition. They despise such as follow not their steps neither will be
partakers of their prodigious exceeding. These men are not company fit for the
better sort, but as shrubs grows in low valleies amongst fig trees
that preferring the prodigal humor of their swelling hearts, before the
moderate reason of humility, excel the better sort in the insolent cogitation
of their climbing desires, Of which sort was one Clodius son to Aesopus a
plaier in tragedies whose Epicurisme so excelled the rest of his time (of the
same profession) that he would give unto his friends that supped with him
pearls relented in vinegar to eat, which noted in him a pride beyond measure,
and arrogancy not to be comprehended in the submissiue estate of a subject.

Have we not now amongst us in England, whose calling is far inferior to their
inordinate living, to their sumptuous show in attire, to their prodigality in
banquets, and to the proud advancement of their low estate? that take upon
them that, which the Prince for modest temperance will refrain? Have we not
such amongst us whose attire rather show them to be Monarchs then mean men,
Kings then subjects, whose minds are neither suppressed with the loyalty of
their duty, nor with the modest regard of their mean estate. Have we not
many a Clodius that spends that vainly and vilely, which might serve (in time
of need) to pleasure their Prince, profit their Country, and generally do
good to the whole estate? And so far are they therein settled, so firmly
fixed, that it is not only impossible to frame any te^perance in their
inordinate desires but moreover beyond the compass of skill to extirpe the least
of these enormities, which they norish in their bosoms. And so basely do they
esteem of those which refrain to follow their manners, to be trained in their
steps, that it is a common saying amongst them, Aut bibe* aut abi, Either do
as we do or be gone, Excel as we exceed, or else refrain to keep us company.
Olives are not planted amongst Oaks, Figs in valleies amongst Shrubs, Roses
amongst weeds, nor Uineyards amongst pricking thorns, neither are men of
virtuous disposition to accompany, the mainetainers of vice. The Ass cannot
safety feed by the Lion, nor the Lamb by the Wolf, simplicity must not
inhabit with subtilty, nor innocence, Who joins two such discords is the
author of discention.

The intricate consideration of this strange condition.

The monster Hiena a beast in Egypt whose original is unknown to any.

Medusae or Gorgon the head of the monster that Persey slew.

The cruelty of Hiena.

Men seeming to be enchanted.

An insolent contempt.


with ravenous cruelty. For so loathsome seems the one to the other, that who
so joins herein a hope of concord, is the author of an irreuocable discord.
It were able to confound a wit well experienced in matters of important
gratersie to gather the cause, (without any error) of this secret contempt
borne, bred, and fostered amongst most part of our Englishmen. The first
orignall thereof is no less strange, then the creation of the beast Hiena,
unknown to our best natural Philosophers, and unto Pliny himself where she
breeds, saving this that her skin in external show being very fair, and
her head most terrible to sight, (like the head of Medusae that tra^sformed the
beholders to a stone) she would turn her face to a hedge and hyding the
fearefulnes of her head, with her fair skin entice other beasts about her,
when (according to her ravenous nature) she satisfies the insatiate cruelty of
her tyrannous stomach. In like manner these enchanted sort of people (the
original of whose condition may rather be wondered at then expressed.) Contemn
their superiors because they are above them, their equals, because their
insolency brooketh no equallity, and their inferiors, because their weighty
minds presses them lower then their estate of it self does debase them. So
that they appear now never content (either with what fortune has lent them)
or their estate holds above their deserte (according to the new found name,
wherein a general price is taken) ( Malcontents.) Such a preposterous
condition to boast of, and so brave a mark to brag of, as those that carried
the tytles of the Babilonian strumpet written in their foreheades. The marks
of the whore of Babylon.

One that boasted of robbing the Temple of Diana. miserably punished.


Or he that robbed the temple of Diana and came into Thessaly to boaste
thereof, where without any regard of commisseration, or pitiful mercy, he
was taken, and racked in yrons, with the unconquered force of wild horses, (as
well deserved the report of his heinous offense.)

Would we not deem him mad that having (of purpose) offended the law to the
intent he might be punished, would come to the Magistrate and boaste of his
injurious arts How may we otherways say of it, How vain a thing it is for
men in an external pride of vain glory to boast in their vice.
when infamy, and external reproach is written in ones forheade (in outward
ostentation of vaineglory) he does present himself to the public view of
every one, and thereby express himself to be the man that takes an esp^^iall
pride in the fairenes and beautiful prospect of his fine stature. The pride of
folly.

They may rather be termed mad contenders, then Male-co^tents. Some men by
gazing to avoid peril do wilfully run into danger.


These mad contenders, rather then Malcontents. May serve as glasses for us
to gaze in, to behold the deformity of the like shape in our selves. When no
doubt some Narcissus not respecting the peril of the prospecte, will not
stick to fall into danger to embrace the fame. But me thinks that some
faint Echo redoubling the foolish sound of some spightfull speeche^, begins
to play with my shadow, and to display the deformity of their own substance,
because of the diffused course of my enterpriced exordium, and (with Lysippus)
mending Mineruas eye will (with a chip) put out their own eye.

But for that I will not offer the least cause in any upright mind to make the
smallest pause. Some make faults in finding faults.
I will first (to avoid the tediousness of every clear judgment) expressly
declare the first point wherein the English man imitates the condition of an
Ape, The mind excells the body therefore the pride of the mind is worse then
the pride of body.
and so consequently proceed to the remnaunt of my whole discourse. First
because the pride of the mind exceedes the power of the body, And that
setrete ambition proceeds outward ostentation, I will search the depth of
such hollow hearts (and as I may unfold the secrets thereof) making the same
manifest to every upright eye.

First ambition (from the beginning) through out all ages, The danger of pride
and ambition. Ambitton like unto strong poison.
and in every estate, from the mightyest to the meanest, from the greatest to
the smallest, from the highest to the lowest, from the head to the foot, has
bin the utter overthrow both of the one and the other. For as poison dispearst
into the veins taking hold of the heart kills without remorce: So ambition
scattered in a common wealth, and dispearst through the whole body thereof,
taking hold of the chief member, destroys the whole body, and kills
(without care) the fatal life thereof.

Climbing minds would reach to heaven, and compass impossibility.
Those climbing minds whose arms would reach to heaven and whose thoughts are
stitched to the stars, are these men that like poison dispearse themselves in
ye veins of the common wealth, and feign covet to desire that which they
cannot aspire. The first fall from heaven was through pride and ambition whose
busy hands having sown their seeds in England to sprout and spread amongst
the wholesomest herbs, The first fall from heaven was through Pride*

Some of their cursed seed from the beginning sown in England.


and sweetest flowers keep us from that place, from whence they fell for there
intolerable pride. Oh ambition the nource of mischief, the fosterer of vile
dissension: The ruin of cities, the overthrow of common wealths, the
disturber of all estates, and the final confusion of al peaceable gouernements.

Plato called the divine philosopher was notwithstanding reproved of Dyon for
his pride.
Plato the Philosopher woondred at for wisdom, and admirde for his doctrine,
in so much that he was called Diuinus ille Philosophus, notwithstanding of the
wisest was as much rejected for his pride, and ambition. In so much that Dyon
meeting him at a triumph wherein was used the exercise tylt and turney, and
beholding the courageous stomach of the fierce palfrayes, foming on their
stamping bits, said unto him, Plato thou would have made a notable horse,
thereby noting the pride of his disdaynefull mind. Damocles that was woonte to
give his mind so studiously to philosophy, The strange Metamorphosis of
Damocles by reason of pride.
that his maid was said to put meat in his mouth, (for that he would spare
not so much time as to feed his own weakened body.) Not withstanding having a
while lived in the pompous court of Dionisius became so proud, that whereas
before he would not eat for the studious love he bare unto philosophy. He
now would not study for the unsatiate desire of pampering with delicates his
forgetful body.

The court of princes is the ^ource of virtue.
O strange condition of men, when the court of princes, which is the pillar of
virtue, the sword to cut vice, the stay of Justice, and the axe to hew down
each start up stem, should (by the inferior minds of some suffered
underminers) be made the author of all pride and ambition. Spyders suck
poison where the Be takes honey.
These spyders that convert so sweet a flower to poison, turn honney to gall,
would be shaken from the stately pillars of a Princes dominion, and not be
suffered to build their Nests under their Noses.

The pompous pride of the Persians has ever bin so plagued that the condition
of their estate has oftentimes been transformed into the authority of
forraygne Rulers. The pride of the Persians plagued by transforming their
government into foreign States.

Cressus esteemed his riches the sum of felicity.


Craessus whose wealth has bin woondered at, and whose riches yet remains in
the mouths of many. Not giving ear to be guided by the wisdom of Solon, but
trusting unto the vanity of his riches, proudly boasting that, to be the sum
of felicity, was amiddest the ambition of his aboundaunte wealth, taken
prisoner by Cyrus, when he confessed no man to be happy before his end,
and that virtue consisted not in the abundance of riches, but in adorning the
mind with precious wisdom.

The mockery of Mydas cannot out of mind, The foolish ambition of Mydas in
wishing that all that he touched might be turned into gold.
whose pride, climbing above any mortal wish (or regard governed by
wisdom) was choked with the pride of his own desires, and led to a
Massacre, whereas his folly had pretended the Instrument of his own death.
Have we not many a Mydas, that (led with an ambitious desire of superiority)
desires that which may destroy him self coueteth to clymbe Heaven, Phaeton
in ambition coueted to guide the Chariot of the Sun with folly overthrew him
and his pride.
when the Clouds conspire to ruin his overthrow. Is there not (nay can there
be without such) as would guide with Phaeton, (though they see the peremptory
estate of present destruction before their careless eyes (that would feign
rule, that which beseems them not to govern) reign where rain conspireth
(in Justice) to drown their desires? Would either such were not, or such
might be abridged of their requests before they desire to rule.

Princes have long reaches, and (with all) eyes at their fingers ends to look
into those Climbers, The sacred judgment, and sparkling sight of a Prince.
and with the policy of their divine wisdom, (sent from their first
institutor) will suffer till such shall be eye witnesses of their own blinded
disposition and beholders (with clearenes) the deformity of their aspiring
minds.

Dionisius his pride exceeded the type of a king because he exalted himself
above God.
Dyonisius, whose pride exceeded the rest of his time, (though endewed with the
sacred Type of a king,) vizegerent unto God himself) was so swollen with the
abundance and superfluous surfeit of ambition: that (in his Throne, aduauncing
himself, above the immortal Deity, and attributing the religious nature of
his estate to his own desert, as one able to sustain the precious weight of
immortality) had suddenly in vision appearing over his head a sharp two edged
sword, The dangerous care of a Kingdom.
the point hanging downward to his Diadem, fixed by the slender hold of a
hair, whereunto was annexed an Angel ready to cut the same, and to put
Dyonisius into the fearful cogitation of his present estate, A sudden fear
causes an unexpected remorse.
who espying the danger thereof suddenly starting from his Chair confessed
his estate to be as a God yet governed, and guided by the imperial Diadem of
the King of Kings, whose Majesty is (matchless) without equality, or beyond
the compass of human capacity.

Prometheus hanged against the Sun for stealing fire from heaven,
Well may that be weighed of Prometheus though (borrowed from the fictions of
former heathnish people) whose proud ambition extending beyond the compass of
his then estate was rewarded with the Justice of a miserable end: for presuming
to steal fire from heaven he was hanged against the sun with his eyes
opposite to the same, and a Vulture continually gnawing his liver.

Deriding spirits esteem Poetry folly, where it morally expresses the danger
of every vice.
Well may this Paradoxe serve in an upright, and judicial mind, (that
corrupts not with a deryding spirit the meaning of such moral virtue) to
admonish those privy spyers that secretly search into Princes matters, and
presume to gaze into that which (with the Wolf) by looking into the Lions
den may cost him his skin. Theban Dyrce for his ambition turned to a fish
by Diana.


Dyrce of Thebes for pulling down the Laurel, which Diana consecrated to
virginity, and for mumbling vnreuerent words against his majesty, to reward her
presumption, and to charm the proud tongue that uttered her ambitious beauty
(had it not been corrupted with ambition) might have pleaded in her behalf
(if it had not seemed so faultful to the Goddess.)

This secret lurker like the poison of Aspis, Ambition lurketh secretly like
the poison of Aspes. England for Israel, London for Bethlem, Iewrie the
polliticall seat of judgment.

The monster Cocoplebis breeds in the side of Nilus whom when she beholds,
is deprived of life. Whereunto the ambition of some English men may be
compared. The English man like an Ape decketh himself with every foreign
refuse. Ebulum cur^lesse poison.


this open Sepulcher to swallow men's souls, this pretended mischief
vnpreuented, those deadly Seeds sown in the flourishing fields of England,
(to bring cockle amongst Corn, Thistles amongst Figs, and Thorns amongst
Grapes.) Builds his bowers even in the bosom of Israel, in the streets of
Bethlehem, and in the judgment of Iewry, the place appointed holy, the native
seat of our Savior, and the cherisher of well instructed souls.

For as the monster Cacophebia (breeding by the side of the sweet fountain
Nilus) depriueth a man of his life at the first view: So do these secret
monsters, that roar with out tongues, conspire without hearts, climb
unseen, and whisper unheard, (leading their lives in elect places, and
choosing their habitations in the perfectest paths) deprive their abbettors
both of life, and soul: Life, as touching the state of their mortality:
Soul, to bring a deadly hazard of that which has been gloriously created
immortal.

Herein does the Englishman (Apelike) decketh himself with the deformed
quality of every foreign refuge, when thinking with their counterfayte
coullours to paynte his face, and to make it seem fair in external shows to
deceive the slight sight of the blind, and ignorant, he kills himself
with the poisoned juice of their black, and venomous Ebulum. Ambition
ra^sacketh the liberty of his own soul. Ambition climbes to fall.
Such is the nature of ambition, that who so borrows the same, from a
stranger, or by corrupcion of manners, permits it properly to creep into his
heart, he ransometh his life with death, and raunsacketh the liberty of his
own soul, by the tyranny of his proud and ambitious thought. How senseless
is he then that climbeth to fall, Ambition gnaweth men's souls like a secret
worm.
casts a stone against hard walls to rebound upon his own head,*
slaughters him self with his own sword, and desires that whose subtyle
success works his own speedy overthrow.

Like as the raging tempest of the swelling Sea, does devour the banks of
earth, by often beating on the wasting shore: Humility stands steadfast like
a Rock in dispite of ambition.
so does ambition (like a gnawing worm) secretly conspyre ruin, and
overthrow. Rocks stand and are rocks, reeds pearish with every blast of
wind. And though the Cedar be shaken, yet it falls not. Though humility
bend, yet it breaks not. Humility stands like a watch tower to arm the
soul against privy conspiracies, secret underminings, and alarumes of
falshoode: under the pretense of golden flattery. Ambition like a Tiger.
Where subtlety sleeps, humility watches: where ambition builds, humility
undermines: where pride insolently contends, humility lovingly ends.
Humility (with the Pelican) cheerisheth her own with the dearest blood.
Ambition (with the Tiger) kills what it breeds, and with the Uyper gnaweth
the bowelles of his first original.

Ambition couets to hurt before it can hurt.

The perfection of England purged from some impurity


These inchaunted charms, these greedy harms, that would devour before their
untimely birth does bring them teeth, that would tear before their tuskes are
sharp. I wonder not at all from whence they first sucked their poisoned sap.
England (whose perfection has been of late purified, by the means of a
cunning Minoresse, and the metal purged, from the Mossie dross that had
almost ouergrowne the fertiltie of that pleasant soil) does not naturally
afforde, the straungenes of these strange confusions, whose perfection (like a
celestial Lamp) does illustrate all Christendom. Whose beams borrowed, from
the saving Son of our eternal God, Medes sowed by some skillesse Gardener.
does dazzle the eyes, and astonish the hearts of the beholders. But that some
skillesse (or rather wilful) Gardener has gathred plants from some foreign
plots, and rashly set the same to sprout in the soil of Thessaly Tempe. The
slips whereof are slipped into the hearts of many hollow, and empty vessels,
wherein is neither contained the seat of virtue, nor yet the smallest spark of
that light that kindles all faithful, and loyal hearts. Hence comes it
that the manifest mischeefes, and published impiety of other Countries is
dispersed in the flourishing field of our English happiness. In these disordered
devises the Englishman imitates the condition of an Ape borrowed from other
countries.
Herein (Apelike) does the English man imitate the disordered devises of
foreign enormities, and follow the footesteeps of every beaten path, though
the indirectnes of the way (together with the unknown success of other secret
snares) bring them to an unexpected confusion.

The next imitation in our English use, is in external show of pride, in so
much that no outward corruption to maculate the perfection of manners is used
any where, The next imitation.
but it is taken up for a singular conceit and practiced for a pearelesse
purity: A preposterous conceit of a new kind of education.
so far that neither his education is accounted excellent, his parentage from
any high descent except he be estranged in the disguise of some new found
form, in the frame of some fine fashion, masking (with the Apes of Egypt) in
the golden habit of some unknown condition. Mistake not my meaning, neither
misconstrue the intent of my invention: for it is not any part of my mind, to
disallowe the commendable quality, and the excelling ornament of strange
languages, The commendable quality of languages.
or to find fault with the industrious practice to obtain any foreign
cunning, Mechannically used a virtuous Art morally professed. Then should I
pull down that which I seem to build, and under pretense of suppressing
vanity extirpe the props and pillars of virtue, To disallowe languages were to
maintain vice.
and in show to extinguish the light of every corrupt condition, take away
that comfortable oil that by his precious nature lighteueth the lamp of
virtue, blazeth the perfection of pure endeavors, and kindles the small sparks
of noble, and virtuous thoughts.

For how is virtue maintained but by the sweet comfort of knowledge, Knowledge
(...) the chief maintayner virtue.
by the nourishing sap of experience, and from whence does that worthy spring
cherish and feed his crystal streams, but from the flowing head of sundry,
and several languages, whose copious phrases, and whose increasing sinceritye
of picked sentences, disperseth it self into the understanding of the diligent
regarders. This is not the flower from whence this festring poison is taken,
but from the springing weed of external spotted pride.

Compare we the general nature of passed times with our own present estate,
Maintainers of pride for ever punished.
wherein we shall find an infallible punishment of the maintayners of pompous
pride. How glorious was the estate of our forefathers in the first creation
before they knew their own nakedness, which divinity God did adorn them as
with a sacred habyte of his own fashioning. But now neither is the glory of
that holy intent remembered, nor the content of former examples followed.

The brutish nature of heathen men, whose God was an Idol, Heathen men abhor
that pompous pride which we honor.
and whose minds never reached with any thought the secret nature of heaven,
have ever hated that pompous pride which we honor. And nothing has ever
seemed more odious unto them, then excess either in Banquets, in Bellychere,
or in decking their mortal Carcasses with precious ornaments of unspeakable
pride. Was not the pride of Darius (though a Monarch) and therefore priuyledged
above mean men, The pride of Darius a Monarch of Persea.
the very first step to his own utter confusion? For when his glittering
army, shining with gold, his barbed horses plated with gold, and Crystal,
his Chariot shining with Saphires of inestimable price was brought before the
scattered company of his enemy Alexander, He was slain by two of his chief
Counselors.
he was overthrown, and all his army slain, himself at last murdered by two
of his chief counselors.

Sardanapalus his monstrous effeminacie in wearing the habit of a woman.
Sardanapalus another of the same sect, and a Monarch of the same regiment, was
deposed by Arbactus in his effeminate attire transforming his shape from a man
to a woman, and afterward beholding the deformity of his then estate by
disguising himself with the attire of a woman, sacrificed himself and it,
burning his pride to the consuming dust of Ashes. If these Monarchs, whose
authority might dispense with the smallnes of some slender fault be thus
punished, One crime deserves one punishment without respect of the person
if these pillars of a state, be torn and committed to the fire, what shall
the meaner sort, the weaker proppes be done with: No doubt the impartial
wisdom of both their Judges does determine for one crime, one punishment, for
one fault, one favor, neither respecting the person, nor the trust of
authority.

That Martial myrrour of all prowess, Alexander the Trophee of Macedon
committed murder in the Priestlike attire of Jupiter.
and warrelike affairs, Alexander the great, the pillar of that state and the
Trophee of Macedon, where in his pride he adorned himself with the garment,
and Ephod of the Priest of Jupiter, esteeming himself in power to be his own
natural son: proceeded so far in his Priestlike Royalty, that being
reprehended of Clytus his dear friend and Counselor, He killed his friend
Clytus.
for that his extraordinary advancement stretched beyond the authority of his
Kingly government not being thereunto elected, his pride no longer permitting
that supposed taunt, suddenly murdered his faithful Clytus with the bloody
thirst of his unsheathed sword. Yet at the length considering the same so
loathed the detested manner of his former face, that he would in revenge of
himself (had he not been stayed) most unnaturally killed himself, He
afterward would have slain himself.
and spilled his own blood, being a Monarch that has left a remembrance of
valor to all posterities to whom both lyneally from himself, and to others
both ears and eyes, the report and sight of his prowess has been uttered.

This famous and excellent Prince (whose noblenes almost what Region has not
felt) was so besotted with the sensual deceit of maintayning his present pride
that forgetting of him self, he went beyond the Maiesticall limits of his
Princely heart.

The Care of Kingdoms whose superior authority every inferior capacity, and
estate (maintained by a submissiue condition) cannot conjecture, Pride is the
subversion of Kingdoms.
has no greater an enemy then this subtyle snare of pride which Satan lays
as a beautyfull bayte, and entrapping engine, by glosing deceyts to deceive
men's souls. Pride is laid by Satan as a beautiful bayt to deceive men's
souls.
Not unlike to a monster in Egypt, who having one foot by nature framed like a
Ducke, and the other like a Dragon, used to the water the fair dissimulation
of the one, that he might the better satisfy the greedy disposition of the
other. This fair offense therefore (devised by that enemy to human souls)
is beautyfull to deceive, and greedy to bereave coloring with the Crocodyle
under entycing tears the tyranny of his damnable effect, and singing with the
Sirens sweet songs to cover and cloak the falsehood of an irreuocable
mischief. Be wise therefore with Ulysses to shun those intycing suares, and
foresee with providence the pernicious deceyt of this cunning Crocodylisme.

For what kingdom has former ages whereof we are care witnesses (though not
eye beholders) left a memoryall for example sake unto our forgetful minds,
The fruits of pride.
by confusion brought to extirpacyon, or ruin, but the same has been wrought
by proud and ambitious government. Babylon a place sometimes blessed (through
pride, Babylon destroyed through pride.
and by reason of their ambitious thoughts) was so utterly left wast and void
of all famous and sumptuous building, that were before the walls were wondered
at for strength and fortitude. Now not one stone commendes another strength,
being knit in unity, but all decayed, and scattered lie in heaps.

Syracusa a part of that famous Isle Cicilia: a City wondered at for beauty, The
fall of Syracassa a famous City through pride
pomp, and sumptuous show in building, whose situation was such, that the
Sun all day did shine upon the same, and in the midst the Moon did yield
her light, through pride did fall, and in the night of their bravery unexpected
of the inhabitaunts were made a slaughtered pray unto the barbarous enemy.
Demosthenes that worthy Grecian Orator and the lamp of Athens through out all
the course of his Orations which he made before their learned assemblies, and
grave audyence, for admonition above all did use this chief persuasion:
Citizens beware of pride, a worm whose biting breeds death, yet is not felt
before death.

And sooth to say Athens had never Eclipsed her shining glory, The glory of
Athens eclipsed through Pride.
perfected with moral study of virtue bright with wisdom, and knowledge,
and continuing his light with a lasting nourishment of learning had it not
been by reason of this vile and darkesome pride, darkesome (I term it) for
that it clouds men's thoughts, that as they would they cannot see their own
deformity.

Democritus laughed at men's pride.
Democritus continually laughing at the fickle disposition of men's folly,
derided nothing more then their pride, as the chiefest mark of their vanity
and the line whereby they direct the course of their godless life. Heraclitus
weppe at men's Pride.
Again, Heraclitus whose contrary disposition of weeping bewrayed a wayling of
men's senseless souls, did use alone to lay his body down, and on the earth
would thus bewail their state. Oh Earth whose senseless disposition has more
sense then human, to thee I will complain of their folly, and to thee (for
that thou best regardest me) will I bewray my very secret thoughts. Whether
run men, thus headlong in their sin, as though their souls were puffed up
with pride? Englands imitation of every base invention.
With pride Earth are men's souls resolved to live, and thus bewayling of their
vanity in tears, he did express the love of his fervent affection, chiefly
exclaiming on their hauty pride.

Then England blush at thy own folly, The imitation of Nabuchodonozers Pride.
that thy pride (borrowed from every bast inferior climate, neither governed
by any religion or virtue, (the chiefest marks to know a perfect soul,
immaculate from blots of filthy pride) should make thee so brutish, as with
Nabuchodonozer, to be transformed to a savage beast.

Let neither Venice (whose vanities presents a world of woes): The vileness of
the Venetians. The Pride of France.
France, whose pride exceedes the Persian Monarchies, nor any foreign Nation
whatsoever, hew down thy flourishing tree, and make thy beauty an habitation
of wild fowls, and birds of the air.

Well might this point be seem so large a discourse, as neither the time, nor
opportunity of study can unfold. But this I say with Solon, who beholding the
people securely living in all sensual lust, and greedy appetite: braste
suddenly into this abruption. Death, death, oh death: for every one must dye.
Supposing that Oration sufficient to talk of naught but death, where he saw
nothing less then death to be respected.

And notable is that of Phillip of Macedon, The wisdom of Phillip of Macedon.
who knowing his own frailety to be such, that security would have domination
of his sinful soul, hired one in midst of his banquets, pride, and
shows: to cry to him Phillip Memento mori, remember death, the end of thy
iollity

If Solon thought his Oration both pithy, and wise containing nothing but an
exclamation of death, Solons oration contained nothing but a memorial of death.
being to admonish security to vigilance, vnwatchfulnes to wariness,
prodigality to temperance; sensuality to simple hospitality. If Philip a
Monarche whose memorial virtues are yet in mind, thought it sufficient
continually to be admonished of death. Philip, for sensual living, was
continually put in remembrance of death.
I hope I shall neither feeme frivolous, nor to encurre the condemning of
Herculis Cothurnos. If I proceed some what farther in this necessary point,
more dangerous then any mortal death, because it touches the immortallity of
the soul, the most precious part of man's creation.

There is yet another part more preposterous then this, An other sort that
practice pride.
and though it seems less because the practisers are weaker, and therefore
the less able to withstand the power of vanity: Yet view it and find it as
an vnremooueable Rock in the midst of the Sea, for every passenger to avoid
the fearful danger thereof. Catterpillers cleave as well to the small twig of
the rose, as to the bough of the Ash.
Catterpillers cleave as well to the tender stalk of the Rose, as to the toughe
branch of the tall Ash: Hiss not Adders where birds singe? Crook not
Ravens where Doves feed? Roares not the Lion where the Lamb grazeth on the
green and springing grass? Even so in the honorable sect of women (honorable
I term them because they are the heavenly creatures of God) consists in
some of them the Leopard like spots of permanent and black vice. A new kind
of pride in some women.
And wherein more then in this infectious pride, in disdaining the tapestry of
beautiful nature, and clothing themselves with the trumpery of ridiculous
art. The meanest would compare with the highest.
In so much that every shrub would be as high as the Cedar, every bramble
branch out with the Oak, and every Thistle borrow the leaves of the green
Laurel. How fond and besotted were he that in his Garden having Bay, and
Brambles, Palms, and Thorns, because the beauty of the one cannot match the
unsearchable virtue of the other: The oversight of this kind of pride
Would find out some artificial mean of painting to counterfaite the one in
beauty comparable to the other. When nature makes this perfect, excellent,
beautiful and maiesticall, that imperfect, vile, deformed, and base in every
point.

If the German that painted every Nation in his natural form, The Germain
painter.
(as far as art could reach) and made the English naked, because he knew
not of what guise to make the chaungeable variety of his attire: lyned now as
sometimes he did, I imagine that he would paynte the disguised form of many
of our women with out skins, If he lived now, he would paint out women
without skins.
for that (in derision of Nature to scoff their Creator) they find out
artificial skins to cover any accidental bleamish on their Faces. A
derogating from the honor of God, and abrogating impudent shame to their modest
Sex

It is a wonder more then ordinary to behold their Periwigs of sundry
colors, The monstrous pride of some women.
their paynting Potts of perlesse perfumes, their Boxes of slibber sauce, the
sleaking of their Faces, their strayned modesty, and their counterfayte
coyness. In so much that they rather seem Curtyzans of Venyce, The immodestie
of some of our English dames.
then Matrones of England, Monsters of Egypt then modest Maidens of Europe,
inchaunting Sirens of Syrtes then diligent searchers of virtue, these
inchauntments charm away their modesty, and entrap fools in folly: Bewitcheth
them selves with wanton wyles, and be sotteth other with these bitter smyles.

Oh that England the Nource of virtue, the welspring of wit, England which
is the Nource of virtue, is choked with her own Milk.
the Foundation of all godly knowledge, should be choked with her own Milk,
drowned with her own sweet Fountains, and overthrown with the Timber work
of her own hand, that the purest part of her perfect climate breathed into
these dainety Sex, in so much that they excel in the pureness of wit,
should deforme them selves with such prodigious spectacles, and deformed
practices whose coats not beseeming the lowness of many of their estates,
show them selves to be Apes of Aegyt.

These unsavory toys, The subtletie of these unsavory toys.
these bayting hooks, and these catching nets, used by these fine Fyshers,
are purpose fashioned to take fools, who playing at ye bait of swallowed the
hooker flying with the nett stifle themselves with their own striving. The
wilful blindness of men to come into these snares.
How strange is it, and how prodigious may it seem, that men contrary to
nature (in love with shadows) should seek, by reason of the beauty of every
painting sepulcher to bury them selves alive, and for some painted external
show, fear not to endanger their own souls. The modest in atrones of Rome
when they were occasioned to walk the city streates, their behavior was such
together with ye modesty of their attire, The modest matrons of Rome refrain
to walk the city streates.
but they were rather admirde at for virtue, then pointed at for vanity, so
^arre that nothing seemed more odious unto them, then to uncover their faces
for every glazing eye, counting it a dishonor to salute any, excepting her Lord
and husband: and so much did they hate to gad about needelesse matters into
the streate, that it was ordained that every one which knocked at a citizens
door, How odious pride appeared unto the^.
her husband being not at home, should lose his right hand. So vile was a
lascivious life counted amongst them, that it was not only required in a
Romain dame to live modestly, The danger of a lascivious mind with the severe
punishment thereof.
but to be such as none should suspect her honesty. Whence proceeded I pray
these gadding feagaries of our English dames but from their decking with
unspeakable pride: For being colloured with variety of vanity, and therefore
spotted with shameless immodesty then daintely tread they the stones of the
streate, The immodestie of some women.
and display their Banners throughout their dwelling places, to sommon the
souls of men to the pearill of Hell.

If wisdom then would a little look into this secret mischief, and with
providence pursue the remedy thereof, we should then behold such a virtuous
alteration, of perfect modesty (suppressed by climbing pride) such unity of
manners, Prudent wisdom may remedy this climing pride.
now containing a disseuering of estates, by reason of monstrous pride, that a
man may well term it a secret dissension in the minds of many in studying
and striving to exceed one another in ye pompous show of pride. In so much that
it may be thus very well defined. A definition of pride.
A secret seducer to deadly sin, an enticer to every enormity, a sower of
privy dissension, the author of malice the maintayner of adoultry, the enemy
to humanity, the beginner of all mischief, and the conclusion of utter
confusion.

The maids of Athens were said with the Snailes to carry their housen on their
backs, The maids of Athens compared unto Snales, because they carried their
housen on their backs continually tarrying at home.
and that for many causes, in respect that it was ordained none of them should
stir into the city, except their feet were bare, and their faces covered,
their attire meruaylous homely, and their hair in steed of imbrodering, tied
up with a rude hairelace, and bound up in a course cloth: whereby the gravity
of their counselors intended, that least they should seduce with the enticing
beauty of their fair blossom, the young men of Athens, These fair blossoms
will entice men's eyes.
giving them selves to the virtuous study of philosophy, they should either
content them selves in their housen at home, or else bar them from pride in
going abroad.

If such orders were taken in England then, (whereas now the streats flock
with lascivious Dames, the dust raised with many a Peacocks plume) there would
be keepers vigilantly watching their own housen, Would England were like to
Athens.
and instructing them selves in the honest point of godly conversation: whereas
now, every stage stayres at their folly, and every gallery does behold vanity,
containing the impurity of their imperfection: these Apish toys borrowed from
Italian Curtizanes

Mistake me not of purpose, These A pish toies borrowed from Italy.
nor condemn me not of malice, I am neither so vureuerent, nor stoycall as to
condemn all, or to commend none. For as precious stones in essence all of one
name and nature, have notwithstanding some, which in precious estimacion excel
other, so no doubt are there in England, many modest, wise* godly virgins,
wives, The diffrence of women, some excelling in all virtue.
and widows, against whose virtue if I should kick, I might be said to
reprehend the brightness of the sun for extending his beams as much on the
fruitelesse weeds as on the fruitful flowers: on the filthy dunghill, as the
profitable crop of corn. But as the view of their secret poison causes me to
mislike the one, so the bright show of shyning virtue, in duty compelles me to
commend the other. Of which sort there is one as the Phoenix, The Phaenix of
the world.
endelesse in glory, and matchless in mortal majesty: At whose illustrate
Lamp may our foolish virgins borrow oil, and by he light direct the course
of their life, Elizabeth, that bright and illustrate Lamp.
thither where her name is already eternized, to bear a light before the holy
lamb: But mighty Iehoua let thy servant yet live till she guide to thy
tabernacle, her flock of Israel. Stand still her candlestick, and lighten all
the earth, that when she goes, we may for company sing Alleluya to thy majesty.

Now give me leave a little in few lines to conclude with an exhortation unto
all estates, An exhorting conclusion.
and permit me to say with Byas: Oh men bewitched, whether wander your minds
shut up in closure of vile vanity, encompast with ambition, ready to yield
your souls slaves unto wretched sin, whether (I say) as Pilgrims wander you?
Fear ye not to fall climbing so high? Shame ye not to sin when every one
beholds your deformity? Is your perverseness like the Indian color, never to
be altered? Is your vile immitation endelesse? Then is the wrath of God
remediless. Let every one commune with his secret heart, and search the secrets
of his inward soul. Uiew every one the deformity of his own state, then shall
we find such wilful blindness, groping in the light as if it were dark, and
delighting in darkness as if it were perfect light. Foresee I say, for shame I
say foresee, the danger of the fiery sword (that sometimes hunge over the
fair Hierusa^em, the city of our God) prepared unawares to cut our throats.
Oh England, nourced with Milk, and honney, fed with Manna: why staruest thou
having such plenty? or why flyest thou from him which seeks thee. Gather your
wandering flocks together, on the mounts of Olyuet the place of peace, and singe
the praise of your everlasting God, singe Syon, your God is a God of peace in
time of peace, a God of war in time of war: whether peace or war,
gracious, benign, and merciful is he. Call on him in peace, worship him in
war, and glorify his name world with out end.

FINIS.

