The Bible in English, that is to say, the content of all the holy
scripture, both of the old and new Testament truly translated after the
veryte of the Hebr^e and Greek textes, by the diligent study of dy^ers
excellent learned men expert in the for said tongues.

Prynted at London by Thomas (...) and (...) for Thomas Berthe^et: Prynter unto
the Kings grace.

Cum Privilegio ad imprimendum solum. 1540.



An Almanacke for.xxx. years.
The nombre of the years. Easter. The golden nombre / Or pryme. The letter
(...) Bisextus. M. d. xi. xxviij. Mar. ij D C M. d. xli. xvij. April. iij B M.
d. xlij. ix. April. iiij A M. d. xliij xxv. Mar. v G M. d. xliiij. xiiij.
April. vi F E M. d. xlv. v. April. vii D M. d. xlvi. xxv. April. viii C M.
d. xlvii. x. April. ix B M. d. xlviii. ii. April. x A G M. d. xlix. xxi.
April. xi F M. d. l. vi. April. xii E M. d. li xix. Mar. xiii. D M. d. lij.
xviii. April. xiiii C B M. d. liii. ^^. Ap^^ xv A M. d. liiii. xxv. M^^ xvi. G
M. d. lv. xiiii. Ap^^ xvii F M. d. lvi. xxx. ma xviii. E D M. d. lvii. xviii.
A^^ xix. C M. d. lviii. x. April i B M. d. lix. xxvi. Mar. ii A M. d. lx.
xiiii. April iii F G M. d. lxi. vi. April iiii E M. d. lxii. xxix. mar. v D
M. d. lxiii. xi. April vi C M. d. lxiiii. ii. April. vii A ^ M. d. lxv. xxii.
April. viii. G M. d. lxvi. xiiii. April ix F M. d. lxvii xxx. Mar. x E M. d.
lxviii. xviii. April xi D C

The year has. xii. months. lii. wekes and one day. And it has in all,
three hundred and. lvi. days and six hours.

The Calendar.
KL January, has. xxxi. days. The moon. xxx
iii A Circumcision i b Octaues of S. Steven ii xi c Octaues of S. John iii d
Octaues of Innocents iiii xix e v viii f (...) vi g Felix and January vii xvi
A Lucian viii v b Joyce ix c Paul first her. x xiii d The son in (...). xi
ii e S. Archade martyr xii f Octaues. Epypha. Hilary xiii x g S. Felex Priest
xiiii A Maure abbote xv xviii b S. Mercell xvi vii c S. Anthony xvii d S.
Priscia virgyn xviii xv e Wulstayne Bishop. xix iiii f Fabian / and Sebast. xx
g Agnes vyrgyn xxi A S. Uincent martyr xxii ^ b S. Emerencyane xxiii c S.
Timothe xxiiii ix d Conuersyon of saint Paul. xxv e Polycarpe bishop xxvi xvii
f S. Iuliane bishop xxvii vi g S. Agnes second xxviii A S. Ualery bishop
xxix xiiii b xxx iii c xxxi

KL February has. xxviii days: the moon. xxix.
d S. Brigit gyrgyn i xi e (...) Lady ii xix f S. Blase bishop iii viii g
Gylberte iiii A S. Agathe virgyn v xvi b vi x c S. Angule bishop vii d S.
Paul bishop viii xiii e S. Appollone vyrgyn ix ii f S. Scolastica virgyn x g
Eufrasye vyrgyn xi x A The son in pisces. xii b S. Uulfran bishop xiii xviii
c S. Ualentyne martyr xiiii vii d Faustine and iouyte xv e Iuliane virgyn xvi
xv f Policron bishop xvii iiii g Symeon bishop xviii A Sabyne martyr xix xii
b S. Myldrede vyrgyn xx i c xxi d Cathedra S. Petri. xxii ix e Locus byssexti
xxiii f ^athy (...) xxiiii xvii g Inuencyon of Paul xxv vi A Nestor bishop
xxvi b Austayne xxvii xiiii c Oswolde bishop. xxviii

KL March has. xxxi. days. The moon. xxx
iii d David bishop i e S. Chad bishop ii xi f Martyne iii g Adriane iiii xix
A ^ v viii b Uictor and Uictoryn vi c Perpetue and Felicite vii xvi d
Deposicyon of Felix viii v e xl martyrs ix f Agape vyrgyn x xiii g Queryon and
candide xi ii A Gregory xii b Theodore matrone xiii x c The son in (...)
xiiii d xv xviii e Hilary and tacoan^ xvi vii f Patryke bishop xvii g Edward
king xviii xv A Joseph xix iiii b Cuthbert abbot xx c Benet abbot xxi xii d
xiii i e Theodore Priest xxiii f Agapite martyr xxiiii ix g (...) xxv A Castor
martyr xxvi xvii b xxvii vi c Dorothe vyrgyn xxviii d Uictorine xxix xiiii e
Quirine xxx iii f Adelme bishop. xxxi

KL April has. xxx. days The moon. xxix
g Theodore vyrgyn i xi A Mary Egypcyan ii b Richard bishop iii xix c S.
Ambrose bishop iiii viii d Martiani and martia. v xvi e vi v f Euphemie vii g
viii xiii A Perpetuus bishop ix ii b x c Buthlake xi ^ d The son in (...)
xii e Iulina xiii xviii f xiiii vii g xv H Isydore xvi xv b Anicete xvii iiii c
Eliuthere xviii d xix xii e Saint Uictor xx i f Symeon bishop xxi g Saint
Sother xxii ix H George martyr xxiii b Wylfryde bishop xxiiii xvii c Macke
Evangelist xxv vi d Saint Clete xxvi e Anastase xxvii xiiii f xxviii iii g
Peter of Mylan xxix H Erkenwolde. xxx

KL May has xxxi. days The moon. xxx.
xi b Philip and James Apostles. i c Athanase bishop ii xix d Inuension of the
cross iii viii e iiii f Godarde v xvi g John^ before the Latin port vi v H
saint John of Beuerley vii b Appearing of S. Michael viii xiii c Transla. of
saint Nicholas ix ii d Gordian and Epimacl^ x e saint Anthony martyr xi x f xii
g Saruatius confessor xiiii xviii H The son in Gemini. xiiii vii b Isydore
martyr xv c saint Brandyne bishop xvi xv d Transla. of S. Bernarde xvii iiii e
Dioscor martyr xviii f saint Dunstayne bishop xix xii g saint Bernardyne xx i
H saint Helyne queen xxi b Iuliane vyrgyn xxii ix c Desidery martyr xxiii d
Transla. of Francys xxiiii xvii e Aldelme bishop xxv vi f saint Austayne xxvi
g saint Bid Priest xxvii xiiii H saint Germayne bishop xviii iii b saint
Corone martyr xxix c saint Felix xxx xi d saint Petronylle vyrgyn. xxxi

KL June has. xxx. days The moon. xxix.
e Nicodeme martyr i ^^^ f Mercellyne and Pet. ^^ viii g saint Erasmus iii xvi
H Saint Petroce iiii v b saint Boniface v c saint Mellon Archbysshop vi xiii d
Transia. of saint Wulstane vii ii e Medarde and Gyldarde viii f Transla. of
saint Edmunde. ix x g ^ x H saint Barnabe Apostle xi xviii b Basilyde* and
Ciryne. etc. xii vii c (...) (...) xiii d Saint Basell bishop xiiii xv e Uite,
Modeste and cre. xv iiii f saint Richard xvi g saint Botulph xvii xii H xviii
b xix c Transla of saint Edward xx xi d Walburge vyrgyn xxi e Saint Albone
martyr xxii xvii f Audrey Fast xxiii vi g ^at^^i. saint John^(...) xxiiii H
Transl. Elegy bishop xxv xiiii b John^ and Paul xxvi iii c saint Crescens
xxvii d Fast. xxviii xi e Peter and Paul Apostl^ xxix f Comme* of saint Paul.
xxx

KL Iulie has. xxxi. days The moon. xxx.
xix g Octa. of saint John Baptist i viii H Uisitacion of our Lady ii v b iii
xvi c Transla. Martyne iiii v d Zoe virgyn and martyr v e Octa. of Peter and
Paul vi xiii f vii ii g saint Grymbalde viii H saint Cirily bishop ix ^ b
Seven brothers martyrs x c Transla. of saint Benet xi xviii d Nabor and Felyx
xii vii e xiii f The son in Zen. xiiii xv g Transla of saint Swithune xv iiii
H Transla. of Osmunde xvi b Kenelme king xvii xii c Arnulphe bishop xviii i d
Ruffyne and Iustyne xix e saint Margarete vyrgyn xx ix f Praxede vyrgyn xxi g
Mary Magdalene xxii xvii H Apolinaris bishop xxiii vi b Cristin vyrgyn Fast.
xxiiii c ^amys Apostle xxv xiiii d Anne mother. etc. xxvi iii e The seven
slepers xxvii f Samson bishop xxviii xi g xix H Abdon and sennes xxx xix b
Germayne bishop xxxi

KL August has. xxxi. days. the moon. xxx:
xiii c Lammas day i xvi d Steven confessoure ii ^ e Inuencyon of saint Steven
iii f Iustyne priest. iiii xiii g v ii Transfiguracyon of our lord vi b The
feast of Jesus vii x c Cyryake and his fellows. viii d Romayne Fast. ix viiix e
(...) x vii f Tyburtius martyr xi g Saint Clare xii xv Ypolyte and his fellows.
xiii iiii b Eusebius Fast. xiiii c Assumpcyon of (...) xv xii d The son^^ (...)
xvi i e Octaue of Laurence xvii f Agapyte martyr xviii ix g Magnus martyr xix H
Jews bishop xx xvii b Saint Bernarde xxi vi c Octaue of the assumpcyon xxii d
Fast. xxiii xiii e (...) xxiiii iii f Jews king xxv g Saint Seryne xxvi xi ^
Rufe martyr xxvii xix b Saint Austyn. xxviii c Decollacyon of John^ xxix viii d
Felix and Audacte xxx e Saint Cuthbert virgyn. xxxi

KL September has. xxx. days. the moon. xxix.
xvi f Saint Gyles abbot i v g Saint Anthony martyr ii iii xiii b Translacyon
of Cuthbert iiii ii c Bertyne abbot v d Saint Eugenius vi x e vii f (...) viii
xviii g Gorgone martyr ix vii H Syluius bishop x b xi xv c Mercyane bishop
xii iiii d Maurilius bishop xiii e Exaltacion of the cross xiiii xii f The
son in Libra xv i g Goyth virgyn xvi Lambert bishop xvii ix b Uictor and
Corone xviii c Ianuarius martyr xix xvii d Saint Eustace Fast. xx vi e (...)
xxi f Maurice and his company xxii xiiii g Tecla virgyn xxiii iii H Andoche
martyr xxiiii b xxv xi c Cypriane and Iustine. xxvi d Cosme and Damiane xxvii
xix e xxviii viii f (...) xxix g Saint Jerome priest xxx

KL October has. xxxi. days: the moon: xxx.
xvi Remygy bishop i v b ii xiii c iii ii d iiii e Appollinaris martyr v x f
saint faith vi g vii xviii H Pelagy viii vii b ix c Geron and victor x xv d
Ficasius bishop xi iiii e saint Wylfryde xii f Translacion of Edward xiii xii
g xiiii H Wulfran bishop xv b (...) xvi ix c xvii d ^^^^ evangelist xviii xvii
e Fredeswyde virgyn xix vii f Austreberte virgyne xx g xi. thousand vyrgyns
xxi xiiii H Mary salome xxii iii b Romayne bishop xxiii c Maglore bishop
xxiiii xi f Crispyne and Crispiane xxv e Euariste xxvi xix f Fast. xxvii viii g
(...) Judah xxviii H Narciscus bishop xxix xvi b Germayne capua. xix v c
Quintyn Fast. xxxi

KL November has. xxx. days. the moon. xxix.
d The feast of all saynte^ i xiii e All souls day ii ii f Wenefrede virgyn
iii g Amantius iiii x ^ ^ete priest ^ b Leonarde vi c Wylfryde archebysshop.
vii vii d viii e Theodore ix xv f Martyne confessoure x iiii g Martyne bishop
xi H Pattern matryr xii xii b xiii i c Transla. of Erkenwalde xiiii d The son
in (...) xv ix e Edmunde archebysshop xvi f New bishop xvii xvii g Orta. of
Martyne xviii H Elyzabeth xix b Edmunde king xx xiiii c xxi iii d Ceryly
vyrgyne xxii e xxiii xi f Grysogone martyr. xxiiii g Katheryne vyrgyne xxv xix
H xxvi viii b Agricole xxvii c Rufi martyr xxviii xvi d Saturnine Fast. xxix v
e Andrewe Apostle. xxx

KL December has. xxxi days: the moon: xxix:
f i g Liban ii H Deposi. Osmunde iii b Barbara virgyne iiii c Sabbe abbot v
xviii d (...) of our (...) vi vii e Octaues of Andrewe vii f (...) bishop viii
xv g Cipriane abbot ix iiii H x b Damasce xi xii c (...) son in (...). xii i
d Lucye virgyne xiii e xiiii ix f Ualery bishop xv g O sa^tenua. xvi xvi A
Lazarus bishop xvii vi b Graciane bishop xviii c xix xiiii d Iulyan martyr xx
iii e Thomas apostle xxi f xxx. martyrs xxii xi g Uictory virgyne xxiii A Fast.
xxiiii xix b Natiuite of our Lord. xxv viii c (...) prothomattyr xxvi d (...)
(...) xxvii xvi e (...) ^ay. xxviii v f xxix g Transla. of James xxx xiii H
Syluester xxxi

The names of all the books of the Bible and the content of the chapters of
every book, with the nombre of the leaf where the books begin.
Chapt^^^ Le^^^ Genesis, The first book of Moses L first Exodus, The second
book of Moses xi xxii Leuiticus The third book of Moses xxvii xxxix Numeri,
The fourth book of Moses xxxvi lii Deuterono, The fyfth book of Moses xxxiiii
lxix

The books of the second part. Chapters (...) Joshua, The book of Joshua xxiiii
ii Iudicum, The book of Judges xxi xii Ruth, The book of Ruth iiii xxii i.
Regum, The first book of the kings xxxi xxiiii ii. Regum, The second book of
the kings xxiiii xxxvii iii. Regum, The third book of the kings xxii xlviii
iiii. Regu^, The fourth book of the kings xxv lxi i. Paralip. The first of the
Chronicles xxix lxxiii ii. Paralip. The second of the Chronicles xxxvi lxxxv i.
Esdras, The first book of Esdras x xcix ii. Esdras, The second book of Esdras
xiii ciii i. Esther, The first book of Esther x cix Job, The book of Job xlii
cxii

The books of the third part Chapters ^ea^e Psalteriu^, The psalter cl ll
Prouerbia. The proverbs of Solomon xxxi xxviii Ecclesiast. The book of the
preacher xii xxxvii^ Cantica Cantirorum. The ballet of ballettes. vii^ ^l Esaye
The prophecy of Esaye. lxvi xlii Jeremy The prophecy of Jeremy. lii lxxii Trent
The lamentacyous of Jeremy. v lxxxvi Ezechiel The prophecy of Ezechiel. lxviii
lxxxviii. Daniel The prophecy of Daniel. xii cviii Oseas The prophecy of Oseas.
xiiii cxv Joel The prophecy of Joel. iii cxviii Amos The prophecy of Amos. ix
cxix Abdye The prophecy of Abdye. i cxxi Jonas The prophecy of Jonas. iiii
cxxii Micheas The prophecy of Micheas. vii cxxiii Nahum The prophecy of Nahum.
iii cxxiiii Abacucke The prophecy of Abacucke. iii cxxv Sophony The prophecy of
Sophony. iii cxxvi Aggeus The prophecy of Aggeus. ii cxxix Zachatias The
prophecy of Zachary. xiiii cxxix Malachy The prophecy of Malachy. iii cxxxiii

The books of (...). (...) Leaf iii. Esdras The third book of Esdras. ix ii
iiii. Esdras The fourth book of Esdras. xvi viii Tobias The book of Tobias.
xiiii xix Judith The book of Judith. xvi xxiii ii. Hester Certain chapters of
Hester. vi xxviii Sapte^cia The book of wisdom. xix xxix Ecclesiasti. The book
of Jesus Syrac. li xxxvi Baruch The prophet Baruch. vi liiii The song Of the.
iii. children in the Oven. i lvii The story Of Susanna. i lviii The story Of
Bell. i lviii The prayer of Manasses. i lix The first book of the Machabees.
xvi lx The second book of the Machabees. xv lxxii

^ All the (...) of the new (...) are contained in title thereof.

(...) and tokens that we have set in the Bible.
FIrst / where as often times ye shall find a Romayne letter in the text, it
sygaifieth that so much as is in the Romayne letter does abound, and is more
in the common translacyon in Latin, then is found either in the Hebrew or in
the Greek, which words and sentences we have added, not only to manifest the
same unto you, but also to satisfye and content those, that here before time,
has myssed soche sentences in the Bybles and new Testamentes before set for
the. More over, where as ye find this sign ^, it betekeneth a diucrsyte and
difference of readyng between the Hebrews and the Chaldees in the same place,
which diuersites of readyng we were purposed to have set forth particulerly
unto you. But for so much as they are very long and tedious, and this volume
is very great and houge alredye, we have therefore at this time left them out,
trusting hereafter to set them forth in some little volume by them selves.

We have also (as ye may se) added many hands both in the mergent of this
volume, and also in the text, upon the which we purposed to have made in the
end of the Bible (in a table by them selves) certain godly annotacions: but
for so much as yet there has not been sufficient time ministered to the kings
most honorable counsel, for the ouersyght and correccyon of the said
annotacyons, we will therefore omyt them, till their more connentente leisure.
Doing now no more but beseke the most gentle reader, that when thou come at
soche a place where the hand does stand (or any other where, in the Bible)
and thou can not attain to the meaning and true knowledge of that sentence,
then do not rashly presume to make any priu^te interpretacion thereof: but
submyt thy self to the judgment of those that are godly learned in Christ
Jesus. To the which Christ Jesus be honor and praise for ever.

Amen.
The first Book of Moses called in the hebrew Bereschith: and in the latin
Genesis.
The creacyon of the world.
By the word all things be create of God, of man's creacion, rule, and
sustenaunce

CAPITVLO. I.
IN the beginning Psalm. cii. d. ^ere. x. b. Eccl, 18. a. ^ Esd. vi. c ^eb. i
c. xi a
God

And God said: Let there be made light, and there was light made. And god saw
the light, that it was good. And God made a division between the light and
darkness. And God called the light, day, and the darkness called he,
night. And the evening and the morning was made one day. And God said: Let
there be a firmament in the mids of the waters, and let it make a division
between waters and waters. And god made the firmament, and set a diuisyon
between waters, which were under the firmament and between the waters that
were above the firmament And it was so done. And god called the firmament,
Heaven. The euenyng also and the morning was made the second day.

And god said: ^rouer. 8. d ^ob. xxvi. c
Let the waters under heaven be gathered together in to one place, that the dry
land may be seen. And so it came to pass. And god called the dry land
earth: and the gatherynge together of waters called he the sees. And god saw
that it was good

And god said: Let the earth bring forth Psalm. 136. a 4. Eid. 6. d
let there be made lyghtes in the firmament of heaven, and let them make a
dyfference between the day and the night, and let them be for signs, and for
appointed seasons, days, and years. And let them be for lyghtes in the
firmament of heaven, that they may give light upon the earth. And so it was
done. And god made Iere. xxxi. ^
two great lyghtes: A greater light to rule the day, and a less light to rule
the night. (And he made) Sterres also. And God set them in the firmament heaven,
that they might give light upon the earth* and that they might rule the day
and the night, and to make a difference between the light and the darkness.
And God saw that it was good. The evening also / and the morning was made
the fourth day.

And God said: 4. Esd. 6. d
Let the waters bring forth mouynge creature that has life, and foul that
may flee upon the earth in the face of the firmament of heaven. And god created
great whales, and every living, and mouyng creature, which the waters brought
forth after their kind, and every fethered foul after their kind. And God
saw that it was good. And god blessed them, saying* Grow and increase and
fill the waters of the Sea, and let fethered fowls be multiplied in the earth.
The euenyng also and the morning was made the fyfth day. And God said: Let the
earth bring forth living creature after his kind, catell worm, and beast
of the earth after his kind, and so it came to pass. And God made the beast
of the earth after his kind, and catel after their kind, and every thing
that crepeth upon the earth after his kind. And god saw that it was good.

And god said: Let us make man in our Sapi, u. d, Eccle. 17. a Mat, xix. a
Mar. x. a Sapi. ix. a psalm. 18. b
God saw Eccl. 39. ^. Mar. vii. ^ i. timo. 4. a
every thing that he had made, and behold: it was exceeding good. The evening
also, and the morning was made the syxte day*

The halowyng of the Sabbath the Chapitre before repeted. The four clouds of
paradise: The setting of than in paradise: The tree of knowledge forbidden.
The creacion of Eua: The institution of marriage.

CAPI. II.
THe heaven also and the earth were finysshed, Exodi. xx. b ^bre. iii^ ^
And in the seventh day he rested from all his work which he had made. And
God blessed the seventh day, and sayntified it, because that in it he had
rested from all his work, which God created to make. These are the
generacions of the henens and of the earth when they were created in the day
when the Lord God made the earth, and the heuens, and every plant of the
field, before it was in the earth, and every herb of the feld, before it grew.
For the lord god had not caused it to rain upon the earth, neither was there
a man to till the ground. And there went up a mist from the exth, and watered
the hoole face of the ground.

The Lord God also * shope man, even dust of the ground, and brethed in to
his nosethyrls the breath of life, and Adam was made a living soul. Moreover
the lord god planted a garden in Eden from the east and there he put man,
whom he had made. Also out of the ground made the Lord God to grow, every
tree that was pleasant to the sight, and commodious for meat. And the Prove.
3. c. Reave. ii. b
tree of life, and the tree of knowledge of good and of evil, was in the mids
of the garden.

And out of Eden there went forth a river to water the garden. And from thence
it was divided, and became in to four heads. The name of one is Eccl. 24. c.
Pison. The same is it that co^passeth the hole land of Hauilah, where is
gold. And the gold of that land is good. There is also Bidelliu^, and the
stoone Onichinus. The name of the second river, is Gihon, the same is it that
co^passeth the hole land of Ethiopis. The name of the third river is Hydekel,
and it goes toward the east side of Assyria. And the fourth river is Eccl.
xvii. i. Cor. xi. ^
made he a woman, and brought her unto the man. And the man said. This is now
boon of my bones / and flesh of my flesh, she shall be called woman,
because she was taken out of man. For this cause shall a man leave his father,
and his mother, and shall be joined with his wife / and they Mat. xix. ^ Mark.
x. ^ Ephe. v. g. i. Cor. vi. ^
shall become one flesh. And they were both naked, the man I say / and his
wife, and were not ashamed.

The serpent deceyueth the woman. The serpent is cursed: the punishment of the
man and woman. Adam driven out of Paradise. Christ our savior is promised.

CAPI. III.
BUt the serpent was sotyller then all the

And ii. Cor. xi. (...)
the serpent said unto the woman: ye shall not dye the death, but God does
know, that the same day that ye eat thereof, your eyes shall be opened / and
ye shall be even as Gods, knowing good and evil. And so the Eccle. 25 ^
woman (seeing that the same tree was good to eat / and delectable to the eyes
/ and

And they herd the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool
of the day. And Adam and his wife hyd them selves from the face of the Lord
God, among the trees of the garden. And the lord God called Adam and said unto
him, where art thou? Which said. I herd thy voice in the garden, and was
afraid, because I was naked, and hyd my self. And he said. Who told the,
that thou wast naked? Have thou not eaten of the same tree, of which I
commanded the, that thou should not eat of it? And Adam said. The woman,
whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat. And
the lord god said to the woman: why have thou done this? And the woman

Collo. ii. c.
The same shall tread down thy head, and thou shalt tread upon his hele.
But unto the woman he said. Multiplyeng I will multiply thy sorrow and thy
conceyuyng. In sorrow shalt thou bring forth children, and thy lust shall
perteyne to thy husband, and he shall have the rule of the.

Unto Adam he said. Because thou have herkened unto the voice of thy wife, and
haste eaten of the tree (of which I commanded the, saying. Thou shalt not
eat of it) cursed is the ground for thy sake. In sorrow shall thou eat of it
all the days of thy life. Thorn also and thystle shall it cause to grow unto
the, and thou shall eat the herb of the field.

In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou be turned again
in to the ground, for out of it was thou taken, in as much as thou Job. 34.
art dust, and in to dust shalt thou be turned again. And Adam called his
wives name Eua, because she was the mother of all living. Unto the same Adam
also and to his wife did the Lord God make letherne

And the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to dress the ground
that he was taken out of. And so he drove out man, and at the East side of the
garden of Eden, he set Cherubim, and the glysterynge flambe of a shaking
sword, to keep the way of the tree of life.

Coin hylleth his ryghtious brother Abel. Cain dispayreth The generation of
Enoch. Mathusaell, Tuhall, Lamrech, Seth, Enos.

CAPI. IIII.
ADam knew Eua his wife. Who conceyuynge, Job. 34.
Abell, and to his oblacyo^. But unto Cain / and to his offering he had no
respect. For the which cause Cain was exceadynge wroth, and his countenance
abated. And the Lord said unto Cain. Why art thou wroth, and why is thy
countenance abated? If thou do well, shall there not be a promocyon. And if
thou do not well, lies not thy syn in the doors? Unto the also perteyneth
the lust thereof, and thou shall have dominyo^ over it. And Cain spoke unto
Abell his brother. ( let us go forth)

And it fortuned Sapi. x. a 1. Iohu^. 3. a Hebre. xii. ^ Mat. ^3. d. Iuo^. ^. d.
when they were in the field, Cain rose up against Abel his brother and slew
him. And the lord said unto Cain. Where is Abell thy brother? Which said. I
wot not. Am I my brothers keeper? And he said. What have thou done? The voice
of thy brothers blood cries unto me out of the ground. And now art thou
cursed upon the earth, which has opened her mouth, to receive thy brothers
blood from thy hand. If thou till the ground, she shall not proceed to yield
unto the her strength. Fugitive, and a vagabounde shalt thou be in the earth.
And Cain said unto the Lord. My Job. xv. ^
iniquite is more, then that it may be forgyuen. Behold, thou have cast me out
this day from the upper face of the earth, and from thy face shall I be hyd.
Fugitive also and a vagabounde shall I be in the earth.

And it shall come to pass, every one that fyndeth me, shall slay me. And the
Lord said unto him, ( it shall not be so) Yea, but who so ever sleeth Cain, it
shall be avenged seven fold. And the Lord set a mark upon Cain

And Cain went out from the face of the Lord, and dwelte in the land Nod,
Eastwarde from Eden.

Cain also knew his wife, which conceived and bare Enoch, and buyldyng a
city, he called the name of the same city after the name of his son Enoch.
Unto the same Enoch was borne Irad. Irad begat Mehuiaell, and Mehuiaell begat
Methuschael. Methuschaell begat Lamech. And Lamech took unto him two wives. The
name of the one, Ada, and the name of the other Zylla. And Ada begat Iaball,
which was the father of such as dwell in tents / and of such as have catel.
His brothers name was Iuball, which was the father of all that handle harp,
and organe. And Zylla also begat Thuball Cain, which wrought connyngly every
craft of brass and of iron. The sister of Thubal Cain, was Naema. And Lamech
said unto his wives Ada, and Zylla: Hear my voice ye wives of Lamech harken
unto my speech: If I

The Genealogy of Adam, and of other Fathers unto Noe.

CAPI. V.
THis is the book of the generacions of

And Adam lived an hundred, and thyrtye years, and begat (a son) in his own
likeness after his image, and called his name Seth. All the days of Adam
(after he had begotten i. Para. i. a
Seth) were eight hundred years, and he begat sons and daughters. And all the
days that Adam lived, were nine iju^dred and thyrty years, and he dyed.

Seth lived an hundred and five years, and begat Enos. And Seth lived (after
he begat Enos) eight hundred years, and seven years, and begat sons and
daughters. And all the days of Seth were, nine hundred, and twelve years. And
he dyed. Enos lived nyntye years, and begat Kenan.

And Iared lived (after he begat Enoch) eight hundred years, and begat sons
and daughters. And all the days of Iared were nine hundred, and sextye and two
years. And Eccle. (...) Hebre. (...)
walked with God after he begat Methuselah, three hundred years, and begat
sons and daughters. And all the days of Enoch were three hundred sextye, and
five years. And Enoch Genesis x(...)
walked with god, and he (was S^^ (...) 4. Reg(...)
no more seen), for god took him away. Methuselah also lived an hundred years,
and eyghtye and seven years, and begat Lamech. And again Methuselah lived
(after he begat Lamech,) seven hundred years, and eyghtye, and two years, and
begat sons, and daughters. And all the days of Methuselah were nigh hundred
years and sextye, and nine years, and he dyed.

Lamech lived an hundred years and eyghtye

Noah was five hundred year old. And Noah begat Sem / Ham, and Iapheth.

The cause of the floode: The malice of man's heart: God warns Noe of the
coming of the floode: The preparynge of the Arc

CAPI. VI.
ANd it came to pass, that man began i. Peter (...)
an hundred, and twentye years. But there were gyauntes in the earth in those
days, yea and after that the sons of God came unto the daughters of men, and
they had gendred unto them: the same became mighty men of the world, and men
of renown. But god saw that the malice of man was great in the earth / and all the ymagynacyon of the thoughts of his Gene viii d
heart was only evil every day. And it ^^. Re. xv. c
repented the Lord, that he had made man in the earth, and he was touched with
sorrow in his heart. And the Lord said: I will (from the upper face of the
earth) destroy man, whom I have created both man, catell / worm / and
foul of the air, for it repents me that I have made them. But Noah found
grace in the eyes of the lord. These are the generacions Eccl. 44. b
Noah was a just and a perfect man in his generacions / and Genesi. v. c
walked with God. Noah begat three sons: Sem, Ham, and Iapheth. The earth also
was corrupt before god, and the same earth was filled with crueltye. And god
looked upon the earth / and behold, it was corrupt. For all flesh had
corrupt his way upon earth.

And God said unto Noah: The end of all flesh is come before me / for the
earth is filled with crueltye from the face of them. And behold, I will
destroy them with the earth: Make the an Arc of pyne trees. Habitacyons
shalt thou make in the Arc, and shalt pytch it within and without with
pytch. And of this fassio^ shall thou make it. The length of the Arc shall be
three hundred cubits. The Gene. ix. b and ^ vii. a.
covenant, and thou shall come into the Arc, thou, and thy sons, thy wife,
and thy so^^es wives with the. And of

The entrance of Noe, and of them that were with him into the Arc. The
rysinge of the floude, wherthrow althynges did perysshe.

CAPI. VII.
ANd the Lord said unto Noah: Come ii. peter. ii ^
ryghteous before me in this generacyon. Of every Leui. xi. a
clean beast thou shalt take with the seven and seven The male and his
female. But of unclean catel two, the male, and his female. Of fowls also of
the air / seven and seven, the male and the female, to keep seed alive upon
the face of all the hoole earth. For yet after seven days I will rain upon the
earth fortye days, and fortye nyghtes. And al substance that I have made will
I destroy from the upper face of the earth. Noah therefore did according unto
all Mat* 24. ^ Luke. xvii ^
froude of waters was upon the earth. And Noah came (and his sons, and his
wife, and his sons wives with him) unto the Arc, because of the waters of
the floude. Of clean catell, and of unclean catell, and of flyeng fowls, and
of every such as crepeth upon the earth, there came two, and two unto Noah
into the Arc, the male and the female, as God had commanded Noah. It fortuned
also after seven days, and the waters of the flood were upon the earth. In the
six hundred year of Noes life, in the second month, the seventh day of the
month. In the same day were all the fou^taynes of the great deep broken up,
and the wyndowes of heaven were opened. And the rain was upon the

And they came unto Noah into the Arc two, and two, of al flesh wherein is
the breath of life. And they entering in, came male, and female of all flesh,
as God had commanded him. And the Lord shut him in round about. And the
Sapi. x. ^
floude came fortye days upon the earth, and the waters were increaced, and
bare up the Arc, which was lift up above the earth. The waters also
prevailed, and were increased excedyngly upon the earth, and the Arc floted on
the upper face of the waters. And the waters prevailed excedyngly (...)

tongues, countrees, and in their nations.

Unto Sem also the father of all the chyldrem of Eber (and elder brother of
Iayheth) there were children borne. The children of Sem: Elam and Assure,
Arphachsad / and Lud, and Aram. The children of Aram: Hus, and Hull, i. Para.
i. d
Arphachsad begat Selah, and Selah begat Eber. Unto Eber also were borne two
sons: The name of the one was Peleg, for in his days was the earth divided.
And his brothers name was Iaketan. Iaketan begat Almodad, and Saleph.
Hazermaueth, and Ierah, and Hodoran, and Uzall / and Dickla / Obal also / and
Abimael and Scheba, and Ophir, and Hauila, and Iobab. All these were the
children of Iaketan. And their dwelling was from Mesa, as thou go unto
Sephar a mounteyne of the east. These are the children of Sem after their
kynreds, and tongues in their lands, and nations. And so these are the
kynreddes of children of Noah / after their generacions in their peoples, and
of these were the nacyons divided in the earth after the floude.

The building of Babell. The confusyon of tongues. The generation of Sem the
son of Noe, until Abram, which goes with Lot unto Haran.

CAPI. XI.
ALL the hole earth was of one language,

And the Lord said: Behold, the people is one, and they have al one
lauguage, and this they by gyn to do, neither will it be restrained from them,
whatsoever they have ymagyned to do. Come on, let us go down, and Geneti. x. b
Confusyon.
Babel, because the Lord did there confound the language of all the earth.
And from thence did the Lord scater them abroad upon the face of all the earth.

These are the generacions of Sem: Sem was an hundred year old, and begat
Arphachsad two year after the floude. And Sem lived (after he begat
Arphachsad) five hundred years, and begat sons, and daughters.

Arphachsad lived five and thyrtye years And begat Selah. And Arphachsad lived
(after he begat Selah) four hundred, and three years / and begat sons, and
daughters. Selah lived thyrtye years / and begat Eber. And Selah lived (after
he begat Eber) four hundred and three years, and be gat sons and daughters.

Eber lived four and thyrtye years, and

Peleg lived thyrtye years, and begat Reu. And Peleg lived (after he begat
Reu) two hundred and nine years, and begat sons and daughters.

Reu lived two and thirtye years, and begat Serug. And Reu lived (after he
begat Serug) two hundred and seven years, and begat sons and daughters.

Serug lived thyrtye years, and begat Nahor. And Serug lived (after he begat
Nahor) two hundred years, and begat sons and daughters.

And Nahor lived nine and twentye years

Terah lived seuentene years / and begat Abram, Nahor / and Haran.

These are the generacions of i. Para. i. d Iosue, 24 a
Terah: Terah begat Abram, Nahor, and Hara^. Haran begat Lot. And Haran dyed in
the presence of Terah his father / in the land of his natiuyte even in Ur of
the Caldees. Abram / and Nahor took them wives. The name of Abrams wife was
Sarai, and the name of Nahors wife was Milca, the daughter of Haran the father
of Milca / and the father of Iisea. But Hebre. x^^.
Sarai was baren, and had no child.

And Terah took Abram Iosue 24. ^ ii. Esd. ix. b
his son, and Lot the son of Haran, his sons son / and Sara his daughter
in law, his son Abrams wife. And they departed together from Ur of the
Caldees, that they might go into the land of Chanaan / and they came unto
Charan, and dwelte there. And the days of Terah were two hundred, and five
years / and Terah dyed in Charan.

Abram is blessed of God, and goes with Lot unto the lunbe of Canaan, which
god promised to give unto him and his seed. Abram goes into Egypt, and
causes Sarai his wife to call her self his sister, for whom Pharao is plaged.

CAPI. XII.
ANd the Lord said unto Abram. ^des. vii. a Hebru. xi. c
Get

And I will make of the a great people, and will Gene. 18. r. and. xxii r.
Acts. iii. d.
bless the, and make thy name great, that thou may be a blessing.

I will also bless them that bless the, and curse such as curses the / and
in the shall all the kynreddes of the earth be blessed.

And so Abram departed even as the lord spoke unto him / and Lot went with
him. And Abram was seuentye and five years Gene. ^ii. a and xiiii. c
substance that they had in possessyon / and the souls that they had begotten
in Charan. And they departed / that they might come in to the land of Canaan,
and in to the land of Canaan they came. Abram passed through the land unto
the place of Sichem, and unto the plain of Moreh. And the Cananite was then in
the land.

And the Lord appearyng unto Abram / said. Unto thy Gene. xiii. d xv. d. xvii
v Deuteronomy. 34. v
seed will I give this land. And there builded he an altar unto the lord /
even where he had appeared unto him.

And remouyng thence unto a mountain that was eastwarde from Beehel, he
pytched

But there was a derth in that land, and therefore went Abram down in to
Egypt, that he might soiourne there, for there was a fore derthe in the land.
And it happened when he was come nere to enter in to Egypt he said unto Sarai
his wife. Behold, I know, that thou art a fair woman to look upon. Therefore
shall it come to pass that when the Egyptyans se the, they shall say. She is
his wife. And they shall kill me, but they shall save the alive. Say (I pray
the) that Give. xx. a
thou art my sister, that I may fare well for thy sake, and that my soul may
live through thine occasyon.

And so it happened, when Abram was come in to Egypt, the Egyptians beheld
the woman, for she was very fair. The princes also of Pharao saw her, and
commended her before Pharao, and the woman was taken in to Pharaos house. And
he entreated Abra^ well for her sake, and he had sheep and oxen, and he asses,
men servants, and maid servants, she asses and camels.

And the Lord smote Pharao and his house with great plages because of Sarai
Abrams wife. And Pharao calling Abram said? Why have thou done this unto me?
Why dyddest thou not tell me, that she was thy wife? Why saydest thou, she is
my sister and I took her to my wife? Now therefore behold there is thy wife,
take her, and goo thy way. And Pharao gave the men commandment concerning
him, and they conuayed him forth, and his wife, and all that he had.

Abram and Lot depart out of Egypt. And Abram deuydeth his land, and castle
with Lot his brother son. Again here is promised unto At ^^m the land of
Canaan.

CAPI. XIII
ANd so Abra^ gat him up out of Egipte, Gene. xii. ^
all that he had, and Lot with him, toward the south. And Abram was very
rich, in cattle, in silver, and gold. And he went forth on his journey
from the Southe toward Bethell, unto the place where his tente had been at the
beginning, between Bethel and Hat. Even unto the place of the Gene. xii. c.
altar which he had made there at the first, and there Abram called on the
name of the Lord.

Lot also which went with Abram had sheep, cattle, and tents, and the land
was not able to receive them, that they might dwell together, for the Gene.
36. a
substance of their Gene. xii. ^
Cananites and the Pheresytes dwelled at that time in the land. Then said
Abram unto Lot. Let there be no strife (I pray the) between the and me, and
Eccle. 25. ^
between my heerdmen and thine, for we be brethren. Is not all the Hiere. xi. a.
hole land before the. Depart I pray the fro me. If thou will take the left
hand, I will go to the right. And if thou depart to the right hand, I will
go to the left. And so Lot lyftynge up his eyes, beheld all the country of
Iordane, which was a plenteous country of water every where, before the Lord
destroyed Sodom and gomorra, even as the garden of the lord, like the land
of Egypt as thou come unto Zoar.

Then Lot chose all the plain country of Iordane, and took his journey from
the east.

And so departed the one brother from the other. Abra^ dwelled in the land of
Canaan, and Lot abode in the cities of the plain, and tented until Sodom.
But Eze. x^i^.
the men of Sodom were wicked, and exceeding sinners before the Lord.

And the Lord said unto Abram, after that Lot was departed from him. Lift up
thine eyes now, and look from the place where thou art, northwarde,
soutwarde, eastwarde and westwarde, for all Gene. xii. b 17. b. ^ 26 a Acts.
vii. a
the land which thou see will I give unto the and to thy seed for ever. And
I will make thy seed, as the dust of the earth, so that if a man can nombre
the dust of the earth, thy feed also shall be nombred. Arise and walk about
in the land, after the length of it, and after the breadth thereof, for I will
give it unto the. And Abram remouynge his tent, came and dwelled in the valeyes
of Mamre, namely in Ebron, and builded there an altar to the Lord.

Lot is taken prisoner: The victory of Abram of the Sodomities. Lot is
delyurred by Abram. Melchisedech offers gyf tes unto Abram, Abram pays
tithes to Melchisedech.

CAPI. XIIII.
ANd it chaunsed in the days of Amraphaell

But in the. xiiii. year came Kedorlaomor, and the kings that were with him,
and smote the gyauntes in Astaroth Karnaim, and the Susyms in Ham, and the
Emyms in the plain of Kariathim, and the Horyms in moun taynes Seir unto the
plain of Pharam, which bordreth upon the wilderness. And they returning
came to En Mispat, which is Kades, and smote all the country of the
Amalechytes, and also the Amorites that dwelt in Hazezon Thamar.

And there went out the king of Sodom,

And the king of Sodom and Gomorra fled, and fell there. And they that
remained, fled to the mountain. And they taking all the goods of Sodom and
Gomorra, and all their vytayles, went their way.

And they carried away Lot also Abrams brothers son, and his good (for he
dwelled in Sodom) and departed. And there came one that had escaped, and told
Abram the Hebrewe, which dwelled in the valeyes of Gene. x^^
Mamre the Amoryte, brother of Escholl, and brother of Aner, which were
confederate with Abram.

When Abram herd that his brother was taken, he harnessed his fresshe young
men, borne in his own house three hundred and eyghtene, and followed on them
until Dan. And he was set in array upon them by night, he and his servants,
and smote them, and pursued them unto Hoba, which lies on the left hand of
Damascos, and recovered all the goods, and also brought again his brother
Lot, and his goods, the women also and the people.

After that he returned again from the slaughter of Kedorlaomor, and of the
kings that were with him, came the king of Sodom forth to mete him in the
plain valcy, which is kings dale. And Hebr* v^^^*
Melchisedech

Blessed be Abram unto the high God possessoure of heaven and earth. And
blessed be the high God which has delivered thine enemies in to thy hand.
And so he gave him tithes of all. And the king of Sodom said unto Abram. Give
me the souls, and take the goods to thy self. And Abram answered the king
of Sodom. I have lift up my hand unto the Lord the high god possessoure of
heaven and earth, that I will not take of all that is thine, so much as a
threde or shoo latchet, leest thou should say, I have made Abram rich. Save
only that which the young men have eaten, and the parts of the men which
went with me, Aner, Eschol and Mamre which shall take their parts.

To Abram is promised Isaac. And again the land of Lanaa^ ^^pro^^ysed. The
faith of Abram. The bondage and delyueraunce of the children of Israel.

CAPI. XV.
AFter these things were done, the word chyldlesse, and the child of the
stewadshyp of my house is this Eleazer of Damasco. And Abraham said. Se, to me
have thou given no seed, and lo, a lad borne in my house is mine heir. And
behold, the word of the lord came unto him saying. He shall not be thine
heir, but one that shall come out of thine own body shall be thine heir. And
he Iere 33 d Roma. 4. d
sterres, if thou be able to nombre them. And hesayd unto him, Roma. 4. ^
even so shall thy seed be. And Abraham Jacob. ii. d Gala. iii a.
byleued the Lord, and that counted he to him for righteousness.

And again / he said unto him. I am the Lord that brought the out of Ur, of
the Caldees, to give the this land, and that thou myghtest possess it. And he
said. Lord God, whereby shall I know that I shall possess it? He answered
him. Take an heyfer of three year old, and a she goote of three year old, and a
three year old, ram, a turtyll dove also, and a young pygeon. He took therefore
all these unto him, and divided them in the mids, and laid every piece, one
against an other. But the fowls divided he not.

And when the birds fell on the carkases,

And he said unto Abram. Know this of a suertye, that thy Acts. vii. a
seed shall be a stranger in a land that perteyneth not unto them. And shall
serve them, and they shall entreat them evil Erodi. xii. f Judith. v. b Gala.
iii. a.
four hundred years. Yet not with sta^dyng the nacyon whom they shall serve,
will I judge. And afterward shall they come out with great substance. And thou
shalt go unto thy fathers in peace, and shalt be buried in a good old age.
But in the fourth genera cyon they shall return hither again, for the
wickedness of the Amorites is not yet full.

And it came to pass that when the son Gene. 24. a
. Unto thy seed have I given this land, from the river of Egypt, even unto
the great river, the river Euphrates, the Kenytes, the Kenizites, and the
Cadmonites, the Hethites, and the Pherezites, and the gyauntes, the Amorites
also, and the Canaanites, the Gergesytes and the Iebusytes.

Agar conceyueth: She* fletth Satai. She is conforted of the Angel: She
bears Ismaell.

CAPI. XVI
SArai Abrams wife bare him no children.

Which when he had gone in unto Agar, she conceived. And when she saw that
she had conceived, her maystresse was despised

Thou do me wrong* I have given my maid in to thy bosom. Which seeing
that she has conceived, I am despised in her eyes the lord judge between the
and me. But Abra^ said to Sarai. Behold, thy maid is in thy hand, do with
her as it pleases the.

And when Sarai fared foul with her, she fled from the face of her. And the
angel of the Lord found her beside a fountain of water in the wilderness,
even by the well that is in the way to Sur. And he said. Agar Sarais maid,
whence came thou, and whyther go thou? She said. I fle from the face of my
maystres Sarai* And the angel of the lord said unto her. Return to thy
maystres agayn^, and submyt thy self unto her hands.

And again, the angel of the Lord said

Wherefore the well was called, the well of him that lives and sees me. And it
is between Cades and Bared. And Agar bare Abram a son, and Abram called his
sons name which Agar bare unto him, Ismael. And Abram was. lxxxvi. year
old, when Agar bare him Ismael.

Abram is called Abraham: and Sarai is named Sara. The land of Canaan is here
the fyfth time promised. Circumsision. Isaac is promised. Abraham prays for
Ismael.

CAPI. xvii.
WHen Abram was nynetie year old / and. Genes. v. d Gene. vi. c.
before me and be thou perfyte. And I will make my bond between me and the,
and will multiplye the excedyngly. And Abram fell on his face. And GOD talked
with him, saying. Behold, I am, and my testament is with the, and thou shall
be a father of many Eccle. 44. c
nacyons. Neither shall thy name any more be called Abra^, but thy name shall
be Abraham. Roma. iiii c
For a father of many nacyons have I made the, I will make the to grow
excedyngly, and will make nations of the: Yea and kings shall spring out of
Acts. vii. b
between me and the, and thy seed after the, in their generacions, by an
everlasting testament, that I may be God unto the and to thy seed after the.
And I will give unto the and to thy seed after the, ^eue. xiii d
the land wherein thou art a stranger, even all the land of Canaan, for an
everlasting possessyon, and will be their God. And god said again unto
Abraham, and thou therefore shalt keep my testament, both thou and thy seed
after the in their generacyons. This is my testament which ye shall keep
between me and you, and thy seed after the. Every manchylde among you shall be
circumcised. Ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskyn, and it shall be
a Roma. 4. b
token of the bond between me and you. And every man child of. viii. days
Gent. xxi. a Luke. ii. d Leui. xii. e.
old shall be circumcised among you, and such as be in your gene

And God said unto Abraham. Sarai thy wife shalt thou not call Sarai, but
Sara shall her name be. And I will bless her, and have given the a son of
her, and will bless her: people also, yea and kings of people shall spring of
her. But Abraham fell upon his face and laughed, and said in his heart. Shall a
child be borne unto him that is an hundred year old, and shall Sara that is
nynetie year old, bear? And Abraham said unto God. O that Ismael might live in
thy sight.

Unto whom God said. Sara thy wife shall Gene. 18. b.
bear the a son in deed, and thou shalt call his name Isaac. And I will make
my bond with him, for an Esai. 24. b.
everlasting bond, and with his seed after him. And as concerning Ismael also,
I have herd the. For I have blessed him, and will make him to encreace, and
will multiplye him excedyngly. Twelve Gene. 25. b.
princes shall he begette, and I will make a great nacyon of him. But my bond
will I make with Isaac, which Sara shall bear unto the, even this time twelve
month.

And he left of talkyng with him, and departed

There appeared three men unto Abraham. Isaac is promised. Sara laugheth. The
destruction of the Sodomites is declared unto Abraham. Abraham prays for them.

CAPI. XVIII.
ANd the lord appeared unto him in the Iudi. xix. i
morsel of bread, to comfort your hertes withal. And then shall ye go your
ways, for even therefore are ye come to your servant.

And they said. Do even so as thou have said. And Abraham went a pace in to
his tent unto Sara, and said. Make ready at once three peckes of fine meal,
kneade it, and make cakes. And Abraham runnynge unto his beasts, set a calfe
tender and good and gave it unto a young man, and he hasted to make it ready at
once. And he took butter and milk and the calfe which he had prepared, and
set it before them, and stood him self Tobi. xii* Iudi. xiii*
when they did cate.

And they said unto him. Where is Sara thy wife? He answered. Behold, she is
in the tent. And he said, In returnyng, I will come again unto the, according
to the time of life. And lo Roma. ix b
Sara thy wife shall have a son. That herd Sara, in the tent door which was
behind him. Abraham and Sara were both old and well stryken in age, and it
ceased to be with Sara after the manner, as it is with women. Therefore Sara
laughed within her self, saying. Now I am wared old, shall I give my self
(...) Eccl. 25. a.
lust, and my lord old also? And God said unto Abraham. Wherefore laughed
Sara, saying. Shall I of a suretye bear a child which am old? is there any
thing wonderful to God? According to the time 4. Re. iiiii. c Roma. ix. b
appointed, will I return unto the even according to the time of life, and
Sara shall have a son. But Sara denied, saying. I laughed not, for she was
afraid. And he said. It is not so, but thou laughed. And the^ these men rysyng
up, looked toward Sodom. Eccle xliiii. Gene. 17. a
great and a mighty people, and all the nacyons of the earth shall be blessed in
him? For I know him, that he will command his children and his household
after him, that they keep the way of the Lord, and do after right and
conscience, that the lord may bring upon Abraham all that he has spoken unto
him. And the lord said. Ezec. xvi. c.
The cry of Sodom and Gomorra is great, and their sin is excedyng grievous.
I will go down now and se whyther they have done al together according to
that cry which is come unto me, and if not, that I may know. And the men
departed thence and went to Sodom ward. But Abraham stood yet before the
Lord, and Abraham drew nere and said. Will thou also destroy the ryghteous
with the wicked? peradventure there be. l. ryghteous within the city, will
thou destroy, and not spare the place for the sake Gene. ii. b
which am but dust and ashes. Peradventure there shall lack five of fyftie
ryghteous. Will thou destroy all the city for lack of five? And he said. If
I find. xl. and five, I will not destroy them. And he proceeded to speak unto
him again, saying. Peradventure there shall be fourtye found there. ^He answered.
I will not do it for fourtyes sake. He said again. O, let not my Lord be angry
that I speak. Peradventure there shall thyrtie be found there. And he said. I
will do nothing if I find thyrtie there. He said again. O se, I take upon me
to speak now also unto my lord. Peradventure there shall be twentye found
there. He answered. I will not destroy them for twentyes sake. And he said. O
let not my Lord be angrye, and I will speak yet but ones. Peradventure there
shall ten be found there. He answered. I will not destroy them for tens sake.
And the lord went his way as soon as he left co^monyng with Abraham. And
Abraham also returned unto his place.

Lot receives Angels in to his house: The fylthy Iustes of the Sodomites, and
their su^uercyon: Lot is delivered: the city zoar: Lots wife is turned into a
pyller of salt: Lot is dronkers his incest with his daughters.

CAPI XIX.
ANd there came. ii. angels to Sodom, Gene. 23. a,
compel them violently. And they turnyng in unto him entered in to his house,
a(...) made them a feast, and did bake sweet (...)d and they did Luke xxiii. c
eat. And before they went to Tobi. xii. d
rest, the men of the city (even the men of Sodom) compassed the house round
about both old and young, all the people from all quarters. And they calling
unto Lot, said unto him. Where are the men which came in to the this night?
bring them out unto us, that we may know them.

And Lot went out at the doors unto them, and will he be now a E^od. ii. b
A^t^^. vii. d
judge? we will now deal worse with the then with them.

And they preased sore upon the man, even

And the men that were at the door of the house, they smote with blyndnesse
Sapi. xix: c 4. Reg. 6. d
both small and great, so that they faynted and could not find the door. And
the men said unto Lot. If thou have yet here any son in law or sons or
daughters, or what so ever thou have in the city, bring it out of this place,
for we will destroy this place, because the cry of them is great Gene. 18. ^
before the face of god, for the Lord has sent us to destroy it.

And Lot went out and spoke unto his sons in law which married his
boughters, saying, stand up, get you out of this place, for the Lord will ouet
throw this city. But he seemed as though he had mocked, unto his sons in
law. And when the morning arose

It fortuned when they had brought them out, he said. Save thy life, and look
not behind the, neither tarry thou in all this plain country. Save thy self
in the mountain, leest thou perysshe. And Lot said unto them. No, I pray the
my Lord. Behold, thy set^^ ^^t has found grace in thy sight, and Esai.
xiii. d Iere l. f Ez^. xvi. ^.
Sodom and Gomorra* brymstone and fire from the lord out of heaven, and
overthrew those cities and all the region, and all that dwelled in the cities,
and that that grew upon the earth. But Lottes wife looked behynd her, and was
turned in to a ii. pet^^. Sapi, ^ Amos 4* Luke. (...) Iudi. ^. ^
out from the mids of the ouerthr^wyng, when he overthrew the cities where
Lot dwelled. And Lot departed out of Zoar, and dwelled in the mountain and
his. ii. daughters were with him, for he feared to tarry in Zoar, but dwelled in a
cave he and his. ii. daughters. And the elder said unto the younger. Our father
is old, and there is not a man in the earth to come in unto us after the manner
of all the world. Come, we will make our father dronken with wine, and lie with
him, that we may save seed of our father. And so they made their father dronken
with wine that night. And the elder daughter went and lay with her father. And
he perceived it not, neither when she lay down, nor when she rose up.

And on the morrow it happened that the

Abraham went as a stranger in the land of Gerar. The ^yngeo Gerar takes
away his wife.

CAPI. XX.
ANd Abraham departed thence toward Give. xii. and xxvi. ^
sister. And Abimalech king of Gerar sent, and fet Sara away.

But God came to Abimalech in dream in the night and said to him: Se, thou
shall dye for the woman's sake which thou haste taken away, for she is a man's
wife. But Abimalech had not yet come nigh her, and he said: Lord will thou
sley ryghtwyse people? said not he vntome, she is my sister? Yea* and said not
she her self: he is my* brother?

Now therefore deliver the man his wife again, for he is a prophet, and he
shall pray for the, that thou may live. But and if thou deliver her not
again, be sure that you shalt dye the death, both thou, and all that thou
have. And so Abimelech rysynge up be^ym^s in the morning called al his
servants, and told al these sayenges in their eats, and the men were sore
afraid. And Abimelech called Abraham and said unto him. What have thou

Then took Abimelech sheep and oxen, men

Isaac is borne. Agar is cast out with her young ^orme I^* ^a^^^. The ange^^
comfort Agar. The covenant ^y^^^ent Abimel^ch and Abraham.

CAPI. XXI.
THe lord vysyted Sara as he had said ^^. xviii. b and. xvii. c. Gala. iiii.
^ Hebre. xi. ^
according as he had promised. For Sara was with child and bare Abraham a
son in his old age / even the same season which the lord had appointed him.
And Abraham called his sons name that was borne unto him, which Math. i. ^
Iosue. xxiiii. a
Sara and bare him, Isaac. And Abraham Genesis 17. ^
cyrcumcysed Isaac his son when he was. viii. days old, as God commanded
him. And Abraham was an hundred year old, when his son Isaac was borne unto
him, But Sara said, God has made me ^ la^ghyng stock; so that all that hear,
will laughe at me. She said also ^ Who would have said unto Abraham, that
Sara should have given children suck? for I have borne him a son in his old
age. The child grow, and was weyned, and Abraham made a great feast, the same
day that Isaac was weyned. And Sara saw the Son of Agar the Egyptyan,
(which she had borne unto Abraham) to be a mocker. Wherefore she said unto
Abraham, * Put away this bond maid and her son for the son of this bond
woman shall not be heir with my son Isaac, and this saying was very grievous
in Abraham's sight because of his son. And God said unto Abraham. Let it not
be grievous in thy fight because of the lad and of thy bond maid. All that
Sara says unto the, here her voice for * in Isaac shall thy seed be called.
More over of the son of the bond woman will I make a nacyon, by cause he is
thy seed.

And so Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread and a bottel of
water, and gave it unto Ager, putting it on her shoulders with the lad also,
and sent her away, who departing, wandered up and down in the wyldernes of
Beer Seba. And the water was spente in the bottell, and she cast the lad under
a busshe and went and sat on the other side a great way, as it were a boweshot
of, for she said. I will not se the death of the child. And she sitting
down on the other side, lift up her voice and wept. And god herd the voice
of the child. And the angel of God called Ager out of heaven and said unto
her. What ayleth the Ager? Fear not for God has herd the voice of the
child. Arise, and lift up the lad from the place in which he is, and take
him in thy hand, for I will make of him a great people. And god opened her eyes,
and she saw a well of water* she went and filled the bottell with water, and
gave the boy drink. And god was with the lad, and he grew and dwelte in the
wilderness, and became an archer. And he dwelte in the wilderness of Pbaran.
And his mother got him a wife out of the land of Egypt.

And it chaunsed the same season, that Abimelech and Phicol cheyf captain of
his host spoke unto Abraham saying. (...). 26. ^
God is with the in all that thou do. And now therefore swear unto me even
here by God, th^^ thou wylt not hurt me, nor my children, nor my chyldrens
children. But that thou shalt deal with me / and the ^olintrey where thou
haste be^^^ ^^^aunge^, according unto the kyndnesse tha^ I ha^^^ showed the.
And Abraham said* I will sw^^^. And Abraham rebuked, Ab^^elech for a well of
water, which Abimelechs servants had vyolently taken away. And Abimelech
said. I wot not who has done this thing. Also thou toldest me not, neither
herd I of it, but this day.

And Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them unto Abimelech. And they made
both if them ab^nde together: And Abraham set all, ewe lambs by themselves.
And Abimelech ^^d unto Abraham* What mean these vii. ewe lambs which thou
have set by them selves? He answ^^d. For these. vii. lambs shalt thou take of
my hand, that they may be a witness unto me, that I have dygged this well.
Wherefore the place is called Beer Seba, because that there they swear both of
them. Thus made they a bond together in Beer Seba. And Abimelech and Phicoll
the cheyf Captain of his host rose up, and turned again unto the land of the
Philistines. And Abraham planted a wood in Beer Seba, and called there on the
name of the lord, the everlasting god, and soiourned in the Philistius land
a long season.

The faith of Abraham is proved, he offered his son Isaac. Christ our savior is
promised. The generation of Nachor Abraham's brother.

CAPI. XXII.
AFter these sayenges it happened that God did * prove Abraham, and said unto
him. Abraham, which answered, here am I. And he said, take thy only son
Isaac whom thou love, and get the unto the land Moria, and offer him up
there for a Sacrifyce upon one of the mountains, which I will show the. Then
Abraham rose up early in the morning, and sadled his ass, and took two of his
young men with him, and Isaac his son, and cloue wood for the sacrifice, and
rose up, and got him to the place which God had appointed him.

The third day Abraham lift up his eyes and saw the place a far of. And
Abraham said unto his young men. Abide you here with the ass, I and the lad
will go yonder / and worship, and come again unto you. And Abraham took the
wood of the sacrifice and laybe it upon Isaac his son, but he him self took
fire in his hand, and a knyfe. And they went ba^^^ of them together.

When spoke Isaac unto Abraham his (...) and said: My father? And he
answe(...) th^^e am I my son. He said: Se here ^^^yre and wood, but where is
the sheep for sacrifyce? Abraham answered: my son, God will provide him a sheep
for sacrifyce. And so they went both together.

And when they cam^ unto the place which God had showed him, Abraham made an
Iaco. ii. ^ ^. Mat. ii. ^
altar there, and dressed the wood, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him
on the altar above upon the wood. And Abraham stretchynge* forth his hand,
took the kynfe to have killed his son. And the angel of the Lord called
unto him from heaven, saying: Abraham Abraham? And he said: here am I.

And he said: lay not thy hand upon the child, neither do any thing at al
unto him, for now I know that thou fear god, and have for my sake not
spared thine only son And Abraham lyftynge up his eyes, looked Hebre. vi. ^
time, and said: By my self have I sworn (says the Lord) because thou
haste done this thing, and haste not spared thy only son: that in blessing
I will bless the, and in multiplyenge I will multiplye thy seed as the
sterres of heaven, and as the sand which is upon the sea side. And thy seed
shall possess Gene. xii. ^ Act. iii. d Gala. iii. ^
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, because thou haste herd my
voice. And so turned Abraham again unto his young men, and they rose up and came
together to Beer Seba. And Abraham dwelte in Beer Seba. And it chau^sed after
these things, that one told Abraham saying: Behold, Milcha, she has also
borne children unto thy brother Nachor: Hus his eldest son, and Bus his
brother, and Kemuel the father of the Siraans, and ceased, and Haso / and
Pyldas, and Iedlaph / and Bethuell. And Bethuel begat Rebecca. These. viii. did
Milcha bear to Nachor Abraham's brother. And his concubyne called Rhuma, she
bare also Tebah, and Gaham, Thaas, and Maacha.

Sara dies, and is buried in the field that Abraham bought of Ephron the
Hethite.

CAPI. XXIII.
SAra was an hundred, and.xxvii. year

Abraham sends a servant to seek a wife for his son. The faithful Isaac
takes fair Rebecca to wife.

CAPI. XXIIII.
ABraham was old and stryke^ in days and the Lord had blessed him in all
Gene. ^v. ^ Gene. xii. ^
seed will I give this land / he shall ^ende his angel before the, and thou
shalt take a wife unto my son from thence. Nevertheless if the woman will not
agree to follow the / then shalt thou be with out danger of this my does.
Only bring not my son thither again. And the servant put his hand under
the thye of Abraham his master, and swear to him as concerning that ma^^er.
And the servant took.x. camels of the camels of his master and departed, and
had of all manner goods of his master with is she that thou haste ordained for
thy servant Isaac: yea, and thereby shall I know that thou have showed mercy on
my master. And it came to pass or he had left speaking behold, Rebecca came
out / the daughter of Bethuel, son to Mylca the wife of Nahor Abraham's
brother, and her pytcher upon her shoulder. The damsel was very fair to look
upon, and yet a maid, and unknown of man. And she went down to the well, and
filled her pytcher, and came up. And the servant rennynge unto her: said, Let
me sup a little water of thy pytcher. And she said: drink my lord. And she
hasted and let down

And Gene. xx^^
Sara my masters wife bare him a son, when she was old, and unto him has
he given all that he has. And my master made me swear saying: thou shalt not
take a wife to my son among the daughters of the Cananytes in whose land I
dwell. But thou shalt go unto my fathers house / and to my kynred, and take a
wife unto my son. And I said unto my master: peradventure

And so I came this day unto the well, and said. O Lord, the god of my
master Abraham, if thou make my journey which I go, prosperous: behold I
stand by this well of water, and when a vyrgyn comes forth to draw water,
and I say to her: give me (I pray the) a little water of thy pytcher to
drink, and she say to me: drink thou, and I will also draw for thy camels,
that same is the wife whom the Lord has prepared for my masters son.

And before I had made an end of speaking in mine heart: behold Rebecca came
forth, and her pitcher on her sholder, and she went down unto the well, and
drew water And I said to her, give me drink I pray the. And she made haste,
and took down her pitcher from of her, and said, drink, and I will give thy
camels drink also.

And I drank, and she gave the camels Gene. 2^. ^ and. xxiii^
whom Milca bare unto him. And I put the earyng upon her face, and the
bracellettes upon her hands. And I bowed my self, and worshep ped the Lord,
and blessed the Lord God of my master Abraham which had brought me the right
way, to take my masters brothers daughter unto his son.

Now also if ye will deal mercyfully / and truly with my master tell me,
and if not, tell me also: that I may turn me to the right hand or the left.

Then answered Laban, and Bathuell / saying. This saying is proceeded even out
of the Lord, we can not therefore say unto the either good or bad: behold,
Rebecca is before the, take her / and goo / that she may be thy masters sons
wife / even as god has said. And when Abraham's servant herd their words,
he worshypped the lord, flat upon the earth. And the servant took forth
iewelles of silver, and iewelles of gold and raiment, and gave them to
Rebecca. And un to her brother / and to her mother, he gave gifts. And they
did eat, and drink / both he and the men that were with him, and tarried all
night. And when they rose up in the morning. He said: let me depart unto my
may ster. Her brother / and her mother answered, let the damsel abide with us
a while / and it be but even ten days / and then shall she go. He said unto
them, hinder me not, behold: the Lord has prospered my journey.

Send me away therefore, that I may

And so they let Rebecca their sister goo, and her norse, and Abraham's
servant, and his men. And they blessed Rebecca, and said unto her. Thou art
our sister, grow in to thousand thousands, Gene. xxii. ^
and thy seed possess the gace of their enemies. And Rebecca arose and her
damsels, and sat them up upon the camels, and went their way after the man. And
the servant took Rebecca, and went his way. And Isaac was coming from the
way of the well, which was called of the Gene xvi. d
living and seeing me, for he dwelt in the southe country, and Isaac was gone
out to pray in the field at the eue^ tide. And lyftyng up his eyes he saw the
camels coming. And Rebecca lift up her eyes / and when she saw Isaac, she
lyghted of the camel, and said unto the servant, what man is this, that com
meth walking against us in the field? And the servant said, it is my master.
Therefore she took her cloak, and put it about her.

And the servant told Isaac all things that he had done. And Isaac brought
her in to his mothers Saras tent, and took Rebecca / and she became his wife,
and he loved her, and so Isaac received conforte after his mother.

Abraham took Kethura to his wife. Abraham dies. The genealogy. and death of
Ismaell. The birth of Jacob. and Esau. Esau sells his byrthryght.

CAPI. XXV.
ABraham proceeded further / and took him

And these are the days of the years of Abraham's life which he lived, an
hundred and. lxxv. year / and then fell sick, and dyed / in a Gene. xv. ^.
lustye age (when he had lived enough) and was put unto his people. And his
sons Isaac, and Ismaell buried him in the double cave in the field of Ephron
son of Zoar / the Hethyre beside the plain of Mamre. Which field Abraham
bought of the sons of Heth. There was Abraham buried / and Sara his wife. It
fortuned that after the death of Abraham that god blessed Isaac his son, and
Isaac dwelled by the well of the living, and seeing me.

These are the generacious of Ismaell, Gene xvii ^ i. Para. i. b
twelve princes of their householdes. And these are the years of the life of
Ismael, an hundred / and xxxvii. year, and he feli sick, and dyed / and was
laid unto his people. And they dwelled from Heuilah unto Sur, that is by the
border of Egypt, as thou go toward the Assiryans. And he dyed in the
presence of al his brethren. And these are the generacyons of Isaac Abraham's
son, Abraham begat Isaac. was bareyn / and the Lord was entreated of him, and
Rebecca his wife conceived / and the children strove together within her. There
fore she said / if it should go so to pass, what helps it that I am with
child? Wherefore she went to ask the Lord. And the Lord said unto her /
there are two manner of people in thy womb, and two nacyons shall be divided
out of thy bowels, and the one nacyon shall be myghtyer then the other, and the
Roma. ix. c
elder shall be servant unto the younger.

Therefore when her time was come to be delyuerd, behold / there were two
twynnes in her womb. And he that came out first was reed, and he was all over
as it were a rough garmente, and they called his name Esau. And after him, came
his brother out, and his hand Dsec, xii. ^.
hele. And his name was called Jacob. And Isaac was. ix. year old when they
were borne / and the boys grew, and Esau became a cunnyng hunter / and
tylman. But Jacob was a perfyte man / and dwelled in the tents. Isaac loved
Esau because he did eat of his venyson, but Rebecca loved Jacob.

Jacob sod potage / and Esau came from the field / and was fayntye, and Esau
said to Jacob / feed me I pray the with that reed potage, for I am fayntye.
And therefore was his name called ^bdi. ^. ^
Edom. And Jacob said, sell me this day thy ^ebre. xii c
byrthryght. Esau said, Loo I am at the point to dye / and what profit shall
this byrthryght do me? Jacob answered ^^^^. 47 g
swear to me then this day. And he swear to him, and sold his byrthryght unto
Jacob. Then Jacob gave Esau bread / and potage of rise. And he did eat / and
drink / and rose up, and went his way. And Esau re guarded not his byrthryght.

Isaac is rebuked of Abim^lech, for calling Rebecca his sy^^ex. Christ is
promised. The chiding of the (...) for the wells. Isaac is conforted. The
a^onement between Abim^lech and Isaac. The bigamie of Esau.

CAPI. XXVI.
ANd there came a derth in the land, pas ^^n^. (...). b. and xiii. d
contreyes. And I will perform the oath which I swore unto Abraham thy father,
and will G^n^. xv. b and. xxii. c Eccl, ^^^^^^
multyplye thy seed as the sterres of heaven / and will give unto thy seed al
these countries. And in thy seed shall all the nacyons of the earth be blessed
/ because that Abraham harkened un to my voice, and kept mine ordinances / my
commandments, my statutes, and my laws. And Isaac dwelled in Gerar. And the
Gene. (...) and. (...)* ^*
sister, for he feared to say, She is my wife. Leest the men of the place
should have killed him because of Rebecca which was bewtyfull to the eye. And
it happened after he had been there long time, that Abimelech king of the
Philistians looked out at a wyndowe / and saw Isaac sportyng with Rebecca his
wife. And Abimelech called Isaac, and said, she is of a suertye thy wife, and
why saydest thou: She is my sister? To whom Isaac answered, I thought that I
might peradventure have dyed for her sake. Abimelech said, why haste thou done
this unto us? one of the people might lightly have line by thy wife, and so
should thou have brought sin upon us. And so Abime lech charged all his
people, saying: he that touches this man or his wife, shall dye the Conten*
cyon.
Eseck, because they strove with him.

And they dygged another well / and strove Enmyt^.
Sitena. And then he departed thence / and dug another well for the which
they stxoue not, therefore called he it Iargen^s
Rehoboth, saying: The Lord has now made us rowme, that we may increase
upon the earth.

And he went up thence, to Beer Seba. And the Lord appeared unto him the same
night, and said: I am the God of Abraham thy father, fear not, for I am with
the, and will bless the, and multiylye thy seed for my servant Abraham's sake.

And he builded an altar there, and called upon the name of the Lord / and
pytched his tente. And there Isaacs servants dygged a well. Then came
Abimelech unto Gene. xxi. c.
Lord was with the / and we said: let there be now an oath bytwyxte us, eue^
bytwyxt us and the, and let us make a bond with the, that thou should do us
no hurt, as we have not touched the, and as we have done unto the nothing but
good, and sent the away in peace, for thou art now the blessed of the Lord.

And he made them a feast, and they did cate and drink. And they rose up by
times in the morning, and swear one to another. And Isaac sent them away. And
they departed

And that same day it happened, that Isaacs servants came and told him of a
well which they had dygged, and said unto him, we have found water. And he
called it Oath.
Seba. And the name of the city is called Beer Seba unto this day. Esau was
xl. year old and he took a wife called Judith, the daughter of Bery an
Hethyte, and Basmath the daughter of Elon, an Hethyte also, which were
disobedient unto Isaac, and Rebecca.

Jacob steals the blyssynge from Esau by his mothers counsel. Isaac is sad.
Esau is comforted. The hatred of Esau toward Jacob.

CAPI. XXVII.
ANd it came to pass that when Isaac

And he said, behold, I am now old, and know not the day of my death, and
now therefore take thy weapens, thy quyuer, and thy bow, and get the to the
feldes, that thou may take me some venyson, and make me meat such as I
love, and bring it me, that I may eat, and that my soul may bless the
before that I dye. But Rebecca herd when Isaac spoke to Esau his son. And
Esau went in to the feelde to catch Uenyson, and to bring it.

And Rebecca said unto Jacob her son, saying? Behold I have herd thy father
talking with Esau thy brother and saying: bring me venyson, and make me meat,
that I may eat and bless the before the Lord / before my death. Now
therefore my son hear

Then said Jacob to Rebecca his mother: behold, Esau my brother is a rough
man, and I am smothe. My father shall peradventure feel me / and I shall seem
unto him as though I went about to begyle him, and so shall he bring a curse
upon me, and not a blessing: and his mother said unto him: Upon me be thy
curse my son, only hear my voice, and go and fetch me them.

And Jacob went and fet them, and brought them to his mother. And his mother
made meat such as she knew his father loved. And Rebecca fet goodlye raymente
of her eldest son Esau, which were in the house

Wher^he came to his father, he said: my father? And he answered: here am I,
who art thou my son? And Jacob said unto his father: I am Esau thy eldest
son, I have done according as thou baddest me, up and sit, and eat of my
venyson, that thy soul may bless me. And Isaac said unto his son, how
comes it that thou haste found it so quyckly my son? He answered: The
Lord thy God brought it to my hand.

Then said Isaac unto Jacob / come nere and ^et me feel the my son, whether
thou be my son Esau or not. Then went Jacob to Isaac his father, and he felt
him, and said: the voice is Jacobs voice, but the hands / are the hands of
Esau.

And so he knew him not, because his nere / and kiss me my son. And he went
unto him and kyssed him. And he smelled the savor of his raiment, and Ec^le,
ili. b. Hebru. xi. d
blessed him, and said Se, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field
which the Lord has blessed, God give the of the dew of heaven, and of the
fatness of the earth, and plentye of corn, and wine. People be thy
servants, and nacyons bow unto the. Be Lord over thy brethren, and thy
mothers children stoop unto the. Cursed be he that curses the, and blessed be
he that blesses the.

It happened that as soon as Isaac had made an end of blessing, and Jacob
was

Who answered: thy brother came with subtilte, and has taken away thy
blessyng.

Isaac answered and said unto Esau: be hold I have made him thy Lord / and
all his mothers children have I made his servants. Moreover with corn and
wine have I stablysshed him / what can I do unto the now my son? And Esau
said unto his father, haste thou but that one blessing my father? bless me
also my father, so lyfted up Esau his voice and Hebre. xiie
wept. Then Isaac his father answered and said unto him, behold, thy owellynge
place shall be the fatness of the earth / and of the dew of heaven from above.

And with thy sword shall thou live, and shalt be thy brothers servant.

And it will come to pass, that when thou shalt get the maystrye^, thou shall
loose his yocke from of thy neck. And Esau Eb^i. i. e
hated Jacob, because of the blessing that his Father blessed him with all.
And Esau said in Gene. 33. ^^
until thy brothers fearsnesse be swaged, and until thy brothers wrath turn
away from the, and he for get the things which thou have done to him. Then
will I send and fet the away from thence.

Why should I be desolate of you both in one day? And Rebecca spoke to Isaac,
I am weary of my life, for fear of the daughters of Heth. If Jacob take a wife
of the donghters of Heth, such one as these are, or of the daughters of the
land, what good shall my life do me?

Jacob is sent into Mesopotamia to Laban for a wife. Esau maryeth an Ismaclite.
Jacob dreameth. Christ is pro mysed. Jacob voweth.

CAPI. XXVIII.
ANd so Isaac called Jacob and Gene. 27 ^^
blessed him, and charged him / and sarde unto him, se thou take not a wife of
the daughters of Canaan, but arise and get the to Mesopotamia to the house of
Bethuel thy motherz father / and there take the a wife of the daughters of
Laba^ thy mothers brother. And god almyghtye bless the, and make the to
increase, and multiplye the / that thou may be a nombre of people, and give
the blessyng of Abraham, to the and to thy seed with the / that thou may
possess the land (wherein thou art a stranger) which God gave unto Abraham.
Thus Isaac sent forth Jacob. And he went to Mesopotamia unto Laban / son of
Bethuel the Sirien, and brother to Rebecca Jacob and Esaus mother.

When Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob / and sent him to Osec. (...)
Mesopotamia / to fet him a wife thence / and that as he blessed him he gave
him a charge, saying: thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan,
and that Jacob had obeyed his father and mother, and was gone unto Mesopotamia:
and Esau seeing also that the daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac his father,
then went he unto Ismaell / and took unto the wives which he had, Mahala the
daughter of Ismaell Abraham's son, the sister of Nabaioth to be his wife.
Jacob departed from Beer Seba / to come unto Haran, and came unto a place by
chance, and tarried there all night, because the Son was down.

And took a stoone of the place, and put it under his heed, and laid him down
in the same place to sleep. And he dreamed, and behold, Gene. 31. b.
and powered oil on the top of it. And he called the name of the place The
House of god
Bethell, but the name of the city was called Lus, before time. And Jacob
vowed a vow, saying: If God will be with me, and will keep me in this journey
which I go, and will give me bread to eat, and clothes to put on, so that I
come again unto my fathers house in safety: then shall the Lord be my God,
and this stone which I have set up an end, shall be Gods house, and of all
that thou shalt give me, will I give the tenth unto the.

Jacob comes to Laban, and serves seven year for Rahel Lea was brought to his
bed in stead of Rahel. He maryeth both. Lea conceyueth.

CAPI. XXIX.
THen Jacob lift up his fete, and came

While he yet talked with them, Rahell came with her fathers sheep, for she kept
them As soon as Jacob saw Rahel, the daughter of Laban his mothers brother,
and the sheep of Laban his mothers brother, he went and rolled the stone from
the wells mouth, and watered the flock of Laba^ his mothers brother. And
Jacob kyssed Rahell, and lift up Gene. xii. b.
seven years for Rahell and they seemed unto him but a few days / for the
love he had to her. And Jacob said unto Laban: give me my wife, that I may
lie with her. For my days are fulfilled.

Then Laban gathered together all the Gene. xxi. ^.
in unto her. And Laban gave unto his daughter Lea, Zilpha his maid; to be her
servant. ( To whom when lacob came in according to the custom.) And when
the morning was come, behold it was Lea. Then said he to Laban, wherefore have
thou played thus with me? did not I serve the for Rahell? wherefore then have
thou begyled me? Laba^ answered: it is not the manner of this place, to marry
the(...)

days journey, and ouertoke him at the mount Gilead. And God came to Laba^ the
Syrian in a dream by night, and said unto him.

Take heed, that thou speak not to Jacob ought save good. And Laban ouertoke
Jacob, and Jacob had pytched his tente in the mount. And Laban with his
brethren pytched their tente also upon the mount Gilead. And Laban said to
Jacob. Why have thou this done to steal away my heart, and carry away my
daughters as though they had been taken captyue with the sword? Wherefore
wentest thou away secretly unknown to me and dydest not tell me, that I might
have brought the on the way with mirth, syngyng tymtell, and harp, and have
not suffered me to kiss my children and my daughters? Thou wast i. Reg. 13. c.
ii. Pat. 16 c
a fool now to do it, for I am able to do you evil. But the God of your
father spoke unto me yesterdaye, saying.

Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob ought save good. And now though thou
wentest thy way, because thou longest after thy fathers house, yet wherefore
have thou stolen my Gods?

Jacob answered and said to Laban, because where as thou layest theft to my
charge.) with whom so ever thou fyndest thy gods, let him dye here before our
brethren. Seek that thine is by me, and take it to the. But Jacob wist not that
Rahell had stolen them. Then went Laban in to Jacobs tent, and in to Leas
tente, and in to the two maidens tents, and found them not. Then went he out
of Leas tente, and entered in to Rahels tente. And Rahel had taken the images
and put them in the Camels straw, and sat down upon them. And Laban serched
all the tente, and found them not. Then said she to her father. My Lord, be
not angrye that I can not rise up before the, for the custom of women is come
upon me. So serched he, but found not those ydols. And Jacob was wroth, and
did chyde with Laban. Jacob also answered and said to Laba^. What have I
trespased, or what have I offended, that thou folowedst so after me? Thou have
searched all my stuff, and what have thou found of all thy household stuff?
put it here before thy brethren and mine that they may judge between us both.
Behold. This. xx. year have I ben with the, thy sheep and thy gootes have not
ben bareyne, and the rams of thy flock have I not eaten. What soever was
torn of beasts I brought it not unto the, but made it good my self. Of my
hand dydest thou require it, even as it that was stolen by day or night. By
day the hete consumed me, and the frost by night and my sleep departed fro
mine eyes.

Thus have I ben. xx. year in thy house, Gene. 29. ^^
xiiii. years for thy. ii. daughters, and. vi. years for thy sheep, and thou
have changed my reward. x. times. And except the god of my father, the God
of Abraham, and the fere of Isaac had been with me: surely thou had sent
me away now all emptye. But god beheld my tribulacyon / and the labor of my
hands: and rebuked the yester day. Laban answered and said unto Jacob: these
daughters are my daughters, and these children are my children, and these sheep
are my sheep, and all that thou see is mine.

And what can I do this day unto these my daughters, or unto their children
which they have borne? Now therefore come on / and let us make a bond, I and
thou: which may be a witness between the and me. Then took Jacob a stone and
set it up an end, and Jacob said unto his brethren: gather stones. And they
took stones, and made an heap, and they did eat thereupon the heap. And
Laban called it The h^^ of wy^^
Iegar Sahadutha, but Jacob called it Tum^^ testific^^
Gilead. ( either of them according to the propertye of his own language.)

Then said Laban. This heap is A totc^^
witness that is a heap of witness.) And Mizpah. For he said. The Lord
look between me and the when we are departed one from an other. If thou shalt
vex my daughters or shalt take other wives beside my daughters. Here is no
man with us. Behold, God be witness between the and me. And Laban said more
over to Jacob. Behold, this heap and this mark which I have set here,
between me and the. This heap be witness and also this mark that I will not
come over this heap to the, nor thou shalt not come over this heap / and
this mark unto me, to do any harm. The God of Abraham, the God of Nahor, and
the God of their fathers be judge between us.

And Jacob swear by the fear of his father Isaac. Then Jacob did sacrifice
upon the mount, and called his brethren to eat bread. And they did eat
bread and tarried all night in the hill. And early in the morning Laban rose
up and kyssed his children and his daughters, and blessed them.

And Laban departing, went unto his place again.

The visyon of Angels. Jacob sends presents to Esau. He wrastleth with the
Angel, which changed his name, and called him Israel.

CAPI. XXXII.
BUT Jacob went forth on his journey. 29 (...) double ^^nye.
Mahanaim. ( This is an army.) And Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau
his brother, unto the land Joshua 24. a
of Seit and the field of Edom. And he commanded them, saying. Thus shall ye
speak to my lord Esau, thy servant Jacob says thus. I have soiourned and
ben a stranger with Laban unto this time and have oxen, asses, and sheep, men
servants, and women servants, and have sent to show it my Lord that I may
find grace in thy sight. And the messengers came again to Jacob, saying.

But Jacob was greatly afraid, and wist not which way to turn him self, and
divided the people that was with him, and the Sheep, and Oxen, and Camels, into
two companyes, and said. If Esau come to the one part and smite it, the other
shall save it self. And Jacob said again. O god of my father Abraham, and God
of my father Isaac, Lord which saydest unto me Gene. 13. b.
return unto thy country and to thy kynred, and I will

And he tarried there that same night, and

And so commanded he the second, and the third, and all that followed the
droues, saying. Of this manerse that ye speak unto Esau when ye mete him, and
say moreover thy servant Jacob also comes after us, for he said, I will pease
his wrath with the present that goes before me, and afterward I will se him
my self, if peradventure he will receive me to grace. So went the present
before him, and he tarried all that night in the company, and rose up the same
night and took his two wives and his. ii. maidens, and his xi. sons, and went
over the foorde Iabok. And he took them and sent them over the river, and sent
over all that he had, and tarried behind him self alone.

And there O see, xii. v.
wrastled a man with him un to the breakyng of the day. And when he saw Gene.
35. v.
Israel. For as a prince have thou wrastled with God, and with man, and have
prevailed.

And Jacob asked him, saying. Tell me thy name. And he said, wherefore do
thou so ask after my Iudi. xiii. c.
name? and he blessed him there. And Jacob called the name of the place The
face of God.
Pheniell, for I have seen god / face to face: and my life is preserved. And as
he went over Pheniell the Son rose upon him / and he halted upon his thye.
And therefore is it that the children of Israel eat not of the synow that
shranke in that place of the thye / unto this day: because that he touched the
place of Jacobs thye in the synowe that shronke.

Esau and Jacob are agreed: And Jacob came unto Sicheni.

CAPI. XXXIII.
Jacob lyftynge up his eyes, looked. And Gene. xix a.
fell on the ground. vii. times until he came unto his brother.

Esau Gene. 27. ^
came to mete him, and enbraced him, and fell on his neck, and kyssed him, and
they wept. And he lift up his eyes and saw the women, and the children, and
said. Whence have thou these? ( And do they belong unto the) And he answered,
they are the children, which Hester. ^v d
as though I had seen the face of god. And thou have had a good will toward
me. Oh take my blessing Gyuynge me all things.) And I have enough. And so he
compelled him, and he took it. And he said. Let us take our journey and go, I
will go before the. Jacob answered him, my Lord. Thou know, that the
children are tender, and the ewes and kyne with young under mine hand, which if
men should ouerdryue but even one day all the sheep will dye. Oh let my lord
go before his servant, and I will drive fair and softly, according as the
cattle that goes before me and the children, be able to endure, until I come
to my Lord unto Seir.

And Esau said. Let me yet leave some of my folk with the. And he answered,
what needs it? ( This one thing only have I need of.) Let me find grace in
the sight of my Bothes.
Sucoth.

And Jacob came to Salem a city of Sichem which is in the land of Canaan,
after that he was come from Mesopotamia, and pytched before the city, and
bought a parcel of ground (where he pytched his tente) of the children of
Hemor Sichems father, for an hundred pieces of money. And he made there an
altar, and called upon the mighty God of Israel.

The rauesshynge of Dyna Jacobs daughter. The men of Sichem are slain by the
sons of Jacob.

CAPI. XXXIIII.
DINA the daughter of Lea, Gene. (...)
which ii. Reg. (...)*
forced her, and his heart lay unto Dina the daughter of Jacob. And he loved
that damsel and spoke kyndly unto her, and Sichem spoke unto his father Hemor,
saying: get me this maiden unto my wife.

And Jacob herd that he had defiled Dina his daughter, his sons being with
their cattle in the field, and he held his peace, until they were come. And
Hemor the father of Sichem went out unto Jacob, to common with him. And when
the sons of Jacob coming out of the field herd it, it grieved them and they
were not a little wroth, because he had wrought folly in Israel, in that he
had layne with Jacobs daughter, which thing ought not to be done. And Hemor
co^moned with them saying: the soul of my son Sichem

But the sons of Jacob answered to Sichem and Hemor his father talkyng among
them selves deceytefully, because he had defiled Dina their sister. And they
said unto them. We can not do this thing that we should give our sister to one
that is uncircumcised, for that were a shame unto us. But in this will we
consent unto you? If ye will be as we be, and all the men children among you
be circumcysed, the^ will we give our daughters to you, and take your daughters
to us, and will dwell with you, and be one people. But and if ye will not harken
unto us to be circumcised, then will we take our daughter and go our ways.
Their words pleased Hemor, and Sichem of they city, saying. These men are
unfeigned toward us, and dwell in the land and do their ocupacyon therein. And
in the land is to wine enough for them, we will take their daughters to
wives, and give them our daughters. Only herein will they consent unto us for
to dwell with us, and to be one people. If all the men children that are among
us be circumcised as they are. Shall not their goods, and their substance,
and all their cattle be ours, only if we consent un to them? For they will
dwell with us.

And unto Hemor and Sichem his son Gene. ^lix a Iudi. ix. a
sword and went in to the city boldly, and siewe all that was male, and
slew also Hemor and Sichem his son with the edge of the sword, and took
Dina out of Sichems house, and went their way. And the sons of Jacob coming
upon the deed, spoiled the city, because they had defiled their sister, and
took their sheep, oxen, and their asses, and what soever was in the city, and
also in the feldes. And all their goods and all their children, and their
wives took they captyue and made havoc of all that was in the house.

But Jacob said to Symeon and Leui. Ye have troubled me and made me stynke
before the inhabytours of the land, before the Canaanyte and the Pherezite.
And I being few in nombre, they shall gather them selves together against me
and slay me, and so shall I and my house be destroyed. And they answered, should
they deal with our sister as with an hoar?

Jacob goes up unto Bethell where he burieth the Idols. Debora dies. Jacob is
called Israel. The land Canaan is promised. Rahell dies in labor. Ruben
lay with his fathers concubyne. Isaac dies.

CAPI. XXXV.
ANd God said unto Jacob, arise and Gene. 28. ^
when thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother. Then said Jacob unto his
household and to all that were with him. Put a way the strange gods that are
among you and be clean, and change your garments, for we will arise and go up
to Bethel and I will make an altar there, unto God, which herd me in the day
of my tribulacion, and was with me in the way which I went. And they gave unto
Jacob all the strange Gods which they had in their hand, and al their
earynges which were in their ears / and Jacob hyd them under an Oak, which
was by sichem. And when they departed / the fere of god fell upon the cities
that were round about them. And they did not follow after the sons of Jacob
So came Iacab to Lus, which is in the land of Canaan. The same Gene. 24. 8
Deborn Rebeccas norse, dyed, and was buried byneath Bethel under an oak. And
the name of it was called the Oak of lamentacion. And god appeared unto Jacob
again after he came out of Mesopotamia and blessed him, and God said unto him,
thy name is Jacob. Notwithstanding thou shall be no more called G^^^. 32. ^.
Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name. And he called his name Israel.

And God said unto him. I am God almyghtye, grow and multiplye, people: and a
multitude of people shall spring of the. Yea and kings shall come out of thy
loins And the lands which I gave Abraham and Isaac, will I give unto the, and
unto thy seed after the will I give that land also. And so god departed up
from him in the place where he had talked with him. And Jacob set up a mark in
the place where he talked with him even a mark of stone and powered drink
offering thereon, and powered also oil thereon, and Jacob called the name of the
place where The house of god
Bethel.

And they departed from Bethell, and when he was but a field breadth from
Ephrath, Ra hell began to travail. And in trauaylynge she was in peril. And
it happened as she was in pains of her labor, the mydwyfe said unto her.
Fear not, for this son is thine also. Then as her soul was a departing,
that she i. Reg. 4. ^^
must dye, she called his name Ben Ont. ( The son of my sorrow.) But his
father called him Ben Iamin. ( The son of the right hand.) And thus dyed
Rahell and was buried in the way to Ephrath, which is Bethleem. And Jacob set
up a stone upon her grave, which is called Rahels Grave stone unto this day.
And Israel went thence, and pytched up his tente beyond the Wiche. 4^
toure of Edar. And it chanced as Israel dwelte in the land, that Ruben went
and lay Gene. xli^ ^
with Bilha his fathers concubyne, and it came to Isreal's ear. The sons of
Jacob were. xii. in nombre. The sons of

And so Jacob came unto Isaac his father to Mamre unto Kyriath Arba which is
Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac soiourned as strangers. And the days of Isaac
were an hundred and. lxxx. years, and Isaac fell sick and dyed, and was put
unto his people, being old and full of days. And his sons Esau and Jacob
buried him.

The wives of Esau. Jacob and Esau are rich. The genealogic of Esau.

CAPI. XXXVI.
THese are the generacyons of Esau. The Gene. 28. ^.
daughter and sister of Nebaioth. And Ada bare unto Esau, Eliphas, and Basmath
bare Reguel. And Ahalibama bare Jesus and Iaelam and Korah. These are the sons
of Esau which were borne him in the land of Canaan.

And Esau took his wives and his sons and daughters, and all the souls of
his house, his goods and all his cat^ell, and all his substance which he had
got in the land of Canaan, and went in to a country away from the face of
his brother Jacob, for their Gene. 13. ^.
riches was much, and they could not dwell together, and the land wherein
they were strangers, could not teceyue them, because 1. Para. ^. ^
Eliphas the son of Ada the wife of Esau, and Reguel the son of Basmath the
wife of Esau.

And the sons of Eliphas were, Theman, Omar, Zepho, Iaethom and Kenas. And
Thimna was concubyne to Elyphas Esaus son, and bare unto Eliphas Amalech. And
these are the sons of Ada Esaus wife. And these are the sons of Regueli,
Nahath, Serah, Samma and Misa. These were the sons of Basmath Esaus wife. And
these were the sons of Ahalibama the daughter of Ana daughter of Zebion Esaus
wife, and she bare unto Esau, Ieus, Iealam and Korah. These were dukes of the
sons i. Para* (...)
Eliphas the first son of Esau, were these. Duke Theman, duke Omar, duke
Zepho, duke Kenas, and duke Korah, duke Gaetha^, and duke Amalech.

These are the dukes that came of Eliphas in the land of of Edom, and these
were the sons of Ada.

These also are the children of Reguell Esaus son. Duke Nahath, duke Serah.
duke Samma, duke Misa. These are the dukes that came of Reguel in the land of
Edom. And these are the sons of Basmath Esaus wife. These were the children
of Aha libama Esaus wife. Duke Ieus, duke Gaelan, duke Korah, these dukes came
of Ahalibama the daughter of Ana Esaus wife.

These are the children of Esau, and these are the dukes of them, which Esau is
Edom These are the children Seir the Horite, the inhabitoure of the land,
Lothan, Soball, Zibeon, and Ana, and Dison, Eser and Disan. These also are the
dukes of the Horites / the children of Seir in the land of Edom. And the
children of Lothan were, Hori and Hemam. And Lothans sister was called Thymna.
The children of S^^a^ were these. Aluan, Manahath and Eball, Sepho and Ona^.

These are the children of Zibeon. Aia and Ana. This was that Ana that found
mules in the wyldernes, as he fed his father Zibeons

These are the children of Dison, Hemdan and Esban, Iethran and Cheran. The
children of Ezar are these. Bylhan, Seaua^ and Akan. The children of Disan also
are these. Uz and Aran. These are the dukes that came of Hori. Duke Lothan,
duke Soball, duke Zibeon, duke Ana, duke Dison, duke Ezer, duke Disan. These be
the dukes that came of Hory after their duke doms in the land of Seir. These
are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom before there reigned any king
upon the children of Israel. Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edomea, and the
name of his city was Dinhaba. And when Bela dyed, Iobab the son of Serah out
of Bozra, reigned in his stead. When Iobab also was dead, Husam of the land
of Themany reigned in his stead. And after the death of Husam, Hadad the son
of Bedad which slew the Madianites in the field of the Moabites, reigned in
his stead, and the name of his city was Auith. When Hadad Saul of the river
Rehoboth reigned in his stead. When Saul was dead, Baal Hanan the son of
Achbor reigned in his stead. And after the death of Baal Hanan the son of
Achbor. Hadad reigned in his stead, and the name of his city was Pahu. And
his wives name Mehetabeel the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mesaab.

These are the names of the dukes that came of Esau, in the xii. kynreddes,
places and names, duke Thymma, duke Alua, duke Ietheth, duke Ahalibama, duke
Ela, duke Pinon, duke Kenas, duke Theman, duke Myhzar, duke Magdyel, duke Iram.
These be the dukes of Edomea according to their habitacions, in the land of
their possessions. This Esau is the father of the Edomytes.

Joseph a^cuseth his brethren. Joseph dreameth and is sold to the Ismaelites.
Jacob bewaleth Joseph.

CAPI. XXXVII.
Jacob dwelte in the land wherein his father

And when his brethren saw that their father loved him more then all his
brethren, they hated him and could not speak peaceably unto him. Moreover
when Joseph (...). x^ii. ^
had

And he dreamed yet another dream and told it his brethren, saying. Behold I
have 1. Reg. 3. ^.
here am I. And he said unto him. Go and se whyther it be well with thy
brethren and the sheep and bring me word again. And so he sent him out of the
vale of Hebron and he went to Sichem. And a certain man found hum. And
behold he was wandrynge out of his way in the field, and the man asked him.
What sekest thou? He answered, I seek my brethren, tell me I pray the where
they keep sheep. And the man said, they are departed hence, for I herd them
say, let us go unto Dothan. Thus went Joseph after his brethren, and found
them in Dothan.

And when they saw him a far of before he came at them, they took counsel
against him, for to slay him. For one said to an other Behold this Met. x^i. ^
Man. (...) ^. Luke. (...). ^.
dreamer comes, come now therefore and let us slay him and cast him in to some
pyt, and we will say, a wicked beast has devoured him, and we shall se what will
come of his dreams.

When Ruben herd that, he ryd him out of their hands, and said. We will not
kill him. And Ruben said moreover unto them. Shede not his Gene. x^^^. ^
blood, but cast him in to some pyt that is in the wilderness, and lay no
hand upon him. ( This he said.) Namely that he might ryd him out of their
hands and deliver him to his father again.

And it happened that when Joseph was ^ctes. v^^ ^ Gene. 45. ^
sell him to the Ismaelites, and let not our hand be upon him, for he is our
brother and our flesh. And his brethren were content. Then as the Madianites
merchant men passed by, they drew and lift Joseph out of the pyt and sold
him unto the Ismaelytes for. xx. pieces of silver. And they brought Joseph in to
Egypt.

And when Ruben came again unto the pyt and found not Joseph there, he rent
his clothes and went again unto his brethren saying, the lad is not yonder,
and whyther shall I go? And they took Joseph's coote and killed a goote, and
dypped the coote in the Gene. 44. f
dououred him, Joseph is rent in pieces. And Jacob rent his clothes, and put
sack cloth about his loins, and sorowed for his son a long season. But
all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him.

Nevertheless he would not be comforted, but said. I will go down into the
grave unto my son, mournyng. And thus his father wept for him. And the
Madianytes Gene ^9. a. Psalm. ^nn. ^ Sap^. x. ^
sold him in Egipte unto Potiphar a lord of Pharaos, and his chief steward.

The marriage of Judah, Et, Onon, Sela. Judah lay with his daughter Thamar. The
birth of Tharez, and zarah.

CAPI. XXXVIII.
IT fortuned at that time, that Judas i. Para. ii a
Sua a Canaanite. And he took her and went in to her. And she conceived and
bare a son, and called his name Er. And she conceived again, and bare a son
and called him Onan. And she conceived again, and bare yet a son, whom she
called Se^a. And he was at Chesyb when she bare him.

And Judas gave Et his eldest son a wife, whose name was Thamar. And Er, Judas
eldest son was wicked in the sight of the lord, and the Lord slew him. And
Judas said unto Onan. Go in to thy brothers wife and marye her, that thou may
stir up seed dnto thy brother. And when Onan perceived

And in process of time, the daughter of Sua Judas wife dyed. Then Judas when
Gene ii. (...)
shere his sheep. And she put her wydowes garments of from her and covered her
with a cloak, and dysgysed her self And sat her down in a common place, which
is by the hye ways side to Tymnath, for because the saw that Sela was grown,
and she was not given unto him to wife.

When Judah saw her, he thought it had been an hoar, because she had covered her
face

And it came to pass that after three months,

It fortuned when time was come that she should be delivered. Behold there was
two twynnes in her womb. And it fortuned, that when she traueled, the one put
out his hand out. And she said, wherefore have thou rent a rent upon the? and
called his name, Pharez. Afterward came out his brother that had the reed
threde about his hand, and his name was colled Zarah.

God prospers Joseph. Pharaos wife tempts Joseph. He is accused, and ^ast
in prison. God has mercy upon him.

CAPI. XXXIX.
Joseph was brought unto Egypt, and Gene. 37. g
a Lord of Pharaos (and his cheyfe steward an Egyptian) bought him of the
Ismaelites which had brought him thither. And God was with Joseph, and he be
came a luckye man, continuyng in the house of his master the Egyptia^. And his
master saw that God was with him, and that God made all that he did to
prosper in his hand. And Joseph found grace in his masters sight, and served
him. And made him rular of his house / and put all that he had in his hand.
And it fortuned from the time that he had made him ruler over his house, and
oueral that he had, that the lord Gene. 31. d.
blessed the Egyptians house for Joseph's sake, and the blessyng of the Lord
was upon all that he had: in the house, and in the field. And therefore he left
^ ^eg. 16. t.
goodly person and a welfauoured. And it fortuned after this, that his masters
wife cast her eyes upon Joseph, and said: come lie with me. But he refused /
and said to his masters wife: Behold, my master woteth not what he has in
the house with me, and has committed all that he has to my hand. There is no
man greater in the house the^ I. Neither has he kept any thing from me, but
only the / because thou art his wife. How then can I do this great
wickedness, and sin against God? And after this manner spoke she to Joseph
day by day, but he harkened not unto her / to sleep nere her, or to be in her
company. And it fortuned on a certain And she not regarded.) She called unto
the men of her house, and told them, saying: Se, he has brought in an Hebrew
unto us, to do us shame, for he came in to me / for to have slepte with me. And
I began to cry with a loud voice. And when he herd that I lift up my voice
and cried, he left his garment with me, and fled away, and gat him out. And she
Being to light of credence.) herd these words of his wife which she told
him saying: after this manner did thy servant to me, he waxed wroth And the
master took Joseph and put him in Psalm. (...)
pryso^ even in to the place where the kings prisoners lay bound. And there
continued he in prison, but God was with Joseph, and showed him mercy, and got
him favor in the sight of the Lord of the prison. And the keeper of the prison
committed to Joseph's hand all the prisoners that were in the prison house. And
whatsoever was done there / that did he. And the keeper of the pryso^ looked unto
nothing that was under his hand, seeing that God was with him. For whatsoever
he did, God made it to prosper.

Joseph expounds the dreams of the two prisoners.

CAPI. XL.
ANd it chanced after this / that the butler

They answered him: we have dreamed a dream, and have no man to declare it.
And Joseph said unto them: Do not interpretynges belong to God: yet tell me?
And the cheyf butler told his dream to Joseph, and said unto him: In my
dream me thought there stood a vine before me and in the vine were three
branches / and it was as though it budded, and her blossoms shot forth, and
the grapes thereof waxed type. And I had Pharaos cup in my hand / and took of
the grapes and wrong them into Pharaos cup, and delivered Pharaos cup in to his
hand.

And Joseph said unto him: this is the

And Joseph answered / and said: this is Met. 14. ^.
birth day, that he made a feast unto all his servants. And he lyfted up the
head of the cheyf butler, and of the cheyfe baker among his servants. And
restored the cheyfe butler unto his butlershyp again, which also reached the
cup in to Pharaos hand, but he hanged the cheyfe baker: even as Joseph had
interpretated unto them. Neither did the cheyfe butler remember Joseph, but
forgot him.

Pharaos dreams expounded by Joseph. He is made ruler over all Egypt. He has
two sons, Manasses and Ephraim. The derth begins in Egypt.

CAPI. XLI.
AND it fortuned after two years, that

And when the morning came, his spirit Psalm. (...)
prison. And he shaued him self, and changed his raiment / and came in to
Pharao. And Pharao said unto Joseph: I have seen a dream, and no man can
interpretate it, and I have herd say of the, that as soon as thou hear a
dream / you canste interpretate it. Joseph answered Pharao, and man that could
tell, what it means. And Joseph answered Pharao, both Pharaos dreams are
one. And god has showed Pharao what he is about to do. The seven good kyne
are seven years: and the seven good ears are seven years also, and it is but
one dream. Likewise, the seven thyn and evil favored kyne that came out
after them, are seven years: and the seven emptye and blasted ears shall be
seven years of hunger. This which I have said unto Pharao, is it that God is
about to do / and shows it unto Pharao. Behold there come seven year of
great

And as concerning that the dream was doubled unto Pharao the second time,
behold, the thing is certainly prepared of god / and God will shortly bring
it to pass. Now therefore, let Pharao provide for a man of understanding and
wisdom, and set him over the land of Egypt. And let Pharao do this also,
that he make officers over the land and take up the fyfthe part of the land
of Egypt in the seven plenteous years / and let them gather all the food of
these good years that come, and lay up corn under the hand of Pharao, that
there may be fode in the cities, and there let them keep it: that there may be
food in store in the land, against the seven years of hunger which shall come
in the land of Egypt, that the land perysshe not through hunger. And the
saying pleased Pharao / and Psalm. ^lilib ^ Math. ii f Dani. ii. g. Acts. vii.
b
over my house, and according to thy word shall all my people be ruled, only
in the kings seat will I be above the. And Pharao said again unto Joseph:
behold, I have set the over all the land of Egypt. And he took of his ring
from his hand, and put it upon Joseph's hand, and arrayed him in cloth of
raynes, and put a golden cheyne about his neck, and set him upon the best
charet that he had, save one. And they cried before him: Bow the line, and
Pharao made him ruler oueral the land of Egypt. And Pharao said unto Joseph: I
am Pharao, without the shall no man

And Joseph departing from the presence of Pharao / went through out all the
land of Egypt. And in the seven plenteous years they made sheues and
gathered up all the fode of the seven plenteous years which were in the land
of Egypt, and laid up the same in the cities. The food of the feldes that
grew round about every city, laid he up in the same. And Joseph laid up
corn in stoore, like unto the sand of the sea, in multitude out of measure,
until he left nombrynge: For it was without nombre. And unto Joseph were
borne two sons (before the years of hunger came) which Asnath the daughter of
Putiphar priest of On, bare unto him.

And Joseph called the name of the first son Gene. 46. c
Manasse, for God (said he) has made me forget al my labor, and al my fathers
house hold. The name of the second called he Ephraim, for god (said he) has
caused me to grow in the land of my trouble. And when the seven years of
plenteousnesse that was in the land of Egypt were ended, then came the seven
years of Acts. vii. b
derth according as Joseph had said. And the derth was in all lands: but in
all the land of Egypt was there yet food. And when the land of Egypt also
began to hunger the people cried to Pharao for bread. And Pharao said unto
all the Egyptians, god unto Joseph, and what he says to you, that do. And the
derth was thorowout all the land. And Joseph opened all the barnes wherein was
corn, and sold unto the Egypcians. For the hunger waxed sore in the land of
Egypt. And all countries came in to Egypt to Joseph for to bye corn: because
that the hunger was so sore in all lands.

Joseph's brethren come into Egypt to by corn. He knows, and tries them
Simeon is put in prison: they return to their father asking Ben Iamin: he
denies.

CAPI. XLII.
ANd Jacob seeing that there was corn Acts. vii. b
Get you down thither and bye us corn from thence, that we may live and not
dye. So went Joseph's ten brethren down to bye corn of the Egyptians. But Ben
Iamyn Joseph's brother would not Jacob send with his other brethren / for he
said: leest some mysfortune happen him. And the sons of Israel came to bye
corn among other that came, for there was derth in the land of Canaan. And
Joseph was gouerner in the land, and sold to all the people of the land.

And his brethren came, and fell flat on the ground before him. When Joseph
saw his Gene. 37. b
dreams which he dreamed of them, and said unto them: ye are spies, and to se
where the land is weak, is your coming. To whom they said: nay my Lord,
but to bye vytayle thy servants are come. We are all one man's sons, and
mean truly, and thy servants are no spies. And he said unto them again /
nay, but even to se where the land is weak / is your coming. And they
said, we thy servants are. xii. brethren, the sons of one man in the land
of Canaan. And behold, the youngest is this day with Gene. 37. d
syn against the lad? and ye would not hear. And se, his blood is required.
They were not aware that Joseph understood them, for he spoke unto them by an
interpreter. And he turned from them and Gene. 4^* and ^^v. (...)
and turned to them again, and comoned with them, and took out Simeon from
among them, and bound him before their eyes / and Joseph commauuded to fill
their sackes with corn / and to put every man's money in his sack, and to give
them vytayle t^ spend by the way. And thus did he unto them. And they laded
their asses with the corn and departed thence. And as one of them open ned his
sack / for to give his ass prauonder in the June, he spied his money: for it
was in his sackes mouth. And he said unto his brethren: my money is restored me
again. For lo, it is even in my sack. And their heart failed them, and they
were astonyed, and said one to another: Why has god delte thus with us?

And so they came unto Jacob their father

For his brother is dead, and he is left alone. If some mysfortune happen
unto him by the way which ye goo, ye shall Gene. 46 (...)
bring my gray head with sorrow unto the grave.

Bringing Ben Iamin, the brethren returned to Joseph with gifts. Symeon is
d^yuered ou^ of prison. Joseph goes aside / and wepeth. They feast together.

CAPI. XLIII.
AND the derth was great in the land. Gene. x^ii. d
look that ye se not my face, except your brother be with you. If thou will
send our brother with us / we will go down / and bye the food. But if thou
will not send him, we will not go down: for the man said unto us, look that
ye se not my face except your brother be with you. And Israel said: wherefore
delte ye so cruelly with me, as Gene. 44 ^
then let me bear the blame for ever. Truly except we had made this taryeng:
by this, we had been here twyse and come again.

And their father Israel said unto them: If it must needs be so now: then do
thus. Gene. (...). ^
money was in the mouth of his sack with full weight: And we have brought it
again in our hand, and other money have we brought also in our hands, to bye
food, but we can not tell who put our money in our sackes. And he said,
peace be unto you, fear not: your God and the God of your father has given
you that treasure in your sackes / I had your money.

And he brought Simeon out to them / and the man led them into Joseph's house,
and gave them water to wasshe their fete, and gave their asses prauender: And
they made redye their present against Joseph came at noone, for they herd
say that they should eat bread there. When Joseph came home, they brought

And they bowed down their heads, and made obeysauuce. And he lyftynge up his
eyes, beheld his brother Ben Iamin his mo there is son, and said, Gene. xli^. ^
is this your younger brother of whom ye said unto me? And he said: God be
mercy full unto the my son. And Joseph made haste (for Gene. xlii. ^ and.
^^v. ^
his heart did melte upon his brother) and sought where too weep, and entered in
to his chamber, and wept there. And he washed his face and came out and
refrayned him self, and said: set bread

Ohad / Iachin / and Zohar, and Saull the Son of a Cananitysh woman. The
children of i. Para. 6 a
Leui: Gerson, Kahath, and Merari. The children i. Para. 4 a
of Judah: Er, and Onan, Sela, and Pharez, and Zerah, But, Er, and Onan dyed in
the land of Canaan. The children of Pharez also were Hezro^, and Hamul. The
children of Isachar: Tola, Phua, Job, and Simron. The children of Zabulon:
Sered, Elon, and Iaheleleel.

These be the children of Lea, which she i. Para. 7. f
Asser: Iemna, and Iesua, Iesui / and Brya, and Serah their sister. And the
children of Brya: Heber, and Malchiell. These are the children of Silpha, whom
Laban gave to Lea his daughter. And these she bare unto Jacob even. rvi.
souls. The children of Rahell Jacobs wife: Joseph and Ben Iamin. And unto
Joseph in the land of Egypt were borne, Manasses, and Ephraim which Gent.
41. a.
Asnath the daughter of Putiphar priest of On bare unto him. The children of i
Para. 7 b and. viii. a.
Ben Iamin, Bela, Becher, Asbell, Gera, Naeman / Ehi, and Ros, Mupim, Hupim,
and Arde. These are the children of Rahel, which she bare unto Jacob. xiiii.
souls al together. The children of Dan, Husim. The children of Nephtalt,
Iahezeell / Guni, Iezer, and Sillem. These are the sons of Bylha / which
Laban gave unto Rahell his daughter, and she bare these unto Jacob / all
together. vii. souls. And so all the Deute. x. d.
souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, which came out of his loins (beside
Jacobs sons wives) were al together. lx. and. vi. souls. And the sons of
Joseph, which were borne him in Egypt, were two souls: So that all the souls
of the house of Jacob which came into Egypt, are. lxx.

And he sent Judah before him unto Joseph,

Jacob i^ broughe before Pharao: to him i^ given the land of Gosan. He maheth
his son swear for his buryall.

CAPI. XLVII.
Joseph came therefore / and told Pharao,

They said moreover unto Pharao: for to Gen^. (...)
soiourne in the land are we come / for thy servants have no pasture for
their sheep / so sore is the famyn in the land of Canaan. Now therefore let
thy servants dwell in the land of Gosan.

And Pharao said unto Joseph: thy father,

And Joseph prepared dwellynges for his Father and his brethren, and gave them
possessions in the land of Egypt / in the best of the land: even in the
land of Rameses, as Pharao had commanded. And Joseph made prouisyon for his
father, his brethren / and al his fathers household with bread, even as

There was no bread in all the land / for the derthe was exceadynge sore: so
that the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan were famysshed by the reason
of the derthe. And Joseph brought together all the money that was found in the
land of Egypt and of Canaan, for the corn which they bought and he laid up
the money in Pharaos house. When money failed in the land of Egypt, and of
Canaan, all the Egyptians came unto Joseph, and said. Give us bread: wherefore
suffrest thou us to dye before the, when our money is spente? Then said
Joseph: bring your cattle, and I will give you for

But when that year was ended, they came unto him the next year, and said unto
him. We will not hyde it from my lord, how that our money is spente, my Lord
also had our cattle and beasts, neither is there ought left in the sight of
my lord, but even our bodies and our lands. Wherefore let thou us dye
before thine eyes, and the land to go to naught? Bye us and our lands for
bread, and both we and our lands will be bond to Pharao. Only give us
seed, that we may live and not dye, and that the land go not to waste.

And so Joseph boughte all the land of Egypt for Pharao. For the Egyptians
sold

Thou have saved our lives. Let us find

And Israel dwelte in Egypt: even in the country of Gosan. And they had their
possessions therein, and grew and multiplied excedynglye. Moreover, Jacob lived
in the land of Egypt. xvii. years, so that the hole age of Jacob was an
hundred and. xlvii. year.

When the time drew nigh, that Israel Gene. 25. ^.
swear unto me. And he swear unto him. And Israel worshypped toward the beds
head.

Jacob lies speak: He despreth Ephraim and Manasses for his sons, and
blesses them.

CAPI. XLVIII.
AFTer these deeds it happened, that a Gene. (...).
Lus in the land of Canaan, and blessed me, and said unto me: behold, I will
make the grow, and will multiplye the, and will make a great Gene. 46, ^
nombre of people of the, and will give this land unto thy seed after the
unto an everlasting possessyon. And now thy two sons Manasses and Ephraim
which were borne unto the in the land of Egypt, before I came to the in to
Egypt, are mine: even as Ruben and Symeo^ are mine. And the children which
thou have gotten after them, shall be thine own: and shall be called after the
names of their brethren in Gene. 35* ^*
dyed upon my hand in the land of Canaan, by the way: when there was but a
field bread to come to Ephrat. And I buried her there in the way to Ephrat. The
same is Bethleem. And Israel beheld Joseph's sons and said: what are these?
Joseph said unto his father: they are my sons which god has given me here.
And he said: oh, bring them to me, and let me bless them. And the eyes of
Israel were dym for age, so that he could not well se. And he brought them to
him, and he kyssed them and enbraced the^

And Israel said unto Joseph: I had not thought to have seen thy face, and yet
loo^ God has showed it me and also thy seed. And Joseph took them away from
his lap,

Then took Joseph them both: Ephraim with his right hand toward Isreal's
left hand, and manasses with his left hand, toward Isreal's right hand, and
brought them unto him. And Israel stretched out his right hand and laid it
upon Ephraims head, which was the younger, and his left hand upon Manasses
head, gydynge his hands wisely, for Manasses was the elder. And he blessed
Joseph, and said: God, before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, God
which has fed me all my life long unto this day. And the angel which has
delivered me from all evil, bless these laddes: and let my name be named in
them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac, and that they may grow in
to a multitude / in the mids of the earth. When Ioseth saw that his father
laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him. And he lift
up his fathers Iohe. iiii. a
land above thy brethren, which I gat out of the hand of the Amorite in my
sword and in my bow.

Jacob blesses his own sons. And shows them what is to come. He apoynteth
where he will be buried: he dies.

CAPI. XLIX.
ANd Jacob called for his sons and said, Gene. 29. f
eldest son / thou art my might / and the beginning of my strength, the
noblenes of dygnyte, and the nobleness of power.

Unstable as water. Thou shalt not be the cheyfest, because thou wenteste up
to thy fathers bed. Even then dydest thou defyle it, and it was no more my
couche. The brethren Simeon and Leuy, cruel instruments in their habitacions.
In to their secrets come not my Soul / unto their congregacyon be my honor
not coupled: for in their Gent. (...)
wrath they slew a man, and in their self will they dygged down a wall. Cursed
be their wrath, for it was shameless, and their fearsnes, for it was cruel. I
will deuyde them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.

Judah thou art he, whom thy brethren shall praise. Thy hand shall be in the i.
P^^^. (...)
neck of Mich^. (...)
lions whelpe. From the spoil my son thou art come an hye. He laid him
down and couched him self as a lion, and as a Gene. (...)
lioness. Who will stir him up? The scepter shall not depart from Judah, and
a law gyuer from between his feet, until Sylo come. And unto him shall the
gatherynge of the people be. He shall bind his fool unto the vine, and his
asses colte unto the branch. He washed his garment in wine, and his mantell
in the blood of grapes. His eyes are redder then wine, and his teeth whytter
then milk.

Iosu^. (...)
Zebulon shall dwell beside the haven of the sea and nigh the haven of ships.
His Iudic. (...) xiiii. (...) xvii. (...)
Dan shall judge his people and the tribes of Israel. Dan shall be a serpente
in the way, an edder in the path, bytynge the horse heles and his ryder fell
backewarde: after thy salvation have I looked (o Lord.)

Gad, an host of men shall euercome him. And he shall overcome at the last.

Of Asser, his bread shall be fat, and he shall give pleasures for a king.

Neptalym is a swyfte hynde, gyuynge goodly words. That flourysshynge child
Joseph, that plenteous child by the well side, the daughters ran upon the
wall. They have provoked him, and shot him through with darts. The archers
have enuyed him. But his bow abode fast, and the arms of his hands were made
strong, by the hands of the myghtie God of Jacob. Out of him shall come an
herd man, a stone in Israel: From thy fathers God which has were stronger
then the blessings of mine elders, unto the vtmoost of the hills of the
world, and they shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the top of the head
of him that was separate from his brethren.

Ben Iamin shall rauysshe as a wolf. In the morning he shall devour the
pray, and at night he shall deuyde the spoil. All these are the. xii. tribes of
Israel, and this their father spoke unto them and blessed them, every one of
them blessed he with a several blessing. And he charged them, and said unto
them. When I shall be gathered unto my Gene. 25. a.
people, bury me with my fathers, in the cave that is

And when Jacob had commanded all that he would unto his sons, he plucked up
his feet unto the bed and dyed, and was ^^^^. vii. c.
put unto his people. And Joseph fell upon his fathers face, and wept upon him,
and kyssed him.

Jacob is buried. Joseph forgyueth his brethren the iniurye they did. He dies.

CAPI. L.
ANd Joseph commanded his servants

My father made me swear, and said: Lo, I dye Gene. 47. g
bury me in my grave which I have made me in the land of Canaan. Now therefore
let me go and bury my father, and then will I come again. And Pharao said, go
and bury thy father, according as he made the swear. And Joseph went up to bury
his father, and with him went all the servants Eccle. xxii d
mourned for his father seven days. And when the inhabiters of the land (even
the Cananites) saw the mournyng in the corn floor of Atad, they said: this
is a great mournyng unto the Egyptyans. Wherefore the name of the place is
called, the mournyng of the Egyptians, and it is beyond Iordane. And his
sons did unto him according as he had commanded them. For his sons carried
him Gene. 49. c. Acts. vii. ^
in to the land of Canaan, and buried him in the double cave of the field:
which cave Gene. 23. d.
Abraham bought, and the Gene. 37. ^
reward us again all the evil which we did unto him. And they did a
commandment unto Joseph, sayng: thy father charged us before his death, sayng.
This wise shall ye say unto Joseph, forgive (I pray the) the trespace of thy
brethren / and their syn: for they rewarded the evil. And now (we pray the)
forgive the trespace of the servants of thy fathers god. And Joseph wept,
when they spoke unto him. For his brethren came unto him / and fell flat before
his face, saying: behold Gene. 45. ^
fear not. Am I God? ye thought evil against me: but God turned it unto good
/ to bring to pass / as it is this day / and to save much people alive. Fere
not therefore / Now I will noryshe you and your children / and he conforted them
/ and spoke kyndly unto them. Joseph dwelt in Egypt he and his fathers house:
and Joseph lived an. C. and. x. year. And Joseph saw Tobi. 14. ^ Job. xlii. d
Psalm. 117. ^
Ephraims children, even unto the third generation. And unto Machir the son
of Manasses were children borne, on Joseph's knees. And Joseph said unto his
brethren: I dye. And god will surely visit you and bring you out of this
land, unto the land which he swear unto Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. And Joseph
took an oath of the children of Israel saying: God will not fail but visit
you: and ye shall carye my Hebre. xi. d. Exodus xiii d Iosu^. 24 g
bones hence. And so Joseph dyed, when he was an hundred and. x. year old. And
they enbawmed him with spices, puttyng him in a chest in Egypt.

The end of the first book of Moses called in the Hebrew Bereschith, and in
the Latin Genesis.
The second book of Moses called in the Hebrew: Uelle Schemoth: And in the
Latin Exodus.
The children of Jacob are nombred. The new Pharao oppresses them. The act of
the godly mydwyuee.

CAPI. I.
THese are the names of the Gene. 46. b
children of Israel, which came into Egypt with Jacob, every man came with his
household. Ruben, Symeon, Leui, and Judah, Isachar Zabulon, and Bentamin, Dan,
Neptalt, Gad and Aser. All these souls that came out of the loins of Jacob
were. ixx. But Joseph was in Egypt already. And Joseph dyed and all his brethren
and all that generation, and the A^^es. vis. c. Psol. ^iiii c
children of Israel grew, increased, multiplied, and wared exceadyng mighty,
and the land was full of them.

But there rose up a new king in Egypt

Therefore did they set task masters over them, to keep them under with
burdens. And they bylte unto Pharao treasure ^^ties: Phiton and Rameses. But
the more they vexed them, the more they multiplied and grew, so that they
abhorred the children of Israel.

And the Egyptians held the children of Israel

And the king of Egypt said unto the mydwyues of the Ebrues women, of which
the ones name was Sepkora and the other Phua: when they do the office of a
mydwyfe to the women of the Hebrews / and se in the birth time that it is a
boy, ye shall kill it.

But if it be a daughter, it shall live. Not withstanding the mydwyues feared
God / and did not as the king of Egypt commanded them: but saved the
menchyldren.

And the king of Egypt called for the

Moses is burn and cast into the Flagges. He is taken up of Pharaos daughter.
He kylleth the Egyptian. He flees, and maryeth a wife. The Israelites cry
unto the lord.

CAPI. II.
ANd there went a man of Exo(...) i. Pat. (...)
the house of Leuy. And took a daughter of Leuy. And the wife conceived / and
bare a son. And when she saw that it was a proper child Acte^. (...) Hebr^
(...)
she hyd him three months. And when she could no longer hyde him, she took a
basket of bulrusshes and dawbed it with slyme and pytche, and laid the child
therein, and put it in the flagges by the ryuers brynke. And his sister stood a
far of, to wete what would come of it. Acts, (...) ii. Reg (...)
And the daughter of Pharao came down Da^l* (...)
to wasshe her self in the river, and her maidens walked along by the ryuers
side. And when she saw the basket among the flagges, she sent her maid to
fetch it. And when she had opened it, she saw it was a child: and behold,
the babe wept. And she had compassyon on it, and said: It is one of the
Hebrews children.

Then said his sister unto Pharaos daughter: shall I go and call unto the a
nurse of the

Pharaos daughter answered her: Go. And the maid ran, and called the chyldes
mother. To whom Pharaos daughter said. Take this child away, and nurse it
for me. I will reward the. And the woman took the child and nursed it up.

The child grew, and she brought it unto Pharaos daughter, and it was made
her son, and she called the name of it Moses, because (said she) I took him out
of the water. And it happened in those days, when Moses was waxed great, that
he went out unto his brethren, and looked on their burdens, and spyed an
Egyptian smytyng an Hebrew which was one of his brethren. And he looked round
about, and when he saw no man by / be slew the Egyptian, and hyd him in the
sand. And when he was gone out, another day behold, two Hebrews strove
together. And he said unto him that did the wrong.

wherefore smytest thou thy fellow? He answered. and Who made the a man of
auctoryte to ^des. vii. d Gene. xix d.
judge use Speak thou to kill me, as thou kylledst the Egyptyan? And Moses
feared

The priest of Midian had. vii. daughters which came and drew water, and
filled the troghes, for to water their fathers sheep. And the shepherdes came
and drove them away. But Moses stood up and helped them and watered their
sheep. And when they came to Raguel their father, he said. How happens it
that ye are come so soon to day? And they answered. A man of Egypt delivered
us from the hand of the shepherdes, and so drew us water, and watered the
sheep. He said unto his daughters. And where is he? why have ye so left the
man? Call him that he may eat bread. And Moses was content to dwell with the
man. And he gave Moses Exodus 18. a.
called him Gerson, for he said.

I have been a stranger in a strange land. ( And she bare yet another son,
whom he called Elieser, saying: the God of my father is mine helper, and has
ryd me out of the hands of Pharao. And it chanced in process of time, that
the king of Egypt dyed, and the children of Israel syghed by the reason of
bondage, and cried. And their complaynte came up unto God from the bondage, and
god herd their moan. And god remembered his promise with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob. And God looked upon the children of Israel, and God had respect unto
them.

Moses hops sheep. He sees God in a busshe: he is sent to the children of
Israel, and to Pharao that cyrauiit.

CAPI. III.
MOses kept the sheep of ^^^e. 18. a.
Iethro his father ^^^^. 14 a ^nes. vii. d
And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a Flambe of fire out of the
mids of the busshe. And he looked, and behold, the busshe burned with fire,
and the bussh^ was not consumed. Therefore Moses said. I will go now, and se
this great sight, how it comes that the busshe burns not. And when the Lord
saw that he came for to se, God called unto him out of the mids of the
busshe, and said. Moses, Moses. He answered: Iosu^. v. d.
Come not hither, put thy shoes of thy fete, for the place whereon thou
stand is holy ground. And he said Math. 22. c M^t. xii. c. Luke. xx. e
I am the god of thy father, the god of Abraham, the god of Isaac, and the god
of Jacob. And Moses hyd his face, for he was afraid to look upon god.

And the Lord said: I have surely seue the trouble of my people which are in
Egypt Exodus xxii. ^ Eccle. xxi. a
and have herd their cry from the face of their task masters. For I know
their sorrows and am come down to deliver them, out of the hand of the
Egyptyans, and to bring

And Moses said unto God. Behold, when I come unto the children of Israel, I
shall say unto them. The god of your fathers has sent me unto you, and if they
say unto me, what is his name, what answer shall I give them? And god
answered Moses. I am that I am. And he said, this shalt thou say unto the
children of Israel: I AM has sent me unto you. And God spoke further unto
Moses. Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel Hebre. xi. ^
the Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the god of Isaac

Go and gather the elders of Israel together, and thou shalt say unto them.
The Lord god of your fathers, the god of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob appeared unto me, and said.

In visityng have I visited you, and know that which is done to you in Egypt.
And I have said, I will bring you out of the tribulacyon of Egypt unto the
land of the Cananytes, and Hethyres, and Amory^es* and Pherezites, and
Heuytes, and Iebusytes, even unto a land that flows with milk, and honey.
And when they hear thy voice then go / both thou and the elders of Israel
shall go unto the king of Egypt, and say unto him. The Lord God of the
Hebrews has met with us, and now will we go therefore Exodi. xi. a and. x^i. c
I will get this people favor in the sight of the Egyptians, so that when ye
go, ye shall not go empty, but a wife shall borowe of her neighbors, and of
her that soiourneth in her house, jewels of silver and of gold, and raiment.
And ye shall put them on your sons and daughters, and shall ^ob the Egyptians.

Moses receives signs of his calling. He goes in to Egypt. His wife
zephora circumcised her son. Aaron me^^^^ with Moses.

CAPI. IIII.
MOses answered and said. Se, they will

And the Lord said forthermore unto him Thrust thine hand into thy bosom,
and he thrust his hand in to his bosom. And when he took it out again,
behold, his hand was leperous even as snow. And he said. Put thine hand in
thy bosom again. And he put his hand in to his bosom again, and plucked it
out of his bosom, and behold, it was turned again as his other flesh.

Therefore if they will not believe the, neither hear the voice of the first
token, yet will they believe for the voice of the second toke^. But and if they
will not believe the two signs, neither harken unto thy voice. Thou

Moses said unto the Lord: oh my Lord, I am not eloquent from yesterday and
ere yesterday, and namely since thou have spoken unto thy servant, but I am
slow mouthed and slow tonged. And the Lord said unto him. Who has made
man's mouth, or who has made the dombe or the deaf, the seeing, or the blind?
have not I the Lord? Therefore Math. (...)
I will be with thy mouth, and teach the what thou shalt say. He said: oh my
Lord, send I pray the by the hand of him whom thou will send. And the
Lord was angry with Moses, and said. Do not I know Aaron thy brother the
leuyte, that he can speak? For lo, he comes forth to mete the, and when he
sees the, he will be glad in his heart. Therefore thou shalt speak unto him,
and put these words in his mouth, and I will be with thy mouth and with his
mouth, and will teach you what ye ought to do. And he shall be thy spokesman
unto the people. He also shall be as thy mouth, and thou shalt be his God, and
thou shalt take this rod in thy hand wherewith thou shalt do miracles.

Therefore Moses went and returned to Math. (...)
for the men are dead which went about to kill the. And Moses took his wife
and his sons, and put them on an ass, and went again to Egypt, and Moses
took the rod of God in his hand.

And the Lord said unto Moses, when thou art entered and come into Egypt
again se that thou do all the wondres before Pharao which I have put in thy
hand. But I will hold Exod^. (...)
his heart, and he shall not let the people go. And thou shalt say unto Pharao
Exodus (...)
slay thine eldest son.

And it chanced by the way in the Inn that the Lord met him, and would have
killed him. And Zephora took a stone, and cut away the foreskyn of her son,
and fell at his feet, and said. A bloody husband art thou unto me. Then he
let him go. And she said a bloody husband, because of the circumcision. Then
said the lord unto Aaron: go mete Moses in the wyldernes. And he went and

Moses and Aaron go unto Pharao. The people is oppressed more and more: they
^^ye out upon Moses and Aaron therefore.

CAPI. V.
MOses and Aaron went in afterward, (...). xxi. ^.
is the lord that I should hear his voice, and let Israel go? I know not the
Lord, neither will I let Israel go. And they said, the God of the Hebrews has
met with us, and therefore will we go three days journey in to the deserte, and
sacrifice unto the Lord our God, leest there happen unto us either pestylence
or sword. Then said the king of Egypt unto them.

Wherefore do ye, Moses and Aaron let the people from their works, get you unto
your labor. And Pharao said furthermore. Behold there is much people now
in the land and ye make them leave their work.

And Pharao commanded the same day unto the task masters which were among
the people, and unto the officers, saying. Ye shall give the people no more
straw, to make brycke withal, (as ye did in time passed) let them go and
gather them straw them selves and the nombre of brycke which they were wont
to make in time passed, lay unto their

For they be idle, and therefore cry, saying. We will go and do sacrifice unto
our God.

They must have more work laid upon them, that they may labor therein, and
not regard vain words.

Then went the task masters of the people and the officers out, and told the
people. Thus say the Pharao. I will give you no more straw, go your selves and
gather you straw where ye can find it, yet shall none of your labor be
mynysshed. And so were the people scatered abroad through out all the land of
Egypt for to gather stubble, in stead of straw.

And the task masters hasted them forward,

The officers also of the children of Israel came and complained unto Pharao,
saying wherefore dealest thou thus with thy seruau^ tes? There is no straw
given unto thy servants, and they say unto us: make brycke. And thy
servants are beaten, and thy people is foul entreated. He said: ydell are
ye, ydell, and therefore ye say. We will go and do sacrifice unto the Lord. Go
therefore now and work, and there shall no straw be given you, and yet shall ye
deliver the hole tale of brycke.

And the officers of the children of Israel

The Lord look unto you and judge you, which has made the sauoure of us
stynke in the eyes of Pharao, and in the eyes of his servants, and have put a
sword in their hand to s^ee us.

Moses returned unto the Lord and said. Lord, wherefore have thou delte
cruelly with this people, and wherefore have thou sent me? For since I came to
Pharao to speak in thy name, he has fared foul with this folk, and yet thou
have not delivered thy people at all. Then the Lord said unto Moses. Now
shalt thou se, what I will do unto Pharao, for in a mighty hand shall he let
them go, and Exodus 1^. ^
in a mighty hand shall he drive them out of his land.

God promyseth delyueraunce, and the land of Canaan. The ge^^alogie of Ruben,
Simeon, and Le^^.

CAPI. VI.
ANd God spoke unto Moses, and said ^^^^. 17. ^.
I made an apoyntment with them to give them the land of Canaan, the land of
their pilgrimage wherein they were strangers.

And I have also herd the gronynge of the children of Israel, whom the
Egyptians keep in bondage, and have remembered my couenau^^

Wherefore say unto the children of Israel. I am the Lord, I will bring you
out from the burdens of the Egyptians, and will ryd you out of their bondage,
and will deliver you in a stretched out arm, and in great judgments. And I
will take you for my people, and will be to you a God. And ye shall

The Lord spoke unto Moses, saying. Go in, and speak unto Pharao king of
Egypt that he let the children of Israel go out of his land. And Moses spoke
before the lord saying. Behold, the children of Israel harken not unto me,
how then shall Pharao hear me / which am of vncircucised lyppes? And the
lord spoke unto Moses and unto Aaron, and gave them a charge unto the children
of Israel and unto Pharao king of Egypt, to bring the children of Israel
out of the land of Egypt. These be the heedes Gene. 46. ^ Erodi i. a Nume. 26
^ ^. Para. v a
children of Ruben the eldest son of Israel are these. Hanoh, and Pallu,
Hezron, and Charmi, these are the housholdes of Ruben. The children of Simeon,
Gemuel, and Iamin, Ohad, and Iachim, Zohar, and Saul the son of a Cananites
wife. These are the kynreddes of Symeon. These also 1. Para. 6 a and xxiii. ^
Nume. (...)* ^ and. xxvi. ^
are the names of the children of Leui in their generacyons. Gerson, and Kahath
and Merari. Leui lived an hundred and. xxxvii. years. The sons of Gerson.
Libui and Semei by their kynreddes.

The children of Kahath, Amram, and Iezear, Hebron and Usiel. And Kahath lived
an hundred and. xxxiii. year. The children of Merari, Maheli and Musi. These
are the kynreddes of Leui by their generacyons.

^^^^. ii. a.
Amram took Nume. 26 ^
Iochebed his nece to wife and she bare him Aaron and Moses. ( And Maria) And
Amram lived an hundred and. xxxvii. year. The children of Iezear, Korah, Nepheg
and Sichri. The children of Usiel, Misael, Elxapha^ and Sithri.

And Aaron took Elizaba daughter of Aminadab

This is that Aaron and Moses to whom the Lord said. Bring the children of
Israel out of the land of Egypt, according to their armies. These are that
Moses and Aaron which spoke to Pharao king of Egypt, that they might bring
the children of Israel out of Egypt. And in the day when the LORD spoke unto
Moses in the land of Egypt, he spoke unto him, saying. I am the lord,
speak thou unto Pharao the king of Egypt all that I say unto the. And Moses
said before the Lord. Behold I am of Exodus* (...)
uncircumcised lyppes, and how shall Pharao give me audience.

The tokens to know god. The rod of Moses is turned to a serpent. The
Sorcerers do even the same. The waters are turned in to blood.

CAPI. VII.
ANd the Lord said unto Moses, Behold, Exodus* (...)
I will harden Pharaos heart, and multiply my miracles and my wondres in the
land of Egypt. But Pharao shall not harken unto you, that I may set mine
hand upon Egypt, and bring out mine armies, and my people the children of
Israel out of the land of Egypt in great judgments. And the Egyptyans shall
know that I am the lord, when I stretch forth my hand upon Egypt, and bring
out the children of Israel from among them.

Moses and Aaron did as the Lord commanded them / even so did they. Moses was
Exodus* (...)
and it turned to a Serpent. Then Pharao called for the wise men and ii. (...)*
Enchau^ters: and those wise men of Egypt did in like manner with their
Sorcery. For they cast down every man his rod, and they turned to serpents:
but Aarons rod did eat up their rods: and he hardened Pharaos heart, that he
herkened not unto them, even as the Lord had said. The lord Exods. 8. a.
let my people go / that they may serve me in the wyldernes. And behold,
hitherto thou would not here. Thus says the Lord: In this thou shalt know
that I am the Lord. Behold, I will smite (with the rod that is in mine hand)
the water that is in the river, and it shall turn to blood. And the fysshe that
is in the river shall dye, and the river shall stynke, and it shall grieve the
Egyptia^s to drink of the water of the river

And the Lord spoke unto Moses, say unto Aaron: take thy rod, and stretche out
thyn hand over the waters of Egypt, over their Psalm. 78. e. ^^d. (...). ^.
and the river stank, and the Egyptians could not drink of the waters of the
river. And there was blood thorowout all the land of Egypt. And the
enchau^ters of Egypt did likewise with their sorceryes, and he hardened Pharaos
heart: neither did he harken unto them ^^od. iiii. d (...) vii, a
as the Lord had said. And Pharao turned him self, and went again into his
house, and set not his heart there unto. And the Egiptians dygged round about
the river for water to drink / for they could not drink of the water of the
river. And it continued a weke after that the Lord had smyten the river.

The plage of Frogs* Moses prays for Pharao. The plage of lyse.

CAPI. VIII.
THe Lord spoke unto Moses / Go unto ^^od. vii. ^ (...)* x. a.
Let my people goo, that they may serve me. If thou will not let them go:
behold, I will smite al thy border with frogs. And the river shall serall
with frogs, which shall go up and come into thine house / and in to thy
preuy chamber where thou slepest, and upon thy bed / and into the house of thy
servants, and upon thy people, and in to thine ouens / and upon thy meats.
And the frogs shall come upon the, and on thy people and upon all thy
servants.

Psalm. 78, ^. and* cv. ^
And the Lord spoke unto Moses: say 3. Reg. 13. ^ Exodi. i^ ^ and x. ^ Acts.
viii^
pray ye unto the lord, that he may take away the frogs from me, and from
my people / and I will let the people go, that they may do sacrifyce unto the
Lord.

And Moses said unto Pharao: Rejoice

Moses, and Aaron, went out from Pharao,

But when Pharao saw that he had rest given him, he hardened his heart, and
herkened not unto them, as the Lord had said.

And the Lord said unto Moses: say unto Aaron: stretche out thy rod, and
smite the dust of the land, that it may turn to lyse through out all the land
of Egypt.

And they did so. For Aaron stretched out but they could not. And the lyse
were both upon men, and beasts. Then said the enchaunters unto Pharao: it is
the fyngre of God. And Pharaos heart remained obstynate, and he herkened not
unto them, even Erodi. 7. a.
as the Lord had said.

And the Lord said unto Moses: rise up early in the morning, and stand
before Pharao, for he will come forth unto the water: and thou shall say unto
him, thus says the Lord: let my people go, that they may serve me. Else, if
thou will not let my people go, behold, I will send all manner of flees both
upon the, and thy servants, and thy people / and into thy houses. And the
houses of the Egyptians shall be full of flees, and the ground whereon they are.

And the land of Gene. 47. f
Gosan where my people are, will I cause to be wonderful in that Exodi. lii. f
as he has commanded us.

And Pharao said: I will let you go, that

The moren of beasts. The plage of botches and sores The hortyble hayle,
thonder, and lyghtnynge.

CAPI. IX.
THe Lord said unto Moses: go in unto Exodi. 7^
let my people go, that they may serve me. If thou will not let them go, and
will hold them still: behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thy flock
which is in the field, for upon horses / asses / camels, oxen / and sheep /
there shall be a mighty great morray ne. And the lord shall do wonderfully
between the beasts of Israel / and the beasts of Egypt: so that there shall
nothing dye of all that perteyneth to the children of Israel. And the Lord
appointed a time, saying: to morrow the lord shall fynysh this word in the
land And the Lord did it on the morrow, and all the cattle of Egypt dyed,
but of the cattle of the children of Israel dyed not one. And Pharao sent,
and behold there was not one of the cattle of the Israelites dead. And the
heart of Pharao was hardened that he would not let the people go.

And the Lord said unto Moses, and Aaron, Exodus ^
as the Lord had said unto Moses.

And the Lord said unto Moses: rise up Exodi. ^
Let my people go, that they may serve me, or else I will at this time send
all my plages upon thine heart, and upon thy servants, and on thy people,
that thou may know, that there is none like me in all the earth. For now I
will stretch out my hand, that I may smite the, and thy people with pestylence,
and thou shalt petysshe from the earth. And in very deed Roma ^ Psalm. 4
for this cause have I kept the / for to show the my power, and that they
might declare my name thorowout all the world.

Yet thou exaltest thy self against my

And the Lord said unto Moses: stretch Psalm. 78, c. and. cv. c
And the Lord so hayled in the land of Egypt, that there was hayle and fire
mengled with the hayle, so grievous, and such as there was noone thorowout all
the land of Egypt, since people inhabyted it. And the hayle smote thorowout
all the land of Egypt, all that was in the field both man / and beast. And the
hayle smote all the Exodi. 8. b.
Pray ye unto the lord. For it is much that there should be thonders of god,
and hayle. I will let you go / and ye shall tarry no longer. Moses said unto
him: as soon as I am out of the city, I will sprede abroad my hands unto the
lord, and the thonder shall cease, neither shall there be any more hayle: that
thou may know how that the earth is the Lords. But I know that thou, and
thy servants yet fear not the face of the Lord God.

And so the flax and the barley were smytten, for the barley was shot up, and
the flax was bolled: but the wheat, and the rye were not smyten, for they were
late sown. And Moses went out of the city from Pharao / and spread abroad his
hands unto the lord, and the thonder, and hayle ceased, neither rayned it
upon the earth. And when Pharao saw that the rain / and the hayle and thonder
were ceased, he syn^ed again, and hardened his heart: he and his servants.
And the heart of Pharao was hardened / neither would he let the Children of
Israel go, as the Lord had said by the hand of Moses.

The heart of Pharao is hardened of God. The greshoppers. The thycke darnesse.

CAPI. X.
ANd the Lord said unto Moses: go in Exodus iiii. t
I have hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants, that I might put
these my signs amongst them, and that thou tell in the audience of thy son,
and of thy sons son / what things I have done in Egypt, and the miracles
which I have done among them: that ye may know how that I am the Lord. And so
Moses / and Aaron came unto Pharao, and said unto him: Thus says the Lord
God of the Hebrews: how long shall it be or thou wylt submyt thy self unto me?
Exodi. 8. ^. and i^, a
Let my people god that they may serve me. Dr else, ( if thou do resyst,) and
will not let my people go: behold, to morrow will I bring greshoppers into
thy coostes, and they shall cover the face of the earth that it can not be seen
/ and they shall eat the residewe which remains unto you and is escaped from
the hayle: and they shall eat every grene tree that bears you

And Pharaos servants said unto him: How long shall he be a slander unto
us? Let the men go, that they may serve the lord their god: know thou not
yet that Egypt is destroyed? And Moses, and Aaron were brought again unto
Pharao, and he said unto them. Go and serve the lord your god. Who are they
that shall go? And Moses answered: we will go with our young, and with our
old: yea and with our sons / and with our daughters, and with our sheep, and
with our oxen must we god: For we must hold a feast unto the Lord.

And he said unto them: let it be so. The upon the land of Egypt, and eat
all the herbs of the land, and all that the hayle left behind. And Moses
stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, and the lord brought an East
wind upon the land / all that day and all that night.

And in the morning the East wind Psalm. (...). c Sapi. xvi b Iohe. i. ^.
brought the greshoppers / and the greshop pers went up over all the land of
Egypt, and remained in all quarters of Egypt very grievously: Before them were
there no such greshoppers, neither after them shall be, for they covered all the
face of the earth, so that the land was dark. And they did eat all the
herbs of the land, and all the fruytes of the trees, and whatsoever the hayle
had left: there was no grene thing left in the trees, and herbs of the
field through all the land of Egypt.

Therefore Pharao called for Moses, and Aaron in haste, and said: I have sinned
against Exodi. ix. ^.
pray unto the Lord your god, that he may take away from me this death
only. And Moses went out from Pharao / and prayed unto the Lord, and the
Lord turned a mighty strong west wind, and it took away the greshoppers
and cast them into the red see; so that there was not one greshopper in all
the coost of Egypt. And the Lord Exodi. 4. ^.
hardened Pharaos heart, so that he would not let the children of Israel go.

And the lord said unto Moses: Stretch Sapi. 17. a.
darkness upon all the land of Egypt, three days long, no man saw
another, neither rose up from the place where he was by the space of three
days, but all the children of Israel had light where they dwelled.

And Pharao called for Moses and said: go, and serve the Lord, only let your
sheep, and your oxen abide, and let your children go with you. And Moses
said: thou must give us also offerynges and burntoffrynges, for to sacrifyce
unto the Lord our God: our cattle also shall go with us, and there shall not one
hooffe be left behind, for thereof must

But the Lord hardened Pharaos heart, and he would not let them goo. And
Pharao said unto him: get the from me, and take heed to thy self / and se my
face no more.

For when soever thou come in my sight / thou shalt dye. And Moses said:
Let it be as thou have said: I will se thy face no more.

The lord commands to rob the Egyptians. The death of all the first
begotten in Egypt

CAPI. XI.
ANd the Lord said unto Moses: yet Exodi (...) and xii. (...)
jewels of silver, and jewels of gold. And the Lord shall give the people
favor in the sight of the Egyptians. Moreover Eccle. (...)
Moses was very great in the land of Egypt: in the sight of Pharaos
servants, and in the sight of the people.

And Moses said: thus says the Lord: Exodus ^. (...)
At mydnyght will I go out in to the mids of Egypt, and all the first borne in
the land of Egypt shall dye: even from the first borne of Pharao that sytteth
on his seat, unto the first borne of the maid servant that is behind the
mylle, and all the first gendred of the cattle. And there shall be a great
cry thorowout all the land of Egypt: such as there was never none like, nor
shall be.

But among all the Children of Israel shall not a dog move his tongue, nor
yet man or beast: that ye may know, how that by a great miracle) puts a
dyfference between the Egyptians and Israel. And these thy servants shall all
come down unto me, and fall before me, and say: get the out and all the people
that are under the, and then will I depart. And he went out from Pharao with an
angry countenance.

And the Lord said unto Moses: Pharao shall not hear you, that my wonders may
be multiplied in the land of Egypt. And Moses and Aaron, did all these
wondres: ( And tokens which are written) before Pharao. And the Lord
hardened Pharaos heart, so that he would not let the children of Israel go out
of his land.

CAPI. XII.
The passover is eaten. The sweet bread. They must teach their children
what the passover signifies.

The destruceyo^ of the first begotten in Egypt. The robberye of the Egyptians.
The going out of the Israelites.

ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, and of Israel, saying: In the tenth day of
this month, every man take unto him a lamb, according to the house of the
fathers, a lamb thorowout every house. If the household be to little for the
lamb, let him take his neighbor which is next unto his house according to
the nombre of the souls: every one of you (according to his carynge) shall
make your count for a lamb. And let that lamb of youres be with out
blemyshe, a male of a year old, which ye shall take out from among the sheep
or from among the gootes. And ye shall keep him in, until the. ^^. xiv. ^
xiiii. day of the same month. And every man of the multitude of Israel shall
kill him about even. And they shall take of the blood, and stryke it on the two
side posts, and on the upper dorepost: even in the houses, where they shall
eat him. And they shall eat the flesh the same night: roost with fire, and
with vnleuended bread, and with sour herbs they shall eat it. Se that ye
eat Exodus 23. b. ^. xxxiiii. c.
Seven days shall ye eat vnleuended bread, and the first day ye shall put
away leven out of your houses. For whosoever Leui. xxiii ^ Nume. 28. c
The first day shall be an holy conuocacyon, and the seventh day shall be an holy
co^uocacion unto you. There shall be no manner of work done in the^, save about
that only which every man must eat, that only may ye do. And ye shall
observe vnleuended bread. For this same day have I brought your armies out of
the land of Egypt / therefore ye shall observe this day, and al your children
after you, by a custom for ever. Leui i. 23 ^ Nume. 28. c
The first month, and the. xiiii. day of the month at even, ye shall eat
sweet bread unto the. xxi. day of the month at even again. Seven days
shall there be no leuended bread found in your houses. And whosoever eats
leuended bread / that soul shall be roted out from the multitude of Israel:
whyther he be a stranger or borne in the land. Ye shall eat nothing leuended,
but in all your habitacyons shall ye eat sweet bread. Moses called for all the
elders of Israel, and said unto them: chose out and take you to every
household of you, a sheep / and kyl it for passover.

And take a bunche of ysop / and dyp it in the

And when ye be come in to the land which the Lord will give you, according
as he has promised, ye shall keep this service.

Iosu^. 4. a.
And when your Children ask you what manner of service is this ye do? Ye shall
say: it is the sacryfyce of the Lords passover, which passed over the houses
of the children of Israel in Egypt, as he smote the Egyptians, and saved our
houses. And the people bowed them selves, and worshypped. And the children of
Israel went, and did as the Lord had commanded Moses, and Aaron: Even so did
Exodi. ^i. ^ Psalm. 135. ^ Sapi. 18. c.
mydnyght the Lord smote all the first borne in the land of Egypt: from the
first borne of Pharao that sat on his seat, un to the first borne of the
captyue that was in prison / and all the first gendred of cattle. And Pharao
arose in the night, he and al his servants, and all the Egyptians: Sapi. 18. ^.
and there was a great cryenge in Egypt, for there was no house where there
was not one dead. And he called unto Moses and Aaron by night, saying: rise up
and get you out from among my people: both ye and also the children of Israel,
and go and serve the Lord as ye have said. And take your sheep, and your
droues with you as ye have said / and departed and Gene. 27. ^
bless me. And the Egyptians were ferce upon the people that they might send
them out of the land in have: for they said: we dye all. And the people took
their dough before it was soured, and their vytayles bound in clothes upon
their shoulders. And the children of Israel did according to the saying of
Moses, Exodi. iii, g
jewels of silver, and jewels of gold / and raiment. And the Lord gave the
people favor in the sight of the Egyptians: so that they granted such
things as they required. And they robbed the Egyptians. And the Nume 33 a
children of Israel took their journey from Rameses to Suchoth Nume. xi. ^.
. vi. hundred thousand men of foot, beside children. And much comen people
went also with them, and sheep, and exon an exceeding great flock. And they
baked sweet cakes of the dough which they brought out of Egypt, for it was not
sowred. For when they were thrust out by the Egyptians / they could not tarry
to prepare them selves any prouisyo^ of meat. The dwelling of the children of
Israel which they dwelled in Egypt, was Gene. xv. c. Iudic. v. b. Acts. vii. a
Gala. iii, c
. iiii. hundred and. xxx. years, and when the iiii. hundred, and. xxx. years
were expyred, eue^ the self same day departed all the hosts of the Lord out
of the land of Egypt. It is a night to be observed to the lord, in the which

Thou shall carye noone of the flesh out at the house: Job. xix. g
Neither shall ye break a ^ Nu. ix. b
bone thereof. All the multitude shall observe it. If a stranger also dwell
among you, and will hold Passover unto the Lord / let him cyrcumcyse all
that be males, and then let him come, and observe it, and he shall be as one that
is borne in the land.

For the vncyrcumcysed shall not eat there of. One manner of law shall be unto him
that is borne in the land / and unto the stranger that dwells among you.
And all the children of Israel did as the Lord commanded Moses, and Aaron.
Even so did they. And the self same day did the Lord bring the children of
Israel out of the land of Egypt with their armies.

The first ^egotten must be sanctified unto the Lord. The memory all of their
delyueraunce. Why they were ^ntye^ through the wyldernes. The bones of Joseph.
The pyller of the cloud.

CAPI. XIII.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses saying. Exodi. (...) Nume. (...) Luke. ii
Sayntifye unto me all the first borne, that open all manner matrices among the
children of Israel as well of man as of beast, for it is mine. And Moses said
unto the people: think on this day in which ye came out of Egypt out of the
house of bon dage: for through a mighty hand the lord brought you out from
thence. There shall no i. Cor^^
leuended bread be eaten. This day come ye out in the month when corn
begins to ripe. Exodi. (...) and. (...) xxxiii. ^
When the Lord had brought the in to the land of the Cananytes, Hethites,
Amorites, Heuytes, and Iebusites Gene. (...). Exodi. (...)
which he swear unto thy Fathers that he would give the, a land wherein milk
and honey flows, y^ shall keep this service in this same month Seven days
thou shall eat sweet bread: Deutt. (...)
and in the. vii. day it is the feast of the lord. Sweet bread shall be eaten
seven days, and there shall no leuended bread be seen / nor yet leven with the
in all thy quarters.

And thou shall show thy son in that day saying: this is done, because of
that which the Lord did unto me when I came out of Egypt. And it shall be a
sign unto the upon thine hand, and for a remembrance between thine eyes,
that the Lords law may be in thy mouth. For Psalm. (...)
in a strong hand the lord brought the out of Egypt, keep therefore this
ordinance in his season from year to year. And it will come to pass, that the
Lord shall bring the in to the land of the Cananites which he Gene. (...)
swear unto the, and to thy fathers: and shall give it the. And then thou shall
appoynte unto the Lord all that opens the matryce. And every thing cast,
that first does open the matryce of a beast which thou have: if they be males,
they shall be the lords.

And Every first gendred of an ass, thou shall redeem with a lamb: if thou
redeem him not / thou shall break his neck. All the first borne among thy
Children also, shalt thou bye out. And when thy son asks the to morrow
saying: what is this? thou shalt say unto him: With a mighty hand the Lord
brought us out of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.

And when Pharao was looth to let us go / the Lord slew all the first borne
in the land of Egypt: as well the first borne of man as of beast. Therefore I
sacryfyce unto the Lord all the males that open the matryce / and all the
first borne of my Children I redeem. This shall be a token upon thine hand, and
a remembrance between thine eyes, that the Lord brought out of Egypt through
a mighty hand. It came to pass, that when ^ene. l. d ^sue. 24. g
God will surely vyset you, and ye shall take my bones away hence with you.
^ume. 33. b
And they took their journey from Suchoth: and abode in Etham in the edge of
the wyldernes. ^ume. 14 c ^orin. x. a ^sai. ii ii. b
And the lord went before them by a day in a pyller of a cloud to lead
them the way: and by night in a pyller of fire to give the^ light: that they
might go both by day, and by night. Nehe. ix. d.
The pyller of the cloud departed not by day, nor the pyller of fire by
night, out of the sight of the people.

Pharaos heart is hardeued and follows the Israelites, with all his host and
capitaynes and is drowned. The Israelites grudge. They go through the red see.

CAPI. XIIII.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses saying: ^ume, 33 b
Baalzephon: and before that shall they pytch by the sea. For Pharao will say of
the children of Israel, they are tangled in the land / the wyldernes has shut
them in. And I will harden Pharaos heart, that he shall follow after you: and I
will get me honor upon Pharao, and upon all his host, the Egyptians also shall
know, that I am the lord And they did even so.

And it was told the king of Egypt that the Psalm. 135. b
an hye hand, and the Egyptians followed after them, and all the horses, and
charettes of Pharao, and his horsemen, and his host oueroke them abiding by
the sea: beside Pi Hiroth before Baalzephon

And when Pharao drew nigh, the children Ios^^e. 24 ^
and the children of Israel cried out unto the Lord. But they said unto
Moses: because there were no graves in Egypt, have thou therefore brought us
away for to dye in the wilderness? Wherefore haste thou served us thus, for to
carye us out of Egipte Did not we tell the this in Egypt / saying let us be in
rest / that we may serve the Egyptians? For it had been better for us to have
served the Egiptians, then for to dye in the will dernesse. And Moses said unto
the people ii. Pat. xx, c
fear ye not, stand still, and behold how the Lord shall save you this
day. For ye that have seen the Egyptians this day / shall se them no more for
ever. The Lord shall fight for you, and ye shall hold your peace.

And the Lord said unto Moses, wherefore

And in the morning watch, the Lord Iudi. ix. a
looked unto the host of the Egyptians out of the fyrie, and clowdy pyller, and
troubled the host of the Egyptians / and took of his charet wheles / and
carried them away violently, so that the Egyptians said: Let us f^e from the
face of Israel, for the Lord fyghteth for the^ against the Egyptians. And the
lord said unto Moses: stretche out thine hand over the Sea, that the waters
may come again upon the Egiptian, upon his charettes, and upon his horsemen.
And Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and it came again Sapi. ^. d
Lord overthrew the Egyptians in the myddest of the sea, and the water
returned, and covered the charettes and the horsemen: and all the host of
Pharao that came in to the sea after them, so that there remained not one of
them. But the children of Israel walked upon dry land Esai. (...). d
through the myddest of the sea, and the waters were a wall unto them: on the
right hand of them, and on the left. i. Mar. 4 a
Thus the Lord delivered Israel the self same day out of the hand of the
Egyptians, and Israel saw the Egyptyans dead upon the sea side. And Israel
saw that mighty power which the lord showed upon the Egyptians Psalm. cv. d.
and the people feared the Lord: and byleued the lord, and his servant Moses.

Moses and the people with the women sing. At the prayer of Moses, the
bitter waters were sweet. God must be herd. They come to Elim.

CAPI. XV.
THen Moses and the children of Israel Erod. xv. c
I will sing unto the lord, for he has triumphed gloriously: the horse and him
that rode upon him has he overthrown in the sea. Psalm. 118. c Esa^a. xii. a
The Lord is my strength, and praise, and he is become my salvation. He is my
god, and I will gloryfy him: my fahthers God, and I will exalte him. The lord
is a man of war. The lord is his name: Pharaos charettes, and his host has
he cast into the sea. His chosen captains also are drowned in the red See,
that deep waters have covered them: they soncke to the botom as a stone. Thy
ryghthand lord, is become glorious in power: thy ryghthande lord has all to
dasshed the enemy. And in thy great glory thou have overthrown them that
rose up against the: thou sentest forth thy wrath which consumed them even as
stoble. Through the wynd of thy nose thrylles / the water gathered together: the
floodes stood still as an heap, and the deep water co^geled together in the
heart of the sea

The enemy said: I will follow on them, Exodus (...)* ^
Sing ye unto the lord, for he has tryumphed gloryously: the horse and his
ryder has he over thrown in the sea. And so Moses brought Israel from the red
see, and they went That is to say, bytternesse.) And the people murmu red
against Moses, saying: What shall we drink? Iudi. v. ^ Eccle. 38. ^ Deute. ^^^
And he cried unto the Lord, and the Lord showed him a tree: which when he
had cast into the water, the waters were made sweet. There he made them an
ordinance, and a law: and there he proved him / and said: If thou wylt
harken * unto the voice of the Lord thy god, and wylt do that which is right
in his sight and wylt give ear unto his commandments, and keep al his
ordynaunces, then will I put noone of these dyseases upon the which I brought
upon the Egyptians, for I am the Lord that heals the.

The Israelites come in to the desert of Syn. It ^ayneth qu^yls, and Mauna.
They s^^dge.

CAPI. XVI.
THe Nume. 33. ^
children of Israel came to Elim Nume. xi, a
murmuryng against Moses and Aaron in the wyldernes / and the children of
Israel said unto them: would to god we had dyed by the hand of the lord in the
land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh pottes, and when we did eat bread
our belyes full, for ye have brought us out in to this will dernes, to kyl this
hole multitude with hongre. Then fayde the Lord unto Moses: behold, Sapi. 16. d.
Psalm. 78, r. John. vi, d
bread from heaven to you, and the people shall go out, and gather day by day
that I may prove them, whyther they will walk in my law or no: the syxt day
they shall prepare for them selves that which they will bring in, and let it be
twyse as much as they gather in daily. And Moses and Aaron said unto all the
children of Israel: at even, ye shall know that it is the Lord, which brought
you out of the land of Egypt, and in the morning ye shall se the glory of
the Lord: because he has herd your grudgynges against the Lord. And what
are we that ye have murmured against us? And Moses said. At even shall the lord
Nume. xi. d
give you flessh to eat, and in the morning bread enough: for the lord has
herd your murmurynges which ye murmr against him: for what are we? your
murmurynges are not against us, but against the lord. And Moses spoke unto
Aaron: Say unto all the company of of the children of Israel, come forth
before the lord: for he has herd your grudgynges

And as Aaron spoke unto the hole multitude of the children of Israel, they
looked toward the wilderness: and behold, the glory of the Lord appeared in
the cloud. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying. I have herd the murmuryng
of the children of Israel, tell them therefore and say: at even y^ shall eat
flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with bread, and ye shall know,
that I Nume. ^i. ^
quay les came and covered the ground where they lay. And in the morning the
dew lay round about the host. And when the dew was fallen: behold, it
lay upon the ground in the wilderness, small and round and thyn as the hoar
frost on the ground. And when the children of Israel saw it, they said every
one to his neighbor. It is Manna. For they wist not what it was. And Moses
said unto them: this is the bread which the Lord has given you to eat.
This is the word which the lord has commanded: gather of it every man for
him self to eat, a gomer full for a man according to the nombre of you and
take every man for them which are in his tent.

And the children of Israel did even so, and gathered some more, some less:
and when they i^. Co^^. ^^
had gathered much, remained nothing oue^ and unto him that had gathered ly^ell
was there no lack: every man gathered sufficient for his eating. And Moses
said unto them. Se that no man let ought remain of it till the morning.
Notwithstanding they herkened not unto Moses: but some of them left of it
until the morning / and it waxed full of worms and stanke, and Moses was
angry with them. And they gathered it all mornings, every man for his eating.
And as soon as the heat of the son came, it moult. And the syxte day they
gathered twyse so much bread it. gomers for one man: and all the rulers of the
multitude came and told Moses.

He said unto them: this is that which the Nume. xi. ^
And it was like unto Coriander seed, white, and the taste of it was like unto
wafers made with honey.

And Moses said: this is that which the Lord commands: fill a Gomer of it,
which may be kept for your children after you: that they may se the bread
wherewith I have fed you in wilderness, when I brought you out of the land of
Egypt. And Moses spoke un to Aaron: take a cruse and put Hebru. ix. b
a Gomer full of Manna therein, and lay it up before the Lord to be kept for
your children after you, as the Lord commanded Moses. So Aaron laid it up
before the testimonye to be kept. Si. Esd. i^. d Iudicu^. v d Iesue. v. d.
And the children of Israel did eat Manna. xl. year vntyt they came unto a
land inhabited. And so they did eat Ma^na, even until they came unto the
borders of the land of Canaan A Gomor is the tenth part of an Epha.

The Israelytes come in to Raphidim. They grudge. Water is given them out of
the rock. Moses holds up his hands: and they overcome the Amelechites.

CAPI. XVII.
ANd all the company of the children of Nume, 33. d
Raphidim / where was no water, for the people to drink. And the people chode
with Moses and said. Give us water to drink. Moses said unto them / why
chyde ye with me? Wherefore do ye tempt the Lord? There the people thyrsted for
water, and the people murmured against Moses and said.

Nume. xx. a
Wherefore have thou thus brought us out of Egypt, to kill us and our children
/ and cattle with thyrste?

And Moses cried unto the Lord, saying Psalm. 78 b. i. Corin. x. a Deute. ix. b
I stand before the beside a rock that is in Horeb, and thou shalt smite a
rock, and there shall come water out thereof, that the people may drink.

Nume. xx a
And Moses did even so before the eyes of the elders of Israel. And he called
the name of the place ^e^tacyon
Massa and Strife.
Meriba, because of the chydyng of the children of Israel, and because they
tempted the Lord, saying. Is the lord among us or not? Then came Amalech and
fought with Israel in Raphidim.

And Moses said unto Joshua. Chose us out Iudi. iiii. c. Deuteronomy. 25. ^
Moses held up his hand, Israel had the better. And when he let his hand
down, Amalech had the better. But Moses hands were heavy, and therefore they
took a stone and put it under him, and he sat down thereon. And Aaron and Hur
stayed up his hands, the one on the one side and the other, on the other side.
And his hands remained stedie until the going down of the son. And Joshua
dyscomfyted Amalech and his people, with the edge of the sword,

And the Lord said unto Moses. Write this for a remembrance in a book, and
commyt it unto the ears of Joshua, for Nume. 24^ ^. Regu^ 15. ^
I will utterly put out the remembrance of Amalech from under heaven. And Moses
made an altar and called the name of it. The Lord is he that works miracles
for me.

For he said: the hand is on the seat of god the Lord will have war with
Amalech from generacyon to generacyon.

Iethros counsel is received of Moses.

CAPI. XVIII.
IEthro the priest of Median Moses father Exodi. iii, and iiii. f
Therefore he took Ziphora Moses wife, (after he had sent her back) and her.
ii. sons, of which the one was called Exodi. ii. ^.
Gerson, for he said. I have been an alyent in a strange land. The name of the
other was Eliesar: for the God of my father (said he) was my help, and
delyucred me from the sword of Pharao.

And Iethro Moses father in law came with his two sons and his wife unto
Moses in to the wyldernes: where he abode by the mount of God. And he said
unto Moses. I thy father in law Iethro am come to the, and thy wife also, and
her two sons with her.

And Moses went out to mete his father in in the thing whereby they delte
cruellye with them, are they them selves perysshed.

And Iethro Moses father in law offered burnt offrynges and sacrifices unto
God. And Aaron and all the elders of Israel came to eat bread with Moses father
in law before God.

And it chanced on the morrow, that Moses

And Moses father in law said unto him: it is not well that thou do. Thou
both wetyest thy self, and this people that is with the: for this thing is of
more weight, then Denis. i. b
thou art able to perform thy self alone Hear now therefore my voice, and
I will give the counsel, and God shall be with the. Be thou unto the people to
Godwarde, that thou may bring the causes unto God, and thou shall teach them
ordinances and laws, and show them the way wherein they must walk, and the
work that they must do.

Moreover thou shalt seek out among all Deute. i. c
great matter that happens, let them bring unto the, but let them judge all
small causes them selves, and so shall it be easyer for thy self, and they
shall bear with the. If thou shall do this thing, (and God charge the
withal) thou shall be able to endure, and yet the people shall come to their
place in peace.

And so Moses obeyed the voice of his father in law, and did all that he had
said, and chose actyue men out of all Israel, and made them as heads over the
people: namely, captains over thousands, over hundreds, over fyftie, and over
ten. And they judged the people at al ceasons, but brought the hard causes
unto Moses, and judged al small matters them selves. And Moses let his father
in law depart / and he went in to his own land.

CAPI. XIX.
The children of Israel come to the mount Smay.

The people of god ate holy, and a royal preesthod. He that touches the hill
dies. God appears unto Moses upon the mount in thondre, and lyghtnynge

IN the third month / when the children Nume. 38. c
For they were departed from Raphidim, and were come to the deserte of Smay,
and had pytched their tents in the wyldernes. And there Israel abode before
the mount. Exodus 24. a
But Moses went up unto God. And the Lord called to him out of the mountain /
saying: Thus shall thou say unto the house of Jacob, and tell the children of
Israel: ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptyans, and took you up upon Egles
wyngs, and have brought you unto my self. Now therefore Deute. 13. d
if ye will hear my voice in deed, and keep mine appointment: ye shall be mine
own, above all nacyons, for all the earth is mine. Ye shall be unto me also a
kingdom of S. Peter. 2. b
priests and an holy people: And these are the words which thou shalt say
unto the children of Israel.

Moses came and called for the elders of the Exodus 24. a Deuteronomy. v. d. and. xxvi.
d.
All that the Lord has said, we will do. And Moses brought the words of the
people unto the Lord. And the Lord said unto Moses. To, I come unto the in
the thycke clowe, that the people may here me talkyng with the, and believe the
for ever. Moses showed the words of the people unto the Lord.

And the Lord said unto Moses. Go unto the people, and sanctify them to day
and to morrow, and let them wasshe their clothes: and be ready against the
third day.

For the third day the Lord will come down in the syghte of all the people
upon mount Smay. And thou shall set marks round about the people and say:
beware, that ye go not up in to the mount, or touch the bordre of it. Who so
ever touches the Hebre. xii. ^
mount shall surely dye. There shall not an hand touch it. Else he shall be
stoned or shot through: whyther it be beast or man, it shall not live: When the
trompe blows long: then may they come up into the mountain.

And Moses went down from the mount

And the third day in the morning there was thonder, and lyghtnynge, and a
thycke cloud upon the mount, and the voice of the trompe excedyng loud, so
that all the people that was in the host was afraid. And Moses brought the
people out of the tents to mete with god, and they Deute. 4. d.
stood under the hill.

And mount Synay was all together on a smoke: because the Lord descended
down upon it in fire. And the smoke thereof ascended up, as the smoke of a
chymney, and all the mount was excedyng fearful. And when the voice of the
trompe blewe, and waxed louder and louder. Moses spoke, and God answered him by
a voice. And the Lord came

And the lord said unto Moses: go down charge the people, that they prease
not up to se the Lord, and so many of them perysshe. And let the priests also
which come to the lord sanctify them selves, lest the Lord destroy them.
And Moses said unto the lord: the people can not come up in to the mount
Synay, for thou chargedst us, saying: Set marks about the hill, and sanctify
it. And the lord said unto him: away, and get the down: and thou shalt come
up, thou and Aaron with the. But let not the Priests and the people presume
for to come up unto the lord, leest he destroy them. And so Moses went down
unto the people, and told them.

The ten commandments are given. The altar of earth.

CAPI. XX.
AND God spoke all these words, and Deute. v. ^
brought the out of the land of Egypt / out of the house of bondage. Thou
shall have none other gods in my sight.

Leuit. 26. a. Deute. 4. c
Thou shalt make the no graven image neither any similitude that is in heaven
above either in the earth bynethe, or in the waters under the earth. Thou
shalt not worship Naum. i a. Eradi. 24 b
them, neither serve them: For I the Lord thy god, am a gelouse god, and
visyte the
sin of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth generacyon
of them that hate me: and show mercy unto thousands in them that love me,
and keep my commandments.

Thou shalt not Leutti. xix'b Eccle. 23. b.
take the name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will Exobi. 23. b
xxxiiii. c and xxxv. a Ezech, xx. b
Remember the Sabbath day, that thou sanctify it. Six days shall thou labor
and do all that thou haste to do: but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy god, in it thou shalt do no manner of work, thou, and thy son, and
thy daughter, thy man servant and thy maid servant, thy cattle and the
stranger that is within thy gates. For in six days the Lord made heaven and
earth, the sea and all that in them is, and Gene. ii. ^
rested the seventh day: Wherefore the Lord blessed the Sabbath day and hallowed
it.

Math. ^5. ^ Mat. vii. ^
Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God gives the.

Math. (...)
Thou shalt not kill. Luke. 18. ^
Thou shalt not break wedlock. Math. v. ^
Thou shalt not steal. Roma. (...)
Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
Thou shalt not covet Roma. 7. ^
thy neighbors house: neither shalt thou covet thy neighbors wife, or his
man servant, or his maid or his ore, or his ass, or what so ever thy
neyboure has.

And all the people saw the thonder and the lyghtnyng, and the noise of the
trompe, and the mountain smokynge. And when the people saw it, they removed
and stood a far of, and said unto Moses: Deuteronomy. 18 ^ Hebre, (...)
talk thou with us and we will hear: but let not god talk with us, leest we
dye. And Moses said unto the people. Fear not, for God is come to prove you,
and Deuteronomy. 17 ^ Iosue. 8. ^ ^. Math 4^
An altar of earth thou shalt make unto me, and thereon offer thy burnt
offrynges, and thy peace offerynges, thy sheep and thine oxen. In all places
where I shall put the remembrance of my name thither I will come unto the and
bless the. And if thou wylt make me an altar of stone, se you make it not of
hewn stone. Else if thou lift up thy toule upon it, thou have poluted it.
Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy fylthynesse be
not showed thereon.

Temporal and Civil ordinances.

CAPI. XXI.
These are the laws which thou shall set

And if he came married, his wife shall go out with him. And if his master have
given him a wife and she have borne him sons or daughters: then the wife and
her children shall be her masters, and he shall go out alone. And if the
servant say: I love my master, my wife and my children, I will not go out
free. His master shall bring him unto the judges, and set him to the door or
the door post, and his master shall bore his ear through with a nawle, and he
shall be his servant for ever.

And if a man sell his daughter to be a

And if he do not these three unto her, then shall she go out free and pay no
money. Leui. 24. c Nume 35 b Math. v. c.
He that smyteth a man that he dye, shall be slain for it. If a man lay not
awayte but God deliver him in to his hand, then I will point the a place
whyther he shall flee. If a man come presumptuously upon his neighbor to flee
him with gyle, thou shalt take him fro mine 3. Regu^. i. g
altar that he dye.

He that smyteth his father or his mother let him be slain for it. Deuteronomy. 24. b
He that steals a man and sells him (if it be proved upon him) shall be
slain for it.

Leui. xx. b ^ione. xx. c Mat. xv. a. Mat. vii. b
And he that curses his father or mother, shall be put to death for it. If men
strive together / and the one smyteth his neighbor with a stone, or with his
fyst, and he dye not, but lies in bed: if he rise again and walk without
upon his staff, then shall he that smote him go quyte: save only he shall
beat his charges for lesynge his time, and shall pay for his healynge.

And if a man smite his servant or his

^uit. 24. c Deute. 19 b
And if any mysfortune follow, then shall he pay life for life, ^ath. v. ^
eye for eye, toth for toth hand for hand, foot for foot, burning for
burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.

And if a man smite his servant or his maid in the eye that it perysshe, he
shall let them goo free / for the eyes sake. Also if he smite out his
servants, or his maids toth he shall let them go out fre for the tothe sake.

If an Ox goore a man or a woman, that they dye, then the Gene. ix. ^
Ox shall be stoned, and his flesh shall not be eaten / but the owner of the
Ox shall go quyte.

If the Ox were wont to pusshe in time

If there be set to him a sum of money then he shall give for the delyueraunce
of his life, what soever is put unto him. And whyther he has gored a son or
hurt a daughter, he shall be served after the same manner. But if it be a
servant or a maid that the ox has gored, then he shall give unto their
master. xxx. sycles of silver, and the ox shall be stoned.

If a man open a well or dyg a pyt and cover it not, and an ox or an ass fall
therein, the owner of the pyt shall make it good and give money unto their
master, and the dead beast shall be his. If one man's ox hurt an other that
he dye: then they shall sell the live ox and deuyde the money, and the dead
ox also they shall deuyde. Or if it be known that the ox has used to pusshe
in times past, and his master has not kept him, he shall pay ox for ox,
and the deed shall be his own.

Such like laws as are in the Chapter above.

CAPI. XXII.
IF a man Prou. vii a
steal an ox or sheep and kyl it ii. Reg ^ii b
.iiii. sheep for a sheep. If a these be found breaking up and be smytten that
he dye, there shall no blood be shed for him: but if the son be up when he is
found, then there shall be blood shed for him.

A thief shall make restitucion: If he have not wherewith, he shall be sold for
his theft. If the theft be found in his hand alive (why there it be ox, ass
or sheep) he shall restore double. If a man do hurt field or vyneyarde, and put
in his beast to feed in another man's feld of the best of his own field, and of
the best of his own vyneyarde, shall he make restitucio^.

If fire break out and catch in the thorns, and the stackes of corn, or in
standing corn, or field be consumed therewith: he that kyndled the fire shall
make restitucion.

If a man deliver his neighbor money And shall svvere.) Whyther he have put
his hand unto his neighbors good.

And in all manner of trespace, whyther it be for ox, ass, sheep, raiment, or
any manner of lost thing which an other chalengeth to be his, the cause of
both parties shall come before the judges. And whom the judges condemn: let
him pay double to his neighbor

If a man deliver unto his neighbor to keep, ass, ox, sheep or what soever
beast it be and it dye or be hurt or be taken away (and no man se it:) then
shall an oath of the Lord be between them, that he has not put his hand unto
his neighbors good: and the owner of it shall take the oath, and the other
shall not make it good. And if it be stolen from him, then he shall make
restitucyon unto

And if a man borowe ought of his neighbor, and it be hurt or else dye, and
the owner thereof be not by, he shall make it good.

But if the owner thereof be by, he shall not make it good: namely, if it be an
hired thing and came for his hyre.

Gene. 34. ^
If a man entyse a maid that is not betrouthed, and lie with her, he shall
endote her, and take her to his wife. And if her father refuse to give her unto
him, he shall pay money according to the dowry of vyrgyns.

Thou shall not suffer a i Reg. 38. a
wytche to live. Who soever lies with a beast, shall be slain for it. He that
offreth unto any gods save unto the lord only, let him be utterly roted
out. Leui. xix. ^.
Uexe not a stranger, neither oppress him: for ye were strangers in the
land of Egypt. zacha. vii. c
Ye shall trouble no wydowe, nor fatherless child. If ye shall trouble them,
and they cry unto me, I will surely hear their cry, and then will my wrath
wax hot, and I will kill you with the sword, and your wives shall be
wydowes, and your children fatherless.

Ezec. xxii. c Leui. xxv, f Deuteronomy. 23. d
If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by the, thou shall not
be as a tiraunte unto him, neither shalt thou oppress him with vsurye. Deuteronomy.
24. b
If thou take thy neighbors raiment to pledge, thou shalt deliver it unto him
again by that the son go down. For that is his covering only: even the
raiment for his skyn, wherein he slepeth. And when he cries unto me, I will
hear him, for I am merciful.

ii. Reg. (...)
Thou shalt not rail upon the gods Acts. (...)*
neither blaspheme the ruler of thy people.

Thy fruytes (whyther they be dry or moist) se thou keep not back. Exodi* ^*
Thy first borne son thou shalt give me: likewise also shalt thou do with
thine oxen and with thy sheep. Senen days it shall be with the damme, and the.
viii. day thou shall give it me. Ye shall be holy people unto me, neither shall
ye eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field. But shall cast it to
dogs.

Here is set no some / because all men should read the Chapter throughoute,
and the two that are next before also.

CAPI. XXIII.
THou shall not accept a vain tale, neither

Deuteronomy. ii
If thou mete thine enemies ox or ass going astraye, thou shalt bring them
to him again. Luke. ii
If thou se thine enemies ass synke under his burden, thou shalt not pass
by, and let him alone, but shalt help him to lift him up again.

Thou shalt not hinder the right of thy poor, in their suit.

Keep the free from a false matter, Sus^^^
and the Innocent and ryghteous se thou slay not, for I will not justify the
wicked. Eccle* ^^
Thou shalt take no gifts, for gifts blind the seeing, and peruerte the
words of the ryghteous.

Thou shalt not oppress a stranger, for ye know the heart of a stranger,
seeing ye

Leui. xx(...)
Six years thou shalt so we thy land, and gather in the fruytes thereof: and
the seventh year thou shalt let it rest and lie still, that the poor of thy
people may eat: and what they leave, the beasts of the field shall eat. In
like manner thou shalt do also with thy vineyarde and thine olyue trees.

Exodus* ^
Six days thou shalt do thy works, and in the seventh day thou shalt
rest, that thine ox and thine ass may rest, and the Son of thy maid and
the stranger may be refresshed. In all things that I have said unto you, be
circumspecte. And make no rehersall of the names of strange gods Ephe. ^
neither let it be herd out of thy mouth. Three feasts thou shall hold
unto me in a year. ^edi. xii. ^ ^ xiiii* c
Thou shalt keep the feast of sweet bread, that thou eat vnleuende bread
seven days long as I commanded the, in the time of the month when corn
begins to ripe, for in that month ye came out of Egypt, (...)di. 34 (...)*
26. d
and se that no man appear before me empty. And the feast of Heruest, when
thou reapest the first fruytes of thy labors, which thou have sown in the
field. And the feast of ingatherynge, which is in the end of the year / when
thou have gathered in thy

(...)it. 16 c
Three times in a year shall all thy men children appear before the Lord God.

(...)d. 34. d
Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice upon leuended bread / neither
shall the fat of my feast remain until the morning. Exodus 34. d ^^nt. 26. a
The first of the first fruytes of thy land thou shalt bring in to the house
of the Lord thy God, (...)t. 14. c Exodus 34. d
thou shalt also not sethe a kyd in his mothers milk.

Behold, I send an angel before the, to keep the in the way, and to bring
the in to the place which I have prepared. Beware of him, and hear his voice,
and resyst him not for he will not spare your misdeeds, and my name is in him.
But and if thou shalt harken unto his voice, and do all that I speak, I will
be an enemy unto thine enemies, and an adversary unto thine adversaries. For
mine Exodi. 13. a
angel shall go before the, and bring the in to the Amorites, and Hethites,
and Pherezites, and Cananites, Heuites, and Iebusites, and I shall destroy
them. Thou shalt not worship their (...). 25. a
gods, neither serve them, neither do after the works of them: but
overthrow them, and break down the images of them. And ye shall serve the
(...). 7. b
lord your god, and he shall bless thy bread, and thy water, and I will take
all syckenesse away from the mids of the.

There shall be no woman chyldelesse or Exodus 34. b Deute. 7. a
drive them out before the. Thou shall make none apoyntment with them, nor with
their gods. Neither let them dwell in thy land, lest they make the sin
against me: for if thou serve their gods, it will be thy decay.

Moses ascends up to the mount and writes the words of the lord: The
bloole of the couertaunt: The elders of Israel judge the people.

CAPI. XXIIII.
ANd he said unto Moses: Come up unto Exodus xix, a
all the words of the lord, and all the laws. And all the people answered
with one voice, and said: all the words which the Lord has said, will we
do. And Moses wrote all the words of the lord, and rose up early, and set up
an Exodi. xx. ^
altar under the hill, and twelve stones according to the. xii. tribes of
Israel, and sent young men of the children of Israel, which brought
burntoffrynges, and offered peace offrynges of oxen unto the lord. And Moses
took half of the blood and put it in basens, and the other half he sprencled
on the altar.

And he to^ke the book of the appointment i. Peter. i. ^
blood, and sprenkled it on the people, and said. Behold Hebre, ix. c.
this is the blood of the appointment, which the Lord has made with you upon
all these words.

Then went Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu and the. lxx. elders of Israel up
and saw the God of Israel, and there was under his feet, as it were a work
of a Saphir stone, and as it were the heaven when it is clear, and upon the
nobles of the children of Israel he set not his hand. And they saw God and
did eat and drink.

And the lord said unto Moses: Come up

Behold, here is Aaron and Hur with you If any man have any matters to do, let
him come to them. And Moses went up in to the mount, and a cloud covered the
hill, and the glory of the Lord abode upon mount Sinay, and the cloud
covered it. vi. days. And the seventh day he called unto Moses out of the
cloud. And the facyon of the glory of the Lord was like consumynge fire on
the top of the hill in the sight of the children of Israel. And Moses went in
to the cloud, and got him up in to the mountayn. And Moses was in the Exodus
34. d
mount. xl. days and.xl. nyghtes.

The Lord shows Moses the facyon of the holy place, and the things
perteynyng thereto.

CAPI. XXV.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: Exodi. 35. a
This is the heueoffrynge which ye shall take of them, gold and silver and
brass: yelowe sylke, purple, scarlet, white sylke, and gootes here: rams
skynnes that are red, and the skynnes of taxus, and sethim wood, oil for
light, spices for anoyntyng oil, and for sweet sense. Onix stones and stones
to be set in the Ephod and in the breast lap. And let them make me a sanctuary
(that I may dwell among them.) And according to all that I show the both
after the facyon of the habitacion, and after the facyon of all the ornaments
thereof, even so shall ye make it. And they shall make an Exodi. 37 a
arc of sethim wood. ii. cubits and an half long, a cubite and an half
broad, and a cubit and an half hye. And thou shall ouerlay it with pure gold,
within and without shalt thou ouerlay it, and

And thou shalt make a merciseate of pure gold. ii. cubits and an half
long, and a cubite and an half broad. And thou shalt make. ii. Cherubins of
gold. Even of a hole work shalt thou make them in the. ii. ends of the
mercyseate: and the one cherub shalt thou make on the end, and the other
Cherub on the other end. Even of the same mercyseate shall ye make Cherubyns
in the. ii. ends thereof. And the Cherubyns shall stretche their wings abroad
over an hye, covering the mercyseate with their wings, and their faces shall
look one to an other: even to the mercyseatewarde, shall the faces of the
Cherubyns be. And thou shalt put the Ro^^ Heb^^
mercyseate above upon the arc, and in the arc thou shalt put the witness
which I will give the. And from thence I will testify unto

Exodus* (...)
Thou shalt also make a table of sethim wood of two cubits long, and one
cubite broad and a cubite and an half hye. And thou shalt cover it with pure
gold, and make thereto a crown of gold round about. And make unto that an
hoope of four fyngers broad, round about. And make a golden crown also to
the hoope round about. And make for it. iiii. rings of gold, and put the
rings in the corners that are on the. iiii. fete thereof: even over against the
hoope shall the rings be, to put in bars, to bear the table withal. And thou
shalt make the bars of Sethim wood and ouerlay them with gold, that the
table may be borne with them. And thou shalt make his dysshes, and spones, flat
pieces, and pottes to power out withal: eue^ of fine gold shalt thou make
them. And thou shalt set upon the table, shewbreade before me always. Exodus*
(...)
And thou shall make a candelstycke of pure gold: even of a hole work shall
the candelstycke be made with his shafte, branches, bolles, knoppes and
flowers procedyng therout. Six branches also shall proceed out of* the sides
of it: three branches of the in three roumes.) Of the six that proceed out of
the candelstycke. And the knoppes and the branches shall be of it. And it shall
be one work, even of pure gold.

And thou shalt make the. vii. lamps of it: and of the. vii. lamps thereof,
shalt thou put an high thereon, to give light unto the othersyde that is over
against it. The tongues and snoffers thereof shall be of pure gold. Of an
hundred pound weight of fine gold shall thou make it with all the apparel.
(...). 8. ^ (...). vii. ^
Look therefore that thou make them after the facio^ that was showed the in the
mount.

This Chapter also descrybeth the things perteynyng in the holy place.

CAPI. XXVI.
THe tabernacle shall thou make with ten curtaynes of white twyned silk: yelow
sylke, purple, and scarlet. And in them thou shall make pictures of brodered
work. The length of one curtayne shall be eight and thentye cubytes, and the
breadth of one curtayne four cubytes, and every one of the curtaynes shall have
one measure: five curtaynes shall be coupled together one to another: and five
curtaynes shall be coupled together one to an other.

And thou shalt make lowpes of yelowe silk, a long by the edge of the one
curtayne which is in the seluege of the couplyng curtayne. And likewise shalt
thou make in the edge of the vtmoost curtayne that is to be Exodi. 36 ^
And thou shalt make. xi. curtaynes of gotes here, to be a coueryng upon the
tabernacle. And the lenght of a curtayne shall be xxx. cubits, and the breadth
four, and they shall be all. xi. of one measure.

And thou shall couple five curtaynes by

And thou shall make bordes for the habytacyon of Sethym wood to stand up
right: ten cubytes long shall every board be, and a cubyte, and an half
broad. Two fete shall there be in one board, and they shall be separate one from
another. And thus shall thou make for all the bordes of the tabernacle. Exodi.
36. ^
And thou shall make. xx. bordes for the habytacyon on the south side, and thou
shall make. xl. sockettes of silver, under the. xx. bordes two sockettes under
one boorde, for his two feet, and two sockettes under an other board for his
two feet. In like manner in the north side of the habytacyon there shall be. xx.
bordes, and. xl. sockettes of silver: two sockettes under one board

And thou shalt make bars of Sethym wood, five for the bordes of the
Tabernacle in one side, and five bars for the bordes of the Tabernacle in the
other side, and five bars for the bordes of the Tabernacle in the west end.
And the myddle bar shall go alonge through the mids of the bordes from the
one end unto the other. And thou shalt cover the bordes with gold, and make
their rings of gold, to put the bars through, and thou shall cover the
bars with gold also. And thou shall rear up the habitacyon according to the
facyon thereof / as it was showed the in the mount. And thou shalt make a
veil of yelowe sylke, of purple, scarlet, and white twyned silk. Of brodered
work, with pyctures shall thou make it. And hang it upon four pyllers of
Sethym wod covered with gold. Whose heads shall be in gold / standing upon
four sockettes of silver.

And thou shall hang up the veil with thou shalt put the table without the
veil: and the candelstycke over against the table on the south side of the
habitacyon. And put the table on the north side. And thou shalt make an
hanging for the door of the tabernacle, of yelowe sylke, Purple, Scarlet, and
white twyned sylke wrought with nedle work. And thou shall make for the hangyng
five pyllers of Sethym wood, and cover them with gold, and their knoppes shall
be of gold, and thou shall cast five sockettes of brass for them.

The form of the altar of the burntofferynge, with his horns, rings,
staves, gredyrons, and other ornaments.

CAPI. XXVII.
ANd thou shall make an Exodi. 38. ^ Ezeth* 43 d
altar of Sethym wood: five cubytes long, and five cubytes broad. For it
shall be. iiii. square and three cubytes hye. And thou shalt make it horns in
the four corners of it, the horns shall be of it self, and thou shalt cover
it with brass. And make his ashpannes, shouels / basyns, fleshhokes,
fyrepannes, and all the apparel thereof for the same, of brass. And thou shall
make unto it a gredyron also (like a net) of brass. And upon that net shalt
thou make four brazen rings in the four corners thereof: and thou shall put
it under the compass of the altar beneth, that the net may be in the mids
of the altar. And you shalt make (two) bars for the altar of Sethym wod,
and cover them with brass and let them be put in rings alonge by the sides of
the altar to bear it withal. And make the altar

And thou shall make the court of the habitacyon, that there may be in the
south side hangynges of white twyned sylke, of an hundred cubytes long, for
one side, and. xx. pyllers thereof: with their, xx. sockettes of brass: but the
knoppes of the pyllers and their hopes shall be silver. In likewise on the north
side there shall be hangynges of an hundred cubytes long, and. xx. pyllers
with their twentye sockettes of brass, and the knoppes and the hoopes of the
pyllers shall be silver. And the breadth of the court which is westward / shall
have courtaynes of fyftye cubytes, and ten pyllers, with their ten sockettes.

And the breadth of the court which is

The length of the court shall be an hundred cubytes, and the breadth. l. and
the heyght five. And the hangynges shall be of white twyned sylke, and their
sockettes of brass. All the vessels of the habytacyon in all manner service,
and all the pynnes thereof, yea, and all the pynnes also of the court, shall be
of brass. Leuiti. (...). ^
And thou shall command the children of Israel that they give the pure oil
olyue beaten for the light, to power always in to the lamps. In the tabernacle
of witness without the veil which is before the wytnes, shall Aaron, and his
sons dress it both euenyng, and morning before the lord, and it shall be a
statute for ever unto their generacyons of the children of Israel.

Aar^ns apparel, and his sons.

CAPI. XXVIII.
ANd take thou unto the Aaron thy brother,

They shall make the Ephod of gold, yelowe

And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and grave in them the names of the
children of Israel: six names of them in the one stone, and the other six in
the other stoone, according to ( the order of) their birth.

After the work of a stonegrauer / and of him that graueth signettes shall
thou grave the two stones with the names of the children of Israel, and shall
make them to be set in gold. And thou shall put the two stones upon the two
shoulders of the Ephod, that they may be stones of remembrance unto the
children of Israel, And Aaron shall bear their names before the Lord upon his
two shoulders for a remembrance.

And thou shall make hooks of gold, and

And thou shall make upon the brestlappe

And Aaron shall bear the names of the

And thou shalt make the tunycle unto the Ephod all together of yelow sylke.
And there shall be an hole for the head in the mids of it having a bond of
wouen work round about the coler of it (as it were the coler of a partlet)
that it rent not. And beneth upon the hem, thou shall make pomgarnates of yelow
sylke, and of Purpull and Scarlet, round Eccle. 45. b
And Aaron shall have it upon him when he minystreth, and the sound shall be
herd when he goes in to the holy place before the Lord, and when he comes
out / and he shall not dye.

And thou shalt make a plate of pure gold, and grave thereon (as sygnettes are
graven,) The holiness of the Lord, and put it on a yelowe sylke lace to be
upon the the mytre: even upon the forefront of it. And it shall be upon Aarons
foreheade: that Aaron may bear the sin of the hoolye things which the
Children of Israel halowe in all their holy gifts.

And it shall be always upon his forehead, Exodi. 27 d
Tabernacle of witness / or when they come unto the altar to minystre in
holiness / that they bear no sin, and so dye. And it shall be a law
forever unto Aaron, and his seed after him.

The consecracyon of Aaron, and his sons.

CAPI. XXIX.
THis thing also shalt thou do unto ^^ai. viii. b
halowest them to be my priests. Thou shalt take a calfe, even a young ox,
and two rams that are without blemish, and vnleuended bread, and cakes of
sweet bread tempred with oil, and wafers of sweet bread anointed with oil
(of wheten flower shall thou make them) and put them in a maunde / and bring
them in the maunde with the calfe and the two rams. And bring Aaron, and his
sons unto the door of the Tabernacle of witness, and wash them with water,
and take the garments, and put upon Aaron: the strayte cote, the tunicle of
the Ephod, and the Ephod / and the brestlap, and gyrde them to him with the
brodered gyrdle which is in the Ephod. And put the mytre upon his head, and
put the holy crown upon the mytre. Then shalt thou take the anoyntyng oil,
and power it upon his head and anoynte him.

And bring his Sons, and put albes Leuiti. i b
And Aaron, and his Sons shall put their hands upon the head of the calfe,
and thou shall kyl him before the lord by the door of the Tabernacle of
witness. And take of the blood of the calfe, and put it upon the horns of
the altar with thy finger, and power all the blood beside the hotome of the
altar, and take all the fat that covers the inwardes, and the kal that is
on the liver, and the two kydneys and the fat that is upon them: and burn
them upon the altar.

But the flesh of the calfe / and his skyn, Leui. viii. d
And take the other ram / and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon
his head. Then shalt thou kyl him, and take of his blood and put it upon the
typ of the right ear of Aaron and of his sons, and upon the thombe of their
right hands / and upon the great too of their right foot, and sprynkle the
blood upon the altar round about. And thou shall take of the Leui. viii. ^
And thou shalt take the fat of the ram, and his rompe, and the fat that
covers the inwardes, and the kal of the liver, and the two kydneys, and the
fat that is upon them, and the right shoulder (for that ram is a
fullofferynge) and a symnel of bread, and a cake of oyled bread, and a wafer
out of the basket of sweet bread that is before the Lord, and put al upon the
hands of Aaron, and on the hands of his sons: and wave the^ for a
waueoffryng before the lord. And again thou shalt take it from of their
hands and burn it upon the altar for a burntofferynge, to be a savor of
swetnesse before the Lord. For it is a sacrifyce unto the lord.

Leui. viii* ^
And thou shall take the breast of the ram of Aarons consecracyon, and wave it
for a waueofferyng before the Lord, and it shall be thy part. And thou shall
sanctifye the breest of the waueofferyng, and the shoulder of the heaueofferyng
which is waued an heued up of the ram of the consecracyon for Aaron, and for
his sons. And it shall be Aarons, and his sons by a statute forever, of the
Children of Israel / for it is an heueofferyng: Even an heueofferynge of the
children of Israel: and of their peaceofferynges. Their have offerynges is the
Lords. And the holy garments of Aaron shall be his sons after him, to be
anointed therein, and to fill their hands therein. And that son that is priest
in his stead after him, shall put them on seven days: when he comes into the
tabernacle of witness to minyster in the holy place. Leui. v 18^
And thou shalt take the ram of the co^secracion, and sethe his flesh in an
holy place.

And Aaron, and his sons shall eat the flesh burn it with fire / and it
shall not be eaten / because it is holy. Therefore shalt thou do unto Aaron,
and his sons, even so according to althynges which I have commanded the,
seven days shall thou fyl their hands, and offer every day a calfe for a syn
offering, for to reconcyle withal: that thou may cleanse the altar when
thou reco^cilest upon it / and thou shall anoint it / to sanctifye it. Seven
days thou shall reco^cyle upon the altar, and sanctyfye it, and it shall be
as an altar most holy: Every one that touches the altar, let him be holy.

Nume. 28 a
This is that which thou shalt offer upon the altar, even two lambs of one
Leuiti. i. a. Number. xii. a.
I will mete you, to speak there, unto the. There I will mete with the children
of Israel, and wylbe sanctified in mine honor. And I will sanctyfye the taber
nacle of witness, and the altar, and I will sanctifye also both Aaron, and
his sons to be my priests. And I will Leuit. 26. b ^Corin. 6 d
dwell among the children of Israel, and will be their god. And they shall
know / that I am the Lord their God / that brought them out of the land of
Egypt, for to dwell among them, even I the Lord their God.

The altar of Insence. The brazen lauer. The anoyntynge Oil.

CAPI. XXX.
ANd thou shall make an altar to burn

And Aaron shall burn thereon sweet sense, Leuiti. x. ^
strange sense there on / burntsacrifyce or meatofferyng, neither power any
drynkofferyng thereon. And Aaron shall reconcyle upon the horns of it once in a
year: with the blood of the synofferynge of reconcilynge, even once in the
year shall he reconcyle it through your generacyons. It is most holy unto the
Lord.

And the lord spoke unto Moses saying: Nume. i. a. and xxvi. a.
If thou take the sum of the Children of Israel after their nombre / they
shall give every man a reconcylynge of his soul unto the Lord when thou
tellest them: that there be no plage among them, when thou tellest them. And
thus much shall every man give, and that goes into the nombre: half a sycle,
after the sycle Leui. 27. ^. Nume* 3 ^. Ezech. 45^
of the sanctuary: a sycle is. xx. halfpense. An half sycle shall be the
heueofferynge of the Lord. All that are no^bred from twentye year old, and
above, shall give an heueofferyng unto the lord. The rich shall not pass, and
the poor shall not goo under half a sycle: But ye shall give an heueofferynge
unto the Lord, that he may have mercy upon your souls. And thou shalt take
the reconcilyng money of the children of Israel, and shall put it unto the use
of the Tabernacle of witness / that it may be a memorial unto the Children of
Israel before the lord, that he may have mercy upon your souls

And the lord spoke unto Moses saying: Exodi. xi. ^
thou shalt make a lauer of brass, and his foot also of brass, to wassh
withal, and shall put it between the tabernacle of wytnes, and the altar, and
put water therein: For Aaron, and his sons shall wash their hands, and their
feet therein: even when they go into the tabernacle of witness, they shall
wash them with water least they dye, or when they goo unto the altar to
minyster, and to burn the lords offering, they shall wash their hands, and
their feet, and they shall not dye. And it shall be an ordinance unto them
forever both unto him, and his seed thorowout their generacions. And the Lord
spoke unto Moses saying: Take unto the, pryncipal spices, of the most pure
myrte five hundred sycles: of sweet Cynamon half so much, even two hundred /
and fiftye sycles: of sweet calamus, two hundred, and. l. Of Cassia: two
hundred and. l. after the holy sycle / and of oil olyue an hin. Leui. viii. b
And thou shall make of the oil an holy ointment / even an ointment co^pou^de
after the craft of the apoticarye / and it shall be the oil of holy unction.
And thou shalt anoynte the tabernacle of wytnes therewith, and the arc of
witness, and the table, and al his apparel: and the candelstycke, and his
apparel: and the altar of insens, and the altar of burntsacrifyce, with all
his vessels, and the lauer, and his foot. And thou shalt sanctifye them that
they may be most holy: so that no man touch them, but they that be hallowed.
And thou shall anoynte Aaron, and his sons / and consecrate them, that they
may minyster unto me.

And thou shalt speak unto the children

The calling of Bezaleel and Ahaliab the workmen. The Sabbath commanded. The
tables of stone ginen Moses.

CAPI. XXXI.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses saying: Exodi. 35. d
I have called by name, Bezaleel the son of Ury; the son of Hur of the
trybe of Judah. And I have filled him with the spirit of God, in 3. Reg. 7. b
wisdom, and understanding / in knowledge / and in all manner work / to find
out subtle feats, and to work in gold, silver, and brass, and in the
craft to set stoones, and to carue in tymbre, and to work in all manner
workmanshyp. And behold, I have given him to be his companion Ahaliab the son
of Ahisamach of the trybe of Dan, and in the hertes of all that are wise herted
/ I have put wisdom, to make all that I have commanded the: the tabernacle

And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: Exodi. iii.
Sabboths / for it is a sign between me, and you in your generacyons for to
know, that I the Lord am he that does sanctifye you. Nume. iii
Keep my Sabbath therefore, for it is holy unto you. He that defyleth it,
shall be stayne.

For whosoever works therein, the same soul shall be roted out from among his
people, Six days shall men work. And in the seventh day is the Sabbath of
the hoolye rest of the Lord.

Whosoever does any work in the Sabbath Gene. (...)
For in syx days the lord made heaven, and earth, and in the seventh day he
rested / and was refreshed. And when the Lord had made an end of the
co^monyng with Moses upon the mount Sinay, Exodi. iii.
he gave him two tables of wytnes: even tables of stone, written with the
finger of God.

The golden calfe. Moses prays, he breaks the tables for anger. He chydeth
Aaron. The ydolaters slain.

CAPI. XXXII.
ANd when the people saw / that it was Acts. vii.
Up, make us Gods, to go before us: for of this Moses (the fellow that
brought us out of the land of Egypt) we wot not what is become. And Aaron
said unto him: Iudi. vii.
pluck of the golden earinges / which are in the ears of your wives / your
Sons, and of your daughters: and bring them unto me.

And all the people plucked of the golden earynges which they had in their
ears, and brought them unto Aaron.

And he Psalm. 106. c
received them of their hands, and facyoned it with a grauer, and made of it a
calfe of molton metal. And they said:

3. Reg. xii. ^
These be thy Gods, o Israel / which brought the out of the land of Egypt.

And when Aaron saw that, he made an ^Corin. x. b
And the people sat them down to eat and drink, and rose up again to play.

And the Lord said unto Moses: Deuit. ix. b
go get the down. Thy people which thou broughtest out of the land of
Egypt, have marred all, they are turned atonce out of the way, which I
commanded them: Psalm. cvi. c.
for they have made them a calfe of molten metal, and have worshipped it, and
have offered thereto / saying: These be thy gods, o Israel, which has brought
the out of the land of Egypt.

And the Lord said unto Moses: Exodus 33. a.
I have seen this people, and behold: it is a styffe Nume. 14 c
wherefore should the Egyptians speak, and say: For a myschefe did he bring
them out: even for to flee them in the mountains, and to co^ sum them from
the face of the earth. Turn from thy fearse wrath, and turn from this evil
(devised) against thy people.

Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, Gene. xv. b and xii. ^
I will mul tiplye your seed as the sterres of heaven, and all this land that I
have spoken of / will I give unto your seed, and they shall enheryte it for
ever. And the lord refrayned him self from that evil, which he said he
would do unto his people. And Moses turned his back / and went down from the
hill / and the Exodi. 31. d
two tables of witness were in his hand / and the same tables were written on
both the leaves, and those tables were the work of God, and the writing was
the writing of god / graven in the tables. And when Joshua herd the noyce of
the people as they showted, he said unto Moses: there is a noise of war in the
host, And he answered: it is not the cry of them that have the maystrye, nor
of them that have the worse, but I do hear the noise of them that sing. And
it fortuned, as soon Deute. ix. d
And he took the calfe which they had made, and burned it in the fire, and
stamped it unto powder, and strawed it in the water / and made the Children of
Israel drink of it. And Moses said unto Aaron: what did this people unto the /
that thou have brought so great a syn upon them? And Aaron answered: let not
the wrath of my Lord wax fearse, thou know the people that they are even
set on myschefe. For they said unto me: make us Gods to go before us, for we
wot not what is become of Moses the fellow that brought us out of the land of
Egypt. And I said unto them: Let them that have gold pluck it of / and
bring it me, and I cast it in to the fire, and thereof came out this calfe.

Moses therefore saw that the people were

And on the morrow it fortuned that Moses

Moses therefore went again unto the Lord, and said: Oh this people have
sinned a great sin, and have made them Gods of gold. And now (I pray the)
either forgive them their Sin: or if thou will not / Psalm. 69 f
wype me out of thy book which thou have written. And the Lord said unto
Moses: I will put him out of my book that has sinned against me. And now go
thou, bring the people unto the place which I said un to the: behold, Exodi.
1^. ^
mine angel shall go before the. Neuerthelatter in the day when I visyte, I
will vysyte their syn upon them. And the Lord plaged the people, because they
made the calfe which Aaron made.

The Lord sends an Angel before his people. The Lord deuyeth to go up with
the people.* The people lament their syn. Moses talks with the lord.

CAPI. XXXIII.
ANd the Lord said unto Moses: depart, Gene. xxii* d
unto thy seed will I give it. Exodi. 23. c
(And I will send an angel before the, and will cast out the Cananytes, the
Amorytes, and the Hethites, the Pherezites, the Heuites, and the Iebusytes) a
land that flows with milk, and honey. For I will not go among you my self,
for Exodus 32. c
ye are a styfnecked people: leest I consume the in the way. And when the
people herd this evil tidings, they sorowed: and no man did put on his best
raiment. And the Lord spoke unto Moses, say unto the Children of Israel: ye
are a styfnecked people: I must come once suddenly upon you / and make an end
of you. Therefore now put thy goodlye raiment from the, that I may wete what to
do unto the. And the Children of Israel laid their goodly raiment from them
even by the mount Horeb.

And Moses took the Tabernacle, and Nume. xii. c
face to face / as a man speaks unto his friend / and he turned again in to
the host. And the child Joshua his servant the Son of Nun departed not out
of the Tabernacle.

And Moses said unto the Lord: se, thou say unto me: lead this people
forth, and thou have not showed me, whom thou will send with me. And thou
haste said moreover: I know the name, and thou have also found grace in my
sight: Now therefore, if I have found favor in thy sight, then show me thy
way that I may know the, and that I may find grace in thy sight. And
consider also, that this nacyon is thy people.

And he said: my presence shall go with the, and I will give the rest. He
said unto him: If thy presence go not with me / carye us not hense: for how
shall it be known here that I and thy people have found favor in thy sight,
but in that thou go with us? If thou go with us, shall not I and thy people
have a preemynence before all the people that are upon the face of the earth?
And the Lord said unto Moses: I will do this also that thou have said, for
thou have found grace in my sight, and I know the by name.

And he said: I beseech the / show me thy glory: And he said, I will make
all my good go before the, and I will be called in this name of the Lord
before the Roma. i^^
and will show mercy to whom I will show mercy and will have compassyon on
whom I will have compassyon. And he said furthermore: thou may not se my face
/ for Deute. (...) Iudi. (...) and xiii ^ Ioh. i. c
there shall no man se me / and live. And the Lord said: behold, there is a
place by me, and thou shalt stand upon a rock: and while my glory goes
forth, I will put the in a clyfte of the rock, and will put mine hand upon
the, while I pass by. And I will take away mine hand, and thou shall se my
back parts: but my face shall not be seen.

The Tables renewed. The mercy of God. Fellowship with the gentyls forbidden, and
their ydolatrye also. Of their feasts.

CAPI. XXIIII.
ANd the Lord said unto Moses Deuteronomy. ^^
hew

And Moses hewed two tables of stoone like unto the first, and rose up early
in the morning, and went up unto the mount of Sinay / as the Lord had
commanded him: and took in his hand the two tables of stone. And the Lord
descended in the cloud, and stood with him there: and he called upon the
name of the Lord. And when the Lord walked before him, he cried, Lord Psalm.
86. c. Iere. 32. d
Lord god, mercyful and gracyous, long sufferyng and aboundaunt in mercy and
truth, and keeping mercy in store for thousands, forgyuynge wickedness,
ungodliness, and sin (and not leaving one innocent, vysytynge the
wickedness of the fathers upon the children, and upon chyldrens children, even
unto the third and fourth generacyon

And Moses bowed him self to the earth quyckely, and worshypped, and said:
If I have found grace in thy sight (o lord) then let my lord go with us (for
it is a stubburne people) and thou shalt have mercy upon our wickedness and
our sin, and shalt take us for thine enheritaunce.

He said: behold, I make an appointment Deute. 7. a 3. Reg. xi. a.
Take heed to thy self, that thou make no compacte with the inhabiters of the
land whyther you go, leest it be cause of tuyne among you. But overthrow
their aulters, and break their images, and cut down their groves. Thou shalt
worship no strange God. For the Lord is Exodi. xx. a
called jealous, because he is a jealous God, leest if thou make any agreement
with the inhabyters of the land, and they go a hooryng after their Gods, and
do sacrifyce unto their Gods, they call the, and thou eat of their sacrifice
/ and thou take of their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters go a
hoorynge after their gods, and make thy sons go a hoorynge after their gods
also.

Thou shalt make the no Gods of metal. Exodi. xii b and, xxiii. b
feast of sweet bread shalt thou keep. Seven days thou shalt eat vnleuen
ded bread, as I commanded the in the time of the month, when corn begins
to ripe For in the month when corn begins to type, thou came out of
Egypt. Exodi. 13. a and. xxii. b Nume. 18. c
All that opens the matryce is mine: and all that open neth the matryce among
the cattle, if it be male, whyther it be ox or sheep. But the first of the
ass thou shalt bye out with a lamb.

And if thou redeem him not, thou shalt break his neck. All the first borne
of thy sons shalt thou redeem. Eccle. 35. a. ^rate. 16 d
And se that no man appear before me emptye. Exodi. xi
Syx days thou shalt work, and in the seventh day thou shall rest: both
from earynge and reapyng.

Exodi. 23. ^
Thou shall observe the feast of wekes with the first fruytes of wheat
harvest, and the feast of ingatherynge at the years end. Thryse in a year
shall all your men children appear before the lord Iehoua God of Israel:
When I cast out the nacyons before the, and enlarge thy coostes, so that no
man shall desire thy land: thou shalt goo up to appear before the Lord thy
God / thryse in the year.

Erodi. 23. c Deute. 14. c
Thou shalt not offer the blood of my Exodi. 23. c.
The first ripe fruytes of thy land, thou shalt bring unto the house of the
Lord thy God. And thou shall not Exodi. 23. ^
sethe a kyd in his mothers milk.

And the Lord said unto Moses: write these words, for after the tenoure of
these words I have made a covenant with the, and with Israel. Exodus 24. d
And he was there with the Lord fourtye days and fourtye nyghtes, and did
neither eat bread nor drink water. De^te. x. ^
And he wrote upon the tables the words of the covenant: even ten verses.

And it fortuned when Moses came down from mount Sinay, the two tables of
witness were in Moses hand, when he came down from the mount. And Moses
wyste not that the skin of his face shone in manner of an horn, while he
talked with him. And Aaron and all the children of Israel looked upon Moses, and
behold, the skin of his face shone, and they were afraid to come nigh him.
And when he had called them, Aaron and all the cheyfe that were in the
company, came unto him, and Moses talked with them. And afterward all the
children of Israel came nigh, and he commanded them all that the Lord had
said unto him in mount Sinay. And when Moses had made an end of co^monyng
with them, ii. Corin. 3 b
he put a covering upon his face. And again when Moses went in before the
lord to speak with him ii. Corin. 3 c
he took the covering of, until he came out. And he came out, and spoke unto
the children of Israel, that which was commanded. And the children of Israel
saw the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses face shone. And Moses put the
covering upon his face again until he went in, to common with him.

The sabbath. The first fruytes required. The redynesse of the people to offer.
Bezalcel and Ahaliab praised of Moses, and set to work.

CAPI. XXXV.
ANd Moses gathered all the company Exodi. xx. b
Six days ye shall work but in the seventh day shall be unto you the holy
Sabbath of the Lords rest. Who soever does any work therein, shall dye. Ye shall
kyndle no fire thorowout oll your habitacyons upon the Sabbath day.

And Moses spoke unto all the multitude of the children of Israel, saying.
Exodi. 25. ^
This is the thing which the Lord commanded, saying. Take from among you an
heueofferyng unto the Lord. Who soever is of the wyllyng heart, let him bring
it for the heueofferyng of the Lord. Namely gold, silver and brass, and
yelowe sylke, purple, scarlet, white sylke, gootes here, and rains skynnes
red, and taxus skynnes with Sethim wood: oil for light and spyces for the
anoyntynge oil, and for the sweet sense. And Onix stones and stones to be set
in the Ephod and in the brestlap

And let all them that are wise herted among

And all the company of the children of

And Moses said unto the children of Israel: behold, Exodi. 32* ^
the lord has called by name Bezaleel the son of Ury the son of Hur of the
trybe of Judah, and has filled him with the spirit of god, in wisdom and
understanding, in knowledge, and in all manner work, to find out curyous
works which are made in gold silver and brass. In the craft of stones to set
them: and in caruyng of wood, to make any manner of subtle work. And he has
put in his heart that he may teach, both he and Ahaliab the son of Ahisamach
of the trybe of Dan. Them has he filled with wisdom of heart, to work all
manner of graven, and subtyl and nedle work: in yelowe sylke, and purple, in
scarlet, and white sylke, and in weuyng. And to do all manner of work and
subtle feats.

The things that Bezaleel and Ahaliab made.

CAPI. XXXVI.
ANd Exodus i. ^^
Bezaleel wrought, and Ahaliab and all wise herted men, to whom the

And beside that, they brought gifts unto it every day in the morning. And
all the wise men that wrought all the holy work, came every man from his work
which they made, and spoke unto Moses, saying. The people bring to much, and
more then enough for the service and work which the Lord has commanded to
be made. And then Moses gave a commandment, and they caused it to be
proclaimed thorowout the host, saying:

Se that neither man nor woman prepare any more work for the present of the
sanctuary: and so the people were forbidden to bring: for the stuff they had,
was suffycyent for all the work, to make it, and to much.

Exodi. 26. a
All the wise hearted men therefore, and they that wrought for the habitacyon,
made x. curteynes of white twyned sylke, yelowe sylke, purple and scarlet: with
pyctures of brodered work made he them. The length of one curteyne was.
xxviii* cubytes, and the breadth. iiii. and the curteynes were all of one syse.
And he coupled five curteynes by themselves, and other five by themselves. And
he made lowpes of yelow sylke along by the edge of one curteyne, even in the
seluege of the couplyng curteyu. And likewise he made on the side of the
couplynge curteyne on the other side. Fyftye lowpes made he in the one
curteyne, and fyftye in the edge of the couplynge curteyne on the other side:
and the lowpes held one curteyne to an other. And he made fyftie rings of
gold, and coupled the curteynes one to an other with the rings: and so was it
made one dwelling place.

Exodi. 31. a
And he made eleven curteynes of gootes here to be a tente over the
tabernacle. The length of a curteyne had thyrty cubytes, and was four cubytes
broad, and they all eleven of one syse. And he coupled five curteynes by
themselves, and syx by themselves: and he made l. loupes alonge by the bordre
of the utmost couplynge curteyne, and fyftie in the edge of the other couplynge
curteyne. ( That they might be joined together.) And he made. l. rings of
brass to couple the tent together / that it might be one. And he made a
covering upon the tent, of rams skynnes red / and yet another of taxus
skynnes above that

(...). 26. ^
And he made standing bordes (for the

And thus made he for all the bordes of the Tabernacle. And he made twenty
bordes for the south side of the habitacyon, and fortye sockettes of silver
under the. xx. bordes* two sockettes under one board, for his two feet: and
two sockettes under an other boorde for his two feet: ( where the sockettes
of the sides end, in the corner.) And for the other side of the dwelling
which is toward the north, he made twentye boordes, and their fourtye
sockettes of silver, two sockettes under one boorde, and two sockettes under
the other. And toward the west end of the tabernacle. ( That is to say, at
the end of the Tabernacle which enclyneth tovvarde the sea) He made. vi.
boordes, and two other boordes made he in the corners of the habitacyon for
either side, and they were joined close benethe and above with a clampe, and
thus they did to both the corners. And there were. viii. bordes and. xvi.
sockettes of silver, under every boorde two sockettes.

And he made bars of Sethim wood. v. Tovvarde the sea.) And he made the
myddest bar to shote through the boordes: even from the one end to the
other, and ouerlayd the bordes with gold, and made their rings of Gold to
thruste the bars through, and covered the bar with gold. And he made an
hangyng of yelowe sylke, purple / scarlet / and white twyned sylke, even with
pyctures made he it of brod^red work. And made there unto four pyllers of
Sithem wood, and ouerlayde them with gold. Their knoppes were also of gold,
and he cast for them four sockettes of silver. And he made an hanging for a
tabernacle door, of yelow sylke, purple, scarlet and white twyned sylke of
nedle work. And the five pyllers of it with their knops, and ouerlayde the
knoppes of them, and the hoopes with gold. Their five sockettes also were of
brass.

The arc of witness. The mercyseate. The table The candelstycke. The lyghtes.
The altar, and the Incence*

CAPI. XXXVII.
ANd Bezaleel made the Exodi. 25. a
arc of Sethim by the side of the arc, to bear it withal.

And he made the mercyseate. ( That is to say. Gods ansvveryng place.) of pure
gold: two cubytes and an half was the length thereof, and one cubite and an
half the breadth: and he made two Cherubyns of thycke Gold upon the two ends
of the mercyseate. One Cherub on the one end, and an other Cherub on the
Exodi. 25. c
And he made the table of Sethym wood / two cubytes was the length thereof and
a cubyte the breadth, and a cubyte and an half the heyght of it. And he
ouerlayde it with fine gold, and made thereto a crown of gold round about,
and made thereto an hoope of an hand bread, round about, and made upon the
hoope a crown of gold round about, and cast for it four rings of gold,
and put the rings in the four corners that were in the. iiii. fere thereof:
Even hard by the hoope were the rings,

Exodi. 25. d
And he made the candelstycke of pure gold: even of one piece made he the
candelstycke: For his foot, his shafte, his cups, his knops and his flowers
were of one piece. Six branches procedyng out of the sides thereof, three out of
the one side, and three out of the other. And in one branch. iii. cups made
like unto almondes with knoppes / and flowers: and in an other branch. iii.
cups made like almondes with knoppes and flowers.

And so thorowout the six branches that proceeded out of the candelstycke. And
upon the candelstycke self four cups after the facyon of almondes with
knoppes and flowers: under every two branches a knop.

And the knoppes and the branches proceeded out of it, and it was all one piece
of pure thycke gold. And he made his seven lamps with the tongues and snoffers
thereof, of pure gold: Even an hundred weight of pure gold: made he it with all
the vessels thereof.

And he made the sense altar of Sethim

The altar of burntofferynges. The brazen lauer. The sum of that the people
offered.

CAPI. XXXVIII.
ANd he made the burntoffryng Exodi. (...) ^
altar

And he made the lauer of brass, and the

But the knoppes of the pyllers, and their hoopes were of silver. And on the
north side the hangynges were an hundred cubytes.

Their pyllers were twentye, and their sockettes of brass twentye. But the
knoppes and the hoopes of the pyllers were of silver.

On the west side, were hangynges of fyftye cubytes ten pyllers and their ten
sockettes ( of brass.) But the knoppes and the hoopes of the pyllers were of
silver. And toward the East side, were hangynges of fyftye cubytes: the
hanginges of the one side of the gate were fyftene cubytes long, with three
pyllers and three sockettes. And on the other side of the court gate, were
hangynges also of. xv. cubytes long, with. iii. pyllers and. iii. sockettes.
All the hangynges of the court round about

This is the sum of the habitacyon of witness, as it was counted according
to the commandment of Moses, for the office of the Leuytes by the hand of
Ithamar son to Aaron the priest. And Bezaleel the son of Uri the son of Hur
of the tribe of Judah, made all that the lord commanded Moses, and with him was
Ahaliab son of Ahisamach of the tribe of Dan, a connyng grauer, and a worker
of nedleworke in yelowe sylke, purple, scarlet, and white twyned sylke. All the
gold that was occupied for all the work of the holy place, was with silver.)
And the brass of the waueoffrynge was lxx. hundred weight / and two thousand,
and four hundred sycles.

And therewith he made the sockettes to the door of the tabernacle of wytnes,
and the brazen altar, and the brazen gredyren, for it, with all the vessels of
the altar, and the sokettes of the court round about, and the sokets for the
court gate, and all the pynnes of the habitacyo^, and all the pynnes of the
court round about.

The apparel of Aaron, and his sons. All that the Lord commanded was
offered.

CAPI. XXXIX.
ANd of the yelowe sylke, purple and scarlet they made the vestimentes of
ministracyon to do service in the holy place, and made the holy garments for
Aaron, as the Lord commanded Moses. And he made the Ephod of gold, yelowe
sylke, purple, scarlet and white twined sylke. And they did beat the gold in
to thyn plates, and cut it in to wyers, to work it in the yelowe sylke,
purple, scarlet and in the fine white, with brodered work.

And they made two sides for it to cloose them up by the. ii. edges. And the
broderyng of the gyrdell that was upon it, was of the same stuff, and after
the same work, of gold, yelowe sylke, purple, scarlet, and twyned white
sylke, as the Lord commanded Moses.

And they wrought Onix stones closed in ^r an Emeroude.
Smaragdus: the second row, a ^r a Carbuncle.
Rubye, a Saphyr and a Diamonde: in the. iii. ^owe, Ligurios,

And they made upon the brestlap, two fastenynge cheynes of wrethen work and
pure gold. And they made two hooks of gold, and two gold rings, and put
the two rings in the two corners of the brestlap And they put the two cheynes
of gold in the two rings, in the corners of the brestlap.

And the two ends of the two cheynes they fastened in the two hooks, and put
them on the shoulders of the Ephod upon the fore front of it.

And they made two rings of gold, and

And they made two gold rings, and put them on the two sides of the Ephod,
benethe on the fore side of it: and over against his fellow, above upon the
brodryng of the Ephod and they strayned the brestlap by his rings unto the
rings of the Ephod, with a lace of yelowe sylke: that it might be upon the
brodryng of the Ephod, and that the brestlap should not be loosed from the
Ephod: as the Lord commanded Moses.

And he made the tunycle unto the Ephod

Thus was all the work of the habitacyon and of the tabernacle of witness
fynysshed. And the children of Israel did according to all that the Lord had
commanded Moses. Even so did they. And they brought the habitacyon unto Moses:
the tente and all his apparel, buttons, bordes, bars, pyllers, and
sockettes: the coueryng of rams skynnes read, and the coueryng of taxus
skins, and the hangyng veil, the arc of witness and the bars thereof, and
the mercyseate: the table and all the vessels thereof, and the shewbread: the
pure candelstycke / with the lamps thereof: even with the Lamppes to be
prepared /

The Tabernacle teared up. The glory of the lord appears in a cloud
covering the Tabernacle.

CAPI. XL.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses saying.

Exodi. ^
And thou shalt take the anoyntyng oil and anoynte the habitacyon, and all
that is

And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons unto the door of the Tabernacle of
witness, and wasshe them with water. And thou shalt put upon Aaron the holy
vestimentes and anoynte him, and sanctify him, that he may ministre unto me.
And thou shalt bring his sons, and clothe them with garments, and anoynte
them as thoyu dydest anoynte their father, that they may ministre unto me. For
their anointing shall be an everlasting priest hode unto them thorowout their
generacio^s Num^
And Moses did according to all that the Lord commanded him: even so did he.

Thus was the Tabernacle reared up the bordes thereof, and put in the bars of
it and reared up his pyllers, and spread abroad the tent over the habitacion,
and put the coueryng of the tent on hye above it: as the lord commanded
Moses. And he took the testimony, and put it in the arc, and set the bars to
the arc, and put the mercyseate on hye upon the arc, and brought the arc
into the habitacyon, and hanged up the veil, and covered the arc of witness,
as the Lord commanded Moses. And he put the table in the Tabernacle

^o^i 30. ^
And he set the lauer between the tabernacle of witness and the altar, and
powered water therein, to wasshe withal. And Moses, Aaron ^^^^. ix. ^
And the cloud covered the tabernacle of wytnes, and the glory of the lord
filled the habitacion. And Moses could not enter into the Tabernacle of
witness, because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the lord filled
the habitacyon. ( For the cloud had covered all.) And when the cloud was
taken up from of the habitacyon, the children of Israel took their iourneys
thorowout their armies. And when the cloud was not taken up, they iourneyed
not till it was taken up: for the cloud of the lord was upon the habitacion by
day, and fire by night, in the sight of all the house of Israel thorowout all
their armies.

The end of the second book of Moses, called in the Hebrew. Uelle schemoth
and in the Latin. Exodus.
The third book of Moses / called in the Hebrew vaicrah: and in the Latin,
Leuiticus.
The order of burntofferynge^.

CAPI. Primo.
ANd the Lord called Moses, Exodi. 29.
Speak unto the children of Israel, and thou shalt say unto them. If a man of
you bring a sacrifice unto the Lord, ye shall bring your sacrifice from among
these cattle, even from among the oxen and the sheep. If his sacrifice be a
burntofferynge, let him offer a male of the oxen without blemysshe, and bring
him (of his own voluntary will) unto the door of the tabernacle of witness
before the Lord. And he shall put his hand upon the head of the
burntsacrifice, and it shall be

And the sons of Aaron the priest shall put fire upon the altar, and put wood
upon the fire. And the Priests Aarons sons shall lay the parts (even the
head and the fat) upon the wood that is upon the fire in the altar. But the
inwardes and the legs thereof shall he wasshe in water, and the priest shall
burn all in the altar, that they may be ^ burntsacrifice for a sweet odoure
unto the Lord.

And if his sacrifice be of the flocks (namely

But he shall wasshe the inwardes and the legs with water, and the priest
shall bring all together, and burn it upon the altar for a burntofferyng of a
sweet sauoure unto the Lord. If the burntofferyng for the sacrifice

And the priest shall bring it unto the altar* and wring the neck a sundre of
it, and burn it on the altar. But the blood thereof shall run out by the side
of the altar. And he shall pluck away the crop with his feathers, and fast
them beside the altar on the East part, in the place of ashes. And he shall
break the wings of it, but pluck them not asundre.

And the priest shall burn it upon the altar, even upon the wood that is upon
the fire, that it may be a burntsacrifice for a sweet favor unto the Lord.

The order of meat offerynges.

CAPI II.
THe soul that will offer a meatoffcynge

And he shall take therout his handful of the flower, and of the oil with all
the frankensence, and the priest shall burn it for a memorial of him upon the
altar: to be an offryng for a sweet savor unto the lord. And the remenaunt
of the meatoffryng shall be Aarons and his sons, a thing most holy of the
sacrifices of the Lord.

If thou bring also a meatoffryng that is

And that which is left of the meatofferyng

All the meatofferynges which ye shall bring unto the Lord, shall be made
without leven. For ye shall neither burn leven nor honey in any offering of the
Lord. Notwithstanding ye shall bring the fyrstlynges of them unto the Lord:
but they shall not come upon the altar for a sweet sauoure.

Math. v. b. Mar. ixi. g. Collo. iiii. ^
All the meatofferynges shalt thou season with salt, neither shalt thou
suffer the salt of the covenant of thy god to be lacking from thy
meatofferynge, but upon all thine offerynges thou shalt bring salt. And if

And it shall be a sacrifice unto the Lord.

The order of peaceofferynges.

CAPI. III.
ANd if his sacrifice be a peaceofferyng, and he take it from among the droues
(...)
fat that covers the inwardes, and all the fat that is about the inwardes:
and the two kydneys, and the fat that is on them and upon the loins, and the
abundaunce that is on the liver shall he take away with the kydneys. And

If he bring a peaceofferynge unto the Lord from of the flock, let him offer
male or female: but without blemysshe. As if he offer a sheep for his
sacrifice, he shall bring it before the Lord, and put his haude upon his
offerynges head, and kill it before the door of the tabernacle of witness,
and Aarons sons shall sprynkle the blood thereof round about the altar.

And of the peaceofferyng, let him bring

If his offering be a goote, he shall bring it before the Lord, and put his
hand upon the head of it, and kill it before the tabernacle of the covenant,
and the sons of Aaron shall sprynkle the blood thereof upon the altar ^^nt.
^i. a. ^eni. 17. ^ (...) xix. ^.
blood.

Offering made for sins done of Ignorance.

CAPI. IIII.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses saying:

And the priest that is anointed ^^^iti. ix. ^
shall take

^^i. 29. ^
But the skin of the young ox, and al his flesh, with his head / and his
legs, with his inwardes, and his donge / shall he bear out and carry the
young ox altogyther out of the hooste unto a clean place: even where the
ashes are powered out / and burn him there on wood in the fire: even by the
place where the ashes are cast out, shall he be burnte. If the hole
congregacyon of Israel syn through ygnoraunce, and the thing be hyd from their
eyes: so that they have committed any of those things which the Lord has
forbidden to be done in his commandments, and have offended. When the sin
which they have sinned in / is known, the congregacyon shall bring a young
ox for the sin, and bring him before the Tabernacle of witness, and the
elders of the multitude shall put their hands upon the head of the young ox
before the Lord. And the young ox shall be slain before the Lord.

And the priest that is anointed, shall bring of his blood into the tabernacle
of witness, and the priest shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprynkle
it seven times before the Lord: even before the veil. And shall put of the
blood upon the horns of the altar, which is before the Lord in the
Tabernacle of witness, and shall power all the blood unto the botome of the
altar of burntofferynge which is before the door of the tabernacle of
witness, and shall take all his fat from him, and burn it upon the altar,
and shall do with this young ox / as he did with the young ox for sin: even
so shall he do with this.

And the priest shall make an atonement for them / and it shall be forgyuen
them. And

And the priest shall make an atonement for him, as concerning his syn / and
it shall be for given him. If one of the comen people of the land sin through
ygnoraunce, and commyt Leuiti. iii. ^
And the priest shall take of the blood thereof with his finger, and put it
upon the horns of the burntofferynge altar / and power all the blood unto the
botome of the altar, and shall take away all his fat / as the fat of the
peaceofferynges is taken away. And the priest shall burn it upon the altar /
that it may be a sweet savor unto the lord, and the priest shall make an
atonement for him / and it shall be forgyuen him.

And if he bring a sheep for a sin offering, Leuiti. iii. d
And he shall take away all the fat thereof, as the fat of the sheep of the
peace offering is wont to be taken away. And the Priest shall burn it upon
the altar / that it may be the lords burntsacrifyce, and the priest shall make
an atonement for his sin / that he has committed, and it shall be forgyuen
him.

Of oaths. ^lmsynge of him that touches unclean things. Purga^yon of an
oath, and of sin done by Ignorance.

CAPI. V.
IF a soul sin, and hear the voice of

Either if a soul swear, and pronou^ceth with his lyppes to do evil or to do
good (what Leutti. (...) Lu^e* (...)* ^
And if he be not able to bring such a sheep / he shall bring for his
trespace which he has sinned, two turtyl doves or two young pygeons unto the
Lord, one for a synneofferyng, and the other for a burntofferynge. And he
shall bring them unto the priest, which shall offer the synneofferyng first,
and wrynge the neck a sundre of it, but pluck it not clean of

And he shall sprynkle of the blood of the

And the Lord spoke unto Moses / saying: (...)
sycle of the sanctuary, that it may be for a trespaceofferynge. And he shall
make amends for the harm that he has done in the holy thing / and let him
put the fyfte part more thereto, and give it unto the Priest. And the priest
shall make an atonement for him with the ram, that is for the trespace, and it
shall be forgyuen him.

If a soul sin, and commyt any of these things which are forbidden to be
done by the commandments of the Lord: and wist it not, and has offended,
he shall bear his sin, and shall bring a ram without blemyshe out of the
flock, that is esteemed to be worth a trespace offering, unto the priest. And
the priest shall make an atonement for him concerning his ygnoraunce / wherein
he erred, and was not ware, and it shall be forgyuen him. This is a
trespaceofferynge / which he offered unto the Lord for the trespace.

The offerynges for sins wyllyngly done. The law of the burntofferynges. The
fy^e must atyde evermore upon the altar. The offerynges of Aaron, and his
sons.

CAPI. VI.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses saying:

And the Priest shall make an atonement for him before the Lord, and it shall
be forgyuen Exodus 29. g
The burntofferynge shall be upon the harth of the altar all night unto the
morning, and the fire shall be kyndled on the altar. And the priest shall put
on his Exodi. 28. g
lynnen albe, and his lynnen breches upon his flesh, and take away the
ashes / upon the which the fire consumed the burntsacrifyce in the altar,
and he shall put them beside the altar, and put of his tayment, and put on
other, and carye the ashes out without the hooste unto a clean place.

The fire upon the altar shall burn still / and never be put out. But the
Priest shall lay wood on (...) every day in the morning / and put the
burntsacrifyce upon it / and he shall burn thereon the fat of the
peaceofferynges. The fire shall ever burn upon the altar / and never go out.
Number xv. a Leuiti. (...) a.
This is the law of the Minha.
meatofferynge, which Aarons Sons shall bring before the Lord, even before
the altar: and one of them shall take his handefull of the flower of the
meatofferynge, and of the oil, and all the frankensence which is upon the
meatofferynge, and shall burn it unto a remembrance upon the altar, for
aswete sauoure, even a memoryall of it unto the Lord.

And of the rest thereof, shall Aaron, and

It is most holy, as the synneofferynge and trespaceofferynge. All the males
among the Children of Aaron shall eat of it: It shall be a statute for ever in
your generacyons concerning the sacrifyces of the Lord: Let every one that
touches it be holy. And the Lord spoke unto Moses saying: this is the
offering of Aaron, and of his sons which they shall offer unto the Lord, in
the day when he is anointed: the tenth part of an Epha of flower, for a
meatofferyng perpetual: half in the morning, and half at night In the
frienge pan it shall be made with oil. And when it is fried / thou shall bring
it in, and the baken offerynges of this oblacyon mynsed small, shalt thou offer
for a sweee savor unto the Lord. And the Priest of his Sons that is
anointed in his stead, shall offer it: It is the lords duty for ever: it
shall be burnt all together.

For every meatofferyng that is made for Leuiti. xv. b
Osee. iiii. b.
But the earthen pot that it is soden in / shall be broken. And if it be
soden in a brazen pot, it shall be scowred, and rinsed in the water All the males
among the priests shall cate thereof, for it is most holy. And no sin
offering / whose blood is brought into the tabernacle of witness to reconcyle
withal in the holy place / shall be eaten: but shall be burnt in the fire.

Trespaceofferynges: Synofferynges: and Peaceofferynges. The ^at and the blood
may not be eaten.

CAPI. VII.
THIS is the law of the trespaceofferynge:

This is the law of peaceofferyng, when

He shall bring his offering upon cakes of leuended bread for his
peaceofferynges to give thanks: and of all the sacrifyce he shall offer one for
an heueofferyng unto the lord, and it shall be the priests that sprynkled the
blood of the peaceofferynges. And the flesh of the thankeofferyng in his
peaceofferynges shall be eaten the same day that it is offered. And let him lay
up nothing of it until the morrow But if he offer his sacrifyce by reason of a
vow, or of his own frewyll, it shall be eaten the same day that he offers
his sacrifyce. And if ought remain until the morrow, it may be eaten but
asmoche of the offered flesh as remains unto the third day, shall be
burnt with fire. And if any of the flesh of his peaceofferynges be eaten in
the third day, then shall he that offers it, obtain no favor neither shall
it be rekened unto him: but shall be an abhominacion. Therefore the soul that
eats of it / shall bear his sin.

And the flesh that touches any unclean Leuit. (...)
Ye shall eat no manner fat of oxen, of sheep and of gootes: neuerthelatter the
fat of the beast that dies alone, and the fat of that which is torn with
wild beasts, shall be occupied in any manner of use, but ye shall in no wise
eat of it. For whosoever eats the fat of the beast of which men use to
bring an offryng unto the Lord, that soul that eats it, shall peresh from
his people. Moreover, ye Gent. (...) Leuit. (...) and ^.^.^. Deuteronomy. (...) i.
Re^. ^^
shall eat no manner of blood, whyther it be of foul or of beast. Whatsoever
soul it be that eats* any manner of blood, the same soul shall perysshe
from his people.

And the Lord talked with Moses, saying, speak unto the children of Israel
and say: he that brings his peaceofferynge unto the Lord / let him bring
his gift unto the lord of his peaceofferyng: Let his own hands bring the
offerynges of the Lord: even the fat with the breast shall he bring: that
the breast may be waued for a waueofferynge before the lord. And the Priest
shall burn the fat upon the altar, and the breast shall be Aarons, and his
Sons. And the right shoulder shall ye give unto the priest, for an
heueofferyng, of your peace offerynges. The same that offers the blood of the
peace offerynges, and the fat, among the sons of Aaron, shall have the right
shoulder for his part, for the Number(...)
wauebrest, and the haueshoulder have I taken of the children of Israel, even
of their peaceofferynges and have given it unto Aaron, and unto his sons: by
a statute for ever of the children of Israel. This is the anoyntynge of Aaron /
and the anoyntynge of his sons in the Sacrifyces of the lord / in the day
when he offered them to be priests unto the lord. And these are the
sacrifyces which the Lord commanded to be given them (in the day of their
anoyntynge) of the children of Israel, by a statute for ever in their
generacyons. This is the law of the burntofferynge, and of the meateofferynge,
and of the Sacrifyce for sin, and trespace, for consecracyon / and for the
peaceofferyng / which the Lord commanded Moses in the mount of Sinay, when
he commanded the Children of Israel to offer their Sacrifyces unto the Lord
in the wilderness of Sinay.

The anoyntynge of Aaron and his sons.

CAPI. VIII.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses saying: Exodi. 28. a
Aaron and his sons with him, and the vestures / and the anoyntynge Oil, and
a young ox for sin, and two rams, and a basket with sweet bread: and
gather thou all the congregacyon together unto the door of the Tabernacle of
witness. And Moses did as the Lord commanded him, and the people were
gathered together unto the door of the Tabernacle of witness. And Moses said
unto the congregacyon: this is the thing which the Lord commanded to be
done.

And Moses brought Aaron, and his sons, and washed them with water, and put
upon him the albe, and gyrded him with a gyrdle and put upon him the tunycle, (
of yelovve sylke,) and put the Ephod thereon / which he gyrded with the
brodered gyrdell that was in the Ephod, and bound it unto him therewith. And he
put the brestlap thereon and put in the brestlap vrim, and thumim.

And he put the mytre upon his head, and Exodus xxx. d
And Moses took the anoyntyng oil, and anointed the Tabernacle / and all that
was therein, and sanctified them, and sprynkled thereof upon the altar seven
times, and anointed the altar, and al his vessels, the lauer and his foot, to
sanctyfy them ( with the oil.) And he powered of the anoyntyng oil upon
Aarons head, and anointed him / to sanctifye him. And Moses brought Aarons
Sons, and put albes upon them / and gyrded them with gyrdels, and put
bonettes upon their heads: as the Lord commanded Moses.

Exodi. 29. ^
And he brought the young ox for sin And Aaron and his sons put their
hands upon the head of the young ox that was for sin. And Moses slew him /
and took of the blood / which he put upon the horns of the altar round
about with his finger, and purifyed it, and powered the blood unto the botome
of the altar (and sanctified it / and reconcyled it. And he took all the fat
that was upon the inwardes, and the abundance of the liver, and the two
kydneyes / and their fat, and Moses burned it upon the altar. But the young
ox, and his hyde, his flesh and his dong, he burnt with fire without the
host, as the Lord commanded Moses.

And he brought the ram for the burnt offering, Exodi. 29. ^
And he brought the other ram, namely the ram of consecracion ( of the
priests) and Aaron, and his sons put their hands upon the head of the ram:
which Moses slew / and took of the blood of it, and put it upon the typpe of
Aarons right ear, and upon the thombe of his right hand, and upon the great
too of his right foot. And Moses brought Aarons sons / and put of the blood
( of the ram) on the typpe of the right ear of them, and upon the thombes of
their right hands / and upon the great tooes of their right feet, and Moses
sprynkled the blood upon the altar round about.

Exodi. 29 ^
And he took the fat, and the rumpe, and all the fat that was upon the inwardes
/ and the abundance of the liver, and the two kydneyes with their fat / and
the right shoulder. And out of the basket of sweet bread that was before the
Lord, he took one sweet cake of oyled bread, and one wafer, and put them on
the fat, and upon the right shoulder: and put all together upon Aarons hands,
and upon his sons hands, and waued it a waueofferyng before the Lord.

And Moses took them from of their hands, Exodi. 29. ^
And Moses took the breest / and waued it for a waueofferynge before the Lord,
for it was of the ^am of the consecracyo^, and it was Moses part / as the
lord commanded Moses. And Moses took of the anoyntynge Oil, and of the
blood which was upon the altar, and sprynkled it upon Aaron, and upon his
vestimentes, upon his sons, and on his sons vestimentes with him, and
sanctified Aaron, his vestures, and his sons, and his sons vestures Exodi.
29. f
eat it with the bread, that is in the basket of consecracyon / as I
commanded, saying: Aaron, and his sons shall eat it: and that which
remains of the bread, shall ye burn with fire.

And ye shall not depart from the door of the tabernacle of witness. vii.
days, until the days of your co^secracion be at an end. For seven days
shall he fill your hand as he did this day: even so the lord has commanded
to do, to reconcyle you withal. Therefore shall ye abide in the door of the
tabernacle of witness day and night, seven days long: and keep the watch of
the lord / and ye shall not dye: for so I am commanded. And so Aaron, and his
sons did all things which the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses.

The first offerynges of Aaron. Aaron blesses the people. The glory of the
lord is showed.

CAPI. IX.
ANd it fortuned that in the eight day /

And they brought that (which Moses Hebre. v a. and vii. d.
Moses said unto Aaron: go unto the altar and offer thy Sacrifyce for sin,
and thy burntofferyng, and make an atonement for the, and for the people: and
thou shalt offer the offering of the people, to reconcyle them, as the Lord
commanded. Aaron therefore went unto the altar, and slew the calfe which he
had for syn. And the sons of Aaron brought the blood unto him, and he dypte
his finger in the blood, and put it upon the horns of the altar, and powered
the blood unto the botom of the altar. But the fat and the two kydnyes, and
the abundau^ce of the liver of the synofferynge, he burnt upon the altar / as
the Lord commanded Moses: The flesh / and the hyde, he burnt with fire
without the host. And he slew the burntofferyng Leui. (...)
and Aarons sons brought unto him the blood, which he sprynkled round
about upon the altar.

And they brought the burntofferyng unto Leuiti. (...)
and brought the meatofferyng, and filled his hand thereof, and burnt it upon
the altar, beside the burnt sacrifyce of the morning. He slew also the ox
and the ram for the peaceofferynge / that the people had for them selves: and
Aarons sons brought unto him the blood, which he sprynkled upon the altar
round about / and took the fat of the ox / and of the ram, the rump, and
the fat that covers the inwardes / and the kydneyes, and the abundance of
the liver, and they put the fat upon the breasts, and he burnt the fat upon the
altar: but the breasts, ii. P^. (...) ii. (...)
And there came a fire out from before the Lord, and consumed upon the altar
the burnt offering and the fat. Which when all the people saw, they gave thanks
/ and fell on their faces.

Nadab, and Abshu are slain. Israel mourns for them. The Priests are
forbidden wine.

CAPI. X.
ANd Exodi. (...) Leuiit. (...)
Nadab, and Abihu the sons of Exodi. (...)
which he commanded them not, and there went a fire out from the Lord, and
consumed them, and they dyed before the lord. Then Moses said unto Aaron:
this is it that the Lord spoke, saying: I will be sanctified in them, that
come nigh me, and before all the people I will be glorified. And Aaron held his
peace.

And Moses called Misaell, and Elsaphan the sons of Oziell the uncle of
Aaron, and said unto them: come on, carye your brethren from the holy place
out of the host. And they went to them, and carried them in their albes out of
the hooste, as Moses had said.

And Moses said unto Aaron, and unto Deute. 14 a Iere. 16. b
uncover not your heads, neither rent your clothes, leest ye dye, and leest
wrath come upon all the people: But let your brethren the hole house of Israel
bewepe the burning, which the Lord has kyndled. And go not ye out from the
door of the Tabernacle of witness / leest ye dye: for the anointyng oil of
god is upon you. And they did as Moses said. And the Lord spoke unto Aaron,
saying: Thou shall not drink wine, and strong drink / thou and thy sons
that are with the: when ye go into the tabernacle of witness, leest ye dye.
Let it be a law for ever thorowout your generacyons, and that ye may ( have
know ledge to) put dyfference between holy, and unholy, between clean and
unclean, and that ye may teach the Children of Israel all the statutes
which the Lord has spoken unto them by the hand of Moses.

And Moses said unto Aaron, and unto

And Moses sought the goote that was

Wherefore have ye not eaten the synneofferynge in the holy place, seeing it is
most holy: and God has given it you, to bear the sin of the congregacyon,
to make a grement for them before the Lord? Behold, the blood of it was not
brought in within the holy place. Ye should have eaten it in the holy place,
as I commanded. And Aaron said, unto Moses: behold, this day have they
offered their synneofferyng, and their burntofferynge before the Lord, and it
is chanced me after this manner. And if I had eaten the sacryfyce to day /
should it have been accepted in the sight of the Lord? And when Moses herd
that, he was content.

Of beasts, which be clean, and which unclean.

CAPI. XI.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, and Gene. 7. a. Deute. 14 ^ Acts. ^. c
these are the beasts which ye shall eat, among all the cattle that are on
the earth: whatsoever parts the hoof, and deuideth it in to two claws, and
choweth cud among the beasts, that shall ye eat. Nevertheless, these shall
ye not eat, of them that chewe cud / and deuydeth the hoofes, as is the
Camel, which choweth cud, but he deuydeth not the hoof / therefore is he
unclean unto you. Eue^ so the cunnye, which choweth the cud but deuydeth not
the hoof: He is unclean to you. And the hare though he chowe the cud, yet
because he deuydeth not the hoof, he is therefore unclean to you. And again,
the swine, though he deuyde the hoof in to two clowes, yet he choweth not the
cud. He is unclean to you. Of their flesh shall ye not eat, and their
carcasses shall ye not touch, but let them be unclean to you.

These shall ye eat of all that are in the

The Egle, the goshawke, and the cormorau^t joy after his kind, the lapwynge
/ and the swalowe. Let all fowls that creep and go upon all four, be an
abhominacio^ unto you Yet these may ye eat of every creping thing Brachus.
the Arbe after his kind: Scatairus
Selaam after his kind: the Locusta.
Hargol after his kind / and the At^achus.
Hagab after his kind. All other fowls that move and have four fete / shall
be abhominacyon unto you. In such ye be unclean / and who soever touches the
carkas of them / shall be unclean unto the even: and who soever bears the
carkas of them / shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until even.

And every beast that has hoof / and deuideth it not in to two clowes, nor
choweth Leuiti. v. a, A^^^r. ii. c
shall be unclean until the even. And he that bears the carkas of them, shall
wasshe his clothes, and be unclean until the even, for such are unclean
unto you. And let these also be unclean to you, among the things that crepe
upon the earth, the weysell, and the mowse, and the toode, after their kind,
the hedgehog, the stellio / the lycerte, the snayle, and the molle: these are
unclean to you among all that crepe: who soever does touch them when they
be dead, shall be unclean until the even. And what soever any of the dead
carcasses of them does fall upon, shall be unclean: whyther it be vessel of
wood / or raiment, or skyn, or bag, or what soever vessel it be, that any
work is wrought in. And it must be piunged in the water, and it shall be
unclean until the even and so shall it be cleansed.

All manner of carthen vessel wherein to any of them falls, shall be unclean /
with all that Leuiti. vi. d and. xv. b.
it shall be broken. All manner meat also that is used to be eaten if any such
water come upon it, it shall be unclean. And al manner drynk that is used to be
dronk in all manner such vessels / shall be unclean. and every thing that their
carkas falls upon, shall be unclean: Whyther it be oven or kettel, let it be
broken. For they are unclean, and shall be unclean unto you: Never the latter,
yet the fountaynes and wells, and collection of waters shall be clean still.
And who so touches their carkas / shall be unclean. If the dead carkas of
any such fall upon any seed used be sown, it shall yet be clean still: but
and if any water be powered upon the seed, and a dead carkas fall thereon / it
shall be unclean unto you. If any beast of which ye may eat, dye and any man
touch the dead carkas thereof, he shall be unclean until the even. He that
eats of the dead carkas of it, shall wasshe his clothes / and be unclean
until the even. And he also that bears the carkas of it, shall wasshe his
clothes / and be unclean until even.

Let every crepynge thing that crepeth upon the earth be an abhominacion, and
not

For I am the Lord your god. Be sanctified therefore, and ye shall be holy
Leuiti. (...)* ^ i. Peter. ^^
for I am holy: and ye shall not defyle your souls with any manner of crepynge
thing / that crepeth upon the earth. For I am the Lord, that brought you out
of the land of Egypt / to be your god ye shall be holy therefore, for I am holy

This is the law of beasts, and fowls, and of every living creature that
moves in the waters, and of every creature that crepeth upon the earth, that
there be a dyfference between the unclean, and clean, and between the beast
that may be eaten, and the beast that ought not to be eaten.

A law how women should be pourged after their deliverance.

CAPI. XII.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: Gene. 17 ^ and ^xi Luke. ^^^
foreskynne shall be cut away. And she shall then continue in the blood of her
purifyenge three and thyrtye days.

She shall touch no hallowed thing, nor come in to the sanctuary, until the
time of her purifyenge be out. If she bear a maid child, she shall be
unclean two wekes, as when she has her natural disease. And she shall
continue in the blood of her purifyenge three score and six days.

Luke. (...)
And when the days of her purifieng are out: whyther it be for a son or for
a daughter, (...)if. v. b.
And this is the law for her that has borne a male or female. But and if she
be not able to bring a lamb, she shall bring ^^ke^^. ii. d
two Turtles or two young pygeons: the one for a burntofferynge, and the other
for sin. And the priest shall make an attonemente for her, and she shall be
clean,

The priests must judge who are Lepers.

CAPI. XIII.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses and

And when the here in the sore is turned unto white, and the sore also seem to
be lower then the skyn of his flesh, it will be a plage of leprosye, and the
priest shall look on him / and judge him unclean.

If there be but a white specke in the skyn of his flesh, and seem not to be
lower then the skin, nor the here thereof is turned unto white, the priest
shall shut him up. vii. days

And the priest shall look upon him again the seventh day. And if the plage
seem to him to abide still, and the plage grow not in the skyn, the Priest
shall shut him up yet seven days moo. And the priest shall look on him again
the seventh day. Then if the plage be darker and not grown in the skin, the
Priest shall judge him clean, for it is but a scurffe. And he shall wash his
clothes, and be clean. But and if the scab grow in the skyn after that he is
seen of the priest, and judged clean, he shall be seen of the priest again.

If the Priest se that the scabbe be grown abroad, in the skin the priest
shall make him unclean: for it is a leprosye.

When the plage of leprosye is in a man /

If a leprosye break out abroad in the skyn and cover all the skyn from his
head to his foore, where soever the priest looks, and the Priest look upon
him. And if the leprosye have covered all his flesh, he shall judge the plage
to be clean because it is all turned in to whytnesse, and he shall be clean.
But and if there be raw flesh on him when he is seen he shall be unclean.

And the priest shall se the raw flesh, and declare him to be unclean. For
the raw flesh is unclean seeing it is a leprosye. Or if the raw flesh
depart again and change unto white, he shall come to the priest, and the
priest shall se him and behold. If the sore be changed unto white ( and cover
the hole man) the priest shall judge the plage clean and he shall be clean.
The flesh also in whose skin there is a byle / and is healed, and in the
place of the byle there appear a white rysynge, either a shynyng white and
somewhat reddyshe, it shall be seen of the priest And if when the priest sees
him, it appear lower then the skin, and the here thereof be changed unto
white, the priest shall judge him unclean, for it is a place of leprosye broken
out of the byle.

But if the priest look on it and there be no

If there be any flesh, in whose skin there is a hoote burning, and the
flesh that burns have a white spotte, somewhat reddysshe or white, the
priest shall look upon it. And if the here in that bright spot be changed to
white, and it appear lower then the skin, it is a leprosye broken out of the
burning. And therefore the Priest shall judge him unclean, seeing it is the
plage of leprosye. But if the Priest look on it / and there be no white here
in the bright spot, and be no lower then the other skin, but be barker, the
priest shall shut him up seven days. And the priest shall look on him the
seventh day. And if it be grown abroad in the skyn the priest shall judge him
unclean, seeing it is the plage of leprosye. And if the spot stand still in it,
and grow not in the skin, but is dark, it is a rysynge of the burning, and
the priest shall therefore declare him clean, seeing it is the prynte of the
burning.

If man or woman has a sore upon the more then it was wont to be.) the
priest shall judge him unclean, saying that the same fretynge is a token of
leprosy upon the head or beerde.

And if the priest look on the sore of the prynt and it seem not lower then the
skyn, and that the here is not black, the Priest shall shut up the fretyng
sore seven days. And in the seventh day the priest shall look on the sore:
and if the sore be not grown, and there be in it no yelowe here, and the sore
seem not lower then the skyn, he shall be shaue^: but the place of the sore shall
he not shave, and the priest shall shut up the sore seven days moo.

And in the seventh day the priest shall look on the sore. And if the sore be
not grown in the skyn, nor seem lower then the other skyn, the priest shall
cleanse him, and he shall wash his clothes, and be clean. But if the sore grow
in the flesh after his clensyng, the priest shall look on him. And if the sore
be grown in the skyn, the priest shall not seek for yelowe here for he is
unclean, But if he se the prynt stand still, and that there is black here
grown up therein, the sore is healed, and he shall be clean, and the priest
shall declare him to be clean. If there be white spots in the skyn of the
flesh of man or woman, the priest shall look upon it. And if the spots in
the skyn of their flesh be somewhat dark and white withal, ( he may be sure
that it is no leprosye. it is a frekell growing in the flesh. Therefore is he
clean.

And the man (whose head is destitute of

And he that has his here fallen from his foreheade, is foreheade balde and
clean. If there be in the balde head or balde forehead a white reddysshe sore
scab, there is leprosye spronge up in his balde head or balde foreheade. And
the priest shall look upon him, and if the rysynge of the soore be white
reddyshe in his balde head or balde forehead after the manner of a leprosye
which is in the skin of the flesh, then he is a leperous man, and unclean.
And the Priest shall make him unclean, for the plage thereof is in his heed.

The leper in whom the plage is / shall have his clothes rent / and his head
bare, and shall put a covering upon his lyppe, and shall be called unclean,
and defiled. And as long as the disease lasts upon him, he shall be defiled
and unclean: he shall dwell alone, even Nume. v. a 4. ^e. 15. a.
without the host shall his habytacyon be.

The clothe that the plage of leprosye is

If the priest se that the plage is not grown

And if the plage have not changed his color, and is spread no further
abroad, it is unclean. Thou shalt burn it in the fire, for it is fret
inward: in part or in all together.

And if the priest se that the plage is darker after that it is washed, he
shall rent it out of the clothe, or out of the skin, or out of the warpe, or
out of the woofe. And if it appear any more in the cloth (either in the warpe
or in the woofe, or in any thing made of skyn) it is a waxynge plage. Thou
shall burn the plage that is in it. Moreover the clothe, either warpe or
woofe, or what soever thing of skyn it be which thou have washed, if the
plage be departed therfro, it shall be washed once again: and then shall it be
clean.

This is the law of the plage of leprosye in a cloth whyther it be woollen or
lynnen: either in the warp or woofe, or in any thing of skynnes, to make it
clean or unclean.

The clensynge of the leper, and of the house that he is in.

CAPI. XIIII.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying. M(...) M(...) Luke* ^ an^ (...)
This is the law of Leper in the day of his clensyng. He shall be brought unto
the priest, and the priest shall go out without the host, and look upon him.
And if the plage of leprosye be healed in the leper, then shall the priest
command that he which is to be cleansed, bring two living birds and clean,
and Cedar wood, and purple clothe, and ysope. And the priest shall command
that one of the birds be killed in an earthen vessel and upon runnynge water.
And he shall take the living bird, with the cedar wood, the purple and the
ysope, and shall dyp them and the living bird in the blood of the slain
bird, upon the runnyng water, and sprynkle upon him (that must be cleansed of
his leprosy) seven times, and cleanse him, and shall let the living bird go
free into the fylde.

And he that is cleansed, shall wasshe his clothes, and shave of al his here,
and wasshe

And after that shall he come into the host, and shall tarry without his tente
seven days: but in the seventh day he shall shave of all his here, namely,
his head, his beerde and his brows: even all his here shall be shaven of. And
he shall wasshe his clothes and his flesh in water, and he shall be clean. And in
the. viii. day he shall take. ii. lambs without blemysh and an ewe lamb of a
year old / without blemysshe, and three tenthdeales of fine flower for a Miuha.
meatoffryng myngled with oil and a log of oil. And the priest that makes
him clean, shall bring the man that is to be made clean and those things,
before the lord even before the door of the tabernacle of witness. And the
priest shall take one lamb, and offer him for trespace, and the log of oil,
and wave them before the lord. And he shall slay the lamb in the place where
the synofferyng and the burntoffryng are slain: even in the holy place. For as
the synofferynge is, even so is the trespass offering the priests: seeing it
is most holy.

And the priest shall take of the blood of

The priest shall take of the logge of oil, and power it in to the palm of his
left hand / and dip his right finger in the oil that is in his left
hand, and sprynkle of the oil with his finger seven times before the Lord.

And the reest of the oil that is in his hand, shall the priest put upon the
typ of the right ear of him that is for to be cleansed, and upon the thombe of
his right hand, and upon the great too of his right foot: even upon the
blood of the trespaceofferynge. And the remenaunt of the oil that is in the
Priests hand, he shall power upon the head of him that is for to be cleansed:
and the priest shall make an a^tonement for him before the lord.

And the priest shall offer the synneofferyng, and make an atonement for him
that is to be cleansed, for his uncleanness. And then shall he kill the
burntoffryng, and the priest shall offer the burntoffryng and the meatofferyng
upon the altar: and the priest shall make an atonement for him, and he shall be
clean. Leui^^. v. ^.
If he be poor, and can not get so much, he shall take one lamb for a
trespace offering to wave it for his clensynge, and a tenthdeale of fine
flower myngled with oil for a meatofferynge, and a log of oil, and two Turtle
doves or two young pigeons, such as he is able to get, whereof the one shall be
for sin, and the other for a burntoffryng. And he shall bring them the. viii.
day for his clensyng unto the priest before the door of the tabernacle of
witness before the lord.

And the priest shall take the lamb that is

And the priest shall put of the oil that is in his hand upon the typ of the
right ear of him that is to be cleansed, and upon the thombe of his right
hand, and upon the too of his right foot: even in the place where the blood
of the trespaceoffrynge was put.

And the rest of the oil that is in the priests hand, he shall put upon the
head of him that is to be cleansed: that he may make an atonement for him
before the Lord. And he shall offer one of the Turtle doves, or of the young
pygeons, such as he can get: the one for a synofferynge and the other for a
burntofferynge with the meatofferynge. And the priest shall make an atonement
for him that is to be cleansed before the Lord. This is the law of him in whom
is the plage of leprosy, and whose hand is not able to get that which
perteyneth to his clensyng.

And the Lord spoke unto Moses and as it were a leprosye in the house. And the
priest shall command them to empty the house, before the priest go in to it,
to se the plage: that all that is in the house / be not made unclean, and then
must the priest go in to se the house. If the Priest also se that the plage is
in the walls of the house, and that there be holowe strakes pale, or red,
which seem to be lower the^ the wall it self, the priest shall go out at the
house doors, and shut up the house seven days. And the priest shall come
again the seventh day, and if he se that the

And if the priest come and se, that the plage

This is the law for all manner plage of leprosye and breakyng out, and of the
leprosye of clothe and house: for a swellyng, for a scab and for a white
blystre. To teach when it must be made unclean and clean. This is the law
of leprosye.

The manner of pourgynge the uncleanness, both of men and women

CAPI. XV.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses and

And he that sytteth on any thing whereon he sat that has the issue, shall
wasshe his clothes, and bathe him self in water / and be unclean until the
evening. He that touches the flesh of him that has the issue, shall wash
his clothes, and bathe him self in water, and be unclean unto the even. If he
also that has the issue, spyt upon him that is clean, he shall wasshe his
clothes, and bathe him self in water, and be unclean unto even.

And what horse harness soever he rydeth

And who soever touches any thing that was under him, shall be unclean unto
the even. And he that bears any such things shall wasshe his clothes, and
bathe him self in water, and be unclean unto the even.

And who soever he touches that has the issue (and have not first washed his
hands in water) shall wasshe his clothes, and bathe him self in water, and be
unclean unto the even. Leuiti and* ^
The vessel of earth that he touches, which has the issue, shall be broken:
and all vessels of wood shall be rynsed in water.

When he also that has an issue, is clen sed of his issue, he shall nombre
seven days for his clensyng, and wasshe his clothes, and bathe his flesh in
runnynge water, and so shall he be clean. And the, viii. day he shall take to
him two Turtle doves, or two young pygeons, and come before the lord unto the
door of the tabernacle of witness, and give them unto the priest.

And the priest shall offer them: the one for a synoffryng, and the other for a
burntoffryng And the priest shall make an atonement for him before the lord,
as concerning his issue.

If a man's seed depart from him in his sleep, he shall wasshe his flesh in
water, and be unclean until even. And all the clothes and all the furs
wherein is such seed of sleep, shall be washed with water, and be unclean,
unto the even. And if he that has such an issue of seed, do lie with a
woman, they shall both wasshe them selves with water, and be unclean until
even.

If any woman's natural course of blood do Leuiti. 1^^. ^
And if a man lie with her, and her uncleanness come upon him he shall be
unclean. vii. days, and all the couche whereon he lies shall be unclean.

^eth. ix. ^.
When a woman's blood runs long time: out of the time of her natural
course:

What Aaron must do. The clensynge of the sanctuarye. Of the feast of
clensynge. Aaron confesses the sins of the children of Israel.

CAPI. XVI.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses Leuiti. x. ^
after 3. Reg. 8. ^.
cloud upon the mercyseate.

But with this thing shall Aaron come in to the holy place: even with a
bullock for sin, and with a ram for a burntoffrynge. He shall put the holy
lynnen albe upon him, and shall have a lynnen breche upon his flesh and
shall be gyrded with a lynnen gyrdle, and put the lynnen mytre upon his head.
These are holy garments: therefore shall he wasshe his flesh with water, when
he does put them on. And he shall take of the multitude of the children of
Israel, two he gootes for sin, and a ram for a burntoffrynge.

And Aaron shall offer his bullock for Hebru. ^x. ^
and make an atonement for him and for his house. And he shall take the two
gootes, and present them before the Lord at the door of the Tabernacle of
witness. And Aaron shall cast lottes over the two gootes: one lot shall be for
the Lord, and an other for the scapegoote. And Aaron shall bring the goote
upon which the lords Lotte fell, and offer him for sin. But the goote on
which the lot fell to escape, shall be set alive before the lord, to reconcyle
with, and to let him go (as a escape goote) fre, in to the wilderness. And
Aaron shall offer his bullock for sin, and reconcyle for him self, an for
his house, and shall kill the bullock for sin.

And he shall take a censer full of burning

Hebr^. ix. b. and x. ^.
And he shall take of the blood of the bullock, and sprynkle it with his
finger upon the mercyseate eastwarde, and before the mercyseate shall he
sprynkle of the blood with his finger seven times. Then shall he kill the
goote that is the peoples synneofferyng, and bring his blood within the veil,
and do with that blood, as he did with the blood of the bullock, sprynklyng it
upon the mercyseate, and before the mercyseate. And he shall reconcyle the holy
place from the vnclennesses of the children of Israel, and from their trespaces
in all their sins. And so shall he do for the tabernacle of witness that is
set among

Luke. i. a.
And let there be no body in the tabernacle of witness, when he goes in to
make an atonement in the holy place, until he come out. And let him make an
attonemente for him self, and for his houssholde, and for all the multitude of
Israel. And he shall go out unto the altar that is before the Lord, and
reconcyle upon it, and shall take of the blood of the bullock, and of the
blood of the goote and put it upon the horns of the altar round about, and
sprynkle of the blood upon it with his finger seven times, and cleanse it, and
halowe it from the vnclennesses of the children of Israel

And when he has made an end of reconcylynge the holy place, and the
tabernacle of

And Aaron shall come in to the tabernacle of wytnes, and put of the lynnen
clothes which he put on (when he went in into the holy place) and leave them
there. and let him wasshe his flesh with water in the holy place, and put on
his own raiment, and then come out, and offer his burntoffryng, and the
burntoffring of the people, and make an attonemente for himself, and for the
people, and the fat of the synnoffryng shall he burn upon the altar And he
that carried forth the goote to As a zel, shall wasshe his clothes, and bathe his
flesh in water, and then come in to the host.

And the bullock which is for his sin, and

And the priest that is anointed, and whose hand was consecrated (to ministre
in his fathers stead) shall make an atonement, and shall put on his lynnen
clothes, and holy vestimentes, and reconcile the holy sanctuary and the
Tabernacle of witness, and shall cleanse the altar, and make an atonement
then, for the priests and for the people of the congregacyon. And this shall be
an Exodus ^
everlasting ordinance unto you, that he make an atonement for the children
of Israel, for all their sins once a year: and he did as the Lord commanded
Moses.

All sacrifyce must be brought to the door of the Tabernacle. To deuyls may
they not offer.

CAPI. XVII.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying.

Wherefore when the children of Israel

And let them no more offer their offrynges unto deuyls, after whom they have
gone a hoorynge. This shall be an ordinance for ever unto them in their
generacyons.

And thou shalt say unto them: what soever man it be of the house of Israel
or of the strangers which soiourne among you / that offers a burtofferyng or
sacrifice, and brings it not unto the door of the Tabernacle of witness to
offer it unto the Lord, that man shall peryshe from among his people.

And what soever man it be of the house of Israel, or of the strangers that
soiourne among

And what souer man it be of the children (...). i^. ^ (...). iii. d (...)
^viii. ^.
ye shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh for the life of all flesh is
the blood thereof: whosoever eats it, shall perysshe. And every soul that
eats it which dyed alone, or that which was torn with wild beasts:
whyther it be one of your selves or a stranger, he shall wasshe his clothes,
and bathe him self in water, and be unclean unto the even and then shall he be
clean. If he wasshe them not, nor bathe his flesh, he shall bear his syn.

What degrees of kynred may marrye together.

CAPI. XVIII.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses saying. (...). ^. ^. (...) iii. d (...). xx b.
which if a man do, he shall live in them. I am the Lord.

Se that none go to his nyghest kynred, (...). ix. g. (...). 22 c
The secrets of thy father, and the secrets of thy mother shall thou not
uncover: for she is thy mother, therefore shall thou not dyscouer her secrets.
Deute. 22. b and. xxvii. c i. Corin. v. a
The secrets of thy fathers wife shall thou not dyscouer, for it is thy
fathers secrets. Deuteronomy. 27. d ^. Reg. 13. ^.
Thou shall not dyscouer the preuyte of thy sister, the daughter of thy father,
or of thy mother: whyther she be borne at home or without. Thou shall not
uncover the secrets of thy Sons daughter / or thy daughters daughter, for
that is thine own preuite. Thou shall not uncover the secrets of thy fathers
wives daughter, which was begotten of thy father, and is thy sister: thou
shall not dyscouer her secrets. Leui. xx. ^
Thou shall not uncover the secrets of thy fathers sister for she is thy
fathers next kynswoman.

Thou shall not dyscouer the secrets of thy Leui. x^. ^ Math. 14 ^
Thou not uncover the secrets of the brothers wife, for that is thy brothers
preuytye. Thou shall not discover the preuytes of the wife and her daughter,
neither shall thou take her sons daughter, or her daughters daughter, to
uncover their secrets: For they are her next kyn, and it were wyckdnesse.

^^^e. 29. ^.
Thou shall not take a wife and her sister also, to vere her, that thou would
uncover her secrets, as long as she lives.

Leui. xv. e Ezech. 22. ^.
Thou shalt also not go unto a woman to uncover her preuitie, as long as she
is put a part for her uncleanness. Leuit. xx, ^ ii. Reg. xi. ^
Moreover thou shalt not lie with thy neighbors wife, to defyle her with
seed. Thou shalt not also give of thy seed, to offer it unto Leui. xx. ^
Meloch, neither shalt thou defyle the name of thy God. I am the Lord. Roma.
i. d Leui. xx. ^
Thou shalt not lie with mankind as with womankynde, for it Deut^. 17. ^
Thou shalt lie with no manner of beast to defyle thy self therewith neither
shall any woman stand before a beast to lie down thereto, for it is
abhominacyon.

Ye shall not defyle your selves in any of these things, wherein all the
nacyons are defiled, which I cast out before you: wherthorowe the land is
defiled, and I will visyte the wickedness thereof upon it, yea and the land it
self has cast out her inheriters.

Ye shall keep therefore mine ordinances, Leuiti. xx. ^
and my judgments, and commit noone of these abhominacyons: neither any of
you nor any stranger that soiourneth among you for all these abhominacyons
have the men of the land done, which were there before you, and the land is
defiled.) Shall not the land spew you out also (if ye defyle it) as it spewed
out the people that were before you? For who soever shall commit any of these
abhominacyons, the same souls that commyt them, shall peryshe from among their
people. Therefore shall ye keep my watch, that ye commit not one of these
abominable customs, which were committed before you: and that ye defyle not
your selves therein. I am the lord your God.

A repeticyon of the laws perteynynge to the x. commandments. A
consyderacyon for the poor. Wytchcraft is forbidden.

CAPI. XIX.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, Leuiti. xi. g i. Peter i. ^.
Ye shall be holy, for I the Lord your God am holy. Ye shall fear every man his
father and his mother, and keep my Sabboths I am the Lord your God. Ye shall
not turn unto ydols nor make you Gods of metal: I am the lord your god. If
ye offer a peaceofferynge unto the Lord, ye shall offer it, that ye may be
accepted. Leui. vii. b.
It shall be eaten the same day ye offer it, and on the morrow. And if ought
remain until the third day, it shall be brent in the fire.

And if it be eaten the third day, it is unclean,

Leuiti. 23. ^ Deute. 24 ^
When ye reap down the ripe corn of your land, ye shall not repe down the
uttermost border of your field, neither shall thou gather that which is left
behind in thy harvest. Thou shalt not pluck in all thy vyneyarde clean,
neither gather in the grapes that are ouerscaped. But thou shalt leave them
for the poor and stranger. I am the Lord your God.

Ephe. 4. ^. ^acha viii. ^
Ye shall not steal, neither lie: neither deal falsely one with an other.
Math. v f Exodi. xx. b Deute. v. a
Ye shall not swear by my name in vain, neither shalt thou defyle the name of
thy God. I am the Lord. Thou shalt not do thy neighbor wrong, neither rob
him violently, Deute. 24 c ^o^i. iiii. ^.
neither shall the workemans labor abide with the until the morning. Thou
shalt not curse the deaf, Deute. 27 ^
neither put a stomblyng block before the blind, but shalt fear thy God. I
am the lord* Ye shall do no unrighteous in judgment. Deute. i. ^ and xvi.
d Jacob. ii. b.
Thou shall not favor the pore nor honor the mighty, but in righteousness
shalt thou judge thy neighbor.

Thou shalt not go up and down as a ^. Io(...) and. (...)
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thine heart, but shalt in any wise Ma^^.
(...) Eccle. (...)
rebuke thy neighbor, that thou bear not syn for his sake. Math. (...)
Thou shall not aueng thy self, nor be myndfull of wrong against the children
of thy people / Math. (...) Math. (...) Rom(...) Gal(...) Jacob. (...)
but shalt love thy neighbor even as thy self. I am the lord. Ye shall
keep mine ordinances.

Thou shalt not let cattle gendre with a contrary kind, neither sow thy
field with myngled seed, neither shall thou put on any garment of lynnen and
woollen.

Who soever lies and medleth with a woman

When ye come to the land, and have planted all manner of trees convenient to
be eaten of ye shall put away the foreskyn of every one with the fruit thereof:
even three year shall they be uncircumcised unto you, and shall not be eaten of.
But in the fourth year all the fruit of them shall be holy and commendable to
the Lord. In the fyfth year shall ye eat of the fruit of them, and ye may
gather in the increace

Le(...)
Ye shall not eat upon blood, neither shall ye use wytchcraft, nor observe times
Ye Leuit(...) E^^^. (...)
shall not round the locks of your heads, neither shalt thou mar the
tuftes of thy beerde. Ye shall not rent your flesh for any souls sake, nor
prynte any marks upon you: I am the Lord. Thou shalt not make thy daughter
common, that thou would cause her to be an hoore: lest the land also fall to
hooredome, and be full of wickedness. Ye shall keep my Sabboths, and fear my
sanctuary: I am the Lord. Ye shall not regard them that work with spirits,
^. (...)
neither seek after sothe sayers to be defiled by them. I am the Lord your
God.

^. (...)
Thou shalt rise up before the hoorehead and reverence the face of the old
man, and dread thy god. I am the Lord. If a stranger saiourne with the in
your land, ye shall not vex him. (...)odi. 22* c
But the stranger that dwells with you, shall be as one of your selves, and
thou shalt love him as thy self, for ye were strangers in the land of
Egypt, I am the Lord your God. Ye shall do no vnryghtousnesse in Judgment,
in meteyearde, in weight or in measure. True balaunces, true weyghtes. A true
Epha, and a true Hin shall ye have. I am the Lord your god which brought you
out of the land of Egypt. Therefore shall ye observe al my ordinances, and al
my judgments, and do them: I am the Lord.

They that give of their seed to Moloch shall dye therefore. Other goodly laws,

CAPI. XX.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses saying. (...)ui. xviii ^
Moloch / let him be slain: the people of the land shall stone him. And I will
set my face against that man, and will destroy him from among his people:
because he has given of his seed unto Moloch, for to defyle my sanctuary, and
to polute my holy name. And though that the people of the land hyde their eyes
from the man that gives of his seed unto Moloch, and kill him not: I will put
my face against that man, and against his kynred, and will destroy him, and all that go a hoorynge after him to commit hoordom with Moloch, from among their
people.

If a soul turn him self after such as work with spirytes, and after
soothsayers / to go a hoorynge after them, I will put my face against that
Soul, and will destroy him from among his people. Sanctifye your selves
therefore (...). xix. a
and be holy, for I am the Lord your God, keep ye mine ordinances, and do
them. I am the Lord which does sanctifye you.

(...)th. 15. ^ (...). xx* c (...)odi. 21. b
Who soever he be, that curses his Father or is mother / let him dye: for he
has cursed his father, and mother, his blood be upon him. (...). 22. a Reg.
xi. a
And the man that breaks wedlock with another man's wife: even he that
breaks wedlock with his neighbors wife let him be slain, both the
aduouterer, and the aduoutresse. And the man that lies (...)iti. 18. ^ (...).
27 ^
with his Fathers wife, and uncovers his Fathers secrettes, let them both
dye, their blood be upon them. (...). 18. ^
If a man lie with his daughter in law, let them dye both of them: they have
wrought abhominacion, their blood be upon them. Leuiti. (...). ^. Roma. ^. d.
If a man also lie with mankind after the manner as with woman kind, they have
both committed an abhominacyon: let them dye. Their blood be upon them. And
if a man take a wife, and her mother also, it is wickedness. They shall be burnt
with fire both he and she, that there be no wyckednes among you. And Leuiti.
1^. ^
if a man lie with a beast, let him dye, and ye shall slay the beast also.

If a woman go unto any beast / and lie down Leuiti. 1^. ^
If a man lie with a woman having her natural disease, and uncover her
secrets, and open her fountain / and she also open the fou^tayne of her
blood they shall both perysshe from among their people. Leu^. 18. ^ Math. 14 ^
Thou shall not uncover the secrets of thy mothers sister Leuit.. 18. ^
nor of thy fathers sister, for he that does so, has uncovered his next kyn:
they shall bear their wysdom. If a man lie with his uncles wife, and uncover
his uncles secrets: they shall bear their sin, and shall dye chyldlesse.

If a man take his brothers wife, it is an Leuiti. 18. d
Ye shall keep therefore all mine ordynaunces, and all my judgments, and do
them: that the land whyther I bring you to dwell therein / spew you not out.
Ye shall not walk in the manners of this nacyon which I cast out before you:
For they committed all these things, Deuteronomy. ix* ^
and therefore I abhorred them. But I have said unto you: ye shall enjoy their
land / and I will give it unto you to possess it: even a land that flows
with milk, and honey. I am the Lord your God / which have separated you from
other nacyons / Leuiti. (...)* ^ Deuteronomy. 14. ^
and therefore shall ye put dyfference between clean beasts, and unclean,
between unclean fowls, and clean. Ye shall not defyle your souls in beasts
/ and fowls, and in all manner crepynge thing that the ground brings forth,
which I have separated from you as unclean. Therefore shall ye be holy unto
me, for I the Lord am holy, and have severed you from other nations: that ye
should be mine. Deute. 13. ^ ^. Reg. 28. ^
If there be a man or woman that works with a spirit, or that is a soothsayer,
let them dye. Men shall stoone them with stones, their blood be upon them.

I law for the Priests.

CAPI. XXI.
ANd the lord spoke unto Moses: speak Reuiti. xix. f
baldness upon their head / nor shave of the locks of their beerd, nor make
any marks in their flesh. They shall be holy unto their god, and not polute
the name of their god, for the Sacrifyces of the Lord which are as the bread
of their God they do offer: therefore they shall be holy.

i. Tim. ii. b
Let them not take a wife that is an aduoutresse, or poluted, or put from her
husband: for such one is holy unto his god. Thou shalt sanctifye him
therefore / for he offers up the bread of thy God: he shall therefore be holy
unto the, for I the Lord which sanctifye you am holy. If a priests daughter
fall to play the hoore, she poluteth her Father: therefore must she be burnte
with fire. He that is the hye Priest among his brethren, upon whose head the
anoyntynge oil was powered, and that consecrated his hand to put on the
vestymentes, shall not uncover his head, nor rent his clothes Luke. ix. g
neither go to any dead body, nor make him self unclean on his Father or his
mother, neither shall go out of the sanctuary, nor polute the holy place of his
god, for the crown of the anoyntynge oil of his God, is upon him. I am the
Lord.

Ezec. 44. f.
He shall take a maid unto his wife: ii. Reg. v. b
for who soever has any blemyshe shall not come nere: as if he be blind, or
lame, or that has a bruised nose, or that has any mysshapen membre, or is
broken foted, or broken handed, or have no here on his eye brows or have a
web / or other blemysshe in his eye, or be maunge, or skalde, or has his
stoones

When he has a deformyte, let him not preace to offer the bread of his god.
Let him eat the bread of his God: even of the most holy / and of the holy:
Only let him not go in unto the veil, nor come nigh the altar, when he is
deformed / that he polute not my sanctuary, for I am the Lord, that sanctify
them. And Moses told it unto Aaron, and to his sons, and unto all the
children of Israel.

Who ought to absteyne from eating the things that were offered. How, what,
and when they should be offered.

CAPI. XXII.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: speak unto Aaron, and his sons,
that they be separated from the holy things of the children of Israel, and
that they polute not my holy name in those things which they halowe unto me:
I am the Lord. Say unto them: who soever he be of all your seed among your
generacyons after you, that goes unto the holy things which the Children of
Israel halowe unto the Lord, having his uncleanness upon him: that soul shall
perysshe from out of my sight. I am the Lord. Leuiti. x^^
What man soever of the seed of Aaron is a leper or has a runnynge issue, he
shall not eat of the holy thyn ges until he be clean. And who so touches
any man that is unclean over the soul of the dead, or a man whose seed
runs from him in his sleep, or who soever touches any worm, whereby he may
be made unclean or a man, of whom he may take uncleanness, (what soever
uncleanness he has) the same soul that has touched any such, shall be unclean
until even, and shall not eat of the holy things, until he have washed his
flesh with water.

And when the son is down / he shall be clean, and shall afterward eat of
the holy things: for asmoche as it is his food. Exodi. (...)
Of a beast that dies alone, or is rent with wyld beasts (whereby he may be
defiled) he shall not eat: I am the Lord. Let them keep therefore mine
ordinance, leest they for the same lade sin upon them, and dye for it, if
they defyle it. I the Lord sanctifye them. There shall no stranger eat of
the holy thing / neither a gest of the priests / neither shall an hired
servant eat of the holy thing. But if the priest bye any Soul with money,
he shall eat of it, like as he that is borne in his house shall they eat of his
bread. If the priests daughter also be married unto a stranger, she may not
eat of the hallowed heueofferynges. Notwithstanding if the Priests daughter be
a wydowe or deuorsed, and have no child, but is returned unto her Fathers
house again, she shall eat of her Fathers bread, as well as she did in her
youth. But there shall no stranger eat thereof. If a man eat of the holy
thing vnwyttyngly, he shall put the fyfth part there unto, and give it unto the
Priest with the hallowed thing. And the priests shall not defyle the holy
things of the Children of Israel (which they offer unto the lord) to lade
them selves with mysdoynge, and trespace while they eat their holy things /
for I the lord do halow them.

And the lord spoke unto Moses, saying:

An ox / or a sheep, that has any membre

Of the holy doyes that they should hepe.

CAPI. XXIII.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: Exodi. 23. b
Six days ye shall work, but the Seventh day is the Sabbath of rest, an
holy co^uocacyon, so that ye do no work therein, it is the Sabbath of the
Lord: in all your dwellynges. These are the feasts of the Lord, even holy
conuocacyons, which ye shall proclayme in their ceasons. In the.xiiii. day of
the first month at even is the lords Exodi. xii c Nume. 28. c
Passover. And in the fyftene day of the same month is the feast of sweet
bread unto the Lord: seven days ye must eat vnleuended bread. Exodi. xii b
In the first day ye shall have an holy conuocacyon: ye shall do no laborous
work therein. But ye shall offer sacrifyces unto the Lord through out those
seven days / and in the seventh day is an holy conuocacyon / ye shall do no
laborous work therein.

And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: Number. xv. a
when ye be come in to the land (which I give unto you) and reap down the
harvest thereof, ye shall bring a sheafe of the first fruytes of your harvest
unto the priest, which shall wave the sheafe before the the lord to be
accepted for you, and even the morrow after the Sabbath the Priest shall wave
it. And ye shall offer that day when ye wave the sheafe, an he lamb without
blemyshe of a year old, for a burntofferynge unto the Lord: and the meat
offering thereof, shall be made of two tenthdeales of fine flower mengled with
oil, to be a sacrifyce unto the lord for a sweet savor: and the drink
offering thereof shall be of wine, even the fourth deal of an Hyn.

And ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched

Wherefore ye shall do after mine ordinances, and keep my laws, and do them,
and ye shall dwell in the land in safetye. And the land shall give her
fruit, and ye shall eat your fill, and dwell therein in safetye. And if ye
shall say: what shall we eat the seventh year, for we shall not sow, nor
gather in our increase? I will send my blessyng upon you in the syxte year /
and it shall bring forth fruit for three years: and ye shall sow the eight
year, and eat yet of old corn until the.ix. year: even until her fruytes
come, ye shall eat of old store. The land shall not Psalm. 24. a.
the land is mine, and ye put strangers and soiourners with me. In all the
land of your possession, ye shall grant a redemption for the land. Ruth.
iiii. a Iere 32. b
If thy brother be waxed poor, and has sold away of his possession: and if
any of his kyn come to redeem it, let him bye out that which his brother
sold. And if he have no man to redeem it, let his hand get as much as may be
sufficient to bye it out again, and let him count how long it has be
sold, and deliver the rest unto the man to whom he sold it, that he may
return to his possessyon again. But and if his hand can not get sufficient
to restore to the other again, the^ that which is sold shall remain in the
hand of him that has bought it, until the year of Iubelye: and in the
Iubelye it shall come out, and he shall return unto his possessyon again. And
if a man sell a house or a dwelling with in the walls of a city, he may bye
it out again wtin a hoole year after it is sold: even any day of the year
shall he redeem it again.

But and if he bye it not out again with

If thy brother be waxed poor, and fallen in decay with the, thou shall releue
him, both the stranger, and soiourner / that he may live with the. Exodus 221
Deute. 23^ Ezeche. 2^^
And thou shalt take none vsurye of him, or vantage. But thou shall fear thy
god, that thy brother may live with the.

Thou shall not give him thy money upon Exodi. 2^^ Deuteronomy. ^^^
If thy brother that dwells by the, be waxed poor, and be sold unto the,
thou shalt not compel him to the bondage of servants: but as an hired
servant, and as a soiourner he shall be with the / and shall serve the unto the
year of Iubelye, and then shall he depart from the: both he and his children
with him, and shall return unto his own kynred again / and unto the
possession of his Fathers: for they are my servants, which I brought out of
the land of Egypt, and shall not therefore be sold as bondmen. Thou shall not
reygne over him cruelly, but shalt fear thy God. Thy bondseruaunt, and thy
bondemayde which thou shall have, shall be of the heathen that are round about
you: of them ye shall purchase servants, and maids, and of the children of
the strangers that are soiourners among you, and of their generacyons that
are with you, which they begatte in your land. These shall be your possession,
and ye shall take them as enherytaunce for your children after you, to possess
them, they shall be your bondmen for ever. But over your brethren the children
of Israel, ye shall not reygne one over another cruelly.

If a soiourner or a stranger wax rich that will) either his uncle or his
uncles son may by him out: or any that is nigh of kyn unto him of his kynred,
may redeem him: either if his hand can get so much, he may be losed. And he
shall reken with him that bought him, from the year that he was sold in, un to
the year of Iubelye, and the price of his byenge shall be valued according
unto the nombre of years. As a hired servant shall he be with him. If there
be yet many years behind, according unto them let him give again for his
delyueraunce, of the money that he was bought for. If there remain but few
years unto the year of Iubelye, let him count with him again / and
according (...) unto his years give him again for his redemption, and he
shall be with him year by year as an hired servant, and the other shall not
reygne cruelly over him in thy sight. If he be not redeemed thus, he shall go
out in the year of Iubelye, both he and his children with him: for the children
of Israel are my servants, which I brought out of the land of Egypt. I am
the lord your God.

They are blessed that keep those things that god byddeth.

CAPI. XXVI.
YE shall Deute. v. a
make you no ydols / nor graven image / neither rear you up any stone, neither
shall ye set up any image of stoone in your land / to worship it: for I am the
lord your god: ye shall keep my Sabbothes, and fear my sanctuary: for I am the
lord. If ye walk in mine ordinances, and keep my commandments, and do
them, I will send you rain in the right ceason / and the land shall yield
her increase, and the trees of the field shall give their fruit. And the
thresshynge shall reach unto wine harvest / and the wyneharuest shall reach
unto sowynge time, and ye shall eat your bread in plenteousnes, and dwell in
your land peaseably. And I will send peace in the land, and ye shall sleep
without any man to make you a frayde. And I will ryd evil beasts out of the
land, and there shall no sword go thorowout your land. And ye shall chase
your enemies, and they shall fall before you upon the sword. ^osua. 23. c
And five of you shall chase an hundred, and an hundred of you shall put ten
thousand to flight, and your enemies shall fall before you upon the sword.

For I will have respect unto you, and ^orsit. ^ d
And I will make my dwelling place among you, and my soul shall not loathe
you. I will walk among you, and will be your god, and ye shall be my people.
I am the Lord your god, which brought you out of the land of Egypt, that ye
should not be their bondmen, and I have broken the cheynes of your yoke, and
made you go up right. Deuteronomy. 28. b Mala. ii. a
But and if ye will not harken unto me, nor will do all these my
commandments. And if ye shall despise mine ordynaunces, either if your soul
abhor my laws, so that ye will not do all my commandments, but break
mine appointment, I also will do this unto you. For I will bring upon you
fearfulness, swellynge of body, and the burning ague, to consume your eyes,
and gendre sorrow of heart. And ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your
enemies shall eat it.

And I will set my face against you, and Prove 28 a
and ye shall flee, when no man follows you. And if ye will not yet for all
this harken unto me, then will I punysshe you seven times more for your sins,
and will break the pride of your stubburnesse. And I will make your heaven as
iron, and your earth as brass. And your labor shall be spent in vain. For your
land shall not give her increase, neither shall the trees of the land give their
fruytes. And if ye walk contrary unto me, and will not harken unto me, I will
bring seven times mo plages upon you, according to your sins. I will also
send in wild beasts upon you, which shall depryue you of your children, and
destroy your cattle, and make you few in nombre, and cause your hye ways
to grow unto a wilderness.

And if ye may not be reformed by these Osee iiii. ^. (...). ^. ^
ye shall eat, and not be satisfied. And if ye will not yet for all this harken
unto me, but will walk against me, I will walk contrary unto you also in
indygnacion, and will chastise you seven times for your sins. Reg. vi. ^
And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your daughters
shall ye devour. I will destroy your hye places, and rore out your images, and
cast your carcasses upon the bodies of your ydols, and my soul shall abhor
you.

And I will make your cities desolate, and and ye shall be in your enemies
land: even then shall the land rest, and rejoice in her Sabbothes. As long
as it lies void it shall rest, because it did not rest in your Sab bothes,
when ye dwelte upon it. And upon them that are left alive of you, I will send
a faintness in to their hertes in the land of their enemies: and the sound
of a shaking leaf, shall chase them, and when they flee the sword, they shall
fall: no man following upon them. They shall fall one upon another, as

And they that are left of you, shall pyne away in their vnryghtousnes / even
in their enemies land, and in the misdeeds of their fathers shall they
consume. And they shall confess their misdeeds and the misdedes of their
fathers for their trespace, which they have trespaced against me, and for that
also that they have walked contrary unto me. Therefore I also will walk
contrary unto them, and will bring them in to the land of their enemies. And
then at the least way their un cyrcumcysed hertes shall be tamed, and they
shall make an atonement for their misdeeds. And Deuteronomy. iiii. e
I will remember my covenant / with Jacob, and my bond with Isaac, and mine
appoyntmente with Abraham will I remember, and will think on the land.

The land shall be left of them, and shall enjoy Deuteronomy. iiiii. e
I will not cast them away, neither will abhor them, to destroy them
utterly, and to break mine appointment with them: for I am the Lord their
God. I will for their sakes remember the covenant made unto their fathers,
whom I brought out of the land of Egypt, in the sight of the Hethen, that I
might be their God: I am the Lord These are the ordynaunces, and judgments,
and laws, which the Lord made between him, and the children of Israel in
mount Sinay, by the hand of Moses.

Of dyuces vows, and of tithes. ^c^.

CAPI. XXVII.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: Nume. 3. ^
sycles of silver, after the weight of the sanctuari. And if it be a woman /
the value shall be thyrtye sycles. And from five years to twentye, the male
shall be set at twenty sycles, and the female at ten sycles. And from a month
unto five year, the male shall be set at five sycles of silver, and the female
at three. And he that is sixtye year old, and above, shall be valued at fiftye
sycles, and the woman at ten.

But if he be to poor so to be set, he shall

If any man dedicate his house, to be holy that vowed) may redeem it no more.
But when the field goes out in the year of Iubely, it shall be made holy unto
the Lord: even as a field that is utterly put away, and it shall be the
Priests possessyon.

If a man sanctify unto the lord a field,

And all setting shall be according to the sycle of the sanctuary. One sycle
conteyneth twentye halfepence. Exodi. 30. b
But the first borne of the beasts that was appointed unto the Deute. 15. d
Lord, may no man sanctify: whyther it be ox or sheep, for it is the Lords
already. If it be an unclean beast he shall redeem it, as it is set at, and
give the fyfth part more thereto: Or, if it be not redeemed, it shall be sold,
according to the value.

Notwithstanding, no dampened thing

Every tithe of the land which is of the seed of the land, or of the fruit
of the trees is the lords, and is sanctified unto the lord And if a man will
redeem ought of his tithes, let him add the fyfth part thereto. And every
tithe of ox and of sheep and of every beast that goes under the rod even
every tenth shall be holy unto the lord. He shall not look if it be good or
bad, nor change it. Else if he change it, both it, and that it was changed
withal, shall be hallowed unto the Lord and may not be redeemed.

These are the commandments, which the Lord commanded by Moses unto the
children of Israel in mount Sinay.



The end of the third book of Moses: called in the Hebrew Uaicrah: and in the
Latin Leuiticus.
The fourth book of Moses called in the Hebrew Uaiedabbar: and in the Latin
Numeri.
All that are apt for battle are nombred. The ^^yb^ of Leut must ministre in
the Tabernacle.

CAPI. Primo.
ANd the Lord spoke unto

Exodi. 30 v Number. ^6. a 2. Reg 24. a
Take ye the sum of all the multititude of the children of Israel, after
their kynreds and household of their fathers, with the nombre of their names,
all that are males, head by head, from.xx. year and above: even all that go
forth to the war in Israel, thou and Aaron shall nombre them thorowout their
armies, and with you shall be men of every trybe, whereof every one is head man
of the house of his fathers.

And these are the names of the men that shall stand with you: of ( the trybe
of) Ruben, Elizur the son of Sedeur: of Simeon, Selumiel the son of Suri Sadai:
of Judah, Nahesson the son of Aminadab: of Isachar, Nathanael the son of Zuar:
of Zabulon, Eliab the son of Helon. Among the children of Joseph: of Ephraim:
Elizama the son of Amihud: of Manasse, Gamaliel the son of Peda Zur: of Ben
Iamin, Abidan the son of Gedeoni: of Dan, Ahiezer the son of Ammi Sadai: of
Aser, Pagiel the son of Ocran: of Gad, Elisaph the son of Deguel: of
Nephthali, Ahira the son of Ena^.

These were of great fame in the congregacyon,

And the children of Ruben Isreal's eldest son thorowout their generacyons,
and their kynreds and houses of their Fathers, in the nombre of names head by
head (al males from xx. year and above) as many as did go forth to the war,
the nombre of them that were of the trybe of Ruben, was. xivi. thousand and
five hundred.

Of the children of Symeon thorowout

Of the children of Gad thorowout their generacyons, and their kynreds and
householdes of their fathers, the nombre of the names from. xx. year and above,
all that went forth to the war: The nombre of them that were of the tribe of
Gad, was. xlv. thousand six hundred and fyftye.

Of the children of Judah thorowout their generacyons, and their kynreds, and
houses of their fathers, the nombre of names from xx. year and above: all that
were able to go forth to the war. The nombre of them that were of the trybe
of Judah, was. lxxiiii. thousand, and six hundred.

Of the children of Izachar thorowout

Of the children of Zabulon, thorowout their generacyons, and their kynreddes
and houses of their fathers the nombre of names from. xx. year and above, which
were all able to go forth in the host: The nombre of them that were of the
trybe of Zabulon, was. lvii. thousand, and four hundred.

Of the children of Joseph: namely of the children of Ephraim thorowout their
generacyons and their kynreds, and houses of their fathers, the nombre of names
from. xx. year and above, all that went out to the war: the nombre of them
that were of the trybe of Ephraim, was xl* thousand, and five hundred.

Of the children of Manasse thorowout their generacyons, and their kynreds and
houses

Of the children of Ben Iamin thoroweout their generacyons, and their kynreddes
and houses of their Fathers / the nombre of names from xx. year and above, all
that went forth to the war: The nombre of them that were of the trybe of Ben
Iamin, was. xxxv. thousand, and four hundred.

Of the children of Dan thorowout their generacyons and their kynreds, and
houses of their fathers: the nombre of names from. xx. year old and above, all
that went forth to the war: The nombre of them that were of the trybe of Dan,
was lxii. M. and vii. hundred.

Of the children of Aser thorowout their

Of the children of Nephthali: thorowout their generacions and their kynreds
and houses of their fathers. The nombre of names from xx. years and above, all
that might go forth to the war. The nombre of them that were of the trybe of
Nephthali was. liii. thousand and. iiii. hundred.

These are the sommes which Moses and Aaron nombred, and the princes of
Israel: those. xii. men, which were over the house of their fathers. And all the nombres of the children of Israel, thorowout the houses of their fathers,
from. xx. years and above, all that went forth to the war in Israel, drew
all unto the sum of Exod^^. Nume. ^
six hundred thousand and three thousand, five hundred and fyftie. But the
Levites after the trybes of their fathers were not nombred among them.

And the lord spoke unto Moses, saying.

The order of the tents. The heads of the kynreds of Israel.

CAPI. II.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron, saying. Eeuery man of the children

On the south side shall, the standerde of

And the Tabernacle of witness shall go

And fast by him, shall be the thybe of Manasse, and the Captain over the
sons of Manasse, was Gamaleel the son of Pedazur: His host and the nombre
of them. xxxii. thousand, and two hundred. And the thybe of Ben Iamin also:
and the Captain over the sons of Ben Iamin, was Abidan, the son of
Gedeoni: His host and the nombre of them. xxxv. thousand, and. iiii. hundred.

All that were appoynsed with the host of Ephraim, were an hundred thousand,
eight thousand, and an hundred, thorowout their armies, and they shall go into
the third place. The standerd of the host of Dan shall keep

These are the sommes of the children of Israel thorowout the houses of their
fathers even all the nombres that pytched thorowout their host. vi. hundred
thousand. iii. thousand. v. hundred and fyftie. But the Leuits were not
nombred among the children of Israel, as the Lord commanded Moses. And the
children of Israel did according to all that the lord commanded Moses, for
so they pytched with their standerdes, and so they iourneyed thorowout their
kynreddes, and thorowout the housholdes of their fathers.

The Levites go not out to battle, but minyster in the sanituary. They pytche
their tent next to the ha^^^^aryo^.

CAPI. III.
THse are the generacyons of Aaron and Number. 2^. ^
These are the names of the sons of Aaron which were Leui. viii. ^
priests anointed, and whose hand was consecrated to ministre.

Leuiti. x. ^.
And Nadab and Abihu dyed before the Lord when they offered straung fire
before the Lord in the wilderness of Sinay, and had no children. And Eleazar
and Ithamar ministered in the sight of Aaron their father.

And the lord spoke unto Moses, saying: Name. 17 b and. xviii. a
that they may serve him, and wait upon him and upon all the multitude, before
the Tabernacle of witness, to do the service of the habitacyon. They shall
keep all the apparel of the tabernacle of witness, and wait upon the children
of Israel, to do the service of the habitacion. And thou shalt give the
Levites unto Aaron, and his sons, for they are given and delivered un to him
of the children of Israel. And thou shalt appoint Aaron and his sons to
wait on their priests office: and the stranger that comes nigh, shall be
slain.

And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying. Behold, I have taken the Levites from
among the children of Israel, Exodus xiii ^ Name. 8. ^.
for all the first borne that opens the matryce among the children of Israel,
and the Levites shall be mine: because all the first borne are mine: for the
same day that I smote all the first borne in the land of Egypt, I hallowed
unto me all the first borne in Israel, both man and beast, and mine they shall
be: I am the Lord.

And the Lord spoke unto Moses in the Exodi. vi^.
And these were the children of Leui, in their names: Gerson, and Cahath and
Merari. And these are the names of the children of Gerson in their kynreds:
Libni and Semei. The sons of Cahath in their kynreds: Amram, Iezehar, Hebron,
and Dziel. And these are the sons of Merari in their kynreds Mahelt and Musi.
These are the kynreds of the Levites, according to the houses of their fathers.

Of Gerson came the kynred of the Libnites /

And of Merari came the kynred of Number. (...)
xxii. thousand.

And the Lord said unto Moses. Nombre of the children of Israel, and the
cattle of the Levites, for all the first gendred of the cattle of the
children of Israel. And Moses nombred as the Lord commanded him, all the
first borne of the children of Israel. And all the first borne males rehearsed by
their names, (from a month old and above, according to their nombre)
were.xxii. thousand two hundred and.lxxiii.

And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying. Exodi. 30. b Leuiti. 27. d (...). 45.
d.
the sycle conteynyng twenty halfepence. And give the money wherewith the odd
nombre of them is redeemed, unto Aaron and his sons. And Moses took the
redempcyo^ money, of the overplus that were moo the^ the Levites: of the
fyrstborne of the children of Israel took he this money: even a M. CCC.
and.lxv. Sycles, after the sycle of the sanctuarye. And Moses gave the money of
them that were redeemed, unto Aaron and his sons, according to the word of
the lord, even as the lord commanded Moses.

The offices of the Levites.

CAPI. IIII.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses and

And upon the show table they shall spread

And the Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron

But let them not go in, to se when the holy things are folden up, lest they
dye.

And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: Take also the sum of the children of
Gerson, thorowout the houses of their fathers, and thorowout their kynreds:
from.xxx. year and above until fyftye shalt thou nombre them, all that are
able to go forth to the war, for to do service in the Tabernacle of witness.
And this is the service of the kynred of the Gersonites, to serve and to bear,
They shall bear the curtaynes of the dwelling, and the roof of the
Tabernacle of witness, his covering, and the coueryng of taxus skynnes, that
is on hye above upon it, and the hanging of the door which is in the
tabernacle of witness: and the hangynges of the court, and the hanging that
is in the entering in of the gate of the court round about the dwelling and
the altar, with the cords, and all the instruments that serve unto them, and
all that is made for to serve them. At the mouth of Aaron and his sons, shall
all the service of the children of the Gersonites be done, in all their charges
and in all their service, and ye shall nombre unto them al their burdens to
keep. And this is the service of the kynred of the children of Gerson in the
tabernacle of witness, and their watch shall be under the hand of Ithamar
the son of Aaron the priest.

And thou shalt nombre the sons of Merari

This is the service of the kynreds of the sons of Merari according to all
their office in the Tabernacle of witness under the hand of Ithamar the Son
of Aaron the Priest. And Moses and Aaron and the princes of the multitude
nombred the sons of the Cahathites, after their kynreds / and houses of their
fathers, from.xxx. year and above unto fyftye, all that were able to go forth
to the war, to do service in the tabernacle of wytnes. And the nombres of
them throwout their kynreddes were two thousand, seven hundred / and.l. This
is the nombre of the kynreds of Cahath: namely, all that might do service in
the tabernacle of witness, which Moses and Aaron did nombre, according to the
commandment of the Lord by the hand of Mores.

These are the nombres of the sons of

And the nombers of them thorowout their kynreds / and houses of their fathers,
were two thousand: vi. hundred, and xxx. This is the nombre of the kynreds of
the sons of Gerson of all that did service in the Tabernacle of wytnes, which
Moses and Aaron did nombre according to the commandment of the lord.

And these are the nombres of the kynreddes of the sons of Merari thorowout
their kynreds / and houses of their fathers, from xxx. year up unto.l. all that
went forth to the war, and served the tabernacle of witness. And the
nombres of them after their kynreddes were three thousand and two hundred.

This is the sum of the kynreds of the sons of Merari, which Moses and
Aaron nombred according to the word of the lord by the hand of Moses. And so
all the nombres of the Levites which Moses, Aaron, and the lords of Israel
nombred, after their kynreds / and housholdes of their fathers, from xxx. year
up unto.l. every one that came to do his office and service, and to bear his
burden in the tabernacle of wytnes: were (when they were nombred) viii.
thousand, five hundred and.lxxx. According to the word of the lord did
(Aaron) nombre them by the hand of Moses, every one according to their
service and charge, and according to their offices as the Lord commanded
Moses.

The knowledge of sin. The clensynge of sin. The law of the first fruytes,
and of ielousye.

CAPI. V.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying. Leui. (...)
put out of the host, every leper and every one that has an issue, and who
soever is defiled upon a soul. Both male and female shall ye put out: even out
of the host / shall ye put them, that they defyle not the tents among which
I dwell. And the children of Israel did so, and put them out of the host, even
as the Lord spoke unto Moses, so did the children of Israel.

And the lord spoke unto Moses, saying. speak unto the children of Israel:
whyther it be L(...) (...)
man or woman. If they have committed any sin that a man does, and have
trespaced against the lord, that soul has done amysse. Therefore they shall
knowledge their sin which they have done, and let him restore again the
hurt that he has done in the hole, and put the fyfte part of it more thereto,
and give it unto him whom he has trespaced against. But and if there be not a
man to restore the hurt unto, nor a kynsman of And every heueofferyng that is
made of the holy things of the children of Israel which they bring unto the
priest, shall be his: and every man's hallowed things shall be his: and what
soever any man gives the priest, it shall be his. And the Lord spoke unto
Moses, saying. Speak unto the children of Israel and say unto them. If any
man's wife go a side, and trespace against him, so that an other man lie with
her flesshely, and it be hyd from the eyes of her husband, and is not come to
light that she is defiled, and there is no witness against her, neither she
taken with the manner, and the spyryte of ielousye comes upon him, so that he
is jealous over his wife which is defiled: or if the spirit of ielousye come
upon him, so that he is jealous over his wife which is yet undefiled: then
let the man bring his wife unto the Priest, and bring with her an offering
for her: the tenth part of an Epha of Barlye meal, but let him power none
oil upon it, nor put fra^kensence thereon: for it is an offering of ielousye,
an offering for a remembrance, causynge the sin to be thought upon.

And the priest shall bring her and set her Number. xix. b
take holy water in an erthen vessel, and of the dust that is in the floor of
the habitacyon, and put it in to the water. And let the Priest set the woman
before the Lord, and uncover the woman's head, and put the memoryal of the
offering in her hands which is the ielousye offering, and the priest shall
have bitter and cursed water in his hand, and the priest shall charge her, and
say unto the woman. If no no man have lain with the, neither have gone aside
to uncleanness without thy husband, then have thou no harm of this bitter,
and cursed waters.

But and if thou have gone aside behynd thine husband, and art defiled, and
some other man has lain with the beside thine husband: (and the priest shall
charge the woman with an horrible curse, and the priest shall say unto the
woman) the Lord make the to be an abhominacyon and a curse among thy people:
when the lord does make thy thygh root, and thy belly swell. These cursed
waters go into the bowels of the that they may make thy belly swel, and thy
thygh root, and let the woman say. Amen Amen.

And let the priest write these curses. And

And then the priest shall take the ielousye offering out of the woman's hand
/ and wave it before the lord, and bring it unto the altar and the priest
shall take an handful of the offering for a memoryall, and burn it upon the
altar, and then make the woman drink the water: and when he has made the
woman drink the waters (if she be defiled and have trespassed against her
husband) then shall the cursed / and bitter waters go into her, and her belly
shall swell, and her thygh shall rot, and that woman shall be a curse among her
people. And if the woman be not defiled, but is clean, she shall have no
harm, but shall conceive and bear. This is the law of ielousye, when a wife
goth a side behind her husband, and is defiled / or when the spirit of
Ielousye comes upon a man, and he being jealous over his wife / does bring
her before the lord, and the priest shall do according unto all this law: and
the man shall be gyltlesse, and the woman shall bear her syn.

The law of abstinence. The blessing of the people

CAPI. VI.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying. Iudi. xiii. ^ Amos. (...). d.
wine and strong drink, and shall drink no vynegre of wine nor of strong
drink, nor shall drink what soever is pressed out of grapes: and shall eat
no fresh grapes, neither yet dried. As long as his abstynence endures, shall
be eat nothing that is made of the vine tree, or of the kyrnels, or of the
husk of the grape. As long as he voweth, and is separated, there shall no
rasure come upon his head. But until his days be out, in the which he
seperateth him self unto the Lord, he shall be holy, and shall let the locks
of his here grow. As long as he consecrateth him self unto the lord: he
shall come at no dead body: he shall not make him self unclean at the death of
his father, mother, brother or sister, because that the vow of the abstynence
of his god is upon his head.

All the days of his abstynence he is holy unto the Lord.

And if it fortune that any man by chance Acts. 1^. ^
shave his head the day of his clensynge: even the seventh day he shall shave
it. And the eight day he shall bring two Turtles or two young pygeons to the
Priest, before the door of the Tabernacle of witness.

And the priest shall offer the one for sin and the other for a
burntofferyng, and make an atonement for him, as concerning that he sinned
upon a soul, and shall halowe his head the same day, and he shall consecrate
him self unto the Lord (the time of his abstynencye) and shall bring a lamb
of a year old for trespace: but the days that were before are lost, because
his abstynencye was defiled. This is the law of the absteyner, when the time
of his abstynence is out, he shall be brought unto the door of the tabernacle
of witness, and he shall bring his offering unto the Lord, an he lamb, of
a year old without blemysshe for a burntoffrynge, and a she lamb of a year
old, without blemysh for sin, a ram without blemysshe also for a
peaceofferynge, and a basket of sweet bread even cakes of fine flower myngled
with oil, and wafers of sweet bread / anointed with oil with their meat
offerynges and drink offerynges.

And the priest shall bring him before the take them of him, and) wave them
before the Lord.

And these holy things shall be the priests,

The Lord bless the and keep the.

The Lord make his face shine upon the, and be merciful unto the. The Lord
lift up his countenance upon the, and give the peace. And they shall put my
name upon the children of Israel, and I will bless them.

The offering of the Lords, and heads of Israel.

CAPI. VII.
ANd it fortuned in the day, when Moses Exodi. ^
anointed it and sanctified it, and all the apparel thereof, the altar also and
all the vessels thereof: and had anointed them and sanctified them, then the
princes of Israel, heads over the houses of their fathers which were the
lords of the tribes, standing in their offices offered and brought their
sacrifyces before the lord. vi. covered charettes, and. xii. oxen, one charet
for two lords, and for one, an ox and they brought them before the habitacyon.

And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying. Take it of them, that they may be to
do the service of the tabernacle of witness, and thou shalt give them unto
the Levites, to every man according to his office. And Moses took the charettes
and the oxen, and gave them unto the Levites two charettes and four oxen he
gave unto the sons of Gerson according unto their office. And four charettes
and eight oxen he gave unto the sons of Merari (according unto their offices)
under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest. The offrynge of
Nahesson
But unto the sons of Cahath Number. ^
he gave none, because they had upon them the office of holy things, which
they did bear upon shoulders.

And the princes offered for the dedicatynge

The second day Nathaneel, the son of * The offrynge of Nathaneel*
Zuar, captain over Izachar did offer. And he offered for his gift, a silver
charger of an hundred and thyrtye sycles: a silver boule of seuentye sycles
after the sycle of the sanctuarye: both full of fine flower myngled with oil
for a meatofferynge: a golden spone of ten sycles, full of sense: a bullock, a
Ram, a lamb of a year old for a burntofferyng: and an he goote for sin:
and for a (peace of feryng) two oxen, five rams, five gootes five lambs of
one year old. This was the offering of Nathaneel the son of Zuar.

The third day, Eliab the son of Helon * The offering of Eliab.
captain of the children of Zabulo^ did offer. And his gift was: a silver
Charger, of an hundred, and thyrtye sycles: a silver bolle of seue^tye sycles
after the sycle of the sanctuary and both were full of fine flower, myngled
with oil for a meatofferyng: a golden spone of ten sycles full of sense: a
bullock, a Ram, a lamb of a year old for a burntofferynge: an he goote for
syn: and for a peaceofferynge two oxen, five rams, five he gootes, five
lambs, of one year old. This was the offering of Eliab the son of Helon.

The fourth day, Elizur the son of Sedeur * The offering of Elizur.
captain of the children of Ruben, did offce. And his gift was: a silver
charger of an hundred and thyrty sycles: a silver bolle of seuentye sicles,
after the Sicle of the sanctuary, and they were both full of fine flower myngled
with oil for a meatofferyng: a golden spoone of ten sycles, full of sense: a
bullock, a Ram, a lamb of a year old for a burntofferynge, an he goote for
sin: and for a peaceofferyng two oxen, five rams / five he gootes, and five
lambs, of one year old. This was the offering of Elizur the son of Sedeur.

The fyfte day, Selumiell the son of * The offering of Selumiell.
Zuri Sadai, captain of the children of Simeon, offered. His gift was: a
silver charger of an hundred, and thyrtye sicles, a silver bolle of seuentye
sicles: after the sicle of the sanctuary, and they were both full of fine
flower myngled with oil for a meatofferynge: a golden spoone of ten sicles full
of senee: a bullock, a ram, a lamb of a year old for a burntofferynge: an he
goote for syn: and for a peaceofferynge two oxen, five rams, v. he gotes, v.
lambs of a year old. This was the offering of Selumiell the son of Zuti
Sadai.

The sixte day, Eliasaph the son of Deguell * The offering of Eliasaph.
captain of the children of Gad, offered:

The seventh day, Elisama the son of * The offering of elisama.
Amiud captain of the children of Ephraim, offered. And his sacrifyce was: a
silver charger of an hundred, and thyrtye sicles: a silver bolle of seuentye
sycles: after the sycle of the sanctuary, both full of fine flour myngled with
oil, for a meatofferynge, a golden spoone of ten sicles, full of sense: a
bullock, a Ram, a lamb of a year old for a burntofferynge: an he goote for
sin: and for a peaceofferynge two oxen, v, rams. v. he gootes. v. lambs of
a year old. This was the offering of Elisama the son of Amiud. * The
offering of gamaliel.


The eight day, offered Gamaliel the son of Pedazur, the captain of the
Children of * The offering of Abidan.


The nynth day, Abidan the son of Gedeoni captain of the Children of Ben
Iamin offered. And his gift was a silver charger of an hundred and. xxx.
sycles, a silver bolle of. lxx. sycles after the sycle of the sanctuary, both
full of fine flower myngled with oil for a meatofferynge: a golden spoone of
ten sycles, full of sense: a bullock, a ram, a lamb of one year old for a
burntofferynge, an he goote for syn: and for a peaceofferynge two oxen, five
rams, five he gootes, five lambs of one year old. This was the offering
of Abidan the son of Gedeoni. * The offering of Ahiezer.


The tenth day. Ahiezer the son of Ammi Sadai, captain of the children of
Dan * The offering of Pagiel, or Phgiel.


The eleventh day, Pagiel the son of Ocran captain of the children of Aser,
offe red. And his offering was: a silver charger of an hundred and thyrtye
sicles: a silver bolle of seuentye sicles after the sicle of the sanctu ary,
both full of fine flower myngled with oil for a meatofferynge: a golden
spoone of ten sicles, full of sense, a bullock, a Ram, a lamb of one year
old for a burntofferynge: an he goote for syn: and for a peaceofferynge two
oxen. v. rams, v. he gootes, v. lambs of one year old. This was the
offering of Pagiell the son of Ocran. * The offering of Ahira.


The twelfth day, Ahira the son of Enan, captain of the Children of
Nephthali offered. And his offering was: a silver charger of an hundred, and.
xxx. sicles: a silver bolle of ten sicles after the sicle of the sanctu ary,
both full of fine flower myngled with oil for a meatofferynge, a golden
spoone of ten sicles, full of sense: a bullock / a Ram, a lamb of one year
old for a burntofferynge: an he goote for sin: and for a peaceofferyng, two
oxen, v. rams, v. he gootes. v. lambs of one year old. This was the
offering of Ahira, the son of Enan.

This was the dedicacyon of the altar in

All the bullockes for the burntofferynge were twelve, the rams twelve, the
lambs of a year old twelve, with the meatofferyng: and the he gootes for
sin, twelve. And all the oxen for the peaceofferynge were. xxiiii. the rams
sixtye, the he gootes. lx. the lambs of a year old sixtye. This was the
Dedicacyo^ of the altar, after that it was anointed. And when Moses was gone
into the tabernacle of witness, to speak with him, he herd the voice of one
speaking unto him from the merciseate, that was upon the arc of wytnes
between the two Cherubyns, and he talked with him.

The order of the lamps. The form of the candelstycke. The clensynge and
offering of the Levites

CAPI. VIII.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: speak unto Aaron / and say unto
him: Exodi. 25. d
when thou put on the lamps, the same seven Lamps shall give light
toward the forefront of the Candelstycke.

And Aaron did even so, and lyghted the lamps toward the forefront of the
Candelstycke, as the Lord commanded Moses, and the work of the Candelstycke
was of styffe gold, both the shafte and the flowers thereof, according unto
the vision which the Lord had showed Moses / even so he made the Candelstycke.
And the lord spoke unto Moses, saying: take the Levites from among the
Children of Israel, and cleanse them. But thus shalt thou do unto them, when
thou clensest them: sprynkle water of purifyenge upon them, and let them make a
rasure to run alonge upon all the flesh of them, and let them wasshe their
clothes / and so make them selves clean.

Then let them take a bullock with his

And the Liuytes shall put their hands upon the heads of the bullockes, and
thou shalt offer the one for sin, and the other for a burntofferynge unto
the Lord / that thou may make an atonement for the Levites. And thou shalt
set the Levites before Aaron and his sons / and wave them for a waueofferynge
before the Lord. And thus thou shall separate the Levites from among the
Children of Israel, and the Levites shall be mine: after that, shall the Levites
go in, to do the service of the tabernacle of witness.

And thou shall cleanse them and wave them,

(...)
For all the first borne of the Children of Israel are mine / both man and
beast: since the day that I smote every first borne in the land of Egypt, I
sanctified them for my self: and I have taken the Leuytes for all the first
borne of the Children of Israel, and have given the Leuytes as a gift unto
Aaron, and his sons from among the Children of Israel, to do the service of
the children of Israel in the Tabernacle of wytnes, to make an atonement for
the children of Israel, that there be no plage among the children of Israel,
if the children of Israel come nigh unto the holy things. And Moses, and Aaron,
and all the congregacyon of the children of Israel did with the Levites,
according unto all that the Lord commanded Moses concerning the Leuytes:
even so did the children of Israel unto them. And the Levites were purifyed,
and washed their clothes.

And Aaron waued them before the lord, Number. iiii. ^
from. xxv. year upward they shall go in to wait upon the service of the
tabernacle of witness, and from the age of. l. year, they shall cease
waiting upon the service thereof, and shall serve no more: but shall minystre
unto their brethren in the Tabernanacle of witness, to wait, but shall do no
more service. Thus therefore shalt thou do unto the Leuytes in their watch.

The Passover. Of the Cloud.

CAPI. IX
AND the Lord spoke unto Moses in Exodus 12. a. ^^^iti. 23. a Nume. 28. c Deuteronomy.
16, ^.
were come out of the land of Egypt, saying: let the children of Israel
offce Passover in his ceason: even the. xiiii. day of this month at even let
them keep it in his ceaso^, according to all the ceremonies of it, and
according to all the manners thereof. And Moses spoke unto the Children of
Israel, that they should offer Passover, and they offered Passover the.
xiiii. day of the first month at even in the wilderness of Sinay:
according to all that the Lord commanded Moses, even so did the children of
Israel.

And certain men were defiled upon the soul of a man, that they might not
offer Exodi. 12. ^ John^. xix. f
nor break any bone of it: But according to all the ordinance of the
Passover let them offer it.

But the man that is clean, and is not in Exodi xl. c. 3. Regu^ ^. ^
cloud covered the habitacyon, which was as a tabernacle of the witness: and
at even there was upon the habitacyon, as it were the simylytude of fire until
the morning. So it was always, the cloud covered it by day, and the
simylytude of fire by night. And when the cloud was taken up from of the
Tabernacle, then the Children of Israel iourneyed: and where the cloud abode,
there the Children of Israel pytched their tents. At the word of the Lord /
the children of Israel iourneyed, and at the word of the lord they pytched.
And as long as the cloud abode upon the habitacion they lay still: and when
the cloud tarried still upon the habitacyon long time, the Children of Israel
kept the watch of the lord, and iourneyed not.

And it chanced that when the cloud abode Children of Israel abode still,
and iourneyed not. And as soon as the cloud was taken up, they iourneyed. At
the word of the lord they rested in the tents, and at the commandment of
the Lord they iourneyed, keeping the watch of the Lord, at the commandment
of the Lord, by the hand of Moses.

The Trompettes of silver. The Israelytes departo from Sinay. The captains of
the host are nombred. Nobab refuses to go with Moses.

CAPI. X.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying:

Also in the day of your gladness, and in

And the host of Ruben went forth with

And the standerd of the host of the Children of Ephraym went forth according
to their armies, whose captain was Elisama the son of Amiud. And over the
hooste of the trybe of the sons of Manasse, was Gama liell the son of
Pedazur. And over the hooste of the tribe of the sons of Ben Iamin was Abidan
the son of Gedeoni. And the standerde of the hooste of the Children of Dan,
came forth, (having all the hoostes together) thorowout their armies: whose
captain was Ahiezer the son of Ammi Sadat. And over the hooste of the Tribe
of the children of Asar, was Pagyell the Son of Ocran. And over the host of
the trybe of the Children of Nephthali, was Ahira the son of Enan. These are
the iourneyes of the Children of Israel thorowout their armies, and thus the
hoostes removed.

And Moses said unto Nobab the son of Raguel the Madianyte, which was Moses
Father in law, we go unto the place, of which the Lord said: I will give it
you. Come thou therefore with us, and we will do the good: for the Lord has
promised good unto Israel. And he answered him: I will not go, but will
depart to mine own land and to my kynred. He said: oh nay, leave us not,
for thou know our mansyons in the wyldernes: and thou have ben to us in
stead of eyes. And if thou go with us, look what goodness the Lord shows
unto us / the same will we show unto the. And they departed from the mount of
the Lord three days journey, and the arc of the testament of the Lord went
before them in the three days journey, to search out a restyng place for the^.
And the lord made a shadow for them through the cloud by day, when they
went out of the tents. And it fortuned, that when the arc went forth, Moses
said: Rise up lord, and let thine enemies be scartered: and let them that hate
the, flee before the. And when the arc rested, he said: Return O Lord unto
the many thousands of Israel.

The people murmureth. They desire flesh. They loathe Manna. The wauerynge
faith of Moses. The Lord divides the burden of Moses to seventy of the
aun^yentes, and they Prophesy. It rayneth quayls. The flesh rauen^ts are
punysshed.

CAPI. XI.
ANd it fortuned, that when Exodi. 16. a
the people

The Manna was as Exodi. 16. g
coriander seed,

And the Lord said unto Moses ^e^^. 8. d.
gather unto me. lxx. men of the Elders of Israel, which thou know, that
they are the elders of the people, and officers over them, and thou shalt
bring them unto the Tabernacle of witness, that they may stand there with
the. And I will come down, and talk with the there, and take of the spirit
which is upon the, and put upon them, and they shall bear the burden of the
people with the, leest thou be constrained to bear it alone.

And say unto the Exodi. 16. t
people: be hallowed against

And Moses said: Exodus 12. t.
six hundred thousand Esaie. ^. ^ and. lix. ^
the lords hand be waxed short? Thou shalt se now whyther my word shall
come to pass unto the, or not.

And Moses went out / and told the people the saying of the Lord, and
gathered the lxx. Elders of the people, and set them round about the
Tabernacle.

And the lord came down in a cloud, and Luke. ix ^ Ioh^l. ii. g
forbid them. And Moses said unto him: enuyest thou for my sake? 1. Cori. 14. ^
would god that all the lords people could prophesye, and that the lord
would put his spirit upon them. And Moses gat him into the host, he, Exodi.
16 d
brought quayles from the sea, and let them fall about the host, even a days
journey round about on every side of the host, and ( They did fly in the
air) as it were two cubytes hye over the earth. And the people stood up, and
all that day, and all that night, and on the morrow they gathered quayles.

And he that gathered a little, gathered ten homers full. And they spread them
abroad round about the hooste. Psalm. 78. d
And while the flesh was yet between their teeth, and or it was chewed up,
behold, the countenance of the Lord was moved against the people, and the
Lord Psalm. 78. d
slew the people with an excedyng great plage. And the name of the plage was
called: (The graves of lust) because they buried the people that lusted,
there. And the people took their Nume. 33. ^
journey from the graves of lust unto Hazeroth, and bode at Hazeroth

Aaron and Mir Iam grudge against Moses. Mir Iam is stryken with Leprosye, and
healed at the prayer of Moses.

CAPI. XII
ANd Deut^ 24 b
Mir Iam, and Aaron spoke against Moses, because of the woman of Jude which he
had taken: for he had taken to wife one of Jude. And they said: Has the Lord
in deed spoken only through Moses? Has he not spoken also by us? And the Lord
herd it. But Moses was a very Eccle. 45. a
meke man, above all the men of the earth. And the Lord spoke atonce unto
Moses / unto Aaron, and to Mir Iam: come out ye three unto Exodi. 29. g
the tabernacle of witness, and they came out all three.

And the lord came down in the Psalm. ^^ix b
pyller of the cloud, and stood in the Exodi. 29 ^
door of the tabernacle, and called Aaron, and Mir Iam. And they went out both
of them. And he said: hear my words. If there be a Prophet of the Lords
among you, I will be known of him in a vision, and will speak unto him in
sleep. My servant Moses is not so, which is faithful in all mine house. Unto
him will I speak Exodi. 33. b
mouth to mouth in a vision, but in ryddels and similitudes ii. Pa. 26. d
leperous, as it were snow. And Aaron looked upon Mir Iam, and behold, she was
leperous, and Aaron said unto Moses: I beseech the my lord, put not the syn
upon us, which we have foolyshly committed, and sinned. Oh, let her not be as
one that comes out of his mothers womb, and whose half flesh is eaten
away. And Moses cried unto the lord, saying: Heal her, O God, I beseech the.

And the Lord said unto Moses: If her Num^. ^
And afterward the people removed from Hazeroth, and pitched in the wyldernes
of Phara^.

Certain men are sent to search the land of Canaan.

CAPI. XIII.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: Deui^. ^
Send men out to search the land of Canaa^, which I give unto the children of
Israel: of every trybe of their fathers shall ye send a man, and let them all
be such as are rulers among them. And Moses at the commandment of the Lord
sent forth out of the wilderness of Pharan such men as were al heads of the
children of Israel. Their names are these. Of the trybe of Ruben, Sa^mua the
son of Zacur. Of the trybe of Symeon, Saphat the son of Hori: Of the trybe of
Judah, Caleb the son of Iephune: Of the trybe of Isachar, Igeall the son of
Joseph: Of the trybe of Ephraim, Hosea the son of Nun: Of the trybe of Ben
Iamin / Palthi the son of Raphu: Of the trybe of Zabulon, Gadiell the son
of Sodi: Of the trybe of Joseph: Namely, of the tribe of Manasse, Gaddi the son
of Susi: Of the trybe of Dan, Amiell the son of Gemali: Of the tribe of Aser,
Sethur the son of Michaell: Of the trybe of Nephthali, Nahebi the Son of
Uaphsi: Of the trybe of Gad, Guell the son of Machi. These are the names of the
men / which Moses sent to spy out the land. And Moses called the name of Hosea
the Son of Nun, Joshua.

And Moses sent them forth to spy out the land of Canaan, and said unto
them: Get you up this way southwarde, that ye may go up into the hye
country, and se the land what manner thing it is, and the people that
dwells therein: whyther they be strong or weyke, either few or many, and what
the land is that they dwell in, whyther it be good or bad, and what manner of
Cities they be that they dwell in: whyther they dwell in tents or walled
towns, and what manner of land it is: whyther it be fat or lean, and whyther
there be trees therein or not. Be of a good courage, and bring of the fruit of
the land. And it was about the time that Grapes are fyrsie ripe. And so they
went up, and searched out

And they turned back again from searchynge

And Caleb stylled the ( murmr that) of the people before Moses, saying: We
will go up and conquer it, for we be able to overcome it. But the men that
went up with him, said: We be not able to go up against the people, for they
are stronger then we. And they brought up an evil report of the land which
they had serched: saying unto the Children of Israel: The land which we have
gone through to search it out, is a land that eats up the inhabiters thereof:
and the people that we saw in it, are men of a great stature. And there we
saw also gyauntes, the Children of Enacke which come of the gyauntes. And we
seemed in our sight as it were greshoppers, and so we did in their sight.

The people murmr against god, and would have stoned Caleb, and Joshua. The
searchers of the land dye. Amalech kylleth the Israelytes.

CAPI. XIIII.
ANd all the multitude of the people cried

But Moses and Aaron fell on their faces Deute. xx. ^
Neither need ye to fear the people of the land / for they are but bread for
us. Their shadow is departed from them, and the lord is with us: fear them
not therefore. But all they which were in that multitude, bad stone them with
stoones. And the glory of the Lord appeared in the Tebernacle of witness,
before all the children of Israel.

And the Lord said unto Moses: How Exodus 13. d.
thou go before them by day time in a pyller of a cloud, and in a pyller
of fire by night. If thou shalt kill all this people as they were but one man,
then the nacyons which have herd the fame of the, will say: The Lord is not
able to bring in this people into the land which he swear unto them, but
has slain them in the wilderness. And now I beseech the, let the power of
my lord be great, according as thou haste spoken, saying: The lord is long
or he be angrye, and full of mercy, and suffers iniquyte, and syn, and
leaves no man innocent, and visits the unrighteousness of the Fathers upon
the

But all those men which have seen my glory, and my miracles which I did in
Egypt and in the wilderness, and have tempted me now this. x. times, and will
not harken unto my voice, shall not se the land which I swear unto their
fathers, neither shall any of them that provoked me, se it. But my servant
Joshua. 13. b
Caleb: with whom there was another manner of spirit, and because he has
followed me unto the vttermoost: him I will bring into the land which he has
walked in, and his seed shall enherite it, and also the Amalechites, and
Cananites which dwell in the plain country.

To morrow turn you, and get you in to Ezech. 4. b.
every day for a year shall ye bear your unrighteousness, even. xl. year and
ye shall know my dyspleasure: I the Lord have said that I will do it unto
all this evil congregacyon, that are gathered together against me: For in this
wyldernes they shall be consumed, and here they shall dye.

And the men which Moses sent to search the land, and which (when they came
again) made all the people to murmr before him, and brought up a sclaunder
upon the land, even those men that did bring up that sclaunder upon it, as
though it had been evil dyed in a great 1. Corin. ^^
plage before the lord. But Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Iephune
which were of the men that went to search the land, lived still. And Moses
told these sayenges unto all the children of Israel, and the people took
great sorrow.

And they rose up early in the morning and Deuit. ^^
lo, we be here, and will go up unto the place, of which the Lord said unto
us, for we have sinned. And Moses said: Wherefore will ye go on this manner
beyond the word of the Lord? it will not come well to pass, go not up
therefore: (for the Lord is not among you) that ye be not slain before your
enemies. For the Amalechites, and the Cananites are there before you, and ye
will fall upon the sword, because ye are turned away from the Lord, and the
Lord will not be with you. But they presumed obstinatly to go up into the hyl
top: Neuerthelatter, the arc of the testament of the Lord, and Moses departed
not out of the hooste. Then the Amalechites, and the Cananites which dwelt in
that hill, came down, and smote them and hewed them: even unto Horma.

The drink offerynges of them that enter in to the land The punysshement of
him that synneth o^ arrogancye or pride.

CAPI. XV.
ANd he Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: Leuiti. ^*
when ye be come in to the land of your habytacyons, which I give unto you,
and will offer an offering unto the Lord, Namely, a burntofferynge or a
special Sacrifice, either of a vow or of a wyllyng mind, and in your
princypal feasts, to make a sweet savor un to the Lord, of the oxen or of
the flock.

Then Leuiti. ^. and. ^^^
let him that offers his offering unto the Lord, bring also a meatofferyng
of a tenth deal of flower, myngled with the fourth part of an Hin of oil /
and the fourth part of an Hin of wine for a drynkofferyng and offer with the
burntofferynge / or any other offering: when it is a Lamb.

Or if it be a ram, thou shall offer for a meat offryng, two tenth deals of
flower, myngled with the third part of an Hin of oil, and for a
drynkoffryng, thou shall offer the third part of an Hin of wine, for a sweet
sauoure unto the Lord.

And when thou offerest a bullock for a

All that are of your selves shall do these things after this manner, to offer
an offering of sweet sauoure unto the lord.

And if a stranger soiourne with you, or who soever be among you in your
generacyons, and will offer an offering of a sweet sauoure unto the Lord:
even as ye do, so he shall do. One ordinance shall be both for you of the
congregation, and also for the stranger. It shall be an ordinance for ever in
your generacyons, both unto you and to the stranger before the Lord. One
law, and one manner shall serve, both for you, and for the stranger that
soiourneth with you.

And the lord spoke unto Moses, saying: Deuit^. 8. c.
When ye be come into the land to the which I bring you, then when ye will
eat of the bread of the land, ye shall take up an heueofferynge unto the
Lord. Ye shall take up a cake of the first of your dow for an heueofferynge
Leuiti. 25. b
as ye do the heueofferynge of the barn, even so ye shall heue it. Of the
first of your dow ye shall give unto the lord an heueofferyng, in your
generacions.

And if ye ouerse your selves, and observe not all these commandments which
the Lord has spoken unto Moses, even all that the Lord has commanded you
by the hand of Moses, from the first day that the Lord commanded Moses, and
hence forward among your generacions. If it happen that ought is committed
ygnorantly of the congregacyon, all the multitude shall offer a bullock for a
burntofferyng, to be a sweet savor unto the Lord, with the meatofferynge and
the drynkofferyng thereto, according to the manner: and an he goote for sin.
And the priest shall make an atonement for all the multitude of the children
of Israel, and it shall be forgyuen them, for it is ygnorau^ce. And they shall
bring their offering for a sacrifice unto the lord, and their synofferyng
before the lord for their ygnoraunce: and it shall be forgyuen unto all the
multitude of the children of Israel, and unto the stranger that dwells among
you: seeing all the people were in ignorance. Leuit. iiii. ^
If any one soul syn through ignorance, he shall bring a she goote of a
year old for syn. And the priest shall make an atonement for the soul that
sinned ygnorau^tly, with the synofferynge before the Lord, to reco^syle him,
and that it may be forgyuen him.

And both thou that art borne one of the

But the soul that does ought presumptuously, whyther he be an Israelite, or
a stranger, the same blasphemeth the lord. And that soul shall be roted out
from among his people, because he has despised the word of the Lord, and
has broken his commandment, that soul therefore shall perysshe, and his
sin shall be upon him.

And while the children of Israel were in the wyldernes, they found a man that
gathered styckes upon the Exodi. 31. ^.
Sabbath day.

And they that found him gatheryng styckes, brought him unto Moses and Aaron,
and unto all the congregation: Leuit. 24. b
and they put him in ward, seeing it was not declared what should be done unto
him. And the lord said unto Moses: Let the man dye: and let all the multitude
stone him with stones without the host. And all the multitude brought him with*
out the host, and stoned him with stones, and he dyed, as the Lord commanded
Moses.

And the lord spoke unto Moses, saying: speak unto the children of Israel,
and bid them, that they Deuteronomy. 22. ^
make them gardes in the quarters of their garments thorowout their
generacyons, and put upon the guard of the quarters a ryband of yelowe sylke.
And the guard shall be unto you to look upon it, that ye may remember all the
commandments of the lord and do them: and that ye seek not after your own
heart or your own eyes, after the which ye use to go a hoorynge: but ye shall
remember rather, and do al my commandments, and be holy unto your god: I am
the Lord your God, which brought you out of the land of Egypt, for to be
your God.

I am the lord your God.

The rebellyon of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram.

CAPI. XVI.
ANd E^cle. 45. c
Corah the son of Iezehar the

And when Moses herd it, he fell upon his face and spoke unto Corah and unto
all his company, saying: to morrow the Lord will show who are his, who is
holy, and who ought to approach nygh unto him, and whom he has chosen to come
to him. This do there fore: take you fire pannes, both Corah and al his company,
and put fire therein, and put sense in them before the lord to morrow. And the
man whom the Lord does chose, the same shall be holy. Ye make much to do ye
children of Leui.

And Moses said unto Corah: Nume. 3. b.
here ye

And Moses sent and called Dathan, and Abiram the sons of Eliab, which
said: we will not come up. Is it a small thing / that thou have brought us
out of a land that flows with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness,
and to reygne over us also?

Have thou brought us unto a land that flows with milk and honey, and given
us enherytaunce of feldes and vyneyardes? Will thou pull out the eyes of these
men? we will not come up.

And Moses waxed very angry, and said

Be thou and all thy company before the Lord: both thou, they, and Aaron, to
morrow. And take every man his sencer and put sense in them, that ye may offer
before the lord: every man of the two hundred and fyftie take his sencer, thou
also Aaron, that every one may have his sencer. And they took every man his
sencer, and put fire in them, and laid sense thereon, and stood in the door of
the tabernacle of witness with Moses and Aaron. And Corah gathered all the
congregacyon against them unto the door of the Tabernacle of witness.

And the glory of the Lord appeared unto all the congregacyon. And the Lord
spoke unto Moses and Aaron, saying: Separate your selves from among this
congregation, that I may consume them atonce. And they fell upon their faces,
and said. Number. (...). ^.
O most mighty God of the spirits of all flesh, if one man has sinned,
will thou be wroth with all the multitude? And the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying: speak unto the congre gacyon, and say: Get you away from about the
dwelling of Corah, Dathan and Abiram.

And Moses rose up, and went unto Dathan,

And he spoke unto the congregacyon, saying: depart from the tents of these
wicked men, and touch no thing of theyrs: lest ye perysshe in all their
sins. And so they gat them from the dwelling of Corah, Dathan and Abiram on
every side, And Datha^ and Abiram came out and stood in the door of their
tents with their wives, their sons, and their little children.

And Moses said. Hereby ye shall know that the lord has sent me to do al
these works, and that I have not done them of mine own mind. If these men
dye the common death of all men, or they be visited after the visitacyon of al
men, then the Lord has not sent me. But and if the Lord make a new thing,
and the earth open her mouth and swalow them up withal that they have, and
they go down quycke in to hell: then ye shall understand that these me^ have
provoked the lord.

And it fortuned that as soon as he had Deuit. ^ Number. ^ Psalm. ^
the ground cloue a sondre that was under them, and the earth opened her
mouth, and swalowed them up, and their houses, and all the men that were with
Corah and all their goods. And they and all that they had, went down alive
unto hell, and the earth closed upon them, and they peryshed from among the
congregation.

And all Israel that were about them, fled at the cry of them. And they
said: leest the earth swalowe us up also. And there came out a fire from the
Lord, and consumed the two hundred and fyftie men that offered sense.

And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying. Speak unto Eleazar the son of Aaron
the priest, that he take up the sencers out of the burning, and skatter the
fire here and there, for the sencers of these sinners are hallowed in their
deaths: and let them make of them thyn beaten plates for a covering of the
altar. For they offered them before the lord, and therefore they are hallowed
and they shall be a sign unto the children of Israel.

And Eleazar the Priest took the brazen

But on the morrow all the multitude of the children of Israel murmured
against Moses and Aaron, saying: Ye have killed the people of the lord. And
it fortuned, that when the multitude was gathered against Moses and Aaron, they
looked toward the tabernacle of witness. And behold, ( when they were
entered in to it,) the cloud covered it, and the glory of the lord appeared.
And Moses and Aaron came before the Tabernacle of witness. And the Lord spoke
unto Moses, saying. Get you from among this congregacyon, that I may consume
them quyckely. And they fell upon their faces.

And Moses said unto Aaron: take a sencer

Aarons rod buddith, and bears blossoms.

CAPI. XVII.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying:

And Moses spoke unto the children of Hebru. ix. ^
the rod of Aaron for the house of Leui was budded, and bare blossoms and
almondes. And Moses brought out all the rods from before the Lord, unto all the children of Israel, and they looked upon them, and took every man his rod.

And the Lord said unto Moses: bring

The office of the leuytes. The tithes, and first fruytes must be given them.
Aarons heritage.

CAPI. XVIII.
ANd the Lord said unto Aaron: Thou and thy sons and thy fathers house, with
the shall bear the fault of that which is done amysse in the holy place. And
thou and thy sons with the, shall bear the fault of that which is done
amysse in your Preesthode. Number. iii. ^^
And thy brethren of the tribe of Leui, and of thy fathers household / shalt
thou take unto the, that they may be joined unto the, and ministre unto the:
even unto the, and thy sons with the, before the tabernacle of witness.

They shall wait upon the, and upon all the Tabernacle: only let them not come
nygh the vessels of the sanctuary and the altar, that they, and ye also dye
not. And they shall be by the and wait upon the tabernacle of witness, for all
the service of the tabernacle, and let no stranger come nygh unto you.

Therefore shall ye keep the holy place and the altar, that there fall no more
wrath upon the children of Israel: behold, I have taken your brethren the
Levites from among the children of Israel, which as a gift of yours are given
unto the lord, to do the service of the Tabernacle of witness. Therefore
shalt thou / and thy Sons with the / take heed unto your priests office,
for all things that perteyne unto the altar, and for all that are within the
veil. And se that ye serve, for I have given your priests office unto you as
a gift: and therefore the stranger that comes nigh, must be flayne.

And the lord spoke unto Aaron: behold,

And this also is thine Leui. vii. d
the heueofferynges of their gifts, thorowout all the waueofferynges of the
children of Israel: I have given them unto the, and thy sons, and thy
daughters with the, to be a duty for ever, and all that are clean in thy
house, shall eat of it: all the fat of the oil, and all the fat of the wine
and of the corn, which they shall offer unto the Lord for first fruytes, the
same have I given unto the. And what soever is first ripe in their land
which they bring unto the Lord, shall be thine: and all that are clean in
thine house, shall eat of it.

All dedicate things in Israel shall be thyn.

And the flesh of them is thyn Leuit. viii
as the wave breast and the right shoulder: these are thyn. All the holy
heueofferynges which the children of Israel offer unto the Lord, have I given
the, and thy sons, and thy daughters with the, to be a duty for ever: let it
be a salted covenant for ever, before the Lord, both unto the, and to thy
seed with the.

And the Lord spoke unto Aaron Deuteronomy. 18^ Eccle. (...)
thou shall have none enheritaunce in their land, neither shalt thou have any
part among them. I am thy part and thine enherytaunce among the children of
Israel. Behold, I have given the children of Leui all the tenth in Israel to
enheryte for the service, which they serve in the tabernacle of witness.
Neither must the children of Israel hence forthecome nygh the Tabernacle of
witness, leest they bear sin and dye. But the Levites shall do the service
in the tabernacle of witness and bear their sin: It shall be a law for ever
in your generacions, that among the children of Israel they possess none
enheritaunce.

But the tithes of the children of Israel

And the lord spoke unto Moses, saying: speak unto the Levites and say unto
them: when ye take of the children of Israel the tithes which I have given you
of them for your enheritaunce, ye shall take an heueofferyng of the same for
the lord: even the tenth part of that tithe. And this your heueoffering
shall be rekened unto you, eue^ as though it were of the corn of the barn, or
out of the fullness of the wine press.

Of this manner ye shall therefore separate an heueoffryng unto the lord, of all
your tithes which ye receive of the children of Israel, and ye shall give
thereof unto the lord an heueofferyng, which shall belong to Aaron the priest.
Of al your gifts, ye shall take out all the lords heueoffrynges: even the fat
of their hallowed things. Therefore you shalt say unto them: When ye have taken
away the fat of it from it, it shall be counted unto the Levites, as if it
were the increase of the corn floor, or the increase of the wine press And
ye shall eat it in all places, both ye and your housholdes, for it is your
reward for your service in the tabernacle of witness.

And ye shall bear no sin by the reason of it, when ye have taken from it
the fat of it: neither shall ye vnhalowe the holy things of the children of
Israel, lest ye dye.

Of the red how. The law of him that dies in the Tabernacle: and of him that
touches any unclean thing.

CAPI. XIX.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses and Hebre. 13. c.
her without the host, and cause her to be slain before his face.

And let Eleazar the priest take of her blood with his finger, and sprynkle it
before the tabernacle of witness seven times. And cause the kowe to be burnt
in his sight with / Leuit. iiii. c
her skyn, flesh and blood. And the dunge of her shall be burnt also. And let
the priest take Cedar wood, and Isope and purple cloth, and cast it upon the
kowe as she burns. The^ let the priest wasshe his clothes, and he shall bathe
his flesh in water, and then come into the host, and the priest shall be
unclean unto the even.

And he that burns her, shall wasshe his Nume. 3. b.
for a sprynklynge water, and for an atonement of sin. Therefore he that
gathers the ashes of the kowe shall wasshe his clothes, and remain unclean
until even. And this shall be unto the children of Israel / and unto the
stranger that dwells among them, a statute for ever.

Nume. 31. ^ ^^l^. 34. d (...). ii. c
He that touches the dead body of any man, shall be unclean seven days. And
he shall puryfye him self with this water the third day, and the seventh
day, and he shall be clean.

But if he purify not him self the third

This is the law of the man that dies in a tent: all that come in to the
tent, and all that is in the tent, shall be unclean seven days. And all the
vessels that be open which have no lyd, nor covering upon them, shall be
unclean. And who soever touches one that is slain with a sword in the
feldes, or a dead person, or a bone of a dead man, or a grave: shall be
unclean seven days.

Therefore for an unclean person they shall Psalm. li. b
take Isope and dyp it in the water, and sprynkle it upon the tente, and upon
all the vessels, and on the souls that were therein, and upon him that touched a
bone, or a slain person, or a dead body, or a grave. And the clean person
shall sprynkle upon the unclean the third day and the seventh day. And the
seventh day he shall purify him self, and wasshe his clothes, and bathe him
self in water, and shall be clean at even.

But the man that is unclean, and sprynkleth not him self, the same soul
shall be destroyed from among the congregacyon: because he has defiled the
holy place of the lord, and the sprynklynge water has not been sprynkled
upon him, therefore shall he remayn unclean. And this shall be a perpetual law
unto them. And he that sprynkleth the sprynklyng water, shall wasshe his
clothes.

And he that touches the sprynklyng water, shall be unclean until even. And
what soever the unclean person touches, shall be unclean. And the soul that
touches it, shall be unclean until the even.

Mir Iam dies. The people murmr. They have water even out of the rock. Edom
denies the Israelites passage through his realm. The death of Aaron, in whose
rowme Eleazar succedeth.

CAPI. XX.
AND the children of Israel came with Nume. 33 d
of Sin in the first month, and the people abode at Cades. And there dyed Mir
Iam, and was buried there. But there was no water for the multitude: and they
gathered them selves together against Moses and Aaron. And the people chode
with Moses, and spoke, saying: Would god that we had perysshed when our
brethren dyed before the lord. Why have ye brought the congregacyon of the
Lord unto this wilderness, that both we and our cattle should dye in it?
Exodus 17. ^
Wherefore have ye made us to go out of Egypt, to bring us into this ungracious
place, which is no place of seed, nor of fygges, nor vynes, nor of
pomegarnates, neither is there any water to drink.

And Moses and Aaron went from the And they cried unto the Lord, and fayde. O
LORD GOD, hear the cry of this people, and open them thy treasure, even a
fountain of living water, that they may be satisfied, and that their
murmuring may cease.

And the glory of the Lord appeared unto them. And the Lord spoke unto Moses
saying: take the rod, and gather thou and thy brother Aaron the congregacyon
together / and speak unto the rock before their eyes, and it shall give for
the his water. And thou shalt bring them water out of the rock, to give the
company drink, and their beasts also, Exodi. 17. c
And Moses took the rod from before the Lord, as he commanded him. And Moses
and Aaron gathered the co^gregacyon together before the rock, and Moses said
unto them: Here ye rebellyons, must we fetch you water out of this rock? And
Moses lift up his hand, and with his Psalm. 74. b
rod he smote the rock two times, and the water came out aboundauntly, and the
multitude drank and their beasts also.

And the Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron:

And Moses Judges. (...). c
sent messengers from Cades unto the king of Edom. Thus says thy brother
Israel. Thou know all the travail that has happened us. Our fathers went
down in to Egypt, and we have dwelte in Egypt a long time, and the
Egypcians vexed us and our fathers. And when we cried unto the Lord, he herd
our voice, and sent an angel, and has fet us out of Egypt. And behold we
are in Cades, even in the vttermoost city of thy bordre. We will go now
through thy country: but Nume. 2^. ^
we will not go through the feldes, or vyneyeardes, neither will we drink of
the water of the fountaynes, we will go by the kings hye way, and neither
turn unto the right hand, nor to the left, until we be past thy country. And
Edom answered him. Thou shall not go by me, lest I come out against the with
the sword.

The children of Israel said unto him: we

And the children of Israel departed from Cades, and came unto mount Hor with
all the congregacyon. And the Lord spoke unto Moses and Aaron in mount Hor,
hard by the coost of the land of Edom, saying: Aaron shall be gathered unto
his people, for he shall not come in to the land which I have given unto the
children of Israel: because ye disobeyed my mouth at the water of strife. Take
Aaron and Eleazar his son and bring them up in to mount Hor, and thou shalt
stryppe Aaron out of his vestimentes, and put them upon Eleazar his son, and
Aaron shall be gathered unto his people, and shall dye there.

And Moses did as the lord commanded: and they went up in to mount Hor in the
sight of all the multitude. And Moses took of Aarous clothes, and put them upon
Eleazar his son Deute. ^. ^ and. xxxii.
and Aaron dyed there in the top of the mount. And Moses and Eleazar came
down out of the mount. When all the multitude saw that Aaron was dead, they
mourned for Aaron thyrtie days, thorowout all the housholdes of Israel.

Israel ^auques^^eth king Arad. The fyrye serpents stynge them. The kings,
Sehon and Og are overcome in battle.

CAPI. XXI.
ANd when king Nume. (...). ^
Arad the Cananite (...)
place Iudg^^. (...)
Horma.

Deute. ^^
And they departed from mount Hor by the way of the red see, to compass the
land of Edom. And the soul of the people faynted by the way. And the people
spoke against God and against Moses Nume. ^^
wherefore have thou brought us out of Egypt, for to dye in the wyldernes? for
here is neither bread nor water, and our soul lotheth this light bread.

^. (...) Sapi^^^
Wherefore the Lord sent fyrye serpents among the people, which stonge
them: and much people of Israel dyed. Therefore the people came to Moses and
said: we have sinned, for we have spoken against the lord and against the,
Exodi. 8 b. (...). Reg. 13. b (...). viii d
make intercessyo^ to the lord, that he take away the serpents from us.

And Moses made intercession for the people John^. i^^. b 4. Reg. 18 a
And Moses made a serpent of brass, and set it up for a sign. And when the
serpents had bytten any man, he beheld the serpent of brass, and was healed.

Nume. 33. a
And the children of Israel departed thence and pytched in Oboth. And they
departed from Oboth, and pitched at the heaps of Abarim: even in the
wilderness which is by the plain of Moab, on the East side. And they removed
thence, and pytched upon the river of Zarad. And they departed thence, and
pytched on the other side of Arnon, which is in the wyldernes, and comes out
of the coostes of the Amorites: for Arnon is the border of Moab, between Moab
and the Amorites.

Wherefore it is spoken in the book of

And the head of the ryuers, that gothe down to the dwelling of Ar, and
stretches unto the border of Moab: From thence it turns unto Beer. The same
is Beer, or well whereof the lord spoke unto Moses. Gather the people together,
and I will give them water. Then Israel sange this song: Arise up well, sing ye
unto him: The princes dygged this well, the captains of the people dug it,
with the teacher, and with their staves.

And from the wilderness they went to Matana, and from Matana to Nahaliel,
and from Nahaliel to Bamoth, and from Bamoth to the valey that is in the field
of Moab unto the top of the hill that appears before Iesimon. And Israel
sent messengers unto Sehon, king of the Amorytes, saying.

Nume. xx. c Deute. ii. t. and. xx. b
I will go through thy land: we will not Deuteronomy. 29. b
But Sehon would give Israel no license to pass through his country, but
gathered al his people together, and went out against Israel into the wyldernes.
And he came to Iaheza, and fought against Israel. Deute. ^. a, and. xxxi. a.
Joshua. 24 a
And Israel smote him in the edge of the sword, and conquered his land, from
Arnon, unto Iabock, and unto the children of Ammon. For the bordre of the
children of Ammon was Deute. ii. d
strong. And Israel took all these cities and dwelte in all the cities of the

Woe be to the Moab: o people of Chamos, ye are undone, he has put his sons

Deute. iii a and. xxix. ^
And they turned and went up toward Basan. And Og the king of Basan came out
against them, he and all his people, to fight at Adrei. And the Lord said
unto Moses: fear him not, for I have delivered him in thy hand, and all his
people, and his land. And thou shall do to him as you dyddest unto Sehon the
king of the Amorites which dwelt at Hesbon. They smote him therefore, and his
sons, and all his people, until there was nothing left him. And they
conquered his land.

King Ba^ar sends for Balaam (whose name in the Hebrew is written B^leam.
Balaams Ass speaks.

CAPI. XXII.
ANd the children of Israel departed and Iosue. ^^^
Balac the son of Ziphor law all that Israel had done to the Amorites: and the
Moabites were sore afraid of the people, because they were many, and stood in
fear of the children of Israel. And Moab said unto the elders of Madian: now
shall this company lycke up all that are round about us, as an ox lycketh up
the grass of the field. And Balac the son of Ziphor was king of the Moabites
at that time.

He sent messengers therefore unto Deute. 18. a 11. Pete. (...). ^
Balaam the son of Beor in Pethor (which is against me. Come now therefore
and curse this people for my sake. For they are to mighty for me, if so
peradventure I might be able to smite them, and to drive them out of the land.
For I wot that he whom thou blessest is blessed, and whom thou cursest, is
cursed.

And the elders of Moab and the elders of Madian departed, having the reward
of the sothsaynge in their hand. And they came unto Balaam, and told him the
words of Balac. He answered them: Tarry here this night, and I will bring you
word, even as the Lord shall say unto me. And the lords of Moab abode with
Balaam.

And god came unto Balaam, and said. What

And Balaam rose up in the morning and said unto the Lords of Balac: get you
unto your land: for the Lord will not suffer me to go with you. And the
lords of Moab rose up, and went unto Balac and said: Balaam would not come
with us. And Balac sent again a greater company of Lords and more honorable
then they, which came to Balaa^ and told him. Thus says Balac the son of
Ziphor: oh, let nothing let the, but come unto me, for I will greatly promote
the unto great honor, and will do what soever thou say unto me, come I
pray the, curse this people for my sake.

And Balaam answered and said unto the servants of Balac: Number. 24. ^
If Balac would give

And Balaam rose up earlye, and sadled his Ass and went with the lords of
Moab. And the countenance of god was angrye because he went. And the angel of
the lord stood in the way against him, as he rode upon his Ass, and his two
servants were with him. And when the Ass saw the angel of the lord stand
in the way, and having a swerd drawn in his hand, the Ass turned a side out
of the way, and went out into the field. And Balaa^ smote the ass, to turn
her into the way.

But the angel of the Lord stood in a

And the Lord opened the eyes of Balaam, gyuynge place to me that stood in the
way,) I had surely slain the, and saved her alive. Balaam said unto the
angel of the Lord: I have sinned: for I wist not that thou stodest in the
way against me. Now therefore if it please the, I will turn home again. The
angel said unto Balaam: Go with the men: but, what I say unto the, that
shalt thou speak. And so Balaam went with the lords of Balac.

And when Balac herd that Balaam was God Nume. 23. ^
puts in my mouth, that shall I speak. And Balaam went with Balac, and
they came unto a city of streets. And Balac offered oxen, and sheep, and sent
( rewards) for Balaam and for the Lords that were with him. And on the morrow
Balac took Balaa^, and brought him up in to the high place of Baall, that
thence he might se the uttermost part of the people.

Balaam blesses the people.

CAPI. XXIII.
ANd Balaam said unto Balac: build Number. 22. ^
Balac the king of Moab has fet me from Mesopotamia out of the mountains of
the east / (saying:) come, curse Jacob for my sake: come, and defye Israel.

How shall I curse him, whom god has not cursed? or how shall I defyle him,
whom

And he brought him in to a field (where Number. 22. ^
put a word in his mouth, and said: go again unto Balac, and say thus. And
when he came to him: behold, he stood by his sacrifyce, and the Lords of
Moab with him. And Balac said unto him: what has the Lord said? And he took
up his parable, and answered: rise up Balac and here, and harken unto me thou
son of Ziphor. i. Corin. i. b and, x. c
God is not a man that he should lie, neither the son of a man that he should
repent: should he say, and not do? or should he speak, and not make it good?
behold, I have taken upon me to bless, for he has blessed, and it is not in
my power to alter it.

He beheld no vanyte in Jacob, nor Number. 24. ^
God brought them out of Egypt, he has strength as an unicorn. There is no
sorcery in Jacob, nor southsayenge in Israel. It is now told unto Jacob and
Israel, what god has wrought. Behold, the people shall rise up as a lioness,
and heue up himself as a lion: He shall not lie down, until he eat of the
pray, and drink the blood of them that are slain.

And Balac said unto Balaam: neither curse them nor bless them. But Balaam
answered and sa^d unto Balac: told not I the saying: all that the Lord
speaks, that I must do? And Balac said unto Balaa^: come I pray the, and I
will bring the yet unto another place: if peradventure it shall please God,
that thou may thence curse them for my sake. And Balac brought Balaam unto
the top of Peor, that boweth toward the wilderness of Iesymmon. And Balaam
said unto Balac: make me here seven aulters, and prepare me here seven oxen,
and seven Rams. And Balac did as Balaam had said, and offered an ox and a
Ram on every altar.

Balaam prophesyeth of the kingdom of Israel, and of the coming of Christ.
Balac is angry with Balaam. The destru^cyon of the Amelechires, and of the
Kenites.

CAPI. XXIIII.
ANd when Balaam saw that it pleased Number. 24. ^
And he took up his parable, and said: Balaam the son of Beor has said: and
the man whose eye is open has said: he has said, which hears the words
of god and sees the visions of the almyghtye / and falls down with open eyes.
How goodly are the tents O Jacob, and thine habitacions O Israel? Eue^ as the
valeys are they laid abroad, and as gardens by the ryuers side: as the tents
which the lord has pytched, and as cipers trees beside the waters. The water
droppeth out of his pooket, and his seed shall be many waters 1. Reg. ^5. b
and his king shall be higher then Agag, and his kingdom shall be exalted.
Nume. 23 d
God brought him out of Egypt: as the strength of an unicorn is he unto him.

He shall eat the nacyons his enemies, and ^^^e. x^^x b
He couched him self, and lay down as a lion, and as a lioness, who shall
stir him up? blessed is he that blesses the, and cursed is he that curses
the. And Balac was wroth with Balaam, and smote his hands together / and
Balac said unto Balaam: I sent for the to curse mine enemies, and behold, thou
have blessed them this iii. times. Therefore now get the quyklye unto thy place.
I thought that I would promote the unto honor, but lo, the Lord has kept
the back from worship. Balaa^ answered unto Balac: told I not thy messengers
which thou sendest unto me, saying: Nume. 22 d
If Balac would give me his housefull of silver and gold, I can not pass the
word of the Lord, to do either good or bad of mine own mind? But what the
Lord says that am I compelled to speak.

And now behold, I go unto my people: Math. ii. a.
There shall come a sterre of Jacob, and rise a s^epter of Israel, and shall
11. Reg. ^. a.
smite the coostes of Moab and shall destroy all the Children of Seth. 11.
Reg. 8. b.
And Edom shall be possessed, and Seir shall fall to the possessyon of their
enemies, and Israel shall do manfully. Out of Jacob shall come he that shall have
dominion, and shall destroy the remenaunt of the city.

And when he looked on Amalech, he took Exodus ^7. b 1. Reg. xv. a
but his latter end shall perysshe utterly. And he looked on the Kenytes, and
took up his parable, and said: strong is thy dwelling place, and thou
put thy nest in a rock. Nevertheless the kenyte shall be roted out, until
Assure take the presoner: And he took up his parable and said: Alas, who shall
live when God does this? The ships also shall come out of the coost of Italy,
and subdue Assure, and subdue Eber, and he him self shall perysh at the last.
And Balaam rose up, and went and returned to his place, and Balac also went his
way.

The people co^my^teth fornicaryon with the daughters of Moab. Phentheo kylleth
zam^i, and ^ozbi. God commands to kill the Madeanites.

CAPI. XXV.
ANd Israel dwelte in Sittim, and the Exodi. (...)* ^*
And the people did eat, and worshypped their Gods, and Israel coupled him
self unto Baall Peor. And the indygnacion of the LORD was provoked against
Israel, and the Lord said unto Moses: take all the princes of the people,
and hang them up before the Lord against the son, that the wrath of the
Lords countenance may be turned away from Israel. And Moses said unto the
judges of Israel Exodi* (...)*
Every one sleye his men that were joined unto Baall Peor.

And behold, one of the children of Israel 1. M^^* (...)*
And when Phinehes the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest saw it,
he rose up out of the mids of the company, and took a weapon in his hand,
and went after the man of Israel in to the tent, and thrust them through:
both the man of Israel, and also the woman, even through the belly of her.
And the plage ceased from the children of Israel 1. ^or^^^*
And there dyed in the plage. xxiiii. thousand And the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying: (...) 1. Math* ^*
Phinehes the son of Eleazar the Son of Aaron the priest, has turned mine
anger away from the children of Israel, while he was jealous for my sake
among them, that I had not consumed the children of Israel in my ielousye.

Wherefore say: behold, M(...)
I give unto of the priests office for ever because he was jealous for his
gods sake, and made an atonement for the Children of Israel. The name of the
Israelite which was sleyne with the Madianytysshe woman, was Zamri the son of
Sal^, a Lord of an house / and kynred of Simeon. And the name of the
Madianityshe woman that was sleyne, was Cozbi the daughter of Zur, a head over
the people of an house and kynred of Madian. And the Lord spoke unto Moses,
saying: Number. 31. a
vex the Madianites, and smite them, for they trouble you with their wyles,
which have begyled you by disceate in the cause of Peor, and in the cause of
their sister Cozbi the daughter of a Lord of the Madianytes, which was sleyne
in the day of the plage for Peor sake.

The children of Israel are nombred.

CAPI. XXVI.
ANd it fortuned, that after the plage, the Nume. i. a.
take the nombre of all the multitude of the children of Israel from. xx.
year, and above thorowout their Fathers houses, all that are able to go to
war in Israel. And Moses and Eleazar the Priest spoke unto them in the
feldes of Moab, by Iordayne, over against Ierico, from. xx. year, and above /
as the Lord commanded Moses, and the children of Israel, when they were come
out of Egypt. ^^^^* 46. b ^* Para. v. a
Ruben the Eldest son of Israel. The children of Ruben: Hanoch, of whom
comes the kynred of the Hanochites: and Palu of whom comes the kynred of
the Paluites. Of Hesron, comes the kynred of the Hesronites: of Carmi,
comes the kynred of the Carmites.

These are the kynredes of the Rubenites, Number. 16. a*
strove against Moses, and Aaron, in the company of Corah / when they strove
against the Lord. Nume* 16. ^*
And the earth opened her mouth, and swalowed them up. Corah also was in the
death of that multitude, what time the fire consumed two hundred and fiftye
men, and they became a sign: Notwithstanding, the Children of Corah dyed not.
And the Children of Simeon after their kynreds were: Nemuell, of whom comes
the kynred of the Nemuelites: Iamin, of whom comes the kynred of the
Iaminytes: Iachin, of whom comes the kynred of the Iachinites: of Zareh,
comes the kynred of the Zarehites. And of Saull, comes the kynred of the
Saul^tes These are the kynredes of Simeon: even. xxii* thousand, and two
hundred. The Children of Gad after their kynreds were: Zephon, of whom comes
the kynred of the Zephonites: Haggi, of whom comes the kynred of the
Haggites: Suni, of whom comes the kynred of the Sun^tes: Of Aseni, comes
the kynred of the Asenites: and of Eri, comes the kynred of the Erites: Of
Arod, comes the kynred of the Arodites. Of A^^ell / comes the kynred of the
Arielites. These are the kynreds of the Children of Gad a^dynge to their
nombres. xl. thousand, and five hundred.

The Children of Judah: Er, and Dnan: Gene. 38. ^*
and Er and Dnan dyed in the land of Canaan. But the Children of Judah after
their kynreds, were: Sela, of whom comes the kynred of the Selanites:
Phares, of whom comes the kynred of the Pharesites: Zareh, of whom comes
the kynred of the Zarehites. And the Children of Phares were* Hesron, of whom
comes the kynred of the Hes^onites: Hamull, of whom comes the kynred of
the Hamulites. These are the kynreds of fuda, after their no^bres. lxxvi.
thousand, and five hundred. The children of Isachar after their kynreds, were:
Thola, of whom comes the kynred of the Tholaites: Phuua, of whom comes
the kynred of the Phuuaites: of Iasub, comes the kynred of the Iasubites, of
Symron, comes the kynred of the Simronites. These are the kynreds of Isachar
after their nombres. ixiii^* thousand, and three hundred. The Children of
Zabalon after their kynreds were: Sered of whom comes the kynred of the
Seredites: Elon, of whom comes the kynred of the Elonites: Iaheliel, of
whom comes the kynred of the Iahelielites.

These are the kynreds of the Zabulonites Joshua. 17 a
Machir* of whom comes the kynred of the Machirites. And Machir began
Gilead, and of Gilead comes the kynred of the Gileadites. And these are the
children of Gilead: Hieser, of whom comes the kynred of the Hieserites:
Helech, of whom comes the kynred of the Helechites: and Asriell, of whom
comes the kynred of the Asrielites: and Sich^^^ of whom comes the kynred
of the Sichemites: Simida, of whom comes the kynred of the Simidites: and
Hepher, of whom comes the kynredde of the Hepherites. And Joshua 17. ^
Zelaphead the Son of Hepher, had no sons but daughters. And the names of
the daughters of Zelaphead were: Mahela, Noa, Hagla, Milcha, and Thirza: These
are the kynreds of Manasse, and the nombre of them. iii. thousand, and seven
hundred. These are the Children of Ephraim after their kynreds: Suthelah, of
whom comes the kindred of suthelahites: Becher, of whom comes the kynred of
the Becherites: Thahen, of whom comes the kynred of the Thahenites.

And these are the children of Suthelah: Eran, of whom comes the kynred of
the

The children of Aser after their kynreds Nume. (...) ^ Iusua. x^ ^
To many thou shalt give the more enheritaunce, and to few the less: to
every trybe shall the enheritaunce be given according to the nombre thereof
Notwithstanding, the land shall be divided by lot, and according to the names
of the tribes of their fathers, they shall enheryte: according to the lot shall
the possessyon thereof be divided, between many and few.

Nume. ^. ^
These are the nombres of the Leuytes Exodus (...) ^
Iochebed a daughter of Leui, which was borne unto Leui in Egypt. And she bare
unto Amram, Aaron, Moses, and Mir Iam their sister. And unto Aaron were borne,
Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.

N(...)
And Nadab and Abihu dyed, when they offered strange fire before the Lord.
And after their no^bres they were: xxiii. thousand all males from a month
old and above. For they were nombred among the Children of Israel, because
there was no enheritaunce given them among the children of Israel. These are
the nombres, when Moses and Eleazar the Priest nombred the children of Israel
in the plain of Moab, fast by Iordane over against Jericho. And among these
there was not a man of them, whom Moses, and Aaron nombred, when they told the
children of Israel in the wilderness of Sinay. For the Lord said of them:
they shall dye in the wilderness, and there was not left a man of them: save
Caleb the son of Iephune, and Joshua the son of Nun.

The law of the heritage of the daughters of zelap^^a^. The land of promise
is showed unto Moses, in whose stead is appointed Joshua.

CAPI. XXVII.
ANd the daughters of Number. 76. d and xxxvi. a Joshua. 17. a
Zelaphead the Nume. 16. c
was not in the company of them that gathered them selves together against the
Lord in the co^gregacyon of Carah: But dyed in his own syn, and had no
sons. Wherefore then is the name of our fathers taken away from among his
kynred, because he has no son? Nume. 36 a
Give unto us therefore a possessyon among the brethren of our father.

And Moses brought their cause before

And the Lord said unto Moses Deuteronomy. iii. d and. 34. a
get Exodi. 17. c
That is the water of strife in Cades in the wilderness of Zin. And Moses
spoke unto the Lord, saying: Let the Lord god of the spirytes of all flesh,
set a man over the co^gregacyon, which may go out and in before them, and lead
them out and in: that the co^gregacyon of the lord be not as sheep which have
not a shepheerde. And the Lord said unto Moses: take Joshua the son of Nun, in
whom is the spirit, and put thine hands upon him, and set him before Eleazar
the priest, and before all

And he shall stand before Eleazar the priest, which shall ask counsel for
him Exodi. 28. ^
after the judgment of Urim before the lord: And according unto his word
shall they go out and in, both he and all the Children of Israel with him,
and all the congregacyon.

And Moses did as the Lord commanded him, and he took Joshua, and set him
before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregacyon, Acts. vi. ^
and put his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, as the Lord commanded
through the hand of Moses.

What must be offered on every feast day.

CAPI. XXVIII.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: Exodi. 29. ^
This is the offering which ye shall offer unto the Lord, two lambs of a
year old, without spot day by day, for a continual burntofferynge. One
lamb shall thou offer in the morning, and the other at even. Nume. 15 ^
And thereto the tenth part of an Epha of flower for a meatoffering mingled
with beaten oil containing the fourth part of an Hin: It is a daily
burntofferynge, such as was ordained in the mount Sinay for a sweet savor, a
sacrifyce unto the lord. And let the drynkeofferynge of the same / be the
fourth part of an Hin for one lamb, and in the holy place shalt thou
command the wine to be powered unto the Lord.

And the other lamb thou shalt offer at myngled with oil for one bullock,
and two tenthdeales of flower, for a meatofferyng myngled with oil for one
Ram. And a tenthdeale of flower myngled with oil, for a meatofferynge unto one
lamb, for a burntofferynge and a sweet savor, and a sacrifice unto the Lord.
And their drynkeofferynges shall be half an Hin of wine, unto one bullock:
and the third part of an Hin of wine unto a ram, and the fourth part of an
Hin unto a lamb. This is the burntofferynge of the month in his month
thorowout the months of the year: and one he goote for a synofferynge unto
the Lord shall be offered, after the daily burntofferyng and his

Exodi. xii. c Leuiti. 23 a Dente. 16. a
And the. xiiii. day of the first month is the Passover of the lord. And in
the. xv. day of the same month is the feast, and. vii days long shall
unleavened bread be eaten. In the Leuit. 23. b
first day shall be an holy conuo cacion, ye shall do no manner of seruyle work
therein. But ye shall offer a Sacrifyce for a burntofferynge unto the Lord, two
young bullockes, one Ram, and seven lambs of a year old, which are to you
without spot, and let their meatofferyng be of flower myngled with oil, three
tenth deals also shall ye offer for a bullock, and two tenthdeales for a Ram /
one tenthdeale shalt thou offer for every lamb of the. vii. lambs: and an
he goote for sin to make atonement for you. Ye shall offer these, beside the
burntofferynge in the morning, which is a contynuall burntsacrifice. After
this manner ye shall offer through out the. vii days, the fode of the sacrifice
for as were savor unto the Lord.

And it shall be done beside the daily Leuit. 23. 5.
and seven lambs of a year old a piece, with their meatoffrynges of flower
myngled with oil, three tenthdeales unto a bullock, two tenthdeales to a Ram,
and one tenthdeale unto a lamb thorowout the. vii. lambs, and an he goote to
make an atonement for you. This ye shall do besides the continual
burntofferyng, and his meatofferynge, and they shall be unto you without spot,
with their drynkeofferynges.

What must be offered the viii. first days of the seventh month.

CAPI. XXIX.
ANd in the first day of the. vii. month Leui. xxiii. ^
ye shall do then no servile work. For it is a day of trompet blowynge unto
you. But ye shall offer a burntofferyng for a sweet savor unto the Lord: one
young bullock, one Ram, and. vii. lambs of a year old a piece, that are
pure. And their meatofferynge shall be made of flower myngled with oil. iii.
tenthdeales unto the bullock, and two unto the ram, and one tenthdeale unto
one lamb thorowout the. vii. lambs. And an he goote for sin to make an
atonement for you, beside the burntofferynge of the month and his
meatofferyng, and beside the daily burntofferynge and his meatofferyng, and the
drynkofferynges of the same, which must be done according unto the manner of
them for a savor of swetnesse of the sacrifyce of the Lord.

Leuiti. 23. ^
And ye shall have the tenth day of that same seventh month an holy
conuocacyon: Leuiti. 23. ^
And in the. xv. day of the. vii. month ye shall have an holy conuocacion,
and do then no servile work, and ye shall keep a feast unto the lord. vii.
days long. And ye shall offer a burntofferyng for a sacrifyce of a sweet
savor unto the Lord: xiii. bullockes two rams and. xiiii. lambs of a year
old, which shall be without blemysh. And their meatofferynge shall be of flower,
myngled with oil three tenthdeales unto every one of the. xiii. bullockes, two
tenthdeales to either of the rams, and one tenthdeale unto each of the.
xiiii. Lambs. And one he goote for syn, beside the daily burntofferyng with
his meat and drynkeofferynge.

And the second day (ye shall offer). xii. an he goote for syn, beside the
daily burntofferynge and his meat and drynkeofferynges. And the third day (ye
shall offer). xi. bullockes, two Rams and. xiiii. yearerynge lambs without
spot, and let their meat, and drynkeofferynges unto the bullockes, rams, and
lambs be after the nombre of them, and according to the manner. And there shall
be offered an he goote for sin, beside the daily burntofferyng and his meat
and drink offering. In the fourth day, ye (shall offer) x. bullockes two
rams and. xiiii. lambs yerelynges and pure: let their meat and
drynkofferynges unto the bullockes, rams, and lambs, be according to the
no^bre of them, and after the manner. And an he goote for syn, beside the daily,
burntofferynge, and his meat and drynkeofferyng. In the fyfth day (ye shall
offer). ix. bullockes, two rams, and. xiiii. lambs of one year old a piece
without spot. And let their meat and drynkeofferynges unto the bullockes,
Rams, and lambs, be according to the nombre of them, and after the manner.

And an he goote for syn, beside the daily

In the eight day ye shall have a collection of the feast unto you, and ye
shall do no seruyle work therein. But ye shall offer a burntofferyng, a
sacrifyce for a sweet savor unto the Lord: one ballocke, one Ram and vii,
yerelynge lambs without spot. Let their meat and drynkeofferynges unto the
bullock Ram, and lambs, be according to their no^bre and according the manner.

And an he goote for syn, beside the daily burntofferynge, and his meat and
drynkeofferyng. These things ye shall do unto the lord in your feasts: beside
your vows and frewylofferynges in your burntofferynges, meatofferynges,
drynkeofferynges, and peaceofferynges. And Moses told the Children of Israel,
all that the Lord commanded him.

Of vows when they shall be hepte, and when not.

CAPI. XXX.
ANN Moses spoke unto the heads of Deute. 23 d
If a man vow a vow unto the lord, or swear an oath to bind his soul, he
shall not go back with his word: but shall fulfill all that is proceeded out
of his mouth. If a woman also vow a vow unto the Lord, and bind her self
being in her Fathers house in the time of her youth, and her father hear her
vow, and bond which she has made upon her soul, and hold his peace thereto:
then all her vows, and bonds which she has made upon her soul shall stand
in effect.

But and if her father forbid her the same

But every vow of a wedowe / and of her

All vows and oaths that bind to humble These are the ordynaunces which the
lord commanded Moses, between a man and his wife, and between the father and
his daughter, being yet a damsel in her fathers house.

The Madianites, and Balaam are sleyne. The pray is equally divided. A present
given of Israel.

CAPI. XXXI.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: Nume. 25 d
trompettes to blow were in his hand. Nume. ^. ^.
And they warred against the Madianites, as the Lord commanded Moses, and
slew all the males. And they slew the kings of Madian among other that were
sleyne: Namely, Eui / and Rekem, Zur, and hur, and Reba: five kings of Madian,
with Balaa^ the son of Beor, whom they slew with the sword.

And the Children of Israel took all the Number. 25. a
these caused the children of Israel through the counsel of ii. Pet. ii. d
Balaam, to commyt trespace against the Lord, in the business of Peor / and
there followed a plage among the congregation of the lord. Now therefore Iudi.
xxi. ^
sley all the men children, and the women that have lain with men fleshlye.

But all the women Children that have Number. (...) ^
, and all that have touched any dead body, and purify both your selves and
your prisoners, the third day, and the seventh. And sprynkle all your
raymentes, and all that is made of skynnes, and all work of Gootes here, and
althynges made of wood. And Eleazar the priest said unto the men of war which
came from the Battle: this is the ordinance of the law, which the Lord
commanded Moses: Gold, Silver, brass, and iron, tyn and lead, and all that
may abide the fire, ye shall make it go through the fire, and it shall be
clean. Nevertheless, it shall be sprynkled with sprynklynge water.

And all that suffers not the fire, ye shall make go through the water. And
wash your

And Moses and Eleazar the Priest did

And the half which was the part of them that went out to war, was three
hundred thousand, and. xxxvii. thousonde, and five hundred sheep: And the
Lords part of the sheep was six hundred, and. lxxv.

And the oxen were. xxxvi. thousand and five hundred, of which the lords
part was lxxii. And the asses were. xxx. thousand and five hundred, of which
the lords part was three score and one.

And the souls of women were. xvi. thousand,

Thy servants have taken the sum

To Ruben and God, and to the half trybe of Manasses, is promised the
possessyon beyond Iordayne, Eastwarde.

CAPI. XXXII.
THe children of Ruben and the children

And Moses said unto the children of Nume. 13 d
Thus did your fathers, when I sent them from Cades barn to se the land. For
when they went up even unto the river of Escoll, and saw the land, they
discouraged the hertes of the children of Israel, that they should not go in to
the land which the lord has given them.

And the Lord was wroth the same time and swear, saying: Nume. 14. ^
None of the men that came out of Egypt from twentye year old

And behold, ye are risen up in your fathers stead, as an increase of
sinful men, to augmente the fearse wrath of the Lord to ward Israel. For if
ye turn away from him, he will yet again leave the people in the wilderness,
and ye shall destroy all this folk.

And they went near him and said: We will build sheep foldes here for our
sheep, and for our cattle, and ( vvalled) Cities for our children. But we our
selves will go redye armed before the children of Israel, until we have
brought them unto their place.

And our children ( and what soever we may have,) shall dwell in the fenced
Cities,

We will not return unto our houses, until the children of Israel have
enherited every man his enheritaunce. Neither will we enheryte with them on
yonder side Jordan forward, because our enheritaunce is fallen to us on this
side Jordan eastwarde.

And Moses said unto them: If ye will do this thing, and go harnessed before
the Lord to war, and will go all of you in har nesse over Iordane before the
Lord, until he have cast out his enemies before him, and until the land be
subdued before the lord, then ye shall return, and be without sin before
the Lord, and before Israel, and this land shall be your possessyon before the
lord.

But and if ye will not do so, behold, ye have sinned against the Lord: and
be sure Joshua. 4. ^
thy servants will go all harnessed for the war, and unto battle before
the Lord, as my lord says. And for their sakes Moses commanded Eleazar the
Priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the ancient fathers of the trybes of
the Children of Israel: and Moses said unto them. If the children of Gad, and
the children of Ruben will go with you over

Joshua. 22. a
We will go harnessed before the Lord in to the land of Canaan, that the
possessions of our enherytaunce may be on this side Jordan.

And Moses gave unto the Children of Gad and to the children of Ruben, and unto
Deuteronomy. (...). ^
Iahir the son of Manasse went and took the small towns thereof, and called
them Hauoth Iair. And Nobah went and took Kenath, and the towns longyng
thereto, and called it Nobah after his own name.

The ion^neys of Israel are nombred. They are commanded to kill the Canaanites

CAPI. XXXIII.
THese are the iourneys of the children of Exodi. ^^^
departed from Rahemses, the xv. day of the first month, on the morrow after
Exodi. ^^^
Passover, and the children of Israel went out with an high hand in the sight
of all the Egyptians. For the Egyptians buried all their fyrstborne which the
lord had smytten among them. And upon their gods also the Lord did execucyon.
And the children of Israel removed from Rahemses, and pytched in Socoth. And
they departed from Exodi. ^^^
Socoth, and pytched their tents in Ethan, which is in the edge of the
wilderness.

And they removed from Ethan, and turned Exodi. 14. ^
Pi Hiroth which is before Baal Zephon, and pytched before Mig doll. And they
departed from the plain of Hiroth, and Exodi. 14. ^
went through the mids of the sea in to the wilderness, and went three days
journey in the wilderness of Ethan, and pytched in Marah. And they removed
from Marah, and came unto Exodi. 16. ^
Elim where were. xii. fou^taynes of water, and. lxx. palm trees, and they
pytched there. And they removed from Elim, and lay fast by the red see. And
they removed from the red see, and lay in the wilderness of Sin. And they took
their journey out of the Exodi. (...). ^
wilderness of Sin, and set up they tents in Daphka.

And they departed from Daphka, Exodi. 17. ^
Raphedim, where was no water for the people to drink. And they departed from
Raphedim, and pytched in the Exodus (...). ^
wilderness of Sinay. And they removed from the deserte of Sinay, and pytched
at the Num^. ^^
graves of lust. And they departed from the sepulchers of lust and lay at Num^.
^^
Hazeroth.

And they departed from Hazeroth, and pytched in Rithma. And departed from
Rithma and pytched at Rimon Parez. And they departed from Rimon Parez, and
pytched in Lybna. And they removed from Lybna, and pitched at Rissa. And they
iourneyed from Rissa, and pytched in Rehelatha. And they went from Rehelatha,
and pytched in mount Sapher. And they removed from mount Sapher, and lay in
Harada. And they removed from Harada, and pytched in Makeheloth. And they
removed from Makeheloth, and lay at Tahath: and they departed from Tahath* and
pytched at Tharath. And they removed from Tharath, and pytched Num^. xx. a
wyldernes of Sin, which is Cades. And they removed from Cades, and pytched in
mount Hor, which is in the edge of the land of Edom.

Nume. xx. d Deuate. 32. g
And Aaron the Priest went up in to mount Hor, at the commandment of the

And they departed from Number. xxi. b
mount Hor, and pitched in zalmona. And they departed from Zalmona, and pytched
in Phunon. And they departed from Phunon, and pitched in Oboth And they
departed from Oboth, and pyched in Iohabarim, and toward the border of Moab.
And they departed from Nume. 2^. ^
Iehabarim, and pytched in Dibon Gad* (...). 25 a
unto the plain of Sittim in the feldes of Moab. And the lord spoke unto
Moses in the feldes of Moab by Jordan over against Jericho, saying: speak unto
the children of Israel and say unto them Deute. 7. ^
when ye are come over Jordan to enter in to the land of Canaan, ye shall
drive out all the inhabyters of the land before you, and destroy all their
pyctures, and break asondre all their Images of metal, and pluck down al
their aulters: And possess the land, and dwell therein, for I have given you
the land to enjoy it. Number. 26. ^
and give to the moo the more enherytaunce, and to the fewer the less
enheritaunce. And your enherytaunce shall be in the tribes of your fathers, every
man's enherytaunce in the place where his lot falls. Iudi. i. e. f.
But and if ye will not drive out the inhabyters of the land before you, then
those which ye let remain of them, shall be pryckes in your eyes, and darts
in your sides, and shall vex you in the land wherein ye dwell. Moreover it
will come to pass, that I shall de unto you, as I thought to do unto them.

The coostes and bordres of the land of promise. Certain men are assygned to
deuyde the land.

CAPI. XXXIIII.
ANd the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying: Joshua. ^v. a
your south quarter shall be from the wilderness of Sin, alonge by the coost of
Edo^, so that your south quarter reach from the side of the salt see eastward,
and fet a compass from the south up to Acra him, and reach to Zinna. And go
out from the south to Cades barn, and go out also to Hazat Adar, and go along
to Azmon: and fet a compass again from Azmon unto the ry uer of Egypt, and
shall go out at the sea.

And let your west quarter be the great see

And the same border shall descend and go out at the side of the sea of
Cenereth castwarde. And then go down alonge by Iordane, and leave at the salt
see. And this shall be your land with the coostes thereof round about. And
Moses commanded the children of Israel, saying. This is the land which ye
shall enheryte by lot, and which the Lord commanded to give unto nine trybes
and an half: Nume. (...) ^
for the trybe of the children of Ruben, arcordyng to the housholdes of their
fathers: and the trybe of the children of Gad / according to their fathers
housholdes, and half the trybe of Manasse, have received their enherytaunce.
Two tribes and an half have received their enheritau^ce on the other side of
Jordan, over against Ierico eastwarde.

And the Lord spoke to Moses, saying. Deuse. 3 d. Joshua. 14 a
Joshua the son of Nun. And ye shall take also a Lord of every trybe, when ye
deuyde the land. The names of the men are these. Of the trybe of Judah, Caleb
the son of Iephune. Of the trybe of the children of Suncon, Semuel the son
of Amiud. Of the trybe of Ben Iamin, Elidad the son of Cisson. Of the trybe
of the children of Dan, the lord Bucki, the son of Iagli. From among the
children of Joseph for the trybe of the children of Manasse, the lord Haniel,
the son of Ephod. Of the tribe of the children of Ephraim, the lord Camuel the
son of Siph ^an. Of the trybe of the sons of Zabulon, the lord Elizaphan the
son of Pharnach. Of the trybe of the children of Isachar, the lord Palthyel
the son of Asan. Of the trybe of the sons of Aser, the lord Ahihud the son
of Salomi. Of the trybe of the children of Nephthali, the lord Peda El the
son of of Ammihud. These are they whom the lord commanded to deuyde the
enheritaunce unto the children of Israel in the land of Canaan.

Cities and suburbs given to the Levites. Cities of refuge. The law of
manquellynge. For one man's witness shall no man be condemned.

CAPI. XXXV.
AND the Lord spoke unto Moses in Joshua. 21. a
cities to dwell in. And ye shall give also unto the cities of the Leuytes,
suburbs hard by their cities round about them. The cities shall they have to
dwell in, and the suburbs for their cattle, and for their possessyon and all
manner of beasts of theyrs. And the suburbs of the cities which ye shall give
unto the Leuytes, shall reach from the wall of the city outward, a thousand
cubits round oboute. And ye shall measure with out the city, of the East
side: two thousand cubits. And of the south side: two thousand cubits. And
of the west side: two thousand cubits. And of the north side: two thousand
cubits also: and the city shall be in the mids. And these shall be the suburbs
of their cities

And from among the cities which ye shall give unto the Leuytes, Joshua. xx* ^
there shall be six cities for refuge, which ye shall appoynte to that
intent, that he which kylleth, may flee thither. And to them ye shall add.
xlii. cities mo: so that all the cities which ye shall give the Leuytes, may
be. xlviii. with their suburbs.

And the cities which ye shall give, shall be

And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying. Speak unto the children of Israel and
say unto them: Deuteronomy. (...) Joshua. (...)
when ye be come over Jordan into the land of Canaan, ye shall appoynte you
cities to be cities of refuge for you: that he which sleeth a soul unawares,
may flee thither. And the cities shall be to flee from the auenger of blood,
that he which kylleth dye not, until he stand before the congregacyo^ in
judgment. And of these syx free cities which ye shall give, ye shall give
three on this side Jordan, and three in the land of Canaan. And these six free
cities shall be a refuge both for the children of Israel, and for the
stranger, and for him that dwells among you, that all they which kyl any
person unawares, may flee thither.

(...) ^*
And if any man smite an other with an Deuteronomy. ^
of hate, or hurl at him with layenge of wait, that he dye, or smite him with
his hand of Envy, that he dye, he that smote him shall dye, for he is a
murderer.

The justice of blood shall sley the murderer, as soon as he fyndeth him. But
and if he pusshed him by chance, and not of hate, or cast at him with any
manner of thing and not of laynge of wait: or cast any manner of stone at him
(that a man may dye with) and saw him not. And he cast it upon him and he dye,
and was not his enemy, neither sought him any harm. Then the cogregacyon shall
judge between the sleer, and the executer of blood in such cases. And the
congregacyon shall deliver the sleer out of the hand of the auenger of blood,
and the congregation shall restore him again unto the city of his refuge,
whyther he was fled. And he shall bide there Joshua. xx. b
unto the death of the hye priest, which was anointed with holy oil.

But and if the sleer come without the borders

Who soever kylleth a soul, the same mansleer must be sleyne him self Deuse.
17 ^ ^ud. xix. b.
through witnesses. Neither shall one wytnes answer to put a man to death.
Moreover ye shall take none amends for the life of the murderer, which is
worthy to dye. But he shall be put to death. Also ye shall take no money of him
that is fled to a free city, that he should come again, and dwell in the
land, before the death of the high priest. And se that ye polute not the
land which ye shall dwell in, for blood defiles the land. And the land can
none otherwise be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood
of him that shed blood. Defyle not therefore the land which ye shall
enhabyte, for I am the mids thereof: even I the Lord dwell among the
children of Israel.

An order for the marriage of the daughters of zelaphead. One of the trybes may
not marrye with another.

CAPI. XXXVI.
ANd the ancient fathers of the children (...). 26 ^
The Lord commanded my Lord, to give the land to enheryte by lot to the
children of Israel. And my lord commanded in Gods behalf, to give the
enherytaunce of Nume. 27 ^
Zelaphead our brother unto his daughters.

Whom if any of the sons of the other

This therefore does the lord command the Tobi. ^. ^ and. (...). ^
let them be wives to whom they them selves think best, only to the kynred
and trybe of their father shall they marrye, so shall not the enherytaunce of
the Children of Israel remove from trybe to trybe, when the children of Israel
abide every man in the enheritaunce of the trybe of his fathers. And every
daughter that possesses any enheritaunce in any tribe of the children of
Israel, shall be wife unto one which is of the kynred of the trybe of her
father, that the children of Israel may enjoy every man the enherytaunce of his
fathers. Neither ought the enheryaunce to go from one trybe to an other: but
every one of the tribes of the children of Israel, must abide in his own
enherytaunce.

And as the Lord commanded Moses,

These are the commandments and laws which the Lord commanded by the hand
of Moses, unto the children of Israel in the feldes of Moab by Jordan, over
against Ierico.

The end of the fourth book of Moses, called in the Hebrew Uaiedabber: and in
the Latin Numeri.
The fyfth book of Moses: called in the Hebrew Elle haddebarim: and in the
Latin Deuteronomium.
A brefe rehersall of things done before

CAPI. Primo.
THese be the words which Number. xxi. c
Sehon the king of the Amorites which dwelte in Hesbon: and Og, king of Basan
which dwelte at Astaroth in Edrai. On the other side Iordane in the land of
Moab, began Moses to declare this law, saying: the lord our God spoke unto
us in Horeb, saying. Ye have dwelte long enough in this Mount: depart
therefore / and take your journey, and go unto the hill of the Amorites, and
unto all the places nyghther unto: both unto the plain, and hills and dales:
to the south, to the ^ees side, to the land of Canaan, and unto Libanon: even
unto the great river Euphrates.

Behold, I have set the land before you: Gent. xv. d. and, xvii. b.
possess the land which the lord swear unto your fathers Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, to give unto them and their seed after them. And I spoke unto you the
same ceason saying. I am not able to bear you my self alone. For the Lord
your God has multiplied you: and behold, ye are this day as the sterres of
heaven in nombre (the lord God of your fathers make you a thousand times so
many mo as ye are, and bless you, as he has promised you,) how can Exodi.
18. c
I my self alone, bear the combraunce, charge, and strife that is among you?
bring (from among you) men of wisdom and of understanding and expert,
according to your trybes, and I will make them rulers over you. And ye
answered me and said: that which thou have spoken is good for us to do. And
so out of your trybes I took the captains, (men of wisdom and that were
expert) and made them rulers over you: captains over thousands, and over
hundredes, over fyftye, and over ten, and officers among your trybes.

And I charged your Judges that same John^. vii. ^
judge ryghteously between every man and his brother, and the stranger that is
with him. Se that ye know no faces in Judgment: Leuiti. ^i^^ Pro^. ^^^
but hear the small as well as the great, and be afraid of no man, for the
judgment is Gods. And the cause that is to Exodi. ^^^
hard for you, bring unto me, and I will hear it. And I commanded you the
same ceason, all the things which ye should do. And when we departed from
Horeb, we went through all that great and terrible wilderness, as ye have seen
alonge by the way of the hill of the Amorites, as the lord our god commanded
us, and came to Cades Barn. And I said unto you: Ye are come unto the hill of
the Amorytes, which the Lord our God will give unto us.

Behold the Lord thy God has set the Deute. x^^
fear not, neither be discouraged. But ye came unto me every one and said:
Number. ^^^
We will send men before us, to search us out the land, and to bring us
word again, what way we must go up by, and unto what cities we shall come.
And the saying pleased me well, and I took.xii. men of you, of every trybe one,
which departed, and went up into the hye country, and came unto the river
Escoll, and serched it out, and took of the fruit of the land ( to declare
the plenteusnesse thereof) in their hands, and brought it unto us, and brought
us word again and said: it is a good land, which the lord our god does give
us.

Notwithstange ye would not consent to go up, but were dysobedient unto the
mouth of the Lord your God, and murmured in your tents, and said: because the
lord hates us therefore has he brought us out of the land of Egypt, to
deliver us in to the hand of the Amorites, and to destroy us. How shall we go
up? Our brethren have dyscouraged Nume. (...).
the people is greater and taller then we, and have cities great and walled
even up to heaven, and more over we have seen the sons of the Enakims there.
And I said unto you: dread not, nor be afraid of them: the lord your god
which goes before you, he shall fight for you, according to all that he did
unto you in Egypt before your eyes. In the wyldernes also you have seen how,
that the lord thy god bare the, even as a man does bear his son, in all the
way which ye have gone by until ye came unto this place. And yet in this
thing ye did not believe the Lord your God. He went in the way before you, to
search you out a place to pytche your tents in, Exodi. 13. d
in fire by night, that ye might se what way to go, and in a cloud by day.

And the Lord herd the voice of your Number. 14. d ^d. xxvi. g
There shall not one of these men and of this froward generation se that good
land which I swear to give unto your fathers, save Caleb the son of
Iephune, he shall se it Joshua. 14. ^
and to him will I give the land that he has trodden upon, and to his children,
because be has followed the Lord, ( VVonderfull was that indignacion against
the people, seeing that) Nume. x^. c and* x. xvic
the Lord was angrye with me likewise for your sakes, saying: thou also shall
not go in thither. But Joshua the son of Nun which stands before the, he shall
go in thither. Bolden him therefore, for he shall cause Israel to enheryte the
land. Nume. 14. ^
Moreover your children, which ye said should be a pray and your sons which
in that day had no knowledge between good and evil, they shall go in thither,
and unto them will I give it, and they shall enjoy it. But as for you, turn
your faces, and take your journey in to the wilderness: even by the way of
the red see. Then ye answered and said unto me.

Nume. 1^. g
We have sinned against the Lord: we will go up and fight, according to all
that

And the Amorites which dwelt in that hyl came out against you, and chased you
(as bees use to do) and smote you in Scir, even unto Horma. And ye came again,
and wept before the lord: but the lord would not hear your voice, nor give
you audience. Nume. xx. a
And so ye abode in Cades a long ceason, according to the time that ye
remained in other places.

That which was ^ one from the time they departed from Cades b^^ne, unto the
battle against the kings Sehon, and Og.

CAPI. II.
THen we (...). xxi. a
turned our face, and took our

Ye have compassed this mountain long enough, turn you northwarde. And warn
thou the people, saying: Ye shall go through the coost of your brethren the
children of Esau, which dwell in Seir, and they shall be afraid of you: take
ye good head unto your selves therefore. Ye shall not provoke them, for I will
not give you of their land, no not so much as a foot breadth, Gente 36. b
Mala. 1. a.
because I have given mount Seir unto Esau, to possess. Ye shall bye meat of
them for money to eat / and ye shall procure water of them for money to
drink. For the lord thy God has blessed the, in all the works of thy hand.

He knew thy entering in to this great Iudi. iii. d
Thou shalt nor fight against the Moabites, neither provoke them to battle,
for I will not give the of their land to possess: because I have given At,
unto the children of Loath to possess. The terrible people the Gene. 14. ^.
Emims dwelte therein in times past, a people great, many, and tall, as the
Enakims: which also were taken for gyauntes as the Enakims: whom the Moabites
call Emyms. The Horims dwelt in Seir before time, whose possessyon the children
of Nume. 14^^ and xxvi. g.
For in deed the hand of the Lord was against them, to destroy them from
among the host, till they were consumed.

And so it came to pass, that all the men of war were consumed and dead from
among That also is taken for a land of gyauntes, and gyauntes dwelte therein an
old time, whom the Ammonites call Zanzumims. Nume. 23. ^
A people that was great, many, and tall, as the Enakims. But the Lord
destroyed them before them, and they succeeded them in the enherytaunce, and
dwelt in their stead: as he did for the Children of Gene. 36. ^.
Esau, which dwell in Seir: when he destroyed the Horyms before them, they
conquered their possessyon, and dwelte in their stead unto this day. And the
Auims which dwelte in Hazatim even unto Aza, the Caphthorims which came out of
Caphthor destroyed them, and dwelte in thyr stead.

Rise ye up therefore, and take your journey Number. xxi. ^
I have given in to thy hand Sehon the Amorite, king of Hesbon, and his land.
Go to therefore and conquete, and provoke him to vattayle. This day will I
begin to send the, fear and dread of the, upon all nacyons that are under all
the heaven: so that they which hear speak of the, shall tremble and quake
before the. And so he sent messengers out of the wilderness of Kedemoth, unto
Sehon king of Hesbon with words of peace, saying:

Number. xxi. ^ Deute. xx. c
I will go through thy land. I will go along vy the hye way. I will neither
turn

Number. xxi. c Deute. 29. b
Then both Sehon, and all his people came out against us to fight at Iaza. And
the lord set him before us, and we smote him and his sons, and all his
people. And we took all his cities the same ceason, and slew the men, women,
and children of all the ctiyes, and let nothing remain, save the cattle
only we caught to our selves, and the spoil of the cities which we took from
Aroer, which is by the brynke of the river of Arnon, and from the city that is
in the river, unto Gilead; there was not one city to strong for us The Lord
our God delivered all unto us: only unto the land of the children of Ammon
thou came not, nor unto every place of the river Iabocke, nor unto the cities
in the mountains, nor unto what soever the Lord our god forbad us.

Things that chanced from the victory of the two kings Sehon and Og unto
the Institucyon of Joshua in Moses strade.

CAPI. III
THen we turned and went up the way to Number. (...). Deuteronomy. (...)
And Og the king of Basan came out against us: he and al his people to battle
at Edrai. And the Lord said unto me: Fear him not, for I will deliver him,
and all his people and his land in to thy hand, and thou shalt do unto him,
as thou dydest unto Sehon king of the Amorites, which dwelte at Hesbon. And
so the Lord our god delivered into our hands. Og also the king of Basan and
all his folk. And we smote him, until none was left him alive.

And we took all his cities the same ceason (neither was there a city which we
took not from them) even three score cities thorowout all the region of Argob,
the kingdom of Og in Basan. All these Cytyes also were made strong with hye
walls, gates and bars, beside unwalled towns a great meanye.

And we utterly destroyed them, as we did unto Sehon king of Hesbon, bryngyng
to naught all the cities, with men, women and children. But all the cattle and
the spoil of the cities, we caught for our selves.

And thus we took the same ceason, out of Nu(...) Deu^. (...) Io(...)
and the cities thereof gave I unto the Rubenites and Gaddites.

And the rest of Gilead and all Basan of the kingdom of Og, gave I unto the
half tribe of Manasse, even all the regyon of Argob with all Basan: which is
called the land of Glauntes. Iair the son of Manasse took all the regyon of
Argob unto the coostes of Gesuri and Maachati, and called them after his own
name: Basan Nauoth Iair unto this day. And I gave Gilead unto Machir.

And unto the Rubenites and Gaddites I of the vvyldernesse) and Jordan, and the
coost thereof, from Ceneroth even unto the sea which is in the plain, eue^ the
salt see under the springes of the hill, Eastwarde. Nume. 32 d
And I commanded you the same time, saying: the Lorde^ your GOD has given
you this land to enjoy it: ye shall go harnessed before your brethren the
Children of Israel, all that are mete for the war. Your wives only, your
children, and your cattle (for I wot that ye have much cattle) shall abide
in your cities which I have given you, until the Lord have given rest unto
your brethren as well as unto you, and until they also have conquered the
land, which the lord your god has given them beyond Jordan: and then shall
ye return again, every man unto his possession which I have given you.

Number. (...) d
And I warned Joshua the same time, saying: thine eyes have seen all that the
lord (...). ^. ^ (...)d. iiii. c
But the lord was angrye with me for your sakes, and would not hear me. And the
lord said unto me: be content, speak no more unto me of this matter. Nume. 27
(...) Deute. 34 ^
Get the up into the top of the hill, and lift up thine eyes westwarde,
northwarde, southwarde, and Eastwarde, and behold it with thine eyes, for thou
shall not go over this Jordan. But charge Joshua, and courage him, and bolden
him. ^um. 34. ^
For he shall go before this people, and he shall deuyde unto them the land
which you shall se. And so we abode in the valey over against the house of Peor.

An exhortacyon to give dilygent head unto the law. Images may not be maid to
worship. The three Cities of refuge.

CAPI. IIII.
AND now harken O Israel unto the Deuteronomy. xii. d Joshua. 23. ^ Prove 30 a
Ye shall put nothing unto the word which I command you, neither do ought
therfrom / that ye may keep the commandments of the lord your God, which I
command you. Your eyes have seen what the Lord did unto Baall Peor, Number. ^5.
^. and. xxxi. c
for all the men that followed Baall Peor, the Lord your God has destroyed
from among you. But ye that cleue unto the Lord your God, are alive every
one of you this day. Behold I have taught you ordynaunces, and laws, such as
the Lord my god commanded me, that ye should do even so in the land, whyther
ye go to possess it. Keep them therefore, and do them, for that is your
wisdom, and understanding in the sight of the nacyons: that they may hear
all these ordinances, and say: Surely it is a wise and understanding people:
it is a great nacyon.

For what other nacyon is so great, that Psalm. 145 ^
as often as we call unto him? Yea, and what nation is so great that has
ordynaunces, and laws so ryghteous, as all this law which I set before you
this day? Take heed to thy self therefore, and keep thy soul dilygently, that
thou forget not the things, which thine eyes have seen, and that they depart
not out of thine heart, all the days of thy life: but Deute. vi. d
teach them thy Sons, and thy sons sons: Specially the day that thou
stodest before the Lord thy god in Horeb, when the Lord said unto me: gather
me the people to gyther, and I will make them hear my words that they may
learn to fear me all the days that they shall live upon the earth / Ephe. vi.
a
and that they may teach their children: ye came Exodus xix. c
and stood also under the hill, and the hill burnte with fire: even unto the
mids of heaven, and there was darkness / clouds, and mist. And the lord
spoke unto you out of the myddest of the fire, and ye herd the voice of the
words Erodi. xx. ^ i. John^. ^. b
but saw no image / save ye herd a voice only. And he declared unto you his
covenant, which he commanded you to do, even. x. verses, which he wrote
upon two tables of stoone. And the Lord commanded me that same ceason, that I
should teach you ordinances, and laws, which ye ought to do in the land
whyther ye go to possess it.

Take therefore good head unto your selves as perteynynge unto your souls, for
Deute. ^7. ^ Sapi. 14. a Job. xxxi. ^
Yea and leest thou lift up thine eyes unto heaven and when thou seyst the
Son, the moon, and the stars, with all the host of heaven, should be
desceyued, and should worship, and serve the things, which the lord Gene.
i. b
thy god has made to serve all nacyons under the hoole heaven. But the Lord
has taken you, and brought you out of the iron fournace: even out of Egypt, to
be unto him a people, and enherytaunce, as ye are this day. Furthermore, the
Lord was angrye with me for your words, and swear / that I should not go
over Jordan, and that I should not go in unto that good land, which the lord
thy god gives the to enherytaunce. Deute. 34 b
But I must dye in this land, and shall not go over Jordan. But ye shall go
over, and conquer that good land.

Take heed unto youreselues, that ye forget Hebru. ^2. ^
For the Lord thy God is a consumyng fire / and a jealous God. If thou do
beget children, and Chyldrens Children, and when ye have dwelt in the land, ye
do wyckedly, and make any manner of graven Iere. xvi. ^.
image, and work evil in the sight of the Lord thy god, to provoke him to
anger, I call heaven and earth to record against you this day, that ye shall
shortly peryshe from of the land, whyther ye go over Jordan to possess it: ye
shall not prolonge your days therein, but shall utterly be destroyed. And the
Lord shall scatter you among the nacyons, and ye shall be left few in nombre
among the people, whyther the lord shall bring you: and there ye shall serve
Gods, which are the work of man's hand, wood, and stoone, which neither
se / nor hear, nor eat, nor smell.

Deuit. 30 a Iere. xxix. ^
And there thou shalt seek the lord thy Leui. (...)* ^
nor forget the apoyntement of thy fathers, which he swear unto them. For ask
of the days that are past, which were before the, since the day that God
created man upon the earth, and (ask) from the one side of heaven unto the
other, if ever there came to pass such a great thing, or whyther any such
like thing has been herd. Did ever a nacyo^ hear the voice of God speaking
out of the mids of a fire, as thou have herd, and yet lived? either whyther
God assayed to go, and take him a people from among nations through
temptacyons, Signs, Wonders, war, a mighty hand, a Psalm. ^^^
stretched out arm, and through great visions, according unto all that the
Lord your God did unto you in Egypt before your eyes? Nnto the it was showed,
that thou myghtest know, how that the Lord he is GOD, and that there is
noone other but he.

Erodi. ^^^
Out of heaven he made the hear his Exodi. ^^
Egypt: to thrust out nacyons great and myghtyer then thou / before the, and
to bring the in, and to give the their land to enherytaunce: as it is come to
pass this day. Understande therefore this day / and turn it to thine heart,
that the Lord he is God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneth: neither is
there any other. Thou shalt keep therefore his ordynaunces, and his
commandments which I command the this day, that it may go well with
the, and with thy Children after the, and that thou may prolonge thy days
upon the earth, which the Lord thy GOD gives the thy life long.

Num^ (...) Deuteronomy. ^^^
Then Moses severed three cities on the other side Jordan toward the Son
rysynge, in Gylead of the Trybe of Gad, and Golan in Basan of the Trybe of
Manasse. And so this is the law which Moses set before the Children of
Israel: These are the witnesses / statutes / and ordinances, which Moses
told the Children of Israel, after they came out of Egypt, on the other side
Iordane, in the valey over against the house of Peor, in the land of Sehon
king of the Amorytes which dwelte at Hesbon: whom Moses and the Children of
Israel Nume. 2^. f
smote / after they were come out of Egypt, and conquered his land, and the
land of Og king of Basan, two kings of the Amorites, which were on the other
side Jordan toward the son rysynge: from Aroer which is by the bank of the
river Arnon, unto Mount Sion which is Hermon, and all the plain on the other
side Iordane Eastwarde: even unto the sea, which is in the plain under the
sprynges of the hill.

The ten commandments.

CAPI. V.
ANd Moses called all Israel, and said Exodi. x^. a
I am the Lord thy God, which brought the out of the land of Egypt from the
house of bondage. Thou shalt have noone other Gods in my presence.

Leuit. 26. a
Thou shall make the no graven image of any manner of likeness that is in heaven
above, and that is in earth beneth, and that is in the waters beneth the earth.
Thou shall neither bow thy self unto them, nor serve them: for I the Lord thy
God, am a jealous God, visityng the wickedness of the fathers upon the
Children, even in the third, and fourth generation, among them that hate me:
and show mercy upon thousands, among them that love me, and keep my
commandments.

Exodi. 19. ^
Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy god in vain: for the Lord will
not hold him giltlesse, that takes his name in vain. Keep the Sabbath day,
that thou sanctifye it, as the Lord thy God has commanded the.

Leuitt. 23. a
Six days thou shalt labor, and Exodi. 13. b
seventh day is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God: thou shalt not do any
work, thou and thy Son, thy daughter, thy servant, and thy maid, thine
ox, and thine ass, and all thy cattle, and the stranger that is within thy
gates, that thy servant, and thy maid may reest as well as thou. Remember,
that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt / and how that the lord thy
God brought the out thence through Psalm. 136 ^
a mighty hand / and a stretched out arm. For which cause the Lord thy God
commanded the, to keep the Sabbath day.

Exodi. xx. b Math. xv a Ephe. vi. a. Mark. 7 b
Honor thy father, and thy mother, as the Lord thy god has commanded the:
that thy days may be prolonged, and that it may go well with the in the
land, which the lord thy God gives the.

* Thou shalt not sley.

Math. v. c. Luke. 1^. d. Roma. 13. c.
Thou shall not break wedlock.

* Thou shalt not steal.

* Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

Roma. 7. b
Thou shalt not lust after thy neighbors wife: thou shall not covet thy
neighbors house, his field / his servant, or his maid, his Ox, his Ass /
or ought that thy neighbor has. These words the Lord spoke unto all your
multitude in the mount out of the mids of the fire, cloud, and darkness,
with a great voice, and added no more Exodus xxxi.
thereto, and wrote them in two tables of stoone / and delivered them unto me.

And it fortuned / that when ye herd the Exodi. xix d
we have herd his voice out of the mids of the fire: We have seen this day,
that God does talk with a man, and he yet lives. Now therefore why should we
dye, that this great fire should consume us? If we hear the voice of the Lord
our God any more, we shall dye. For what flesh has it ben, that ever herd
the voice of the living god speaking out of the mids of the fire (as we have
done) and yet did live? Go thou and hear all that the Lord our God says,
and tell thou unto us all that the Lord our God says unto the Exodi. xix a
and we will hear it, and do it.

And the Lord herd the voice of your Iere. 24. b. and. xxxi* ^
Oh that there were such an heart in them that they would fear me, and keep
all my commandments all way, that it might go well with them, and with
their Children for ever. Go, and say unto them: get you in to your tents
again, but stand thou here by me, and I will tell the, all the
commandments, ordynaunces, and laws, which thou shall teach them, that
they may do them in the land, which I give them to possess. Take heed
therefore, that ye do in deed as the LORD your God has commanded you, and
Deute. 17 d
turn not aside: either to the right hand, or to the left: but walk in all
the ways which the Lord your God has commanded you, that ye may live /
and that it may go well with you, and that ye may prolonge your days, in
the land which ye shall possess.

The law of God may not be forgotten.

CAPI. VI.
THese are the commandments, ordinances, D^ut^. x. c.
fear the Lord thy God, and keep all his ordynaunces, and his commandments
which I command the: thou and thy son, and thy sons son all days of
thy life, that thy days may be prolonged. Hear therefore, O Israel, and take heed, that thou do thereafter, that it may go well with the, and that ye may
increase myghtely, even as the Lord God of thy Fathers has promised the a
land, that flows with milk, and honey.

Mark. xii. ^
Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is Lord only, and Mat. 22. b Mark. xii. c
Luke. x. ^.
thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy Deute.
xi. c.
And these words which I command the this day / shall be in thine heart,
and thou shall show them unto thy Children, and shalt talk of them when thou
art at home in thine house / and as thou walk by the way, and when thou
lie down, and when thou rysest up: and thou shall bind them for a sign
upon thine hand. And they shall be warnynges between thine eyes and thou
shalt write them upon the poostes of thy house, and upon thy gates. And when
the Lord thy God has brought the into the land / which he swear unto thy
fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and gives the great and goodly cities
which thou buyldest not, houses full of all manner of goods which thou
fylledst not, and wells dygged which thou dyggest not, vyneyeardes and olyue
trees which thou plantedst not, and when thou have eaten and art full: Then
beware leest thou forget the Lord, which brought the out of the land of
Egypt from the house of bondage.

Deute. x^. Math. 4^ Luke. ii^^^
Thou shall fear the lord thy god, and math. ii^^^
Ye shall not tempte the Lord your God as ye did in the temptacion. But keep
the commandments of the Lord your God, and his witnesses, and his
ordynaunces which he has commanded the, and thou shalt do that which is
right and good in the sight of the Lord: that thou may prospere, and that
thou may go in, and conquer that good land, which the Lord swear unto thy
fathers to cast out all thine enemies before the, as the Lord has said.

Deute. ^. ^
And when thy son asks the in time to

The Israelites may make no covenant with the Gentyles. They must destroy
their Idols. Idolatrer^ must be sleyne.

CAPI. VII.
WHen the Lord thy God has brought before the: namely, the Hethites, the
Gergesites, the Amorites, the Cananites, the Pheresites, the Heuytes and the
Iebusytes. vii. nations greater, and myghtyer then thou Exodus xiii c ^.
xxxiiii. b.
and when the Lord thy god has set them before the, thou shall smite them,
and utterly destroy them, and make no couenaunte with them / nor have
compassion on them. Thou shalt make no maryages with them, neither give thy
daughter unto his son, nor take his daughter unto thy son. For they will
dysceyue thy son, that he should not fear me, and they shall serve strange
gods, and then will the wrath of the lord wax hoote against you, and
destroy you shortly. But thus ye shall deal with them: Exodus 34. b. Nume. 33. f
Ye shall overthrow their aulters, and break down their pillars, cut down
their groves and burn their graven images with fire. Deuteronomy. 14. a and. 36. d
Peter. ii b
For thou art an holy nacyon unto the Lord thy God: Exodi. xix a
the Lord thy God has chosen the, to be a several people unto him self,
above all nacyons that are upon the earth. It was not because of the multitude
of you above al nations, that the lord had lust unto you and chose you, seeing
ye were fewest of all nations.

But because the lord loved you, and because ^eue. xxii, c
oath which he had sworn unto your fathers, therefore has the Lord brought
you out through a mighty hand, and delivered you out of the house of bondage:
even from the hand of Pharao king of Egypt. Understande therefore, that the
lord thy god he is god, and that a true god Exodi. xx. a and. 34. a
which keeps poyntment and mercy unto them that love him and keep his
commandments, even thorowout a thousand generacyons: and rewards them
that hate him before his face, so that he brings them to naught, and does not
defar the time, but rewards him that hates him, before his face. Keep thou
therefore the commandments / and ordinances and laws, which I command the
this day that thou do them. Exodi. 23. d
If ye herke^ unto these laws, and observe and do them, the lord thy god also
shall keep to the, the poyntment, and the mercy which he swear unto thy fathers.
He will love the / and bless the / and multiplye the: he will also bless the
fruit of thy womb, and the fruit of thy land, thy corn, thy wine and thine
oil, and the increase of thine oxen, and the flocks of thy sheep in the
land, which he swear unto thy fathers to give the.

Thou shall be blessed above all nations: Exodi. 23. d
take away from the all manner infirmityes, and will put none of the evil
diseases Exodi. ix. a
of Egypt (which thou know) upon the, but will send them upon all them
that hate the. Thou shall consume all the nations which the Lord thy God shall
deliver the: thine eye shall have no pitye upon them / neither shalt thou
serve their Gods, for that shall be thy decay. If thou say in thine heart:
these nations are ^o then I, how can I cast them out? Deute. xx. ^ Joshua. ^. a.
Thou shall not fear them but remember, what the lord thy God did unto
Pharao, and unto al Egypt: the great temptacions which thine eyes saw, and the
signs, and wondres, and the mighty hand, and stretched out arm, where
through the Lord thy god brought the out: even so shall the Lord thy god do
to all the nacyons, of whom thouarte afraid. Exodi. 23. ^ Joshua. 24. ^
Moreover, the lord thy god will send hornettes among them, until they that
are left (and hyde them selves from the) be destroyed. Thou shalt not fear
them, for the Lord thy god is among you, a mighty god and a terrible, for the
lord thy god will put out these nacyons before the by a little, and a little
Exodi. 23. ^
thou may not consume them at once, leest the beasts of the field increase
upon the.

But the Lord thy God shall give them Joshua. x. x^* and, xii*
And he shall deliver their kings into thine hand, and thou shall destroy
their name from under heaven. There shall no man he able to stand before the,
until thou have destroyed them. The graven images of their Gods shalt thou
burn with fire, and Iosu. vii. a ii. Ma. xii. c
covet not the Gold, and silver that is on them, nor take it unto the, lest
thou be snared therein. For it is an abhominacyon before the lord thy god.
Bring not therefore abhominacyon in to thine house, lest thou be a dampened
thing, as it is: but utterly defye it, and abhor it, for it is a dampened
thing.

Moses puts the Israelytes in remembrance what God has done to them in the
wilderness.

CAPI. VIII.
ALl the commandments which I command Exodi. i^. ^ Nume. xi. ^
humbled the, and suffered the to hungre, and fed the with Manna, which
neither thou nor thy Fathers knew of, to make the know, that Math. 4. a
a man does not live by bread only: but by every ( word) that proceeds out
of the mouth of the lord / does a man live. Diute. ^9. a
Thy raiment waxed not old upon the, neither did thy foot swell these. xl.
years. This also shalt thou consider in

For the Lord thy God brings the in to a good land, a land in the which
are ryuers of waters, and fou^taynes, and sprynges that spring out of valeyes,
and hills: a land wherein is wheat and barley, vyneyardes, fyg trees, and
Pomgarnates: a land wherein is oil olyue, and honye: a land / wherein thou
shalt eat bread without scarceness, neither shalt thou lack any thing: a
land ^ob. 2^. ^.
whose stoones are iron, and out of whose hills thou shalt dygge brass. When
thou have eaten therefore, and filled thy self, thou Nume. (...). x. ^
yea and when thou have eaten, and filled thy self, and have build goodly
houses, and dwelt therein, and when thy beasts, and thy sheep are waxed many,
and thy silver and gold is multiplied and all that thou haste is increased,
then beware, leest thine heart rise, and thou forget the lord thy god, which
brought the out of the land of Egypt, and from the house of bondage, and
which was thy guide in the great and terrible wilderness (wherein were) fyryt
serpents, scorpyons, and drought with out any water.

But he brought out water for the, even ^. Regu^. ii. b
my power, and the might of mine own hand has prepared me this abundau^ce:
But remember the lord thy god / how that it is he which gives the power to
get substance, for to make good the promise which he swear unto thy fathers,
as this day does witness.

And if thou forget the lord thy god, and walk after strange (...)
gods, and serve them and worship them, I testifye unto you this day, that
ye shall surely peryshe. As the nacyons which the lord destroys before you,
even so ye shall peryshe, because ye would not be obedient to the voice of the
lord your god.

They are forbidden to trust in their own strength.

CAPI. IX.
Hear O Israel, thou passest over Iordane this day, to go in, and co^quere
nacyons Number. (...)
people great and tall, even the Children of the Enakyms, which thou know
of, and of whom thou have herd say: who will stand before the Children of
Enake? Understande therefore this day, that the Lord thy god is even he which
goes over before the as a ( devouring) and a consumynge fire, he shall
destroy them, and he shall bring them down before thy face. He shall cast
them out, and bring them to naught quyckely, as the lord has said unto the.
Speak not thou in thine heart (after that the Lord thy God has cast them out
before the) saying: for my ryghtousnesse the lord has brought me in, to
possess this land. Nay, but for the wickedness of these nations the Lord
has cast them out before the. It is not for thy ryghtousnes sake, or for thy
right heart, that thou go to possess their land. But for the wickedness
Leuit. (...)
of these nations, the Lord thy god does cast them out before the, even to
perform the word, which the Lord thy God swear unto thy fathers Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob. Understande therefore, that it is not for thy ryghtousnes sake,
that the Lord thy god does give the this good land to possess it, seeing
thou art a styffe necked people.

Remember, and forget not, how thou prouokedst Exodi. 17 ^ and* 325 ^
Also in Noreb ye angered the Lord, so that the lord was wroth with you, even
to have destroyed you, when I was goone up into the mount, to receive the
tables of stoone, the tables of appointment, which the Lord made with you.
And I abode in the hill. xl. days / and xl. nyghtes, when I neither did eat
bread nor drank water. Exodi. (...)
And the lord delivered me two tables of stone, written with the finger of
god, and in them was according to all the words which the lord said unto
you in the mount out of the mids of the fire, in the day of the gatheryng
together. And when the. xl, days, and* xl. nyghtes were ended, the lord gave
me the two tables of stone, the tables of the covenant, and the Lord said
unto me. Exodi. 32. b
Up and get the down quyckly from hence, for thy people which thou have
brought out of Egypt, have marred all.

They are turned atonce out of the way / which I commanded them, and have
made

Exodi. 32. ^
And I took the two tables and cast them out of my two hands, and brake them
before your eyes. Exodus 24. ^ and. 34. d
And I fell down flat before the lord: even as at the first time, and. xl.
days and. xl. nyghtes I did neither eat bread nor drynk water, because of all
your sins which ye sinned, in doing wyckedlye in the sight of the Lord, in
that ye provoked him unto wrath. For I was afraid that for the wrath and
fearsnesse wherewith the Lord was moved against you, he would have destroyed you
But the Lord herd me at that time also.

The Lord was very angrye with Aaron also, even to have destroyed him: and I
made intercessyon for Aaron also the same time.

And I took your syn, Exodi. 32 ^
the calfe which ye had made, and burnte him with fire, and stamped

Also at the burning, Nume. xi. a
at the temptacyon / and at the Sepulchers of lust ye angered the Lord,
likewise when the lord sent you from Cades Barn, saying: go up, and conquer
the land which I have given you, ^^^eg. vii. ^
ye disobeyed the mouth of the Lord your god, and neither byleued him, nor
herkened unto his voice. Ye have been disobedient unto the lord, since the day
that I knew you. And I fell down flat before the Lord. xl. days, and. xl
nyghtes which I lay there, for the Lord said, that he would destroy you. I
made intercessyon therefore unto the Lord, and said: Exodus 34. ^
O Lord God destroy not thy people and thine enheritaunce, which thou have
delivered through thy greatuesse / and which thou have brought out of Egypt
through a mighty hand. Remember thy servants Abraham, Isaac / and Jacob,
and look not unto the stubburnesse of this people, nor to their wickedness and
sin: leest the land whence thou broughtest them, say: The lord is not able
to bring them into the land, which he promised them, and because he hated
them, therefore has he carried them out, to sley them in the wilderness.
Behold, they are thy people, and thine enheritaunce which thou broughtest out
in thy mighty power, and in thy stretched out arm.

The renuynge of the Cables. An exhortaciyn to give head to the law.

CAPI. X.
IN the same ceason the Lord said unto Exodus 34. ^
hew the two tables of stoone like unto the first, and come up unto me in to
the mount, and make the an Arc of wood and I will write in the Cables, the
words that were in the first tables which you brakest / and thou shalt put
them in the Arc. And I made an Arc of Sethym wood, and hewed two tables of
stone Exodi. 32. ^
like unto the first, and went up into the mountain, having the two tables in
mine hand. And he wrote in the tables, Exodus 34. ^
according to the first writing (the ten verses which the Lord spoke unto
you, in the mount out of the mids of the fire / in the day of the
gatherynge together) and the lord gave them unto me. And I departed, and came
down from the hill, and Deute. 31. ^
put the tables in the Arc which I had made: and there they be, as the lord
commanded me.

Nume. 33. ^
And the Children of Israel took their Nume. xx. ^
Aaron dyed, and was buried, and Eleazer his son became priest in his stead.
From thence they departed unto Gadgad, and from Gadgad to Iath bath a land
which has ryuers of waters Nume. iii. (...) iii. ^. xviii.
The same ceason the lord separated the trybe of Leui to bear the Arc of the
appointment of the Lord, and to stand before the Lord, and to minystre unto
him, and to bless in his name unto this day. Deuteronomy. 18. ^.
Wherefore the Levites have no part, nor enherytaunce with their brethren: But
the lord is their enheritau^ce / as the lord thy god has promised them.

Deute. ix. ^
And I tarried in the mount, even as at the first time. xl. days and. xl.
nyghtes, and the to give unto them. And now Israel, what does the Lord thy
God require of the Deuteronomy. vi. a.
but to fear the Lord thy God, and to walk in all his ways, to Deute. vi b
Joshua. 22 d Math. ^2. d
love him, and to serve the lord thy god with all thine heart, and with all thy
soul: Namely, that you keep the commandments of the lord, and his
ordinances which I command the this day, for thy wealth. Behold, heaven and
the heaven of heuens is the lords thy god, and the earth with all that therein
is: Notwithstanding, the lord had a lust unto thy fathers to love them, and
chose their seed after them, even you, above all nacyons, as thou see this
day. Deuteronomy. 30. b
Circumcise therefore the Ealat. ii. d. Roma. ii. b. Act^^. ^. c Collo. iii. d.
Epi^e. vi. b. ^. Peter. ^. c.
which regards no man's person / nor takes gift: He does right unto the
fatherless, and wydowe, and loves the stranger, to give him fode, and
raiment. Exodi. 22. c
Love ye therefore the stranger also: for ye were strangers your selves in
the land of Egypt. Deute. vi. e Math. 4 b Luke. iiii. b
Thou shalt fear the Lord thy god, and him (only) shalt thou serve, to him
shall thou cleue, and swear by his name, he is thy praise and thy god, that
has done for the these great and terrible things, which thine eyes have
seen. Thy Fathers went down in to Egypt Gene. 46. ^
with. lxx. souls, and now the Lord thy god has made the, and multiplied
the, as the Gene xv. ^.
sterres of heaven.

An exhortacyon to regard the Law.

CAPI. XI.
Therefore thou shalt love the Lord thy Exodi. 14. f
how he brought the water of the red see upon them, as they chased you behind,
and how the Lord has brought them to naught unto this day: and what he did
unto you in the wilderness, until ye came unto this place: and what he did
unto Number. 16. ^.
Dathan, and Abiram the sons of Eliab the son of Ruben how the earth opened
her mouth, and swalowed them, with their housholdes, and their tents, and all
their substance that was in their possessyon, in the mids of Israel.

Doutles your eyes have seen all the great Deute. ^. ^.
For the land whyther you go to possess it, is not as the land of Egypt
that ye came out of, where thou sowedst thy seed and wateredst it with thy
feet, as a garden of herbs: but the land whyther ye go over to possess it,
is a land that has hills and valeyes, and drynketh water of the rain of
heaven. This land does the lord thy god care for, and the eyes of the lord
thy God are always upon it, from the beginning of the year, unto the end of
the year. If ye shall harken therefore unto my commandments, which I
command you this day, that ye love the lord your God, and serve him with
all your heart / and with all your soul. Deute. (...) ^ ^ohel. (...) Amos.
(...)* ^
I also will give rain unto your land in due ceason: the first rain and the
latter, that thou may gather in thy corn, thy wine, and thine oil. And I
will send grass in thy feldes for thy cattle: that thou may eat, and fill
thy self. But beware that your heart deceive you not, and ye turn aside, and
serve strange Gods, and worship them, and then the lord being wroth
against you, Deute. (...). ^ 3. Re. x^i^. ^ and. xviii ^ Amos. ii^ ^
shut up the heaven, that there be no rain, and that your land yield not her
fruit, and leest ye peryshe quyckly from of the good land, which the lord
gives you

Therefore shall ye put up these my words Deute. (...). ^ Prove. (...) ^
your heart, and in your soul, and bind them for a sign upon your hand,
that they may be as a warning between your eyes, and ye shall Deute. (...) ^
Prove. ii^ ^
teach them your children that they may talk of them, when thou syttest in
thine house, and when thou walk by the way: when thou lie down, and when
thou rysest up: yea and thou shall write them upon the door posts of thine
house, and upon thy gates, that your days may be multiplied, and the days of
your children, in the land which the Lord swear unto your fathers to give
them, as long as the days of heaven last upon the earth. For if ye keep all
these commandments, which I command you, so that ye do them: Namely: that
ye love the lord your God, and walk in all his ways, and cleue unto him.
Then will the lord cast out all these nacyons before you, and ye shall be the
heirs of great nacyons, and of them that are myghtyet then your selves.
Joshua. i. a
All the places whereon the sooles of your fete shall tread shall be yours, even
from the wyldernes, and from Libanon, and from the river Euphrates, even unto
the uttermost see, shall your coost be. There shall no man be able to stand
before you: for the Lord your God shall cast the fear and dread of you, upon
all the land that ye shall tread upon, as he has said unto you.

Deute. 30. c
Behold, I set before you this day, a blessyng Deuteronomy. 28. ^.
a blessyng: if ye obey the commandments of the lord your god, which I
command you this day. And a curse: if ye will not obey the commandments of
the lord your god, but turn out of the way, which I command you this day,
to go after strange gods, which ye have not known.

When the Lord thy God therefore has brought the in to the land, whyther you
go to possess it, thou shalt put the Deuteronomy. 27. b
blessing upon mount Garizim, and the curse upon mount Ebal, which
(mountains) are on the other side Iordane, on the back side of the way
toward the going down of the son in the land of the Cananites, which
dwell in the plain over against Gilgal beside the grove of Moreh. For ye shall
pass over Iordane, to go in, and possess the land, which the lord your god
gives you, and ye shall con quere it, and dwell therein. Take heed therefore that
ye do all the commandments and laws, which I set before you this day.

Idolatrye must the Israelites destroy and flee from. They must only do that
thing, which god commands.

CAPI. XII.
THese are the ordinances and laws which Deute. 7. a
Ye shall destroy all places wherein the nations which ye shall conquer served
their gods, upon hye mountains, on hills, and under every thycke tree.
Overthrow their aulters, and break their pyllers, and burn their groves with
fire, and hew down the graven images of the gods that they have, and bring
the names of them to naught out of that place. Ye shall not do so unto the
Lord your God, but ye shall seek the place, which the lord your God shall
have chosen out of all your trybes, to put his name there, and there to dwell.
And Exodus 14. b and. xvi. b
thither thou shalt come, and thither ye shall bring your burnt sacrifices,
your offerynges, your tithes, and heueofferynges of your hand, your vows,
your frewylofferynges, and the first gendred of your oxen / and of your sheep.
And there ye shall eat before the Lord your God / and ye shall rejoice in all
that ye put your hand un to / both ye and your housholdes / wherein the Lord
thy God has blessed the.

Ye shall not do after all the things that Deute ^. (...) and. xviii. ^
for as much as he has no part nor enheritaunce with you.

Take heed that thou offer not thy burnt offerynges in every place that thou
see* but in the place which the Lord shall have chosen in one of thy
trybes, there thou shall offer thy burntofferynges, and there thou shall do all
that I command the. Notwithstanding thou may kill and eat flesh in all
thy cities, whatsoever thy soul lusts after, according to the blessing of
the Lord thy God, which he has given the, Deuteronomy. xv. ^
both the unclean, and the clean may eat thereof, even as the roo, or the
heart: only ye shall not eat the blood, but power it upon the earth as water.
and be refresshed,) before the lord thy God, in all that thou put thine
hand to. Ec^le. vii. ^
Beware, that thou forsake not the Leuite, as long, as thou lyuest upon the
earth.

If (when the lord thy god has enlarged thy border, as he has promised the)
thou say: I will eat flesh, because thy soul longs to eat flesh, thou
may eat flesh whatsoever thy soul lusts. If the place which the lord
thy god has chosen to put his name there, be to far from the, then thou
shalt kill of thy oxen, and of thy sheep, which the lord has given the, as
I have commanded the, and thou shalt eat in thine own city, whatsoever thy
soul lusts. Deuteronomy. xv. d
And as the too and the heart is eaten, even so thou shall eat them: both the
clean and the unclean shall eat of them. But be strong ^i. Reg. 14. t
that thou eat not the blood. For the blood is the life, and thou may not
eat the life with the flesh thou shalt not eat it, but power it upon the
earth, as water. Se thou eat it not, that it may go well with the, and with
thy children after the. But thou shalt do that, which is right in the sight
of the Lord.

But thy holy things which thou have and thy vows Deute. 14. c and. xvi. b
thou shalt take, and come unto the place which the Lord has chosen

When the Lord thy god has destroyed the nations before the, whyther thou
go to conquer them, and thou succedest in their enheritau^ce, and dwell
in their land. Beware, that thou be not taken in a snare after them, after
that they be destroyed before the, and that thou ask not after their Gods,
saying: how did these nations serve their Gods? I will do so likewise.
Deute. 18. t
Nay, thou shall not do so unto the Lord thy God: for all abhominacions, and
that which the Lord hates, the same have they done unto their Gods. For
they burn both their sons and their daughters with fire before their
Gods. Therefore whatsoever I command you, that take heed ye do (
only, unto the lord) and Joshua. i. d Deuteronomy. iiii. a Joshua. 23. b Prove. 30 a
put thou naught thereto, nor take ought therfro^.

The false prophet must be put to death. God proves our faith by false
miracles.

CAPI. XIII.
IF there arise among you a Math. 7. c.
Prophet Deuteronomy. viii ^
For the Lord thy God proves you, to wete whyther ye love the Lord your god
with all your heart, and with all your soul. Ye shall walk after the Lord
your god, and fear him, keep his commandments, and harken unto his voice,
serve him, and cleave unto him. Iere. 28. 8. and. 29. ^ zacha. 13. ^.
And the prophet or dreamer of dreams shall dye, because he has spoken to
turn you away from the Lord your God which brought you out of the land of
Egypt, and delivered you out of the house of bondage) to thrust the out of the
way, which the Lord thy God commanded the to walk in: and therefore thou
shalt put the evil away from the.

If thy brother, the son of thy mother, Deuteronomy. ^. ^
but cause him to be sleyne. Thine hand shall be first upon him to kill him: and
then the hands of all the people. And thou shalt stone him with stones that
he dye, because he has gone about to thrust the away from the Lord thy God,
which brought the out of the land of Egypt, and from the house of bondage.
And all Israel shall hear and fear, and shall do no more any such
whyckednes as this is, among you.

If thou shalt hear say in one of thy cities street thereof, and burn with
fire both the city Deute. 7. d ii. Ma. xii. t
And there shall cleue naught of the dampened thing in thy hand, that the lord
may turn from the fearce nesse of his wrath, and show the mercy, and have
compassyo^ on the, and multiply the, as he has sworn unto thy fathers. Exodus
xix. a
Therefore shalt thou harken unto the voice of the Lord thy god, to keep all
his commandments, which I command the this day, that you do it, which is
right in the eyes of the lord thy God.

The manners of the Gentyles may not be followed. What beasts are clean to
^^ten, and what not.

CAPI. XIIII.
YE are the children of the lord your god. Leuiti. x. b.
Ye shall not cut your selves, nor make you any baldnes bitwene your eyes, for
any dead man. Deuteronomy. vii. a
For thou art an holy people unto the lord thy god, and the lord has chosen
the, to be a several people unto him self, above all the nacyons that are upon
the earth. Thou shalt Leuiti. xi. a.
eat no manner of abhominacion. These are the beasts which ye shall eat of:
oxen, sheep, and gootes, heart, to and bugle: wild goote, unicorn, wild ox,
and Camelion. And all beasts that cleue the hoof, and slyt it in to two
claws, and chew the cud, them ye shall eat. Nevertheless, these ye shall not
eat of them that chewe cud, and of them that deuyde and cleue the hoof: the
camel, the hare, and the conye: which chewe cud, but deuyde not the hoof:
therefore are they unclean unto you: and also the swyne: though he deuyde the
hoof, yet he cheweth not cud, therefore is he unclean unto you: ye shall not
eat of the flesh of such, nor touch the dead carkesse of them.

Leuiti. xi. b.
These ye shall eat of all that are in the waters: All that have fynnes and
scales shall ye eat. And what soever have not fynes and scales ye may not eat,
but it is unclean unto you.

Of all clean birds ye shall eat: but these are they of which ye shall not
eat: the Ele / the goshauke / and the cormeraunt / the Ixion / the vultur /
the kyte after her kind / and all kind of ravens / the Estritche / the
nyghtcrowe / the cuckowe / the sparow hawk after her kind, the little owl,
the great owl, the back, the bytture, the pie, the storke, the Heron, the
Iaye in his kind, the lapwynge, the swalowe. And let the crepynge fowls be
unclean unto you, and not be eaten of: but of all clean fowls ye may eat.

Ye shall eat of nothing that dies alone. Exodi. 23. ^ and. xxxiiii. d
sethe a kyd in his mothers milk

Thou shalt tithe all the increase of thy seed, that the field brings forth
year by year And thou shalt eat before the lord thy god (in the place Deuteronomy.
xii. d
which he has chosen, and where he has put his name) the tithe of thy
corn, of thy wine and of thine oil, and the first gendred of thine oxen, and
of thy sheep, that thou may learn to fear the Lord thy god always.

Deuteronomy. xii. a
If the way be to long for the, so that thou art not able to carry it, and if
the place be far Deute. ^ b. and. xviii. ^
for he has neither part nor enheritaunce with the.

Deute. 25. ^
At the end of three year, thou shalt bring forth all the tithes of thine
increase the same year, and lay it up within thine own gates. And the Leuite
which has no part nor enherytaunce with the, shall come, and the stranger,
the fatherless and the wydowe, which are within thy gates, shall eat and be
filled: that the Lord thy God may bless the, in all the works of thine hand
which thou do.

The forgyuenes of detres in the seventh year.

CAPI. XV.
IN the seventh year thou shalt make a Leuiti. 25. ^
And this is the manner of the fredome, Exodi. 22. d
who soever lends ought with his hand unto his neighbor, may not ask again
(that which he has lent) of his neighbor or of his brother: because it is
called the Lords free year: yet of a stranger ( and of an alyent) thou may
call it home again. But Eccle. iiii. a
he that is thy brother, him shall thine hand remytte. Nevertheless there
shall be no beggar among you. For the Lord shall bless the in the land,
which the lord thy god gives the, an enheritaunce to possess it: so that thou
harken unto the voice of the Lord thy god, to observe and do all these
commandments, which I commanded the this day. For the Lord thy god has
blessed the as he has promised the, and (...). 28. b
thou shalt lend unto many nacyons, but thou thy self shall not borowe: And
you shalt reygne over many nacyons, and they shall not reygne over the.

If one of thy i. John^. 3. ^.
brethren among you be poor within any of thy gates in thy land, Math. 26. a
The l^^de shall never be without poor. And therefore I command the, saying.
Thou shalt open thine hand unto thy brother that is nedye and poor in thy
land.

Leuiti. 26. a
If thy brother an Ebrue sell him self Exodus xxi. ^
I will not go away from the because he loves the and thine house, and is well
at ease with the: Then shalt thou take a naule, and nail his ear to the door
therewith, and let him be thy servant for ever. And unto thy maid servant
thou shall do like wise.

And let it not grieve thine eye, when thou let him go out free from the,
for he has been worth a double hired servant to the in his service six
years. And the lord thy god shall bless the in all that thou do.

Leuit. 27. d
All the first gendred that come of thine oxen, and of thy sheep that are
males, thou shall halowe unto the lord thy God. Thou shalt do no work with
the first gendred of thine oxen, nor shere the first gendred of thy sheep. Thou
shalt eat it before the Lord thy god year by year, in the place which the
lord has chosen, both thou and thine household. If there be any deformite
therein, as if it be lame or blind, or have any evil fauourednesse, thou shall
not offer it unto the lord thy god. But shalt eat it within thine own Deuteronomy.
x^^. ^
gates the unclean and the clean indifferently as the roo and the heart.
Only eat not the blood thereof, but power it upon the ground as water.

Of Easter. Wytsontyde, and the feast of Tabernacles. What officers ought to be
ordained.

CAPI. XVI.
Observe the Exodi. 23. ^
month of new corn, Exodi. (...)
Passover unto the Lord thy god. For in the month when corn begins to
ripe, the Lord thy God brought the out of Egypt by night. Thou shalt
therefore offer passover unto the lord thy God (and sheep and oxen) in the
place which the lord shall chose to put his name there. Thou shalt eat no
leuened bread with it: but seven days shalt thou eat vnlcuened bread
therewith: even the bread of tribulacyon (for thou came out of the land of
Egypt in have) that thou may remember the day, when thou came out of the
land of Egypt, all days of thy life. And there shall be no leuened bread seen
in all the coostes seven days long, neither shall there remain any thing of
the flesh which thou offeredst the first day at even, until the morning.

Thou may not offer Passover within Deuteronomy. (...) and. xv^^
in the place which the lord thy God shall chose, to set his name in, there
thou shalt offer Passover at even, about the going down of the son, even
in the ceason that thou came out of Egypt. And thou shalt sethe and eat it,
in the place which the lord thy god has chosen, and depart on the morrow,
and get the into the tente. Six days you shall eat sweet bread, and the
seventh day is a gatheryng together before y^ lord thy god: thou shalt do no
work therein. Leuit^. ^^
Seven wekes shalt thou nombre unto the, and begin to nombre the. vii. wekes,
when thou begynnest to put thy syckle to the corn, Acts. ^^
and keep the feast of wekes unto the lord thy god, with a frewyl offering of
thine hand: which thou shall give unto the lord thy god, according as the
lord thy god has blessed the. And rejoice before the lord thy god, thou and
thy son thy daughter, thy servant and thy maid, and the Leuite that is within
thy gates, and the stranger, the fatherless and the wydowe that are among
you, in the place which the Lord thy god has chosen to put his name there.
And

Thou shalt also observe the feast of tabernacles seven days, after that thou
haste gathered in thy corn and thy wine. And thou shalt rejoice in that thy
feast, thou and thy son, thy daughter, thy servant / and thy made, the
Leuyte, the stranger, and the fatherless, and the wydowe that are within thy
gates. ^. Regu^. 8. g
Seven days shalt thou keep holy day unto the lord thy god, in the place
which the Lord shall chose: for the Lord thy God shall bless the in all thy
fruytes, and in all the works of thine hands, therefore shalt thou be glad.
Exodi. 23. ^
Three times in the year shall all thy males appear before the Lord thy God
in the place which he shall chose.

In the feast of sweet bread, in the feast of Exodi. 23. b
appear before the lord emptte but every man according to the gift of his
hand, and according to the blessing of the Lord thy god which he has given
the.

Judges and officers shall thou make the in all thy Cities, which the Lord
thy God gives the thorowout the trybes, and they shall judge the people
ryghteouslye. Leuiti. xix. ^
Wrest not thou the law, nor know any person, neither take any reward:
Exodi. 23. ^ ^ide. xx. d.
for gifts blind the wise, and peruerte the words of the righteous. That
which is just and right, shalt thou follow, that thou may live, and enjoy the
land, which the Lord thy god gives the.

Thou shalt plant the no grove of what soever trees it be, nygh unto the
altar of the lord thy god, which thou shalt make the. Thou shalt set the
up no ^* Reg. xv. ^. ^* Reg. ^8. ^^
pyller, which the Lord thy God hates.

The punishment for Idolatrye. The punishment of a rebel. The institucyon of a
King.

CAPI. XVII.
THou shalt offer unto the lord thy god ^euiti. 22. ^ Deuteronomy. xv. ^^
wherein is blemysshe or any deformite: for that is an abhominacion to the lord
thy god. If there be found among you within any of thy gates, which the Lord
thy god gives the, man or woman that has wrought wickedness in the syghte of
the Lord thy god, so that they have gone beyond his appointment, and gone and
served strange gods, and worshypped them Deute. 4. ^.
the son or moon, or any of the host of heaven, which I have not
commanded, and it is told the, and thou have herd of it: then shall thou
enquere diligently. And if it be true, and the thing of a suretye, that such
abhominacyon is wrought in Israel, then shalt thou bring forth that man or
that woman (which have committed that wicked thing) unto the gates, and shalt
stone them with stones, till they dye. Number. 35. d.
At the mouth of two or three witnesses shall he that is worthy of death, dye:
And at the mouth of one witness let no man dye. The hands of the witnesses
shall be first upon him, to kill him, and afterward the hands of the people, and
thou shalt put the wicked away from the.

If there rise a matter to hard for the in Ezech. 44 ^
and they shall show the, the sentence of judgment. And thou must do
according to that, which they of that place (which the lord had chosen) show
the, and thou shalt observe to do, according to all that they enfourme the.
According to the sentence of the law which they teach the, and according
to the judgment which they tell the, shalt you do, and Deute. v. b Joshua. ^^
bow not from that which they show the, neither to the right hand nor to the
left.

And that man that will do presumptuously and will not harken to the priest
(that stands ^. Regu^. 8. ^
I will set a king over me: like as all the nacyons that are about me: Then
thou shalt make him king over the, whom the Lord thy god shall chose: Even one
from among thy brethren shalt thou make king over the, and thou may not
set a stranger over the, which is not of thy brethren.

3. Regu^ 4 ^
But he shall not multiply horses to him self, nor bring the people again
to Egypt 3. Regsi xi ^
ought not to multiply wives to him self, lest his heart turn away, neither
shall he gather him gold or silver to much. And when 3. Regu^. (...) Esai.
(...). ^.
he is set upon the seat of his kingdom, he shall write him out a copye of
this law in a book, before the priests the Leuytes.

And it shall be with him, and he ought to read therein, Joshua. i. ^
all days of his life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to
keep all the words of this law, and these ordinances, for to do them: and
that his heart arise not above his brethren, and that he turn not from the
commandment: to the right hand, or to the left, but that he may prolong his
days in his kingdom: he, and his children in Israel.

The Levites had no possessions. Idolatrye must be fled. The Prophet Christ is
promised. The false prophet must be sleyne, and how he may be known.

CAPI. XVIII.
THe priests, the Levites, and all the trybe Nume. 18 ^ Deute. t. b. and.
xiiii. d.
must have no part nor enheritaunce with Israel: but shall eat the offerynges
of the Lord, and his enheritaunce. Therefore shall they have no enheritaunce
among their brethren: But the Lord, he is their enheritau^ce, as he has said
unto them And this is the priests duty of the people, and of them that offer
sacrifice, whyther it be ox, or sheep: They must give unto the priest: the
shoulder, and the two chekes, and the mawe, the first fruytes also of thy
corn, wine and oil and the first of the woll of thy sheep shall thou give
him. Nume. iii b and ^^iii. ^
For the Lord thy god has chosen him out of al thy trybes, to stand and to
ministre in the name of the Lord: he and his Leuiti. 18. a and. xx. d Deute.
12. d and. xvii. c. 4. Reg. 21. a Iere. vii v.
When thou art come unto the land which the Lord thy god gives the, se
that thou learn not to do after the abhominacions of those nacyons.

Let there not be found among you any one, that makes his Son or daughter
to Leuiti. 19. b
or that regards the fleing of fowls, or a sorcerer, or a charmer, or that
cou^selleth with spirits, or a soth sayer, or that asks ( the truth) at
them that be dead. For all that do such things are abhominacion unto the
Lord: and because of these abhominacions the Lord thy God does cast them
out before the: Thou shalt be perfyte therefore ( and without ble mysshe) in
the sight of the Lord thy god. For these nations which thou shall conquer
harken unto chosers out of days, and unto sorcerers: but the lord thy god
has not suffered the so to do.

The Lord thy God will Leuiti. iii. d. and. vii. ^
stir up unto the a prophet among you: even of thy brethren, like unto me,
Math (...) ^
unto him ye shall harken, according to all that thou desyredst of the Lord
thy god in Horeb, in the day of the gatherynge together, when thou saydest:

Exodi. ^^^
Let me hear the voice of my lord god

No^ (...) ^ Deuit. (...) Ez^^^ (...) ^
But the prophet which shall presume to speak a word in my name, which I
have not commanded him to speak, or that speaks in the name of strange
Gods, the same prophet shall dye. And if thou say in thine heart: how shall
we know the word which the Lord has not spoken? ( This token shall thou
have.) Even when a prophet speaks in the name of the lord, if the thing
follow not nor come to pass, that is the thing which the lord has not spoken.
But the prophet has spoken it presumptuously. Thou shalt not therefore be
afraid of him.

The fraun^^ese^ towns. The punishment of him that bears false witness.

CAPI. XIX.
WHen the Lord thy God Deuteronomy. (...)
has roted Ios^^ ^^
appoynte. iii. cities for the in the mids of the land which the lord thy
god gives the to possess it: thou shall prepare the way, and deuyde the
coostes of thy land, which the Lord thy God gives the to enherite: into
iii. parts, that Exodi. ^^
who soever co^mytteth murder, may flee thither.

For this cause must the steer f^ee thither thynkyng no harm) and as his hand
fetches a stroke with the axe to cut down the tree, the head slyppeth from
the hafte, and smyteth his neighbor that he dies: the same shall flee unto
one of the same Cities and live. Leest the executer of blood follow after the
sleer while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the way is long, and
slay him, and yet there is no cause worthy of death in him, in as much as he
hated him not in time past. Wherefore I command the, saying: thou shall
appoynte out. iii. cities for the.

And if the lord thy god enlarge thy coostes Number. xxx. t
But and if any man hate his neighbor, and lay awayte for him, and rise
against him, and smite him that he dye, and then flees unto any of these
cities: the elders of his city shall send, and fetch him thence, and deliver
him in to the hands of the justice of blood, that he may dye. Thine eye shall
not spare him, but thou shalt put away innocent blood from Israel, that it
may go well with the.

Job. 34. ^
Thou shall not remove thy neighbors mark, which they of old time have set
in Number. 35. d.
One witness shall not rise against a man for any manner trespass: or for any
manner sy^ie, or for any manner fault, that he offend in. Deut^ 17^ Math. 18. c
I^hsi. viii. ^
But at the mouth of two witnesses or of three witnesses shall the matter be
stablysshed. ^ Cori. 13 a ^Timo, v. c ^^^u^. x. c ^^osa^ 1. 8
If an unrighteous witness rise up against a man to accuse him of trespass:
then both the men which strive together, shall stand before the Lord,
before the Priests and the Judges, which shall be in those days, and the
Judges shall make diligent inquisicion. And if the wytnes be found false, and
that he has given false witness against his brother, the^ shall ye do unto him
as he had thought to do unto his brother, and thou shalt put evil away from
the. And other shall hear, and fear, and shall henceforth commit no more any
such wyckednes among you. And thine eye shall have no compassion but ^^^^i. 22.
c (...). 24. c (...). 13. g. Math. v. ^.
soul for soul, eye for eye, tothe fortothe, hand for hand, foot for foot.

Who ought to go to battle. The Law of arms. The ^anaanites must they kill.

CAPI. XX.
When thou go out to battle against Deute. i. v.
afraid of them, for the Lord thy God is with the, which brought the out of
the land of Egypt. And when ye are come nygh unto battle, the priest shall
come forth to speak unto the people, and shall say unto them: Hear O Israel,
ye encountre this day with your enemies in battle, let not your hertes
faynte, neither fear, nor be amassed, nor abrede of them. For the Number. 14. d
lord your god goes Deute. 28. ^
with you, to fight for you against your enemies, and to save you.

And let the officers speak unto the people, and laufull for every man to cate
of,) let him go and return again unto his house, lest he dye in the battle,
and another make it common. Deuteronomy. 24. ^
And if any man be betrouthed unto a wife, and have not taken her, let him go
and return again unto his house, lest he dye in the battle, and an other
man take her. And let the officers speak further unto the people, and say:
Iudi. vii. ^
If any man fear and be faynte herted, let him go and return unto his house,
leest he make his brothers heart faynte as well as his. And when the officers
have made an end of speaking unto the people, they shall make captains of war
over them. When thou come nygh unto a Deute. ii. ^.
offer them peace. And if they answer the again peasablye, and open unto the,
then let all the people that is found therein, be tributaries unto the, and
serve the. And if they will make no peace with the but make war against the,
thou shalt besyege it. And when the lord thy god has delivered it into thine
hand^, thou shalt smite all the males thereof with the edge of the sword. But the
women and the children, Iosu vii. ^
and the cattle, and all that is in the City, and all the spoil thereof,
shalt thou take unto thy self, and eat the spoil of thine enemies, which
the Lord thy God has given the. Thus shalt thou do unto all the Cities
which are a great way of from the, and not of the cities of these nacyons.

But of the cities of these nacyons, which the Lord thy god shall give the to
enheryte: thou shall save alive nothing that bretheth.

Deuteronomy. vii. ^ Iosus. vi. ^ viii. t. ^. ^. ^
But shall destroy them without redempcyon, namely the Hethites, the Amorites,
the Canaanites, the Pherezites, the Heuites, and the Iebusites, as the Lord
thy God has commanded the, that they teach you not to do after all their
abhominacions, which they have done unto their Gods, and so ye should sin
against the Lord your god.

When thou have besyeged a City long time, and made war against it, to take
it, destroy not the trees thereof, that thou would thrust an are unto them.
But eat of the^ and cut them not down. For the trees of the feldes are no
men, to come against the, and to besyege the. Only those trees which thou
know that they are not fruytfull, ( but vvylde, and fytte for other uses,)
those shalt thou destroy and cut down, and make bulworkes against the city
that makes war with the, until thou subdue it.

Inqu^sityon for murder. Punishment for Children that disobey Father and Mother

CAPI. XXI.
IF one be found sleyne in the land, which

And the priests the sons of Leuy (whom Deuteronomy. 17. b Eccle. 45. d
the Lord thy god has chosen to ministre to him, and to bless in the name of
the Lord) shall come forth, and at their mouth shall all strife and plage be
tried. And all the elders of the city that come forth to the sleyne man, shall
wash their hands over the heyffer that is beheaded in the valey, and shall
answer and say: our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes
seen it.

Be merciful Lord unto thy people Israel, which thou have delivered Jonas. i.
d
and lay no mno cent blood unto thy people of Isreal's charge and the blood shall
be forgyuen them. And so shalt thou put innocent blood from the, when thou
shalt have done that which is right in the sight of the Lord.

When thou go to war against thine

Gene. (...) and x^^.
If a man have two wives, one loved and an other hated, and they have borne him
children, both the loved and also the hated. If the fyrstborne be the son of
the hated: then when the time comes that he deals his goods among his
children, he may not make the son of the byloued first borne, before the son
of the hated, which is in deed the first borne. But he shall know the son of
the hated for the first borne, and give him double porcyon of all that he has.
For he is the first of his strength, and to him belongs the right of the
first borne.

Exodi. xx^.
If any man have a son that is stubborn Joshua. ^.
If a man have committed a trespass worthy of death, and is put to death for
it, and thou hangest him on tree: his body shall not remain all night upon
the tree, but thou shall burye him the same day. For Gala. (...).
the curse of God is on him that is hanged. Defyle not thou thy land, which
the Lord thy god gives the to enheryte.

What thou ought to do when thou syndest thy neyghbourts beast going
astray. A man shall not wear woman's clothing, or a woman a man's clothing
To w^are a cote of woolle ^ of Flax, is also forbidden. The punyshmente of him
that accuses a man vnryghteously: Of an aduouterer also, and of him that
^auesheth a maid.

CAPI. XXII.
THou shalt not se thy brothers ox, or he has lost, and thou have found,
shall thou do likewise, for thou may not hyde it.

Exodi. 23. a Math. 12. a Luke. 14. a.
Thou shalt not se thy brothers Ass or ox fall down by the way, and
withdraw thy self from them: but shall help him to heue them up again. The
woman shall not we are that which perteyneth unto the man, neither shall a man
put on woman's raiment. For all that do so, are abhominacyon unto the lord thy
god. If thou chance upon a byrds nest by the way / in whatsoever tree it be,
or on the ground, whyther they be young or eggs, and the damme sitting upon
the young or upon the eggs: Thou shalt not take the damme with the young. But
shall in any wise let the damme go, and take the young to the, that thou may
prospere and prolonge thy days.

When thou buyldest a new house, thou Leuit. xix. d
Thou shalt not so we thy vineyerde with diverse seeds: leest the fruit of
the seed which thou have sown, and the fruit of thy vineyearde be defiled.
Thou shall not plowe with an ox, and an ass together. Thou shall not wear a
garment made of woolle and flax together. Nume xv d
Thou shalt make the gardes ( in the hemmes,) upon the four quarters of thy
vesture, where with thou couerest thy self. If a man take a wife, and when he
has lain with her, hate her, and lay shameful things unto her charge, and
bring up an evil name upon her, and say: I took this wife, and when I came to
her, I found her not a maid: Then shall the father of the damsel / and the
mother bring forth the tokens of the damsels virginyte un to the elders of the
city in the gate.

And the damsels Father shall say unto

Leuit. xx. ^
If a man be found lyenge with a woman, having a husband, they shall dye
Exodus xxi^. ^
If a man find a maid that is not betrouthed, and take her, and lie with her,
and they be found: Then the man that lay with her, shall give unto the damsels
father. l. sycles of silver. And she shall be his wife, because he has humbled
her, and he may not put her away all his days.

Leuiti. 18. ^
No man shall take his Fathers wife, nor vnheale his fathers covering.

What manner of men may not be admytted in to the church. Pollucyons that
happen in the night Usurye.

CAPI. XXIII.
NOne Leuiti. 21. c. Esai. ivi. a.
that is gelded or has his preuye 2. E^^r. 1^ ^
The Ammonites and the Moabites shall not come into the congregacyon of the
Lord, no not in the tenth generacyon, no they shall never come into the
congregacyon of the lord, because they met you not with bread and water in
the way / when ye came out of Egypt, and because they hired against the Nume.
22. ^
Balaam the Son of Beor of Pethor, of Mesopotamia, to curse the.
Nevertheless the Lord thy God would not harken unto Balaam but the Lord thy
God turned the curse to a blessyng unto the, because the Lord thy God loved
the. Thou shall not seek the prosperity or wealth of them, all thy days for
ever. Gene. xxv. c
Thou shalt not abhor an Edomite, for he is thy brother: neither shall thou
abhor an Egyptian, because thou wast a stranger in his land.

The Children that are begotten of them shall come in to the co^gregacyon of
the lord in the third generacyon. When thou go out with the hooste against
thine enemies / keep the from all wickedness. If there be among you any man
that is unclean, by the reason of uncleanness that chances him by night, let
him go out of the hooste, and not come in again, in to the host / but at even
let him wash him self with water, and then when the son is down, let him
come in to the hooste again. Thou shalt have a place also without the hooste,
whyther thou shalt resort to, ( for thy natural necessyte) and thou shall
have a sharp point upon thy wepon: and when you will ease thy self, dygge
therewith, and turn and cover that which is departed from the.

For the Lord thy God walks in the

Exodi. 22. d Leuit. 25. f
Thou shalt not hurt thy brother by usury of money, nor by usury of corn,
nor

Number. ^0. d Ecclesi. v. a Baruch. ^ ^
When thou have vowed a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shalt not slack to
pay it. For the Lord thy God will surely require it of the, and it shall be
sin in the. If thou shalt leave vowynge, it shall be no sin in the: but
that which is once gone out of thy lyppes, thou must keep and do, according as
thou have vowed unto the Lord thy God of a frewyll, and as thou have spoken
with thy mouth. When thou co^mest into thy neighbors vyneyerde, thou may
eat grapes thy belyfull at thine own pleasure: but thou shalt put noone in
thy vessel. Even so when thou co^mest into thy neighbors corn, Math. xii ^
thou may pluck the ears with thine hand, but thou shalt not move a sycle
unto thy neighbors corn.

Deuo^cement is permytted. He that is newly married shall not be compelled to go
to war.

CAPI. XXIIII.
WHen a man has taken a wife, and married Iere. iii a Mala^. ii. d Math. xix. ^
Then let him write her a byll of deuorcement, and put it in her hand, and
send her out of his house. And when she is departed out of his house, let her
go, and be another man's wife. And if the second husband hate her, let him
write her also a letter of deuorcement, and put it in her hand, and send her
out of his house: or if the second man dye which took her to wife, her first
man which sent her away, may not take her again to be his wife, after that
she is defiled For that is abhominacion in the sight of the Lord. And thou
shall not cause the land to sin, which the Lord thy God shall give the to
enheryte.

Deute. ^ ^
When a man takes a new wife, he Exodi. (...). ^
No man shall take the nether, or the upper mylstoone to pledge, for then he
shall hurt a man's life. Exodus xx. ^
If any man be found stealyng any of his brethren the children of Israel, and
abuses him, or sells him, the these shall dye, And thou shalt put evil
away from the. Take heed to thy self as concerning the plage of leprosye,
that thou observe dilygently. And ye shall do according to all that the
priests the Levites shall teach you: Even as I commanded them, so ye shall
observe to do. Remember what the lord thy god did unto Number. x^ ^
Mir Iam by the way, after that ye were come out of Egypt. When thou do
lend thy brother any thing, thou shall

And it shall be righteousness unto the / before the Lord thy God. Leuiti.
xix. c Tobi. iiii. c Eccle. vii. c
Thou shall not defraude an hired servant that is nedye, and poor, whyther he
be of thy brethren, or of the strangers that are in thy land with in thy
gates. Leuit. xix. c.
But shalt give him his hyre the same day, and let not the Son go down
thereon. For he is nedye, and therewith susteyneth his life, lest he cry against
the unto the Lord, and it be syn unto the. Iere. xxxi. c 4. R^. 14. ^ Ezech.
18. e.
The fathers shall not dye for the children, nor the children for the fathers:
but every man shall dye for his own syn. Thou shall not hinder the right of the
stranger nor of the fatherless, nor take a wydowes raiment to pledge. But
remember that thou wast a servant in Egypt, and how the lord thy god
delivered the thence: And therefore, I command the to do this Leuit. ^xix. b
When thou cuttest down thine heruest in thy field, and has forgot a sheafe
in the field, thou shall not go again to fetch it. But it shall be for the
stranger, the fatherless and the wydowe, that the Lord thy god may bless
the / in all the works of thine hand. When you beatest down thine olyue tree,
thou shall not turn again to gather up that thou leftest behind the: but it
shall be for the stranger, the Fatherless and the wydow. When thou gatherest
thy vyneyerd, thou shall not gather the grapes clean after the: but leave them
for the stranger, y^ fatherless and the wydowe. And remember that thou also
wast a servant in the land of Egypt: and therefore I command the to do this
thing.

The punysshment of offenders. The law of raysyng seed: to thy brother that is
deed. Measures and weyghtes.

CAPI. XXV.
IF there be strife between men, they shall ^^. ^orl. xi. ^
xl. strypes he shall give him and not pass: leest if he should excede and
beat him above that with many strypes, thy brother should appear ungoodly
before thine eyes.

^. ^orl. ix. a ^. Timo. v c
Thou shall not mosel the ox that treads out the corn ( in the barn.)

Math. xii b Ruth. iiii. b
If brethren dwell together, and one of them dye, and have no child, the wife
of the

If when men strive together, one with another, Leuit. x^^, ^ Mich. vi, ^
two manner of weyghtes, a great and a small: neither shall thou have in thine
house diverse measures / a great and a small. But thou shalt have a right, and
just weight, and a perfect, and a just measure shall thou have: that thy days
may be lengthened in the land, which the lord thy god gives the. For all
that do such things and all that do unright, are abhominacyo^ unto the Lord
thy God. Exodi. 17 ^
Remember what Amalech did unto the by the way / when ye were come out of
Egypt, how he met the by the way, and smote the hyndmoost of you, all that
were feeble and came behind / when thou wast faynted and werye, and he feared
not god. Therefore when the lord thy God has given the rest from all thine
enemies round about, in the land which the lord thy god gives the to
enheryt and possess: se that thou put out the remembrance of Amalech from
under heaven, and forget not.

The first fruytes and tithes to the Leuytes, fatherless, wydowes, and
strangers.

CAPI. XXVI.
WHen thou art come in to the land Exodi. 23. c and. xxxiiii. c Prove. iii ^
take of the first of all the fruit of the earth, and bring it out of thy
land that the Lord thy GOD gives the, and put it in a maunde, and go unto
the place which the Lord thy God shall chose to set his name in it. And thou
shall come unto the priest, that shall be in those days, and say unto him: I
knowledge this day unto the Lord thy God, that I am come unto the country
which the Lord swear unto our fathers for to give us.

And the Priest shall take the maunde out Gene. xlvi ^
and he went down in to Egypt, and so soiourned there with a few folk, and
grew there unto a nacyon great, mighty, and full of people. Exodi. i b
And the Egyptians vexed us, and troubled us, and laded us with most cruel
bondage. And when we cried unto the lord God of our fathers, Exodi. iii. b
the Lord herd our voice, and looked on our aduersyte, labor, and
oppressyon. And the Lord Exodi. 14. c
brought us out of Egypt in a mighty hand, and a stretched out arm, and in
great terriblenes, and signs / and wonders. And he has brought us into this
place, and has given us this land / that flows with milk, and honye. Deuteronomy.
14. d
And now loo, I have brought the first fruytes

When thou have made an end of tythyng all the tithes of thine increase / the
third year which is the year of tythynge: thou shalt give it unto the
Leuite, the strangers, the fatherless and the wydowes, that they may eat
within thy gates, and fyl them selves. And thou shalt say before the Lord
thy God. Leuiti. 18. b
I have brought the hallowed things out of mine house, and have given them unto
the Levites, the strangers, the fatherless, and the wydowes according to all
thy commandments which thou have commanded me: I have not ouerskypped thy
commandments / nor forgotten them. I have not eaten thereof in my mourning
nor suffered ought to peryshe through uncleanness, nor given ought thereof for
the dead, but have herkened unto the voice of the Lord my God, and have done
Exodi. xix ^
after all that you have commanded me.

Baruch. ii c
Look down therefore from thy holy habitacyon even from heaven, and bless thy

Exodus (...). Deute. v. ^
Thou have set up the Lord this day to be thy god, and to walk in his ways,
and to keep his ordynaunces, his commandments and his laws, and to harken
unto his voice. Exodus xix ^ Deuteronomy. (...). ^ and. xiiii. ^.
And the Lord has set the up this day, to be a several people unto him (as
he has promised the) and that thou keep his commandments, and to make the
hye above all nations (which he has made) in praise, in name and honor:
Iere. xiii. ^ Deuteronomy vii ^.
and that thou may be an holy people unto the Lord thy god, as he has
said.

They build an altar The blossynges in the hill Garizim. The cursed in the
hill Eball.

CAPI. XXVII.
ANd Moses with the Elders of Israel Jesus. iiii. ^
And when ye be come over Iordane / unto the land which the lord thy god
gives the, thou shalt set the up great stones, and plaster them with
plaster, and write upon them all the words of this law, when thou art come
over: because thou art come into the land which the Lord thy God gives
the: a land that flows with milk, and honye, as the Lord god of thy
fathers has promised the. Therefore when ye be come over Iordane, ye shall set
up these stoones, which I command you this day in mount Eball, and thou
shall plaster them with plaster. Joshua (...).
And there shalt thou build unto the Lord thy god, Exodi. ^^^
an altar of stones, and lift up no iron upon them: Thou shall make the altar
of the Lord thy god of hoole stones / and offer burntofferynges thereon unto
the Lord thy god.

And thou shalt offer peaceofferynges, and Deute. x^^
mount Garizim to bless the people, when ye are come over Jordan: Symeon,
Leui, Judah, Isachar, Joseph, and Ben Iamin. And these shall stand upon mount
Eball to curse: Ruben, Gad, Aser, Zabulon, Dan, and Nephthli. And the Levites
shall answer / and say unto all the me^ of Israel with a loud voice

Exodi. xx^
Cursed be the man that makes any carved or molten image (an abhominacyon
unto the lord, the work of the hands of the craftesman) and puts it in a
secret place, and all the people shall answer, and say, Amen.

Exodus xxi. b
Cursed be he that curses his Father / and his mother, and all the people
shall say, Amen.

Deuteronomy. xix. b
Cursed be he that remoueth his neighbors mark, and all the people shall say,
Amen.

Leuiti. xix. c
Cursed be he that makes the blind go out of his way, and all the people shall
say, Amen.

Deute ^4. c
Cursed be he that hyndreth the right of the stranger, Fatherless, and
wydowe, and all the people shall say, Amen.

Leuiti. 18. ^
Cursed be he that lies with his fathers wife, and vnhealeth his fathers
covering / and all the people shall say, Amen.

Leuit. 18. c.
Cursed be he that lies with any manner of beast, and all the people shall
say, Amen.

Leuiti. 18. b.
Cursed be he that lies with his sister, the daughter of his father, or the
daughter of his mother, and all the people shall say, Amen.

Leuit. 18. t.
Cursed be he, that lies with his mother in law, and all the people shall
say, Amen.

Exodus xxi. b
Cursed be he that smyteth his neighbor secretly, and all the people shall say,
Amen.

Cursed be he that lies with his neighbors wife, and all the people shall
say, Amen.

Ezech. 22. c
Cursed be he that takes a reward to sleye the soul of innocent blood, and
all the people shall say, Amen.

Eala. iii. b.
Cursed be he that contynueth not in all the words of this law to do them,
and all the people shall say,

Amen.
The promyses of the blessings unto them that regard the commandments, and
the curses to the contrary.

CAPI. XXVIII.
IF (...). 26. a
thou shall harken dilygently unto the Deute. xi. d
And all these blessings shall come on the, and overtake the, if thou shall
harken unto the voice of the Lord thy God. Blessed shalt thou be in the
town, and blessed in the feldes: blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and
the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy cattle, the fruit of thine
oxen, and the flocks of thy sheep: blessed shall be thy basket and thy store.
Blessed shall thou be, when thou go out, and blessed when thou come in.
Deuteronomy. xx. a.
The Lord shall give over thine enemies that rise against the / that they may
fall before thy face. They shall come out against the one way, and flee before
the seven ways. The lord shall put the blessing upon the in thy store
houses, and in all that thou set thine hand to, and will bless the in the
land which the Lord thy god gives the. The lord shall make the an holy
people unto him self, as he has sworn unto the: if thou shalt keep the
commandments of the Lord thy God, and walk in his ways. And all nations
of the earth shall se, that the name of the Lord, is called upon over the, and
they shall be afraid of the. And the lord shall make the plenteous in goods /
in the fruit of thy body, in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of
thy ground, in the land which the lord swear unto thy fathers / to give the.
The lord shall open unto the his good tresure, even the heaven Deute. xi. b
to give rain unto thy land in due ceason, and to bless all the labors of
thine hand.

Deuteronomy. xv. a.
And thou shalt lend unto many nations, Deute. ^. a. and. (...). b.
bow not aside from any of these words / which I command the this day,
either to the right hand, or to the left, that thou would go after strange
gods to serve them.

Leuiti 26. ^
But and if thou will not harken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep
and to do all his commandments, and his ordinances, which I command the
this day: Baruch. i. ^ Daniel. ix. ^
all these curses shall come upon the, and overtake the: Cursed shalt thou be
in the town, and cursed in the field: cursed shall thy basket be, and thy
store. Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy land, and
the fruit of thine Oxen, and the flocks of thy sheep. Cursed shalt thou be
when thou go in, and cursed when thou go out. The Lord shall send upon
the, cursynge, destruction, and rebuke in all that thou set thine hand to,
and that thou do: until he destroy the, and bring the to naught quyckly,
because of the wickedness of thine inuencions, and because thou have forsaken
me. The Lord shall make the pestylence cleue unto the, until he have consumed
the from of the land, whyther thou go to enjoy it.

Leuiti. 26. b
The Lord shall smite the with swellynge, with fevers, heete, burning, and
with Leuiti. 26. ^ Deute. xi. b
And the heaven that is over thy head shall be brass, and the earth that is
under the, iron. The lord shall turn the rain of the land unto powder and
dust: even from heaven shall they come down upon the, until thou be brought to
naught. And the Lord shall plage the before thine enemies: Thou shalt come
out one way against them, and flee seven ways before them, and shall be
scattered among all the kingdoms of the earth. And thy carkas shall be meat
unto all manner fowls of the air, and unto the beasts of the earth, and no
man shall fraye them away. Exodi. ix. b
The Lord will smite the with the botche of Egypt, and the Emarodes, scalle,
and maungenes, that thou may not be healed thereof. And the lord shall smite
the with madness, and blyndnesse and abashment of heart. Thou shalt grope at
noone days, as the blind gropeth in darkness, and shall not prosper in thy
ways. Thou shalt be oppressed with wrong, and be polled evermore, and no man
shall succoure the. ^^. Reg. xii. c
Thou shall be betrowthed unto a wife, and another man shall lie with her.
Deute. 25. b
Thou shalt build an house, and not dwell therein, Thou shalt also plant a
vineyearde, and shalt not gather the grapes.

Thine ox shall be sleyne before thine eyes, and thou shall not eat thereof.

Thine ass shall be violently taken away Dani. 4. d. 11. Par 33 b 4. ^e. 24. d
Iere. 24. a
The Lord shall bring the and thy king (which thou shall set over the) unto
a nacyon, which neither thou nor thy fathers have known, that there thou
may serve strange Gods: even wood and stone. And thou shalt be wondered
at, spoken of, and iested at among all nacyons, whyther the Lord shall carye
the. Thou shalt carye much seed out in to the field / and shalt gather but
little in: for the greshop pers shall destroy it. Thou shalt plant a
vyneyearde and dress it, but shalt neither drink of the wine, neither gather
the grapes, for the worms shall eat it.

Thou shalt have olyue trees thorowout all thy coostes, but shall not anoint
thy self with the Oil, for thine Olyue trees shall be rooted out. Thou shalt
beget Sons, and daughters, but shall not have them: for they shall be carried
away captyue. All thy trees and fruit of thy land shall be marred with
blastynge. The stranger that is among you, shall clyme above the up on hye,
and thou shalt come down beneth allow. He shall lend the, and thou shalt
not lend him: he shall be before, and thou behind.

Moreover, all these curses shall come upon

And the Lord shall bring a nacyon upon the from a far, and from the end
of the world, as swyfte as an Egle flies: a nation whose tongue thou shalt
not understand: a hard favored nacyon, which shall not regard the person
of the old, nor have compassyon on the young. The same shall eat the fruit
of thy cattle, and the fruit of thy land, until he have destroyed the: and
shall leave the neither corn, wine, nor oil, neither the increase of thine
oxen, nor the flocks of thy sheep: until he have brought the to naught. And
he shall keep the in, in all thy cities, until he have cast down thy hye
walls and strong holds, wherein thou trustedst, thorowout all the land. And
he shall beseyge the in all thy cities thorowout all thy land / which the
Lord thy god has given the.

4. Reg. (...) Ba^^^^ (...) Leuit. ^^^
And thou shall eat the fruit of thine own body: the flesh of thy sons,
and of thy daughters, which the lord thy god has given thine enemy shall
beseyge the in all thy cities.

Yea and the woman that is so tender and delycate, that she dare not adventure
to set the soole of her foot upon the ground, (for softness and
tenderness,) shall be grieved to look on her husband / that lies in her
bosom, and on her son, and on her daughter: and on her afterbyrth (that is
come out from between her legs,) and her children which she shall bear: For
when all things lack, she shall eat them secretlye, in the seyge and
straytenesse, wherewith thine enemy shall beseyge the in thy cities.

Exodi. xv. d
If thou will not keep and do all the words of this law (that are written in
this book,) and fear this glorious, and fearful name of the Lord thy God:
the Lord will send unto the and thy seed, great plages and of long
contynuaunce, evil sycknesses and of long duraunce. Moreover he will bring
upon the all the diseases of Egypt, and those which thou wast afraid of shall
cleave unto the. And all manner syckenesses, and al manner plages which are not
written in the book of this law, will the Lord bring upon the, until he
bring the to naught. And ye shall be left few in nombre, where before ye
were as the Deute. x. d.
sterres of heaven in multitude: because thou would not herke^ unto the voice
of the Lord thy God.

Iere. xxxi. ^
And it shall come to pass, that as the lord reioysed over you, to do you
good, and to multiply

And among these nations thou shall find no ease, neither shall the so^le of
thy foot have rest. But the Lord shall give the there an unquiet heart, and
dasynge eyes, and sorrow of mind. And thy life shall hang before the, and
thou shalt fear both day and night and shall have no trust in thy life. In
the morning thou shall say, would god it were night. And at night thou shalt
say: Would God it were morning: for fear of thine heart which thou shalt
fear, and for the sight of thine eyes, which thou shalt se. And the lord
shall bring the in to Egypt again with ships by the way which I bad the,
that thou should Exodus 14. d
se it no more. And there ye shall be sold unto your enemies for bondmen, and
bondwomen: and no man shall bye you.

The people are exhorted to observe the cammaundementes, which if they break
/ they are threatened to be plaged.

CAPI. XXIX.
THese are the words of the Exodus xix. ^
appointment,

And Moses called all Israel, and said unto them: Ye have seen all that the
Lord did before your eyes in the land of Epypte, unto Pharao and unto all his
servants, and unto all his land, the great temptacyons which thine eyes
have seen, those great miracles and wonders: and yet the Lord has not given
you an heart to perceive, and eyes to se, and ears to hear unto this day.

And I have led you. xl. year in the wilderness: and your Deute. ^ ^.
clothes are not wared old upon you, and thy shoo is not wared old upon thy
foot. Ye have eaten no bread, nor drunk wine, or strong drink, that ye
might know how that I am the lord your god.

Nume. xi. ^
And ye came unto this place, and Sehon the king of Hesbon, and Og king of
Basan Deuteronomy. iiii. ^
Keep therefore the words of this appointment and do them, that ye may
understand all that ye ought to do. Ye stand this day every one of you
before the Lord your God: your captains, your tribes, your elders, your
officers, and all the men of Israel: your children also, your wives, and the
stranger that is in thine host, Joshua. ix. ^
from the hewer of thy wood, unto the drawer of thy water: that thou should
go in to the appointment of the LORD thy God, and in to his oath Gene. 17. a.
which the Lord thy god makes with the this day. For to make the a people
unto him self, and that he may be unto the a GOD, as he has said unto the,
and as he has sworn unto thy fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.

I make not this bond and this oath with

Lest there be among you man or woman, kynred or trybe, whose heart turns
away this day from the Lord our God, to go and serve the Gods of these
nations: and leest there be among you some root that bears gal and wormwood,
so that when he hears the words of this oath, he bless him self in his
heart, saying. Iere. v. ^.
I shall have peace. I will walk in the meaning of mine own heart, (to put
the dronken to the thyrstye.) And so the Lord will not consent to be merciful
unto him, but then the wrath of the Lord, and his ielousye shall smoke
against that man, and all the curses that are written in this book shall light
upon him, and the Lord shall do out his name from under heaven, and the lord
shall separate him unto evil out of all the tribes of Israel, according unto
all the curses of the appointment, that are written in the book of this law.
So that the generation to come of your Gene. xix. ^.
Sodom, Gomor, Adama, and Zeboim: which the Lord ouerthrewe in his wrath,
and anger. Even then shall all nations say: Iere. xxii. b ^ Regu^. ix. b
Wherefore has the Lord done of this facion unto this land? O how fearse is
this great wrath? And men shall say: because they left the testament of the
Lord God of their fathers which he made with them, when he brought them out of
the land of Egypt. For they went, and served strange gods, and worshypped
them: Gods which they knew not, and which had given them naught

And the wrath of the Lord wared hoote against this land, to bring upon it,
all the curses that are written in this book. And the Lord cast them out of
their land in anger, wrath, and great indignacion, and cast them in to a
strange land, as this day bears witness. The secrets of the Lord our
God ^. ^ori^. 4. a.
are opened unto us, and to our children for ever, that we may do all the
words of this law.

The word of God is at hand.

CAPI. XXX.
WHen all these words are come upon

Though thou wast cast unto the extreme parts of heaven: even from thence will
the Lord thy God gather the, and from thence will he fet the, and the Lord thy
God will bring the in to the land which thy fathers possessed, and thou
shalt enjoy it. And he will show the kyndnesse, and multiply the above thy
fathers.

Deute. ^^
And the Lord thy god will circumcyse thine heart, and the heart of thy seed,
that thou

And the Lord thy God will put all these curses upon thine enemies, and on
them that hate the, and that persecute the. But thou shalt turn, and harken
unto the voice of the Lord, and do al his commandments, which I command
the this day. And the Lord thy God will make the plenteous in all the works of
thine hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and
in the fruit of thy land, for thy welthe. Iere. ^^^
For the Lord will turn again and rejoice over the to do the good, as he
reioysed over thy fathers: If thou harken only unto the voice of the Lord thy
God, to keep his commandments, and his ordinances which are written in the
book of this law, and if thou turn unto the Lord thy God with all thine
heart and all thy soul.

Rome. ^^
For the commandment which I command the this day, is not separated from
complain, and) say: who shall go up for us to heaven, and fet it us, that we
may hear it, and do it. Neither is it beyond the sea: that thou should
say: who shall go over the sea for us, and fet it us, that we may hear it:
and do it? But the word is very nygh unto the: even in thy mouth and in thine
heart, that thou do it.

Deute ^^
Behold I have set before the this day life and good, death and evil: For
where as I command the this day, to love the LORD thy God, to walk in his
ways, and to keep his commandments, his ordinances, and his laws (if thou
so do) thou shalt live and multiply, and the Lord thy God shall bless the in
the land whither thou go to possess it.

But and if thine heart turn away, so Deuteronomy. iiii. ^
I call heaven and earth to record this day against you, that I have set
before you life and death, blessyng and cursynge: Therefore chose life, that
both thou and thy seed may live, that thou may love the lord thy god, and be
obedyent to his voice, and cleave unto him. For he is thy life, and the length
of thy days, that thou may dwell upon the earth which the lord swear unto
thy fathers: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to give them.

Moses being ready to dye orders Joshua to rule the people in his stead. This
bo^e Deuteronomy to written and laid in the Tabernacle beside the Arc. The
Leuttes are charged to read it to the people.

CAPI. XXXI.
ANd Moses went and spoke these words Nume. xx b
thou shall not go over this Jordan. The lord thy God he will go over before
the, and he will destroy these nations before the, and thou shalt conquer
them. Nume. 27 d
And Joshua he shall go before the, as the lord has said. And the lord shall
do unto them, as he Nume. 27. ^
did to Sehon and Og kings of the Amorites, and unto the land of them, whom
he destroyed

And the Lord shall give them over before your face, that ye may do unto
them, according Joshua i. b Regu^ ii. a
Be strong and bold, for thou must go with this people unto the land, which the
lord has sworn unto their fathers to give them, and thou shall give it them
to enherite. And the lord he does go before the: He shall not fail the,
neither forsake the: fear not therefore, nor be discomforted. And Moses wrote
this law, and delivered it unto the priests the sons of Leui Nume iii. d
bare the arc of the testament of the lord) and unto all the elders of
Israel, and Moses commanded them, saying: (...). ^. a.
At the point of, vii. years in the solempnyte of the freyere, even in the
feast of tabernacles, when all Israel is come to appear before the Lord thy
god, in the place which he has chosen: thou shall read this law before all
Israel in their ears. Gather the people together: men, women and children, and
the stranger that is within thy gates, that they may hear, and learn and
fear the lord your God, and keep, and observe all the words of this law,
and that their children which know nothing, may hear, and learn to fear
the lord your god, as long as ye live in the land, whyther ye go over Iordane
to possess it.

And the lord said unto Moses: Behold

And Moses and Joshua went, and stood in the tabernacle of witness. And the
lord appeared in the tabernacle: even in the pyller of the cloud. And the
Exodi. 33. ^
pyller of the cloud stood over the door of the tabernacle. And the lord said
unto Moses: behold, thou shalt sleep with thy fathers, and this people will
rise up, and go a hooryng after strange gods of the land (whyther they go)
and will forsake me, and break the appointment, which I have made with them.
And then my wrath will ware hoote against them, and I will forsake them and will
hyde my face from them, and they shall be consumed.

And much aduersyte and tribulacyons

Now therefore write ye this song for you and teach it the children of
Israel, and put it in their mouths, that this song may be my witness
against the children of Israel. For I will bring them in to the land, (which
I swear unto their Fathers) that flows with milk and honye, and they shall
eat, and fill them selves, and wax fat, and turn unto strange gods, and
serve them and blaspheme me, and break my covenant. And then when much
myscheyfe and tribulacion is come upon them, this song shall answer them, as
a witness. For it shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of their seed: for
I know theyrymaginacion, which they goo about even now, before I have
brought them in to the land which I swear.

Moses therefore wrote this song the same reason, and taught it the children of
Israel. And he gave Joshua the son of Nun a charge and said: Joshua. i. b i.
Regu^. ii* a
be bold, and strong, for thou shall bring the children of Israel into the
land, which I swear unto them, and I will be with the. And when Moses had made
an end of writing out of the words of this law in a book unto the end of
them, Moses commanded the Levites, which bare the arc of the testament of
the Lord, saying: take ye the book of this law, Deute. x. a.
and put it in the side of the arc of the testament of the lord your God,
that it may be there for a witness against 4 Re. xvii. c Mala. iii. b
and thy styffe neck: while I am yet alive with you this day ye have been
dysobedient unto the lord: and how much more after my death? Gather unto me
all the elders of your tribes, and your officers, that I may speak these words
in their cares, and call heaven, and earth to record against them. For I am
sure that after my death, ye will utterly corrupt, and turn from the way
which I have commanded you, and tribulacion will come upon you in the latter
days, because ye shall have wrought wickedness in the sight of the Lord, to
provoke him through the works of your hands. And Moses spoke in the ears of
all the congregation of Israel the words of this song, until he had ended
them.

The song of Moses.

CAPI. XXXII.
Hear O ye heuens, and Mith. iii. b. Esaie i. a
I shall speak, and let the earth hear the words of my mouth. Esai. iv. c
My doctrine shall drop as does the rain, and my speech shall flow as does
the dew, as the shower upon the herbs, and as the drops upon the grass.
For I will call on the name of the Lord: Ascribe ye honor unto our god.
Genesi. i. d. Eccle. xlii. d
Perfect is the work of the most mighty god: For all his ways are judgment.
He is a god of truth, without wickedness: ryghteous, and just is he. Frowardly
have they done against him through their deformities: not his own children, but
a wicked, and froward generation. Do ye so reward the lord, O folyshe nation
and unwise? Mala. i. b
Is not he thy father and thine owner? Gene. i* d
has he not made the, and ordained the? Remember the days of the world that
is past: consider the years from time to time. Job. viii. b
Ask thy father and he will show the: thy elders, and they will tell the. When
the most highest divided the nacyons, and when he separated the sons of
Adam, he put the borders of the nations fast by the multitude of the children
of Israel.

For the lords part is his folk, and Jacob Psalm. ^^^
And he fed him with honey out of the rock, and with oil out of the most hard
stone With butter of kyne, and milk of the sheep, with fat of the lambs and of
fat ra^mes and he gootes with the fat of most plenteous wheat: and that thou
myghtest drink the most pure blood of the grape. But he that should have been
Psalm. xvi^.
They offered unto deuyls, and not to God, even to gods whom they knew not:
to new gods that came newly up, whom their fathers feared not. Of god that
begat the, thou art unmindful, and have forgotten god that made the. The
lord therefore saw it, and was angry, because of the prouokyng of his sons
and of his daughters. And he said, I will hyde my face from them, and will se
what their end shall be. For they are a very froward generation, children in
whom is no faith. They have angered me with that which is no God, and provoked
me with their vanitis. Roma. ^^
And I also will provoke them with those which are no people, I will anger them
with a foolyshe nation. Iere. x^^
For fire is kyndled in my wrath, and burns unto the bottom of hell. And
has Iere. (...) John ^^
I will also send the teeth of beasts upon them, with the furiousness of
serpents in the dust. Without forth shall the sword rob them of their
children, and within in the chamber: fear both young men and young women, and
the suckelynges with the men of gray heads. I have said: I will scatter them
abroad, and make the remembrance of them to cease from among men.

Were it not that I feared the wrath of the enemy, lest their adversaries
should utterly withdraw themselves, and lest they should say: our high hand
has done all this, and not the Lord. For it is a nation without forecast
neither is there any understanding in them O that they were wise, and
understood this, that they would consider their latter end. How should one
chase a. M, and two put. x. M. to flight: except their maker had sold them
and except the lord do shut them up.

For their God is not as our God 1. Regu^. v b
our enemies also themselves are judges.

For their vine is of the vyneyarde of Sodom, and of the feldes of Gomorra.
Their grapes are grapes of gall, and their clusters be bitter. Their wine is a
poison of dragons, and the cruel gall of adders. Is not this laid in store
with me, and sealed up among my treasures? Roma. xii. d Hebrew. x. ^
Uengeaunce is mine, and I will reward: their fete shall slide in due time.
For the day of their destruction is at hand and the things that shall come
upon them, make have. i Mac. 7. a
For the lord shall judge his people, and have co^passyon on his servants:
when he sees that their power is gone, and that they be in a manner shut up, or
brought to naught and forsaken. And he shall say Iere. ii. d
where are their gods? their god, in whom they trusted? The fat of in
necessyte.) Se now, how that I, Daui. 4* ^.
I am god and there is none but I, ^ Regu^. ii.
I kyl, and will make alive: I wound, and I will heal, Job. x. d.
neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand.

For I will lift up mine hand to heaven, and will say: I live ever. If I whet
the edge of my sword, and my hand take hold to do justice, I will recompense
vengeance on mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me. I will make
mine arowes drunk with bloood, and my sword shall eat flesh, and that for
the blood of the sleyne, and for their captivity, since the begyn^yng of the
wrath of the enemy. Romans xv. b.
Praise ye hethen his people, for he will avenge the blood of his servants,
and will avenge him of his adversaries, and will be merciful unto his land,
and to his people.

And Moses came and spoke all the words Deuteronomy. xi. b. ^^d, xi. e
Set your hertes unto all the words which I testify unto you this day: and
ye shall command them unto your children, that they may observe, and do all
the words of this law. And let it not be a vain word unto you: for in it is
your life, and through this word ye shall prolonge your days in the land
whyther ye go over Iordane, to conquer it. And the Lord spoke unto Moses the
self same day, saying. Get the up into this mountain Abarim. ( That is to
say, a passage) unto mount Nebo, which is in the land of Moab over against
Ierico. And behold the land of Canaan, which I give unto the children of
Israel to possess: And dye in the mount which thou go up unto, and thou
shalt be gathered unto thy people.

Nume. xx. d and. 33. c.
As Aaron thy brother dyed in mount Hor, and was gathered unto his people:
because ye trespassed against me among the children of Israel Nume. xx. a
at the waters of strife, at Cades in the wilderness of Zin: For ye sanctified
me not among the children of Israel. Thou shalt therefore se the land before
the, and shall not go thither unto the land which I give the children of
Israel.

Moses dyenge, blesses all the trybes of Israel.

CAPI. XXXIII.
THis is the blessing wherewith Moses Exodi. iii. a
The Lord came from Smay and showed his beams Exodus xi^. ^
from Seir unto them, and appeared from mount Pharan, and he came with
thousands of saints, and in his right hand a law of fire for them. And he
loved the people. Sapi. iii. a*
All his saints also are in thy hands. They were smytten to go after thy
feet, and to receive of thy words.

Moses gave us a law, to be an enheritaunce of the congregacyon of Jacob. And
he was in Israel king when the heads of the people, and the tribes of
Israel were gathered together. Let Ruben live, and not dye: and be few in
nombre. This same also happen to Judah. And he said: hear lord the voice of
Judah* and bring him unto his people: his hands shall be good enough for him, if
thou help him against his enemies.

And unto Leut he said: Thumin^ and Urim shall be with the, and with every

Bless lord his first fruytes and accept the work of his hands: smite the
loins of them that rise against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise
not again.

And of Ben Iamin he said. The Lords derlyng shall dwell in safety upon him,
and the Lord shall cover him all the day long, and he shall dwell between his
shoulders.

And of Joseph he said: blessed of the lord is his land for the fruytes of
heaven, through the dew and sprynges that lie bynethe: and for the sweet fruytes
of the increase of the son, and ripe fruytes of the moon: For the first
fruit of the principal mountains, and for the Fruytes / that the hills
bring forth for ever, and for the fruytes of the earth, and fullness thereof:
and for the good will of him that dwelte in the Exodi. iii. a
Busshe, shall the blessing come upon the head of Joseph, and upon the top of
the head of him that was separated from among his brethren his first borne ox
has beautye, and his horns are as the horns of an unicorn. And with them he
shall trouble the nations together, even unto the ends of the world. These
are also the many thousands of Ephram, and the thousands of Manasses. And
unto Zabulon he said: Rejoice Zabulon in thy going out, and thou Isachar in
thy tents. They shall call the people unto the hill, and there they shall offer
offerynges of righteousness. For they shall suck of the abundance of the sea, and of treasure hyd in the sand.

And unto Gad he said: blessed be the rowme maker Gad: he dwells as a Lion,

And to Aser he said: Aser shall be blessed with children: he shall be
acceptable unto his brethren, and shall dyp his foot in oil: Thy dwelling be
Iron and brass, and thine age be as thy youth. There is none like unto the God
of Israel, which though he sit upon the heaven as upon an horse, yet is he thy
helper, whose glory is in the celestyall places. The eternal God is thy
refuge, and under the arms of the everlasting god shalt thou live. He shall
cast out the enemy before the, and say: destroy. Israel then shall dwell in
safety, and alone. And the eye of Jacob shall be upon a land of corn and
wine, and his heuens shall drop the dew. Happy art thou O Israel, who is
like unto the? O people, that art saved in the Lord, which is the shylde of
thy help, and sword of thy glory. Thine enemies have lost their strength to
the ward, and thou shalt tread upon the hight of them.

Moses dies. Israel wepeth. Joshua succedeth in Moses room.

CAPI. XXXIIII.
ANd Nume. 71
Moses went from the plain of Moab up in to mount Nebo, and unto the top of
Deuteronomy. ^^^
the hyl that is over against Jericho. And the Lord showed him all the land
of Gilead, even unto Dan, and all Nephthali, and the land of Ephraim and
Manasse, and the land of Judah: even unto the uttermost see, and the south, and
the region of the plain of Jericho / the City of paulme trees, even unto Zoar.
And the Lord said unto him. (...). and. ^^^
This is the land which I swear unto Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, saying: I will
give it unto thy seed. I have caused the also to se it with thine eyes, Deute.
4.
but thou shalt not go over thither.

So Moses the servant of the lord dyed Number. ^^
wept for Moses in the plain of Moab thyrtie days. And the days of weeping
and mourning for Moses were ended.

And Joshua the son of Nun was full of Number. ^^
for Moses had put his hands upon him. And the children of Israel were
obedient unto him, and did as the Lord commanded Moses. And there arose not a
prophet since in Israel like unto Moses, whom the Lord knew face to face,
according unto all the miracles and wonders which the Lord sent him to do in
the land of Egypt, unto Pharao and all his servants, and before all his
land: and according to all that mighty hand, and all the great visions,
which Moses showed in the sight of all Israel.

The end of the fyfth book of Moses, called in the Hebrew Elle Haddebarim:
and in the latin Deuteronomium.
The Book of Joshua, whom the Hebrews call Iehosua.
The Lord courageth Joshua to invade the land of promise: and commands him
contynually to read Deuteronomium.

CAPI. Primo.
AFter the death of Moses

Deute. xi. c.
All the places that the sooles of your feet shall tread upon have I given
you, as I said unto Moses: from the wilderness and this Libanon unto the
great river Euphrates: all the land of the Hethites, even unto the great see
toward the going down of the son, shall be your cooste. There shall not a
man be able to withstand the, all the days of thy life. Iesua. iii. b
For as I was with Moses, so will I be with the Hebru. 13. b
and will not fayll the, nor forsake the.

Deuteronomy. 31. f. 3. Regu^ ii. a
Be strong therefore and bold: for unto this people shalt thou deuyde the
land which I swear unto their Fathers to give them. Only be thou strong and
as bold as thou can, that thou may observe and do according to all the
law, which Moses my servant commanded the. Deute. v. d
Turn therfrom neither to the right hand, nor to the left: that thou may
do wisely in all thou take in hand: Deuteronomy. 17. d.
let not the book of this law depart out of thy mouth: But record therein
day and night that thou may observe / and do according to all that is
written therein.

For then shalt thou make thy way prosperous, Number. 32. d.
Remember the word, which Moses the servant of the Lord commanded you,
saying: the Lord your God has given you rest, and has given you this land.

Your wives, your Children, and your

And then shall ye return unto the land of your possessyon and enjoy it,
which land Moses the Lords servant gave you on this side Jordan toward the
son rysynge. And they answered Joshua, saying: Deute. v. ^. Iere. xlii. a.
All that thou have commanded us, we will do, and whyther soever thou sendest
us / we will go. According as we obeyed Moses in all things, so will we obey
the: only the Lord thy god be with the, as he was with Moses. And whosoever he
be that does dysobeye thy mouth, and will not harken unto thy words, in all
that thou co^maundest him, let him dye: Only be strong / and of good courage.

Joshua sends spies to Ierico, which were hyd of Rahab

CAPI. II.
ANd Joshua the son of Nun sent out Hebru. xi. c. Jacob. (...). d
and hyd them. And said thus: in deed there came men unto me, but I wist not
whence they were.

And about the time of the shutting of Joshua. v. ^^
hyd them with the stalks of flare, which she had lyenge abroad upon the
roof. And the men pursued after them, the way to Jordan, even unto the ferye,
and as soon as they which pursued after them were gone out, they shut the
gate: and or ever they were a flepe, she came up unto the^ upon the roof, and
said unto the men: I know, that the lord has given you the land Deuteronomy. ^8
a. Joshua. v. a
for the fear of you is fallen upon us, and the enhabyters of the land faint
at the presence of you. For we have herd, how the Lord Exodus xiiii c
dried up the water of the red see before you when ye came out of Egypt, and
what ye did unto the two kings of the Amorites / that were on the other side
Jordan Nu. 21. f. g.
Sohon, and Og, which ye utterly destroyed. And as soon as we have herd
these things ( We were sore afraid, and) our hertes did faint.

And there remained no more courage in any man at the presence of you. For the
lord your god, he is the God in heaven above, and on the earth benethe.

Now therefore (I pray you) swear unto Deute. x. d.
by the Lord that as I have showed you mercy, ye shall also show mercy unto
my fathers house, and give me a true token. And that ye shall save alive, both
my father, and my mother, my brethren, and my systers, and all that they have.
And that ye shall deliver our souls from death. And the men answered her: our
lives for you to dye, if ye utter not this our business. And when the Lord
has given us the land, Iosna. vi. c
we will deal mercifully and truly with the. And then she let them down by a
cord, i. Regu^. 19 c Acts. ix. d
through a wyndowe: For her house was by the town wall And she dwelt by the
town wall. And she said unto them: get you in to the mountain, leest the
pursuers mete you, and hyde your selves there three days, until the pursuers
be returned, and then shall ye go your way. And the men said unto her: we
will be bla melesse of this thine oath, which thou have made us swear. Behold,
when we come in to the land, thou shall bind this purple cord in the
wyndowe, which thou let us down bye.

And thou shall bring thy father, and thy

And they departed, and got them into the mountain, and there above three days
until the pursuers were returned. And the pursuers sought them thorowout all
the way, but found them not. And the two men returned, and descended from the
mountain, and passed over, and came to Joshua the son of Nun, and told him all
that had chanced them. And they said unto Joshua: the Lord truly has
delivered into our hands all the land: and all the inhabyters of the country
faynte at the presence of us.

Joshua with the people pass over Iordane.

CAPI. III.
ANd Joshua rose early: and they removed

And ye shall not come nygh unto it, that ye may know the way, by which ye
must go: and bevvare, that ye approach not nygh un to the arc.) And Joshua said
unto the people: ^ xuiii. (...) Nume. (...) i. Re. (...) Joshua ^^^^
Sanctifye your selves, for to morrow the Lord shall do wonders among you.

And Joshua spoke unto the priests, saying: Take up the Arc of the covenant,
and go before the people. And they took up the arc of the testament, and went
before the people. And the Lord said unto Joshua: this day will I begin to
magnifye the, in the sight of all Israel, that they may know how that
Joshua. ^^
as I was with Moses, so will I be with the. And thou shalt command the
priests that bear the arc of the covenant / saying: when ye are come to
the edge of the waters of Iordayne, ye shall stand still in it.

And Joshua said unto the Children of that are beneath, shall run down,
and) shall be divided: and the waters that come from above, shall stand still
upon an heap. And it fortuned, that when the people were departed from their
tents to go over Jordan, the priests bearing Acts. vii. ^
the Arc of the appointment, went before the people. And as soon as they that
bare the Arc came unto Iordane, and Eccle. 24. d
For Iordane uses to fill all his banks all the time of harvest) the waters
also that came down from above, did rise up upon an heap ( and appeared as
great as a mountain,) and departed far from the city of Adam, that was
beside Zarthan. And the waters that were benethe toward the sea of the
wilderness, fell away and departed into the salt see, and the people Psalm.
66. b.
went right over against Ierico. And the priests that bare the arc of the
appointment of the Lord, stood dry within Iordane, ready prepared, and all the
Israelytes went over through the dry, until all the people were gone clean over
through Iordane.

Joshua sets up. xii. stones in Iordane.

CAPI. IIII.
ANd it fortuned, that when the people / Deuteronomy. 27. 8
over Iordane, the lord spoke unto Joshua, saying: Take you twelve men out of
the people, out of every trybe a man. And command you them, saying: take you
hence out of the mids of Iordane, (even out of the place where the priests
stood in a redynesse) twelve ( of the most hardest) stoones, which ye shall
take away with you, and leave them in the place, where you shall lodge this
night. And Joshua called the twelve men, which he had prepared of the Children
of Israel, out of every tryde a man, and Joshua said unto them: get you before
the Ark of the Lord your God / even through the mids of Jordan, Deuteronomy. 27. a
and take up every man of you a stoone upon his shoulder, according unto the
nombre of the trybes of the Children of Israel, that this may be a sign
among you. That when your Children ask their fathers in time to come,
saying: what mean these stones with you? Ye may answer them how that the
waters of Iordane divided at the presence of the arc of the appointment of the
Lord.

For when it went over Jordan, the waters ^^^^. 18. f.
twelve stoones out of the mids of Iordane, as the Lord said unto Joshua
according to the nombre of the trybes of the children of Israel, and carried
them away with them unto the place where they lodged, and laid them down
there. And Joshua set up twelve stones also in the mids of Jordan, in the
place where the feet of the priests which bare the Arc of the testament,
stood. And there have they continued unto this day. For the priests which
bare the Arc / stood in the mids of Iordane, until all was finysshed that
the Lord commanded Joshua to say unto the people, according to all that
Moses charged Joshua And the people hasted, and went over.

It fortuned also, that when all the people Number. 32. c.
And the children of Ruben, and the children of Gad, and half the Trybe of
Manasses went before the children of Israel armed, as Moses charged them. Even
fourtye thousand prepared for war, went before the lord unto battle, through
the plain of Ierico. Joshua iii. ^
That day the lord magnifyed Joshua in the sight of all Israel, and they
feared him, as they feared Moses all days of his life. And the Lord spoke
unto Joshua, saying: command the Priests that bear the arc of witness / to
come up out of Iordane.

Joshua therefore commanded the priests / saying: Come ye up out of Iordane.
And when the Priests that bare the Arc of the appointment of the lord were
come up out of the mids of Jordan, and as soon as the sooles of the priests
feet were set on the dry land, the waters of Iorda^ returned again unto
their place, and went over all their banks

And the twelve stoones which they took out of Iordane, did Joshua pitche in
Gylgal. And he spoke unto the Children of Israel, saying: Exodi. xii. ^
If your Children ask their Fathers in time to come, and say: what mean
these stones? ye shall show your Children, and say: Israel came over this
Iordane an dry land. For the lord your god dried up the water of Iordane
before you, vutyll ye were gone over, as the Lord your God did the red see
Exodi. 14. ^
which he dried up before us, till we were gone over: that all the people of
the world may know the hand of the Lord, how mighty it is, and that ye
might fear the Lord your God for ever.

The Canaanites are afraid.

CAPI. V.
ANd it fortuned, that when all the kings Joshua. ii. b.
their hertes faynted for fear. And there was no spirit in them any more, for
the presence of the children of Israel.

That same time the Lord said unto Joshua: Exodi iiii. f
Make the sharp knyues (of stone) and go to again and circumcyse the Children
of Israel the second time. And Joshua Number. 14. f.
which the lord swear unto their fathers, that he would give us, even a land
Nume. ^3. d
that flows with milk and honye.

And their children whom he set up in

And the Lord said unto Joshua: this day I have taken away the shame of
Egypt from you: wherefore the name of the same place is called Gilgall unto
this day. And the children of Israel abode in Gilgall Exodi. xi. a.
and held the feast of passover the fourtene day of the month at even in the
plain of Ierico. And they did eat of the corn of the land on the morrow
after passover sweet cakes, and parched corn, in the self same day.

For the Exodus 17. ^.
Manna ceased on the morrow, after they had begone to eat of the corn of the
land, neither had the children of Israel Manna any more, but did eat of the
corn of the land of Canaan that year.

And it fortuned that when Joshua was Exodi. iii Acts, vii. ^
do thy shoo of thy foot, for the place whereon thou stand, is holy. And
Joshua did so.

The walls of Jericho fall, and it to destroyed.

CAPI. VI.
ANd Ierico was shut up, and locked because that be used in the Jubilee.) And
the seventh day, ye shall compass the city seven times, and the Priests
shall blow with the trompettes. And when they make a long blaste with the
rams horn, and ye hear the sou^de of the horn, all the people shall shoute
with a great shoute. And then shall the wall of that city fall down, and the
people shall ascend up, every man straight before him.

And Joshua the Son of Nun, called the priests, and said unto them: take up
the Arc of the appointment, and let. vii. Priests bear seven trompettes of
Rams horns before the ark of the Lord. And he said unto the people, and
go and compass the city: and let him that is harnessed, go before the Ark of the Lord. And when Joshua had spoken unto the people, the seven priests bare
the seven trompettes of rams horns, and went forth before the ark of the lord, and blewe with the trompettes, and the arc of the covenant of the
Lord followed them.

And all the men of arms went before the compassed the city, and went about
it once: and they returned in to the host, and lodged there. And Joshua rose
early in the morning / and the priests took up the ark of the lord / and
seven priests bare seven trompettes of rams horns, and went before the ark of the Lord, and blewe with the trompettes. And all the men of arms went
before them, but the common people came after the ark of the lord, which went
before with the blowynge of the trompettes. And the second day they compassed
the city once, and returned again into the hooste, and so they did six
days. And when the seventh day came, they rose early: even with the dawning
of the day, and compassed the city after the same manner seven times: only
that day they compassed the city seven times.

And at the seueth time, when the priests Joshua. ii. a.
hyd the messengers that we sent. And in any wise be ye ware of the
excommunicate things leest ye make your selves excommunicate, and take of the
excommunicate things, and make the host of Israel excommunicate, and trouble
it. But all the Silver, gold, vessels of brass, and iron shall be consecrate
unto the lord, and shall come into his treasurye. And the people shouted, and
blewe with trompettes. And when the people herd the sound of the trompe, they
shouted with a great shoute: and the wall fell down, so Hebrew. xi. f
that the people went up in to the city, every man straight before him, and
took the city.

And they utterly destroyed all that was in the city, both man and woman,
young and old / ore, sheep and ass, with the edge of the sword.

Then Joshua said unto the two men that had spyed out the country: Hebrew. xi.
f
go in to the harlottes house, and bring out thence the woman / and all that
she has, Joshua. i^. r.
as ye swear to her.

And the young men that were spies, went Hebrew. ^i. ^
And Joshua saved Rahab the harlot, and her fathers household, and all that she
had, and she dwelt in Israel, even unto this day, because she hyd the
messengers, which Joshua sent to spy out Ierico. And Joshua swear at that time /
saying: cursed be the man before the Lord, that ryseth up, and buyldeth this
city Ierico: he shall lay the foundacyon 3. Reg 16. ^
in his eldest son, and in his youngest son shall he set up the gates of it.
And so the lord was with Joshua, and his fame was noysed throwout all lands.

Hai is spyed out. Acan is stoned.

CAPI. VII.
BUt yet the children of Israel trespassed Deuteronomy. vii. d and, xiii. d
excommunicate things: And Joshua. 22. d i. Para ^i a (...). match. 12 ^
Acan the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zareh of the trybe
of Judah, took of the excommunicate things, And the wrath of the Lord waxed
hoote against the children of Israeli. And Joshua sentmen from Ierico to Hai,
which is beside Bethauen, on the east side of Bethel, and spoke unto them,
saying: Get you up, and vewe the country. And the men went up, and spyed out
Hai. And returned unto Joshua, and said unto him, let not all the people go up
but let as it were a two or three thousand men go up, and smite Hai, and make
not all the people to labor thither, for they are but few.

And so there went up thither of the people, about a three thousand men, and
they fled before the men of Hai. And the men of Hai smote of them upon a
thyrtye and sire men: for they chased them from before the gare even unto
Sebarina and smote them in the going down. Wherefore the hertes of the people
Psalm. xxii. ^
for fear melted away like water.

And Joshua rent his clothes, and fell to the Dente, ix. ^
Alas, O Lord God, wherefore have thou brought this people over Iordane, to
deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, and to destroy us: would to God we
had been content, and dwelte on the other side Iordane. Oh Lord what shall I
say / when Israel turns their backs before their enemies: Surely the
Cananites, and all the enhabyters of the land shall hear of it, and shall
conspyre against us, and destroy the name of us out of the world. And what
wylt thou do unto thy mighty name? And the Lord said unto Joshua, get the up,
wherefore lie thou thus upon thy face? Israel has sinned, and they have
transgressed mine appointment, which I commanded them: for they have taken of
the excommunicate things, and have stolen, and dissembled, and put them unto
their own stuff: And therefore is it that the children of Israel can not
stand before their enemies, but shall turn their backs before their enemies,
because they be excommunicate. Neither will I be with you any more, except ye
destroy the excommunicate from among you.

Exodus xix. a
Up therefore, and sanctifye the people, and say: sanctifye your selves
against

And Joshua said unto Acan: my son /

The fe^ge, and winning of Hai. The king thereof is hanged. Joshua sets up
an altar. He blesses the people.

CAPI. VIII.
ANd the Lord said unto Joshua: Deuteronomy. vii ^
fear

Take all the men of war with the, and up, and get the to Hai. Behold, I have
given into thy hand, the king of Hai, and his people, his city and his land.
And thou shalt do to Hai and her king, as thou dydest unto Joshua vi ^
Jericho and her king. Nevertheless the spoil and Deute. ^^^
cattle thereof, shall ye take unto your selves: And lay a watch unto the
town, on the backesyde thereof. And so Joshua arose, and all the men of war,
to go up against Hai. And Joshua chose out thyrtye thousand men of war, and
sent them away by night. And he commanded them, saying: behold, ye shall
lay awayte unto the town on the backesyde thereof. Go not very far from the
city, but be al redye. And I and all the people that are with me, will approach
un to the city.

And when they come out against us, as and came against the city, and pytched
on the north side of Hai, and there was a valey between them and Hai.

And he took upon a five thousand men,

And it fortuned, that when the king of Hai saw it, they hasted and rose up
early, and the men of the city went out against Israel to battle, he and all
his people, at a time appointed, even before the plain, and wist not that
there were layers awayte on the bacsyde of the city. And Joshua and all Israel
feigned them selves to be put to the worse before them, and fled toward the
wilderness. And all the people of the town were called to gyther, to follow
after them.

And they followed after Joshua, and were

And the other issued out of the city against Joshua. vi. c
And they laid upon them, so that they let no one of them escape. And the king
of Hai they took alive, and brought him to Joshua. And when Israel had made an
end of sleyenge all the enhabyters of Hai, in the field of the wilderness,
where they chased them, and when they were al fallen on the edge of the sword,
until they were wasted, all the Israelytes returned unto Hai, and smote it in
the edge of the sword. And all that fell that day, both of men, and women,
were twelve thousand, even all the men of Hai. For Joshua plucked not his hand
back again, which he stretched out upon the spear, until he had utterly
destroyed all the enhabitatours of Hai. Nume. 35. d Deute. xx. ^
Only the cattle and the spoil of the city, Israel took unto them selves,
according unto the word of the Lord, which he commanded Joshua.

And Joshua set Hai on fire, and made it an Deuteronomy. xix. d
that they should take the carkas down of the tree, and cast it at the
entering of the gate of the city, and Joshua. 7. d
lay thereon a great heap of stoones, that remains unto this day. Then
Joshua Deuteronomy. 27. a
build an aultre unto the Lord God of Israel, in mount Eball, as Moses the
servant of the Lord commanded the children of Israel, and as it is written
in the Deuteronomy. 27. a
bokeof the law of Moses: Exodi xx ^
an altar of hoole stoones, over which no man has lylte any tool of iron.
And they Sacrifyced thereon burntsacrifyces unto the Lord, and offered
peaceofferynges. And he wrote there upon the stoones, a rehearsal of the law
of Moses, and wrote it in the presence of the Children of Israel.

And all Israel and the elders thereof, and

The Gibconyies obtain peace of Joshua.

CAPI. IX.
ANd it fortuned, that when all the kings the Pheresites, the Heuites, and the
Iebusytes) herd thereof, they gathered them selves together, to fight against
Joshua, and against Israel with one accord. ^. Reg. (...). a
And the enhabytours of Gibeon herd what Joshua had done unto Jericho, and to
Hai: And they played wylylye, and went, and made them selves ambasadours, and
took ( them vyttayles, and) old sackes upon their Asses, and wine bottels
old, and rent and worne^ and old clouted shoos upon their feet, and their
raiment was old, and all their prouysyon of bread was dried up, and hoored.

And they came unto Joshua into the host of the pour) of him, and all that he
did in Egypt, and all that he did to the two Nume. 21. ^
kings of the Amorites that were beyond Iordane, Sehon king of Hesbon, and
Og king of Basan, which was at Astharoth. Wherefore our Elders and all the
enhabytours of our country spoke ^ us, saying: take vitayles with you to
serve by the way, and go meet them, and say unto them: we are your
servants. And now make ye a covenant of peace with us. This our food of
bread, we took with us out of our houses hoote, the day we departed to come
unto you And now behold, it is dried up, and hoored. And these bottels of
wine which we filled, were new: and se, they be rent. And these our garmetes
and shoos are worn for oldnesse / by the reason of the exceeding long
Journey. And the men took of their vittayles, and counsayled not with the mouth
of the lord.

And Joshua made peace with them, and 3. Re. xxi. a
made a covenant with them, that they should be suffered to live, and the
Lord of the congregacyon swear unto them. And it fortuned that three days
after they had made peace with them, they herd that they were their
neighbors, and that they dwelt among them. And the children of Israel took
their Journey and came unto their cities the third day: and their cities were
Gibeon, and Caphira, Beeroth and Kariath Iarim.

And the Children of Israel slew them not, because the Lords of the
congregation had sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel. And all the
multitude murmured against the Lords. But all the Lords said unto all the
congregacyon: we have sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel, and
therefore we may not hurt them. But this we will do to them: We will let them
live, leest wrath be upon us, because of the oath which we swear unto them.

And the Lords said unto them again: Deuteronomy. 29. ^.
and hew wood, and draw water unto all the congregacyon, as the lords said
unto them. And Joshua sent for them, and talked with them, and said: wherefore
have ye begyled us saying: We dwell far from you, when ye dwell among us?
and now are you cursed, and there shall not cease to be of you, bond men, and
hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the house of my God.

And they answered Joshua, and said: it was told thy servants, how that the
lord thy God had commanded his servant Moses to give you all the land, and
to destroy all the enhabytours thereof out of your sight, and therefore we were
excedyng sore afraid ( and did provide) for our lives at the presence of you
and this have we done, and behold we are in thine hand: as it seems good and
right in thine eyes to do unto us, so do. And even so did he unto them, and ryd
them out of the hand of the Children of Israel, and they selwe them not. And
Joshua made them that same day hewers of wood, and drawers of water for the
co^gregacyon, and for the altar of God unto this day, in the place which god
should chose.

The Am^rytes are overcome of Joshua. It rayneth stones. The son stands ^^yll.
The five kings are hanged.

CAPI. X.
ANd it fortuned, that when Adonizede^ king of Jerusalem had herd, how Joshua
had taken Hai, and had destroyed it, and how that Joshua. (...) and. vi^^
as he had done to Ierico and her king, even so he had done to Hai / and her
king, and how the enhabytoures of Gibeon had made peace with Israel, and
were among them, they feared excedynglye, for Gibeon was a great city, as any
city of the kingdom, and was greater then Hai / and all the men thereof were
very mighty. Wherefore Adonizedec king of Jerusalem sent unto Hoham king of
Hebron, and unto Pirea king of Irimoth, and unto Iaphia king of Lachis, and
unto Dabir king of Eglon, saying: Come up unto me, and help me, that we may
smite Gibeon: for they have made peace with Joshua, and with the children

And the men of Gibeon sent unto Joshua and to the host to Gilgal, saying:
Withdraw not thy hand from thy servants, come up to us, to save us, and to
help us. For all the kings of the Amorites which dwell in the mountains are
gathered together against us. And so Joshua ascended from Eilgal, he and all the
peole of war with him, and all the men of might, and the Lord said unto
Joshua: fear them not, for I have delivered them in to thine hand. Neither
shall any of them stand against the. Joshua therefore came unto them suddenly,
and went up from Gilgall all night.

And the Lord troubled them before Israel,

Then spoke Joshua before the Lord, in the day when the Lord delivered the
Amorites before the children of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel.
E^l. xivi. a
Son, stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou Moon, in Aialon. And the son
abode, and the moon stood still, until the people avenged them selves upon
their enemies. Is not this written in the book of the ryghteous? The son (I
say) Abode in the mids of heaven, and hasted not to go down by the space of
a hole day. And there was no day like that, before it, or after it, that the
lord herd the voice of a man. For the lord fought for Israel.

And Joshua returned and all Israel with

And suffer them not to enter into their cities, for the Lord your God has
despuered them in to your hand. And it fortuned when Joshua and the children of
Israel had made an end of sleynge them with a great slaughter till they were
wasted, the rest that remained of them, entered in to walled Cities.

And all the people returned to the host, to Joshua at Makeda in peace, neither
did any man move his tongue against the children of Israel. Then said Joshua:
Open the mouth of the cave, and bring out these five kings unto me out of
the cave. And they did so, and brought those five kings unto him, out of the
cave, even the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Ierimoth,
the king of Lachis, and the king of Eglon.

And it fortuned, that when they brought Joshua. ^. ^.
trees, and ^ast them in to the cave, (wherein they had been hyd) and laid great
stones on the ^a^^s mouth which remain unto this day.

And that same day Joshua roke Makeda, and smote it with the edge of the sword
and the king thereof also D^ut^. xx. d
destroyed he utterly, with all the souls that were therein, and let naught
remain. And he did to the king of Makeda Joshua v^. d
as he did to the king of Jericho. Then Joshua went from Makeda, and all
Israel with him unto Libna, and fought against Libna. And the Lord delivered
it, and the king thereof in to the hand of Israel, and he smote it with the
edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein. He let naught remain
in it, but did unto the king thereof as he did unto the king of Jericho.

And Joshua departed from Libna, and with the edge of the sword, and all the
souls that were therein, doing according to all, as he had done to the city
of Libna.

Then Horam king of Geser came up to help Lachis: And Joshua smote him and his
people, until naught remained of him.

And from Lachis Joshua departed unto Eglon, and all Israel with him / and they
beseyged it, and assaulted it, and took it the same day, and smote it with the
edge of the sword, and all the souls that were therein he utterly destroyed
the same day / according to all that he had done to Lachis.

And Joshua departed up from Eglon / and all Israel with him, unto Hebron. And
they fought against it, and when they had taken it, they smote it with the edge
of the

And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him to Dabir, and fought against it.
And when he had taken it, and the king thereof, and all the towns that
perteyned thereto, they smote them with the edge of the sword, and utterly
destroyed all the souls that were therein, neither let he ought remain. Even
as he did to Hebron, so he did to Dabir and the king thereof, as he had done
also to Libna and her king.

Joshua therefore smote all the hill countries, and the southe countries, and the
valeys, and the hyl sides, and all their kings, and let naught remain of
them, but utterly destroyed all that Deute. xx. d
breathed, as the lord god of Israel commanded. And Joshua smote them from
Cades barn unto Asah, and all the country of Gosan, even unto Gibeon. All
those kings and their land did Joshua take at one time: because the Lord God
of Israel fought for Israel. And Joshua and all Israel returned, unto the host
that was in Gilgall.

The battle of Joshua with diverse hynges.

CAPI. XI.
ANd it fortuned, that when Iabin king

And the Lord said unto Joshua: be not afraid at the presence of them: for to
morrow about this time will I deliver them all sleyne before Israel: thou
shalt hough their horses, and burn their charettes with fire.

And so Joshua came and all the men of war

And Joshua at that time turned back, and took Hazor, and smote the king
thereof with the sword. And Hazor before time was the head of al those
kingdoms. And they smote all the souls that were therein with the edge of the
sword, utterly destroyenge all, and nothing that breathed, was let remain.
And he burnt Hazor with fire, And all those cities of those kings, and all the
kings of them, did Joshua take, and smote them with the edge of the sword, and
utterly destroyed them Exodi. (...) and, 34. ^ Deute. 7^
as Moses the servant of the lord commanded.

But Israel burnt none of the cities that stood still in their strength, save
Hazor only Deute. ^^
so that he mynysshed no word, of all that the lord commanded Moses. And so
Joshua took all the land, the hills, and all the south country, and all the
land of Gosan, and the low country, and the plain, and the mountain of
Israel, and the low country of the same, even from the mount of partyng,
that goth up to Seir unto the plain of Gad in the valey of Libanon, under
mount Hermo^. And all the kings of the same he took, and smote them, and slew
them.

Joshua made war long time with those ^i. Reg. 22. a
Geth and Asdod, there remained of them.

And Joshua took the hoole land, according to all that the lord said unto
Moses and Joshua gave it for a possessyon unto Israel Number. ^9. f.
according to their parts and tribes: and the land rested from war.

What hynges Joshua and the children of Israel hylled, which were in nombre
thyrtye and one.

CAPI. XII.
THese are the kings of the land which Number. 2^. ^. Deute. iii. a
Sehon king of the Amorites, that dwelte in Hesbon, and ruled from Aroer,
which is beside the river of Arnon, and from the myddest of the river, and
from half Gilead unto the river Iabocke, which is the border of the children
of Ammon: And from the plain unto the sea of Ceneroth eastwarde, and unto the sea in the plain: even the salt see eastwarde, the way to Beth Iesimoth, and
from the southe under the sprynges of the hill.

And the coost of Og king of Basan which Nume. 21. f.
Moses the seuaunt of the Lord and the children of Israel smote them, Nume.
32. f and. 33. c. Joshua 13. b Deuteronomy. ^i^. b.
and Moses the servant of the lord, gave their land for a possessyon, unto
the Rubenites, Gaddites, and half the tribe of Manasses.

These are the kings of the country, which Joshua and the children of Israel
smote on this side Jordan westwarde, from the plain of Gad, which is in the
valey of Libanon, even unto the partyng mount that gothe up to Seir. Which
land Joshua gave unto the tribes of Israel to possess, to every man his part:
in the upper land, and nether land, in playnes, and hill sides, in the
wyldernes, and south country: the Hethites, the Amorites, the Cananites, the
Pheresites, the Heuites, and the Iebusites.

Joshua. vi. a
The king of Jericho: was one. The Joshua. 8. a.
king of Hai which is beside Bethel: one. The Joshua. 8. a.
king of Jerusalem: one. The king

All the kings together thyrtye and one.

Joshua is commanded to deuyde the land to the Children of Israel.

CAPI. XIII.
Joshua was old, and strycken in years, and

And the land of the Giblites, and all Libanon toward the Son rysyng, from
the plain of Gad under mount Hermon, until a man come to Hemath: all the
enhabitours of the hyl country, from Libano^ unto the hoote waters, and all
the Sidonians, will I cast Nume. 32. f Deut^. (...). b
which Moses gave them beyond Jordan Eastwarde: even as Moses the servant of
the Lord gave them: from Aroer that lies on the brym of the river Arnon, and
from the city that is in the mids of the river. And all the plain of Midba
unto Dibon, and all the Cities of Sehon king of the Amorites, which reigned
in Hesbon, even unto the border of the children of Ammon: and Gilead, and the
border of Gesuri and Machati, and all mount Hermon, with all Basin unto
Salecah: even all the kingdom of Og in Basan, which reigned in Asthoroth and
Adrai, which same remained yet of the rest of the Gyauntes. These did Moses
smite, and cast them out.

Nevertheless the children of Israel expelled not the Gesurites and the
Machathttes. But the Gesurites and the Machathites dwelte among the Israelites
even unto this day. Only unto the tribe of Leut, he gave none enheritaunce:
Nume. (...). ^
But the offering of the Lord God of Israel is their enheritaunce, as he said
unto them.

Moses gave unto the tribe of the Children Nume. 31. a
with the lords of Madian, Eui Rekem, Zur, and Hur, and Reba, the which were
dukes of Sehon dwelling in the country. And Balaam the son of Beor the soth
sayer, did the children of Israel sley with the sword, among other of them
that were sleyne. And the border of the children of Ruben was Jordan with the
country that lies thereon. This was the enheritaunce of the children of Ruben
after their kynreds, cities and villages perteynyng thereto.

And Moses gave unto the tribe of Gad, even unto the children of Gad, he gave
by

And Moses gave unto the half tribe of Manasses. And this was the possessyon
of the half tribe of Manasses by their kinreds Their coost was from Mahanaim,
even all Basan, and all the kingdom of Og king of Basan, and all the towns
of Iair which lie in Basan, even three score cities, and half Gilead,
Astaroth, and Edrai, cities of the kingdom of Og in Basan, Nume. (...)* ^
which perteyne unto the children of Machir the son of Manasses, even the
half porcyon of the children of Machir by their kynreds. These are the things
which Moses did distribute in the (...) of Moab, on the other side Jordan over
against Jericho eastwarde. Joshua. (...)* ^
But unto the trybe of Leui Moses gave none enherytaunce, for the lord god of
Israel he is their enherytaunce, (...). (...). ^
as he said unto them.

Caled requires the enherytaunce that was promised him, and Hebron was given
him.

CAPI. XIIII.
ANd these are the countries which the Number. ^4* ^
unto which Eleazar the priest and Joshua the son of Nun, and the ancient
heads of the tribes of the children of Israel, gave them their enheritaunce
Nume. (...) (...). xxxiii. ^
by lot, as the lord commanded by the hand of Moses, to give unto the nine
tribes, and unto the half tribe of Manasses.

For Moses had given enheritaunce unto two tribes and an half on the other
side Jordan. But unto the Levites he gave none enherytaunce among them. Gen^.
(...)*
For the children of Joseph were two tribes, Manasses and Ephraim. And therefore
they gave no part unto the Levites in the land, save cities to dwell in, with
the suburbs of the same, for their beasts and cattle.

Nume. 35 a
As the Lord commanded Moses: even so the children of Israel did when they
divided Nume. 14. d
And Caleb the son of Iephune the ken^syte said unto him: thou wottest what the
Lord said unto Moses the man of god, about my matter and thine in Cades
barn. Nume. 13. a
Fourtye year old was I when Moses the servant of the Lor^^ sent me from
Cades barn to spy out the land. And I brought him word again even as it was
in mine heart. Nevertheless my brethren that went up with me, dyscouraged the
herts of the people. And I followed the lord God.

And Moses swear the same day, saying: Number. 14. d Deute. ^. ^.
The land whereon thy feet have trodden, shall be thine enheritaunce and thy
chyldrens for ever, because thou have followed the lord God. And behold the
Lord has kept me alive (as he said,) Eccl. xlvi. b
this fourtye and five years, even since the Lord spoke this word unto Moses,
while the children of Israel wandered in the wilderness. And now ^o, I am
this day four score and five year old and yet am as strong at this time, as
I was when Moses sent me: look how strong I was then, so strong am I now,
whyther I go to war, or come again.

Now therefore give me this mountain whereof Joshua. xv. c
Hebron was called in old time, Kariath arbe. For the same was a great man
among the Enakims And the land ceased from war.

The ^o^^e of the children of Judah, and the names of the Cities and vyllages of
the same.

CAPI. XV.
THis was the lot of the tribe of the children ^^^. 34. ^
And their south coost was from the brynke of the salt see, from a rock that
leans southward. And it went out to the south side, toward the going up to
Acrabim, and went along to Zinna, and ascended up on the south side unto Cades
Barn, and went along to Hezron, and went up to Adar, and fet a compass to
Karea. From thence went it along to Azmon and reached unto the river of Egypt:
and the end of that coost was on the west side. And this is their south coost.

Their East coost is the salt see, even unto ^^^. Reg. ^. ^
well of Rogel. And then went up to the valey of the son of Hennon, even unto
the south side of Iebus^: the same is Jerusalem. And then went up to the top of
the hill that lies before the valey of Hennon westwarde, and by the edge of
the valey of the gyauntes northwarde.

And then it compasses from the top of the hill unto the fountain of the
water of Nepthoah, and gothe out at the cities of mount Ephron: and draws to
Baala, which is Kiriathiarim, ( that is a city of vvoodes.) And then it
compasses from Balah westwarde,

And unto Caleb the son of Iephune did Joshua give a part among the children
of Judah, according to the mouth of the lord even Joshua. 14 ^
Kiriatharbe of the father of Enacke which City is Hebron. And Caleb drove
thence the three sons of Enacke, Sesai, and Ahman, and Thalmai, which were
the sons of Enacke. And he went up thence to the enhabitours of Dabir. And
the name of Dabir in the old time was Kariah Sepher. ( That is a City of
letters.) And Caleb said (...). ^. (...). ^. Regu^. (...)* ^.
he that smyteth Kariath Sephar / and takes it: to him will I give Acsah my
daughter to wife.

And Othniel, the son of Kenes, the brother and dry) land: give me also
sprynges of water. And he gave her spryn ges of water, both above and benethe.
This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of the children of Judah, by their kynreds.

And the uttermost cities of the tribe of the children of Judah, toward the
coostes of Edom southwarde, were: Kabzel, Eder, and Iagur: Kinah, Dinmoah, and
Adada: Kedes, Hazor and

Lebnah, Either, and Asan: Iephthah, Asnah and Nezib: Keilah, Kahezip and
Maresah: nine cities with their villages. Akron with her towns and villages.
For Akron and from the west, all that lies about Asdod with their villages,
Asdod with her tow nes and villages, Azah with her towns and villages, cuen
unto the river of Egypt: and the great see was their coost.

And in the mountains, they had Samir Iathir, and Socoh, Danah: and Kariah Se
nath, which is Dabit: Anab, Esthemoh, and Anim, Gozen, Holon, and Giloh,
eleven Cities with their villages. Arab, Dumah, and Esean: Ianim, Beththaphuah
and Apheah Numatah, and Kariath arbe: which is Hebron, and Ziorinyne cities
with their villages. the city of vvoodes) and Harabba, two cities with their
villages.

In the wilderness they had Betharabah Meddin and Sacacah: Nebson, the Citte
of salt, and Engaddi: Six cities with their villages. Nevertheless, the
Iebusites that were the enhabitours of Jerusalem, could not the children of
Judah cast out. But the Iebusites dwelte with the children of Judah at Jerusalem,
unto this day.

The ^otte or part of Ephraim.

CAPI. XVI.
And the lot of the children of Joseph fell

And the border of the children of Ephraim

And the separate cities for the Children of Ephraim / were among the
enheritaunce of the children of Manasses: even the cities with their villages.
And they drove not out the Cananites that dwelte in Gasar: but the Cananices
dwelte among the Ephraites un to this day / and served under tribute.

The Lotte, or porcyon of the half trybe of Manasses. The Lananites ^re become
try tutaryes to the Israelytes. Manasses and Ephraim require a greater proeyo^
of heritage.

CAPI. XVII.
This was the lot of the tribe of Manasses (...)
eldest son of Joseph. And Machir the eldest son of Manasses which was the
father of Gilead (and a man of warte) had Gilead and Basan This was the
possessyon of the rest of the children of Manasses by their kynreds: Namely,
of the children of Abiezer: the children of Helek^the children of Ariell: the
children of Sichem, the children of Hepher, the children of Semida: for these
were the male children of Manasses, the son of Joseph by their kynreds. Nam.
26. d. iivii. ^. and iiivi. a
But Zelaphead the son of Hepher, the son of Gilead, the son of Machir the
son of Manasses, had no sons but Number. 27 d ^. xxxvi. ^.
the lord commanded Moses to give us an enheritaunce among our brethren. And
therefore according to the commandment of the Lord, he gave them an
enherytaunce among the brethren of their father. And there fell ten poreyons to
Manasses, beside the land of Gilead and Basan which is on the other side
Jordan: because the daughters of Manasses did enherite among his sons. And
Manasses other sons, had the land of Gilead.

And the coost of Manasses was from Aser to Machmathah that lies before Sichem
and went alonge on the right hand, even unto the enhabiters of Entaphuah, and
the land of Thaphuah belonged to Manasses which Thaphuah is beside the border
of Manasses, and beside the border of the children of Ephraim. And the coost
descended un to the river Eanah southwarde, even to the river of the cities of
Ephraim, and between the cities of Manasses. The coost of Manasses

And the children of Joseph spoke unto Joshua,

Lertayne are sent to de^yde the land to the other (...) trybes. The lotte of
the Lhyldren of Ben Iamin.

CAPI. XVIII.
ANd the hoole congregation of the children Io^ua (...).D and. xiiii. a.
the Levites have no part among you, for the preesthode of the lord is their
en heritaunce. Joshua. x. i. ^
And Gad, and Ruben, and half the tribe of Manasses have received their en
heritau^ce beyond Jordan east ward: which Moses the servant of the lord
gave them.

And the men arose, and went their way. And Joshua charged them that went to
describe the land, saying: depart, and go through the land, and describe it,
and come again to me, that I may here cast lottes for you before the lord in
Silo. And the men departed, and

And Iordane keeps in this coost on the

The lottes or parts of habulon. Isachar. Aser. Nephthali, Dan and Joshua.

CAPI. XIX.
AND the second lot came out for the

And the third lot arose for the children of Zabulon thorowout their kynreds.
And the coostes of their enheritaunce came to Sarid, and went up westwarde, and
to Morialah, and reached to Dabaseth, and came thence to the river that lies
before Iokneuen: and turned from Sarid eastwarde toward the son rysyng unto
the border of Chisloth Thabor: and then gothe out to Dabereth, and gothe up to
Iaphia: and from thence gothe a long castwarde, to Gethah, Iepher, Ithah and
Iazim, and gothe to Remon, Methoer, and Neoh. And compasses it on the north
side to Nathan, and ends in the valey of Iephthahel. And Iatath, Nahalol,
Semron, Iedaiah, and Bethleem: twelve cities with their villages. This is the
enheritaunce of the children of Zabulon thorowout their kynreds, and these

And the fourth lot came out for the children of Isachar by their kynreds. And
their coost was Iesraelah, Casuloth, and Sunem, Hapharaim, Sion, and Anaharath:
Harabith, Kision, and Abez: Rameth, Enganim, Enhadah, and Bethphazez. And his
coost reaches to Thabor, and Sahazimah and Bethsames, and ends at Jordan.
Syxtene cities with their villages. This is the enheritaunce of the trybe of
the children of Isachar by their kynreds. And these are the cities with their
villages. And the fyfte lotte came out for the tribe of the children of Aser by
their kynreds.

And their coost was: Helkath, Hall, Beten

Otherwise called be city of ^he Son.
Irsames, Saelabin, Aialon Iethlah: Eglon and The^nathah and Akaron* Elthekeh,
Gibethon, and Baalath: Iehud, Benebarak, and Gathermo^, Meiericon and Aarcon,
with the border that lies before Iapho. And the coostes of the Children of Dan
went out from them. And the Children of Dan went up to fight against Lesen, and
took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and conquered it / and
dwelte therein, and called it ^ud xviii ^
Dan after the name of Dan their father. This is the enheritau^ce of the trybe
of the Children of Dan in their kinreds: these also are the cities with their
vyllages. When they had made an end of deuydyng the land by her coostes, the
Children of Israel gave an enherytaunce unto Joshua the son of Nun among
them, according to the word of the Lord, they gave him the city which he
asked, even Joshua. 24 ^
Tha^nath serah in mount Ephraim. And he buylte the city and dwelte therein.
Number, 34. d
These are the enheritaunces which Eleazar the priest and Joshua the son of Nun,
and the ancient Fathers of the trybes of the children of Israel divided by
lotte in Siloh before the Lord / in the door of the tabernacle of witness,
and so they made an end of deuidyng the country.

The Cities of refuge, or Sanctuaryes.

CAPI. XX.
THe Lord also spoke unto Joshua, saying: Nume. ^5 a Deuteronomy. (...). ^
Appoynte out from among you cytyes of refuge, whereof I spoke unto you by the
hand of Moses, that the sleyer that kylleth any person unawares, and
vnwittyngly, may flee thither. And those cities shall be your refuge from the
auenger of blood

And he that does flee unto one of those cities, shall stand at the entering
of the gate of the city / and shall show his cause in the ears of the elders
of the city. And they shall take him into the city unto them, and give him a
place, that he may dwell among them.

And if the auenger of blood follow after Nume. 35 ^
and until the death of the hye priest that shall be in those days: for then
shall the sleyer return, and come unto his own City / and unto his own
house, and unto the city from whence he fled.

And they sanctified Kedes in Galile / in mount Nephthali, and Sichem in mount

These were the Cities appointed for all the children of Israel, and for the
stranger that sosourned among them, that whosoever killed any person
ygdorauntly, the same myghteflee thither, and should not dye by the hand of
the auenger of blood, until he stood before the congregation ( to declare his
cause.) (...)

the altar of the Lord our God. Joshua. 7 a.
Did not Acan the son of Zareh trespass in the excommunicate thing, and wrath
fell on all the co^gregacyon of Israel, so that he alone perysshed not for his
wickedness?

Then the children of Ruben, and the chylde^ and judge.) And if we have not
rather done it of a carefulnes, and of a sure occasyon, saying: In time to
come your children might say unto ours: what have ye to do with the Lord God
of Israel? the Lord has made Jordan a border between us and you (ye children
of Ruben and of God) ye have no part therefore in the lord: and so shall your
children make our children cease from fearyng the lord.

Therefore we ( took better aduisement,) said: We will make us an altar, not
for burntofferynge, nor for sacrifyce, but for a Gene. 31. g. Joshua. 24, f
witness between us and you, and our generacyons after us, that we should
serve the lord, with our offerynges, sacrifices, and peace offerynges before
him: and that your children should not say to ours in time to come: Ye have no
part in the lord. Therefore said we, that if they should so say to us or to
our generacyons in time to come, that we would say again: Behold, the facion
of the altar of the lord, which our Fathers made, neither for
burntoffrynges, nor sacrifices, but for a witness between us and you. God
forbid, that we should rebel against the Lord, and turn this day from after
him, and build any other altar for burntofferynges, oblacions, or sacrifices,
save the altar of the lord our God, that is before his tabernacle.

And when Phinehes the Priest, and the

Iusua. exhorts the people, that they join not them selves to the gentyles.

CAPI. XXIII.
ANd it came to pass a long ceason after And there remain yet many nacyons.)
And the Lord your God shall expel them before you, and cast them from out of
your sight, and ye shall conquer their land, as the Lord your GOD has said
unto you.

Go to therefore Deute. (...) B
as strongly as ye may, that ye take heed and do all that is written Deuteronomy.
(...) ^ and. (...) ^ Prouer. ^
that ye bow not a side therfrom, to the right hand or to the left, and lest
that when ye come among these nations, (even among these that are left with
you) ye make mention or swear by the names of their Gods: and that ye
neither serve them, nor bow your selves unto them. But that ye stycke fast
unto the lord your God, as ye have done unto this day.

So shall the Lord cast out before you Deuteronomy. 3^ ^
One man of you shall chase a thousand: for the lord your god he fyghteth for
you, as he has promised you. Take good head therefore unto your souls, that ye
love the Lord your god. Else, if ye go back, and cleue unto the rest of these
nacyons that remain with you, and shall make maryages with them, and go in
unto them, and they to you, be ye sure, that the lord your god will no more
cast out all these nations from before you. Number. 33. g
But they shall be snares and trappes unto you, and scourges in your sides, and
pryckes in your eyes, until ye perysshe from of this good land, which the
Lord your God has given you.

And behold, this day, do I enter in to the Joshua. 21. d
nothing has failed of all the good things which the Lord your God
promised you: But all are come to pass, and nothing has failed thereof.
Therefore as all good things are come upon you, which the Lord your god
promised you, so shall the Lord bring upon you all evil, until he have
destroyed you from of this good land, which the Lord your GOD has given
you, when ye have transgressed the appointment of the Lord your God, which he
commanded you: and have gone and served strange gods / and bowed your
selves to them. Then shall the wrath of the Lord ware hoote upon you, and ye
shall perysshe quyclye from of the good land, which he has given you.

Joshua exhorts the people to the keeping of the law, He dies. The bones of
Joseph are buried. Eleazar dies.

CAPI. XXIIII.
ANd Joshua gathered all the Trybes of Gene. xi. d
Your Fathers dwelte on the other side of the floode in old time: even Thareh
the father of Abraham and of Nachor, and served strange gods. And I took
your father Abraham from the other side of the flood, and brought him thorowout
all the land of Canaan, and multiplied his seed, and Gene. xxi. a Math. i a
gave him Isaac. And I gave unto Isaac, Jacob and Esau. Gene. 31. a.
And I gave unto Esau mount Seir, to possess it. But Jacob and his children
went down into Egypt. I sent Moses also and Aaron. And I Exodi. vii. viii. ix.
x. and. xiiii.
plaged Egypt: and when I had so done among them, I brought you out, and I
brought your Fathers out of Egypt.

And as they came unto the sea, the Egyptians Exodi. 14. ^
And when they cried unto the lord, the lord put darkness between you and
the Egyptians, and brought the sea upon them, and covered them. And your eyes
have seen what I have done to the Egiptians. And ye dwelt in the wilderness a
long ceason. And Number. 21. d
I brought you into the land of the Amorytes, which dwelt on the other side
Iordane. And they fought with you: and I gave them into your hand, that ye
might conquer their country. And I destroyed them from out of your sight.

Nume. 22 a Deuteronomy. 23. a.
Then Balac the Son of Ziphor, king of Moab arose, and warred against Israel,
and sent and called Balaam the son of Beor, for to curse you. But I would not
harken unto Balaam, and therefore he rather blessed you: And so I delivered you
out of his hand. And ye went over Jordan, and came unto Ierico, and the men of
Ierico fought against you: the Amorites, Pheresites, Canaanites, Hethites,
Girgosites, Heuites, and Iebusites, and I delivered them into your hand.

And I sent Deuteronomy. vii. ^
hornettes before you, which cast them out of your sight: even the two kings
of the Amorytes, but not with your own sword, or with your own bow. And I
have gyudn you a land, in which ye did no labor, and cities, which you
build not, and which ye dwell in: vincyeardes also, and olyue trees which ye
planted not, and whereof ye do eat. ^ Regu^. 7. a ^ohn, 14 ^.
Now therefore fear the lord, and serve him in perfytenesse and truth: And
put away the gods, which your Fathers served on the other side of the
floode, and in Egypt, and serve ye the Lord.

And if it seem evil unto you to serve the lord, then chose you this day
whom you will serve: whyther the gods which your fathers served (that were
on the other side of the stood) either the Gods of the Amorites, in whose
land ye dwell. As for me / and my house, we will serve the Lord.

The people answered and said: God forbid,

And Joshua said unto the people: Ye can and a ielous god, and can not bear
your ininutte and syn. If ye forsake the lord, and serve strange gods,
Joshua. 23. d
he will turn and do you evil, and consume you, after that he has done you
good. And the people said unto Joshua: nay, but we will serve the lord. And
Joshua said unto the people: ye are witnesses your selves, that ye have thosen
you the Lord, to serve him: and they said: we are witnesses. Then put away
(said he) the strange gods which are among you, and bow your hertes unto
the Lord God of Israel. The people said unto Joshua: the Lord our god will
we serve, and his voice will we obey.

And so Joshua ^ Reg. 23. a
made a covenant with the people the same day, and set an ordinance and law
before them in Sichem. And Joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of
god, and ^. Regu^. 7. d
took a great stone, and pytched it on end in the said place, even under an
oak that was in the sanctuarye of the Lord. And Joshua said unto all the
people: behold, ^^^^. 31. ^. Joshua. 22 ^
this stoone shall be a witness unto us, for it has herd all the words of
the Lord which he spoke with us. It shall be therefore a witness unto you,
leest ye deny ( and dissemble with) your God. And so Joshua let the people
depart, every man unto his enheritaunce.

And after these things it came to pass / Joshua. 19 b
enheritau^ce, even in Th^nath Sareh, which is in mount Ephraim, on the north
side of the hill of Gaas.

And Israel served the Lord ii. Pa. 34. ^
all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the Elders that over lived Joshua,
and which had known all the works of the Lord that he had done for Israel.
And the Gene. ^ d Exodus xiil. d
bones of Joseph, which the children of Israel brought out of Egypt, buried
they in Sichem Gene. 33. d.
in a parcel of ground, which Jacob bought of the sons of Hemor the father
of Sichem, for an hundred pieces of silver, and it became the enheritaunce of
the Children of Joseph. And Eleazar the Son of Aaron dyed, whom they buried
in a hill that perteyned to Phinehes his son, which (hill) was given him in
mount Ephraim.

The end of the book of Joshua / whom the Hebrews call Iehosua.
The Book of Judges / called in the Hebrew Sophtim: and in the Latin Iudicum.
After Joshua was dead. Judah was constytute Lord over the Army.

CAPI. Primo.
AFter the death of Joshua Joshua. (...). ^
behold I have delivered the land in to his hands. And Judah said unto Simeon
his brother: come up with me in my lot, that we may fight against the
Cananites: And I likewise will go with the in to thy lotte. And so Simeon went
with him. And Judah went up, and the Lord delivered the Cananites, and
Pheresytes in to their hands. And they slew of them in Bezeke ten thousand
men. And they found Adonibezeke in Bezeke. And they fought against him, and
slew the Cananites and Pheresites. But Adonibezeke fled, and they followed after
him, and caught him, and cut of his thombes, and his great toos.

And Adonibezeke said: three score and ten kings having their thombes and
great toos cut of, gathered their meat under my table: (...) Iudi x^. ^
as I have done, so God has done to me again. And they brought him to
Jerusalem, and there he dyed. The Children of Judah fought against Jerusalem,
and took it Dru^^. ^^^
and smote it with the edge of the sword, and set the city on fire. Afterward
the children of Judah went to fight against the Cananytes, that dwelt in the
mountain, and toward the south, and in the low country. And Judah went
against the Cananites that dwelte in Hebron, which before time was called
Kariath Arbe. And slew Sesai, Ahiman and Thalmai. And from thence they went to
the inhabyters of Dabir, whose name in old time was called kariathsepher (
that is a city of letters.)

And Caleb said Iosu(...)
he that smyteth Kariathsepher, lyghted of her Ass, and Caleb said unto her:
What ayleth the? She answered unto him: give me a blessyng: for thou have given
me a Southwarde (or dry) land, give me also sprynges of water. And Caleb gave
her sprynges both above and benethe. And the Children of the Kenite, Moses
father in law went up Joshua. 4. a Deuteronomy. 34. a
out of the city of palm trees with the Children of Judah in to the
wilderness of Judah, that lies in the south of Arad and they went and dwelt
among the people.

And Judah went with Simeon his brother, Nume. 2^ a
and called the name of the city Horma.

And at the last Judah took Azah with the coostes thereof, and Askalon with the
coostes thereof, and Akaron with the coostes thereof. And the Lord was with
Judah, and he conquered the mountains, but could not drive out the enhabyters
of the valeyes / because they had charettes of iron. And they gave Joshua. 14 b
Hebrou unto Caleb, as Moses said. And he expelled*thence the three sons of
Nume. 13. ^
Enach

Joshua. xv g
And the Children of Ben Iamin did not cast out the Iebusites, that enhabyted
Iosu. xvi a
And in like manner they that were of the house of Joseph went up to Bethell,
and the Lord was with them, and the house of Joseph scarched out Bethell,
which before time was called Lus. And the spies saw a man come out of the
City, and they said unto him: show us the way into the city, Joshua. ii. ^.
and we will show the merry. And when he had showed them the way into the
city, they smote it with the edge of the sword / but let the man and all his
household go fr^e. And the man went in to the land of the Hethites, and build
a city, and called the name thereof Lus, which is the name thereof unto this
days.

Joshua. 17. c
Neither did Manasses expel Bethsea^ with her towns, Thaanach with her towns /
the enhabitours of Dor / with her towns / the enhabitours of Ieblaa^ with her
towns, neither the enhabytours of Magedo with her towns, but the Cananites
were bold to dwell in the land. But it came to pass, that as soon as Israel
was waxed mighty, they put the Cananytes to trybute, and expelled them not.
Joshua. 16 d
In like manner Ephraim expelled not the Cananytes that dwelte in Gazer, but the
Cananites dwelte still in Gazer among them. Neither did Zabulon expel the
enhabytours of Ketron, neither the enhabytours of Nahaloll: But the Cananytes
dwelte among them, and became tributaryes.

Neither did Aser cast out the enhabytours of Acho, neither the enhabytours of

And the Amorites troubled the Children of Dan in the mountain, and suffered
them not to come down to the valeye. And the Amorites were content to dwell in
mount Here Is ( which is by interpretacyon, a vvitnesynge,) in Hailon and in
Salabim. And the hand of Joseph prevailed, so that they became trybutaryes.
And the coost of the Amorytes was from the going up to Acrahim, and from the
rock upward.

The angel rebukes the people, because they had ma^^ peace with the
Lana^ites. I dointrers are pu^^sshed.

CAPI. II.
ANd the Angel of the Lord came (...). vii. ^ and. (...). ^
And I said: I will not break mine appointment that I made with you. And ye
also shall make no covenant with the enhabytours of this land, but shall break
down^ their aulters: Never thesse ye have not herkened unto my voice / why have
ye this done? Wherefore I have likewise determined, that I will not cast them
out before you: but they shall be thorns unto you, and their Gods shall be a
snare unto you. And when the angel of the Lord spoke these words unto all
the Children of Israel, the people cried out and wept.

And called the name of the said place A place of such as weep.
Bochim, and offered Sacrifyces unto the Lord. And when Joshua had sent the
people away, the children of Israel went every man into his enherytaunce, to
possess the land. Joshua. 24 ^
And the people served the Lord all the days of Joshua, and all the days of
the elders that out lived Joshua, and had seen all the great works of the lord
that he did for Israel. And Joshua the Son of Nun the servant of the Lord
Joshua. ^4 ^
dyed, when he was an hundred and ten years old: whom they buried in the
coostes of his enherytaunce: even in Thamnath Hares in mount Ephraim, on the
northsyde of the hill Gaas. And even so all that generacyon were put unto their
fathers, and there arose another generacyon after them which neither knew the
Lord, nor yet the works which he had done for Israel. And then the Children
of Israel Iudi. iiii. a.
did wyckedlye in the sight of the Lord, and served Baalim, and forsook the
Lord god of their fathers, which brought them out of the land of Egypt, and
followed strange gods: even the gods of the nacyons that were round about
them, and bowed themselves unto them, and angered the Lord.

They forsook the Lord, and served

And when the lord raised them up Judges, Exodi. ii. d.
for the Lord had compassyon over their sorowynges, which they had, by the
reason of them that oppressed them and vexed them: yet for all that Iudi. iii. b
as soon as the Judge was dead, they turned and did worsse then their
Fathers, in following strange Gods, and in serving them, and ceased not
from their own inuencyons, nor from their malicyous way.

And the wrath of the Lord was moved against Israel, and he said: because
this people has transgressed mine appointment which I commanded their
fathers, and have not herkened unto my voice, I will hence forth not cast out
before them one man of the nacyons, which Joshua left when he dyed / that
through them I may Deute. 13. a
prove Israel, whyther they will keep the way of the lord, and walk therein,
as their fathers did, or not. And so the Lord left those nacyons, and drove
them not out immedyatly, neither delivered them into the hand of Joshua.

Othonyell delyuereth Israel. Ahud kylleth king Eglon. Samgar kylleth the
Phelystines.

CAPI. III.
THese are the nacyons which the Lord

And the Children of Israel dwelte among the Cananites, Hethites, Amorites /
Pheresytes, Heuites, and Iebusytes, Deuteronomy. (...). ^
and took the daughters of them to be their wives, and gave their own
daughters to their sons, and served their Gods. And the children of Israel
did wyckedlye in the sight of

And when the Children of Israel cried unto the Lord, the Lord styrred up a
savior, to the Children of Israel, and saved them: one Othoniell the Son of
Kenes, Calebs younger brother. And the spirit of the Lord came upon him. And
he judged Israel, and went out to war. And the Lord delivered Chusan
Risathaim king of Mesopotamia into his hand, and his hand prevailed against
Chusan Risathaim. And the land had ii. Pe. xvi
rest fourtye years. And Othoniel the son of Kenes dyed. And the Children of
Israel went to again, and committed wickedness in the sight of the lord.
And the Lord strengthed Eglon the king of the Moabites, against the Children
of Israel, because they had committed wickedness before the Lord. And this
(Eglon) gathered unto him the children of Ammon, and the Amalekites, and went
and smote Israel, and conquered the city of Palm trees. And so the Children
of Israel served Eglo^ the king of Moab. xviii. years. But when they cried unto
the lord, the lord styrred them up a savior, Ahud the son of Gera the son of
Iemini, a man that could do nothing handsomely with his right hand.

And by him the children of Israel sent a

And Ahud came unto him, and in a somer parler, which he had, sat he himself
alone, and Ahud said, 2. Reg. 3. e.
I have a message unto the from God. And he arose out of his seat. And Ahud
put forth his left hand, and took the dagger from his right thyghe, and
thrust it into his belly, and the hafte went in after the blade. And the fat,
closed the hafte, so that he might not draw the dagger out of his belly but the
dyrte came out. Ahud gat him out at a postren door, and shut the doors of the
parler about him, and locked them.

When he was gone out, his servants

And when he was come Num^. x a.
he blewe a trompet in mount Ephraim. And the children of Israel went down
with him from the hill and he went before them. And he said unto them, follow
me: for the Lord has delivered your enemies, the Moabites into your hand.
And they descended after him, and took the passages of Jordan, toward Moab,
and suffered not a man to pass over. And they slew of the Moabites the same
time upon a ten thousand men, which were all fat and men of war: and there
escaped not a man, Deute. ii. b.
and so Moab was subdued that day, under the hand of Israel: and the land had
rest. lxxx. years.

After him was Samgar the son of Anath which slew of the Philistines. vi.
hundred men with an ox goade, and delivered Israel also.

Debora and Barah deliver Israel. Sisara is killed of Ia^^

CAPI. IIII.
ANd the children of Israel began again

And Debora a prophetess, the wife of Lapidoth judged Israel the same time,
and the same Debora dwelte under a palm tree, between Ramath and Bethel, in
mount Ephraim. And the children of Israel came up to her for judgment. And she
sent and called Barak the ^^dis^ ^ ^
son of Abinoam out of Kedes / Nephthalim, and said unto him.

Has not the Lord god of Israel commanded the, to draw to mount Thabor, and
take with the ten thousand men, of the children of Nephthalim, and of the
children of Zabulon? And I will bring unto the / to the Psalm. (...). ^*
river Kison, Sisara, the captain of war unto Iabin,

But Haber the Kenite (which was of the children of Nume. ^. ^.
Hobab, the father in law of Moses) removed from the other Kenites, and
pytched his tente until the plain of Zaania^, which is by Kedes.

And they showed Sisara, that Barak the son of Abinoam was gone up to mount
Thabor. And Sisara gathered together all his charettes. even. ix. hundred
charettes of iron, and all the people that were with him, from Haroseth of the
gentyles, unto the river of Kyson. And Debora said unto Barak: Up, for this is
the day in which the Lord has delivered Sisara into thine hand.

Is not the Lord gone out before the? And

But the Lord destroyed Sisara, and all his charettes, and all his host with
the edge of the sword, before Barak: so that Sisara lyghted down of his
charet, and fled away on his feet. But barak followed after the charettes, and
after the host, even unto Haroseth of the gentyles. And all the host of
Sisara fell upon the edge of the sword, and there was not a man left. Howbeit
Sisara fled away on his feet to the tente of Iael the wife of Haber the
Kenite: for there was peace between Iabin the king of Hazor, and the household
of Haber the kenite.

And Iael went out to mete Sisara, and said unto him: turn in my Lord, turn
in to me* fear not. And when he had turned in unto her into her tent, she
covered him with a mantell. And he said unto her: give me a little water to
drink, for I am thyrstye. Iudi. v. d.
a bottell of milk, and gave him drink, and covered him. And again he said
unto her: stand in the door of the tent and when any man does come and
inquire of the, whyther there be any man here: thou shalt say, nay.

Then Iael Habers wife took a nail of the tente, and an hammer in her hand,
and went softly unto him, and smote the nail into the temples of his head,
and fastened it into the ground, for he slombred sore, and was weary: And so he
dyed. And behold, as Barak followed after Sisara, Iael came out to mete him, and
said unto him: come, and I will show the, the man, whom thou sekest. And when
he came into her tent: Behold Sisara lay dead, and the nail was in his
temples. And so god brought Iaben the king of Canaan into subieccyon that
day, before the children of Israel And the hand of the children of Israel
prospered, and prevailed against Iaben the king of Canaan* until they had
brought him to naught.

The song and thanks gyuynge of Debora, and Barak after the vyctory^*

CAPI. V.
THen Debora and Barak the son of Abinoam

Hear O ye kings, harken O ye princes I, even I, will sing unto the Lord, I
will praise the Lord God of Israel.

Lord Deuteronomy. iiii. b
when thou wentest out of Seir, when you departedst out of the field of Edom,
the earth trembled, and the heuens rayned: the clouds also dropped water.

Psalm. 97. ^
The mountains melted before the lord even as did Sinay, before the Lord God
of Israel. In the days of Iudi. iii d
Samgar the son of Anath, in the days of Iudi. (...). ^
Iael the high ways were unoccupied: And the runners of the paths walked
through bywayes.

The enhabiters of the towns were gone they were gone in Israel, until I
Debora came up, which came up a mother in Israel. They chose new gods, and
then had they (the enemy) in the gates: There was not a shylde or spear seen
among. xl. M. of Israel.

My heart loves the governors of Israel

Speak ye that ride on fair asses, and that sit uppermost in judgment, and
walk by the ways.

At the cryenge of the archers, among the drawers of water, there shall they
speak of the ryghtousnes of the lord: his rightousnes in the unfenced places
of Israel: the^ shall the people of the lord go down to the gates.

Up Debora up, got the up, and sing a song: Iudi. (...)
Arise Barak, and lead the captivity captyue, thou son of Abinoam.

Then shall they that remain, have dominion of the proudest of the people (of
Iabin.) The lord shall for my sake have dominion over the myghtie. Out of
Iudi* (...)
Ephraim was there a rote of them against Amalecke, and after the, Ben iamin
among thy people* Out of Machir came rulers, and out of Zabulon they that
govern the pen of the writer.

And of Isachar, there were princes with Debora, Isachar also and Barak were
sent on their f^te into the valey, when in departing away of Ruben there were
great men, and wise of heart.

Why abodest thou among the sheep foldes,

Gilead also abode beyond Iordane: and why does Dan remain in ships.

Aser continued on the sea shore, and tarried in his decayed places.

But the people of Zabulon have ieoperde their lives even unto the death, like
as did Nephthali in the high places of the field.

The kings came and fought, then fought the kings of Canaan in Thamah, by the
waters of Megiddo, and wan no money.

They fought from heaven, even the sterres in their courses fought against
Sisara.

The river of Cyson removed them, that ancient river, the river Cyson: My
soul shall tread (him) down myghtely.

Then were the horse hoofes smytten asunder, by means of the praunsinges that
their mighty men made.

Curse ye the city of Meros (said the angel

Iael the wife of Haber the Kenyte shall be blessed above other women, blessed
shall she be above other women in the tent.

Iudi. iiii. c.
He asked water, and she gave him milk: she brought forth butter in a lordly
dysshe.

Iudi. iiii. d.
She put her hand to the nail, and her right hand to the smythes hammer: with
the hammer smote she Sisera, and smote his head, wounded him, and pearsed his
temples.

He bowed him down at her feet, he fell down and lay still: At her feet he
bowed him down, and fell. And when he had sonke down he lay still desolate.

The mother of Sisera looked out at a wyndowe, and cried through the lattesse.
Why is his charet so long a coming? Why carry the wheles of the carts?

All the wise ladies answered her, yea and her own words answered her self.

Surely they have found, they deuyde the spoils: Every man has a damsel or
two: Sisera has a pray of diverse colored garments, even a pray of raiment
dyed with sundry colors, and that are made of nedle work, raiment of diverse
colors and of nedle work which is mete for him that is cheyfe in
distributyng of the spoils. So peryshe all thy^e enemies, O lord: but they
that love him, let them be as the Son when he ryseth in his might. And the
land had rest fourtye years.

Israel is oppressed of the Madianites: Gedeon is sent of God to be their
delpue^^r.

CAPI VI.
ANd the children of Israel Joshua. 4. ^
committed

And I said unto you: I am the lord your god, ^. Re. ^7. ^. Iere. ^. ^.
fear not the gods of the Amorites in whose land you dwell. But you have
not obeyed my voice. And the angel of the lord came, and sat under an Oak /
which was in Ephrah, that perteyned unto Ioas the father of the Ezerites. And
his son Gedeon pressed out wheat of the ears in a press, to hyde it from
the Madianites.

And the angel of the Lord appeared unto

And he said: I will carry until thou come

And the angel of god said unto him: take the flesh and the sweet cakes, and
lay them upon this rock, and power out the broth.

And he did so. Then the angel of the Lord put forth the end of the staff /
that he held in his hand, and touched the flesh and the sweet cakes. And 3.
Reg. 18. f
there arose fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the sweet
cakes. But the angel of the Lord vanysshed out of his sight. And when Gedeon
perceived that it was an angel of the lord, he said Alas, O Lord God, Exodi.
33 d Iudi. xiii. d
have I therefore seen an angel of the lord face to face, that should dye? And
the Lord said unto him: peace be unto the, fear not, thou shalt not dye.

Then Gedeon made an altar there unto

And when the men of the city were up

All the Madianites therefore, and the Amalekites and they of the east, were
gathered together, Nume. x. a.
And he blewe a trompet, and called Iudi viii. ^
Abiezar to follow him, and sent messengers thorout al Manasses, and called
them, which also did follow him. And he sent messengers unto Aser, Zabulon, and
Nephthalim, and they came to mete him.

And Gedeon said unto god: if thou wylt save Israel in my hand, as thou have
said:

Behold, I will put a fleece of wolle in the thresshynge place. And if the
dew come on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all the earth beside, then
shall I be sure, that thou will save Israel by my hand, as thou saydest. And
it came so to pass. For he rose up early on the morrow, and thrust the fleece
together, and wrong the dew therout, and filled a bowl of water. And Gedeon
said again unto God: be not angrye with me, that Gene. (...) ^.
I speak once more. For I will prove once again by the fleece. Let it be dry
only upon the fleece, and dew upon all the ground.

And god did so that same night: For it was dry upon the fleece only, and
there was dew on all the ground.

Gedeon with iii. hundred men overcomes the Madianites. Oreb and zeb are
sleyne.

CAPI. VII.
THen Iudi. ^. ^.
Ierobaal (otherwise called Gedeon) Deui. (...) i. Ma^^. ^
If any man dread or be afraid let him return and get him soon from mount
Gilead. And there departed and returned of the people. xxii. thousand, and
there abode ten. M. And the lord said unto Gedeon: the people

But all the remenaunt of the people kneled down upon their knees to drink
water.

And the Lord said unto Gedeon. By

But and if thou fear to go down, then go thou, and Pharah thy lad down to
the host, and thou shalt harken what they say, and so shall thine hands be
strong, to goo down unto the host. Then went he down, and Pharah his ladde,
even hard unto the men of arms that were in the host. And the Madianytes,
the Amalekytes, and al they of the East, lay alonge in the valey, like a
multitude of Greshoppers / and their Camelles were without nombre / even as
the sand by the sea side in multitude.

And when Gedeon was come: Behold /

And he divided the three hundred men in

And so Gedeon / and the three hundren men that were with him, came unto the
side of the host in the beginning of the mydle watch and raised up the watch
men.

And they blewe with their trompettes, and i. Regu^ 14 ^ 11. Pa. xx. ^.
every man's sword upon his neighbor, thorowout all the host. And the host
sted to Bethsitah, to Zererath, and to the edge of the plain of Maholah unto
Tabath.

And the men of Israel being gathered together

Ephraim makes insurreciyon against Gedeon, but is soon^y acifyed.

CAPI. VIII.
ANd the me^ of Ephraim said unto him: and had almost done him violence) And he
said unto them: What deed have I done like unto youres: is not a clustre of
Ephraim better, then the wine heruest of Abiezer? God has delyucred in to
your hands the lords of Madian, Oreb and Zeb, And what was I able to do like
as you have done? And then their spirits abated from of him, when he had said
that. And Gedeon came to Iorda^ to pass over, he and the three hundred men that
were with him, very faint, and yet followed the chase. And he said unto the men
of Socoth: give I pray you

Gedeon said, therefore when the lord has delivered Zebah, and Zalmona in to
mine hand, I will tear the flesh of you with the thorns of the wilderness,
and with breers. And he went up thence to Phanuel, and spoke unto them
likewise. And the me^ of Phanuel answereed him, as did the men of Socoth. And
he said also unto the men of Phanuel: when I come again in peace, I will break
down this tower.

Zebah and Zalmona were in Carkar, and

And Gedeon the son of Ioas returned 3. Reg. 12. f.
Phanuel, and slew the men of the city.

And then said he unto Zebah and Zalmona

And Gedeon said unto them. I will not reygne over you, neither shall my Child
Exo vi. 3^^
earynges of his pray. For they had golden earynges, because they were
Ismaelites. And they answered: we will give them. And they spread a mantel, and
did cast therein every man the earynges of his pray. And the weight of the
golden earynges that he required, was a thousand and seven hundred sycles of
gold, beside cheynes, pomaunders and purple raiment, that was on the kings of
Madia^ and beside the cheynes, that were about their Camels necks. And Gedeon
made an Ephod thereof, and put it in his city Ephrah. And all Israel went a
Ezech. (...) and. xx. ^
hoorynge after it, which thing became a ruin unto Gedeon, and to his house.
Thus was Madian brought low before the children of Israel, so that they lift
up their heads no more. And the country was in quietness fourtye years in
the days of Gedeon.

And Ierobaall the son of Ioas went (...)
lxx, sons of his body begotten, for he had many wives. And his concubine
that was in Sichem, bare him a son also, whose name he called Abimelech. And
Gedeon the son of Ioas dyed, in a good age, and was buried in the sepulcher
of Ioas his father, even in Ephrah, that perteyned unto the father of the
Ezrites. But it fortuned, that as soon as Gedeo^ was dead, the children of
Israel turned away, and went a hoorynge after Baalim, and made a covenant with
Baall to be their god, and the children of Israel thought not on the lord
their god, which had delivered them out of the hands of all their enemies on
every side. Neither showed they mercy on the house of Ierobaall, otherwise
called Gedeon, according to all the goodness which he had showed unto
Israel.

Abimelech is made king.

CAPI. IX.
ABimelech the son of Ierobaall went

And his mothers brethren spoke of him in the audience of the men of Sichem al
these words, and their hertes were moved to follow Abimelech. For they said:
he is our brother. And they gave him. lxx. pieces of silver out of the temple of
Baal Berith, wherewith Abimelech hired vain and light persons, which went
with him. And he went unto his fathers house at Ephrah ii. Pa. xxi. a
and slew all his brethren, the sons of Ierobaal, even. lxx. persons with
one stone. Notwithstanding yet Ioatham the youngest son of Ierobaal escaped,
for he hyd him self. And all the men of Sichem gathered together, and all the
house of Mello, and came and made Abimelech king in the plain, where the great
stone was by Sichem. And when they told it to Ioatham he went and stood in
the top of mount Garizim, and lift up his voice, and cried, and said unto them.

Harken unto me, ye men of Sychem, ^. Eid. 4. b
The trees went forth to anoint a king over them, and said unto the Olyue
tree: reygne thou over us. But the olyue tree said unto them: should I leave my
fatness, which both gods and men praise in me, and go to be promoted over
the trees? And the trees said to the Fygge tree: come thou, and be king over
us. The fygge tree answered them: should I forsake my swetnesse, and my good
fruit, and go to be promoted over the trees? Then said the trees unto the
vine: come thou and be king over us. The vine said unto them: should I leave
my wine whereby I chere both gods and me^, and go to be promoted over the
trees? Then said all the trees unto the Fyr busshe: come thou, and reygne over
us. And the Fyr busshe said unto the trees: if it be true that ye will anoynte
me king over you, the^ come, and put your trust under my shadow. If no, the
fire come out of the Fyr busshe, and waste the Cedre trees of Libanon.

Now therefore, if ye do truly and incorruptly,

But if ye have not delte truly, then I pray God a fire may come out of
Abimelech and consume the men of Sichem and the house of Mello. And that there
may come a fire from among the men of Sichem, and out of the house of Mello,
and consume Abimelech And Ioatham ran away, and fled, and went to Beer and
dwelt there, for fear of Abimelech his brother. When Abimelech had reigned
three year, God sent an hate between Abimelech and the men of Sichem. And the
citezens of Sichem rayled upon Abimelech, and wysshed, that the wyckednes done
to the lxx. sons of Ierobaal might come on him and laid the blood of them
unto Abimelech their brother which slew them and unto the other men of Sichem,
which aided him in the kyllyng of his brethren. And the citezens of Sichem set
men to lay awayte for him in the top of the mountains: which men, ( while
they tarried for his co^^^^) robbed all that came alonge the way by them. And it
was told Abimelech.

And Gaal the son of Abed came with Gene. 34. ^
Hemor the father of Sichem, for what reason is it, that we should serve him?
would God this people were under my hand, then would I take Abimelech out of
the way. And he spoke against Abimelech: make thine host greater, and go out.
And when Zebull the ruler of the city herd the words of Gaal the son of
Abed, he was wroth, and sent messengers unto Abimelech pryuely, saying.
Behold, Gaal the son of Abed and his brethren be come to Sichem, and
behold, they set the city against the. Now therefore up by night, thou and
all the people that is with the, and lay in wait in the field. And arise
earlye in the morning as soon as the Son is up, and fall upon the City.
And if he and the people that is with him, come out against the, do to him what
thy hands shall be able. And Abimelech rose up, and all the people that were
in him, by night.

And they laid awayte against Sichem and by that error art thou deceived.)
And Gaall answered again, and said: Se, there come folk down by the myddle
of the land, and another company come alonge by the plain of the charmers.
The^ said Zebul unto him: where is now thy mouth that said: What fellow is
Abimelech, that we should serve him? Is not this the people that thou have
despised?

Go out now and fight with them. And Gaal went out before the citizens of
Sichem and fought with Abimelech. And Abimelech chased him, that he fled before
him, ( and he drove him in to the City,) and many were over thrown and
wounded, even unto the entryng of the gate. And Abimelech dwelte at Arumah. And
Zebul thrust out Gaal and his brethren, that they should not dwell in Sichem, (
and suffered them not to tarry thenin.

And on the morrow, it happened, that the Where they made a bond with him,
and thereof did the place take the name, which place was exceeding strong.)

And it was told Abimelech, that all the men of the tower of Sichem were
gathered together, and Abimelech gat him to mount Zelmon, both he and all the
people that were with him, and took axes with him and cut down bownes of
trees, and took them and bare them on his shoulder, and said unto the folk
that were with him, Iudi, vii. ^.
what ye have seen me do, speed your selves, and do likewise as I have done.
And all the men that were among the people, cut down bows, and followed
Abimelech, and put them in to the hold, and set the hold a fire by them: so
that ( with smoke and fire,) all the men of the tower of sichem were sleyne,
upon a thousand men and women.

Then went Abimelech to Thebez, and be by the bulvvorkes) to the top of the
tower. And Abimelech came unto the tower, and fought against it, and went hard
unto the door of the tower, to set it on fire. And a certain woman ^i. (...)
cast a piece of a mylstone upon his head, and all to brake his brain pan.

Then Abimelech called hastily unto the young man that bare his harness, and
said unto him: ^. (...) ^. Pe^^ ^^
Draw thy sword and sley me, that men say not of me: a woman slew him. And
his lad thrust him through, and he dyed. And when the men of Israel saw that
Abimelech was dead, they departed, every man unto his own house. And thus
(...)
the wickedness of Abimelech which he did unto his father, in sleyenge his
seuentye brethren, and thereto all the wickedness of the men of Si-chem did God
bring upon their heads. And upon them came the curse of Ioatham the son of
Ierobaal.

Thola, and Iair are Judges of Israel.

CAPI. X.
AFter Abimelech there arose, to defend

And he had thyrtye sons that (...)
rode on thyrtie Ass coltes, and they had thyrtie cities which are called the
towns of Iair unto this day, and are in the land of Gilead. And Iair dyed,
and was buried in Kamon.

(...)
And the children of Israel wroughte wickedness yet again, in the syghte of
the Lord, and served Baalim and Astharoth, and the gods of Siria, the gods
of Sidon, and the gods of Moab, the gods of the children of Ammon, and the
Gods of the Philistines, and forsook the lord and served not him. And the
Lord was wroth with Israel, and sold them in to the hands of the
Philistines, and in to the hands of the children of Ammon: which from that
year forth, pylde and oppressed the children of Israel. xviii. year, all that
were on the other side Iordane: in the land of the Amorites which is in
Gilead. Moreover, the children of Ammo^ went over Iordane to fight against
Judah, Benjamin, and the house of Ephraim: so that Israel was sore combred.

And the Children of Israel cried unto Deuteronomy. 32. c. I^^e. (...). ^.
let them save you in the time of your tribulacio^

And the Children of Israel said unto

And his soul had pitye on the miserye of Israel. Then the Children of Ammon
gathered together, and pytched in Gilead. And the children of Israel gathered
them together, and pytched in Mizpa. And the Lords of Gilead said each to
other, who soever will begin the battle against the children of Ammon, the
same shall be head over all the enhabyters of Gilead.

Iephthath delivered Israel from the Ammonites.

CAPI XI.
ANd there was one Iephthah a Gileadite,

And there gathered idle ( and theuysshe) men to Iephthah and went out with
him. And it chanced in process of time, that the children of Ammon made war
against Israel. And when the Children of Ammon fought thus against Israel,
the Elders of Gilead went to fetch Iephthah out of the land of Tob ( to help
them,) and said unto him: come and be our captain, that we may fight with
the children of Ammon. Iephthah answered the elders of Gilead: Did not ye hate
me and expel me out of my fathers house? how

And Iephthah sent messengers unto the king of the Children of Ammon, saying*
what have thou to do with me, that thou art come against me, to fight in my
land? The king of the Children of Ammon answered unto the messengers of
Iephthah: Because Israel took away my land, when they came out of Egypt, even
from Arnon unto Iabo^ ^ D^^^. (...). ^
Israel took not away the land of Moa^* nor the land of the children of
Ammo^. But when Israel came out of Egypt, and walked through the wilderness,
even unto the red see, they came to Cades, Num^. (...). ^
and sent messengers unto the king of Edo^, saying: Let me (I pray the) go
through thy land. But the king of Edo^ would not agree thereto, And in like
manner they sent unto the king of Moab, but he would not consent. And so Israel
abode still in Cades. And then they went alonge through the wilderness, and
compassed the land of Edo^, and the land of Moab, and came alonge by the east
side of the land of Moab, and pytched on the other side of Arnon, and would not
come within the cooste of Moab. Nume. (...). ^
For Arnon was the vttermoost border of Moab. And then Israel Deute. ii. ^*
sent messengers unto Sehon, king of the Amorytes, and smote them / and
conquered all the land of the Amorites, the enhabyters of the said country.
And they conquered all the coostes of the Amorites, from Arnon unto Iaboke, and
from the wilderness unto Iordane. So now, seenge the Lord God of Israel
has cast out the Amorites before his people Israel, should you possess the
land? Nay, but what people, Camos thy God dryueth out, that land possess
thou. Even so whatsoever nacio^ the lord our god expels, that land ought
we to enjoy. Nume. 22 a Deuteronomy. 23. a.
And art thou better then Balack the son of Zephor king of Moab? did he
Nume. vi a
If thou shalt deliver the Children of Ammon

And thus the Children of Ammon were brought under, before the children of
Israel. When Iephthah came to Mazphah unto his house, se, his daughter came out
against him, with tymberels and daunses, which was his only Child: so that
beside her, he had neither son nor daughter. And when he saw and given the
victory) of thine enemies the Children of Ammon. And she said unto her father:
do thus much for me: let me alone ii. months, that I may go down to the
mountains, and bewail my virgynyte, I and my fellows. And he said: go, and he
sent her away two months. And so she went with her companions, and lamented
her maiden head upon the mountains. And after the end of the two months,
she turned again unto her Father, which did with her according to his vow
which he had vowed, and she had known no man. And it grew to a custom in
Israel. The dougters of Israel came year by year to lament the daughter of
Iephthah the Gileadite, four days in a year.

The battle of Iephthah against Ephraim. After the* death of Iephthah
succedeth Elon. After Elon Abdon.

CAPI. XII.
ANd the men of Ephraim gathered them (...)
Wherefore wentest thou to fight with the children of Ammon, and dydest not call
us to go with the? We will therefore burn thine house upon the, with fire. And
Iephthah said unto them: I and my people were at great strife with the
children of Ammon. And when I called you, ye delivered me not out of their
hands. And when I saw that ye delivered me not, Job. (...) Psalm. ^^^
I put my life in my hands, and went upon the children of Ammon. And the lord
delivered them in to my hands. Wherefore then are ye come upon me now to fight
with me?

Iephthah therefore gathered together all the men of Gilead, and fought with the
Ephraites which is by interpretacyon, an ear of corn.) And he said:
Sibboleth: for he could not so pronounce. And then they took him, and slew
him, at the passages of Iordane. And there were overthrown at that time of the
Ephraites, thirtye sons and thirtye daughters, whom he sent out, and took
thirtye other in, for his sons. And when Abeza^ had judged Israel seven year,
he dyed, and was buried at Bethleem. After him, Elon a Zabulonite Judged Israel
ten year, and Elon the Zabulonite dyed, and was buried in Aialon, in the
country of Zabulon. After him, Abdon the son of Hellel a Pharathonite judged
Israel. And he had fourtye sons, and thirtye neues, that rode on seventy
ass coltes. And when Abdon the son of Hellell the Pharathonite had judged
Israel Iu^^. x. d.
eight year, he dyed, and was buried in Pharthon in the land of Ephraim, in
the mount of the Amalechites.

Israel being an Idolatret, is o^pressed of the Ph^istinell. The birth of
Samson. The sacrifice of Samsons Father.

CAPI. XIII.
ANd the Children of Israel began again to commyt wickedness in the sight of
the Lord. Iudi. x. b
And the lord delivered them in to the hands of the Philistines fourtye
year. And there was a man in Zarah of the kynred of Dan, named Manoah, whose
wife was barren, and bare not. And the angel of the Lord appeared unto the
woman, and said unto her: Behold, thou art batten, and bear not: But thou
shalt conceive, and bear a son. And now beware Nume. vi a
that you drink no wine, nor strong drink, neither eat any unclean thing:
for se, thou shalt conceive and bear a son. And there may no 1. Regu^. i. b.
raser come on his head: For the lad shall be an Nume. vi a
absteyner unto God, even from his ( infancye and from his) birth. And he shall
begin to deliver Israel out of the hands of the Philistynes. Then the wife
came, and told her husband, saying: a man of God came unto me, and the
fassyon of him, was like the fassyon of an angel of god, excedyng fearful. But
I asked him not whense he was neither told he me his name, but said unto me:
^^^. 16. ^. ^uke. i. ^.
behold, thou shalt be with child and beat a son, and now drink no wine
nor infancye, and from his) birth, to the day of his death. The^ Manoah made
intercession to the lord, and said: I pray the my lord, let the man of god
which thou sendest, come once more unto us, and teach us what we shall do
unto the lad, when he is borne. And god herd the voice of Manoah, and the
angel of god came again unto the wife as she sat in the feld: But Manoah her
husdand was not with her. And the wife made have, and ran, and showed her
husband, and said unto him, Behold, the man appeared unto me, that came unto
me to day. And Manoah arose, and went after his wife, and came to the man, and
said unto him: art thou the man that spakest unto my wife? And he said: I
am. Manoah said: now when thy saying Cobi. xii. ^
we have made redye a kyd, and have set it before the. And the Angel of the
Lord said unto Manoah: though you make me abide. Gene. 18. ^ Cobi. xii. b.
I will not eat of thy bread. And if you will offer a burntofferynge, thou
must offer it unto the Lord. For Manoah wist not, that it was an angel of the
Lord. And Manoah said again unto the angel of the Lord: what is thy name,
that when thy saying is come to pass, we may do the some worship? And the
Angel of the Lord said unto him: Gene. (...). ^
why ask thou after my name, which is Secret. And so Manoah took a kyd with
a meat offering, and offered it upon a rock unto the Lord. And the Exodi.
3^. d Iudi. (...). ^
we shall surely dye, because we have seen god. But his wife said unto him: If
the lord would kill us, he would not have received a burnt offering, and a
meat offering of our hands, neither would he have showed us all these
things, nor would now have told us any such. And the wife bare a son, and
called his name Samsom. And the lad grew, and the lord blessed him. And the
spirit of the Lord began to move him in the hooste of Dan, between Zaraah and
Esthaoll.

The marriage of Samsom. He hylleth a Lion. He propounds a ryddle. ^e hylleth.
(...). ^en. His wife forsakes him, and takes another.

CAPI. XIIII.
SAmson went down to Thamnath, and told his father, and his mother, and
said: I have seen a woman in Thamnath of the daughters of the Philistines. And
now give her me to wife. Then his father and mother said unto him, Deuteronomy. vii. a
Is there never a woman among the daughters of thy brethren, and among all my
people, but that thou must go, and take a wife of the uncircumcised
Philistines? And Samson said unto his father: give me this woman, for she
pleases me well. But his Father and mother wist not that it was the Lords
doing, and that he sought an occasyon against the Philistines, for at that
time the Philistines reigned over Israel. Then went Samson, and his father,
and vvod) Lion roored upon him. And the spirit of the lord came upon him. And
he tare him, as he would have rent a kyd, and yet had nothing in his hand,
neither told his father and mother what he had done. And he went down, and
talked with the woman* which seemed well favored in the sight of Samson. And
within a short space after, as he went thither again to take her to wife, he
turned out of the way, to se the carkas of the Lion. And behold, there was a
swarm of bees, and honey in the carkas of the Lion. And he took of the honye in
his hands, and went eating, and came to his father and mother, and gave them
also. And they did eat. But he told not them that he had taken the honye out
of the carkas of the Lion.

And so his father came unto the woman, the cy^esens of that place) saw him,
they brought xxx. companions to be with him. And Samson said unto them: I will
now put forth a ryddle unto you, and if ye can declare it me within seven days
of the feast, and find it out, I will give you thirtye shertes, and xxx.
chaung of garments: But and if ye can not declare it me, then shall ye give me
thyrtye shertes and thyrtye change of garments. And they answered him: put
forth the ryddle, that we may hear it. And he said unto them: Out of the eater
came meat, and out of the strong came swetnesse. And they could not in three
days expound the ryddle. And when the seventh day was come, they said unto
Samsons wife: flater thine husband ( and persuade him) that he may declare us
the ryddle, lest we burn the and thy fathers house with fire* Have ye called
us hither, to make us beggars? And Samsons wife wept before him, ( complained)
and said: Surely thou hate me and love me not: for thou have put forth a
ryddle unto the Children of my folk, and have not told it me. And he said
unto her: Behold, I have not told it my father, and my mother, and shall I
tell it the?

And Samsons wife wept before him seven days, while the feast lasted. And
the seventh day he told her, because she lay so sore upon him. And she told
it the children of her folk. And the men of the ritye said unto him the
seventh day, before the son went down. What is swetter then honye, and what
is stronger then a Lion? Then said he unto them: If ye had not plowed with my
calfe, ye had not found out my ryddle. And he went down to Askalon, and slew
thyrtye men of them, and spoiled them, and gave change of garments unto them
which expounded the ryddle. And he was wroth, and went up to his fathers
house. But Sa^sons wife was given to one of his companyons, that he had taken
unto him.

Samson ty^th fyrebrandes to Fore tails. With the ^awe bone of an Ass he
hylleth a thousand men. Out of a great to the in the Iaw God gives him water.

CAPI XV.
BUt it chanced within a while after, even

And Samson went out, and caught three hundred foxes, and took fyrebrandes and
fastened tail to tail, and put a fyrebrand in the mids between two tails.
And when he had set the brandes on fire, he sent them out ( that they might run
abroad, which went immediately) in to the standing corn of the Philistines,
and burnt up both the reaped corn and also the standing, with the
vineyeardes be aduenged of you, and then I will crase. And he smote them leg
and thygh with a mighty plage. And then he went and dwelte in the cave of the
rock Etam.

Then the Philistines came up, and pytched in Judah, and lay in ( a place, that
was afterward called) Lehi ( that is a Iavve bone, where their host was
scatered abroad.) And the men of Judah said, why are ye come up unto us? They
answered to bind Samson ^^^^^^. 24. ^ Iudi. i. b
as they did unto me, so I have done unto them. And they said unto him again:
we are come down to bind the, and to deliver the in to the hand of the
Philistines. And Samson said unto them: swear unto me ( and promise me,) that
ye shall not fall upon me your selves. They answered him, saying: No, but we
will bind the and deliver the unto their hands: But we will dot kill the. And
they bound him with two new cords, and brought him from the rock. And when
he came to Lehi, the Philistines showted against him. And the spirit of the
Lord came upon him, and the cords that were upon his arms became as flax
that was burnt with fire, for the bands lowsed from of his hands. And he
found a rotten Iawbone of an Ass, and put forth his hand, and caught it, and
slew a thousand men therewith.

And Samson said: with the Iawe of an

( That is by interpretacyon the lyftynge up of the iavve bone.) And he was
sore a thyrst, and called on the Lord and said: Thou have given this great
victory, in the hand of thy servant. And now I must dye for thyrst, and
fall into the hands of the vncircumsised. But God brake a great to the that
was in the Iawe, and there came water therout. And when he had drunk / his
spirit came again, and he was refresshed: wherefore the name thereof was
called, unto this day, the well of the caller on, which came of the Iawe. And
he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines, twentye years.

Samson lyfteth up the gates of ^a; ^. He was deceived by Dalila. He pulls
down the house upon the Phylystynes, and dies with them.

CAPI. XVI.
THen went Samson to Otherwise called Ga^a.
Azath, and saw

And Dalila said to Samsom: Oh, tell me where thy great strength lies, and
how thou myghtest be bound, and brought under. Samson answeeed unto her: If
they bind me with seven grene withes that were never dried, I shall be weak
as other men,

And then the Lords of the Philistines brought her seue wythes that were yet
grene and never dried, and she bound him therewith* Notwithstanding she had
men lyenge in wait with her in the chamber. And she said unto him, the
Philistines be upon the Samson. And immediately he brake the cords as a
string of towe, ( that is tvvyned) breaks, when it feleth fire. And so his
strength was not known.

And Dalila said unto Samson: Se, thou have mocked me and told me lies. Now
therefore tell me, wherewith thou myghtest be bound. He answered her: if they
bind me with new ropes that were never occupied / I shall be weak, and as
another man. Dalila therefore took new ropes, and bound him therewith, and
said unto him: the Philistines be upon the Samson. And there were liars of
wait in the chamber, and he brake them from of his arms, as they had been but
a threde. And Dalila said unto Samsom: ^^therto thou have begyled me, and
told me lies: yet tell me how y^ myghtest be bound. He said unto her: If
thou plattedst the. vii* locks of my head with an here lace.

And she fastened them with a nail, and said unto him: the Philistines be
upon the Samson. And he awaked out of his sleep, and plucked away the nail,
that was in the plattynge with the here lace.

And she said unto him again: How Nume. vi a Iudi. xiii. a
there never came raser upon mine head, for I have been an absteyner ( that is
to say, consecrate) unto God, even from my mothers womb: therefore when I am
shaven, my strength will go from me, and I shall wax weak, and be like all
other men. And when Dalila saw that he had told her all his heart, she sent,
and called for the Lords of the Philistines, saying: come up yet this once,
for he has showed me all his heart. Then the Lords of the Philistines came up
unto her, and brought the money in their hands. And she made him sleep upon
her knees ( and to lay his head down in her lap,) and she sent for a man,
and he did shave of the seven locks of his head, and began to vex him, and
his strength was gone from him. And she said: the Philistines be upon the
Samson.

And he awoke out of his sleep, and said: Or ^aza
Azath, and bound him with two fetters of brass. And he did grynde in the
prison house, howbeit the here of his head began to grow again after that
he was shaven. Then the Lords of the Philistines gathered them together, for
to offer a solemn offering unto Dagon their god, and to rejoice: for they
said, our God has deleuered Samson our enemy in to our hands. And when
the people saw him, they praised their God: for they said: our God has
delivered into our hands, our enemy, and distroyer of our country, which
slew many of us. And when their hertes were merye, it fortuned, that they
said: send for Sa^son, that he may make us laugh.

And they fet Samson out of the prysonhouse,

And Samson called unto the Lord, and

Of Micah / whose mother made him an ydoll of silver.

CAPI. XVII.
THere was a man in mount Ephraim,

Now therefore I will give it the again. And when he restored the money again
unto that is to say, a garment for the priest and Ydols) and filled the hand
of one of his sons which became his priest. I^di. (...) ^ and. (...)* ^
In those days there was no King of Israel, but every man did that, which
was good in his own eyes. And there was a young man out of Bethleem Judah, of
the kynred of Judah: which young man was a Leuite, and soiourned there. And the
man departed out of the city of Bethleem Judah, to go dwell where he could
find a conuenyent place. And he came to mount Ephraim, to the house of Micah
as he iourneyed. And Micah said and where I may spy it to be for my profyt.)
And Micah said again unto him: dwell with me, and be unto me a father and a
priest. And I will give the ten syluerlynges by year, two garments, and thy
meat and drink.

And the Leuite was content to dwell with the man, and was unto him as one of
his own sons. And Micah consecrated the hand of the Leuyte, and the young
man became his priest, and was in the house of Micah. Then said Micah: now I
am sure that the Lord will be good unto me, seeing I have a Leuyte to my
Priest.

The children of Dan take the gods and the priest of Micah away. They destroy
Lais, and after build it again.

CAPI. XVIII.
IN those days Iudi. 17. b.
there was no king in Ios^a 19 b
for unto that time there fell none enherytaunce unto them among the trybe of
Israel. And the Children of Dan sent of their kynred five actyue men in feats
of war out of their coostes, even out of Zarah, and Esthaoll, to vewe the
land and search out the land. Which when they came to mount Ephraim, even
to the house of Micah, they lodged there. And when they were in the house of
Micah, they knew the voice of the young man the Leuyte: and when they turned
in thither, they said unto him: Who brought the hither? what make thou in
this place? and what have thou here? And he answered them: thus and thus
deals Micah with me, and has hired me, and I am become his priest.

And they said unto him again: ask

And they came unto their brethren, to Zarah and Esthaoll. And their brethren
said unto them: what have ye done?

And they answered: Arise, that we may Number. 13. ^
for we have seen the land: surely a very good one. And do ye sit still? be
not slothful to depart. But come to conquer the land ( it shall be no
labor.)

If ye will go, ye shall come unto a people that casts no peryls, and it is a
very large country: which god has given in to your hands. It is also a
place, which does lack nothing that is in the world. And there departed
thence of the kynred of the Dannites / even out of Zarah, and Esthaoll, sire
hundred men appointed with instruments of war. And they went up, and pytched
in Kariath Iarim which is in Judah.

Wherefore they called the place the hooste

Now therefore consydre what ye have to do. And they turned thither ward and
came to the house of the young man the Leuyte, even unto the house of Micah,
and saluted him peasably. And the six hundred men g^rden with wepons o^ war,
which were of the Children of Dan, stood by the entering of the gate. And the
five men that went to spy out the land, went in thither and took the carved
Image, and the Ephod, Theraphim, and the Image of metal.

And the priest stood in the enteryng of the an outcrye, and followed after the
children of

And they took the things which Micah ^^sus 19. ^
and called it Dan, after the name of Dan their father / which was borne unto
Israel. Howbeit, in very deed the name of the City was Lays at the beginning.
And the children of Dan set them up the graven Image. And Jonathan the Son of
Gerson, the Son of Manasses and his sons were the priests in the trybe of
Dan I^di. 1^. s.
until they were carried away out of the land captyue. And they set them up
the carved Image which Micah made* all the while that the house of God was in
Silo.

Of the Leuyte, whose wife was vyllanously^ hylled in Gibea.

CAPI. XIX.
IT chanced in those days, when there

And the damsels father said unto his Gene. (...)* ^
of bread, and then go your way. And they sat down, and did eat and drink
both of them together. And the damsels father said unto the man: Be content I
pray the* and tarry all night* and let thine heart be merye. And when the man
stood up to depart, his father in law compelled him to turn again: and to
tarry all night there. And he arose up early the fyfth day to depart, and the
damsels Father said, conforte thine heart: and they tarried until after
mydday. And they did eat both of them together. And when the man arose to
depart with the concubyne and his lad, his father in law the damsels father
said unto him: behold, the day gothe fast away and draws toward even,
tarry all night: at the least way tarry this day here, that thine heart may be
me^ye.

And to morrow get you earlye upon your

And they went forward upon their way and the son went down upon them, when
they were fast by Gibea which belongs to them of Ben Iamin. And they turned
thither ward to go in, and lodge all night in Gibea. And when he came, he sat
him down in a street of the city, for there was no man that took them to
lodging. And behold, there came an old man from his work, out of the field
at even, which was also of mou^te Ephraim, and dwelte as a stranger in Gibea:
But the men of the place were the Children of Iemini. And when he had lift up
his eyes, he saw a wayfarynge man in the street of the city. And the old man
said: whyther go thou?

And whence co^mest thou? He answered him: we come from Bethleem Judah, toward
the side of mount Ephraim: from thence am I, and I went to Bethleem Judah, and
go now to the house of the Lord.

And there is no man that receives me to

And Gene. 19. b.
the man of the house, the old man

And then came the woman in the dawnyng of the day, and fell down at the door
of the

And he ( thinking her to have been a sleep,) said unto her: Up / and let us
be going. But she answered not. Then the man ( perceiving that she was
dead,) took her up upon an Ass, and stood up, and gat him unto his own home.
And when he was come unto his house, he took a knyfe, and caught his concubine,
and divided her with the bones into twelve pieces, and sent her in to all
quarters of Israel. And all that saw^ it, said: there was no such deed done,
or seen, since the children of Israel came out of Egypt unto this day,
consider the matter, take aduisement, and say your minds.

The battle of the Israelyties against the trybe of Ben Iamin* for the
Levites wife which was killed.

CAPI. XX.
THen all the children of Israel went out:

And the men of Gibea rose against me, and beset the house round about upon me
by night, and thought to have sleyne me: and my concubyne have they so forced /
that she is dead. And I took my concubine, and cut her in pieces, and sent her
thorowout all the lands of the enheritau^ce of Israel. For they have committed
abhominacyon and follye in Israel. Behold, ye are all children of Israel
Pondre this matter, and give your advise in the case.

And all the people arose, as it had been one man, saying: there shall not a man
of us go to his tente, neither turn in to his house.

But this shall be it that we will ^o to Gibea: We will go up by lot against it.
And we will take ten men of the hundred thorowout all the tribes of Israel, and
an hundred of the thousand, and a thousand out of ten thousand, to fet
vytayle for the people to make that they may go against Gibea Ben Iamin,
because of all the abhominacyon, that they have wrought in Israel.

And so all the men of Israel gathered together against the City, knyt
together, as it had been but one man. And the tribes of Israel sent men through
all the tribe of Ben Iamin, saying. Joshua. 2^ ^
What wickedness is this that is happened among you. Now therefore deliver us
the men, those children of Beliall which are in Gibea, that we may sley them,
and put away evil from Israel.

Neuerthelatter the Children of Ben Imin would not h^rken unto the voice of
their brethren and children of Israel: but gathered themselves together out of
the cities unto Gibea, to come out and fight against the children of Israel.
And the children of Ben Iamin were nombred at that time, out of the cities.
xxvi. thousand men that drew swerdes, beside the enhabitours of Gibea, which
were^ nombred seven hundred chosen men. And among all these folk were seven
hundred left handed me^, which every one could flyng stones at an here
breadth, and not mysse.

And the children of Israel beside Ben

Then the children of Israel and all the

And the children of Ben Iamin came

But the other wist not that so great evil was so nygh them. And the lord
plaged Ben Iamin before Israel, and the children of Israel destroyed of the
Beniamites the same day. xxv. thousand and an hundred men, that drew swerdes
every one of them.

And when the children of Ben Iamin saw

And beside that, they which came out and ouerran them to Gibea on the East
side and there were sleyne of Ben Iamin. xviii. thousand, which were all men
of war. And they turned and fled toward the wyldernes, and unto the rock of
Rimmon. And the other slew by the way of the rest of them, five thousand me^,
and stycked unto them, until they came to Gideom, and slew two thousand me^
of them. So that all that were sleyne that same day of Ben Iamin were. xxv.
thousand men that drue swerdes, which were all men of war: only. vi. hundred
men turned and fled to the wilderness, unto the rock of Rimmo^ and abode
there iiii. months. And the men of Israel turned back again unto the
children of Ben Iamin, and smote them with the edge of the sword in the
cities, both man and beast, and all that came to hand, and set on fire all the
cities that they could come by.

The enhabiters of Gilead are utterly destroyed

CAPI. XXI.
ANd every man of Israel swear in Mizpa ^^ne. 31. c
And this is it that ye shall do: utterly destroy all the males and all the
women that have lain by men. And they found among the enhabytours of Iabes
Gilead four hundred damselles, vyrgyns, that had known no man, by lyeng with
any male. And they brought them unto the host to Silo, which is in the land
of Canaan. And the hole congregation sent and spoke with the children of Ben
Iamin that were in the rock of Rimmon, and called p^aceably unto them, and Ben
Iamin came again at that time, and they gave them wives, which they had saved
alive of the women of Iabes

And when their fathers, or brethren come unto us to complane, we will say unto
them: have pytie on us for their sakes because we reserved not to each man his
wife in time of war, Neither have ye gyu^n unto them that ye should sin at
this time. And the children of Ben Iamin did eue^ so: and took them wives
according to the nombre of them that daunced whom they caught. And they went,
and returned unto their enheritaunce, and repared the cities, and dwelte in
them. And the children of Israel departed thence at that time, and went every
man to his tribe, and to his kynred, and went out from thence every man to
his enheritaunce. ^^^^. ^. ^ and, xviii. ^
In those days there was no king in Israel: but every man did that which
served right in his own eyes.

The end of the book of Judges* called in the Hebrew, Sophism.
The book of Ruth
Elimelec goth with his wife and Children into the land of Moab.

CAPI. Primo.
in the days of a certain Judge) when the Judges judged, there fell a derthe
in the land, and a certain man of Bethleem Judah went for to sotourne in the
country of Moab, he and his wife, and his (...). sons. The name of the man
was Elimelec, and the name of his wife, Naomi: and the names of his two sons
were, Mahlon and Chilion, and they were Ephraites, out of Bethleem Judah. And
when they came in to the land of Moab, they continued there. And Elimelec
Naomis husband dyed, and she remained with her two sons, which took them
wives of the nations of the Moabites the ones name was Orpha, and the others
Ruth. And they dwelled there about a ten year. And Mahlon and Chilion dyed
also even both of them, and the woman was left desolate of her two sons and
of her husband.

Then stood she up with her daughters in law, and returned from the country
of Moab

Turn again my daughters, and go for I am to old to have an husband. And if
I

When she saw that she was stedfastlye minded to go with her, she left
speaking that is to say, beutyfull,) but call me Mara ( that is to say,
bitter.) for the almygh tie has made me very bitter. I went out full: and the
lord has brought me home again emptye. Why then call ye me Naomi: seeing the
lord has humbled me, and the almyghtye has brought me unto aduersyte. And so
Naomi with Ruth the Moabitesse her daughter in law returned out of the country
of Moab, and came to Bethleem, in the beginning of barley harvest.

Ruth gathers corn in the ^eldes of Booz.

CAPI. II.
ANd Naomis husband had a kynsman of strength, and might, (which was of such
as the reapers leave) after any man in whose sight, I synde grace. And she
said unto her: go my daughter. And she went, and came to the field, and
gathered after the reapers, and her chance was, that the same field perteyned
unto Booz, which was of the kynred of Elimelec. And behold, Booz came from
Bethleem, and said unto the reapers: the lord be with you. And they answered
him: the Lord bless the.

Then said Booz unto his young man that stood by the reapers. Whose damsel is
this?

And the young man that stood by the reapers, answered and said: It is the
Moabity she damsel, that came with Naomi out of the country of Moab, and she
said unto us. Oh let me lease and gather after the reapers, the ears that
remain: and so she came and has continued even from the morning unto now,
save that she tarried a little in the house. Then said Booz unto Ruth: hear
thou my daughter: go to none other field to gather, neither go from hence: but
abide here by my maidens. Let thine eyes be on the feld that they reap, and go
thou after the maidens. Have I not charged the young men, that they shall do
the no hurt? Moreover when thou art a thyrst, go unto the vessels, and drink
of that which the laddes have drawn. Then she fell on her face and (...). 33.
a.
bowed her self to the ground, and said unto him: how is it that I have
found grace in thine eyes: and that thou should know me, seeing I am an
alyaunt?

And Booz answered and said unto her^ (...). v. b.
parched corn: of the which she did eat, and was suffysed, and left part.
And when she was risen up to gather, Booz commanded his young men saying, let
her gather even among the heaps, and forbid her not. And leave her some of
the sheues for the nonce, and let it lie, that she may gather it up ( without
shame) and rebuke her not. And se she gathered in the field until even, and
thresshed that she had gathered and it was in measure upon an Epha ( that is
three busshels) of barley.

And she took it up, and went in to the city: Tobi. (...). ^
good to the living and to the dead. And Naomi said again unto her: the man
is nygh unto us, and of our next kynne. And Ruth the Moabite said: he said
unto me also. Thou shall be with my young men, until they have ended all my
harvest. And Noami answered unto Ruth her daughter in law: It is best my
daughter that thou go out with his maidens, that they fall not upon the in any
other field. And so she kept her by the maidens of Booz, to gather, unto the
end of Barley harvest, and of wheat harvest also: and dwelte with her mother
in law.

Ruth sleeps at Booz feet, and is known his kynswoman.

CAPI. III.
THen Naomi her mother in law said unto her: my daughter, shall I not seek

And so she went down unto the barn,

And behold: a woman lay at his feet. And he said: what art thou* she
answered: I am Ruth thine handmayde, spread thy wynge over thine handmayde,
for thou art the next of the hynne. He said: blessed be thou in the Lord my
daughter, for thou have showed moore goodness in the latter end, then at the
beginning, in as much as thou folowedst not young men, whyther they were
poor or rich.

And now my daughter fear not, I will do to the all that thou requyrest, for
all the

Tarry this night, and when morning is come, if he will marry the, it is good,
so let him do But and if he will not have the, as sure as the lord lives I
will have the: lie still until the morning. And so she lay at his feet
until the morning. And she arose up before one could know another. And he
said: let no man know, that there came any woman in to the barn.

And he said again: bring thy mantell

Booz takes Ruth to wife, of whom he begets Obed.

CAPI. IIII.
THen went Booz unto the gate, and sat Leuiti. 25. b Iere. 32. b
will sell a parcel of land, which was our brother Elimeltes. And I thought
to do the to wete, and bid the bye it before the enhabito^ts and elders of my
people. If thou be dysposed to redeem it, do: but and if thou will not
purchase it, then tell me that I may know. For there is none to challenge it,
save thou, and I next the. And the other answered: I will purchase it. Then
said Booz, what day thou byest the field Deute. 25. b
wife of the dead, to stir up the name of the dead upon his enheritaunce. The
kynsman answered: I can not purchase it, for marrynge of mine own
enheritaunce: take thou my right to the, for Iean not purchase it. Now this was
the manner of old time in Israel concerning purches and chaungyng, for to
stablysshe al thing that a man must pluck of his shoo, and give it his
neighbor, and this was a sure witness in Israel.

Therefore the kynsman said to Booz: Bye

And all the people that were in the gate, and the elders said: we are
witnesses: the Lord make the woman, that is come in to thine house, like ^^^^.
(...) and (...).
Rahel and Lea, which twain did build the house of Israel: do thou also
valyau^tly in Ephrata, and be famous in Bethleem. Thy house be like the house
of Pharez (...)
whom Thamar bare unto Judah, even of the seed which the Lord shall give the
of this young woman.

And so Booz took Ruth, and she was his (...)
Pharez: Pharez begat Hezron: Hezon begat Ram: Ram begat Aminadab: Aminadab
begat Nahson: Nahson: begat Salmon: Sal mon begat Booz. Booz begat Obed, Obed
begat Isai: Isai begat David.

The end of the Book of Ruth:
The first book of Samuel called the first book of the kings.
Elkana has two wives, Hanna, and Phenenna.

CAPI. Primo.
THere was a man of one (...). vi. ^.
Elkana, the son of Ieroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Thohu the son of
Zuph, an Ephrathite: which had two wives, the one called Hanna, and the other
Phenenna. And Phenenna had children, but Henna had none. (...). 23. ^ (...).
16. ^
And the said man went up out of his city every feastful day, to pray and to
offer unto the lord of hoostes in Silo where were the two sons of Eli
(Hophni and Phinehes) the Lords priests. And it fell on a solemyne day, that
Elkana offered, and gave to Phenenna his wife and to all her sons and
daughters porcions. But unto Ha^na he gave a porcyon with an heavy chere, for he
loved Hanna, and the Lord had made her barren. And her enemy (Phenenna) vexed
her a good, to move her, because the Lord had made her barren. And so did she
year by year as often as she went up to the house of the lord. And so chafed
her, which wept, and did not eat.

Then said Elkana her husband to her: Hanna, why wepest thou? and why eatest
thou

Oh Lord of hoostes, if thou will look on the trouble of thine handmayde, and
remember me, and not forget thine handmayde, but give unto thine handmayde a
man child: I will give him unto the lord all the days of his life (...).
^^ii. a (...). vi b
and there shall no raser come upon his head. And as she continued prayenge
before the lord it fortuned, that Eli marked her mouth. For Ha^na spoke in her
heart, and her lyppes did but move only, but her voice was not herd. And
therefore Eli thought she had been dronken, and Eli said unto her. How long
will thou be dronken? put away from the, the wine that thou have.

Hanna answered, and said: not so my Psalm. x^ii. ^
powered out my soul before the lord. Count not thine handmayd to be like a
daughter of Belial, for out of the abundance of my heaviness, and grief,
have I spoken hitherto.

Eli answered her again, and said: go in peace: the God of Israel grant the
thy peticion, that thou have asked of him. She said let thine handmayd find
grace in thy sight. And so the woman went her way, and did eat, and looked no
more so sad. And they rose up early, and worshypped before the Lord, and then
returned and came to their house to Ramath. And when Elkana knew Ha^na his
wife, the lord remembered her: for in process of time it came to pass, that
she conceived, and bare a son, and called his name Samuel (saying.) Because
I have asked him of the lord. And Elkana and all his house went up to offer
unto the Lord, the offering due for the feast, and also his vow.

Nevertheless Ha^na went not up, but said

The song of Hanna. The offense of the sons of Eli.

CAPI. II.
ANd Hanna prayed and said: mine heart

Talk not to much proudlye: let old things depart out of your mouths,
for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and his purposes come to pass. The bow
of the strong is broken: and they that were weak, have gyrded them selves with
strength.

They that were full, have hired out them Deute. 32. f
The Lord kylleth, and makes alive: brings down to hell, and fetches up
again. The Lord makes poor, and makes rich: brings low, and heaueth up
on hye. Psalm. ^3. b.
He rayseth up the poor out of the dust and lyfteth up the beggar from the
dunghyl: to set them among princes, and to enherite them with the seat of
glory. For the pyllers of the earth are the lords, and he has set the round
world upon them. He will keep the feet of his saints, and the wicked shall
keep silence in darkness, and Deute. ^. d.
in his own might shall no man be strong. The Lords adversaries shall be
destroyed of him: and out of heaven shall he thunder upon them.

The Lord shall judge the ends of the world, and shall give might unto his
king,

And Elkana went to Ramath to his house, and the lad did ministre unto the
Lord before Eli the priest. But the sons of Eli were children of Belial, and
knew not the lord. And the priests made a l^we for the people, that when
soever any man offered any offering, the priests lad came, while the flesh
was in seething, and a flesh hoke with three teeth in his hand, and thrust it
in to the pan, ketle, caldron, or pot. And all that the flesh hoke brought
up, that the priest took away. And so they did unto all the Israelites, that
came thither to Silo. Yea and thereto, before they burnt the fat, the priests
lad came and said to the man that offered: Give flesh that I may dress it
for the priest, for he will not have sodden flesh of the, but raw.

And if any man said unto him: let them burn the fat according to the day, and
then

For men abhorred the offering of the lord.

But the child Samuel ministered before the Lord / gyrded about with a lynnen
Ephod. Moreover his mother made him a little coote, and brought it to him from
year to year, when she came up with her husband to offer the offering in the
solemn feasts. And Eli blessed Elkana and his wife and said: the lord give
the seed of this woman for the peticion that she asked of the Lord.

And they went unto their own home. And the Lord visited Hanna, so that she
conceived and bare three sons and two daughters. And the child Samuel grew
before the Lord.

Eli was very old, and herd all that his sons did unto all Israel, and
how they ^^^^* (...)*
and grew, and was in favor both with the Lord and also with men. And there
came a man of God unto Eli, and ^^^^ (...) (...)* ^*
upon mine altar, and to burn insence, and and to wear an Ephod before me.

And I gave unto the house of thy father all the offrynges of the children of
Israel. Wherefore tread ye down my sacrifice and mine offering, which I
commanded to be made in the Tabernacle, and honor thy Children above me,
to make your selves fat of the first fruytes of all the offerynges of Israel
my people?

Wherefore the Lord god of Israel says: I said, that thy house, and the
house of thy father should walk before me, for ever.

But now the lord says: that be far from me: for them that worship me, I
will worship: and they that despise me, shall come to shame. Behold, the days
come, that I will cut of thine arm, and the arm of thy fathers house, that
there shall not be an elder in thine house. And thou shalt se thine enemy in
the tabernacle, and in all that shall please Israel, and there shall not be an
elder in thine house for ever. Nevertheless, I will not dedestroye all the
males that come of the, from mine altar. But to make thine eyes dase, and to
make thine heart melte. And all they that be multiplied in thine house, ^. Reg.
^2. d.
shall dye, if they be men. And this shall be a sign unto the, that shall come
upon thy two sons, ^. Reg. ii. g.
Hophni and Phinehes: even in one day they shall dye both. And I will stir
me up a faithful priest that shall do according to my heart and mind. And I
will build him a sure house. And he shall walk before mine anointed for ever.
And they that are left in thine house, shall come and crouche to him for a
little piece of silver and a cake of bread, and shall say: put me I pray the
in one office or other among the priests, that I may eat a morsel of
bread.

The Lord called Samuel three times.

CAPI. III.
ANd the child Samuel minystred un ^. Regu^. 4. c
eyes began to ware dyu^ that he could not se. And ere the lamp of god went
out, Samuel laid him down to sleep in the temple of the Lord, where the ark of God was. And the Lord called Samuel, and he said: here am I, and he ran
unto Eli, and said: here am I, for thou calledst me. And he said I called the
not: go again and sleep. And he went, and laid him down to sleep. And the
Lord called once again, Samuel: and Samuel arose and went to Eli, and said:
I am here, for thou dydest call me. And he answered: I called the not my Son.

Go again and take thy rest: Samuel

And the Lord went to, and called Samuel the third time. And he arose and
went to Eli and said: I am here, for thou have called me. And Eli perceived
that the lord had called the child. Therefore, Eli said to Samuel: go, and
lie down: and if he call the again, then say: speak on Lord, for thy
servant hears. So Samuel went, and laid him down in his place. And the
Lord came and stood, and called as before, Samuel Samuel. Samuel answered:
speak on, for thy servant hears. And the Lord said to Samuel: behold, I
will do a thing in Israel / that both the ears of as many as hears it,
shall tyngle. In that day I will raise up against Eli, that which I have
spoken concerning his house, from the beginning to the ending. I have told
him. ^* Regu^. ii. ^
that I will judge his house forever. For the wyckednes which he knows. For
when the people cursed his sons for the same wickedness / he has not
correct them.

And therefore I have sworn unto the house Ruth. ^* ^
God do so and so to the, if thou hyde any thing from me, of all that he said
unto the.

And Samuel told him every whyt / and hyd nothing from him. And he said,
it is the lord, let him do what seems him best.

And Samuel grew, and the Lord was with him, and left none of his words
vnper formed. And all Israel from Dan to Bersabe wist that faithful Samuel
was made the Lords prophet. And the lord appeared again in Silo: for the
Lord opened him self to Samuel in Silo, through the word of the Lord.

The ark of the Lord is taken. Eli and his ^hridren (...).

CAPI. IIII.
ANd Samuel spoke unto all Israel. And it fortuned that in those days the
Philistynes came together to sight.) And Israel wen^ cut against the
Philistines to battle, and pytched beside the ^. Reg. (...). ^.
help stoone. And the Philistines pytched in Aphek. And put them selves in
array against Israel. And in the end of the batrayl Israel was put to the
worse before the Philistines. And the Philistines slew in at aye alonge by the
feldes, about a four thousand men. And when the people were come in to their
tents, the elders of Israelll said: where fore has the Lord cast us down
this day before the Philistines? let us fetch the Arc of the appointment of
the lord out of Silo unto us, that when it comes among us, it may save us
out of the hand of our enemy.

And so the people sent to Silo, and fet from herd the noise of the shoute,
they said: what means the soude of this mighty shoute in the hooste of the
Hebrews? And they understood, how that the Ark of the Lord was come into the
host. And the Philistines were afraid, and said: God is come into the host.
And they said again: woe unto us, for it was never so before this. Woe unto us,
who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty Gods? these are the
gods that smote the Egyptians with so many plages in the wilderness. Be
strong and quite our selves like men O ye Philistines, that ye be not
servants unto the Hebrews, Iudi. ^3. ^.
as they have been to you. Be men therefore and fight.

And the Philistines fought, and Israel ^. Reg^. (...). g
Hophni, and Phinekes were dead. And there ran a man of Ben Iamin out of the
array, and came to Silo the same day, with his clothes rent and earth upon his
head. And when he came, Eli sat upon a stool and looked toward the way: for
his heart feared for the ark of God. And when the man came into the city and
told it, all the city cried. And when Eli herd the noise of the cryenge, he
said: What means the noise of that rumor? And the man came in hastily, and
told Eli. Eli was four score and eyghtene year old, and ^. Reg^. 3. a
his sight failed him that he could not se. And the man said unto Eli: I am
he that came out of the array, and fled this day out of the hooste. And he
said, what thing is fortuned my son? The messenger answered, The glory is
gone.
Ichabod, saying: The glory is departed from Israel. Because the ark of god
was taken, and because of her father inlaw and her husband. And she said
again: The glory is gone from Israel, for the ark of god is taken

Dagon the god of the Philistynes, to cast ^^a^ before the arc.

CAPI. V.
AND the Philistines took the Arc of

But the hand of the Lord was heuye The vyllages also and the feldes in the
myddest of the country were full, and there came up myce, and it was a
confusyon of a great death in the city) And when the men of Asdod saw that it
was so, they said: the arc of the God of Israel shall not abide here with
us, for his hand is sore upon us and upon Dagon our God. They sent therefore
and gathered all the lords of the Philistines unto them, and said: what shall
we do with the arc of the god of Israel? They answered: let the arc of the
god of Israel be carried about unto Gath. And they carried the arc of the god
of Israel about. And it fortuned, that when they had carried it about, there
was by the hand of the lord a mighty great noise in the city, and he smote
the men of the city both small And the Gethites took council, and made them
selves preuye seats of skynnes.) Therefore they sent the ark of god to Akaron.

And as soon as the ark of God came to Akaron, the Akaronites cried out,
saying: they have brought the arc of the God of Israel to us: to sley us and
our people. And so they sent, and gathered together all the lords of the
Philistines, and said: send away the arc of the god of Israel, to go again
unto his own place, that it sley us not, and our people. For there was a
deadly noise through out all the city, and the hand of God was exceeding sore
there. And the men that dyed not, were smyten with the Emerodes, and the cry
of the city went up to heaven.

The kyne bring home the Arc with the rewards.

CAPI. VI.
THe ark of the Lord was in the country Or ^z^.
Gaza one: for Askalon one: for Gath one: and for Akaron one. And golden myce,
according to the nombre of all the cities of the Philistines, even according to
the five Lords: both of walled towns, and of towns unwalled, even unto the
great stone of lamentacion, whereon they set down the ark of the lord, which
stone remains unto this day / in the field of Joshua the Bethsamite. And he
plaged the men of Bethsames, because they had seen the Ark of the lord. And
he slew among the people fiftye thousand, and three score and ten men. And
the other people lamented, because the lord had sleyne the people with so
great a slaughter. Wherefore the men of Bethsames said: who is able to stand
before the Lord so holy a God: and to whom shall he go from us? And they
sent messe^gers to the enhabyters of Kariath Iarim, saying: The Philistines
have brought again the ark of the Lord: come ye down therefore, and fet it
up to you.

The Arc is brought to Kariathiarim.

CAPI. VII.
ANd so the men of Kariathiarim came / ii. Reg. vi. ^
brought it in to the house of Abinadab in Gibea, and sanctified Eleazar his
son, to keep the ark of the Lord. And while the arc abode in Kariathiarim,
the days multiplied, and there passed over twenty years and all the house of
Israel lamented after the lord. And Samuel spoke unto all the house of
Israel, saying: if ye be come again unto the Lord with all your hertes, then
* put (...)

of the house, saying: Up, that I may send the away. And Saull arose. And
they went out at the doors both be and Samuel. And when they were come almoost
out of the town. Samuel said to Saull: bid the lad go before us (and he went
before) but stand you still a while, that I may show the what god says.

Saull is anointed king, and prophesyeth.

CAPI. X.
ANd then Samuel took a vessel of oil / ^^tes xiii. d
kyssed him, and said: has not the Lord anointed the, to be captain over
his enherytaunce ( and thou shalt deliver his people out of the hands of
their enemies, vviche are round about them. And this token shall thou have,
that the LORD has anointed the to be prince.) When thou art departed from me
this day / thou shalt find two men by Gene. 35. ^
Rahels sepulcher in the border of Ben Iamin, even at Zalezah. And they will
say unto the: the Asses which thou wentest to seek / are found. And lo, thy
father has left the care of the asses, and soroweth for you, saying: what
shall I do for my son? Then shall thou go forth from thence, and shalt come to
the plain of Thabor. And there shall mete the three men going up, to God to
Bethell: one caryenge three kyddes, and another caryeng three loves of bread:
and another caryenge a bottell of wine. And they will salute the, and give the
two loves of bread, which thou shall receive of their hands. After that
shall thou come to the hill of God, where the Philistines i. Reg. vi. a i. Par.
^8. ^
these signs are chanced the, do what thou have to do, for God is with the.
And thou shall go before me to Gylgal. And I also will come down unto the, to
sacrifye, burntsacrifyces, and to offer peaceofferynges. i. Reg. 13. b
Tarry for me seven days, until I come to the, and show the what thou shall
do. And as soon as he had turned his shoulder to go from Samuel, god gave him
another manner of heart, and all those tokens came to pass that same day. And
when they came to the hill: behold, the company of prophettes met him, and i.
Reg. xi. b.
the Spirit of God came upon him also, he prophesyed among them. And all that
knew him before / when they saw that he prophesyed among the prophettes,
they said each to other: what is this that is happened unto the son of Cis? i.
Reg. (...). ^
Is Saull also among the Prophettes? And one of the same place answered, and
said: who is their father? And thereof came the proverb what, is Saull also
among the prophettes? And when he had made an end of prophesienge, he came to
the hyl. And Saules fathers brother said unto him and to his lad: whyther went
ye? He said: to seek the Asses: and when we saw that they were no where, we
came to Samuel. And Saul's uncle said, tell me what Samuel said unto you?
Saull answered his uncle: he told us plainly, that the asses were found: But
of the kingdom whereof Samuel spoke, told he him not. And Samuel called the
people together unto the lord to Mizpa, and said unto the children of
Israel: thus says the lord god of Israel: I brought Israel out of Egypt,
and delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians and out of the hands of
all kingdoms that troubled you. And ye have this day cast away your God
that helped you out of all your aduersityes and tribulacyons. And ye have said
unto him: i. Reg. (...) and x^^. ^
make a king over us. Now therefore stand ye before the lord by your trybes
and your thousands. And when Samuel had brought all the trybes of Israel, i.
Reg. ^^
God lend the king life. Then Samuel told the people (...)
the duty of the kingdom, and wrote it in a book, and laid it up before the
Lord / and sent all the people away / every man to his house. And Saul also
went home to Gibea. And there followed him strong men, whose hertes God had
touched. But the children of Beliall, said: how shall he save us? Iudi. ^. ^
And they despised him, and brought him no presents. And he held his tongue.

The people renueth the kingdom of Saull.

CAPI. XI.
NAhas the Ammonite came, and beseged

Then came the messengers to Gibea unto 1 Reg. xv. a
nombred them in Bezek, the children of Israel

And Saull said: there shall no man dye

Samuel declares him self to be an innocent Judge.

CAPI. XII.
Samuel said unto all Israel: behold, Eccle. (...) ^ A^tes. (...) ^
Whose ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken: whom have I done wrong
to? Whom have I hurt? Or of whose hand have I received any brybe, to blind
mine eyes therewith? and I will restore it you again. They said: you have done us
no wrong / nor hurt us, neither have thou taken ought of any man's hand. He
said unto them again: the Lord is witness and gaynst you and his anointed is
witness this day, that ye have found naught in my hands. And they answered:
he is witness. And Samuel said unto the people: it is the Lord, that made
Gene. 4^. ^ E^odi (...). ^.
After that Jacob was come into Egypt, and your fathers cried unto the Lord,
Exodi. iii. ^
the Lord sent Moses* and Aaron, which brought your fathers out of Egypt,
and made them dwell in this place. Iudi iii^. ^.
And when they forgot the Lord their god he delivered them in to the hand of
Sisara captain of the hooste of Hazor, Iudi. xiii. a
and in to the hand of the Philistines, and Iudi iii. b.
in to the hand of the king of Moab, and they fought against them. And they
cried unto the lord and said: we have sinned, because we have forsaken the
Lord, and have served Baalim and Astharoth. Now therefore deliver us out of
the hands of our enemies and we will serve the. And the Lord sent Ierobaall /
Iudi. xiil. d
Badan Iudi. xi a
Iephthah, and 1. Reg. vii. b
Samuel, and delivered you out of the hands of your enemies on every side,
and ye dwelled safe. And for all that, when ye saw that Nahas the king of the
children of Ammo^ came against you, ye said unto me: i. Regu^. ^. ^
not so, but a king shall reygne over us, when yet the lord your god was your
king. Now therefore, behold the king whom ye have chosen, and whom ye have
desired: so, the Lord has set a king over you. If ye will fear the Lord
and serve him, and hear his voice, and not dysobeye the word of the Lord:
both ye and the king that reygneth over you, shall follow the lord your God.
If ye will not harken unto the voice of the Lord, but dysobeye the Lords
mouth: then shall the hand of the Lord be upon you and on your fathers. Now
also stand, and se this great thing, which the Lord will do before your
eyes: is it not now wheatheruest? I will call unto the lord, and he shall send
thunder and rain: that ye may perceive and se, how that your wickedness is
great, which ye have done in the sight of the Lord, in asking you and King.

And Samuel said unto the people: fear not. Ye have in deed done all this
wickedness, yet depart not from following of the Lord. But serve him even
with all your hertes. Neither turn ye after vain things whi^^ are not able
to profyt you, for they are but vanity. For the Ero (...). 34 b Deuit. ^x. ^.
^^sua. 7. b.
Lord will not forsake his people, because of his great names sake: because it
has pleased the Lord, to make you his people. Moreover, God forbid that I
should sin against the Lord, and cease prayenge for you, but to show you
the good, and right way. Therefore fear ye the Lord, and serve him in the
truth, and with all your hertes, and consydre, how great things he has
done for you. But and if ye do wyckedlye, then shall ye peryshe, both ye and
your king.

The Philistines are s^^ytten of Saull and Ionathas. Saull being dysn bedyent
to gods: o^moundement, is showed of Samuel that he shall not reygne.

CAPI. XIII.
SAull had been king one year (when these

The Philistines also gathered them selves Esaias. ^^
sand by the sees side in multitude, and came up and pytched in Michmas
Eastwarde from Bethauen. And when the men of Israel saw it / they were in a
strayte, and fere came upon the people, and they hyd them selves in caves, and
in preuye hooles, and in rocks, and in hye places, and in pyttes. And some of
the Hebrews went over Jordan to go unto the land of Gad and Gilcad. And Saull
was yet in Gilgall, and all the people that followed him were astonyed. And he
tarried seven days / even unto the time that Samuel 1. Reg^ ^^
had appointed. But Samuel came not to Gilgal, and the people were therefore
scattered from him. And Saull said: bring a burntsacrifyce to me and peace
offerynges. And he offered burntsacrifice. And as soon as he had made an end
of offering the burntsacrifice, behold, Samuel came. And Saull went against
him, to bless him. And Samuel said: what have thou done? Saull said: because
I saw that the people scattered from me, and that thou cammest not within the
days appointed, and that the Philistines gathered them selves together to
Michmas: therefore said I: the Philistines shall come down now upon me to
Gilgall, and I have not made supplicacyon unto the Lord.

And when I had overcome my self, at the last I offered a burntofferynge. And
E(...)
thou art become a fool, thou have not kept the commandment of the Lord
thy God, which he commanded the. For at this time would the Lord have
stablysshed thy kingdom upon Israel for ever. But now, thy kingdom shall not
contynewe, 1. (...)
The Lord has sought him a man after his own heart, and the lord has
commanded him to be captain over his people, because thou have not kept
that, which the lord commanded the. And Samuel arose and gat him up from
Gilgal to Gibea Benjamin. ( And the remenaunte of the folk went up after
Saull, to mere the people, which fought against them, as they were coming
from Gilgall to Gibea, in the hill of Ben lamin.) And Saull nombred the people
that were found with him, and they were about a. vi. C. men.

And Saul and Ionathas his son and the

Ionathas and his harnes bearer puts the Philistines to fl^ght. He tastes
the Honye.

CAPI. XIIII.
ANd it fortuned the same time, that Ionathas ^^a. 14. ^.
to save either in many or in few. And his harnes berer said unto him: Do all
that is in thine heart. Go where it pleases the: Behold, I am with the, as
thine heart lusts. Then said Ionathas: Behold, we go over unto these men,
and shall show our selves unto them: if they say on this wise to us: tarry,
until we come to you, then we will stand still in our place, and not go up
unto them. But and if they say: come up unto us, then we will go up, for 1.
Math. 4 ^
the lord has delivered them in to our hands. And this shall be a sign unto
us. And they both showed them selves unto the watch of the Philistines. And
the Philistines said: Se, the Hebrews come out of the holes where they had hyd
them selves in. And the men of the watch answered Ionathas and his harnes
bearer, and said: come up to us, and we will show you a thing. And Ionathas
said unto his harnes bearer: Come up after me, for the Lord has delivered
them in to the hand of Israel. And Ionathas clambe up upon hands and fete,
and his harnes berer after him. And ( so when they had seen ^onathas face)
they fell before Ionathas: and his harnes berer slew them after him. And that
first slaughter which Ionathas and his harnes berer made, was upon a. rr. men,
with us the compass as it were about an half aker of land. And there was a
fear in the host, by little and little, and gave a more clear found) And Saul
said unto the priest: withdraw thine hands. And Saull joined him self unto
all the people that were with him, and they came to the battle. And behold
Iu^^^^ 7. ^ (...). Pa. xx. ^.
every man's sword was against his fellow, and there was a very great tumor.
Moreover, the Hebrews that were with the Philistines before that time, and were
come with them in to al parts of the host, turned, to be with the Israelites
that were with Saul and Ionathas. And all the me^ of Israel also, which had hyd
them selves in mount Ephraim, as soon as they herd how that the Philistines
were

And the people gat them to the spoil, and ^cuit vii c and. xix. ^
with the blood. Then men told Saull, saying: Behold, the people sin
against the Lord, in that they eat with the blood.

And he said: ye have trespassed. Roll a great stone unto me this day, and
Saul said again: Go abroad among the people, and bid them bring me every
man his ox, and every man his sheep, and fley them here, and sin not against
the Lord in eating with the blood. And the people brought every man his ox
in his hand, by night, and flue them there. And Saull made an altar unto the
Lord. And that was the first altar that he made unto the Lord. And Saul
said: let us go down after the Philistines by night and spoil them, until it
be day in the morning, and let us not leave one man of them. And they said: do
what soever thou thynkest best. Then said the priest: let us come hither unto
God. And Saul asked of God: shall I go down after the Philistines?will thou
deliver them in to the hands of Israel? But be answered him not at that time.
And Saul said: Let the people come hither out of all quarters, and know and
se by whom this sin is chanced this day: for as truly as the lord lives
which saves Israel, though it be in Ionathas my son, he shall dye the death.
But there was no man among all the people that answered him.

Then he said unto all Israel: be ye on Lord god, give thou the indgement.
How happens it, that thou gyuest thy servant no answer to day? If this
syn be in me, or in Ionathas my son, show it, or if this iniquyte be in thy
people.) And Saul and Ionathas were caught, but the people escaped free. And
Saul said: cast lottes between me and Ionathas my son. And Ionathas was
caught. The^ Saul said to Ionathas: tell me what thou have done. And Ionathas
told him, and said: I tasted a little honye with the end of the rod that was
in mine hand: and lo, I must dye.

Saul answered: (...) ^
God do so and so with me, thou shalt dye the death Ionathas. And the people
said unto Saul: shall Ionathas dye, which has so myghtely helped Israel? God
forbid. As truly as the Lord lives 2. (...)
there shall not one here of his head fall to the ground: For he has
wrought with God this day. And so the people delivered Ionathas, that he dyed
not. And then Saul departed up from following the Philistines. Diui^^
Amaleckites, and tyd Israel out of the hands of them that spoiled them. The
sons of Saul were: Ionathas, Iosui, and Melchisua. And his two daughters were
thus named: the elder was called Merob, and the younger Michol. And the name of
Saules wyr^e, was Ahinoa the daughter of Ahimaaz. And the name of his cheyfe
captain was Abner the son of Ner, Saules uncle.

And 1. (...)
Cis was Saules father. And Ner the father of Abner was the son of Abiell.
And there was sore wacre against the Philistines, all the days of Saul. And who
soever Saul saw to be a strong man, and mete for the war, he took him unto
him.

Saul is ro^maunded to kill Aninlecke. He is disobedient to the voice of God
Samuel moutneth for Saul.

CAPI. XV.
Samuel said unto Saul: ^rgii. ix. c
the lord sent (...) 17 d
how they laid wait for them in the way, as they came out of Egypt. Now
therefore go, and smite Amalec and destroy ye all that perteyneth unto them, and
se thou have no compassyon on them, (...) d
( and covet nothing that they have) slay both man and woman, infant, and
suklyng, o^e and sheep, camel, and ass. And Saul gathered the people together,
and (...) xi, c
nombred them in Telaim, two hundred thousand foot men, and ten thousand men
of Judah. And Saul came unto a city of Amalec, and set watch in Number. 24. b
But saul and the people spared Agag, and the better sheep, and the fatter
oxen, and the lambs, and all that was good, and would not destroy them. But
all that was foul and naught worth, that they destroyed utterly. Then came the
word of the lord unto Samuel, saying.

It ^ina, vi. a
repents me, that I have made Saul king. For he is turned from me, and has
not Saul offered burntsacrifyce unto the lord of the first of the spoils
which he had brought from Amalec. And when Samuel was come unto Saul) Saul
said unto him: Blessed be thou in the Lord I have fulfilled the co^maundament
of the lord. Samuel said: what means the^ the bleatyng of the sheep in mine
ears, and the noise of the oxen which I hear? Saul an i. Regu^. ix. ^ and. x.
^.
when you wast little in thine own sight wast you not made the head of the tribes
of Israel? And the lord anointed the king over Israel. And the lord sent the
on a journey and said: Go, and utterly destroy those sinners the Amaleckites,
and fight against them, until you utterly destroy the^. And wherefore have you
not Erodi. 2^ ^ Deu. ^8 b.
wytcherafte, and stoburnes is as the wickedness of Idolatry. Because you have
cast away the word of the lord, therefore has the lord cast away the also,
from being king. And Saul And so Samuel turned again and followed Saull. And
Saull worshypped the Lord.

Then said Samuel: Bring ye hither to me. Agag the king of the Amaleckites.
And Agag came unto him delicately. And Agag said: truly the bitter death
comes on.

And Samuel said: As thy sword has made women chyldelesse, so shall thy
mother be chyldelesse above other women. And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces, before
the Lord in Gilgal. And then 1. Regu^. 7. d
Samuel departed to Rama. And Saul went home to his house to Gibea Saul. And
Samuel came no more to se Saul until the day of his death. Nevertheless
Samuel mourned for Saul, and the lord repented, that he had made Saul king
over Israel.

David is anointed king. An ^uyl spirit comes upon Saul.

CAPI XVI.
THe Lord said unto Samuel: How

3. Regu^. ii, c
Come thou peaceably? He answered: Yea, I am come to offer unto the Lord.

Nume. (...) d Joshua. ii^. b and. vii c
Sanctify your selves, and come with me to the offering. And he sanctified
Isai and his sons, and bad them to the offering. And when they were come, he
looked on Eliab, and said: Surely the Lords anointed is before him. But the
lord said unto Samuel: look not on his facion, or on the heyght of his
stature, because I have refused him: for God seyth not as man seyth. For man
looks on the outward apperau^ce, but god beholds the heart. Then Isai
called Abinadab, and made him come before Samuel. And he said: neither has the
Lord chosen this. Then Isai made Sa^ma come, and he said, neither yet has
the Lord chosen him. Again, Isai made seven of* his sons to come before
Samuel. And Samuel said unto Isai, the lord has chosen none of these.

And Samuel said unto Isai: are here al (...)
and of an excellent beautye, and and well favored in sight. And the Lord
said: Arise, and anoynte him: for this is he. Therefore Samuel took the horn
with the ointment, and anointed him in the mids of his brethren. And the
spirit of the Lord came upon David, from that day forward. And Samuel arose
up, and went to Rama. But the spirit of the Lord departed from Saul, and an
evil spirit sent of the Lord vexed him.

And Saul's servants said unto him: behold* an evil spirit sent of god
vexes the let our lord therefore command his servants (that are before
the) to seek a man that is a co^nyng player with an harp: that when the evil
spirit sent of god comes upon the, he

Wherefore Saul sent messengers unto Isai, and said: send me David thy son,
which is with the sheep. And Isai took an ass laden with bread, and a
flacket of wine, and a kyd, and sent them by David his son unto Saul. And David
came to Saul, and stood before him, and he loved him very well, and he was made
his harnes bearer. And Saul sent to Isai, saying: let David remain with me,
for he has found fououre in my sight. And so it fortuned, that when the evil
spirit sent of God came upon Saul. David took an harp, and played with his
hand, and so Saul was refresshed, and did amend, and the evil spirit
departed from him.

David ouercometh great Gol^ath.

CAPI. XVII.
THe Philistines gathered their host to out of the tents of the Philistines,
named Goliath (...). x^. d
of Gath. vi. cubits and an handbredth long, and had an helmet of brass upon
his head, and a coote of mayle about him. And the weight of his coote of
mayle was five thousand spcles of brass. And he had boots of brass upon his
legs, and a shield of brass upon his shoulders. And the shafte of his spear
was like a weuers beam. And his spear head wayed. vi. hundred s^cles of pron.
And one bearyng a shield went before him.

And he stood and cried against the host

When Saul and all Israel herd those words of the Philistine, they were
discouraged, and greatly afraid. David was the son of an Ephrathite ( of whom
mencyon is made before) of Bethleem Judah, named Isai which had eight sons.
And was an old man in the days of Saul, and came to age among me^. And the.
iii. eldest sons of Isai went, and followed Saul to the battle. And the
names of his three sons that went to battle, were: Eliab the eldest, and the
next Abinadab, and the third Sa^ma, and David was the least. And the three
eldest went after Saul. David also went and departed from Saul, to feed his
fathers sheep at Bethleem And the Philistine came forth in the morning and
euenyng, and continued. xl. days,

And Isai said unto David his son: take for thy brethren an Epha of this
parched corn, and these ten loves, and bring it unto the host to thy
brethren. And carry these. x. fresh cheses unto the captain, and look how thy
brethre^n fare, and fet out their pledge. And Saul and they, and all the men of
Israel were in the oak valey, fightyng with the Philistines.

Joshua. 1^. ^.
And to him that beats him, will the king give great riches, and will give
him his daughter thereto: yea and make his fathers house free in Israel. And
David spoke to the men that stood by, and said. What shall be done to the man
that beats this Philistine, and takes away the shame from Israel? And what
is this vncircu^cysed Philistine, that he should reuyle the host of the living
god? And the people answered him (after this manner,) saying: so shall it be done
to the man, that beats him. And Eliab his eldest brother herd when he spoke
unto the men, and Eliab was angry with David, and said.

Why came thou down hither? and with Iud^. 14. d. ^eb^ue. xi ^
a Lion and likewise a bear and took a sheep out of the flock. And I went
out after him, and smote him, and took it out of his mouth. And when he arose
against me, I Now will I go and take away the rebuke of the people, for
what is this uncircumcised Philistine?) seeing he has rayled on the host of
the living god. And David spoke moreover: the lord that delivered me out of
the hand of the Lion, and out of the hand of the bear, he shall deluyer me
also out of the hand of the Philistine.

And Saul said unto David: go, and the Lord shall be with the. And Saul put
his raiment upon David, and put an helmet of brass upon his head, and put a
coote of mayle upon him, and gyrded David with his own sword upon his
raiment. And he assayed to go. And because he never proved it, David said unto
Saul: I can not go with these, for I have not used my self thereto: and David
put them of him, and roke his staff in his hand and chose him five smoth
stones out of a broke and put them in a shepeheerdes bag which he had, and in
a siyng poke: and his slyng was in his hand, and he went to the Philistine.
And the Philistine came and drue nere against David, and the man that bare the
shield went before him. And when the Philistine looked about and saw David,
he dysdayned him, for he was but young, and well colored, and goodly to look
upon.

And the Philistine said unto David: am Eccle 47. a
and he fell grouelynge to the earth. And so David overcame the Philystyne with
a s^ynge, and a stone / Iub^. v^^^
they fled.

And the men of Israel and of Judah arose and shouted, and followed after the
Philistines, until they came to the valey and unto the gates of Akaron. And the
Philistines fell down wounded by the way to Saaraum, even unto Gath, and
Akaron. And the Children of Israel returned from chasynge after the
Philistines and spoiled their tents. And David took the head of the
Philistine, and brought it to Jerusalem: but he put his armoure in his tente.
When Saull saw David go forth against the Philistine, he said unto 1. Reg. 14.
^
Abner the captain of the host: Abner, whose son is this young man? Abnen
answered: as truly as thy soul lives (O king) I can not tell. And the king
said: Inquire thou, whose son the yonglyng is. And when David was returned from
the slaughter of the Philistine, Abner took him, and brought him before Saul
with the head of the Philistiane in his hand And Saul said to him: whose son
art thou, thou young man? David answered: I am the son of thy servant Isai the
Bethleemite.

The bond between David and Ionatha^. Saull gothe about to ^^ee David.

CAPI. XVIII.
ANd when he had made an end of spra-kynge

And Ionathas put of his own co^te that was upon him, and gave it David, and
thereto his cloak, his sword, his bow and his gyrdle. And David went out
whyther soeue^ Saul sent him, and behaved him self wyselye. And Saul set him
over his men of war, and he was accepted in the sight of all the people, and in
the sight of Saul's servants. And it happened as they went, when David was
returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, that women came out of all
cities of Israel syngyng and

And the women answered one an other in their play, and said. 1. Reg. (...)
and. (...)
Saul has slain his thousand, and David his. x. M. And Saul was excedyng
wroth, and the saying dyspleased him. and he said: they have ascribed unto
Daiud ten thousand, and to me but a thousand, and what can he more have, save
the kingdom? Wherefore Saul looked aside on David from that day forward. And
it happened on the morrow, that the evil spirit sent of God came upon Saul,
and he prophesyed in the mids of the house.

And David played with his hand like

And Saul said to David. Behold, my

And Saul said: I will give him her that

And David said: seems it to you a light thing to be a kings son in law:
I am a poor man and of small reputacion. And the servants brought Saul
word again, saying: of this manner spoke David.

And Saul said: this wise shall ye say to David: the king cares for none other
dowry

And or the days were expyred, David arose with his men and went, and slew of
the ^^. Reg. (...). ^
Wherefore Saul gave him Michol his daughter to wife. And Saul saw and
understood, how that the Lord was with David, and that Michol his daughter
loved him, and he was the more afraid of David, and Saul became always David's
enemy. The lords of the Philistines used to go forth. And it fortuned that
when they went forth, David behaved him self wyselyer the^ all the servants
of Saul: so that his name was much set by.

Saul commands to flee David. Micholl his wife saves him.

CAPI. XIX.
SAul spoke to Ionathas his son, and to ^. Regu^, (...) ^
But Ionathas Saul's son had a great favor to David, and Ionathas told
David, saying: Saul my father gothe about to fley the. Now therefore take heed
to thy self until the morning and abide in some secret place, and hyde thy
self. And I will go out, and stand by my father in the field, where thou art,
and will comen with my father of the, and what soever I se, I will tell the.
And Ionathas spoke good of David unto Saul his father, and said unto him: let
not the king syn against his servant David, for he has not sinned against
the, and his works have been toward the very good. For he did put ^^di. ^ii. ^.
Psalm. (...) ^
his life in his hand, and slew the Philistine, and the Lord brought to pass
a great health for all Israel. Thou saw it, and thou reioysed, wherefore then
will thou syn against innocent blood, and sley Daiud without a cause? And
Saul herkened unto the voice of Ionathas, as he smote the spear ( with a
vain stroke) in to the wall. And David fled, and was saved that same night.
Saul also sent messengers unto Dauyds house, to watch him, and to sley him in
the morning. And Michol Dauyds wife told it him, saying: If thou save not thy
self this night, to morrow thou will be sleyne. And so Micholl Joshua. ii c
Acts. ix. d.
let David down through a wyndowe, and he went, and fled, and was saved.

And then she took an image and laid it

And one told Saul, saying: Behold, i. Regu^. ix. c
And thereof it is, that they say: is Saul also among the prophets?

David complayneth unto Ionathas.

CAPI. XX.
ANd David fled from Naioth which

If thy father speak of me, then say: David (...)
for thou have made with me thy servant a bond in the Lord.
Notwithstanding, if there be in me any trespass, then slay me thy self, and
bring me not to thy father. And Ionathas answered: God keep that from the (
neither is it possible to come to pass.) For if I know, that wickedness were
concluded of my father, to come upon the, thynkest thou that I should not tell
it the? Then said David, who shall tell me, if thy father answer cruelly? And
Ionathas said unto David, come and let us go out i^ to the field. And they
went out both of them into the field.

And Ionathas said unto David: The

But if my father have any pleasure to do the evil, I will show the also, and
send the away that thou may go in peace. And the Lord be with the, as he
has been with my father. And thou shall perform unto me the mercy of the
Lord, not only while I live / but even when I am dead, and pluck not thy
mercy away from my house for ever: No not when the Lord has destroyed the
enemies of David, every one from the face of the earth. And so Ionathas made a
bond with the house of David, desiring that the Lord should seek it out by
the hands of David's enemies (if it were broken.) And with other words did
Ionathas sweat unto David, because he loved him. For he loved him, as his own
soul. Then said Ionathas to in peace) forth Lord has sent the away. And
as touching this which thou and I have spoken: behold the Lord be between
the, and me for ever. And so david hyd him self in the field. And when the
new moon was come / the king sat him down to eat meat.

And the king sat him down after the

Then was Saull angrye with Ionathas, i Regu^ ii. Reg.
for he is the child of death. And Ionathas answered unto Saull his father,
and said to him: wherefore should he dye? What has he done? And Saul lift up
a spear to hit him / whereby Ionathas wist well, that it was utterly
determined of his father, to sley David. And so Ionathas arose from the table
in a great anger, and did eat no meat the second day of the month, for he
was sorry for David, bycuse his father had done him shame. On the next
morning, Ionathas went out in to the field, at the time appointed with David,
and a little lad with him. And he said unto his boy: run and seek out mine
arowes which I shute. And as the boy ran, he shot an arowe beyond him. And
when the ladde

And Ionathas gave his wepons unto the lad that was with him, and said unto
him: go and carye them to the town. And as soon as the lad was gone, David
arose out of a place that was toward the south, and fell on his face to the
ground, and worshypped three times. And they kyssed either other, and wept
together so long, till David exceded in weeping. And Ionathas said to David:
go in peace. And the things which we have sworn both of us in the name of the
lord, saying: the Lord be between the and me, and between thy seed and mine,
let them stand for ever. And he rose and departed. And Ionathas went into the
town.

David flees into Nob. to Ahimelech the Priest. and gets of him the show
bread to satisfye his hunger Afterward he flees to king Achis / and there
feyneth him self to be mad.

CAPI. XXI.
THen came David to Nob to Ahimelech i. Regu^ 25 ^udi. vi^
give me five loves of bread, or what comes to hand. And the priest
answered David, and said: there is no comen bread under my hand, but here is
hallowed bread, if the young men have kept

David answered the Priest, and said unto him: of a truth women has been
locked up from us about a three days, when I came out and the vessels of the
young men were holy. How be it this way is vnpure, and how much more shall
there be holiness in the vyssell. Leuit. 24. b Math. xii a
And so the priest gave him hallowed bread, for there was none other bread
there save the show breades, that were taken from before the lord, to put
fresh bread there, the day that it was taken away. And there was there the
same day a certain man of the servants of Saull abiding before the lord,
named Doeg an Edomite, the cheyfest of Saul's heerde men. And David said unto 1.
Reg. 1^. b. and. xxix. c.
Saul has sleyne his thou sand, and David his. x. M? And David put

Doeg betrayeth David. Ahimelech is accused of treson, and sleyne, and
lxxxiiii. priests moo with him, because they received David. Nob is destroyed
of Saull. Abiathar flees to David.

CAPI. XXII.
David therefore departed thence, and escaped, 1. Regu^ (...) ^ and. xx. d
And where as my son has made a bond with the son of Isai, there is none of you
that mourns for me, or shows it in mine eat: behold, my son has styrred
up my servant to lay awayte against me this same day. Then answered Doeg the
Edomite, which also stood by the servants of Saull, and said: I saw the
son of Isai, when he came to Nob, to Ahimelech the son of Ahitob, which asked
counsel of the Lord for him, and gave him vyttayles, and the sword of
Goliath the Philistine also. Then the king sent and called for Ahimelech the
priest the son of Ahitob, and all his fathers house: that is to say, the
priests that were in Nob. And they came all to the king. And Saull said: hear
now thou son of Ahitob. He answered: here fate men that stood about him:
turn, and sley the priests of the Lord, both because

And one of the sons of Ahimelech the son of Ahitob (named Abiathar) escaped,
and fled to David. And Abiathar showed David, how that Saull had sleyne the
lords priests. And David said unto Abiathar: I wist it the same day, when
Doeg the Edomite was there / that he would tell Saull. And I am cause of the
death of all the souls of thy fathers house Abide thou with me, and fear not:
For if any man seek my soul, he shall seek thine also / with me thou shalt be
in sauegarde.

David flees into the wylldernes of ziph.

CAPI. XXIII.
THey told David saying: Behold, the

And it chanced, when Abiathar the son ^. Regu^ 30 ^
Bring the Ephod. Then said David: O Lord God of Israel, thy servant has
herd, that Saull is about to come against Keilah to destroy the City for my
sake: will the men of Keilah deliver me into his hand? And will Saull come
down, as thy servant has herd say? O Lord God of Israel, tell thy
servant. And the Lord said: he will come down. Then said David: will the
men of Keilah deliver me, and the men that are with me, into the hand of Saul?
and the lord said: they will betraye you.

Then David and his men which were upon a six hundred, arose and departed out
of Keilah, and went whyther they could. And it was told Saull, that David was
fled from Keilah, and he let the journey alone. David abode in the wilderness
in strong holds, and remained in a mountain in the wilderness of Ziph.

And Saull sought him every day, but 1. Reg. (...) ^* and. (...). b
And they made a bond, both of them together before the lord. And David
tarried still in the thicket, and Ionathas went to his house. Then came the
Ziphites to Saull, to Gibea, saying: Does not David hyde him self fast by us
in strong holds, in a thycket that is by the hill of Hachila, on the right
side of the wilderness?

Now therefore king, you may come down according to all the lust of thy
soul: come down, and our part shall be to deliver him in to the kings
hand. And Saul said: Blessed are ye in the Lord: for ye have co^passyon on
me. Go I pray you, and order the matter well, know and se his haunte, where
his foot has been, and who has seen him there: for it is told me, that he is
very subtyl, and works craftly.

Se therefore, and know all the lurkynge in the wilderness of Maon. And when
Saul herd that, he followed after David in the wilderness of Maon. And Saull
and his men went on the one side of the mountain, and David and his men on the
other side. And David took thought, how to get from Saull. For Saull and his
men, compassed David and his men, round about, to take them. But there came a
messenger to Saull, saying: Have the, and come, for the Philistines are come
in to the land. Wherefore, Saul returned from persecutyng David, and went
against the Philistines. And therefore is it, that they called the place: The
rock of separacion. And David went thence, and dwelte in strong holds at
Engadi.

David flees into Engadi, and there hydeth him in ^ ^au^. Saull ^o^meth in thy
thee to do his ^a^^mente.

CAPI. XXIIII.
WHen Saull was come again from following

And he said unto his men, the lord keep For as truly as the lord lives,
except the lord smite him, or except his day come, or if he go not down to
war and perysshe: the lord be merciful unto me, that I lay not my hand upon
the Lords anointed.) And so David kept of his servants with these words,
and suffered them not to rise against Saull.

But Saull rose up out of the cave and went away, David also arose and went
out of the cave, and cried after Saull, saying: My lord king. And when Saull
looked behind him. David ^^owped to the earth, and bowed him self, and said
to Saull: wherefore gyuest thou an care to men's words, that say, David
seeks evil against the? Behold, this day

After whom is the king of Israel come out? After whom do you move
persecucion? After a dead dog, and after a flee. The lord be judge, and judge
between the and me, and se, and pleate my cause, and aduenge me of thine hand

When David had made an end of speaking i. Reg. (...)
is this thy voice my son David? and Saul lift up his voice, and wept, and
said to David: thou art more ryghtous then I, for you have rewarded me, with
good, where as I have rewarded the with evil. And thou have showed this day,
how that you have delte louynglye with me, for as much as when the Lord had
locked me in thine hands, thou kylledst me not. For who shall find his enemy,
and let him depart into a good way? Wherefore the lord reward the with good,
for that you have done unto me this day. And now behold, I wot well that thou
shall be king, and that the kingdom of Israel shall be stablysshed in thine
hand. Swear now therefore unto me by the lord, that thou shalt not destroy
my seed after me / and that thou shalt not put my name out of my fathers
house. And David swear unto Saull, and Saull went home. But David and his men
gat them up unto an hold.

Samuel dies. David flees into the wylder^nes of Pharan.

CAPI. XXV.
AND i. (...)
Samuel dyed, and all the Israelites gathered together and lamented him, and
buried him in his own house at Rama. And David arose, and gat him to the
wilderness of Pharan. And there was a man in Maon whose possessyon was in
Carmell, and the man was excedyng mighty, and had. iii. M. sheep, and a
thousand gootes. And he was shearynge his sheep in Carmell. The name of the man
was Naball, and the name of his wife was Abigaill, and she was a woman of a god
wit, and bewtyfull. But the man was churlyshe, and of shrewed conditions, and
was of the kynred of Caleb. And David herd in the wilderness, that Naball did
sheare his sheep. And David sent out ten young men, and said unto them: get
you up to Carmell, and go to Naball, and great him in my name. And thus shall
ye say: peace be to in the vvyldernesse,) and we did them no spyte, neither
was there ought ( of the flock) myssyng unto them, all the while they were in
Carmel: ask thy laddes / and they will show the. Wherefore let these young men
find favor in thine eyes (for we come in a good ceason) and ^ Reg. (...). ^.
give I pray the whatsoever comes to thine hand, unto thy servants, and
to thy son David. And when David's young men came, they told Naball al those
words in the name of David, and then held their peace. And Naball answered
David's servants, and said: What is David? and what is the son of Isai? there
is plentye of servants now a days, that break away every men from his
master. Shall I then take my bread, my water and my flesh, that I have
killed for my shearers, and give it unto men whom I wot not whence they be?

And so David's servants turned their

And they gyrded every man his sword about him, and David was gyrded with his
sword. And there followed David upon a iiii. C. men, and two hundred abode by
the stuff

But one of the laddes told Abigaill Nabals wife, saying: behold, David sent
messengers unto our master out of the wilderness to salute him, and he rayled
on them. And yet the men are very good unto us, and did us no dysplesure,
neither myssed we any thing, as long as we were conversant with them, when we
were in the feldes. They were a wall of defense unto us both by night and day,
all the while we were with them keeping sheep. Now therefore, take heed, and se
what thou have to do, for there is an occasyon of evil given against our
master and all his household, seeing: he is ungracious to speak to. Then
Abigaill made have, and took. ii. C. loves, and two bottels of wine, and five
sheep redye dressed, and five measures of parched corn, and an hundred frayles
of reasennes, and two hundred topnettes of fygges, and the King) regard this
vnthryftye man Nabal: for as his name is, so is he: Nabal is his name / and
follye is with him. But I thine handemayde / saw not the young men of my
lord, whom thou sendedst. Now therefore my

But when the lord shall have delte well, this day to mete me. Blessed is thy
saying / and blessed art thou, which have kept me this day from coming to
shed blood, and from aduengyng my self with mine own hand. For in very deed,
as sure as the Lord God of Israel lives, which has kept me back from
hurtynge the, except thou had hasted and met me, thynkest thou, there had been left unto Naball by the dawning of the day, a pysser against the wall?
And so David received of her hand, that which she had brought him, and said
to her: go up in peace to thine house. Behold, I have obeyed thy voice, and
have accepted thy person.

And Abigaill came to Naball: and behold / he held a feast in his house, like
the feast of a king, and Nabals heart was merry within him, for he was very
dronken. Wherefore she told him nothing, neither less nor more /

And when the servants of David were come to Abigaill to Carmell, they spoke
unto her, saying: David sent us unto the, to take the to his wife. And she
arose, and bowed her self on her face to the arth, and said: Behold, let thy
handmayde be a servant, to wash the feet of the servants of my lord. And
Abigaill hasted, and arose, and gat her up upon an ass, with five damsels of
hers that went at her feet, and she went after the messengers of David / and
became his wife. David also took Ahinoam of Iesrahell, and they were both his
wives. But Saull gave ii. Reg. iii. ^
Micholl his daughter David's wife to Phalti the son of Lais which was of
Gallim.

Saull slepeth in his tent, and David takes away his spear / and a cruse of
water that stood at his head.

CAPI. XXVI.
THe Ziphites came unto Saull to Gibea, saying: Does not David hyde him

And behold, Saull lay slepyng within

For they were all a sleep, because the lord ^. Reg^. (...) ^
ye are worthy to dye, because ye have not kept your master, the lords
anointed. And now se where the kings spear is, and the cruse of water, that
was at his head.

And Saull knew David's voice, and said: ^ Reg^ ^4 d
is this thy voice my son David? and David said: it is my voice, my lord, O
king. And he said: wherefore does my Lord thus persecute his servant? for
what have I done? or what evil is in mine hand? Now therefore let my Lord
the king hear the words of his servant. If the lord have styrred the

David ^^^eth to Achis hynge of Gath.

CAPI. XXVII.
ANd David said in his heart: I shall

The Philistines moan war against Saull, which seeks alter an enchaunter.

CAPI. XXVIII.
ANd it chanced in those days, that the

^ Reg^ (...) ^
Samuel was then dead, and all Israel had lamented him, and buried him in
Rama his own city. Exodi. (...). ^
And Saull had put the women that had spirytes of prophesye, and the Sothsayers
out of the land. And the Philistines gathered together, and came, and pytched
in Sunem. And Saul gathered all Israel together, and they pytched in Gilboa:
And when Saull saw the hooste of the Philistines, he was afraid, and his
heart was sore astonyed. And when Saull asked counseyle of the Lord, the lord
answered him not, neither by dreams / nor by Urim, nor yet by prophets. Then
said Saull unto his servants, Leuit. x^^. ^
seek me a woman that has a spirit of prophesye, that I may go to her and
ask of her. And his servants said to him: Behold, there is a woman that
has a Spirit of prophesye at Endor. And Saull changed himself, and put on
other raiment, and then went he and two men with him, and they came to the
woman by night. And he said: prophesye unto

And Saull perceived that it was Samuel, i. Reg. xv. f.
For the lord has rent the kingdom out of thine hand, and given it to thy
neighbor David. Because thou obeyedst not the voice of the Lord, nor
executedst his fearce wrath upon the Amalechites, therefore has the lord done
this unto the this day. And moreover, the Lord will deliver Israel with the,
into the hands of the Philistines. i Regu^. 31. a
To morrow shalt thou and thy sons be with me, and the lord shall give the
host of Israel into the hands of the Philistines. Then Saull fell straight
way flat on the earth as long as he was, and was sore a dread, because of the
words of Samuel.

And there was no strength in him, for he had eaten no bread all the day and the
night before. Iudi xii. ^ i. Reg. xix. ^ Psalm. ^xix.
have put my soul in my hand, and have harkened unto thy words, which thou
saydest unto me. Now therefore harken thou also unto the voice of thine
handmayd and let me set a morsel of bread before the, that thou may eat and
get the strength, and then go on thy iourneye. He refused, and said: I will
not eat. But his servants and the woman together compelled him, and he
herkened unto their voice. And so he arose from the earth, and sat him on a
bed. The woman had a fat calfe in the house, and she hasted and killed it, and
took flower and kneded it, and did bake sweet cakes thereof, and brought them
before Saull and before his servants. And when they had eaten, they stood up,
and went away the same night.

David goth with king Achi^ to fight against Saull.

CAPI. XXIX.
THe Philistines were gathered together

And the Lords of the Philistines were i Reg. (...) and. ^^^^
Saull slew his thousand, and David his. x* M? Then Achis called David, and
said unto him: As sure as the Lord lives, thou have ben honest, and good in
my sight, when thou wentest out and in with me in the host: neither have I
found evil with the, sense thou came to me unto this day: Nevertheless
the Lords of the Philistines been with the unto this day, that I may not go
fight against the enmyes of my lord the king? Achis answered and said to
David: I know that thou art good, and art in my sight as an angel of God.
Notwithstanding the lords of the Philistines have said. Let him not go up
with us to battayl. Wherefore now arise up early in the morning with thy
masters servants that are come to the: and when ye be up early (as soon as
ye have light) depart. And so David and his men arose up early to depart in
the morning, and to return in to the land of the Philistines. And the
Philistines went up to Iezrahel.

David returnyng from king Achis fyndeth zi^leg burnt.

CAPI. XXX.
BUt when David and his men were come Reg^^. ^3. b
said to Abiathar the priest Ahimelechs son: I pray the, bring me the Ephod.
And Abiathar brought the Ephod to David. And David asked counsel at the
lord, saying: shall I follow after this company? and shall I overtake them?
And he answered him: follow for thou shalt overtake them, and recover the
pray. So David and the. vi. C. men that were with him, went and came to the
river Besor, where a part of them abode. But David and iiii. C. men followed.
For. ii. C. abode behind being to weary to go over the river Besor. And they
found an Egypcian in the field, and ^rouer. 25 c
and gave him bread to eat, and water to drink, and gave him a few fygges
and two clusters of reasens. And when he had eaten, his spirit came again to
him: for he had eaten no bread, nor drunk no water in three days and three
nyghtes.

And David said unto him: to whom belongest thou? and whence art thou? he
said?

And David laid upon them from the even until the twylyght on the morrow: so
that there escaped not a man of them, save four hundred young men which rode
away upon camels, and fled. And David recovered all that the Amalekites had
carried away, and David rescued his two wives: so that there was no person of
them lackyng, small or great, son or daughter, or of the spoil of all that
they had taken away, David recovered them all again. And David took all the
sheep, and the oxen. And they drove them before his ca^^el, and said: this is
David's pray. And Daui^ came to the. ii. C. men, that were to werye for to
follow David, whom they had made also to abide at the river Besor. And they
came to mete David, and the people that were with him. And when David came to
the people, he saluted them. Then answered all the wicked

Joshua. (...) t
But as his part is that goth down and fyghteth, so shall his part be, that
taryeth by the stuff that it may be parted alyke. And so from that day
forward, was that made a statute and law in Israel until this day. When
David therefore came to Zikleg, he sent ( gifts) of the pray unto the elders of
Judah and to He sent to them of Bethel: to them of southe Ramoth: to them of
Iathir: to them of Aroer to them of Sephamoth: to them of Esthemoa to them of
Rachel: to them of the cities of Ierhameel: to them of the cities of the
Kenites: to them of Horma: to them of Borasa^: to them of Athach: to them that
are in Hebron, and in all places, where David and his men were wont to haunte.

Saul kylleth him self, and his chyldr^ are sleyne in the battle.

CAPI. XXXI.
THe ^ Para. ^. ^
Philistines fought against Israel Iudi. ix ^. ^. Para. x. a
draw out thy sword, and thrust me through therewith, lest these uncircumcised
come and thrust me through, and make a mockyng stock of me. But his harnes
berer would not, for he was sore afraid. And Saul took a sword, and fell upon
it. And when his harnes berer saw that Saul was dead, he fell likewise upon his
sword, and dyed with him. And so Saul dyed and his. iii. sons, and his harnes
berer, and al his me^ that same day together. And when the men of Israel that
^. Para. x. ^
On the morrow when the Philistines were come to spoil them that were sleyne,
they found Saul and his. iii. sons lie in mount Gilboa. And they cut of his
head, and stryped him out of his harnes: and sent in to the land of the
Philistines on every side, that they should publishe it in the temple of their
ydols: and among the people. And they laid up his harnes in the house of
Astharoth, but they hanged up his body on the wall of Bethsan. ii. Regu^. ii d
When the inhabitours of Iabes in Gilead herd thereof what the Philistines had
done to Saul, they arose (as many as were strong men) and went all night and
took the body of Saul, and the bodies of his sons from the wall of Bethsan
and came to Iabes, and ^^^^. 34. a
burnt them there, and took their bones, and buried them under a tree at Iabes,
and fasted, vii. days

The end of the first book of Samuel, otherwise called the first of the kings.
The second book of Samuel, otherwise called the second book of the kings.
The lamentacyon of David for Saull and Ionathas.

CAPI. Primo.
AFter the death of Saull i Regu^. (...). ^
slaughter of the Amaleckites, and had been two days in Zikleg, Behold, there
came a man the third day out of the host from Saul, with his clothes rent,
and earth upon his head. And when he came to David, he fell to the earth and
did obeysaunce. David said unto him: whence come thou? He said unto him:
Out of the host of Israel am I escaped. And David said unto him. And what is
chanced? tell me. He said: the people is ^^ed from the battle: and many of
the people are overthrown, and dead: And Saull and Ionathas his son are
dead also.

And David said unto the young man that ii. Reg. (...) and x^^^.
and rent them, and so did all the men that were with him. And they mourned, and
wept, and fasted until even, for Saul and Ionathas his son, and for the
people of the lord, and for the house of Israel, because they were overthrown
with the sword.

And David said unto the young man that

And David called one of his young men and said: Go to, and run upon him. And
he smote him: that he dyed: the^ said David unto him. Thy blood be upon thine
own head. Math. ^i^. c ^he, xix. d
For thine own mouth has testified against the saying: I have sleyne the
Lords anointed.

And David mourned with this lamentacion over Saul and over Ionathas his son,
and bad teach the children of Israel the use of the bow. And behold, it is
written in the book of the ryghteous. ( And he said. Consider, O Israel,
these that be dead and vvounded upon thy high hills.) O noble Israel the
wounded are sleyne upon thy hills: Oh how are the mighty overthrown. ^^^he.
i. e
Tell it not in Gath: nor publysshe it in the streets of Askalon: lest the
daughters of the Philistines rejoice, and lest the daughters of the
uncircumcised triumph. Ye mountains of Gilboa, upon you be neither dew nor
rain, not upon these feldes of offerynges. For there the shield of the myghtie
is cast down: the shield of Saull, as though he had not

Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saull, which clothed you in purple with
pleasures and hanged ornaments of gold upon your apparel. How were the
mighty sleyne in battle? Ionathas is dead on the high hills. Woe is me for
the (my brother Ionathas) very kind have thou been unto me.

Thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of women. ( As a mother loves
her only child, even so did I love the.) Oh how are the mighty overthrown?
and the weapons of war destroyed.

David is anointed in Hebron. The battle of the servants of David and
Isboseth.

CAPI. II.
AFter this, it fortuned, that David ^. Reg. 23. a Regu^. 5. ^
asked

And the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David king, over the house
of Judah. And they told David, saying: It is i. Regu^. 31. e
the men of Iabes in Gilead that buried Saul.

And David sent messengers unto the men ^^. Reg. ^. ^
And the time which David reigned in Hebron over the house of Judah, was. vii.
year and six months. And Abner the son of Ner and the servants of
Isboseth the son of Saul went out of Mahanaim, to Gibeon. And Ioab the son
of Zaruia and the servants of David went out, and met them by the poole of
Gibeon. And they sat down, the one on the one side of the poole, and the other
on the other side. And Abner said to Ioab: let the young men arise, and play
before us. And Ioab said: Let them arise.

Then there arose and went over twelve of Gene. 24. ^.
turned neither to the right hand nor to the left, from Abner. Then Abner
looked behind him, and young men, and take the his weapons. But Asahel would
not depart from him. And Abner said again to Asahel, depart fro me. Wherefore
should I smite the to the ground and not be able to hold up my face to Ioab
thy brother? Howbeit, when he would in no wise depart, Abner with the hinder
end of the spear smote him under ^ Regu^. xx c
the short rybbes, that the spear came out behind him, that he fell down in
the same place, and dyed there. And as many as came to the place where Asa

And Ioab said: as truly as God lives if thou had not spoken in the
morning the people had been departed, every one from ^. Reg. xx. ^
Ioab blew a trompet, and all the people stood still, and pursued after Israel
no more, neither fought they any more. And Abner and his men walked all that
night through the plain, and went over Jordan, and past through all Bethhoron
till they came to Mahanaim.

And Ioab returned from persecutyng Abner. And when he had gathered all the
people together, there lacked of David's servants nynetene men, and Asahel.
But the servants of David had sleyne of Ben Iamin and of Abners men, three
bundred and three score men. And they took up Asahel and buried him in the
Sepulcher of his father in Bethleem. And Ioab and his men went all night,
until the dawning of the day, and came to Hebron.

Abner comes to David and brings him his wise Michol. Ioab kylleth Abner.

CAPI. III.
THere was long war between the house 1. Par. iii. c
And unto David were ( syxc) children borne in Hebron: his eldest son also
was Amnon, of Ahinoam the Iezrahelite: the second Cheleab, of Abigail the wife
of Nabal the Carmelite: the third Absalom, the son of Maachah the daughter of
Thalmai the king of Gessur: the fourth Adonai, the son of Hagith the fyfte,
Sephatia the son of Abitall: the syxte, Iethream by Egla David's wife. These
were borne to David in Hebron. And it fortuned that while there was war
between the house of Saul and the house of David, Abner held up the house of
Saul. And Saul had a concubyne named Rizpa, the daughter of Ahia.

And Isboseth said to Abner: wherefore 1. Regu^. ^^^
dogs head, which against Judah do show mercy this day unto the house of
Saul thy father, and to his brethren and friends, and have not delivered the
into the hand of David: and thou fyndest a fault in me this day for this
woman? Rut^* ^^
So and so do God to Abner. For as the Lord has sworn to David, so will I be
on his side, to bring the kingdom from the house of Saul, that the throne of
David may be stablysshed over Israel and over Judah even from Dan to Bersabe.
And he could give Abner never a word to answer, because he feared him.

And Abner sent messengers to David secretly,

And David sent messengers to Isboseth Saul's son, saying: (...)
deliver me my wife Michol, which I married with (...)
an hundred foreskynnes of the Philistines. And Isboseth sent, and took her
from her husband (...)
Pal^iel the son of Lais. And her husband went with her, and came weeping
behind her, till they came to Bahurim. Then said Abner unto him, go and
return. And he returned. And Abner had co^municacion with the elders of Israel,
saying: Ye sought for David in times past, that he might be your hynge. Now
then do it: for the Lord has said of David: By the hand of my servant
David I will save my people Israel, out of the hands of the Philistines, and
out of the hand of all their enemies. And Abner spoke in the

And Abner said unto David: I will

And behold, the servants of David, and Ioab came from chasynge the robbers,
and brought a great pray with them. But Abner was not with David in Hebron: for
he had sent him away to depart in peace. When Ioab and all the host that was
with him were come, men told Ioab saying: Abner the son of Ner came to the
kyng^, and he has sent him away, that he is gone in peace. Then Ioab came to
the king, and said: what have thou done? Behold, Abner came unto the, and why
have thou sent him away, that he should escape quyte? Thou know Abner the son
of Ner, (...).
to speak with him secretly, and smote him under the short rybbes that he
dyed, for the blood of Asahel his brother. And when afterward it^ came to
David's ear, he said. I and my kingdom are gyltlesse before the lord for
ever, concerning the blood of Abner the son of Ner. Let the blood remain on
the head of Ioab and on (...).
sleyne their brother Asahel at Gibeo^ in battle. And David said to Ioab, and
to all the people that were with him. (...). b
Rent your clothes, and put on sack cloth, and mourn before Abner. And king
David him self followed the corse. And when they buried Abner in Hebron, the
king lift up his voice and wept beside the sepulcher of Abner, and so did all
the people. And the king lamented over Abner, and said: dyed Abner as a fool
dies? Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet brought in to cheynes: but as
a man falls before wicked Children, so fellest thou. And al they that were of
the people wept yet more over him.

And when all the people came to eat meat

And these men the sons of Zaruia be to hard for me. The Lord reward the
doer of evil, according to his wickedness.

Baanath and Rechab slew Isboseth the son of Saul's.

CAPI. IIII.
WHen Saul's son herd that Abner

And Saul's son had two men that were captains over the soldiers, the one
called Baanah and the other Rechab, the sons of Rimmon a Berothite, of the
children of Ben Iamin: for Beroth was rekened to Ben Iamin. And these
Berothites fled to G^^ thiam, and soiourned there until the same time. (...)
And Ionathas Saul's son had a son that was lame on his feet.

And he was five year old, when the tidings And the woman that was the
keeper of the door, and cleansed the wheat, was a sleep) And they came into the
mids of the house as though they would have fetched wheat, and Rechab and
Baana his brother smote him under the short

And David answered Rechab and Baana 1. Reg. (...). b
As surely as the Lord lives, which has delivered my soul out of all
adversities: when one 11. Regu^. ^^
told me and said that Saul was dead, thynkyng to have brought good tidings,
I caughte him, and slew him in Zikleg: which thought that I would have given
him a reward for his tidings bringing. How much more when wicked men have
sleyne a ryghteous person, in his own house and upon his bed? Shall I not
require his blood of your hand and take you from the earth? And David
commanded his young men, and they slew them and cut of their hands and fete,
and hanged them up over the poole in Hebron. But they took the head of
Isboseth, and buried it in the sepulcher of ii. Reg. iii. f
Abuer in Hebron.

David is yet again anointed King, and takes the arc from Sion.

CAPI. V.
THen came all the trybes of Israel i. Para. x. a
to ii. Reg. ii. ^.
king to Hebron. And king David made a covenant with them in Hebron before
the Lord. And they anointed Dauyd king over Israel. David was thyrtie year
old, when he began to reygne, and he reigned xl. year. In Hebron he reigned
over Judah seven year and six months: And in Jerusalem he reigned thyrtye and
three years over all Israel and Judah.

The king also and his men went to Leuit. xx^. d
Wherefore: they said, the blind and the lame shall not come in to the house.
And so David dwelte in the tower and called it the city of David, and buylte
round about it from Millo inward. And David prospered and grew, and the
Lord God of hoostes was with him. And Hiram king of Tire sent messengers to
David, and Cedar trees, and carpenters and masons for walls: and they buylte
David an house. And David perceived, that the lord had stablysshed him king
over Israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom for his people Isreal's sake.

And David took him mo concubines and i. Pat. ii^. ^
And these be the names of the sons that were borne unto him in Jerusalem:
Sa^mua, Sobab, Nathan, and Solomon, Iibhar also and Elisua, Nepheg, and Iaphia,
Elisama Eliada, and Eliaphalet. But when the Philistines herd, that they had
anointed David king over Israel, they came all up to seek David. And as soon
as David herd of it, he gat him to an hold* And when the Philistines came,
they laid them along in the valey of Raphaim. And David 1 Reg(...) 2. Reg(...)
asked counsel of the Lord, saying: shall I go up to the Philistines? Will
thou deliver them in to my hands? And the Lord answered unto David: Go up,
for I will deliver the Philistines in to thy hands.

And David came to the plain of Perazim Shall I go up against the Philistynes?
and vvylt thou deliver them in to my hand?) He answered: Thou shalt not go
up: but compass them on the backesyde, and come upon them over against the
Peretrees. And when thou herest the noise of a thing going in the top of the
Peretrees then remove. For then shall the Lord go out before the, to smite the
host of the Philistines. And David did as the Lord had commanded him, and
smote the Philistines from Geba, until thou come to Gazer.

The Arc is brought forth of the house of Abinadab. Uza is stryken and dies,
David daun^eth before it, and is therefore despised of his wife Mithol.

CAPI. VI.
Again, David gathered together all (...)
of the house of Abinadab that was at Gibea. And Uza and Ahio the sons of
Abinabab drove the new carte.

And when they brought it out of the house of Abinadab that was at Gibea, with
the Ark of God. Ahio went before the arc. And David, and all the house of
Israel playde before the Lord in sundry instruments made of Cedre wood, with
harpes, Psalteries, Tymbrelles, fedyls, and Symbals.

And when they came to Nachons thresheynge (...). 1^. a
Obeth Edom the Gethite, three months, and the Lord blessed Obeth Edom and al
his household. And one told king David, how that the Lord had blessed the
house of Obeth Edom and all that perteyned unto him, because of the ark of God. And David went and brought the ark of God from the house of Obeth Edom,
into the city of David with gladness. ( And there were which David vii. sorts
of dauncers, and calves for Sacrifyce.

And when they that bare the Ark of the lord, had gone six spaces, he offered
an axe, played on harp strings, and) daunsed before the Lord with all his
might, and was gyrded with a lynnen Ephod. So David and all the house of
Israel brought the Arc ( of the covenant) of the lord, with showtyng and
trompet blowynge. And it fortuned, that as the ark of the lord came in to the
city of David, Michol Saul's daughter looked through a wyndew, and saw king
David spring and dance before the lord, and she despised him in her heart.
And when they brought in the ark of the Lord, they set it in his place, even
in the mids of the tabernacle that David had pytched for it.

And David offered burntofferynges and peace offerynges before the Lord. And
as soon as David had made an end of offryng burntoffrynges and
peaceoffrynges, he blessed the people in the name of the Lord of hoostes and
gave among all the folk, even among the hole multitude of Israel, as well to
the women as men, to every one a Cake of bread and a piece of flesh, and a
flacket of drink. And so all the people departed every one to his

David would build God an house: but is forbidden of God.

CAPI. VII.
IT fortuned, that as the king sat in his

Now therefore, so say unto my servant 1. Reg. xvi*
I took the from the sheep coote (as thou waste following sheep) that thou
myghtest be ruler over my people Israel. And I was with the in all that thou
wentest to, and have destroyed all thine enemies out of thy syghte, and have
made the a great name, like unto the name of the great men that are in the
world. And therefore, I will appoynte a place for my people Israel, and will
plant it, that they may dwell in a place of their own, and move no more,
neither shall wicked people trouble them any more, as they did at the
beginning: since the time that I set Judges over my people Israel, and I will
give the rest from all thine enemies. And the Lord tells the, that he will
make the an house. And when thy days be fulfilled, thou shalt sleep with thy
fathers, and I will set up thy seed after the, which shall pracede out of thy
body, and will stablysshe his kingdom. 11. Reg. v. a Psalm. 132. d
He shall build an house for my name, and I will stablysshe the seat of his
kingdom forever. ^^bru^. i b.
I will be his father and he shall be my son: 111. Reg. (...). ^ Psalm. 89. d.
If he sin, I will chasten him with such a rod as men be chastened with, and
with such plages as the Iere. 33. ^
and thy seat shall be stablysshed forever.

According to all these words, and according to all this vision, bid Nathan
speak unto David. Then went David in, and set him down before the lord, and
said: what am I, O lord God? and what is my house? that thou should have
brought me thus far forth? And this was yet a small thing in thy sight: O lord
god, but thou have spoken also of thy servants house for a great while to
come. For this is the use of man, O lord god. And what can David say more unto
the For thou Lord God know thy servant. Even for thy words sake and
according to thine own heart have thou done all these great things, to make
them known unto thy servant. Wherefore thou art great, O lord God: for there
is none like the, Deuteronomy. vii. ^
neither is there any God save thou, according to all that we have herd with
our ears.

Deuteronomy. iiii. a
And what one people in the earth is like thy people Israel, whose God, went
and delivered them, that they might be his people, and that he might make him a
name, and to show great and terrible things in the earth, for thy people
Exodi. 14. d
which thou redemedst to the out of Egypt, even the people with their
gods. For thou have ordained thy people Israel, to be thy people forever.

And thou Lord art become their God. And now (Lord God) the word that thou
have spoken concerning thy servant and his house make it good forever, and do
as thou haste said. For so shall thy name be magnified forever, of men that
shall say: the lord of hoostes is the god of Israel: and the house of thy
servant David shall be stablysshed before the. For thou O Lord of hoostes,
God of Israel have told in the ear of thy servant saying. I will build the
an house. And therefore has thy servant found in his heart, to pray this
prayer unto the. Deui^. ^^
Therefore now lord God, thou art God, and thy word must be true, thou that
have told this goodness unto thy servant. And now go to, and bless the house
of thy servant, that it may continue forever before the. For thou Lord God
have spoken it, and with thy blessyng shall the house of thy servant be
blessed forever.

David overcomes the Philistines.

CAPI. VIII.
AFter this it fortuned that David smote Number. ^^
And he smote the Moabites and measured them with a line, and cast them down
to the ground. Even with two lines measured he them whom he slew, and the
length of one line saved he a live. And so became the Moabites David's
servants, and paid tribute.

David smote also, Hadadezar the son of Rehob king of Zoba as he went to
recover his brother at the river Pherat. And David took a thousand and seven
hundred horsemen of his host, and twenty thousand footmen and destroyed all
his charettes, reserving only one hundred of them.

And when the Sirians of Damascon came

And David took the sheldes of gold that belonged to the servants of
Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem. And out of Beta and Berothai (cities
of Hadadezer) did David bring exceeding much brass. ( vvherof Solomon made
all the brazen vessel in the temple, and the brazen Lauatory, and the pyllers,
and the altar.)

i. (...)
When Thoi king of Hamath herd how silver and gold that he had consecrated of
all nacyons, which he subdued: of Sirya of Moabites, and of the children of
Ammo^, of the Philistines, and of Amalek, and of the spoil of Hadadezer son of
Rehob king of Zoba. And David gat him a name after that he returned (...). ^4.
b
And he put kepers in Edo^, even thorowout al Edom put he soudyours, and al
they of Edom became David's servants. And the Lord kept David whatsoever he
took in hand. And David reigned over all Israel, and executed right and
Justice unto all his people. And 1 Reg (...). b
Ioab the son of Zaruia was over the hooste, and Iehosaphat the son of Ahilud
was recorder. And Sadoch the son of Ahitob, and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar
were the Priests, and Saraia was the Scrybe. And Banaiahu the son of Iehoiada
was over the Crethites and the Phelethites: and David's sons were cheyfe
rulers.

David restores all the feldes of Saull to Miphiboseth the son of Ionathas.

CAPI. IX.
ANd David said: is there yet any man 1 Reg. 4. b
Ionathas has yet a son: which is lame on his feet. The king said unto
him: where is Micha.
thy masters son may have food to cate. But Miphiboseth thy masters son
shall eat bread always upon my table. For Ziba had fyftene sons, and
twentye servants.

Then said Ziba unto the king: According 11. Reg. ^. ^
and was lame on both his feet.

The messengers of David are vyllaynously ^ntreated of the king of Moab.

CAPI. X.
IT happened after this, that the king of the death of) his father. And David's
servants came into the land of the Children of Ammon, and the Lords of the
children of Ammo^ said unto Hanon their lord* thynkest thou that David does
honor thy father, that he has sent confortours to the? Has not David rather
sent his servants unto the, to search the City, and to spy * out, and to
overthrow it? Wherefore, Hanon took David's servants, and shaued of the one
half of every man's beerde, and cut of their garments in the mydle, even
hard to the buttockes of them, and sent them away. When they told it unto
David, he sent to mete them (for they were men excedyngly a shamed) and the
king said: ^arye at Ierico until your beerdes be grown, and then t^turne.
were by themselves in the field. When Ioab saw that the front of the battle
was against him before and behind, he chose of all the fresshe young men of
Israel, and put them in array against the Sirians. And the rest of the people
he delivered into the hand of Abisai his brother, that he might put them in
array against the children of Ammon.

And he said, if the Siryans be stronger

And they came with their army, and Sobah

The aduoutry of David with Bethsabe, the wy^e of Urias. Urias is gyl^fully
s^^yne.

CAPI. XI.
ANd it came to pass that (after the year ^ Par. xx. a
destroyed the Children of Ammon, and beseyged Raba. But David tarried still at
Jerusalem. And it chanced in an evening that David arose out of his bed, and
walked upon the roof of the kings palace, and from the roof he saw a woman
Exodi. i^ ^
washing herself, and the woman was very bewtyfull to look upon. And he sent
to inquire what woman it should be, saying: is it not Bethsabe the daughter of
Eliam, and wife to Urias the Hethite? And David sent messengers, and fet her.
And she came in unto him Reu^ti. (...) ^
and he lay with her. And ( immediately) she was purifyed from her uncleanness,
and returned unto her house. And the woman conceived, ii. Reg. ^^^
By the life and by the life of thy soul, I will not do this thing. And David
said unto Urias: Iudi. (...)
tarry here this day also, and to morrow I will let the depart. And so Urias
abode in Jerusalem that day, and the morrow. And when David had called him, he
did eat and drink before him, and he made him drunk. And at even he went out
to lie on his couche with the servants to fume, and say unto the: wherefore
approached ye so nygh unto the city, when ye did fight? wist ye not that they
would hurl and ^^di. ix. ^
did not a woman cast a piece of a mylstone upon him from of the wall, and he
dyed in Thebes? Why went ye nygh the wall? then say thou? thy servant Urias
the Hethite is dead also. So the messenger went, and came, and showed David all that Ioab had sent him for, and the messenger said unto David: the men
prevailed against us, and came out unto us into the field, and we ( with
violence) stacke unto them, even unto the entering of the gate. And the shuters
shot from the walls, upon thy servants, and some of the kings servants
be dead. And thy servant Urias the Hethite is dead also. And David said
unto the messenger: thus shall thou say unto Ioab: let not that thing trouble
the. For ( the chance of war is diverse, and) the sword deuoureth one as
well as another: make thy battle more strong against the City, to
overthrow it, and se that thou courage Ioab. And when the wife of Urias herd
that her husband was dead, she mourned for him. And when the mourning was
past, David sent and fet her to his house, and she became his wife, and bare
him a son. But this thing that David did, dyspleased the Lord.

David is reproved for the slaughter of Urias. The ^hy^^s conceived in
aduoutrye dies. After it / is Solomon borne.

CAPI. XII.
ANd the Lord sent Nathan unto David.

And David was excedyng wroth with ^. Regu^ xx. f
is the child of death. He shall restore the lamb ^^^di. 22. ^
four fold, because he did this thing, and had no petye.

And Nathan said to David: thou art the man. Thus says the Lord God of
Israel / i Regu^ 16 ^
I anointed the king over Israel, and ryd the out of the hand of Saull. I
gave the thy masters house, and thy masters wives into thy bosom, and gave
the, the house of Israel and of Judah, and might (if that had been to little)
have given the so much more. Wherefore then have thou despised the commandment
of the Lord, to do wickedness in his sight? thou have kylde Urias the Hethite
with the sword, and have taken his wife to thy wife, and have sleyne him with
the sword of the children of Ammon.

Now therefore, the sword shall never depart Deuit. ^8. ^
take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy nyghboure, and he
shall lie with thy wives in the sight of the son. For thou dydest it
secretly. But I will do this thing before all Israel, and in the open son
light.

And David said unto Nathan E^^^. (...)
I have sinned against the lord. And Nathan said bread before him, and he did
cate. Then said Eccle. 38. ^.
But now, seeing it is dead, wherefore should I fast? can I bring him again
any more? I shall go to him, rather then he shall come again to me. And David
comforted Bethsabe his wife, and went in unto her, and lay with her, and she
bare a son, and called his name p^ateable
mata. 1. a 1. Pat. iii. b
Solomon, and the lord loved him. And he sent by the hand of Nathan the
prophet, and called his name Beloved of the lord
Iedidia, of the lords behalf. Ioab fought against Raba the city of the
children of Ammon, and took the city of the kingdom: And Ioab sent messengers
to David saying: I have made 1. Par. (...). b
And he took their kings crown from of his head, which wayed an hundred
weight of gold, and in it were precious stoones. And it was set on David's
head. And he brought out the spoil of the city in exceeding great abundance.
And he carried out the people thas was therein and put them upon sawes and upon
iron harowes, and upon ar^es of iron, and thrust them in to the Tylekele. Thus
did he with all the cities of the children of Ammon. And so David and all the
people returned to Jerusalem.

Amnen David's son desyleth his systet Thamae. Absalom therefore hylleth Amnon.

CAPI. XIII.
AFter this it chanced that Absalom the

And so Amnon lay down, and made him

And she answered him: nay my brother / do (...)
forced her, and lay with her. And then Amnon hated her excedynglye: so that
the hate where with he hated her, was greater then the love with which he before
loved her. And Amnon said unto her: up, and get the hence. She answered him.
Thou have no cause. This evil that thou put me away is greater then the
other that thou dydest un to me. Nevertheless he would not hear her, but
called his boy that served him, and said: put away this woman from me, and
bolte the door after her. And she had a kyrtell of diverse colors upon her:
for with soche were the kings daughters (that were virgyns) apparelled. Then
his servant brought her the? Now yet be still my sister: he is thy brother.
Let not this thing grieve thine heart. And so thamar remained desolate in her
brother Absaloms house. But when king David herd of all these things, he was
very wroth. ( And he would not vex the spirit of Amnon his son for he loved
him, because he was his first borne.) And Absalom said unto his brother Amnon
neither good nor bad. Now be it Absalom hated Amnon because he had E^^te. 3^.
c. (...). xx^ viii
sheep shearers in the plain of Nazor, beside the trybe of Ephraim, and bad
all the kings sons, and came to the king, and said: behold, thy servant
has sheep shearers, let the king with his servants come to thy servant. The
king answered Absalom: nay my son. We will not go al, nor be chargeable
unto the. And Absalom lay sore upon him: howbeit he would not go, but blessed
him. Then said Absalom: If thou wylt not come, then let my brother Amno^ go
with us. And the king answered him: what needs it, that he go with the? But
Bvsalom made soche instance that he let Amnon, and all the kings children go
with him. Now had Absalom commanded his young men saying: mark when Amnons
heart is merry with wine and when I bid you smite Amnon, then kyl him: and fear
not, have not I bydden you? be hold therefore, and play the men. And the young
^^. (...). l. b and. iii. f.
tare his garments / and lay alonge on the earth: and all his servants
stood by with their clothes rent. And Ionadah the son of Simeah David's brother
/ answered, and said: let not my lord suppose that they have sleyne all the
young men / the kings sons, save Amnon only is dead. For that has been
determined in Absaloms mind, sense he forced his sister Thamar. Now therefore,
let not my lord the king take

By the wysdom of the woman of Thekoa, Absalom is called.

CAPI. XIIII.
IOab the son of Zaruia perceived, that Deuteronomy. ^i^. ^
deliver us him that smote his brother: that we may kill him for the soul of
his brother whom he slew. We will destroy the heir also. And so they shall
quench my sparkle which is left, that he shall styrte up (to my husband)
neither name nor issue upon the earth. And the king said unto 1. Reg. 14. ^
there shall not one here of thy son fall to the earth.

The woman said: let thine handmayde

And the king shall hear his handmayd / ^^. Reg. xi. b
As sure as thy soul lives my lord king, there is else no man (on the right
hand nor on the left) but as my lord the king has spoken, thy servant
Ioab: He bad me, and he put all these words in the mouth of thine handmayde.

For to the intent that I should alter my communicacyon, has thy servant Ioab
done this thing. And my Lord is wise, even as an angel of god, to understand
all things that are in the earth. And the king said unto Ioab: behold, I am
content to do this thing. Go, and ^et home the child Absalom again. And Ioab
fell to the ground on his And Ioabs servants came with their garments
rent, and said. Absaloms servants have burnt the piece of land with fire.

Then Ioab arose and came to Absalom unto his house, and said unto him:
wherefore has thy servants burnt my field with fire. And Absalom answered
Ioab: behold, I sent for the, desiring the to come, because I would have sent
the to the king, for to say: wherefore am I come from Gesur. It had been better
for me / to have been there still. Now therefore would I se the kings face. And
if there be any trespass in me, kill thou me. And so Ioab came to the king,
and told him: which when he had sent for Absalo^, he came to the king, and
fell to the ground on his face before him. And the king kyssed Absalom.

Absalom makes insurrection against his father. David is feign to flee for
fear of him.

CAPI. XV.
AFter this it fortuned, that Absalom gat him, and kyssed him. And on this
manner did ^. Re. xv. ^.
(when I was in Gesur in the land of Siria) saying: if the lord shall bring
me again to Jerusalem / I will serve the Lord. And the king said unto him:
go in peace. And so he arose, and went to Hebron. But Absalo^ sent spies
thorowout all the trybes of Israel saying: as soon as ye hear the voice of
the trompet blow, ye shall say: Absalom reygneth king in Hebron. And with
Absalom went. CC. men ^ Re. xvi. d and. ix. a
ten concubynes, to keep the house. And so the king and all the people went
out a foot, and tarried in a place that was far of. And all his servants went
about him. And all the Cerethites and all the Phelethites, and all the Gethites
( mighty men of war) (even vi. C. men which were come a foot from Geth) went
before the king. Then said the king to ^ Reg. 18. b
Ithai the Gethite, wherefore co^mest thou with us? Return and abide with the
king, for thou art a stranger, and art removed from thine own place. Thou
came but yesterdaye, and should I unquiet the to day to go with us? I will go
whyther I can. Therefore return thou, and carye again thy brethren. Mercy and
truth ( shall the Lord shevve unto the.) And Ithai answered the king, and
said: as truly as the Lord lives, in what place my Lord the king shall
be, whyther in death or life, even there also will thy servant be. And David
the king said to Ithai: come then, and go forward. And Ithai the Gethite
went forth, and all his men, and all the children that were with him. And all
the country wept with a loud voice, and so did all the people that went
forth.

The king also him self passed over the

If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again,
and show me both it, and the tabernacle thereof. But and if the Lord thus
say: I have no lust unto the, behold, here am I, let him do with me / what
seems good in his eyes.

The king said also unto Sadocke the i Regu^. (...). ^
Sear? Return into the city in peace. And take your two sons with you:
Ahimaaz thy son, and Ionathas the son of Abiathar. Behold, I will tarry in the
feldes of the wilderness, until there come some word from you to be told me.
Sadock therefore and Abiathar carried the ark of god again to Jerusalem, and
they tarried there. And David went up on mount olyuete, and wept as he went,
and had his head covered and went barefoote. And all the people that was with
him, had every man his head covered, and as they went up, they wept also. And
one told David, saying: Ahithophell is one of them that have conspyred with
Absalom: And David said: O Lord, turn the counsel of Ahithophell in to
folyshnesse.

When David was come to the top of the

But if thou return to the City, and say unto Absalom: I will be thy
servant O king: (as I have thus long ben thy fathers servant, so am I now
thy servant) thou may for my sake destroy the counsel of ii. Reg. xvii a,
b, c.
Ahithophell. And thou have there with the, Sadocke, and Abiathar the Priests,
unto whom thou shalt show all that thou can hear out of the kings house.
And behold, they have there with them their two sons, Ahimaaz Sadockes
son, and Ionathas Abiathers son: By them also shall ye send me all that ye
can hear. And so ^^^. xvii. d
Husai David's friend gat him to the city. And Absalom also entered into
Jerusalem.

ziba bringing presents to David / does falsely accuse Miphiboseth. Semei
curses David, and hurleth stones at him. Absatom (by the counsel of
Ahithophell) lies with his fathers concubynes.

CAPI. XVI.
ANd when David was a little paste the ^^. Reg. ix. b
Miphiboseth. And Ziba said: I beseech the that I may find grace in thy
sight, my Lord, O king.

And when king David came to Bahurim: ii. Re. xix. ^
Semei the son of Gera, and he came out cursynge. And he cast stones at David,
and at all the servants of king David: All the people also and all the men
of war were on his right hand, and on his left. And thus said Exobi. 22. d
Semei when he cursed: come forth, come forth thou bloodsheder, and thou man
of Belyall.

The Lord has brought upon the all the blood of the house of Saull, in whose
stead thou have reigned, and the Lord has delivered the kingdom into the
hand of Absalom thy son. And behold thou art come to thy mischeyfe,
because thou art a bloodsheder. Then said Abisai, the son of Zaruia unto
the king: why does this dead dog curse my lord the king? let me go now and
take of the head of him.

And the king said: what have I to do 3. Regu^. ii ^
for the Lord has bydden him: haplye the Lord will look on my wretchedness,
and do me good for his cursynge this day. And as David and his men went by the
way, Semei went alonge on the hills side over against him, and cursed as he
went, and threw stones at him, and cast dust. And the King and all that were
with him came werye, and refresshed them selves ^^ (...) (...).
there. And Absalom and all the people of the men of Israel came to Jerusalem,
and Ahithophell was with him.

And as soon as Husai the Arachite David's friend was come unto Absalo^, he
said unto him: God save the king, God save the king. And Absalom said again
to Husai: is this the kyndnes thou owe to thy friend? Why wentest thou not
with him? Husai answered unto Absalom: nay not so, but whom the Lord and this
people and all the men of Israel chose, his will I be, and with him will I
dwell. Moreover, unto whom shall I do service, but even to his son? And as I
was servant before with thy father, even so shall I be with the. Then spoke
Absalom to Ahithophell: give counsel, what is best for us to do. And
Ahithophell said unto Absalom: get the in unto thy Fathers ^^ Reg. (...) ^
and. (...)* ^
concubines which he has left to keep the house. And all Israel shall
hear, that thou art cast out of thy father: then shall the hands of all that
are with the, be strong. And so they pytched Absalom a tent upon the top of the
house. And he went in unto his Fathers concubynes in the sight of all Israel.

And the counsel of Ahithophell which he councelled in those days, was as a
man had asked counsel of God: even so was all the counsel of Ahithophell,
both with David and with Absalom.

Ahithophell, seeing his counsel disalowed of ^us^^ and forsaken, hangs him
self.

CAPI. XVII.
AHithophel said unto Absalom: let me Then said Absalom: call also Husai the
Arachite, and let us hear his counsel. When Husai was come to Absalom,
Absalom spoke unto him, saying: Ahithophell has given such counsel: Shall we
do after his saying, or no? tell thou.

Husai answered unto Absalom: the counsel that Ahithophel has given, is not
good (...). 17 b
Bear robbed of her whelps in the feelde. Thy father is a man also practiced
in war, and makes no taryenge with the people: behold, he lurketh now in
some cave or in some other place. And though some of his me be overthrown at
the first brunt, yet they that hear it will say: The people that follows
Absalom, be put to the worse. And the best men thou haste, whose hertes are as
the hertes of Lions, shall shrynke thereat. For all Israel knows, that thy
father is a mighty man, and they which be with him are all men of war.

Therefore my counsel is, that all Israel Esai. xix. ^.
For it was even the lords determinacion to destroy the good counsel of
Ahithophel: that the lord might bring evil upon Absalom.

Then said ^ Reg. xv. g
Husai unto Sadocke and Abia that the priests: of this and that manner did
Ahithophel and the elders of Israel counsel Absalom. And thus and thus have
I counsayled. Now therefore send quyckely, and show David, saying: tarry not
all night in the feldes of the wilderness, but get the over, lest the king be
devoured and all the people that are with him. Now Ionathas and Ahimaaz abode
by the well Rogell: (for they might not be seen to come into the city.) And a
wenche went and told them. And they went, and showed king David.

Nevertheless a lad saw them, and told

Then David came to Mahanaim. And Absalom passed over Jordan, he and all the
^^. Reg. x^. ^
Rabba the city of the children of Ammon, and Machir the son of Ammiel out of
Lodeber, and ^^. Reg. x^^ ^ 3. Reg. (...)* (...).
Berzela^ the Geliadite out of Roglim, brought beds, basyns, earthen vessels,
wheat and barley, flower, and parched corn, beenes rice, ootemele, honey,
butter, sheep, and chese of kyne, for David and all the people that were with him,
to eat. For they said: the people is hungrye, werye, and thrystye in the
wilderness.

Absalom is overcome in battle. He haugeth by the head in an Oak. He is
killed, and put in a dytche. David is so sorrowful for the death of Absalom
that he wepeth.

CAPI. XVIII.
AND David nombred the people that under the hand of Itha^, the Gethite. And
the king said unto the people: I will go with you also. And the people answered.
Thou shalt not go forth: for if we flee, our adversaries will not care for us:
neither shall they regard us, though half of us were sleyne. But thou art
worth ten thousand of us. Wherefore it is better, that thou soccoure us o^te of
the city. And the king said unto them: what seems you best, that will I do.

And the king stood by the gate side, and all the people came out by hundreds /
and by thousands. ^^. Reg. 16. d
Itha^, saying: entreat the young man Absalom gentylly for my sake. And all
the people herd, that the king gave all the captains charge concerning
Absalom. And so the people went out into the field against Israel, and the
battle was in the wood of Ephraim: where the people of Israel were put to
the worse before the servants of David, and there was a great slaughter that
day, even of. xx. M, me^. For the field was fought there in diverse places,
all abroad upon the earth. And the wood devoured mo people that day, then did
the sword. And Absalom came before the servants of David rydyng upon a Mule,
which carried him under the thic^e bows of a great oak. And his head was
caught of the oak, and he was lift up between heaven and earth: and the Mule
that was under him, went his way. And one that saw it

And he took three spears in his hand, and ^. Reg (...)* ^*
took and ^eared up a pyller, which is in kings dale. For he said: I have no
son. And therefore to keep my name in remembrance do I it. And he called the
pyller after his own name. And it is called unto this day: Absaloms pyller.

Then said Ahimaaz the son of Sadocke

And David sat between the two gates.

And the king said: is the young man

And behold, Chusi came also, and said: Good tidings my Lord the king, for
the Lord has quytte the this day out of the hand of al them that rose
against the. And the king said unto Chusi: is the young man Absalom safe?
Chusi answered: the enmyes of my lord the king, and all that rise against the,
to do the hurt, be as that young man is. And the king was moved, and went up
to a chamber over the gate, and wept. And as he went, thus he said: O my son
Absalom, my son, my son Absalom, would God I had dyed for the: O Absalom my
son, my son.

David is restored to his kingdom, and brought again to Jerusalem.

CAPI. XIX.
AND it was told Ioab: behold, the

And this day I do perceive, that if Absalom

And king David sent to Sadocke and For the king had said. Thus shall ye say
unto the people of ^uda.) Ye are my brethren, my bones and my flesh: wherefore
the^ are ye the last that bring the king home again? And say ye to Amasa: art
thou not of my bone and of my flesh? God do so and so to me, if thou be not
captain of the host to me for ever in the room of Ioab

And he bowed the hertes of all the men of Judah, even as the heart of one man:
so that they sent this word to the king: Return you with all thy servants.
So the king returned, and came to Jordan. And Judah came to Gilgal, for to go
down to mete the king and to convey him over Iorda^. And S^mei ^^. Re^ x^^. ^
the son of Gera, the son of Gemini, which was of Bahurim, hasted, and
came with the men of Judah to mete king David, and there were a thousand me^ of
Benjamin with him and ^^. R^^. ^6.^
Ziba the servant of the house of Saul and his. xv. sons and twentye
servants with him. And they went quyckely over Jordan before the king. And
there went over a boot that carried over the kings household, and they did him
pleasure.

And S^mei the son of Gera fell before

And Miphiboseth the son of Saul came the king, the king said unto him:
wherefore wentest thou not with me Miphiboseth? He answered: My lord, O king,
my servant deceived me. For thy servant said, I would have mine Ass sadled
to ride thereon, for to go to the king, because thy servant is lame. And Ziba
has falsely reported of thy servant unto my lord the king. And my Lord the
king is as an angel of god: do therefore what seems good in thine eyes. For all
my fathers house were but dead men before my lord the king: and yet dydest
thou put thy servant among them that did eat at thine own table. What right
therefore have I yet, to cry any more unto the king? And the king said unto him:
Why speak thou yet in thine own cause? ( It is determined, that) I have
said, thou and Ziba deuyde the lands between you. And Miphiboseth said unto
the king: yea let him take all: for so much as my lord the king is come
again in peace unto his own house.

And Berselai the Gileadite came down ^^. ^e. 57. g.
said unto the king: I am thus old, and how am I able to go up with the king
unto Jerusalem? I am this day four score year old: and can I descerne between
good and evil? Has thy servant any taste in that he eats or drynketh? Can
he hear any more the voice of singing men and women? Wherefore then should thy
servant be yet a burden unto my Lord the king? Thy servant will go a little
way over Jordan with the king: and why will the king recompense it me with
such a reward? Oh, let thy servant turn back again that I may dye in mine
own city, and (be buried) in the grave of my father and of my mother.
Behold, here is thy servant Chimean: let him go with my Lord the king, and
do to him, what shall please the.

And the king answered: Chimean shall go

And behold, all the men of Israel came to the king, and said unto him: why
have our brethren the me^ of Judah stolen the away and have brought the king and
his household and al David's men with him over Iordan^ And all the men of Judah
answered the men of Israel: the king is nere of kyn to us. wherefore be ye
angry for that mattter? think ye that we eat of the kings cost, or that we
take us any gifts? And the men of Israel answered the men of Judah, and said:
We have ten parts in the king, and have thereto more right to David then ye.
Why then did ye despise us, that our advise should not be first had in
restorynge our king again? And the words of the men of Judah were fearcer,
then the words of the men of Israel.

Seba the son Bichri cayseth Israel against David. Ioab kylleth Amasa
traitorously. The head of Seba is delivered to Ioab. David's receyuers are
nombred.

CAPI. XX.
WHen there came thither a certain man ii Reg^^ and. ^^^^
and took the ten women his concubines, that he had left behind him to keep
the house, and put them in ward, and fed them: but lay no more with them. And so
they were enclosed unto the day of their death, living in wydowhode.

Then said the king ^o Amasa: Call me

And Ioabs garment (that he had about (...). 27^
kiss him. But Amasa took no head to the knyfe that was in Ioabs hand, for
therewith he smote him ^^gu^. ii f
in the short rybbes, and shed out his bowels to the ground, and thrust at
him no more, and he dyed.

So Ioab and Abisai his brother followed Reg. ii. g
all the people stood still, he rolled Amasa out of the way in to the field, and
cast a cloth upon him, because he saw that every one that came, stood still by
him. And as soon as he was tombled out of the way, all the people went after
Ioab, to follow after Seba the son of Bichri.

And he went through all the tribes of Israel

And they cast up a bank against the city that stood in the valley. All the
people that was with Ioab, thrust at the wall to overthrow it. Then cried a wise
woman out of the city, hear, hear, bid Ioab come hither, that I may speak
with him. When Ioab was come unto her, the woman said: art thou Ioab? He
answered: I am he. She said unto him: hear the words of thy handmayde? And he
answered: I do hear. And she said again.

They speak in the old time, saying: 11. Reg. ii. g.
And he blewe a trompet, and they scattered from the city, every man to his
tente. And Ioab returned to Jerusalem, unto the king. Ioab was over all the
host of Israel. And Banaia the son of Iehoiada was over the Crethites and
Phelethites. And Aduram was over the tribute. And Iehosaphat the son of
Ahilud was recorder. Seua was scribe. And Sadocke and Abiathar were the
priests. And Ira the Iairete was David's priest.

Three dear years. The vengeance of the sins of Saul lyghteth on his seven
sons, which are hanged. Four great battayles^, which David had against the
Philistines.

CAPI. XXI.
THen there fell an hunger in the days of David, three years together, And
David ^ Reg. (...)
Gibaonites. And the king called the Gibaonites, and said unto them. (Now the
Gibaonites were not of the ^. (...) (...)
children of Israel, but a remenaunt of the Amorites, and the children of
Israel swear unto them: And Saull sought to sley them, for a zelle that he had
to the children of Israel and of Judah.) wherefore David said unto them what
shall I do for you, and wherewith shall I make the atonement, that ye may
bless the enheritaunce of the Lord* The Gibaonites answered him: we will have
no silver* nor gold, of Saul nor of his house, neither is it our mind, that
thou should kill any man in Israel. He said: what say ye th^n that I shall do
for you? They answered the king:

The man that consumed us, and ymagened

But the king had compassyon on Miphiboseth the son of Ionathas, the son
of Saull because of the Lords oath that was between them: even between David
and Ionathas the son of Saul. But he took the two sons of Rizpa the
daughter of Aia, (whom she bare unto Saul) even Armoni and Miphiboseth, and
the.v. sons of Michol, (the daughter of Saul) whom she bare to Adriel the
son of Barselai the Meholathite. And he delivered them unto the hands of the
Gibeonites, which hanged them in the hill before the Lord.

And they fell all seven together, and were sleyne in the days of harvest:
eue^ in the first days and in the beginning of barley harvest.

And Rizpa the daughter of Aia took sack cloth and hanged it up for them upon
the rock, even from the beginning of harvest until rain dropped upon them
out of heaven: and suffered neither the birds of the air to fall on them by
day, nor beasts of the field by night. And it was told David what Rizpa

It fortuned, that the Philistines had yet war again with Israel. And David
went down and his servants with him, and fought against the Philistines. And
David waxed fayntie, and Iesbi of Nob one of the sons of the gyau^tes (the
iron of whose spear wayed three hundred sycles, and he being gyrded with a new
sword) thought to have sleyne David. 2 Regu^. 23 c
But Abisaia the son of zaruia socoured him, and smote the Philistine, and
killed him.

And there was yet an other battle in i. Pa. xxi. a
Nob with the Philistines, where Eihana^ the son of the Iaere Orgim, a
Bethleemite slew one Goltath a gethite: the staff of whose spear was as great
as a weuers cloth beam And there was yet an other battle in Geth where was a
man of a great stature, and had on every hand. vi. fyngers, and on every foot
vi. toes xxiiii. in all. And was borne also of the kynred of the giauntes in
Geth. And wen he defied Israel, Ionathas the son of Simea the brother of
David, slew him. These four giauntes were borne in Geth, and fell in to the
hand of David and in to the hands of his seruauauntes.

The song of David for his delyueraunce from his enemies.

CAPI. XXII.
ANd David spoke the words of this Psel. ^^^
I will praise and call on the Lord, and so shall I be saved from mine
enemies. For the corrupcyons of death closed me about: the floudes of Beliall
put me in fear. The sorrows of hell compassed me about: the snares of death
ouertoke me. In my tribulacio^ will I call upon the lord, and cry to my god.
And he shall hear my voice out of his temple, and my cry shall enter into his
ears. The earth trembled and quaked: the foundacyons of heaven moved and shoke,
when he was angrye.

Smoke went up in his wrath, and consuming fire out of his mouth, coals were
kendled thereof. And he bowed heaven, and came

God thundered from heaven, and he that is most high, does put out his voice. He
shot arowes, and scattered them: he hurled lyghtenyng, and dyscomfyted them.
The flowynges of the sea appeared, and the foundacions of the world were seen,
by the reason of the rebukynge of the lord, and through the blastyng of the
breath of his nose thryls. He shall send from heaven, and fet me, he shall pluck
me out of many waters. He shall deliver me from my mighty adversary, and fro
mine enmyes, for they are to strong for me. When they had overtaken me in the
day of my tribulacion, the lord stayed me up: for he brought me out into
roumth, he delivered me, because he had a love unto me.

Roma (...)
The Lord will reward me according to my righteousness: according to the
pureness

And the Lord did to me again, according to my ryghteousnes, even after my
pureness in his eye sight. With the godly thou shalt be godly, and with the
man that is incorrupt, thou shall be incorrupt. With the pure, thou shalt be
pure: and with the froward, thou shall be froward.

And the people that are in aduersyte, thou shalt help. And on the proud
shalt thou cast thine eyes. Thou art my light O lord the Lord shall light
my darkness. For with thy help I will run through an host of me^, and in my
God will I spryng over a wall. God is incorrupt in his way: the word of the
Lord is tried in the fire, he is the defender of al them that trust in him.
For who is a God, save the Lord? and who is mighty, save our god? God
strengtheth me with power, and ryddeth the way clear before me. He makes my
feet like hearts feet, and sets me fast upon my hye hold. ^sel. 144 a
He teaches my hands to fight, that even a bow of stcle is to weak for mine
arms.

Thou have given me the shield of thy salvation,

Strange children dissemble withme: At the hearing of the ear they obey me.

Strange children will shrynke away / and they shall be smytten with fear in
their preuye chamber. God is alive, and blessed be my maker: magnified be God,
my most strong salvation. It is god that aduengeth me, and brings down the
people under me. He delyuereth me from mine enemies, thou also shalt lift me
up on high from them that rise against me, thou shalt deliver me from the
wicked men. And therefore I will praise the (O lord) among the nacyons, and
will sing unto thy name. Which shows great salvation for his king, and
deals mercyfully with his anointed: even with David and with his seed for
evermore.

The last co^municatyon of David, and the descryptyo^ of the mighty men to him
belonging.

CAPI. XXIII.
THese be the last sayenges of David. ii. Reg. 7* ^
For he has made with me an everlasting covenant, perfyte, and suit in all
points: and this is truly all my he^che and all my desire that it grow. But
the ungodly man of Belial shall be as a thorn clean plucked up, which can not
be taken with hands: But the man that shall touch them, must have iron, or a
long helue: (...)
Or else must they be burnt with fire in the same place.

These be the names of the mighty men which had fled) returned, and went
after him to run to the spoil. After him was Sa^ma the son of Age the
Hararite: and the Philistines gathered together beside a town (where was a
parcel of land full of rice) and the people fled from the Philistines. But he
stood in the mids of the ground and defended it, and slew the Philistines.
And the lord gave great victory.

i. Pat* xii. ^
These three (which were of the thyrtie cheyfe captains) went down to David
in the harvest time unto the cave Adulla^, and the host of the Philistines
abode in the valey of Gyauntes. And David was then in an hold.

And the soldiers of the Philistines were ii. Reg. xxi d
Abisai the brother of Ioab, the son of Seruiah, was cheyfe among the three,
and he lift up his spear against three hundred, and slew them, and had the
name among the three. For he was nobler man then the three, and was their
captain.

Howbeit he atteyned not unto ( the first) three. And Banaiahu the son of
Iehoiada (the son of a mighty man) valiant in acts, of Kabzeel, slew two
strong lions, even lions of Moab. He went down also, and slew a lion in a pyt
in time of snow. And he slew an Egyptian, a goodly byg man, which had a
spear in his hand. But he went down to him with a staff, and plucked the
spear out of the Egyptians hand, and slew him with his own spear: These
things did Banatahu

David causes the people to be nombred, and therefore is Israel plaged with
Pestilence, so that in three days there dyed. ixi. thousand.

CAPI. XXIIII.
ANd again, the Lord was wroth against Exodi. (...).
go and nombre Israel and Judah. For the king said to Ioab the captain of his
host: go thou abroad now, thorowout all the trybes of Israel, even from Dan
to Beer seba, and nombre ye the people, that I may know the nombre of them.
And Ioab said unto the king. I beseech the Lord thy God, to make the people
as many mo as they be: yea and an C. times so many mo, and that the eyes of my
lord the king may se them. And what is the cause that my Lord the king has
a lust to this thing? Notwithstanding the kings word prevailed against Ioab
and against the captains of the host. And Ioab and the captains of the host
went out from the presence of the king, to nombre the people of Israel. And
they passed over Jordan, and pytched in Aroer on the right side of the City
that lies in the mids of the valey of Gad, over against Iazer. And the^ they
came to Gilead, and to the nether land (where was a new habitacion,) and from
thence they came to Dan

And Ioab delivered up the nombre and su^me of the people unto the king. And
there were in Israel. ix. C. thousand me^ of might that drew swerdes. And the
men of Judah were five. C. thousand men. And David's heart smote him, after that
he had nombred the people. And David said unto the Lord: I have sinned
excedyngly in that I have done

And now Lord take away the trespass of thy servant, for I have done very
folysshly.

And when David was up in a morning, the word of the lord came unto the
prophet Gad David's sear, saying: Go and say unto David, thus says the Lord: I
offer the three things, chose the, which of them I shall do unto the.

So Gad came to David, and showed him the, and se, what answer I shall give to
him that sent me. And David said unto Gad: I am in extreme trouble. (...).
(...). ^
We will fall now into the hand of the Lord, for much is his mercy, and
let me not fall in to the hand of man. And the Lord sent a pestylence in
Israel, from the morning unto the time appointed. And there dyed of the
people from Dan to Beerseba seuentye thousand men.

And when the angel stretched out his hand upon Jerusalem to destroy it, the
lord had co^passyon to do that evil, and said to the angel that destroyed
the people: it is now sufficyent: hold thine hand. And the angel of the
lord was by the thresshynge place of Aresna the Iebusyte. And David spoke unto
the Lord (when he saw the angel that smote the people) and said: loo, it is
I that have sinned, and I that have done wyckedly But these sheep, what have
they done? Let thine hand (I pray the) be against me, and against my fathers
house. And Gad came the same day to David, and said unto him: go up and rear
an altar unto the Lord in the threshynge floor of Aresna the Iebusite. And
David (according to the sayng of Gad) went up, as the lord commanded.

And Aresna looked, and saw the king and

The end of the second book of Samuel: otherwise called the second of the
Kings.
The third book of the Kings after the reckoning of the Latenistes: which
third Book and the fourth also, is but one with the Hebrews.
The young virgyn Abisag keeps David in his extreme age. Adonia occupies the
realm vnwyttynge to his father. Solomon is anointed hynge, and so Adonia
gets him away.

CAPI. Primo.
ANd King David was Joshua. (...) ^
by the well of Rogell, and called all his brethren the kings sons, and the
men of Judah the kings servants. But Nathan the prophet and Banaiahu, and the
other mighty men, and Solomon his brother, he called not. Wherefore, Nathan
spoke unto Bethsabe the mother of Solomon, saying: have thou not herd how
that Adonia the son of Hagith does reygne, and David our lord knows it not?
Now therefore come, and I will give the counsel / how to save thine own
life, and the life of thy son Solomon. Go and get the in unto king David, and
say unto him: dydest not thou (my lord O king) swear unto thy handmayde
saying. Solomon thy son shall reygne after me, and he shall sit upon my seat?
Why is then Adonia king? Behold, while thou yet talkest there with the king,
I will come in after the, and confyrme thy words.

And Bethsabe went in unto the king in

For else when my Lord the king is laid to rest with his fathers, I and my
son Solomon shall be sinners. And while she yet talked with the king, Nathan
the Prophet came also. And they told the king saying: behold, here comes
Nathan the pro / phet. And when he was come in to the king / he made obeysaunce
before the king upon his face on the ground, and Nathan said: My Lord (O
king) have thou said, Adonia

And all they of the people blewe trompettes,

And Adonia and all the gestes that he had called unto him, herd it / even as
they had made an end of eating. And when Ioab herd the sou^de of the
trompet, he said: how happens it that there is soche a noise in the city?
And as he yet spoke: behold, Ionathas the son of Abiathar the Priest came.
And Adonia said unto him: come in, for thou art a valiant man, and bryngest
good tidings And Ionathas answered and said to Adonia: Uerely our lord king
David has made Solomon king. And the king has sent with him, Sadok the
Priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Banaiahu the son of Iehoiada, and the
Crethites, and the Phelethites, and they have set him upon the kings Mule. And
Sadocke the priest, and Nathan the prophet have anointed him king in Gihon.
And they came up again, and reioysed, that the city did sound again. And
that is the noise, that ye have herd. And Solomon sytteth on the seat of the
kingdom. And moreover, the kings servants came to bless in to the
tabernacle of the lord) and caught hold on the horns of the altar. And one
told Solomon, saying: behold, Adonia does fear king Solomon: for he has
(...)di* 21. b
caught hold on the horns of the altar, saying* let king Solomon swear
unto me this day that he will not sley his servant with the sword. And
Solomon said: if he will he a child of virtue, there shall not an here of
him fall to the earth. But and if wyckednes be found in him, he shall dye. And
so king Solomon sent, and they brought him from the altar. And he came, and
did obeysaunce unto king Solomon. And Solomon said unto him: get the to thine
house.

David dies Adonai requires to have Abisag to his Con^ubine, and therefore
Solomon co^maudeth to sley him* Abiathar so put from his preesthode. Semei, and
Ioab are sleyne.

CAPI. II.
THe days of David drew nygh, that he (...) ^* ^ (...)* ix^^^. b (...)*
(...). ^
be thou strong therefore, and show thy self a man. Keep thou the watch of
the lord thy God, that thou walk in his ways, and keep his statutes, and his
precepts, his judgments, and his testymonyes, even as it is written in the
law of Moses: that thou may prosper in all that thou do and in every
thing that thou medlest with all.

That the Lord also may make good his word which he spoke unto me, saying:
if thy Children take heed to their way, that they walk before me in truth*
with all their hertes, and with all their souls, Regst. ix ^
then shall thou not be with out a man on the seat of Israel. Reg. iii. c
(...). xx. ^.
Moreover, thou wotest how Ioab the son of Zatuia served me, and what he did
to that two captains of the hoostes of Israel: unto Abner the son of Ner,
and unto Amasa the son of Iether, whom he slew and shed blood in time of
peace (even as it had been in war) and put the blood of war upon his gyrdle
that was about his loins, and in his shoes that were on his feet* Deal with
him therefore according to thy ii. Reg xix. ^
But show kyndnesse unto the Sons of Berselat the Gileadite, that they may
eat at thy table: For they came to me, when I fled from Absalom ii. Re. xvi. ^
thy brother. And behold, thou have with the, Semei the son of Gera, the son
of Gemini of Bahurim, which cursed me with an horrible curse, in the day when
I went to Mahanahim. But he came to mete me at Iordane, and I swear to him by
the Lord, saying. I will not sley the with the sword. But thou shalt not
count him as vngyltye: For thou art a man of wisdom, and know what thou
ought to do to him, his hoore head shalt thou bring to the grave / with
blood.

And so Acts. ii. c
David slepte with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David. And ^.
(...). (...)
Then sat Solomon upon the seat of David his father, and his kingdom was
stablysshed myghtely.

And Adonia the son of Hagith, came to Bethsabe the mother of Solomon. And
she said: i. Reg* (...)
Come thou peaceably? And he said: peaceably. He said moreover: I have
somewhat to say unto the. She said: say on. And he said: thou know that the
kingdom was mine, and that all Israel set their faces on me, that I should
reygne, how be it the kingdom is turned away / and given to my brother, for
it is appointed him of the Lord: and now I ask a peticyon of the / deny me
not. And she said unto him: Say on. And he said: speak I pray the, unto
Solomon the king (for he will not say the nay) that he give me Abisag the
Sunamite to wife. And Bethsabe said: well, I will speak for the unto the
king.

Bethsabe therefore went unto king Solomon, to speak unto him for Adonia. And
the king rose up to mete her, and bowed himself unto her, and sat him down
on his seat. And there was a seat set for the kings mother, and she sat on
his right side. Then she said: I desire a little peticyon of the, I pray the
say me not nay. And the king said unto her: Ask on my mother: For I will
not say the nay. She said: let Abisag the Sunamite be given to Adonia thy
brother, to wife. And king Solomon answered and said unto his mother: why
do thou ask Abisag the Sunamite for Adonia? ask for him the kingdom also:
for he is mine elder brother, and has for him Abiathar the priest / and Ioab
the son of Zaruia. Then king Solomon swear by the Lord saying: God do so,
and so to me, if Adonia have not spoken this word against his own life. Now
therefore, as truly as the lord lives (which has ordained me, and set me on
the seat of David my father, and made me an house (as he promised) Adonia
shall dye this day. And king Solomon sent by the hand of Banaiahu, the Son
of Iehoiada, and he smote him that he dyed.

And unto Abiathar the Priest said the

And so Solomon put away Abiathar from being priest unto the Lord: that he
might fulfill the words of the lord which he spoke over the house of Eli in
Silo. Then tidings came also to Ioab: for Ioab had turned after Adonia though
he turned not after Absalom. And Ioab fled unto the tabernacle of the Lord,
and caught hold on the horns of the altar. And it was told king Solomon,
how that Ioab fled unto the tabernacle of the lord, and stood by the altar.
Then Solomon sent Banaiahu the son of Iehoiada, saying: go and fall upon
him. And Banaiahu came in to the tabernacle of the lord, and said unto him:
thus says the king: come out. And he said: nay. But I will dye even here.
And Banaiahu brought the king word again, saying: thus said Ioab, and thus
he answered me. And the king said: do even as he has said: smite him, and
bury him, that thou may take away the blood (which Ioab shed causeless)
from me, and from the house of my father. And the lord shall bring his blood
upon his own head, for he smote two men ryghtwyser and better then he, and
slew them with the sword (my father David not knowing thereof:) even Abner the
son of Ner, captain of the hooste of Israel, and Amasa the son of Iether
captain of the host of Judah. Their blood shall therefore return upon the
head of Ioab, and on the

But upon David, and upon his seed, and upon his house, and upon his seat
shall there be peace for evermore of the lord. So Banaiahu the son of
Iehoiada went up, and smote him and slew him, and buried him, in his own house
in the wilderness. And the king put Banaiahu the son of Iehoiada in his rowme
over the host, and put Sadocke the priest in the rowme of Abiathar. And the
king sent and called Semei and said unto him, build the an house in
Jerusalem, and dwell there: and se that thou go not forth thence any whyther
For be thou sure, that the day that thou go out, and passest over the river
of Cedron, thou shall dye that day, and thy blood shall be on thine own
head. And Semei said unto the king. This is a good thing: as my Lord the
king has said, so will his servant do. And Semei dwelte in Jerusalem many a
day. And it chanced after three years, that two of the servants of Semei
ran away unto Achis son of Maacha king of Geth. And they told Semei,
saying: behold, thy servants be in Geth. And Semei stood up / and sadled
his Ass, and gat him to Geth to Achis, to seek his servants, and returned /
and brought his servants again from Geth.

And it was told Solomon, how that (...)
thou remembrest all the wyckednes which thine heart knows, and that thou
dydest to David my father. The lord also shall bring thy wickedness upon
thine own head: and king Solomon shall be blessed, and the seat of David
stablysshed before the lord for ever. So the king commanded Banaiahu the
son of Iehoiada, which went out, and smote him that he dyed.

And the kingdom was stablysshed in the hand of Solomon.

Solomon takes Pharaos daughter to wife. The Lord appears to him, and
gives him wysdom. The pleatynge of the two Harlottes who should owe the living
child, and Salomons sentence therein.

CAPI. III.
Solomon made affinite with Pharao king the name of the Lord, until those
days.

And Solomon loved the Lord, and walked in the ordinances of David his
father, save only that he sacrificed and offered incense upon aulters in
hills. ^. Par. i. a
And the king went to Gibeon, to offer there: for that was a special
offering place. A thousand burntofferynges did Solomon offer upon that altar.
And in Gibeon the Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream by night. And God
said: Ask what thou wylt, that I may give it the. And Solomon said: thou
have showed unto thy servant David my father, great mercy, when he walked
before the in truth in ryghtuousnes, and in playnesse of heart with the. And
thou have kept for him this great mercy that thou have given him a son, to sit
on his seat: as it is come to pass this day. ^. Pata. i. a
And now (O Lord my God) it is thou that have made thy servant king in
stead of David ^^pi. ix. a.
And I am but young, and wot not how to go out and in. And thy servant is in
the mids of thy people, which thou have chosen: And verily, the people are
so many, that they can not be told nor nombred for multitude. ^^pi. ix. b.
Give therefore unto thy servant an understanding heart, to judge thy people:
that I may dyscerne between good, and bad. For who is able to judge this, thy
so mighty a people? And this pleased the Lord well, that Solomon had desired
this thing. And God said unto him: Because thou have asked this thing, and
have not asked long life, neither have asked riches, nor the soul of thine
enemies, but have asked understanding and discrecyon in judgment. Behold, I
have done according to thy peticyon: For I have given the a wise and an
understanding heart, so that there was none like the before the, neither after
the shall any arise like unto the. And I have also given the that which thou
have not asked, even richesse and honor: so that there shall be no king like
the all thy days.

And if thou will walk in my ways, to 3. Re. xv. a.
as David thy father did walk) I will lengthen thy days. When Solomon awoke,
behold, it was a dream. ^. Pata. i. b
And he came to Jerusalem, and stood before the arc of the testament of the
lord, and offered burntofferynges, and peaceofferynges, and made a feast to
all his servants. Then came there two women (that were harlottes) unto the
king, and stood before him. And the one woman said: Oh my lord, I and this
woman dwell in one house. And I was delivered of a child with her in the
house. And the third day after that I was delivered, she was delivered also:
and we were together, and no stranger with us in the house, save we two. And
this wives child dyed in the night, for she smothered it. And she arose at
mydnyght and took my son from my side (while thine handmayd slept) and laid it
in her bosom, and put her dead child in my bosom. And when I rose up to give
my child suck: behold, it was dead. But when I had looked upon it in the
morning: Behold / it was not my son

Then spoke the woman (whose the living child was) unto the king (for her
bowels yerned upon her son) and said: I beseech the my lord, give her the
living child, and in no wise sley it. But the other said: let it be neither
mine nor thine, but deuyde it. Then the king answered and said: Luke. vii ^
give her the living child, and sley it not, for she is the mother thereof.
And all they of Israel herd of the judgment (which the king had judged)
and feared the king: for they saw that the wysdom of god was in him, to do
justice.

The princes and rulers under Solomon. The purueyaunce for his vyttayles. The
nombre of his horses, and of his parables.

CAPI. IIII.
AND so king Solomon was king over iii. Reg v. d
Adoniram the son of Abda was over the trybutes. And Solomon had twelve
officers over all Israel, which provided vyttayle for the king and his
householde: each man his month in a year, made prouisyon for necessary
things.

And these are their names: The son of (...). 72 ^.
And Solomon reigned over all the kyngdoms / from the (...)
river, unto the land of the Philistines: even unto the border of Egypt, and
they brought presents, and served Solomon all the days of his life.

And Salomons bread for one day, was xxx. quarters of manchet flower, three
score quarters of meal: ten stalled oxen, and twenty out of the pastures, and
an hundred sheep, beside hearts buckes and wild gootes and capons. For he
ruled in all the regyon on the other side Euphrates, from Thiphsah, to (...)
Aza, over all the kings on the other side the river. And he had peace with
all his servants on every side. And Judah and Israel dwelt without fear,
every man under his vine and under his fygge tree, from Dan to Beerseba, all the
days of Solomon.

And Solomon had (...). 27. d.
fourtye thousand Eccle. 47. b
And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding excedyng much / and a large
heart, even as the sand that is on the sea shore, and Salomons wisdom ex
celled the wisdom of all the Children of the East country, and all the
wisdom of Egypt: For he was wyser then al men, yea then Etha^ the Ezrahite,
and Heman, Chal^oll, and Darda the sons of Maholl. And his name was spoken
of, thorowout all nacyons on every side. And Solomon spoke. iii. M. proverbs
And his songs were a thousand and five. And he spoke of trees, even from the
Cedat tree that grows in Libanon, unto the Isope that spryngeth out of the
wall. He spoke also of beasts, of fowls, of worms, and of fysshes. And there
came of all nacyons to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and from all kings of the
earth, which had herd of his wysdom.

King Hi^am sends Ledar tymbre to the building of the Temple. The
descryptyon of the works.

CAPI. V.
ANd Hiram king of Tire sent his servants 11. Reg. ^. ^.
For Hiram was ever a lover of David. 11. (...)
And Solomon sent to Hiram, saying: thou know 11. (...)
how that David my father could not build an house unto the name of the Lord
his God, for the wars which were about him on every side, until the lord
put them under the soles of his feet. But now the Lord my God has given me
rest on every side, so that there is neither aduersarye nor any evil plage.
And behold, (...)
I am determined to build an house unto the name of the lord my god, as the
Lord spoke unto David my father, saying: thy son whom I will set upon thy
seat for the, he shall huylde an house unto my name. Now therefore, command
thou that shall bring them from Libanon to the sea. And I will convey them by
ship unto the

And the lord gave Solomon wisdom, as he promised him. And there was peace
between Hiram and Solomon, and they two were confedered together. And king
Solomon raised a sum out of al Israel. And the sum was. xxx. thousand men,
whom he sent to Libanon. x. M. a month by course so that when they had been
one month in Libanon, they abode two months at home.

And ^^. Reg. 4. ^
Adoniram was over the sum. And Solomon had. lx. and x. M. that bare burdens,
and four score thousand masons in the mountains, besides the lords, whom
Solomon appointed to over se the work / even. iii. M. and. CCC. Which ruled
the people ( and them) that wrought in the work. And the king commanded them
to bring great stones, trestones, and hewed stones for the fou^dacion of the
house. And Salomons masons and the masons of Hiram did hew them, with the
workmen of the corners. And so they prepared both tymbre / and stones for the
building of the house.

How, and when the Temple was builded.

CAPI. VI.
ANd it came to pass that in the four hundred, (...). iii. a
in the fourth year of the reygne of Solomon upon Israel, and in the month
Ziff, which is the second month (...). vii. f
he began to build the house of the lord. And the house which Solomon buylt
for the lord, was three score cubits long / and twentye cubytes broad, and
thyrtye cubytes high. And he (...). x. e (...). b. and. b. ^
made a porche before the body of the temple, which was twentye cubytes long
after the bredeth of the house, and ten cubytes broad, even in the forefront of
the house. And in the house he made wyndowes, broad without, and narow within.
And in the wall of the house, he made chambers round about, (even in the
walls of the house) round about the temple and the queer, and made sides
round about. The neythermost chamber was five cubytes broad, and the myddle
was six cubytes broad, and the third was seven cubits broad. For without in
the wall of the house he laid beams round about / that the beams of the
chambers should not be fastened in the walls of the house. And the house was
buylte of stoone, made perfyte already before it was brought thither, so that
there was neither hammer nor are, either any tool of iron herd in the house,
while it was in building.

The door of the myddle chamber was in

And the word of the Lord came to Solomon, saying: concerning the house
which thou art in building, if thou will walk^ in mine ordynau^ces, and
execute my laws* and keep all my commandments, to walk^ in them: then will I
make good unto the, my promysse, (...)
which I promised David thy father. (...)
And I will dwell among the children of Israel, and will not forsake my people
Israel. Solomon therefore buylte the house. and finysshed it, and syled the
walls of the house within, with bordes of Cedar tree: even from the pauement
of the house unto the rofe, did he syle the walls of it within, with Cedar tree
/ and borded the floor of the house with plankes of fyrxe. And he syled
twentye cubytes in the sides of the queer of the temple, both floor and
walls, with bordes of Cedar, and dressed it within in the secret place of the
temple even in the most holy. And the first house / that is to say, the body
of the temple without was fourtye cubytes long.

And the Cedar of the house within, was carved with knoppes and graven with
flowers, altar that was in the queer he over laid with gold also. And with in
the queer he made two Exodi. 25. b
Cherubins of Olyue tree, ten cubytes high. Five cubits long was a wyng of
the one cherub, and five cubits long was a wyng of the other cherub: so that
from the uttermost part of one wynge unto the uttermost part of the other,
were ten cubytes. And the other Cherub was ten cubytes high also, so that both
the cherubs were of one measure, and one syse: For the heygth of the one Cherub
was ten cubytes, and so was it of the other. And he put the cherubs with in the
inner house. Exodi. 25. b
And the cherubes stretched out their wings, so that the one wyng of the one
touched the one wall, and the one wyng of the other touched the other wall. And
the other two wings of them touched one another in the mids of the house.
And he ouerlayde the cherubs with gold.

The building of the house of Solomon. The house of Pharaos daughter. The
form of the pyllers of brass / of the brazen Sockets. etc.

CAPI. VII.
BUt Solomon was buyldyng his own iii. ^e. iii. ^
(whom he had taken to wife) like unto the fassyon of that porche. And all
these were of the best stones, ^^. (...)
And king Solomon sent and fet one Hiram out of Tire, a wedowes son of the
trybe of Nephtalim, his father being a man of Tire. Which Hiram was a crafts
man in Brass / Exodus ii ^
full of wysdom, understanding, and cunning: to work all manner of work in
brass. And he came to king Solomon, and wrought all his work. For he cast
I^^^ iii ^ ^. Pe^. iii. 4. (...). ^^
two pyllers of brass, of xviii. cubytes hight a piece, and a string of xii.
cubytes did compass either of them about.

And he made two head pieces of molten brass (after the fassyon of a Crown)
to set the other. And so he made the pyllers, and two rows round about, in
the one wrythe^ work to cover the headpeces that were upon the Pomgarnates.
And thus did he also for the other headpeace. And the headpeces that were on
the tops of the pyllers, covered he above with a curyous work of roses,
toward the palace by the space of. iiii. cubits. Likewise, under the
headpeces in those. ii. pyllers beneth, over against the mids, and before the
net work. And upon the second headpece were there two hundred Pomegarnates in
two rows round about. And he set up the pyllers in the porche of the temple.

And when he had set up the right pyller, he called the name thereof ^ ^^ed fast
(...).
Iachin: and when he had set up the left Pyller, he called the name thereof
^it^^gth.
Boaz. And in the top of the pyllers was a work of roses, and so was the
workmanshyp of the pyllers fynysshed. And he made a molten lauatory, ten
cubits wide from brym to brym, round in compass, and five cubits high. And
a stryng of thyrtie cubits did compass it about, and under the brym of it
there were knoppes round about ten in one cubite: and they compassed the
lauatory round about. And the knoppes were cast with it, in two rows, when it
was cast. And it stood on twelve oxen: of which. iii. looked toward the north.
iii. toward the west, three toward the South, and three toward the East, and
the lauatorye stood upon them, and all their hynderpartes were inward. It was
an hand bredthe thycke, and the brym wrought like the brym of a cup with
flowers of lylyes. And it contained two thousand Bates. And he made ten
sockets of brass, four cubits long, and four cubits broad apece, and three
cubits high. And the work of the sockers was on this manner. They had sides,
and the sides were between the ledges. And on the sides that were between the
ledges, were lions, oxen and Cherubs.

And likewise upon the ledges that were where it is seen on the oursyde) one
cubyte high, and a cubyte and an half round and in the heyght of it were
graven works, whose sides were made four square, and not round. And under the
sides were four wheles, and the axeltrees joined fast to the bottom. And the
heyght of every whele was a cubyte and an half. And the workemanshyp of the
wheles was like the work of a charet whele. And the axeltrees, nauels, spokes
and shaftes were all molten. And there were. iiii. vndersetters in the. iiii.
corners of one socket: and the vndersetters were of the very bottom self.
And in the heyght of the bottom was there a round compass of half a cubite
hye: and in the heyght of the bottom there proceeded both ledges and sides out
of the same: For in the bordes of the ledges and on the sides he had graven
pyctures of Cherubins lions, and palm trees, one by an other round about.
Thus made he the ten sockets after this manner. And they had all one fassyon of
castyng, one measure, and one syse.

Then made he ten lauers of brass, one lauer

And so was ended all the work that king Solomon made for the house of the
Lord*

And ii. Par. 4. a
Solomon brought in the things which David his father had dedicated: even the
silver gold and vessels, and laid them up among the treasures of the house of
the lord.

The A^he is borne in to the temple. A cloud fylleth the temple. The temple is
blessed.

CAPI. VIII.
THen ^^. Par. v. a
Solomon gathered together ii Reg. vi. d
out of the city of David, which is Sion. And all the men of Israel
assembled unto king Solomon to the feast that falls in the month Ethanim,
which is the seventh month.

And all the elders of Israel were come / and the priests took up the arc.
They bare the ark of the Lord, in to the tabernacle of witness, and all the
holy vessels that were in the tabernacle: those did the priests and the
Levites bear. And king Solomon and all the congregacyon of Israel that were
assembled unto him (and went with him before the arc,) did offer sheep and
oxen, that could not be told nor nombred for multitude. And so the priests
brought the arc of the appointment of the lord unto his place, eue^ into the
queer of the temple and place most holy, under the wings of the Cherubs.
Forth Cherubs stretched out their wings over the place of the arc, and
covered both it and also the staves thereof an high upon it. And they drew
out the staves, that the ends of them might appear out of the holy place
within the queer, but they were not seen without.

And there they have been unto this day / Deute. ^. a.
save the two tables of stone, which Moses put there at Horeb, in the which
(tables) the lord made an appoyntmente with the children of Irael, when he
brought them out of the land of Egypt. And it fortuned that when the priests
were come out of the holy place, the cloud filled the house of the Lord, that
the priests could not stand and minister, because of the cloud: for the
glory of the Lord had filled the house of the lord. Then spoke Solomon: the
Lord Leuit. 1^. a
said that he would dwell in the dark cloud. I have buylte the an house to
dwell in, an habitacion for the to abide in for ever. And the king turned his
face, and blessed all the congregation of Israel, and all the congregation of
Israel stood still. And he said: Blessed be the lord God of Israel, which
spoke with his mouth unto David my father ii. Reg. vii. i Para. vi. ^
and has with his hand fulfilled it, saying. Since the day that I brought
my people Israel out of Egypt, I chose no city of all the tribes of Israel,
to build an house, that my name might 1. Reg. 16. ^
be therein: But I have chosen David, to be ruler over my people Israel.

And it was in the heart of David my father to build an house for the name of
the Lord God of Israel. And the Lord said unto David my father. Where as it
was thine heart to build an house unto my name thou dydest well, that thou wast
so minded. Nevertheless thou shall not build the house but thy son that shall
come out of thy loins, he shall build the house unto my name. And the lord
has made good his word that ii P^^. v^ ^
Lord God of Israel, there is no God like the in heaven above, or in the earth
beneth, thou that kepest covenant and mercy for thy servants that walk
before the with all their heart: thou that have kept with thy servant David
my father, that thou promysedst him. Thou spakest also with thy mouth, and have
fulfilled it with thine hand, as it is come to pass this day. Therefore, now
Lord God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my father, that thou
promysedst him, saying: ii. Regu^ ^^
Thou shalt not be without a man in my sight to sit on the seat of Israel: so
that thy children take heed to their way, that they walk before me, as thou
have walked in my sight. And now (o god) of Israel, let thy word be
verified, which thou spakest unto thy servant David my father.

Will God in deed dwell on the earth? Behold Esai* (...)* ^ A^te^* ^^^
the heuens, and heuens of all heuens are not able to conteyne the: And how
should then this house, do it, that I have builded? Have thou therefore respect
unto the prayer of thy servant, and to his supplicacion (O Lord my god) to
hear the voice and prayer before the this day, that thine eyes may be open
toward this house, night and day, even toward this place of which thou have
said, (...)
my name shall be there) that thou may harken unto the prayer, which thy
servant prays in this place.

And regard thou the supplicacion of thy (...). vi. d
If any man trespass against his neighbor, and there go an oath between
them, and the one compel the other, and come swearynge before thine altar in
this house, then harken thou in heaven, and work and judge thy servants, that
thou condemn the ungodly to bring his way upon his head, and iustifye the
ryghteous, to give him according to his righteousness.

(...)
When thy people Israel be put to the worse before the enemy, because they
have sinned against the, and afterward turn again to the, and knowledge unto
thy name and pray and make supplycacyon unto the in this house: then hear
thou in heaven, to be merciful unto the sin of thy people Israel, and bring
them again unto the land, which thou gave unto their fathers.

(...). 17. ^
If heaven be shut up, and there be no rain, because they have sinned against
the yet if they pray in this place, and knowledge unto thy name, and turn from
their sin, through thy scourgynge of them: then hear thou in heaven, and be
merciful ( unto the sins) of thy servants, and of thy people Israel, that
thou show them a good way to walk in, and give rain upon thy land that
thou have given unto thy people to enherite.

If there be in the land derth, or pestylence, brought, blastyng, greshopper
or caterpyller, or if their enemy beseyge them in the land of their cities,
or what soever plage or syckenesse chance: (...).
then what prayers and supplicacion soever be made of any man of all thy people
Israel, which shall knowledge every man the plage of his own heart, and
stretche forth his hands toward this house. Hear thou then in heaven, even in
thy dwelling place, and be merciful, and work, and give every man according
to all his ways (even as thou that only know his heart, for thou only
know the hertes of all the children of men:) that they may fear the as
long as they live in the land, which thou gave unto our fathers.

And likewise, if a stranger that is not (...) vi^i. ^
come out of a far country forthy names sake (for they shall hear of thy
great name, and of thy myghtie hand and of thy stretched out arm) and shall
come and pray in this house. Therefore hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place,
and do all that the stranger calls to the for: that all nations of the earth
may know thy name and fear the, as do thy people Israel: and that they may
know that thy name is called upon in this house which I have buylte.

If thy people go out to battle against their enemy, whyther soever thou
shall send them, and shall pray unto the (O Lord Dani. vi. ^.
toward the way of the city which thou have chosen, and toward the house
that I have buylte forthy name:) hear you in heaven their prayer and
supplicacion, and judge their cause.

If they sin against the 1. (...).
(for there is no man that synneth not) and thou be angry with them, and
deliver them in to the hand of their enemies, so that they carye them away
prisoners unto the land of their enemies, whyther far or near, yet if they
turn again unto their hertes in the land (to the which they be carried away
captive,) and return and pray unto the in the land of their enemies saying:
we have sinned, we have done wyckedlye, and have committed ungodliness, and so
turn again unto the with all their heart, and all their soul in the land of
their enemies (which led them away captive) and pray unto the, toward the
way of their land, which thou gave unto their fathers, and toward the
city which thou have chosen, and toward the house which I have buylte for thy
name: Then hear thou their (...).
prayer and supplicacion in heaven thy dwelling place, and judge their cause:
and be merciful unto thy people, that have sinned against the, and unto all
their iniquities (whereby they have done wickedly against the) and get thou them
the favor of those which led them away captive, that they may have compassyon
1. Esdr^. ^. d
to harken unto them, in all that they call for unto the. For you dydest
separate them, from among all the nations of the earth, (to be thine own
enheritaunce) as thou saydest by the hand of Moses thy servant, when thou
broughtest our fathers Exodus ^i^. a
out of Egypt, O lord God.

11. Par. 7. ^
And when Solomon had made an end of prayeng all this prayer and supplicacion
unto the Lord, he arose from before the altar of the Lord, and from knelynge
on his knees, and from stretchynge of his hands up to heaven, and stood and
blessed all the congre gacion of Israel with a loud voice saying:

Blessed be the Lord, that has given rest unto his people Israel, according
to all that he promised: ^ Reg.ili. d.
there has not failed one word of all the good promise, which he promised by
the hand of Moses his servant. The Lord our God be with us, as he was with
our fathers, and forsake us not, neither leave us: but that he may bow our
hertes unto him, that we may walk in all his ways, and kape his
commandments, his statutes and his laws, which he commanded our fathers.
And these my words which I have prayed before the Lord, be nygh unto the
Lord our god day and night, that he defend the cause of his servant, and the
cause of his people Israel (what thing socuer chance at any time) that al
nations of the earth may know that the Lord is God, and none but he.

Let your heart therefore be perfyte with the (...) 7.a
And Solomon offered a sacrifice of peace offerynges unto the Lord, and he
offered unto the lord xxii. thousante oxen, and an hundred and.xx. thousand
sheep: And so the king and all the children of Israel dedicated the house of the
lord. The same day did the king halo we the mydle of the court, that was
before the house of the lord: for there he offered burnt offerynges meat
offerynges and the fat of the peaccofferynges, because the brazen altar that
was before the Lord, was to little to receive the burnofferynges,
meateofferynges, and the fat of the peaccofferynges. And Solomon held that
same time an high feast and all Israel with him, a very great congregation,
even from the entryng in of Hemath unto the river of Egypt, before the lord
our God, Den^t. 16. c
seven days and seven days, even. xiiii. days. And the. vill. day he sent
the people away. And they blessed the king and went unto their tents joyous
and with glad heart, because of all the goodness that the Lord had done for
David his servant, and for Israel his people.

The Lord appears the second time to Solomon. Solomon gives towns to
Hirem. The Lananytes become tret (...). He sends ships for gold. He
vnytoeth many Litres.

CAPI. IX.
ANd when Salomo^ had ^^. Para. 7 ^
finysshed the

iii. Reg. ^^
Thou shalt not be without a man upon the seat of Israel. But and if ye and
your children turn away from me, and will not keep my commandments and my
statutes (which I have set before you) but go and serve other Gods, and
worship them: then will I wede Israel out of the land, which I have given
them. And this house which I have hallowed 4 Reg. ^ Iere. ^^
for my name, will I cast out of my sight. And Israel shall be a proverb and a
fable among al nations. And this house shall be taken away: so that every one
that passes by it, shall be astonyed, and shall hysse, and they shall say:
^^^^^ (...) Iere. (...). ^
why has the lord done this unto this land and to this house? And they shall
answer: because they forsook the lord their god, which brought their fathers
out of the land of Egypt, and have taken hold upon other Gods, and have
worshypped them, and served them: therefore has the Lord brought upon them all
this evil. ^^ P^^^
And it fortuned, that at the end of twentye years, Solomon fynysshed the
buyldyng of the two houses, that is to wete, the house of the Lord, and the
kings palace.

And Hiram the king of Tire brought ^ (...) ^
Hiram came out from Tire to se the cities which Solomon had given him, and
they pleased him not. And he said: What cities are these, which thou have
given me, my brother? And he called them the land of Cabull unto this day.
And Hiram sent the King six score hundred weight of gold. And this is the
sum, which king Solomon raised for a tribute when he builded the house of
the Lord and his own house, and Millo and the wall of Jerusalem, and Hazoer,
and Meg^ddo, and Gazer.

For Pharao king of Egypt went up, and took Gazer, and burnt it with fire, and
slew the Cananites that dwelt in the city, and gave it for a present unto his
daughter, Salomons wife. And Solomon buylte Gazer and Beth Horon the nether:
and Baalath and Thamar in the wilderness and in the land: and all the
treasure Cities that Solomon had, ( and were vnvvalled, those he made strong.)
and cites for his charettes, and cities for his horsemen, and all that Solomon
desired, and would build in Jerusalem, in Libanon, and in all the land of his
dominyon. And all the people that were left of the Amorites, Hethites,
Pheresites, Heuites, and Iesubites, (which were not of the children of
Israel) their children that were left after them in the land, whom the
children of Israel also were not able to destroy. Those did Solomon compel to
bring tribute unto this day.

But of the children of Israel did Solomon (...). ^5. ^.
make no bond men. But they were men of war, his ministers, his lords, his
captains, and rulers of his charettes, and of his horsemen.

And these were the lords that were set over

The name of Saba comes to hear the wysdom of Solomon, whose royaltye is
here discry^ed.

CAPI. X.
ANd the queen (...) ^ii d (...) i^. ^
of Saba hearing the

And the queen of Saba considered all Salomons wisdom, and the house that he
had builded, and the meat of his table, and the syttyng of his servants, the
order of his ministers, and their apparel, his drink and his burntsacrifices
that he offered in the house of the Lord, and she was astonyed.

And she said unto the king, It was a true

Happy are thy men: and happy are these thy servants, which stand ever
before the, and hear thy wisdom. Blessed be the Lord thy God, which loved
the, to set the on the seat of Israel, because the lord loved Israel for
ever, and made the king, to do equite and rygteousnesse. And she gave the
king six score hundred weight of gold, and of sweet odoures excedyng much,
and precious stones. There came no more such haboundau^ce of sweet odoures, as
the queen of Saba gave to king Solomon. The nauye also of the 3. Reg. (...). ^
ships of Hiram (that carried gold from Ophir) brought likewise great plentye
of Almuge tree and precious stones. And the king made of the Almuge trees,
pyllers for the house of the Lord, and for the kings palace, and made harpes
and psaltryes for syngers. There came no more such Almuge trees, nor were any
more seen unto this day. And king Solomon gave unto the queen of Saba
according to all her desire what soever she asked: Besides that he gave her of
a free will with his own hand. And so she returned unto her own country:
both she, and her servants.

The weight of gold that came to Solomon iii. Reg. 7. ^
house of the wood of Libanon.

And the king made a great seat of yuerye, and covered it with the best
gold. And the seat had six steps. And the top of the seat was round
behind, and there were pomels on either side on the place of the seat and two
lions stood beside the pomels. And there stood. xii. Lions on the steps. vi.
on a side. There was none like (work) seen in any kingdom. Deuteronomy. 17. b
And al king Salomons drynkyng vessels were of gold, and likewise all the
vessels of the house of the wood of Libanon were of pure gold. And as for
silver, it was nothing worth in the days of Solomon.

For the kings nauye of ships went on the sea unto Tharsis with the nauye of
Hirams ships: even once in three year went the nauye to Tharsis, and brought
Gold and silver Elephantes tethe, apes and pecockes.

^^. Pat. ix. f
And so king Solomon exceded all the kings of the earth both in richesse and
wisdom. 11. Pat. ^. d.
And the king made silver in Jerusalem as plenteous as stones, and Cedar as
plenteous as the wild fyg trees that grow aboundauntly in the feldes.

The bringing of horses also out of Egypt: and the collectyon of the wares,
did the kings merchants take again, and sold the stuff for a price. A
charet came up out of Egypt for. vi. hundred sycles of silver: that is one
horse for an hundred and fyftye. And even so for all the kings of the
Hethites, and for the kings of Siria, did they bring them out, through their
hands.

Solomon has seven hundred queen's, and three hundred concubynes, which bring
him to Idolatrye. His adversaries re^^ll against him. He dies.

CAPI. XI.
BUt king 111. Re. ^i^. a
Solomon loved many outlandyshe Exodus ^4. b
Come not ye at them, nor let them come at you: Else will they turn your hertes
after their gods. Nevertheless, Solomon claue unto them in love. And he had
seven hundred Queen's, and. CCC. co^cubines, and his wives Deuteronomy. ^7. d.
turned away his heart. For it came to pass, when Solomon was old his wives
turned his heart after other Gods: and his heart was not perfyte with the Lord
his God, as was the heart of David his father: For Solomon followed Astaroth the
God of the Zidons, and Milco^, the obhominacion of the Ammonites.

And Solomon wrought wickedness in 111 (...) and (...).
which had appeared unto him twyse, and gave him a charge (concerning this
thing) that he should not follow other Gods. But he kept not that, which the
Lord commanded him: wherefore the Lord said unto Solomon: for as much as
this is done of the, and thou have not kept mine appointment, and my statutes
(which I commanded the) I will rent the kingdom from the, and will give it to
thy servant.

Notwithstanding in thy days I will not do it, because of David thy father:
but

And they arose out of Madian, and came to Paran, and took me^ with them out of
Paran,

And Hadad gat great favor in the sight of Phara^ ^o that he gave him to wife
the sister of his own wife, even the sister of Thahpenes the Queen. And the
sister of Thahpenes bare him Genubath his son, who^ Thahpenes norished in
Pharaos house And Genubath was of Pharaos household among the sons of
Pharao. And when Hadad herd in Egypt, that David was laid to sleep with his
fathers, and that Ioab the captain of the host was dead also, he said to
Pharao: let me depart, that I may go to mine own country. Pharao said unto
him: What haste thou lacked here with me, that thou would thus go to thine
own country? He answered: nothing: howbeit, let me go. And God styrred him up
an other adversary one Rezom the son of Eliada, which fled from his lord
Hodadezer king of Zoba. And he gathered men unto him, and became captain over
the company, when David slew them. And they went to Damasco, and dwelte there,
and reigned in Damasco. Therefore was he an aduersarye to Israel all the days
of Solomon. And this was the myscheyfe, in that Hadad did abhor Israel, and
reigned over Syria.

And Jeroboam the son of Hebat an (...). vii. ^
and he shall have one, for my servant David's sake, and for Jerusalem the city
which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel: because they have
forsaken me and have worshypped Astharoth the God of the Zedons, and Chamos the
god of the Moabites, and Milcom the god of the children of Ammon, and have not
walked in my ways (to fulfill my pleasure, my statutes and my laws,) as did
David his father.

I will not take the hole kingdom out of his hand: but will make him cheyfe
all his life long, for David my servants sake, whom I chose: because he
kept my commandments and my statutes. (...). xii. ^ (...). 132, b
But I will take the kingdom out of his sons hand, and will give unto the,
even ten tribes of it: and to his son will I give one trybe, that David my
servant may have a light always before me in Jerusalem, the city which I have
chosen me, to put my name there. And I will take the, and thou shalt reygne
according to all that thy soul desires, and shalt be king over Israel.

And if thou harken unto all that I command

Solomon sought therefore to kill Jeroboam, and Jeroboam arose, and fled in to
Egypt unto Sisak king of Egypt, and continued there in Egypt until the death
of Solomon. The rest of the words that concern Solomon, and all that he did,
and his wysdom: are they not written in the book of the words of Solomon? The
time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem upon all Israel, was fourtye year. And
Solomon slepte and he laid him with his fathers, and was buried in the city of
David his father, and Rehoboam his son reygued in his stead.

The kingdom is divided. Rehoboam reygneth over (...) Trybes, and Jeroboam over
ten. Adu^am is stoned. Jeroboam makes golden Calves.

CAPI. XII.
ANd 11. (...). x. ^
Rehoboam went to Sichem: for 111 Re. xii. ^^
for he fled to Egypt from the presence of king Solomon, and dwelte in Egypt.
So they sent and called him: and Jeroboam and all the congregacyon of Israel
came, and spoke unto Rehoboam, saying: Thy father made our yoke grievous, now
therefore make thou the grievous service of thy father and his sore yoke which he
put upon us, lyghter, and we will serve the. And he said unto them: depart yet
for the space of. iii. days, and then come again to me. And the people
departed. And king Rehoboam took counsel with the old me^ that stood before
Solomon his father, while he yet lived, and said: what counsel give ye, that
I may have matter to answer this people? And they said unto him: If you be a
servant

But he forsook the counsayie that the old men had given him, and called unto
his counsel young men, that were grown up with him, and waited on him. And
he said unto them: what counsel give ye, that we may answer this people?
for they have communed with me, saying: make the yoke which thy father did
put upon us, lyghter? And the young men that were grown up with him, spoke
unto him, saying: Thus shalt thou ^^ Reg. (...). ^
perform his saying, which the lord spoke by Ahia the Silonite unto
Jeroboam, the son of Nebat. And so when Israel saw, that the king regarded
them not, the people answered the king with these words, saying: ^^ R^^ ^x. a.
What procyon have we in David? we have no enheritaunce in the son of Isai.
^^. Pat. x. d.
To your tents, O Israel, now se to thine own house David. And so Israel
departed unto their tents. Howbeit, over the children of Israel which dwelte
in the city of Judah, did Rehoboam reygne still. Then king Rehoboam sent
Adura^ the receyuer of the tribute. And all they of Israel stoned him to
death. But king Rehoboam made speed to get him up to his charet, and to flee
to Jerusalem.

And they of Israel rebelled against the ^^. Pat. xi. a
And when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, he gathered all the house of Judah,
with the tribe of Benjamin an hundred and four score thousand of chosen men
(which were good warryours) to fight against the house of Israel And to bring
the kingdom again to Rehoboam the son of Solomon.

And the word of God came unto Sema^a the man of God: saying: Speak unto
Rehoboam Iudi. (...)
and buylte Penuel.

And Jeroboam thought in his heart: now shall the kingdom return to the
house of David. For if this people go up, and do sacrifice in the house of the
lord at Jerusalem, the^ shall the heart of this people turn again unto their
lord Rehoboam king of Judah: And so shall they kill me, and go again to
Rehoboam king of Judah. (...) (...) Erod^. 47 Exodi. ^^
Whereupon the king took counsel, and made two calves of gold, and said unto
them. It is much for you to go up to Jerusalem. Erodi. (...)


(...)
Behold, O Israel: these are thy gods (...)
and made priests of the lowest of the people, which were not of the sons of
Leui. Ieroboa^ made a feast the. xv. day of the. viii. month, like unto the
feast that is in Judah, and offered on the altar. And so did he in Bethel, to
offer unto the calves that he had made And he put in Bethel the priests of the
hill aulters, which he had made. And he offered burnt offerynges upon the
altar, which he had made in Bethel the. xv. day of the. viii. month: even
in the Month which he had ymagened of his own heart: and made a solemn
feast unto the children of Israel, and offered upon the altar, and burnt
insence.

Jeroboam doing sacrifice unto the calves, is reprehended of the Prophet. His
hand is dried up, while he puts it out against the Prophet. The Prophet is
killed and buried.

CAPI. XIII.
AND behold, there came a man of the altar in the word of the lord, and
said: O altar, altar, thus says the Lord: Behold, a child shall be borne
unto the house of David, (Iosia by name) and upon the shall he offer the
Priests of the hill aulters that burn incense upon the, and men's bones
shall be brent upon the. And he gave a token the same time, saying: this is the
token, that the Lord has spoken it: Behold, the altar shall rent, and the
ashes that are upon it, shall fall out.

And when the king herd the saying of ^^od^. ^. b. (...). 23. b. (...) ^iii.
c
Oh pray unto the lord thy god, and make intercession for me, that my hand
may be restored me again. And the man of God he sought the Lord, and the
Kings hand was restored again, and became as it was before. And the king
said unto the man of God: come home with me, that thou may dyne, and I will
give the a reward. And the man of god said unto the king: if thou would give
me half thine house, I will not go in with the, neither will I eat bread or
drink water in this place.

For so was it charged me through the word

He said unto him: come home with me,

And he cried unto the man of God that (...)
a Lion met him by the way, and sieve him, and his carkas was cast in the way,
and the ass stood thereby, and the Lion stood by the coorse also.

And men that passed by, saw the carkas

And the prophet took up the body of the is buried: lay my bones beside his
bones: ^. Reg. 23 d
For the saying which is cried at the word of the Lord against the altar in
Bethell (and against all the houses of hill aulters, which are in the cities
of Samarie) shall come to pass. Howbeit, for all that, Jeroboam converted not
from his wicked way: but turned back, and made of the lowest of the people
Priests of the hylaulters. And who so pleased him, he filled his hand, and he
became Priest of the hylaulters. And this thing turned to sin unto the house
of Jeroboam, even to destroy him, and to bring him to naught from of the face
of the earth.

^ctoboams wife asueth council of Ai^a the Prophet. Jeroboam dies. Sysack
king of Egypt robs the house of the lord. Rehoboam dies, and Abram
succedeth him.

CAPI. XIIII.
AT that time Abia the son of Jeroboam fell sick. And Jeroboam said unto ^
Regu^. xi. ^
that I should be king over this people And take with the ten loves, and
cracknels / and a cruse of honye, and go to him: that he may tell the what shall
be come of the child. And Ieroboams wife did so: and arose, and went to Silo,
and came to the house of Ahia.

But Ahia could not se, for his eyes were waren dymme for age. And the Lord
said unto Ahia: behold, the wife of Jeroboam comes, to ask a thing of the
for her son, for he is sick. But thus shall thou say unto her. And when she
came in, she feyned her self to be a another woman.

But when Ahia herd the sound of her 3 Regu^* 12 ^
I eralied the from among the people, and made the prince over my people
Israel, I did rent the kingdom away from the house of David, and gave it the:
Nevertheless, thou have not ben as my servant David, which kept my
commandments, and followed me with all his heart, to do that which is right in
mine eyes: but have done evil, above all that were before the: for thou have
gone, and made the other Gods, and molten images, to provoke me, and have
cast me behind thy back: therefore behold, I will bring evil upon the house
of Jeroboam / and will rote out from Jeroboam, even him that 1. Reg. xv. ^
pysseth against the wall, and him that is in prison and forsaken in Israel,
and will

iii Re. (...). ^
Whosoever (of Ieroboams house) dies in the town, him shall the dogs eat:
and he that dies in the field, shall the fowls of the air cate, for the
Lord has said it. Uy therefore, and get the to thine house: Behold / when thy
foot enters into the City, the child shall dye. And all they of Israel
shall mourn for him, and burye him, for he only of Jeroboam, shall come to the
scpulchre, because in him there is found goodness toward the Lord God of
Israel in the house of Ieroboa^. Moreover, the lord shall stir him up a
king over Israel, which shall destroy the house of Jeroboam in that day.

But what is it now? For the Lord shall smite Israel, as when a read is
shaken in the water, and he shall wede Israel out of this good land (which
he gave to their fathers,) and shall scatter them beyond the river, because
they have made them groves / and angered the Lord. And he shall give Israel
up, because of the sins of Jeroboam, which did sin, and made Israel to
sin. And Ieroboams wife arose, and departed / and came to Thirzah, and when
she came to the threshold of the door, the child was dead And all Israel
buried him, and lamented him, according to the word of the Lord, which he
spoke by the hand of his servant Ahia the prophet.

And the rest of the words that concern

His mothers name was Naama an Ammonite. And Judah wrought wickedness in of the
nacyons which the Lord cast out before the Children of Israel. And it
fortuned, that in the fyfte year of king Rehoboham: Sisack king of Egypt
came up against Jerusalem, and took away the treasures of the house of the
Lord, and the treasures of the kings house, and spoiled all that was to be
had.

And he took away the shyldes of gold, (...). d
which Solomon had made. In whose stead king Rehoboam made brazen shyldes /
and committed them unto the hands of the keeping of the captains of the guard,
which waited at the door of the kings house. And when the king went in to the
house of the lord, they of the guard bare them, and brought them again into
the guard chamber. The rest of the words that concern Rehoboam / and all that
he did, are they not written in the book of the Chronicles of the kings of
Judah? And there was war between Rohoboam, and Jeroboam all their lives. And
Rehoboam slepte with his fathers, and was buried beside his fathers, in the
city of Dauyd. His mothers name was Naama an Ammonite. And Abiam his Son
reigned in his stead.

Wicked Abiam reygneth over Judah, and ryghteous As^ succedeth in his rou^ne.
The battle between Asa and Baasa. Iehosaphat succedeth Asa. Nadab succedeth
Jeroboam* Baasa hylleth Nadab.

CAPI. XV.
IN the. xviii. year of king (...)
Jeroboam (...)
as the heart of David his father. Nevertheless for David's sake did the Lord
is God gyne him a light in Jerusalem, that he set up his son after him, and to
stablysshe Jerusalem: Because David did that, which was right in the sight of
the Lord, and turned from nothing that he commanded him all the days of his
life, 1 Reg. xii. a
save only in the matter of Urias the Hethite.

And there was war between Rohoboam / and

^i. Par. 14. ^
In the. xx. year of Jeroboam king of Israel, reigned Asa over Judah. xli.
year reigned he in Jerusalem, and his mothers name was Maacha, the daughter of
Abisalom. And Asa did that seemed right in the eyes of the Lord, as did David
his father. 3. Reg. 22. ^
And he took away the hoore kepers out of the land, and put away all the
abhomynable Idols that his fathers had made.

And he put down ^^. Par. 15 ^
Maacha his mother from bearyng rule, because she had made images in groves.
And Asa destroyed her images, and burnt them by the broke Cedron. But the
hylaulters were not put down. Nevertheless Asas heart was perfyte with the
Lord all his days. He brought in the holy vessels of his Father, (and that he
had dedicate) unto the house of the Lord: gold and silver, and Iuels. And
there was war between Asa, and Baasa king of Israel all their days. (...)
And Baasa king of Israel, went up against Judah, and buylt Rama, so that he
would let none go out or in, to Asa king of Judah.

Then Asa took all the silver and gold, 5 (...)
Ben^^dad the son of Tabrimon, the son of Hezion king of Siria, (that
dwelt at Damasco,) saying: there is a bond between me and the, between my
father and thy father. And behold, I have sent unto the a present of silver
and gold that thou come and break the bond that thou have with Baasa king
of Israel, that he may depart from me* So Benhadad herkened unto king Asa,
and sent the captains of the hoostes (which he had) against the cities of
Israel, and smote Hion, and Dan, and Abell, Beth Maacah, and all the regyon of
Ceneroth withal the land of Nephthali.

And when Baasa herd thereof, he left

And Asa slepte with his fathers, and was ^^. Pa. 17 a Math. ^. b
Iehosaphat his son reigned in his stead. And Nadab the son of Jeroboam
began to reygne upon Israel the second year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned
upon Israel two year. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, walking in
the way of his father and in his sin wherewith he made Israel ^ynne. And
Baasa the son of Ahia (which was of the house of Isachar) conspyred against
him, and Baasa smote him at Gibbethon which is a city of the Philistines: For
Nadab and all Israel laid seyge to Gibbethon. Even in the third year of Asa
king of Judah, did Baasa sley him, and reigned in his stead.

^il. Re. 14. a
And it fortuned that when he was king, he smote all the house of Jeroboam, and
left

So in the third year of Asa king of Judah, began Baasa the son of Ahia to
reygne over all Israel in Thirza. xxiiii. year. And he did that which is
evil in the sight of the Lord, walking in the way of Jeroboam / and in his
sin, which made Isaell to syn.

Iehu prophesyeth against Baasa, whom Ela succedeth. ^^m^^ hylleth his maystre
Ela. and destroys the house of Baasa. Ahab succedeth Amri, and takes to wife
wythed Iezabell.

CAPI. XVI.
THen the word of the lord came to Iehu 3. Reg. 14. ^ and ^^x^. ^
That man of Baasa which dies in the city, him shall the dogs eat: and
that man of him which dies in the feldes, shall the fowls of the air eat.
The rest of the words that concern That is to say I^hu the son of Hanani
the prophet.)

The. xxvi. year of Asa king of Judah began Ela the son of Baasa to reygne
over Israel in Thirza, two year. And his servant Zimri (which was captain of
half his charettes) conspired against him, as he was in Thirza drinking: and
was dronken in the house of Arza steward of his house in Thirza

And Zimri came, and smote him, and killed (...) (...)* ^. Re^^* ^* ^
and satte on his seat, he sieve all the house of Baasa, not leaning thereof:
one to pysse against a wall:

Yea, he slew his kynsfolkes, and friends also. And thus did Zimri destroy all
the house of Baasa, according to the word of the lord, which he spoke
against Baasa by the hand of Iehu the prophet, for all the sins of Baasa and
sins of Ela his son / which they sinned, and made Israel to syn, and
anger the lord god of Israel with their vanities. The rest of the words that
concern Ela, and al he did, are they not written in the book of the Cronicles
of the kings of Israel? In the. xxvii. year of Asa king of Judah, did Zimri
reygne. vii. days in Thirza, and the people was then in the hooste beseygynge
Gibbethon a city of the Philistines.

And the people in the host herd one say: Zimri has conspired, and sleyne
the king:

The rest of the words that concern Zimri and the treason that he wrought,
are they not

For he walked in all the way of Jeroboam

And Ahad the son of Amri did evil in ^. Reg. x. d.
went and served Baall, and worshypped him. And he reared up an altar for
Baall in the temple of Baall, which he had builded in Schomron. And Ahab made
groves, and proceeded further in angerynge the Lord God of Israel then all the
kings of Israel that were before him.

In his days did Hiell of Bethel build Ierico. And it Joshua. vi. d
cost him Abiram his eldest son when he laid the foundation, and his youngest
son Segub, when he set up the gates, according unto the word of the lord,
which Joshua. vi. d
he spoke by Joshua the son of Nun.

Elsa (...) norysshed and fed of Ravens, and after is sent to zarphat
(otherwise called Sareptha) to a woman, whose child he raised to life.

CAPI. XVII.
ANd Elia the Thesbite (which was of 3. Reg^. 8 ^
as truly as the Lord God of Israel lives, before whom I stand Deute. ^i. ^
3 Reg^i. 8. d Jacob. v. d
there shall be neither dew nor rain these years, but according to my
word. And the word of the Lord came unto him, saying, get the hence, and
turn the Eastward, and hyde thy self in the broke Cherith, that is it that
lies before Jordan: Thou shall drink of the river, and I have commanded the
ravens to feed the there. And so he went, and did according unto the word of
the Lord: For he went, and dwelte by the brook Cherith, that is before
Iordane.

And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and like wise
bread and flesh in the evening, and he drank of the brook. And it
chanced after a while / that the brook dried up, because there fell no rain
upon the earth. And the word of Luke. ii^^. ^.
up, and get the to Zarphath, which is in Sidon, and dwell there. Behold, I
have commanded a wydowe there to sustain the. So he arose, and went to
Zarphath. And when he came to the gate of the city, the wydowe was there /
gatherynge styckes. And he called to her, and said: Jude. (...). ^
fet me I pray the, a little water in a vessel, that I may drink. And as she
was going to fet it, he cried after her, and said: bring me I pray the, a
morsel of bread also in thine hand. She said: As truly as the Lord thy
god lives, I have no bread redye, but even an handefull of meal in a barell,
and a little oil in a cruse. And behold* I am gatherynge two styckes for to
go in / and dress it form and my son, that we may eat it, and dye. And Elia
said unto her: fear not, come and do as thou have said: but make me thereof a
little cake first of all, and bring it unto me: and afterward make for the
and thy son.

For thus says the Lord god of Israel:

And after these things, it happened, that the son of the wife of the house
fell sick. And his sycknesse was so sore, that there was no breath left in
him. And she said unto Elia: what have I to do with the, O thou man of God?
Art thou come unto me, to call my sin again to remembrance, and to sley my
Son? He said unto her: give me thy Son.

And he took him out of her lap, and carried 4. Reg. 4. f Acts. xx. c
And he stretched him self upon the child three times, and called unto the
Lord, and said: O Lord my God, let this chyldes soul come in to him again.
And the Lord herd the voice of Elia, and the soul of the child came in to
him again and he reuyued. And Elia took the boy, and brought him down out of
the chamber in to the house, and delivered him unto his mother, and Elia said:
behold, thy Son lives. And the woman said unto Elia: now I know, that
thou art a man of God, and that the word of the Lord in thy mouth, is true.

Elia is sent to Ahab. Obadia (otherwise called Abdia) hydeth an hundredth
Prophets. Elia kylleth all Baals Prophets, and afterward obteyneth rain.

CAPI. XVIII.
AFter process of many days the word Deute. xi. b (...). v. c
I will send rain upon the earth. And Elia went to show him self unto Ahab,
and there was a great famyshment in Scom^on. And Ahab called Obadia, which was
the gouerner of his house: and Obadia feared God greatly: For when Iezabell
destroyed the Prophets of the Lord / he took an hundred prophets and hyd
them, fyftie men in one cave, and fyftie in another, and provided bread and
water for them. And Ahab said unto Obadia: Go in to the land, unto al
fountaynes of water, and unto al brokes, if happly we may find grass, to save
the horses and the mules, and that we destroy not some of the beasts. And so
they divided the land between them, to walk through it. Ahab went one way by
him self / and Obadia went another way by him self.

And it chanced that as Obadia was in

Was it not told my Lord, what I did, (...)
four hundred and fyftye, and the prophettes of the groves four hundred,
which eat of Iezabels table.

So Ahab sent unto all the children of Israel, and gathered the Prophettes
together unto mount Carmell.

And Elia came unto the people, and said: ^. (...)
And all the people answered, and said: it is well spoken.

And Elia said unto the Prophettes of ^^th. vi. a
Baall from morning to noone, saying: O Baall hear us. But there was no
voice nor one to answer. And they lept upon the altar that they had made. And
at noone it fortuned, that Elia mocked them, and said: cry loud, for he is a
god: peradventure he is talking, or occupied (in following upon his enemies)
or is in his iourneye, or happily he slepeth, and must be awaked. And they
cried loud, and cut them selves, as their manner was, with knyues and launcers,
till the blood followed on them. And it chanced / that when myddaye was passed
they prophesyed until the time of the evening Sacrifyce.

But there was neither voice nor one to answer, nor any that regarded them.
And Elia said unto all the folk: come to me. And all the people came to him.
^. Reg. ^4. c.
And he repaired the altar of the lord, that was broken. (...). 4. b.
And Elia took. xii. stoones according to the nombre of the. xii. trybes of
the sons of Jacob (unto whom the word of the lord came) saying. (...). 32.
f.
Israel shall be thy name.And with the stones he made an altar in the

(...). vi. d (...). 4^. a Math. i. c
And the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed the burntsacrifyce and the wood,
the stones and the dust, and lycked up the water that was in the pytte.

And when all the people saw it, they fell

Elia fleing from Iezabell is norysshed of the Angel of God, and is
commanded to anoynte Azahel, Iaha, and Heliseus, whom the Hebrews call, Elisa.

CAPI. XIX.
ANd Ahab told Iezabell, all that Elia ^. Reg^. ^. ^
So and so let the gods do to me, if I make not thy soul like one of theyrs,
by to morrow this time. When he saw that, he arose and went for his life, and
came to Beerseba in Judah, and left his servant tw^re. But he him self went a
days journey in to the wilderness, and came and sat down under a Ginaper
tree, and desired for his soul, that he might dye, and said: Iona. iiii. ^
it is now enough (O Lord) take my soul, for I am not better then my
fathers. And as he lay and slepte under the Ginaper tree: behold, an angel
touched him, and said unto him: up, and eat. And when he looked about him:
behold there was a loofe of bread baked on coals, and a vessel of water at
his head. And he did eat / and drink: and laid him down again to sleep.

And the angel of the Lord came again And he arose, and did eat and drink,
and walked in the strength of that meat Exodi. 34 ^ Math. 4. a.
fourtye days and fourtye nyghtes, even unto Horeb the mount of god: When he
came thither in to a cave, he lodged therein, all night.

And behold, the word of the lord came to him and said unto him: what do
thou here Elia? And he answered: I have been ielous for the lord god of
hoostes sake. For the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, Roma.
xi. a
broken down thine aulters / and sleyne thy prophets with the sword, and I
only am left, and they seek my life to take it away.

And he said come out, and stand upon Eccle. 48. a
the lord went by / and a mighty strong wind that rent the mountains and
brake the rocks before the lord. But the lord was not in the wind. And
after the wind came an earthquake. But the lord was not in the earthquake.
And after the earthquake, came fire: but the lord was not in the fire. And
after the fire, came a small still voice. And when Elia herd it, he covered
his face with his mantle, and went out and stood in the entering in of the
cave. And behold, there came a voice unto him, and said: what do thou here
Elia? And he answered: I have been ielous for the lord god of hoostes sake:
because the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, cast down thine
aulters, and sleyne thy prophettes with the sword, and I only am left, and
they seek my life to take it away And the lord said unto him: go and turn
thy way to the wilderness unto Damasco, that thou may anoint ^. Reg. ^. d
Hazaell, king over Siria. And 4. Reg. ix. b
Iehu the son of Nimsi, shalt thou anoint king over Israel. And Elisa the
son of Saphat of Abell Meholoh, shall thou anoint to be prophet in thy rowme

And it shall come to pass that who so escapes the sword of Hazaell, him
shall Iehu R^ma. xi. ^
I have left me seven thousand in Israel, of which never man bowed his
knees unto Baall, nor kyssed him with his mouth. So he departed thence, and
found Elisa the son of Saphat plowynge, and having twelve yocke of oxen
before him, and he with the xii. And Elia went by him, and cast his mantell
upon him. And he left the oxen, and ran after Elia and said: ^^^^. ix. ^
let me I pray the, kiss my father and my mother, and then I will follow the.
He said unto him: go back again, for what is it, that I have done to the And
when he went back again from him, he took a couple of oxen, and slew them,
and dressed the flesh with the instruments of the oxen, and gave unto the
people, and they did eat. And then he arose and went after Elia, and minystred
unto him.

The first, and second time that Samaria was beseyged of Benhadad king of
Siria.

CAPI. XX.
ANd Benhadad the king of Siria gathered

And when the messengers came again, they said: Thus says Benhadad: I have
sent unto the saying: Thou shalt deliver me thy silver and thy gold, and thy
wives, and thy children. I will therefore send my servants unto the to morrow
this time: and they shall search thine house / and the houses of thy
servants. And what soever is pleasant in Behold, I will deliver it in to
thine hand this day, and thou shalt know, that I am the lord. And Ahab
said: By whom? he said: thus says the lord: even by the servants of the
gouernoures of the shyres. He said again: Who shall order the battle? And
he answered: thou. Then he nombred the servants of the governors of the
shyres: and they were two hundred and. xxxii. And after them also, he nombred
all the people, all the children of Israel, even. vii. thousand. And they went
out at noone: but Benhadad did drink till he was dronken in the pauylyons
both he and the kings: even. xxxii. kings, that help him. And the
servants of the governors of the shyres went out first. And Benhadad sent
out, and they showed him, saying there are men come out of Samaria. He said,
Whyther they be come out for peace, take them a live, or whyther they be come
out to fight take them yet alive.

And so those young men of the governors of the shyres came out of the city,
and the host

And there came a prophet to the king of Israel, and said unto him: go forth
and play the man, be wise and take heed what thou do for when the year is
gone about, the king of Siria will come up against the. And the servants of
the king of Siria said unto him: the Gods of the hills are their Gods, and
therefore they had the better of us. But let us fight against them in the
plain, and for what ye will, we shall have the better of them. And this do:
take the kings away every man out of his place, and put dukes in their rowmes.
And do thou nombre the an host, like the host that thou have lost, such
horses and such charetes and we will fight against them in the plain, and thou
shall se us get the better of them. And he herkened unto their voice, and did
even so.

And it fortuned, that after the year was

And his servants said unto him: Behold, we have herd say, that the kings
of 3. Regu^. 13 ^
a lion found him, and slew him. Then he found an other man and said: smite
me I pray the. And the man smote him, so that in smiting he wounded him. So
the prophet went forth, and waited for the king by the way, and put him self
out of knowledge with ashes which he laid upon his face.

And when the king came by, he cried unto the king, and said: thy servant went
out in

And if he be myssed or lost, thy life shall go for his: or else, thou shalt
pay a talent of silver. And as thy servant had here and there to do, he was
gone. And the king of Israel said unto him: even so shall thy judgment he,
as y^ have defined it thy self. And he hasted and took the ashes away from
his face: and the king of Israel knew him, that he was of the prophets. And he
said unto him: thus says the Lord: because thou haste let go a man, that is
in my curse, thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people. And
the king of Israel went to his house, way ward, and in displeasure, and came
to Samaria.

Iezabell commands to kill Nabath for the vyneyarde that he refused to sell
to Ahab. Elia reproves Ahab, and he repents.

CAPI. XXI.
AFter these things, it chanced, that ^. Regsi. ^. ^
Give me thy vyneyarde, that I may make me a garden of herbs thereof* because
it lies so nyghe my house: and I will give the for it a better vyneyard then
it is: or rather if it please the, I will give the, the worth of it in money.
And Naboth said to Ahab: the lord forbid that from me, that I should give the
enheritaunce of my fathers unto the.

And Ahab came into his house heavy, and to the wall) and would eat no bread.
But Iezabel his wife came to him, and said unto him: Why is thy spirit so way
ward, that thou eatest no bread? And he said unto her: For I spoke unto
Naboth the Iezraelite, and said unto him: give me thy vyneyarde for money, or
else if it please the, I will give the an other vyneyarde for it. And he
answered: I will not give the my vyneyarde,

And Iezabell his wife said unto him: false) witness against him, saying:
thou dydest blaspheme God and the king. And then carye him out, and stone him
to death.

And the men of his city: that is to say, Acts. 7. ^
And they carried him out of the city and stoned him with stones that he dyed.
And then they sent to Iezabel, saying: Naboth

And when Ahab herd that Naboth was dead, he stood up to go down to the
vyneyarde of Naboth the Iezraelyte, and to take passessyon of it. And the word
of the Lord came unto Elia the Thesbite, saying: up, and go down to mete
Ahab king of Israel, which is in Samaria. For to, he is gone down to the
vyneyarde of Naboth to take possessyon of it. And therefore shalt thou say unto
him: thus says the lord: have thou kyssed, and gotten possessyon? And y^
shalt speak 3. Reg. (...) ^.
in the place where dogs lycked the blood of Naboth, shall dogs lycke even
thy blood also. And Ahab said to Elia: have thou found me, O y^ mine enemy?
He answered: I have found the: for y^ art even sold to work wickedness in
the sight of the lord. Behold I will bring evil upon the, and will make
clean ryddaunce of thy posterite, and will 4. Reg. (...). ^
destroy from Ahab, even him that makes water against the wall, and him that
is shut up and left behind in Israel: and will make thine house, like the
house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasa the son of
Ahia, for the prouocacio^, wherewith thou have provoked, and made Israel to
sin.

And of Iezabell spoke the lord, saying: O^^^. (...). 4. (...).
dogs shall eat Iezabell, in the passession of Iezrael. (...). ^ 3. (...).
(...). ^ (...). ^. ^^^^
And he that dies of Ahab in the town, him shall dogs eat: and he that
dies in the feldes, him shall the fowls of the air eat. But there was none
like Ahab, which did even sell him self, to work wickedness in the sight of
the Lord, and that because Iezabell his wife prycked him forward. He did
exceeding abhominably, in following foul ydols, according to all things, as
did the Ammorites ^^^. xxi. ^.
whom the lord cast out before the children of Israel.

And it fortuned that when Ahab herd those words, ^^^. 37. g
he rent his clothes, and put sack cloth about his flesh, and fasted, and
lay in sack cloth and went bare foot. And the word of the Lord came to
Elia, the Thesbyte, saying: See thou how Ahab humbles him self before me?
because he so submytteth him self before me, I will not bring that evil in his
days: But in his sons days, will I bring evil upon his house. And they
co^tynued (...). year without war between Siria and Israel.

Four hundred false Prophettes do counsel Ahab, and Iehosaphat to war
against Ramoth, only Michea prophesyeth the truth, for which he i^ smytten,
and put in prison. Of Ahazia, otherwise called Ochosias.

CAPI. XXII.
ANd in ^^^^. 18 a
the third year did Iehosaphat ^. Reg. (...). ^
I will be as thou art, and my people shall be as thine, and my horses as thine.

And Iehosaphat said unto the king of Israel: Regu^. ii. a
Ask counsel I pray the at the word of the Lord to day. And then the king
of Israel gathered the prophets together, upon Regu^. ^8 ^
a four hundred men, and said unto them: shall I go against Ramoth in Gilead to
battle, or shall I let it alone? And they said, go up: for the Lord shall
deliver it in to the hands of the king.

And Iehosaphat said: is there here never

And the king of Israel and Iehosaphat the king of Judah sat either in his
seat, and their apparel on them, in the void place beside the entryng in at
the gate of Samaria, and all the prophets prophesyed before them. And Zedekia
the son of Canaana made horns of iron, and said: thus says the Lord* with
these horns shall thou pushe the Sirians, until thou have made an end of
them. And all the Prophettes prophesyed even so, saying: Go up to Ramoth in
Gilead, and prosper, for the Lord shall deliver it in to the kings hands.

And the messenger that was gone to call Michea, spoke unto him, saying:
Behold, ^^ P^^^. (...). ^, ^, ^, ^.
go and prosper, the Lord shall deliver it into the hand of the king. And
the king said unto him: So and so many times do I charge the, that y^ tell me
nothing, but that which is true, in the name of the lord. He said: I saw all
them of Israel scattered upon the hills, as shape that have not a shepheerde.
And the lord said: these have no master, let every man return to his house
in peace. And the king of Israel said unto Iehosaphat: did I not tell the,
that he wolds prophecy no good unto me, but evil?

And he said again: hear thou therefore ^^. (...). (...) ^
who shall persuade Ahab, that he may go and fall at Ramoth in Gilead? And one
said on this manner, and an other on that. And there came forth a certain
spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said: I will persuade him. And the
Lord said unto him: wherewith? And he said: I will go out, and be a false
spirit in the mouth of all the prophettes. He said: thou shalt persuade him,
and prevail, go forth then, and do even so. Now therefore behold, Iere. 14, ^
the Lord has put a lyenge spirit in the mouth of all these thy prophettes:
and the lord has sp^spoken evil toward the.

But Zedekia the son of Canaana went to, and smote Michea on the cheke, and
said: When went the spirit of the lord from me, to speak unto the? And
Michea said: Behold, thou shalt se in that day, when thou shall go from
chamber to chamber to hyde the.

And the king of Israel said: take Michea, and carye him unto Amon the
governor of the city, and unto Ioab the kings son, and say: thus says the
king. Put this fellow in the prison house, and feed him with bread of
affliction, and with water of trouble until I return in peace.

And Michea said: If thou return in by chance) smote the king of Israel
between the rybbes, and his harness. Wherefore he said unto the dryuer of his
charettes: turn thy hand, and carye me out of the host, for I am ( sore)
hurt. And the battle increased that day, and the king stood still in his
charet against the Sirians, and dyed at even. And the blood ran out of the
wound into the mids of the charet.

And there went a proclamacion thorowout 3. Reg. 21, f.
and the dogs lycked up his blood (and harlottes washed by the pole side)
according to the word of the Lord, which he spoke. The rest of the words
that concern Ahab and all that he did, and the Iurye house which he made, and
all the cities that he builded, are they not written in the book of the
Cronicles of the kings of Israel? And so Ahab slepte with his fathers, and
Ahazia his son reigned in his stead.

ii, (...)
Iehosaphat the son of Asa began to reygne upon Judah in the fourth year of
Ahab king of Israel, and Iehosaphat was xxxv. year old when he began to
reygne, and reigned. xxv. year in Jerusalem. His mothers name was Azuba the
daughter of Silhi. And he walked in all the ways of Asa his father and bowed
not therfrom: but did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord.
Nevertheless, the hill aulters were not taken out of the way: for the people
offered and burnt insence yet, in the hill aulters.

And Iehosaphat made peace with the iii. (...).
The rest of the words that concern Iehosaphat, and the might that he used,
and how he warred, are they not written in the book of the Cronicles of the
kings of Judah? And the remenaunt of the stues of the males, which remained in
the days of his father, he put clean out of the land.

There was then no king made in Edom. And Iehosaphat made. x. ships in the sea, to come through Tharsis to Ophir for Gold, but they went not: For the
ships brake at Ozion Gaber. Then said Ahazia the son of Ahab unto
Iehosaphat: let my servants go with thy servants in the ships. But
Iehosaphat would not. And Iosaphat did sleep with his fathers, and was buried
with his fathers in the city of David his father. And Iehoram his son
reigned in his stead. Ahazia the son of Ahab began to reygne over Israel in
Samaria, the seuententh year of Iehosaphat king of Judah, and reigned two years
over Israel. But he did evil in the sight of the lord, and walked in the way
of his father, and in the way of his mother, and in the way of Jeroboam the
son of Nabat, which made Israel to sin. For he served Baal, and worshypped
him, and provoked the Lord God of Israel unto wrath, according unto all that
his father (...).

The end of the third book of the Kings after the reckoning of the
Latinystes: which the Hebrews call the first book of the Kings.
The fourth book of the Kings / after the Latunstes which book / and the
third together / is but one with the Hebrews.
The captains over fiftye with their sold yours are burnte with fire from
heaven, by the prayer of Elia. Ahazia is reproved of Elia, and dies. and
Iehoram his brother succedeth him.

CAPI. Primo.


And when the messengers turned back again unto him, he said unto them: why
^ath. iii. ^
and gyrde with a gyrdle of lether about his loins. And he said: it is Elia
the Thesbite. Then the king sent unto him a captain over fyftie (with his
fyftie men) which came to him: and behold, he sat on the top of an hill. And
he spoke unto him. Thou man of god, the king has said: come down.

Elia answered and said to the captain over (...). (...). ^
And there came fire of god, and consumed him and his fyftye. And the king
went again, and sent to him an other captayn over fyftye with his fyftie. And
he answered and said unto him: O man of God, thus has the king said: make
have, and come down. Elia answered and said unto them: If I be a man of God,
fire come down from heaven, and consume the and thy fyftie. And there came fire
of God down from heaven, and consumed him and his fyftie. And the king went
again and sent the third captain over fyftie with his fifty men. And the
third captain over fyftie went up, and came and fell on his knees before
Elia, and besought him, and said unto him: O man of god, let my life, and the
life of these fyfiye thy servants be precious in thy sight. Behold, there
came fire down his brother) began to reygne in his stead, in the second
year of Iehoram the son of Iehosaphat king of Judah, because he had no son.
The rest of the words that concern Ahazia, what things he did, are they not
written in the book of the cronicles of the kings of Israel.

Elia deuydeth the waters with his maritell. He ^s taken up in to heaven. The
b^tter and venomous wat^rs are healed. The children that mock Hes^^^us
(otherwise c^ll^d Elisa,) are rent in pieces.

CAPI. II.
ANd it chanced, that when the Gene. ^. ^
Lord i. Reg. (...)
as surely as the lord lives, and as thy soul lives, I will not leave the.
And they came down to Bethel. And the children of the Prophets that were at
Bethell, came out to Elisa, and said unto him: know thou not, how that the
Lord will take away thy master from thy head this day?

He said: I know it also, hold ye your peace. And Elia said unto him:
Elisa, tarry here I pray the, for the lord has sent me to Jericho. He said:
as surely as the lord lives and as surely as thy soul lives, I will not
leave the, and so they came to Jericho. And the children of the Prophettes that
were at Jericho came to Elisa and said unto him:

Eccle. 4^. a
And Elia went up through the whyrle and they parted not a sonder,) and he
said: where is the lord god of Elia, and he him self? And when he had smytten
the waters, they parted this way and that way, and Elisa went over. And when
the children of the prophettes which were at Jericho saw him from a far,
they said: the spirit of Elia does rest on Elisa, and they came to mete him,
and fell to the ground before him, and said unto him: Se, there be with thy
servants fyftie strong men, let them go and seek thy master: happily the
spirit of the lord has taken him up, and cast him upon some mountain or in
to some valley. And he said: Ye shall send none. And when they say upon him
till he was ashamed, he said: send. They sent therefore fyftie men, which sought
him three days, but found him not. And when they came again to him, which
tarried at Jericho, he said unto them, did I not say unto you, that ye should
not go?

And the men of the city said unto Elisa

The kings of Israel, Judah, and Edom lack water, which they obtain through
the prayer of Heliseus. The king of Moab fygh: eth against Israel.

CAPI. III.
I Ehoram the son of Ahab began to reygne

And so the king of Israel took his journey, ^^ 22. ^.
Is there not hear a prophet of the Lord, that we may inquire of the Lord by
him? And one of the king of Isreal's servants answered and said: here is
Elisa the son of Saphat, which powered water on the hands of Elia. And
Iehosaphat said: Is not the word of the Lord with him? And so the king of
Israel, and Iehosaphat and the king of Edom went down to him. And Elisa said
unto the king of Israel: what have I to do with the? get the to the prophets
of thy father, and to the prophettes of thy mother. And the king of Israel
said unto him: Oh nay, for the lord has called these three kings together to
deliver them in to the hand of Moab. And Elisa said: As sure as the Lord of
hoostes lives (in whose sight I stand) and it were not that I regard the
presence of Iehosaphat, the king of Judah, I would not look toward the nor yet
se the. But now bring me a mynstrel. And when the mynstrell played, the hand
of

And when they came to the host of Israel the Israelites stood up and smote
the Moabites, so that they fled before them. But they followed upon them, and
smote Moab. And they ouerthrewe the cities, and on every good parcel of land,
cast every man his stone, and filled it, and they stopte all the wells of
waters, and felled all the good trees. Only in the city, of brycke left they
the stones thereof: Howbeit they went about it with slings and smote it. And
when the king of Moab saw, that the battle was sore against him he took
with him vii. hundred me^ that drew the sword, to have gone through, even
unto the king of Edom. But they could not. And then he took his eldest son
(that should have reigned in his stead) and offered him for a burntofferyng
upon the wall. And there was great indignacion against Israel, and they
departed from him, and returned unto their own land.

God gives a certain po^^ woman Oil by Heliseus* Heliseus (whom the text
calls Elisa) obteyneth of g^^ and Child for his hoostesse, which dies, and
is after raised to life. He makes sweet the pottage, and mult: plyeth the
loves.

CAPI. IIII.
ANd there cried a certain woman of

He said unto her: Go and borowe vessels for the, of them that are without,
even of all thy neighbors, empty vessels and that not a few. And when thou
art come in, you shalt shut the door after the and after thy sons, and power
out into all those vessels, and set aside that which is full.

And so the woman went from him, and shu^

And it fell on a day, that Elisa came to Sunem, where was a great woman that
took him in, for to eat bread. And so it came to pass, that from that time
forth (as often as he came that way) he turned in thither to eat bread. And
she said unto her husband: Behold, I perceive, that this is a holy man of
God, that comes so often by our place. Let us make him a chamber (I pray the)
with walls, and let us set him there a bed, and a table, a stole and a
candelstycke: that he may turn in thither when he comes to us.

And it fortuned on a day, that he came Ge^e. i^. b. (...). 1^. b
by such a time, and as soon as the fruit can live, thou shalt enbrace a
son. And she said: Oh nay my Lord, thou man of god, do not lie unto thine
handmayd. And the wife conceived, and bare a son that same season that Eliseus
had said unto her, as soon as the fruit could have life.

And when the child was grown, it fell

And when he had taken him and brought him to his mother, he sat on her knees
till noone, and then dyed. And she went up and laid him on the bed of the man
of God, and shut the door about him, and went out, and called unto her
husband, and said: Send with me (I pray the) one of the young men and one
of the Asses, for I will run to the man of God, and come again. And he said:
wherefore wylt thou go to him, seeing that today is neither new moon nor
Sabbath day. She answered: For health. Then she sadled an Ass and said to her
servant: lead away the Ass, and make her not to go slowly (because I ride
upon her) but when I bid the.

And so she went and came unto the man

Then he said to Gehezi: 4. Reg. ^
Gyrde up thy loins, and take my staff in thine hand, and go thy way. Luke.
^. ^
If thou mete any man salute him not. And if any salute the, answer him not
again. And lay my staff upon the face of the child. And the mother of the
child said: 1, Reg. (...). ^
As sure as the Lord lives, and as thy soul lives, I will not leave the.
And he arose and followed her. Gehezi went before them, and laid the staff upon
the face of the child, But there was neither voice nor any feeling. Wherefore
he went again to mete him, and told him, saying: the child is not awaked.
And when Elisa was come in to the house: Behold, the child was dead and
laid upon his bed.

He went in therefore, and shut the door to 111. Re^^* (...)*
And went up and lay upon the lad, and put his mouth upon his mouth, and his
eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon his hands, and when he so lay upon the
child, the flesh of the child waxed warm. And he went again, and walked
once up and down in the house, and then went up, and laid him self upon him
again. And then the chyldenesed seven times and opened his eyes. And he called
Gehezi, and said: Call for this Sunamite. So he called her: which when she was
come in unto him, he said unto her: (...)
take thy son. Therefore she went in and fell at his feet, and bowed her self
to the ground, and took up her son, and went out.

Elisa came again to Gilgall, and there as it were) a wild vine, and
gathered thereof wild Coloquintidas his lapfull, and came, and shred them into
the pot of pottage: for they knew it not. So they powered out for the me^ to
eat And it fortuned, that when they tasted of the pottage, they cried out, and
said: Oh thou man of God, there is death in the pot: and they could not eat
thereof. But he said: bring meal. And he cast it into the pot, and said:
fill for the people, that they may eat, and there was no more harm in the pot.

There came a man from Baall Salisa, and brought the man of God bread of the
first fruytes, even. xx. loves of barley, and new corn which was yet in his
bags. And he said: Give unto the people that they may eat. And his minyster
answered: why, shall I set this before an hundred men? He said again: give it
unto the people that they may eat. For thus says the lord, (...).
they shall eat, and there shall be left over. And so he set it before them,
and they did eat, and left over, according to the word of the Lord.

Naaman the Sirian is heale^ of his Leprosye. Gehezi is stryken with a
Leprosye, because he took money and raiment of Naaman.

CAPI. V.
NAaman, captain of the hooste of the

And he came, and took with him ten talentes (...). 32. f
am I God, that I should sley, and make alive? for he does send to me that I
should deliver a man from his leprosye. Wherefore consider (I pray you) and se
how he seeks a quarrel against me^ which when Elisa the man of god had herd,
how that the king of Israel had rent his clothes, he sent to the king,
saying: Wherefore have thou rent thy clothes? let him come now to me, and he
shall know, that there is a Prophet in Israel.

And so Naaman came with his horses, and

If I wash me also in them, shall I not be cleansed? And so he turned him, and
departed with displeasure. And his servants came, and co^muned with him, and
said: Father / if the Prophet had bid the do some great thing, ought thou
not to have done it.

How much rather then, when he says (...).
and he was cleansed. And he turned again to the man of god, he and all his
company, and stood before him, and said. Behold, I know now that there is
no god in all the world, but in Israel. Now therefore take a blessyng of thy
servant. But he said: (...).
as surely as the lord lives (before whom I stand) I will receive none. And
when the other would have constrained him to receive it, he would not.

And Naama^ said: ( Even as thou vvyl^,) Shall there not be given to thy
servant as much of this earth as two Mules may bear? For thy servant will
hence forth offer neither burntsacrifyce nor offering unto any other god, save
unto the lord. But herein the lord be mercyful to thy servant, that when my
master goes in to the house of Rimmo^ and does worship there, and leans on
my hand, and I also worship in the house of Rimmo^, (when I do worship I say)
in the house of Rimmon, the Lord be merciful unto thy servant because of
this thing. Unto whom he said: go in peace.

And when he was departed from him as nynge after him, he light down from the
charet, to mete him* and said: 4. Reg. 4. d
is all well? He answered: All is well, Behold, my master has sent me,
saying: se, there be come to me even now from mount Ephraim two young men of
the children of the prophettes: give them I pray the, one talent of silver,
and two change of garments.

And Naaman said: With a good will. 4. Re. xv a. (...). Pa. 16. a
And he went out from his presence a leper, as white as snow.

Elisa makes iron to swymme above the water. The Serians beseyge Israel, so
that two women agree together to eat their own Children.

CAPI. VI.
THe children of the prophettes said unto

But the king of Siria warred against Israel, and took counsel with his
servants. and said: In yonder secret place shall be my remaining. And the
man of God sent unto the king of Israel, saying: Beware, that thou go not
over to soche a place, for there the Sirians are lurkyng. Therefore the king of
Israel sent to the place which the man of god told him, and warned him of,
and saved him self from it, not once nor twyse. And the heart of the king of
Siria was troubled for this thing, and he called for his servants, and said
unto them: will ye not show me, which of our men ( betrayeth me) to the king
of Israel? And one of his servants said: none

Therefore sent he thither horses and charettes, and a mighty hooste. And they
came by night, and compassed the city about. And when the servant of the man
of god rose up early to go out: Behold, there was an host round about the
town with horses and charettes. And his servant said unto him: Alas master,
what shall we do? He answered ^^ Pat. (...) ^
fear not, for they that be with us, are mo then they that be with them.

And Elisa prayed and said: lord (I beseech

And when they came down to him, Elisa prayed unto the lord, and said: Smite
this people (I pray the) with ^^^^. (...). (...) ^^
blyndnesse. And he smote them with blyndnes, according to the desire of Elisa.
And Elisa said unto them, this is not the way, neither is this the town
follow me, and I will bring you to the man whom ye seek. But he led them to
Samaria.

And it fortuned that when they were come

After this it chanced, that Benhadad was a great derth in Samaria: and
behold, they beseyged it, until an Asses head (was ^olde) for. lxxx. silver
pens, and the fourth part of a Cab of doves dounge for five sycles.

And as the King of Israel was going upon the wall, there cried a woman unto
him saying: help, my lord O king. He said: if the lord do not succor the:
wherewith can I help the: with the barn, or with the wine press? And the king
said unto her: what wylt thou? She answered: yonder woman said unto me:
bring thy son, that we may eat him to day, and we will eat mine to morrow.
^^^^. 26. d (...). 28. ^ (...). 4 ^
And so we dressed my son and did eat him. And I said to her the other day:
bring thy Son that we may eat him, and she has hyd her son.

And it came to pass, that when the king ^^^^. 19. ^
God do so and so to me, if the head of Elisa the son of Saphat shall stand
on him this day. But Elisa sat in his house, and the elders sat by him and the
king sent a man before him. But or the messenger came to him, he said to the
elders: have ye not seen, how that the son of this murderer has sent, to
take away mine head? Be circumspecte when the messenger comes, and shut the
door, and hold him at the door: is not the sound of his masters feet
behind him? While he yet talked with them: Behold, the messe^ger came down
unto him, and said behold, this evil is of the lord, and what more shall I
look for of the lord?

Elisa prophesyeth plenteousnes of vyttayles, and oth^^ things to Samaria. The
Sirians run away, and have no man following them The lord that would not
believe the word of Elisa is trodden to death.

CAPI. VII.
THen Elisa said: hear ye the word of Rig. 7. ^
to morrow this time shall a busshell of fine flower be sold for a Sicle, and
two busshels of Barley for a Sycle in the gate of Samaria. Then a certain
Lord (on whose hand the king leaned) answered the man of god, and said:
behold, if the lord would make wyndowes in heaven, might this saying come to
pass? He said: behold, thou shall se it with thine eyes, but shalt not eat
thereof. And there were four leperous men at the entetynge in of the gate. And
they said one to another, why sit we here, until we dye? If we say: we will
enter into the city, behold, the derth is in the city, and we shall dye
therein. And if we sit still here, we dye also, Now therefore come, and let us
fall upon the host of the Sirians: If they save our lives we shall live: If
they kyl us, then are we dead And so they arose in the night, to go to the
host of the Sirians. And when they were come to the vttermoost part of the
host of Siria: behold, there was no man there.

For the lord had made the host of the Sirians Math. b. a Esar. 13. ^.
to hear a noise of charettes and a noise or horses, and the noise of a great
host. In so much that they said one to another, lo, the king of Israel
has hired against us the kings of the Hethites, and the kings of the
Egyptyans, to come upon us. Wherefore they arose and fled in the night, and left
their ten tes, their horses, and their Asses, and the field which they had
pytched even as it was, and fled for their lives. And when these lepers came to
the edge of the host, they went in to a tent, and did eat, and drink, and
carried thence silver and gold and raiment, and went and hyd it: and came
again and entered in to another tent / and carried thence also, and went and hyd
it.

Then said one to another: we do not well this day, for asmoch as it is a day
to bring good tidings / and we hold our peace. If we tarry till the day
light, some myscheyfe will come upon us. Now therefore come, that we may go,
and tell the kings household.

And so they came, and called unto the porter of the city, and told them
saying: we came to the pauilions of the Sirians: and se, there was no man
there, neither voice of man, but horses and asses tied, and the tents were,
even as they were wont to be. And so the man called unto the porters, and they
told the kings house wtin. And the king arose in the night, and said unto
his servants: I will show you now, what the Sirians have done unto us* They
know that we be hungrye, and therefore are they gone out of the pauilyons, to
hyde them selves in the field, saying: When they come out of the city, we
shall earth them alive, and get into the city. And one of his servants
answered, and said: Let men ta^^ (I pray you) five of the horses that remain
and are left in the multitude. Behold they are even as all the multitude of
Israel that are left in the city: behold (I say) they are even as all the
multitude of the Israelites that are consumed, and we will send, and se. They
took therefore the horses of two chareties and the king sent after the host of
the Sirians / saying: go, and se. And they went after them / even unto Jordan:
and lo, all the way was full of clothes and vessels which the Sirians had cast
from them in their haste.

And the messengers returned, and told 4. Re. vii. ^
according to the word of the lord.

And the king appointed that Lord (on whose hand he leaned) to be at the
gate. And the people trod upon him in the gate, and he dyed, according to the
word of the man of god which he said, when the king came down to him. And
so came the thing to pass that the man of God had spoken to the king,
saying: two busshels of barley for a sycle, and a busshell of fine flower for
an other / shall be 4. Reg. 7. a
to morrow this time in the gate of Samaria. Where unto that lord answered the
man of God, and said. Yea / and if the Lord made wyndowes in heaven might it
come to pass? And he said: Behold, thou shall se it with thine eyes / and
shall not eat thereof. And even so chanced it unto him: for the people trod
upon him in the gate / and he dyed.

Clisa prophesyeth unto the Sunamyte the derth of seven years. After the death
of Benhadad reygneth Hazaell in Siria. Iehoram the son of Iehosephat reygneth
in Judah. Edom falls from Judah ^hozia succedeth Iehoram.

CAPI. VIII.
THEN spoke 4. Reg. 4. a
Elisa unto the woman

He told the king, how he had restored

And ^. Reg. xix. ^
Elisa came to Damascis, and Benhadad the king of Siria was spcke. And one
told him saying: The man of God is ^i^. Re. 14. ^
take a present in thine hand, and go mete the man of God, that thou may
ask the lord by him, whyther I shall recover of this disease. And so Hazaell
went to mete him and took the present with him, and of every good thing of
Damasco, even asmoch as. xl. Camels could bear, and came and presented him
self before him, and said: thy son Benhadad king of Siria has sent me to
the saying, shall I recover of this disease? And Elisa said unto him: go and
say unto him: thou shall recover, howbeit the lord has showed me, that he
shall surely dye.

And he looked aside, and was ashamed /

The fyfte year af Iehoram the son of Ahab (...)
xxxii. year old was he, when he began to reygne, and he reigned. viii. year
in Jerusalem. And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as they that
were of the house of Ahab: for the daughter of Ahab was his wife, and he did
evil in the sight of the lord. And the lord would not destroy Judah, and
that by cause of David his servant (...)
as he promised him to give him all way a light among his children. (...)
In those days Edom did wyckedly when he was under the hand of Judah: for they
made them a king of their own.

So Iehoram went to Zair, he and all his the hand of Judah unto this day. And
then Lobnah began to be dysobedyent, even that same time. The rest of the
words that concern Ioram and all that he did, are they not written in the
book of the Chronicles of the kings of Judah? And Ioram rested with his fathers
/ and was buried beside his fathers in the city of David. And (...)
Ahaziahu his son reigned in his stead.

In the. xii. year of Ioram the son of Ahab,

And he went with Ioram the son of Ahab to war against Hazaell king of Siria /
in Ramoth Gilead, and the Sirians wounded Ioram. And (...)
king Ioram went back again, to be healed in Iezrahel of the wounds which
the Sirians had given him at Ramoth, when he fought against Hazaell king of
Siria. And Ahaziahu the son of Iehoram king of Judah went down to se Ioram
the son of Ahab in Iezrahell, because he was sick there.

Iehu is made king of Israel, and kylleth Iehoram the king thereof: and
Ahaziahu king of Judah also, and causes Iezabel to be cast down out of a
wyndowe, and the dogs eat hi^.

CAPI. IX.
ANd Elisa the prophet called one of the (...)
gyrde up thy loins, and take this box of oil in thine hand, and get the to
Ramoth in Gilead. And when thou co^mest thither, look were is Iehu the son of
Iehosaphat the Son of Nimsi, and go to him, and make him arise up from among
his brethren, and carry him to a secret chamber. Then take the bore of oil,
and power to on his head, and say: thus says the lord: I have anointed the
to be king over Israel.

And then open the door, and flee without any taryenge. And so the servant of
the prophet gat him to Ramoth Gilead: and when he came in / behold, the
captains of the hooste were syttyng together. And he said: I have an erand to
the O captain. And Iehu said: unto which of all us? He said: to the O
captain. And he arose, and went into the house.

And he powered the oil on his head, and 3. Reg. 19. ^
I have anointed the to be king over the people of the lord, even over
Israel. Thou shall smite the house of Ahab thy master, that I may aduenge
the blood of my servants the prophettes, and the blood of all the servants
of the Lord, of the hand of Iezabell (for the hoole house of Ahab shall be
destroyed) and I will destroy from Ahab / even him that makes water against
the wall, and him that is prysoned and forsaken in Israel: and I will make the
house of Ahab like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nabat, and like the house
of Baasa the son of Ahia. And as for Iezabell 3. Reg. xxi. ^
the dogs shall eat 4. Reg. 29. f
her in the field of Iezrahell, and there shall be none to bury her. And he
opened the door and fled. Iehu came out to the servants of his lord, and one
said unto him, is all well?

Wherefore came this mad fellow to the? And he said unto them: ye know what
manner of man he is, and what his co^municacion is: They said unto him again:
it is not so, tell us. He said: thus and thus spoke he to me, saying: Thus
says the lord: I have anointed the to be king over Israel. Then they
hasted, and took every man his garment, and put it under him in manner of a
judges seat / and blewe with trompettes, saying: Iehu is king. And so Iehu
the son of Iehosaphat the son of Nimsi conspired against Ioram. Ioram kept
Ramoth Gilead, he and all Israel because of Hazaell king of Siria, and 4.
Regu^. ^^
king Ioram returned to be healed in Iezraell, of the wounds which the
Sirians had given him, when he fought with Hazaell king of Siria.

And Iehu said: If it be your minds /

Then he sent out an other on horseback, me. And the watchman told, saying: he
came to them also, and comes not again, and the dryuynge is like the
dryuynge of Iehu the son of Nimsi, for he dryueth the charet as he were mad.
And Iehoram said: make redye. And the charet was made ready. And Iehora^ king
of Israel, and Ahaziahu king of Judah went out either of them in his charet
against Iehu, and met him in the furlong of Naboth the Iezrahelite. And it
fortuned / that when Iehoram saw Iehu, he said: is it peace Iehu? He
answered: What peace should there be, so long as the hooredomes of thy mother
Iezabell and her wytchcraftes, are so great? And Iehoram turned his hands, and
fled, and said to Ahaztahu: there is falshed O Ahaziahu. And Iehu took a bow
in his hand, and smote Iehoram between the arms, and the arowe went through
his heart. And he fell down flat in his charet.

Then said (Iehu) to Bidkara captain: And they smote him) in his charet at the
going up to Gur by Iibleam, and he fled to Magiddo, and there dyed. And his
servants carried him in a charet to Jerusalem, and buried him there in his
sepulcher with his fathers in the city of David. And in the. xi. year of
Ioram the son of Ahab, began Ahaziahu to reygne over Judah. And when Iehu was
come to Iezrael / Iezabell herd of it, and starched her face / and tired her
head, and looked out at a wyndow And as Iehu entered at the gate, she said: had
Zimri peace which slew his master? And he lift up his eyes to the wyndow,
and said; who is of my side, who? And there looked out to him two or three
chamberlaynes. 3. Re. xvi. g
for she is a kings daughter.

And so when they came to burye her, they found no more of her then the scull,
and the feet, and the palms of her hands. Wherefore they came again, and
told him. And he said: This is the word of the lord, which he spoke by the
hand of his servant Elia the Thesbite, saying: 1. Reg. (...).
in the field of Iezrahell shall dogs eat the flesh of Iezabel. And so the
carkas of Iezabell was even as donge upon the earth, in the field of Iezrahell:
so that no man might say: This was Iezabell.

Iehn causes the. lrx. sons of Ahab to be sleyne, and after that. rl^^. of
his brethren. He fyndeth a mean also to kill all the preested of Baall. After
his death his son reygneth in his st^ade.

CAPI. X.
A Hab had Iosue. ^^
. lxx. Sons in Samaria.

Then he wrote an other letter to them, say

And when it was day, he went out, and stood the house of Ahab: for the lord
has brought to pass the things that he spoke by the hand of his servant
(...). 21. ^.
Elia. And so Iehu slew all that remained of the house of Ahab / in Iezrahell
and all that were great with him / and his kynsfolkes, and his priests, so
that he let nothing of him remain. And he arose, and departed, and came to
Samaria. And when Iehu was in the way to the house where the shepherdes did
shere their sheep, he met with the brethren of Ahaziahu king of Judah, and
said: what are ye? They answerered the brethren of Ahaziahu are we, and go
down to salute the children of the king, and of the queen. And he said: take
them alive. Whom when they had taken them alive, they flue them at the well
which was beside the house where the sheep are shorn, even. xlii. men neither
left he any of them. And when he was departed thence, he met with Iehonadab
the son of (...). 35. a
Rechab coming against him: And he blessed him, and said to him: is thine
heart right, as mine heart is true with thine?

And Iehonadab answered: yea that it is. ( if it, be says he) then give me
thine ^ Reg. 16 g
Ahab served Baall a little: But Iehu shall serve him more. Now therefore call
unto me all the prophettes of Baal, all soche as serve him, and all his
priests and let none be lacking. For I have a great sacrifyce to do to Baall:
and therefore, whosoever is myssed, he shall not live.

But Iehu did it for a subteltye, to the in

And they smote them with the edge of the sword. And the men of war and the
captains neither forsook he) the golden calves that were in Bethell and in
Dan. And the lord said unto Iehu: because y^ have done right well, in
bryngyng to pass, the thing that is right in mine eyes, and have done unto
the house of Ahab according to all things, that are in mine heart, therefore
shall (...)
thy Children unto the fourth generacyon, sit on the seat of Israel. But Iehu
cared not for this, to walk in the law of the lord god of Israel 4. Regu^. ^.
Hazael smote them in all the coostes of Israel, from Jordan Eastwarde: even
all the land of Gilead, the Gad^tes, the Rubenites, and them that were of
Manasses / from Aroer unto the river of Arnon: even Gilead and Basan. The rest
of the words that concern Iehu, and all that he did / and all his power, are
they not written in the book of the Cronicles of the kings of Israel? And
Iehu slepte with his fathers, and they buried him in Samaria, and Iehoahaz his
son reigned in his stead. And the time that Iehu reigned upon Israel in
Samaria, is. xxviii. years.

^thalia puts to death all the kings Sonne^* except Iehokaz the son of
O^oziah, whith is hyd, and after her death is made king.

CAPI. XI.
ANd Athalia the mother of Ahaziahu / with him, out of a slepynge chamber, and
hyd him from Athalia, that he was not sleyne. And he was with her, hyd in the
house of the lord. vi. year. And Athalia did reygne over the land. And the
seventh year Iehoiads sent and fet the rulers over the hundreds, with the
captains, and them of the guard, and took them to him into the house of the
lord, and made a bond with them, and took an oath of them in the house of the
Lord, and showed them the kings son. And he commanded them, saying: This is
it that ye must do: one third part of you (whose duetye is to come on the
Sabbath day) shall keep the watch of the kings house: And an other third
part shall keep (...). 24. ^
Iehoiada the pretst commanded: and they took every man his men (that were to
come in on the Sabbath day, with them that should go out on the Sabbath) and
came to Iehoiada the priest. And to the captains over hundreds, did the priest
give king David's spears and shyldes that were in the temple. And they of the
guard stood / and every man had his weapon in his hand round about the king,
from the right corner of the temple to the left, alonge by the altar, and the
temple. And he brought out the kings son, and put the crown upon him, and
delivered him Deuteronomy. 17. d
the witness, and made him king, and anointed him. And they clapte their
hands, and said: God save the king.

ii Par. 23. d
And when Athalia herd the noise of the runnynge of the people, she came to
the people into the temple of the lord. And when she looked, behold, the king
stood by a pyller (as the manner was) and the syngers and the trompets by the
king, and all the people of the land reioysed / and blewe with trompets. And
Athalia rent her clothes and cried: treason / treason. But Iehoiada the priest
commanded the captains of the hundreds that had the rule of the host, and
said unto them: have her out without the temple, that she may be with in the
ranges, and if any follow her, kill him with the sword: for the Priest had
said: she may not be sleyne in the house of the Lord. And they laid hands
on her till she came into the way, by the which the horses went in to the
kings palace: and there was she sleyne. ii. Pat. (...)* ^
And Iehoiada made a bond between

Iehoas malteth prouisyon for the reparyng of the temple. He to killed by two
of his servants, and Amaziahn reygneth in his stead.

CAPI. XII.
ANd he began to reygne in the seuenthyere

And so it came to pass that unto the. xxiii

And the priests consented to receive no more money of the people: except to
repair the decayed places of the temple.

But Iehoiada the priest took a chyst and ^oted an hoole in the lyd of it, and
set it beside the altar on the right side, as every man comes into the temple
of the Lord. And the priests that kept the doors, put all the money that was
brought in to the house of the Lord.

And it fortuned, that when they saw Re. xxii* a
the kings scribe and the high priest came up, and told the money that was
found in the house of the lord and put it in to a bag. And they gave the
money sealed in to the hands of them that executed the work, and that had the
ouersyght of the house of the lord: and they brought it out to the earpenters
and buylders (that wroughte upon the house of the Lord) and to masons and
hewers of stone: And they bought tymbre and free stone, to repair the decay in
the house of the lord, and to all that went out to amend the temple: howvelt
there was not made for the house of the Lord, bolles of silver, instruments
of Musyke, basens, trompettes or any vessel of gold, or vessel of silver, of
the money that was brought in to the house of the Lord: But they gave that to
the workmen, and repaired therewith the house of the Lord. Moreover, they
rekened not with the men, in to whose hands they delivered that money to be
bestowed on workmen: for they did their business faithfully. Howbeit
trespass money, and sin money was not brought in to the house of the Lord,
for it was the priests. Then came Hazael king of Siria up, and fought against
Geth, and took it, and Hazael set his face to go up to Jerusalem.

And Iehoas king of Judah took all the

The remenaunt of the words that concern Iehoas and all that he did, are they
not written in the book of the Cronicles of the kings of Judah? And his own
servants arose, and wrought treason, and slew Iehoas in the house of Millo,
when he came down to Silla. Iosabar the son of Semeath and Iehozabad the son
of Somer his servants smote him, and he dyed. And they buried him with his
fathers in the city of David. And Amaziahu his son reigned in his stead.

Iehoahaz the son of Iehu is delivered in to the heads of the Siriane and
dies. Ioa^ his son reygneth in his stead. Elisa dies.

CAPI. XIII.
IN the. xxiii. year of Ioas the son of Ahaziahu

And there remained a grove still also in Samaria. Neither did he leave of the
people to Iehoahaz, but fifty horsemen, ten charettes and ten M. fotemen 4.
(...)
for the king of Siri^ destroyed them, and made them like threshed dust. The
rest of the words that concern Iehoahaz, and all that he did, and his power,
are they not written in the book of the Cronicles of the kings of Israel? And
Iehoahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in samaria, and Ioas his
son reigned in his stead* In the. xxxvii. year of Ioas king of Judah, began
Ioas the son of Iehoahaz to reygne over Israel in Samaria syxtene year, and did
that which is evil in the sight of the Lord and departed not from all the
sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, (that made Israel sin) for he walked
therein. The remenaunt of the words that concern Ioas and all that he did, and
his power wherewith he fought against Amaziahu king of Judah, are they not
written in the book of the Cronicles of the kings of Israel? And Ioas slepte
with his fathers, and Ieroboa^ sat upon his seat. And Ioas was buried in
Samaria among the kings of Israel.

When Elia was fallen sick of his syckenesse 4. Reg. ii. ^
O my father, my father, the charet of Israel, and the horsemen of the same.
Elisa said unto him: take bow and arowes And he took unto him bow and arowes.
And he said unto the king of Israel: put thine hand upon the bow, and he put
his hand upon it* And Elisa put his hands upon the kings hands, and said:
open a wyndowe castwarde: and when he had opened it, Elisa said: shute, and he
shot. And he said: the arowe of help of the Lord, and the arowe of help
against Siria, for thou shalt smite Siria in Aphek till thou have made an end
of them. And he said: take the arowes:: and he took them. And he said unto the
king of Israel: smite the ground: and he smote thryse and ceased. And the
man of god was angry with him, and said: thou should have smytten. v. or. vi.
times ( or seven times) and then thou hadest smytten Siriatyl thou hadest made
an end of them: where now thou shalt smite Siria but thryse. Eccle. 48. a
hereuiued, and stood upon his feet. But Hazael vexed Israel, all the days of
Iehoahaz. And the lord had mercy on them, and pttyed them, and had respect
unto them, because of his appointment made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
would not destroy them, neither cast he them from him as yet. So Hazael the
king of Sitia dyed / and Benhadad his son reigned in his stead. And Iehoas the
son of Ichoahaz went again and took out of the hand of Benhadad the son of
Hazael, the cities which he had taken away out of the hand of Iehoa haz his
father, in war: for three times did Ioas beat him, and restored the cities
unto Israel again.

Amaziahu the hynge of zuda puts to death the m^^quellers of his father, and
after smyteth Edom. Zoas dies, and Ierot^am his son succedeth in his room,
and after him reygneth zacharia. Amazia is killed in ^achio, and Azaria
teygneth in his stead.

CAPI. XIIII.
The second year of Ioas son of Ichoahaz ii. Pa. 25. a.
he was. xxv. year old when he began to reygne and reigned. xxix. year in
Jerusalem, and his mothers name was Ieohadan, of Jerusalem. And he did that
which is good in the sight of the Lord, yet not like David his father: but
did according to all things as Ioas his father did. Neither were the hill
aulters taken away. For as yet the people did sacrifice and burnt insence on
the hyl aulters. And as 4 Reg* xii. v
it came to pass, that he slew his servants which had killed the king his
father. But the children of those murderers he slew not, according to it that
is written in the book of the law of Moses: wherein the Lord commanded,
saying: Deuteronomy. 24. ^ 11. Par. (...). xx^. ^ Ezech. (...). ^.
Let not the fathers dye for the children, nor let the children be sleyne for
the fathers. But let every man be put to death for his own sin. He slew of
Edom in the salt valley ii. Par. (...). ^*
ten. M. and took the castle on the rock in the same battle, and called the
name of it Ioktheel unto this day. Then Amaziahu sent messengers to Iehoas the
son of Iehoahaz son of Iehu king of Israel saying: Come, let us se each other.
And Iehoas the king of Israel sent to Amaziahu Iudi. (...). ^. 4 Esdr. 4 ^
did not a thystle that is in Libanon, send to a Cedre tree that is in
Libanon, saying: Give thy daughter to my son to wife. And the wild beast
that was in Libanon, went and trod down the thystle. Thou have smytten Edom,
thine heart has made the proud: Enjoy this glory, and tarry at home. Why do
thou provoke to myscheyfe, that thou shuldeste be overthrown / and Judah with
the? But Amaziahu would not hear. And Iehoas king of Israel went up, and he
and Amaziahu king of Judah saw either other at Bethsames which is in Judah.

And Judah was put to the worse before Israel, and they fled every man to their
tents. And Iehoas king of Israel took Amaziahu

Amaziahu the son of Ioas king of city of David. (...). Pa. 26. ^
And all the people of Judah took Azaria, which was. xvi. year old, and made
him king for his father Amaziahu. He buylte (...) Reg. 16. ^
Elath, and brought it again to Judah, after that the king was laid to rest
with (...) i. a.
Jonas the son of Amithai the prophet, which was of (...). Reg. 13. d (...).
^. ^.
he would put out the name of Israel from under heaven, but helped them by the
hand of Jeroboam the son of Ioas.

The rest of the words that concern Jeroboam, and all that he did, and his
strength, which he executed in the wars, and how he restored Damasco and
Hemath to Judah in Israel, are they not written in the book of the Cronicles of
the kings of Israel? And Jeroboam slept with his fathers, even with the
kings of Israel, and Zacharia his son reigned in his stead.

Azaria the king of Judah b^^^m^th a leper. Of Iotham, Dallum, Menahem,
Peli^hin, Uziah, Iotham, and ^haz.

CAPI. XV.
IN the. xxvii. year of Jeroboam king of (...). ^iii^. (...).
the day of his death, (...). Pa. (...). ^.
and dwelte in a several house at lybertye, and Iotham the kings son
governed the palace, and judged the people of the land. The rest of the words
that concern Azaria and all that he did, are they not

The rest of the words that concern Zacharia: behold, they are written in
the book of the Cronicles of the kings of Israel. This is also the words of
the Lord which he spoke unto Iehu, saying: 4. Reg. ^. ^.
Thy sons shall sit on the seat of Israel in the fourth generation after
the. And it came so to pass.

Sallum the son of Iabes began to reygne year, and did that which was evil in
the sight of the Lord, and left not of from the sins of Jeroboam the son of
Nabat, which made Israel sin. But Pekah the son of Remaliahu (which was a
captain of his) conspired against him, and smote him in Samaria, even in the
palace of the kings house with Argob and Aria: and with him were fifty men of
the Gileadites: and he killed him, and reigned in his room. The rest of the
words that concern Pekahia and all that he did: behold, they are written in
the book of the Cronicles of the kings of Israel. In the. lii. year

And Hosea the son of Ela conspired treason against Pekah the son of
Remaliahu, and smote him and slew him, and reigned in his stead in the. xx.
year of Iotham the son of Uziahu. The rest of the words that concern Pekah
and all that he did: behold they are written in the book of the Cronicles of
the kings of Israel. The second year of Pekah the son of Remaliahu king of
Israel, began Iotha^ the son of Uziahu king of Judah to reygne.

Five and twentye year old was he when

In those days the Lord began to send in to Judah, Rezin the king of Siria,
and Pekah the son of Remaliahu. And Iotham slepte with his fathers, and was
buried with his fathers / in the city of David his father, and Ahaz his son
reigned in his stead.

Ahaz king of Iud^ consecrate^^ his son in fire, and ^ath many battayles
against the king of Israel. In the stead of Ahaz reygneth (...) his son.

CAPI. XVI.
THe. xvii. year of Pekah the son of Remaliahu ii. Pa. ^9. ^
his son to go through the fire after the abhominacions of the hethe^, whom
the lord cast out before the children of Israel, And he offered and burnt
insence in the hill aulters and on the hills, and under every thycke tree.
(...). 4. (...).
Then Rezin king of Siria and Pekah Esa^. (...)
son of Remaliahu king of Israel came up to Jerusalem to fight. And they
fought against Ahaz, but could not overcome him.

At the same time Rezin king of Siria 4 Re. x^^
came to Elath, and dwell therein unto this day. So Ahaz sent messengers to
Thiglath Peleser king of Assyria, saying: I am thy servant and thy son, come
up, and deliver me out of the hand of the king of Siria, and out of the hand
of the king of Israel, which rise up against me.

And Ahaz took the silver and gold that was found in the house of the lord,
and in the treasures of the kings house, and sent a reward to the king of
Assyria. Esa^. ^. ^
And the king of Assyria consented unto him. For the king of Assyria went up
against Damasco: And when he had taken it, he carried the people away to Kir,
and slew Rezin. And king Ahaz went to Damasco, to mete Thiglath Peleser king
of Assyria. And when king Ahaz saw an altar that was at Damasco, he sent to
Uria the priest the patron of the altar, and the fassion

And Uria the priest made an altar in all points like to the patron which
king Ahaz had sent from Damasco: Even so did Uria the priest make it, against
king Ahaz came from Damasco. And so, when the king was come from Damasco, he
saw the altar, and the king went to it, and offered thereon.

Ad he burnt his burnt offering, and his meat offering, and powered his drink
offering, and sprinkeled the blood of his peaceofferinges beside the altar,
that was by the brazen altar which was before the lord, and set it without
the temple, between the altar and the temple of the Lord, and put it on the
north side of the altar.

And king Ahaz commanded Uria the Priest and said: upon the great altar set
on fire in the morning the burntoffryng, and in the even, the meateofferyng,
and the kings burntsacrifice and his meateofferyng, with the burntofferyng of
all the people of the land, and their meateofferynge, and their drink
offerynges: and power thereby, all the blood of the sacrifice offerynges. But
the brazen altar will I come and se.

And Uria the priest did according to all ^. ^e^. 7. d
And king Ahaz brake the sides of the bottomes, and took the lauer from of
them, and took down the lauatorye from of the brazen oxen that were under it,
and put it upon a pauemente of stones. And the pulpyt for the Sabbath (that
they had made in the house) and the kings entry without turned he to the
house of the lord, for (fear of) the king of Assyria. The rest of the words
that concern Ahaz, what he did, are they not written in the book of the
Cronicles of the kings of Judah? And Ahaz slepte with his fathers, and was
buried with his fathers in the city of David: And Hezekia his son reigned in
his stead.

Hosea king of Israel is taken. And he and all his realm is brought to the
Asserians.

CAPI. XVII.
IN the. xii. year of Ahaz king of Judah, began ^. Reg. ^8. ^.
And then the king of Assyra came up thorowout all the land, and gat up
against Samaria, and beseyged it three year.

In the nynth year of Hosea / the (...). ^3. ^
king of Assyria took Samaria, and carried Israel away

And they walked in the ceremonies of the hethen, whom the Lord east out
before the children of Israel, and in the ceremonies which the kings of
Israel had made. And the children of Israel went about to hyde those things
that were not well, from the Lord their God. And they buylte them hill aulters
in all their cities, both in the towers where they kept watch, and also in
the strong towns. And they made them images and groves in every high hyl, and
under every thycke tr^e. And there they burnt insence in all the hill aulters,
as did the hethen (whom the Lord carried away before them) and wrought wicked
things to anger the Lord withal. For they served most vile Idols, whereof the
lord had said unto them. Deuteronomy. (...). ^.
Ye shall do no such thing. And the lord testified in Israel and in Judah by
all the prophettes and by all the sears, saying. Iere. xxv. ^
Turn from your wicked ways and keep my commandments and my statutes,
according to all the law which I commanded your fathers, and which I (...)
to you by my servants the prophettes.

Notwithstanding they would not hear Deute. (...) ^ Man. (...)
but rather hardened their necks, like to the stubburnesse of their fathers
that did not believe in the Lord their god. For they refused his statutes, and
his appointment that he made with their fathers, and the witnesses (when with he
wytnessed unto them) and they followed vanite, and became vain, and went after
the hethen that were round about them: concerning whom, the Lord had charged
them that they should not do like them. But they left the commandments of
the Lord their God, and made them Images of metal ^. Reg. (...). ^
even two calves: and made groves, and worshypped all the host of heaven, and
served Baall. Deute. (...). ^.
And they sacrificed their sons and their daughters in fire, and used
wytchcrafte and enchau^tementes even sellyng themselves to work wickedness in
the sight of the lord and to anger him. And the Lord was exceeding wroth with
Israel and put them out of his syghte 3. Reg. (...). ^
that there was left but the tribe of Judah only. Nevertheless, Judah also kept
not the commandments of the Lord their God, but walked in the ceremonies of
Israel, which they made.

And the Lord cast up all the seed of Israel,

And Jeroboam drew Israel away (that they should not follow the Lord) and made
them sin a great sin: For the children of Israel walked in all the sins of
Jeroboam which he did, and departed not therfrom until the Lord put Israel
away out of his sight, as he had said by all his servants the prophettes. And
so was Israel carried away out of their own land to Assyria, even unto this
day. And the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon, from Cutha, from Aua,
from Hanath, and from Sepharuaim, and put them in the cities of Samaria, in
stead of the children of Israel. And they possessed Samaria, and dwelte in the
cities thereof.

And it fortuned, that at the beginning of

The men of Babylon made Socoth Gens. 32. e.
whom he called Israel. And the lord made an appointment Iudi. vi. b I^^e. x.
^.
fear none other gods, nor bow your selves to them, nor serve them, nor
saerifice to them: but fear the lord which brought you out of the land of
Epypt with great power and a stretched out arm: him fere, and to him bow, and
to him do sacrifice, The statutes, ordinances law and commandment which he
wrote for you, se that ye be diligent to do for evermore, and fear not any
other Gods. And the appointment that I have made with you, se ye forget not,
and fear none other gods: but the lord your God ye shall fear, and he shall
deliver you out of the hands of all your enemies. Howbeit, they did not
harken, but did after their old custom. And so these nations feared the
lord, and served their image also: like as did their children and their
chyldrens children. Even as did their fathers, so do they unto this day.

Hezehia king of Judah puts down the brazen serpent. ^ destroys the
Idol. Selmanasar brings Israel to the Assirians. The blasphemic of
Sennacherib or Sanherib.

CAPI. XVIII.
IN the third year of Hosca son of Ela ii. De. 19. ^
Twentye and five year old was he when be began to reygne, and reigned. xxix.
year in Jerusalem. His mothers name also was Abi the daughter of Zacharia, and
he did that which is right in the sight of the lord according to all, as did
David his father. Deuit. 7. ^ 4. Reg. ^3. ^
He put away the hill aulters, and brake the images, and cut down the groves,
and al to brake the (...). (...). ^
brazen serpent that Moses had made. For unto those days the children of
Israel did burn sacrifice to it, and he called it Nehustan.

He trusted in the lord God of Israel, so

4. (...). ^
And in the fourth year of king Hezekia, (which was in the seventh year of
Hosea son But transgressed his appoyntinent: and all that Moses the servant of
the lord commanded, and would neither hear them, nor do them (...) Par. 22 a
(...). ^6. a. En^r. 48. a
Therefore in the. xiiii. year of king Hezekia did Sennacherib king of Assiria
come up against all the strong cities of Judah, and took them. And Hezekia king
of Judah sent to the king of Assyria to Lachis, saying: ^ Reg. xii d
I have offended: depart from me, and all that thou put on me, that will I
bear. And the king of Assyria appointed unto Hezekia king of Judah three
hundred talentes of silver, and thyrtie talentes of gold. (...). ^. ^
And Hezekia gave him all the silver that was found in the house of

On whom then do thou trust, that thou (...). 36. a. (...)* ^9. ^
do thou trust to the staff of this broken read Egypt, on which if a man
lean, it will go into his hand, and pearce it. Even so is Pharao king of
Egypt unto all that trust in him. (...). 32. ^
If ye say unto me, we trust in the lord out god: Is not that he whose hill
aulters, and his other aulters Hezekia has put down, and has said to Judah.
(...) Jerusalem, ye shall worship before this (...) here in Jerusalem. Now
therefore dely^^ the words to my lord the king of Assyria, And I will deliver
the two thousand horses, if thou be able to set riders upon them. Why thynkest
thou scorn at the presence of one of the least Dukes of my masters
servants, and trustest to Egypt for charettes and horesmen? Moreover, am I
come now without the bidding of the Lord to this place, to destroy it^the
Lord said to me: Go up to this land, and destroy it.

And Eliakim the son of Helkia and Sob

Deal kyndly with me, and come out to me. And then eat every man of his own
vine, ^^^^ (...) ^
Has every one of the Gods of the nations belyue red his land, out of the
hand of the king of Assyria? where is the god of Hamath, and of At phad? and
where is the God of Sephatuaim, Hena and Iua? did they deliver Samaria out of
mine hand, and what God is it among all the Gods of the nations, that has
delivered his land out of mine hand, shall the Lord deliver Jerusalem out of
mine hand? But they that were of the people held their peace, and answered
not him a word: for the king had commanded, saying: answer him not. Then
Eliakim which was the steward of householde, and Sobna the scrybe, and Ioah
the son of Asaph the recorder, came to Hezekia with their clothes rent: and
told him the words of Rabsake.

CAPI. XIX.
The Angel of the Lord kylleth an hundred four^ score and five thousand men
of the Asserians.

Sennacherib is killed of his own sons.

SO it came to pass, that when king Heze Esai. 37. ^.
house of the lord and sent Eliakim which was the steward of household, and
Sobna the scribe* and the elders* of the Priests clothed in sack, to Isay the
prophet the son of Amoz. And they said unto him, thus says Hezekia: this
day is a day of tribulacyon and of rebuke and blasphemy. For the children are
come to the birth, and there is no strength to be delivered. Per adventure the
Lord thy God will hear all the words of Rabsake, whom the king of Assyria
his master has sent, to rail on the living god, and to rebuke him with
words which the lord thy God has herd.

And lift thou up thy prayer for the remenaunt that are left. So the
servants of Esal. 37. ^
And I will bring to pass, that he shall fall upon the sword Pa. 32. d.
even in his own land. And Rabsake went back again and found the king of
Assyria fighting against Lybna: for he had herd, how that he was departed
from Lachis. And he herd men say of Thirhaka king of the black Mores.
Behold, he is come out to fight against the, he departed, and sent messengers
unto Hezekia, saying. Thus speak to Hezekia king of Judah, saying: let not thy
god deceive the, in whom thou trustest, saying.

Jerusalem shall not be delivered in to the alone) escape? Have the gods of the
hethen delivered them which mine aunseters have destroyed? as Gozan, and
Haran, Rezeph, and the children of Eden which were in Bithiasat? where is the
king of Hamath, and the king of Arphad the king of the city of Sepharuaim,
and of Hena and Iua? So Hezekia received the letter of the hand of the
messengers, and red it: And Hezekia went up into the house of the Lord, and
laid it abroad before the Lord. And Hezekia prayed before the lord, and
said: O lord God of Israel, which dwell between the Cherubs, thou art
god alone over sl the kingdoms of the earth, thou have made heaven and earth.
Lord, bow down thine ear, and hear. Open thou thine eyes (I beseech the)
and se, and hear the words of Sennacherib which has sent this man to rail
on the living God. Of a truth lord, the kings of Assyria have destroyed
nacyons and their lands, and have set fire on their Gods. for they were no
Gods, but the work of the hands of man: even of wood and stone, and they
destroyed them.

Now therefore, O lord our God, I beseech

This is therefore the word that the Lord has said of him: The vyrgyn, even
the daughter of Syon has despised the, and laughed the to scorn (O thou
king of Assyria) the daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her head at the.
(...) Math. (...) (...)
Whom have thou rayled on, and whom have thou blasphemed? Against whom have
thou exalted thy voice, and lyfted up thine eyes so hye? Even against the holy
of Israel. By the hand of the messengers thou have rayled on the lord and
said: with the multitude of my charettes I am come up to the tops of the
mountains, even alonge by the sides of Libanon, and I will cut down the hye
Cedar trees, and the lustye fyrre trees thereof: and I will go in to the lodgyng
of his nest, and in to the wood of his plain.

I have dygged and drunk strange waters Psalm. (...). ^
shall be like the grass of the field, or grene herb, or as the hay on the
tops of the houses: or as the corn that is unripe, and smytten with
blastyng. I know thy dwelling, thy coming out, and thy going in, ( and thy
way) and thy furye against me. And because thou ragest of Judah, shall yet
again take routynge down ward and bear fruit upward.

For out of Jerusalem shall go a remenau^t ^^^^. ^d
And so Sennacherib king of Assirya avoided and departed: and went again, and
dwelte at Niniue. And it fortuned, that as he was in a temple worshyppynge
Nisroch his god, Adramelech and Saresat his own sons smote him with the
sword. And they escaped in to the land of Armenia, and Asathaddon his son
reigned in his stead.

Hezekia is sick, and recayueth the sign of his health. He receives rewards
of Be^oda^h, and is reprehended of Isai, because he showed him the treasure. He
dies, and Manasseh his son reygneth in his stead.

CAPI. XX.
About that time was Hezekia sick unto ^^^. 32. f. (...)
son of Amoz came to him, and said unto him: Thus says the Lord: put
thine household in an order, for thou shalt dye / and not live. And Hezekia
turned his face to the wall, and prayed unto the Lord / saying: I beseech the
now, o lord remember how I have walked before the in truth, and with a
perfyte heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight, and Hezekia wept
sore. And it fortuned that before Isai was gone out in to the myddle of the
court, the word of the Lord came to him, saying: turn again, and tell
Hezekia the captain of my people: Thus says the Lord God of David thy
father: I have herd thy prayer / and seen thy tears.

And behold, I will heal the, so that on Eccle. 48. ^
shall the shadow go forward ten degrees, or go back again ten degrees?
Hezekia answered: it is a light thing for the shadow to go down ten degrees,
( neither is that my desire) but if the shadow go backewarde ten degrees, it
is no light thing. And Isai the prophet called unto the lord, Eccle. 48. ^
and he brought the shadow ten degrees backwarde by which it had gone down, in
the dyall of Ahaz.

Esal. 39. ^
The same ceason Berodach Baladan the son of Baladan king of Babylon sent
letters and a present unto Hezekia, for he had herd, how that Hezekia was
sick. And Hezekia was glad of them, and showed them al his treasure house:
silver, gold, odours, precyouse ointment, all the house of his armorye, and
all that was found in his treasures: there was nothing in his house, and in
all his realm, that Hezekia showed them not.

And Isai the Prophet came unto king Hezekia, and said unto him: what said
these men, and from whence came they to the? And Hezekia said: they be come
from a far country, even from Babilo^. And he said agaynei what have they seen
in thy house? Hezekia answered: all the things that are in my house have they
seen: there is nothing among my treasures, that I have not showed them. And
Isai said unto Hezekia: hear the word 4. Re. (...) ^ and. xxv. b. Iere. xx. ^
shall be carried to Babylon, and nothing shall be left says the lord. And
of thy sons (that shall proceed out of the, and which thou shalt beget)
shall they take away, and they shall be chamberlaynes in the palace of the
king of Babylon. And Hezekia said un to Isai: welcome be the word of the
Lord which thou have spoken: And he said: shall there not be peace and
truth in my days? The remenaunt of the words that concern Hezekia, and all
his power, and how he made a poole and a conduyte, and brought water in to the
city, are they not written in the book of the Cronicles of the kings of
Judah? ^. Pat. 32. ^
And Hezekia slept with his fathers, Math. ^. ^.
and Manasse his Son reigned in his stead.

Wythed Manasse restores again the Idols, and after dies, in whose stead
Amon his son sucredeth / which is killed of his own saruauntes. After him
reygneth faithful Iosia, whorne we use to call Iosia^, or Iosiah^.

CAPI. XXI.
MAnasse ^^ (...). 32. ^
was twelve year old, when Deute. 18. a
Lord cast out before the children of Israel. For he went and buylte up the
hylaultees, 4. Reg. 18. a
which Hezekia his Father had destroyed: And he reared up aulters for Baall,
and made groves (as did Ahab king of Israel,) and worshypped all the hooste
of heaven, and served them. And he buylte aulters in the house of the Lord, of
which the Lord said: 11. R^. vli. b 3. Reg. (...). b.
in Jerusalem will I put my name. And he buylt aulters for all the hooste of
heaven, even in two courts of the house of the lord. Leuit. xx. d. Drute. 18.
b. ^. Reg. 16 a
And he offered his son in fire / and gave head unto witchcrafte and forcery,
and maynteyned workers with spirytes, and tellers of fortunes: and wrought much
wickedness in the sight of the Lord to anger him.

And he put an image of a grove (that he 3. Reg. ix. a
in this house and in Jerusalem (which I have chosen out of the Crybes of
Israel) will I put my name for ever. Neither will I make the feet of Israel
move any more out of the land, which I gave their fathers: so that they will
observe and do all that I have commanded them, and according to all the law
that my servant Moses commanded them. But they herkened not: and Manasse led
them out of the way, to do more wyckedlye then did the He then people, whom
the lord destroyed before the children of Israel. And the Lord spoke by his
servants the Prophettes, saying: because Manasse king of Judah has* done
soche abhomynacyons, and has wrought more wyckedlye then all that the Amorytes
(which were before him) did: and has made Judah sin also with his Idols:
Therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel.

^^e. xix. ^.
Behold, I will bring such evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that who so hears
of

And I will leave the remenaunt of mine enherytaunce, and delyued them into the
hand of their eneemyes, and they shall be robbed and spoiled of al their
adversaries, even because they have done evil in my sight, and have angered me,
sense the time their fathers came out of Egypt unto this day. And Manasse shed
innocent blood exceeding much, till he repienysshed* Jerusalem from corner to
corner, beside his sin wherewith he made Judah to syn, and to do evil in the
sight of the Lord. The rest of the words that concern Manasse, and all that
he did, and his sin that he sinned, are they not written in the book of the
Cronicles of the kings of Judah?

And Manasse slept with his fathers, and ^^. P(...)
Amon was. xxii. year old when he began to reygne, and he reigned two year
in Jerusalem. His mothers name also was Mesulemeth the daughter of Haruz of
Iocba. And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, (as his Father Manasse did,)
and walked in all the way that his father walked in: and served the ydols that
his father served, and worshipped them. And he forsook the Lord God of his
fathers, and walked not in the way of the lord. And the servants of Amon
co^spyred against him, and slew the king in his own house. And the people of
the land slew all them that had conspyred against king Amon, and the people
made Iosia his son king / in his stead. The rest of the words that
concern Amon, what things he did, are they not written in the book of the
Cronicles of the kings of Judah? And they buried him in his sepulcher, in the
garden of Uza: and Iosia his son reigned in his stead.

After Iosia herd of the book of the law that was sound in the Temple, he
sends to Old^h the Prophetess for council.

CAPI. XXII.
Iosia was (...)
. viii. year old when he began (...)
And it came to pass, that in the. xviii. year of the reygne of king Iosia,
the king sent Saphan the son of Azalia the Son of Mesulan the scrybe / to
the house of the Lord, saying: 4* (...)
go up to Helkia the high Priest / that he may sum the silver which is
brought in to the house of the Lord, which the kepers of the porche have
gathered of the people, and let them deliver it in to the hand of them that do
the work, and that have the ouersyght of the house of the lord: and let them
give it to them that work in the house of the Lord / (to repair the decayed
places of the temple) ^^^. 34. c
and Helkia the high Priest said unto. Saphan the scrybe: I have found the
book of the law in the house of the lord / and Helkia gave the book to
Saphan, and he red in it. And Saphan the scrybe came to the king, and brought
him word again / and said: Thy servants have bestowed the money (that was
found in the temple) and have delivered it unto them that do the work, and
that have the ouersyght of the house of the lord. And Saphan the ^^rybe showed
the king saying: Helkia the priest has delivered me a book. And Saphan red
in it before the king.

And it fortuned, that when the king had herd the words of the book of the
law, he (...). xxl. ^.
Go ye, and inquire of the Lord for me, and for the people, and for all Judah,
concerning the words of this book that is found. For great is the wrath of
the Lord that is kyndled against us, because our fathers heue not herkened
unto the words of this book, to do according unto all that, which is
written therein for us. So Helkia the high priest and Ahikam, Achbor, and
Saphan, and Asahia went unto Hulda the Prophettesse the wife of Sullam the
son of Chikua the son of Harham keeper of the wardrop, which Prophettesse
dwelt in Jerusalem in the house of the doctrine, and they co^muned with her.

And she answered them: thus says the

Iossa redeth Deuteronomie before the people. He puts down the Idolles
after he had killed the p^^r^tes thereof. He keeps Passover. He was killed in
Magedo, and his son Iehoa az reygneth in his stead. After he was taken, his
son Iehoa^im was made king.

CAPI. XXIII.
ANd then ii. Par. 14^
the king sent, and there gathered unto him all the elders of Judah and of
Jerusalem. And the king went up in to the house of the Lord, with all the men
of Judah and all the enhabytours of Jerusalem, with the Priests, and Prophettes
and all the people both small and great. And he red in the ears of them
(...).
all the words of the book of the covenant, which was found in the house of
the Lord. And the king stood by a pyller (...)
and made a covenant before the lord, that they should walk after the Lord,
and keep his commandments, his witnesses, and his statutes with all their
heart, and all their soul, and make good the words of the said appointment
that were written in the forsayde book. And all the people consented to the
appointment. And the king commanded Helkia the high Priest, and the
inferyoure priests and the kepers of the ornaments, to bring out of the
temple of the Lord, all the vessels that were made for Baall, for the groves,
and for all the hooste of heaven.

And he burte them without Jerusalem in 4. Re. 18. ^.
hylaulters and cities of Judah, that were round about Jerusalem, and also
them that burnt incense unto Baall to the son / to the moon, to the
planettes, and to all the hooste of heaven. And he brought but the grove from
the temple of the Lord without Jerusalem unto the broke Cedro^, and burnt it
there at the broke Cedron, and stampte it to powder, and cast the dust thereof
upon the graves of the children of the people. And he brake down the celles of
the male stues, that were by the house of the Lord, where the women woue
hangynges for the grove.

And he brought all the Priests out of the cytyes of Judah, and defiled the
hylaulters, where the Priests had burnt incense, even from Geba to Beerseba,
and destroyed the aulters of the gates, that were in the entering of the gate
of Joshua the governor of the city, which were (as a man goes in) on the
left hand of the gate of the city. Neuerthe less the Priests of the
hylaulters came not up to the altar of the Lord in Jerusalem / save only
they did eat of the sweet bread among their brethren.

And he defiled Iere. vii. a.
Topheth, which is in the valeye of the children of Hinnom, because 4. Reg.
21. a
aulters which Manasse had made in the two courts of the house of the Lord /
did the king break down, and ran thence and cast the dust of them in to the
broke Cedron. And the hylaulters that were before Jerusalem on the right hand
of the mount Oliuete 3. Reg. xi. b
(which Solomon the king of Israel had builded for Astaroth the Idol of the
Zidons, and for Chamos the Idol of the Moabites, and for Milchom the
abhomynable Idol of the Children of Ammon) those the king defiled: and brake
the images, and cut down the groves, and filled their places with the bones of
men.

Moreover 3. Re. xiii. a.
the altar that was at Bethell, the hylaulter made by Jeroboam the ^. Re.
x^^i. ^
which told the same words.

Then he said: what grave stone is yonder that I se? And the men of the city
told him, it is the sepulcher of the man of God, which came from Judah, and
told the self same things that thou have done to the altar of Bethell. And
he said let him be: se that no man move his bones. And so his bones were saved
with the bones of a Prophet that came out of Samaria* And in all the houses of
the hylaulters in the cities of Samaria which the kings of Israel had made,
to anger ( the Lord) withal: those Iosia put out of the way, and did to them
according to all the acts that he had done in Bethel. And he sacrifyced all
the Priests of the hylaulters that were there even upon the aulters / and
burnt men's bones upon them, and returned to Jerusalem.

And the king commanded all the people, ii Pat. 35. ^ 3. E^d^^. ^. ^
keep the feast of Passover unto the Lord your God Deute. 16 ^
as it is written in the book of this covenant. 3. E^d^^. i* ^
There was no Pass, ^^er holden like that, from the days of the judges that
judged Israel, and in all the days of the kings of Israel and of the kings
of Judah. In the. xviii. year of king Iosia was this Passover holde^ to the
lord in Jerusalem. And thereto workers with spirits and sothsayers, images,
ydolles, and all the abhominacions that were spyed in the land of Judah and in
Jerusalem, those did Iosia put out of the way, to perform the words of the
law, which were written in the book, that Helkia the Priest found in the
house of the Lord: like unto him was there no king before him, that turned to
the Lord with all his heart, with all his soul / and all his might, according
to all the law of Moses, neither after him arose there any soche as he.

Notwithstanding the Lord turned not 4. Reg. (...)*
I will put Judah also, out of my sight, as I have done away Israel, and will
cast of this city Jerusalem which I have chosen, and the house of which I
said: my name shall be there. The rest of the words that concern Iosia and
all that he did / are they not written in the book of the cronicles of the
kings of Judah. ii. P^. (...)
In his days Pharao Necho king of Egypt went up against the king of Assyria
to the river of Euphrates. And king Iosia went against him, and was sleyne of
him at Magyddo / when he had seen him. And his servants carried him ^^^ad from
Magiddo, and brought him to Jerusalem, and buried him in his own sepulcher.
And the people of the land took Iehoahaz the Son of Iosia, and anointed him,
and made him* king in his fathers stead.

Iehoahaz was. xxiii. years old when he

Iehoakim dies. Jerusalem is beseyged of the Babilonians. Iehoachin yeldeth
him self to the king of Babylon And in his room came Mathaniah. which was
called zedekia.

CAPI. XXIIII.
IN his days came Nabuchodonezer king

The rest of the words that concern Iehoakim Math. i b. Iere. xxxii. f
Iehoachin his son reigned in his stead. And the king of Egypt came no more
out of his land: for the king of Babylon had taken (from the river of Egypt
unto the river of Euphrates) all that perteyned to the king of Egypt.
Iehoachin was xviii. year old when he began to reygne, and reigned in
Jerusalem three months. His mothers name also was Nebustha the daughter of
Elnathan of Jerusalem. And he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord
according to all, as his father had done.

Daniel. i. ^
In that time came the servants of Nabuchadnezar king of Babylon, up against
Jerusalem, and the city was beseyged.

And Nabuchadnezar the king of Babylon Hestir. ii. ^.
And Iehoachin the king of Judah came out to the king of Babylon, he and his
mother, his servants, his Lords, and his chamberlaynes. And the king of
Babylon took him, in the eight year of his reygne. 4. Reg* (...). ^ ^sai.
(...). ^.
And he carried out thence all the treasures of the house of the Lord, and the
treasure of the kings house, and brake all the vessels of gold (which
Solomon king of Israel had made, in the temple of the Lord,) as the Lord
said. And he carried away all Jerusalem, and all the lords, and all the strong
men of war, even ten thousand in to captiuytye: and all crafts men, and
kepers, none remaining save the poor comen people of the land.

Deuteronomy* (...). d Iere. 14. ^
And he carried away Iehoachin to Babilion, and the kings mother, and the
kings ii. Pa. 2^* b Iere. 37. a
And the king of Babylon made Mathania (his fathers brother) king in his
stead, and changed his name to Zedekia. Zedekia was Iere. lii. a
xxi. year old when he began to reygne, and he reigned eleven year in
Jerusalem. His mothers name also was Hamitall the daughter of Ieremia of Libna.
And he did evil in the sight of the Lord, according to all as Iehoachin had
done. For the wrath of the Lord was moved against Jerusalem and Judah, until he
cast them out of his sight. And zedekia re belled against the king of Babylon.

Jerusalem is beserged of Nabuchodonezer (otherwise call led Nebuchudnezer,) and
the ^^mple and (...) are both burn^e. The sofies of zedekis are sleyue before
his eyes, and after are his own eyes put out. Judah is brought to Babylon, and
after is Iehoachin exalted.

CAPI. XXV.
ANd it fortuned, Iere. 39. a. and, (...). a.
that in the nynth year E^t. (...). 4. a
And the nynth day of the month, there was so great hongre in the city,
that there was no bread for the people of the land. And the city was broken
up: and all the men of Arms fled by night, by a way through a gate / which is
between two walls by the kings garden: the Caldeyes lyenge about the city.
And the king went the way toward the plain.

And the souldyers (of the Caldeyes followed and left him) So they took the
king, and brought him to Nebuchadnezar the king of Babylon, to Ribla, where
they reasoned with him. And they flue the Sons of Zedekia before his eyes,
and he put out the eyes of Zedekia, and fettered him, and carried him to
Babylon. And the seventh day of the fyfth month which is the nynteneth year
of king Nebuchadnezer king of Babylon, came Ne busaradan a servant of the
king of Babilons (and the cheyfe captain of the men of

3. Re. v^^. b. Iere. lii c 1. Par. (...). b
And the pyllers of brass that were in the house of the Lord, and the
sockettes, and the brazen Lauatory that was in the house of the

And the cheyfe captain of the men of

And Nabusaradan the cheyfe captain of the men of war took these, and
brought them to the king of Babylon to Ribla. And the king of Babylon smote
them, and slew them at Ribla in the land of Hanath. And so Judah was carried
away out of their land

How be it, there remained people in the land of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezar
king

But it chanced in the seventh month / that Ismaell the son of Nethania,
the son of Elisama, of the kings blood, came, and

And all the people (both small and great) and the captaynis of war, arose
and came to Egypt: for they were afraid of the Caldeyes. Notwithstanding yet
in the.xxxvii. year after Ieoachin king of Judah was carried away, the.xxvii.
day of the twelueth month, Euylmerodach king of Babylon (the same year that
he began to reygne) did lift up the head of Iehoachin king of Judah out of
the prison, and spoke kyndlye to him, and set his seat above the seat of the
kings that were with him in Babylon, and changed his prison garments. And he
did ever eat bread before him all the days of his life. His porcyon was a
contynuall porcyo^ that was assygned him of the king (every day a certain)
as long as he lived.

The end of the fourth Book of the Kings.
The first book of the Chronicles / called in the latin Uerba dierum / or (after
the Greeks) Paralipomenon: which the Hebrews call Dibre Haiamim / and reken
both the books but for one.
A brefe rehersall of all the genealogy of Adam, and so forth unto the sons
of Esau, and Jacob.

CAPI. Primo.
ADam / Gene. v. a
Seth, Enos: Renan, Gene. ^. a*
The sons of Iapheth: Gomer / Magog / Madai, Iauan, and Thuball, Mesech, and
Thiras. The Sons of Gomer: Aschena^, Diphath, and Thogarma. And the sons of
Iauan: Elisa and Tharsisa, Citim and Dodanim. The Sons of Ham: Chus, and
Mizraim, Phut and Canaan. The Sons of Chus: Siba, and Hauila, Sabbetha, and
Rahma and Sabtheca. And the Sons of Rahma: Seba and Dedan. And Chus began
Nimrod: and he began to be mighty upon* the earth. Mizraim begat Ludim, and
Anamin, Lahabim, and Naphth^im, Phatrusim, and Castuim: of which came the
Phelistines and the Chaphthorites. Canaan, begat Zidon his eldest son, and
Heth, Iebusi also and Amori, and Girgasi, Heui, Araki, and Sini, and Aruadi,
Zamari and Hemathi*

The sons of Sem: Elam, and Issut, Arphacsad, Lud, and Aram, and Uz, Hul, and
Gether and Masech. Arphacsad begat Selah, and Selah begat Eber. And unto Ebes
were borne two sons: the name of the one was Pelegge, because that in his
days the land was divided. And his brothers name was Ioktan. Ioktan begat
Almodad, and Saleph, Hazermaneth and Ierah: Hadoran also and Usall, and Dikla:
Ebal and Abimael, and Seba, and Ophir, Hauila, and Iobab. All these were the
sons of Ioktan. Gene. xi. ^
Se^^ Arphacsad, Selah: Eber, Peleg, Rehu: Serug, Nahor, Therah: Abram,
otherwise called Abraham. The sons of Abraham, Isaac and Ismaell. And these
are their generacyons: Gene. 25. ^^
The eldest son of Ismaell was Nabaioth, then Kedar, Adbeell, and Mibsam*
Misma, and Dumah, Maska, Hadad and Thema: Ie^ur, Naphis and Kedma. These are
the Sons of Ismaell.

The children of Ketura Abraham's co^cubute* she bare Zimran, Ioksan, Medan,
Median / Iisbok and Suah. The children of Ioksan Seba, and Dedan. ( The
Children of Dedan, Assurim, and Latussim, and Laomini.) The children of Midian:
Epha, and Epher, Henoch, Abida and Eldaa. Gene. 25. a.
All these are the children of Ketura. And so Abraham begat Isaac. The sons
of Isaac: Esau and Israel. The sons of Esau: Gene. 36. b.
Eliphaz, Rehuell Iehus, Iaelam, and Korah. The children of Eliphaz: Thema^,
Omer, Zephi, and Gahtham, Kenas, Thimna, and Amalek. The children of Rehuell:
Nahath, Zerah, Samma, and Miza. Gene. 36. d.
The Sons of Seir: Lotan, Soball, Zibeon, And Ana, Dison, Ezer and Disan. The
children of Lotan: Hori and Homam, and Thimna was Lotans sister. The children
of Soball: Alian, Manahath, Ebal, Sephi, and Onam. The sons of Zibeon: Aia
and Ana. And the sons of Ana: Dison. The sennes of Dison: Hamran, Esban
Iithran, and Cheran. The sons of Ezer: Bilham, Zaeuan, and Iakan. The sons
of Disan: Uz and Aran.

Gene. 36. e.
These are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom, before any king
reigned

The Genealogy of Judah, unto Isai the father of David.

CAPI. II.
THese be the Sons of Israel: Ruben / Genesis 3^. ^
the sons of Judah: Er, Onan, and Sela, These three were borne unto him of Bath
Sua the Cananytesse. And Earth eldest Son of Judah was evil in the, sight of
the Lord, and he slew him. And Math. ^. ^*
Thamar his daughter inlawe bare him Pharez, and Zara: and so all the sons of
Judah were* five. Ruth. iiii. ^
The sons of Pharez, Hezron, and Hamull. The sons of Zarah, Zimri, Etha^,
Zeman, Chalcholl and Dara: which were five in all.

And the sons of Charmi Ios^^. ^. ^.
Achar that troubled Israel, transgressyng in the thing, Math. ^. ^
And Ram begat Aminadab: and Aminadab begat Nahson a lord of the children of
Judah. And Nahson begat Salma: and Salma begat Boaz: Boaz begat Obed: and Obed
begat Isai. ^. Reg. 16. ^.
And Isai begat his eldest Son Eliab, and Aminadab the second, and Simaa the
third, Nathanaell the fourth / and Radai the fyfte, Ozem the syxte and David
the seventh. Whose systers were Zeruia and Abigaill. The Sons of Zaruia:
Abisai, Ioab and Azahell, three. And Abigaill bare Amaza, (...)
the father of which Amaza was Iether an Ismaelite.

And Caleb the son of Hezron begat Asuba (...)
And Hur begat Uri, and Uri begat Bezaleel. Afterward came Hezron to the
daughter of Machir the father of Gilead, and took her when he was three score
year old. And she bare him Segub, and Segub begat Iair, which had three and
twentye cytyes in the land of Gilead. And he overcame Gessur, and Aram, the
towns of Iair from them, and Kenath and the towns thereof: even. lx. towns.

All these were the sons of Machir, the father of Gilead. And after that
Hezron was dead at Caleb in Ephrata / Abia Hezrons wife, bare him, (...)
Ashur the father of

And the wife of Abisur was called Abihail, and she bare him Ahban and Molid.
The sons of Nadab: Seled and Appa^m.

The sons of Caleb the brother of Ierhameel: (...). 23. b
Ziph: and the sons of Maresa the father of Hebron. The sons of Hebron:
Corah, and Tap^ah, Rekem and Sama. Sama begat Raham the father of Ierkoa^. And
Rekem begat Sammai. The son of Sammai was Maon. And Maon was the father of
Bethzur. And Epha a concubine of Calebs bare Hara, and Mosa and Gazez: Haran
begat Gazez. The sons of Iahdai were Regem Iothan, Gesan, Pellet, Epha and
Saaph.

And Maacha was Calebs concubine, of whom he begat Seber and Thirhana. And she
bare also Saaph the father of Madman na, and Seua the father of Machbena, and
the father of Gibea. (...)
And Achsa was Calebs daughter.

These were the sons of Caleb the son of Hur the eldest son of Ephrata:
Soball

The kynreddes of Kiriath Iearim are these: the Iethrites, the Happuthites, the
Hassumathites, and the Hamis^aites. And of them came the Zarathites and the
Esthaulites. The sons of Salma: the Bethleemites, and Netophathites the glory
of the house of Ioab and half the country of the mansions gat the Zaraites.
The kynreddes of the writers dwelte at Iabes, the Tirathites, the Simeathites,
the Suchathites (...)
which are the Kenites, that came of Hemath the father of the house of Rechab.

The Genealogy of David in Hebron, and in Jerusalem.

CAPI. III.
THese were the sons of David which ^^. Reg. iii ^
the eldest, Amnon of Ahinoam the Iesraelitesse. The second Daniell of
Abigaill the Carmelitesse. The third Absalom the son of Maacha, daughter of
Thalmai king of Gesur. The fourth Adonia the son of Haggith. The fyfte
Sephatia of Abitall. The syxte Iethream by Egla his wife. These. vi. were borne
unto him in Hebron and there he reigned seven year and six months. And in
Jerusalem he reigned. xxxiii. year.

^^. Reg. (...). ^.
And these were borne unto him in Jerusalem: Simeia, Sobab, Nathan and Solomon.

Salomons son was Rehoboam, whose son was Abia: and Asa was his son, and
Iehosaphat his son: whose son was Ioran: and his son was Ahazia, and Ioas
was his son. Amazia his son / Azariah his son / and Iotham his son. Ahaz
was his son, Hezekia his son, and Manasse his son. And Amon was his son,
and Iosia was his son. And the sons of Josiah were, the eldest son
Iohanan, the second Iehoakim the third Zedekia / and the fourth Sallu^. The
sons of Iehoakim were, Ieconiah his son, and Zedekiah his son.

The sons of Ieconia: Asser and Schealthiel his son. Malchiram also and
Phedaia, Senazer, Iecamia, Hosama and Nedabia. The sons of Pedaia were:
Zuroba bell and Simehi. The sons of Zurobabel. Mesula^, Hanania, and Selumith
their sister, and Hasubah, Ohei, Berechia, Hasadi^ and Iusabhesed, five in
nombre.

The sons of Hanania: Pelatia and Iesaia, whose son was Rephaah, and his
son Arnan, and his son was Obadia, and his son Sechaniah. The son of
Secaniah was Semaiah. And the sons of Semaiah were Hatus, Igeall, Bariah,
Naariah and Saphat and Sesa, six. And the sons of Naaria were Elioenai,
Hezezia and Az^icam, three. And the sons of Elioenai were Hodaiah, Eliasib,
Phelea, Akub, Ioanam, Dealaia and Anani, Seven.

The Genealogy of the sons of Judah and Symeon.

CAPI. IIII.
THe sons of Judah: Pharez / Hezron / Gene. 38. g. and. xlvi. b.
the son of Soball begat Iahath. And Iahath begai Ahumai and Lahad: and these
are the kynreddes of the Zoreathetes. And of these came the father of Etam /
Iezrael / Iisma and Iidbas: and the name of their sister was Hazlelpeni. Penuel
was the father of Gedor: And Eser the father of Husa: and these are the sons
of Hur the eldest son of Ephrata the father of Bethleem. And Ashur the Father
of Thekoa had two wives: Heleah and Naara. And Naara bare him Ahusam, Hepher,
Themni, and Hahastari: These were the sons of Naarah. And the sons of
Heleah were Zareth, Iezoar, and Ethnan.

And Coz begat Anub and Zobeba, and the

The sons of Kenas: Othniel and Saraia. And the sons of Othniel, were
Hathath. And

And these are the sons of Bithiah the

The sons of the wife of Hodia the sister of Naan, the father of Keilah were:
Barmi, and Esthemoa the Maachathite. The sons of Simon were: Amnon, and
Rimna, Benhanan, and Thilon. And the sons of Iissi were: Zoheth and Benzoheth.

Gene. 38. ^.
The sons of Selah the son of Judah were: Er the father of Lecha, and Laada
the Father of Maresa, and the kynreddes of the housholdes of them that wrought
lynnen in the house of Asbea. And Iokim and the men of Chosebah, and Ioas and
Saraph, which had the dominion in Moah, and Iasubi Lehem: These also are
words of old. These

These were their cities unto the reygne of

And they went to the entryng in of Gedor

The Genealdgie of Ruben and God, and o^ the half trybe of Manasse.

CAPI. V.
THe sons of Ruben the eldest son of (...)* xlix. ^ (...)* vi. b (...)* 25.
^
and had defiled his fathers bed his byrthryght was given unto the sons of
Joseph the son of Israel. Howbeit the genealogye is not rekened after this
byrthryght. For Judah, he prevailed above his brethren, and of this trybe came
the cheyfe, and the byrthryght was given to Joseph. The sons then of Ruben
the eldest son of Israel, were: Henoch, Phalu, Hezron and Charmi.

The sons of Joel: Samaiah his son, Gog his son, and Semhi his son. Micah
his son, Reaia his son, and Baal his son Beera his son: whom Thiglath
Philneser king of Assiria carried away: for he was a great lord among the
Rubenites. And when his brethren in their kynreddes, rekened the genealogye of
their generacions: Ieiel and Zachariah were the cheyfe.

And Bala the son of Azan, the son of

And the children of Gad dwelte over against them in the land of Basan, eue^
unto Salcha. And in Basan, Joel was the cheyfest and Sapham the next, then
Ionai and Saphat. And their brethren of the household of their fathers, were
Michaell, Meosuesam / Seba, Iorah, Iahean, Zia, Eber, seven. These ^te the
children of Abihail the son of Huri the son of Ieroah, the son of Gilead, the
son of Michael, the son of Iesisai, the son of Iahdo, the son of Buz. Ahi
(the son of Abdiel, the son of Guni) was a captayn of the household of their
fathers. And they dwelt in Gilead, in Basan, and in her towns, and in all the
suburbs of Saron, and in their borders.

All these were rekened by kynreddes in

And the children of the half trybe of Manasse

And they transgressed against the God of their fathers, and went a horyng
after the Gods of the people of the land, whom God destroyed before them: and
God styrred up the spirit of Phul king of Assyria, and the spirit of Thiglath
Pilneser king of Assiria, and carried them away: even the Rubenites, the
Gaddites, and the half tribe of Manasse, and brought them unto Halah, Habor,
H^ra, and to the river Go^zan, unto this day.

The Genealogy of the sons of Leui.

CAPI. VI.
THe sons of Leui: Gerson, Cahath, Genesis (...)* ^*
The sons of Cahath, Amram, Izahar, Hebron, and Uziell. The Children of
Amram: Aaron, Moses, and Miriam. The sons also of Aaron Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar
and Ithamar.

Eleazer begat Phinehes* Phinehes begat Abisua. Abisua begat Boki. Boki begat
Uzi Uzi begat Zarahia. And Zarahia begat Meraioth. Meraioth begat Amaria, and
Amaria begat Ahitob. Ahitob begat Zadoc, and Zadoc begat Ahimaaz. Ahimaaz begat
Azaria, and Azaria begat Iohanam. Iohanam begat Azaria, which ministered in the
temple that Solomon buylte in Jerusalem. ii. P^. 2^. c.
Azaria begat Amaria. Amaria begat Ahitob. Ahitob begat Zadoc, and Zadoc begat
Sallum. Sallum begat 4. Reg. 22 b
Helkia, and Helkia begat Azaria.

Azatia begat Saraia, and 4. Reg. 25. ^
Saraia begat Iehozedech. And Iehozedech departed /

Erodi. vi. c.
The sons of Leui: Gersom, Cahath and Merari. And these be the names of the
sons of Gersom: Libni and Simhi. And the sons of Cahath were: Amram /
Izahar Hebron and Uziel. The sons of Merari: Mazli and Musi, and these are
the kynreds of Leui, concerning their fathers. The son of Gersom was Lobni,
whose son was Iahath, and his son Zemma / and his son Ioah, and his son
Iddo, and his son Zetah, and his son Ieathrai. The sons of Cahath:
Aminadab and his son Korah, and his son Assyr, and his son Elcana, and his
son Ebiasaph, and his son Assir, and Chahath was his son, and Uriell his
son, and Uzia his son, and Saul was his son.

The sons of Elcana: Amazai, and Ahimoth and Elcana. The sons of Elcana,
Zophai, whose son was Nahath, and his son Eliab and Ieroham his son, and Elcana
his son, and Samuel the son of him. And the sons of Samuel: the eldest
Uasni, and Abia.

The sons of Merari: Mahlt, and his

And these be they, whom David set for to singe in the house of the Lord,
after that the arc had test. And they ministered before the dwelling place,
and the Tabernacle of witness with syngyrige, until Solomon had buylte the
house of the Lord in Jerusalem. And then they waited on their offices,
according to the order of them. These are they that waited with their
children, of the sons of Cahath: Heman a synger, which was the son of Joel,
the son of Semuell, the son of ^. Regu^. i. a.
Eirana, the son of Ieroham, the son of Elielithe son of Thoah, the son
of Zuph, the son of Elcana, the son of Mahath, the son of Amasai the son of
Elcana, the son of Joel, the son of Asaria, the son of zephania, the son
of Thahath, the son of Assyr, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah the
son of Izahar, the son of Cahath, the son of Leui, the son of Israel.

And his brother Asaph stood on his right hand, and Asaph was the son of
Barachia, the son of Simha, the son of Michaell, the son of Basaaia, the
son of Melchia, the son of Atham, the son of Zarah, the son of Adaia, the
son of Ethan, the son of Zima, the son of Sunhi, the son of Iahath, the
son of Gersom, the son of Leui.

And their brethren the sons of Merari

These are the sons of Aaron: Eleazar, whose son was Phinehes, and his
son Abisua: and his son Boki, whose son was Uzi, and his son Zerahia: and
the son of him Merahioth, and his son Amaria, and the son of him, Ahitob:
and Zadoc his son and Ahimaaz his son. And these are the dwelling places of
them (thorowout their towns and coostes) even of the sons of Aaron thorowout
the kynred of the Caathites, for so the lot fell for them. And they gave unto
them Joshua. 14. ^ and. xxi. v.
Hebron in the land of Judah and the Suburbs thereof round about it.

But the field of the city, and the villages

And the children of Israel gave the Levites

And they that were of the kynreddes of the sons of Cahath, had cities and
their coostes out of the trybe of Ephraim. Joshua. xx^. ^
And they gave unto them cities of refuge: Sichem in mount Ephraim and her
suburbs, Gaser and her suburbs / Iocmeam and her suburbs / Bethhoron and her
suburbs, Aialon and her suburbs, Geth Rimmon and her suburbs. And out of the
half tribe of Manasse. Aner and her suburbs. Bileam and her suburbs for the
kynred of the remenaunt of the sons of Cahath. And unto the sons of Gerson
were given out of the kynred of the half tribe of Manasse: Golon in Basan and
her suburbs and Astharoth and her suburbs.

Out of the trybe of Isacar, Kedes and he

The genealogy of Isacar, Benjamin, Nephthali, Manasse, Ephraim, and Asser.

CAPI. VII.
THE sons of Isacar: Thola, Phua, ^ Reg 24 ^
whose nombre was in the days of David, two and twentye thousand and six
hundred. The sons of Uzi: Izrahia. The sons of Izrahia Michael, Obadia,
Joel, and Iesiah, five me^ all captains. And with them, in their generacions
after the household of their fathers, were six and thyrtye thousand
soldiers and valcaunt men of war: For they had many wives and sons. And
their brethren among all the kynreddes of Isacar were valeaunt men of war
rekened in all: four score and seven thousand. The sons of Benjamin: Bela,
Becher and Iediel: three. The sons of Bela: Ezbon / Uzi / Uziel / Ierimoth and
Iri, Five heads of the household of their fathers, men of might / and were
rekened by the genealogies. xxii. thousand, and. xxxiiii.

The sons of Becher: Zemira / Ioas /

The sons of Nephthali: Iahzie^ / Guns Gene. (...). ^
Bilha. The sons of Manasse: Aziel whom (his wife) bare unto him: But
Aramiah his concubine bare Machir the father of Gilead. And Machir took wives
for Hupim and Suppim ( his sons.) And the name of his sister was Maaca. And
the name of an other son was Zelophahad. Number. ^8. ^ (...)
And Zelophahad had daughters. And Maaca the wife of Machir bare a son, and
called his name Pherez / and the name of his brother was Zeres / and his sons
were Ulam and Rekem. The sons of Ulam / Bedan: and these are the sons of
Gilead the son of Machir the son of Manasse. And his sister Molecath bare
Ieshud, Abieser and Mahelah. And the sons of Semida were: Ahiam, Sechem,
Likchi and Antham.

The sons of Ephraim: Suthalah, whose son was Bered, and Thahath his son,

And when he went in to his wife, she conceived and bare him a son, and he
called the name of it Beria, because it went evil with his household. And his
daughter was Seera which buylte Bethhoron the nether, and also the upper, and
Uzan Seera. And Raphah was his son: whose son was Reseph and Thelah, whose
son was Thahan, and his son Ladan, and his son Amihud, and his son
Elisama, and his son Nun, and his son Iehosua. Their possessions and
abhominacion was in Bethel, and the towns that longed thereto, and unto the
east of Naeran, and on the west side of Gazer with the towns thereof. Sechem
and the towns thereof, Adaia and the towns thereof, and a long by the borders
of the children of Manasse, Bethsean and her towns, Thaanach and her towns,
Magiddo and her towns, and Dor and her towns. In those dwelt the children of
Joseph the son of Israel.

The sons of Aser: Iimna, Iesua, Isuia, and Beria, and Serah their sister.
The sons of Beria: Ieber and Melchiel, which is the

The sons of Zophah, Suah, Harnephar Sual, Beri, and Iimrah, Bezer, Hod,
Sa^ma Silsa, Iethran and Beera. The sons of Iether / Iephune / Pispa / and
Ara. The sons of Ola Arch, Haniel and Rezia. All these were the children of
Asser, and heads of their fathers houses, noble men, and myghtie head
captains. The nombre thorowout the genealogye of them that were apt to the
war, and battle was. xxvi. thousand men.

Of the sons of Benjamin.

CAPI. VIII.
Benjamin begatte Bela his eldest son,

And of Husim he begat Ahithob and Elpaal.

And Mikloth begat Simea. And these also ^. Regu^. (...)
Cis begat Saul, and Saul begat Iehonathas, Malchisua, Abinadab and Esbaal. And
the son of Iehonathas was Meribbaal, and Meribbaal begat Micah. And the sons
of Micah were Puhon, Melech, Tharea, and Ahaz. And Ahaz begat Iehoiada. And
Iehoiada begat Alemeth, Asmaueth and zihiri. Zimri begat Moza. Moza begat
Binea, whose son was Rapha and his son was Elasa, and his son Azel.

And Azel had sire sons, whose names are these: Esricam, Bochri, Ismael,
Seatia, Obadia / and Hanan. All these were the sons of Azel. And the sons
of Esek his brother were Ulam his eldest / Iehus the second / and Elfphelet
the third. And the sons of Ulam were myghtie men and strong archers / and
bow men: and had many sons and sons sons / an hundred and fyftye. All
these are of the sons of Benjamin.

Of the priests. Levites, and of their offices.

CAPI. IX.
ANd so all Israel nombred by kynreddes: ^ (...)
of the children of Pharez / the son of Judah. And of Siloni Asaia the eldest
and his sons.

And of the sons of zerah, Iebuel and their brethren, six hundred and
nynetye. And of the sons of Benjamin: Salu the son of Mesullam the son of
Hodauia, the son of Senua: and Iibneia the son of Ieroham.

And Ela the son of Uzi the son of Michri.

And of the Levites: Semeia the son of

Es^^. 3i. 8
The porters were Sallum, Acub, Talmon, and Ahiman and their brother, Sallum
was the cheyfe. For they watched hitherto, even unto the kings gate eastwarde,
thorowout the tents of the children of Leui.

And Sallum the son of Corah the son of Abiasaph the son of Corah, and his
brethren the Corahites (of the house of their father) had their business and
office to keep the porches of the tabernacle: and their fathers the host of
the Lord kept the entryng.

And Phinehes the son of Eleazar was

(...). iii. b.
In. iiii. quarters did they keep the watch:

And in Gibeon dwelt Abi Gibeon and Iehiel whose wife was called Maacha, his
eldest son was Abdon, then Zur, Cis, Baal, Ne^ and Nadab: Gedor, Ahio, Zacharia
and Mikloth. And Mikloth begat Simea^. And they also ^ Regu^. (...). ^ (...).
1^. ^
Cis begat Saul. And Saul begat Iehonathas, Malchisua, Abinadab and Esbaal. And
the son of Ionathas, was Meribbaal. And Meribbaal begat Micah, and the sons
of Mirah were, Pithon, Melech and Chahrea. And Ahaz begat Iahra. Iahra begat
Alameth, Asmaneth, Zimri. Zimri begat moza. Moza begat Binea, whose son was
Rephaia, and his son was Elasa, and his son Azell. And Azell had six
sons, whose names are these: Azricam Bochru, Ismael, Searia, Obadia and
Hanan. These are the sons of Azel.

The battle of Saull against the Philistines: in which he dies, and his
sons also.

CAPI. X.
ANd the Philistines fought against Israel. 1. (...) (...)
And the men of Israel fled before the Philistines, and were overthrown and
wounded in mount Gilboa. And the Philistines followed, and were fearce after
Saul and his sons, and the Philistines smote Iehonathas, and Abinadab and
Malchisua the sons of Saul,

And the battle went sore against Saul, and the archers found him, and he
was wounded of shuters. Then said Saull to his weapon berer Iud^. (...). g. 1.
Reg. 3^. b.
draw thy sword, and thrust me through therewith, that these vncircumcysed
come not and do me shame. But his weapon berer would not, for he feared
excedingly. So Saul caught a sword, and fell upon it. And when his ha^nes
berer saw that Saul was dead, he fell on a sword also and dyed.

And thus Saul and his three sons. and

^* Regu^. 3^. ^
And it fortuned that on the morrow (when the Philistines came to strype the
dead bodies) they found Saull and his sons overthrown in mount Gilboe. And
when they had strypte him, they took his head, and his harness, and sent them
in to the land of the Philistines round about / to show them unto their
ydols, and to the people. And they put his harness in the house of their God,
and set up his head in the temple of Dagon.

And when al they of Iabes in Gilead herd all that the Philistines had done to
Saull: they arose (all the strongest of them) and fet away the body of Saull,
and the bodies of his sons, and brought them to Iabes, and buried the bodies
of them under an ooke in Iabes, and fasted seven days. So Saul dyed for his
trespass that he trespassed against the lord, in that he kept not the word
of the lord, and in that he sought and asked counsel of a woman that wrought
with a spirit, and asked not of the Lord. And therefore he slew him, and
turned the kingdom unto David the son of Isai.

After the death of Saull is David anointed in Hebron. The I^busites rebel
against David / from which he takes the ^oure of Sion. His men are nombred.

CAPI. XI.
THen all Israel gathered them selves to ^^. Reg. v. ^
saying: Behold we be thy bones and thy flesh. And more over in time past,
even when Saul was king, thou leddest Israel out and in. And the lord thy God
said unto the: thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be captain
over my people Israel. Therefore came all the elders of Israel to the king, to
Hebron, and David made a covenant with them in Hebron, before the Lord. And
they anointed David king over Israel, ^. Reg. 1^. ^
according to the word of the Lord by the hand of Samuel. And David and all
Israel went to Jerusalem, which is Iebus: where as were the Iebusites, the
enhabitours of the land. And the enhabitours of Iebus said to David: thou
come not here. Nevertheless David wan the castle of Sion, which is called
the city of David. And David ^^. Reg* (...)
said, who so ever smyteth the Iebusites first, shall be the principal
captain and a Lord. So Ioab the son of Z^ruia went first up, and was made
the cheyfe captain. And David dwelt in the castle, and therefore they called
it the city of David. And he buylte the City on every side, even from Millo
round about, and Ioab repaired the rest of the City. And David prospered, and
waxed great, and the Lord of hoostes was with him.

ii. Reg. (...)
These are the principal men of power, whom David had, and that claue to him
in his kingdom with all Israel, to make him king, according to the word of the
lord unto Israel. And this is the nombre of the mighty men whom David had:
Iasobeam the son of Hachmoni the cheyfe among thyrtye: he lift up his spear
against three hundred, and wounded them at one time. After him was Eleazar his
uncles son an Ahothyte, which was one of three myghtyest. He was with David at
Pasdammin, and there the Philistines were gathered together to battle. And
there was there a parcel of ground full of barley and the people fled before
the Philistines. And they stepte forth in to the mids of the field, and saved
it, and slew the Philistines. And the lord gave a great victory.

And the three of the thyrtye cheyfe captains went to a rock to David in to
the cave Adullam. And the host of the Philistines abode in the valley of
Rephaim. And when David was in the hold, the Philistines watch was at
Bethlee^ that same time. And David longed, and said: (...)
Oh that one would give me drink of the water of the well that is at the gate
at Bethleem. And the three brake through the host of the Philistines, and drew
water out of the well, that was by the ga^e at Bethleem: and took it, and
brought it to David Nevertheless, David would not drink of it but rather
offered it to the Lord, and said: My God forbid it me, that I should do this
thing. Shall I drink the blood of these men, that have put their lives in
ieoperdye? (for with the Ieoperdye of their lives they brought it) therefore he
would not drink it. And this did these three myghtyest.

And Ab^sai the brother of Ioab: he also spear against three hundred, and
wounded them, and had a name among the three: Yea among three, he was more
honorable then the two, for he was their captain. Howbeit, he attaynted not
unto the ( first) three.

Banaia the son of Iehoiaba (the son of a very strong man) did greater
acts then Cabzeell, for he slew two strong lions of Moab, and went down /
and slew a Lion in a pyt in time of snow. And he slew an Egyptian, whose
stature was even five cubytes long, and in the Egyptians hand was a spear
like a weauers beam. And the other went down to him with a waster, and
plucked the spear out of the Egyptians hand, and slew him with his own
spear.

Soch things did Banaia the son of Iehoiada, and had the name among the three
myghtest, and was honorable among thyrtye:

The other men of arms were these: Asahell the brother of Ioab, Elhanan his
uncles son of Bethleem. Sammoth the Harodite Helez the Pelonite: Ira the
son of I^kes the Thekoite, Abieser the Anatothite: Siba^ai the Husathite,
Ilai the Ahohite: Maharai the Nethophathite, Heled the son of Ba^na the
Nethophatite: Ithai the son of Ribai of Gibea that perteyneth to the children
of Benjamin: Benaia the Phirathonite: Hu^ai of the ryuers of Gaas, Abiell the
Arbathite: Azmaneth the Baharumite, Elihaba the Saalbonite.

The sons of Assem the Gezonite, Iona than the son of Sage, an Haraite:
Ahiam the son of Sacar the Ha^aite / Eliphal the son of Ur. Hepher the
Mecherathite, Ahia

What they were that went with David, when he ^led from Saull.

CAPI. XII.
THese are they that came to David to

And of the Gadites there separated them

And there came of the Children of Ben^a ^ode. xii. ^.
Peace / peace be unto the / and peace be to thy helpers, for thy God is thy^e
help. Then David received them, and made them heads of companyes of the men
of war.

And there fell some of Manasse to David / when he came with the Philistines
against Saull to battle, ^. Reg. 2^. ^
but they helped them not. For the lords of the Philistines took aduysement,
and sent him away again saying: he will fall to his master Saull to the
ieoperdye of our heads. As he went to Zikleg there fell to him of Manasse:
Adna, Iozadad Iediell, Michael, Iozabad, Elihu and Zilthai / heads of the
thousands that were of Manasse. And they helped David against the rouers. For
they were al mighty men of war / and captains in the host. For at that time
there came one or other to David day by day to help him: until it was a great
host, like the hooste of god. And this is the nombre of the cheyfe Captains
that were prepared to battle, and came to David to Hebron, to turn the
kingdom of Saull to him, according to the word of the Lord.

The children of Judah that bare shylde,

And the children of Ephraim. xx. M. and eight hundred mighty men of war and
famous men in the household of their fathers.

And of the half trybe of Manasse. xviii how to command) what Israel ought
to do: The heads of them were two hundred, and al their brethren were at their
will. And of Zabulo^ that went out to the battle and proceeded forth to the
war, with all manner of instruments of war fyftie M. that were prepared to the
war, without any doubleness of heart. And of Nephthali a thousand captains,
and with them (with shylde and spear) xxxvii. M. And of Dan prepared to
battle xxviii. M. and six hundred. And of Asse^ that went out to the war,
and kept the forefront of the battle, fourtye thousand. And of the other
side Iordane of the Rubenites / and Gaddites and of the half trybe of Manasse,
with all manner of instruments of war / an hundred and twentye thousand.

All these were men of war, keeping the

The Arc is brought again from Kiriath Ia^i^ to Jerusalem ^z^ (otherwise
called Osa) dies.

CAPI. XIII.
ANd David counsayled with the captains

So David gathered all Israel together

And Uza and his brother gyded the carte. being a little vvylde) stombled. And
the Lord was wroth with Uza, and smote him because he put his hand to the
Arc. And there he dyed before God.

And David was out of quiet, because the brought not the Arc home to him to
the city of David: But carried it in to the house of Obed Edom a Gethite. And
the Ark of god remained with Obed Edom, even in his house, three months. And
the Lord blessed the house of Obed Edom, and all that he had.

Hiram sends wood and workmen to David, which has two victoryis of the
Philistines.

CAPI. XIIII.
SO Hiram the king of Tire sent messengers

And when the Philistines herd that David was anointed king upon all Israel,
all

And when they had left their Gods

The ^enites bring the Arc again. David daunsynge before it, is dispysed of
his wife Michou.

CAPI. XV.
ANd David made him houses in the city

Of the sons of Hebron: Eliel the cheyfe,

And the Levites appointed H^ma^ the son of Ioell: and (of his brethren) Asaph
the son of and Banaiahu played with psaltryes on an Alamoth. Mathachtahu,
Eliphalehu, Mikniahu, Obed Edom, Ieiell, and Azaziah played upon harpes an eight
above, with courage. And Chenamahu the cheyf of the Levites, was master of the
song, for he taught other to sing, because he was a man of understanding.
Berechia and El^ana kept the door of the Arc. And S^caniahu, Iehosaphat*
Nethanaell, Amasai, Zacha^iahu / Bana^ahu, and Eliezer the priests did blow
with trompettes before the Ark of god.

And Obed Edo^, and Iehia, were kepers of the ^^. Reg. vi. c
And the elders of Israel and the captains over thousands, went to fet the
Arc of the appointment of the lord out of the house of Obed Edom with
gladness. And when god helped the Levites, that bare the arc of the
apoyntment of the lord, they offered seven oxen, and seven rams. And David
had on him a lynnen garmente, like as had also all the Levites that bare the
Arc, and so had the syngers: and Chenania the ruler of the song, with the
syngers. And David had upon him an Ephod of lynnen. And all they of Israel
brought the ark of the Lord's covenant with shoutynge, and blowynge of the
shaume and trompettes: making a noise with symbals, psaltryes, and harpes. And
as the Arc of the appointment of the Lord came in to the city of David,
Micholl the daughter of Saull, lokynge out at a wyndowe, saw king David
daunsyng and playenge, and she despised him in her heart.

David ordeyneth Asaph and his brethren to minister before the Lord. He him
self prayseth the Lord god of Israel.

CAPI. XVI.
SO they brought in the Ark of god, and

And he appointed certain of the Levites to minyster before the lord, and to
repeat, and to thank, and praise the Lord God of Israel. And Asaph was the
cheyfe, and next to him Zacharia, Ieiell, Semeramoth, Iehiell, Mathathia,
Eliab, Benaia, ^^. Reg. vi. b
Obed Ehom, and Iehiell with psalteres and harpes.

But Asaph made a sound with symbals. Banaiahu and Iahaziell priests blew
with trompettes continuallye before the Arc of the covenant of god. And that
same time David did appoint cheyfelye to thank the lord, by Asaph and his
brethren.

Psalm. (...) ^ Esai. xi^. ^
O give thanks unto the lord, call upon his name, make his Acts known among
Psalm. (...)
Sing unto the lord all the earth: and show from day to day his Salvation.

Tell of his glory among the Heathen:

For great is the Lord, and worthy to be praised excedyngly: he is to be
feared above all gods. For all the gods of the people are of no vallue: But
the lord made heaven.

Praise and honor are in his presence* strength and gladness are in his
place. Ascribe unto the lord ye kynreds of people, Ascrybe to the lord,
glory and dominyo^. Ascribe unto the Lord, the glory due unto his name:
bring sacrifyces, and come before him, and worship the lord with holy honor.
Let all the earth fear him, although the compass of the earth be so
stablysshed that it can not be moved: let the heuens rejoice, and let the earth
be glad, and let men tell among the nacyons / that the lord is king. Let the sea thu^der, and the fullness thereof: let the feldes rejoice, and all that is
therein. Then shall the trees of the wood rejoice at the presence of the lord,
because he comes to judge the earth.

O give thanks unto the lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures ever:
and say ye: save us (o God) of our salvation, gather us together, and deliver
us from among the Heathen, that we may give thanks to thy holy name, and
triumph in the praise of the. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel for ever and
ever, and let all the people say, Amen: and praise the lord.

And so, he left there before ^he arc of the and that by their courses.) And
Obed Edom, and his brethren. lxviii. and Obed Edom, the son of Ieduthun / and
Hosa were appointed to be porters. And Zadocke the priest and his brethren the
priests, were before the tabernacle of the Lord, in the high place that was
at Gibeon to offer burntofferynges unto the lord, upon the burntofferynge
altar perpetually, in the morning and evening, according to all that,
which is written in the law of the Lord, which he commanded Israel. And
with them were Heman and Ieduthun, and other that were chosen (whose names were
expressed) to give thanks to the lord, that his mercy lasts ever. And with
them did Heman and Ieduthun sing with the trompettes and symbals, ma king a
sweet melody with instruments of Musycke, and goodly songs. And the sons of
Ieduthun were porters. And all the people departed, every man to his house, and
David returned to bless his house.

David is forbidden to build an house unto the Lord. Christ so promised under
the figure of Solomon.

CAPI. XVII.
ANd it fortuned that when David dwelt (...).
an house of Cedar tree: but the Ark of the lord's covenant remains under
curtaynes. And Nathan said to David: do all that is in thine heart, for god is
with the. And the same night it for tuned that the word of god came to Nathan
saying: go and tell David my servant, thus says the lord, thou shalt not
build me an house to dwell in. For I have dwelte in no house sense the day
that I brought out the children of Israel unto this day: But have gone from
tent to tent, and from one habytacyon to an other. And whersoeuer I have walked
with all Israel, spoke I ever one word to any of the judges of Israel (whom
I commanded to feed my people, (saying: why have ye not build me an house of
Cedar tree? Now therefore, thus shalt thou of one) of the greatest men that
are in the earth. And I have ordained a place for my people Israel, and made it
fast, so that now they may dwell in their place, and move no more: Neither
shall the children of wickedness vex them any more as at the beginning. And
sense the time that I commanded judges to be over my people Israel, I have
subdued all thine enemies / and I told the, that the lord would build the an
house.

This also shall come to pass: when thy

And David the king came and sat before the lord, and said: What am I (O
lord god?) and what is mine house, that thou have promoted me thus far? And
yet this seemed little in thine eyes, O God: But thou haste also spoken of thy
servants house for a great while to come: and haste looked upon me / as upon a
man of high degree (O Lord God.)

What shall David desire more of the, for the honor of thy servant? For thou
haste known thy servant: O Lord for thy servants sake, even according to
thine own heart, have thou done all this magnifycence / to show all great
things. Lord there is none like the, neither is there any God save thou,
according to all that we have herd with our ears. Moreover, what nacyon on the
earth is like thy people Israel, to whom god has vouchsafed to come and
redeem them to be his own people, and to make the a name of excellency and
terriblenes, with castyng out nacyons from before thy people, whom thou have
delivered out of Egypt.

The people of Israel dydest thou make thy servant and his house, be true for
ever / that thou do as thou have said: let it come to pass, that thy name may
be magnifyed for ever, that it may be said: the lord of hoostes is the god of
Israel (even the god of Israel) and the house of David thy servant endures
stable before the. For thou (O my God) have told thy servant, that thou wylt
buyld him an house. And therefore thy servant has found in his heart to pray
before the. And now lord, thou art god, and have promised this goodness
unto thy servant. Now therefore, let it be thy pleasure to bless the house of
thy servant, that it may continue before the for ever. For whom thou blessest
(o lord) the same is blessed for ever.

The battayles of David against the Philistines.

CAPI. XVIII.
ANd after this it fortuned, that David ^^ R^, v^^^, ^
longed thereto, out of the hand of the Philistines. And he smote Moab, and the
Moabites became David's servants, and paid him tribute. And David smote
Hadadezer king of Zoba unto Hanath, as he went to stablysh his dominyon by the
river Euphrates. And David took from him a. M. charettes, and vu. M. horse men,
and. xx. M. foremen, and lamed all the charet horses, and reserved of them an
hundred charettes. And when the Sirians 3. Regsi. 7 b Iere. iii. ^
the pyllers / and the vessels of brass.

And when Tou king of Hemath, herd

Hanon king of the sons of Ammon, do the great iniurye to the servants of
David.

CAPI. XIX.
AFter this, it chanced that ^^. (...). ^
Nahas the

Wherefore Hanon took David's servants: and polde them,) and shaued them, and
cut of their cootes herd by their buttockes, and sent them away. And there
went certain and told David, how the men were served. And the king sent to
mete them, (for the men were excedynglye a shamed) and the king said: Tarry
at Jericho, until your beerdes be grown, and then return. And when the
children of Ammon saw that they stanke in the sight of David. Hanon and the
children of of Ammon sent a. M. talentes of silver to hyre them charettes and
horsemen, out of Mesopotamia, and out of Siria Maacha and out of Zoba. And they
hired. xxxii. M. charettes, and the king of Maacha and his people, which came
and pytched before Meoba.

And the Children of Ammon gathered that were come, kept them by them selves
back in the field. When Ioab also saw that the front of the battle was
against him before, and behind: he chose out of all the chosen men of Israel,
and put them in array against the Sirians. And the rest of the people he
delivered unto the hand of Abisai his brother, and they put them selves in
array against the children of Ammon. And he said If the Sirians be to strong
for me, thou shall succoure me, and if the children of Ammon prevail against
the, I will help the.

Pluck up thine heart, and let us play the men, for our peoples sake, and for
the cytyes of our god, and the lord shall do that which is good in his own
sight. So Ioab and the people that were with him, drue nygh before the Sirians
unto the battle and they fled before him.

And when the children of Ammon saw

The three most victoryous battayle^ of David.

CAPI. XX.
ANd it came to pass, that after the year ^ Reg. xi. a.
about the time that kings go out a war fare. (Ioab carried out the army of
the host, (...)
and destroyed the country of the children of Ammon, and came, and beseyged
Rabha, and dystroyed it: But David tarried at Jerusalem while Ioab smote Rabha
and destroyed it: ^ Reg. xii. g
And David took the crown of their king, from of his head: and found that
it had the weight of a talent of gold, and there were precious stones in it,
and it was ordained for David's head. And he brought also exceeding much
spoil out of the city. And he brought out the ^^. Reg. (...). ^
After this, it fortuned, that there arose war at Gazer with the philystines.
At which time Sobocai the Husathite sieve Sippa^, that was of the children of
Gene. 14. ^
Rephaim, and they were subdued. And there was battle again with the
Philistines, and Elhanan the son of Iair / slew Lahemi the brother of Goliath
the Gethite,

David causes the people to be nombred^ and the^^ dies. lxx. thousand men of
the Pestylence.

CAPI. XXI.
ANd Satan stood up against Israel, and provoked David to nombre Israel.

And the Lord spoke unto Gad David's of three things: chose the one of them,
that I may do unto the. And Gad came to David, and said unto him: Thus says
the lord. Chose the, either three years famyshment, or three months to be
destroyed before thine adversaries, and that the sword of thine enemies may
overtake the: or else the sword of the lord and pestilence in the land three
days, and the angel of the Lord destroyenge thorowout all the coostes of
Israel. And now advise thy self, what word I shall bring again to him
that sent me. And David said unto Gad: I am in an exceeding strayte: let me
fall now into the hand of the lord, for passing great are his mercyes, but
let me not fall into the hand of men. So the Lord sent pestylence upon
Israel, and there were overthrown of Israel lxx. M. men. And god sent the
angel into Jerusalem to destroy it.

And as he was about to destroy, the lord

And Ornan said unto David: take it to

David wylleth his son Solomon to buyld the temple of the lord, which thing
he him self was forbyden to do.

CAPI. XXII.
ANd David said, this is the house of the

I will therefore make ordinance for it. And ii. Re. (...) 3. Regu^. ^^
My son, I thought (as it was in mine heart) to build an house unto the name
of the lord my god. But the word of the lord came to me, saying: thou have
shed much blood, and have ma^^ great battayles: Thou shall therefore not buyld
an house unto my name, for thou have shed much blood upon the earth in my
sight. Behold, a son is borne the, and he shall be a man of rest, for I will
give him rest from all his enemies round about: For his name is Solomon: and
I will send rest and peace upon Israel in his days.

He shall build an house for my name, and

David being old ordeneth Solomon king. He causes the Leuyit^ to be
nombred, and assygneth them to their offices.

CAPI. XXIII.
SO when David was old and full of days ^ Regu^. i. c.
he made Solomon his son king over Israel. And then he gathered together all
the lords of Israel with the priests and the Levites. And the Levites were
nombred from the age of. xxx. year and above, and the nombre and sum of them
was. xxxviii. thousand men. Of which. xxiiit. thousand were set to forther
the work of the house of the Lord. And six thousand were officers and
Judges. Four thousand were porters, and four thousand praised the lord with
such instruments as was made to praise withal. And so David put an order
among the children of Leui: Gerson, Cahath and Merari: Of the Gersonites was
Laadan and Semei. The sons of Laadan: the cheyfe was Iehiel, Zethan and Joel,
three. The sons of Semei: Selomith, Haziel, and Haran, three. These were the
ancient fathers of Laadan.

And the sons of Semei were / Iahath, Exodi (...). ^ Man. (...) ^
The sons of Amram: Aaron and Moses. And Aaron was separated, to have the
rule of the holy things in the place most holy, he and his sons for ever:
and to burn insence before the Lord, and to ministre unto him, and to bless
in his name for ever. Moses also the man of God, and his children, were named
with the tribe of Leui. The sons of Moses: Gerson and Eliezer. Of the sons
of Gerson: S^buell was the cheyfe. The sons of Eliezer: Rehabia the cheyfe.
And Eliezer had none other sons: But the sons of Rehabia were very many.
The sons of Izahar, Salomith, the theyfe. The sons of Hebron: Ieriahu the
first. Amaria the second, Iahaziel the third and Iecameam the fourth.

The sons of Uziel: Micha the first, and Iesia the Levites were nombred from
twentye

David assygneth offices to the sons of Aaron.

CAPI XXIIII.
THese are the deuisions of the sons of (...). xvi. a
Nadab also and Abihu dyed before their father, and had no Children: But
Eleazar, and Ithamar executed the priests office. And David ordered them on
this manner: Sadocke of the sons of Eleazar, and Ahimelek of the sons of
Ithamar according to their offices in their ministracion. And there were mo
ancient men found among thosonnes of Eleazar then the sons of Ithamar. And
thus were they ordered together: Among the sons of Eliazar there were syxtene
rulers, according to the household of their fathers: and right among the sons
of Ithamar according to the household of their fathers. And thus were they put
in order by lot, the one sort from the other, and so were there rulers in the
Sanctuary and lords before God, as well of the sons of Ithamar as of the
sons of Eleazar.

And Semeia the son of Nathaneel the (...). i. a
Abia. The nynth to Iesua: and the tenth to Secan^ahu: the eleventh to Eliasib:
And the twelfth to Iakim: The thyrtenth to Hupa: The fourtenth to Iesebeab. The
fyftenth to

The rest of the sons of Leui, are these: of the sons of Amram, Subael. Of
the sons of Suhael, Iehediahu. Of the sons of Rehabia, the first Iesia. Of
the Iezeharites Selomoth. Of the sons also of Selomoth, Iahath. The sons of
Iariahu: Amariahu the second, Iahaziel the third, and Iekamea^ the fourth. Of
the sons of Usiel, Micha. Of the sons of Micha, Samir. The brother the lot
made equal distributyon among them all.)

The syngers are appointed, with their place^ and lo^^^.

CAPI. XXV.
ANd so David and the captains of the

Of Ieduthun: the sons of Ieduthun: Gedeliahu, Zeri, Iesaiahu, Hasabiahu, and
Mathithiahu. vi. under the hands of their father Ieduthun, which prophesyed
with an harp, for to give thanks and praises unto the lord, Of Hema^ the
sons of Hema^. Bukia hu, Mathaniahu, Uziel, Zebuel, Ierimoth, Hanania,
Hanani, Eliatha, Gedalthi, Romanthi Ezer, Iosbekasa, Malothy, Hothir, Pro. xvi.
d.
cast lottes among them selves (how they should wait) as well for the small
as for the great, for the scoler as well as for the scole master.

And the first lot in Asaph fell to Joseph. The second to Gedeliahu (with his
brethren

The twelfth to Hasabia with his sons

The porters of the Temple are ordained, every man to the gate which he should
^^ep^.

CAPI. XXVI.
THese are the deuisions of the porters,

The sons of Hosa of the children of Merari:

As concerning the sons of Laada^ which were the children of the Gersonites.
Of Laadan came ancient fathers, Even of Laada^ there came Gersuni and Iehieli.
The sons of Iehieli: Zethan and Joel his brother, which were over the
treasures of the house of the Lord. Of the Amramites also and Izaharites,
Hebronites and Ozielites, was Subuel the son of Gerson, the son of Moses, a
ruler over the treasures. And of his brethren the sons of Eliezer, was
Rahabiahu, whose son was Isaiahu, whose son was Ioram, whose son was
Zichri, whose son was Selomith, which Selomith and his brethren were over all
the treasures of the dedicate things, which David the king, and the ancient
fathers, the captains over thousands and hundredes, and the captains of the
host had dedicated out of the spoils won in battayls: they did dedicate them
to maynteyne the house of the Lord: and all that Samuel the Sear, and Saul
the son of Cis, and Abner the son of Ner, and Ioab the son of Zeruia

Of the Izaharites was Chenaniahu and his sons, appointed to the business
without forth over Israel: for they were officers and Judges. And of the
Hebronites Hasabiahu and his brethren, men of actiuite a thousand and seven
hundred, were officers among them of Israel beyond Jordan westwarde, in all
business belonging to God, and service of the king. Among the Hebronites
was Iedia the cheyfest, even a prince among the Hebronites and fathers of his
kynred.

And in the forty year of the kingdom of David, they were sought for. And
there were found among them men of actiuite at Iazer in Gilead. And his
brethren were men of actiuite, even two thousand and seven hundred ancient
fathers, whom king David made rulers over the Rubenites, Gaddites, and over
the half tribe of Manasse, for every matter perteynynge to God, and for the
kings business.

Of the princes and rulers that minystred unto the king.

CAPI. XXVII.
THe children of Israel: after the nombre ii. Reg. ^3. ^ i Para. xi. ^
Banaiahu the son of Iehoiada the high priest. And in his course were. xxiiii
thousand. This is that Banaiahu, which was most mighty among. xxx. and
above. xxx. And in his part was Amizadad his son.

The fourth captain for the fourth month,

And the rulers over the tribes of Israel of Abner. Among them of Dan: Azarel
the son of Ieroham. These are the lords of the trybes of Israel. But David
took not the nombre of them under. xx. year: because the Lord said he would
increase Israel like unto the sterres of the sky. And ^ Par. xxi. a
Iaob the son of Zeruia began to nombre: but he fynysshed it not, because
that there fell wrath for it against Israel: neither was the nombre put in to
the Cronicles of king David.

Over the kings treasures was Azmaueth

And the ouersyght of the vyneyardes had Semei the Ramathite. Over the encreace
also of the vyneyardes, and over the wynesellers was Sabdi the Hasiphunite. And
over the olive trees, and mulbery trees that were in the valleys, was Baal
Hanan the Gederite. And over the treasure of oil, was Ioas Over the oxen that
fed in Saron, was Setari the Saronite. And over the Oxen that were in the
valleys was Saphat the son of Adlai. Over the camels, Obel the Ismaelyte. And
over the asses was Iohadiahu the Meronothite. Over the sheep, was Iazis the
Hagerite. All these were the rulers of the substance of king David. And
Iehonathan David's uncle, a man of counsel, and of understanding was a scribe,
and Iehiel the son of Hachmoni was with the kings sons. And Ahitophel was of
the kings counsel. And Husai the Arachite was the kings companion. And
next to Ahitophel was Iehoiada the son of Banaiahu, and Abiathar. And the
captain of the kings war, was Ioab.

Because David was forbidden to build the temple, he exhorts Salamon, and
the people to perform it.

CAPI. XXVIII.
ANd David gathered together all the ^ Reg. 7. a.
I had in mine heart to build an house of rest for the arc of the covenant
of the Lord, and for the footstool of our god, and had made ready, for the
buyldyng. But god said unto me: 3. Regu^. v. ^ 1. Pa. xxii. ^
thou shalt not build an house for my name, because thou have ben a man of
war, and have shed blood. Moreover the lord God of Israel 1. Reg. 16. ^
chose me before all the house of my father, to be king over Israel for ever,
for in Judah would he chose a captain: and of the household of Judah is the
house of my father, and among the sons of my father he had a lust to me, to
make me king over all Israel.

And of all my sons (for the lord has i. Par. 17. ^ ii. Par. ^^^^
Solomon thy son, he shall build me an house and courts, I have chosen him to
be my son, and I will be his father. I will stablysshe his kingdom for ever,
if he will be strong to do my commandments, and my laws, as it goes this
day. Now therefore, in the sight of all Israel the congregation of the Lord,
and in the audience of our God: keep and seek for all the commandments of
the Lord your God, that ye may enjoy a good land, and leave enheritaunnce
for your children after you for ever. And thou Solomon my son, know thou the
God of thy father, and serve him with a pure heart, and with a sweet courage.
P^^. vii. ^.
For the Lord searches all hertes, and understands all the ymaginacions of
thoughts. And if thou seek him, he will be found of the: But if thou forsake
him, he will cast the of for ever. Take heed now, for the Lord has chosen
the, to build him an house of a Sanctuary. Be strong therefore, and play the
man.

And David gave Solomon his son the of the temple also) and of the houses that
longed thereto, of the store houses, upper chambres, inner parlours, and of the
house of the mercyseate: and the example of all that he had in his mind, for
the courts of the house of the lord, and for all the celles round about,
for the treasures of the house of god, and for the treasures of the dedicate
things, and of the companyes of the priests and Levites that waited by
course, and of all the workmanshyp, that should serve for the house of the
lord, and for all the vessels that should serve in the house of the Lord.
For gold and for the weight of gold, for all vessels of sundry ministracions:
for all manner of vessels of silver in weight, and for all vessels, what for
ever purpose they served unto.

The weight of gold for the candelstyckes, and the gold for the lamps, with
the weight for every candelstycke, and for the lamps thereof. And for the
candelstyckes of silver by weight, both for the candelstycke and also for her
lamps according to the dyuersyte of the use of every candelstycke.

And by weight ( he gave) gold for the

And David said to Solomon his son: Be strong, and do manfully, fear not,
nor be faint herted. For the Lord God, even my God, is with the, and he shall
not fail the, nor forsake the, until thou have fynysshed all the work that
must serve for the house of the Lord. Behold, the priests and Levites are
divided in companyes, for all manner of service that perteyneth to the house of
god: they are with the for all manner of workmanshyp, and so are all that excel
in wisdom for any manner of service. Thou have also the Lords and all the
people for every thing that thou have need of.

The offering of David, and of the princes for the building of the Temple.
David dies, and Solomon his son reygneth in his stead.

CAPI. XXIX.
ANd David the king said unto all the 1. Regu^. v ^
God has specially chosen Solomon my son which is yet young and tender, and
the work is great for the house shall not be for man, but for the lord God.
Moreover I have prepared with all my might for the house of God: gold for
vessels of gold, silver for them of silver, brass for things of brass,
iron for things of iron, and wood for things of wood: and onyke stones / and
stones to be set, glistrynge stones of diverse colors, and all manner of
precious stones, and marble stones in great haboundaunce. And because I have
lust to the house of my God: I have of mine own propre good, of gold and
silver, which I have severally given to the house of my god beside all that I
have prepared for the holy house: even three thousand talentes of gold of
Ophir, and seven thousand talentes of

And so the ancient fathers, and the lords of the trybes of Israel, the
captains of thousands and hundredes, with the lords that were rulers over
the kings work, were willing and gave for the service of the house of God,
five thousand talentes of gold, and ten thousand pieces of gold: and ten
thousand talentes of silver, and. xviii, thousand talentes of brass, and an
hundred thousand talentes of iron. And they with whom precious stones were
found gave them to the treasure of the house of the Lord, by the hand of
Iehiel the Gersonite.

And the people reioysed, when the were

And David the king reioysed with great gladness. And David blessed the Lord
before all the congregation, and said. Blessed be thou lord God of Israel our
father, from ever, and forever. Thine (O lord) is greatness, and power,
glory, victory and praise: for all that is in heaven and in earth is thine,
and thine is the kingdom (O lord) and thou excellest above all, even as the
head of all.

And tychesse and honor come of the, and thou reygnest over all, and in thine
hand is power and strength, and in thine hand it is to make great, and to
give strength unto al. And now our god, we thank the, and praise thy glorious
name. But who am I^ and what is my people? that we should enfor^^ our selves to
give these things so wyllyngly?

But all things come of the: and of that (...). 47. ^ Psalm. 39. (...)
For we be but strangers before the, and soiourners, as were all our fathers.
Our days on the earth also are but as a Sapi. (...)
shadow, and there is none abiding. O lord our God, all this stuff that we
have prepayred to build the an house for thy holy name, comes of thine hand,
and is all thine. (I wot also my god) that thou tryest the hertes, and have
pleasure in vnfaynednesse. And in the vnfaynednesse of mine heart, I have
wyllyngly offered al these things. And now have I seen thy people which are
found here, to offer unto the wyllynglye, and with gladness. O lord God of
Abraham. Isaac, and of Israel our fathers, keep this for ever, as the
beginning of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare their hertes
unto the.

And give unto Solomon my son* a perfyte

(...). ^
And Solomon sat on the seat of the Lord, and was king in stead of David his
father, and prospered, and al they of Israel obeyed him. And all the lords
and men of power, and all the sons of king David submitted them selves, and
were under king Solomon. (...).
And the lord magnifyed Solomon in dignitye, in the sight of all them of
Israel, and gave him so gloryouse a kingdom as no king had before him in
Israel.

And so David the son of Isai reigned

The end of the first book of the Chronicles: otherwise called the first book
of Paralipomenon.
The second book of the Cronicles: which in the Hebrew is one with the first.
The offering of Solomon in the hill altar at Gib^^^^, where he receives an
answer of God, what wisdom should be given him, with the nombre of his
Charettes, and horsemen.

CAPI. Primo.
ANd Solomon the son 3. Reg. iii. ^
went to the high place that was at Gibeon: for 3 Reg. iii. ^
there was the Tabernacle of the witness of God, i, Par. ixi. ^
which Moses the servant of the lord made in the wyldernes. But the ark of God, Grods. 3^. 37. and. 3^. (...). Reg. vi ^
had David brought from Kiriath Iarim, in to the place which David had
prepayred therefore. For he had pytched a tent for it at Jerusalem. Moreover,
the brazen altar Exods. 3^* ^
that Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur had made, was there, before
the tabernacle of the Lord. And Solomon and the congregacyon went to vysyt it.

And Solomon gat up there before the 3. Reg. ii^ ^
offered a thousand burnt sacrifices upon it. And the same night did God
appear unto Salamon, and said unto him: Ask what I shall give the. And
Solomon said unto God: thou haste showed great mercy unto David my father,
and Sapi. ix. ^.
haste made me to reygne in his stead. 3. Reg. i. ^ ^.
Now therefore O Lord God, let thy promise which thou made unto David my
father, be true.

For 3. Reg. iii. ^
thou haste made me king over a people, which is like the duste of the earth
in multitude. Wherefore, give me now wisdom, and knowledge, that I may be
able to go out and in before this people: for who else ( vvorthelye) can judge
this people that is so great?

3. Reg. i^i. ^
And god said to Solomon, because this was in thine heart, and because thou
haste which I have made the king: wysdom and knowledge is granted unto the,
and I will give the treasure, and richesse, and glory, so that among the
kings that have been before the or after the, none was or shall be like the.
And so Solomon came from the hyl aul ter (that was at Gibeon) to Jerusalem,
from the tabernacle of witness, and reigned over Israel.

And 3. Regu^. x. ^
Solomon gathered charettes and horsemen: and he had a thousand and four 3.
Regu^. x. ^
the king made silver and gold at Jerusalem, as plenteous as stones: and
Cedar trees made he as plenty as the mulbery trees that grow in the valleys.
And the horses which Solomon had, were brought him out of Egypt by the kings
merchants that were together: Which being of one company, took them out
at a price. They came also and brought out of Egypt a charet for six hundred
petes of silver, even an horse for an hundred and fyftie. And so brought they
horses for all the kings of the Hethites, and for the kings of Sitia by their
own hand.

Solomon sends to Hiram the king of Tire, for wood, and workmen.

CAPI. II.
ANd Solomon determined to build an

3 Regu^. v. a
And Solomon sent to Hiram the king of Tire, saying: As thou dydest deal
with David my father, and ii. Reg. v. ^.
dydest send him Cedar wood, to buyld him an house to dwell in, even so deal
with me: For I am about to build an house for the name of the Lord my god,
to offer unto him holy things, and to burn sweet sense, and to set shewbread
before him contynually, to offer burntsacrifices of the morning and euenyng, on
the sab both days, in the first day of every new moon, and in the
solempnefeastes of the lord our God. For it is an ordinance to be continually
kept of Israel.

And the house which I buylte shall be

But who is able to build him an house: when that heaven, and heaven above al
heuens is not able to receive him? What am I then that I should build him an
house ^ay, but even to burn sacrifice before him, shall this buyldyng be:
send me now therefore a conning man, that can work in gold and silver, in
brass and iron, in purple, cremosyn and yelowe sylke, and that can skyll to
grave, with the conning men that are with me in Iud^ and Jerusalem, whom David
my father did prepayre. Send me also Cedar trees, Pyne trees, and Algume trees
out of Libanon. For I wot that thy servants can skyll to hew tymbre in
Libanon.

And behold, my men shall be with thine,

And Hiram king of Tire answered in writing, which he sent to Solomon.
Because the lord has loved his people, therefore has he made the king over
them. And Hiram said moreover: blessed be the Lord God of Israel which made
heaven and earth, and that has given David the king a wise son, and one that
has dyscrecyon, prudence, and understanding, to buyld a^ house for the lord,
and a palace for him self.

And now I have sent a wise man, and a ^. ^n(...)
the son of a woman of the daughters of Dan, and his father was a man of
Tire, and he can skyll to work in gold and silver, in brass and iron, in
stone and tymbre in purple and yelowe sylke, in fine white and cremosyn: and
can grave sondrye manner of grauynges, and to find out diverse manner of subtle
work that shall be set before him, with thy conning men, and with the connyng
men of my Lord David thy father. Now therefore, the wheat and barley, oil
and wine, which my lord has spoken of, let him send unto his servants. And
we will cut wood in Libanon, as much as thou shalt need, and will bring it
to the in ships by see to Iapho, from whence thou may carye them to
Jerusalem. And Solomon nombred all the strangers that were in the land of
Israel, after the nombre of them, whom his father David had nombred. And they
were found an hundred and. liii. M. and six hundred. And he set. lxx.
thousand of them to bear burdens, and lxxx. M. to hew stones in the
mountain, and three thousand and six hundred officers, to set the people a
work.

The temple of the lord and the porche are builded. with other things thereto
belonging.

CAPI. III.
ANd Salomo^ began to build the house (...). xxi. ^.
where (the Lord appeared unto David his father: even in the place that David
prepared in the thresshynge flower of Ornan the Iebusite. And (...). vii. ^
he began to build in the second day of the second month (...) vi. ^
the fourth year of his reygne. And these are the patrons whereby Solomon was
instruct to build the house of God. The length was three score cubytes after
the old measure, and the breadth. xx. cubytes. The porche, that was in breadth
as large as the temple, had. xx. cubytes: and the heygth was an hundred and xx.
cubytes. And he ouerlayde it on the inner side with pure gold.

And the greater house he syled with fyrre

And he ouerlayde the house with precious stone beutyfully. And the gold was
gold of Paruaim: The house (I say) the beams / posts, walls and doors
thereof, ouerlayde he with gold, and made graven work upon the walls. And he
made the house most holy, whose length was. xx. cubytes like to the breadth of
the house, and the breadth thereof was also. xx. cubytes.

And he ouerlayde it with good gold, even with. vi. hundred talentes. And the
weight of the nails of gold was fyftye sycles. And he ouerlayde the upper
chambers with gold

(...). (...). ^
And in the house most holy, he made two Cherubins of image work, like
children,

And he made a fore hanging of yelowe

The altar of brass, the lauatorye, the vessels to was she with, the
candelstyckes. etc.

CAPI. IIII.
ANd he made an altar of brass. xx. cubits 3. Re. vii ^.
And he cast a brazen Lauatorye of ten cubytes from brym to brym, round in
compass, and five cubytes high: and a line of thyrtye cubytes did compass it
round about. And under it was the fassyon of oxen which did compass it
round about: with ten cubytes did they compass the Lauatory round about,
and there were two rows of oxen, which were cast of like molten work. And it
stood also upon twelve oxen: three looked toward the North, three toward the
west, three toward the South, and three toward the East: and the Lauatory was set
upon them, and all their backs were toward the Lauatory. And the thyckest of
it was an hand breadth, and the brym like the brym of a cup, with flowers of
lylyes. And ^o received and held three thousand bates.

^. Re^. 7. ^.
And he made ten lauers: and put five on the right hand, and five on the
left, to

And he made an hundred basens of gold. And he made the court of the
Priests, and the great court and doors to it: and ouerlayde the doors of them
with brass. And he set the great Lauatory on the right side of the east end,
over against the South. And Hiram made pottes, shouels and basens, and
fynysshed the work that he was appointed to make for king Solomon in the house
of god: The two pyllers, the couerynges or two heads that were on the pyllers.
And he made two bottomes, and lauers made he upon the bottomes: the great
lauatory, and twelve oxen under it. Pottes also and shouels, fleshehokes and
all these vessels did Hyram (his father) make to king solomon for the house of
the Lord, of bright brass.

In the plain of Iordane did the king he made) the door of the temple / and
the inner doors within the place most holy: and the inner doors of the
temple, were gylted. And so was all the work that Solomon made for the house of
the lord finysshed.

The Arc is brhought into the temple, which is filled with the glory of the
Lord.

CAPI. V.
ANd so all the work that Salomo^ made 3. Regu^. 7 ^
Solomon brought in all the things that David his father had dedycated, with
the silver and gold / and all the Iuels, and put them among the treasures of
the house of God. Then Solomon 3. Regu^. 8 a
gathered the elders of Israel together / and all the heads of the trybes,
and ancient fathers of the children of Israel, unto Jerusalem: to bring the
arc of the covenant of the lord out of the city of David which is Zion:
Wherefore all the men of Israel resorted unto the king in the feast, even in
the seventh month. And all the elders of Israel came, and the Leuytes took up
the arc.

And the priests and the Levites brought

And the bars of the Arc, were so long 3. Regu^. ^^
save the two tables which Moses put thee in at Horeb, when the lord made a
covenant with the children of Israel, after they were come out of Egypt. And
it fortuned, that when the Priests were come out of the holy place (for all
the Priests that were present, were sanctyfyed and did not then wait by
course) that both the Levites and the syngers (under Asaph, Heman and
Ieduthun) were appointed to sondrye offices with their Children and brethren,
and were arayde in fine white, having Symbals, Psalteries and harpes, and
stood at the East end of the altar: and by them an hundred and twentye
Priests blowynge with trompettes.

And the trompet blowers and the syngers so agreed, that it seemed but one voice
in pray sing and thanking the Lord. And when they lift up their voice with
the Trompettes, Symbals and other instruments of Musycke, and when they
praised the Lord, ( and said) how that he is good, and that his mercy
lasts ever, the house of god was filled with a cloud: so that the priests
could not endure to mynyster, by the reason of the cloud. For the majesty of
the Lord had filled the house of God.

The words of Solomon to the people, and the prayer that he made unto god.

CAPI. VI.
THen Solomon said: 3. Reg(...)
the Lord has

And he said: blessed be the Lord god of Israel which has with his hands,
fulfilled it, that he spoke with his mouth to my father David, saying: ii.
Re(...)
Sense the day that I brought my people out of the land of Egypt, I chose no
city among all the trybes of Israel to build an house in, that my name
might be there, neither chose I any man to be a ruler over my people Israel:
saving that ii. Reg (...) and. (...)
have chosen Jerusalem, (that my name might be there) and have chosen David to
be over my people Israel.

^ Reg. 7. a. (...). viii b Pa^. 22. b
And when it was in the heart of David my father to build an house for the
name of the Lord God of Israel: the Lord said to

(...). viii. c
O lord God of Israel, there is no

And now Lord God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my Father, the
things that thou promysedst him, saying: (...) ii. a (...) ix. b Pa. vii. d
thou shalt in my sight not be without a man, that shall sit upon the seat of
Israel: so that thy children take hyde to their ways / to walk in my law,
as thou have walked be fore me. And now Lord God of Israel, let thy saying
be true which thou spakest unto thy servant David. And will God in very deed,
dwell with men on earth? Behold / Regu^. (...) 66. a. (...). vii. f
heaven and heaven above all heuens do not to^teyne the: how much less the
house which I have builded? Let it be thy pleasure therefore to turn to the
prayer of thy servant and to his supplycacyon (O Lord my God) to harken unto
the voice and prayer which thy servant prays before the: and let thine
eyes be open toward this house day and night,

3. Regu^ 8 ^
If a man syn against his neighbor, and take an oath against him, and make
him to swear, and they both come before thine altar in this house: then
hear thou from heaven, and work, and judge thy servants / that thou reward
the ungodly, and recompense him his way upon his head, and iustifye the
ryghteous, and give him according to his ryghtwysenesse.

And if thy people Israel be put to the worse before the enemy, because they
have sinned against the: Yet if they turn and give thanks unto thy name, and
make intercessyon / and pray before the in this house: then heat thou from
heaven, and be merciful unto the sin of thy people Israel, and bring them
again unto the land, which thou gave to them, and to their fathers. Deute.
^ ^. 3. Re. xvii. ^
When heaven is shut up, and there be no rain, because they have and destroy
the countries) or whatsoever plage or syckenesse it be: Then what supplicacyons
and prayers soever shall be made of any man, and of thy people Israel, which
shall know every man his own sore, and his own grefe, and shall stretche out
their hands toward this house, thou shalt hear from heaven, even from thy
dwelling place, and shall be merciful, and give every man according unto all
his ways / even as thou do know every mann* heart: for thou only know
the hertes of the children of men: that they may fear the and walk in thy
ways, as long as they live in the land, which thou gave unto our fathers.

3. Regu^ 8. ^ John in. c Acts. viii. ^
Moreover, the stranger which is not of thy people Israel, if he come from a
far land for thy great names sake, and thy mighty

If thy people go out to war against their enemies, by the way that thou
shalt send them, and they pray to the, in the way Deute. vi. e
toward this city which thou have chosen, even toward the house which I have
buylte for thy name: then hear thou from heaven their supplicacyon and prayer,
and help them in their right.

If they syn against the (as 3. Regu^. 8. ^ ^, Iohu^. ^. d.
there is no man but he does sin) and thou be angrye with them, and deliver
them over before their enemies, and they take them, and lead them away unto a
land far or near, yet if they repent in their heart in the land where they
be in captiuyte, and turn, and pray unto the in the land of their captiuyte,
saying:

We have sinned (we have done evil and wyckedlye) Psalm. 132. a
O Lord God in to thy resting place: thou and the Arc of thy strength: O
Lord God, let thy Priests be clothed with health, and let thy saints rejoice
in goodness. O lord god, turn not away the face of thine anointed: Remember
the mercyes, which thou have promised to David thy servant.

The fire consumes the Sacrifyce. The lord appears to Solomon the second
time.

CAPI. VII.
ANd ^. Regu^ 8. f
when Solomon had made an end Leuit. ix. d
there came down fire from heaven, and consumed the ^. Regu^. 8. g
burnt offering and the sacrifyces. And the house was filled with the glory
of the Lord, and the Priests could not go in to the house of the Lord,
because the glory of the lord had filled the Lords house. And when all the
children of Israel saw how the fire, and the glory of the lord came down
upon the house, they fell down flat upon their faces to the earth upon the
pauement, and worshypped and confessed unto the Lord, that he is gracyous, and
that his mercy lasts ever. And the king, and all the people offered
sacrifyces before the Lord.

And king Solomon offered a sacrifyce

So at the same time Solomon kept a M^^^. iii. ^
feast of seven days, and all they of Israel with him an excedyng great
congregacyon, iii. Re. ^. ^.
And so Solomon finyshed the house of the Lord, and the kings house: and all
that came in his heart to make in the house of the Lord, and in his own
house, went prosperouslye forward. And the lord appeared to Solomon by
night, and said to him: I have herd thy petycyon, and ii. Pat. (...).
have chosen this place for my self, to be an house of Sacryfyce. If I shut up
heaven, that there be no rain: or if I command the locustes to devour the
land, or if I send pestylence among my people: and if they that are of my
people (among whom my name is called upon) do humble them selves, and make
intercessyon, and seek my presence, and turn from their wicked ways, then
will I hear from heaven, and be merciful to their sin, and will heal their
land. And from hence forth mine eyes shall be open, and mine ears attent to
the prayer that is made in this place.

And therefore now ^P^. vi. a
I have chosen and sanctified this house, that my name may be ^. Reg. ii. a.
(...). vi, ^
thou shall not be without a man, to be ruler in Israel. But and if ye turn
away, and forsake my statutes, and my commandments (which I have set
before you) and shall go and serve other gods, and worship them: then will I
pluck them up by the routes out of my land which I have given them, and this
house (which I have sanctified for my name) will I cast out of my sight, and
will make it to be a proverb / and a jest among all nations. And every one
that passes by, shall be astonyed at this house (which belonged to the most
high God) and shall say: ^^^^. 29. d ^. Reg. ix. b. (...). xxii. ^.
why has the lord delte on this fassion with this land, and with this house?
And they shall answer: because they forsook the Lord God of their fathers,
(which brought them out of the land of Egypt) and caught hold on other gods,
and worshipped them, and served them: even there fore has he brought all this
evil upon them.

The cities that Solomon builded, after that the house of God was finyshed.

CAPI. VIII.
ANd ^. Reg. ix. b
it fortuned, that after. xx. year

And all the people that were left of the

And Solomon brought the daughter of Exodi. 23. ^ Deute. 16. ^
three times in the year: that is to say, in the feast of sweet bread, in the
feast of wekes, and in the feast of tabernacles. And Solomon set the sorts of
Priests to their offices, (as David his father had ordered them,) and the
Levites in their watches, for to praise and mynystre before the Priests day
by day, and the porters by course at every gate.

^ Pat. (...) ^
For so had David the man of god commanded. read) sees side in the land of
Edom. And Hiram sent him by the hand of his servants, ships and servants
that had knowledge of the sea: and they came with the servants of Solomon to
Ophir, and carried thence four hundred, and fyftye talentes of gold, and
brought it to king Solomon.

The co^municacyon of Solomon with the queen of Saba and the gifts that the
one gave to the other. The death of Solomon, after whom succedeth Rehoboham.

CAPI. IX.
ANd 3. Regu^. ^. ^ Math. xi^. ^ Luks. xi. d.
when the queen of Saba herd that bare spyces, and plentye of gold, and
precious stones. And when she was come to Solomon, she co^muned with him of all that she had in her heart. And Solomon assoyled her, all her questions, and
there was not one word hyd from Solomon, which he told her not. And when the
queen of Saba had seen the wisdom of Solomon and the house that he had buylte,
and the meat of his table, the sitting of his servants, and the standing
of his wayters, their apparel, his butlers, their apparel, his going up (by
the which he went in to the house of the Lord,) there was no more spirit in
her.

And she said to the king: the saying

And she gave the king an hundred, and xx.

The weight of gold that came to Solomon

And. xii. lions stood on the one side and

3. Reg^. x. ^
And king Solomon passed all the kings of the earth in richesse and wysdom.
And all 3. Reg. 4. ^.
And Solomon had four thousand stalles for horses and charettes / and twelve
thousand horsemen, whom he bestowed in the charet cities, and some were with
the king at Jerusalem. And he reigned over all the kings that were from
Euphrates unto the land of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt.

3. Regu^. ^. ^ ii. Pa^^. ^^
And the king made silver in Jerusalem as plenteous as stones, and Cedar trees
as 3. Reg. (...) ^
The rest of the acts of king Solomon / first and last / are they not written
in the sayenges of Nathan the Prophet, and in the prophesye of Ahiah the
Selonite, and in the visyons of Iedo the Sear of visyons, against Jeroboam the
son of Nabat? And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem upon all Israel fourtye
years. And Solomon slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the City of
David his father, and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.

The folyshnesse of Rehoboam, and the diuisyon of his realm.

CAPI. X.
ANd ^ Reg. xii. a
Rehoboham went to Sichem: for (...). Re. xi. g.
was fled into Egypt from the presence of Solomon the king) herd it, he
returned out of Egypt, And they sent and called him. And so Jeroboam and all
they of Israel came / and comuned with Rehoboam, saying: Thy father laid a
grievous yocke upon us: now therefore remyt thou somewhat of the grievous service
of thy father / and of his heuye yocke that he put upon us, and we will serve
the. And he said to them: come again unto me after three days. And the people
departed.

And king Rehoboam counsaylled with

And the young men that were grown up ^ Reg. xii. ^
For where my father put a heavy yocke upon you, I will put more to your yocke:
my father chastysed you with whyppes, but I will chastyse you with scorpyons.
And so Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day as the king
bad, saying: Come again to me the third day. And the king answered them
cruelly, and king Rehoboam left the counsel of the aged men, and answered
them after the advise of the young men, saying. My father made your yocke
grievous, and I will add thereto: my father chastysed you with whyppes, but I
will chastyse you with scorpyons. And so the king herkened not unto the
people: but the occasyon came of god, that the Lord might make good his
saying, ^ Reg. xi. ^.
which he spoke (by the hand of Ahia the Selonite) to Jeroboam the son of
Nebat. And when al they

3. Reg xii. ^
And now David, se to thine own house. And so all Israel gat them to their
tents / so that Rehoboam reigned over no mo^ of the children of Israel, then
dwelte in the cities of Judah. Then king Rehoboam also sent Haduram that was
ruler over the trybute, and the children of Israel stoned him with stones that
he dyed. But king Rehoboam made speed to get him up to his charette to fley to
Jerusalem. And they of Israel rebelled against the house of David unto this
day.

Rehoboam is forbidden to sight against Jeroboam. He has. xviii. wives, and.
(...). concubynes, and by them xxviii. sons, and lx. daughters.

CAPI. XI.
ANd when Rehoboam was come to Jerusalem, 3. Reg. (...)* ^
he gathered of the house of Judah and Ben Iamin, nine score. M. chosen men of
war to fight against Israel, and to bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam.
And the word of the Lord came to Semeiahu the man of God, saying: speak
unto Rehoboam the son of Solomon king of Judah, and to all them of Israel that
are in Judah and Ben Iamin, and say: thus says the lord: Ye shall not go up nor
fight against your brethren: return every man to his house, for this thing is
done of me. And they obeyed the words of the Lord, and returned from going
against Jeroboam.

And Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem, and

And the Priests and the Leuytes that ii. Par. 1^. ^
For Ierobdam and his Sons had ^ast them out from ministryng unto the Lord.
3. Reg. xii. ^
And he ordained him Priests for the byll austers, for the deuyls and for the
calves which he had made.

And after the Levites there went of all the trybes of Israel / (such as
submytted their hertes to seek the Lord God of Israel) and came to Jerusalem,
to offer unto the Lord god of their fathers.

And so they strengthed the kingdom of Judah, and made Rehoboam the Son of 3.
Reg. ^v. a
Maaca the daughter of Absalom which bare him Abia, Atthai, Ziza and Selomith.
And Rehoboam loved Maaca the daughter of Absalo^ above all his wives and
concubynes, for he took. xviii. wives and three score concubynes, and begat.
xviii. sons and three score daughters. And Rehoboam made Abia the son of
Maacha the cheyfe ruler among his brethren, and to have the over sight of the
kingdom. And he played wisely, and scattered all his children through out all
the countries of Judah, and Ben Iamin unto every strong city. And he gave
them abou^daunce of vyttayle, and obtained many wives.

Seba king of Egypt robs the temple of the Lord. Rehoboam dies, and Ahia
his son succedeth him.

CAPI. XII.
ANd it came to pass, that when Rehoboam 3. Re. xiiii. ^
And it fortuned, that in the fyfth year of king Rehoboam, Sesac the king of
Egypt came up against Jerusalem, (because they had transgressed against the
Lord, with twelve hundred charettes, and. lx. thousand horsemen. And the
people were without nombre, that came with him out of Egypt. Lubim, Suckim and
the blackmores. And they took the strong cities in Judah, and came to Jerusalem,

Then came Semeia the Prophet to Rehoboam and to the lords of Judah (that were

And so Sesac king of Egypt came to Jerusalem, 1. Regu^. x. ^
which Solomon made. In stead of which, king Rehoboam made scheldes of
brass, and committed them to the hands of the captains which had the
ouersyght of the footmen, and that kept the entrance of the kings house.
And it came to pass, that when the king entered into the house of the lord,
the guard came, and fet them, and brought them again unto the guard chamber.
And when he humbled him self, the wrath of the lord turned from him that he
would not destroy all together. And in Judah all was well.

And so king Rehoboam waxed mighty 3. Re. (...)
And he did evil: because he prepared not his heart to seek the Lord.

The acts also of Rehoboam, first and last, are they not written in the
sayenges of Semeia the prophet and of Iddo the sear, which noted the
genealogye? and there was warr^ always between Rehoboam, and Jeroboam. And
Rehoboam slepte with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David, and
Abia his son reigned in his stead.

The victory of Abia against Jeroboam.

CAPI. XIII.
THe eyghtene year of king Jeroboam, 3. Reg. (...)
began Abia to reygne over Judah, and he reigned three year in Jerusalem. His
mothers name also was Michaiahu the daughter of Uriell of Gibea. And there was
war between Abia and Jeroboam. And Abia made prouisyon for the war, having
valiant and expert men of war, even four hundred thousand chosen men. And
Jeroboam set him self in array to fight against him, with eight hundred
thousand pycte men, which were strong and men of arms.

And Abia stood by upon Zemaraim an hill which is in mount Ephraim, and
said: hear me thou Jeroboam and al Israel. Do not ye know how that the
Lord God of Israel gave the kingdom (over them of Israel) to David for ever:
even to him and to his sons with a salted covenant? And Jeroboam

And now ye say, that ye be able to prevail against the kingdom of the
Lord, which is in the hand of the sons of David, and ye be a great
multitude, and have the golden calves, ^. Reg. xii. ^
which Jeroboam made you for Gods. And ^ Para. xi. ^
have ye not cast out the priests of the lord the sons of Aaron, and the
Levites, and have made you priests after the manner of the nacyons of other
lands? so that who soever comes, and consecrateth his hand with a young ox,
and seven rams, the same may be a priest of them that are no Gods.

But we belong unto the Lord our God, ^^^^. x. b.
trompettes, and cry alarm against you. (O ye children of Israel) fight not
against the lord God of your fathers: for it will not prospete with you. But
for all that, Jeroboam conuayed men privily about, to come behind them: and
so they were before Judah, and the layers in wait were behind them.

And when they of Judah looked about, behold, the battle was before and
behind, and they cried unto the Lord, and the priests blewe with the
trompettes, and the men of Judah gave a showte.

And as the men of Judah showted, it came to pass, that God smote Jeroboam and
all

Of Asa king of Judah.

CAPI. XIIII.
SO Abia slepte with his fathers, and they buried him in the City of David,
and Math. ^. ^.
Asa his son reigned in his stead. In whose days the land was in
quietness ten year. And 3. Reg xv* b
Asa did that was good and right in the eyes of the Lord his God: for he took
away straung aulters and the hyl aulters, and brake down the images, and cut
down the groves, and commanded Judah to seek the lord god of their fathers,
and to do according to the law and co^maundmentes. And he put away out of all
the cities of Judah, the hyl aulters and the images: and the kingdom was quiet
before him. And he buylt strong cities in Judah: because the land was in rest,
and he had no war in those years. For the lord had gyued him rest.

Therefore, he said to Judah: let us build

And there came out against them Zarah 11. P^. (...). ^
with an host of. x. hundred thousand, and three hundred charettes, and came
as far as Maresa. And Asa went out before him, and they joined the battle
in the valley of Zephata beside Maresa. And Asa cried unto the Lord his God,
and said: Lord, 1. Re. xliii. b
it is no hard thing with the to help either many, or them that have no
power: help us therefore O Lord God, for we trust to the, and in thy name we
go against this multitude. Thou art the lord our god and no man shall
prevail against the.

So the Lord smote the black Moors

King Asa by the monicion of the prophet Azaria sacrifyeth unto the Lord. He
depryueth his mother of her dominyon.

CAPI. XV.
ANd the spirit of God came on Azaria

And when Asa herd those words, and the prophecy of Azaria / the son of Oded
the prophet, he took courage, and put away the abominable ydolles out of all
the land of Judah / and Benjamin / and out of the cities which he wanne in
mount Ephraim, and renewed the altar of the Lord, that was before the porche
of the Lord, And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and the strangers with
them out of Ephraim, Manasse and Simeon For there fell many to him out of
Israel, when they saw that the Lord his god was with him. So they assembled
at Jerusalem the third month, the fyftenth year of the reygne of Asa. And
they offered unto the lord the same time of the spoil which they had brought.
vii. C. oxen, and. vii. M. sheep.

And they made a covenant to seek the lord God of their fathers, with all
their heart and all their soul: And who soever would not seek the lord God of
Israel, should dye for it whyther he were small or great, man or woman. And
they swear unto the Lord with a loud voice, showtyng and blowynge with
trompettes and shaulmes.

And all they in Judah reioysed at the oath, of Priapus) in a grove, and Asa
brake down her ydoll, and stamped it, and burnt it at the broke Cedron. But
all the hill aulters were not taken away out of Israel: though the heart of
Asa was perfyte all his days. And he brought in to the house of god the
things that his father had dedicate, and that he him self had dedicate: even
silver, and gold, and Iuels. And there was no more war unto the Iudi. iii. ^
xxxv. year of the reygne of Asa.

Asa (for fear of Baasa king of Israel) makes a covenant with Benhadad
king of Siria.

CAPI. XVI.
IN the. xxxvi. year of the reygne of Asa, 3. Reg. x^. ^
Baasa king of Israel up against Judah, and buylte Rama, to the entente that he
would let none pass out or in ( safely) to Asa king of Judah. And Asa fet out
gold and silver, out of the treasures of the house of the Lord, and of the
kings house, and sent to Benhadad king of Siria that dwelte at Darmese^, and
said. There is a confideracion between me and the, between my father and
thine. Behold, I have sent the silver and gold, that

At that same time Hanani the seat came

(...) Pa. 14. c.
Had not the black moors and Lubim an excedyng great host with many charets
and horsemen? And yet because thou trustedst in the Lord, he delivered them in
to thine hand. For the eyes of the Lord behold all the earth, to strength
them that are of parfite heart toward him. (...) Reg* xiii. c
Herein thou have done folysshly, and therefore from henceforth thou shalt have
war. And Asa was wroth with ^ul^. 38. ^
in his syckenesse he sought not the Lord, but Phisicians. And Asa slept with
his Fathers, and dyed in the. xli. year of his reygne. And they buried him in
his own sepulcher (which he had made for him self in the city of David) and
laid him in the bed which he had filled with diverse kinds of spices and sweet
odoures, made by the craft of the potecaries. And they burnt very much spyce
about him.

Iehosaphat causes the fear of the Lord to be renewed among the people.

CAPI. XVII.
ANd Math. ^. b.
Iehosaphat his son reigned in

And the Lord stablysshed the kingdom in his hand, and all they that were in
Judah, brought him presents, so that he had abundaunce of richesse and honor.

And he lift up his heart unto the ways of the Lord, and he put down yet
more of

In the third year of his reygne he sent to his Lords: even to Benhail,
Obadia, Zacharia, Nethanel and to Michaahu, that they should teach in the
cities of Judah: and with them he sent Levites: even Semeiahu, Nethadiahu,
Zabadiahu, Asahel, Semiramoth Iehonathan, Adoniahu, Thubiahu, Tubadonia, and
with them Elisamah and Iehora^ priests. And they taught in Judah, and had the
book of the law of God with them, and went about thorowout all the cities of
Judah and taught the people.

And the fear of the Lord fell upon all

And these are the offices of them in the houses

After Ahab had asked counsel of the. LLLL* proph^^^, he put Michea in prison.
He dies with the s^ot of an arowe.

CAPI XVIII.
ANd Iehosaphat had abundaunce of richesse 3. Reg. 11. ^
after certain years he went down to Samaria. And Ahab slew many sheep and
oxen for him, and for the people that he had with him, and entreated him to go
up with him to Ramoth in Gilead. And Ahab king of Israel said to Iehosaphat
king of Judah: will thou go with me to Ramoth in Gilead? And he answered him: I
will be as thou, and my people shall be as thine, and we will go with the to the
war.

And Iehosaphat said unto the king of Israel: ask counsel I pray the, at
the And they said, go up and god shall deliver it into the kings hand. But
Iehosephat said: is there yet here never a prophet more of the Lords, that we
might ask at him? And the king of Israel said unto Iehosaphat: there is yet
one man, by whom we may ask the Lord: But I hate him, for he never
prophesyeth me good, but always evil, and the same is Mithea the son of
Iimla. And Iehosaphat said: let not the king say so. And the king of Israel
called one of his chamberlaynes, and said: fetch hither quycklye Michea the
son of Iimla. And the king of Israel and Iehosaphat king of Judah sat either
of them on his seat in their apparel, in a thresshyng flower beside the gate
of Samaria, and all the prophettes prophesyed before them. And one Zedekia the
son of Chanana

And the king said to him. So and so many

Then he said: I did se all them of Israel scattered in the mountains, as
sheep that have no shepheerde. And the lord said: these have no master, let
them return every man therefore to his house in peace. And the king of Israel
said to Iehosaphat: did I not tell the, that he would not prophesye good unto
me, but evil? But he said again: therefore hear ye the word of the Lord:
^. Re. xxii. ^ Esai. vi. a
I saw the Lord sit upon his seat, and all the company of heaven stood on his
right hand, and on his left. And the Lord said: who shall deceive Ahab
king of Israel, that he may go up and be overthrown at Ramoth in Gilead?

And he said: one says this, an other that. ii. (...). Re. ^ Job. xii. d
Ezech. 14. ^
the Lord has put a lyenge spirit in the mouths of al these thy prophettes,
and the Lord has spoken evil against the. And Zedekia the son of Chanana,
went to, and smote Michea upon the cheke, and said: by what way went the
spirit of the Lord from me, to speak with the? And Michea said: thou shalt
se the day when thou shalt go in from chamber to chamber, for to hyde thy
self. And the king of Israel said: Take ye Michea, and bring him to Ammon

And the king of Israel changed him self, and they came to battle. But
the king of Siria had commanded the captains of the charettes that were with
him, saying: se that ye fight not against small, or great, save against the
king of Israel only.

And when the captains of the charettes

After Iehosaphat was rebuked by the prophet Iehu, he called again the people
to the honor* ^^g^ of the lord god.

CAPI. XIX.
AND Iehosaphat the king of Judah

And so Iehosaphat dwelt at Jerusalem, ^^m^. ii. b ^^tt^. ^. ^ Eph^. vi. b.
(...). iii. d
that he should have any respect of persons, or take rewards.

Moreover, in Jerusalem did Iehosaphat set of the Levites, and of the priests
and of

Thus do, and ye shall not offend. And behold, Amaria the high priest is
among you in all matters of the Lord, and Zebadia the son of Ismael, a ruler
of the house of Judah, he is over such busynesses as concern the king: there
be officers of the Levites also before you. Take courage to you therefore, and
he doing manfully: and the lord shall be with such as be good.

The merueylou^^ ^ittorye that the lord gave Iehosapha^ king of Judah against
the Moabites, and the Children of Ammon, and them of Seir.

CAPI XX.
AFter this also it fortuned, that the children

And they came out of all the cities of Judah ii. Pa^. v^.
If evil come upon us, as the sword of judgment, pestilence or hongre: then,
if we stand before this house in thy presence, (for thy name is in this house)
and cry unto the in our tribulation / heat thou, and help.

And now behold, the children of Ammon

To morrow go ye down against them: behold the help of the Lord which is
with you: fear not, nor let your hertes fail you, Oye of Judah and of
Jerusalem. Tomorow go out against them: for the lord will be with you. And
Iehosaphat bowed his face to the earth, and all Judah and the enhabitoures of
Jerusalem fell before the lord, worshyppyng the lord. And the Levites of the
children of the Cahathites and of the children of the Corahites stood up, to
praise the Lord God of Israel with a loud voice on hye. And when they arose
early in the morning, they gatte them out unto the wilderness of Thekoa.

And as they went out, Iehosaphat stood,

And when Judah came to the edge of the

And 3. Re. (...)
Iehosaphat reigned upon Judah and was.xxxv. year old when he began to reygne

After this did Ieosaphat king of Judah join him self with Ahaziahu king of
Israel, whose mind was to do wyckedly. He coupled him self with him, to make
ships to go to Tharsis. And they made the ships in Ezion Gaber. And Eliezer
the son of Dodanah of Maresa prophesied against Iehosaphat, saying: because
thou have joined thy self with Ahaziahu, the Lord has broken thy works. And
the ships were broken, that they were not able to go to Tharsis.

Ieosaphat dies, and Iehoram succedeth him, which puts his brethren to
death, and is oppressed of the Philistines, and dies of the Fly^^.

CAPI. XXI.
I Ehosaphat also 3. Reg. (...)
slepte with his fathers,

All these were the sons of Iehosaphat king of Judah. And their father gave
them many great gifts of gold, and silver, and other specyal substance, with
strong cities in Judah: But the kingdom gave he to Iehoram, for he was the
eldest. And Iehoram arose up against the kingdom of his father and prevailed,
and Iudi. (...)
slew al his brethren with the sword, and diverse of the Lords of Israel. 4.
Reg. (...)
Iehoram was two and thyrtye year old when he began to reygne, and he reigned
eight year in Jerusalem.

And he walked in the way of the kings

Howbeit the Lord would not destroy the house of David, because of the 3.
Reg. (...) and. (...). (...)
covenant that he had made with David, as he promised to give a light to him,
and to his sons for ever. Re. v^i^. ^ Reg. (...). g Regu^. 8 ^
In his days the Edomites rebelled, when they were under the dominion of Judah,
and made them selves a king. And Iehoram went forth with his lords, and all
his charettes were with him: and arose up by night, and smote the Edomites,
which compassed him in, and the captains of the charettes. But Edom rebelled
still, so that they would not be under the hand of Judah unto this day.

That same time also did Libna depart from being under his hand, Because
Iehoram

And so the Lord styrred up against Iehoram

Ahaziahu reygneth in the room of Iehorain. Ieh^^ king of Israel kylleth
Ahaziahu. Athalia puts to death all the the ^ynges lyu^ge, only Ioas
^^capcth.

CAPI. XXII.
ANd 4. Reg. ^. ^.
the enhabitoures of Jerusalem made Ahaziahu his young son king in ii. Pa. xxi.
d
that came with the host of the Arabians, had sleyne al his eldest sons. And
so Ahaziahu the son of Iehora^ king of Judah, was made king. Xlii. year old
was he, when he began to reygne, and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. His
mothers name was Athalia the daughter of Amri. And he walked also in the ways
of the house of Ahab, for his mother (by her counsel) entysed him to do
wyckedly. Where fore he did that which was evil in the sight of the lord, as
did they that were of the house of Ahab: for they were his cou^saylours after
the death of his father, to his destruction.

And he walked after their counsel, and (...)
whom the Lord had anointed to destroy the house of Ahab.

And so it came to pass that when Iehu was 4. Reg. (...)
And he sought Ahaziahu, and they caught him where he was hyd in Samaria, and
brought him to Iehu. And when they had sleyne him, the buried him: Because
(said they) he is, the son of Iehosaphat, which sought the lord with all his
heart. And the house of Ahaziahu had no power to keep still the kingdom. 4.
Reg. (...)
But when Athalia the mother of Ahaziahu, saw that her son

Ioas the son of Ahaziahu is made king. Athalia is put to death.

CAPI. XXIII.
ANd ^. Reg. xi. a
in the seventh year Iehoiada being 3 Re. ii. a. 9 b (...). Par. vi. c 7. d.
^. 2^. b.
as the lord has said of the children of David.

This is it therefore that ye shall do: The Exodi. 27 ^
courts of the house of the Lord. But there shall none come into the house of
the lord, save the priests, and they that ministre unto the Levites: They
shall go in, for they are holy: but all the people shall keep the watch of the
Lord. And the Levites shall compass the king round about, and every man
shall have his weapon in his hand: and what other man soever does come into
the house of the Lord, he shall be sleyne: and let them be with the king, when
he comes in, and when he goes out. And the Levites and all Judah did
according to all things that Iehoiada the priest had commanded, and took
every man his men, that came in on the Sabbath, with them that went out on the
Sabbath day: neither did Iehoiada the priest let the companies depart.

And Ieohoiada the Priest delyuerrd to Deute. 17. d
the testimony, ( and they gave him in his hand, the law that was to be
kept,) and made him king. And Iehoiada and his sons anointed him and
said: God save the king. When Athalia herd the noise of the people, runnyng
^ praysynge the king, she came to the people in to the house of the Lord. And
she looked, and behold, the king stood in his place at the entering in, and
the Lords, and the trompettes were by the king, and all the people of the
land reioysed, blowynge with trompettes, and did play with instruments of
musyke, and taught to sing and praise.

But Athalia rent her clothes, and said: treason, treason. And Iehoiada the
Priest went out to the captains of hundredes that were governors of the
host, and said unto them: have her out without the door of the temple: and
who so follows her, let him be sleyne with the sweth. For the priest said that
they should not sley her in the house of the lord And they laid hands on her,
till she was come to the entryng of the horse gate beside the kings house, and
there they slew her.

4. Reg ^^
And Iehoiada made a bond between him and all the people and the king, that
they should be the lords people. And all the people went to the house of Baal,
and destroyed it, and brake his aulters and his images, and slew Mathan the
Priest of Baal before the aulters And Iehoiada put the offices for the house of
the lord under the hand of the priests and Levites, 1. (...)
as David had distributed them in the house of the Lord, to offer Number. ^^
as it is written in the law of Moses, with reioysyng and syngyng, as it was
ordained by David. And he set porters by the gates of the house of the Lord,
that none which was unclean in any thing should enter in. And he took the
captains of hundreds, and all the nobles, and the governors of the people,
and all the folk of the land, and caused the king to come down out of the
house of the lord, and they came through the high gate in to the kings house,
and set the king upon the scate of the kingdom. And all the people of the
land reioysed, and the city was in tranquilite, after that they had sleyne
Athalia with the sword,

Ioas during the life of Iehoiada, keeps the law, but after his death he
regards it not. He kylleth za^^a^^a the prophet. Ioas is killed of his own
servants: and after him reygneth Amaziahu.

CAPI. XXIIII.
IOas was seven year old when he began 4. Reg. ^^
and he reigned fourtye year in Jerusalem. His mothers name also was Zibia of
Beer seba. And Ioas did that which was right in the sight of the Lord all the
days of Iehoiada the priest* And Iehoiada took him two wives, and he begat
sons and daughters. And it chaunsed after this, that Ioas was minded, to
renew the house of the Lord and he gathered together the priests and the
Levites, and said to them: go out unto the cities of Judah, and gather of al
Israel money, to repair the house of your god from year to year: and se that
ye have the thing: howbeit the Levites were slack.

And the king called Iehoiada that was (...). 30. b
the collectyon of money, according to the commandment of Moses the servant
of the lord, and the congregation of Israel should offer it for the tabernacle
of witness. For wyeked Athalia and her children brake up the house of god /
and all the things that were dedicate for the house of the Lord, did they
bestow for Bealim. And at the kings commandment, (...) xii. b.
they made a chyst, and set it without at the gate of the house of the Lord:
and made proclamacyon through Judah and Jerusalem, to bring into the Lord
(...). 30. b
the taxacyon of money, that Moses the servant of god set upon Israel in the
wilderness. And the lords and all the people reioysed, and brought in, and cast
in to the chyst, until it was full.

And it fortuned, that at the same time they

And so the workmen wrought, and the work mended through their hands, and
they

And they buried him in the city of David

And after the death of Iehoiada, came the lords of Judah, and made obeysaunce
to the king. And the king herkened unto them. And so they left the house of
the Lord God of their fathers, and served groves and ydols. And then came the
wrath of God upon Judah and Jerusalem, for this their trespasses sake. And he
sent Prophettes to them to bring them again unto the Lord. And they testyfyed
unto them: But they would not hear. And the spirit of god came upon Zacharia
the son of Iehoiada the Priest, which stood by the people, and said unto
them: Thus says god: why transgress ye the commandments of the lord, that
ye can not prospere?

For because ye have forsaken the Lord, Math* (...)
And they conspyred against him, and stoned him with stones, at the
commandment of the king: even in the court of the house of the lord. And so
Ioas the king remembered not the kyndnesse which Iehoiada his father had done
to him, but slew his son. And when he dyed / he said: the Lord look upon it,
and require it. And when the year was out, it fortuned / that the host of
Siria came up against him: and they came against Judah and Jerusalem / and
destroyed all the Lords of the people from among the people, and sent all the
spoil of them unto the king to Damasco.

For the Sirians came with a small company of men, and the Lord delivered a
very great host into their hand, because they had forsaken the Lord god of
their fathers. And moreover they served Ioas according.

And when they were departed from him, 4 Reg. xii ^
his aw^e servants co^spired against him for the blood of the children of
Iehoiada the Priest, and slew him on his bed, and he dyed, and they buried him
in the city of David: but not in the sepulchers of the kings. And these are
they that conspyred against him: Zebad the son of Simeath an Ammonite, and
Iehosaba^ the Son of Simrith a Moabite. And his sons, and the sum of the
tax that was raised in his time, and the repayrynge of the house of God,
behold, they are written in the storye of the book of the kings. And Amaziahu
his son reigned in his stead.

Amaziahu ouercometh the Edomites. And Ioas hynge of Israel ouercometh
Amaziahu.

CAPI. XXV.
AMaziahu was.xxv. year old when he 4 Reg* 14. ^
Jerusalem. His mothers name was Iehodadan of Jerusalem. And he did that which
is right in the sight of the lord: but not with a perfyte heart. And as soon
as he was satled in the kingdom, he slew his servants, that had killed the
king his father But he slew not their children, because it is written thus in
the law / and book of Moses / where the Lord commanded, saying:

Deuteronomy. 24. c 4 Re. xiiii. b Iere. xxxi. ^. Ezech. 1^. c.
The fathers shall not dye for the children,

And there came a man of god to him, and

And Amaziahu took heart and carried out ^ Re. xiiii. b
smote of the children of Seir ten. M. And other ten. M. did the children of
Judah take alive, and carried them unto the top of a rock / and cast them down
from the top of the rock, that they all to braste: But the souldyers of the
army which Amaziahu sent away, that they should not go with his people to
battle, fell upon the cuyes of Judah, from Samaria unto Bethhoron, and smote
three thousand of them, and took much spoil.

And it chanced, after that Amaziahu was come from the slaughter of the
Edomites, he brought the gods of the children of Seir, and set them up to be
his Gods, and bowed him self before them, and burned cense unto them. Wherefore
the lord was wroth with Amaziahu and sent unto him a prophet, which said unto
him: why have thou sought the gods of the people, which were not able to
deliver their own people out of thine hand? And it chanced, that as the
Prophet talked with him, the king said unto him: have men made the of the
kings counsel? cease, why will thou be beaten? And the Prophet ceased, and
said: I am sure that god is minded to destroy the, because thou haste done
this, and agreest not unto my counsel.

4 Re. xiiii. ^
Then Amaziahu King of Judah took advise, and sent to Ioas the son of
Iehoahaz 4. Re. x^^^ Iuduu^. (...) 4. Esd. 4. ^
give thy daughter to my son to wife. And there came a wild beast of
Libanon, and trod down the thystle. Thou say that thou have beaten the
Edomites, and thine heart makes the proud, to gloryfy thy self. Now therefore
bide at home: why do thou provoke unto evil, that thou may peryshe, both
thou, and Judah with the?

But Amaziahu would not harken to him: for it came of god, even to deliver them
in to the

And Amaziahu the son of Ioas king of Judah lived after the death of Ioas
son of Iehoahaz king of Israel fyftye year. The rest of the acts of
Amaziahu first and last, are they not written in the book of the kings of
Judah and Israel? And after the time that Amaziahu did turn away from the
lord, 4. Re. (...)
they conspyred treason against him in Jerusalem: and when he was fled to
Lachis they sent to Lathis after him, and slew him there and brought him up
with horses, and buried him with his fathers in (...).
the city of Judah.

After the death of Amaziahu reygneth ^^zia (otherwise called Ozia) which is
stryhen with the ^eper, and Io^ham reygneth in (...) r^^^e.

CAPI. XXVI.
THen all the people of Judah took Uzia (...). a
syxtene year old) and made him king in the room of his father Amaziahu. And
he buylte Eloth, and brought it again to Judah, after the king was laid to
sleep with his fathers. Syrtene year old was Uzia, when he began to reygne,
and he reigned. ^i^. year in Jerusalem. His mothers name also was Iecholia of
Jerusalem. And he did that which was right in the sight of the lord according
to alas did his father Amaziahu. And it came to pass, that he sought god and
in the days of Zachariahu (...) xii. b.
(which maynteyned the fear of god) and as long as he sought the Lord, God
made him to prospere.

And he went to battle against the philistines,

And Uzia had an host of fighting men that went out to war in the armaye
according

And Uzia provided them thorowout all the host, sheldes, spears, helmettes,
^abergeons, bows and slings for to cast stones. And he made subtel engynnes
in Jerusalem, which he invented and laid on the towers and corners, to shute
arowes and great stones with all. And his name spread far abroad, because he
was helped so excellently, so that he became very mighty. But in his strength
/ his heart arose to his destructto^: for he transgressed against the lord his
god, and went into the temple of the Lord, to burn cense upon the altar of
incense. And Azariahu the priest went in after him, and with him four score
priests of the lord that were valeaunt men. And they stood by Uzia the king,
and said unto him: Nume. 28 ^
It perteyneth not to the Uzia / to burn cense unto the lord, but to the
priests the children of Aaron, that are consecrate for to offer incense. Come
therefore out of the sanctuarye, for thou have trespassed, and it is no worship
to the before the lord god.

And Uzia was wroth, and had cense in his 4 Reg. ^v ^
the leprosye sprange in his foreheade before the Priests in the house of the
Lord, even beside the incense altar. And Azariahu the cheyfe priest with all
the other Priests looked upon him: and behold, he was become a Leper in his
forheade, and they vexed him thence. And he was feign to go out, because the
Lord had smytten him. And Uzia the king co^tynued a leper unto the day of
his death, and dwelt several in a house being a leper and shu^ts out of the
house of the lord. And Iotham his son had the governance of the Kings
house, and judged the people of the land. The rest of the acts of Uzia first
and last / did Isai the prophet the son of Amos, write. And so Uzia slept
with his fathers, and they buried him with his fathers in the field of the
buryall which was beside the sepulchers of the kings. For they said: he is a
leper. And Iotham his son reigned in his stead.

Iotham reygneth, and ouert^meth the Ammo^ytes. Ahaz his son reygneth aftre
him.

CAPI. XXVII.
I Otham was five and twentye year old / 4 Reg* ^v ^
began to reygne, and reigned syxtene year in Jerusalem. His mothers name also
was Ierusa the daughter of Zadoc. And he did that which was right in the sight
of the lord / in all points as did his father Uzia: save that he came not
into the temple of the Lord, and the people did yet wyckedly.

He buylte the bygh gate of the temple of the lord, and on the wall (where the
house of of Ammon, and prevailed against them. And the children of Ammon gave
him the same year an hundred talentes of silver, and ten thousand quarters of
wheat, and ten thousand of batley. So much did the children of Ammon give
him the second year and the third also.

So Iotham became mighty, because he

The wickedness of Ihaz king of Judah. After him reygneth Heze^^a.

CAPI. XXVIII.
AHaz was ^ Reg. xvi^
twentye year old when he Dente. 1^. b ^. (...). xxi. a
burnt his children in fire after the abhomynacyons of the Heathen, whom the
lord cast out before the Children of Israel. He offered also, and burnte
incence in hylaulters and on mountains / and under every grene tree. ^ Re xvi.
^. Esai. vii. e.
Wherefore the lord his god delivered him into the hand of the king of the
Sirians which bet him, and carried away a great multitude of his captive, and
brought them to Damasco. And he was delivered in to the hand of the king of
Israel, which smote him with a great slaughter. For Pekah the son of
Remaliahu slew in Judah an C, and twentye thousand in one day, which were all
fighting men, and that because they had forsaken the lord god of their
fatheyrs. And Z^chri a mighty man of Ephraim slew Maasiahu the kings son,
and Asrica the gouernoure of the house, and Elcana that was next to the king.

And the Children of Israel took prisoners

For where as we have offended toward

^. Re. (...)
At that same time did king Ahaz send unto the kings of Assure, to have help
of them. And the Edomites came again, and slew some of Judah, and carried away
captyues. And the Philistines invaded the cities in the low country, and
toward the south of Judah: and took Bethsames, and Aialon / and Gederoth, and
Socho with the towns longyng thereto, and Thimna with the towns of the same:
Gimso, and the towns thereof, and dwelte there. For the Lord brought Judah
low, because of Ahaz king of Judah, which made Judah naked, and transgressed
fore against the Lord.

And Thilgath pylneser king of the Assirians

For Ahaz took away a porcyon out of the house of the Lord, and out of the
Kings house, and out of the lords houses and gave unto the king of the
Assiryans: and yet it helped him not. And in the very time of his tribulacion
did king Ahaz trespass yet more against the Lord. For he offered unto the
Gods of them of Damasco, which bette him, and he said: because the Gods of
the kings of Siria help them, therefore will I offer to them, that they may
help me also. But they were his destruction, and the destruccyon of all
Israel. And Ahaz gathered together the vessels of the house of God, and brake
them, and (...).
shut up the doors of the house of the Lord, and made him (...). c.
aulters in every corner of Jerusalem. And in all the cities of Judah he made
hill aulters, to burn incense unto other Gods, and angered the Lord god of his
fathers. The rest of his acts and his works first and last: behold, they are
written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel. And Ahaz slepte with
his fathers, and they buried him in the city of Jerusalem: but brought him not
unto the sepulchers of the kings of Judah. And Hezekia his son reigned in his
stead.

Hezehia (otherwise called Ezechias, or Ieh^zki^ah^^) restores unto the temple
of the Lord all the things that had not ben regarded of his predeceslouts.

CAPI. XXIX.
HEzekia began to reygne, when he was (...).
opened the doors of the house of the Lord (...). d
(in the first year and first month of his reygne) and repaired them. And he
brought in the priests and the Levites, and gathered them together into the
East street: and said unto them: Hear me ye Levites, and now be sanctified,
and halowe the house of the lord God of your fathers, and bring fylthynesse
out of the holy place. For our fathers have trespassed, and done evil in the
eyes of the lord our God: and have forsaken him, and turned away their faces
from the habitacyon of the lord, and turned their backs on it.

And beside that they have shut up the Number. (...). ^.
has chosen you to stand before him, and for to minystre and serve him, and
to burn incense.

Then the Levites arose: Mahath the son

They began the first day of the first month

And they brought seven oxen, seven ^ammes, seven sheep, and seven he gootes to
be ^ altar. And then they brought forth the he gootes for the synofferynge
before the king and the congregation, and put their hands upon them. And the
priests slew them, and with the blood of them they cleansed the altar, to
make satasfactyon for all Israel: for the king commanded, that the
burntofferynge and the synofferynge should be made for all Israel. And set the
Levites in the house of the lord with symbals, psaltryes and harpes, ^. Pa.
xxv. a
according to the commandment of David and of Gad the kings sear, and
Nathan the Prophet.

For so was the commandment of the lord

And the congregacyon brought in the sacrifyces,

Hezekia renueth the feast of passover.

CAPI. XXX.
ANd Hezekia sent to all Israel and Judah, Nume. (...). ^
to keep the feast of Passover in the second month

For they could not keep it at that time: because the priests were not
sanctified suffycyentlye, neither was the people gathered together to
Jerusalem. And the thing pleased the king and all the congregacyon. And they
decreed, that it should be proclaimed thorowout all Israel from Beersabe to Dan
/ that they should come, and hold the feast of Passover unto the Lord God of
Israel at Jerusalem: for they had not done it of a great season as they
should have done by the law. So the posts went with letters of the hand of
the king, and of his lords thorowout all Israel and Judah: and at the
commandment of the king they said: Ye Children of Israel, turn again
unto the lord god of Abraham, Isaac and Israel, and let every one return to
the remenau^t that are escaped you out of the hand of the kings of Assure. And
be not ye like your fathers and your brethren / which trespassed against the
Lord God of their fathers, which gave them up to be destroyed, as ye se.

And now be not ye styffe necked, like as Erodi(...) Ierem. (...) ^ Psalm. (...)
for the lord your God is gracyous and merciful and will not turn away his
face from you, if ye convert unto him. And so the posts went from city to
city in the land of Ephraim and Manasse, even unto Zabulon. But they laughed
them to scorn, and mocked them. Nevertheless, yet diverse of Asser, Manasse
and of Zabulon submytted them selves and came to Jerusalem. And the hand of
God was in Judah, so that he gave them one heart, to do the commandment of the
king and of the rulers, according to the word of the lord. And there
assembled to Jerusalem much people, and there was present a mighty great
congregation, to hold the feast of sweet bread in the second month.

And they arose, and removed the ^* Pa. (...). ^
aulters that were in Jerusalem. And all the vessels

Wherefore Hezekia prayed for them, and said: the good lord be mercyful unto
them. For he set his hoole heart, to seek the Lord God / even the God of his
fathers: but all the other did not so according to unfeigned holiness. And the
lord herd Hezekia, and healed

After that Hezekia had called again the people unto the way of the lord, he
ordeneth the priests, unto whom he commands to give tithes

CAPI. XXXI.
ANd when all these things were finysshed, 2. Par. 14^
cut down the groves, and all to brake the high places, and ii. Par. 33. ^
aulters, thorowout all Judah and Ben iamin / in Ephraim also and Manasse,
until they had utterly destroyed them all. And all the Children of Israel
returned, every man to his possessyon and to their own cities. And Hezekia
appointed sundry companyes of the priests / and Levites after the dyuersyte
of their minystracyons, every man according to his office, both priests and
Levites, for the burntofferynge / and peaceofferynges / to ministre, and to
give thanks / and praise in the gates of the hooste of the Lord. And the
kings porcyon of his substance that he gave, were burntofferynges in the
morning and euenyng / and burntofferynges for the Sabbath days, new moons,
and solemn feasts, according Number. (...). ^
as it is written in the law of the lord. And he bad the people that dwelt in
Jerusalem, give the part to the Priests, and Levites, that they might
substancyally apply them selves to the law of the lord.

And as soon as the kings commandment in to the house of the lord, we also
have had enough to ^ate, there remained so much: for the Lord has blessed his
people, and this heap is left.

And Hezekia bad prepare the chambers unto whom all these things belonged.)
And Chore the son of Iimna the Leuite and por^er of the East door, had the
over sight of the things that were offered of a frewyll unto God (and were
given in manner severally unto the lord) and over the things most holy. And
under his hand were Eden, Mintamin, Iesua, Semeiahu, Amariahu, and Sechaniahu
in the cities of the priests appointed of their fyde lyte, to give to their
brethren their porcions, as well to the small as to the great. Except that to
the males that were rekened from three year and above (among all that went in
to the house of the Lord) they should give day by day, for their
ministracyon, and for their gyuynge attendaunce, and for their diverse
waytynges by course.

And to the Priests and Levites thore wout

And in all the works that he began for the service of the house of god, for
the law, and for the commandments, he sought his God, and that did he with
all his heart, and prospered.

Sennacherib (or Sanherib) bes^ygynge Jerusalem* is str^hr^ of the Angel.
Hezekia dies, after whom succedeth Manasse.

CAPI. XXXII.
AFter that these deeds were faithfully 4. Reg. 1^. ^ Esai. 36. ^ Eccle. 48. ^
Sennacherib king of Assure came, and entered in to Judah, and compassed the
strong Cities, and thought to win them for him self. And so when Hezekia saw
that Sennacherib was come, and that he was purposed to fight against
Jerusalem, he took counsel with his Lords, and men of might, to stop the
water of the fountaynes / without the city: and they did help him.

For there gathered many of the people together, and stopped all the wells and
the broke that ran through the mids of the land, saying: Why shall the
kings of Assure come, and find much water? And Hezekia went to lustelye, and
buylte up all the wall where it was broken, and made ordinance upon the towers
and to the other wall without, and repaired Millo in the city of David, and
made many darts and sheldes.

And he set captains of war over the people, 4. Reg. vi. ^
for there be mo with us then with him. With him is an Ia^. xvii. ^
arm of flesh: But with us is the lord our god, for to help us, and to
fight our battayls. And the people took a courage through the words of Hezekia
king of Judah. 4. Re. (...). ^.
After this did Sennacherib king of Assure send of his servants to Jerusalem
(but he him self remained beside Lachis: having all his power with him) unto
Hezekia king of Judah, and unto al Judah that were at Jerusalem, saying: Thus
says Sennacheryb King of Assure: 4 Reg. (...). ^
wherein do ye trust, O ye that dwell in Jerusalem which is beseyged? Does not
Hezekia entyce you to hand? wherefore, now let not Hezekia deceive you, nor
persuade you of this fassyo^, nor yet believe him. For as no God among all
nations and kingdoms, was able to ryd his people out of mine hand, and out of
the hand of my fathers: how much less shall your gods be able to keep you
out of mine hand?

And yet mo things did his servants

But Hezekia the king, and the prophet Isal

^. (...). xix. g
And when he was come into the house of his God, they that came of his own
body, slew him there with the sword. And so the lord saved Hezekia and the
enhabitours of Jerusalem out of the hand of Sennacherib king of Assure, and
from the hand of all other, and maynteyned them on every side. And many
brought offerynges unto the Lord to Jerusalem, and presents to Hezekia king
of Judah: so that he was magnifyed in the sight of all nations from thence forth.

^ (...). (...). a (...). 38. a.
In those days Hezekia was sick unto the death, and prayed unto the Lord:
which answered him, and showed him a wonderful

And he made him cities, and had of sheep

This same Hezekia stopped the upper water sprynges of Gihon, and brought them
down to the west side of the city of David. And Hezekia prospered in all his
works. And when the princes of Babylon sent unto him Ambassadoures, to inquire
of the wondre that chanced in the land, God left him Deuteronomy. viii a
to try him, and that all that was in his heart, might be known. The rest of
the deeds of Hezekia, and his goodness: behold, they are written in the
vision of Isai the prophet the son of Amoz in the book of the kings of Judah
and Israel. And Hezekia slepte with his fathers, and they buried him in the
most worthy place of the sepulchers of the sons of David: and all Judah and
the enhabytours of Jerusalem did him worship at his death. And Manasse his
son reigned in his stead.

Manasse is taken prisoner, and after that he rometh (...)* he destroys the
I^^lles: he dies, and after him succedeth ^^uion, which is killed of his own
people, and Ios^a his son reygneth in his stead.

CAPI. XXXIII.
MAnasse was. xii. year old ^. Re. (...)
when he began 4 Reg. (...). a
which Hezekia his father had broken down. And he reared up aulters for
Baalim, and made groves, and worshypped all the host of heaven, and served
them. And he buylt aulters in the house of the lord where as the Lord yet had
said: ii. Re. vil. b. 11. Pa^. vi a and. v^^. c.
In Jerusalem shall my name be for ever. And he buylt aulters for all the host
of heaven, in the two courts of the house of the lord. And he burnt his
children in fire, in the valley of the son of Hinnom. He was a sorcerer, he
regarded the cryenge of birds, used inchauntment, and maynteyned workers with
spirits, and Sears of fortunes: and wrought much evil in the sight of the
Lord, to anger him withal.

And he put the carved image and an Idol ii. Re. vi^. b ^. Re. viii. b (...).
Pa. vi. a and. vii. c.
will I put my name for ever, and will no more bring the seat of Israel from
of the land which I have ordained for your fathers. If so be that they will be
diligent and* do all that I have commanded them in all the law, and statutes,
and ordinances by the hand of Moses. And so Manasse made Judah, and the
enhabytours of Jerusalem to er^e, and to do worse then the hethen whom the
lord destroyed before the children of Israel. And the Lord spoke to Manasse
and to his people, but they would not regard. Wherefore, the Lord brought upon
them the captains of the host of the king of the Assirians, which took
Manasse in hold, and bound him with cheynes, and carried him to Babylon.

And when he was in tribulacyon, he besought ^^. ^a. ^4. a ^^d. (...). ^.
all the aulters that he had buylte in the mount of the house of God, and in
Jerusalem, and cast them out of the city. And he repared the altar of the
Lord, and sacrificed thereon peace offerynges, and thank offering, and charged
Judah, to serve the lord god of Israel. Never thelesse the people did offce
still in the hylaul ters, howbeit unto the lord their god only.

The rest of the acts of Manasse, and his

But he did evil in the sight of the Lord, like as did Manasse his father,
for Amon sa crificed to all the carved images which Manasse his father had
made, and served them, and submytted not him self before the Lord as Manasse
his father had mekened him self. But Amon trespassed greatly. And his own
servants conspired against him, and slew him in his own house. But the people
of the land slew al them that had co^spired against king Amon. And the same
people of the land made Iosia his son king in his rowme.

Ios^^ destroys the Idols, and restores the temple in which the book of the
law is f^^nde He sends to Hulda the Prophettesse for counsel.

CAPI. XXXIIII.
IOsia was eight year old when he began 4. Reg. (...).
and he reigned in Jerusalem xxxi. year. And he did that which was right in
the sight of the Lord, and walked in the ways of David his father, and bowed
neither to the right hand nor to the left.

In the eight year of his reygne (when he was yet a Child) he began to seek
after the God of David his father, And in the twelfth year he began to pourge
Judah, and Jerusalem from hylaulters, groves, carved images, and images of
metal: and they brake down the aulters of Baalim even in his presence: and
other images that were in greater honor then they, he caused to be destroyed.
And the groves, carved images, and images of metal he brake and made dust of
them, and strawed it upon the graves of them that had offered to them. And he
burnt the bones of the priests upon the aulters of them, and cleansed Judah and
Jerusalem. And even so did he in the cities of Manasse, Ephraim, Simeon unto
Nephthal^. 4 (...). (...). ^.
he sent Saphan the son of Amaziahu, and Maasiah the governor of the city,
and Ioah the son of Ioahaz the recorder, to repair the house of the lord his
God. And when they came to Elkia the high priest, they delivered them the money
that was brought in to the house of God, which the Levites that kept the
entries had gathered of the hand of Manasse and Ephraim, and of all that yet
remained in Israel, and of all Judah and Benjamin, and of the enhabitoures of
Jerusalem. And they put in the hands of the workmen, that had the ouersyght
of the house of the Lord: and they gave it to the laborers that wroughte in
the house of the Lord, to repair and amend the house.

Even the maso^s and carpenters gave they ^^. xx^i. b
Helkia the priest found the book of the law of the Lord, given by Moses. And
Helkia answered and said to Saphan the Scrybe: I have found the book of the
law, in the house of the lord, and Helkia gave the book to Saphan.

And Saphan carried the book to the king 4 Reg. ^3. ^
Then the king sent, and gathered together all the elders of Judah and
Jerusalem. And the king went up in to the house of the lord, and all the men
of Judah, and the enhabitours of Jerusalem, and the priests and Levites, and
all the people great and small: and the king did read in their hearing all the
words of the book of the covenant that was found in the house of t^^ Lord.
And the king stood at his standing

And Iosia put away all manner of abhominacions out of all lands that
perteyned to the children of Israel, and brought in all that were found in
Israel, to worship, and to serve the Lord their God. And they turned not
aside from after the Lord God of their fathers, as long as he lived.

Iosia holds Passover. He fyghteth against the king of Egypt, and dies.
The people bewail h^^^.

CAPI. XXXV.
ANd Iosia held the 4. Reg. 23. ^ 3. E^^^^. ^. ^
feast of passover Solomon the son of David king of Israel, did build,
there shall none other burden be laid upon your shoulders. But now serve the
Lord your God and his people Israel. And prepare your selves by your
ancient housholdes and companies, according to the writing of David king of
Israel, and the writing of Solomon his son. And stand in the holy place
according to the division of the ancient housholdes of your brethren the
children of the people, and after the division of the ancient housholdes of
the Levites kyl passover, and sanctify and prepare your brethren, that they
may do according to the word of the Lord by the hand of Moses.

And Iosia gave to the people flocks of (...) i. a
as it is written in the book of Moses. And so did they with the oxen also.

And Exodus xii. b
they dressed the passover with fire as the manner was. And the other dedicate
^. Par. xxv. and xxvi.
according to the commandment of David and Asaph, Heman and Ieduthun the
kings Sea^: and the porters waited at every gate, and might not depart from
their service: for their brethren the Levites prepared for them. And so all the
service of the lord was prepared the same day, to offer Passover, and to
offer burnt offerynges upon the altar of the Lord, according to the
commandment of king Iosia. And so the children of Israel that were present,
offered Passover the same time, and kept the feast of sweet bread seven days.
And there was no Passover like to that, kept in Israel, from the days of
Samuel the prophet: neither did all the kings of Israel hold such a
Passover feast as did Iosia and the priests and Levites and all Judah, and
Israel that were presen^e, and the enhabitours of Jerusalem. This Passover was
holden in the eyghtene year of the reygne of Iosia.

4. Reg. (...). ^
After all this, when Iosia had prepared the temple. Necho king of Egypt came
up as a King) in an other charet that they had. And when they had brought him
to Jerusalem, he dyed, and was buried in the sepulcher of his fathers.

^^^^. ^. (...). ^.
And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Iosia. And Ieremia lamented Iosia, and
all syngyng men and syngyng women mourned for Iosia in their lamentacyons, to
this day, and made the same lamentacyons an ordinance in Israel: and
behold, they be written in the lamentacions. The rest of the acts of Iosia
and his goodness which he did in following the writing of the law of the
Lord, and his sayenges, first and last: Behold they are written in the book
of the kings of Israel and Judah.

After Iosia reygneth Iehoahaz: after Iehoahaz, ^cho as him: after Ieho^^im,
Iehoatin: after Iehoa^i^, ^^^chia: in whose time all the people were carried
away to Babylon and were brought again the. ixx. year after, by hynge L^^u^,
(otherwise called ^hores.)

CAPI. XXXVI.
ANd the people of the land took Iehoahaz ^^^^. ^. (...). ^.
son of Iosia, and made him king in his fathers stead in Jerusalem. And
Iehoahaz was three and twentye year old, when he began to reygne, and he
reygued three months in Jerusalem. And the king of Egypt put him down at
Jerusalem, and merced the land in an hundred talentes of silver, and a talent
of gold. And the king of Egypt made Eliakim his brother king upon Judah and
Jerusalem, and turned his name unto Iehoakim: And Necho took Iehoahaz his
brother, and carried him to Egypt. Iehoakim was five and twenty year old, wh^
he began to reygne, and he reigned, xi. year in Jerusalem: and he did evil in
the syghte of the Lord his God. Against him came up Nabuchodonozer king of
Babylon, and bound him with two chains, to carye him to Babylon. The (...) 24.
^.
king Nabuchodonozer also carried of the vessels of the house of the Lord to
Babylon, and put them in his temple at Babylon.

The rest of the act^^ of Iehoakim, and his

And when the year was out, king Nabuthod onozer sent, and fet him to Babylon
with the goodly vessels of the house of the Lord, and made Zedekia (his fathers
brother) king over Judah and Jerusalem. (...) 24. ^
Zedekia was one and twentye year old, when he began to reygne, and reigned
eleven year in Ierusalam. And he did evil in the sight of the lord his God,
and humbled not him self before Ieremia the Prophet, at the mouth of the Lord.

And he rebelled against Nabuchodonozer, Iere. 25. ^
And the Lord god of their fathers sent to them, by his messengers, rysynge up
besymes and sendynge: for he had compassyon on his people, and on his dwelling
place. But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and
myssevsed his prophettes, until the wrath of the lord arose agayn^ his
people, and till there was no remedy. And (...) he brought 4. ^e. 25. ^
upon them the king of ^^^^ey, which slew their young men with the swe^^e in
their holy temple, and spared neither young man, maiden, old man, nor him that
stowped for age: He gave them all in to his hand. And all the vessels of the
house of God (both great and small) and the treasures of the house of the
Lord, and the treasures of the king* and of his lords: Al these carried he to
Babylon.

And they burnt the house of God, and brake (...) (...). ^.
by the mouth of Ieremia, until the land had he^ pleasure of her Sabbothes:
for as long as she lay desolate, she kept Sabbath, bn^yl seuentye years were
fulfilled. 1. (...) ^. ^
And the first year of Cyrus king of Persia (when the word of the Lord Iere.
(...). ^. a^^. (...). ^
spoken by the mouth of Ieremia, was fynysshed) the Lord styrred up the
spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamacyon thorowout all his
kingdom and that by writing, saying: Thus says Cyrus king of Persia: All
the kingdoms of the earth has the Lord God of heaven given me, and has
charged me to build him an house in Jerusalem, that is in Judah.

Wherefore, who soever is among you of all his people, the Lord his God be
with him, and let him go up.

The end of the second book of the Cronicles.
The first book of Esdras.
Cyrus sends again the people that was in captiuy^e* and restores them
their holy vessels, and commands them to build again the temple.

CAPI. Primo.
IN the first year of ii. Pa. 36. d
Cyrus Iere. xxv. b
by the mouth of Ieremi might be fulfilled) the lord styrred up the spirit
of Cyrus king of Persia, that he caused to be proclaimed thorowout all his
empire, and to be written, saying. Thus says Cyrus the king of Persia. The
Lord God of heaven has given me all the kingdoms of the earth, Esal. 44. d
and has commanded me to build him an house at Jerusalem which is in Judah.

Who soever now among you is of his

Then gat up the principal fathers of ii Par. 36. ^ 3 E^g. 25. a Daniel. i. ^
which Nabuchodonozer had taken out of Jerusalem, and had put in the house of
his God. Those did

The nombre of them that returned from the captiuyte.

CAPI. II.
THese are the children of the land that 2. Es^^. ii. ^
Nehemiah, Saraea, Re^laia, Mardochai, Bilsan, Mispar, Biguai, Rehum, Baana.
This is the nombre of the men of the people of Israel: The children of Phares,
two thousand, an hundred, seuentye and two: the children of Saphatia, three
hundred, and seuentye and two: the children of Arath, seven hundred, and
seventy and five: the children of the captain of Moab among the children of
Iesua and Ioab, two thousand, eight hundred and twelve: the children of Elam,
a thousand, two hundred, and fyfty and four: the children of Zathu, nine
hundred, and forty and five: the children of Zaccai, seven hundred, and. lx:
the children of Bani / six hundred, and forty and two: the children of Bebai,
six hundred and three and twentye The children of Asgad, a thousand, two
hundred, and two and twentye: the children of Adonicam, six hundred, and
syxtye and six.

The children of Beguai, two thousand, and thyrtye. The priests of the
children of Iedaia of the house of Iesua, nine hundred seuentye and three: the
children of Immer, a thousand and two and fyftye: the children of Phashur, a
thousand, CC. and. xlvii. The children of Harim, a thousand and seuentene.
The Levites. The children of Iesua, and Cadmiell of the children of Hodauia,
seventy and four. The syngers, the children of Asaph, an hundred and xxviii.

The children of door kepers. The children

The children of Bazluth, the children of Mehira, the children of Harsa, the
children of Barcom, the children of Sisara, the children of Thamah, the
children of Neziah, the chylden of Hatipha. The children of Salomons
servants, the children of Sotai, the children of Sophereth, the children of
Peruda, the children of Iaala, the children of Darcon, the children of Giddel,
the children of Sephatiah, the children of Hattil, the children of Pochereth
Hazbaim, the children of Ami. All the Nethimms and the children of Salomons
servants, were all together, three hundred nynetye and two. And these went up
from Thelmelah, and from Thel Harsa, Cherub, Addon and Immer. But they could
not discern their fathers house and their seed whyther they were of Israel.
The children of Delaia, the children of Tobia, the children of Necoda, six
hundred and two and fyftye.

And of the children of the priests. The ^ ^e. 17. ^. (...). (...). ^ ^. E^g.
ii. ^.
Berzilat the Gileadite to wife, and was called after their name: these sought
their evidence among them that had the register of birth, and were not found
therein therefore were they put from the preesthode. And Hathirsatha said unto
them, that they should not eat of the most holy, till there rose up a Exodi. 28.
^
priest to wear Urim and Thumim. The hole congregation together, was two and
fourtye thousand, three hundred and three score: beside their servants and
maidens, of whom there were. vii. thousand, three hundred and seven and
thyrtye. And there were among them two hundred singing men and women. Their
horses were seven hundred and six and thyrtie. Their Mules, two hundred and
five and fourtye: and their Camels, four hundred and five and thyrtie. Their
Asses, six thousand, seven hundred and twentye. And certain of the cheyfe
fathers, when they came because of the house of the lord at Jerusalem, they
offered them selves wylling, for the house of god, to set it in his place, and
gave gold after their abilite unto the tresure of the work even one and three
score thousand pe^^s, and fy^e thousand pound of silver, and an hundred
priests garments. So the priests and the Levites, and certain of the people
and the syngers, and the porters, and the Nethinims dwelt in their cities, and
all Israel in their cities.

After the foundacyon of the temple once renewed: they sacrifyce unto the Lord.

CAPI. III.
ii. Esd^. 8. ^ 3 Esd^. v ^
the seventh month came and the children of Israel were now in their cities,
the people came together (even as one man) unto Jerusalem. And there stood up
Iesua the son of Iosedee and his brethren the priests, and Zorobabel the son
of Salathiel and his brethren, and builded the au^ter of the god of Israel, to
offer burnt offrynges thereon, as it is written in the law of Moses the man of
god, and the altar set they upon his sockettes (for there was a fearfulness
among them because of the nations and lands) therefore they offered burnt
offerynges thereon unto the Lord Number. 2^. ^
in the morning and at even. And they held the feast of tabernacles Number. 29. ^
as it is written, and offered burnt sacrifices daily according to the nombre
and custom, day by day. Afterward they offered daily burnt offerynges also,
and in the new moons and in all the feast days that were consecrate unto the
Lord, and for all them which did (of their own fre will) offer unto the Lord.

From the first day of the seventh month began they to offer burnt sacrifices
unto the Lord: even when the foundation of the temple of the Lord was not yet
laid. They gave money also unto the masons and carpenters, and meat and
drink, and oil unto them of Zidon and of Tire, to bring them Cedre tymbre
from Libanus by See unto Iappa, according to the grant that they had of Cyrus
the king of Persia.

In the second year of their coming unto

And when the bulders laid the foundacyon ^. (...). (...). ^
after the manner of David king of Israel. And they sang together when they gave
praise and thanks unto the lord, because he is gracious, and because his
mercy endures for ever upon Israel.

And all the people showted loud in praysyng the lord, because the fou^dacyon
of the house of the Lord was laid. Many also of the priests and Levites and
ancient fathers, which had seen the first house (when the fou^dacyon of this
house was laid before their eyes) wept with a loud voice. And many showted
with joy / so that the noise gave a great sound, in so much that the people
could not discern the joyful sound and gladness / from the noise of the
weeping among the people: for the people showted with a loud cry, and the
noise was herd far of.

The building of the temple is hyndered and let.

CAPI. IIII.
BUt ^. Esdr. v. g
the adversaries of Judah and Ben Iamin herd, that the children of the
captivity builded the temple unto the lord God of Israel. And they came to
Zorobabel and to the principal fathers, and said unto them. We will build
with you: for we seek the Lord your God like as ye do. And we have done
sacrifice unto him, since the time of Asor Hadon the king of Assure, 3. (...).
17. d
which brought us up hither. And Zorobabell, and Iesua, and the other ancient
fathers of Israel said unto them. It can not be, that you and we together
should buyld the house unto our God: for we our selves will build alone unto the
lord our god of Israel, ^. Esdr ^. ^*
as Cyrus the king of Persia has commanded us.

And it came to pass, that the folk of the 3. Reg (...).
whom the great and noble Asnapar brought over, and set in the cities of
Samaria, and other, that are now on this side the water. This is the copy of
the letter that they sent unto king Arthaxerses.

Thy servants, and the men that are

And now in the mean season we have destroyed the temple, and would no longer
se the kings dyshonoure. Therefore sent we out also, and certified the king:
that it may be sought in the book of Cronicles of thy progenitors, and so
shalt thou find in the book of the Cronicles, and perceive, that this city
is sedicious and noisome unto kings and land^, and that they cause other also
among them to rebel of old, and for the same cause was this city destroyed.
Therefore do we certify the king, that if this city be builded again, and
the walls thereof made up; thou shalt hereafter have no portion on this side
the water. Then sent the king an answer unto Rehum the recorder, and Samsai
the scrybe, and to the other of their companyons

By the exhortacyon of Aggeus and zachary, in the temple builded again.

CAPI. V.
THe Prophettes, (...) (...). ^
Aggeus and Zachary (...). ^. ^
Then gat up Zorobabell the son of Salathiell, and Iesua the Son of
Iosedec, and began to build the house of God at Jerusalem / and with them were
the prophettes of god, which helped them. At the same time came to them Tathnai
/ which was captain on this side the water, and Starbaznai, and their
companyons / and said thus unto them:

Who has commanded you to build this house, and to make up these walls?
Then told we them the names of the men, that made this building. But the eye
of their God was upon the elders of the Iues, that they could not cause them
to cease, till the matter was brought to Darius, and then they answered by
letters thereunto.

This is the copye of the letter that Tathnai

We asked their names also, that we might 3. Reg. v^. ^ (...). Pa. (...). ^.
which a great king of Israel builded, and set up. But after that our fathers
had provoked the God of heaven unto wrath, 4. Reg. 24* and* xxv.
he gave them over in to the hand of Nabuchodonozer the king of Babylon, and
of the Caldyes / which brake down this house, and carried the people away
captyue unto Babylon.

^. (...). ^. ^
But in the first year of Cyrus the king of Babylon, the same king Cyrus gave
commandment ^. (...). ^. ^
they were delivered unto one Sasbazar by name, whom he made captain, and
said unto him: Take these vessels, and go thy way, and set them in the temple
that is at Jerusalem / and let the house of God be builded in his place. Then
came the same Sasbazar, and laid the foundacyo^ of the house of god, which is
at Jerusalem. Since that time also until now has it ben in building, and yet
is it not finysshed. If it please the king now therefore, let there be search
made in the kings library, which is there at Babylon, whyther it had been king
Cyrus commandment, that this temple of god at Jerusalem should be builded:
and let him send us the kings mind concerning the same matter.

At the commandment of Darius king of Persia. after the temple was builded
and dedicate, the Children of Israel kept the feast of vnleuended bread.

CAPI. VI.
THen commanded king Darius, and they ^. Esdr. ^^^
And there was found in a Coffe^ (in the place that is in the land of the
Medes^ a volume: and therein was it thus written, and soche a memoryall: In the
first year of king Cirus, gave the same king Cirus commandment concerning
the house of God at Jerusalem, that the same house should be builded in the
place where they offer the sacrifyces, and to ^oyne the walls together of three
score cubytes heyght, and three score cubytes breadth. Three rows of rough stones
/ and one row of timber, and the expenses shall be given of the kings house.
And let the gold and silver vessel of the house of God (which Nabuchodonozer
took out of the temple at Jerusalem / and brought unto Babylon) be restored,
and brought again unto the temple at Jerusalem to their place in the house of
God.

Get you far^e from them therefore / thou

And the God that set his name there, destroy ^^. P^. (...). ^
And the Children of Israel, the Priests / the Levites, and the other
Children of the captiuyte held the dedicacyon of this house of God with joy,
and offered at the dedicacion of this house of God, an hundred Oxen, two
hundred rams, four hundred gootes: and for the reconcylynge of all Israel
twelve he gootes, according to the nombre of the trybes of Israel, and set
the Priests in their

And the Children of the captyuyte held Passover upon the. x^iii. day of the
first month: for the priests and Levites were puryfied, so that they were al
clean together, and killed Passover for all the Children of the captiuyte,
and for their brethren the priests, and for them selves. And the children of
Israel which were come again out of the captiuyte, and all soche as had
separated them selves unto them from the fylthynesse of the Heathen of the
land: to seek the Lord God of Israel, did eat / and held the feast of
unleavened bread seven days with joy: for the Lord had made them glad, and
turned the heart of the king of Assure unto them, to strengthen their hands in
the work of the house of God / even the God of Israel.

By the commandment of Arthaxerses, ^^dras ta^^eth hi^ companyo^^ the
children of Israel, and returns to Jerusalem.

CAPI. VII.
AFter these acts, there was in the reygne ^. (...) ^. ^
Arthaxerses King of Persia, one Esdras the son of Saraiah, the son of Azaria,
the son of Helkia, the son of Sallum, the son of Zadoc, the son of Ahitob, the
son of Amaria, the son of Asaria, the son of Mera^oth, the son of Zeraia,
the son of Uzi / the son of Bucki / the son of Abisua* the son of
Phinehes / the son of Eleazar / the son of Aaron the cheyfe priest. This
Esdras also went up from Babylon / and was a perfyte scrybe in the law of Moses
/ Exodus (...). ^
which the lord god of Israel did give. And the king gave him all that he
required / because the hand of the Lord his God was upon him. And there went
up certain of the children of Israel / of the priests / Levites / syngers /
porters / and of the Nethinims unto Jerusalem in the seventh year of king
Arthaxerses.

And he came to Jerusalem in the fyfth month / even in the seventh year of
the king. For upon the first day of the first month / began he to go up from
Babylon / and on the first day of the fyfth month came he to Jerusalem /
because the good hand of god was upon him. For Esdras prepared his heart to
seek the law of the lord / and to do it / and to teach the precepte and
judgment in Israel.

And this is the copye of the letter / that

Take thou the same, and bye dilygently with ^^. (...). b.
Batthes of oil, and salt without measure.

Whatsoever also belongs to the law of the

3. Esdra. ^ ^
Blessed be the Lord god of our fathers / which so has inspired the kings
heart, to garnysshe the house of the lord, that is at Jerusalem: and enclyned
his mercy unto me ^n the presence of the king, and his counsaylers, and before
all the kings high estates. And I was comforted (even as the hand of the
Lord my god was upon me) and so gathered I the heads of Israel together,
that they might go up with me.

The nombre of them that return to Jerusalem with Esdra^.

CAPI. VIII.
THese are the princypal fathers of them / 3. E^d^. ^. ^.
of Phinches, Gerson: of the children of Ithamar, Daniell: of the children of
David, Hatus: of the Children of Zecania among the children of Pharos,
Zachary, and with him were nombred an hundred and fyftye men. Of the Children
of the captain, of Moa^ / Elioenai the son of Zerahia, and with him two
hundred men. Of the children of Zechania the son of Iahasiell, and with him
three hundred men. Of the children of Adin, Abed the son of Jonathan, and with
him fyftye men. Of the children of Elam, Isai the Son of Athalia, and with him
seuentye men. Of the Children of Saphatia, Zebadia the son of Michaell, and
with him four score men.

Of the children of Ioab, Obadia the son of Iehiell, and with him two hundred
and him eight and. xx. men. Of the children of Asgad, Iohanan, the Son of
Hakatan, and with him an hundred and ten men. Of the Children of Adonicam, that
were the last / whose names were these: Eliphelet, Iehiell, and Samaiah, and
with them three score men Of the children of Biguai, Uthai / and Zabud, and with
them seuentye men. And I gathered them together by the water that renneth
toward Aha^a, and there abode we three days. And I looked among the people and
the Priests and found there none of the children of Leui.

Then sent I to Elieser, to Ariel, Semeia,

And of the Nethinims / whom David and his dominyon) his violence and wrath is
against all them that forsake him. So we fasted, and besought our god for this,
and he herd us.

And I took out twelve of the cheyfe priests,

Then took the priests and Levites that

According to the nombre and weight of

Esdra^ complayneth on the people that had ^^rned them selves from god, and
married with the gentyles.

CAPI. IX.
WHen these things were done, the rulers D^^^. (...) Iosu^. 13* Iud^. (...).
(...)
For they have taken the daughters of the same to them selves, and to their
sons, and the holy seed is myxt with the nacyons in the lands: and the
hand of the princes and rulers has been pryncypall in this trespass. ^ E^^^.
8. c
And when I herd this saying / I rent my clothes and my raiment / and piuckte
of the here of my head, and of my beerde, and sat mournyng. And there
resorted unto me all soch as feared the words of the the lord God of Israel,
because of the transgressyon of the people of the captivity.

And I sat mourning until the evening

My god, I am ashamed, and dare not lyf^ up mine eyes unto the my god: for our
wyekednesses are grown over our head, and our trespass is waxen great unto
the heaven. Since the time of our fathers have we ben in great trespass unto
this day / (...). (...). b ^ (...). 33. b ^ (...). (...) b
and because of our wyckednesses have we and our kings ben delivered in to
the hand of the kings of the nacyons, into the sword, in to captiuyte, into
shame, and into confusyon of face / as it is to se this day. And now is there a
little and sudden gracyousnesse come from the Lord our God, in causynge some
of us to escape / and that he may give us a nail

(...). (...). ^
Therefore shall ye not give your daughters unto their sons, and their
daughters as it is come to pass this day. And if we turn back again to let
go thy commandments, and make contracte with the people of these
abhominacyons, will thou not then be wroth at us, (and not without cause) till
we be utterly consumed, so that nothing remain, and till there be no
delyueraunce? O Lord god of Israel, thou art ryghteous, for we remain yet
escaped, as it is to se this day. Behold also, in thy presence are we in our
trespasses / and because of it may we not stand before the.

The people repent, and turn^: and put away their strange wives.

CAPI. X.
ANd when 3. Esdr. 8. ^
Esdras prayed after this

^. E^^^. (...). ^
Then rose Esdras, and took an oath of the cheyfe Priests and Levites, and of
all rain. And Esdras the Priest stood up, and said unto them. Deuteronomy. vii. a
Iudi. iii. a
Ye have transgressed, and have taken strange wives, to make the trespass of
Israel yet more: confess now therefore unto the Lord god of your fathers,
and do his pleasure, and separate your selves from the people of the land, and
from the strange wives. And all the congregacyon answered / and said with a
loud voice: It shall be so / and we will do as thou have said. But the people
are many, and it is a raynye wether, and the people are to faint to tarry
without in the street, neither is this a work of one day or two / for we
have offended very sore in this thing. Let our rulers stand therefore in all
the co^gregacyon, and let al them which have taken strange wives in our
Cities come at the time appointed, and let the Elders of every city and their
Judges be with them, till they have turned the wrath of our god away from us
concerning this matter.

Then were appointed Jonathan the son

And of Israel. Among the children of

Among the children of Bebai / Iehohanan Hanania / Zabai and Athalai. Among
the children of Beni / Mesulam, Maluc, Adaiah, Iasub / Saall and Ierimoth.
Among the children of the captain Moab, Adna, Cholal Benaia, Masia, Mathania
/ Bezelell, Benui and Manasse. Among the Children of Harim, Eliezer / Iesia /
Malchia / Semeia, and Simeon: Ben Iamin / Malluch and Samaria. Among the
children of Hasum, Mathanai / Mathathah / Zabad, Eliphelet, Ieremi, Manasse and
Simei. Among the children of Bani, Madai, Amram, Huel, Bane^ Cheluhi, Badaiah,
Uaniah, Maremoth, and Eliasib / Mathania, Mathanai, Iaesai, Bani, Beni, and
Semeiah, Selemia. Nathan / and Adaia, Machnadba^, Sa^ai, and sarai, Asarell,
Selemiahu, and Samariah, Sallum / Amaria, and Joseph, Among the children of
Nebo, Ieh^ell, Mathathia, Zabad / Zabina, Iadai, Ioell, and Banaia. All these
had taken strange wives. And among the same, there were some, that had
children by the wives.

The end of the first book of Esdras.
The second book of Esdras, otherwise called the Book of Nehemia.
Nehemia, butle^ to king Iethax^^s^^, pr^^eth to God for the people.

CAPI. Primo.
THe words of Nehemia / 4. Reg. (...). ^
The wall of Jerusalem also is broken down / and the gates thereof are butnte
with fire.

It fortuned / that when I herd these words / tayne days, and fasted / and
prayed before the god of heaven / and said. O Lord god of heaven / thou great
and terryble God / E^o^^. x^. a (...) xxiiii. a (...) vii. b
thou that kepest covenant and mercy for them that loves the, and observe
thy commandments: let thine ears harken / I beseech the / and let thine eyes
be open / that thou may hear the prayer of thy servant, which I pray
now before the / day and night / for the children of Israel thy servants /
and knowledge the sins of the children of Israel / which we have sinned
against the.

I and my fathers house have sinned. We E^^^^. (...) ^
I will scatter you abroad among the nations. But if ye turn unto me / and
keep my commandments and do them: though ye were cast out unto the vt
^ermoost part of heaven / yet will I gather you from thence / and will bring
you unto the place / that I have chosen to set my name there. They are thy
servants / and thy people / whom thou ^ast delivered through thy great
power, and in thy mighty hand. O lord / I beseech the / let thine ear
harken to the prayer of thy servant / and to the prayer of thy servants /
whose desire is to fear thy name / and let thy servant prospere this day and
grant him mercy in the sight of this man: for I was the kings butlar.

After N^hemia had obtained letters of Arthaxerses, he comes to Jerusalem, and
^^yldeth the walle^.

CAPI. II.
IT fortuned, that in the month ^ (...). ^
Nisan

And the king said unto me (the queen

And I came to Jerusalem, and was there

And the rulers knew not whyther I went

But when Sanabalat the Horonyte, and Tobia the servant (an Ammonite,) and
Gesem the Arabian herd it, they laughed us to scorn, and mocked us, and
said: What is this that ye do? will ye fall away from the king? Then
answered I them, and said: the God of heaven, he it is that has granted us
prosperity: and we be his servants. Let us get up and build. As for you / ye
have no porcyon nor right / nor remembrance in Jerusalem.

The nombre of them that builded the walls.

CAPI. III.
ANd Eliasib the high Priest gat him Iere. xxxi. g zatha. 14. c.
tower of Hananeell. Next unto him also builded the men of Ierico. And beside
him builded Sachur the son of Amri. But the fysshe port did the Children of
Senaa build, which also laid the beams thereof, and set on the doors, locks
and bars of it. And next unto him builded Meremoth the son of Uria / the
son of Hakoz: and next unto them builded Mesulam the Son of Berechia the
son of Mesesabeell: and next unto him builded Zadoc the son of Baana. And
next unto him builded they of Thekoa

But the great men that were among them,

Next unto them builded Raphaiah the

The valley gate builded Hanun, and the citezyns of Zanoa. They builded it, and
set on the doors, locks and bars thereof, and a. M. cubytes on the wall, unto
the Dongeporte.

But the Dongeporte builded Melchiah

After him builded their brethren, Beua^

After him builded Pala the son of Usai over against the corner and the high
tower / which lies out over from the kings house, that was beside the court
of the prison. After him Phedaia the son of Pharhos (as for the Nethinims
they dwelte in the strong hold unto the watergate, toward the cast / and to
the tower that lies out.) After him builded they of Thekua the other piece over
against the great tower, that lies outward, unto the wall of the strong hold.

But from above the Horsgate forth, builded the priests, every one over
against his the keeper of the East gate. After him builded Hanania the son of
Selemia, and Hanun the son of Zalaph the syxte, the other piece. And after him
builded Mesulam the son of Bara^hia over against his store house. After him
bulded Malchia the gold smythes son, until the house of the Nithinims, and
of the merchauntes over against the gate of Mephkad, and to the parlour in the
coruer. And between the parloure of the corner unto the sheep gate builded the
gold smythes and the merchauntes.

The building of Jerusalem is hyndered and let: but the Iues build it, being
ready harnessed, lest their enemies should invade them.

CAPI. IIII.
BUt when Sanabalat herd that we builded

And it fortuned, that when Sanabalat, and

Therefore set I the people after their kynreddes with their swerdes, speres and
bows beneth in the low places behind the wall, and I looked, and gat me up,
and said unto the cheyfe men, to the rulers, and to the other people: be not ye
afraid of them, 2. Esdra. ^. ^ and. ix. f.
but think rather upon the great Lord which ought to be feared, and fight
for your brethren, your sons, your daughters, your wives, and your houses.
Nevertheless it chanced, that when our enemies herd, that we had gotten word
of it: God brought their counsel to naught, and we turned all again to the
wall, every one unto his labor. And from that time forth it came to pass, that
the half part of the young me^ did the labor, and the other half part of
them held the speres, sheldes, bows, and breast plates: and the rulers stood
behind all the house of Judah, which builded on the wall, and bare burdens,
from those that laded them. With one hand did every one work, and with the
other held he his weapon.

And every one that builded, had his swerd Exodi. ^4. ^
and our God shall fight for us, and we will be labouryng in the work. And the
half part of them held the speres from the morning spring, till the
sterres came forth. And at the same time said I unto the people: every one
abide with his servant at Jerusalem, that in the night season we may watch,
and labor on the day time. As for me and my brethren, my servants, and the
men of the watch (which were behind me) we put never of our clothes, no
more then the other did their harness, save only because of the water.

The people are vexed with hunger. He requires not the living of a captain.

CAPI. V.
ANd there arose a great complaynte of

But some there were that said: let us borow money for the kings tribute and
that upon our lands and vyneyardes. Behold, our bodies as the bodies of our
brethren, and our children as their children: else should we sub due our sons
and daughters unto bondage, and some of our daughters are subdued unto bondage
already, and no strength is there in our hands, and other men have our lands
and vyneyardes.

And when I herd their complaynte, and such words, it displeased me sore,
and I

Then said they: We will restore them

But so did not I, and that because of the 2 Eso^ (...) and* x^^^. ^
Think upon me (my god) unto the best, according to all that I have done for
this people.

The building so ye^ again hyndered, and le^^e.

CAPI. VI.
ANd when Sanabalat, Tobiah and Gesem

Then sent Sanabalat his servant again

And I came unto the house of Semaia

And I said: should any such man as I flee?

Who is that, being as I am, that will go in to the temple, to save his life?
I will not go in. And I perceived, that god had not sent him: yet spoke he
prophecy upon me, nevertheless Tobiah and Sanabalat had hired him for money.
Therefore took he the money that through fear I should so do, and syn: that
they might have an evil report of me to blaspheme me. My God think thou upon
Tobiah, and Sanabalat, according unto these their works, and of the prophet
Noadia, and of the other prophettes, that would have put me in fear. And the
wall was fynysshed

After the wall once builded is the watch appointed. They that returned from
the captiuyte are nombred

CAPI. VII.
Now when the wall was builded, I hanged ^. E^o^. (...). ^.
which came up before out of the captivity: and found written therein. These
are the sons of the land, that went up from the captiuyte of the caryenge
away (whom Nabuchodonozer the king of Babylon had brought away) and came
again to Jerusalem and Judah, every one unto his city. They which came with
Zorebabel are these Iesua, Nehemia, Azariah, Raamia, Nahamani, Mardochee,
Belsam, Mesperath, Beguai, Nahum and Baanah. This is the nombre of the men of
the people of Israel. The children of Pharos were two thousand, an hundred
seuentye and two: The children of Sephatiah, three hundred seuentye and two: the
children of Arah, six hundred fyftie and two: the children of the captain of
Moab, among the children of Iesua and Ioab, two thousand, eight hundred, and
eyghtene.

The children of Elam, a thousand, two

The men of Michmas, an hundred and

The Priests. The children of Iedaiah of the house of Iesua, nine hundred,
seuentye and three: the children of Immer, a thousand and two and fyftye: the
children of Phashur, a thousand, two hundred and seven and fourtye: the
children of Harim, a thousand and seuentene. The Levites. The children of
Iesua of Cadmiel, and of the children of Hoduah, seventy and four. The
syngers. The children of Asaph, an hundred and eight and forty. The porters:
The children of Sallum, the children of Ater, the children of Talmon, the
children of Acub: the children of Hatita: the children of Sobai, all together
an hundred and eight and thyrtye.

The Nethinims. The children of Ziha,

The Children of Salomons servants: the children of Sotai: the children of
Sophereth: the children of Pherida: the children of Iaala: the children of
Darcon: the children of Giddel, the children of Saphatiah: the children of
Hatyll: the children of Pochereth of Zibaini: the children of Amon. Al these
Nethinims, and the children of Salomons servants, were three hundred ixxxxii.

And these went up also to Thel Mela,

Their horses seven hundred and six and

Esdras gathers the people together, and redeth to them the Law. They keep
the feast of Tabernacles, or bothes.

CAPI. VIII.
ANd all i. Esdr. iii. ^ 3. Esdr. li^. ^
the people gathered them Deute (...). ^ 4. To. 23. ^
the book of the law of Moses, which the Lord commanded to Israel. And Esdras
the Priest brought the law before the congregacyon both of men and women, and
all that could understand did harken unto it, upon the first day of the
seventh month, and he red therein in the street that was before the water gate
(from the morning until the noone day) before men and women that did harken
to it: and the ears of all the people were enclyned unto the book of the law.
And Esdras the scribe stood upon an high pulpyt of wood, which they had made
for the preaching, and beside him stood Mathathia Sema, Anania, Uriah, Helkia,
and Maasia on his right hand: and on his left hand stood Pedaia, Misael,
Malchia, Hasum, Hasebadana, Zachary, and Mesulam.

And Esdras opened the book before all

And Iesua, Baam, Serabiah, Iamin, Acub Sebathai, Hodaia, Maasia, Celita,
Azaria, Iozabad, Hanan, Pelaia: and the Levites caused the people to give head
unto the law, and the people stood in their place. And they red in the book of
the law of god distynctly and plainly, so that men understood the thing that
was red. And Nehemiah (which is Hathirsatha) and Esdras the priest and scribe,
and the Levites that caused the people to take heed, said unto all the people:
this day is holy unto the Lord your God: be not ye sorry, and weep not. For all
the people wept, when they herd the words of the law.

And he said unto them: ^. Esdr. ix g
go your way, and eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and send (...) 23. f.
^^^m. 29. b (...) Mata, i. c
which the Lord had commanded by Moses) that the children of Israel should
dwell in bothes in the feast of the seventh month: and that they should cause
it to be declared and proclaimed in all their cities, and thorowout Jerusalem,
saying.

Go forth unto the mount and fetch Olyue

And so the people went forth, and fet them and made them bothes, every one
upon the rofe of his house, and in their courts, and in the courts of the
house of god, and in the street by the water gate, and in the street by port
Ephraim. And all the congregation of them that were come again out of the
captiuyte, made bothes, and sat under the bothes: For since the time of Joshua
the son of Nun unto this day, had not the children of Israel done so, and there
was very great gladness. And every day, from the first day unto the last, red
Esdras in the book of the law of God. And seven days held they the feast,
and on the eight day, the gatheryng together, according unto the manner.

The people repent, and forsake their straung wives. Esdras recyteth the
benefytes of god, and the sins of the people.

CAPI. IX.
IN the four and twentye day of this month i. Esdra. 8 d Eccle. 58. a.
fasting and sack clothes, and earth upon them, and they that were of the
seed of Israel were separated from all the strange children, and stood and
knowledged their sins, and the wickedness of their fathers, and stood up in
their place, and red in the book of the law of the Lord their god four times
on the day, and they knowledged, and worshypped the Lord their god iiii. times
on the day. And the Levites stood on high, namely Iesua, Bani, Cadmiel
Sabaniah, Buni, Sarebiah, Bani, and Chanani, and creyed loud unto the Lord
their God. And the Levites, Iesua and Cadmiel, Bani and Hasabnia, Serebia and
Hodia, Sebania, and Phathahia, said: stand up, and praise the Lord your God
for ever: and let thanks be given unto the name of thy glory, which excels
all thanks gyuynge and praise.

Thou art Lord alone, thou have made Gene. xl. d.
Ur in Chaldea, Genesis 17. ^
and calledst him Abraham, and foundest his heart faithful before the, Gene.
xv. d.
and made a couenaunte with him, to give unto his seed the land of the
Canani-tes, Hethites, Amorites, Pheresites, Iebusytes and Gersites, and have
made good thy words: for thou art ryghteous Exodi. iii. ^
and have considered the mysery of our fathers in Egypt, and herd their
complaynte by the reed see, and showed tokens and wonders upon Pharao, and on
al his servants, and on all the people of his land: for thou knew, that
they were presumptuous and cruel against them, and so made thou the a name,
as it is this day. And the reed see dydest thou deuyde in sundre before them,
so that they went through the mids of the sea dry shod: and their
persecutours threwest thou in to the deep (as a stone) in the mighty waters,
and ledst them on the day time in a cloudy pyller, and on the night season in a
pyller of fire, to show them light in the way that they went. Exodus xix. ^
Thou came down also upon mount Sinay, and spakest unto them from heaven, and
co^maundedst them precepts, ordinances, and laws, by the hand of Moses thy
servant and Exodi. 16, d
gave them bread from heaven when they were hongrye, and Exodus 17. d. Number.
25. b.
broughtest forth water for them out of the rock when they were thyrstye:
and promysedst them, that they should go in, and take possession of the land
over which thou had lift up thine hand for to give them. But they and our
fathers were proud and hard necked, so that they followed not the
commandments, and would not obey, neither were myndfull of the wonders that
thou dyddest for them: but became obstynate and headye, in so much, that they
turned back to their bondage for their disobedience. And thou my god forgauest
/ and wast gracious, merciful, pacient, and of great goodness, and forsokest
them not.

Exodi. 32. a
And though they made a molten calfe (and said: This is thy gods that brought
the out

Exodus xiii. d Number. 14. c. a. Corin. x. a
And the cloudy pyller departed not from them on the day time to lead them
away / neither the pyller of fire in the night season to show them light in
the way that they went And thou gave them thy good spirit / to inform them,
Exodi 16. d
and withheldest not thy Manna from their mouth, Exodi 17. d Nume. xx b
and gave them water when they were thyrstye. Fourtye years long made thou
provision for them in the wylder nesse / so that they lacked nothing, Deute. 8.
b. and.xix. ^
their clothes waxed not old, and their feet swelled not. And thou gave
them kingdoms and nations / and partedst them according to their porcions / so
that they possessed Nume. xxi ^
the land of Sehon, king of Hesbon / and the land of Og the king of Basan.
And their children multipliedst thou as the sterres of heaven / and broughtest
them in to the land / whereof thou had spoken unto their fathers, that they
should go into it / and have it in possessyon.

And the children went in / and possessed the land, Iesua ii. iii and. iiii.
and thou subduedst before them the enhabitours of the land, even the
Cananites / and gave them in to their hand, with their kings / and the
people of the land / that they might do with them what they would.

And they wan their strong cities / and a fat land / and took possessyon of
houses that were full of all manner of goods, wells dygged out, vyneyardes,
oil gardens, and many fruytfull trees: and they did eat, and were filled, and
became fat, and lived in welthe through thy great goodness. Nevertheless they
were disobedient, and rebelled against the, and cast thy law behind their
backs, 3. Reg. 19. ^
and slew thy prophettes (which exhorted them ernestly, that they might bring
them again unto the) and did great blasphemies. Therefore, thou gave them over
in to the hand of their enemies that vexed them. And in the time of their
trouble when they cried unto the, thou herdest them from heaven: and through thy
great mercy thou gave them saviors, which helped them out of the hand of
their enemies. But when they came to rest they turned back again, to do evil
before the: therefore leftest thou them in the hand of their enemies, so that
they had the dominion over them.

And when they converted, and cried unto Leuiti. (...). ^ Ezech. xx. b Roma. x.
^. Galat. iii. ^
(which if a man do he shall live in them,) and turned the shoulder away, and
were styffe necked, and would not hear. And many years dyddest thou forbere
them, and testifiedst unto them through thy spirit, even by the hand of thy
prophettes and yet would they not hear. Therefore gave thou them in to the
hand of the nations in the lands. And for thy great mercyes sake, thou have
not utterly consumed them, neither forsaken them: for thou art a gracious and
merciful God.

ii Esdr. Exodi (...). ^ and.34. ^.
Now therefore our God, thou great god mighty, and terrible, thou that kepest
covenant and mercy, regard not a little all

And great is the increase of it unto the kings, whom thou have set over us,
because of our sins, and they have dominion over our bodies and cattle
(even as they will them selves,) and we are in great trouble. And in all this
make we a sure covenant, and write it, and our princes, Levites and Priests
seal unto it.

The names of them that sealed the couenaunte between god and the peope.

CAPI. X.
THe sealers were: Nehemiah (that is) Hathirsatha

And the other people / the priests / Levites / Res. 24 f ^ard. ^.
And they came to swear / and to bind them selves with an oath to walk in
gods law, which was given by Moses the servant of God / and that they would
observe / and do according unto all the commandments / judgments and
statutes of the lord our god: Deuteronomy. vii. a
And that we would not give our daughters unto the people in the land /
neither to take their daughters for our sons.

Esdr. 13 ^
And if the people of the land brought ware on the Sabbath / and all manner of
vittayles to sell / that we would not take it of them on the Sabbath and on the
holy days. (...) 25. a Deuteronomy. xv. a
And that we would let the seventh year be fre / concerning all manner of charge.

And we decreed a statute upon our selves

And to bring the fyrstlynges of our land

And the priest the son of Aaron shall with the Levites have also of the
tithes of the Levites, so that the Levites shall bring up the tithes of their
tithes unto the house of our God, to the store houses and to the treasure
houses. For the children of Israel and the children of Leui shall bring up the
heueoffrynges of the corn, wine and oil unto the store houses, there as are
the vessels of the sanctuary, and the priests that minystre, and the porters
and syngers, that we forsake not the house of our God.

Who dwelled in Jerusalem after it was builded, and who in the Cities of Judah.

CAPI. XI.
ANd the rulers of the people dwelte at

And at Jerusalem dwelte certain of the children of Judah and of Ben Iamin. Of
the children of Judah: Athaia the son of Usia, the son of Zachary, the son
of Amaria, the son of Sephatia, the son of Mahalaleel, of the children of
Phares. And Maasia the son of Baruch, the son of Chal Hose, the son of
Hasaia, the son of Adaia, the son of Ioiarib, the son of Zachari, the son
of S^^oni. All these were the children of Phares that dwelte at Jerusalem: even
four. C. three score and eight valiant me^. These are the children of
Benjamin: Sallu the son

And after him Gabai, Selai, nine hundred and eight and twentye. And Joel the
son of Zichri had the ouersyght of them: and Judah the son of Senua was next
over the city. ^. Part. x. b
Of the priests: Iedaiah the son of Ioiarib, Iachin. Saraiah the son of
Helkia the son of Mesulam, the son of Zadoc, the son of Meraioth, the
son of Ahi^ob, was prince in the house of God: and his brethren that
performed the work in the temple. viii. C. and.xxii. And Adaia the son of
Ieroham, the son of Plalal^el, the son of Amzi, the son of Zachari, the son
of Phashur the son of Malchia and his brethren cheyf among the fathers: two
hundred and two and fourtye. And Amasai the son of Asarel, the son of
Ahasai, the son of Mos^lemoth, the son of Immer: and his brethren were valiant
men an hundred and eight and twenty. And their ouerseer was Zibdiel a son of
one of the great men.

^^. P^^ x. b
Of the Levites: Semeia the son of Hasub the son of Aserikam, the son of
Hasabia ii. Para. x. ^
And the porters Acub and Talmon, and their brethren that kept the ports,
were an hundred seuentye and two. As for the resydue of Israel, the priests
and Levites, they were in all the cities of Judah, every one in his
enheritaunce. And the Nethinims dwelte in Ophel, and Ziba and Gispa was set
over the Nethinims. The ouerseer of the Levites at Jerusalem, was Ust the son
of Baani, the son of Hasabia, the son of Mathania, the son of Micha.

Of the children of Asaph there were syngers

The children also of Benjamin of Geba dwelte at Machmas, Aia, Bethel and in
their vyllages. And at Anathoth, Nob, Anamah, Hazor, Ramah, Gethaim, Hadid,
zeboim, Nabalath, Lod, and Ono, the carpenters valley And the Levites had
possession both in Judah and in Bentamin.

The priests and levites which came with zorobatell to Jerusalem, are
nombred: and the wall is dedicate.

CAPI. XII.
THese are the priests and Levites that under Maraioth, Helca: under Iddo,
Zachary: under Gentho^, Mesullam: under Abia, Zichri: under Miniamin, and
Moadia, Piltai: under Belga, Samua: under Semeia / Iehonathan: under Ioiarib /
Mathenai: under Iadaia, Usi: under Selai, Kelai: under Amok / Eber: under
Helchia, Hasabia: under Iadaia Nathanaell. And in the time of Eliasib: Ioiada /

And I brought the princes of Judah up upon the wall, and appointed two great
queers of men to give thanks, which went on the right hand of the wall
toward the donggate, and after them went Hosaia, and half of the princes of
Judah / and Asaria / Esdras / and Mesullam, Judah, Benjamin, Semeia and Jeremy:
and certain of the priests children with trompettes, namelye Zachary the
son of Jonathan, the son of Semeia / the son of Mathania, the son of Michaia
/ the son of Zacur, the son of Asaph, and his brethren Semeia, Asaraell /
Melalai / Gilalai / Maai / Nathanael, and Judah / and Hanani with the musical
instruments of David the man of God.

And Esdras the scryhe went before them, and beside the welgate, they went up
over against them upon the steps of the City of David at the going up of
the wall beyond the house of David, unto the watergate east ward. The other
queer of them that gave thanks, went over against them, and I after them, and
the half part of the people upon the wall, beyond the furnace gate, until
the broad wall / and beyond the port of Ephraim, and beyond the Oldgate,
beyond the fyshgate, and the tower of Hananeel, and the tower of Mea, until
the Shepegate.

And they stood still in the prison gate / and so stood the two queers (of them
that gave i. Pa^. ^3. ^
for in the time of David and Asaph, were the cheyfe syngers founded, and the
songs of praise and thanks geuyng unto god. In the time of Zorobabel and
Nehemia, did all they of Israel, give porcyons unto the syngers, and porters,
every day his porcyon, and they gave tithes unto the Levites: and the Levites
gave tithes again, unto the children of Aaron.

The law is red, and when they have herd ii, they separate from them all
strangers.

CAPI. XIII.
ANd that day did they read in the book Deuteronomy. 24. ^
that the Ammonytes and Moabites should never come in to the congregacyon of
God / because they met not the children of Israel with bread and water, Number.
23. ^*
but hired Balaam against them, that he should curse them: and our God turned
the curse in to a blessing. Now when they herd the law, it fortuned, that
they separated from Israel, every one that had myxte him self therein. And
before this, had the priest Eliasib the ouersyght of the treasury of the house
of our god, and he was kynsman unto Tobia: and had made him a great chamber,
and there had they before time laid the offerynges, frankensence, vessel /
and the tithes of corn, and wine and oil (according to the commandment
given to the Levites, syngers and porters) and the heue offerynges of the
priests. But in all this time was not I at Jerusalem: for in the xxxii. year of
Arthaxerses king of Babylon, came I unto the king, and after certain days
opteyned I license of the king to come to Jerusalem.

And I gatte knowledge of the evil that Eliasib did unto Tobia, in that he had
made

And I made treasurers over the treasure / even Selemiah the priest, and Zadoc
the scrybe / and of the Levites, Phadaia, and under their hand was Hanan the
son of Zacur the son of Mathanta: for they were counted faithful, and their
office was to dystrybute the porcyons unto their brethren. ^. Es^ra. v. ^.
Think upon me O my god herein, and wype not out my mercy that I have showed
on the house of my god, and on the offices thereof. At the same time saw I some
treading wine presses on the Sabbath, and bryngyng in sheaues, and asses laden
with wine, grapes, fygges and bringing al manner of burdens unto Jerusalem,
upon the Sabbath day.

And I rebuked them earnestly the same day that they sold the vyttayles.
There

And at the same time saw I Iues / that married wives of Asdod, of Ammon and of

AMEN.
The end of the second book of Esdras / otherwise called the book of Nehemia.
The book of Esther
King Abasu^rns makes a royal feasts, whereunto the queen Uasthi will not
come, for which cause ^he (...) deuorsed.

CAPI. Primo.
IT fortuned in the days of

And when these days were expyred / the

But the queen Uasthi would not come at cheyfe and) next unto him were /
Carsena / Sethar / Admata, That sis / Mares / Marsena, and Mamucan, the. vit
princes of Persia, and Media, which saw the kings face, and sat above in the
kingdom. What law (says the king) should be executed upon the queen Uasthi /
because she did not according to the word of the king Ahasuerus, which he
commanded by his chamber laynes? And Memucan answered before the king and the
princes: the queen Uasthi has not only done evil against the king / but also
against all the princes and against all the people that are in all the lands of
king Ahasuerus: for this deed of the queen shall come

This pleased the king and the princes: and the king did according to the
word of Memucan. For he sent letters forth in to all the kings lands, into
every land, according to the writing thereof, and to every people after their
language, that every man should be lord in his own house. And this caused he
to be spoken after the language of his people.

After the Queen is put away, certain goodly pon^^ dau^* sel^ are searched
out. Edissa (otherwise called s^^^er) pleases the king, and is made queen.
Metdocheus opens unto the king / those that would betray him.

CAPI. II.
AFter these acts, when the dyspleasure appointed certain men in all the
lands of his Empire / whom he charged that they should bring together all
the fair young virgyns unto Susan the head City, to the women's buyldyng,
under the hand of Hagei the kings chamberlayne, that kept the women, to give
them their apparel ( and other things necessary to be had.) And that the
damsel which pleased the king should be queen in Uasthis stead. And this
pleased the king, and he did so.

In the city of Susan there was a Iue, whose name was Mardocheus, the son of
Iaer, the son of Semei the son Cis, a man of Iemini, which was carried away from
Jerusalem, i. Reg. 24. c Iere. 24. ^.
when Iekonia the king of Judah was led away, (whom Nabuchodonozer the king of
Babylon carried thence) and he norysshed Hadassa (that is Esther) his uncles
daughter: for she had neither father nor mother, and she was a fair and
beutyful damsel: whom Matdocheus (when her father and mother was dead)
received for his own daughter.

So it fortuned that when the kings commandment so that it were comely)
that must be given her to go with her out of the women's building unto the
kings palace.

In the euenyng she went, and on the morrow

Now when the time came of Esther the daughter of Abihan the uncle of
Mardocheus (which had received her as his own daughter) that she should come
into the king, she desired nothing, but what Hagei the kings chamberlayne the
keeper of the women said. And Esther found favor in the sight of all them
that looked upon her. And Esther was taken unto king Ahasuerus into his house
royal / in the tenth month which is the month December*
Tebeth, in the seventh year of his reygne. And the king loved Esther above all
the women, and she found grace and favor in his sight before all the virgins:
so that he set the crown of the kingdom upon her head, and made her queen in
stead of Uasthi.

And the king made a great feast unto Esther ^
and told it unto queen Esther, and Esther certifyed the king thereof in
Mardocheus name. And when inquisicion was made, it was found so. And they were
both hanged on tree: and it was written in the Cronicles before the king.

Haman the Maridonian, after he was eralted, obtained of the king that all the
Iues should be put to death, because Mardocheus had not done him worship, as
other had.

CAPI. III.
AFter these acts did the king Ahasuerus him not. Then the kings servants
which were in the kings gate, said unto Mardocheus: why transgressest thou
the kings commandment? And when they spoke thus daily unto him, he followed
them not, and they told Haman, that they might se how Mardocheus matters would
endure: for he had told them, that he was a Iue.

And when Haman saw that Mardocheus

And Haman said unto king Ahasuerus:

Then were the kings scrybes called on ^e^^he.
Nisan) and there was written (according as Haman commanded) unto all the
kings officers and to the captains that were in all the lands, and to the
rulers of every people in the countries on every side, according to the
writing of every nacyon, and after their language, in the name of king
Ahasuerus was it written, and sealed with the kings ring. And the wrytynges
were sent by nostes in to all the kings lands, to rote out, ^^kyl and to
destroy all Iues, both young and (...), children and women in one day (namely
^^o^ the thyrtenth day of the twelueth month / which is the month (...)uary.
Adar) and to spoil their goods. This was the sum of the writing / that
there should be a commandment given in all lands, and publyshed unto all
people, that they should be ready against the same day. And the posts went in
all the have, according to the kings commandment. And in Susan the cheyfe
city was the commandment devised. And the king and Haman sat and drank:
when in the mean time the city of Susan was disquieted.

Mardocheus gives the queen knowledge of the cruel decre^ of the king
against the Iues.

CAPI. IIII.
WHen Mardocheus perceived all that

But Mardocheus would not take them.

And when Hathath came in, he told Esther unto him ( in token of graciousnes)
for then he shall live. As for me, I have not ben called to come into the king
now this thyrtye days. And they certifyed Mardocheus of Esthers words, and
Mardocheus bad say again unto Esther, think not to save thine

And who knows whyther thou art come to the kingdom, for this causes sake?
Esther bad them give Mardocheus this answer: Go thou thy way, and gyther
together all the Iues that are found at Susan, and fast ye for me, that ye
eat not and drink not in three days, neither day nor night. I and my damsels
will fast likewise, and so will I go in to the king, which thing yet, is
contrary to the commandment: and if I peryshe / I peryshe. So Mardocheus
went his way / and did all that Esther had commanded him.

Esther enters in to the king, and byddeth him and Haman to the feast. Haman
prepares a galous for Mardocheus.

CAPI. V.
ANd on the third day it fortuned, that

Then said the king unto her: What

Then answered Esther, and said: my peticyon

And when the same Haman saw Mardocheus in the kings gate, that he stood not
up and kneled before him, he was full of in dygnacyon at Mardocheus.
Nevertheless / Haman refrayned him self: and when he came home, he sent, and
called for his friends / and Zares his wife: and Haman told them of the glory
of his riches, and the multitude of his Children, and all together how the
king had promoted him so greatly, and how that he had set him above the
Princes and servants of the king.

Haman said moreover: Yea and Esther

The king turns over the Cronicles, and fyndeth the fidelite of Mardocheus:
and then to the confusion of Haman, commands Mardocheus to be had in honor.

CAPI. VI.
THe same night could not the King (...). ^.
Mardocheus had told that Bigthana, and There Is the kings two chamberlaynes
(which kept the thressholdes) sought, to lay hands on king Ahasuerus. And
the king said: what worship and good have we done to Mardocheus therefore?
Then said the kings servants that minystred unto him: There is nothing at
all done for him. And the king said: Who is in the court? (For Haman was gone
in to the court without before the kings house, that he might speak unto the
king to hang Mardocheus on the tree, that he had prepared for him.)

And the kings servants said unto court. And the king said: let him come
in. And when Haman came in, the king said unto him: what shall be done unto
the man / whom the king would feign bring unto worship? Haman thought in his
heart: whom desires the king to bring unto worship, more then me? And Haman
answered the king. Let the man whom the king pleases to bring unto
worship, be brought hither, that he may be arrayed with the royal garments
which the king uses to wear: and the horse that the king rydeth upon, and
that the crown royal may be set upon his head. And let this raiment and
horse be delivered

And Mardocheus came again to the kings

The queen bydde^^ the king and Haman again: and prays for her self, and
for her people. She accuses Haman, and he is hanged on the galous, which he
had prepared for Mardocheus.

CAPI. VII.
ANd the king and Haman came in to

And would God we were sold to be bondmen

And the king arose from the banquet and

Then said the king: will he force the

After the death of Haman is Mardocheus exalted, and then is there comfortable
words sent unto the Iues.

CAPI. VIII.
THe same day did King Ahasuerus

And the king ( according to the manner,) ( vvherby was declared a token of
graciousnesse.) Then rose Esther, and stood before the king, and said: if it
please the king, and if I have found grace in his sight, and if it be
acceptable before the king, then let it be written, that the letters of the
deuyce of Haman the Son of Hamadatha the Agagite, may be called again:
which letters he wrote, to destroy the Iues, which are in all the kings
lands. For how can I suffer and se the evil, that shall happen unto my
people? Or how can I look upon the destruccyon of my kynred?

And the king Ahasuerus said unto queen Ma^e.
Siuan, on the three and twentyeth day. And it was written (according to all
as Mardocheus commanded) unto the Iues, and to the princes, to the Debityes
and captains in the lands which are from India until Ethiopia, namely an
hundred and seven and twentye lands / unto every one according to the
writing thereof, and unto every people after their speech, and to the Iues
according to their writing and language. And he wrote in the king Ahasuerus
name, and sealed it with the kings ring. And by posts that roode upon
horses, and swyfte young Mules, sent he the wrytynges, wherein the king
granted the Iues (in what cities soever they were) to gather them selves
together, and to stand for their life, and for to rote out, to sley, and to
destroy all the power of the people, and land that would trouble them, with
children and women, and to spoil their good upon one day in all the lands of
king Ahasuerus, namely upon the thyrtenth day of the twelueth month, which
is the month February.
Adar.

The su^me of the writing was, how there from the palace, and) from the king in
royal apparel of yelowe and white, and with a great crown of gold, being
arrayed with a garment of sylke and purple, and the city of Susan reioysed, and
was glad: and unto the Iues there was come ( a new) light and gladness,
joy and worship. In all lands and cities, in to what places soever the kings
word and commandment reached, there was joy and mirth, prosperyte and good
days among the Iues: in so much, that many of the people in the land became
of the Iues bylefe / and the fear of the Iues came upon them.

At the commandment of the king the Iues put their adversaries to death. The
sons of Haman are hanged. The Iues keep a feast day in the remembrance of
their delyueraunce.

CAPI. IX.
IN the twelueth month, that is the month

Thus the Iues smote all their enemies

And the king said unto queen Esther: The Iues have sleyne and destroyed five
hundredth men in the city of Susan, and the ten sons, of Haman: What have
they done thynkest thou in the other lands of the king?

And what is thy peticion, that it may be

This they did on the thyrtenth day of the

And Mardocheus wrote these acts, and sent the wrytynges unto all the Iues
that were in all the lands of king Ahasuerus, both nygh and far that they
should make a law among themselves and hold the fourtenth or fyftenth day of
the month Adar, as the days wherein the Iues came to rest from their enemies,
and as a month wherein their pain was turned to joy, and their sorrow into a
holy day, and that in those days they should make feasts and gladness, and
one to send gifts unto an other, and to distribute unto the poor.

And the Iues were content with it that

And the Iues set it up, and took it upon

And they bound their soul and their seed

The end of the book of Esther.
The book of Job.
Job by plaged of god by the loss of his goods, and Children.

CAPI. Primo.
IN the land of Gene. 22. d.
Hus there Job. xiii. d
His substance also was seven. M. sheep, and three. M. camelles, five. C. yocke
of oxen, and five. C. she asses, and a very great household: so that he was
one of the most principal men among al them of the East country. And his
sons went, and made bankettes: one day in one house, an other day in an
other, and sent for their three systers, to eat and drink with them.

And it fortuned, that when they had passed over the time of their bankettynge
round about, Job sent for them, and sanctified them, and gat up early, and
offered for every one a burntofferyng. For Job said: lest peradventure my
sons have done some offense and have been unthankful to god in their
hertes. Thus did Job every day. And upon a day Job. ii. ^.
when the children of God came and stood before the Lord, it fortuned that
Satan come also among them.

And the Lord said unto Satan. From ^. P^^. v. ^
I have gone about the land, and walked through it. And the Lord said unto
Satan: have thou not considered my servant Job, how that there is none like
him in the land? a perfyte and a just man, such a one as fears God, and
exchueth evil. Satan answered, and said unto the Lord: Does Job fear God
for naught? have thou not preserved him, and his house, and all that he has on
every side? Thou have blessed the works of his hands, and his possessyon is
increased in the land. But lay thine hand now upon him ( a little) and
touch all that he has, and he shall curse the to thy face. And the Lord said
unto Satan: Lo, all that he has, be in thy power: only upon him self se that
thou lay not thine hand. And Satan went forth from the presence of the Lord.

And upon a certain day it fortuned, that

The fire of god is fallen from heaven, and has brent up all thy sheep and
servants, and consumed them: and I only ran my way, to tell the. And while
he was yet speaking there came an other, and said.

The Caldees made three armies, and fell Ecclesi. ^. ^ i. ^i^. vi. ^
Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I turn thither again.

The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, ( even as it has pleased the
lord, so is it come to pass) Blessed be the name of the lord. Job. ii. ^
In all these things did Job not offend, nor murmured folysshly against god.

Job is plaged with sore byles, and afterward is mocked of his wife. His
friends vispt him, and have co^mpassyon on him.

CAPI. II.
ANd the children of God came and stood

And thou mouedst me against him, that

So went Satan forth from the presence of the Lord, and smote Job with
merueylous sore byles, from the sole of his foot unto his crown: so that he
sat upon the ground in the ashes, and scraped of the fylthe of his sores with
a pot sharde. Then said his wife unto him: (...). ii. d (...). ^iii. d
Do thou continue yet in thy perfytenesse? curse God and dye. But Job said
unto her: Thou speak like a folysshe woman. Shall we receive prosperity at
the hand of God, and not receive aduersyte?

Job, i, d
In all these things did not Job sin with his lyppes. Now when Jobs friends

Then they cried, and wept: and every one of them rent his clothes, and
sprynkeled dust upon their heads in the air. They sat them down by him also
upon the ground seven days and vii. nyghtes. Neither was there any of them
that spoke one word unto him: for they saw, that his pain was very great.

The words of Job, wherein he declares that this present life is miserable,
and that the death of the ryghteous is joyous and ^or^unable.

CAPI. III.
AFter this opened Job his mouth, and

Alas, (...). xx. d
why dyed I not in the birth? why did not I perysshe, as soon as I came out

Wherefore is the light given to him that

Job ^o reprehended of impatience, and in justice, and (...) the presumptyon of
his own righteousness.

CAPI. IIII.
ANd Eliphas the Themanite answered

Behold, thou have been a chastenet of many and have conforted the weary
hands. Thy words have set up those that were fallen, thou have refresshed the
weyke knees.

But now that the plage is come upon the, thou art grieved: now that it has
touched thy self, thou art faint herted. ^ob^. ii. d Job. ii. c
Is not this thy fear, thy steadfastness, thy patience, Galat. vi. d
sow wretchedness reap the same. With the blaste of God they perysshe, and
with the breath of his nose thyrles are they consumed away.

The rorynge of the Lion, and the voice of the Lion, and the teeth of the Lions
whelps are pulled out. The lion peryssheth for lack of pray, and the lions
whelps are scattered abroad.

And unto me came the word secretly, and

The wind passed by, before my presence, and made the heeres of my flesh to
stand up.

He stood there, and I knew not his face, an image there was before mine eyes,
and in the stylnes herd I a voice. Job. xxv. a. Psalm. 143. a Roma. iii. ^
Shall man be more just then God? Or shall a man be purer then his maker?
Behold, he found no truth in his servants, and i^. P^^. ii. b.
in his angels there was folly.

How much more in them that dwell in

The ^ude of a fool. The ryghteousnes of god. The Lord chasteneth his, and
delivers them again.

CAPI. V.
Cry (I pray the) if happly there be any Psalm. 37. ^.
I have seen my self, when the folyshe was deep roted, and suddenly I cursed
his habitacion. His children were without prosperity, and they were sleyne in the
gate, and there was no man to deliver them: Deuteronomy. ^8 ^.
His harvest was eaten up of the hungry: and the weaponed man spoiled it, and
the thurstye drank up their labor. It is not the earth that brings forth
iniquite, neither comes sorrow out of the ground: but man is borne unto
labor, like as the sparks fly up out of the hot coals.

But I will ask counsel at the Lord, and Deuteronomy. 28. b.
He gives rain upon the earth / and pours water upon the streets, to
Ecclesi. ^ b
set up them that be of low degree, and that those which are in heaviness may come
to prosperity. He destroys the deuyses of the subtyle / so that their hands
are not able to perform any steadfast thing. ^. R^gu^. ii. c
He compasses the wise in their own craftynesse, and overthrows the counsel
of the wicked. In so much that they run in Deuteronomy 28 d
to darkness by fair day, and ^. Corin. 3. ^.
grope about them at the noone day, like as in the night.

He shall deliver the poor from the sword Heb (...). (...) Apo^a. iii. d
Prove* iii b
happy is the man, whom god punyssheth: therefore, refuse not thou the
chastenyng of the almyghtye. For O see. vi. ^
though he make a wound, he gives a plaster: though he smite, his hand
makes hole again. He shall deliver the in six troubles, and in the seventh
there shall none evil come to the. In hunger he shall save the from death: and
when it is war, from the power of the sword.

Thou shalt be kept from the evil tougue Psalm. 91. ^.
shalt not be afraid of beasts of the earth: For the stones of the land
shall be confederate with the, and the beasts of the field shall give the
peace. And thou shalt know, that thy dwelling place shall be in rest: and
thou shalt go and behold thy habitacion, and shalt not sin. Thou shall se
also, that thy sede shall encreace, and that thy posterite shall be as the
grass upon the earth. Thou shalt come also to thy grave in a fair age, like
as when they take up a corn sheafe in due season. Lo, this we our selves have
proved by experience, and even thus it is. Harken thou to it also, that thou
may take heed to thy self.

Job answers that his pain is more grievous, then his fault: yet
notwithstanding he delyteth therein.

CAPI. VI.
Job answered also, and said, O that

Amos. iii. ^
Does the wild Ass rore when he has grass? or cries the ox, when he has
fodder enough? That which is unsavory, shall it be eaten without salt, or is
there any taste in the white of an egg? The things that sometime I might not
away withal, are now my meat for very sorrow.

O that I might have my desire: and that

Then should I have some comfort: yea I would desire him in my pain, that he
should not spare, for I will not be against the words of the holy one. For what
power have I to endure? And what is mine end, that my soul might be pacient?

Is my strength the strength of stones?

Even so are ye also come unto me: but now that ye se my miserye, ye are
afraid. Did I desire you, to bring unto me, or to give me any of your
substance? To deliver me from the enemies hand, or to save me from the hand
of tyrauntes? Teach me, and I will hold my tongue: And when I do arre, show
me wherein. How steadfast are the words of truth? And which of you can rebuke
and reprove them? Do ye take deliberacyon to check men's sayenges, and judge
a poor word spoken in vain? Ye fall upon the fatherless and go about to
overthrow your own friend. And therefore be content, and look now upon me,
and I will not lie before your face. Turn (I pray you) be indifferent Judges
turn again, and ye shall se mine vngyltynesse: whyther there be any
unrighteousness in my tongue, or vain words in my mouth.

Job shows that this life is but a battle, or warfare.

CAPI. VII.
Has man any certain time upon ^sal. 39. ^
Are not his days also like the days of an hired servant? For like as a
bond servant desires the shadow, and as an hyrelyng would feign have an
end of his work. Even so have I labored hole months long (but in vain,)
and many a careful night have I told. ^^u^e. 2^ ^
when I lay me down to sleep, I say: O when shall I arise? Again. I longed
sore for the night. And in the mean time am I full of sorrows until the
twylyght. My flesh is clothed with Job. (...). ^ and. xiiii. ^
my days pass over more spedely, then a weyuer can weyue out his webb^: and
are gone or I am aware. O remember, that my life is but a wynd, and that mine
eye shall no more se the pleasures thereof, yea and that none other man's eye
shall se me any more. For if thou fasten thine eyes upon me, I come to naught.
The cloud is consumed and vanysshed away, even so he that goes down to the
grave shall come no more up, nor turn again in to his house neither shall his
place know him any more.

Therefore I will not spare my mouth, but Danie ^. ^
The^ troublest thou me with dreams, and make me so afraid through visions,
that my soul wysheth rather to perysshe and dye, then my bones to remain. I
can se no remedy, I shall live no more: O spare me then, for my days are but
vain.

What is man, that thou have him in such ^^^ie* ^^^i. ^ Deut^. ^. ^.
try him. Why go thou not fro me, nor let me alone, so long till I may
swalowe down my spetle? I have offended, and what shall I do unto the, O thou
preserver of men? Why haste thou made me to stand in thy way, and am so heavy a
burden unto my self? Why do thou not forgive me my sin? Wherefore take
thou not away my wickedness. Behold, now must I sleep in the dust: and if
thou seek me to morrow in the morning, I shall be gone.

Job is reprehended and noted to have ^e^^^ned his pain. A descryptyon of
ypocrisye.

CAPI. VIII.
THen answered Baldad the Suhite, and unto the immediately, and give the, the
beau tie of righteousness again? In so much, that wherein soever thou had
little before, thou should now have great abundance.

Inquire (I pray the) of them that have been Dente. 32. ^
and search diligently among their fathers. For we are but of yesterdaye, and
consydre not, that Job. (...) Psalm. 39. b.
our days upon earth are but a very shadow. Shall not they show the and tell
the, yea and gladly confess the same?

May a rysshe be grene without moystnes? Or may the grass grow without
water? No, but (or ever it be shot forth, and or ever it be gathered) it
withers, before any other herb Even so gothe it with all them, that forget
God: and even thus also shall the ypocrites hope come to naught. His confidence
shall be destroyed, and his trust shall be a spiders web.

He shall lean upon his house, but it shall

Job declares the benefyte^ of God, and that man's righteousness is nothing.

CAPI. IX.
Job answered, and said: I know it is so Psalm. 114. ^ Job. ii^i. ^ ix. ^.
^xxv. a Roma. iii. ^
be justified? If he will argue with him, he shall not be able to answer him
unto one among a thousand. Concerning such as be wise of heart, or mighty
instrength, who ever prospered, that took part against him? He translateth the
mountains, or ever they be aware. It is he that overthrows them in his
wrath. He remoueth the earth out of her place, that the pyllers thereof shake
withal. He commands the son, and it ryseth not: he closes up the
sterres, as it were under a sygnet. He him self alone spreads out the
heuens, and goes upon the waves of the sea. He makes the waynes of heaven, the
Orion, Amos. v, b.
the seven sterres, and the secret places of the south. He both great things,
such as are unsearchable yea and wonders without nombre.

Lo, when he gothe over by me, I shall not Eccle^^. ^. ^
what do thou? I^^^^. ^. ^.
He is god whose wrath no man may withstand: but the proudest of all must
stoop under him. How should I then answer him? or what words should I find
out against him? Yea though I were righteous, yet might I not give him one
word again, but mekely submyt my self to him as my judge. If I had called upon
him, and he had answered me, yet would I not believe, that he herd my voice: he
trou bleth me so with the tempest, and wounds

One thing it is and therefore I said. He destroys both the ryghteous and
ungodly. And though he sley suddenly with the scourge. yet will he laugh at the
punysshment of the innocent. As for the world, it is given over in to the
hand of the wicked, and he shall cover the faces of the judges thereof. Is it
not so? Where is there any but he is such one.

Job. (...)
My days are more swyfte then a runner they are gone and have seen no good
thing.

Job i^ weary of his life, and sets out his frag^lyte before god. He desy^eth
the time to repent. A dis^typryon of death.

CAPI. X.
IT greueth my soul to live. I will make (...). 32. ^
there is no man able to deliver me out of thine hand. (...). ^. ^.
Thy hands have made me, and fassyoned me altogyther round about, wylt thou
then destroy me suddenly?

O remember (I beseke the) how that thou

Thou huntest me out (being in heaviness) (...)
Whefore have thou brought me out of my mothers womb? O that I had perysshed,
and that no eye had seen me. If they had carried me to my grave as soon as I was
borne, then should I be now, as though I had never been. Are not my days few?
Let him then leave of fro me and let me alone, that I may ease my self a
little before I go thither, from whence I shall not turn again: even to the
land of darkness and shadow of death: yea in to that dark cloudy land
and deadly shadow, where as is no order, but terrible fear, as in the
darkness.

Job is vn^ustly reprehended of Sophar. God is incomprehensyble: He is
merciful to the rep^^tou^^.

CAPI. XI.
THen answered Sophar the Naamathite

Art thou able to find out the secrets of Or who may say unto him, why
do thou so?) i. (...) (...) Ier^. (...). ^. Psalm. vii. ^. Roma. ^. ^
For it is he that knows the vanite of men, he sees their wyckednes also
should he not then consydre it? A vain body exalts him self, and man new
borne is like a wild asses colte. If thou had dest now a right heart, and
lyftedst up thine hands toward him: if thou would put away the wickedness
which thou have in hand, so that no un godliness dwell in thy house.

Then myghtest thou lift up thy face

Job in showing his perpe^ce, declares the might and power of god.

CAPI. XII.
SO Job answered and said. Then (no doubt) as well as ye, and am no less then
ye. Yea who knows not these things? Thus he that calls upon God, and whom
god hereth, is mocked of his neighbor: The godly and innocente man is laughed
to scorn.

Godliness is a light despised in the hertes of the rich, and is set for them
to stomble upon. The houses of robbers are in welthe and prosperity, and they
that maliciously meddle against God, dwell without care: in those things that
God has given rychely with his hand.

Ask the cattle, and they shall enfourme

^^p^. iii. ^.
In whose hand is the soul of every living thing, and the breath of the
flesh of all men. Job. 34. ^
Have not the ears pleasure in hearing, and the mouth in tastyng the thing
that it eats? Job. xxxii. b
Among old persons there is wisdom, and in age is understanding. Yea with
God is wisdom and strength, it is he that has counsel and* fore knowledge.
Behold, If he break down a thing, who can set it up again? ^^^^. ^xii. ^.
(...). i^i. b * (...). ^* ^
If he shut a thing, who will open it? Behold, and if he withholde the
waters, they dry up: If he let them go, they destroy the earth. With him is
strength end wisdom: he knows both the deceyuer and him that is deceived.

He caryeth away the wise men, as it were ii. (...). 1^. ^ (...). 14. ^
He takes the verite from out of the mouth, and disapoynteth the aged of their
reason. He pours out confusyon upon princes, and conforteth them that have
been oppressed. Look ^^^^. xii. a. (...). x. ^
what lies hyd in darkness, he declares it openly: and the very shadow of
death brings he to light. He both increases the people, and destroys
them. He makes them to multiplye, and dryueth them away. He changes the
hertes of them that rule the people of the earth, and disapoynteth them: so
that they go wandrynge out of the way, and grope in the dark without light:
he makes them also to sta^ker to and fro like dronken men.

Job reproves his friends with they^ own sayenges, and condemns ypocrps^^.

CAPI. XIII.
LO, all this have I seen with mine eye, (...)
Phisicians all together. Would God ye kept your tongue, for then might ye be
taken for wise men. Now hear my chiding, and pondre the sentence of my
lyppes.

Do ye speak iniquite against God? and

He shall punysshe you: and reprove you; if ye do secretly accept any person.
Shall he not make you afraid when he shows him self? Shall not his terrible
fear fall upon you? Your remembrance is like unto a spark, and your bodies
like the claye. Hold your tongues for my sake, that I also may speak^ and my
sorrow shall be the less.

Wherefore do I bear my flesh in my Iub^ (...) Psalm. (...)
and put my soul in my hands? Lo, though he sley me, yet will I put my trust
in him. But Psalm. 32. (...) Luke. (...). (...)
I will reprove mine own ways in his sight, he shall make me hole: and there
may no ypocrite come before him. Hear my words, and pondre my sayenges with
your ears. Behold, now have I prepared my judgment, and know that I shall
be found ryghteous. What is he that will go to law with me? ( Let him come)
that I may now hold my tongue, and dye. Nevertheless grant me two things, and
then will I not hyde my self from the.

Withdraw thine hand from me, and let Psalm. ^^
for the sins of my youth. Job. 33. ^
Thou put my fete also in the stocks: and lokest narowly unto all my
paths, and markest the steps of my fete: where as I (notwithstanding) must
consume, like as a foul caryon, and as a clothe that is moth eaten.

Job des^llybe^h the lyte of (...), and prophesyeth of the resurre^^yon. Hope
systeyneth the godly, until they obtain th^^ they io^e for.

CAPI. XIIII.
MAn that is borne of woman, has but a Job. ^i^. a (...)
The days of man surely are determined / the nombre of his months are known
only unto the. Thou haste appointed him his bounds, which he can not go
beyond. Go from him, that he may rest ( a little,) until his day come:
which he looks for, like as an hyrelynge does.

If a tree be cut down, there is some hope (...). (...). ^. (...). iii. b
until the heaven perysh: he shall not wake up nor rise out of his sleep.

O that thou would keep me, and hyde me (...). 47. b
All the days of my life will I wait still, till my chaungynge shall come.
Thou shall call me, and I shall answer the: (...). (...). b
despise not you the work of thine own han des. For now thou no^brest all my
goynges, yet be not thou to extreme upon my sins. My iniquite is sealed up,
as it were in a bag but be merciful unto my wyckednesses.

The mountains fall away at the last, the

Eliphas reprehendeth Job, because he as^^ybeth wysdom and pureness to him
self. He descrybeth the course that falls on the wyched, rekenyng Job to be
one of that nombre.

CAPI. XV.
THen answered Eliphas the Themanite

Thynkest thou it a small thing of the Job. (...) ^ ii. (...). ii. ^.
Behold, he does not trust his saints: Yey the very heuens are not clean in
his sight. How much more then an abhomynable and vile man / which drynketh
wickedness like water? I will tell the, hear me, and I will show the that I
have seen: which wise men have told / and has not been hyd from their fathers
unto whom only the earth was given, and no stranger went among.

The Gene. iii^. ^
ungodly soroweth all the days of his life as it were a woman traueylynge of a
king with his host ready to the battle. For he has stretched out his hand
against God, and armed him self against the almygh tie. He runs proudly
upon him, and with a styffe neck fyghteth he against him: where as he covers
his face with fatness, and makes his body well liking.

Therefore shall his dwelling be in desolate Psalm. vii. d. Esai. (...). a
conceyueth travail, and bears vanite, and their body brings forth
dysceyte.

Job repeatynge his miserye, says that he suffers more then his wickedness
has deserved.

CAPI. XVI.
Job answered, and said: I have often times But what shall I do?) For all my
words, my sorrow will not 3. Reg. 22. d Math. 14 ^
and smytten me upon the cheke despytefullye, they gather them selves together
against me.

God has put me in prease with the ungodly,

My face is swollen with weeping / and

Job says that he consumes away, and yet does patiently abide it.

CAPI. XVII.
MY breath stynketh, my days are shortened.

He promyseth his friends part of his

Uertuous men therefore shall well consider this, and the innocent shall take
part against the ypocryte.

The ryghteous also will keep his way /

Though I tarry never so much, yet the grave worms call I my mother and my
sister. What helps then my long taryenge? Or / who has considered the
thing, that I look fore All that I have, shall go down in to the pyt, and lie
with me in the dust.

Bildad rehe^seth the pains of the unfaithful, and wicked.

CAPI. XVIII.
THen answered Bildad the Suhite, and said: when will ye make an end

The light shall be dark in his dwelling,

Fearfulness shall make him afraid on

His rotes shall be dried up beneth, and above

Job recites his miseryes and grenous payned. He prophesyeth of the general
resurreceyon.

CAPI. XIX.
Job answered, and said: how long will Abacu^ c. ^. ^
complain of the violence that is done unto me, I can not be herd. And if I
cry, there is no sentence given with me.

He has hedged up my way, that I can Job. ^. ^ (...).
He has spoiled me of mine honor / and taken the crown away fro my head.
He has destroyed me on every side, and I am undone: My hope has he taken
away fro me, as it were a tree plucte up by the rote. His wrath is kyndled
against me: he takes me, as though I were his enemy. His men of war came
together, which made their way over me, and beseyged my dwelling round
about Psalm. 38. ^
He has put my brethren far away fro me, and soche as were of mine
acquayntaunce, are become strangers unto me

Psalm. (...). ^
Mine own kynsfolkes have for saken me, and my friends have put me out of
remembrance.

My bone hangs to my skin, and my But beware of the sword, for the sword
will be avenged of wickedness, and be sure, that there is a judgment.

Sophar says that the unfaithful, the couptou^, and the wicked shall have a
short end.

CAPI. XX.
THen answered Sophar the Naamathite,

In so much that they which have seen

The bread that he did eat, is turned to

For though the wicked have never so much Job. 27. ^
This is the porcyon that the wicked man shall have of god, and the heretage
that he may look for of god, because of his words.

Job recyteth the prosperyte of the wicked, and after descrybeth their sudden
ruin, and destruccyon.

CAPI. XXI.
Job answered, and said: O heart my words, if it like you.) Is it for man's
sake that I make this disputacyon? Which if it were so, should not my spirit
be then in sore trouble? Mark me well, and be abashed, and lay your hand
upon your mouth. For when I consider myself, I am afraid, and my flesh is
smytten with fere. Psalm. 73. ^. I^^. x^^. ^.
Wherefore do wicked men live in health and prosperity, come to their old age,
and increase in riches? Their children live in their sight, and their
generacyon before their eyes. Their houses are safe from all fear, and the rod
of god does not smite them. Their bullock gendreth, and that not out of time:
their cow calueth, and is not vnfruytfull.

They send forth their children by flocks / and Esa^. v. ^
They bear with them tabrettes and harpes, and have instruments of Musycke at
their pleasure. They spend their days in welthynes: but suddenly they go down
to hell. They say also unto god: go from us, we desire not the knowledge of
thy ways. E^ob^. v. ^.
Who is the almyghtye / that we should serve him? And what profet should we
have to submyt oureselues unto him? Lo, there is utterly no goodness in them /
therefore will not I have to do with the counsel of the ungodly. How often
shall the candle of the wicked be put out? how often comes their destruccyon
upon them? O what sorrow shall God give them for their part in his wrath? Yea
they shall be even as hay before the wind, and Psalm. ^. ^.
as chafe that the storm caryeth away.

And though god save their children from

For ye say: where is the princes palace? (...) ii. ^. Mat. x^^^. d
wicked is kept unto the day of destruccyon, and that the ungodly shall be
brought forth to the day of wrath.

Who dare reprove him for his way to his face? who will reward him for the
ungraciousness that he does? Yet shall he be brought to his grave, and dwell
among the heap of the dead. Then shall he be feign to be buried among the
stones of the plain. All men also must follow him, and there are innumerable
gone before him. How vain then is the comfort that ye give me? Does not
falseheed remain in all your answers.

Eliphas reprehendeth Job of vnmercyfulnesse.

CAPI. XXII.
SO Eliphas the Themanite gave answer

Should soch one then as uses violence / wrong Eccle. 23. ^. Ezeche. ix. ^
because that god is higher then the heuens, and because thou seyst that the
sterres are so high, will thou therefore say: Tusshe / how should god know?
Does his dominion reach upon the clouds? Tushe / the clouds cover him that
he may not se / and he dwells above heaven.

Do not thou keep the old way, that

Reccyue the law at his mouth, and lay (...) (...) ^
if thou wylt turn to the almighty, thou shall stand fast, and put all
unrighteousness from thy dwelling: Thou shall make gold as plentyfull as the
dust, and the gold of Ophit as the flyntes of the ryuers. Yea, almighty god
his own self shall be thy defense, and thou shall have plentye of silver.
Then shall thou have delight in the almyghtye, and lift up thy face unto God.
Then shalt thou make thy prayer unto him, and he shall hear the, and thou
shalt keep thy promyses. Then, look what thou take in hand, he shall make
it to prospere with the, and the light shall shine in thy ways. For (...). ^.
who so humbles himself, him shall be set up: and who so looks mekely, shall
be healed. If thou be innocent / thou shalt deliver the country: because of
the vngyltynesse of thine hands.

Job affirms that he both knows and fears the power and sentaunce of the
Judge, and so^eth that he has wa^hed in his righteousness.

CAPI. XXIII.
Job answered, and said: My saying is Will he plead against me with his
great

Behold, though I go before, I find him: If I come behind, I can get no
knowledge of him: If I go on the left side where he does his work / I cannot
atteyne unto him. Again, if I go on the right side, he hydeth himself, that I
cannot se him. But as for my way / he knows it: and Sapi. iii. a 1. Peter.
1. b
tries me as the gold in the fire.

My foot does keep his path, his high

This is the cause that I schrynke at his

Job descrybeth the wickedness of men, and shows what curse belongs to the
wicked.

CAPI. XXIIII.
Considering then that there is no time Deute. xix c and. xxvii. c
remove other men's landmarkes: that rob them of their cattle, and keep the
same for their own: that Exodi. 22 c
drive away the Ass of the fatherless: that take the wydowes ox for a
pledge: that thruste the poor out of the way, and oppress the simple of the
world together. Behold, even as the wild Asses in the deserte go they forth
to their work / and rise by times to spoil: Yea, the very wyldernes
minystreth fode for their children.

They reap the corn field that is not their Apor^. (...) ^* (...). x^^
The souls of the sleyne also make their complaynte: But God destroys them
not for all this, where as they (notwithstanding) are conuersaunt among them
that abhor the light: they know not his way / nor continue in his paths.

Luke. 22 ^.
Tymely in the morning do they arise /

O that all compassyon upon them were forgotten: that their dayntyes were
worms, that they were clean put out of remembrance / and ungodliness
utterly hewn down like as a tree. He has oppressed the bareyne, that she
cannot bear, and unto the wydowe has he done no good. He drue the mighty
after him with his power, and when he was gotten up / no man was without fear
/ as long as he lives. And though they might be safe yet they will not receive
it, for their eyes look upon their own ways. They are exalted for a little,
but shortly are they gone, brought to extreme pouerte, and taken out of the
way: yea, and utterly pluckte of, as the ears of corn Is it not so? Who will
then reprove me as a liar, and say that my words are nothing worth?

Bildad proves that no man is clean, and without sin before god.

CAPI. XXV.
THen answered Byldad the Suhite, and

But how may a man compared unto God, Job. (...) (...). i^. a Psalm. 143. a
(...) iii. c
be justified? Or how can he be clean / that is borne of a woman? Behold, the
moon shyneth nothing in comparison to him, and the sterres are unclean in his
sight. How much more then man, that is but corrupcyo^: and the son of man,
which is but a worm?

Job shows that man cannot help god / and proves it by his miracles.

CAPI. XXVI.
Job answered, and said. Whom have thou

What comfort gyuest thou unto him that has no strength? Where is the
counsel that thou should give him, which has no wisdom? Have thou showed
the way of right living. To whom have thou spoken those words? Who made the
breath to come out of thy mouth? Are not dead things shapen under the waters?
and things by the water side? Hell is naked before him, and the very
destruccyon itself cannot be hyd out of his sight. He stretches out the north
over the emptye, and ha^geth the earth upon nothing.

He byndeth the ^^^^ ^, ^^
waters in his clouds / and the cloud is not broken under them. He Job. 38. a
Psalm. ^iiii b Iu^mi. ^. ^
He has compassed the waters with certain bounds until the day and night
come to an end. The very pyllers of heaven tremble and quake at his reprofe.
^^^^. viii. ^
He stylleth the sea with his power, and through his wisdom smyteth he the
strength thereof. His spirit has garnysshed the heuens, and his hand has
made the rebellyous serpent. Lo, this is now a short su^me of his ways. But
who is able sufficyently to rehearse his works? Who can perceive and
understand the thondre of his power?

The constantnesse and perfytenesse of Job, and the part of the unfaithful
with God.

CAPI. XXVII.
ANd Job proceeded and went forth in his

My ryghtwyse dealing keep I fast, which

Behold, ye stand in your own conceyte, Job. xx. d
This is the porcyon that the wicked shall have of god, and the heritage that
Tyrauntes shall receive of the almyghtye. If he get many Children, they shall
perysshe with the sword, and his posteryte shall have scarceness of bread.
Look whom he leaves behind him, they shall dye and be buried, and no man
shall have pitye of his wydowes. Though he have as much money as the dust of
the earth, and raiment as ready as the clay he may well prepare it, but the
Godly shall put it upon him, and the innocent shall deal out the money.

His house shall endure as the moth, and Psalm. (...)* ^ Luke. (...)* (...).
When the rych man dies, he caryeth nothing with him: he is gone in the
twynkelynge of an eye and has nothing. Destruccyon takes hold upon him as a
water floode / and the tempest steals him away in the night season. A
vehement East wind caryeth him hence, and departs, a storm plucketh him out
of his place. It russheth in upon him, and spares him not, he may not escape
from the power thereof. Then clap men their hands at him, yea, and jest of him
when they look upon his place.

Job shows that the wysdon of god is unsearchable.

CAPI. XXVIII.
THere is a place where silver is brought Deuteronomy. viii^
where iron is dygged out of the ground, and stones resolved to metal. The
darkness shall once come to an end, he can seek out the ground of al
things: the stones the dark, and the shadow of death.

With the river of water, parts he a sunder the strange people, that know
no good neyghbourheade: soch as are rude, unmannerly, and boystous. He brings
food out of the earth, and that which is under, co^sumeth he with fire. There
is found a place, whose stones are clean Saphirs, and where the clottes of
the earth are gold. There is a way also that the birds know not, that no
vultours eye has seen: wherein the lions whelps walk not, and where no lion
comes. There puts he his hand upon the stony (...). ii. a ^^^te. vii. c.
James. i. a. 3. ^^^sr. 3. ^ ^^d. ^u^. d
Where is the place that men find understanding? Herely no man can tell how
worthy a thing she is, neither is she found in the land of them that live, (
at their own pleasure). The deep says* she is not with me. The sea says:
she is not with me. Sapi. vii. ^
She cannot be gotten for ( the most pure) gold, neither may the price of her
be bought with any silver. No wedges of gold of Ophir, no precious Onix
stones, no Saphirs may be compared unto her. No, neither gold nor Crystal,
neither sweet odours nor golden plate. There is nothing so worthy, or so
excellent / as once to be named unto her: for perfyte wisdom goes far beyond
them all. The Topas that comes out of Inde, may in no wise be lykened unto
her: yea, no manner of apparel how pleasant and fair soever it be.

From whence then comes wisdom? and (...). i. ^. Psalm. ^xi. ^. P^o^^^. i. ^
(...). ix. ^
to fear the lord, is wisdom: and to forsake evil, is understanding.

Job complayneth of the prosperyte of the time past, subtyllye reyrouynge his
friends of iniurye, because they said that Job suffered according to his
destruynge.

CAPI. XXIX.
SO Job proceeded, and went forth in his co^municacyon,

He that should have been lost, gave me a ^^^^^. 1^. ^
and pluckte the spoil out of his teeth. Therefore, I thought verily, that I
should have dyed in my nest: and that my days should have been as many as the
sands of the sea.

For my root was spread out by the water

The* great dispysynge of men and curse of God that Job suffers.

CAPI. XXX.
BUt now they that are younger then I / have and waste, pluckynge up netles
among the busshes, and the Ieniper roots for their meat And when they were
driven forth, men cried after them, as it had been after a thief. Their dwelling
was beside foul brokes, yea in the caves and dens of the earth.

Among the busshes went they about ^^^^. iii. ^ Psalm. 69. ^
Now am I their song, and am become their iestyng stock: they abhor me, and
flee far fro me, and stayne my face with spetle. For the Lord has loosed
the strength of my body, and brought me low. The bridle have they cast out of
my syghte. Upon my right hand rise the young men against me they have hurt my
feet, treadyng upon me as upon the ways that they would destroy. My paths
have they clean marred. It was so easy for them to do me harm, that they
neded no man to help them.

They fell upon me, as it had been the br^^

Sure I am, that thou will deliver me

Job recites the innocen^^^ of his living, and nombre i^ his ^^rt^es.

CAPI. XXXI.
I made a covenant with mine eyes / Eccle. ^li. ^ Math. ^. ^.
Job. ^4 ^ (...). ^. ^
Does not he se my ways, and tell all my goynges? If I have walked in vanite,
or if my feet have run to deceyue^ (...) me be weyed in an even balaunce,
that God may se mine innosencye. Psalm. vii. ^
If so be that I have withdrawn my foot out of the right way, and if my
heart has followed mine eye sight? If I have stained or defiled my hands? then
shall I sow, and an other eat, (...) my generation and posterite shall be
clean roted out. If mine heart has lusted after my neighbors wise, or if I
have laid wait at his door? O then let my wife grynde unto to another man,
and let other men lie with her. (...) ^
For this is a wickedness and sin, that is worthy to be punysshed, yea attire that utterly should consume, and rote out all my substance.

Did I ever think scorn to do right

Did I ever lift up my hand to hurt the fatherless? yea in the gate where I
saw myself to be in auctorite: the^ let mine arm fall fro my shoulder, and
mine arm holes be broken from the joints. For I have ever feared the
vengeance and punysshment of God, and knew very well, that I was not able to
bear his burden. Have I put my trust in gold? Or have I said to the fynest
gold of all: thou art my confidence? Have I reioysed because my power was
great, and because my hand gat so much? Deutt. 4. t. and. ^vit. b. Sapi.
xiii. a
Did I ever greatly regard the rysynge of the son? or had I the going down
of the moon in great reputacyon? Has mine heart meddled pryuely with any
deceyte? Or, did I ever kiss mine own hand? that were a wickedness worthy
to be punysshed, for then should I have denied the God that is above. Pro.
xvii. a
Have I ever reioysed at the hurt of mine enemy? Or was I ever glad, that any
harm happened unto him? Oh no, I never suffered my mouth to do such a sin,
as to wysshe him evil.

Did not the men of mine own household

Thus have I quyetly spente my life, and not gone out at the door. O that I had
one which would hear me. Lo, this is my cause. In the which the almyghtye
shall answer for me: though he that is my contrary party, has written a book
against me. Yet will I take him upon my shoulder, and as a garland about my
head. I will tell him, the nombre of my geynges, and go unto him as to a
prince. But if case be that my land cry against me, or that the forowes
thereof make any complaynte: if I have eaten the fruytes thereof unpaid for, yea
if I have grieved any of the plowine^: then let thystles grow instead of my
wheat, and cockle for my barley.

Here ends the words of Job.
Elihu after the other had fynysshed their co^municacyon, reproves them of
folyshnesse. Age maheth not a man wise, but the spirit of god.

CAPI. XXXII.
SO these three men would strive no more

So when Elihu the son of Barachel the Eccle. 3^ ^.
Consyderyng that I am young, and ye be men of age, I was afraid, and durst not
show forth my mind, for I thought thus within myself: It becomes old men to
speak, and the aged to teach wysdom. Every man (no doubt) has a mind but 3.
Reg. i^^. ^ and. ^il. d Ge^^^ vii. ^ Jacob. ^. a. Prove. (...) a Dan^^. (...).
^.
it is the inspiracion of the almyghtye that gives understanding. Great men
are not always wise, neither does every aged man understand the thing that is
lawful. Therefore will I speak also (hear me) and I will show you also mine
understanding.

For when I had waited till ye made an end of your talking, and herd your
wysdom what arguments ye made in your co^municacyon: yea, when I had
diligently pondred what ye said, I found not one of you that made any good
argument against Job, or that directely could make answer unto his words:
leest ye should say. We have found out wisdom: God shall cast him down, and
no man.

He has not spoken unto me, and I will not answer him as ye have done (for
they were so abashed, that they could not make answer, nor speak one
word,) but in so much as ye will not speak, standing still like dombe men,
and making no answer: I have a good hope for my part to shape him an
answer, and to show him my meaning. For I am full of words, and the spirit

Behold, my belly is as the wine, which has no vente, and brasteth the new
vessels in sunder. Therefore will I speak that I may have a vente: I will open
my lyppes, and make answer. I will regard no manner of person, no man will I
spare. For Galat. ^. ^
if I would go about to please men, I know not how soon my maker would take
me away.

Elihu shows wherein Job offends: with god may we not strive, no^ curyous^ye
search out his works.

CAPI. XXXIII.
Wherefore hear my words (O Job) and heart does order my words aryght, and my
lyppes talk of pure wisdom. The spirit of God has made me, and Gene. ii. b
the breath of the almyghtye has given me my life. If thou can, then give me
answer: prepare thy self to stand before me face to face. Behold, before God
am I even as thou, for I am fassioned and made, even of the same moulde.

Therefore, thou nedest not to be afraid of me, neither nedest thou to fear,
that my auctorite shall be to heavy for the.

Now have thou spoken in mine ears, and Job. xiii. d.
he has put my foot in the stocks, and looks narowly unto al my paths
Behold, in this have thou not done right. I will make answer unto the, that
God is more then man. And why do you then strive against him: For he shall
not give the accomptes of all his words. For when God does once command a
thing, there should no man be curyous to search whyther it be right.

Gene. (...). ^. ^^d ^^v^^ ^ Daniel. (...). ^ (...). ii. d.
In dreams and visions of the night (when stombrynge comes upon men, that
they fall aslepe in their beds) he roundeth them in the ears, he enfourmeth
them, and

Now if there be a messenger (one among a thousand) sent for to speak unto
man, and to show him the right way: then the Lord is merciful unto him, and
says: He shall be delivered, that he fall not down to the grave, for I am
sufficiently reconcyled. Then shall his flesh be as well liking as it was
before, and shall be as it was in his youth. For if he submyt himself unto
god, he shall

Lo, thus works god always with man, that he keeps his soul from
perysshynge, and lets him enjoy the light of the living Mark well (O Job)
and hear me: hold the still, and I will speak. But if thou have anythyng to
say, then answer me, and speak, for thine answer pleases me. If thou have
nothing, then hear me, and hold thy tongue, so shall I teach the wisdom.

Elihu prayseth the Justice of god, which judges the worl^e, and governs
all.

CAPI. XXXIIII.
ELihu proceadynge forth in his answer, Job. xii. ^
and the mouth tastes the meats: As for judgment, let us seek it out among
ourselves, that we may know what is good. And why? Job has said: I am
righteous, but God does me wrong. I must needs be a liar, though my cause be
right, and violently I am plaged where as I made no fault: Where is there such
a one as Job, that drynketh up scornefulnesse like water? which goes in the
company of wicked doers, and walks with ungodly men? For he has said:
Though a man be good, yet is he naught before God. Therefore hecken unto me ye
that have understanding.

Far be it from god, that he should meddle Mat. (...). d Roma. 11. b
For he shall reward the works of man, and cause every man to find
according to his ways. For sure it is, that Roma. iii. ^
God condemns no man wrongfully, and the judgment of the almyghtye is not
unrighteous. Who rules the earth in his stead? Or, whom has he set to
govern the hole world? To whom has he given his heart, for to draw his
spirit and breath unto him? All flesh shall come together unto naught, and
all men shall turn again unto Gene. iii. d. Psalm. 146 ^
dust.

If thou now have understanding hear what I say, and harken to the boyce of
my words. May he be a ruler, that loves no right? Or may he that is a very
innocent man, do ungodly? Is it reason, that thou should say to the king.

Thou art wicked, or, thou art ungodly, ii. Par. 30. ^ Roma. ii. d. Ephe.
vi. b. Collos (...). d Eccle. 35. ^.
He has no respect unto the persons of the lordlye, and regards not the
rich more then the poor. For they be all the work of his hands. In the
twynkelynge of an eye shall they dye: and at mydnyght, when the people and the
tyrauntes rage, then shall they perysshe, and be taken away without hands. And
why? Job. xxxi. ^. Prove. v. d
his eyes look upon the ways of man, and he sees all his goynges. There is no
darkness, nor shadow of death, that can hyde the wicked doers from him. For
no man shall be suffered to go in to judgment with God. Many one, yea
innumerable does he punysshe, and sets other in their steades. Therefore
shall he declare their works, he shall turn the night and they shall be
destroyed. They that were in the stead of Scars, delte like ungodly men: and
therefore he punyshed them, because they turned back from him, and would not
consydre al his ways. In so much that they have caused the voice of the poor
to come unto him, and now he heateth the complaynte of such as are in trouble.

If he grant pardon, who will condemn?

If I have gone amysse, enfourme thou me if I have done wrong, I will leave of.
Can he do nothing without the? for thou have reproved his judgment. Thou also
have thine own mind and not I. But speak on what thou know. Let men of
understanding tell me, and let a wise man harken unto me. As for Job, he has
neither spoken to the purpose nor wisely. O father, let Job be well tried
because he has answered for wicked men: yea above his sin he does wyckedly:
triumphs among us, and multiplieth his words against god.

Neither does godliness profit, nor ungodliness hurt to god, but to man.

CAPI. XXXV.
ELihu spoke moreover, and said: Thynkest

If thou have sinned, what have thou done

If any such complain, no man gives

Elihu shows wherefore god punysheth, and cor^^^teth.

CAPI XXXVI.
ELihu proceeded forth in his talkyng, and

He with punysshynge and nurturyng of Esai. i. ^.
If they now will take heed and serve him, they shall wear out their days in
prosperity, and their years in pleasure and joy. But if they will not harken,
they shall go through the sword, and perysshe, or ever they be aware. As for
such as be feigned ypocrites, they shall heap up wrath for them selves: for
they call not upon him, though they he his prisoners. Thus shall their soul
perysshe in folysshnes and their life shall be condemned among the fornicatours.
The poor shall he deliver out of his affliccion, and round them in the care
when they be in trouble. Even so shall he keep the (if thou will be content)
from the bottomless pyt that is beneth: and if thou wylt hold the quyete, he
shall fill thy table with plenteousnesse.

Nevertheless, thou have condemned the

For then shall not thy cause be stylled with crueltye, nor pacified with many
gifts.

Thynkest thou, that he will regard thy richesse? he shall not care for gold,
nor for all them that excel in strength. Prolonge not thou the time, till
there come a night for the to set other people in thy stead. But beware that
thou turn not aside to wickedness and sin, which hitherto thou have chosen
more then meekness. Behold, god is of a mighty high power: Where is such a
gyde and law gyuer as he? Who will reprove him of his way? Who will say unto
him: thou haste done wrong.

O consydre how great and excellent his (...). ^i. b (...). xxviii.
He turns the water to small drops. He dryueth his clouds together for to
rain, so that they power down and drop upon men. He can sprede out the
clouds (a coueryng of his tabernacle) and cause his light to shine upon them,
and to cover the botome of the sea. By these things governs he his people,
and gives them abundance of meat. With the clouds he hydeth the light,
and at his commandment it comes again. The rysynge up thereof shows he to
his friends, and to the cattle.

Elihu proves that the wisdom of god is unsearchable.

CAPI. XXXVII.
AT this, my heart is astonyed, and moved Psalm. 147^
When he commands the snow, it falls upon the carthe. As soon as he
gives the rain a charge, immediately the showers have their strength, and
fall down. He sends ^^are upon every man, that they might know their own
works.

The beasts crepe into their dens, and

He distributeth also on every side, according as it pleases him to deal out
his works, that they may do, what soever he commands them through the hole
world: whyther it be to punysshe any land, or to do good unto them, that seek
him.

Harken unto this (O Job) stand still, and

Shall it be told him what I say? Should

Gold is brought out of the north, but the praise and honor of Gods fear
comes from God him self. It is not we that can find out the almyghtye: for
in power, equite and ryghteousnes, he is higher then can be expressed. Let men
therefore fear him, for there shall no man se him that is wise in his own
conceyte.

The won^ers and ma^^els that the Eo^de has done from the beginning.

CAPI. XXXVIII.
Then answered the Lord unto Job out Job. xi. ^.
Gyrde up thy loins like a man, for I will question with the, se thou give me a
direct answer. Where wast thou, when I laid the foundacions of the earth?
Tell plainly, if thou have understanding.

Who has measured it, know thou? Or, who has spread the line upon it?
Whereupon stand the pyllers of it? Or, who laid the corner stone thereof? Where
wast thou, when the sterres praised me together, and all the children of god
reioysed triumphauntly? Job. xxvi. a Ieremi. v. ^ Psalm. ^^iii b
Who shut the sea with doors, when it brake forth as a child out of the
mothers womb?

When I made the clouds to be a coueryng for it, and swadled it with the
dark? When I gave it my commandment, making doors and bars for it,
saying.

Hitherto shalt thou come, but no further,

Knew thou (before thou wast borne) Exodi. ix e. Joshua. x. c
which I have prepared against the time of trouble, against the time of
battle and war? By what way is the light parted, and in to what land
breaks the East wind: Who deuydeth the abundance of waters into ryuers, or
who makes a way for the lightening and thondre, that it waters and
moystneth the dry and bareyne ground: to make the grass grow in places
where no body dwells, and in the wyldernes where no man remains? Who is
the father of rain? Or who has begotten the drops of dew? Out of whose
womb came theyse? Who has engendered the coldness of the air? that the
waters are as hard as stones, and lie congeled above the deep. Will thou
hyndre the sweet influences of the seven sterres? Or art thou able to break
the circle of heaven? Can thou

Can thou thondre also that they may go their way, and be obedient unto the,
saying: Lo here are we? Who gives sure wysdom, or steadfast understanding? Who
nombreth the clouds in wysdom? Who stylleth the vehement waters of the heaven?
Who turns the clottes to dust, and then to be clottes again? Will thou
hunte the pray from the lion, or feed his whelps lyenge in their dens, and
lurkyng in their couches? Who Psalm. 147b
provides meat for the raven, when his young ones cry unto god, and fly
about for lack of meat.

God speaks unto Job showing him by the example of his works, that his
ryghteousnes is unsearchable.

CAPI XXXIX.
Know thou the time when the wild

That they may give no force for the multitude

And that because god has taken wysdom

Comes it through thy wisdom, that the Goshauke flies toward the South?
Does the Egle mount up, and make his nest on high at thy commandment? He
abides in the stony rocks, and upon the high tops of hard mountains,
where no man can come from thence seeks he his pray, and looks far about
with his eyes. His young ones are fed with blood: Math. ^4. ^
and where any dead body lies, there is he immediately.

Job humbles him self unto god. The descryptyon of Behemoth, and Leuiathan.

CAPI. XL.
Moreover the lord spoke unto Job, and Job. (...). ^
Gyrde up thy loins now like a man, and tell me the things that I will ask
the. Will thou disanul my judgment? Or wylt thou condemn me, that thou thy
self may be made ryghteous? Is thy power then like the power of God? Makes
thy voice such a sound as his does? Then arm thy self with thine own
power

Who dare lay hand upon him openly, and undertake to catch him? Or, who dare
put an hoke through his nose, and say a snare for him? Dare thou draw out
Esai 2^ ^. Psalm. 7^ ^.
Leuiatha^ with an angle, or bind his tongue with a snare? Can thou put a
ring in the nose of

Will thou take thy pastyme with him, as with a bird, or give him unto thy
maidens, that thy companyons may make a ^efeccion of him, or that he may be
parted among the merchau^t men. Can thou fyl the basket with his skyn, or
the fysshe panyer with his head? Dare thou lay hand upon him?

It is better for the to consydre what harm might happen the therthorowe, and
not to touch him. For when thou thynkest to have hold upon him, he shall
begyle the.

Of the same Leuiathan which is me^^^oned in the Chapter before.

CAPI. XLI.
NO man is so cruel, that is able to stir Ier^^^ ^. ^.
Who is able to stand before me? Or Rom^. (...). ^
who has given me any thing before hand, that I may reward him again? All
things under heaven are mine. I fere him not, whither he threaten or speak
fair. Who lifts him up, and strypeth him out of his clothes, or who takes
him by the byt of his bridle? Who opens the door of his face? for he has
horrible teeth round about. One is so joined to an other, that no air can
come in: Yea, one hangs so upon an other, and stycketh so together, that they
can not be sundred. His nesyng is like a glystryng fire, and his eyes like the
morning shine. Out of his mouth go torches, and out of his nose thyrles there
goth a smoke, like as out of an hot seething pot. His breath makes the cooles
burn, and the flambe goth out of his mouth In his neck remains strength,
and nothing is to laborous for him.

The members of his body are joined so

He statteth not away for him that bends

The repentance of Job. He prays for his friends, and his goods are
restored to him double.

CAPI XLII.
THen Job answered the Lord, and said: Esai. 28. ^ ^. Regu^. 19 b
I know that thou have power over all things, and that there is no thought
hyd from the. For who can keep his own counsel so secret, but it shall be
known? Therefore have I spoken that I understood not, the things that are so
high, and pass mine understanding. O harken thou unto me also, and let me
speak: answer unto the thing that I will ask the. I have given diligent
ear unto the, and now I se the with mine eyes. Wherefore I give mine own self
the blame, and take repentance in the duste and ashes.

Now when the Lord had spoken these Math. ^. ^. Mark. d^
offer up for your selves a burnt offering: and my servant Job shall pray for
you. Him will I accept, and not deal with you after your folysshnesse: in
that ye have not spoken the thing which is right, like as my servant Job
has done.

So Eliphas the Themanite, and Bildad Gene. (...). ^
The lord also accepted the person of Job, and the lord turned the captivity
of Job, when he prayed for his friends: Yea the Lord gave Job Math. (...) ^
twyse as much as he had before. And then came there unto him all his
brethren, all his systers, and all they that had been of his acquayneaunce
before, and did eat bread with him in his house, wondering at him, and
confortynge him over all the trouble, that the Lord had brought upon him.
Every man also gave him a certain sum of money, and a Iuel of gold.

And the Lord made Job rycher then he

He had seven sons also and three daughters. The first daughter called he
Iemima: the second Kezta: and the third Kerenhapuch. In all the land were no
women found so fair, as the daughters of Job, and their father gave them
enheritaunce among their brethren. After this lived Job an hundred and fourtye
year, so that he saw ^^^^. (...) Tobi. 14. ^ Psalm. (...). ^
his children, and his chyldrens children into the fourth generation. And so
Job dyed, being old and of a perfyte age.

The end of the book of Job.
The Psalter of David.
The third part of the Bible conteynyng these Books.
The Psalter. Ecclesiastes. The proverbs. Ca^tica Ca^ticorum
The Prophets.
Esaye. JEREMY. Ezechiel. DANIEL. Oseas. JOEL. Amos. ABDY. JONAS. Micheas.
NAVM. Abacuc. SOPHONY. Aggeus. ZACHARY. Malachy.
The first Psalm.
BLessed is the man / (...) (...) (...). 33. ^. (...). viii. ^.
he shall be like a tree planted by the water side, that will bring for the his
fruit in due season. His leaffe also shall not wither: and what soever he shall
do, it shall prospere. As for the ungodly, it is not so with them: but (...).
(...). b.
they are like the chafe, which the wind scatereth away * (from the face of
the earth.) Therefore the ungodly (...). x. ^. (...). xxix. t.
neither the sinners in the congregation of the ryghtuous. But the Lord
knows the way of the ryghtuous, and the way of the ungodly shall peryshe.

The. ij. Psalm.
W (...) Quaie
HY DO the Heathen grudge together? and why do the people ymagyne a vain
thing? The Kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take council (...)
(...).
against the Lord / and against his anointed. Let us break their bonds
asunder, and cast away their cords (...). 17 ^
from us. He that dwells in heaven, (...). (...).
shall laugh them to scorn: the Lord shall have them in derysyon. Then shall
he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex (...). i. d (...). (...). ^
them in his sore displeasure. Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of
Syon.

I will preach the law, whereof the Lord has said unto me. Act. xiii. c.
Heb. i. b. and. v. ^.
Thou art my son this day have I begotten the. Desire of me, and I shall
give the the Heathen for Apoca. ii. ^ and. xix. c.
Thou shall bruise them with a rod of iron, and break them in pieces Esa. xxx.
c.
like a potters vessel. Be wise now therefore, O ye kings, be learned ye that
are judges of the earth. Serve the Lord in fear, and rejoice * ( unto him)
with reverence. * Kiss the son, lest he be angrye, and so ye perysh from
the * ( right) way if his wrath be kyndled but a little: blessed are all they
that put their trust in him.

The. iij. Psalm.
Psalm of David when he fled from the face of

Lord, how are they increased, that trouble dn^e quid multiplicati.
me? many are they, y^ rise against me. Many, say of my soul: there is no
help for him in ( his) God. Sela. But thou (O Lord) art my defender: thou art
my worship, and y^ lyfter up of my head. I did call upon y^ Lord with my voice,
and he herd me out of his holy hill. Sela. I laid me down and slepte, and
rose up again, for the Lord sustained me. I will not be afraid for ten
thousands of the people, that have

Up Lord, and save me (O my God:) for thou smytest almyne enemies upon the
cheke bone, thou have broken the teth of the ungodly. Salvation belongs unto
the Lord, and thy blessing is upon thy people

The. iiij. Psalm.
To him that excels in Music, a Psalm of David.

Hear me, when I call (O God (of my Cum inuocare^.
ryghteousnes: thou have set me at lybertye when I was in trouble: have mercy
sense the time that their corn and wine * ( and oil) increaced. I will lay
me down in ^^
peace, and take my rest: for it is thou Lord only, that make me dwell in
safetye.

The. v. Psalm.
To him that excels in songs of Music a Psalm of David.

POndre my words (O Lord) consydre my meditacyon. O harken thou unto Verba
mea a^.
For thou art the Prou. iii. d
God that has no pleasure in wickedness, neither shall any evil dwell with
the.

Such as be foolysh, shall not stand in thy sight, for thou hate all them
that work vanyte. Thou shall destroy them that speak lesynge: the Lord will
abhor both the bloody, thyrstye, and disceytfull man. But as for me, I will
come into thy house, even in the multitude of thy mercy: Psa^. ^* ^. a
I worship toward thy holy temple. Lead me (O Lord) in thy righteousness,
because of mine enemies: make thy way plain before my face For there is no
faythfulnesse in his mouth: their inward parts are very wyc kednesse: ^^^a.
^. ^
their throat is an open sepulcher they flatter with their tongue. Destroy y^
them (O God) let the^ perysh through their own ymaginacions: cast them out in
the

The. v^. Psalm.
To him that excels in Music, upon the instrument of eight strings.

O Lord Dn^e ^e. ^^^l. ^ ^. a (...). x. ^.
rebu^e me not in thy indigna cyon: neither chasten me in thy wrath Have mercy
upon me (O Lord) for I am weak: O Lord heal me for my bones Esaias. 38. ^
Psa. ^xv. ^
in death no man remembers the: and who will give the thanks in the pity I am
weary of my groaning: every night Mat. vii. ^ and* ^xv. ^ ^uke. (...).
A way fro* me all ye that work vanyte: for the Lord has hard the voice of
my weeping. The Lord has heard my peticyon, the Lord will receive my
prayer. All mine enemies shall be confounded and sore vexed: they shall be turned
back and put to shame, suddenly.

The. vij. Psalm.
Sigaion of David, which he sauge unto the Lord in the busynes of ^^hu^ the
conne of Iemini.

O Lord my God, in the have I put my trust: save me from all them that per
Dn^e de^ meus.
if I have done any such thing or Job. xxx. ^
if there be any wickedness in my hands.

If I have rewarded evil unto him that dealt frendely withme: (ye I have
delyue red him, that with out any cause is mine enemy.) Then let mine enemy
persecute my soul: and take me: ye let him tread my life down upon the
earth, and lay mine honor in the dust. Sela. Stand up (O Lord) in thy
wrath, and lift up thy self because of the indyngnacions of mine enemy:
arise up (for me) in the judgment,

(...). ^. ^
God is is a ryghteous judge * ( strong and pacyent,) and God is provoked
every day. If man will not turn, he will whette his sword: he has bente his
bow, and made it ready. He has prepared for him the instruments of death:
he ordeneth his arowes * against the persecutours. Bebolde ^
he trauyleth with mischefe, he has conceived sorrow, and brought forth
ungodliness. Job. xv. ^ Esaias. (...) ^ E^^b^^ 7. ^ ^rou. ^6 ^ E^^le. xl. E^cl^.
32^
He has graven and dug up a pytte, and is fallen him self into the
destrue cyon that he made (for other.) For his trauayll shall come upon his own
head Psalm ^xi^
and his wickedness shall fall upon his own pate.

I will give thanks unto the Lord according to his ryghteousnes, and will
praise the name of the Lord the most highest.

The. viii. Psalm.
To him that excels in Githith a Psalm of Dauyd:

O LODE our governor, how excellent ^n^e d^^s ^^oster.
is thy name in the world, thou that haste set thy glory above the heavens*

(...). xxl. v.
Out of the mouth of very babes and sucklynges have thou ordained strength
because of thine enemies, that thou myghtest still the enemy and the auenger.
For I will consydre thy heuens, even the work of thy fyngers: the Moon and the
Stars which thou haste ordained. (...)* 144 ^
What is man, that thou art myndeful of him* and the son of man that thou
vysitest him?

Thou made him little less then the angels, to crown him with glory and
worship. Thou make him to have domi nyon in the works of thy hands: and
^^^. ii. b. Cor. xv. d.
thou haste put all things in sub^ectyon under his fete. Al sheep and oxen,
ye and y^ beasts of the field. The fowls of the air,

The. ix. Psalm.
To him that eycelleth upon Almuth L^ben, a Psalm of Dauyd.

I will Consitebot tibi. Psalm. ^xi. d. (...). 138. 8.
give thanks unto the, O Lord with my whole heart, I will speak of all thy
merueylous works. I will be glad, and rejoice in the, ye my songs will I make
of thy name, O thou most highest

While mine enemies are driven back they shall fall, and peryshe at thy
presence.

For thou haste mayntened my right and my cause: thou art set in the throne
that ^ud ged right. Thou have rebuked y^ Heithen, and destroyed the ungodly,
thou haste put out their name for ever and ever. O thou enemy: distruccions
are come to an end, even as the cities which thou have distroied: their
memorial is perished with them. But the (...) 33. ^
eue^ a refuge i^ due time of trouble. And they y^ know thy name, will put
their trust in the: for thou (Lord) have never failed the^ that seek the. O
praise the Lord, (...) ^6. a
which dwelleste in Syon, show the people of his doings. For when he makes
in quisycion for blood, he remembers them: and (...). xxii. ^
forgets not the complaynte of the poor.

Have mercy upon me (O Lord) consydre my trouble which I suffer of them that
(...), thou that lyftest me up from the ga(...) death. That I may show all
thy

The Heythen are suncken down in the pytte that they made: in the same net
which they hyd pryuely, is there own fore taken.

The Lord is known to execute judgment: the ungodly is trapped in the work
of his own hands: A consideracion. Sela.

The wicked shall be turned unto hell, and all people that forget God. For the
poor shall not be all way forgotten nor the hope of the meke shall not
peryshe for ever.

Up Lord, and let not man have the upper hand, let the Heythen be judged in
thy sight. Put them in fear (O Lord) that the Heythen may know them selves
to be but men. Sela.

The. x. Psalm.
WHy stand thou so far of (O Lord) and hidest thy face in time of trouble
* The ungodly for his own lust, does persecute ^
Vt qui dn^e
His Rome. iii. e
mouth is full of cursing, and diss^it and frau^e under his tongue is ungodliness
and vanite

Prou. ^. ^.
He sytteth lurkynge in the streets, and privily does he murder y^ innocent:
his eyes are set against the poor. For he lies waiting secretly (even as a
Lion lurketh he in his den) that he may rauishe the pore.

He does rauishe the pore, when he gets him into his net. He falls down
and humbles him self, that the congregation of the poor may fall into the
hand of his captains. He has said in his heart Tushe, God has forgotten,
he hydeth away his face, and he will never se it. Arise (O Lord God,) and
lift up thine hand, forget not the poor. Wherefore should the wyeked blapheme
God, while he does say in his heart: tushe, thou carest not for^t? Surely
thou have seen it. For you beholdest ungodliness poor co^miteth him self unto
the, for ^ one (...) the helper of the friendless. Break ^ Lord the power of
the ungodly and malycyo* (...) take away his ungodliness, and (...) shall
find none. The Lord is king for ever, and ever, and the Hethen are peryshed
out of the land. Lord, thou have heard the desire of the poor, thou
preparest their heart and thine ear herkeneth thereto. To help the fatherless
and poor unto their right that the man of the earth be no more exalted
against them.

The. xi. Psalm.
To the Chaunt^^^ Psalm of Dauyd. Indn^o consido.


IN the Lord put I my trust: how say ye then to my soul: that she should
fle as a bird upon your hill? For lo, the ungodly be^de their bow, and make
ready their arowes in the quyuer, that they may pryuely shote at them, which
are true of heart. For the foundacions wylbe cast down, and what has the
ryghteous done? Abat (...) d.
The Lord is in his holy temple Esa. ixvi
the Lords seat the poor) and his eye lyddes behold the children of men. The
lord aloweth that ryghteous: but the ungodly, and him that delyteth in
wyckednes, does his soul abhor, Upon the ungodly he shall rain snares,
fire, add brymstone, storm and tempest: this shall be their porcyon to drink.
For y^ ryghteous Lord loves ryghteousnes: his cou^tenau^ce will behold the
thing that is just.

The. xii. Psalm.
To him that excels upon an iuste^mente

Help ( me) Lord, for there is not one Saluum fac dn^e.
godly man left. For the faithful are mynisshed from among the children of
me^, They talk of vanyte, every one with his neighbor, they do but flatter
with their lyppes and dyssemble in their heart. The Lord shall rote out all
discetyfull lyppes / and the tongue that speaks proud things.

Which have said: with our tongue will we prevail: we are they yt ought to
speak, who is our lord. Now for the troubles Psa. 119. ^.
and because of the complaynte of the poor, I will up (says the Lord) and
will help every one, fro him ^ swells against him, and will set them at
rest. The words of y^ Lord are pure words even as the silver, which from
earth is tried and purifyed seven times i^ the fire. Thou shall keep them (O
Lord) thou shalt preserve him from this generacyon for ever

The ungodly walk on every side: when they are exalted, the children of men
are put to rebuke.

The. xiij. Psalm.
To the chaunter, a Psalm of David.

How long will thou forget me (O Vsqueco dn^e
Lord? for ever? how long wilt you hyde thy face from me? How long shall I seek
cou^ cell in my soul? and be so vexed in mine heart how long shall mine
enemy triu^phe over me? Consydre, and here me (O Lord my God) lyghte^ mine
eyes, y^ I sleep not in death. Lest mine enemy say: I have prevailed against
him: for if I be cast down: they y^ trouble me will rejoice at it. But my
trust is in thy mercy, and my heart is joyful in thy salvation

I will sing to the Lord because he has dealte so louyngly with me. * ( ve I
will praise the name of the Lord the most highest.)

The. xiiij. Psalm.
To the chaunter, a Psalm. of David.

THe Dixit in sipi^e^*
fool has said in his heart, there is no God. They are corrupt, and become
abhomynable in their doings Psalm (...). ^ Psalm. (...). ^. Roma. (...)
there is not one y^ does good, * no not one.)

The Lord looked down from Heaven upon the children of men, to se if there
were any that would understand, and seek after God. But they are all gone out
of the way they are all together become abhomyable: there is none that does
good, no not one. * ( Their throat is an open sepulcre: with their tongues they
have disceyued, the poison of aders is under their lyppes. Their mouth is full
of cursyng and bytternes, their fete are swyfte to shed blood. Distruccion and
unhappiness is in their ways, and the way of peace have they not known,
there is no fear of God before their eyes.) Have they not known me, yt are
such workers of mischefe, eating up my people,

There were they brought in great fear * ( even where no fere was) for God is
in y^ generation of y^ rightuous. As for you ye have made a mock at the
council of the pore, because he puts his trust in the Lord.

Who shall give salvation unto Israel * out of Sion. When the Lord turns the
captivity of his people, then shall Jacob reioy^^, and Israel shall be glad.

The. xv. Psalm.
LORD, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? who shall rest upon thy holy hill?
Domine quis habitabit Psalm: 4^ Esap 33. ^. Mat (...). ^
Even he that leads an incorrupt life, and does the thing which is right,
and that speaks the trueh in his heart.

He that has vsid no disceyt in his tongue nor done evil to his neighbor, and
has not sclandred his neighbors. He that sets not by him self, but makes
much of them that fear the Lord: he that swears unto his neighbor, and
disapointeth him not. ^^^. 28. ^.
He that has not given his money upon usury, nor taken reward against the
innocent. Who so does these things, shall never fall.

The. xvj. Psame.
The (badge or arms) of David.

Preserve me (O God) for in the have I Co^serua me dn^e.
put my trust. Thou have said (O my soul) unto the Lord: thou art my God, my

But they that run after another God, shall have great trouble. Their drink
offrynges of blood will not I offer, nether make mencyon of their names within
my lyppes. The Lord him self is the porcyon of mine enheritau^ce and of my
cup: thou shall maynteyne my lotte. The lot is fallen unto me in a fair
ground, ye I have a goodly heritage. I will thank the Lord for geuynge me
warning: my reins

I have set God always before me, for he is on my right hand, therefore I
shall not fall. Wherefore my heart rejoiced, and my tongue was glade, my flesh
also shall rest in hope. For why? ^^^ ii d. (...). iiii. e.
thou shall not leave my soul in hell, neither shalt thou suffer thy holy one
to se corrupcyon. Thou shalt show me that pathe of life: in thy presence is
the fullness of joy, and in thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore.

The xvij. Psalm.
A prayer of David.

Hear the right (O Lord) consider my complaynte: and herke^ unto my prayer,
that goes not our of feigned lyppes. Let my sentence: come forth from thy
presence: and let thine eyes look upon the thing that is equal. Exaudi ^^e
iusti ^iam.
Thou have proved and visited mine heart in the night season: thou have tried me
and shalt find no wyckednes in m^* for I am utterly purposed, that my mouth
shall not offend. Because of men's works that are done against the word of
thy lyppes I have kept me from the ways of the distroyer. O hold thou up my
goynges in thy paths, that my ^o^e steps s^ppe not. I have called upon the
(O God) for thou shall hear me: incline thine ear to me: and harken unto my
words. Show thy marvelous loving kyndnesse, (thou that art the Savior of
them which put their trust in the) from such as resist thy right hand. Keep
me Pro. 17. ^.
as the ^acha. ii. ^.
under y^ shadow of thy wings. From the ungodly y^ trouble Mat. 33. ^.
me. Mine enemies compass me round about, to take away my soul. They main
tayne their own welthinesse, and their mouth speaks proud things. They lie
waiting in our way on every side, turnynge their eyes down to the ground.
Like as a lion y^ is gredy of his pray, and as it were a lions whelpe lurckinge
in secret places.

Up Lord, disapoynte him, and cast him

They have children at their desire, and leave the rest of their substance
for their babes. But as for me, I will behold thy presence in ryghteousnes:
and when I awake up after thy lycknesse, I shall be satisfied.

The. xviij. Psalm.
To the chaunte^ of David the servant of the Lord, which spoke unto the
Lord the words of this song, in the day that the Lord delivered him from
the hand of al his enemies, and from the hand of Soul (and he sap^e Diligam
^e dn^e.


I Will love the (O Lord) my strength. The Lord is my stonye rock and my ii.
reg. 12. ^.
I will call upon the Lord which is worthy to be praised, so shall I be safe
fro mine enemies. Psalm. ^^6. ^
The sorrows of death compassed me, and the brooks of ungodliness made me
afraid. The pains of hell came about me the snares of death ouertoke me. In my
trouble will I call upon the Lord, and compain unto my God. So shall he hear
my voice out of his * (holy) temple, and my co^playnte shall come before him,
even in to his ears. Mat. (...). ^.
The earth trembled and quaked, the very fou^dacyons also of y^ hills sh^ke
and were removed, because he was wroth.

There went a smoke out of his nostrels, and out of heaven, and the highest gave
his tho^dre with hayle stones and cooles of fire. He sent out his arrows and
scatred them, he cast forth lyghtnynges, and destroyed them.

The springes of waters were seen, and the fou^dacions of the round world
were discovered at thy chiding (O Lord at the blastynge Psalm. xii. b and.
ixix. s.
the word of the Lord also is tried in the fire: he is the defender of all
them that put their trust in him. For Deuteronomy. iiii. e
who is God, but the Lord? Or, who has any strength, except our God.

It is God that gyrdeth me with strength, of war, and makes my way perfect.

He makes my fete like hertes fete, and sets me up on hye. He techeth mine
hands to fight, and mine arms shall break 2. reg. xxii ^. Psa. 144 a
even a brazen bow. Thou haste given me the defense of thy salvation: thy
right hand also shall hold me up, and thy loving correccyon shall make me
great. Thou shall make rowme enough under me for to go, y^ my fore steps
shall not styde. I will follow upon mine enemies, and over take the^, and will
not turn again till I have dedestroyed them. I will smite the^ that they
shall not be able to stand, but fall under my fete. Thou haste gyrded me with
strength unto war, thou shalt throw down mine enemies under me. Thou have
made min enemies also to turn their backs upon me, and I shall destroy them
that hate me. ^bat. iii. d.
They shall cry, but there shall be none to help them: ye even unto the
Lord, shall Prou^^. ^.
they cry, but he shall not hear them.

I will beat them as small as the dust before the wind, I will cast them out
as the claye in the streets. Thou shalt deliver me from the stryuynges of the
people and thou shall make me the head of the Heithe^.

A people whom I have not known shall serve me. As Soon as they hear of me,
they shall obey me, but the strange children shall dissemble with me. The
strange children Rom^ (...). ^
For this cause I will give thanks unto the (O Lord) among the gentyls, and
sing praises unto thy name. 2. (...). ^^ii. ^
Great prosperity gives he unto his king, and shows loving kyndnes unto
Dauyd his anointed, and unto hes sede for evermore.

The. xix. Psalm.
To the Chaunter, a Psalm of Dauyd. Celi m^rant.


THE * heavens Roma. ^. ^.
declare the glory of

Their sound is gone out in to all Roma. ^. ^
lands, and their words in to the ends of the world. In them has he set a
tabernacle

The law of the Lord is undefiled converting the eyes. The fear of the
Lord is clean and endures for ever: the judgments of the Lord are true
and ryghteous altogether.

^^^. viii. b
More to be desired are they then gold, ye then much fine gold: sweter also
then honey, and the honey comb. Moreover, by them is thy servant taught, and in
keeping

The, xx. Psalm.
To the chaunter, a Psalm of David.

THe Lord hear the in the day of trouble, ^^^^diat ^ond.
the send the help from ye Santuary, and strength the out of Sion. Remember
all thy offerynges, and accept thy burnt sacrifyce, Sela. Grant the thy
hertes desire, and fulfill all thy mind. We will rejoice in thy salvation, and
triumph in the name of the Lord our God: the Lord perform all thy
peticions. Now know I, that the

Some put their trust in charettes, and some in horses, but we will remember
the name of the Lord our God they are brought down and fallen, but we are
risen, and stand up right. Save, Lord, and hear us, O king, in the day when
we shall call * (vponthe.)

The. xxi. Psalm.
To the chaunter, a Psalm of David.

THe king shall rejoice in thy strength, ^omine in ^^^ute ^ua.
O Lord, exceadynge glad shall he be of thy salvation. Thou have given him his
hertes desire, and have not denied him the request of his lyppes. Sela. For
thou shall preuente him with the blessings of goodness, and shalt set a crown
of pure gold upon his head. He asked life of the, and thou gave him a long
life, even for ever and ever. His honor is great in thy salvation: glory and
great worshipe shall thou lay upon him. For thou shall give him everlasting
felycite, and make him glad with the joy of thy countenance. because the
king puts his trust in the

Their fruit shall thou destroy out of the earth, and their sede from among
the children of men. For they intended myschefe against the, and ymagyned such
a deuyce, as they are not able to perform. Therefore shalt thou put them to
flight, and the strings of thy bow shall thou make ready against the faces of
them. Be thou exalted, Lord, in thine own streyngth: so will we sing and
praise thy power.

The xxii. Psalm.
To the Chaunter upon the hynde of the dawning A Psalm of David.

MY Deus de^s men's.
God, my God: * (look upon me) why have thou forsaken me: and art so far fro
my health, and from the words Mat* (...) Mat. xv. ^
of my complaynte? O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou hear not: and
in the night season also I take no rest. And thou contynuest holy, O thou
worship of Israel. Our fathers hoped in the: they trusted in the, and thou
dyddest deliver the^

They called upon the, and were helped: they put their trust in the, and were
not confounded. But as for me, I am a worm and no man: a very scorn of men
and the Psalm cix. d
All they that se me, laugh me to scorn: they shote out their lyppes, and
shake the head. Mat. 27. ^.
He trusted in God, let him deliver him: let him deliver him, if he will have
him. Psalm. ^1. ^.
But thou ar^ he that took me out of my mothers womb: thou wast my hope, when
I hanged yet upon my mothers breasts. I have been left unto the ever sense I
was borne: thou art my God, even fro my mothers womb.

O go not fro me, for trouble is hard at

Iosu. vii. b
I am powered out like water, and al my bones are out of joint: my heart also in
the myddest of my body is even like meltynge wax. My strength is dried up like
a po^sherde, and my tongue cleueth to my go^es and

For * (many) dogs are come about me, and the council of the wicked lay
seage against me. They pearsed my hands and my tete, I may tell all my
bones, they stand staring and lokynge upon me.

They part my garments among the^, Mat. 27. d.
and cast lottes upon my vesture. But be not thou far fro me, O Lord: thou
art my succoure, have the to help me. Deliver my soul from the sword, my
darlyng from the Ioh. rr. ^. Head. i^ c.
myddest of the congregation will I praise the. O praise the Lord ye that
fear him: Psalm. ix. v.
fear him al ye sede of Israel. For he has not dispysed nor abhorred the low
estate of the pore: he has not hyd his face from him but when he called unto
him, he herd him.

My praise is of the in the great congregation, my vows will I perform in
the sight of them that fear him. The poor shall eat, and be satisfied: they
that seek after the Lord, shall praise him: your heart

The. xxiij. Psalm.
A Psalm of Dauyd.

THE Lord is my shepherd, therefore ca^ Dn^s regit me.
I lack nothing. He shall feed me in a grene pasture, and lead me forth
beside the

Thou shall prepayre a table before me against

But * (thy) l^uynge kyndnes and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life.
and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever.

The. xxiiij. Psalm.
A Psalm of David. (in the first day of the Sabath.)

The Domini est terra.
earth is the Lords, and all that therein is: the compass of the world, and
they that dwell therein. For he has founded it upon the sees, and prepared it
upon ^eus. (...). ^ Cor^^. ^. ^.
Who shall ascend into y^ hyl Psalm vx. ^. Esa. (...). ^. Mat (...) ^
of the Lord? Or, who shall rise up in his holy place? Even he that has
clean hands and a pure heart: and that has not lift up his mind unto
vanyte, nor sworn to bysceaue. * (his neighbor) He shall receive the
blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation.

Who is this king of glory? It is the Lord strong and mighty, even the
Lord mighty in batell. Lift up your heads (O ye gates) and be ye lift up ye
everlasting doors, and the king of glory shall come in.

Who is this king of glory? Eue^ the Lord of Hoostes, he is the king of glory.
Sela.

The. xxv. Psalm.
Of David. Ad te domine le.


Unto the (O Lord) will Ilyfte up my soul. My God. I have put my trust

Roma. 9. ^ and. ^. d. Esa. ^. ^.
For all they that hope in the, shall not be a shamed: but such as tra^sgresse
without a cause, shall be put to confusion. Show me thy ways, O Lord, and
teach me thy paths Lead me forth in thy truth, and learn me, for thou art
the God of my salvation: in the has been my hope all the

O remember not the Job. (...). ^.
sins and offenses of my youth, but according unto thy mercy think upon me
(O Lord) for thy goodness. Good and ryghtuous is the Lord, therefore will he
teach sinners in the way. Them that be meke, shall he gyde in judgment: and
such as be gentle, the^ Esa. xli^. ^.
For thy names sake, O Lord, be merciful unto my sin, for it is great.

What man is he that fears the Lord? him shall he teach in the way that he
shall chose. His soul shall dwell at ease, and his sede shall inherit the
land. The secret of the Lord is among them that fear him Iere. xxxi. ^
(...) ^xxii. ^
and he will show them his covenant.

Mine eyes are ever lokynge unto y^ Lord for he shall pluck my fete out of yt
net. Turn the unto me, and have mercy upon me: for I am GOD, out of all his
troubles.

The. xxvj. Psalm.
(A Psalm of Dauyd) Before he was enbalmed. Iudica medn^e.


BETHOV my Psalm. 17. a.
judge O Lord for I have walked innoce^tly: my trust has been also in the
LORD, therefore shall I not fall. Psa. 139. d
Examen me, O Lord, and

For thy loving kyndnesse is before mine eyes, and I will walk in thy truth.
I have not dwelt with vain persons, neither will I have fellowship with the
disceytfull. I have hated the congregation of the wicked and will not sit
among y^ ungodly. Esa. ^. ^.
I will wasshe my hands in innocency, O Lord

Lord, I have loved the habitacion of thy house, and the place where thy
honor dwells. O shut not up my soul with the sinners, nor my life with the
blood thrustye.

In whose hands is wickedness, and their right hand is full of gifts. But as
for me I will walk innocentely: O deliver me, and be merciful unto me. My
fore stands right: I will praise the Lord in the congregacions.

The, xxvij. Psalm,
Of David.

THE Lord is my D^s illu min itio Psalm xxii. a
light and my salvation: whom shall I fear? the Lord is the strength of my
life: of whom shall I be afraid? When the wicked

Luke. x. g. ^. Reg. vli. c
One thing have I desired of y^ Lord which I will require: even yt I may
dwell in the^ house of y^ Lord all the days of my life, to behold the fair
beutie of the Lord, and to vyset his temple. For in the time of trouble he shall
hyde me in his 1. Beg. xxi. a
tabernacle, ye in the secret place of his dwelling shall he keep me, and
set me up upon a ii. re. xxiii. c.
rock of stone. And now shall he lift up my head above mine enemies round
about me. Therefore will I offer in his dwelling, the oblacion of thanks
geuynge: I will sing and speak praises unto the Lord.

Harken unto my voice, O Lord, when I cry unto the: have mercy upon me, and
hear me. My heart has talked of the Seek ye my face: thy face Lord will I
seek. O hyde not thou thy face fro me, nor cast thy servant away in
dyspleasure. Thou have ben my succoure, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God
of my salvation. Wha^ my father and my mother forsake me, the Lord takes me
up. Teach me thy way Psalm. (...) ^
be strong, and he shall conforte thine heart, and put thou thy trust in the
Lord.

The. xxviij. Psalm.
A Psalm of David. Ad ^e do mine cla


Unto the will I cry, O Lord my strength: think no scorn of me, lest
neither destroy me) with the ungodly and wicked doers Iere. ix. b.
which spoke fryndely to their neighbors, but ymagin mischefe in Job. 34. d.
Mat. (...). d Roma. ii. ^.
Reward the^ according to their deeds: and according to the wicked nesse of
their own inuencions. Recompense them after the work of theye hands: pay
them that they have deserved.

For they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operacyon of his hands
therefore shall he break them down, and not build them up. Praised be the
Deu. viii.
The Lord is my strength and my shylde: my heart has trusted in him, and I
am helped: therefore my heart daunseth for joy, and in my song will I praise
him. The Lord is their strength and he is the wholesome defense of his
anointed. O Save thy people, and give thy blessing unto Deuteronomy. 32. b.
thine enheritau^ce: feed them, and set them up for ever.

The. xxix. Psalm.
A Psalm of David (at the perfourmynge Afferte domino.
of the Tabernacle.

Bring unto the Lord (O ye myghtie) Exodus vii. and. viii.
It is the Lord that commaundethe the waters: It is the glorious God that
makes the thonder: Ero. xiiii. g Mat. viii d
it is the Lord that rules the sea. The voice of the Lord Ezc. xvii. g
Cedre trees: ye the Lord breaks the Ceders of Libanus.

He made them also to skyppe like a Calfe: Libanus also, and Sirion like a young
unicorn. The voice of the Lord deuydeth the flames of fire: the voice of the
Lord, shakes the wilderness, ye the Lord shakes the wilderness of Cades.
The voice of the Lord makes the hyndes to bring forth young and dyscouereth
the thycke busshes: and in his temple does every man speak of his honor. The
Lord sits above the water floude, and the Lord remains a king for ever.
The Lord shall give strength unto his people, the Lord shall bless his his
people in peace.

The. xxx. Psalm.
A Psalm and song of the dedicacyon of the house of Dauyd. Exaltabo te dn^e.


I Will magnyfye the, O Lord, for thou haste set me up, and not made my foes
to triumph over me. O Lord my God, I tried unto the, and thou haste healed me.

Thou Lord have brought my soul out of hell: thou have kept my life, from
them that go down to the pyt. Sing praises unto 1. Cor. 4. ^.
For his wrath endures but the twynclynge of an eye, and his pleasure is in
life: heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes again in the morni^g
And in my prosperity, I said: I shall never be removed: thou Lord of thy
goodness had made my hill so strong. Thou dyddeste

Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me:

The. xxxi. Psalm.
To the chaunter a Psalm of Dauyd. In te domine speraui.


IN the, O Lord, have I put my trust: let Luke. 14 ^. Acts. 7. g.
Into thy hands I commend my spyryte: For thou have delivered me / O Lord
thou God of treuth. I have hated them that hold of supersticious vanities /

Show thy servant the light of thy cou^tenau^ce, and save me for thy mercyes
sake. Let me not be confounded, O Lord, for I have called upon the: let the
ungodly be put to confucion, and be put to syle^ce in the grave. Let the lyenge
lyppes be put to silence, which cruelly, disdaynfully, and despytfully, speak
against the ryghtuous. O how plentyfull is thy goodness, which thou have
laid up for them that fear the^ and that thou have prepayred for them, that
Psalm. 27 d. (...). xxxi. e.
Be strong, and he shall strength your heart / all ye yt put your trust in the
Lord.

The. xxxii. Psalm.
An instruccyon of Dauyd. (...) quo^^^


BLESSED is he, whose unrighteous is forgyuen, and whose sin is covered.
(...). 4. a
Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord imputes no sin, and in whose
sprete there is no gyle. For while I held my tongue, my bones consumed away
through my daily complaining. For thy hand is heavy upon me day and night,
and my moisture is like the drough in Summer. Sela. I will knoweledge my sin
(...). c (...). iv. d.
I will confess my sins unto the Lord, and so thou forgauest the wickedness
of my sin. Dela. For this shall every one that is godly, make his prayer unto
the in due season, but in the great water floudes they shall not come nigh him.

Thou art my defense, thou shalt preserve me from trouble: thou shall
compass me about with so^ges of delyuerau^ce. Sela. I will enfourme the, and
teach the i the way wherein you shall go: and I will gyde y^ with mine eye. Ye
shall not be like a horse and mule, which have no understanding. And whose
mouths must be holde^ with byt and bridle, lest they fall upon y^. Great plages
remain for y^ ungodly, but who so puts his trust in y^ Lord, mercy
embraces hi on every side. Be glad, O ye righteous, and rejoice in y^ Lord
and be joyful all ye that are true of hrete.

The. xxxiii. Psalm.
Rejoice Exultate iusti in dn^o
in the Lord, O ye ryghtuous, for it becomes well the just to Psalm. 97. d
Praise the Lord with harp sing Psalms unto him with the lute, and
instrument of ten strings. Sing unto the Lord a new so^ge, sing praises
lustely * (unto him) with a good courage. For the word of the Lord is true,
and all his works are faithful. He loves ryghtuousnes and judgment: the
earth is full of the goodness of the Lord. Ephe. v. d. Col. iii. c.
By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the Gene. i. a.
Hoostes of them by the breath of his mouth.

He gathers the waters of the sea together as it were upon a heap, and
lays Psa. 14^. ^
For he spoke, and it was done: he commanded, and it stood fast

The Lord brings the Psalm. i a Esa. viii. b.
council of the Heithen to naught, and makes the devices of the people, to be
of none effect. * (and casts out the councels of Princes.)

The council of the Lord shall endure for ever, and the thoughts of his heart
from generacyon to generacyon. Blessed is the people whose God is the Lord
Jehovah, and blessed is the folk that have chosen be^ to be their
inheritance. The Lord looked down from Heaven, and beheld all the children
of men: from the habitacion of his dwelling, he consydreth all them that dwell
in the earth. He tashyoneth all the hertes of them, and understands all
their works. There is no king that can be saved by the multitude of an host,
neither is any mighty man delivered by much strength.

A horse is counted but a vain thing to save a man, neither shall he deliver
any man by his great strength. Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that
fear him, and upon them that put their trust in his mercy. To deliver their
souls from death, and to feed the^ in the time of dearth. Our soul has
patiently tarried for the Lord, for he is our help and our shylde. For our
heart shall rejoice in him, because we have hoped in his holy name. Let thy
mercyful kyndnesse, O Lord, be upon us, like as we have put our trust in the.

The. xxxiiij. Psalm.
Of Dauyd, when he changed his speech before Abimilech: which drove him
away and he departed. Benedic^ dominum


I Will all way give thanks unto the Lord, hes praise shall ever be in my
mouth My soul shall make her bost i the Lord: the humble shall here thereof,
and be glad. O praise the Lord with me, and let us magnyfye his name together.
1. ^eg. xxi. ^
I sought the Lord, and he heard me, ye he delivered me out of all my
fear. They had an eye unto him, and were lyghtened, and their faces were not
ashamed. Lo, the poor cries, and the Lord hears him, ye and saves Joshua.
v. d. 4. reg. 19 ^ Psalm. ii. b.
The Angel of the Lord tarieth round about them and fear him, and
delyuereth them.

O taste and se, how gracious the Lord is, Psa. 127. a
blessed is the man that trusts in him.

O Mat. vi. b.
fear the Lord, ye that be his saints: for they that fear him, lack
nothing.

The lions do lack, and suffer hunger but they which seek the Lord / shall
want no manner of thing that is good. Come ye children / and i. Pet. iii. c
that lists to live, and woloe feign se good days? Keep thy tongue from
evil, and thy lyppes, that they speak no gyle. Eschew cuyll, and do good:
seek peace and ensue it.

The eyes of the Lord are over the rightuous, and his ears are open unto
their prayers. The countenance of the Lord is against them that do evil, to
rote out the re membraunce of them from the earth. The rightuous cry, and the
Lord hears the^, and delyuereth them out of all their troubles. Pro. 24. b.
(...)* (...). d ^ (...). ^. c.
Great are the troubles of the ryghteous, but the Lord delyuereth him out of
all. He keeps all his bones, so that not one of them can be broken. Eut
mysfourtune shall slaye the ungodly, and they that hate the rightuous shall be
desolate. The Lord delyuereth the souls of his servants: and all they y^
put their trust in him shall not be destitute

The* xxxv. Psalm.
O^ David.

Plead thou my cause, O Lord, with them that strive wtth me: and fight thou
against them that fight against me. Lay hand upon the shylde and bucler,
Iudica* dn^e noce^ tes.
Let Psalm. 83. c.
them be as duste before the wind, and the angel of the Lord scateringe
them. Let their way be dark and slippery, and let the the angel of the Lord
persecute them. For they have preuely laid their net to destroy me without a
cause, ye even without a cause have they made a pyt for my soul.

Let a sudden destruction come upon him ^ix ^osti (...)
salvation. All my bones shall say: Lord, who is like unto the? which
delyuerest the poor from stronger than him self ye the poor and the
wretched from him that spoileth him. False witness did rise up: they lated to
my charge, things that I know not. They rewarded me evil for good, to the
great dyscomforte of my soul,

Nevertheless: when they were sick, I put on a sack cloth: and humbled my
soul with fasting, and my prayer shall turn into mine own boso^. I behaved
my self as though

But in mine aduersyte they reioysed, and gathered them together: ye the very
abiectes came together against me unawares, ma king mowes at me, and ceased
not. With y^ flatterers were busy mockers, which gnas shed against me with
their tethe. Lord, how long will thou look upon this? O deliver my soul
from the wicked rumors of them, and my dearlynge from the lions?

So will I give the thanks in the great congregacyon, I will praise the among
much people. O let not them that are mine enemies tryumphe over me for naught:
nether let them wyncke with their eyes, that Psalm. 6^. ^ Ioh. (...). ^.
hate me without a cause. And why? their co^monynge is not for peace, but they
ymagyn dysceytfull words against them that are quiet in the land. They gaped
upon Nol ^^li
thy tongue then, go not far fro me, O Lord

Awake and stand up: avenge thou my cause, my God, and my Lord. Judge me O
Lord my God, according to thy ryghtuousnesse, and let them not triumph over
me. Let them not say in their hertes: there, there, so would we have it:
neither let them say: we have over come him. Let them be put to confusyon and
shame, that together reioise at my trouble, let the^ be clothed with rebuke and
dishonor, that boast them sell ues against me. Let them be glad and rejoice,
that favor my rightuous dealing ye let them say always: blessed be the Lord
that wills the peace of his servant.

And as for my tongue, it shall be talking of thy ryghtuones and of thy praise,
all the day long.

The. xxxvi. Psalm.
To the chauntee, of Dauyd the servant of the Lord.

MY heart shows me the wickedness of the ungodly, that ^ixit in ^oslus.
(...)ma, iii c
there is no fear of God before his eyes. For he flatereth hi^ self in his
own sight, till his abhomynable sin be found out. The words of his mouth
are unrighteous, and full of disceyte: he has left of to behave him self
well and to do good. He ymagyneth myschefe upon his bed. and has set him
self in no good way, neither does he refuse any thing that is evil. Thy
mercy, O Lord reaches unto the Heaven, and thy truth unto the clouds. Thy
ryghtuousnes stands like the strong mountains: thy judgments are like the
great deep.

Thou Lord will preserve both man and beast. How excellent is thy mercy,
O God? and the children of men shall put their trust under the shadow of thy
wings.

They shall be satysfyed with the plentuousnes of thy house, and thou shalt
give them drink of thy pleasure, as out of the river. For with the is the
well of life, and in thy light, shall we se light. O sprede forth thy loving
kyndnes unto them that know the, and thy ryghtuousnes unto the^ that are true
of heart. O let not the foot of pride come against me: and let not y^ hand of
the ungodly cast me down. There are they fallen ( all) that work wyckednes:
they are cast down, and shall not be able to stand.

The. xxxvij. Psame.
A Psalm of Dauyd.

FRET not thy self because of the ungodly neither be thou envious against the
evil doers. For they shall sone be cut down LORD, and put thy trust in him,
and he shall bring it to pass. He shall make thy ryghtuousnesse as clear as
the light: and thy just dealyng as the none day. Hold the still in the Lord,
and abide pacyently upon him: but grieve not thy self at him whose way does
prospere, and that does Prou. 24. d
to him self. Noli e^^lare.
Though he fall, he shall not be cast away, for the Lord vpholdeth him with
his hand. I have been young, and now am old: and yet saw I never the
rightuous forsaken, nor hes sede to seek their bread Prou. x. ^c.


Prou. x. d.
The ryghtuous is ever mercyful, and The unrighteous shall be punysshed.) as for
the sede of the ungodly it shall be roted out. The ryghtuous shall inherit the
land, and dwell therein for ever

The mouth of the rightuous is exercised in wisdom, and his tongue will be
talking of judgment. The law of God goynges shall not slide. The ungodly
seythe the ryghteous, and sekethe occasyon to sleye him. The Lord will not
leave him in his hand, ner condemn him when he is judged. Hope thou in the
Lord, and keep his way, and he shall promote the, that thou shalt possessethe
land, when the ungodly shall perish, thou shall se it. I my self have seen
the ungodly in great power and floryshynge like a grene baye tree: and I went
by, and lo, he was gone: I sought him but * ( his place,) could no where be
found. Keep innocence, and take heed unto the thing that is rygte, for that
shall bring a a man peace at the last. As for the transgressors, they shall
perysshe together, and the ungodly shall be roted out at the last.

But the salvation of the ryghtuous comes of y^ Lord, which is also their
strength in the time of trouble. And the Lordeshal stand by* them, and save
them: he shall deliver them from the ungodly, and shall save them, because they
put their trust in him.

The. xxxviij. Psalm.
A Psalm of David for remembrance.

PUt me not ^ne ne infuro. Psalm. 7 a. I^^. x. d.
to rebuke (O Lord) i^ thine anger: nether chasten me in thy heavy displeasure.
For thine arowes stycke fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore. There is no
health in my flesh, because of thy displeasure: nether is there any rest in
my bones, by reason of my sin. For my wyckednesses are gone over my head,
and are like a sore burden, to heavy for me to bear.

My wounds stynke and are corrupt, through my folyshenesse. I am brought into
so great trouble and mysery, that I go Job. xix. ^.
My lovers and my neighbors did stand lokynge upon my trouble, and my kinsmen
stood a far of. They also that sought after my life, laid snares for me: and
they that went about to do me evil, talked of wickedness, and Imagined
dysceate all the day long. As for me, I was like a deaf man and herd not,
and as one that is domme, which does not open his mouth. I was even as a man
that hears not: and in whose mouth are no reprofes.

For in the, O Lord have I put my trust, even my enemies) should not tryu^phe
over me: for wha^ my foot slypte, they reioysed greatly against me. I truly am
set in the plage, and my heaviness is ever my syghte. For I will confess my
wickedness / and be sorry for my sin. But mine enemies live, and are mighty:
and they that hate me wrongfully, are many in nombre. They also that reward
euel for good are against me / because I follow the thing that good is.
Forsake me not (O Lord my God.) Be not thou far fro me. Haste the to help
me, O Lord * ( God) my salvation.

The. xxxix. Psalm.
To the chaunter Ieduthun a Psalm of David.

I Said: I will take heed to my ways, Dixi, custodiam.
that I offend not in my tongue. I will keep my mouth (as it were with a
bridle) while the ungodly is in my syghte.

I held my tongue, and spoke nothing, I kept silence ye even from good
words but it was pain and grefe to me. My heart was hot within me / and
while I was thus musing, the fire kyndled: and (at the last) I spoke with my
tongue: Psalm x^. ^.
Lord Job. vii. ^. and. viii. ^.
Behold, thou haste made my days as it were a spanne Luke. x^^. ^.
and can not tell who shall gather them. And now Lord what is my hope? truly
my hope is even in the. Deliver me from all mine offenses, and make me not a
rebuke unto the foolyshe. I became domme, and opened not my mouth, i. pat.
(...). ^.
I am a stranger with the and a songeouer, as all my fathers were.

Oh spare me a little, that I may recover my strength, before I god hence: and
be no more seen,

The. xl. Psalm.
To the chaunter a Psalm of David.

I Waited pacyently for the Lord, and he enclyned unto me: and heard my
calling. Expec^t^^s* ex.
Blessed is the man, that has set his hope in the Lord and turned not unto
the proud, and to such as go about with lies. O Lord my God, great are thy
wondrous works which thou haste done: like as be also thy thoughts which
are to us ward: and yet there is no man that ordreth them unto the. If I would
declare them, and ^e^. xvii. b
Sacryfyce and meat ^^^. xv. ^.
offering you would not have but * mine ears haste thou opened: burnt
offerynges and sacrifice for sin haste thou not required. Then said I: Lo I
come In the volume of the book it is written of me, that I should fulfill thy
will, O my God, I am content to do it: ye thy law is within my ^erie. I have
declared thy righteousness in the great congregacyon: Lo, I will not retrayne
my lyppes, O Lord, and that thou know. I have not hyd thy rygtuousnes within
my heart, my talkyng has been of thy truth and of thy salvation I have

Thou art my helper and redemer: make no long taryinge (O my God.)

The. xlj. Psalm.
To the chaunter* a Psalm. of David. Beatus qui intel


BLESSED is he Prou. 14. d
y^ co^sidreth y^ pore * ( and nedy) y^ Lord shall deliver him

I said Lord be mercyful unto me, hele my soul, for I have sinned against
the.

Mine enemies speak evil of me: when Psalm. iv. ^. Ioh. xiiii. ^
(which did also eat of my bread) has * laid great wait for me. But be
thou merciful unto me (O Lord) raise thou me up again, and I shall reward

Amen.
The. xlij. Psalm.
To the chaunter a mon^cyon of the sons of Corah.

LIke as the heart desires the water brokes so longs my soul after the. (O
Que^admodum.
God.) My soul is a thirst for GOD, ye^ even for the living GOD: when shall
I

Psa. lxxx. a
My tears have been my meat day and night, while they daily say unto me:
where is thy God? Now when I think there upon 1. Reg. 1. c. Psalm. lxii. a
I power out my heart by my self: for I went with y^ multitude, and brought the^
forth unto the house of god, in the voice of Psa. xliii. ^
Why art thou so full of heaviness (O my soul) and why art thou so unquiet
within me? Put thy trust in God for I will yet give him thanks: for the help of
his countenance. My God, my soul is vexed within me: therefore will I remember
the concerning the Jesus. xii. ^
land of Iordane, and the little hill of Hermonym. One deep calls another
because of the noise of thy water pipes and al thy waves and storms ar gone
over me. The Lord has granted his loving kyndnesse on the day time, and
in the night season did I sing of him, and made my prayer unto the God of my
life.

I will say unto the God of my strength why haste thou forgotten me: and why
go I thus heuely, while the enemy oppresses me. My bones are smyten asunder,
while mine enemies * ( that trouble me) cast me in the tethe, Namely while they
said daily unto me: where is now thy God? Why art thou so vexed (O my soul)
and why art thou so dysquieted within me? O put thy trust in God, for I will yet
thank him which is the help of my countenance, and my God.

The xliij. Psalm.
Give sentence with me (O God) and de fend my cause against the ungodly
Iudica me (...).
why art thou so heavy (O my soul) and why a^te thou so disquyeted within me?
Psalm xiii. b
O ^ut thy trust in god, for I will yet give him thanks which is the help of
my countenance, and my God.

The. xliiij. Psalm.
To the chaunter an instruccyon of the sons of Lo^ah.

WE have herd with our ears (O God( Deus au ^ibus.
our fathers have told us: what y^ haste done in their time of old. How
thou D^u. ix. a.
De^te. v^* ^
For they gat not the land in possessyon through their own sword, nether was
it their own arm that helped them. But thy right hand, and thine arm, and
the light of thy countenance, because thou had a favor unto them. Thou
art Psalm. 97. a,
my king (O God) send help unto Jacob.

Through thy, will we overthrow our enemies, and in thy name will we tread
the^ under that rise up against us. For I will not trust i my bow, it is not
my sword that Psalm. ^x. ^
go not for the with our armies.

Thou make us to turn our backs from our enemies, and they which hate us,
spoil our goods. Thou let us be eaten up like sheep, and haste scatered
us among the Psalm. 79. ^.
Thou make us to be a by word among the heithen, and that the people shake
their heads at us. My confusion is daily before me, and the shame of my face
has covered me, For the voice of the sclau^derer and blasphemer for the enemy
and auenger. And though all this be come upon us, yet do we not forgette the,
nor behave our selves frowardly in thy covenant. Our heart is not turned back
neither our steps gone out of thy way. No not when thou haste snutte^

Shall not God search it out? for he knows the very secrets of the heart.
Roma. (...)
For thy sake also are we killed all the day long, and are counted as sheep
appointed to be slain.

Up Lord why slepest thou? Awake, and be not absent from us for ever. Wherefore
hydest thou thy face, and forgettest our mysery and our trouble? Psalm. (...)
For out soul is brought low even unto the dust: our belie cieueth unto the
ground. Arise and help us, and deliver us for thy mercy sake.

The. xlv. Psalm.
To him that excel among the ^^^^es an instruccyon of the children of Lorah,
a song of love. Eruct^ uit co^*


MY heart is endytynge of a good matter I speak of the thiges, which I have

Girde the with thy sword upon thy thigh (O thou most mighty) according to
thy worshype and renown. Good luck have thou with thine honor, ride on
because of the word of treuthe, of meekness and righteousness: and thy right
hand shall teach very sharp, and the people shall be subdued unto the, even in
the myddest among the kings enemies. ^^b. ^. ^.
Thy seat (O God) endures for ever: the scepter of thy kingdom is a right
scepter. Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquite: wherefore God (even
thy God (has anoyted the with the oil of gladness above thy fellows

All thy garments smell of myrre, Aloes and Cassia, out of the yuerye palaces,
where by they have made the glade. Kings daughters were among thy honorable
women: upon thy right hand did stand the queen in a vesture of gold * (
wrought about with diverse colors.) Harken (O God) and worshype thou him. And
the daughter of Tire shall be there with a gift, like as the rich also among
the people shall make their supplicacyon before the. The kings daughter is all
glorious within, her clothing is of wrought gold. She shall

The. xlvi. Psalm.
To the chaunter, a song for the children of Lorath upon Alamoth. ^^us nos^er
refu^^um.


GOd is our hope and strength: a very pre sent help in trouble. Therefore will
we not fear, though the earth be moved, and Psalm. 83. a.
Though y^ waters thereof rage and swell, and though the mountains shake at the
tempest of the same. Sela. The ryuers of the floude thereof shall make glad the
city of God, the holy place of the tabernacles of the most highest. God is in
the myddest of her, therefore shall she not be removed: God shall help her, and
that right early. The Heithen make much a do, and the kingdoms are moved: but
God has Psalm. 76. a
He makes wars to cease in all the world: he breaks the bow and knappeth
y^ spear in sonder and burns the charettes in the fire. Be still then, and
know that I am God: I will be exalted among the Heythen, and I will be exalted
in the earth. The Lord of Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our defense.
Sela.

The xlvij. Psalm.
To the chaunter a Psalm for the children of Lor^h.

O Clappe your hands together (all ye people) O sing unto God with the voice
of melody. For y^ Lord is hye and Omnes gentes po pul^. Psalm. 76. a
to be feared he is the great king upon all the

God is gone up with a merry noise, and the Lord with the sound of the trompe.
O sing praises, sing praises unto * ( our) God: O sing praises, sing
praises unto our king. For God is king of al y^ earth

The. xlviij. Psalm.
^ song^ of a Psalm of the children of Lo^ah * in the second day of our
Sabba^h.

Great is the Lord, and hyghly to be ^agnus dominus.
praised, in the city of our God, even upon his holy hill. The hill of Syon
is of the earth) are gathered, and gone by together. They merueled, to se such
things: they were astonyed, and suddenly cast down. Fear came there upon
them, and sorrow, as upon a woman in her travail.

Thou shall break the ships of the sea,

Mark well her bulwerkes, set up her houses, that ye may tell them that come
after. For this God is our God for ever and ever, he shall be our gyde unto
death.

The. xlix. Psalm,
To the chaunter, a Psalm for the children of Lorah. Audite oe^s ge^tes hec.


O Hear this, al ye people: po^dre it with your ears, all ye that dwell in
the Psalm. li^. b. Luke. xii c.
There be some that trust in their 1. Petr. i. c. 1. Ioh. ii. ^.
For it costeth more to redeem their souls, so that he must let that alone for
ever. ^ee though he live long, and se not the grave. Eccle. il. c* and. iii.
For he sees, that wise men also dye, and peryshe togeyther, as well as the
ignorant and folysh and Ioh. ^7. d. Luke. xii. c.
leave their riches for other. And yet they think, that their houses shall
continue for ever, and that their dwelling places shall endure from one
generation to another, calling the lands after their own names

Nevertheless, man will not abide in honor, seeing he may be compared unto
the beasts that peryshe: this is the way of them. This is their folyshnesse,
and their posterite praise their saying. Sela.

They lie in the hell like sheep, death Job. 27. d.
For he shall carry nothing away with him when he dies, nether shall his pomp
follow him

For while he lived, he counted him self an happy man: and so long as y^
do well unto thy self, me^ will speak good of the. He shall follow the
generation of his fathers, and shall never se light. Man being in honor has
no understanding, but is compared unto the beasts, that peryshe.

The. l. Psalm.
A Psalm of Asaph.

The Lord even the most myghtie God has spoken, and called the world from
the rysynge up of the son unto the ^* ^^^tum (...).
Out of Syon Esa. (...). ^.
has God apeared in perfect bewtye.

Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: there shall go before him a
co^sumynge fire, and a mighty tempest shall be stered up round about him.

He shall call the heaven from above, and the earth, that he may judge his
people.

Gather my saynctes togeyther unto me, those that have made a covenant with
me, with sacrifyce. And the heavens shall Esaias. ^. ^ Amos. v. l^ Acts. vii. ^
I will take no bullock out of thy house / nor he Goats out of thy foldes. For
all the beasts of the Forest are mine, and so are the cattle upon a thousand
hills. I know all the fowls upon the mountains, and the wild beasts of
the field are in my sight. If I be hongrye I will not tell the: for E^^^ (...)*
^ Psalm. ^4^ ^. Co^^^. ^^
the whole world is mine, and all y^ therein is. Thynkeste thou, that I will
eat bulls flesh and drink the blood of goats? Offer 2. Pa^. ^5. ^
call upon me in the time of trouble, so will I hear the, and thou shalt
praise me.

But unto the ungodly said God. Why do thou preach my laws, and take my
covenant in thy mouth? Where as thou hate to be reformed: and haste cast my
words behind the? Wha^ thou saw a thief thou consentedest unto him, and
haste been partaker with the aduouterers. Thou have let thy mouth speak
wickedness, and with

These things haste thou done, and I held my tongue and y^ thoughtest * (
wickedly) that I am eue^ such a one as thy self: but I will re prove the, and
set before the, the things that thou have done. O consydre this, ye y^ forget
God: lest I pluck you away, and there be none to deliver you. Who so offreth
me thanks and praise, he honors me: and to him y^ ordreth his conversation
right, will I show the salvation of God.

^ The. li. Psalm.
To the chaunter, ^ Psalm of David, when the prophet Nathan came unto him,
after he was gone in to Bethsave. (...) (...) deus.


Have mercy upon me (O God) after thy * ( great) goodness, according unto the
multitude of thy mercyes / do away mine offenses. wash me thoroughly fro my
wickedness, and cleanse me fro my sin. For (...). xiii. ^* (...). xv. d.
I knowleg my fautes, and my sin is ever before me. Against the only have I
sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: ^o^, 19. ^
y^ thou myghtest be justified in thy saying, and clear when y^ art judged.
Behold, I was shapen in wickedness, and in sin has my mother conceived me.
But lo, thou requyrest truth in the inward parts, and shall make (...)* (...).
^.
Isope, and I shall be clean: thou shall wash me, and I shall be whiter then
snow. Thou shall make me hear joy and gladness, that the bones which y^
have broken, may rejoice. Turn thy face from my sins, and put out al my
misdedes.

(...)
Make me a clean heart (O God (and renew a right spryte within me. Cast me not
away

For thou desyrest no sacryfyce, else would I give it y^: Psalm. l. ^. (...). l.
^. (...)* v. d. (...). vi^. ^
but thou delitest not in burntofferynge. The sacrifice of God is a troubled
spryte, (...)* 66. a.
a broken and a co^tryte heart (O God (shall thou not despise. O be favorable
and gracious unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem. Then shall thou be
pleased with y^ ^^. 1^. d.
sacryfice of righteousness, with the burnt offerynges and oblacions: the^
shall they offer young bullockes upon thine altar.

The. lii. Psalm.
To the chaunter; an exortacion of David, when Do^g the Edomyte came to Saul
and showed him saying: David is come to the house of Abimelech. Quid ^lo
^^a^is in ^ali^i^.


WHy boastest thou thy self / thou Tyraunte, that thou ca^ste do myschefe?
Where as the goodness of God endures yet daily. Thy tongue ymagyneth
wickedness, and with lies thou cutteste like a sharp ^asoure. Thou haste
loved vngracyousnesse more then goodness, and to talk of lies more then
righteousness. Sela. Thou have loved to speak al words that may do hurt, O
thou false tongue.

Thertore shall God destroy y^ for ever: he shall take y^ and pluck y^ out of
thy dwelli^g and rote the out of the la^d of the living. Sela

The righteous also shall se this, and fear, and Psalm 49. ^ Luke. xii. c
trusted unto y^ multitude of his riches, and stre^gthed him self in his
wickedness. As for me, I am like a grene olive tree in the house of God: my
trust is in the tender mercy of God for ever and ever. I will always give
thanks unto the, for that thou haste done: and I will hope in thy name, for
thy saynctes like it well.

The. liii. Psalm.
To the chaunter upon Mahalath, an instruccyon of David Dicit in s^pt^ns.


THe Psalm. xiii. ^
foolyshe body has said in his Psa. x^^^^ ^ Roma. iii. c.
there is none that does good.

God looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to se if there were any
that would understand, and seek after God.

But they are all gone out of the way, they are all together become
abominable: there is also none y^ does good, no not one.

Oh that the salvation were given unto Israel out of Sion: Oh that y^ Lord
would deliver his people out of captyuyte.

Then should Jacob rejoice, and Israel should be right glad.

The. liiii. Psalm.
To the chaunter in melodyes, an instruccyon of David, when the zephytes came
and said unto Saul: Has not David hyd him self among us.

Save me (O God) for thy names sake, and avenge me in thy strength. Hear Deus
in no^^ tuo.
He shall Deuteronomy. 32. ^.
reward euel unto mine enemies: Destroy thou them in thy truth. An offering
of afre heart will I give the, and praise thy name (...) truth. Sela. Therefore
were thy beloved Psalm. 10^. d
God has spoken in his holiness: I will rejoice and deuyde Siche^ and mete
out the valley of Suchoth. Gilead is mine, and Manasses is mine: Ephraim also
is the strength of my head, Judah is my law given. Moab is my washpotte^ over
Edo^ will I cast out my sho, Philistea be thou glade of me. Who will lead me
into the strong cite? Who will bring me Psalm. 44. c
go out with our hoostes? O be thou our help in trouble, for bayne is the
help of man. Through God we shall do great acts, for it is he that shall
tread down our enemies.

The. lxj. Psalm. ^^audi eus d^^ccacio (...).

To the chaunter in the melodies of David.

Hear my cryenge (O God) give ear unto my prayer, From the ends of the earth
will I call unto the, when my heart

He shall dwell before God for ever: O prepare thy loving mercy and faythfulnes
that they may preserve him. So will I always sing praises unto thy name, ^sal.
^vi b
that I may daily perform my vows.

The. lxij. Psalm.
To the chaunter For Iedu^hum: a Psalm of David.

MY soul truly wayteth still upon God onne o sub (...) ^.
for of him comes my salvation.

He verily is my strength, and my salvation: He is my defense: so that I shall
not greatly fall. How long will ye ymagyne myschefe against every man? ye
shall be stayne all the sort of you: ye as a tottryng wall shall ye be, and like
a broken hedge. Their deuyce is only how to put him out whom God will exalte:
their delight is in lies, they give good words with their mouth, but curse
with their heart. Sela. Nevertheless, my soul wait thou still upon God, for
my hope is in him. He truly is my strength, and my salvation: he is my defense:
so that I shall not fall. In God is my health, and my glory, the rock of my
might, and in God is my trust. O put your trust in him always (ye people) i.
Reg. ^. c P^a. xlii. a
power out your hertes before him, for God is our hope. Sela. As for Psalm.
18. ^ Mat. xii^. d
thou rewardest every man according to his work.

The. lxiij. Psalm.
A Psalm of David, when he was in the wyldernes of Judah.

O God, thou art my God: early will I Deus de us meus*
seek the. My soul thrusts for the: my flesh also longethe after the in a
baren and dry land: where no water is.

Thus have I looked for the in holiness that I might behold thy power and glory

For thy loving kyndnesse is better then life it self, my lyppes shall praise
the.

As long as I live will I magnyfye the on this manner, and lift up my hands in
thy

Have I not remembered the in my bed, and

Because thou haste been my helper, therefore under the shadow of thy wings
will I rejoice. My soul ha^geth upon the, thy right hand has vpholden me.
These also that seek the hurt of my soul, they shall go into the lower parts
of the earth. Let the^ fall upon the edge of the sword, y^ they may be a
portion for foxes. But y^ king shall rejoice in God Deu. vi. c.
all they also y^ swear by him shall be commended, for the mouth of them chat
speak lies, shall be stopped.

The. lxiiij. Psalm.
To the Chaunter, a Psalm of Dauyd.

HEAR my voice (O God) in my praer: Ex ^udi deus oracionem.
preserve my life from fere of the enemy. Hyde me from the gatherynge together
of the froward, and from the insurrection of wicked doers. Which have whee
their tongue like a sword, and shote out their arrows: even bitter words.
That they may pryu^^^ shote at him which is perfect: suddenly do they hit him
and fear not. They courage them selves in mischeife, and commune among them
selves, how they may lay snares: and say, that no man shall se them They
ymagin wickedness, and practyse it yt they keep secret among them selves, every
man in y^ deep of his heart. But god shall suddenly shote at them with a swifte
arow, y^ they shall be wounded. Ye their own tongues shall make them fall, in so
much y^ who so sees them, shall laugh them to scorn. And all men that se it,
shall say: this has God done, for they shall perceive that it is his work.
The ryghteous shall rejoice in the Lord, and put his trust in him: and all
they that are true of heart, shall be glad.

The. lxv. Psalm.
To the chaunter a Psalm and song of Dauyd.

THou (O God) art praised in Syon, and ^e decet hymnus.
unto the shall the vow be performed. * ( in Jerusalem.) Thou that hear
the prayer: unto the shall all flesh come.

My misdeeds prevail against me: Oh be thou merciful unto our sins,
Blessed is y^ man whom thou chosest and receauest unto the: he shall dwell in thy
court: and shall be satysfyed with the pleasures of thy house even of thy holy
temple. Thou shall show us wonderful things in righteousness (O God) of our
salvation: thou y^ art the hope of all the ends of the earth, and of

The. lxvi. Psalm.
To the chaunter: The song of a Psalm.

O Iubilate deo.
Be joyful in God / all ye lands, sing praises unto the honor of his name /
make his praise to be glorious. Psalm. c. a


Say unto God: O how wonderful art Exo. xiiii. g
He turned the sea into dry land, Iosu. iii. d
so that they went through the water on foot: there did we rejoice thereof. He
rules with his power for ever, his eyes behold y^ people and such as will not
believe shall not be able to exalte them selves. Sela. O praise our God (ye
people) and make the voice of his praise to he heard. Which holds our soul
in life, and suffers not our fete to slyp.

For thou (O God) haste proved us: thou Es^* ^ ^. ^
We went through fire and water: and y^ broughtest us out into a welthy place. I
will go in to thy house with brent offrynges, and will (...)
pay the my vows, which I promised with my lips, and spoke with my mouth,
when I was in trouble. I will offer unto the, fat burnt sacryfyces with the
meense of rams, I will offer bullockes and goats Sela. O come hither and
harken. all ye y^ fear God: and I will tell you, what he has

But God has heard me, and considred the voice of my prayer. Praised be God
which has not cast out my prayer, nor turned his mercy fro me.

The. lxvii. Psalm.
To the chaunter, in melodies, a Psalm and a song.

GOd Deus miseria^ut nost^i.
be merciful unto us, and bless us, and show us the light of his
countenance. * ( and be mercyful unto us.) ^ela

That thy way may be known upon Nu^^ vi. d
earth, thy saving health among all nations.

Let the people praise the, O God, ye let all people praise the. O let the
nacyo^s rejoice and be glad. For thou shall judge the folk righteously, and
govern the nations upon earth. Sela. Let the people praise y^, O God, let all
people praise the. Then shall the earth bring forth her increase, and God even
our own god shall give us his blessing. God shall bless us, and all the
ends of the world shall fear him.

The* lxviies. Psalm.
To the chaunter a Psalm and song of David.

LEt Exurgat deus* Nume. x* d
God arise, and let his enemies be scattered: let them also that hate him,

But let the ryghteous be glad and rejoice in the sight of God: let them also
be merry and joyful. Oh sing unto God, and sing praises unto his name: magnifye
him that rydeth upon the heavens, as it were upon a horse: praise ye him i^hys
name ye and rejoice before him. Deute. x. d.
He is a father of the fatherless, and defends the cause of wydowes: even
God in his holy habitacion. He is the Exodus xiii. d Nume* 14. c Esaias. iiii. b
thou wentest for the before the people, when thou we^test through the
wilderness. Sela. The earth shoke, and the heavens dropped at the presence of
God, even as Sinai also was moved at y^ presence of God, which is the God of
Israel. Thou O God sendedst a gracyous rain upon thine enheritaunce, and
refresshedyst it, when it was werye. Thy congregacyon shall dwell therein: For
thou (O God) haste of thy goodness Iosu. ^. d
Kings with their armies did fly, and were discomfited: and they of the
household divided the spoil. Though ye have lain among y^ pottes, yet shall ye
be as y^ wings of a dove that is covered with silver wings, and her feathers
like gold. When the almyghtye scattred kings for their sake, then were they
as white as snow in zalmon. As the hill of Basan so is Godys hill: even a hye
hill, as the hill of Basan* Why hoppe ye so ye hye hills? This is Godys hyl in
the which it pleseth Ephe. 4. b.
Thou art gone by an hye, thou have led captiuyte captyue, and received gifts
for men: Ye even for thine enemies, that the Lord God might dwell among
them. Praised be the Lord daily, even the God which helps us, and pours
his benefytes upon us. Sela. He is our God, eue^ the God of whom comes salua
cyon: God is the Lord by whom we escape death. God shall wound the head of
his enemies and the heary scalpe of such one as goth on still i^ his wyckednes.
The Lord has said: I will bring my people again as I did from Basan: mine
own will I bring again as I did sometime from the deep of the sea. That thy
foot may be dypped

The. lxix. Psalm.
To the chaunter upon Sosanim of David. Sal^um me fat deus.


Save me, O God, for the waters are come in even unto my soul. I stycke fast
in the deep mire, where no ground

They that Psalm. 35. ^. Ioh. xv. ^*
hate me without a cause, are mo the^ the heeres of my head, they that are mine
enemies and would destroy me giltlesse are mighty: I paid them the things
that I never took. God, thou know my symplenesse, and my fautes are not hyd

And why? for thy sake have I suffered reprofe shame has covered my face. I am
become a stranger unto my brethren: even an aleaunt unto my mothers children.

For Ioh. ii. b.
the zele of thine house has even eaten me, and Ro^a 15. a
the rebukes of them that rebuked the are fallen upon me. I wept and chastened
my soul with fasting, and

They that sytte in the gate, speak against me, and the dronckardes Job. xxx.
b. ^ren. iii. s.
make songs upon me. But Lord I make my prayer unto the in an acceptable time.

Hear me (O God) in the multitude of thy mercy, eue^ in the truth of thy
salvation.

Take me out of the mire, that I synke

The rebuke has broken my heart, I am full of heaviness: I looked for some to have
pitye upon me, but there was no man: nether found I any to conforte me. Mat.
27. b Job. xix. f.
They gave me gall to eat, and when I was thyrsty, they gave me vinegar to
drink. Roma. xi. b
Let their table be made a snare to take the^ selves with all, and let the
things (that should have been for their wealth) be unto the^ an occacyon of
falling. Let their eyes be blinded, y^ they se not: and ever bow y^ down
their backs

Power out thine indignacion upon the^, Mat. 23. d. ^cies. i. c.
Let their habitacion be void, and no man to dwell in their tents. For they
persecute him whom thou have smyte^, and they talk how they may vex the^
whom thou have wounded. Let them fall from one wickedness to another, and not
come into thy righteousness, Exo. 32. ^.
Let them be wyped out of the book of the living, and not be written among the
righteous. As for me, wha^ I am poor and in heaviness, thy help (O God) shall
lift me up. I will praise the name of God with a song, and magnyfye

The. lxx. Psalm.
To the chaunter, of David to bring to remembrance (because the Lord saved
me). Deus in ad^u^orium*


HAste the, O God, to deliver me: make haste to help me, O Lord. Psalm. xi. d.
Let them be shamed and confounded that seek after my soul: let them be turned
backewarde, LORD, make no long taryenge.

The. lxxi. Psalm.
IN the Inte dn^^speraui*
O Lord, have I put my trust let me never be put to confusyon, but ryd Psalm.
25. a. and. 31. a.
me / and deliver me in thy righteousness: enclyne thine ear unto me, and
save

For thou, O Lord God, art the thing that I long for, thou art my hope even
fro my youth. Through the have I been holden up ever sense I was borne Psalm.
22. b. Iere. i. ^.
thou art he that took me out of my mothers womb my praise shall be all way of
the. I am become as it were a monster unto many,

derous works declare. When I receive the congregation, I shall judge
according unto right. The earth is weak and all the ^habiters thereof, I bear
up y^ pillars of it. Sela. I said unto y^ foles: dele not so madly, and to the
ungodly: set not up your horn. Set not up your horn on hye, and speak not
with a styfenecke. For promocyon comes neither from the east, nor from the
west, nor yet from y^ south. And why? ^^^^. 35. d.
God is the Judge: he puts down one, and sets up another. For in the
hand of the Lord there is Esa. (...). ^. (...). xxv. d.
acuppe, and the wine is red, It is full myxte, and he pours out of the same.
As for the dregs thereof all the ungodly of the earth shall drink them, and
suck them out. But I will talk of the God of Jacob, and praise him forever. All
the horns of the ungodly also will I break, and the horns of the ryghtuous
shall be exalted.

The. lxxvj. Psalm.
^o the (...) in inclo^^es, a Psalm, and song of Asaph.

IN Iewrye is God known, his name is great in Israel. At Schalem is his
tabernacle, and ^otus in ^^^^a.
his dwelling in Syon. There Psa. ix v. Psalm. 4^. b
brake he the arrows of the E^^. xix. d.
When God arose to judgment, and to help all the make upon earth. Sela. The
fearsenesse of man shall turn to thy praise: and the fearsenesse of other
shall y^ refrain. Promise unto the Lord your God, and Deu. 24. d Eccle. v. ^.
keep it, all ye that be round about him: bring presents unto him that
ought to be feared. He shall refrain the sprete of Princes, and is wonderful
among the kings of the earth.

The. lxxvij. Psalm.
To the ^haunter, for I^duthun, A Psalm of Dau^d.

I ^^^^ mea ad ^n^m. P^a. 34^. a
will cry unto God with my voice, eue^ unto God will I cry with my voice, and
he shall harken unto me. In the time of

Thou hold mine eyes waking, I am so feeble, that I can not speak. I have

Is his mercy clean gone for ever? And is his promise come utterly to an end
for evermore? Has God forgoten to be gracyous? And will he shutt up his
loving kyndnesse in displeasure? Sela. And I Psalm. 43. ^
call to mind thy wonders of old time. I will think also of all thy works,
and my talking shall be of thy doings. Thy way O God, is holy: who is so
great a God as ^ ( our) God? Thou art the god that does ^
wonders and have declared thy power among people. Thou haste myghtely
delivered

Thy way is in the sea, and thy paths in the great waters, and thy
fotesteppes are not known. Thou leddest thy people like sheep, by the hand of
Moses and Aaron.

The. lxxviii. Psalm
An inst^uceyon of Asaph.

Hear my law, O my people, enclyne your ears unto the words of my mouth.
Atteudite pupule.
I will open my mouth in a parable, Mat. xiii. ^
I will declare hard se^^e^ses of old.

Which we have hard and known, and De^^. iii^. ^ v^. b. ^. ti ^ Ephe. (...).
^
such as our fathers have told us.

That we should not hyde them from the children of the generacyons to come: but
to show the honor of the Lord, his might and wonderful works that he has
done.

He made a couenaunte with Jacob, and gave Israel a law Exo. xii. d. Iosu.
iiii. ^
which he commanded our forfathers to teach their children.

That their posterite might know it, and the children which were yet unborn.

To the intent that when they came up, they might show their children the same.

That they might put their trust in God, and not to forget the works of God,
but to keep his commandments. And not to be E^eth. ^x. c (...). 3^^ a.
as their forfathers Exo. xiiii. d
as a faithless and stubburne generacyon, a generacyon that set not their
heart a right, and whose sprete Exo. xiiii. ^.
He divided the sea, and brought them through: he made the waters to stand on
a heap. Number. xx. b
In the day time also he led them with a cloud, and all the night through
with a light of tire. He cloaue the Exo. 17. v ^
hard rocks in the wilderness, and gave them drink thereof, as it had been
out of the great deapth.

He brought waters out of the ^, ^or. x. ^.
stony rock, so that it gusshed out like the rivers.

Yet for all this they sinned more against him, and provoked the most highest
in the wyldernes. They tempted God in their

They spoke against God also, saying: Shall God prepare a Exo. xvi. b. Num^.
xi.
table in the wylder nesse^ He sinote the stony rock in deed, y^ the water
gusshed out, and the streams flowed with all: but can he give bred also, or
provide flesh for his people? When y^ Lord heard this, he was wroth: so the
fire was kyndled in Jacob, and there came up heavy dyspleasure against Israel.
Because they believed not in God, and put not their trust in his help. So he
commanded the clouds above, and opened the doors of heaven.

He rayned down Ma^na also upon the^, for to eat, and gave them Exo. xvi. b.
^en. viii. ^ Sap. ^vi. d John. vi. a.
food from heaven. So man did eat angels fode, for he sent them meat
enough. He caused the East wind to blow under the heaven, and through his
power he brought in y^ south west wind. Ex^^d. xvi. d Num^. xi. g
He rayned flesh upon them as thick as dust, and fethered fowls like as the
sand of the sea. He let it fall among their tents eue^rou^de about their
habitacyon. So they did eat / and were well filled / for he gave the^ their
own desire. They were not disapoynted of their lust. Nume. xi. g
But while the meat was yet in their mouths: y^ heavy wrath of God came Nu.
xiiii. a.
But for all this they sinned yet more / and believed not his wondrous worckes.
Therefore, their days did he consume in vanyte / and their years ^ trouble.
Nume. xi. g i. Lori. x. a.
When he slew them / they sought him / and turned them early and enquered
after God. And they remembered that God was their strength; and that the hye God
wrs their redemer. Nevertheless, they did but flatter him with their mouth,
and dyssembled with him in their tongue. For their heart was not whole with him,
nether continued they steadfast in his couenaunte.

But he was so merciful, that he forgave their misdeeds / and destroyed them
not.

Ye many a time turned he his wrath away / and would not suffer his whole
dyspleasure to arise. Psalm. ^iii. ^.
For he considered y^ they were but flesh: and that they were / eue^ a mind
that passes away / and comes

They thought not of his hand, and of y^ day when he delivered the^ from the
hand of the enemy. How he had wrought his miracles in Egipte, and his
wondres in the field of zoan. Exo. vii. d.
He turned their waters into blood, so that they might not drink of the
ryuers. Exo. viii. d
He sent lyce among the^, and devoured them up and frogs to destroy the^.
He gave their fruits unto the Exo. viii. b.
eatyr pyller, and their labor unto the greshopper. Exodus x. ^. Exodus ix. ^
He destroyed their vynes with hayle stones, and their mulbery trees with the
frost. Exodus ix. ^.
He smote their eatel also with hail stones, and their flocks with hot
thonder boltes. He cast upon the^ the furyousnesse of his wrath, anger,
displeasure and trouble, and sent evil angels among them.

Exodus ^^
He made away to his indignacion, and spared not their soul from death, but
gave their life over to the pestylence. Exodus (...)* Psalm. (...)* and. 135. b.
And smote all the first borne in Egypt, the most pryncipall and myghtyest in
y^ dwellynges of Ham. But as for his own people

And brought them within the borders of his Sanctuary: eue^ to this mountain,
(...)

more: let them be put to shame and perish.

And they shall know, that thou whose name is Iehoua) art only the most
highest over all the earth.

The. lxxxiiij. Psalm
To the chauntet upon Githith, a Psalm of the sons of Lorah.

O How amyable are thy dwellynges, Quam di le^ta ta beenacula
thou Lord of Hosts? My soul has a desire and longinge to enter into the
courts

Which going through the vale of my sery use it for a well, and the poles are
filled with water. They will go from strength and unto the God of Gods
appears every

The. lxxxv. Psalm.
To the Chaunter a Psalm of the sons of Lorah.

LORD thou art become gracyous unto thy land, thou haste turned away the
captyuyte of Jacob. Thou haste forgyuen Benedixisti on^e.
covered Psalm. 32. ^.
all their sins. Sela. Thou haste taken away all thy dyspleasure, and turned
thy self from thy wrathful indingnacion.

Turn us then, O God our savior, and let thine anger cease from us. Wylt
thou be displeased at us for ever? and will thou stretche out thy wrath from
one generation to another. Will thou not turn again and quycken, us that thy
people may rejoice in the? Show us thy mercy O Lord and grant us thy
salvation. I will harken concerning me for he shall speak peace unto his people
and to his saints, y^ they turn not again to folyshnes, For his salvation is
nigh them that fear him, that glory may dwell in our land Mercy and truth are
met together ryghtuousnesse and peace have kyssed each other. Truth shall
floryshe out of the earth and ryghtuousnes has looked down fro heaven. Ye,
the Lord shall show loving kyndnesse, and our land shall give her increase.
Ryghtuousnesse shall go before him, and he shall direct his going in the way.

The. lxxxvj. Psalm.
A prayer of Dauyd.

Bow down thine ear, O Lord, and near me, for I am pore, and in misery.
Inclina dn^e aute^.
For thou Ero. 34. ^. Ier. xxxii. b Io^i. ii. c. Psalm. 143. b and. 145. b.
Lord art good and gracious, and of great mercy unto all them that call upon
the.

Give ear Lord unto my prayer, and po^ dre the voice of my humble desires. In
the time of my trouble I will call upon the, for thou hear me. Psalm. 89. b.
Among the Gods

Teach me thy way, O Lord and I will walk in thy truth: O knytte my heart
unto the, that it may fear thy name. I will thank the, O Lord my God with
all my heart, and will praise thy name for ever.

For great is thy mercy toward me and Psa. xxix. ^
thou have delivered my soul from the nethermoste hell. O God, the proud are
risen against me, and the congregacions of noughtie men have sought after my
soul,

Exo. 34. a. Iere. xxxi. d 2. Par. 30. b
But thou, O Lord God, art full of compassion, and mercy, long suffryng,
plentuous in goodness and truth. O turn the then unto me and have mercy upon
me: give thy strength unto thy servant and save the son of thine handmayde.

Show some token upon me for good, that they which hate me, may se it, and
be ashamed, because thou Lord have helped me and comforted me.

The. lxxxvii. Psalm.
A Psalm and song of the sons of Lorah.

HER foundacions are upon the holy Fu^dame^ta eius.
hills: the Lord loves the gates of Syon more then all the dwellynges of
Jacob. Uery excellent things are spoken of the, thou cite of God. Selah. I
will think upon Rahab and Babylon, with them that know me. Behold, ye the
Phylistynes also, and they of Tire with the Moryans. Lo, there was he borne.

And of Syon it shall be reported, that he was borne in her, and the most highest
shall stablysh her. The Lord shall rehearse it, when he writes up the people,
that he was borne there. Selah. The syngers also and trompetters shall he
rehearse. All my fresh sprynges shall be in the.

The lxxxviij. Psalm.
A song and Psalm of the sons of Lorah, to the chaunter upon Mahelath, to
give thanks: an instruccion of Heman the Ezrahyte.

O Lord God of my salvation, I have Osie deus salutis.
cried day and night before the: Oh let my prayer enter into thy presence,
enclyne thine ear unto my calling. For my soul is full of trouble, and my
life draws nigh unto hell. I am counted as one of them that go down unto the
pyrte, and I have been even as a man y^ has no strength.

Fre among the dead, like unto them that be wounded slepynge in the grave,
whithe Psalm. 6. a. Esa. 38. d.
Wylt thou show wonders among the dead? Or shall the

Shall thy loving kyndnes be showed in the grave, or thy faithfulness in
destruccyon? Shall thy wondrous works be known in the dark, and thy
ryghtuousnes in the land of forgetfulness. Unto the have I cried O Lord, and
early shall my prayer come before the. Lord, why abhorrest thou my soul? and
hydest thou

My lovers and friends haste thou put away fro me, and hyd mine acquayntau^ce
out of my sight.

The. lxxxix. Psalm.
An instruccyon of Ethan the Ezrahyte.

MY Meseri cordias domine. Psalm. 101. a
song shall be all way of the loving kyndenes of the Lord, with my mouth will I
ever be showing thy truth from one generacyon to another. For I have said:
mercy shall be set up for ever, thy truth shall thou stablysh in the heavens. 2.
Reg. 5. a.
I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my servant.

2. Reg. 7. b. Psalm. 132. b.
Thy sede will I stablysh forever, and set up thy trone from one generacyon to
another. Sela. O Lord Psalm. 19. a.
the very heavens shall praise thy wondrous works,

And Psalm. 86. b.
what is he among the children of gods, that shall be like unto the Lord?

God is very greatly to be feared in the council of the saints, and to be had
in reverence of all them that are about him.

O Lord God of Hosts, who is like unto the? thy truth (most mighty Lord)
is on every side. Ero. 14. b. Math. 8. d.
Thou rulest the ragyng of the sea, thou styllest the waves thereof, when they
arise. Thou have subdued Egypt and destroyed it, thou haste scatred thine
enemies abroad with thy mighty arm, The heavens are thine, the earth also is
thine: thou haste laid the foundacyon Esaic. 1. a.
Lord Acts. 13. d. 1. Reg. 10. b 2. Reg. 5. a.
I have found David my servant: with my holy oil have I anointed him. My
hand shall hold him fast, and mine arm shall strengthen him.

The enemy shall not be able to do him vyolence, the son of wickedness shall
not hurt him. I shall smite down his foes before his face, and plage the^
that hate him

My truth also and my mercy shall be with him, and in my name shall his horn be
exalted. ^ Re. 8. ^.
I will set his dominion also in the sea, and his right hand in the floudes.

He shall call me: thou art my father, my God, and my sure salvation. And I
will make him my first borne, hyer the^ the Kings of the earth. My mercy will
I keep 3. Reg. 9. b.
If they break my statutes and keep not my commandments. Exo. 10. a.
I will vyset their offenses with the rod and their sin with scourges.

Nevertheless, my loving kyndnesse will I not utterly take from him, nor
suffer my truth to fail. My covenant will I not break / nor alter the
thing that is gone out of my lyppes. I have sworn once by my holiness / that
^^t^^. 7. ^.
I will not Pr. lxxii. ^.
as the son before me. He shall stand fast for evermore as the moon, and
as the faithful witness in heaven. Selah: But thou haste abhorred and for
saken thine anointed / and art dyspleased at him. Thou haste broken the
covenant of thy servant and cast his crown to the ground.

Thou haste overthrown all his hedges, Psalm. ^8. b.
and broken down his strong holds. All they that go by the way / spoil him
and he is become a rebuke unto his neighbors.

Thou have set up the right hand of his enemies, and made al his adversaries
to re^oyse. Thou have taken away the edge of hes sword, and geuest him not
victory in the battle: Thou have put out his glory, and cast his Trone down
to y^ ground. The days of his youth have thou shortened, and

O remember, how short my time is, wherefore have you made al m^ for naught?
Gene. 2. c.
What man is he that lives, and shall not se death? And shall he deliver his
own soul from the hand of hell? Selah. Lord, where are thy old loving
kindnesses, which you sworest unto Dauyd in thy truethe? Remember (Lord) the
rebuke y^ thy servants have and how I do bear i my bosom thy rebukes of
many people. Wherewith thine enemies have blasphemed the, and sclaunder the
fotesteppes of thine anointed. Praised be the Lord for evermore: Amen:

Amen.
The. xc. Psalm.
A prayer of Moseo the man of God.

LORD, thou haste been our refuge Domine refugium
from one generacyon to another.

Before the mountains were brought forth / or ever the earth and the world
were made thou art God from everlasting and world without end.

Thou causest man to return unto contrycion. Again, thou say: come again
ye children of men. 2. Cor. 7. ^. 2. Pet. 3. b.
For a thousand years in thy syghte are but as yestardaye / saying that is
past as a watch in the night.

As soon as thou scatrest them, they are even as a sleep, and fade away suddenly
like dried up) and wythered. For we consume away in thy displeasure, and are
afraid at thy wrathful indignacyon.

Thou haste set our misdeeds before the, and our secret sins in the light
of thy countenance. For when thou art angrye, all our days are gone: we
bring our years to an end. as it were a tale that is told. The days of
our age are three score years and ten: and though men be so strong that they
come to four score years, yet is their strength then but labor and sorrow:
so soon passes it away, and we are gone. *But who regards the Psalm. 39. ^.
O teach us, to nombre our days, that we may apply our hertes unto wisdom.

Turn the again (O Lord) at the last, and be gracyous unto thy servants.
O satysfye us with thy mercy, and that soon: so shall we rejoice and be glad
all the days of our life, Comfort us again, now after the time that thou
haste plaged us, and for the years wherein we have suffered aduersyte. Show thy
servants thy work, and their children thy glory. and the glorious majesty of
the Lord our God be upon us: prospere thou the work of our hands upon us,
O prospere thou our handy work.

The. xcj. Psalm.
WHo so dwells under the defense of ^ui habi ^at.
the shadow of the almyghtye. I will say unto the Lord: Thou art my hope /
and my strong hold / my God / in him will I trust. For he shall deliver the
from the snare of the hunter, and from the noisome pestylence. He shall defend
the under his wynge / and thou shalt be safe under his feathers: his
faythfulnesse and truth shall be thy shylde and buckeler.

Thou shalt not be afraid for any tertour by night / nor for the arrowe that
flies by day. For the pestylence that walks

For thou Lord art my hope / thou have set thine house of defense very hye.

There shall no evil happen unto the, neither shall any plage come nigh thy
dwelling

Mat. 4. ^. Luke. 4. b
For he shall give his angels charge over the / to keep them all thy ways.

They shall bear the in their hands / that thou hurt not thy foot against a
stone

Thou shall go upon the Lion and Adder / the young Lion and the Dragon shall
thou tread under thy fete. Because he has set his love upon me therefore shall
I deliver him: I shall set hi up, because he has known my name. Psalm. 4. ^.
He shall call upon me / and I will hear him: ye I am with him in trouble / I
will deliver him, and bring him to honor. With long life will I satysfye him
/ and show him my salvation.

The. xcij. Psalm.
I Psalm and ^onge for the Sabbath day. Bonu^ est co^fiteri.


IT Hebr. xiii. a
is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lor^e / and to sing praises unto
thy name / O most highest.

To tell of thy loving kyndnesse early in the morning / and of thy truth in
the night season. Upon an instrumente of ten strings, and upon the lute: upon
a loud instrument / and upon the harp.

For thou Lord haste made me glad tho row thy works / and I will rejoice in
genynge praise for the operacions of thy hands. O Lord how glorious are thy

Such as be planted in the house of the Lord shall floryshe in the courts *
( of the house) of our god. They shall also bring for the more fruit in their
age, and shall be fat and well lykinge. That they may show, how true the Lord
my strength is, and that there is no vnryghtuousnesse in him.

The. xciij. Psalm.
THE Lord is king / and has put on glorious apparel: the Lord has put on
his apparel, and gyrded him self with strength: Du^s tegnauit.
he has made the round world Psalm. 24. ^.
so sure / that it can not be moved. Ever syns the world began has thy
seat ben prepared / thou art from everlasting.

Psa. x^vi. a
The floudes are risen (O Lord) the floudes have lift up their noise / the
floudes lift up the waves. The waves of the sea are mighty / and rage
horrybly: but yet the Lord that dwells on hye / is myghtyer. Thy
testymonyes, O Lord / are very sure / holiness becomes thine house for
ever.

The. xciiii. Psalm. Deus v^tionem.

O LORD God Deuteronomy. 32. ^. Romans xii. d Hebru. ^. f.
to whom vengeance belongs: thou God to whom vengeance belongs, show
thy self. Arise thou judge of the world: and reward the proud after their
deseruynge. Lord how long shall the ungodly, how long shall the ungodly
triu^phe? How long shall all wicked doers speak so disdaifully, and make

And yet they say: Tushe Psalm. 23. b.
the Lord shall not se, nether shall y^ god of Jacob regard it

Take heed, ye unwise among y^ people O ye fools, when will ye understand?

He y^ planted the care, shall he not hear? Or he y^ made the eye, shall not
he se? For he y^ nurtureth the Hethen, it is he y^ techeth man knowledge, shall
not he punysh? 1. Corin. 3. d
The Lord knows y^ thoughts of men, y^ they are vain. Blessed is the man,
whom y^ chastenest (O Lord) and teach him in thy law. That thou may
give him pacyence in time of aduersyte, until the pyt be Psalm. 32. b Job.
xiii. ^. Luke xv. d.
But when I said my foot has slypped, thy mercy (O Lord) held me up. ^.
John^. ^. b 2. ^or^. ^. n.
In the multitude of the sorrows that I had in my heart / thy comfortes have
refresshed my soul. Will thou have any

The. xcv. Psalm.
O COME let us sing unto ye Lord Uenite ex ultemus. Ephe. v. d.
let us hertely reioise in the strength of our salvation: Let us come before
his presence with thanckesgeuynge, and show our self glad in him with
psalms. For the Lord is a great God, and a great king above al gods. In
his hand are all the corners of the earth, and the heightes of the hills is
his also. The sea is his, and he made it, and his hands fourmed the dyre land.

O come let us worship and fall down, and knele before the Lord our maker.
For he is * ( the Lord) our God: and we are the Hebr. iii. b. and. iiii. d.
To day if ye will here his voice harden not your hertes, as in the prouocacyon
and as in the day of te^ptacyon in the wilderness. When your fathers tempted
me, prouyd me, and saw my worckes. Forty years long was I grieved with that
generacyon, and said: it is a people that do err in their hertes: for they
have not known my ways. Number. 14. f. Hebru. 4. a
Unto who^ I swear in my wrath that they should not enter into my rest.

The. xcvj. Psalm.
O Sing unto the Lord a new song sing unto the Lord all the whole earth.
Sing unto the Lord / and praise his name, be telling of his salvation from
day to day. Declare his honor unto the Heathen, and his wonders unto al
people. Cantate domino. 1. Par. 16. c
For the Lord is great, and can not worthelye be praised: he is more Psalm. 67.
^ Eccle. 63. ^ Psalm. 67. ^
to be feared then all gods. As for all the Gods of the Heathen, they be
but Idols / but it is the Lord that made the Heavens.

Glory and worship are before him / power and honor are in his Saynctuary.

Ascrybe unto the Lord (O ye kynredes of the people) ascrybe unto the Lord
worship Psalm. 29. ^
Give unto the LORD the honor due unto his name, bring presents, and come
into his courts. O worship the Lord in the beautye of holiness / let the
whole earth stand in awe of him. Tell it out among the Heathen / that the
Lord is king: and that it is he which has made the round world so fast,
that it can not be moved, and how that he shall judge the people ryghtuously.

Let the heavens rejoice / and let the earth be glad: let the sea make a
noise, and all that therein is. Let the field be joyful and

The. xcvij. Psalm.
THE Lord is king / the earth may be glad thereof: yea, the multitude of the
Isles may be glad thereof. Clouds and darckenesse are round about him /
ryghtuousnesse and judgment are the habytacyons of his seat. There shall go a
fire before him, and burn up his enemies on every side. His lyghtnynges gave
shine unto the world, the earth saw it and was Iu^. v. ^.
afraid. Domin^ regnau^.
The hills melted like wax at the presence of the LORD / at the presence of
the LORD of the whole earth

Psalm. xix. ^
The Heavens have declared his ryghtuousnes / and all the people have seen his
glory. Psalm. xv. ^.
Confounded be all they that worship carved images, and that delight in vain
Gods: worship him all ye Gods. Syon herd of it and reioysed: and the
daughters of Judah were glad because of thy judgments / O Lord. For thou
Lord art higher then all that are in the earth / thou art exalted far above
all Gods. O ye that love the Lord / se that ye hate the thing which is
evil: the Lord preserves the souls of his saynctes, he shall deliver them
from the hand of the ungodly. There is spronge up a light for the rightuous,
and a joyful glad nesse for such as be true herted. Psalm. 33. a.
Rejoice in the Lord / ye ryghteous: and give thanks for a remembrance of
his holiness.

The. xcviij. Psalm.
A Psalm for Dauyd.

O SING unto the Lord a new so^ge Cantate domino. Psalm. 96. ^
/ for he has done marvelous things. With his own right hand and with his
holy arm has he gotten himself the vyctorye. The Lord declared his
salvation / his righteousness has he openly showed in the sight of the
Heathen.

He has remembered his mercy and truth toward the house of Israel: Esaias. lii.
c.
and all the ends of the world have seen the salvation of our God. Show your
selves joyful unto the Lord all ye lands / sing / rejoice Ephe. 5. d.
Praise the Lord upon the harp / sing to the harp with a psalm of
thankesgeuynge. With trompettes also and shawmes: O show your selves joyful
before the Lord the king.

Let the sea make a noise and all that there in is / the round world / and they
that dwell therein. Let the floudes clappe their hands / and let the hills be
joyful together.

Before the Lord / for he is come to judge the earth. With ryghtuousnes shall
he judge the world / and the people with equity.

The. xcix. Psalm * ( of David.)
THE Lord is king / be the people never so impatient: he sytteth between the
Cherubins / be the earth never so unquiet. The Lord is great in Syon, and hye
above all people. They shall give thanks unto thy name, which is great,
wonderful and holy. The kings power loves judgment, thou have prepared
equity, thou have executed judgment and righteousness in Jacob. O magnyfye the
Lord our God, and fall down before his footstool, for he is holy. Moses and
Aaron among his preastes, and Samuel among such as call upon Dominus reguauit.
out Number. xii. b 1. Reg. 3. ^
of the cloudy pyller, for they kept his testimonies, and the law that he
gave them.

Thou herdest them (O Lord our God) thou forgauest them O God / and punyshedst
their own inuencions. O magnifye the Lord our God / and worship him upon
his holy hill / for the Lord our God is holy.

The. C. Psalm.
A Psalm for thankesgeuynge.

O Iubilate deo.
Be joyful in the Lord (all ye lands) serve the Lord with gladness / Psalm.
66. ^.
and come before his presence with a song.

Be ye sure / that the Lord he is God: It is he that has made us, and not we
our selves: we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture. O go your way
into his gates with thanks geuynge, and into his courts with praise: be
thankeful unto him, and speak good of his name. For the Lord is gracious,
Psalm. 97. ^
his mercy is everlasting / and his truth endures from generation to
generacyon.

The. C. j. Psalm.
A Psalm of Dauyd.

MY Misericor diam et.
song shall be of mercy / and judgment unto the (O Lord) will I sing Psalm.
86. ^.


O let me have understanding in the way of godliness: When wylt thou come
unto me? I will walk in my house with a perfect heart. I will take no wicked
thing in hand. I hate the sins of unfaithfulness / there shall no such
cleue unto me. A froward heart shall depart from, I will not know a wicked
person.

Who so preuely slau^dreth his neighbor

I shall sone destroy all the ungodly that are in the land, that I may rote
out al wicked doers from the city of the Lord.

The. C. ij. Psalm.
A prayer of the af^ly^t, when he has an heuye Du^e exau dt oractonem.


H Psalm. 143. ^
Ear my prayer / O Lord / and let my cryenge come in unto the.

Hyde not thy face fro me in the time of my trouble: enclyne thine ears unto
me when I call / O hear me / and that right sone. For my days are consumed
away like smoke, and my bones are burnt up, as it were a fire brande. My heart
is smytten down and wythered like grass / so that I forget to eat my bread.
For the voyse of my gronynge / my bone will scarce cleue to my flesh. I am
become like a Pellycane of y^ wyldernes, and like an owl y^ is in the deserte.
I have watched, and am eue^ as it were a sparowe / y^ sytteth alone upon the
house

turned, so that they hated his people, and dealt untruly with his servants.
Exo. 3. 4, b Acts. vii. d
Then sent he Moses hes servant, and Aaron, whom he had chosen. And these
showed his tokens among them, and wonders in the land of Ha^. Exods. x. ^
He sent darckenesse, and it was dark, and they were not obedyent unto his
word. Exodus vii. d Psalm. 78. d.
He turned their waters into blood, and slew their fyshe. Exo. viii. d.
Their land brought forth frogs, ye even in their kings chambers. Exo.
viii. d
He spoke the word, and their came all manner of flies, and lyce in all their
quarters. Exodi. ix. c
He gave the^ hayle stones for rain, and flammes of fire in their land.

He smote their vines also and fyge trees and destroy the trees that were in
their coasts. Exodi. x. d ^^pl. 16. b (...). 1. a.
He spaeke the word, and the gre shoppers came, and catyrpellers innumerable.
And did eat up all the grass in their land, and devoured the fruit of their
ground.

Ex^d. xi. b. and. xii ^ Psalm 135. b (...). 1^. ^
He smote all the first borne in their land, even the chief of all their
strength. He brought them forth also with silver and gold, there was not one
feeble person among Exo. xiiii. g
they were afraid of them.

Exo. xiii. d
He spread out a cloud to be a covering, and fire to give light in the night
season.

Exo. xvi d Nu^^e. xi. g
At their desire, he brought quayles, and he filled them with the bread of
heaven.

Exo. xvii. b Number. xx. b
He opened the rock of stone, and the waters flowed out: so that ryuers ran
in the dry places. For why? he remembered his holy promise, and Abraham his
servant. And he brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with
gladness. And gave the^ the lands of the Heathen, and they took the labors
of the people in possessyon. That they might keep his statutes, and observe his
laws Praise the Lord.

The. cvi. Psalm.
Praise the Lord.

O Give ^o^sitemi (...) dn^o.
thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracyous, and his mercy endures for ever.
Who can express the noble acts of the Lord, or show forth al his praise.
Blessed are they that allwaye keep judgment, and do ryghteousnes. Remember me,
O Lord, according to the favor that thou bear unto thy people, O vyset me
with thy salvation. That I may se the felycyte of thy chosen, and rejoice in
the gladness of thy people, and give thanks with thine enherytaunce. We have
sinned with our fathers, we have done amysse, and dealte wyckedly. Our fathers
regarded not thy wonders in Egypt, nether kept they thy great goodness in
remembrance: but were dyssobedient at the sea, even at the 1. Pa^. 16. a Psalm.
(...). a 1. Mac. 4. e Judith. 13 c Esaias. xii. a
He rebuked the reed see also, and it was dried up: so he led them through the
deep as through a wilderness. And he saved them from the adversaries hand,
and delivered them from the hand of the enemy. Psalm. (...). ^
As for those Exo. xiiii. ^
that troubled them, the waters over whelmed them, there was not one of them
left.

Exo. xv. ^
Then believed they his words, and sange praise unto him. But within a while
they forgot his works, and would Number. 1^. ^.
So the earth opened, and swalowed by Dathan, and covered the congre gacyon of
Aberam. And the fire was kyndled in their company, the flame burnt up the
ungodly. Exodi. ^2^ 1. Cor. 1^. ^
They made a calfe in Horeb, and worshipped the molten image.

Roma. 1. ^.
Thus they turned their glory in to the simylytude of a calfe, that eats hay.

And they forgot God their Savior,

Wondrous works in the land of Ham, and fearful things by the reed see. So
he said he would have destroyed the^, had not Moses his chosen stand before
him in that gappe: to turn away his wraythful indig nacyon, lest he should
destroy them.

Number. 14. ^
Ye, they thought scorn of ye pleasant land, and gave no credence unto his
word

But murmured in their tents, and herkened not unto the voice of the Lord.

Then lift he up his hand against the^, Number. 15. ^ Ios^ x^^^^ 1. Cor. ^. ^
They joined them selves unto Baal Peor, and eat thofferinges of the deed.
Thus they provoked him unto anger with their own inuencio^s and the plage was
great among them.

Number x^^^
Then stood up Phinehes and prayed, and so the plage ceased. And that was
counted unto him for righteousness, among all po sterites for evermore. Exo.
xv^^. ^ Num^. (...). ^
They angered him also at the waters of strife so that he punyshed Moses for
their sakes. Because they provoked hissprete, so y^ he spoke unadvisedly with
his lyppes. Nether destroyed they the Heathen, Deuteronomy. vii. a and. xii. a. Iudi^.
(...). a
as the Lord commanded them. But were myngled among the Heathen, and learned
their works. In so Deut^. 32. ^ Leuiti. xx. a
Ye they offered their sons and their daughters unto devils. 4. Reg. 22. t
Iere. vii. d. Deuteronomy. 18. b Iere. 4 4. b Eze. xx. 8.
And shed innocent blood even the blood of their sons and of their
daughters, whom they offered unto the ydols of Canaan, and the land was
defiled with blood. Thus were they stained with their own works, and went a
whorynge with their own inuencions. Therefore was the wrath of the Lord
kyndled against his people, in so much that he abhorred his own
enheritaunce. And he gave them over into the hand of the Heathen,

Nevertheless, when he saw their aduersyte, he herd their co^playnte. He
thought upon his covenant, and Deu. xxx. a
pytied them according unto the multitude of his mercies ye, he made al those
that had led them a way captive, to pytie them. Deliver us (O Lord our God)
and gather us from among the Heathen: that we may give thanks to thy holy
name, and glory in thy praise.

Luke. 1. ^.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting and world without end,
and let all people say: Ame^, Amen. Praise y^ Lord

The. cvii. Psalm. Co^fitemi (...) d^^o.

O 1. Par. 16. b Psalm. cv. a and cvi. a 1. Man. 4. a Judith. 13 c Esaias. xii. a.
Give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracyous, and his mercy endures for
ever. Let them give thanks whom the Lord has redeemed / and delivered from
the hand of the enemy. And gathered them out of the lands, from the East,
and from the west, from the North, and from the south. They went a straye in
the wilderness out of the way, and found no city to dwell in. Hongrie and
thrysty: their soul faynted in them. So they cried unto the Lord in their
trouble, and he delivered the^ from their distress. He led them forth by the
right way, yt they might go to the cite where they dwelt. O that men would
therefore Exodus 16. a Deu. viii. ^
For he satisfied yt emptye soul, and filled the hongry soul with goodness.

Such as sit in darckenes and in the shadow of death, being fast bound in
myserye and iron. Because they rebelled against the words of ye Lord, and
lightly regarded the council of the most hygest. He also brought down their
heart through heuinesse: they fell down, and there was none to help them.

So when they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, he delivered them out of
their distres. For he brought them out of darckenesse and out of the shadow of
death: and brake their bonds in sonder. O that men would therefore praise the
Lord for his goodness:

Mat. viii. ^
He sent his word, and healed them, and they were saved from their destruccyon.

O that men would therefore praise ye Lord for his goodness, and declare the
wonders that he does for the children of men.

Heb^^ 13. d Eccle. 35. ^ Acts. ^. a Rom xii. ^* Philip. 4. b
That they would offer unto him the sacrifice of thankesgeuynge, and tell out
his works with gladness. They that go down to the sea in ships / and occupye
their business in great waters. These men se the works of the Lord, and his
wonders in the deape. Jonas. 1. b
For at hes word, the stormy wind arises, which lyfteth up the waves thereof

They are carried up to the heaven, and down again to the deape, their soul
mel telth away because of the trouble. They rele to and fro, and stacker like
a droncken man, and are at their wits end. So when they cry unto ye Lord in
their trouble, he delivered the^ out of their distress. For Mat. viii, e
he makes the strome to cease, so y^ the waves thereof are still. The^ are
they glad because they be at rest, and so he brings them unto the haven where
they would be. O that men would therefore praise the Lord for his goodness, and
declare the wo^dres yt he does

Which turns the floudes into a wilderness: 3. Reg. 17. ^
and dries up the water sprynges

A f^utfull land makes he baren, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein.

Again, he makes the wilderness a standing water, and water sprynges of a
dry ground. And there he serves the hongrye (...)

that ye skipped like rams: and ye little hills, like young sheep? Tremble
thou earth at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob.
Exodus 17. b Number. 20. b
Which turned y^ hard rock into a standing water, and the flynt stone into a
spryngynge well.

The. cxv. Psalm.
NOt unto us (O Lord) not unto us / Non nobes domint.
but unto thy name give the praise, for thy loving. mercy, and for thy truths
sake

Wherefore shall the Heathen say: where is now their God? As for our God, he
is i heaven, he has done what so ever pleased him. Their ydoles are silver and
gold, Psalm. 135. c Sapl. xv. d Baru. vi. a
even the work of men's hands. They have mouth and speak not: eyes have
they and se not. They have ears, and hear not: noses have they, and swel not.
They have hands and handle not: fete have they, and walk not, nether speak
they through their throat. They y^ make them, are like unto them, and so are all
such as put their trust house of) Israel trust thou in the Lord, he is Psalm.
79. c
their succor and defense, Psalm* ix. b


Ye house of Aaron put your trust in the Lord: he is their helper, and
defender.

Ye that fear the Lord, put your trust in the lord, he is their helper and
defender. The Lord has been myndfull of us, and he shall bless us: even he
shall bless y^ house of Israel, he shall bless the house of Aaron.

He shall bless them that fear the Lord, Psalm. vi. a Esap. 38. d
The deed praise not y^ (O Lord) nether all they y^ go down in to the silence.
But we will praise the Lord, from this time forth for evermore.

The. cxvj. Psalm.
Praise the Lord.

I Am well pleased / that the Lord has Dilcri quon^am.
herd the voice of my prayer. That he has enclyned his ear unto me,
therefore will I call upon him as long as I live.

Psalm. 18. a 2. Reg. 22. a
The snares of death co^pased me round about, and y^ pains of hell gat hold
upon me, I shall find trouble and heuinesse, and I shall call upon the name of
the Lord (O Lord) I beseech the deliver my soul.

Gracyous is the Lord, and ryghteous, ye, our God is merciful* The Lord
preserves the simple. I was in misery, and he helped me* Turn again then
unto thy rest, O my soul, for the Lord has rewarded the. And why? Psalm. lvi.
c
thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears and my fete
from falling. I will walk before the Lord, in the land of the living.

2. Cori^. 4. ^.
I believed, and therefore will I speak, Roma. 3. a
All men are liars. What reward shall I give unto the Lord, for all the
benefytes ye he has done unto me? I will receive the cappe of salvation, and
call upon the name of the Lord. I will pay my vows now in the presence of al
his people right dear in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints.
Behold (O Lord) how that I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son
of thy handmayde, thou have broken Psalm. 92. a Deb. xiii. c
I will pay my vows unto the Lord in the sight of al his people, in the
courts of the Lords house, even in the mids of the, O Jerusalem.

The. cxvii. Psalm.
Praise the Lord. Laudate dominum


O Romans xv. b
Praise y^ Lord al ye Heythe^, praise him all ye nacyons. Psalm. C. a
For his merciful kyndnes is ever more and more to, ward us, and the truth of
the Lord endures

The cxviij. Psalm.
Praise the Lord. Co^fitemint dn^o.


Psalm. 105. a and* 106* a i. Mat. 4. ^ Esaias. xil. a i. Pat. 16* b
O Give thanckes unto the Lord, for he his gracyous, because his mercy endures
for ever. Let Israel now confess, * ( that he is gracyous and (that his
mercy endures for ever. Let the house of Aaron now confess / that his mercy
endures for ever. Ye, let them now that fear confess, that his mercy
endures for ever. I called upon the Lord in trouble, and the Hebre. 13. b
The Lord is on my side, I will not fear what man can do to me. The Lord
takes my part with them that help me: therefore shall I se my desire upon mine
enemies. It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put any co^fydence in man.
It is better to trust in the Lord, then to put any confydence in princes.

All nations compassed me round about. but in y^ name of y^ Lord will I
destroy the^.

They kept me i^ on every side, they * kept me in (I say) on every side, but
in the name of the Lord, I will destroy them. They came about me like bees,
and are extincte, even as the fire among the thorns, for in y^ name of the
Lord I will destroy them.

Thou haste thrust sore at me / that I might fall, but the Lord was my help.

Exodus xv. a Esaias. xii. a.
The Lord is my strength, and my song and is become my salvation. The voice
ofioye and health is in the dwellynges of the ryghtuous: the right hand of
the Lord brings mighty things to pass. The

The Lord has chastened and correct me, but he has not given me over unto
death

Open me the gates of ryghtuousnes, that I may go into them, and give thanks
unto the Lord. This is the gate of the Lord the rightuous shall enter into it.
I will thank the / for thou haste herd me, and art become my salvation. Mat.
xxi. c. Mat. xii. a. Luke. xx. c. Acts. 4. b.
The same stone which the buylders refused, is become the head stone in the
corner. This was the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes This is the
day / which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be glad in me) now O
Lord / O Lord send us now prosperity. Mat. xxi. ^. Luke. xix. f. John^* xii.
b Mark. xi. b
Blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord, we have wisshed you good
luck, ye that be of the house of the Lord. God is the Lord which has
showed us light: bind the sacrifice with cords / ye even unto the horns of
the aultre. Thou art my God, and I will thank the: thou art my God* I will
praise the, O give thanks unto the Lord for he is gracyous, and his mercy
endures for ever.

The. c. xix. Psalm.
B B^a^^ immaculati.
LESSED are those that be undefiled in the way: and walk in the Psalm. 1. a.
law of the Lord. Blessed are they that keep his testymonyes, and seek him
with their whole heart. For they which do no wickedness walk in his ways.

Thou haste charged that we should dylygently keep thy commandments.

O that my ways were made so direct, that I might keep thy statutes. So shall
I not be confounded, while I have respect unto all thy commandments. I will
thank the with an unfeigned heart, when I shall have learned the judgments of
thy ryghtuousnesse. I will keep thy cerymonyes, O forsake me not utterly.

Where with all shall a young man cle^se his way? Even by rulynge him self
after thy word. With my whole heart have I sought the / O let me not err
from thy commandments. Deuteronomy. vi. b.
Thy words have I hyd with in my heart, that I should not sin against the.
Blessed art thou O Lord, O teach me thy statutes. With my lyppes have I told
all the judgments of thy mouth. I have had as great delight in the way of
thy testymonyes / as in all manner of riches. I will talk of thy
commandments, and have respect unto thy ways. My delight shall be in thy
statutes and I will not forget thy word. O do Gene. xlvii. Job. xiiii. b
I am a stranger upon earth O hyde not thy commandments from me. My soul
breaks out / for the very fervent desire that it has always unto thy
judgments. Thou have rebuked y^ proud and cursed are they that do err from
thy commandments. O turn fro me shame and rebuke, for I have kept thy
testymonyes. Princes also did sit and speak against me, but thy servant is
ocupied in thy Psalm. 44* d
My soul cleaves to the dust / O quycken thou me according to thy word. I
have knowledged my ways / and thou herdeste me, O teach me thy statutes. Make
me to understand the way of thy commandments, and so shall I talk of thy
wondrous worekes:

My soul melts away for very heaviness, comfort thou me according unto
thy word. Take fro me the way of lyenge / and cause y^ me to make much of
thy law.

I have chosen the way of truth, and thy judgments have I laid before me.

I have stycken unto thy testymonyes / O Lord confound me not. I will run
the way of thy commandments, when thou have set my heart at liberty.
Teach me O Lord the way of thy statutes, and I me in thy ryghtuousnesse. Let
thy loving

O take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth, for my hope is in thy
judgments. So shall I always keep thy law, ye for ever and ever. And I will
walk at liberty, for I seek thy commandments. I will speak of thy
testymonies also, even before kings, and will not be ashamed. And my delight
shall be in thy commandments, which I have loved. My hands also will I lift
up unto thy commaundemantes which I have loved, and my study shall be in thy
statutes. O think upon

The same is my comfort in my trouble / for thy word has quyckened me. The
proud have had me excedingly i derisyon / yet have I not shrynked from thy
law.

For I remembered thine everlasting judgments, O Lord, and received comfort.

I am horrybly afraid for the ungodly, that forsake thy law. Thy statutes
have been my songs, in the house of my pylgremage. I have thought upon thy
name O Lord, in the night season, and have kept thy law. This I had /
because I kept thy commandments. ^^. xvi^^. c.
Thou art my poreyon, O Lord / I have promised to keep

The congregacious of the ungodly have robbed me / but I have not forgotten thy
law. At mydnyght will I rise, to give thanks unto the, because of thy
rightuous judgments. I am a companyon of all them that fear the / and keep
thy commandments. Psalm. 33. a
The earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercy, O teach me thy statutes,

O Lord, thou have dealt graciouslye with thy servant, according unto thy
word.

O learn me true understanding, and knowledge, for I have believed thy
commandments. Before I was troubled, I went wrong, but now have I kept
thy word.

Mat. xix. c.
Thou art good and gracious, O teach me thy statutes. The proud have ymagined
a lie against me, but I will keep thy commandments with my whole heart.

Their heart is as fat as brawne, but my delight has been in thy law. It is
good for me that I have been in trouble, y^ I may learn thy statutes. The law
of thy mouth is dearer unto me, then thousa^des of Gene. ^. d. Job. x. ^
Thy hands have made me and fasshyoned me, O give me understanding, that I
may learn thy commandments. They that fear the, will be glad when they se
me, because I have put my trust in thy word. I know, O Lord / that thy
judgments are right, and that thou of very faythfulnesse haste caused me to
be troubled. O let thy merciful kyndnesse be my comfort, according to thy
word un to thy servant. O let thy loving mercyes come unto me, that I may
live, for thy law is my delight. Let the proud be confounded, for they go
wickedly about to destroy me: but I will be occupied in thy commandments.
Let such as fear the, and have known thy testymonyes / be turned unto me. O
let mine heart be sound in

Mine eyes long sore for thy word, saying. O when will thou comfort me.

For I am become like a bottell in the smoke, yet do not I forget thy statutes.

How many are the days of thy servant? When will thou be avenged of them
that persecute me? The proud have dygged pyttes for me, which are not after
thy law. Al thy commandments are true / they persecute me falsely, O be thou
my help. They had all most made an end of me upon earth* / but I forsake
not thy commandments, O quycken me after thy loving kyndnes, and so shall I
keep the testimonies of thy mouth. O Lord /

Psalm. xl. ^. 1. Pet. ^. d.
Thy truth also remains from one generation to another: thou haste laid the
foundation of the earth, and it abides.

They continue this day according to thine ordinance, for all things serve
the If my delight had not been in thy law / I should have peryshed in my
trouble. I will never forget thy commandments, for with the^ thou have
quickened me. I am thine / Oh save me, for I have sought thy commandments.
The ungodly laid wait for me to destroy me / but I will consydre thy
testimonies. I se that al things come to an end / but thy commandment is
exceadyng broad. ^ ( Lord) What love have I unto thy law? all the day long
is my study in it. Thou, through thy commandments haste made me wyser then
mine enemies, for they are ever with me.

I have more understanding then my teachers, for thy testimonies are my study.

I am wyser then the aged, because I kept thy commandments. I have
refrayned my fete from every evil way, that I may keep thy word. I have not
shrynked from thy judgments, for thou teach me. O how sweet are thy
words unto my throat. Ye sweter then honey unto my mouth. Through thy
commandments I get understanding / therefore I Psalm. xix. ^.
Thy word is a lantern unto my fete, and a light unto my paths. I have
sworn and am steadfastly purposed, to keep thy ryghteous judgments. I am
troubled above measure: quicken me, O Lord, according unto thy word. Let the
frewyll offering of my mouth please the, O Lord, and teach me thy
judgments. Iud. xii. a. Job. xiii. ^.
My soul is always in my hand, yet do not I forget thy law. The ungodly have
laid a snare for me, but yet swarued not I from thy commandments. Thy
testymonies have I claymed as mine heritage for ever: and why^they are the very
joy of my heart.

I have applied mine heart to fulfill thy statutes always / even unto the end.

I hate them that ymagen evil things,

Thou put away all the ungodly of the earth like dross therefore I love
thy testimonies. My flesh tre^bleth for fear of the, and I am afraid of thy
judgments*

I deal with the thing that is laufull and

Mine eyes are wasted away with lokyng for the health, and for the word of thy
righteousness. O deal with thy servant according unto thy loving mercy and
teach me thy statutes. I am thy servant, O grant me understanding that I
may know thy testymonyes. It is time for the Lord to lay to thine hand,
for they have destroyed thy law. For I love thy commandments above gold
and precious stone. Therefore hold I straight all thy commandments, and all
false ways

Order my steps in thy word, and so shall no wickedness have domynyon over
me. O deliver me from the wrong dealings of men, and so shall I keep thy
commandments. Show the light of thy countenance upon thy servant, and
teach me thy statutes. Ryuers of waters ran out from mine eyes, because men
keep P^. (...). ^. John. (...). ^.
Thy word is tried to the uttermost, and thy seruauns Psalm. ^ii. b. and.
xvii^. ^
loves it. I am small and of no reputacyon, yet do not I forget thy
commandments. Thy righteousness is an everlasting ryghteousnes, and thy
law is truth. Trouble and heaviness have taken hold upon me, yet is my
delight in thy commandments. The righteousness

Mine eyes preuente the night watches, that I might be occupied in thy words.

Hear my voice, O Lord, according unto thy louig kindenes: quicke^ me
according as thou art wont. They draw nigh* that of malice persecute me: and
are far from thy law. Be thou nigh at hand, O Lord, for all thy
commandments are true. As concerning thy testimonies, I have known long
sens, that thou have grounded the^ for

mysse, Oh Lord who may abide it?

For there is mercy with the / therefore shall thou be feared. I look for the
Lord, my soul does wait for him, in his word is my trust. My soul does
pacyently abide the Lord, from the one morning to the other. Let Israel
trust in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is
plenteous redempcyon.

And he shall redeem Israel / from all his sins.

The.cxxxi. Psalm.
A song of the steares. Demine non est et alta^um.


LORD, I am not hye minded / I have no proud looks. E^^^^. iii. c.
I do not exercise my self in great matters, which are to hye for me. But I
refrain my soul and keep it low, like as a child that is weened from his
mother: ye / my soul is even as a weened child. Let Israel trust in the
LORD from this time forth for evermore.

The.cxxxij. Psalm.
A song of the steares* Memeto du^e david


LORD, remember Dauyd, and all his trouble. 2. Re. 34. d. 1. Pa^. 22. b
How he swore unto the Lord / and vowed a vow unto the almyghtye God of
Jacob: I will not come within the tabernacle of my house, nor clyme up in my
bed. I will not suffer mine eyes to sleep, nor mine eye lyddes to slomber. *
( Nether the temples of my head to take any rest.) Untyll I find out a
place for the Lord, an habitacy on for the mighty God of Jacob. Lo, we heard
of the same at Ephrata, and found it in the wood. We will go in to his
tabernacle, and fall down before his footstool.

2. Pa^a. 6 g
Arise O Lord, into thy resting place thou and the arcke of thy strength.

Let thy Preastes be clothed with righteousness, and let thy saynctes rejoice.

For thy servant Dauyds sake, turn not away the presence of thine anointed.

2. Reg. 7. b.
The Lord has made a faithful oath unto David, and he shall not shrynke
from it: Acts. 13. b.
Of the fruit of thy body shall I set upon thy seat. If thy children will keep
my covenant, and my testimonies that I shall learn them: their children also
shall sit upon

I will deck her Preastes with health, and her saynctes shall rejoice and
sing. There shall I make Luke. i. ^
the horn of David to floryshe, I have ordened a lantern for mine anointed.
As for his enemies, I shall clothe them with shame, but upon himself shall his
crown floryshe.

The.cxxxiij. Psalm.
A song of the steares of David.

BEHOLD, how good and joyful a thing it is / Ecce qua^ bonum. Psalm. ii. a.
brethren to dwell to gether in unity. It is like the precious ointment upon
the head, that ran down unto the beerd: even unto Aarons beerd / and went
down to the skyrtes of his clothing. Like the dew of Harmon, which fell
upon the hyl of Sion. For there the Lord promised his blessyng, and life for
evermore.

The.cxxxiiij. Psalm.
A song of the steares.

Behold, * ( now) Ecce nu^c benedicite Psalm. 113. a
praise the Lord, al ye servants of the Lord, ye that by night stand in
the house of the Lord. * ( even in the court of the house of our God) Timo.
ii. b.
Lift up your hands in the Sanctuary and praise the Lord. Number. vi. b
The LORD that made heaven and earth, bless the out of Syon.

The.cxxxv. Psalm.
O Laudate ^ome^ d^^. Psalm. ^^3. a and. 134. ^.
Praise the name of the Lord, praise it O ye servants of the Lord.

Ye that stand in y^ house of the Lord / in the courts of the house of our
God. O praise the Lord, for the Lord is gracious O sing praises unto his
name, for it is lovely. Deuteronomy. iiii. ^ and. x. c.
For why? the Lord has chosen Jacob unto him self, and Israel for his own
possessyon. For I know that the Lord is great, and that our Lord is above
all gods. Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did hem heaven and in earth, in
the sea, and in all deape places. Ie^^. x. d. and. li. a.
He dringeth forth the clouds from the ends of the world* and turns the
lyghtenynges unto rain, brynging the wyndes out of their treasuryes. He *
smote the first borne

Exodus* xi^. ^ Ex. 7 8 9 10 Psalm. 78. ^. and. ^v. c.
He has sent tokens and wou^ders into the myddest of the, O thou land of
Egypt, upon Pharao and all his servants. Iosu. x^i. ^.
He smote diverse nacyons, and slew mygtye Kings. Number. x^^. ^ Deu. iii. a.
Sehon King of y^ Amorytes, and Og the King of Basan, and all the Kyngedomes
of Canaam.

Iosue. x^^. ^
And gave their land to be an heritage, even an heritage unto Israel his
people. Thy name / O Lord. endures for ever, so does thy memorial, O lord
from one generacyon to an other. Deuteronomy. 3^. e.
For the Lord will avenge his people, and be Psalm. 115. a Sapi. xv. d Buruch.
vi
As for the images of the Heathen, they are but silver and gold / the work of
men's hands.

They have mouths / and speak not: eyes have* ^ey / but they se not. They
have ears / and yet they hear not / neither is there any breath in their
mouths.

They that make them / are like unto them / and so are al they that put their
trust in them. Praise the Lord ye house of Israel / praise the Lord ye house
of Aaron.

Praise the Lord, ye house of Levy ye ye fear the Lord / praise the Lord.
Praised be the Lord out of Syon, which dwells

The.cxxxvj. Psalm.
O Give thanks unto the Lord / for he Co^fitemi in to mino Iud xiii c ps^v.
^vi. ^
is gracyous / and his mercy endures for ever. O give thanks unto the God of
all Gods / for his mercy endures for ever, O thank the Lord of al Lords,
for his mercy endures for ever.

Iudi. xiii. d psa. lxxii, d.
Which only does great wonders / for his mercy endures for ever. Which by
his wisdom made the heavens / for his mercy endures for ever. Which laid
out the earth above the waters, for his mercy endures for ever. Gene. 1. b.
Which has made great lyghtes, for his mercy endures for ever. The son
to rule the day / for his mercy endures for ever.

The Moon and the Stars to govern Exodus 12. e.
Which smote Egypt with their first borne, for his mercy endures for ever

And brought out Israel from among them / for his mercy endures for ever.

With a mighty hand and stretched out arm / for his mercy endures for ever.

Which divided the reed see into parts / for his mercy endures for ever.

Exodus 14. e
And made Israel to go through the myddest of it / for his mercy endures for
ever. But as for Pharao and his host / he ouerthrewe them in the reed see, for
his mercy endures for ever.

Exo. 15. 16. and. 17.
Which led his people through the will

Iosue. xii. a
Which smote great kings, for his mercy endures for ever. Yea, and slew
mighty Kings, for his mercy endures for ever

Nume. 21. c Drut. iii. a.
Sehon King of the Amorites, for his mercy endures for ever. And Og the King
of Basan / for his mercy endures for ever. And gave away their land for an
heritage / for his mercy endures for uer. Even for an heritage unto Israel
his servant / for his mercy endures for ever. Which remembered us / when we
were in trouble / for his mercy endures for ever. And has delivered us from
our enemies for his mercy endures for ever.

Psa. ciiii. d
Which gives fode unto all flesh / for his mercy endures for ever.

O give thanks unto the God of Heaven / for his mercy endures for ever.

The.cxxxvij. Psalm. * ( Of Jeremy.)
BY the waters of Super flumina.
Babylon we satte down and wept / when we remembered Ezec. 1. a. ^ iii. b
* ( the, O) Syon. As for our Harpes / we hanged them up upon the trees / that
are therein. For they that led us away captyue / required of us then a song
and melody in our heaviness: sing us one of the songs of Syon. How shall we
sing the Lords song in a strange land

If I forget the / O Jerusalem, let my I^e^. xlix. d Ezec xxv. d A^^^. ^. ^
Edom, O Lord / in the day of Jerusalem, how they said: down with it, down
with it: even to the ground. O daughter of Babylon / thou shall come to mysery
thy self: yea, happy shall he be / that rewards the as y^ haste served us.
Esaias. xiii. ^
Blessed shall he be, that takes thy children, and throws them against the
stones.

The.cxxxviij. Psalm.
Of Dauyd.

Confitebor tibi. Psalm. 9. ^ ^ cxi. a.
I Will give thanks unto the, O Lord with my whole heart / even before the
Gods / will I sing praise unto the.

Psalm. v. ^
I will worship toward thy holy temple / and praise thy name / because of
thy loving kyndnesse and truth / for thou have magnyfyed thy name and thy
word above al things. When I called upon the: thou hardeste me, and endewedst
my soul with much strength. All the Kings of the earth shall praise the, O
Lord, for they have heard the words of thy mouth. Yea psa. cxiii. ^
For though the Lord by hye / yet has he respect unto the lowly: as for the
proud, he beholds him a far of. Though I walk in the myddest of trouble,
yet shalt thou refreshe me: thou shalt stretche forth thine hand upon the
furyousnes of mine eunemyes / and thy right hand shall save me.

The Lord shall make good for me, yea thy mercy / O Lord / endures for ever.
Job. 14. ^.
d espyse not then the works of thine own hands.

The. cxxxix. Psalm.
To the chaunter, a Psalm of Douyd.

O Lord, thou have searched me out, and Domine probast^.
known me. Thou knoweste my down sitting and mine vprysynge, thou
understand my thought a far of.

Thou art about my path, and about my bed / and spyest out all my ways.

For lo* there is not a word in my tongue but thou / O Lord know it all
together

Thou haste fashyoned me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me.

Such knowledge is to wonderful and excellent for me. I can not atteyne unto
it.

(...). a.
Whyther shall I go then from thy spret^ or wyther shall I go then from thy
presence

If I clymme up into Heaven, thou art there: if I go down to hell, thou art
there also. If I take the wings of the morning, and remain in the vr^ermpste
part of the sea. Even there also shall thy hand led me, and thy right hand
shall hold me.

If I say: peradventure the darckenes shall cover me / then shall my night be
turned to day. Yea the darckenesse is no darkness with the, but the night is
as clear as the day, the darkness and light are both a like. For my reins
are thine /

My bones are not hyd from the, though I be made secretly, and fasshyoued
beneth in the earth. Thine eyes se mine vnpar

Wyite thou not slaye the wicked (Oh God?) depart from me ye blood thyrstye
men. For they speak vnryghtuouslye against the / and thine enemies take thy
name in vain. Do not I hate them, O Lord* that hate the? and am not I grieved
with those that rise up against the? Yea I hate them right foore, even as
though they were mine enemies. Psa. xxvi. ^
Try me / O God, and seek the ground of mine heart: prove me / and examyne my
thoughts.

Look well if there be any way of wickedness in me, and lead me in the way
ever lasting.

The. cxl. Psalm.
To the chaunter, a Psalm of Dauyd.

Deliver me / O Lord, from the evil man, and preserve me from the wicked
man. Which ymagyne myschefe in their hertes, and stere up strife all the day
long. They have sharpened their tongues ^oma. ii^. c
like a serpente, E^^pe me.
adders poison is under their lips. Sela. Keep me, O Lord from the hands of
the ungodly / preserve me from the wicked men, which are purposed to
overthrow my goynges.

The proud have laid a snare for me / and spread a net abroad with cords, yea
and set trappes in my way. Sela. But my saying is unto the Lord: thou art my
God hear the voice of my prayers, O Lord.

O Lord God, thou strength of my health thou haste covered my head in the
day of battle. Let not the ungodly have his Psalm. vii. ^.
Let the myschefe of their own lyppes fall upon the head of them, that compase
me about.

Let hot burning coals fall upon them let them be cast into the fire, and to
the pyt that they never rise up again. A man full of words shall not prospere
upon the earth: a malycious and wicked person shall be hunted away / and
destroyed. Sure I am / that the Lord will avenge the pore and mayntene the
cause of the helpelesse.

The ryghtuous also shall give thanckes unto thy name, and the just shall
continue in thy sight.

The. cxlj. Psalm.
A Psalm of Dauyd. Domint clama^^.


LORD I call upon the: haste the unto me and consydre my voice, when I cry
unto the. Let my prayer be set forth in thy sight Exo. xxx. ^.
as the incense, and let the lyftyng up of my hands be an euenyng sacryfyce.
Eccle. xx^^ ^
Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, yea a watch at the door of my lips. O
let not mine heart be enclyned to any evil thing / to be minded as the
ungodly orwycked men lest I eat of such things as please them, Let the
ryghteous rather smite me friendly, and reprove me: so will I take it / as
though he had powered oil upon my head: it shall not hurt my head, ye I will
pray yet for their wickedness. Let their judges stomble in

But mine eyes look unto the, O Lord God: in the is my trust, Oh cast not out
my soul. Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me, and from the
trappes of the wicked doers. Let the ungodly fall into their own nets to
geyther, until I be gone by them.

The. cxlij. Psalm.
The instruc^yon of David, a praye^

I Uo^e men ad du^m. Psalm. 67. a.
Cried unto the Lord with my voice, ye even unto the Lord did I make my
supplycacyon. I powered out my complaints before him, and showed him of my
trouble. When my sprete was in heaviness, thou knew my pathe: in the way
wherein I walked have they preuely laid a snare for me. I looked also upon my
right hand, and se, there was no man that would know me. I had no place to
fle unto, and no man cared for my soul. I cried unto the, O Lord, and said:
thou art my hope, and my porcyon in the land of the living. Consydre my
complaynte, for I am brought very low. O deliver me from my persecutours, for
they are to strong for me. Bring my soul out of pryso^, that I may give
thanks unto thy name: which thing if thou wylt grant me, then shall the
ryghteous resort unto my company.

The. cxliij. Psalm.
A Psalm of David, (when his own son persecuted him.)

HEAR my prayer, O Lord, and consider Domine ^^audi.
thy truth and righteousness sake.

And enter not into judgment with thy servant, for Job. iiii. ^. (...). a.
xxv. a. Roma. 3. c.
in thy sight shall no man living be justified. For the enemy has persecuted
my soul, he has smyten my life down to the ground, he has laid me in
the darckenesse, as the dead men of of the world. Therefore is my sprete vexed
within me, and my heart within me is desolate. Psalm. 77. c.
Yet do I remember the times past. Exo. 34. a. Psalm. 86. a Iere. 32. d. Joel.
(...). c.
thy loving kyndenesse by times in the morninge / for in the is my trust: she
we thou me the way that I should walk in / for I lift up my soul unto the.
Deliver me / O Lord, fro mine enemies, for I resort unto the. Teach me to do
the thing that pleases the / for thou art my God, let thy loving sprete
lead me forth unto the land of ryghteousnes. Quycken, O lord, for thy names
sake, and for thy righteousness sake bring my soul out of trouble.

And of thy goodness scater mine enemies abroad, and destroy all them that
vex my soul, for I am thy servant.

The. cxliiij. Psalm.
Of David.

BLessed be the Lord my refuge, which Benedi^tus dn^s. 2. Reg. 22. Psa* xiii.
^
my hands to war, and my fyngers to fight. My hope and my castle / my
defense and my delyuerer, my shylde in whom I trust, which governs the
people that is under me. Psalm. viii. ^
Lord, what is man, that thou haste such respect unto him? Or the son of
man, that thou so regardest him? Job. viii. ^.
Man is like a thing of naught, hes time passes away like a shadow.

Bow thy heavens, O Lord, and come down, touch the mountains, and they
shall smoke. Send forth the lyghtynyng

Save me / and deliver me from the hand Dau. 28. ^
That our garners may

The Proverbs of Solomon.
The praise of wisdom. We ma^e not harken unto the voluptuous prouocacyon and
in^ysynges of sinners: wisdom co^ptayneth to be despised of al men, and
prophecyeth destruccyon unto her desspis^^^.

CAPITVLO. I.
THe Proverbs of Solomon DAVID king of Israel: to learn wisdom / and
instruccyon / and to perceive the words of understanding: and thereby to
receive prudence ryghtuousnesse judgment and equytye. That the very simple
might have wit, and the young men might have knoweledge and understanding. By
hearing / the wise man shall come by more wisdom: and he that is endewed with
understanding / shall obtain wit to perceive a parable / and the
interpretacyon thereof / the words of the wise / and the darcke speeches of
the same. Job. 28. b. Eccle. ^ g. Psalm. (...). Prove. ix. e
The fear of the Lord / is the beginning of wisdom. But fools despise
wisdom and instruccyon. My son Psalm. 124. a
swalow them up like the hell, and devour them quycke and whole, as those that
go down into y^ pyt. So shall we find all manner of costely riches, and fill
our houses with spoils. Cast in thy lot among us Prouer. 8. a
their fete run to evil, and are hasty to shed blood. But in vain is y^ net
laid forth before the birds eyes, Yea, they the^ selfs lay wait one for
another blood and one of them would sleye another. These are the ways of all
such as be covetous, y^ one would rauysh another life. Psa* xiiii. a
Wisdom tries without, and puts forth her voice i^ y^ streets. She calls
before y^ congregation in y^ open gates, and shows her words through y^
city saying. O ye children, how long will ye love childeshnesse? how long will
y^ scorners delight in scornynge, and y^ unwise be enemies unto knowledge* O
turn you unto my correccyon: ^o I will express my mind unto you, and make
you understand my words Esaias. lxv. ^ Iere. vii ^.
I have called, and ye refused it: I have stretched out my hand, and no man
regarded it, but all my councels have ye dyspised Prou. 3. b.
But who so harkeneth unto me, shall dwell safely, and be sure from any fear of
evil.

Wisdom (...) to be embrased and set by, which teaches fear and knowledge,
wisdom directs ve in the ways of God. An aduouterous woman is to be eschued.

CAPI. II.
MY son, if thou will receive my words, Iaco. ^. a Eccle. ^. ^ and. vii. x.
3. Reg. 3. b. and. iiii. ^*
For it is the Lord that gives wisdom, out of his mouth comes knoweledge
and understanding.

He preserves the well fare of the ryghtuous crooked, and they froward in
their paths. Prou. v. a. (...). vii. a
from the strange woman, and from her that is not thine own: which gives
sweet words and which for saketh the husband of her youth, and forgeteth the
covenant of her God. For her house is enclyned unto death, and her paths unto
hell. Al they that go in unto her, come not again, neither take they hold of
the way of life. Therefore, walk thou in the way of such as be virtuous /
and keep the paths of the ryghtuous. For the just shall dwell in the land,
and they that be perfect, shall remain in it: but the ungodly shall be roted
out of the land, and the wicked doers shall be roted out of it.

The commandments of God must be dylygentely regarded and observed.

CAPI. III.
MY son Deuit. xi. a
forgette not thou my law / Esaye. v c Roma. 12. c
Be not wise in thine own conceyt, but fear the Lord and depart from evil*
so shall thy navel be whole / and thy bones strong. Tobi. 4. b. Deuteronomy. 16. a
Mala. 3. b. Exodus 2, c. and* 37. c
Honor the Lord with thy substance and with the fyrstelynges of all thine
increase * ( give unto the poor) so shall thy barnes be filled with
plenteousnesse / and thy presses shall flow over with sweet wine. My son /
despise not the chastenynge of the LORD neither faynte when thou art rebuked
of him Hebre. xii. b Apo. iii. d.
For who^ the Lord loves / him he chasteneth / and yet delyteth i^ hi^, even
as a father i^ his own son. Well is him that fyndeth wisdom and optayneth
understanding / for the getting of it is better then any marchaundise Prove.
8. a
Wisdom is more worth then precious stones / and all the things that thou
canste desire / are not to be compayred unto her. Upon her right hand is long
life, and upon her left hand ^s riches and honor. Her ways are pleasant
ways and all her paths are peaceable. She is a Gene. ii. b
tree of life to them that lay hold upon her, and blessed is he that keeps
her fast. With wisdom has the Lord laid the foundacyon of the earth / and
through understanding has he stablyshed the heavens. Through his wisdom the
deapthes break up, and the clouds drop down the dew. My son / let not
these things depart from thine eyes / but keep my law and my council: so
shall it be life unto thy soul, and grace unto thy mouth. Then shalt thou
walk safely in thy way, and thy foot shall not sto^ble. Prou. 1. ^.
If you slepest, you shall not be afraid, but take thy rest and sleep swetely.
Thou nedest not to be afraid of any sudden fear / nether for y^ vyole^te
russhynge in of the ungodly / when it comes Prou. 1.
Follow not a wicked man, and chose none of his ways: for the Lord abhors
the froward but his council is among the righteous. The curse of the Lord
is in the house of the ungodly, but he blesses the dwellynges of the
ryghteous. As for the scoruefull / does not he laughe them to scorn? but he
geuethe grace unto the lowelye. The wise shall have honor in possession: but
shame is the promocyon that fools shall have.

Wisdom and her fruytes and her way ought to be sought.

CAP. IIII.
HEAR O ye children / the fatherlye Deuteronomy. vi. b* (...). ^. 3^. g.
Let thine heart receive my words / keep my commandments / and thou shalt
live. Get the wisdom / and get the understanding, forget not y^ words of my
mouth, and shri^ke not from the^. Forsake her not, and she shall p^serue y^:
leave her, and she shall keep y^. The chief point wisdom, and before all thy
goods to get the understanding. Deuteronomy. 26. d.
Make much of her and she shall promote the: Ye if thou embrace her* she
shall bring the unto honor. She shall make the a gracyous head / and garnyshe
the with a crown of glory. Hear my son, and receive my words and the
years of thy life shall be many. I have showed the, the way of wisdom / and
led the into the right paths. So that if thou go therein, there shall no
straytenesse hinder the and when thou ru^neste, thou shalt not fall. Take
fast hold of doctrine, and Psalm. 1. a. and xxvii. a.
Come not in the path of the ungodly, and walk not in the way of the wicked.
Eschew it, and go not therein, depart aside / and pass over by it. For they
can not sleep, except they have first done some myschefe: nether take they any
rest, except they have first done some harm. For they eat the bred of
wickedness, and drink the wine of robberye. The pathe of the ryghteous
shyneth as the light that is ever bryghter and bryghter unto the perfect
day. But the way of the Deute. vi. b and* xi. ^.
My son / marcke my words, and incline thine ear unto my sayings Let them
not depart from thine eyes / but keep them even in the mydeste of thine heart.
For they are life unto all those that find them, and health unto all their
bodies. Keep thine heart with all dylige^ce, for there upon hangs life. Put
away from the a froward mouth / and let the lyppes of sclaunder be far from
the. Let thine eyes behold the thing that is right / and let thine eye liddes
look straight before the. Pondre the path of thy fete, and let all thy ways be
ordered a right. Deute. v. d. and. xxvii. d
Turn not aside neither to the right hand nor to the left / but witholde thy
foot from evil. * ( For the Lord knows the ways that are on the right
hand. As for the ways that be on the left hand, they be froward. For he
shall direct thy goynges, and thy ways shall he gyde in peace.

He warns to eschew whordome. He forbyddeth wastfull spending He wylleth us
to live of our own labors Men must love their wives.

CAPI. V.
My son / give head unto my wisdom Apply not thou thy self to the
disceytful nesse of a woman.) For the lyppes of an harlot Prou. ii. b. and.
vii. a.
are a droppynge honye comb, and her throat is softer then oil. But at the
last she is as bitter as wormewode / and * ( her tongue) as sharp as a two
edged sword. Her fete go down unto death / and her steps pearse through
unto hell. She regards not the path of life: so unsteadfast are her ways

Let thy wells flow out abroad / that there may be ryuers of water in the
streets: but let them be only thine own / and not strangers with the. Let
thy well be blessed / and be glad with the wife of thy youth Job. xxxi. a. and.
34. ^.
For every man's ways are open in the sight of the Lord, and he pondreth all
their goynges. The wickedness of the ungodly shall catch him self / and with ye
snares of his own sins shall he be trap ped. He shall dye without amendment
/ and for his great folyshnesse he shall go astray.

The slouthefull and slougyshe is prycked and styrred to work. The scysmatyke
is reproved. Aduoutry ought to be earnestly avoided.

CAPI. VI.
My son Pro. xvii. ^. and. xx. ^.
if y^ be suertie for thy neighbor, and have fastened thine hand for another
man, thou art bound with thine own words, and taken with thine own
speech. Therefore / my son / do this and you shall be discharged: when you art
come into thy neighbors danger. Go thy ways then sone, and entreat thy
neighbor: let not thine eyes sleep / nor thine eye lydde slombre.

Save thy self as a do from the hand, and as a bird from the hand of the
fouler. Go to the Emmet (thou stougard) consydre her Pr^. xiii. d.
How long wylt thou sleep, thou slogysh man? When wylt thou arise out of thy
sleep? Ye sleep on still a little, slomber a little / fold thine hands to
gether yet a little, that y^ mayeste sleep: so shall pouerte come unto the as
one that trauayleth by the way / and necessyte like an armed man. So * ( But
if thou be not slouthful, thy harvest shall come as a sprynging well, and
poverty shall fly far from the). An ungodly person / a wicked man goth with a
froward mouth, he wyncketh with his eyes, he tokeneth with his fete, he
poi^teth with his fingers, he is ever ymagenige myschefe and frowardness i^
his heart, and causes discord Therefore shall his destruction come hastily upon
him suddenly shall he be al to broken, and not be healed. Pro. xii. c.
These six things does the Lord hate, and the seventh he utterly abhors A
proud look a dysse^blynge tongue hands ye shed innocent blood, an heart y^
goes about wicked ymagynacyon Psalm. 14. ^. Prouet. 1. ^
fete y^ be swyfte in rennynge to do myschefe, a false witness that brings
up lies, and such one as sows Psalm. 119.
the commandment is a lantern, and and the law a light: ye chastenynge and
nurtoure is the way of life, that they may keep the from Pro. v. a. and. vii*
a.
the evil woman, and from the slateringe tongue of the harlot: that thou lust
not after her bewty in thine heart, and lest thou be taken with her fair
lokes. An harlot will make a man to beg his bred, but a married woman will
hunte for the precious life, May a man take fire in his bo some, and his
clothes not be burnt? Or can Ero. xxii. a
Men do not utterly despise a thief that steals to satysfye his soul / when
he is hongry, but if he may be gotten he restores again seven times as much,
or else he makes recompe^se with all y^ good of his house. But who so
commits aduoutry with a woman, he is a fool, and hryngeth his life to
destruction. He gets him self also shame and dishonor / such as shall
never be put out. For the gelousy and wrath of y^ man will not be entreated, no
though thou would offer him great gifts to make amends, he will not
receive them.

God ought to be feared and honored. His command, inentes ou^^h (...) to be
hepte: wanton apperytes and desires ought to be shonned.

CAPI. VII.
My son, Deuteronomy. vi. b and. xii. a.
keep my words, and lay

Keep my commandments and my law, eue^ as the apple of thine eye, and thou
shall live, Bind them upon thy fingers, and write them in the table of thine
heart.

Say unto wisdom: thou art my sister, and call understanding thy kynswoman:
Prou. 2. b. and. 5. a.
that she may keep the from the strange woman, and from the harlot which
gives sweet words. For out of the wyndowe of my house I looked through the
latysse, and beheld y^ simple people: and among other young folks I Ecele. ix.
^.
an harlottes apparel (a dysceytfull) wanton and an unsteadfast woman: whose
fete could not abide in the house / now is she without now in the streets
and lurketh in every corner, she caught the young man / kyssed him / and was not
ashamed, faynge: I had a vow of peace offerynges to pay / and this day I
perform it. Therefore came I forth

For the good man is not at home, he is gone far of. He has taken the bag
of money with him: who can tell when he comes home? Thus with many sweet
words in her ways, and be not thou disceaued in her paths. For many one
has she wounded and cast down, ye many a strong man has been slain by the
means of her.

Her houses are the way unto hell, and bring me^ down into the chambers of
death.

The praise of the wisdom of God.

CAPI. VIII.
Does not Prouer. i. ^
wisdom cry? does not un derstan ^ynge put forth her voice? Stands she not
in the hye places in the streets and ways? does she not cry before the whole
city, and in the gates where me^ go out and in? It is you, O ye men (says
she) whom I call: Unto (the children of me^) do I lift up my voice. Take heed
unto knowledge: O ye ignoraunte: be wise in heart, O ye foles. Give eat, for I
will speak of great matters, and open my lyppes to tell things that be
right. For my throat shall be talking of the truth and my lyppes abhor
ungodliness. All the words of my mouth are ryghteous, there is no
frowardenesse nor falshede therein.

They are all plain to such as will understand, and right to them that find
knowledge. Receive my doctrine, and not silver, and my knowledge / more then
fine gold. For Prou. iii. b.
wisdom is more worth then precious stones, ye all things that thou can
desire / may not be compared unto it. I wisdom have my dwelling Deu. xvii. d
Sapi. vi. a.
Through me / kings reygne: through me / princes make just laws. Through me,
do princes bear rule / and all judges of the earth execute judgment. I am
loving unto those that love me: and Luke. xi. b.
they that seek me early / shall find me. Riches and honor are with me. Ye
excellent goods and righteousness. My fruit is better then gold and precious
stone / and mine increase more worth then fine silver. I will gyde the in the
way of righteousness, and in the street of judgment. That I may Sapi. ix. b.
The Lord him self had me in possessyou in the beginning of his ways, or
ever he began his worckes aforetyme. Eccle. 24. ^
I have been ordeued from everlasting and from the beginning or ever the earth
was made. When I was borne: there were nether depthes nor springes of water.
Before the foundacions of the mountains were laid, ye before al hills was I
borne. The earth and all that is upon the earth was not yet made, no not the
ground it self. Sapi. (...). ^.
For when he made the heavens, I was present: when he set up the depthes in
order / when he hanged the clouds above: when he fastened the springes of the
deep: when he shut the sea with in Gene. i. a, Job. xxvi. ^ and. 38. a. Psa.
^iiii. ^
certain bounds, that the waters should not go over their marckes. When he
laid the foundacions of the erath I was with him / ordrynge all things
dely^ynge daily, and reioysynge always before him. As for the round compase of
this world / I make it joyful: for my delight is to be among the children of
men. Therefore harken unto me* O ye children, blessed are they that keep my
ways. give ear unto nurtour, be wise and refuse it not. Blessed is the man
that hears me, watchynge daily at my gates / and geuynge attendaunce at the
posts of my doors. For who so fyndeth me, fyndethe life, and shall obtayue
favor of the Lord. but who so offends against me, hurtethe his own soul.
And all they that hate me / are the lovers of death.

Wisdom monethe all men to embrace her. The property of a whore.

CAPI. IX.
Wisdom has builded herself Job. 28. d. Psalm. (...). ^. Proue^. (...)
Ecclesi. ^^
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom / and the knowledge of holy
things is understanding For through me thy days shall be prolo^ged, and y^
years of thy life shall be many. If thou be wise, thy wisdom shall do thy self
good: but if ye thikest scorn thereof, it shall be thine own harm. A folysh
rechelesse woman, full of words, and such a one as has no knowledge, sytteth
at the door of her house, and in ye high places of ye cite to call such as go
by, and that walk straight in their ways. Who so is ignorant (says she)
let him come hither, and to the unwise she says: stolen waters are sweet and
the bread that is preuely eaten, has a good taste. And he does not consydre
/ that they are but dead which be there, and that her gestes are in ye deep
of hell. * ( For he that will be joined unto her, shall go down to hell but he
that auoydeth from her, shall be saved.

The Proverbs of Solomon.
In this chapter, and in all that follow unto the thyrtye the wise man
exhorts by diverse sentences, which he calls Parables, to follow virtues
and fly vices. And shows also what profet comes of wisdom, and what
hyndrau^ce proceadeth of folyshnesse

Capitulo. X.
A Wise Prove. 15. ^
son makes a glad father, but Prou. 11. ^. Eccle. v. b.
Tresures yt are wickedly gotten profit nothing, but ryghtuousnes delyuereth
from death. Psa. 34. b.
The Lord will not let ye soul of ye ryghtuous suffce hongre, but he puts
the ungodly from his desire. An idle hand makes poor / but the quycke
labourynge hand makes rich. * ( who so regards lesynges, fedeth the wind,
and does but follow birds that have taken their flight.) Who

Psa. ^xii. a
The memorial of the just shall have a good report, but the name of the
ungodly shall styncke. A wise man will receive war nynge / but a fool will sooner
be smyte^ in the face. Psalm. 23. a
He that leads an innocent life, wall keth surely: but who so goes a wrong
way shall be known. He y^ wincketh with hes eye, will do some harm but he y^ has
a folish mouth shall be bete^. The mouth of a rightuous man is a vein of life,
but y^ mouth of y^ ungodly keeps mischefe i^ secret. Evil will stereth up
strife, but love covers y^ multitude of sines In y^ lips of hi^ y^ has
vndersta^dig, a man shall find wisdom, but y^ rod belongs to y^ Psalm. 27. a
Eccle. xi. ^.
men Eccle. 27. d
as for careful travail, it does nothing thereto. A fool does wyckedly and
makes but a sport of it, nevertheless it is wisdom for a man to beware of
such. The thing y^ y^ ungodly are afraied of, shall come upon the^ / but y^
rightuous shall have their desire. The ungodly is like a tempest y^ passes
over, and is 1. Pe. 4. ^ ^ 1. Cor. 13. b.
The righteous shall never Psalm. 125. a
be overthrown, but the ungodly, shall not remain in ye land. Prou xi. b.
The mouth of y^ just will Psalm, 37 ^
be talki^g of wisdom, but ye to^g of y^ froward shall perish. The lips of y^
rightuous are occupied in acceptable things, but y^ mouth of y^ ungodly takes
the^ to y^ worst.

CAP. XI
A Prou. 16. ^ ^ xx. ^.
False balau^ce is an abhominacio^ un Prou. x. a. Eccle. ^. b.
Riches help not i^ y^ day of ve^geau^ce but righteousness delivers from
death. The righteousness of y^ inoce^t ordreth hes way, but ye ungodly shall fall
in his own wickedness, The righteousness of y^ just shall deliver the^, but y^
wicked shall be taken in their own ungodliness. When an ungodly man dies, hes
hope is gone, y^ co^fide^ce of riches shall perish. The rightuous shall be
delivered out of trouble, and y^ ungodly shall come to hes stead. Through ye
mouth of y^ disse^bler is hes neighbor destroyed, but through knowledge shall
^^^^. v. ^.
When it goes well with the righteous, y^ cite is merry: and when y^ ungodly
perish, there is gladness. When ye just are i^ wealth y^ cite prospers: but
when ye ungodly have ye rule, it decaieth. A fool bri^geth up a sclau^der of
hes neighbor, but a wise man will keep it secret. Pro. xiiii. d
A disse^blyng person will discover Prou. x. ^.
preuy things, but he that is of a faithful (...)
Where no good ^. Re. xii. ^.
council is, there ye people decay, but where(...)

does a mysse: but Psalm. xli. a.
blessed is he that has pytye of the poor. * ( He that puts his trust in
the Lord, louethe to be merciful) They that ymagin wickedness, shall be
disapoynted: but they that muse upon good things, unto such shall happen mercy
and faithfulness. Diligent labor brings riches / but where many vain
words are / truly there is scarceness. Riches are as a crown unto the wise,
but the ignorance of fools is very folyshenesse: A faithful witness
delyuereth souls, but a liar dysceuethe Prou* ^i. b Math* xx ^
He that does a poor man wrong / blasphemeth his maker: but who so has pytie
of the poor, does honor unto God. The ungodly is afraied of every parel, but
y^ righteous has a good hope even i^ death. Wisdom rests in the heart of
him that has understanding, and he shall be known among them that are
unlearned. Prou. xi. b.
Righteousness sets up the people, but wickedness brings folk to
destruccyon. A discrete seruau^te is a pleasure unto y^ King / but one that is
not honest provoke him unto wrath.

CAPI. XV.
Pro. xxv. c
A Soft answer puts down displeasure Were righteousness is plentyfull,
there is very great power: but ymaginacio^s of the ungodly shall be roted out.)
The house of y^ righteous is full of riches, but y^ increse of y^ ungodly is my
destruccio^. A wise mouth pours out knowledge but y^ heart of the folyshe
does not so. Pro. xxi. d. Eccle. 34. ^. Esaye. 66.
The Lord abhors the sacrifice of y^ ungodly but y^ prayer of y^ ryghteous
is acceptable unto him. The way of the ungodly is an abhominacyon unto the
Lord: but who so follows ryghteousnes, him he loves. He that forsakes the
right way shall be sore punyshed: and who so hates correccion, shall dye. Hell
and perdiscion are konwne unto the Lord, how much more then the hertes of of
men? Sapi^. (...). ^
A scornful body loves not one that rebukes him neither will he come unto
the wise? Prou. (...). ^ and. xv^^* ^* Eccle. xix. ^
A merry heart makes a cheerful countenance, but an unquiet mind makes it
heavy. The heart of him that has understanding, does seek after knowledge,
but the mouth of fools is feed with foolyshnesse. All the days of y^ poor
are miserable but, a quiet heart is as a contynual feast. Psalm. 37. ^* 1. ^im.
^. ^*
Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then great treasure with
sorrow. Better is a measse of potage with love, then a fat ox with evil
will. Prou. xv. ^
An angrye man stereth up strife, but he that is pacyente, stylleth discord.
The way of a slothful man / is as it were hedged with thorns, but the Prou.
x. ^.
A wise son makes a glade father, but an indiscreet body shameth his mother.
A fool reioyseth in foolysh things / but a wise man looks well to his own
goynges.

Unaduysed thoughts shall come to naught, but where as me^ are that can give
council, there is steadfastness. A joyful thing is it, when a man gives a
conuient answer? And very pleasant is a word spoken in due season. The way
of life leads unto heaven, that a man should beware of hell beneth. The Lord
will break down the house of the proud, but he shall

The Lord abhors the ymaginacions of the wicked, but pure words are
pleasant unto him. The covetous man roteth up his own house, but who so
hates rewards, shall live. * ( Through mercy and faith are sins pourged,
and through the fear of the lord does every one eschew evil.) A ryghteous
man museth in his mind how to do good, but the mouth of the ungodly brings
forth evil things. The Lord is far from the ungodly, but he hears the
prayer of the ryghteous. Like as the clearness of the eyes reioyseth the
heart, so does a good name feed y^ bones. The ear that harkeneth of the
refourmacion of life, shall dwell among the wise. He that refuses to be
reformed, despyseth his own soul: but he that submits him self to
correccyon, is wise. The fear of the lord is the right sience of wisdom, and
lowlynes goes before honor.

CAPI. XVI.
A Man may well purpose a thing in his heart / but the answer of the tongue
comes of the Lord. Prou. 2^. a Psalm. 33. b.
A man thinks al his ways to be clean, but it is the Lord that judges the
minds. Psalm. 37. a
Commytte thy works unto the Lord: and look what thou deuysest, it shall
prospere. The Lord does all things for his own sake, ye and when he keeps
the ungodly for the day of wrath. The Lord abhors all such as be of a
proud heart, there may neither strength nor power escape. * ( The beginning
of a good life is to do ryghtwysnes: for that is more accepted unto God, then
to offer up sacryfyces.) With loving mercy

Better it is to have a little thing with ryghteousnes / then great rentes
wrong fully gotten. Pro. 19. c.
A man deuyseth a way in his heart / but it is the Lord that ordreth his
goynges. When the prophecy is in the lyppes of the king / his mouth shall not
go wrong in judgment. Pr. (...). a. and. 20. b
A true measure and a true balau^ce are the Lords / he makes all weyghtes.
It is a great abhominacyon when kings are wicked / for a kings seat should be
holde^ up with righteousness. Ryghteous lyppes are pleasant unto kings: and
he that speaks the truth shall be beloved. The kings displeasure is a
messaunger of death, but awyse man will pacify him. The cherefull countenance
of the king is life, and his loving favor is as the evening dew. Prove. 8.
a
To have wisdom in possessyon is better then to have gold: and to get
understanding, is more worth then to have silver. The path of the ryghteous is
to eschew euel: and who so looks well to his ways, keeps his own soul.
Presumpteousnes goes before destruccyo^, and after a proud stomach there
follows a fall. Better it is to be of humble mind with the lowly / then
codeuyde the spoils with the proud. He that ha^deleth a matter wisely,
opteyneth good: and Psalm. 2. b.
blessed is he, that puts his trust in the Lord. Who so has a wise
understanding, shall be called to council: a^^ ^e

Fair words are an honey comb, a refreshynge of the mind, and health of the
bones. Prou. 14. b Deuteronomy. 12. a Esaias. 55. b.
There is a way that me^ think to be right, but the end thereof leads unto
death. A troublous soul disquyeteth her self / for her oune mouth has
brought her thereto. An ungodly person stereth up evil / and in his lyppes he
is as an hot burning fire. A froward body causes strife / and he that is a
blabbe of his tongue / makes deuysyon among princes. A wicked man begyleth his
neighbor, and leads him in to the way that is not good.

He that wynketh with his eyes, ymagyneth

CAPI. XVII.
BETTER is a dry morsel with quietness / then a full house and many fat
catell with strife. Eccle. 1^. d
A dyscrete servant shall have more rule then the sons that have no wisdom
/ and shall have like heritage with the brethen Sa^^e^. 3. (...)
Like as silver is tried in the fire, and gold in the furnace, even so does
the Lord prove the hertes. A wicked body holds much of false lyppes / and a
froward person gives care to a dysceatfull tongue. Prou. 14. d Job. 31. ^.
Who so laugheth the poor to scorn / blasphemeth hes maker: and he that is
glad of another man's hurt / shall not be unpunished.

Chylders children are a worship unto the elders / and the fathers are the
honor

Lyberalyte is a precious stone unto him that has it: for where soever he
becomes, he prospers. Who so covers another man's offense, seeks love:
but he that dyscloseth the fault / sets the prince against him self: One
reprofe only do^he more good to him that has understanding, then an.
C^stor^pes unto a fool. 1. Reg. 12. ^*
A sedycy^us* person seeks myschefe, and therefore is a cruel messaunger
sent against him. It were better to come against a she(...)

evil, but put thy trust in the Lord, and Prout. (...). a and. 1^. ^
The Lord abhors two manner of weyghtes / and a false balaunce is an evil
thing. ^ere x, d
The Lord ordreth every man's goynges: how may a man then understand his
own way?

It is a snare for a man to blaspheme that which is holy, and then to go
about with vows. 1. Reg. (...). ^
A wise king destroys the un godly, and brings the whele over them.

The lantern of the Lord is the breath of man, and goes through all the in
ward parts of the body. Prou. 29. b
Mercy and faythfulnesse preserve the king, and with loving kindness his seat
is holden up. The strength of young men is their worship, and a graye head, is
an honor unto the aged. Woun des drive away evil, and so do strypes the
inward parts of the body.

CAPI. XXI.
THE 4. Reg. ^. ^.
Kings heart is in the hand Mich. v. ^.
To do ryghtuousnesse and judgment is more acceptable to the Lord the^
sacrifyce. A presumptuous look, a proud stomach / and the lantern of the
ungodly is sin. The deuyces of one that is dilygent / bring pletuousnesse:
but he that is unadvised, comes unto pouerte.

Who so hordeth up riches with the dysceytfulnesse of his tongue, he is a fool
/ and like unto them that seek their own death.

The robberyes of the ungodly shall be their own destruccyon, for they will not
do the things that is right. The ways of the froward are strange: but * the
works of him that is clean / are right

Eitu^. ^. ^. Prou. 25. d.
It is be^tter to dwell in a corner under the house top, then with a
braulynge woman in a wide house. The soul of the ungodly wyssheth evil and
has no pitye upon his neighbor. Prou. 19 ^
When the scornful is punyshed / the ignorant take the better head: and when
a wise man is warned, he will receive the more understanding. The ryghtuous
wisely consydereth the house of the ungodly / and he sees that God
overthrows the ungodly for their own wickedness. Mat. 18. ^
Who so stops his ear at the cryeng of the poor he shall cry him self,
and not be herd.

A preuy reward pacyfyeth dyspleasure, and a gift in the bosom, stylleth
futyousnesse. The just delyteth in doing that thing that is right, but the
works of wyekednesse abhor the same. The man y^ wan dreth out of the way of
wisdom, shall remain in the congregation of the dead Prou^. ^. ^
He that has pleasure in bancket^es, shall be a poor man: who so delyteth in
wine and Eccle. 25. ^.
It is better to dwell in a wilderness, then with a chiding and an angry
woman. In a wise man's house there is great treasure and plentuousnesse but a
folyshe body spends up all. Who so follows ryghtuousnesse and mercy, fyn
death both life, ryghtuousnesse and honor A wise man wynneth the city of the
mighty: and as for the strength that they trust in he brings it down. Prou.
(...). ^
Who so keeps his mouth and his tongue, the same keeps his soul from
troubles. He that is proud and presumptuous, is called a scornful man /
which in wrath dare work malycyously. Prou. (...). ^
There Esay^. ^. ^. and. x^^^. ^
is no wisdom, there is no understanding, there is no council against the
Lord.

Psalm. 33. ^.
The horse is prepayred against the day of battle / but the LORD gives
the vyctorye.

CAPI. XXII.
A Eccl^. (...). ^ Eccle. (...). ^
GOOD name is more worth then great riches / and loving favor is better
then silver and gold.

The rich and poor met together: the Lord is the maker of them all. A wise
man sees the plage / and hydeth him self: but the folyshe go on still and are
punyshed

The end of lowelynes and the fear of GOD / riches / honor prosperity and
health. Thorns and snares are in the way of the froward: but he that does
keep his soul, will fle from such. Teach a child in his youth what way he
should go: for he shall not leave it, when he is old. The rich rules the
pore, and the borower is servant to the lender. He that sows wickedness
shall reap sorrow, and the rod of his crueltye shall peryshe ^^^^. 31. ^
He y^ has a loving eye shall be blessed, for he gives of his bread who so
gives rewards, shall obtain vyetory and honor: but he takes a way the
soul of such as receive the^.) Cast out the scornful man, and so shall
strife go out with him, ye varyaunce and sclaunder shall cease. Who so
deliteth to be of a clean heart and of gracyous lyppes, the King shall be his
frynde. The eyes of the Lord preserve knowledge, but as for the words of the
despyteful, he brings the^ to naught. The slothful body says: there is
alyon without, I might be slain in the street (...). 2^. ^.
The mouth of an harlot is a deep pytt, wherein he falls that the Lord is
angrye withal. Folyshnes stycketh in the heart of the lad, and the rod of
correc^o^ shall ^^^^. vi. ^ ^. (...). ^. 27. ^
Be not thou one of the^ yt bind their hand upon promise, and are suertye for
det: for if thou haste nothing to pay, they shall take away thy bed from under
the. Prou. 23. ^ Deuteronomy. ^7. ^.
thou shall not remove the land mark, which thy fore elders have set. See
thou not, that they which be dilligent in their busynes, stand before kings
and not among the simple people.

CAPI. XXIII.
WHen thou syttest at y^ table to eat with a lord, order thy self manerly
with the things that are set before the. Measure thine appitite: and if thou
will rule thine own self, be not over gredy of his meat, for meat begyleth
and disceaueth. E^^^. 27. ^ (...). xvii. b.
Take not over great travail and labor to be rich, beware of such a
purpose. ^. Tim. vi ^
Why wylt thou set thine eye upon the thing, which suddenly vanishes away?
For riches make the^ selves wings, and take their flight like an Aegle in to
y^ air. Eat not thou with the enuyous and desire not his meat / for he has
a marvelous heart. He says unto the: eat and drink, where as his heart is
not with the.

Ye the morsels that thou have eaten shall Pro. xxii. v. Deuteronomy. 27. ^.
Remove not the old land mark, and come not within the field of the
fatherless: For he that delyuereth them, is myghtie, even he shall defend
their cause against the. Apply thine heart unto correcyon, and thine eats of
y^ words of knowledge. Pro. xiii. d. Eccle. xxx. a
Withholde not correccion from the child, for if y^ beatest him with the rod,
he shall not dye thereof. If thou smite him with y^ rod, thou shall deliver his
soul from hell. My soon, if thy heart receive wisdom, my heart also shall
rejoice: ye my reins shall be very glad: if thy lyppes speak the thing tha is
right.

Prou. 14. ^ and. ^.
Let not thine heart be gelous to follow sinners / but keep the still in the
fear of the Lord all the day long: for the end is not yet come, and thy
pacient abydyng shall not be in vain. My son / give ear and be wise, so
shall thine heart prospere in the Prou. xxi. ^
ryotous eaters of flesh: for such as be dronkardes and ryotous shall come to
pouerte, and he that is given to much sleep / shall go with a ragged coat.
Give ear unto thy father that begat the / and despise not thy mother when she
is old. Labor for to get the truth: sell not away wisdom nourtour and
understanding (for a ryghteous father is marvelous glad of a wise son, and
delyteth in him) so shall thy father be glad / and thy mother that bare the /
shall rejoice. My son / give me thine heart, and let thine eyes have pleasure
in my ways.

Pro. xxii. b.
For an whore is a deep grave / and an harlot is a narowe pyt. She lurketh like
a thief / and brings unto her such me^ as as be full of vice. Who has woe?
who So shall thine eyes look unto strange women, and thine heart shall muse
upon froward things. Ye thou shall be as though thou slepeste in the
myddeste of the sea / or upon the top of the mast. They wounded me (shall
thou say) but it has not hurt me: they smote me but I felt it not. When I am
well wakened, I will go to the drink again.

CAP. XXIIII.
B Pro. 23. b. and. 24. ^.
E not thou gelous over wicked men Psalm. 37. d.
For a just man falls seven times, and ryseth up again, but the ungodly
fall in to wyckedness. Pro. 17. a.
Rejoice hat thou at the fall of chyne enemy / and let not thine heart be glad
when he stomblech. Lest the Lord (when he seyth it) be angrye, and turn his
wrath from him unto the. Pro 23. b, and. 24, a.
Let not thy wrath and gelousy move the, to follow the Job. 21. b. Prove. 13. a
the candle of the ungodly shall be put out. Prou. 20. a
My son fear thou the Lord and the king / and keep no company with the
sclaunderous, for their destruceyon shall come suddenly, and who knows the
aduersyte of them both? These are also the saynges of the wise. Pro. 18. b.
It is not good, to have respect of any person in judgment. He that says
to the ungodly: thou art ryghteous / him shall the people curse, ye the
comenty shall abhor him. But they that rebuke the ungodly / shall be commended,
and a rich blessing shall come upon them. Every man shall kiss his lyppes /
that gives a good answer. First make up thy work that is without and look
well unto that which thou have in the field and then build thine house. Be no
false witness against thy neighbor, and hurt him not with thy lyppes.
Prove. 9. b
Ye sleep on still * ( I say) a little sto^ber a little, fold thine hands
together yet a little: so shall pouerte come unto the as one that trauaileth by
the way, and necessyte like an armed man.

These also are the parables of Solomon, which the men of Ezekiah King of
Judah copyed out.

CAPI. XXV.
IT IS y^ honor of god to keep a thing

The heaven is hye / the earth is deep / and the kings heart is unsearchable.
Take the dross from the silver, and there shall be a clean vessel thereof. Take
away vngodgodlynesse from the kings sight, and his seat shall be stablished in
ryghteousnes. Put not for the thy self in the presence of y^ king, and preace
not i^to y^ place of great me^. Luke. 14. ^
For better is it yt it be said unto y^: come up hither / then thou to be set
down in the presence of y^ prince who^ thou seyst with thine eyes. Eccle. 8.
^. Math. (...). ^.
Be not hasty to go to ye law, lest happly y^ order thy self so at y^ last,
that thy neighbor put the to shame. Handle thy matter with thy Grace and
frendshyppe do the deliver: which se that thou keep for thy self lest thou be
reproved.) a word spoken in due season, is like apples of gold in a silver
dishe. The correccyon of the wise is to an obedient ear, a golden cheyne and a
Jewel of gold. Like as the cold of snow in the harvest, so is a faithful
messenger to them that send him: for he refressheth his masters mind. Who so
makes great bostes Pron xv. a Gene. 32. a Reg. 25. ^
with a soft tongue is rygorousnes broken. If thou fyndest honey, eat so much
as is sufficient for the: least thou be ouerful, and perbrake it out again
Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbors house, lest he be weary of the, and so
abhor the. Who so bears false witness against his neighbor, he is a very
spear, a sword and a sharp arrowe. The hope of the ungodly in time of need,
is like a rotten to the and a slyppery foot. Who so takes away a man's
garmente in the cold wether, is like vyneger upon chalk, or like him that
syngeth songs to an heavy heart. * ( Like as the moth hurts a garment, and a
worm the tree so does the heaviness of a man hurt the heart) Roma. 1^. c 1.
Reg. 30. b
If thine enemy honger, feade him: if he thryste, give him drink: for so
shalt thou heap coals of fire upon his head, and the Prou. xxi. a
It is better to sit in a corner under the ro^e, then with a brawling woman in
a wide house: A good report out of a far country, is like cold water to a
thrysty soul Aryghtuous man falling down before the ungodly is like a
troubled well and a spring that is destroyed. Like as it is not ^ccle. 3. c
good to eat to much honye, even so he that will search out hye things, it
shall be to heavy for him. He that can not rule him self is like a cite which
is broken down, and has no walls.

CAPI. XXVI.
LIke as snow is not mete in Summer, Psalm. 32. b
Unto the horse belongs a whyppe, to the Ass a bridle / and a rod to the
foles back. Give not the fool an answer after his folyshnesse, least thou
become like unto him: but make the fool an answer to his folishnesse, lest he
be wise in his own conceate. He is lame of his fete, yea droncken is he in
vanite, that commytteth any thing to a fool. Like as it is an unsemely thing
to have legs and yet to

1. Pet. 2. ^
Like as the dog turns again to his vomyte, even so a fool begins his
folyshnesse again a fresshe. If thou see a man that is wise in his own
conceyt, there is more hope in a fool then in him.

Pro. xxii. b
The slothful says: there is a leoparde in the way, and a lion in the
myddest

Prou. xix. c
The slothful body thrusts his hand into his bosom, and it greueth him to
put it again to his mouth. The s^ogarde thinks him self wiser then seven
men that sit and teach. Who so goes by and medleth with other men's strife, he
is like one y^ takes a dog by the ears. Like as one shoteth deadly arowes
and darts out of a preuy place, even so does a dissembler with his neighbor.
And then says he? ( when thou art taken) I did it but in sport. Where no wod
is, there the fire goes out: Even so where the backebiter is taken away, there
y^ strife cease. As Eccle. 28. b
coals kyndle heat, and wod the fire: even so does a brawlyng fellow stere up
variaunce. A sclaunderers words Eccle. x. b. Eccle. 27. d
Who so dyggeth up a pyt, shall fall there in: and he that weltreth a stone, shall
stomble upon it him self. A dyssemblynge tongue hates one that rebukes him,
and a flateryng mouth works myschefe.

CAPI. XXVII.
MAke not thy boste of to morrow Luke. 2. c. Ezec. 28. ^ James. 4 b
for you know not what may happen to day Let another man praise the, and not
thine own mouth: yea other folks lyppes, and not thine. The stone is heavy
and the sand weyghtye: but a foles wrath is heuyer then they both. Wrath is
a cruel thing, and furiousnes is a very tempest: yea who is able to abide
envy? An open rebuke is better then a secret love. Faithful are the wounds
of a lover, but the kysses of an enemy are cruel. He that is full, abhors an

For better is a friend at band / then a brother far of. My son, be wise,
and thou shalt make me a glad heart: so that I shall make answer unto my
rebukers.

A wise man seeing the plage / will hyde him self, as for fools they go on
still, and suffer harm. Prouit. x. c
Take his garmente that is surety for a stranger, and take a pledge of him
for the unknown man's sake.

He that is to hastye to praise his neighbor Prou. xix. b
A braulyng woman and the rofe of the house droppynge in a taynye day, may
well be compared together. He that refrayneth her / refrayneth the wind, and
holds oil fast in his hand. Like as one iron whetteth another, so does one
man comfort another

Who so keeps his fygge tree, shall enjoy the fruits thereof: even so, he
that wayteth upon his master, shall come to honor.

Like as in one water there appear diverse faces / even so diverse men have
diverse hertes. Like as hell and destruccyon are never full, even so Eccle. 1.
a. Eccle. 14. a and. xxvii. c
the eyes of men can never be satisfied. Silver is tried in the moulde, and
Gold in the furnace / and so is a man, when he is openly praised to his face.
* The heart of a wicked man seeks after myschefe, but a true heart seeks)
Though thou should bray a fool with a pestell in a mortar like otemell, yet
will not his foolyshenesse go from him. Se that thou know the nombre of thy
cattle thy self / and look well to thy flocks. For riches abide not always
and the crown endures not for ever.

The heye grows, the grass comes up, and herbs are gathered in the
mountains. The lambs shall clothe the, and for the goats thou shall have
money to thy husbandry. Thou shall have goats mylck enough to feed the / to
uphold thy household and to sustain thy maidens.

CAPI. XXVIII.
THE ungodly flies when no man chaseth him / but the ryghtuous stands Leuit.
26. ^
Because of sin the land does often change her Prince: but through men of
understanding and wisdom a realm endures long: One poor man oppressyng
another by vyolence is like a contynuall rain that destroys the fruit. They
that forsake the law praise the ungodly: but such as keep the law, abhor
them. 1. Cor^. 2. ^.
Wicked men dyscer^e not the thing that is right / but they that seek after
the Lord, discuss all things. Prou. (...). ^
A poor man leadynge a godly life, is better then the rich that goes in
froward ways. Who so keeps the law, is a child of understanding: but he
that is a companion of ryotus me^, shameth his father. Who Prouet. ^. b
He that turns away his ear from hearing the law, his prayer shall be
abominable. Who so ledeth the ryghtuous into an evil way, shall fall in to
his own pyt / but the just shall have the good in possession. The rich man
thinks him self to be wise, but the poor that has vnderstaudyng, can
perceive him well enough. Eccle. x. ^. Prou. (...). ^
When ryghtuous men are in prosperity, then does honor floryshe: but when the
ungodly come up, the state of men changes. He that hydeth his sins, shall
not prospere: but Job. x^i^. ^* Psalm. 32. b 1. Job. ^. ^
who so knowledgeth the^ and forsakes them, shall have mercy. Well is him that
stands always in awe: as for him that harder^eth his heart, he shall fall in
Gen^. 4. ^
He that by vyolence sheddethe any man's blood, shall be a rennagate unto his
grave: and no man shall be able to succoure Prove. x. ^
him. Who so leads a godly and an innocent life, shall be saved: but he that
goes froward ways, shall onse have a fall.

Prou. (...). ^ Eccle. (...). ^.
He that tylleth his land, shall have ple^tuousnesse of bread: but he y^
follows ydil nesse, shall have pouerte enough. A man y^ deals faithfully,
shall be filled with blessings: and 1. Tim. 6. b Pro. xxiii. a
he that makes haste to be rich, shall not be unguilty. To have respect of
persons in judgment is not good.

And why? A man will do wrong / yea even for a piece of bread. He that will be
Mat. xv. a.
Who so robs his Father and mother / and says it is no sin / the same is
like unto a destroyer. He that is of a proud stomach, stereth up strife: but
he that puts his trust in the Lord, shall be well fed. He that trusts
in his own heart, is a fool: but he that walks wisely shall be safe. 2.
Cori. 9. b
He that gives unto the poor, shall not lack: but he that turns away his
eyes from such as be in necessytie / shall suffer great pouerte him self.
Prou. 28. b and. 29. ^
When the ungodly are come up, men are feign to hide them selves: but when they
peryshe, the ryghtuous increase.

CAPI. XXIX.
HE THAT is styfnecked / and will Prou. 28. b Eccle. x. a
When the ryghtuous have the over hand / the people are in prosperity: but
when the ungodly bears rule / there the people mourn. Who so loves wisdom /
makes his Father a glad man: Prove. v. a Luke. xv. c.
but he that kepethe^ company with harlottes / spends away that he has

With true judgment the king sets up the land, but if he be a man that is
covetous / he turns it up side down.

Who so flatereth his neighbor / lays a net for his fete. * The sin of
the wicked is his own snare, but the ryghtuous does sing and rejoice. The
ryghtuous consydreth the cause of the poor / but the ungodly regards no
understanding.

Wicked people bring a city in decay, but wise men set it up again. If a
wise man go to law with a fool (whether he deal with him friendly or
roughely) he gets no rest. The blood thyrstye hate the ryghtuous / but the
just seek his soul. A fool powers out his sprete all together but a wise
man keeps it in till afterward. If a Prince delight in lies / all his
servants are ungodly.

The poor and the lender mete together

Prove. xx* ^
The seat of y^ King that faithfully judges the poor / shall continue sure
for ever more. The rod and correcion mynys^re wisdom / but if a child be
not looked unto, he brings his mother to shame.

When the ungodly come up, wyckednes increases: but the ryghtuous shall se
their fall. Nurtoure thy son with correccyon, and thou shall be arrest, yea
he shall do the good at thine heart. When the word of god is not preached, the
people peryshe, but well is him that keeps the law. A servant will not be
the better for words, for though he understand, yet will he not regard them.

If thou see a man that is hastye to speak unadvised, thou may trust a
fool Job. xxii. d
but a lowely sprete brings great worship. Who so keeps company with a
thief, hates his own soul: he hereth blasphemies, and tells it not forth.
He that fears men, shall have a fall: but who so puts his trust in the
Lord is without danger. Many there be that seek the Princes favor, but
every man's judgment comes from the Lord The rightuous abhors the
ungodly: but as for those that be in the right way / the wicked hate them. * (
A child that keeps the word, shall be without destruccyon,

The putenes of the word of God: and what we ought to require of God, with
certain wonderful things that are in this world.

CAPI. XXX.
THE words of Agur the son of Iakei, and the Propherye that the same Psalm.
xix. ^.
All the words of God are pure and clean, for he is a shylde unto all them /
that put their trust in him.

Deute. 4. a and. xii. d
Put you nothing unto his words, lest he reprove the, and thou be found a
liar.

Two things have I required of the, that

what were error and folishnes And I perce^ued that this was but a vexacyon of
mind: for where much wisdom is, there is also great travail and
disquyetnes: and the more knowledge a man has, the more is his care.

Abundance of richesse, of pleasure and of building are vain things.

CAP. II.
THen said I thus in my heart: Now go to, I will take mine ease and have good
days. But lo, that is vanite also: in 3. R. 3456
I made gorgyous fair worckes. I builded me houses, and planted vyneyardes. I
made 4. (...). 4. 9.
I made pooles of water, to water the grene and fruitful trees withal. I
boughte servants and maidens, and had a great household. As for catell and
sheep / I had more substance of them / then all they that were before me in
Jerusalem, I gathered silver and gold together / even a treasure of kings and
lands. I provided me syngers and women, which could play of instruments to
make men mirth and pastyme. I gat me psalteries and songs of musycke. And I
was greater and in more worshype, then all my predecessors in Jerusalem.

For wisdom remained with me: and look whatsoever mine eyes desired, I let
them have it: and wherein soever my heart delyted. or had any pleasure, I with
held it not from it. Thus my heart reioysed in all that I did, and this was my
porcyon of all my travail. But when I considred all the worckes that my hands
had wrought, and all the labor that I had taken therein: lo all was but vanite
and vexacyon of mind, and nothing of any value under the Sun. Then turned

This is also a vain thing and great misery. For what gets a man of all y^
labor and travail of his mind, that he takes under the Sun* but
heaviness, sorrow and ^isquyetnetnes all the days of his life? In so much
that his heart can not rest in the night, this is also a vain thing? Eccle.
v. ^.
Is it not better then for a man to eat and drink, and his soul to be merry
in his labor? Yes, I saw that this also was a gift of God: For who will eat
or go more lustely to his work then I? And why? he gives unto man, what it
pleases him: whether it be wisdom, understanding, or gladness. But unto the
sinner he gives weerynes * ( and superfluous ca^e) that he may gather and
heap to gether y^ thing, that afterward shall be given unto him, who^ it
pleases God. This is now a vain thing, ye a very disquietnesse and vexacyon
of mind.

Al things come i^ their time, and pass away in their time.

CAPI. III.
Every thing has a time, ye all that laugh. A time to mourn, and a time to
daunse. A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together. A
time to embrace, and a time to reftayne from embracing. A time to win, and a
time to lose ^uis. 20. ^ 31. d. (...). ^
A time to keep silence, and a time to speak. A time to love, and a time to
hate. A time of war / and a time of peace. What has a man else (that does
any thing) but werynesse and labor?

For as touching the travail and carfulness which God has given unto
men, I se that he has given it them, to be exercised in it. All this has he
ordained marvelous goodly: to every thing his due time. He has planted
ignorance also in the hertes of men, that they should not co^ prehende the
ground of his works / which he does from the beginning to the end E^^^^. x.
d.
The thing that has been, is now: and the thing that is for to come, has
been before time, for God restores again the thing that was paste. More over,
I saw under the Sun ungodliness in the stead of judgment and iniquyte in
stead of ryghtuousnesse. Then thought I in my mind God shall separate the
ryghtuous from the ^^p^^. 2. ^


Who knows the sprete of man that goes upward, and the breath of the beast
that goth down into the earth? Wherefore I perceive, that there is nothing
better for a man / then to be joyful in his labor, for that is his porcyon.
But who will bring him to se the thing that shall come after him.

The myse^yes of th innocent. The superfluou^ labors of men. The chyld^^ at
to poor and wise. etc.

CAPI. IIII.
SOITVRNED me, and Aba^ue. 1. ^ Eccl^^. 5. ^
consydred

Again, I saw that all travail and di

There is one man, no mo but him self alone, having neither child nor
brother: yet is there no end of his careful travail his eyes can not be
satisfied with riches* * ( yet does he not remember him self, and say)

But woe is him that is alone, for if he fall, he has not another to help him
up.

Again, when two stepe together, they are warm: but how can a body be warm
alone? One may be overcome, but two may make resystaunce: A threfolde threde
is not lightly broken. A poor child being wise is better then an old king,
that doce^h, and Gene. ^li. 5. I Reg. 10. c ^. Reg. 1^. c. ^. Pat. (...). c. 4.
Re* ^5* ^
Some one comes out of prison, and is made a king: and another which is
borne in the kyngedome, comes unto pouerte.

And I perceived, that all men living under the Son, go with the second
child* that comes up in the stead of the other. As for the people that have
been before him and that come after him, they are innumerable: yet is not their
joy the greater through him. This is also a vain thing and a vecacion of
mind. When thou come in to the house of God, keep thy foot and drawnye,
that thou may hear: 1. Reg. x v. ^
that is better the^ the offerynges of fools, for they know not what evil
they do.

Amonyeyon so beware of rasshe communication. We ought not to marvel at the
oppressyon of the ^ort. The to ^^tous is not satisfied with his riches.

CAPIT. V.
BE NOT hasty with thy month, and Dut. 23. d. Datur. ^. ^.
If thou make a vow unto God be not slack to perform it. As for folyshe
vows, he has no pleasure in them. If thou promise any thing, pay it: for
better it is that thou make no vow, the^ that thou shul best promise, and not
pay. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh for to sin / neither say thou
before the angel, that it is thy ignorance. For then God wylbe angrye at thy
voice / and destroy all the works of thine hands. And why* where as are many
dreams and many words, there are also diverse vanities: but look that thou
fear Eccles. 4. ^ (...). 1. ^
and wrongefully dealte withal, so that equity and the right of the law is
wrested in the land: marvel not thou at such a thing, for one great man
keeps touch with another, and the mighty help them selves together. The
whole land also with the feldes, and all that is therein, is in subieccion and
bondage unto the King. He that loves money, will never be satysfyed with
money: and who so delyteth in riches shall have no profit thereof. This is also
a vain thyage. Where as much riches is / there are many also that spend them
away And what pleasure more has he that possesses them, saving that he may
look upon

For often times they perysh with his great mysery and trouble, and if he have a
child it gets nothing. Job i. ^. Timo. 6. b.
Like as he came naked out of his mothers womb, so goes he thither again,
and caryeth nothing away with him of all his labor. This is a miserable
plage, that he shall go away eue^ as he came. What helps it him then, that he
Eccle. 2. ^.
Therefore me thyncke it a better and a fayrer thing, a man to eat and drink,
and to be refreshed of al his labor, that he takes vnter the Son all the
days of his life, which God gives him, for this is his poreyon. For unto whom
soever God gives riches goods and power, he gives it him to enjoy it, to
take it for his porcyon, and to be refreshed of his labor: this is the gift
of God. For he thinks not much how long he shall live, for so much as God
fylleth his heart with gladness.

The myserye of the rich and covetous. The dyfference of a fool and a wise
man.

CAPI. VI.
THERE is yet a plage which I beheld

All the labor that a man takes / is for him self, and yet his desire is
never filled after his mind. For what has the For who knows what is good
for man living, in the days of his vain life, which is but a shadow? Or who
will tell a man / what shall happen after him under y^ Su^ne.

That which passes our strengthes and wits ought we not to seek after.

CAPI. VII.
A Pro. 22. a.
GOOD name is more worth then Cant. 1. ^
a precious oyntmente / and the day of death is better then the day of birth.
It is better to go in to an house of mournyng / then in to a bancketinge house.
For there is the end of all men: and he that is living / takes it to heart.
It is better to be sorry then to laugh: for when the countenance is heavy, the
heart is reformed. The heart of the wise is in the mourning house, but the
heart of the folysh is in the house of mirth, Prou. 17. ^
It is better to give ear to the chastenynge of a wise man, then to hear the
song of fools For the laughing of foles is like the crackynge of thorns
under a pot. And that is but a vain thing. Who so does wrong, makes a wise
man to go out of his wit and destroys a gentle heart. The end of a thing
is better then the begynnyne. The pacyent spryte is better then the hye minded.
Be not hastily angry in thy mind, for Roma. 11. c.
be thou nether to ryghteous nor over wise that thou peryshe not, be nether to
unrighteous also nor to folyshe, lest y^ dye before thy time. It is good for
the to take hold of this, and not to let y^ go out of thy hand. For he that
fears God, shall escape them all. Wisdom gives more courage unto the wise /
then ten mighty men of the city: 3. Reg ^. ^. 2. Pata. 6 g Prou. ^0. ^ 1
(...) 1. b.
for there is not one just upon earth / that does good, and synneth not: Take
not head unto every word that is spoken, lest thou hear thy servant curse
the: for thine own here knows, that thou thy self also have often times
spoken evil by other men. All these things have I proved in wisdom: I said I
will be wise Job. 28. ^
but she went farther fro me then she was before / ye and so deep y^ I might
not reach unto her. I applied my mind also unto knowledge, and to seek out
scye^ce, wisdom and understanding: to know the foolyshenes of the ungodly and
the error of dotynge fools. And I found, that Prou. 7. d
a woman is bytterer the^ death: for she is a very angle, her heart is a net,
and her hands are cheynes. Who so pleases God, shall escape from her but the
sinner will be taken with her.

Behold (says the preacher) this have Gene. ^. ^.
God made man just and right, but they sought many inuencyons.

The kings commandment ought to be obeyed* Gladness is one of the chief
things under the son.

CAPI VIII.
WHo is wise? Who has knowledge Prou. 17. ^. Job. 9. ^.
makes his face to shine but malice puts it out of favor. I must keep
the kings commandment / and the oath that I have made unto God. Be not
hastye to go out of his sight, and se thou continue in no evil thing: for
whatsoever it pleases him, that does he. Like as when a king gives a
charge, his commandment is mighty: Even so Job. 9. b.
who may say unto him: what do est y^? Leui. 18. ^.
Who so keeps the commandment: shall feel no harm: but a wise man's heart
discerns the time and manner: For every thing will have oportunyte and
judgment, and this is the thing that makes men full of carefulnes and forowe.
And why? a man knows not what is for to come for: who will tell him? Nether is
there any man y^ has power over the spryte, to keep still the spryte, nor to
have any power in the time of death^ it is not he also that can make an end of
the battle / nether may ungodliness deliver them that meddle with all. Al these
things have I considered, and applied my mind unto every work y^ is done
under the Son: how one man has lordshype(...) when the strong men shall
bow them selves when the myller^ stand still, because they be so few, and
when the sight of the wyndowes Eccl. ^i. ^. a
All is but vanyte (say the the Preacher) all is but plain vanyte.

The Preacher was yet more wise, and taught y^ people knowledge: he gave good
head sought out the ground, and set forth many parables. His diligence was to
find Hebre. 4. ^.
the words of the wise are like pryckes and nails that go through, where with
men are kept together: for they are given of one shepherde only. Therefore
beware (my son) that above these thou make the not many and innumeble books,
nor take diverse doctrynes in hand, to weary thy body withal.

Let us hear the conclusion of all things: Fear God, and keep his
commandments: For that touches all men: For God shall judge all worckes and
secret things / whether they be good or evil.

The end of the Book of the Preacher / otherwise called Ecclesiastes.
The Ballet of Ballettes of Solomon: called in Latin / Canticu^ Canticorum.
A mystical song of the spyrytuall and godly love, between Christ the
spouse, and the Church or Congregacyon his spousesse.

CAPITVLO. I.
O That he would kiss me with the kysses of his mouth: for thy love is more
pleasant then wine, and y^ because of the good and pleasau^te savor Thy name
is Eccle. 7. ^.
a sweet smelling ointment, therefore do the maidens love y^: draw thou me
unto the: we will run after the. The king has brought me in to his preuy
chambres. We will be glad and rejoice in the, we think more of thy love then
of wine. They that be ryghtuous Gene. (...). ^* ^.
the tents of the Cedarenes, and P^^a. 3. ^
as the hangynges of Solomon: but yet am I fair and welfauoured withal.
Maruayle not at me that I am so black: for why? the sunue has shyned upon me.
My mothers children had evil will at me, they made me the keeper of the
vyneyard's: but mine own vineyard have I not kept. Tell me of hi whom my soul
loves where y^ fedest, where you make them rea^^ at the noone day: for why
shall I belyke him, that goes wrong about the flocks of thy companyons? If
thou know Exodus 14. ^.
the host of Pharaos charettes have. I compared the, O my love. Thy chekes and
thy neck is beautiful as the turtils, and hanged with spanges and goodly
jewels: a neck band of gold will we make the with silver buttons. When the
King sytteth at the table, he shall smell Mynardus: a bo^del of Myrre is my
love unto me: he will lie betwyxte my breasts. A cluster ^^nt. 14. ^
O how fair art y^ (my love) how fair art thou? y^ have doves eyes. O how
fair art y^ (my beloved) how well favored art y^? Our bed is decte with flowers,
y^ selynges of our house are of Cedre tree, and our balkes of Cypress*

CAPI. II.
I Am the ly^ie of the field, and rose of the

Like as the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among
the sons. My delight is to sit under his shadow, for his fruit is sweet unto
my throat. He brings me into his wine seller, and loves me specially well.
Refresh me with grapes, comfort me with apples, for I am sick of love. Can^^.
^. ^
His left hand lies under my head, and his right hand shall embrace me.
Can^^. 3. ^.
I charge you (O ye daughters

O stand up my love, my beutyfull, and come: for lo, the wenter is now paste,
the rain is away and gone. The flowers are come up in the field the time of
the vyrdes singing is come, and the voice of the turtle done is hard in our
land The fygge tree brings forth her fygges, and the vynes bear blossoms,
and have a good smell. O stand up my love, my beutyful and come (O my dove) out
of the caves of y^ rocks / out of the holes of the wall: O let mese thy
countenance and hear thy voice, for sweet is thy voice, and fair is thy
face. Get us the foxes, ye the little foxes, that hurt the vynes / for our
vynes bear blossoms. ^enti. 6. ^
My love is mine, and I am his, which fedeth among the roses, until the day
break, and till the shadows be gone. Come again (O my beloved) and be like
as a Roo or a young heart upon the wide mountains.

CAPI. III.
By night in my bed I sought him, who^

Saw ye nat^^^ whom my soul loves

* I charge you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and Hyndes of the
field / that ye wake not up my love nor touch her / till she be content her
self. Who is this, that comes up out of the wyldernes like vapors of smoke,
as it were a smell of Myrre / franckencence / and all manner spyces of the
Apotecary? Behold / about Salomons bedstede there stand. xl. valeau^e men of
the most myghtie in Israel. They hold swerdes every one, and are expert in
war. Every man also has his sword upon his thygh, because of fere in the
night King Salamon had made him self a palace of the wod of Libanus, the
p^lars are of silver, the covering of gold / the seat of

Go forth O ye daughters of Sion) and behold King Solomon in the crown:
wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his marriage / and in the day of
the gladness of his heart.

CAP. IIII.
O Canti. 1. ^.
How fair art thou / my love, how

C^^. 6. a.
Thy hearye locks are like the wol of a flock of sheep that be shorn upon
mount G^lead: Thy teth are like sheep of the same by gnesse, which went up from
the washyng place: where every one bears two twins, and not one unfruitful
among them.

Thy lyppes are like a rose coulored rybonde, thy words are lovely: thy chekes
are like a piece of a pomgranate / besides that which lies hyd within. Thy
neck is like the tower of David builded with bulwerckes / where upon there hang
a thousand shyldes, ye all the weapens of the geauntes. Canti. 7. a.
Thy two breasts are like two twyns of young roes / which feed among roses. O
that I might go to the mountain of Myrre, and to the hill of frankyncense:
till the day break and till the shadodowes be past away. Thou art all fair,
O my love and there is no spott in the. Come

The Book of the Prophet Esaye.
Esaye prophecyeth that the anger of God shall come upon Jerusalem because of
their sins.

CAPITVLO. I.
THe vysyon of Esaye

Your land lies waste / your cities are

Hear the word of the Lord ye Lords of Sodoma / and harken unto the law of
our God, thou people of Gomorra says y^ lord Why offer ye so many sacrifyces
unto me? I am full of the brent offerynges of wethers and of the fatness of fed
beasts. I have no pleasure in the blood of bullockes, lambs and gotes. When
ye appear before me / who

Wash you, make you clean / put away your evil thoughts out of my sight,
cease

How happens it then that the ryghtuous

And except ye be ashamed of y^ oak trees wherein ye have so delyted / and of
the gardens y^ ye have chosen: ye shall be as an oak whose leaves are fallen
away, and as a garden that has no moistness. And as for y^ glory of these
thiges, it shall be turned to dry straw and he y^ made the^ to a spark. And
they shall both burn to gether, so that no man shall be able to quench them

Of the coming and death of Christ, and of the calling of the Heathen.

CAPI. II.
THis is the word that was opened unto Psa. 122. a. Mith. 4. a.
let us go to the hill of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob: that
he may show us his ways, and that we may walk in his paths. For the law
shall come out of Syo^, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem, and shall
give sentence among the Heathen / and shall reform the multitude of people:
They shall break their swerdes also in to mattockes and their spears to make
sythes. And one people shall not lift up

And therefore get them to some rock, and hyde the in the ground for fear of
the Lord* and for the glory of his majesty. Which casts down the high
lokes of presumptuous persons, and brings low the pride of man / and the
Lord only shall be exalted in that day. For the day of the Lord of Hosts
shall go over all pride and presumpcyon, upon all them that exalte the^ selves,
and shall bring them all down: upon al high and stout Cedre trees of
Libanus, and upon all the oaks of Basan, upon all high hills, and upon all
stout mountains, upon al costly rowres, and upon all strong walls, upon all
ships of the sea, and upon every thing that is glorious and pleasant to
look upon. And it shall bring down the pride of man, and lay man's
presumptuousnesse full low, and the Lord shall only have the vyctory in that
day. But the Idols shall utterly be roted out. Men shall crepe in to holes of
stone, and in to caves of y^ earth, for fear of the Lord and for the glory of
his magesty: what time as he shall rise up to condemn the earth. Then shall
man cast away his gods of silver, and his gods of gold (which he
nevertheless had made to honor the^) unto

He prophecyeth that at the coming of Christ all strength and power shall be
put forth of Iur^e.

CAPI. III.
FOrlo, the Lord God of Hosts does

Woe be unto their souls / for they have rewarded evil unto them selves. Bid
the ryghteous do well, for they shall enjoy the fruits of their studies. But
woe be to the ungodly and unrighteous, for they shall be rewarded after their
worckes. Children are

O my people, the leaders deceive the / and deprave the way of thy
fotesteppes. The Lord is here to commen of the matter, and stands to give
judgment on the people. The Lord shall come forth to reason with the
Senators and princes of his people. It is ye y^ have destroyed my vineyarde,
the robbery of y^ poor is in your houses. Wherefore do ye oppress my people,
and mar y^ faces of y^ poor? says the Lord God of Hosts. Moreover, thus
says the Lord: Seeing y^ daughters of Sion are be come so proud and have
walked with stretched out necks and with vain wanton eyes: seeing they come
in tryppynge so nycely with their fete

And in stead of good smell, there shall be styncke among them. And for their
gyrdles there shall be loose bands. And for well set hear there shall be
baldenesse. In stead of a stomachec a sack clothe, and for their bewty
witherdnesse and son burninge. Yourhousbandes and mighty men shall peryshe
with the sword in battle.

At that time shall their gates mourn and complain / and they shall sit as
desolate folcke upon the earth.

For want of men, seven women desired to have one man.

CAPI. IIII.
THEN shall seven wives take hold

Of Christ and his vyneyarde, with an execracion of covetousness and
dronekennes.

CAPI. V.
Now will I sing my beloved friend

Well, now I shall tell you how I will

Woe unto them that join one house to another

Woe be unto them / that rise up early to follow dronckennes, and to them that
continue so vntyllnyght, and till they be set on fire with wine. In those
co^panyes are harpes and lutes, taberettes and pipes, and wine. But they
regard not the work of the Lord, and consider not the operacyon of his
hands. Their fore comes my folk also into captyuyte, because they have no
understanding.

Thus has man a fall, and is brought low / and the high look of the proud
shall be laid down. But the Lord of Hosts is exalted in iudge^ment / and God
that is holy / is praised in ryghtuousnes. Then shall the sheep eat in order,
and the rich men's lands that were laid waist, shall strangers devour. Woe
be unto them / that draw wyckednes unto them / with coardes of vanyte and syn
/ as it were with a cart rope. Which use to speak on this manner, let him make
haste now, and go forth with his work, that we may se it. Let the counsel
of the holy one of Israel come: and draw nigh / that we may know it.

Woe be unto them that call euel good, and

Therefore, like as fire lycketh up the straw, and as the flame consumes the
stubble: even so their rote shall be as corrupcyon and their blossom shall
vanyshe away like duste for they have cast away the law of the Lord of
Hosts, and blasphemed the word of the holy maker of Israel.

Therefore is the wrath of the Lord kind

Esaias saw the glory of the Lord / and was sent to prophecye the desolacyon of
Iurye.

CAPI. VI.
IN the same year that king Ozyah dyed

Then flewe one of the Seraphins unto me / having a hot cole in his hand,
which he had taken from the Altar with the tongues / and touched my mouth: and
said, lo / this has touched thy lyppes, and thine un Mat. 13. b Man. 4. b.
Luke. 8. b. Acts. 18. f. John. 12. f. Roma. 11. b
ye shall hear in deed but ye shall not understand, ye shall plainly see / and
not perceive. Harden the heart of this people / stop their ears, and shut their
eyes that they se not with their eyes / hear not with their ears / and
understand not with their hertes / and convert and be healed.

Then spoke I: Lord / how long? he answered / until the cities be utterly
without ^^^^^tours / and the houses without men / till the land be also
desolate, and lie vnbuylded. For the Lord shall take the men far away, so
that the land shall lie waste. Nevertheless, the tenth part shall remain there
in / for it shall convert and be fruitful. And like wise as the Cerebintes
and Oketrees bring for the their fruits, so shall the holy sede have fruit.

The syryans move ha^ayle against Jerusalem, I vyrgyn shall bear a child.

CAPI. VII.
IT HAPPENED i the time of Ahaz 3. Reg. 16. a 2. Dar. 28. a
Razin the King of Siria, and Prekeh the son of Romelyah, King of Israel:
went up toward Jerusalem to besege it, but wanne it not. Now when the the
house of David (that is Ahaz) herd word thereof, that Siria and Ephraim were
confederate together his heart quaked (ye and the hertes also of his people
(like as when a tree in the field is moved with the wind.

Then said God unto Esaye: go mete Ahaz (thou and thy son Seat Iasub) at the
head of the over pole, in the fore path by

Moreover / God spoke unto Ahaz, sayynge require a token of the Lord thy God
whether it be toward the depthe beneth, or

The Lord also shall send a time upon the / upon thy people, and upon thy
fathers house (such as never came sense y^ time that Ephraim departed from
Judah) through the King of the Assirians. For at the same time shall the Lord
whystle for the flies that are about the water of Egypt, and for the Bees in
the Assirians land. These shall come, and shall light all in the valeyes / in
the vawtes of stones, upon all grene things and in all corners.

At the same time shall the Lord shave the hear of the head and the fete and
the beerd clean of, with the rasour that he shall pay them withal beyond the
water: namely, with the King of the Assirians. At

The delyueraunce of the land by Emanuell. The stone of offense, at which
many shall s^^inble.

CAP. VIII.
MORE OVER, the Lord said the king of the Assyrians.

The Lord spoke also unto me, saying: for so much as this people refuses the
still rennynge water of Sylo, and put their delight LORD of Hosts, let him be
your fear and dread. For he is the sanctifyenge, and stone to stomble at: the
rock to fall upon: a suare and net to both the houses: to Israel, and the
inhabyters of Jerusalem. And many shall stomble, fall, and be broken upon him:
yea, they shall be snared and taken.

Now lay the witnesses together and seal the law with my disciples. Thus
will

And if they say unto you: ask counsel at the sothesayers, wytches, charmers
and coniurers / then make them this answer. Is there a people any where, that
asks not counsel at his God: Luke. 24. ^
Should me run unto the dead for the living? If any man want light, let
him look upon the law / and the testymony, whether they speak not after this
meaning. If he do not this, he sto^bleth and suffers hu^gre. And if he suffer
hungre he is our of pa^ience, and blasphemeth his king and his God. Then
looks he upward, and downward to the earth, and be hold, there is trouble
and darkness, vexacion is round about him, and the cloud of error. And
out of such aduersyte, shall he not escape. Even like as in time past, it
has been well seen, that the land of Zabu lon and the land of Nepthali
(were through the sea way goes over Iordane, into the land of Galilee) was at
the first in little trouble: but afterward fore vexed.

He prohecyeth of Christ's n^tyu^te and domynyon.

CAPI. IX.
THE PEOPLE that walk in darkness have seen a great light. As for them that
dwell in the land of the Shadow Psalm. 119. c
They rejoice before the, even as men make merry in harvest, and as men that
have gotten the vyctory, when they deal the spoil. For thou have broken the
yoke of the peoples burden, the staff of his shoulder and the rod of his
oppressoure, as in the days of Madian.

More over, all temerarious and sedycious

The Lord sent a word into Jacob, the same is come into Israel. And all the
people

After all this is not the wrath of the Lord ceased, but yet is his hand
stret^hed out still. For the people turns not unto him, that chastyseth them,
neither do they seek the Lord of Hoostes. Therefore has the Lord roted out
of Israel both head and tail, branch and twygge in one day.

By the head, is understand the Senatoure and honorable man, and by the tail
the Prophet that teaches lies. For all they which enfourme the people that
they be in a right case, such be disceiuers. Such as men think also to be
perfect among these, are but cast away.

Therefore shall the Lord have no pleasure

For cause of the wrath of the Lord of Hoostes, is the land full of
darkness, and the people be consumed, as it were with fire no man does spare
his brother. If a man do turn him to the right hand, he shall famyshe, or to
the left hand to eat, he shall not have enough. Every man shall eat the
flesh of h^s own arm. Manasses shall eat Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasses / and
they both shall eat Judah. After all this is not the Lords wrath ceased, but
yet is his hand stretched out still.

He threatens the oppressors of the poor and prophecyeth against Sennaherib.

CAPI. X.
WOE BE UNTO the^ that make unrighteous laws, and deuyse

Woe be also unto Assure, which is a staf of my wrath, in whose hand is the
rod of my punyshement. I shall send him among those ypocrytishe people, among
the people y^ have deserved my dysfauoure shall I send him: that he may
utterly rob them spoil them, and tread the^ down like the mire in the
street How be it his meaning is not so neither thinks his herre of this
fashyon. But he ymagmeth only how he may rote out and destroy much people,
for he says: are not my Princes all Kings?

Wherefore the Lord says. As Soon as I have performed my whole work upon the
hill of Syon and Jerusalem, then will I vyset the noble and stout heart of the
king of Assyria, with his proud lokes. For he stands thus in his own
conceyte: This do I through the power of mine own hand, and through my
wisdom. For I am wise, I am he that remove the lands of the people. I rob
their treasures: and (like one of the worthyes) I drive the^ from their hye
seats. My hand has found out the strength of the people, as it were a
neste. And

Shall the axe boste it self, against him that heweth therewith? or does the
saw make any bragging against him that rules it. That were eue^ like, as if
the rod did exalte it self against him that bears it: or as though the
staff should magnyfye itself, as who say: it were no wod. Therefore shall the

After that day shall the remenau^t of Israel, and such as are escaped out of
the house of Jacob seek no more comfort at him that smote the^, but with
faithfulness and truth shall they trust unto the Lord, the holy one of Israel.
The remnaunt, even the Posteryte

Moreover / the Lord of Hosts shall prepare

He prophecieth of the natiuyte of Christ / and of his people, of the remnaunt
of Israel / and of the faith of the he^ then / or Gentyles.

CAPI. XI.
ANd there shall come a rod forth of the kynred of Isaye / and a blossom
shall florysshe out of his rote. The spirit of the Lord shall light upon him
/ y^ spirit of wisdom / and understanding / the spirit of council / and
strength / the spirit of knowledge / and of the fear of the lord / and shall
make him fervent in the fear of God.

For he shall not give sentence / after the thing that shall be brought before
his eyes nether reprove a matter at the first hearing but with ryghtuousnes
shall he judge y^ pore / and with Justice shall he refourme the simple of the
world.

He shall smite the world with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of
his mouth shall he slaye the ungodly. Ryghtuousnes shall be the gyrdle of his
loins / * truth and faythfulnes / the girdynge up of his raynes The wolf
shall dwell with the lamb / and the Leoparde shall lie down by the goat.
Bullockes / Lions / and catel / shall keep company together / so y^ a little
child shall rule them. The cow and the bear shall feed

And in that day shall the gentyls enquere

The Lord also shall clean the tunges of the Egipcyans see / and with a
mighty wind shall he lift up his hand ouet Nilus and shall smite his seven
stremes / and make men go over dry shod. And thus shall there be a way for his
people, that remains from the Assirians, like as it happened to the
Israelites, what time they departed out of the land of Egypt.

The song of the Church for the obtayninge of the victory and over coming of
the world.

CAPI. XII.
SO THAT then thou shalt say: O

He prophecyeth the destruccyon of Babylon / the captiuyte / and the coming
again of the people.

CAPI. XIII.
This is the heavy burden of Babylon which Esaye the son of Amos did se.
Lift up the banner upon the hye hill call unto them / hold up your hand
that the Princes may go in at the gates. I have sent for my debytyes and my
gyauntes (says the Lord) and in my wrath I will call for such / as tryumphe
i^ my glory.

There is a noise of a multitude in the mountains, like as of a great people:
a russhyng, as though the Kingdoms of the nations came together. (And the
Lord of Hosts is the captain of the whole army.) They come out of a far
country, from the end of heaven: Even the Lord himself with the ministers of
his wrath, to destroy the whole land. Mourn ye, for the day of the Lord is
at hand, and shall come as a destroyer from the Almyghtye. Therefore shall al
hands be letten down, and all men's hertes shall melte a way, they shall
stand in fear* carfulness and sorrow shall come upon them and they shall have
pain, as a woman that trauayleth with child. One shall be abashed of
another, and their faces shall

Behold, the day of the Lord shall come / terrible, full of iudignacyon and
wrath: to make the land waste, and to root out the sinners thereof. For the
stars and planets of heaven shall not give their light, the sun shall be
darkened in his rysynge, and the moon shall not shine with his light. And I
will punyshe the wickedness of the world, and the sins of the ungodly,
says the Lord. The hye stomachs of the proud will I take away, and will
lay down

Thus shall it go with Babylon in the wrath of the Lord of hosts, and in the
day of his fearful indignacion. And Babylon shall be as an hunted or chased do,
and as a sheep that no man takes up. Every man shall turn to his own people
and fly each one into his own land. Who so is found alone, shall be shot
through. And who so gather together / shall be destroyed with the sword. Psalm.
(...).
Their children shall be slain before their eyes / their houses spoiled / and
their wives rauysshed. For lo, I shall bring Gene. (...)
Sodom and Gomorta. It shall not endure for ever / nether shall there be any
more dwelling there, from generacyon to generacyon.

The Arabyans shall pytche no tents there, nether shall the shephardes make
their foldes there any more, but wild bestes shall lie there, and the houses
shall be full of great Oules. Estryches shall dwell there, and Apes shall daunse
there: wild cattes shall cry in the palaces, and Dragons shall be i^ the plea
saunt houses, And as for Babylons time it is at hand, and her days shall not
be prolo^ged.

The return of the people from captyuytye. The prosperitye of the people of
god, and affliccion of their enemies. The pride of Babylon.

CAP. XIIII.
BUT THE Lord will be merciful The people shall take them / and carry them
home with them. And make them to enheryte the house of Israel in the land of
the Lord / that they may be servants and hand maidens of the Lord. They
shall

Yea, even the Fyrre trees / and Cedres

How art thou fallen from heaven (O Lucifer) thou fayer morning child? how
haste thou gotten a fall even to the ground and art become weaker then the
people? For thou saydest in thine heart. I will clyme up into heaven, and make my
seat above beside the stars of God, I will sit also upon

All Kings of the nacyons lie every one in his own house with worship / and
thou art cast out of thy grave like a wild branch, like as dead men's
raiment that are stryken through with the sword / and go down to the stones of
the deep / as a dead

I will stand up against them (says the

The same year that King Ahaz dyed /

A prophecye against Moab.

CAPI. XV.
THIS is the heavy burden upon Moab:

But ye foolysh princes of Zoan / ye wise cou^cellers of Pharao, whose wit is
turned to foolyshnes, how say ye unto Pharao? I am come of wise men and of
ancient kings? Where are thy wise men? Let them tell the (if they can) what
the Lord of Hoostes has devised upon Egypt.

The Princes of Zoan are become fools

In that day shall five cities in the land of Egypt speak the la^gage of
Canaan, and swear by the Lord of hoostes: the city of desolacyon shall be
called one of them. In that day shall the altar of the Lord be in the mids
of the land of Egypt, and these title beside it: UNTO THE LORD And it shall be a
token and witness unto the Lord of hoostes in the land of Egypt. For they
shall cry unto the Lord because of such as trouble them, and he shall send them
a saui our and a great man to deliver them.

And the Lord shall be known in Egypt,

Against Egypt and Ethiopia.

CAPI. XX.
IN THE year that Tharthan came

They shall be brought in fear also and

Against Babylon, Idumea, and Arabia.

CAP. XXI.
THE burden of the waste See: Even

While they garnyshed the table: y^ watch all the whole day, and am appointed
to keep my watch every night. And behold / here comes a charet of men, with
two horsemen. And he answered and said: Babylon is fallen, it is fallen, and
all the images of her gods has he smytten down unto the ground. Thou art
he whom I must thresshe / and thou belongest to my corn floor* This that I
herd of the Lord of Hoostes the God of Israel have I showed unto you.

The burden of Duma: he calls unto

Aprophecye against Jerusalem.

CAPI. XXII.
THe burden of the valley of vision: ^^^i. 19. ^.
I will make lame^tacio^. Ye shall not be able to comfort me, because of the
destruccio^ of the daughter of my people. For this is a day of trouble, of
ruin and of destruction that the lord will bring to pass in the valley of
vysyon, breaking down the cyty and crienge unto mountains. 1 Cor. ^5. a.
Sapi. ^. b.
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. And it came to the ears
of the Lord of hoostes: This iniquite shall not be pourged from you till ye
dye, says the Lord god of hoostes. Thus says y^ Lord God of hosts: Go,
get the in to yonder treasurer, even unto Esaias. 36. ^.
Sebna / which is the ruler of the house. what haste thou to do here? and whom
haste thou here, that thou should here hew the out a sepulcre, as it were
one that heweth him out a sepulcre an hye, or that graueth an habytacion for
himself in a hard rock? Behold, and shall send the) into a far country:
There shalt thou dye, and there (in stead of the charetes of thy pomp) shall
the house of thy Lord have confusion I will drive the from thy place, and out
of thy dwelling shall he overthrow the. And in that day shall I call my
servant Eliakim the son of Helkia. And with thy garments will I clothe him,
and with thy gyrdle will I strength him: thy power also will I yield into his
hand and he shall be a father of such as dwell in Jerusalem, and in the house of
Judah. Job. 12. b. Apoca. ^. b.
And the keye of the house of Dauyd will I lay upon his shoulder, so that he
shall open and no man shall shut. He shall shut, and no man shall open. And I
will fasten him as a nail in a sure place, and he shall be the glorious seat
of his fathers house.(...)

to the just (O thou most ryghteous) Pro. 16. a. Iere, 10. d.
thou shalt order the path of him that is ryghteous, Ye, in the way of thy
judgments (O Lord) have we put our trust in the? Thy name also and the
remembrance of the, rejoice the soul. Psalm. 63. a. and. 143. a.
My soul has lo^ged for y^ all the night, and with my sprete (which is
within me) will I seek the early in the morning: For when thy judgments are
i the earth, the inhabytatours of the world shall learn ryghteousnes. Shall
the ungodly man be favored, which has not learned ryghteousnes, but does
wyckedly in the earth, where nothing ought to be done, but that which is
ryghteous? He shall not se the glory of the Lord: Lord when thy hand is
lift up, they se it nar, but they shall se it, and be confounded with the zele
of the people, and the fire that consumes thine enemies, shall devour them.

Lord, unto us thou shall provide peace Philip. 2. ^
for thou also haste wrought all our works in us. O Lord our God, other
Lords beside the has subdued us, but we will be myndefull only of the and of
thy name.

The deed will not live, and they that be out of life, will not rise again,
therefore have thou visyted and roted them out, and destroyed all the memory of
them. Thou haste increased the people (O Lord) thou have increased the people,
and thou art pray sed, thou have sent them far of unto all the coasts of the
earth. Leui. 26. g.
Lord in trouble have they visited the: they powered out their prayer / when
thy chastenynge was upon John. 10. ^.
Like as a woman with child that draws nigh toward her travail, is sorry and
cries in her pains / even so have we been in thy sight O Lord. Roma. 8. d
We have been with child and suffered pain, as though we had brought forth
wind: For there is no salvation in the earth, neither do the inhabitours of
the world submit themselves.

1. Cor. 6. d.
Thy deed men shall live, even with my body shall they rise again. Awake and
sing ye that dwell in dust. For thy dew is even as the dew of herbs / and
the earth shall cast out them that be under her.

Come my people, Gene. ^9. c
enter thou into thy chambers / and shute thy doors about the: Apoca. 6. b
hyde thy self a little for a while / until the indygnacyon be ouerpaste.
Miche. ^ ^
Forlo, the Lord is coming out of his place, to vyset the wickedness of
such as dwell upon earth. The earth also shall disclose her own blood, and
shall no more hyde them that are slain in her.

A prophecye of the coming of Christ and destruccyon of Idolatrye.

CAPI. XXVII.
IN that day the lord with his sore, great 1 Cor 15. ^. Apoca. 1^^
Leuiathan the fugityue serpent / even Leuiathan that crooked serpent / and he
shall slaye the dragon that is in the sea. In that day se that ye sing of the
vyneyarde, which brings forth the best wine. Even I the Lord do keep it. In
due seasons shall I water it / and lest the enemy do it any harm. I will both
night and day preserve it. There is no displeasure in me: or else (when the
vyneyarde brings me forth breers and thorns) I would go through it by war,
and burn it up together. Let it take hold of my strength and it shall be at
one with me / even at one shall it be with me.

The days are coming / that Jacob shall

Deuteronomy. 3^. ^.
For it is a people of no understanding, and therefore he that made the^, shall
not favor the^, and he that created the^ shall give the^ no grace. And in that
day shall the Lord make a thresshynge from the mids of the river Euphrates
unto the river of Egypt and ye children of Israel shall be gathered together one
to another. In that day shall y^ great tro^pe be blown: so y^ those which were
lost in the land of Assyria, and they that were banysshed into y^ land of
Egypt shall come and worship the Lord in the holy mount at Jerusalem.

Against the pride of Ephraim, and against false prestes and preachers.

CAPI. XXVIII.
WOE BE unto the crown of price Osee. 3. a.
to the dronken people of Ephraim (whose great po^pe is as afloure y^ faydeth
away) upon the head of the valley of such as be in wealth, and are ouerlade^
with wyue. Behold, Math. 16. c
there comes a vehement and sore day from the Lord like an unmeasurable hayle
and perilous tempest even like the force of mighty and horrible waters, that
bears down at thiges. The crown of the pride of the dronke^ Ephraemites
shall be trode^ under foot: Esaias. 40. ^
so that the flower of his fairness and beautye (which is in the head of
the valley of farnesse) shall fade away, as does an untimely ripe fygge before
harvest. Which wha^ a man sytteth, he looks upon it: and while it is yet in
his hand, he eats it up.

In that day shall the Lord of hoostes be Esaias. 3. c.
The priest also and the prophet are gone astraye by the means of strong
drink / they are dronken with wine, they go amysse through strong drink:
they fail in sight and stomble in judgment. For all tables are so full of
vomyte and fylthynes, that no place is clean. Whom then shall such one
teach knowledge? And whom shall be make to understand the thing that he
hereth? For they are ignorant as young children, that are taken from the milk
and are weened.

For they that be such must have after one lesson, another lesson: Esaias, 10.
^. Math. 23. ^
after one commandment, another commandment: after one rule, another rule,
after one instruccion, another instruceyon, there a little, and there a little
For he y^ speaks unto this people is eue^ as one y^ uses rudeness of speech,
and a strange langage. If any man say unto them: lo, this is the rest where
with ye may ease him that is werye, this is the refresshynge, they will not
harken. Cor. 14. c.
Therefore shall the word of the Lord (lesson upon lesson, commandment upon
commandment, rule upon rule, instruccion upon instruccyon, there a little and
there a little) shall be unto them an occasyon of stomblynge that they may go
on and fall backward, be broused, tangled and snared.

Wherefore, hear the word of the Lord

And thus the covenant that ye made with Esaias. 36. ^
For the Lord shall stand as in mount 2. Reg. 5. a. Iosue. 10.
Pecazim, and shall be wroth like as in the valley ^ 1 Para 13 ^
Gibeon, that he may do his work his strange work and bring to pass his
act: his strange act.

Now therefore se that ye be no mockers

out arm with a terrible countenance and with the flame of a consumynge fire:
with noisome lightening / with a shower, and with hayle stone. For through the
voice of the Lord shall Esaias. 10. a.
Assure be destroyed / which smote other men with the rod. And it shall come to
pass, that whither soever he goes / the rod shall cleave unto him / which
the Lord shall lay upon him with tabrettes, and harpes. And with great war
shall he fight against his host. Math. 25. b
For the fire of pain is ordained from the beginning yea even for Kings is
it prepared. This has the Lord set in the deep, and made it wide / the
burning whereof is fire and much wood. The breath of the Lord (which is as a
river of brymstone) does kyndle it.

He curses them that forsake God / and seek for the help of men.

CAPI. XXXI.
WOE be unto them that go down Apoc. 5. a.
Lion or Gene. 49. b
lions whelpe roareth upon the pray that he has gotten, and is not afray ed /
though the multitude of shephardes cry out upon him, neither abashed for all
the heap of them. So shall the Lord of Hosts come down to fight for mount
Syon Deuteronomy. 32. b.
so shall the lord of Hosts keep, save / defend, and deliver Jerusalem.
Therefore, O ye children of Israel / turn again / like as ye have exceaded in
your going back. Esaias. 2. c.
For in that day every man shall cast out his Idols of silver and gold /
which ye have made with your Esaias. 37. e.
Assure also shall be slain with the sword / not with a man's sword. A sword
shall devour him, but not a man's sword. And he shall fle from the slaughter /
* and his servants shall be taken prisoners. He shall go for fear to his
strong holds / and his Princes shall fle from his badge. This has the Lord
spoken, whose light burns in Syon / and his fire in Jerusalem.

The condicyons of good Rulers and Officers.

CAPI. XXXII.
BEHOLD, the King shall govern Prou. 17. ^
But the lyberall person ymagineth honest things / and comes up with
honestye.

Up (ye rich and ydel Cities) harken unto

Then shall the wyldernes be a fruitful field, and the plenteous field shall be
rekenned for a wode. Then shall equite dwell in the deserte and righteousness
in a fruitful laud. Roma. 5. a.
And the reward of ryghteousnes shall be peace, and her fruit, rest and
quietness for ever. Iere. 33. c.
And my people shall dwell in the innes of peace, in my tabernacle and pleasure
where there is enough in them al. And when the hayle falls / it shall fall in
the wodde and the city shall be set in the valleye. O how happy shall ye be,
when ye shall safely sow your sede beside all waters, and drive thither the
fete of your oxen and asses.

Thretnynge against the Assyrians. A descrypcyon of them that shall se the
Lord.

CAPI XXXIII.
Therefore woe be unto the (O robber) Exodus 21. b. Leuy. 24. d. Sapi. 11. c. Mat.
vii. a
even so shalt thou be hurt also. And as thou layest wait / so shall wait
be laid for the also.

Lord be merciful unto us for we put our trust in the. Thine arm is at a
point to vyset us / Psol. 9. b.
but be thou our health in the time of trouble. The people did fle at the
anger of thy voice, and at thine up standing the Gentyles were scatred abro de
/ and their spoil shall be gathered / as the greshoppers are comenly gathered
together into the pyr. Stand up Lord, thou that dwell on hye: Let Syon be
filled with equity and righteousness. Let truth and faythfulnesse be in her
time: power / health, wisdom, knowledge and the fear Iere. 5. ^.
Ye shall conceive stubble and bear straw, and your spryte shall be the fire,
that it may consume you: and the people shall be burnt like lyme, and as thorns
burn y^ are hewn of, and cast in the fire.

Now harken to, ye that are far of how I do with them, and considre my
glory, ye y^ be at hand. The sinners at Sion are a frayde, a sudden ferfulnes
is come upon y^ ypocrytes. What is he among us (say they) that will dwell by
that consumynge fire? which of us may abide that everlasting hete? Psalm. 14.
a. and, 23. a.
He that leads a godly life (say I) and speaks y^ truth. He that abhors
to 1. Corin. ^. a
What shall then become of the scrybe? of the Senatoure? What of him that
teaches children? There shalt thou not se a people of a strange tongue to
have so dyffused a language, that it may not be understand: neither so
strange a speech but it shall be perceived. There shall Syon Hebre. 9. b.
the tabernacle that never shall remove, whose nails shall never be taken out
world without end whose coardes every chone shall never corrupt: for the
glorious Magesty of y^ Lord shall there be present among us. In that place /
where fair broad ryuers and streams are, shall nether Galey row, nor great
ship sail. I^^^. 4. c.
For the Lord shall be our capteyne, the Lord shall be our law geuer. The Lord
shall be our king, and he himself shall be our Sauyoure. There are the
cords so laid abroad, that they can not be better: The mast set up of such a
fashyon, that no ba^ner nor sail hangs thereon but there is dealed great
spoil, ye lame men run after the pray. There lies no man that says: I
am sick, but al euel is taken away from the people, that dwell there.

The last destruccyon of the Synagoge, in which the kingdom and presthode of
that people was translated to the Church and congregacyon of Christ.

CAPI. XXXIIII.
COme ye Heythen and here / take heed ye people. Harken thou earth and all
that is therein: thou round compass and all that grows there upon: for the
Lord is angrye withal people, and his dyspleasure is kyndled against all the
multitude of them, to curse them, and to sleye them. So that their slain
shall be cast out / and their bodies styncke: that eue^ the very hills shall be
wet with the blood of them All the stars of heaven shall waaste, and the
heaven shall fold together like a roll: and all the stars thereof shall fall
/ like as the leaves fall fro the vynes and fyge trees. For my

And the Lords swearde shall be full of blood / and be rustye with the fatness
and blood of lambs and goats: with the fatnes of kydneys of ye wethers. For
the Lord shall kill a great offrynge in Bosra / and a great slaughter in the
land of Idumea.

There shall the Unicornes fall with the bulls (that is with the gyauntes) and
their land shall be washed with blood, and their ground corrupt with fatnes.
Unto the also (O Sio^) shall come the day of ye vengeance of God and the year
when thine own judgments shall be recompensed. And his floudes shall be turned
to pytche / and his earth to brymstone / and therewith shall the land be
kyndled / so that it shall not be quenched day nor night But smoke evermore:
and so forth to lie waste And no man shall goo through it for ever.

For God shall spread out the line of desolacyon upon it / and weye it with the
stones of emptines. When kings are called upon there shall be one / and all
princes shall be away. Thorns shall grow in their palaces, nettels and
thystels in their strong holds / that the dragons may have their pleasure
therein / and that they may be a court for Estriches. There shall strange
visours and monstrous beasts mete one an other and the wild keep company
together. There shall the Lamya lie / and have her lodgyng There shall the oule
make her nest / build, be there at home, and bring forth his yongones. There
shall the kytes come together /

Seek through the scripture of the lord and read it. There shall none of these
things be left out / there shall not one (nor such like fail. For what his
mouth commands / ye same does his spirit gather together (or full fylleth
(upon whom soever the lotte falls or to whom he deals it with the line,
those shall possess the enheritaunce from generacyon to generacyon / and dwell
therein for ever.

Of the time and Kingdom of Christ.

CAPI. XXXV.
BUT the deserte and wilderness shall Hebre. 12. b
And therefore strength the weke hands, and comfort the feeble knees.

Say unto them that are of a fearful Deuteronomy. 2^. ^ and. 31. b.
Behold your God comes, to take ve^geaunce and to reward, God comes his
own self and will deliver you. Math. (...). ^ and. ^5. c. Luke. 7. ^
Then shall the eyes of the blind be lyghtened / and the ears of the deaf
opened. Then shall the lame man leap as an heart, and the Psalm. 8. a.
domme man's tongue shall give thanks.

Esa. 41. ^. 43. c. 44. ^
In the wyldernes also there shall wells spring, and floudes of water in the
deserte The dry ground shall turn to ryuers, and the thurstye to sprynges of
water. Where as dragons dwelte before, there shall grow

Jerusalem is asseged by Sennaherib, in the time of king Hezekias.

CAPI. XXXVI.
I 4. R^. 18. ^. 2. Par. ^2. ^ Esa. 7. ^. ^. b. ^. 10. ^. 17. ^. ^. 321
N the. xiiij. year of King Hezekias, Esaias. 22* ^.
Sobna the Scrybe / and Ioah Asaphs son the Secretary.

And Rabsaketh said unto them: Tell Hezekias / that the great King of Assiria
says thus unto him: What presumpcyon is this / that thou trustest unto?. Thou
thynekest (peradventure) that thou have council and power enough to maintain
this war or else whereto trusteste thou / y^ that casteste thy self of fro me^
4. Re. 18. b. E^^. 29. a.
lo, thou put thy trust in a broken staff of read (I mean Egypt) which
he that leans upon, it goes into his hand and shuts him through. Eue^

But thus says the King of Assyria opteyne my favor incline to me: so may
every man enjoy his vineyardes and fyg trees, and drink the water of his
cysterne unto the time that I come my self / and bring you into a land that
is like your own: wherein is wheat and wine, which is both sown with sede,
and planted with vyneyardes. Let not Hezekia disceaue you, when he says unto
you: the Lord shall deliver us.

Esaias. 1^. ^.
Might the Gods of the Ge^tyles keep every man's land, from the power of y^
king of the Assyrians? Where is the God of Hemath and Arphad? Where is the God
of Sepharuaim? And who was able to defend Samaria out of my hand? Or which of
all the Gods of the lands, has belyuered their country out of my power /
so that the Lord should deliver Ierusele^ fro my hand. Unto this Hezekias
messau^gers held their tunges, and answered not one word: for the King had
charged the^, that they should give him none answer. So came Eliakim Helkias
son the President, Sobna the Scribe, and Ioah Asaphs son the Secretary,
unto Hezekeas with rent clothes, and told him the words of Rabsaketh.

Hezekias humbles him self before the Lord The army of Sennaherib is slain
of the Aung^ll of the Lord and be him self so hylled of his own sons

CAPI. XXXVII.
WHen Hezekias herd that, he rent 4. (...). 19. ^
and put on a sack cloth, and went in to the house of the Lord / But he sent
Eliakim the President / Sobna the Scrybe / with the eldest preastes clothed in
(...) (...).
sack / unto the Prophet Esaias the son of Amoz / and they said unto him Thus
says Hezekias: This is the day of trouble, of plage, and of blasphemy for
the children are come to the place birth / but there is no power to bring them
forth, The Lord thy God (no doubt) has well co^sydered the words of
Rabsakeh, whom his Lord the king of the Assyrians has sent, to defye and
blaspheme the living God: with such words as the Lord thy God has heard
right well. And therefore lift up thy prayer for the remnaunt, that yet are
left. So the serua^^tes of king Hezekias came to Esaias. And Esaias gave them
this Esaias. 31. ^.
Behold, I will cause a wind to go over him, as soon as he hears the
rumoure, he shall go again into his country / there will I destroy him with y^
sword 1. Reg. 23. ^.
Now when Rabsaketh returned, he found the king of Assyria layenge sege to
Libnas / for he had understand, that he was departed from Lachis. For there
came a rumore that Tharhakas king of Ethiopia was come forth to war against
him.

And when the king of Assyria heard to Hezekias king of Judah: Let not thy
God disceaue the, in whom thou hopest, and say: Jerusalem shall not be given
into the hands of the king of Assyria. For, lo thou know well how the
Kings of Assyria have handeled all the lands that they have subverted, and
hopest thou to escape? Were the people of the Gentiles (whom my progenitors
conquered) delivered at any time through their gods? 2. Reg. 17. a
As namely, Goza^, Haram, Rezeph, and the children of Eden, which were at
Thalassar. Where is the king of Hemah, and the king of Arphad, and the King
of the city Sepharnaim / Ena and Aua? Now when Ezekia had received the letter
of the messaungers / and read it, he went up into the house of the Lord, and
opened the letter before the Lord. And Ezekia prayed before the Lord on this
manner. O Lord of Hosts / thou God of Israel, which syttest upon Exodus 25. c
Cherubin. Thou art the God, that only is God of all the Kingdoms of the
world / for thou only haste Gene. 1. a.*
created heaven and earth. Baruc. 2. c.
Enclyne thine ear Lord and consider, open thine eyes / O Lord, and se, and
pondre all the words upon Sennaherib / which has sent his embassage to
blaspheme the living God. It is true, O Lord, that the kings of Assirya have
conquered all Kingdoms and lands / and cast their gods in the zacha. 2. b.
(...). 25. ^ (...). (...). ^. c.
who^ have thou defied and blasphemed? Against whom haste thou lyfted up thy
voice, and exalted thy proud looks? eue^ against y^ holy one of Israel. Thou
with thy servants haste blasphemed the Lord / and thus hold thou of thy
self. I will cover the hye mountains, and sides of Libanus with my horsemen.

And such of the house of Judah as are escaped, shall come together, and the
remnau^t shall take rote beneth, and bring forth fruit above. For the escaped
shall go out of Jerusalem, and the remnaunt from the mount Syon.

And this shall the gelousy of the Lord of Hosts bring to pass. Therefore
thus says the Lord, concerning the king of the Assiryans. He shall not
come into this city, and shall shote no arowe into it / there shall no shilde
hurt it nether shall they make any bulwark against it. The same way that he
came shall he return, and not come at this city, says the Lord. And I
will keep and save the city (says he) for mine own, and for my servant
David's sake. 4. Re. 16^. Eccle. 4^^ Esaias. (...) 2. Ma. (...). ^
Thus the angel of the Lord went forth, and slew of the Assirians host, an
hundred fourscore and five thousand. And when men arose up early (at
Jerusalem:) Behold all lay full of deed bodies. So Sennaherib the king of
the Assireans brake up, and dwelt at Niniue. Afterward it chaunsed, as he
prayed in the temple of Nesrah his god, that Adramalech and Sarazer his own
sons slew him with the swearde, and fled into the land of Arme^^a. And Asar
Hadon his son raygned in his stead.

CAP. XXXVIII.
Hezekia is sick unto the death, but is yet reuyued bythe Lord, and lives
fyftene years after: for which benefyte he gives thanks.

NOT long before this / was Hezechia 4. Re. 20. a ^. Par. 3 2. f
and the Prophere Esaye the son of Amoz came unto him, and said to him: Thus
commands the Lord: Set thine house in order: for y^ must dye, and shall not
escape. Then Hezechia turned his face toward the wall, and prayed unto the
Lord, and said: Remember (O Lord) ye I have walked before the in truth and
a steadfast heart, and have done the thing that is pleasant to the. And
Hezechia wept ^ore. Then said God unto Esaye: Go and speak unto Hezechia: the
Lord God of Dauyd thy father se^deth the this word: I have herd thy prayer,
and co^sydred thy tears, Jonas. 3. b
be hold I will put fyftene years mo unto thy life, and deliver the and the
city also, from the hand of the king of Assiria, for I will 1. Reg. 2. g.
And take the this token of the Lord, that he will do it, as he has spoken.
Behold, I will return the shadow of Ahaz dyal, that now is laid out with y^
Son and bring it ten degrees backward Iosue, 10, c
So the Sun turned ten degrees backewarde, the which he was descended before

A thankesgeuynge, which Hezekia King of Judah wrote, when he had been sick /
and was recovered.
I Thought I should have gone to the gates of hell in my best age, and have
wa^ted the resydue of my years.
I spoke within my self: I shall never viset
Mine age is folden up together, and taken away fro me, like a shepherdes
cotage my life is hewe^ of, like as a weeuer cutteth of his web.
While I was yet taking my rest, he hewed me of, and made an end of me i^
one day
Job. 4. b
I thought I would have lived unto the morrow, but he brosed my bones like a
Lion, and made an end of me in one day.
Then chatred I like a swalowe, and like a crane, and mourned as dove.
I lift up mine eyes into the heyght: O Lord (said I) my syckenes keeps me
down: ease thou me.
* What shall I speak or say, yt he has this done? I shall therefore as
long as I live remember this bitterness of my life.
Uerely (Lord) men must live in bytternes / and al my life I must pass over
therein For thou raysest me up, ^ wakest me. But lo, I will be well content with
this bytternes.
Nevertheless, my conversation has so pleased the, that thou would not make
an end of my life: so that thou have cast all my sins behind thy back.
Psalm. vi. ^ lxxxxiii. b. ^ cx^. b.
For hell prayseth not y^, death does not magnyfie the.
They y^ go down into the grave, praise not thy truth: but the living, yea
the living a knowledge the, like as I do this day.
The father tells his children of thy faythfulnesse.
Luke. 1. ^
Deliver us (O Lord) and we will sing praises i thy house, all the days of our
life.
And Esaias said: take a plaster of fygges, and lay it upon ye sore, so shall
it be whole.

Then said Hezekia: O what a great thing is this / that I shall go up into
the house of the Lord.

Hezekia is reproved of Esaye, because he showed his tresure unto the
Embassytours of Babylon.

CAPI. XXXIX.
AT THE same time Merodach Baladam 4. Re. (...). ^
/ Baladamus son King of Babylon, sent letters and presents to Hezekia. For
he understood how that he had been sick / and was recovered again.

1. Pat. 3^. ^
And Hezekia was glad thereof / and showed them the co^modyties of his treasure,
of silver, of gold, of spyces and roots, of precious oils / all that was in
his cubbordes and treasure houses. There was not one thing in Hezekias house,
and so through out al hes

Then came Esaye the Prophet to king Hezekia, and said unto him. What have
the men said, and from whence came they unto the? Hezekia answered: they came
out of a far country unto me, out of Babylon: Esaias said: what have they
looked upon in thine house? Hezekia answered: All that is in min house have they
seen: and there is nothing

Then said Esaias unto Hezekia: Understa^de the word of the Lord of Hosts: 4.
Re. 24. ^
Behold / the time will come, that every thing which is in thine house, and
all that thy proge nitoures have laid up in stoare unto this

shall he not break, and the smokynge flax shall he not quench: but
faithfully and truly shall he give judgment. He shall neither be ouersene nor
hastye / that he may restore ryghtuousnes unto the earth: and the Ge^tyles
also shall keep his laws. Esaias. 40. ^. and. 44. ^
For thus says God the Lord unto him (even he that Esaias. 4 9. ^
Therefore will I also defend the, and give the for a covenant of the people,
and to be the Luke. ^. ^.
light of the Gentyles. That thou may open the eyes of the blind, zacha. 9.
b.
let out the prisoners, and them that sit in darckenesse, out of the dongeon
house. I my self, whose name is the Lord. Esaias. 48. ^.
And my glory will I give to none other, neither mine honor to graven images.
Behold, old things are come to pass, and new things do I declare. And or
ever they come, I tell you of them.

Psalm. ^l, a
Sing unto the Lord, a new song of thankesgeuyng, blow out his praise un
to the end of the world. They that be upon the sea / and all that is therein /
praise him, that Isles and they that dwell in them. Let the wilderness with the
cities lift up her voice the towns also that they of Cedar dwell in.

I have long holden my peace (says the Lord) should I therefore be still,
and keep silence for ever? I will cry like a trauaylynge woman, and once will
I destroy, and devour. I will make waste both mountain and hill, and dry up
every grene thing that grows thereon. I will dry up the floudes of water,
and drink up the ryuers. I will bring the blind into a street that they
know not: and led the^ into a foot pathe / that they are ignorant in. I
shall make darkness light before them / and the thing that is crooked to be
straight. These things have I done unto them, and not forsaken them. Esaias.
44. b
And therefore let them convert, and be ashamed earnestly, that hope in Idols,
and say to fashyoned images: ye are our gods.

Hear, O ye deaf men, and sharpen your Mat. xv. ^
Who is blind, but my seruau^te Or so deaf, as my messau^gers, whom I sent
unto them? For who is so blind as my people, and they that have the rule of
them? Thou understand much, and kepest nothing: the ears are open, and no
man hears. The Lord is merciful unto them for his ryghtuousnesse sake: that
his word might be magnified and praised But it is a mischeuous and wicked
people. Their young men belong all to the snare / and be shut into prison
houses. Deuteronomy. 28. ^.
They be carried away captyue / and no man does lowse them. They be trodden
under foot, and no man does labor to bring them again. Esaias. 44. ^
But who is he among you / that pondreth this, that consydreth it, and takes
it for a warning in time to come?

Baruc. 1. ^ Tob^. 3. ^ Dani. 9. ^
Who suffered Jacob to be troaden under foot, and Israel to be spoiled? Did not
the Lord? Because we have sinned against him, and have had no delight to walk
in his ways, neither been obedyente unto his law. Therefore has he poured
upon us his wrathful displeasure / and strong bataile, which makes us have
to do on every side yet will we not understand. He burns us up, yet syncketh
it not into our hertes.

God promyseth to send his Christ, which shall delyuct his people. He forgeueth
sins for his own sake.

CAPI. XLIII.
BUT now, the Lord that made the O Jacob, and he that fasshyoned the: O
Israel, says thus: 4. Reg.
Fear not / for I have redeemed the. ^ Esaias. 4^.
I have called the by name: thou art mine own. 17 ^ Deute. 7 ^ and. xx^^^. ^
If thou go through the water, I wylbe with the, that the strong floudes
should not pluck the away. Exodi. 14. ^ Dani. (...). ^
And if thou walk through the fire / it shall not burn the, and the flame
shall not kindle upon the. For I am the Lord thy God, y^ holy one of Israel,
thy Savior: I gave Egypt for thy delyueraunce, the Morians and the Sabees for
the: because thou waste dear in my sight, and because I set by the, and loved
the. I will give over al men for the, and deliver up al people for thy sake,
fear not: for I am with the. Esaias. 41* ^ Math. ^^
I will bring thy sede from the East ^ and gather the together from y^ West. I
will say to the North, let go. And to the South, Esaias. 29 ^ Gala. 3. ^^
but bring me my sons from far, and my daughters from the ends of y^ world.
Namely, all those that be called after my name. For them have I created,
fasshyoned; and made for mine honor.

Luke xiiii. c.
Bring forth that people, whether they have eyes or be blind, deaf or have
ears.

Ep^^. ii. c.
If all nacyons come in one, and be gathered together, which among them shall
declare such things / and tell us what is to come? Let them bring their
witness / so shall they be fre: else, let them hear, and say, it is truth.
You are my witnesses (says the Lord) and my servant, whom I have chosen:
therefore be certyfyed and give me faithful credence: and consydre, Esa.
x^^iii. b Apoca. i. b.
that I am he, before whom there was never any God, and that there shall be none
after me. I am only the Lord, and Osce. xiii. ^
without me is there no Sauyoure. I give warning / I John. xx. ^
there is none that can take any thing out of my hand. And what I do, can no
man change.

Thus says the Lord the holy one of Israel your redemer: Esaias. v. ^.
for your sake I have sent to Babylon, and brought down the strongest of
them. All they are fugitive with the Chaldees that boost them of their ships:
Even I the Lord your holy one which have made Israel, and am your king.
Thus says the Lord, ^^^uc. (...) c
even he that makes a way in the sea, (...). ^. d.
and a footepath in the mighty waters: (...). (...). c.
which brings forth the charettes and horses, the host and y^ power of
war, that they may fall and never rise, and be extincte, like as towe is
quenched. Ye remember not things of old / and regard nothing that is paste.
Therefore behold I shall make a new thing / and shortly shall it appear: ye
shall well know it, I told it you before, but I will cell it you again. I
will make streets in the deserte / and ryuers of water in the wyldernes. The
wild beasts shall Psalm vi. d. Esa. xxxv. ^ 41. c. 44. a.
For I shall give water in the wyldernes, and streams in the desert: that may
give drink to my people, who^ I chose This people have I made for my self,
and they shall she we forth my praise. For thou (Jacob) would not call upon
me, but thou had an unlust toward me, O Israel. Thou gave me not thy
young beasts for burnte offrynges, neither dydest honor me with thy
sacrifyces Thou boughtest m^ no dear spyce with thy money, nether pouredest
the fat of thy sacryfyces upon me.

Esaias. i. b. Iere. vii. c.
How be it I have not be^e chargeable unto y^ in offringes, nether grievous in
ince^se. But thou have laden me with thy sins, and weeried me with thine
ungodliness.

Psalm. 24. b. Ie. xxxiii. b
Where as I yet am even he only, that for mine own selfs sake do away thine
offenses, and forgette thy sins: so that I will never think upon them. Put
me now in remembrance (for we will reason together) and show what thou have
for the, to make the ryghteous. Gene. iii. b. Number. xx. ^.
Thy first father offended sore, and thy rulers have sinned against me.
Therefore I either suspended, or slew the chefest princes: I did curse Jacob, and
gave Israel into reprofe.

Christ promyseth to deliver his church, which he has redeemed. Idolatry
and knelynge before images. (...). are confuted.

CAPI. XLIIII.
SO hear now, O Jacob my servant, and Israel whom I have chosen. For thus
says the Lord, that made the fashyoned the, and helped the / even from thy
mothers womb. Be not afraid, O Jacob my servant / thou ryghteous, whom I
have chosen. Esaias. 35. b. 14. c. 43. c.
For I shall power water upon the dry ground / and ryuers upon the thurstye.
Eze. 36. d.* Joel. ii. f. Acts. ii. d.
I shall pour my sprete upon thy sede, and mine increase upon thy stock. They
shall grow together, like as the grass and as the wyllowes by the waters side.

One shall say: I am the Lords. Another shall call him self after the name
of Jacob. The third shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and give
him Esaias. xii. a. Apoca. i. b. Esaias. 4^. c. Apo. xxii. c. Esa. x^^^^. ^
I am the first and the last, and without me is there no God. For what is he,
that ever was like me, which am from euerlasti^ge? Let him show his name, and
do where through he may be lykened unto me. Let him tell you forth plainly
things that are past and for to come, ye, and that without any fear or
stop. For have not I ever told you hitherto, and warned you? Ye can bear me
record your selves. Is there any God except me? or any maker, that I should
not know him?

All caruers of images are but vain, and the carved images that they love, can
do no good. They must bear record them selves, that (seeing they can neither
se nor understand) they shall be confounded. Esaias. xlii. ^
Who dare then make a God, or fashion an image, that is profitable for
nothing? Psa. 114. d Sap. xiii. c
Behold, all the felowshyppe of them must be brought to confusyon. Let all the
workemasters of them come and stand together from among men: they must be
abashed and confounded one with another. The smyth takes iron, and tempereth
it with hoate coals and fashio neth it with hammers, and makes it with all
the strength of his arms: ye, sometime he is faint for very hunger, and so
thurstye, that he has no more power. The carpenter (or image caruer) takes
measure of the timbre and spredeth forth his line: he marketh it with some
color: he playneth it, he rules it, and squareth it, and makes it after the
image of a man, and according to the bewty of a man: that it may stand in
the house.

Moreover, he goes out to hew down

And afterward makes a God there of, to honor it: and an Idol to knele
before it. One piece he burns in the fire, with another he rosteth flesh, that
he may eat roste his belyfull: with y^ third he warmeth him self / and
says: Aha, I am well warmed, I have been at the fire. And of the resydue he
makes him a God, and an Idol for him self. He kneleth before it, he
worshyppeth it, he prays unto it, and says: deliver me, for thou art my
God.

Esa. xlii. c.
Yet men neither consydre nor understand, that their eyes are stopped, that
they can not se: and their hertes, that they cannot perceive. They pondre not
in their minds / for they have neither knowledge nor understanding / to
think thus. I have burnt one piece in the fire. I have baked bred with the
coals thereof, I have roasted flesh with all / and eaten it: shall I now of

Thus he does but lose his labor, and his heart which is dysceaued / does
turn him aside: so that none of them can have a fre conscience to think: may
not I err?

Consydre this (O Jacob and Israel) for thou art my servant. I have made the,
that thou myghttest serve me. O Israel / forget me not. Esa. xiiii. d
As for thine offenses, I have driven them away like the clouds, and thy
sins as the mist. Turn the again unto me for I have redeemed the.

Be glade ye heavens, whom the Lord has made / let all that is hear beneth
upon the earth / be joyful. Rejoice ye mountains and woddes / with all the
trees thereof: for the Lord has redeemed. Jacob, and and showed his glory
upon Israel. Thus says the Lord thy redemer / even he that fashyoned the
from thy mothers womb.

Gede. i. ^* Esaias. (...). ^*
I the Lord, do all things my self alone. I only spryde out the heavens and
I only have laid the foundacyon of the earth. I destroy the tokens of
wytches, and make the Sothsaiers foles. As for the wise, I turn them bacwarde
/ and make their conning folyshnesse.

He does set up the purpose of his servant, and fulfylleth the council of
his messaungers: Concerning Jerusalem he says: It shall be inhabyted. And of
the cities of Judah: They shall he builded again, and I will repair their
decayed places. He says to the ground: be dry. And I will dry up thy water
floudes. He says of Cyrus. He is mine herdeman: so that he shall fulfill all
things after my will. He says also of Jerusalem. It shall be builded / and
of the temple: It shall be fast grounded.

The delyueraunce of the people by Cyrus. The coming of Christ and calling
of the Gentyles.

CAPI. XLV.
THVS says the Lord unto Cyrus i. (...). ^^
I will lose the gyrdle of kyngys: that they shall open the gates before thy
face, and not to shut their doors. I will go before the, and make the crooked
straight. I shall break the brazen doors / and burste the iron bars. I shall
give the / the hyd treasures / and the thing which is secretly kept, that
thou may know / that I the Lord God of Israel have called the by thy name:
and Gene. 39 ^*
that for Jacob my servants sake, and for Israel my chosen. For A called the
by thy name / and ordained the or ever thou knew me. Esa. xiiii d
Even I the Lord before who^ there is none other: for without me there is no
God. Iere. i. a.
I have prepared the Gene. i. a.
created y^ light and darckenes. Iud. ix. b.
I make peace and trouble: ye even I the Lord do all these things * ye
heavens from above drop down, and let the clouds rain ryghteousnes. The
earth open it self, and bring forth health, that thereby ryghteousnes may
florysh. Even I the Lord bring it to pass. Esaias. 29. c. Iere. 18. c. and
xix. c. Boma. ix. c Eccle. 33. b.
Woe be unto him that stryueth with his maker / the potsherde with the potter.
Says the claye to y^ potter What make thou or thy work serves for
nothing? Woe be unto him that says to his father: Why begettest thou? And to
hes mother: why bear thou? Thus says the Lord, even the holy one / and
maker of Israel. Ask me of things for to come / concerning my sons: and put
me in remembrance as touching the works of my hands. I have made the earth,
and created man upon it. With mine hands have I spread forth heaven, and given
a commandment for all the host thereof. I shall wake him up with ryghteousnes,
and order al his ways. Esoras. i. a
He shall build my city, and let out my prisoners: and that neither for gift
nor rewards, says the Lord of Hosts. Thus Roma. xi. d
O how profounde art thou O God, thou God and Sauyoure of Israel? Confounded
are they al, and put to dishonor: they are gone hence together with shame,
even the makers of images. But Israel shall be saved in the Lord, which is the
everlasting salvation. Ye shall not come to shame nor confusyon, world
without end. For thus says the Lord: Gene. i. a.
even he that created heavens / the God that made the earth, that fashyoned it,
and set it forth. He did not make it for naught, but to be enhabited. Even I
the Lord, without whom there is none other. Exodus xx. c.
I have not spoken secretly / nether in dark places of the earth. It is not
for naught / that I said unto the sede of Jacob: seek me. I am the Lord /
which when I speak, declares the thing that is ryghteous and true: gather
you and come together, draw nigh hither, that are Esai. 44. ^, Baruc. vi. c
Have they any understanding, that set up the stocks of their Idols / and
pray unto a God / that can not help them? draw nigh, come hither / and let
them ask council one at another / and show forth. What is he, that told
this before? or, who spoke of it / ever sense the beginning? Have not I the
Lord done it? Esaias. 46. b
without who^ there is none other God? the true God and Sauyoure / and there is
else none but I? Esaias 44. b
And therefore turn you unto me (all ye ends of the earth) that ye may be
saved: for I am God, and there is else none. I swear by my self: out of my
mouth comes the word of ryghteousnes, and that may no man turn: To. xiiii.
v. Phili. ii. a.
but all knees shall bow unto me, and all tunges shall swear by my name,
saying. Uerely, in y^ Lord is my ryghteousnes and strength. To him shall men
come: but al they that think scorn of him, shall be confounded. And the whole
sede of Israel shallbe justified, and make their boast in the Lord.

Idolatry is reproved. The health that comes by Christ is prophesied.

CAPI. XLVI.
B Bell c. i. (...). xv. a. Ierem. i. a.
Ell is fallen, Nabo is broken down whose images were a burden for the
beasts and catell, to ouerlade them, and to make them weery. They are soncke
down, and fallen together: for they may not ease them of their burden /
therefore must they go in to captivity. Harken unto me / O house of Jacob / and
all ye that remain yet Exodus xx. a.
Whom will ye make me syke / in fashion or image that I may be like him? Ex.
xxxii. a
Ye fools (no doubt) will take out silver and gold out of your purses, and
weye it, and hyre a goldsmyth Esa. 44. c. Baruc. vi. ^
Yet must he be taken of men's shulders and borne, and set in his place, that he
may stand and not move. Alas / that men should cry unto him / which gives
no answer: and delyuereth not the man that calls upon him / from his trouble.

Consydre this well, and be ashamed. Go into your own selves (O ye
runnagates.) Remember the things which are past sense the beginning of the
world: that I am God and that there is else no God / ye, and that there is
nothing, like unto me. In the beginning of a thing. I show the end thereof:
and I tell before, things that are not yet come to pass. With one word is my
deuyce accomplyshed, and fulfill all my pleasure. Exo. xvi. a.
I call a bird out of the East, and all that I take in hand / out of far
countres / as soon as I command / I bring it hither: as soon as I think to
deuyse a thing / I do it. Hear me, O ye that are of an hye stomach / but
far from righteousness / I shall bring forth my ryghteousnes. It is not
far / and my health shall not tarry long away. I will give health in Syon /
and in Israel my glory.

The word of the Lord against Babylon.

CAPI. XLVII.
BVTAS for the (O daughter / thou

Bring forth the querne / and grynde meele, put down thy stomacher / make
bare thy knees: and wade through the water ryuers. Eze. xvi. ^. Naum. 3. a.
Thy shame shall be discovered, and thy pryuyties shall be seen. For I will avenge
me of the / and no man shall let me: says our redemer / which is called
the Lord of Hosts, the holy one of Israel. Pro. xxi. b. Ieremi. l. b
Nevertheless / thou shewedest them no mercy, but even the very aged men of
the^, dydest thou oppress right sore with thy yocke. and thou thoughtest thus:
I shall be lady for ever. And beside all that / thou haste not regarded these
things neither cast / what should come after. Hear now therefore, thou
wylfull / that syttest so careless, and spekest thus in thine heart: Esaias. x. b.
Apo xviii b
I am alone, and without me is there none: I shall never be wedowe / nor
desolate again And yet both these things shall come to Dan. v. c.
Namely / wyddowheade, and desola cyon. They shall myghtely fall upon the, for
the multitude of thy witches, and for the great hepe of thy coniurers. For
thou haste trusted in thy wyckednes / and haste said: Esa. xxix. c.
No man sees me. Thine own wisdom, and connyng has deceived the. In that
thou have said. I am alone and without me there is none. Therefore shall
trouble come upon the, and thou shall not know / from whence it shall arise.
Myschefe shall fall upon the, which thou shall not be able to put of. A sudden
mysery shall come upon

The ypocryse of the Jews is reproved. The Lord alone wylbe worshypped; which
has chosen us, and which socoureth us for his own sake.

CAPI. XLVIII.
HEAR this, O thou house of Jacob: Ephe. ii. b. Esaias. li. a. and. liiii. ^.
fre men of the holy city / and are grounded upon the God of Israel Iere.
xxxi. ^*
whose name is the Lord of Hosts.

The things that I showed you ever sense the beginning. Have I not brought
them to pass / immediately as they came out of my mouth, and declared them. And
they are come? How be it, I know that thou art obstinate, and that thy neck
has an iron vein, and that thy browe is of brass. Nevertheless / I have
ever sense the beginnynge showed the of things for to come / and declared the^
unto the, or ever they come to pass: that thou should not say: mine Idol
has done it / my carved or molten image has showed it. Hear and consider
al these things, whether it was ye that prophesied them. But as for me, I
told the before at the beginning, new and secret things, y^ thou know
not of. Esaias. 37. ^.
And some done now, not of old time, whereof thou never hardest / before they
were brought to that thou can not say. Behold I knew of them. Moreover /
there be some whereof thou haste nether herd nor known, nether have they been
opened unto thine ears before time. For I knew that thou would malicyously
offend, therefore have I called the a transgressour / even from thy mothers
womb.

Nevertheless, for my names sake / I have with drawn my wrath, and for mine
honors sake I have ouersene the, so that I have not rooted the out. Behold I
have pourged the / and not as silver. Exodus iii. b
I have chosen the in the fire of affliccyon. And that only for mine own sake
/ yea, even for mine own sake / Esaias. 41. a 43. b. 44. b
For I give my honor to none other that thou should not despise me. Harken
unto me, O Jacob / and Israel, whom I have called. I am even he that is, I am
the first and the last, My hand has laid the foundation of the earth, and
my right hand has spanned over the heavens. As Soon as I call them they are
there. Gather you al together, and harken: which of yonder gods has declared
this: The Lord has a love unto him, and he shall perform his will against
Babell, and declare his power against the Caldees. I my self alone / even I
have told you this before. Yea, I did call him and bring him forth / and he
shall give a prosperous journey. Come nigh and hear this: have I spoken any
thing darckely sense the beginning? when a thing begins I am there.

Wherefore the Lord God and his sprete has sent me. And thus says the Lord
god thy redemer, the holy one of Israel: I am the Lord thy God, which
teaches the profitable things, and lead the the way, that y^ should go.
Roma. 7. b 1. Eun. 1. ^ Titum. 3. b
O that y^ had regarded my commandments, then had thy welthynes been as
the water stream: and thy ryghtu ousnes as the waves flowynge in the Sea. Thy
sede also had be like as the sa^de in the sea, and the fruit of thy body, like
the gravel stones thereof: Thy name should not be roted out, nor destroyed
before me. Deute. 28.
Go away from Babylon / fly from the Caldees with a merry voice speak of this,
declare it abroad and go forth unto the end of the world: say they. The Lord
has redeemed his servant Jacob, that they suffered no thurst, he led the^
through the wilderness, and caused the waters to flow out unto them from out
of the rock. Iere. li. a 1. Eld. 1. v
He claue the rock a sonder, and the water gushed out. Exodus 17. b Number. 20. b
Esaias. 57. c
As for the ungodly they have no peace, says the Lord.

Thryst shall gather together all nacyons be they never so fo far of.

CAPI. XLIX.
YE Isles, harken unto me, and take heed Esaye. li. c.
has made my mouth Ephe. vi. c
like a sharp sword, under the shadow of his hand has he defended me, and
hyd me in his quyuer as a good arowe, and said unto me: Thou art my servant
Israel / Ioh. xvii. d
I will be honored in the. Then answered I / I have lost my labor / I have
spent my strength in vain. Nevertheless, I will committee my cause and my work
unto the lord my god. And now says the Lord / even he that fashyoned me
from my mothers womb to be his servant / that I may bring Jacob again
unto him / howbeit, Israel will not be gathered unto him again. In whose sight
I am great, which also is my Lord my God, and my strength. And he said, It
is but a small thing / that thou art my servant / to set up the kynreddes
of Jacob / and to restore the destruccyon of Israel. Esaias. 42. b Johan 8. ^
Acts. 13. ^
For I have made the the light of the Gen tyles / that thou may be my health
unto the end of the world.

Moreover / thus says the Lord the redemer, 2. Cori. 6. a
In the time Iere. xi. a.
accepted have I heard the, Esaias. xiii. a
and in the day of salvation have I helped the. Esaias. 42. a
I will preserve the / and make the to be the atonement of the people, that
thou may help up the earth again, and challenge again the scattered
herytages. zacha. 9. b. Luke. 4. b
That thou may say to the prisoners, go forth / and to them that are in
darkness / come into the light / that they may feed in the hye ways / and
get their living in all hye places. Apoc. vii. c.
There shall neither hunger, nor thirst / heat, nor sun hurt them. For he
that favors them / shall lead them / and give them drink of the spring
wells. I will make ways upon al my mountains, and my foot paths shall be
exalted. And behold * Rejoice ye heavens, and sing praises y^ earth: Talk
of joy ye hills, for God has comforted his people, and will have mercy upon
his, that be in trouble.

But Syon said: Roma. x^. a
God has forsaken / and my Lord has forgotten me. Will a wife forget the
child of her womb and the son whom she has borne? And though she do
forget, yet will not I forget the. Behold, I have written the up upon my
hands / thy walls are ever in my sight. They make haste to build the up
again. As for those that ouerthrewe the and made the waste / they shall depart
from Gene. xv. a Esaias. ix. a
Lift up thine eyes and look about the: al these gather them together, and
come to the. As truly as I live says the Lord) thou shall put them all upon
the / as an apparel, and gyrde them to y^ as a bryde does her Jewels. As for
thy land that lies desolate, wasted and destroyed: it shall be to narowe for
them / that shall dwell in it. And they that would devour the / shall be far

And therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold / I will stretche out my hand
to the Ge^tyles, and set up my token to the people. They shall bring the thy
sons in their lappes, and carye thy daughters unto the upon their shoulders.
For kings shall be thy noursynge fathers, and Queen's shall be thy noursynge
mothers. They shall fall before the with their faces flat upon the earth, and
lycke up the dust of thy fete: that thou may know how that I am the Lord
Roma. 9. ^
And who so puts his trust in me, shall not be confounded. Who spoyleth the
Gyaunte of his pray? or who takes the prisoner from the mighty? And
therefore, thus says the Lord: The prisoners shall be taken from the gyaunt,
and the spoil delivered from the violence: for I will maynteyne thy cause
against thine adversaries, and save thy sons. And will feed thine enemies
with their own flesh, and make them drink of their own blood / as of
sweet wine. And all flesh shall know (O Jacob) that I am the Lord thy
sauyoure / thy noble redemer.

The Jews are reproved, and also called.

CAPI. L.
THVS says the Lord: Iere. iii. ^
where is Esaias. lix. ^
Behold, for your own offenses are ye sold: and because of your
transgressyons / is your mother forsaken. For why would no man receive me /
when I came? and when I called, noman gave me answer. * Is my hand shortened,
that it might not help? or have I not power to deliver? lo, Nume. xi. ^ Esaias.
lix. ^
at a word I drink up the Exodus 14. ^ Iosue. 3. d
and of water floudes I make dry land: so that for want of water, the fyshe
corrupt and dye of thirst. * As for Heaven, I Exodi. x. c.
clothe it with darkness, and put as it were a sack upon it.

The Lord God has given me a well learned tongue, 1. Lori. 1. d.
so that I can comfort them which are troubled, yea, and that in due sea son.
He waked mine ear up by times in the morning (as the scole masters do) that
I might harken. Psalm. 39. d. Hebre. x. a Mat. 2^. ^ Luke. xxii. ^
The Lord God has opened mine ear therefore can I not say nay, nor withdraw
my self / Psalm. lv. a Hebr^. 13. ^
but I offer my back unto the smytters, and my chekes to Roma. 8. d
Behold, the Lord God stands by me, what is he then y^ can conde^pne me?
lo, Psalm. ^ii d 2. Pet^^. ^. ^
they shall be al like as an old cloth the mothe shall eat them up.

Therefore who so fears the Lord among you, let him hear the voice of his
servant. Who so walks in darkness, and no light shyneth upon him, let him
put his trust in the name of the Lord, and hold him by his God. But take heed, ye all kyndle a fire, and stere up the coals, walk on in the glystrynge
of your own fire, and in the coals that ye have ki^dled. This comes unto
you fro my hand, namely, that ye shall sleep in sorrow.

A consolacyon and comfort is promised unto the faithful.

CAPI. LI.
HARKEN unto me ye that hold of hewn, and to the grave wherout ye are dug.
Consydre Genesis xxi. a Roma. 4. a Gene. xii. a
Abraham your father, and Sara that bare you: how that * I called him alone,
and blessed him / and increased him. Therefore shall the Lord comfort Syon, and
repair all her decay: making her deserte as a Paradyse, and her wyldernes
Esay^. 2. ^.
for a law and an ordinance shall go forth fro me / to lyghten the Gentyles.
It is hard by that my health and my ryghtuousnesse shall go forth, and the
people shall be ordered with mine arm.

The ylandes (that is the Gentyles) shall hope in me, and put their trust in
mine arm. Lift up your eyes toward heaven, and look upon the earth beneth. *
For the Heavens shall vanysshe a way like smoke, and the earth shall tear
like a clothe, and they that dwell therein, shall perysshe in like manner. But my
salvation shall endure for ever, and Psalm. cii. d. Mat. 24. ^. ^. Pet. 3. b.
beareste my law in thine heart. * Fear not the curse of men, be Iere. 31. ^.
Math. x. d. Luke. xii a Psalm. ^ii. d
not afraid of their blaphemyes and reuylinges: * for worms and mothes shall
eat them up like cloth and woll. But my ryghtuousnesse shall endure for ever,
and my saving health from generation to generation Wake up, wake up, and be
strong. O thou arm of the Lord: wake up, like as in times paste, ever and
sense the world began.

* Art not thou he, that haste wounded the proud, and hewn the Dragon in
pieces Art not thou even he, which have dried up 1. E^d^. 1. b.
might be with them / that sorrow and woe might fle from them? * Yea I / I am
even he, that in all things gives you consolacyon. 2. Lorin. ^. c
What art thou then / that fear a mortal man, the child of man / which *
goes away as does the flower? And forgettest the Lord that made the / that
spread Esaias. xl. ^. 1. Pe^^^. i. d
out the heavens, and laid the foundacyon of the earth. But thou art ever
afraid for the sight of thine oppress^ure, which is ready to do harm. Where
is the wrath of the oppressoure? It comes on fast, it makes haste to appear.
It shall not peryshe, that it Math. 8. a.
thy God (that make the sea to be still, and to Esaias. 48. a Esaias. 49. a
rage) * Whose name is the Lord of hosts Esaias. 14. b Exodus* 14. c
I have put my words in thy mouth, and have defended y^ in the shadow of my
hand that I may plant the heuens / and lay the foundation of the earth, and
say unto Sion, thou art my people.

Awake / awake, and stand up, O Jerusalem, thou that from the hand of the
Lord Psalm. 75. b Iere. xxv. c
thou that haste supped of, and sucked out the slumbring cup to y^ botome. For
among all the sons whom he has begotten, there is not one that may hold it
up / and not one to lead it by the hand, of all the sons that he has
noryshed.

Both these things are happened unto the, but who is sorye for it? Ye,
destruccyon, wastyng, hungre and sword: but who will comfort the? Thy sons
lie comfortles at the head of every street like a taken

A consolacion and comfort to the people of God.

CAPI, LII,
UP Syon up, take thy strength unto Roma. 7. b
ye are sold for naught / therefore shall ye be redeemed also with out any money.

For thus says y^ Lord God: Gene 46. a Exodi. i. a
My people went down before time in to Egypt / there to be strangers, 4. Re.
18. c.
and the king of the Assyrians oppressed the^ without any cause And now what
profit is it to me (says the Lord / that my people is freely carried away,
and brought in to heaviness by their rulers, Ezec. 36. d
and my name ever still blasphemed? says the Lord? But that my people may
know my name? I my self will speak in that day. Behold / here I am. Roma 2. d
O how beautyfull are the fete of the Embassytours that brings the message
from the mountain and proclaymeth peace: that brings Nume. 2. ^ Roma. x. ^
se him present, when 1. John. 1. c
the Lord shall convert Syon.

Esaias. 49. c
Be glad, O thou desolate Jerusalem, and rejoice together: for the Lord has
comforted his people / he has delivered Jerusalem. The Lord has made bare
his holy arm, and showed it forth in the sight of all the Ge^tyles, Psalm. 98. a
^.
and all the ends of the earth has seen the saving health of our God. Cori.
^. ^
Away Exodi. 13. d
the Lord shall go before you, and the God of Israel shall gather you
together.

Behold, my servant shall deal wisely / therefore shall he be magnyfyed /
exalted and greatly honored. Like as the multitude shall wondre upon him,
because his face shall be so disfourmed and not as a ma^s face, his Esaias. liii. c
beautye like no man: Even so shall the multitude of y^ Gentyles look unto him /
and kings shall shut their mouths before him. Esaias. lxv. ^ ^oma. xv. ^
For they that have not been told of him / shall se him / and they y^ herd
nothing of him, shall behold him,

He P^ophecyeth euydentely of the passion of our Savior Jesus Christ.

CAPI. LIII.
BUT who has John. xii. ^. Roma. 1^. e
given credence unto Esay^. lii. c
he has nether beauty nor favor. When we look upon him there shall be no
fairness / we shall have no lust unto him. Hebre. v. a
He is despised and abhorred of men, he is such a man as has good experyence
of sorrows and infirmyties. We have rekened him so vile / that we hyd our faces
Mat. viii. b 1. Petri. 2. c
he only has taken on him our infirmytie / and borne our pains. Yet we did
judge him / as though he were plaged and cast down of God: i. Cor^. x^. ^
where as he (notwithstanding) was wounded for our offenses, and smytten for
our wickedness. For the pain of our punishment was laid upon him / and with
his strypes are we healed. Psalm. 119. ^
As for us we have gone all astraye (like sheep) every one has turned his own
way. But through him the Lord has pardoned Iere. x^. d Mat, 27. d Acts. 8. d
2. Cor^^. ^. ^
He shall be led as a sheep to be slain / yet shall he be as still as a lamb
before the shearer / and not open his mouth. He was had away, his cause not
herd, and without any judgment. Whose generation yet who may nombre? he was
cut of from the ground of the lyuinge. Which punisshment did go upon him, for
the transgressyon of my people Math. 27. ^
His grave was given him with the condemned, and with the rich man at his
death. 2. Corin 5. ^ 1. Pett. 2. d
Where as he did never vyolence / nor unright / neither has there been any
disceytfulnesse in his

Johan. x^. ^ Roma. 8. d.
Yet has it pleased the Lord to smite him with infirmite / that when he had
made his soul an offering for sin, he might se long lasting sede. And
this deuyce of the Lord shall prospere in his hand. With travail and labor
of his soul / shall he obtain great riches. Rom^ (...)*
My ryghtuous servant shall with wisdom iustifye and de liver the multitude /
for he shall bear away their sins. Therefore will I give him the multitude for
his part / and he shall deuyde the strong spoil / because he gives over his
soul to death / Mat. 15. (...) Luke. 23. ^.
and is reckened among the trangressours / which nevertheless has taken away
the sins of the multitude / and made intercessyon for the mysdoers.

Of the great dominyon of Christ. The indignacyon of God endures but a short
space / * but his mercy is everlasting.

CAP. LIIII.
BE glad now, Gala. iiii. d Luke. xiii. ^
thou baren that barest Be not ashamed, for thou shall not come to confusyon.
Yea thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth, and shalt not remember the
dishonor of thy wedowed. For he Esa. lxii. a. Eze. xvi. b.
and husband (whose name is ii. Cor. xi. a Esaias. 48. a
the Lord of hosts) and thy redemer shall be even the holy one of Israel, the
Lord of the whole world. For the Lord, has called the, being as a
desolate sorrowful woman, and as a young wife that has broken her wedlock:
says thy God.

Esa. xxvi. ^ Psa. xxix. ^
A little while have I sorsaken the / but with great mercyfulnes shall I take
the up unto me. When I was angry, I hid my face from the for a little season,
but through everlasting goodness have I pardoned Gene. ix. b.
And this is unto me as the water of Noe: for like as I have sworn that I will
not bring the water of Noe any more upon the world: 11. (...). vii. a
so have I sworn that I will never be angry with the nor reprove the: The
mountains shall remove, and the hills shall fall down: but my loving
kyndnesse shall not move / and the bond of my peace shall not fall down from
the, says the Lord thy merciful lover. Behold thou poor, vexed / and
Esaias. vi. d.
despised: I will make thy walls of precious stones, and thy foundacyons of
Sapphires, thy wyndowes 1. John. ii. b ^ John. ^. ^
Thy children shall all be taught of God, and I will give them plenteousnesse
of peace. In righteousness shalfe thou be grounded, and be far from
oppressyon: for the which thou nedeste not be afraid, neither for
hynderaunce, for it shall not come nigh the. Behold, the alyaunt that was far
from the, shall dwell with the: and he that was sometime a stranger unto the,
shall be joined with the: Behold, I make the smyth that blows the coals in
the fire, and he makes a weapen after his handy work. I make also the waster
to destroy: but all the weapens y^ are made against the shall not prospere.
Luke. xxi. b (...). iiii. a.
And as for all tunges, that shall resyste the in judge mente, thou shall
overcome them, and condemn them. This is the heritage of the Lords
servants, and their righteousness comes of me, says the Lord.

A consolacion and comfort to the people. The ^ru^e and profet of the word of
God.

CAPI. LV.
COME to the waters all ye, that be Ecle li. d^ John. vii. d Apo. xxii. d*
Come / bye, that ye may have to eat.

Come / bye wine and mylcke / without any money / or money worth / wherefore do
ye lay out your money / for the thing that fedeth not, and spend your
labor about the thing that satysfyeth you not. But harken rather unto me /
and ye shall eat of the best, and your soul shall have her pleasure in
plenteousnesse. Enclyne Act. xii^. d. ii. Re. vii. c
For I will make an everlasting couenaunte with you, even the sure mercyes of
Dauyd.

Behold, I gave him for a witness among the folk / for a Prince and
captain unto the people. Lo, thou shalt call an unknown people: and a people
that had not knowledge of the, shall run unto the: because of the Lord thy
God / and the holy one of Israel, which gloryfyeth the. Eze. xviii. c and*
xxx^^^. ^
Let the ungodly man forsake his own ways, and the unrighteous his own
ymagynacyons, and turn again unto the Lord / so shall he be merciful unto
him: and ^o our God, Psalm. ciii. ^ Esaias. lxv. d
for he is ready to forgive. For thus says the Lord, my thoughts are not
your thoughts, and your ways are not my ways / but as far as the heavens
are hyer then the earth / so far do my ways exceade yours / and my
thoughts yours. De. xxxii. b.
And like as the rain and snow comes down from heaven / and returns not
thither again / but waters the earth / makes it fruitful and grene / that
it may give corn and bread unto the sowet

So the word also that comes out of

The mountains and hills shall sing with you for joy, and all the trees of
the field shall clappe their hands. For thorns, there shall grow Fyrre
trees, and the Myrre tree in the stead of breers. And this shall be done to the
praise of the Lord / and for an everlasting token, that shall not be taken
away.

An exor^a^yon to judgment and ryghtcousnes, and to the spy* ytual keeping of
the Sabbath. Against ^^^pherdes that devour their flo^ke.

CAPI. LVI.
THus says the Lord. Math. iii. c
Keep equity, Esaias. 58. ^.
He that takes head, that he vnhalowe not the Sabbath (that is) he that keeps
him self that he do no evil. Then shall not the stranger, which cleauethe to
the Lord, say: Deu. xxiii. c
Alas, the Lord has shut Sapi. iii. b
gelded man say: lo / I am a dry tree. For thus says the Lord / unto the
gelded that keeps my Sabbath: Namely that holds greatly of the thing that
pleases me, and keeps my couenaunte. Unto them will I give in my household and
with in my walls / a better heritage and name, then if they had been called
sons and daughters. John. 1. c.
I will give them an everlasting name that shall not perysshe. Again he
says unto the strangers that are disposed to stycke to the Lord / to serve
him: and to love his name. John. 8. c.
That they shall be no 3. Reg 8. c. Math xx. b Mar. xi. b. Luke xix d.
house shall be called an house of prayer for all people.

Thus says the Lord God which gathers

Iere. xii. b. Eze. 34. a.*
For his watch men are all blind, they have all together no understanding,
they are all domme dogs, not being able to barcke, they are slepery: slogish
are they, and lie snortynge: they are shameless dogs that be never
satysfyed. The sheperdes also in like manner have no understanding, Iere. vi. b.
but every man turns his own way, every one after his own covetousness with all his power. Esa. xxii. b i. Cor. xv. d. Sapi. ii. b.
Come (say they) I will fetch wine so shall we fill our selves, that we may be
dronken: And do to morrow, like as to day ye and much more.

The Jews are rebuked for their iniurye done to Christ

CAPI. LVII.
THe Sapi. ii. d.
ryghteous perysheth, and no man Math. 12. ^
ye sons of the aduoutrer and the whore: wherein take ye your pleasure? Upon
whom gape ye with your mouth, and bleare out your tongue? Are ye not children of
aduoutry / and Eze. xvi. a. Esa. xiv. a Iere. vii. 3. Deuteronomy. 18. ^. Eze. xx. d.
Leuy. xx. ^. Deuteronomy. 32. ^.
Ye take your pleasure under the oaks / and under al grene trees the child
being slain in the valleys / and dens of stone. Thy part shall be with the
stony rocks by the river: Yea / eue^ these shall be thy part. For there you
haste poured meat and drink offringes unto them. Should I ouerse that? Thou
haste made thy bed upon hye mountains: thou wentest up thither, and there have
thou slain sacrifices. Deuteronomy. 37. ^
Behind the doors and posts / haste thou set up thy remembrance.

When thou had discovered thy self Eze. xvi. ^. Osec. xii. ^.
oil and diverse oyntementes (that is) thou have sent thy messengers far
of. and yet art thou fallen into the pyt thereby Thou art weary for the
multitude of thine own ways yet saydest thou never: I will leave of. Math.
ix. b
Thou thynkest to have life (or health) of thy self and therefore thou beleuest
not that thou art sick. For when wylt thou be abashed or fear, seeing thou
have broken thy promise and remembrest not me, nether have me in thine heart?
Thynkest thou, that I also will hold my peace (as before time (y^ thou fear
me not? Yea, verily I will declare thy goodness and thy worckes, but they shall
not profyt the when thou cryest, let thy chosen heap deliver the. But the
wind shall take them al away, and carry them in to the Romans xi. ^.
air. Nevertheless, they that put their trust in me, shall inheret the land,
and have my holy hill in possessyon.

And therefore thus he says: Esaias. xl. ^.
Make ready, make ready, and cleanse the street, take up Psalm. 50. b. Esa lxvi. ^
and. 66. ^.
I dwell hye above and in the sanctuary, and with him also, that is of a
contrite and humble sprete: that I may heal a troubled mind, and a contryte
heart. Psa. c. iii. ^ Iere. iii. ^.
For I chyde not ever, and am not wroth with out end. But the blastynge goes
from me / though I make the breath. I am wroth with him for his covetousness, I
smite him / I hyde me / and am angrye / when he turns him self, and follows
the by way of his own heart. But if I may se his right way again, I make him
whole / I led him and restore him unto them, who^ he Luke. xv. a.
makes joyful, and that were sorry for him I make the fruits of thankesgeuyng.
I give peace Ephe. ii. c.
unto the^ that are far of, and to the^ that are nigh, say I the Lord / that
make him whole. But the wicked are like the raginge see, that cannot rest,
whose water fometh with the mire and grauel. Even so the Esaias. 48. d
wicked have no peace, says God.

The Lord (by the mouth of the Prophet) reproves the People for their
fastings, which were full of hypocrysye.

CAPI. LVIII.
Cry Eze. iii. ^. Iera. xix. ^
now / as loud as thou canste. Leave not of, lift up thy voice like a
trompet / and show my people their offenses, and the house of Jacob their
sins.

For they seek me daily / and will know my ways / even as it were a people
that did right / and had not forsaken the statutes of their God. They argue
with me concerning right judgment / and will pleate at the law with their God
Math. ix. b
wherefore fast we (say they) and thou seyste it not? we put our lives to
straytenesse, and thou regardeste it not?

Esaye. i. b.
Behold, when ye fast, your lust remains still: for ye do no less
vyolence to your detters: lo, ye fast to strife and debate / and to smite him
with your fyste y^ speaks unto you. Ye fast not (as some time) that your
zatha. vii. a and. b.
Thyncke ye these fast pleases me, that a man should chasten him self for a
day / and to wrythe his head about like an hoke in an heary cloth and to lie
upon the earth? Should that be called fasting, or a day y^ pleases the Lord?
Does not this fasting rather please me / that thou Deuteronomy. xv. a
lowse him out of bondage, that is in thy danger: that thou break the oath of
wicked bargaynes / that thou let the oppressed go fre, and take from them al
manner of burdens: Eze. xviiib Esai xv. x.
to deal thy bred to the hongry / and bring the poor fatherless home in to
thy house (when thou seyst the naked that thou cover him / and hyde not thy
face from thine own flesh.

Luke. xi. d.
Then shall thy light break forth as the Prou. xxi b.
Then if thou calleste / the Lord shall answer the: if thou cryeste / he
shall say: here I am. Yea, if thou layeste away thy burdens / and hold
thy fyngers / and ceaseste from blasphemous talking, zacha. viia. Math. v. b
if thou haste compassyon upon the hongrye / and refressheste the troubled
soul: Then shall thy light spring out in the darcnesse, and thy darcknesse,
shall be as the noone day. The Lord shall ever be thy gyde, and satysfye the
desire of thine heart / and fill thy bones with mary. Thou shalt be like a
fresshe watered garden, John. iiii. b
and like the fou^teine of water, that never leaves running.

Yea, if thou turn thy fete from the Esaias lvi. a and. lxvi. d.
Sabbath / so that thou do not the thing, which pleases thy self in my holy
day: then shall thou be called unto the pleasant, holy and glorious Sabbath of
the Lord, where thou shall be in honor: so that thou do not after thine own
ymaginacion, nether seek thine own will, nor speak thine own words. Then
shalt thou have thy pleasure in the Lord, which shall carye the hye above
the earth / and feed the with the heritage of Jacob thy father: for y^ Lords
own mouth has so promised.

The Lord is mighty to save, and ready to hear our requests.

CAPI. LIX.
BEHOLD Esaias. l. a. Nume. xi
the Lords hand is Iere. v. b.
your misdeeds have separated you from your God, and your Esaye. i. v.
sins hyde his face from you, that he hears you not. For your hands are
defiled with blood, and your fingers with unrighteousness: Your lyppes speak
lesynnes / and your tongue sets out wyckednes. No man regards
ryghteousnes, and no man judges truly. Every man hops in vain things / and
ymagyneth disceate, Job. xv. d. Psalm. vii. b
conceaueth weerynesse, and brings forth evil. They bread cokatryce eggs,
and weaue the spyders web. Who so eats of their eggs, dies. But if one
tread upon them there comes up a serpent. Their web makes no clothe, and
they may not cover the^ with their labors. Their deeds are y^ deeds of
wyckednes, and the work of robbery

I have set watchmen upon thy walls (O Jerusalem) which shall neither cease
day nor night to preach the Lord. And

Stand back / and depart a sunder / ye Esaye. xl. b z^^ha ix. b Mat. x^x. a
tell the daughter Sion: se, thy savior comes, behold, he brings his
treasure with him / and his works go before him. For they whom the Lord de
liuereth, shall be called the Esaias. 54. a
holy people: and as for the / thou shalt be named the greatly occupied / and
not the forsaken city.

Of the redempcy on promised to the people.

CAPI. LXIII.
WHAT is he this, that comes Esaias 34. b
For the day of vengeance that I have take in han^de / and the year of my
delyueraunce / is come. I looked about me / and there was no man to show me
any help I marualed / that no man held me up. The^ I held me by mine own
arm, and my feruentnesse sustained me. And thus will I tread down the people
in my wrath, and bathe them in my displeasure: and upon the earth will I lay
their strength.

I will declare the goodness of the Lord, ye and the praise of the Lord for
all that he has given us / for the great good that he has done for Israel:
which he has given them of his own favor / and according to the multitude
of his loving kyndnesses For he said: These no doubt are my people and no
shrynkynge children / and so he was their savior. In their troubles he forsook
them not Exodus xv. a Esaias. xii. a
but the Angel that went forth from his presence / delivered them: Of very
Exo. xiii. ^ 14. d. ^ ^3. ^
How he brought them from the water of the sea / Exodus 14. ^
as a shepherde does with his sheep, how Psalm. 77. b
he had given his holy spirit among them how he had led Moses by the right
hand with his glorious arm / how he had divided the water before them
(whereby he gat him self an everlasting name) how he led them in the deep / as
an horse is led in the plain that they sh^lde not stumble. The spirit of the
Lord led them as a tame beast goes in the field.

Thus (O God) have thou led thy people to make thy self a glorious name with
all.

Deuteronomy. 26. ^ Daru^. 2. ^
Look down then from heaven, and behold the dwelling place of thy sanctuary
and thy glory. How is it / that thy gelousy thy strength / the multitude of
thy mercyes and thy loving kyndnesse / will not be entreated of us? yet art
thou Math. 6. ^ Luke. xi. (...) xxiii. ^
our father: For Abraham knows us not / neither is Israel acquainted with us.
But thou Lord art our rather and redemer / and thy name is everlasting O
Lord, wherefore haste y^ led us out of thy way: Psa. cxix. ^
Wherefore haste y^ hardened our herces / y^ we fear the not? Be at one with us
again, for thy servants sake that are of the generation of thine heritage.
Thy people has had but little of thy Saynctuary in possessy on / for our
enemies have taken it in. And we are become even as we were from the
beginning: but thou art not their Lord, for they have not called upon thy
name.

The Prophet (under the person of the Jews) be wayleth their exple and
banyshement. Man's ryghtuousness is like a cloth fyled with the flowers of a
woman.

CAPI. LXIIII.
O THAT thou would cleue the heaven upon the fire, Whereby thy name might be
known among thine enemies, and that the Gentyles might trymble before the.

That thou myghtest come down with thy wondrous strange works, the^ should
the hills melt at thy presence. For sense the beginning of the world there
was none (except thou O God) that heard or perceived, Cor. ii. b.
neither has any eye seen what thou do for the^, that put their trust in
the. Thou helpest him that does right Romans li^i. b Psa. xiii. a
and there is not one whole.

We are all as an unclean thing, and all our ryghtuousnesses are as the
clothes stained with the flowers of a woman: we fall every chone as the leaf,
for our sins carry

But now O Lord, thou father of ours: Roma. ix. c. Psalm. 79. a
we are the claye, and thou art our potter, and we all are the work of thy
hands. (...)temi. x. d
Be not to sore dyspleased (O Lord) and keep not our offenses to long in thy
remembrance / but consydre that we all are thy people. The Mich. iii. c.
Syon is a wilderness, and Jerusalem a deserte. Our holy house which is our
bewty, where our fathers praised the, is burnt up: ye, al our commodities
and pleasures are wasted away. Wylt thou not be entreated (Lord) for all
this? Wylt thou hold thy peace, and scourge us so sore?

The felycytye of Jerusalem, and the calling of the Heathen.

CAPI. LXV.
Esayc. li. c. Roma. x. a.
THEY seek me, that hitherto have Deuteronomy xii. a. and. xiiii. b.
They make their oblacyons in gardens, and their smoke upon Exodus xx. d.
aulters of brycke, they lurk among the graves, and lie in the dens all
night. Deu. xiiii. a Leui. xi. a.
They eat swynes flesh, and unclean broth is in their vessels. If thou come
nigh them, they say: touch me not, for I am holyer then thou.

All these men when I am angrye, shall be turned to smoke and Mat xxv. d
fire / that shall burn for ever. Behold it is written before my face, and
shall not be forgotten / but reco^pen Iere. vii. a. Esa. 57. a. ^ Eze. xi. d.
I shall reward it them into their bosom: I mean your misdeeds / and the
misdeeds of your fathers together (says the Lord) which have made their
smokes upon the mountains, and blasphemed me upon the hills: therefore will I
measure their old deeds into their bosom again. Moreover, thus says the
Lord Roma. xi. b.
like as when one would gather holy grapes / men say unto him: break it not
of, for it is holy: 3. Reg. 19. c. Roma. ix. c.
even so will I do also for my servants sakes, that I will not destroy them
al. But I will take a sede out of Jacob, and out of Judah one, to take
possession of my hill. My chosen shall possess these things, and my
servants shall dwell there. Saron shall be a shepefolde, and Iosu. vii. d
the valley of A^hor shall give the stallynge for the catell of my people
Prouce. i. c Iere. vii. d.
But as for you / ye are they, that have forsaken the Lord, and forgotten my
holy hill. Ye have set up an altar unto fortune, and given rich drink
offerynges unto treasure. Therefore will I nombre you with the sword, that ye
shall be destroyed all together. For when I called, no man gave me answer:
when I spoke ye herkened not unto me / but did wickedness before mine eyes / and
those the chynge that pleased me not. Therefore thus says the Lord God:
Behold / my servants shall eat / but ye shall have honger. Behold, my
servants shall drink / but ye shall suffer thirst. Behold / my servants
shall be merry / but ye shall be confounded. Behold, my servants shall rejoice
for very quietness of heart: But ye shall cry for sorrow of heart / and
complain for vexacyon of mind. Your name shall not be sworn by among my
chosen, for God the Lord shall sleye you / and call his servants by another
name. Iere. ix. b. i. Cona. i. c. 2. Cor. xi., a
Who so reioyseth upon earth, shall rejoice in the true God: And who so
swears upon earth, shall swear in the true God. For the old emnyte shall be
forgotten / and taken away out of my sight.

ii. Pet. iii. b Apo^. xxi. d.
For lo, I shall make a new heaven, and a new earth. And as for the old, they
shall never be thought upon, nor kept in mind: but men shall be glad and
evermore rejoice, for the things, that I shall do.

For why: Behold, I shall make a joyful Apo^. xxi. a.
And the voice of weeping and waylynge shall not be hard in her from thence
forth. There shall never be child nor old man, that have not their full days.
But when the child comes to an hondreth year old, it shall dye. And if he
that is an hundredth year of age do wrong, he shall be cursed. Deu. 18. ^c
They shall build houses, and dwell in them: they shall plant vyneyardes, and
cate the fruit of them. They shall not build, and another possess, they shall
not plant and another cate: Gene. ii. b. Ier xvii. b. Psalm, i. a.
But the life of my people shall be like a tree, and so shall the work of their
hands. My chosen shall live long, they shall not labor in vain, nor begette
with trouble: for they are the hye blessed sede of the Lord, and their fruits
with them. And it shallbe, that or ever they call, I shall answer them. While
they are yet but thynckynge how to speak, I shall hear them. * The wolffe
and the lamb shall feed together / and the lion shall eat hay like the
bullock.

Esaias. xi. b. Gene. iii. c.
But earth shall be the serpents meat. There shall no man hurt nor sleye
another, in all my holy hill, says the Lord.

God dwells not in temples made by me^nes hand. He despyseth sacryfyces done
without m^t^y and faith. God comfort them that are troubled for his sake.
Among the Christen, the Sabbath is contynuall.

CAPI. LXVI.
THVS says the Lord: 3. Reg. 8. c. (...). Pa, vi. c. Ac ^. vii. f.
Heaven is

Psalm. l. b. Esa. lvii. c. and. lxi. a.
which of them shall I then regard? Even him that is of a lowly troubled
sprete and stands in awe of my words. For who so sleyeth an ox for me,
does me so great dishonor, as he that kylleth a man. He y^ kills a sheep
for me, choketh a dog. He that brings me meat offringes, offreth swynes
blood: Who so makes me a memo

Job. vi. d.
Therefore will I also have pleasure in laughing them to scorn, and the thing
that they fear, will I bring upon them.

Prou^^ i. b Esa. lxv. b.
For when I called, noma^ gave answer: when I spoke, they would not hear: But
did wyckeduesse before mine eyes, and chose the things that displease me.
Hear the word of the Lord all ye that fear the thing which he speaks.
Your brethren that hate you, and cast you out for my names sake, say: Let
the Lord magnyfye him self, that we may se your gladness and yet they
shallbe confounded.

zach (...)
For as touching the city and the

Who ever hard or saw such things? does the ground bear in one day? or
are the people borne all at once, as Syon bears her sons? For thus says
the Lord.

Gene. x(...) 29. f. (...)
Am I he that makes other to bear / and bear not my self? Am not I he that
bears, and makes baren? says thy God. Mat. v. e
Be joyful with her, all ye that mourned for her. For ye shall suck comfort
out of her breasts, and be satysfyed. Yeshall taste, and have delight in the
plenteousnesse of her power. For thus says the Lord: behold, I will let
peace into her, like a water floude, and the might of the Heathen like a
flowynge stream, Then shall ye suck, ye shall be borne upon her sides, and be
joyful upon her knees. For like as a child is comforted of his mother, so
shall I comfort you, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. And when ye se
this, your heart shall rejoice, Pro. x(...) Ez^. ^7, ^.
and your bones shall florysh like an herb.

Thus shall the hand of the Lord be (that be delivered) among the Gentyles:
into Celycia, Affryca and Lidia (where men can handle bows (into Italy also
and Greek land.

Esaias. 49. a lii. a. ix. a. ^ ^^v. a
The Isles far of, that have not herd speak of me, and have not seen my
glory / shall preach my praise among the Gentyles, and shall bring all your
brethren for an offering unto the LORD / out of all people / upon Horses /
Charettes and horse lytters / upon Mules and Carts to Jerusalem my holy hill,
(says the Lord) like as the children of Israel bring the offrynge in clean
vessels, to the house of the Lord.

Esaye. lxi. a 1. Pet^^. 2. a Romans xii. a
And I shall take out certain of them, for to be Priests and Leuytes, says
the Lord. For like as the new Heaven and the new earth which I will make,
shall be fast stablysshed by me: (sayethe the Lord). So shall your sede and
your name continue / and there shall be a new Moan for the other, and a new
sabath for the other and all flesh shall come to worship before me (says the
Lord). And they shall go forth and look upon the caryons of them that have
transgessed against me. Mar. ix. a
For their worms shall not dye / neither shall their fire be quenched / and
all flesh shall abhor them.

: The end of the Book of the Prophet Esaye.
The Book of the Prophet Ieremye.
The stock of Jeremy, and in what time he propheeyed He excuses him self and
would refuse the office of a Prophet (because he is young and vnexperte. He is
taught of the Lord, and becomes bold. God opens unto him, that the
destruccyon of the Jews, by the Babylonyans, to be at hand. Ieremye is
commanded to speak the word of god unto the Jews, without fear.

CAPITV. I.
THese are the Sermons Iere. xi. a
Anathoth in the land of Ben Iamm: when the Lord had first spoken with him,
in the time of Josiah the son of Amon king of Judah, in the. xiij. year of
his reygne: and so during unto the time of Iehoakim the son of Josiah king
of Judah, 4. Reg. 25. a Iere. ^9. a
and until the. x^. years of Zedekyah the son of Iosyah king of Judah were
ended / when Jerusalem was taken, eue^ in the fyfth Month. The word of y^
Lord spoke thus unto me: Esaias. ^4. a and. 46. a Psalm. 7^. a
Before I fasshyoned the in thy mothers womb / I did know the: And or ever
thou wast borne / I santifyed the, and ordained the, Exodi. 4. ^. ^^es. 9. b
Oh Lord God, I am unmeet / For I am yet but young. And the Lord answered me
thus: Say not so / I am to young. Math. x. c
For thou shall go to all that I shall sendethe unto / 1. Corin. ^. a
and what so ever I command the / that shall thou speak. Be not afraid of
their faces / for I am with the / to deliver the / says the Lord.

Psalm. vi. a Iere, 18. a
And With that, the Lord stretched out his hand, and touched my mouth, and said
unto me,

It happened afterward, that the Lord spoke to me again, and said: What
seyst thou? And I said: I do se a seethyng Job xli. b
pot, lokynge from out of the north.

Then said the Lord unto me: Out of Iere. 4. b. and. xxv. b
the North shall come a plage upon all the lers of the land. For lo Abat i. b.
I will call all the officers of the kyngdoomes of the North (says the
Lord.) And they shall come, and every

Ex c. iii. a
And therefore girde up thy loins, arise and tell them al, that I give the in
commandment. Fear them not, I will not have the to be afraied of them. Iere.
xv. b
For behold, this day do I make the a strong fensed town an iron pyller,
and a brazen wall against the whole land, against the kings, and mighty men
of Judah, against the prestes and people of the land. They shall fight against
the, but they shall not be able to overcome the: for I am with the, to deliver
the, says the Lord.

God reherceth his benefytes done unto the Jews. Against Preested and
Prophets, or Preachers that contemn and despise God. The Jews are destroyed,
because they forsake God, and because they can a whore huntyng after Idols.

CAPI. II.
Moreover, the word of the Lord came Iere. x d zatha ii. d.
All they that devour Israel shall offend: mysfortune shall fall upon them /
says the Lord. Hear therefore the word of the LORD, O thou house of Jacob /
and all the generacions of the house of Israel. Thus says the Lord.

What unfaithfulness found your fathers Exodus 14. c
that led us through the wilderness, through a deserte and roughe land /
through a dry and a deadly land / ire, a land that no man had gone through,
and wherein no man had dwelt. Deuteronomy. vi. b
And when I had brought you into a pleasant welbuilded land, ye ye might
enjoy the fruits and all the commodities of the same: ye went forth and
defiled my land, and brought mine heritage to abhominacyon.

The Prestes them selves said not: Where is the Lord? They that had y^ law in
their hands, knew me not: The shepherdes offended against me. The Prophets
did service unto Baal, and followed such things as shall bring them no
profit.

Wherefore, I am constrained (says the

Be astonyshed (O ye heavens) be afraid, and abashed at such a thing,
says the Lord. For my people has done two euyls. They have forsaken me the
well of the Iere. xvii. ^ John. iiii. ^* Exo. iiii. ^
water of life, and dug them pyttes, ye vile and broken pyttes, that can
hold no water. Is Israel a bond servant, or one of the household? Why is he
the^ so spoiled? Why do they roar and cry then upon him / as a Lion? They
have made his land waste / Esaias. i. ^
his cities are so burnt up, that there is no man dwelling in them. Ye, the
children of Noph and Taphnes have defiled thy neck.

Iere. 3 2. ^
Comes not this unto the, because thou haste forsaken the Lord thy God, ever
sense he led the by the way? And what have thou now to do in the way of
Egypt? to drink foul water? Either, what make thou in the way to Assyrya?
To drink water of the floude? Job. xxii. ^
Thine own wickedness shall reprove the, and thy turnynge away shall condemn
the: that thou may know and understand: how evil and hurtefull a thing
it is, that thou haste forsaken the Lord thy God, and not feared him, says
the Lord God of Hosts.

Esaias. 45. ^
I have ever broken thy yoke of old, and burste thy bo^des: yet say thou,
Eze. x. d. Ier^. iii. b
I will no more serve, but (like an harlot) thou ru^nest about upon al hye
hills, and among al grene trees, where as I planted the as a noble vine, and a
good rote. Esaye. v. ^
How art thou turned then i^to a bitter, vnfrutful, and strange grape? Ye /
and that so sore: that though thou wash y^ with Nitrus and make thy self to
sauoure with

Say not now, I am not unclean, and I have not followed the Gods. 4. Re. 17.
b. Ie 4. b and 5 b Esa. lvii. a. Eze. xvi. b.
Look upon thine own ways in the woddes, vallyes and dens: so shall thou
know, what thou have done. Thou art like a swyft Dromedary, that goes easily
his way, and thy wantonness is like a wild Ass, that uses the wilderness,
and that snoffeth and blows at his will. Who can tame the? All they that seek
the, shall not fail, but find the in thine own uncleanness. Thou kepest thy
foot from nakedness, and thy throat from thyrste, and thynkest thus in thy
self: tush: I will take no sorrow, I will love y^ sta^u^ge gods, and hang
upon them.

Like as a thief that is taken with the deed comes to shame, even so is the
house of Israel come to confusion: the comen people, their kings and rulers,
their prestes and prophets. Roma. i. ^.
For they say to a stock, Ie. xxxii d. ^acha. vii, b
ye, they have turned their back upon me, and not their face. ^. Deu. 32. ^
But in the time of their trouble, when they say: stand up, and help us, I
shall answer the^: Where are now thy gods, that thou have made the? bid them
stand up, and help the in the time of need? Iere. xi. b.
For look how many cities thou have (O Judah) so many gods have thou also.
Wherefore then will ye go to law with me, seeing ye all are sinners against
me, says the Lord? It is but lost baboure, that I smite your children for
they receive not my correccyon. 2, Pa. 24. b
Your own sword destroys your prophets / like a devouring lion. If ye
be the people of the Lord, then harken unto his word. Am I then become a
wilderness unto the people of Israel? or a land that has no light? Wherefore
says my people then: we are Lords, we will come no more unto the? Does a
maiden forget her raymente, or a bryde her stomacher? And does my people Deuteronomy.
18. b. Iere. vii. a. Ezech. x^. d Psalm, c^. e.
Upon thy wings is found the blood of poor and innocente people, and that
not in corners and holes only / but openly in all these places. Yet darrest
thou say: I am (* without sin and) gyltlesse. Tush, his wrath can not come
upon me. Behold, I will reason with the, because thou darrest say: I have not
offended. O how evil will it be for the, to abide it: when it shall be
known, now often thou have gone bacwarde? For thou shalt ^e confounded, as
well of Egypt, as of the Assyrians: yea, thou shall go thy way from them, and
smite thine hands together upon thy head. Because the Lord shall bring that
confyde^ce and hope of thine to naught, and thou shall not prospere with all.

God being mercyful calls unto repentance his people, which he had forsaken
for their whordome with Idols. He exorteth Israel to repentance, promising
them shepherdes, that should have the true knoweledge of God. The return of
Israel unto God, confessing their offenses.

CAPI. III.
COmenly, Deuteronomy. 24. a.
when a man puts away his wife / and she goes from him / and maryeth with
another / then the questyon is: should he resort unto her any more after that?
Is not this land then defiled and unclean? Osee. ii. a. Eze. xvi. ^.
But as for the / thou haste played the harlot with many lovers / yet turn
again to me, says the Lord Lift up thine eyes on every side / and look /
if thou be not defiled. Thou have waited for the^ in the ways, and as a
murderer in the wilderness. Through thy whordome and shameful blasphemies, is
the land defiled.

3. Re. 17. a.
This is the cause, that the rain and evening dew has ceased. Thou haste
gotten the an whores forehead / and will not be ashamed. Else woldeste thou
say unto me: O my father / thou art he that haste brought me up / and led me
fro my youth: Wylt thou then put me away / and cast me of for ever? Or will
thou withdraw thy self clean fro me? Nevertheless thou speak such words,
but thou art ever doing worse and worse.

Iere. i. a. Iere. ii. d. 4. Re. 17. b
The Lord said also unto me: in the time of Josiah the king: Haste thou seen
what y^ rebellyo^ Israel has done? how she has run up upon all the hills /
and among al thycke trees, and there played the harlot: have thou seen also
(when she had done all this) how I said unto her: that she should turn
again unto me, and yet she is not returned? Eze. xxiii. b
Judah that unfaithful sister of hers also saw this: Namely / that after I had
well seen the aduoutry of the shrynckynge harlot Israel. 4. Re. 17. a
I put her away / and gave her a byll of deuorcement.

For all this, her unfaithful sister Judah was not ashamed, but went back and
played the whore also. Yea, and y^ noise of her whor dome has defiled the
whole land. For she has committed fornycacyon with stones and stocks.

Nevertheless, her unfaithful sister Judah ^see. v. a.
turned unto me again with her whole heart, but famedly, says the Lord. And
the Lord said unto me: Eze. xvi. ^.
The backslyder Israel is more ryghtuous, then the unfaithful Judah: and
therefore go preach these words toward the north, and say: Thou disobediente
Israel / turn again (says the Lord) and I will not turn my face from you,
for I am merciful (says the Lord) and I will not always Psa. ^iii. a.
bear dyspleasure against the: but on this condicyon that thou know thy
great blasphemy: Namely, that thou have unfaithfully forsaken the Lord thy
God, and have made thy self partaker of strange Gods Iere. v. b. Esaias lvii.
a
under all grene trees, but haste had no will to hear Ez^. ii. c. Osc^. ^4. a
O ye disobedient children, turn again, says the Lord: and I will be
married with you. For I will take one out of the city, and two out of one
generacyon from among you, and bring you in to Syon: and will give you
herdme^ after mine own mind, which shall feed you with lernyng and wisdom.
Moreover, when ye be increased and multyplyed in the land, then (says the
Lord) there shall no more boaste be made of the arcke of the Lords Testament:
Noman shall think upon it, nether shall any man make mencyo^ of it: for from
thence forth it shall nether be bysyted, nor honored with gifts.

Gala. iiii. c
Then shall Jerusalem be called the Lords seat, and all Heathen shall be
gathered unto it / for the name of the Lords sake, whi the shall be set up at
Jerusalem. And from that time forth, they shall follow no more the ymagynacyon
of their own froward Mat. vi^^. ^
and they shall come together out of the North / into the same land that I
have given your fathers. I have showed also / how I took the up being but a
child / and gave the a pleasant land for thine heritage, ye, and a goodly
Host of the Heathen: and how I commanded the / that thou should Math. 23. ^
call me father only, and not to shrynke fro me.

But like as a woman fails her husband / so are ye unfaithful unto me (O ye
house of Israel) says the Lord. Iere. xxxi. ^.
And therefore the voice of the children of Israel was herd on hye / weeping
and waylinge: for they have defiled their way / and forgotten God their Lord.

O ye disobedient children, turn again Osee. xiii. a Act. iiii. (...).
but the health of Israel stands only upon God our Lord. Th^e. ^. (...).
David. (...) Baruch. (...) Iere. x^iii. ^.
Co^fusyon has devoured our fathers labor from our youth up: ye / their
sheep and bullockes / their sons and daughters. So do we also sleep in our
confusion / and shame covers us: Psa ^v^. ^. Esaias. 64. ^ Iudi^. vii^ i. Es^r.
ix. ^* and, x. b.
for we and our fathers from our youth up unto this day have sinned against
the Lord our God / and have not obeyed the voice of the Lord our God.

The true repentounte or returning to God. He exhorts to the circumcisyon of
the heart. The destruccyon of Iewry is prophesied, for the in alyce of their
hertes.

CAPI. IIII.
O Israeel, if thou will turn the / then Ie^ ^^^^
And shall swear: The Lord lives: in truth, in equity and righteousness:
and all people shall be fortunable and joyful in him. For thus says the
Lord / to al Judah and Jerusalem: plowe your land / and sow not among the
thorns. Iere, v^. b* and. ^x. ^.
Be circuncysed in y^ Lord, and cut away the foreskynne of your hertes, al ye
of Judah, and all the indwellers of Jerusalem: I^^c. xi. 5.
that my indignacyon break not out like fire and kyndle / so that no man may
quench it / because of the wyckednes of your ymagynacyons.

Esaias. 58. b
Preach in Judah and Jerusalem / cry out add speak: blow the trompettes in
the land, cry that every man may hear, and say: Gather you together, and
we will go in to strong cities. Set up the token in Syon, speed you / and make
no taryeng: Ieremi. ^. ^
for I will bring a great plage / and a great destruccyon from the north.
For the spoyler of the Gentyles is broken up from his place, as a lion out of
his den / that he may make thy land waste, and destroy the cities, so that
no man may dwell therein.

Wherefore / gyrde your selves about with sack clothe mourn and weep, for
the fearful wrath of the Lord is not withdrawn Deuteronomy. (...). ^
ye shall have peace / and now the swearde goes through their lives? Then
shall it be said to the people and to Jerusalem: Ier^n. i. ^
there comes a warm wind from the north through the way of my people, but
neither to fan, nor to cleanse.

After that shall there come unto me a strong wind, and then will I also give
^hie. 4. a Dam. 7. a
his horsemen are swifter then the Aegle. Woe unto us / for we are destroyed. O
Ierusalaem, Psalm. li. a Esaias. i. c.
wasshe thine heart from wickedness, that thou may be helped. How long shall
thy noisome thoughts remain with the?

For a voice from Dan and from the hyl of Ephraim speaks out, and tells of
a destruccyon. Behold, the Heathen give Jerusalem warning, and preach unto
her / that her destroyers are coming from far countrees. They tell the cities
of Judah the same also, they shall give them warnyng in every place, like as the
watchemen in the field. zatha. 8. ^
For they have provoked me to wrath, says the Lord.

3 Reg. 18. d Iere. ii. c. ^ xliiii. ^.
Thy ways and thy thoughts, have brought the unto this, this is thine own
wickedness and disobedyence / that has possessed thine heart: Ah my belly, ah
my belly (shalt thou cry) how is my heart so sore? my heart pants within
me, I can not be still, for I have herd the cryeng of the from pettes, and
peales of war.

They cry murthur upon murthur, the whole land shall peryshe. Immediately my
tents were destroyed, and my hangynges, in the twynclynge of an eye. How
long shall I se the tokens of war, and hear the noise of the trompettes?

Nevertheless, this shall come upon them Esaias. v. b Baruc. 3 b
because my people is become foolish, and has utterly no understanding.
Osee. 4. d
They are the children of foolyshenesse, and without any discrecion. To do
evil, they have wit enough: but to do well / they have no wisdom. I have
looked upon the earth, and se it was wast and void. I looked toward heaven, and
it had no shine.

I beheld the mountains, and ^o they trembled, and all the nylles were in a
fear. I looked about me, and there was no body, and all the birds of the air
were away. I marked well / and the plowed field was become waste: yea, all
their cities were broken down at the presence of the Lord, and indignacion of
his wrath.

For thus has the Lord said: The

What will thou now do, thou being destroyed? Iere. ii. ^
For though thou clothest thy self with scarlet, and deckest the with gold: 4.
Reg. 9. f
though thou payntest thy face with colors, yet shall thou trym thy self in
vain.

For those that hitherto have been thy great favorers, shall abhor the / and
go about to sley the. For I hear a noise, like as it were of a woman
trauaylynge, or one labourynge of her first child: Even the voice of the
daughter Syon, that casts out her arms, and sowneth, saying: Ah, woe is me /
how sore vexed and faint is my heart, for them that are slain?

In Iewry is there no ryghtuous or faithful man found, either amongst the
people, or the rulers, for whose sake the Lord should spare the city.
Wherefore Iewry is destroyed of the Assyrians.

CAPI. V.
LOOK through Jerusalem / behold Iere. iiii. ^ ^ xii. ^.
For though they can say: the Lord lives, yet do they swear to disceaue:
Where as thou (O Lord) lokest only upon faith and truth.

Thou haste scourged them, but they took no repentance: thou haste corecte
them for amendment / but they refused thy correccyon. They made their faces
harder then a stone, and would not amend.

Therefore I thought in my self: peradventure they are so simple and folish,
that they Deuteronomy. 17. ^
Therefore will I go unto their heads and rulers, and talk with them: if they
know the way of the Lord, and the judgments of our God. But these (in like
manner) have broken the yoke, and burste the bands in sonder.

Deuteronomy. 32. d.
Wherefore a Lion out of the wodde has hurt them, and a wolf in the evening
shall destroy them. The ieoparde does lie lurkyuge by their cytyes / to tear
in pieces all the^, that come therout. For their offenses are many, and their
departing away is great. Should I then for all this have mercy upon the? Thy
children have forsaken me, and Sopho. i. ^
sworn by them that are no Gods. And albeit they were bound to me in
marriage, yet they fall to aduoutrye, and haunt harlottes houses.

In the desire of uncleanly lust they are be come like the stoned horse, Ezec.
xxii b
every man neyeth at his neighbors wife: Iere. ix. a
Should I not correct this, says the Lord.

Should I not be avenged of every people, that is like unto this? Clyme up upon
their walls, beat them down, but destroy them not utterly, cut of their
branches, be cause they are not the Lords. For unfaithfully has the house of
Israel and Judah for saken me, says the Lord. 2. Petr 2. a Iere. ^4. b and.
24. c D^^. xxix c
They have denied the Lord, and said: it is not he. Sopho. 1. c
Tush, there shall no misfortune come upon us, we shall se neither sword nor
hongre. Iere. vi. b and. xx. b
As for the warnyng of the Prophets, they take it but for wind, yea, there is
none of these which will tell them, that such things shall happen unto them.

Wherefore, thus says the Lord God of Esaye. 33. b
The words that are in thy mouth will I turn to fire, and make the people to
be wood, that it may consume them.

Deute. 28. c Baruc. 4. c
Lo, I will bring a people upon you from far, O house of Israel (says the
Lord (a mighty people, an old people, a people whose speech thou know
not / nether understand what they say. Their arrows are sudden death, yea
/ they themselves be very grauntes. This people shall eat up thy fruit and
thy meat, yea, they shall devour thy sons and thy daughters thy sheep and
thy bullockes.

They shall eat up thy grapes and fygges. As for thy strong and well tensed
cities / wherein thou dydest trust, they shall destroy them with the sword.
Iere. xvi. b
Nevertheless I will not then have done with you, says the Lord, But if they
say: wherefore does the Lord our God all this unto us.

Then answer them: Deuteronomy. 28. g
because, that like Esaias. 6. b and Johan. 9. b
ye have eyes, but ye se not: ears have ye / but ye hear not.

Fear ye not me / says the Lord? Are ye not ashamed, to look me in the
face? Job. 26. b ^* xxviii. a
which bind the sea with the sand, so that it cannot pass his bounds: For
though it rage, yet can it do nothing, and though the waves thereof do
swell, yet may they not go over.

But this people has a false and an obstinate

Esaias. lix. ^
Nevertheless, your misdedes have turned these from you, and your sins have
robbed you hereof. For among my people are found wicked persons, that
preuely lay snares and wait for men, to take them and destroy them. And like
as a net is full of birds, so are their houses full of that which Esaye. i. ^.
They minystre not the law / they make no end of y^ fatherles cause, they
judge not the poor according to equite.

Iere. v. b. ^ ix. a
Should I not punish these things, says the Lord? should I not be avenged of
all such people as these be? Horrible and grievous things are done in the
land.

The Prophets teach falsely / and the prestes follow them, and my people
Osee. vii. ^ Roma. i. d
has pleasure therein. What will come thereof at the last.

The sins for which Jerusalem is afflyete. Un^i^^u^cysed years.
Covetousness, Disceate. The Lord rejects the sacryfices of the Jews. The
coming of the Babylonian^ is prophesied again.

CAPI. VI.
COME out of Jerusalem / ye strong 2. Reg. 14 ^
Tecuytes, set up a token unto Bethearam, for a plage and a great misery pepeth
out from the North.

I will lyken the daughter Sion to a fair and tender woman, and to her shall
come the shepherders with their flocks. There tents shall they pitche round
about her, and every one shall feed them yt are under his hand. Make battle
against her (shall they say) Arise, let us go up, while it is yet day.

Alas, the day goes away, and the night

Hew down her trees, and set up bulworkes against Jerusalem. This is y^ city
that must be punished, for in her is al malisiousnes. Like as a co^dyte
abounds in water, even so this city abounds in wyckednes. Robberye and
vnryghtuousnesse is herd in her, sorrow and wounds are ever there in my
sight. Amend the (O Jerusalem) lest I withdraw my heart from the, and make
the desolate: and thy land also, that no man dwell in it. For thus says the
Lord of hosts: The resydue of Israel shall be gathered as the remnaunt of
grapes.

And therefore turn thine hand again Iere. 4. a and. ix. d
Their ears are so uncircumcised, that they may not hear.

Behold, Iere. v. c and. xx. b
they take the word of the Lord but for a scorn / and have no lust thereto
And therefore, I am so full of thine indignacyon, (O Lord) that I may suffer no
longer. But shede it out upon y^ children that are without, and upon all young
men: yea / the man must be taken prysonner with the wife / and the aged with
the crepel. Their houses with their lands and wives shall be turned unto
strangers / when I stretche out mine hand upon the inhabitours of this land
/ says the Lord. Esaias. lvi. c Iere. viii. b
For from y^ least unto the most, they hang al upon covetousness, and from the
Prophet unto the priest / they go all about with falsheede and lies.

Esaias. lvi d Iere. viii. b Ezec. xiii. b
And beside that / they heal the hurt of Iere x. c
And therefore they shall fall among the slain, and in the hour when I shall
vyset them / they shall be brought down / says the Lord.

Thus says the Lord: go into the streates / consydre and make inquisicyon
for the old way: and if it be the good and right way, then go therein / that
ye may find rest for your souls. But they say: we will not walk therein / and
I will set watchemen over Iere. xix. ^
I will cause a plage to come upon this people / even the fruit of their own
ymaginacyons.

For they have not been obedient unto my words and to my law / but abhorred
them Wherefore / Esaias. i. b Iere. vii. c
bring ye me incense from Saba / and sweet smelling Calamus from ^^r
countrees? Your burnt (...) please me / and I rejoice not in your sacrifyces.

And therefore thus says the Lord: behold / I will make this people fall /
and there shall fall from among them / the father with the children / one
neighbor shall perysshe

Thus says the Lord: Iere. 1. c and. v. c Abar. 1. c
Behold / there shall come a people from the North, and a great people shall
arise from the ends of the earth, with bows and with darts shall they be
weapened. It is a rough and fearce people, and an vnmercyful people, their
voice roareth like the sea, they ride upon horses well appointed to the battle
against the, O daughter Sion. The cry of them have we herd. Our arms are
feeble, henynesse and sorrow is come upon us / as upon a woman trauaylynge with
child. No man go forth into the field / no man comes upon the hye street:
for the sword and fear of the enemy is on every side.

Wherefore, gyrde a sack cloth about the Amoz. 8. b
mourn and weep bytterly as upon thy only beloved son. For the destroyer
shall sodaynely fall upon us. The have I set for a prouer of my hard people /
to seek out and to try their ways. Psa xiiii. a and. liii. a Roma. 3. c
For they are all unfaithful and fallen away / they hang upon fylthy lucre /
they are clean brass and iron / for they hurt and destroy every man. The
bellous are burnt in the fire / the lead is consumed / the melter melts in
vain / for the evil is not taken away from the^. Therefore do they call them
naughty silver, because the Lord has cast them out.

Ieremye is commanded to show unto the people the word of God* which
trusts in the outward service of the temple. The euylles that shall happen
to the Jews for the despysynge of their Prophets. Sacryfices does not the
Lord thefely require of the Jews, but that they should obey his word.

CAPI. VII.
THESE are the words that God spoke JEREMY: Iere. 17. b and. xxvi. a
Stand under the gate of the Lords house, and cry out these words there
with a loud voice, and say: Hear the word of the Lord all ye of Judah, that
go in at this door / to worship the Lord. Thus says y^ Lord of Hosts y^
god of Israel. Esaias. i. c Iere. xxvi. c
Amend your ways and your councils, and I will let you dwell in this place.
Trust not in false lieng words, saying: here is the temple of the Lord, here
is the temple of the Lord, here is y^ temple of the Lord.

For if ye will amend your ways and a man and his neighbor: Exodi. 22. ^
zacha. 8. c Leuit. 29 g Job. 24, a
if ye will not oppress the stranger, the fatherless, and the wydowe: if ye
will not shede innocent blood in this place: if ye will not cleue to strange
gods to your own destruccyon: then will I let you dwell in this place / yea,
in the land y^ I gave before time unto your fathers forever. But take heed: ye
trust in councels / y^ begyle you and do you no good. For when ye have
stolen, murdered, committed aduoutry and perjury. When ye have offered unto
Baal / following strange and unknown gods. Then come ye, and stand before
me in this house 3. Reg. 8. 6
(which has my name given unto it) and say: Tushe, we are absolved quyt /
though we have done all these abhominacyons.

Esaias. 59. ^ Job. ^. b
What? think you this house yt bears my name / is a den of thieves? Math.
(...) b I^r^. (...). ^
And these things are not done privily / but before mine eyes / says the
Lord Go to my place in Siloh, Io. xviii a
wheru^to I gave my name before time / and look well Ier. xxvi. (...).
what I did to the same place for the wickedness of my people of Israel. And
now though, ye have done all these deeds (says the Lord) and I myself
rose up ever by times to warn you and to commen with you, yet would ye not
hear me. Prou. i. c.
I called, ye would not answer. And therefore / Esaias. lxv. b Luke. xxi. a
eue^ as I have done unto Siloh, so will I do to this house, y^ my name is given
unto (and that ye put your trust in) ye unto the place that I have given to
you and your fathers. And I shall thrust you out 1. Re. (...)
as I have cast out all your brethren the whole sede of Ephraim.

Ier. 14. b. (...). c 3. Iona. v. c
Therefore, thou shalt not pray for this people / thou shalt neither give
thanks / nor bid prayer for them: thou shalt make no intercession to me for
them, for in no wise will I hear the. Seyst thou not what they do in y^ cities
of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem. Iere. 44. e
The children gather styckes / the fathers kyndle the ^yre / the women kneade
the doughe / to bake cakes for the Queen of Heaven.

They pour out drink offrynges unto strange Gods / to provoke me unto
wrath Howbeit they hurt not me (says the Lord) but rather confou^de / and
shame themselves.

And therefore thus says the Lord God? behold / my wrath and my
indignacyon shall be poured out upon this place / upon men and catell upon the
trees in the field and fruit of the land / and it shall burn so / that no man
may quench it.

Thus says the Lord of Hoostes, the God of Israel: Heap up your Esaias. ^. ^
burnteoffrynges with your sacryfyces / and eat the flesh. Deute. x. ^ Esaias.
4^. ^
But when I brought your fathers out of Egypt, I spoke no word unto them of
burntoffrynges and sacryfyces: but this I commanded them / saying: Exodus xix.
^
harken and obey my voice / and I shall be your God, and ye shall be my people:
so that ye walcke in all the ways / which I have commanded you / that ye
may prospere.

zacha. vii^
But they were not obedyent / they inclyned not their ears there unto, but
went after their own ymaginacions and after the mocyons of their own wicked
heart / and so turned themselves away / and converted not unto me. And this
have they done / from the time that your fathers came out of Egypt / unto
this day.

Iere. 25. a 29. c. 44. a
Nevertheless / I sent unto them my servants all the prophets: I rose up
early / and sent them word / yet would they not harken / nor offer me their
ears, but were obstinate and worse then their fathers. And thou shalt now
speak al these words unto them, but they shall not hear the: thou shalt
cry upon them / but they shall not an swear the. Therefore, shalt thou say
unto them: this is the people, that neither hears the voice of the Lord
their God / nor receaueth his correccyon. Iere. v a
Faythfulnesse and truth is clean roted out of their mouth.

Eze. v. ^
Wherefore cut of thine hearre, and cast it away, take up a complaynte on
hye, for the Lord has cast away, and scatred the people that he is
displeased withal. For the children of Judah have done evil in my sight,
says the Lord. Iere. 32. ^
They have set up their abhominacyo^s, in the house that has my name, and have
defiled it. They have also builded an aultre at Deute. 32. c 4. Reg. 23. ^
Psalm. cvi. ^ Iere. 44. ^
Topheth, which is in the valley of the children of He^nom: that they might
burn their sons and daughters, which I never commanded the^ neither came
it ever in my thought. And therefore behold, the days shall come (says the
Lord) that it shall no more be called Topheth, or the valley of the children of
He^nom, but y^ valley of slaughter, Iere. xix. ^
for in Topheth, they shall be buried, because they shall else have no rowme. Iere.
8. b. ^ ix c
Yea / the dead bodies of this people shall be eaten up of the fowls of the
air and wild bestes of y^ earth, and no man shall fray them away. Iere. xvi.
^ and xxv. d Ezec. xvi. ^
And as for the voice of mirth and gladness of the cities of Judah, and
Jerusalem, the voice of the brydegrome, and of the bryde: I will make them
cease, for the land shall be desolate.

The destruccyon of the Jews. The Lord moves the people to amendment,
reckenynge up their sins. He reprehendeth the lyinge doctrine of the
Prophets and prestes.

CAPI. VIII.
AT THE same time says the Lord D^u. iiii. ^.
Sun / the Moon and all the heavenly host: whom they loved, whom they
served, whom they ran after, whom they sought and worshypped. They shall
nether be gathered together nor buried, but shall lie upon the earth / to their
shame and despysynge.

^^b. xx^^^. ^
And all they that remain of this wicked generacyon, shall desire rather to
dye then to live: whersoeuer they remain / and whereas I scatre them, says
the Lord of hosts. This shalt thou say unto them

Eze. xx. f.
For I have looked, and considered: but there is no man that speaks a good
word there is no man that takes repentance for his sin, that will so much
as say: wherefore / have I done this? But every man (as soon as he is turned
back) runs forth still, like a wild horse in a battayll. The Storke
knows his appointed Esaye. i. a.
but my people will not know the time of the punishment of the Lord. How dare
ye say then: we are wise, we have the law of the Lord among us?

Behold, the dysceatfull pen of the scrybes, sets forth lies: therefore
shall the wise be confounded, they shall be afraid and taken: for lo, D^u. iiii.
a Psalm. xix. a
they have cast out the word of the Lord: what wisdom can then be among
them? Wherefore, I will give their wives

Eze. vi. d.
For from the loweste unto the hyeste / they follow all filthy lucre: and from
the Prophet unto the priest, they deal all with lies. Esaias. lvi. ^ Iere. vi. b.
Eze. xiii. d
Nevertheless, they heal the hurt of my people with sweet words, saying*
peace / peace, where there is no peace at all.

Fie for shame, how abhomynable things do they? and yet they be not ashamed /
ye, they know of no shame,

Iere. vii. d.
Wherefore, in the time of their vysitacyon, they shall fall among the deed
bodies, says the Lord.

Moreover, I will gather them in (says the Lord) so that there shall not be
one grape upon the vine nether one fygge upon the fygge tree, and the leaves
shall be plucte of.

Then will I cause them to depart, and say: why prolonge we the time? Let us

Iere. xiiii. d
We looked for peace, and we fare not the

The noise of his horses is heard from Dan, the whole land is afraied at the
ueyenge of his strong horses: for they are come in / and have devoured the
land, with all that is in it: the cytyes, and those that dwell therein* Leu^.
26. d.
Moreover, I will send Cockatrices and serpents among you (which will not be
charmed) and they shall byte you, says the Lord.

Sorrow is come upon me, and heaviness

The complaynt and bewaylyng of the prophet, the ^^lyce of the people. In the
knowledge of God ought we only to rejoice. The vncyrcumcysyon of the heart.

CAPI. IX.
O Who Es^. xxii. ^
will give my head water enough, and a well of tears for mine eyes: that I
may weep night and day: for the slaughter of my people? Would God that I had
a cotage some where far from folcke / that I might leave my people / and go
from the^: for they be all aduoutrers and a shrynckynge sort. They bend their
tunges like bows, to shute out lies, As for the truth they may nothing
away withal in the world. For they go from one wyckednes to another, and will
not know me, says the Lord. Iere. xii. ^
Ye, one must keep Mat x c. ^ Mith. 7. a.
one brother vndermyneth another, one neighbor begyleth another. Ye, one
dissembleth with another, and they deal with no truth.

Psalm. 28. a.
They have practysed their tunges to lie, and taken great pains to do
myschefe, Thou syttest in the mids of a dysceatfull people / which for very
dissembling falshede will not know me, says the Lord

Therefore / thus says the Lord of Hosts:

Prou. 18. a. Psalm. 28. a.
Their tunges are like sharp arowes, to speak disceate. With their mouth they
speak peacyable to their neighbor / but preuely they lay wait for him.
Iere. v. b.
Should I not punysh them for these things, says the Lord? Or should I not be
avenged of any such people as this? Upon the mountains will I take up a
lamytacyon and sorrowful cry, and a mourning upon the fair playnes of the
wilderness. Namely, how they are so brent up, yt no man goes there any more.
Ye, a man shall not hear Psalm. 79 a. Mith. iii. c.
I will make Jerusalem also an heap of stones, and a den of venymous worms.
And I will make the cities of Judah so waste, that no man shall dwell therein.
What man is so wise, as to understand this? Or to whom has the Lord spoken
by mouth, that he may show this, and say: O thou land, why peryshest thou
so? Wherefore art thou so brynt up, and like a wyldernes, that no man goes
through? Ye, the Lord him self told the same unto them, that forsook his
law / and kept not the thing that he gave them in commandment, nether
lived thereafter: Deu. xxix. b Io. xxiiii. c.
but followed the wickedness of their own hertes, and served strange Gods /
as their fathers taught them.

Therefore, thus says the Lord of Hosts, Deu. xxii. b Ier. xxiii. c.
I will scater the^ also among the Heathen, whom nether they nor their fathers
have known: Deuteronomy. xx. c.
and I will send a swearde among them, to persecute them, until I bring the^
to naught. Moreover, thus says the Lord of Hosts: look that ye call for
mourning wives. and send for wise women: that they come shortly, and sing a
mourning song of you: that ye tears may fall out of our eyes / and that our
eye liddes may gusshe ont of water.

For there is a lamentable noise heard of

But tell thou plainly / thus says the Iere. vii. ^. and. viii. ^.
The deed bodies of men shall lie upon the ground, as the donge upon the field
/ and as the heye after the mower, and there shall be no man to take them up. Thus
says the Lord: Let not the wise man rejoice in his wisdom / nor the strong
man in his strength / nether the rich man in his richesse. Esaye, iv. ^. i.
Cor. i. ^. ii. Cor. xi. ^
But who so will rejoice, let him rejoice in this, that he understands / and
knows me: for I am the Lord, which do mercy, equity and righteousness upon
the earth. Math. ix. d. and. xii. a. Os^e. vi. b.
Therefore, have I pleasure in such things / says the Lord. Behold / the
time comes (says the Lord) that I will vyset all them, whose foreskynne is
vncyrcumsysed. The Egypcia^s, the Jews, the Edomytes, the Ammonytes / the
Moabytes, Iere. xxv. ^. Iere. iiii. a. and. vi. b.
and the shaven Madyanytes, that dwell in the wyldernes. Roma. ii. c.
For all the Gentyles are vncyrcumcysed in the flesh / but all the house of
Israel are vncyrcumcysed in the heart.

The constellacyone of the ^arres are not to be feared.

CAPI. X.
Hear the word of the Lord / that he speaks unto the / O thou house of
Israel: Thus says the Lord. Esa xlvii. c
Ye shall not learn after the manner of the Heathen / and ye shall not be
afraid for the tokens of heaven / for the Heathen are afraid of such: yea /
all the customs and laws of the Gentyles are nothing, but vanite. Esa. 44. ^.
They hew down a tree in the wod with the hands of the worckeman, and
fashyon it with the axe: they cover it over with gold or silver / they fasten
it with nails and ha^mers, that it move not. It stands as stiff as the
palm tree / it can nether speak nor go, but must be borne. Baruc. vi. c 4.
Re. 17. g
Be not ye afraid of such for they can do nether good nor evil. But there is
none like unto the / O Lord, Apoc. xv. a
thou art great, and great is the name of thy power Who would not fear the?
or what king of the Gentyles would not obey the?

For among all the wise men of the Gentyles ^. Reg ix. c
Ophir, a work that is made with the hand of the craftesman and the caster,
clothed with yelowe sylke and scarlet: even so is the work of their wise men
al together. But the Lord is a true God, a living God, and an everlasting
king. Naum. i. a
If he be wroth, the earth shakes: all the Gentyles may not abide his
indignacyon.

As for their gods / it may well be said of them: they are gods, that made
neither heaven nor earth: therefore shall they peryshe from the earth, and from
all things under heaven. But (as for our God) Gene. ^, a
he made the earth with his power, and with his wisdom does he order the whole
compass of the world, with his discrecion has he spread out Psa. 144. a
he draws up the clouds from the vttermoste parts of the earth: he turned
lyghtnynge to rain, and brings forth the wyndes out of their treasures. His
wisdom makes al men fools. And confounded be all casters of images / for
that they cast, is but a vain thing, and has no life. Esaias. i. d. and. 44. b
Iere. vi. c.
The vain craftesmen with their works, that they in their vanite have made,
shall peryshe one with another in the time of visitacyon. Nevertheless /
Jacobs porcyon is no such: but it is he, that has made all things, and
Israel is the rod of his inherytaunce. The Lord of Hoostes is his name. Gather
up thy wares out of the land thou that art in the strong place: For thus
says the Lord: Behold, I will now thrust out the inhabytours of this land a
great way of, and trouble them of such a fashyon / that they shall no more
be found.

Alas / how am I hurt? Alas how paynful are my scourges unto me? For I
consider this sorrow by my self, and I must suffer

Now have I none to sprede out my tente / or to set up my hangynges. For the
herd men have done foolyshly, that they have not Prou. xx. d
Now I know (O Lord) that it is not in man's power to order his own ways /
or to rule his own steps and goynges. Therefore / chasten thou us, O Lord /
but with favor Psalm. vi. a. and. 38. a Esaias. 64. b
and not in thy wrath, bring us not utterly to naught. Psalm. 79. a Eccle. 36. a
Pour out thine indignacion rather upon the Gentyles / that know the not /
and upon the people that call not on thy name. Iere. xxx. c. and. ^. a
And that because they have consumed / devoured and destroyed Jacob, and have
made his habitacion waste.

A curse of them that obey not the word of Gods promise. The people of
Judah following the steps of their fathers, worshyppeth strange Gods. The
Lord says that he will not hear the Jews, and forbyddeth also Ieremye to
pray for them.

CAPI. XI.
THIS is another Sermon, which the Deuteronomy. 27. c. and. 28. b Gala. 3. b.
Cursed be every one that is not obediente unto the words of this covenant:
which I commanded unto your fathers, what time as I brought them out of the
land of Egypt / from the iron furnace / saying: Exodus xix. a
Be obedyent unto my voice / and do according to all that I command you: so
shall ye be my people / and I will be your God, and will keep my promise /
Gene. xv c xxvi. a. and xxviii. c.
that I have sworn unto your fathers. Namely that I would give them a land
which flows with milk and honey, as ye se: it is come to pass unto this day
Then answered I / and said: Amen. Let it be even so Lord / as thou say.

Then the Lord said unto me again / Preach this in the cities of Judah and
round Iere. xiii. b
Nevertheless / they would not obey me / nor enclyne their ears unto me / but
followed the wicked ymaginacyons of their own hertes. And therefore, I have
accused them as transgressors of all the words of this covenant / that I
gave them to keep / which they (notwithstanding) have not kept.

And the Lord said unto me / It is found out / that whole Judah and all these
Cytezyns of Jerusalem are gone back. They have turned them selves to the
blasphemies of their forefathers, which had no lust to here my words. Even
like wise have these also followed strange godde^s, and worshypped them. The
house of Israel and Judah have

Therefore, thus says the Lord: Behold I will send a plage upon them, which
they shall not be able to escape: and though they cry unto me, I will not here
them. ^acha. vii. b
Then shall the towns of Judah, and the citezins of Jerusalem go, and call upon
Deute. ^5. c
their gods unto whom they made their oblacions: but they shall not be able
to help them in time of their trouble. Iere ii. d
For as many cytyes as thou have, O Judah, so many gods haste you had also. And
look how many streets there be in the, (O Jerusalem) so many shameful aulters
have ye set up, to offer upon them unto Baall. Iere. vii. d and. xv. ^
Therefore, pray not thou for this people / bid neither praise nor prayer for
them, for though they cry unto me in their trouble, yet will I not hear them.

O thou beloved, why do thou so shameful great blaphemyes in my house?
eue^ as though Agge. ii. b
that holy flessh might absolve the, specially when thou have made thy boste of
thy wyckednes. Iere. xvii. b Mat. vii. b Roma. xi. c
The Lord called the a grene olyue tree, a fair one, a fruitful one / a
goodly one: but now that there is a contrary report of the abroad, he will
burn the up, and destroy thy branches. For the Lord of Hoostes that planted
the, has devised a plage for the (O thou house of Israel and Judah) for the
evil that ye have done to provoke him to wrath, in that ye did service unto
Baal.

This (O Lord) have I learned of the, and understand it, for thou have showed
me their ymaginacio^s. Esaye. lii. b
But I am (as a mekela^be) that is carried away to be slain, not knowing, that
they had devised such a council against me, saying: Iere. 18. b
We will destroy his meat with wood, and drive him out of the land of the
living: that his name shall never be thought upon. Therefore, Iere xx a and.
xvii. ^
I will beseech the now (O Lord of hosts) thou rightuus iudgeus thou that
triest the raines and the her tes: let me se the avenged of them, for unto the
have I committed my cause. The Lord therefore spoke thus of the cytezins of
Anathoth, that sought to sley me, saying: Esaye. 30. ^ Amos. 7. ^
Preach not unto us in the name of the Lord, or else thou shall dye of our
hands. Thus (I say) spoke the Lord of Hosts. Behold, I will vyset you. Your
young men shall perish with the sword, your sons and your daughters shall
utterly dye of hongre, so that none shall remain. For upon the cytezins of
Anathoth will I bring a plage, even the year of their visitacion.

The Prophet maruayleth greatly at the prosperity of the wicked, all though
he confess God to be ryghtuous. The Jews are forsaken of the Lord. He
speaks against Curates and Preachers that seduce the people. The Lord
threateneth destruccyon unto the nacyons that bordered upon Iewry^, which
troubled and vexed it.

CAPI. XII.
O LORD, thou art more ryghtuous, then that I should dispute with the.
Nevertheless, let me talk with the in things reasonable. Job. xxi. ^ Aba^u^.
i. b Psalm. 73. ^
How happens it, that the way of the ungodly is so prosperous? and that it
goes so well with them, which (without any shame) offend and live in
wickedness? Thou plantest them, they take rote they grow, and bring forth
fruit. They boste much of the / yet do thou not punysh them. But thou Lord
(to whom I am well known) thou that have seen, and proved my heart, ^. P^i^. ^^
take them away, like as a flock is carried to the slaughter house, and
apoynte them for the day of slaughter.

How long shall the land mourn, Iere. 14. ^
and all the herbs of the field perish, for the wyckednes of them that dwell
therein.

The catell and the birds are gone / yet Deuteronomy. xix. ^ Iere. v. ^ and xxiii. ^
Soph. i. ^
God will not destroy us utterly.

Seeing, thou art weary in running with the foot men, how will thou then
run with horses? In a peaceable sure land thou may be safe / but how
will thou do in the furyous pride of Iordane? For thy brethren and thy kynred
have all together despised the / and cried out upon the in thine absence. Iere.
ix. ^.
Believe them not / though they speak fair words to the. As for me (I say)
I have forsaken mine own dwelling place, and left mine heritage. My life also
that I love so well, have I given into the hands of mine enemies. Esaye. ^ix ^
Mine heritage is become unto me, as a Lion in the wod. It cried out upon me,
therefore, have I forsaken it. Mine heritage is unto me, as a speckled bird, a
bird of diverse colors is upon it. Go hence, and gather all the beasts of
the field together, that they may eat it up.

Esa. ^vi. c. Esaias. v. a.
Diverse herdmen have broken down my vineyarde, and trodden upon my portion. Of
my pleasant porcyon, they have made a wyldernes and deserte. They have laid
it waste: and now that it is wast, it sigheth unto me. Ye, the whole land
lies waste, and no man regardethe it. The destroyers come over the heeth every
way, for the swearde of the Lord does consume from the one end of the land
to the other / and no flesh has rest. They have sown wheat and reaped
thorns. They have taken heritage in possession, but it does the^ no good. and
ye shall be confounded of your own wynnynges, because of the great wrath of
the Lord.

Thus says the Lord upon all mine Deuteronomy. iiii. ^. and. xxx. ^. Esa. ^iii. b.
And when I have roted them out I will be at one with the^ again, and I will
have mercy upon them: i. Esdr. ^. a.
and bring them again, every man to his own heritage, and in to his land.
And if they (namely that trouble my people) will learn the ways of them / to
swear by my name. The Lord lives (like as they learned my people to swear
by Baal) then shall they be rekened among my people. Mat. xxii. b
But if they will not obey, then will I rote out the same folk, and destroy
them / says the Lord.

The destruccyon of the Jews is prefygured, and their sparsinge abroad. Why
Israel was received to be the people of God, and why they were forsaken.

CAPI. XIII.
THus says the Lord unto me go thy

Then said the Lord unto me: Thus says the Lord: Even so will I corrupt
the pride of Judah, and the hye mind of Jerusalem. This people is a wicked
people, Iere. vii. ^* xi ^. xviii. a and. xix. c.
they will not hear my word, they follow the wicked ymaginacyons of their
own heart and hang upon strange Gods, them they serve and worship: and
therefore they shall be as this breche, that serves for nothing.

For as straytely as a breche lies upon a man's loins, so straytely did I
bind the whole house of Israel, and the whole house of Judah unto me, says
the Lord: Deuteronomy. iiii. ^ and. xxvi. d Iere. xxx. d.
that they might be my people: that they might have a glorious name: that they
might be in honor: but they would not obey me. Therefore lay this rydle
before them / and say: Thus says the Lord God of Israel: Every pot shall be
filled with wine. And they shall say: thynkeste thou we know not, that every
pot shall be filled with wine? Then shalt thou say unto them. Thus says the
Lord: Behold, I shall fill all the inhabytours of this land with
dronekennes, the kings that sit upon Dauyds stole / the prestes and prophets
/ with all that dwell at Jerusalem. And I will shute them one against another,
ye, the fathers against the sons, says the Lord.

I will not pardon them, I will not spare Iere. xxx^* ^ Threno. ^. a
Pyteously will I weep, and the tears shall gusshe out of mine eyes. For y^
Lords flock shall be carried away captive. Tell the king and the queen:
Humble your selves, set you down low, for the crown of your glory shall fall
from your head: The cytyes toward the southe shall be shut up, and no man shall
open them. All Judah shall be carried away captyue, so that none shall remain*

Lift up your eyes, and behold them, that come from the North. Like a fat
flock shall they fall upon the. To whom wylt you make thy moan, when they come
upon the * for thou haste taught them thy self / and made them masters over
the. Shall not sorrow come upon the, as on a woman trauayllynge with child?
And if thou would say then in thine heart. Wherefore come these things upon
me? Iere. xxi. ^* Esaias. xiii. ^
Even for the multitude of thy blasphemies, shall thy hinder parts and thy
fete be dyscouered. For like as the man of Inde may change hysskynne / and
the cat of the mountain her sportes: so may ye that be exercysed in evil / do
good. Therefore will I scatre you, like as the stoble ye is taken away with y^
south wind. This shall be your portion, and the poreyon of your measure,
wherewith ye shall be rewarded of me, says the Lord: because ye have forgotten
me / and put your trust in dysceatfull things. Iere. xv. b.
Therefore Os^^. ii. d.
shall I turn thy clothes over thy head / and dyscouer thy thyghes / that thy
preuytyes may be seen, thy aduoutry / thy deedly malice, thy beastlynesse, and
thy shameful whordome. For upon the feldes and hills I have seen thy
abhomynacyons. Woe be unto the (O Jerusalem) when will thou ever be cleansed any
more?

Of the dea^the that should come in Iewry. The prayer of the people asking
mercy of the Lord. The unfaithful people are not heard. Of prayer, ^astynge,
and of false prophets that seduce the people.

CAPI. XIIII.
THE word of the Lord showed unto Iere xxiii. b
For the ground is dried up / because there comes no rain upon it. The
plowmen also be ashamed / and cover their heads. The hynde also forsook the
young fawn, that he brought forth in the field / because there was no
grass. The wild Asses did stand in the hye places, and drew in their wind
like the dragons. their eyes did fail for want of grass.

Doutles our own wickedness does reward Esaias. 49. ^ Iere. xvi. ^. and*
xvii. ^*
For thou art the comfort and help of Israel in the time of trouble. Why wylt
thou be as a stranger in the land, and as one that goes over the field, and
comes in only to remain for a night? Why wylt thou make thy self a cowarde
/ and as it were a gyaunt that yet may not help? For thou (O Lord) art in
the mids of us / and thy name is called upon of us: forsake us not. Thus
has the Lord said unto this people: seeing they have had such a lust to
wander abroad, and have not refrayned their fete, and therefore displeased the
Lord: but he will now bring again to remembrance all their misdeeds, and
punysh all their sins. Ye, even thus said the Lord unto me: Iere. vii. ^.
Esaias. ^. ^.
Thou shall not pray to do this people good.

For though they fast, I will not hear their prayers. And though they offer
burnt offrynges and sacryfyces, yet will not I accept them. For I will destroy
them with Iere. v. ^. Soph. ^.
the prophets say unto the^: Tush, ye shall ^. Iere. xi^. ^ and. xxiii. ^.
need to fear no swearde, and no honger shall come upon you, but the Lord
shall give you co^tynuall rest in this place.

And the Lord said unto me: The prophets preach lies in my name, where as I
have not Iere. xx^^^. ^
sent them, nether gave I them any charge, nether did I speak unto the^: yet
they preach unto you false visio^s, charmynge, vanyte / and disceatfulnes of
their own heart. Therefore, thus says the Lord: As for those prophets that
preach in my my name (whom I nevertheless have not sent) and that say:
Tush, there shall no swearde nor ho^ger be in this land. ^^^ha. ^3. ^.
With swearde and with honger shall those prophets perysh, and the people to
whom they preach shall be cast out of Jerusalem, dye of honger, and be slain
with the swearde, Iere. xv^. ^.
(and there shall be no man to burye them) both they and their wives, their
sons and their daughters. For thus will I pour their wickedness upon the^.
This shalt y^ Treno. i. ^. and. ii. ^.
Mine eyes shall weep without ceassynge day and night. For my people shall be
destroyed with great harm / and shall peryshe with a great plage. For if I go
into the field, lo; it lies al full of slain men. If I come into the cyty, lo,
they be all famyshed of honger.

Ye, their prophets also and prestes shall be led into an unknown land.

Haste thou then utterly forsaken Judah? plaged us, that we can be healed
no more? Iere. viii. ^
We looked for peace, and there comes no good: for the time of health, and lo,
here is nothing but trouble. We knowledge (O Lord (all our misdeeds, and the
sins of our fathers, that we have offended the. Be not displeased, (O Lord)
for thy names sake (...). xlix. ^
forget not thy loving kyndnesse. Remember the trone of thine honor, break
not the covenant, y^ thou have made with us. Iere. v. d
Are there any among the Gods of the Gentiles, that send rain or give the
showers of heaven? Do not thou it, O Lord our God in whom we trust? Ye
Lord, thou doste all these things.

The Lord will not hear Moses or Aaron, if they pray for the people, but will
wrape them in many myseryes. The ^^use of such great myseryes.

CAPI. XV.
THEN spoke the Lord unto me: Iere. 7. b. 11 1. and. 14. b Ezec. xi^ii. ^
Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet have I no heart to this people.
Drive them away, that they may go out of my sight. And if they say unto the:
Why there shall we go? then tell them: The Lord gives you this answer.
Ezech. v. ^
Some unto death, some the swearde, some to honger / some into captyuite. For
I will bring four plages upon them, says the Lord. The swearde shall
stra^gle them, the dogs shall devour them, Iere. xvi. a
the fowls of the air / and beasts of the earth shall eat them up, and
destroy them. I will scatre them about also in all kingdoms and lands to be
plaged because of 4. Re. 21. a
Manasseh the son of Hezekia king of Judah, for the things that he did in
Jerusalem.

Who shall then have pity upon the / O Jerusalem? Who shall be sorye for the?
Or Iere. vii. ^
I have wasted my people and destroyed them. Yet they have had no lust to turn
from their own ways I have made their wydowes mo in nombre, then the sa^des,
of the sea. Upon the mothers of their children did I bring a destroyer in the
none day. 1. Tess. 5. a
Suddenly and unawares did I send a fear upon their cities, She that has
borne seven children, has none, her heart is full of sorrow.

(...). b
The Son does fail her in the clear day, she is confounded and faynte for
very heaviness. As for those that cemayne, I will deliver them unto the sword
before their enemies, says the Lord. Iere. xx. d
O mother, alas that ever thou did bear me / an enemy and hated of the
whole land: Though I never lent nor received upon vsurye / yet all men speak
evil upon me. And the Lord answered Iere. xvii. ^ and. xx. ^
As for thy richesse and treasure, I will give them out into a pray not for any
money, but because of al thy sins, that thou have done in all thy costs.
Deute. 32. ^
And I will bring the with thine enemies into a land, that thou know est not /
for the fire that is kyndled in my indignacion shall hurne you up.

O Lord, thou know: therefore remember me, and vyset me, deliver me fro my
persecuters. Receive not my cause in thy long wrath, yet thou know, that
for thy sake I suffer rebuke. Psalm. ^ix. ^ Ezec. iii. a
When I had found thy words / I did eat them up gredely: they Iere. xxi. a
They shall convert unto the, but turn not thou unto them: and so shall I
make the a strong brazen wall against these people. Iere* ^. ^.
They shall fight against the / but they shall not prevail: For I my self will
be with the, to help the / and deliver the says the Lord. And I will ryd the
out of the hands of the wicked, and deliver the out of the hand of Tiraun^es.

He prophecyeth the mysery of the Jews. He shows, that the worshyppynge of
Idols: the contempt of Gods law, is the cause of their myserye. He
prophecyeth the captyuite of Babylon, and their delyu^raunce from thence
again. The calling of the Gentyles.

CAPI. XVI.
THVS said the Lord unto me* Thou that have borne them, and of their fathers
that have begotten them in this land thus says the Lord. * They shall dye an
horrible death, Leuit. r. d Iere, xiiii. c
no man shall mourn for them, nor burye them, but they shall lie as donge upon
the earth. They shall perish through the swearde and honger, Psalm. ^9. a Iere
xv. a
and their bodies shall be meat for the fowls of the air, and beasts of the
earth. For thus says ye Lord: Go not thou in unto the^ nor come to mourn and
weep for the^, for I have taken my peace from this people (says the Lord)
ye, my favor and my mercy. And in this land shall they dye, old and young,
and shall not be buried:

There shall not one viset another, to mourn with them for their dead, or to
comfort them. One shall not offer another the cup of consolacyon, to forget
their heaviness for father and mother. 1. Cor. xv. b
Thou shall not go into their feast house, to sytte down, to eat or drink
with them. For thus says ye Lord of Hosts the God of Israel: Iere. vii. d
and. xv. b.
Behold, I shall take away out of this place, the voice of mirth and
gladness, the voice of the brydegrome and of the bryde: ye, and that in your
days, that ye may se it.

Now when thou show this people al Iere. v. d
Wherefore has the Lord devised all this great plage for us? Or what is the
offense and sin / that we have done against the Lord our God? Then make thou
them this answer: Deuteronomy iiii. d ^ire. vii. d
Because your fathers have forsaken me (says the Lord) and have walked after
strange Gods, whom they have honored and worshypped: but me have they
forsaken, and have not kept my law. Iere. vii. d.
And ye with your shameful blasphemies / have exceaded the wickedness of
your fathers. For every one of you has followed the froward and evil
ymagynacyon of his own heart, and is not obedyent unto me.

Deuteronomy. 28. ^.
Therefore will I cast you out of this land, into a land that ye and your
fathers know not: and there shall ye serve strange gods day and night, there
will I show you no favor. Iere. xxiii. b
Behold therefore (says the Lord) the days are come, that it shall no more
be said: The Lord lives, which brought the children of Israel out of ye
land of Egypt: but, it shall be said, the Lord lives, that brought the
children of Israel from the North, and from all lands where he had scatred
them. For I will bring them again into the land / that I gave unto their
fathers.

Behold (says the Lord) Math. 4. c
I will send Iere. xiiii. a and. xvii
O Lord, my strength, my power / and refuge in time of trouble. The Gentyles
shall come unto the from the ends of the world, and say: Uerely, our
fathers have cleued unto lies, their Idols are but vain and unprofitable. How
can a man make those hes gods, which are not able to be gods? And therefore I
will once teach them, says the Lord, I will show them my hand and my power,
that they may know / that my name is the Lord.

The frowardenesse of the Jews. Curssed be those that put their confydence in
man, and those blessed that trust to God. Man's heart is wicked. God is the
searcher of the heart. The living waters are forsaken. The halowynge of the
Sabbath is commanded.

CAPI. XVII.
YOVRE sin (O ye of the tribe of Judah) is written in the table of your
hertes, Iere. xv. ^ and. xx. ^
Wherefore, I will make al your substance and treasure be spoiled, for the
great sin that ye have done upon your hye places through out all the costs of
your land. Ye shall be cast out also from the heritage, that I gave you. And I
will subdue you under the heavy bondage of your enemies, in a land that ye know
not. For ye have ministered fire to my indignacion, which shall burn ever
more. Thus says the Lord. Psalm. (...) Prove. x^. ^ Iere. ^ivi. ^ and. 48. a*
Eze. xxix. a
Cursed be Psalm. ii. b and. 39. ^ Prou. x^^^. ^
O blessed is the man, that puts his trust in the Lord, and whose hope is
the Lord him self. Psalm. i. a. Prou. xi. d
For he shall be as a tree, that is planted by the water side: which spredeth out
the rote unto moystnesse, who^ the heat ca^ not harm, whe^it comes, but his
lefe shall be grene. And though there grow but little frut because of drouth yet
is he not careful, but he never leaves of to bring forth fruit. Among all
things, man bathe the most disceatfull and vnsexcheable heart.

Who shall then know it? Iere xi. d. ^poca. ii d Psalm. vii. b
Even I the Lord search out the ground of the heart, and try the raynes,
Romans (...). ^.
and reward every man according to his ways, and according to the fruit of
his works.

Pro (...) a Psalm iii. b. Luke xiii. b.
The partriche makes a nest of eggs, but brings forth no young. He comes
by riches, but not ryghteously. In the myddest of his life must he leave them
behind him, and at the last be found a very fool. But thou (O Lord) whose
trone is most glorious, excellent and of most antyquite, which dwell in the
place of our holy rest: Thou art the comfort of Israel. All they that forsake
the, shall be confounded: all they that depart from the, shall be written in earth
Iere. iii. d. Eze. 36 d. John (...). b
for they have forsaken the Lord the very condyte of the waters of life.

Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be hole: Iere xi^i^. a and. xvi. c.
for thou art he in who^ I hope, when I am in parell. Let my persecuters be
confounded, but not me: let them be afraid, and not me. Thou shalt bring
upon them the time of their plage, and shalt destroy them right sore.

Thus has the Lord said unto me: Iere. vii. a. and. xxvi. a
Go and stand under the gate, where through the people and the kings of Judah
go out and in, ye, under all the gates of Jerusalem, and say unto them. Hear
the word of the Lord, ye kings of Judah, and all thou people of Judah, and all
ye cytesyns of Jerusalem, Exodus 23. b. Deuteronomy. v. b.
Take heed for your lives, that ye carry no burden upon you in y^ Sabbath, to
bring it through the gates of Jerusalem: ye shall bear no burden also out of
your houses in y^ Sabbath Ye shall do no labor therein, but halowe the Sabbath,
Exodus xx. b.
as I commanded your fathers. How be it, they obeyed me not neither herkened
they unto me: but were obstynate and stubburne, and neither obeyed me: nor
received my correccyon. Nevertheless, if ye will hear me (says the Lord) and
bear no burden in to the city through this gate upon the Sabbath: If ye will
halowe the Sabbath, so that ye do no work therein: then shall there go through
the gates of this cyt^e, kings and princes, that shall sit upon the stool of
David: They shall be carried upon charettes, and ride upon horses, both they
and their princes. Ye, whole Judah and all the cytesyns of Jerusalem shall go
here through, and this city shall ever be the more and more inhabited. There
shall come men also from the cities of Judah, from about Jerusalem, and from

God shows, by the example of a pott^r, that it is in his power to destroy
the despys^rs of his word, and to help the^ again when they amend. The
conspira^ye of the Jews against Jeremy. His prayer against his aduersary^s.

CAPI. XVIII.
THIS is another co^municacio^, that Esa. xlv. b. Iere. xix. ^. Roma. ix. ^
May not I do with you, as this Potter does, O ye house of Israel, says the
Lord? Be hold, ye house

Eze. xviii. ^ and. 33. ^. Luke. xv. a.
When I take in hand to rote out, to destroy, or to waste away any people or
kingdom Iona^. 3. b.
if that people (against whom I have thus devised) convert from their
wyckednes: I repe^te of the plage, that I devised to bring upon the^. ^. Reg.
xv. f
Again, when I take in hand, to build / or to plant a people or a kingdom:
if the same people do evil before me, and hear not my voice: I repent of the
good: that I devise to do for them. Speak now therefore unto whole Judah: and
to the^ that dwell at Jerusalem. Thus says the Lord: Behold, I am deuysynge
a plage for you, and am taking a thing in hand against you.

Ier. xxv. a. and xxxv. c Iona. iii. b
Therefore let every man turn from his evil way, take upon you the thing
that is good, and do right. But they said. No More of this Ier. xiii. a.
we will follow our own ymaginacions, and do every man according to the
wylfulnesse of his own mind.

Therefore thus says the Lord. Ask Iere. xix. b. and. xlix. c.
So that whosoever trauayleth thereby, shall be abashed, and wagge their heads
with an East wind will I scater them, before their enemy. And when their
destruccyon comes, I will turn my back upon the^, but not my face. Then
said they: Iere. xi. b.
come, let us ymagin sumthing against this Jeremy. For the prestes shall not
be destitute of the law: nether shall the wyseman be destitute of council, nor
the prophets destitute of the word of. God Come, and let us smite him with
the tongue, and let us make all his words. Co^sydre me, O Lord, and hear the
voice of Psalm. cix. a.
shall they recompense evil for god? for they have dygged a pyt for my soul
Iere. x. d.
Remember, how that I stood before the, to speak good for them, and to turn
away thy wrath from them.

Psalm. cix. b ^hren. iii. f
Therefore let their children dye of hunger, and let them be oppressed with the
swearde. Let their wives be robbed of their children, and become wyddowes: let
their husbaundes be slain, let their young men be killed with the swearde in
the field. Let the noise be herd out of their houses, when the murderer
comes suddenly upon them.

Iere. xi. d.
For they have dygged a pyt to take me, and laid snares for my fete. Yet Lord,
thou know all their council, that they have devised, to sleye me. Forgive
not their wyckednes / and let not their sin be put out of thy sight: but let
them be judged before the as the gyltie: This shall thou do unto them in the
time of thy indygnacyon.

He prophecyeth the destruccyon of Jerusalem, for the contempt and despysynge
of the word of God.

CAPI. XIX.
THVS said the Lord: Go thy way 3. Reg. 21. ^. Ieremi. 6. c
Thus says the Lord of Hosts the God of Israel: Deuteronomy. xii d and. 28. b.
Psalm. ^vi. ^ Eze. xvi. c. and. xx. d.
Behold I will bring such a plage upon this place / that the ears of all
that hear it, shall glowe. And that because they have forsaken me / and
unhallowed this place, and have offered in it unto strange gods: whom neither
they / their fathers, nor the kings of Judah have known. They have filled this
place Iere. vii. d.
for they have set up an altar unto Baal, to burn their children for a burnt
offering unto Baal, which I neither commanded / nor charged them, neither
thought once there upon. Behold therefore 3. Reg. 9. b. Ier. xviii. b and.
xxix. c. and. ^. b.
the time comes (says the Lord) that this place shall no more be called
Topheth, nor the valley of the children of Henno^, but the valley of slaughter:
For in this place will I sleye the Senators of Judah and Jerusalem / and kill
them down with the swearde in the sight of their enmyes, and of them that seek
their lives. And their deed carcases will I give to be meat for the fowls of
the air, and beestes of the field. And I will

Three. iiii. b
I will feed them also with the flesh of their sons and their daughters.
Deuteronomy. 28. c. 4. Reg. vi. ^
Ye, every one shall eat up another in the besegynge and straytnesse,
wherewith their enemies (that seek their lives) shall keep them in. And y^
pitcher shall thou break in the sight of the me^, that shall be with the, and
say unto them: Thus says the Lord of Hosts: ^^^. xviii. ^
Even so will I destroy this people and city: as a man breaks an earthen
vessel, that cannat be made whole again.

Iere. vii. d.
In Topheth shall they be buried, for they shall have none other place. Thus
will I do unto this place also, says the Lord, and to them that dwell therein:
ye, I will do to this city as unto Topheth (For the houses of Ireusalem and
the houses of the kings of Judah shall be defiled, like as Topheth) because of all the houses, in whose parlers they did sacryfyce unto all the Hooste of heaven
and powered drink offerynges unto strange gods. And so Jeremy ca^ from
Topheth, where the Lord had sent him to prophecy, and stood in the court of
the house of the Lord, and spoke to all the people: Thus says the Lord of
Hosts the God of Israel: Behold, I will bring upon this city and upon every
town about it, all the plages that I have devised again them: Iere. vii. c.
and. xiii. b.
for they have been obstynate, and would not obey my warnynges.

Jeremy is smytten and east into preson, for preaching of the word of God. He
prophecyeth the captyuyi^e of Babylon. He complayneth that he is a mocking
stoche for the word of God. He is compelled by the sprete to preach the word.

CAPI. XX.
WHen Phashur the priest, the son Job xv^ii. c (...) xxiii. a.
he smote Jeremy and put him in the stocks, that are by the hye gate of Ben
Iamin, in the house of the Lord. The next day following Phashur brought
Jeremy out of the stocks again. Then said Ieremye unto him. The Lord shall
call the no more Phashur (that is excellent and increasynge) but Magor (that is
fearful and afraid) every where. For thus says the Lord: behold, I will
make the afraid, even thy self, and all that favor the: which shall perysh
with the swearde of their enemies, even before thy face.

And I will give whole Judah under the 4. Reg. ix. c Iere. xv. c. and. xvii. a
Moreover, all the substance of this land, all their precious and gorgeous
works, all costlynesse, and all the tresure of the Kings of Judah: will I give
into the hands of their enemies, which shall spoil them, and carry them unto
Babylon. But as for the (O Phashur) thou shall be carried unto Babylon with all
thine household, and to Babylon shall thou come, where thou shall dye, and be
buried, thou and all thy favorers, to whom thou have preached lies. O Lord.
If I am disceaued, the^ have thou disceaued me: thou haste dealte strongly, and
have prevailed, and make me strong again. Three. i^i. b
All the day long am I despised, and laughen to scorn of every man: because
I have now preached long against malycious Tyranny, and showed the^ of
destruccyon. Iere. vi. b.
For the which cause they cast the word of the Lord: in my teeth, and take me
ever to the worst.

Wherefore, I thought from hence forth / not to speak of him, nor to preach any
more Psa. ^xxi. b
I hard so many derisions and blasphemies, ye, even of mine own companions,
and of such as were conuersaunte with me: which went about to make me
afraid, saying, upon him, let us go upon him, to fear him, and make him
hold his tongue: that we may overcome him, and be avenged of him.

But the Lord stood by me, like a mighty gyaunte: therefore my persecutours
fell, and could do no thing. They shall be sore confounded, for they have
done unwisely / they shall have an everlasting shame.

Iere. xi. d.
And now, O Lord of Hosts, thou righteous sercher (which know the reins
and the very hertes:) let me se the^ punished, for unto the I commytte my cause.

Sing unto the Lord, and praise him, for he has delivered the soul of the
oppressed, Job. iii. a. Iere. xv. b.
Cursed be the day, wherein I was borne, unhappy be the day wherein my mother
brought me forth. Cursed be the man, that brought my father the tydinges, to
make him glad / saying: thou haste gotton a son. Let it happen unto that
man, as to the cities Gene. xix. c
which the Lord turned up side down (when he had heard long the wicked
rumoure of them) because he slew me not / as soon as I came out of my mothers
womb / and because my mother was not my grave her self, that the birth might
not have come out but remained still in her. Job. x. c.
Wherefore came I forth of my mothers womb? To have experience of labor and
sorrow? and to lead my life with shame?

CAPI. XXI.
He prophecieth that zadekiah shall be taken, ^ the city burned.

THESE are the words y^ the Lord Iere. 37. a.
what time as king Zedekiah sent unto him Phashur the son of Melchias, and
Sophonias, the son of Maasias priest, saying. 4. Re. ^2. b. 2. Par. 1^. a
Ier. xlii. a.
Ask council at the Lord (we pray the) of our behalf, for Nabuchodonosor
the king of Babylon besegeth us, if the Lord (peradventure) will deal with
us, according to his marvelous power, and take him from us. Then spoke Jeremy,
Give Zedekias this answer. Thus says the Lord God of Israel: behold, I
will turn back the weapens that ye have in your hands, wherewith ye fight
against the king of Babylon and the Caldees, which besege you round about
the walls, and I will bring them together into the myddest of this cyrie, and
I myself will fight against you, with an outstretched hand, and with a
myghtie arm, in great displeasure and terrible wrath: and will smite them,
that dwell in this city: ye, both men and catell shall dye of a great Iere.
39. a
And after this (says the Lord) I shall deliver Zedekias the king of Judah,
and his servants, his people (and such as are escaped in the city, from the
pestilence, swearde, and honger (into the power of Nabuchodonosor king of
Babylon: Ye, into the hands of their enemies into y^ hands of those that
follow upon their lives, which shall smite the^ with the swearde, they shall not
pytie them, they shall not spare them, they shall have no mercy upon them.

And unto this people you shall say. Thus says the Lord: Deu. xxx ^.
behold, I lay before you the way of life and death. Iere. 27. a. and. 38.
a.
Who so abides in this city, shall perish: either with the swearde, with
honger, or with pestilence. But who so goes out to hold on the Chaldees
part, that besege it, he shall save his life, and shall win his soul for a
pray.

Ie^. xxxii. a
For I have set my face against this city (says the Lord) to plage it, and
to do it no good. It must be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and
be brent with fire. And unto the house of the king of Judah, say thus: Hear
the word of y^ lord (O thou house of David) for thus says the Lord: Esaye.
i. ^. Ier. xxii. a. zacha. vii. b
Ministre ryghteousnes and that soon, deliver the oppressed from violente
power Iere. iiii. a
or ever my terryble wrath break Iere. 48. a.
Behold (says the Lord) I will come upon you, that dwell in the valleies,
rocks and feldes, and say.

Deu. xx^x. ^ Iere. v. b. 12. a. 14. b and. 23. c. Sophi. ^* c.
Tush: who will make us afraid? or who will come into our houses? For I will
vyset you (says the Lord) because of the wyckednes of your inuencyons, and
will kyndle, such a fire in your wod, as shall consume all that is about you.

He exorteth the King of Judah to judgment and ryghteousnes. Why Jerusalem to
brought into captyuyte. The death of Selum the son of Joshua is prophesied.

CAPI. XXII.
THus said the Lord, Goo down into Esaye. ^. t. Iere. xxi. ^. zacha. vii. d
keep equity and righteousness, deliver the oppressed from the power of the
vyolent: do not grieve nor oppress the stranger, the fatherless nor the
wyddowe, and shed no innocent blood in this place. And if ye keep these
things Esaye. i. ^. Iere. 51. ^. Hebr. vi. b.
I swear by mine own self (says the Lord) this house shall be waste For
thus has the Lord spoken upon the kings house of Judah. Thou Gilead art unto
me the head of Libanus. Shall I not make the so waste (and thy cities also)
that no man shall dwell therein? I will prepare a destroyer with his weapens for
the, to hew down thy special Cedre trees, and to cast them in the fire.

And all the people that go by this city / Deu. ^9. ^. 3. Reg. ix. b
Wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this noble cyty. Then shall it be
answered: Deuteronomy. 29. ^. 3. Reg. 9. b. 4. Re. ^3. b. 2. Pat. 7. d
because they have broken the covenant of the Lord their God / and have
worshyped and served strange Gods.

4. Reg. 23. ^
Mourn not over the deed, and be not woe for them, but be sorry for him that
departs away: for he comes not again, and sees his native country no
more.

For thus says the Lord, as touching. ii. Pa. iii. ^
Selum the son of Josias king of Judah which raygned after his father / and
is carried out of this place. He shall never come hither again, for he shall dye
in y^ place, whereunto he is led captive, and shall se this land Esay^. v. c
Agge. i. a.
Woe worth him, that builds his house with unrighteousness, and his parlers
with the good that he has gotten by vyole^ ce: which never reco^penseth his
neighbors labor, nor pays him his hyre. He thinks in himself. I will
build me a wide house, and gorgeous parlers. He causes windows to be hewn
therein, and the sylynges and ioystes makes he of Cedre, and paynteth the^ with
Smaper. Thynkest thou to raygne, now that thou prouokest me to wrath with the
Cedre trees.

Did not thy father eat and drink, and prospere well, as long as he dealte
with equite and ryghtuousnesse? Ye, when he helped the oppressed and poor to
their right, then prospered he well.

From whence came this / but only because he had me before his eyes, says
the Lord? Nevertheless, as for thine eyes and thine heart, they look upon
covetousness, to shed innocent blood, to do wrong and vyolence. 4. Reg. 23. c
and. 24. a Iere. 36. d
And therefore, thus says the Lord against Iehoakim, y^ son of Josias king
of Judah. They shall not mourn for him (as they use to do) alas brother, alas
sister. Nether shall they say unto him. Alas sir / alas for that noble prince.
But as an Ass shall he be buried, corrupt and be cast without the gates of
Jerusalem.

Clyme up the hill of Libanus (O thou daugter Syon) lift up thy voice upon
Basan, cry from all parts: for all thy lovers are destroyed. I gave the
warning, while thou waste yet in prosperity. But thou saydest: I will not
here. And this manner have thou used from thy youth, that thou would never
hear my voice. All thy herdmen shall be driven with the wind, and thy
derlynges shall be carried away into captivity. Then shall thou be brought to
shame and confusion, because of al thy wickedness: thou y^ dwell upon Libanus
/ and make thy neste in the Cedre trees Esaye. 13. ^ and. x^^i. a Iere. xii.
b and. xxx. a
O how great shall thy mourning be, when thy sorrows come upon the as a woman
trauaylynge with child.

4. Re. 24. b
As truly as I live (says the Lord) Though Conanias the son of Iehoakim
king of Judah were the sygnet of my right hand, yet will I pluck him of. And
I will give the into the power of them that seek to sleye the, and into the
power of them that thou fear: into the power of Nabuchodonosor the king of
Babylon, and into the power of the Caldees. Moreover, I will send the, and thy
mother that bare the, into

O thou earth / earth / earth, hear y^ word of the Lord. Thus says the
Lord: write this man among the outlawes, for no prosperity shall this man have
al his life long, Neither shall any of his sede be so happy / as to sit upon
the seat of Dauyd, and to bear rule in Judah.

He speaks against evil Curates that make havoc of the flock of the
Lord. Of the co^u^rsyon of the remenaunt of the Jews to the faith. The
coming of the true shepherde Christ is prophesied. Against false Prophets.
When a Prophet preaches the word of God, God co^uerteth the hertes of the
hearers. Against Prophets that preach lies under the name of God. The
Miracles of false Prophets.

CAPI. XXIII.
WOE BE Ezec. 34. a
unto the shepherdes Iere. 33. c
Behold the time comes says the Lord / that I will raise up the *
ryghtuous branch of Dauyd / Esaias. xi. ^
which shall bear rule / and discuss matters with wisdom, and shall set
up equite and righteousness again in y^ earth

In his time shall Judah be saved / and Israel shall dwell without fear. And
this is the name that they shall call him, Deuteronomy. 33. c
even the Lord our ryghtuousnesse. 1. Corin. i. d
And therefore Iere. xvi. c
behold / the time comes, says the Lord, that it shall no more be said:
the Lord lives / which brought the children of Israel out of the land of
Egypt: But the Lord lives / which brought forth / and led the sede of the
house of Israel, out of the North land and from al countrees where I had
scatred them, and they shall dwell in their own land again.

My heart breaks in my body because of the false prophets / al my bones
shake: I am become like a dronken man (that by the reason of wine ca^ take no
rest) for very fear of the Lord, and of his holy words: Because the laud is
full of aduoulterers and through swearyng it mourns Iere. xiiii. a
and the pleasant pastures of the deserte are dried up. Ye, y^ way that me^
take, is wicked, and their governance

I have seen also among the Prophets of Jerusalem foul aduoutry, and
presumptuous lies. They take the most shameful men by the hand, flattering
them, so that they can not return from their wyekednes. All these with their
citesyns are unto me, as Sodom, and as the inhabytours of Gomorre.

Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts concerning the Prophets: Iere. ix. b
Behold / I will feed them with wormewod, and make them drink the water of
gall. For from the Prophets of Jerusalem is ypocrysye come into all the land.

And therefore the Lord of Hosts gives Iere. 27. b and. xxix. b
Hear not the words of the Prophets, that preach unto you / and disceaue
you, for they speak the meaning of their own heart, and not out of the mouth
of the Lord. Iere. xii. a And. xiiii. b Sopho. i. c
They say unto them, that despise me: The Lord has spoken it: Tush: ye shall
prospere right well. And unto all them, that walk after the lust of their own
heart, they say: Tush, there shall no mysfortune happen you. For who has
sitten in the council of the Lord, that he has herd and understand, what he
is about to do? Who has marked his deuyse, and herd it? Iere. xxx. d.
Behold / the stormye wether of the Lord (that is, his indignacion) shall go
forth, and shall fall down upon the head of the ungodly. And the wrath of the
Lord shall not turn again, until he perform and fulfill the thought of
his heart. Iere. xxx. d.
And in the latter days ye shall know his meaning.

I have not sent these Prophets (says the Lord) and yet they ran. Iere.
xiiii. b
I have not Psalm. 139. a Ezech. 8. b
Am I then God that seyth but the thing / which is nigh at hand, and not that
is far of? says the Lord. Psalm. 139. a Amos. ix. a
May any man hyde him self so / that I shall not se him? says the Lord.
Esaias. 66. a Acts. vii. ^ and. xvii. d
Do not I fulfill heaven and earth? says the Lord. I have herd well
enough, what the Prophets say / that preach lies in my name, saying: I
have dreamed / I have dreamed. How long will this continue in the Prophets
heart / to tell lies / and to preach the craftye sotyltye of their own
heart? Whose purpose is (with the dreams that every one tell) to make my
people forget my name / as their forefathers did / when Baal came up. The
Prophet that has a dream / let him tell it 2. Lori. 4. a 1. Petr. 4. ^
and he that understands my word / let him show it faithfully.

For what has chafe and wheat to do together? says the Lord. Is not my
word

If this people, other any prophet or pressed ask the and say: what is the
burden of the Lord? Thou shall say unto the^. What burden? Therefore will I
cast you fro me (says the Lord) because ye your selves are a burden. And
the Prophet, pressed or people that uses this term (the burden of the Lord)
him will I vyset, and his house also

But thus shall ye say, every one to another. What answer has the Lord
given? or what is the Lords commandment? And as for the burden of the Lord,
ye shall

Thus shall every man say to the Prophets: what answer has the Lord given
the? Or / what says the Lord? And not once to name the burden of the Lord.
Therefore thus says the Lord. For so much as ye have used this term (the
burden of the Lord) where as I not withstanding sent unto you, and forbadde
you to speak of the Lords burden.

Behold therefore, I will repute you as a burden, and will cast you out of my
presence: ye, and the city also, that I gave you and your fathers: and will
bring you to an everlasting confusion, and into such a shame / as shall never
be forgotten.

The vysyon of the two pannyers of fygges. The first vysion sygnifieth that
part of the people should be brought again from captiuyte. The second, that
zedekyas and the rest of the people should be destroyed.

CAPI. XXIIII.
THE Lord showed me a vysion: Behold, there stood two maundes of fygges 4.
Re. 24. d
Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon had led away captyue Iechonias the son of
Iehoakim king of Judah / the mighty men also of Judah, with the work masters,
and conning men of Jerusalem / unto Babylon. In the one maunde were very good
fygges / even like as those that be first ripe In the other maunde were very
naughtye figs, which might not be eaten, they were so evil. Then said the
Lord unto me: what seyst thou Jeremy? I said Osee. ix. b
fygges, whereof some be very good, and some so evil / that no man may eat them.

Then came the word of the Lord unto Deuteronomy. 29 (...) Iure. xxx. d 31, f. 1.
32. e
And I will give them an heart to know, how that I am the Lord. They shall be
my people, and I will be their God, for they shall return unto me with their
whole heart.

(...) xxix. c
And like as thou knoweste the naughty fygges, which may not be eaten, they
are so evil: Even so will I (says the Lord) let Zebekias the King of Judah,
(ye and al his princes, and the residue of Jerusalem that remain over in this
land, and them also that dwell in Egypt) to be vexed and plaged in all
kingdoms and lands. And will Psalm. 79. ^ ^atuc. 3. a
reprofe, a comen by word a laughyng stock and shame / in all the places where
I shall scatre them. I will send the swearde, honger, and pestilence among
them / until I have clean consumed them out of the land / that I gave unto
them / and their fathers.

Jeremy prophecyeth that they shall be in capituyte. lxx. years, because they
cont^iuned and dispysed the word of God He shows that after. lxx. years the
Babeloni^ris should be destroyed. The destruction of all ^aryone to propheried.
He moves the Preastes of the nacyons to waylings.

CAPI. XXV.
A SERMON that was given unto

From the thyrtene year of Josias the son of Amon King of Judah, unto this
present day (that is even. xxii^. year) the word of the Lord has been
committed unto me. Iere. xxix. c and ^5 c. ^ xxxviii. ^
And so I have spoken to you, I have risen up early / I have given you
warning in season / but ye would not hear me. 2. Par. 36. ^
Though the Lord has sent his servants, all the Prophets unto you in
season. Yet would ye not obey, ye would not enclyne your ears to hear.

He said 4. Reg 17. ^
turn again every man from his evil way / and from your wyeked
ymaginacions / and so shall ye dwell for ever in the land / that the Lord
promised you and your forefathers. And go not after strange Gods, serve them
not / worship them not, and anger me not with the works of your hands:
then will not I punyshe you. Nevertheless / ye would not hear me (says the
Lord) but have defied me with the works of your hands / to your own great
harm.

Wherefore thus says y^ Lord of hosts: Jeremy. ^. b
Because / ye have not herkened unto my word, lo / I will send out, and call
for all the people / that dwell in the North, says the Lord, and will
prepayre Nabuchodonosor the king of Esaias. ^. ^ Iere. xvii. ^
Babylon my servant / and will bring them upon this land, and upon all that
dwell therein / and upon all the people that are about them / and will utterly
rote them out. I will make of them a wilderness a morkage, and a continual
deserte.

Iere lvii, b. and. xvi. b.
Moreover, I will take from them the the anointed / with the cresshettes: and
this whole land shall become a wilderness, and they shall serve the said
people and the king of Babylon, threscore years and ten. 2. ^a. 36 d 1. Esd.
1. a Iere. v. c and. ^9. b Dani. ix. ^. zotha. 1. b
When the. ixx. years are expired, I will vyset also the wickedness of the
King of Babylon and his people says the Lord: ye / and the land of the
Caldees / and will make it a perpetual wyldernes, and will fulfill al my
words upon that land / which I have devised against it: ye, all that is
written in this book / which Jeremy has prophesied of al people: so that
they also shall be subdued unto diverse nacyons and great kings Job. 34. b
for I will recompense them according to their deeds and worckes of their
own hands.

For thus has the Lord God of Israel spoken Esaias li d Psalm. 75. b
wine cup of indignacyon fro my hand / that thou may cause all the people,
to whom I send y^ / for to drink of it: that when they have droncke^ thereof
/ they may be mad / and out of their wits, when the swearde comes / that I
will send among them. Then took I the cup from the Lords hand, and made
all the people drink thereof / unto whom the Lord had sent me.

But first the city of Jerusalem / and all the cities of Judah, their kings
and Princes: to make them desolate / waste / despised and cursed / according as
it is come to pass

Therefore say thou unto them: This is the commandment of the Lord of hosts
the God of Israel: Drink and be dronken Iere xlix b Ezech. ix. b 1. Petr, 4. ^
I begin to plage the city / that my name is given unto: think ye then /
that I will leave you unpunished? Ye shall not go quite. For why, I call for a
swerd upon all the inhabitours of the earth, says the Lord of Hoostes.

Therefore tell them all these words, and say unto them. Joel. iiii. c ^mos.
i. a
The Lord shall cry from above, and let his voice be herd from his holy
habytacyon. With a great noise shall he cry from his court regal, He shall
give a great voice (like the grape gatherers) and the sou^de thereof shall be
herd unto the ends of the world. For the Lord has a judgment to give upon
all people. and will hold his court of justice with all flesh, and punysh
the ungodly / says the Lord.

For thus says the Lord of Hoostes. Iere. xxx. d


Mourn (O ye shepherdes) and cry: sprinkle yourselues with ashes / O ye
Rams of the flock: for the time of your slaughter is fulfilled, and ye
shall fall like vessels connyngly made for pleasure.

Psa. 142^
The shepherdes shall have no way to fly, and the Rams of the flock shall
not escape. Then shall the shepherdes cry horrybly / and the Rams of the
flock shall mourn? for the Lord has consumed their pasture / and their
best feldes lie dead because of the horrible wrath of the Lord. They have
forsaken their foldes like as a Lion. For their land is wast / because of his
fearful indignacion.

Ieremye moves the people to amendment. He is taken of the Prophets and
Priests, and brought to judgment. Uryah the Prophet is killed of Ioachim,
contrary to the will of God.

CAPI. XXVI.
IN THE beginning of the raygne IVDA / came this word from the Lord /
saying: Thus says the Lord: Iere. vii. ^ and. xvii. ^
Stand in the court of the LORDS house / and speak unto all them which
(out of the cities of Judah (come to do worship in the Lords house, all the
words that I command the to say. Deu. iiii. a. and. xii. b.
Look that thou keep not one word back / if (peradventure) they will harken,
and turn every man from his wicked way: Iere. 18 a. John. iii. b
that I may also repent of the plage, which I have determined to bring upon
them, because of their wicked inuencyons.

And after this manner shalt thou speak Iere. vii. a.
as I did unto Siloh, and will make this city to be abhorred of all the people
of the earth. And the preastes, the prophets and all the people herd Ieremye
preach these words, in the house of the Lord.

Now when he had spoken out all the words, that the Lord commanded him to
preach unto the people, then the prestes, y^ prophets and all the people took
hold upon him, and said: thou shall dye. How darrest thou be so bold, as to
say in the name of y^ Lord: it shall happen to this house as it did

And when all the people were gathered about Jeremy in the house of the Lord,
the princes of Judah herd of this rumor, and they came soon out of the kings
Palace into the house of the Lord / and sat them down before the 4. Re. xv g
Iere. ^6. b.
new door of the Lord. Then spoke the prestes and the prophets John. xix. a
M^t. 26. g.
This man is worthy to dye, for he has preached against this city, as ye
youreselues have herd with your ears.

Then said Jeremy unto the rulers and to all the people: The Lord has sent me
to preach against this house and against this cyty all y^ words that ye have
herd. Therefore amend your ways, and your aduysementes, and be obedient
unto the voice of the Lord your God: so shall the Lord repe^te of the plage /
that he had devised against you. Now as for me: I am in your hands do with
me, as ye think expedient and good. But these shall ye know: if ye put me to
death / Math. 23. 3
ye shall make youreselues, this city and all the inhabytours thereof / gyltye
of innocent

Then said the rulers and the people unto the prestes and prophets. This man
may not be condemned to death, for he has preached unto us in the name of the
Lord our God. The Elders also of the land stood up* and said thus unto all the people: Micheah the Morasthite, Mich. ^. a.
which was a prophet under Ezekiah king of Judah, spoke to all the people of
Judah: Thus says the Lord of Hosts: Mich. iii, ^
Sion shall be plowed like a field, Jonas. 3. ^
but rather feared the Lord, and made their prayer unto him. For the which
cause also the Lord repented of the plage, yt he had devised against the^.
Should we the^ do such a shameful deed against our souls: 3. Reg. 22. d
Iehoakim the king with all the estates and princes had herd his words, the
king went about to sleye him. 3. Reg. 19. ^ Math. 1^. c.
When Uriah perceived that, he was afraied and fled, and departed into Egypt.

Then Iehoakim the king sent servants into the land of Egypt, Namely:
Elnatha^ the son of Achbor and certain men with him into Egypt, which
fetched Uriah out of Egypt, and brought him unto king Iehoakim, that slew him
with the swearde, and cast his deed body into the comen peoples grave. But
Ahikam the son of Saphan helped Jeremy / that he came not into the hands of
the people to be slain.

Jeremy, at the commandment of the Lord / sends bonds to the king of Judah
/ and to the other kings that were nigh, whereby they are monyshed to become
subjects unto Nabuchodonosor. He warns the people and the kings and rulers,
that they believe not false Prophets.

CAPI. XXVII.
IN THE beginning of the reygne bid them say unto their masters: Thus says
the Lord of Hosts the God of Israel, speak thus unto your masters: Deuteronomy. x.
t.
I am he that made the earth, the me^, and the catell that are upon the
ground, with my great power and outstretched arm, and have given it unto
whom it pleased me. ^rcl^. x. ^. Iubit. xi. d. Ie. xxxii. ^.
And now will I deliver all these lands into the power of Nabuchodonosor y^
king of Babylon Da^i, iiii. ^ Iere. xxv. d
my sernaunte. The beasts also of the field shall I give him to do him
service. Iere. xxi. ^. 38. a. 42. c,
And al people shall serve him, and his son, and his chylders children / until
the time of the same land be come also: ye, many people and great kings
shall serve him.

Moreover, that people and kingdom which will nat*serue Nabuchodonosor / and
that will not put their necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon: the same
people will I vyset with the swearde, with honger, with pestylence, until I
have consumed the^ in his hands, says the Lord. Ie 23 c. 29d
And therefore follow not your Prophets, sothesayers expounders of dreams /
charme^s and wytches / which say unto you: ye shall not serve the king of
Babylon. For they preach you lies: to bring you far from your land, and
that I might cast you out, and destroy you. But the people that put their
necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him, those I will let
remain still in their own land (says the Lord) and they shall occoupye it
/ and dwell therein.

All these things told I Zedekiah the Iere. 38. ^.
Put your necks, under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him and his
people, that ye may live. Why wylt thou and thy people peryshe with the
swearde, with honger, with pestylence: like as the Lord has devised forall
people, that will not serve the king of Babylon? Iere. xxii. c Iere. 39. d.
Therefore give no ear unto those Prophets (that tell you: Ye shall not serve
the king of Babylon (for they preach you lies, neither have I sent them /
says the Lord: howbeit they are bold, falsely to prophesye in my name: that
I might the sooner drive you out / and that ye might perysh with your
preachers. I spoke to the Prestes also, and to all the people: Thus says the
Lord: Hear not the words of those Prophets that preach unto you, and say:
Behold, Iere. 28. ^.
the vessels of the Lords house shall shortly be brought hither again from
Babylon: For they prophecye lies unto you. Hear them not, but serve the king
of Babylon, that ye may live. Wherefore will ye make this city to be destroyed?
But if they be true Prophets in very deed, and if the word of the Lord be
committed unto them, then let them pray the Lord of hosts, that the remnaunte
of the ornaments (which are in the house of the Lord, and remain yet in the
house of the King of Judah and at Jerusalem) be not carried to Babylon also. For
thus has the Lord of hosts spoken concerning the pyllers, the lauer, the
seat and the resydue of the ornaments that yet remain in this city / which
Nabuchodonosor the King of Babylon took not, 4. ^e. 24. ^.
when he carried away Iechoniah the son of Iohoakim King of Judah, with all
the power of Judah, and Jerusalem / from Jerusalem, unto Babylon / captyue.

Ye / thus has the Lord of Hoostes the God of Israel spoken, as touching
the resydue of the Ornametes of the Lords house of the king of Iudaes house,
and of Jerusalem: 4. ^e^. 25. ^
They shall be carried unto Babylon, and there they shall remain until I vyset
them says the Lord. ^. ^^d. i. ^*
Then will I bring them hither again. And this was done in the same year, e^e^
in y^ beginnynge of the reygne of Zedekiah*kynge of Judah.

The false Prophecye of Hananiah the Prophet. Ieremye shows that the
prophecye of hananiah is false, by the example of the other Prophets. He
being inspyred of the Lord reproves Hananiah, prophecyinge ^y^ death.

CAPI. XXVIII.
BUT in the fourth year of the raygne of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fyfth
Month, It happened, that Hananiah the son of Assure the prophet of Gybeon,
spoke to me in the house of the Lord / in the presence of the prestes and of
all the people / and said: Thus says the Lord of hoostes the God of Israel:
I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon, ^^^^. (...). ^.
and after two year Will I bring again into this place / all the ornaments
of the Lords house / that Nabuchodonosor king of babylon carried away from
this place unto Babylon. Ye, I will bring again Ie choniah the son of
Iehoakim the king of Judah him self, with all the presoners of Judah (that are
carried unto Babylon (even into this place, says the Lord, for I will break
the yoke of the king of Babylon.

Then the prophet Jeremy gave answer and before all the people that were
present in the house of the Lord. (...). iii. ^,
And the prophet Jeremy said: Amen, the Lord do that / and grant the thing
which thou haste prophesied: that he may bring again all the ornaments of the
Lords house, and restore all the presoners from Babylon in to this place.
Nevertheless / harken thou also / what I will say, that thou and all the people
may hear: The prophets that were before us in times paste / which
prophesied of war / or trouble / or pestylence / either of peace / upon many
nacyons and great kingdoms / were proved by this (if God had send the^ in
very deed) Deuteronomy. ^8. d. (...), xvi. ^.
when the thing came to pas: which that prophet told before And Hananiah the
prophet took the chain Iere. xxix. ^
Hear me Hananiah: The Lord has not sent the / but thou bring this people
into a false belefe. And therefore thus says the Lord: behold / I will send
the out of the land / and within a year thou shall die, because thou have
falsely spoken against the Lord. So Hananiah the prophet dyed the same year
in the seventh Month.

The pystle of Jeremy / sent unto them that were in captyuyte in Babylon. He
prophecyeth their return from captyuytys after. ixx. yearc^. He prophecyeth
the destruccyon of the king and of the people that remained in Jerusalem. He
threatens. ii. Prophets that seduced the people. The death of Semeiah the
Nehelamyte i^ prophesied.

CAPI. XXIX.
THESE are the words of the book / that

Thus has the Lord of hosts the God Ie. xxxv. d.
build you houses to dwell therein: pla^te you gardens, that ye may enjoy the
fruits thereof: Gene. i. d. and. ix. a.
take you wives, to bear you sons and daughters, provide wives for your
sons and husbands for your daughters yt they may get sons and daughters,
and yt ye may multiplye there. Labor not to be few, but seek after peace and
prosperity of y^ city, wherein ye be presoners, Baruc. i. c. i. Ei^o. ^. ^
and pray unto the Lord for it. For in the peace thereof, shall your peace Ier.
xxiii. f. and. xxvii. d
Let not those prophets and sothsaiers that be among you disceaue you: and
bele ue not your own dreams. For why, Iere. xiiii. d
they preach you lies in my name, and I have not sent them, says the Lord.
But thus says the Lord: ^. ^ar. 36. d Iere. xxv. d i. E^dr. i. a.
When ye have fulfilled. lxx. years at Babylon, I will bring you home, and of
mine own goodness I will carye you hither again unto this place. For I know
what I have devised for you, says the Lord. My thoughts are to give you
peace, and not trouble (which I give you all redye) and that ye might have hope
again. Deu iiii. c. and* xxx. ^.
Ye shall cry unto me, ye shall go and call upon me, and I shall hear you.
John. vii d
Ye shall seek me and find me / ye / if so be that ye seek me with your whole
heart, I will be found of you (says the Lord) and will deliver you out of
prison / and gather you together again out of al places, where in I have
scatred you, says the Lord: and will bring you again to the same place /
from whence I caused you to be carried away captyue. But where as ye say /
that God has raised you up prophets at Babylon: Thus has the Lord spoken
to the king that sits in the stole of David, and to all the people that
dwell in this cyty, your brethren 4. ^e. 24. d
that are not gone with you in to captyuite. Thus (I speaks the Lord of
hoostes: Behold Iere. 14. b.
I will send a swearde, honger and pestilence upon them, and will make them
like untimely fygges, that may not be eaten for bitterness. And I will persecute
them with the swearde, with honger and death.

I will deliver them up to be vexed of all kingdoms, to be cursed, abhorted,
laughed to scorn, and put to confusyon of all the people, among whom I have
scatred them: and that because they have not been obedyente unto my
commandments (says the Lord) which I sent unto them by my servants y^
prophets. Iere. xxv. a and. 44. n.
I stood up early, and sent unto them / but they would not hear / says the

For they have not only defiled their neighbors wives, but also preached
lyeng words in my name / which I have not commanded them. This I testyfy /
and assure / says the Lord. But as for Semeiah the Nehelamyte thou shalt
speak unto 4. Reg. xi* a ^* Pa. 23. a.
Iehoiada the priest / that thou shuldeste be the chief in the house of the
Lord above al prophets / and preachers, and that thou might put the^ in
preson, or in the stocks. How happens it then, that thou have not reproved
Jeremy of Anathoth / which never leaves of his prophecyige. And beside all this
/ he has sent us word Iere. 29. c.
unto Babylon / and told us plainly / that our captyuyte shall long endure:
that we should build us houses to dwell therein, and to plant us gardens that we
might enjoy the fruits thereof.

Which letter Sophoniah the pressed did read, and let Jeremy the prophet hear it.

Then came the word of the Lord unto Ier. 28. c.
Because that Semeiah has prophesied unto you without my commission, and
brought you in to a false hope / therefore thus the Lord does certyfye you:
Behold / I will vyset Semeiah the Nehelamite, and his sede: so that none of his
shall remain among this people, and none of them shall se the good, that I
will do for this people / says the Lord. For he has preached falsely of
the Lord.

The return of the people from Babylon. God by his chastenyng the shows
that the people so sinful. The destruccyon of the enemies of Israel.

CAPI. XXX.
THESE are the words, that the Iere. xxx. ^
Write up diligently all the words, that I have spoken unto the, in a book.
For, io, the time comes (says the Lord) that I will bring again the
presoners of my people of Israel and Judah, says the Lord: For I will
restore them unto the land / that I gave to their fathers / and they shall have
it in possessyon*

Again / these words spoke the Lord / concerning Israel and Judah: Thus
says the Lord: We have heard a terryble erye / fear and dysquietnes. For
what else does this signifye / that I se? Namely / that all strong men smite,
every man his hand upon his loins, Iere. xlii. ^
as a woman in the pain of her travail. Who ever saw a man travail with
child? Enquere theafter, and se. Ye / all their faces are marvelous pale.

Alas for this day, which is so dredefull / that none may be lykened unto it:
and alas for y^ time of Jacobs trouble, from the which he shall yet be
delivered. For in the day says E^e. 34. d.
Dauyd their king / whom I will raise up unto them. Iere. 46. ^.
And as for tho / O my servant Jacob / fear not (says the Lord) and be not
afraid / O Israel. For lo I will help the also from far / and thy sede from
the land of their captiuyte.

And Jacob shall turn again / he shall be in rest, and have a prosperous life
and no man shall make him afraid. For I am with the, to help the, says the
Lord. ^^^^. ix. b
And though I shall destroy all the people, among whom I have scatred the,, yet
will I not destroy the, but correct the, Iere. ^. ^
and that with dyscrecyon. For I know, that thou art in no wise Exodus 34. ^
Nah^^^. i ^
without fau^e. Therefore thus says the Lord. I am sorry for thy hurt and
wounds.

All thy lovers have forgotten the / and care nothing for the. For I have given
the a cruel stroke / and chastened the roughly / and that for the multitude of
thy misdeeds for thy sins have had the over hand. Why makeste thou moan
for thy harm? I myself have pity of thy sorrow, Iere. xiii. ^
but for the multitude of thy misdeeds and sins / I have done this unto the.

Iere. ii. ^ ^. 1* ^
And therefore all they that devour the / shall be devoured, and al thine enemies
shall be led into captivity. All they that make the waste, shall be wasted
themselves, and al those that rob the, will I make also to be robbed. For I
will give the thy health again and make thy wounds whole, says the Lord:
because they reuyled the, as one cast away and despised, O Syon.

For thus says the Lord: Behold, ^^. 24. a
I will set up Jacobs tents again, and defend his dwelling place. The city
shall be builded in her old estate, and the houses shall have their right
foundacyon. And out of them shall go thankesgeuyng, and the voice of joy.

I will multiple them / and they shall not be few. I shall endue them with
honor / and no man shall subdue them. Their children shall be as a fore time,
and their congregation shall continue in my sight. And all those that vex
them, will I vyset.

Mith. v. a*
A captain also shall come of them, and a prince shall spring out from the
myddest of them: him will I challenge to myself, and he shall come unto me. John.
vi. ^
For what is he, that gives over his heart to come unto me? says the Lord.
Iere. xiii. b ^4. b. ^1 ^
Ye shall be my people also / and I wylbe your God. Iere. xxiii* ^ and. xxv. d
Behold, on the other side shall the wrath of the Lord break out as a
stormye water as a mighty whyrle wind: and shall fall upon the heads of the
ungodly.

The terryble dyspleasure of the Lord shall not leave of / until he have done,
and performed the intent of his heart / Iere. 23. ^
Which in the latter days ye shall understand. At the same time (says the
Lord) shall I be the God of all the generacyons of Israel, and they shall be my
people.

CAPI. XXXI.
He prophetyeth that the people of Israel shall be resto^ed again unto their
prosperity. To be turned from sin is the gift of God. The birth of Christ
is prophesied. All the wicked shall dye in their wyckednes. The new testament
and couenaunte so prophesied. The Christen art taught and instruct of the
Lord. Out sins shall so be remytted, that they shall not ones be thought
on. God promyseth that he will cast of the Jews. The building again of
Jerusalem.

THVS says the Lord: Nume. 13. c
The people of Israel which escaped in the wilderness from the swearde,
found grace to come into their rest. Even so shall the Lord now also appear
unto me from far, and say: I love the with an everlasting love, therefore do I
sprede my mercy before the. I will repair the again (O thou daughter of
Israel) y^ thou may be fast and sure, Thou shall take thy tabrettes again,
and go forth with them / that led the dance.

Thou shalt plant vynes again upon the hills of Samaria / and the grape
gatherers shall plant / and sing.

And when it is time / the watchmen upon the mount of Ephraim shall cry: Esaye.
ii. ^
Arise, let us go up unto Syon to our Lord God / for

They departed from hence in heaviness / but with joy will I bring them hither
again. I will led the^ to the ryuers of water in a straight way / where they
shall not stomble: Deuteronomy, 33. a
For I am Isreal's father / and Gene. 47. ^
Ephraim is my first borne.

Hear the word of the Lord, O ye Gentiles, preach in the Isles, that lie far
of, and say: he that has scatred Israel, shall gather him together again,
and shall keep him as a shepherde does his flock. For the Lord has redeemed
Jacob, and ryd him from the hand of the vyolent. And they shall come / and
rejoice upon the hyl of Syon / and shall have plentuousnes of goods / which
the Lord shall give the^: Namely / wheat / wine / oil, young sheep and
calves. And their conscience shall be as a well watered garden, for they shall no
more be hongrye.

Then shall the maid rejoice in the dau^ce, ye / both young and old folks.
For I will turn their sorrow into gladness, and will comfort them and make
them joyful, even from their hertes. I will pour plentuousnes upon the hertes
of the prestes / and my people shall be satisfied with my goodness / says the
Lord.

Thus says the Lord, Iere. iii. ^ Math. iii ^
The voice of heaviness / weeping, and lamentacion was herd on hye: even of Rachel
mourning for her children, and would not be comforted, be cause they were away.

But now says the Lord: leave of from weeping and cryenge, witholde thine
eyes from tears, for thy labor shall be rewarded / says the Lord. And they
shall come again out of the land of their enemies: Ye / even thy posterytie
shall have consolacyon in this (says the Lord) that thy chyldre^n shall come
again in to their own land.

Moreover I herd Ephraim (that was led away captive) complain on this manner:
Eze^. xx. ^
O Lord, thou have correct me, and thy chastenynge have I received, as an
untamed calfe. ^ren^. ^. ^ z^tha. 1. a
Convert thou me / and I shall be converted, for thou art my Lord God: Ye /
as soon as y^ turnest me / I shall refourme my self: and when I understand, I
shall

Upon this complaynt, I thought thus by my self / G^n^. 4^. b
is not Ephraim my dear son Is he not the child / with whom I have had all
mirth and pastyme? For sense the time that I first commened with him / I have
him ever in remembrance: therefore my very heart drives me unto him, gladly
and lovingly will I have mercy upon him says the Lord. Get the watchmen,
provide teachers for the / set thine heart upon y^ right way, that thou
should walk / and turn again. O thou daughter of Israel turn again to
these cities of thine. How long wylt thou go astraye. O thou shrynkynge
daughter? For the Lord will work a new thing upon earth. A woman shall
compass a man.

For thus says the Lord of hosts the God of Israel / It will come thereto / yt
when I have brought Judah out of captivity, these Esaias. 42. a
bryde grome of ryghtuousnesse, make the fruteful O thou holy hill: And there
shall dwell Judah / and all her cities, the shepherdes and husband men: For
Math. v. a and. xi. ^
I shall feed the hongry soul, and refreshe all faynte hertes. When I herd
this I came again to my self, I mused, like as I had been waked out of a
sweet sleep.

Behold (says the Lord) the days come that I will sow the house of Israel
and the house of Judah, with me^ and with catel. Deuteronomy. 28. ^ Iere. 32. ^ zacha.
8. ^.
Ye / it shall come thereto / that like as I have gone about in times past to
rote them out, to scatre them / to break them ^^wne / to destroy them and
chasten them: Even so will I also go diligently abonte, to build them up
again and to plant them / says the Lord.

Ezec. 18. ^
Then shall it no more be said: the fathers have eaten a sour grape, and the
childrens teth are set on edge: for every one shall dye for his own misdede, so
that who so eats a sour grape, hes teth shall be set on edge

Hebr. viii. b
Behold, the days come (says the Lord) that I will make a new covenant
with the house of Israel and with the Hebre. x. b
But this shall be the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel
after those days / says the Lord. Esays. li. b.
I will plant my law in the inward parts of them, and write it in their
hertes, Iere. 24. b and. xxx. d
and will be their God / and they shall be my people.

And from thence forth shall no man teach his neighbor or his brother, and
say: know the Lord: But they shall all know me, from the lowest unto the
highest, says the Lord. For I will forgive their misdeeds / and will never
remember their sins any more. Thus says the Lord which gave the ^^ne. ^.
b.
son to be a light for the day / and the Moon and Stars to shine in the
night: which moves the sea, so that the flou des thereof wax fearce: his name
is the Lord of hosts. Like as this ordinance shall never be taken out of my
sight, says the Lord: So shall the sede of Israel never cease, but always be a
people before me.

Moreover, thus says the Lord: like as the heaven above can not be measured,
and as the fou^dacions of the earth beneth may not Roma. xi. ^
So will I also not cast out the whole sede of Israel, for that they have
committed, says the Lord. Behold the days come says the Lord, yt the
city of yt Lord shall be enlarged from the ^. Esor. 3. n. zacha. 14. b
tower of Hananeel, unto the gate of the corner wall. From thence shall the
right measure be taken before her unto the hylltoppe of Iere. xix. b.
Gareb, and shall come about Gaath, and the whole valley of the dead
karcases, and of the ashes, and all the feldes unto the broke of Cedron: and
unto the corner of the horsegate toward the East / where as the Saintuarye of
the Lord also shall be set. And when it is now builded / and set up of this
fasshyon it shall never be broken, nor cast down any more.

Ieremye is cast in to preson, because he prophesied that the city should be
taken of the King of Babylon, By the field that Jeremy bought at the
commandment of the Lord, is sygnyfyed, that the people should come again to
their own possessyon. The people of God are his servants, and he is their
Lord. To fear God is Gods gift, to thyntent that sins may be eschued.

CAPI. XXXII.
THESE words spoke the Lord unto Iere. 34. a. and. 38. ^. xxxix. a
Behold: I will deliver this city in to the hands of the king of Babylon,
which shall take it. As for Zedekiah the king of Judah, he shall not be able
to escape the Caldees, but surely he shall come into the hands of the king of
Babylon: which shall speak with him mouth to mouth, and one of the^ shall look
another in the face. And Zedekiah shall be carried unto Babylon, and there shall
he be, until the time that I viset him says the Lord. But if thou take in
hand to fight against the Caldees, thou shall not prospere.

And Jeremy said: thus has the Lord spoken unto me: Behold, Hananeel the
son of Selum thine Uncles son shall come unto the / and require the to
redeem the land / that lies in Anathoth unto thy self / Ie^y. 25. d. Number.
27. ^ xxxxi. d. ^uth iiii. a
for by reason of kindred it is thy right to redeem it, and to bye it out.

And so Hananeell mine uncles son came to me in the court of the prison
(according to the word of the Lord) and said unto me, Bye my land (I pray
the) that lies in Anathoth in the country of Ben Iamin: for by heritage thou
have right to lowse it out for thy self / therefore redeem it. Then I
perceived, that this was the commandment of the Lord, and so I bought the
land from Hananeel of Anathoth, mine Uncles son / and weyed him there the
money: even seven sycles, and ten silver pens.

I caused him also to make me a writing and to seal it, and called record
thereby, and weyed hi^ there the money upon the wayghtes.

I charged Baruch also before the^: saying The Lord of Hosts the God of
Israel commands the, to take this sealed euydence with the copye, and to lay
it in an erthen vessel, that it may long continue.

For the Lord of Hoostes the God of Israel has determined, that houses,
feldes and vyneyardes shall be possessed again in this land.

Now when I had delivered the euyde^ce unto Baruch y^ son of Neriah, I
besought the Lord, saying: O Lord god, Gene. i. ^. Iere. 1^. b
It is thou that have made heaven and earth with thy great power and hye arm,
and there is nothing Exo. 34. ^.
Thou show mercy upon thousands, thou reco^pencest the wickedness of the
fathers, into the bosom of y^ children that come after them.

Thou art the great and mighty God / whose name is the Lord of Hosts: great
in council, and excellent in work. Thine eyes look upon all the ways of men's
children, Roma. ii. a
to reward every one after his ways, and according to the fruits of his
inuencions: Exo. vii. unto the. 1^ Chaptre
Thou have done great tokens and wonders in the land of Egypt (as we se this
day) upon the people of Israel and upon those men to make thy name great, as
it is come to pass this day: Thou have brought thy people of Israel out of
the land of Egypt, with tokens, with wonders, with a mighty hand, with a
stretched out arm and with great terryblenes: and have given them this land,
like as thou had promised unto their fathers: Namely, that y^ would give
them a land, that flows with mylcke and honye.

Iud. ii. iii. iiii. vi. vii.
Now when they came therein, and possessed it / they followed not thy voice, and
walked not in thy law, Hist. v. b
but all that thou commaundedest them to do, that have they not done, and
therefore come all these plages upon them.

Behold, there are bulwarks made now against the city, to take it: and it
shall be won of the Caldees that besege it, with swearde / with honger and
death, and look what thou have spoken, that same shall come upon them.

For lo, all things are present unto the Yet say thou unto me (O Lord
God) and

Then came the word of the Lord unto me saying: Behold, I am the Lord God of
all flesh, is there any thing then to hard for me? Therefore thus says the
Lord: Iere. xxv. b (...). ^. ^
be hold, I shall deliver this city into y^ power of the Caldees, and into the
power of Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon / they shall take it. For the
Caldees shall come, and win this city, and set fire upon it / and burn it:
with the gorgyous houses, in whose parlers they have made sacryfyce unto Baal,
and poured drink offerynges unto strange Gods, to provoke me unto wrath.

For seying the children of Israel, and the children of Judah have wrought
wickedness before me ever from their youth up, what have they else done, but
provoked me with the works of their own hands? says y^ Lord.

Or, what has this city been else, but a provoking of my wrath, ever sense
the day that they builded it, unto this hour? wherein I cast it out of my
sight, because of the great blasphemies of the children of Israel and Judah,
which they have done to provoke (...)
me: ye, they, their kings, their princes / their Prestes, their Prophets,
the men of Judah, and the cytesyns of Jerusalem.

Iere. ii. d
When I stood up early, and taught the^ and instructed the^, they turned their
backs to me, and not their faces. They would not hear, to be reformed and
correct Iere. vii. d
but set their Idols in the house / that is hallowed unto my name, to defyle
it. They have builded hye places for Baal in the valley of the children of
Hennom, to bow their sons and daughters unto Moloch: which I never
commanded them, neither came it ever in my thought, to make Judah sin with
such abhominacion.

And now therefore / thus has the Lord God of Israel spoken, concerning
this city, which (as ye your selves confess (shall be delivered in to the
hand of the king of Babylon, when it is won with the sword / with honger
and with pestilence: Deuteronomy. xx^^
Behold I will gather them together from al lands wherein I have scatred them
in my wrath in my fearful and great displeasure: and will bring them again
unto this place, where they shall dwell safely. And they shall be my people, and
I will be their God.

Psalm. ^^^^
And I will give them one heart and one way, that they may fear me all the
days of their life, that they and their children after them may prospere.
Ezec. 36. ^
And I will set up an everlasting covenant with them. Namely, that I will
never cease to do the^ good and that I will put my fear in their hertes so
that they shall not run away from me.

Deuteronomy. 33. ^ Iere. xx^^. ^
Ye, I will have a lust and pleasure to do them good, and faithfully to plant
them in this land, with my whole heart, and with all my soul.

For thus says the Lord: like as I have brought all this great plage upon
this people: so will I also bring upon them all the good, that I have promised
them. And men shall have their possessions in this land whereof ye say now,
that it shall neither be inhabited of people nor of catel, but be delivered
into the hands of y^ Caldees: Ye, land shall be bought for money, and
euydences made thereupon and sealed before witnesses in the country of Ben
Iamin, and round about Jerusalem: in the cities of Judah / in the cities y^ are
upon the mountains, and in them that lie beneth / ye / and in the cities that
are in the Southe. For I will bring their presoners hither again, says the
Lord.

The Prophet is monyshed of the Lord, to pray for the delyueraunce of the
people, which the Lord promyseth. God forgeueth sins and does graciously to
the people, for his own renown. Of the birth of Christ. The kingdom of
Christ in the Church shall never be ended.

CAPI. XXXIII.
MORE OVER the word of the Lord Iere. (...). ^ xxxii. a
when he was yet bound in the court of the preson: Thus says the Lord /
which fulfylleth the thing that he speaks / the Lord which perfourmeth the
thing that he takes in hand: even he, whose name is the Lord: E^^. xiiii. ^
1. Reg. vii ^
cry unto me / and I will answer: and show the great and hye things /
which were unknown unto the.

Thus (I say) spoke the Lord God of Israel, concerning the houses of this
city, and the houses of the kings of Judah: that they shall be broken through
the ordinance and weapens / when the Caldees come to besege them: and they
shall be filled with the deed karcases of men / whom I will steye in my wrath and
dyspleasure: when I turn my face from this city, because of all her
wyckednes. Behold, (says the Lord) I will heal their wounds and make them
whole: I will open the^ the treasure of peace and truth. And I will return
the captyuyte of Judah and Israel: and will set them up again: as they were
before. Esa. xiiii. ^
From all misdeeds (wherein they have offended against me) I will cleanse the^:
And al their blasphemies which they have done against me, when they regarded me
not, I will forgive Iere. vii. d
In this place, whereof ye say that it shall be a wilderness / wherein neither
people nor catell shall dwell: in like manner in the cities of Judah and without
Jerusalem (which also shall be so void / that nether people nor catell shall
dwell there) Shall the voice of gladness be hard again, the voice of the
Brydegrome and of the bryde, the voice of the^ that shall sing (: Psalm. 118. a
1. Mat. 4* d
Praise y^ Lord of Hosts / for he is loving and his mercy endures for ever)
and the voice of them that shall offer up gifts in the house of the Lord. For
I will restore the captyuyte of this land, as it was before / says the Lord.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts It shall come yet thereto / that in this land,
which is void from men and catell / and in all the cities of the land, there
shall be set up shepherdes cotages: in the cities upon the mountains: and in
the cities that lie upon the plain / and in the cities of the southe. In the
land of Ben Iamin / in the feldes of Jerusalem / and in the cities of Judah
shall the sheep be nombred again / under the hand of him / that tells Ier.
xxiii. ^
Behold, the time comes / says the Lord / that I will perform that good
thing / which I have promised unto the house of Israel and to y^ house of
Judah. In those days and at the same time, I will bri^ge forth unto David, the
branch of ryghtuousnes, and he shall do equity and ryghtuousnesse in the
land. In those days shall Judah be helped Esa xxxii. c
and Jerusalem shall dwell safe, and he that shall call her is even God our
ryghtuousnesse. For thus the Lord promeseth: 2. Reg vii. c
David shall never want one, to sit upon the stole of the house of Israel: 1.
Reg. ii. ^.
neither shall the prestes and Leuytes want one to offer all way before me
burnt offeringes, to kyndle y^ meatofferynges, and to prepare the sacrifyces.

And the word of the Lord came unto Gene viii d
which I have made with day and night be broken, that there should not be
day and night in due season? Then may my covenant also be broken, which I
made with David my servant, and so he not to have a son to reygne in his
Trone, 1. Pet. ii. a.
so shall also the prestes and Leuytes never fail, but serve me. Gene. xv. b
and. xxii. c.
For like as the stars of heaven may not be nombred, neither the sand of
the sea measured: so will I multiplye the sede of David my servant, and the
Levites my mynisters.

Moreover, the word of the Lord came to Jeremy, saying: Consydrest thou not
what this people speaks? Two kynreddes (say they) had the Lord chosen, and
those same two has he cast away. For so far is my people come, that they
have no hope to come together any more / and to be one people again. Therefore
thus says the Lord: If I have made no couenaunte with day and night, and
give no statute unto heaven and earth: the^ will I also cast away the sede of
David my servant: so that I will take no prince out of his sede, to rule the
posterite of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. But yet I will turn again their
captyuite, and be merciful unto them.

He threateneth that the city, and the king zedekiah also, shall be given into
the hands of the king of Babylon. He rebukes them that brought such of their
brethren into captiuyte, as were pardoned to go at their lybertye.

CAPI. XXXIIII.
THESE are the words which the Ier. xxxix. ^
what time as Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon, and all his Hosts (out of
all the kingdoms that were under his power) and al his people, fought against
Jerusalem and all the cities thereof. Thus says the Lord God of Israel: Goo,
and speak to Zedekiah the king of Judah, and tell him. The Lord sends the
this word: Behold, 4. Re. 25. a. Ier. xxxi^ a. and xxxix. a
I will deliver this city in to the hand of the king of Babylon, he shall
burn it, and thou shalt not escape his hands, but shalt be led away
presoner, and delivered into his power. Thou shall look the king of Babylon in
the face, and he shall speak with the mouth to mouth, and then shall thou go
to Babylon. Yet hear the word of the Lord, O Zedekiah thou king of Judah:
Thus says the Lord unto the: Thou shalt not be slain with the swearde, but
shall dye in peace. i. Re. xxxi. c
Like as thy fore fathers the kings, thy progenitors, were burnt: so shall
thou be brent also, and in the mourning they shall say: Oh Lord. For thus
have I determined, says the Lord.

Then spoke Jeremy the prophet all these words unto Zedekiah king of Judah in
Jerusalem: what time as the king of Ba bylons hooste beseged Jerusalem, and
the remnaunt of the cities: Namely, Lachis and 2. Dat. xi. a
strong defensed cities of Judah.

These are the words that the Lord spoke unto Jeremy the prophet, when
Zedekiah was agreed with all the people at Jerusalem, that there should be
proclaimed Exo. xxi. a. ^eui. xxv. f. Deu. xv. b.
a lyberty: so that every man should let his servant and handmayde go fre,
Hebrew and Hebruesse, and no Jew to hold his brother as a bond man. Now as
they had conseted, even so they were obedient, and let them go fre. But
afterward they repented, and took again the servants and haude mayde^s,
whom they had let go fre and so made them bond again. For the which cause
Deuteronomy xv c ^ Exo. 21. a
I made a couenaunte with your fathers, when I brought the out of Egypt,
(that they should no more be bondmen) saying: When seven years are out, every
man shall let hes bought servant an Hebrye gofre, if he have served him six
years. But your fathers obeyed me not and herkened not unto me. As for you ye
were now turned, and did right before me, in that ye proclaimed, every man to
let his ueyghboure go fre / and in that ye made a covenant before me / in the
temple that bea reth my name: But yet ye have turned your selves again, and
blasphemed my name: In this that every man has required his servant and
handmayden again, who^ ye had let go quyte and fre, and compelled the^ to
serve you again / and to be your bond men. And therefore thus says the
Lord ye have Gene. xv. b
when they hewed y^ calfe in two and when there went through the two halfes
thereof The Princes of Judah, the Princes of Jerusalem, the gelded men, the
Priests and all the people of the land, which went through the two sides of
the calfe. Those men will I give into the power of their enemies, and in to the
hands of them that follow upon their lives. Psa. 79. ^. Ierc. vii. d.
And their deed bodies shall be meat for the fowls of the air, and beasts of
the field. As for Zedekiah the king of Judah and his Princes, I will deliver
them into the power of their enemies, and of them that desire to sleye them,
and in to the hand of the king of Babylous host Ieue. 37. c.
which now is departed from you: But through my commandment (says the
Lord) they shall come again before this city, they shall fight against it,
win it, and burn it. Moreover, I will lay the cities of Judah so waste, that
no ma^shall dwell therein.

CAPI. XXXV.
He propounds the obedsente of the Rechabites, and there by confounds the
pride of the Jews. The commandment of Iona^dab, the father of the
Rechavites. He threateneth punishment unto the rebellyous Jews. He promises
prosperity unto Rechabi^es for their obedience unto their father.

THE words which the Lord spoke unto Jeremy, in the rain of Iehoakim the
son of Josiah king of Judah, are these: Go unto the house of 4. ^^eg. x. ^.
the Rechabytes, and call them out, and bring them to the house of the Lord
into some commody oiis place / and give then wine to drink. Then took I
Iazaniah the son of Jeremy the son of Habaziniah, and his brethren, and all
his sons, and the whole houshulde, of the Rechabytes: and brought the^ to the
house of the Lord in to the closet of the children of Hanan the son of
Iegebaliah the man of God: which was by the closet of the Princes, that is
above the closet of Maasiah the Ionadab the son of Rechab our father
commanded us, saying: ye and your sons shall never drink wine Ier. xxix.
b.
build no houses, sow no sede, plant no vynes, ye, ye shall have no
vyneyardes, but for all your time ye shall dwell in tents, that ye may live
long in the land wherein ye be strangers. Thus we have obeyed the
commandment of Ionadab the son of Rechab our father, in all that he has
charged us, and so we drink no wine all our life long: we, nor our wives,
our sons and our daughters. Nether build we any house to dwell therein, we
have also among us neither vyneyardes, nor corn land to sow: but we dwell
in tents, we obey, and do according unto all, that Ionadab our father
commanded us.

But now that Nabuchonosor the king of Babylon came up into y^ land / we
said, come let us go to Jerusalem, that we may escape the hooste of the
Caldees and the Assyrians: Ie. xviii. a. and. xxv. a.
I have stand up early, I have spoken unto you, and given you earnest warnyng:
and yet have ye not been obedient unto me. Ye, I have sent my servants, all
the prophets unto you, I rose up early, and sent you word, saying: O turn
you, now every man from his wicked way: amend your lives, and go not after
strange gods, to worship them: that ye may continue in the land, which I
have given unto you and your fathers, but ye would neither hear me, nor
follow me. The children of Prouer. i. ^ Esa. lxv. b. Iere. vii. b.
for I have spoken unto them, but they would not follow: I have called unto
them, never theles they would give me no answer. Jeremy also spoke unto the
houshoulde of the Rechabites: Thus says the Lord of Hosts the God of
Israel: For so much as ye have obeyed the commandment of Ionadab your
father: and kept al his precepts, and done according unto all that he had
bydden you: Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel: Ie
Ionadab the son of Rechab shall not fail, but have one out of his stock,
to stand always before me.

CAPI. XXXVI.
Baruch writes (as Jeremy endyteth) the book of the cursses against Judah and
Israel He is sent with the book unto the people, and reads it before them
all. He is colled before the rulers, and reads it before them also. The
rulars show unto the King the words of the book Iehuti takes the book, and
reads a little of it, and after casts it in the fire. There is another
written, at the commandment of the Lord.

IN the fourth year of Iehoakim y^ son of Josiah King of Judah, came the
word of the Lord unto Jeremy, saying. Iet
Take a book, and write therein all the words, that I have spoken to y^ /
against Israel against Judah / and against all the people / from the time that
I began for to speak unto the (in the raygne of Josiah) unto this day. That
when the house of Judah hereth of the plage, which I have devised for the^,
they may peradventure Iet.
turn / every man from his wicked way / that I may forgive their offenses and
sins. Then did Jeremy call Baruch the son of Neriah, Iet^
and Baruch wrote in the book at the mouth of Jeremy / all the words of the
Lord, which he had spoken unto him. And Jeremy commanded Baruch, saying: I am
in preson, so that I may not come into the house

So Baruch the son of Neriah did, according unto all that Jeremy the prophet
commanded him, reading the words of y^ Lord out of the book in the Lords
house. And this was done in y^ lift year of Iehoa kim the son of Josiah
king of Judah, in the. ix. mouth Io^^
when it was commanded, that all the people of Jerusalem should fast before
the Lord, and they also that were come from the cities of Judah unto Jerusalem.

Then red Baruch the words of Jeremy Iere. xxvi. ^
new door of the Lords house: that all the people might hear. Now when
Micheah the son Gamariah the son of Saphan had hard all the words of the
Lord out of the book, he went down to the kings palace in to the Scrybes
chamber, for there all the Princes were set: Elysama the Scrybe, Dalaiah the
son of Semei, Elnathan the son of Achbor / Gamariah the son of Saphan,
Zedekiah the son of Hananiah, with all the Princes. And Mischeah told them
all the words, that he hard Baruch read out of the book before the people.

Then all the Princes sent Iehudi the

Then said the Princes unto Baruch: Go thy way, and hyde the with Jeremy, so
that no man know where ye be. And they went in to the king to the court. But
they kept the book in the chamber of Elisama the Scrybe, and told the king
all the words that he might hear. So the king sent Iehudi to fetch him the
book, which he brought out of Elisama the* Scrybes chamber. And Iehudi red in
it, that the king and all the princes, which were about him, might hear.
Now the king satan the winter house, for it was in the. ix. Month, and there
was a fire before him. And when Ieiudi had red three or four leaves thereof, he
cut the book in pieces with a pen knyfe / and i. Mat. 3. ^.
cast it into the fire upon the harth / until the book was all burnt in the
fire upon the harth. Yet no man was 4. Re. 24. b. Iere. xxii. ^.
There shall none of his generacyon sit upon the throne of David. His deed
corse shall be cast out, that y^ heat of the day, and the frost of the night
may come upon him. And I will byset the wyckednes of him, of his sede and of
his servants. More over, all the euel that I have promised them (though they
herd me not) will I bring upon them, upon the inhabytours of Jerusalem, and
upon all Judah. The^ took Jeremy another book, and gave it Baruch the Scrybe the
son Neriah, which wrote therein out of the mouth of Jeremy: all the sermons
that were in the first book, which Iehoakim the king of Judah did burn. And
there were added unto the^ many mo sermons, then before.

Zedekiah succedeth Cononiah. He sends unto Jeremy to pray for him. Jeremy
goinge into the land of Ben Iamin, is taken. He is beaten, and put in preson.
He is delivered by hynge zedekiah.

CAPI. XXXVII.
ZEdekiah the son of Josiah 4. Re. 24. ^.
which (...)
the son of Iehoakim. But neither he, nor his servants, nor the people in
the land would obey the words of the Lord which he spoke by the Porphet
Jeremy. Nevertheless, Zedekiah the king sent Iehucal the son of Selemiah and
Sophoniah the son of Maasiah the Preeste to the Prophet Ieremye / saying: O
pray thou unto the Lord our God for us. Now Ieremye walked fre among the
people at that time / and was not put in preson as yet. Iere. xxi. a and. xlii.
a
Pharaos host also was come out of Eze. xvii. b
Egypt: which when the Caldees that beseged Jerusalem perceived, they
departed from thence.

Then came the word of the Lord unto Iere. xlvi. a
Behold, Pharaos host which is come forth to help you, shall return to
Egypt into his own land: but the Caldees shall come again, and fight
against this city, win it / and set fire upon it. For thus says the Lord
/ dysceaue not your own minds, thynkyng on this manner: tush, the Caldees go
now their way from us. No, they shall not go their way For though ye had
slain the whole host of the Caldees, that besege you, and every one of the
slain lay in his tente, yet should they stand up, and set fire upon this
city. Now when the Host of the Caldees was broken up from Jerusalem, for
fear of the Egypcyans army, Ieremye went out of Jerusalem toward the land
of Ben Iamin / to get him from among the people.

And when he came under Ben Iamyns port / there was a porter / called Ieriah,
the son of Selemiah the son of Iere. 28. b
Hananiah, Iere. 38* c
Then Zedekiah the king sent for him, and called him, and asked him quyetly in
his own house, saying: thynkest thou this busynes (that now is in hand)
comes of the Lord? Jeremy answered: ye, that it does: and thou (said he)
shall be delivered into the king of Babylons power.

Moreover, Jeremy said unto king Zedekiah: What have I offended against the,
against thy servants, or against this people, that ye have put me in prison?
Iere. 27. c.
Where are your prophets which have prophesied unto you, and said, that the
king of Babylon should not come against you and this land? And therefore here
now, O my Lord the king: let my prayer be accept before the, and send me
no more into the house of Ionathas the scrybe, that I dye not there. Then
Zedekiah the king commanded to put Jeremy in the fore entrye of the preson /
and daily to be given him a cake of bread, until all the bread in the city
was eaten up. Thus Jeremy remained in the fore entry in the preson.

By the mocyon of the rulers Jeremy is put in to a Dongeon. At the requrste of
Abedmelech the Chamberlayne, the king commands Ieremye to be brought for
the of the Dongeon. Jeremy shows the King how he might escape death.

CAPI. XXXVIII.
SAphatiah the son of Mathan, Godoliah Iere. xxi. b ^* xxvii. a
Who so remains in this city, shall peryshe, either with the swearde, with
honger or with the pestylence: But who so falls unto the Caldees / shall
escape winning his soul for a pray, and shall live. Iere. xxii. a
For thus says the Lord: This city (no doubt) must be delivered into the
power of the king of Babylon / and he also shall win it. Then said the
Princes unto the king: Sir, we beseech you let this man be put to death. For
thus he discourageth the hands of the ^oudyours that be in this city, and the
hands of all the people, when be speaks such words unto them. This man
verily labors not for peace of the people / but mischefe. Zedekiah the king
answered and said: lo, he is in your hands, for the king may deny you
nothing. Then took they Jeremy, and cast him into the dongeon of king, where
as these men meddle with Jeremy the Prophet, they do him wrong: Namely,

And Abedmelech the Morian said unto the Prophet Jeremy: O, put these rags
and cloutes under thine arm holes, betwyxte Iere. 37. c
Zedekiah the king sent and caused Jeremy the prophet to be called unto hi,
into the third entrye, that is in y^ house of the Lord. And the king said
unto Jeremy: I will ask the some what but hyde nothing fro me* Then Jeremy
answered Zedekiah: if I be plain unto the, thou will cause me to suffer
death: If I give the council, thou will not follow me. So the king swore an
oath secretly unto Jeremy, saying: As truly as the Lord lyneth, that made us
these souls, I will not sleye the, nor give the into the hands

Then said Ieremye unto Zedekiah: Thus says the Lord of Hoostes the God of
Israel: Iere. ^7. c
If case be, that thou will go forth unto the king of Babilons princes, thou
shall save thy life, and this city shall not be burnt / ye, both thou and
thy household shall escape with your lives. But if thou will not go forth to
the king of Babylons princes / then shall this city be delivered into the
hands of the Caldees, which shall set fire upon it, and thou shalt not be
able to escape them. And the king Zedekiah said unto Ieremye. I am afraid
for the Jews, that are fled unto the Caldees / least I come in their hands,
and so they, to have me in derision.

But Jeremy answered: No, they shall not Iere. 39. c
So Jeremy abode still in the fore entrye of the preson, until the day that
Jerusalem was won.

Nabuchodonosor besegeth Jerusalem. zedekiah flies. He (...) taken of the
L^^dces. His sons are slain. His eyes are thrust out. Ieremye is provided
for. Abedmelech is delivered from captivity, because of the confydence that he
has in God.

CAPI. XXXIX.
Now Iere. 32. ^ 4. Reg. ^5. ^
when the city of Jerusalem was taken (for in the. ix. year of Zedekiah King
of Judah in the tenth Month / came Nabuchodonosor the King of Babylon and all
his Host, and beseged Jerusalem. And in the. xi. year of Zedekiah in the
fourth Month the. ix. day of the Month, he brake into the city. Then all
the princes of the king of Babylon, came in / and sat the^ down under the
port: Neregel, Sarezer / Samegarnabo, Sarsachim / Rabsaris Neregel, Sarezer,
Rabmag, with all the other Princes of the King of Babylon. Iere. 34. ^
And when Zedekiah the king of Judah with his soudiours saw them, they fled /
and departed out of the city by night through the kings garden, and through
the porce that is between the two walls, and so they went toward the
wilderness.

But the Caldees Host followed fast after them / and took Zedekiah in the
field of Jericho, and brought him presoner to Nabuchodonosor the king of
Babylon unto Reblath / that lies in the land of Hemath where he gave
judgment upon him. So the King of Babylon caused the children of Zedekiah and
all the nobles of Judah to be slain / before his face at Reblath. And made
Zedekias eyes to be put out / and bound him with chains / and sent him to

4. Reg. 25. b Iere. 32. d
Moreover / the Caldees burnt up the kings palace / with the other houses of
the people, and brake down the walls of Jerusalem. As for the remnaunt of the
people that were in the city / and such as were come to help them (what
soever was left of the comen sort) Nabuzaradan the chief capytayne carried
them to Babylon. But Nabuzaradan the chief captain let the ^ascal people (and
those that had nothing) dwell still in the land of Judah, and gave them
vineyardes and corn feldes at the same time Nabuchodonosor also the king of
Babylon gave Nabuzaradan the chief captain a charge / concerning Ieremye /
saying: take and cheryshe him, and make much of him: se thou do him no harm,
but entreat him after his own desire.

So Nabuzaradan the chief, captain / Nabusasban the chief chamberlayne,
Nergalsarezer the treasurer and all the king of Babilons lords / sent for
Jeremy ^^^^. 38. d
and caused him to be fet out of the fore entrye of the preson, Iere. xl. b
and so he dwelte among the people. Now while Ieremye lay yet bound in the
fore entry of the prison / the word of the Lord came unto him, saying: Go
and tell Abedmelech the Morian: Thus says the Lord of Hosts the God of
Israel: Behold / the cruel and sharp plage y^ I have devised for this cite,
will I bring upon them / that thou shall se it: but I will deliver the (says
the Lord) and thou shalt not come in the hands of those men / whom thou
fear. For douceles I will save the, so that thou shall not peryshe with the
swearde: but thy life shall be saved, and that because thou have put thy trust
in me / says the Lord.

Jeremy has license to go whether he will. He dwells with the people that
remains at Jerusalem, over whom Godoliah rules. Iohana^ prophecyeth death
unto Godoliah

CAPI. XL.
THIS is the manner how the Lord in Iere. xli^^. a
when Nabuzarada^ the chief Captain had let him go fre from Iosue. 18. d
Ramah, whyther he had led him bound among all the presoners, that were
carried from Jerusalem and Judah unto Babylon. The chief captane called for
Jeremy, and said unto him: The Lord thy God spoke mygh tely before of the
myserye upon this place: Now the Lord has sent it, and performed it as he
had promised. For ye have sinned against the Lord, and have not been obedyent
unto his voice, therefore comes this plage upon you. Behold, I lowse the
bonds from thy hands this day: if thou will now go with me unto Babylon /
up then: for I will se to the / and provide for the: But if thou will not go
with me to ^^^ xi^i. b Tobi. ^. b
Behold, all the land is at thy will, look where thou thynkest convenient and
good for the to abide / there dwell. If thou can not be content to dwell
alone / then remain with Godoliah the son of Ahicam / the son of Saphan:
4. Reg. 25. c
whom the king of Babylon has made gouernoure over the cytyes of Judah, and
dwell with him among the people, or remain where soever it pleases the So the
chief Capytayne gave him his expenses with a reward / and let him go.

Iere. (...). ^.
Then went Ieremye unto Godoliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpa, and dwelt there
with him among the people that were left in the land.

Now when the captains of the Host of 4. Reg. 25. c
Be not afraid to serve y^ Caldees, dwell in the land / and do the king of
Babylon service / so shall ye prospere. Behold / I dwell at Mizpa to be an
officer in y^ Caldees behalf / and to satisfye such as come to us. Therefore
gather you wine / corn and oil / and keep them in your ware houses, and dwell
in your cities that ye have in keeping.

Ye, all the Jews also y^ dwelt in Moab under the Ammonites, in Idumea and in
all Ahicam the son of Saphan, gouernoure upon the^ y^ were left in Judah. All the Jews (I say) returned out of al places where they were fled unto: and came
into the land of Judah to Godoliah unto Mizpa, and gathered wine and other
fruits, and that very much.

Moreover, Iohanan the son of Careah and all the captains of the host, that
were scatred on every side in the land, came to Godoliah in Mizpa, and said
unto him: know thou not that Baalis king of the Ammonites has sent Ismaell
the son of Nathaniah, to sleye there But Godoliah the son of Ahicam believed
them not. Then said Iohanan the son of Careah unto Godoliah in Mizpa these
words secretly: Let me go, I pray the, and I will sleye Ismael the son of
Nathaniah, so that no body shall know it. Wherefore will he kill the, that all the
Jews which resort unto the / might be scatred, and the remnaunt in Judah
perish? Iohanan the son of Careah: Thou shall not do it, for they are but
lies / y^ thou say / of Ismael.

Ismaell kylleth Godoliah gylefully, and many other with him. Iohanan follows
after Ismael.

CAPI. XLI.
BUt in the seuenthe Month it happened 4. Re. 25. ^
Ismaell the son of Nathaniah the son of Elisama (one of the kings blood)
came with them that were greatest about the king / and ten men that were
sworn with him: unto Godoliah the son of Ahicam to Mizpa, and they did eat
together. And Ismael the son of Nathaniah with those ten me^ that were sworn
to him, starte up, and smote Godoliah the son of Ahicam the Son of Saphan
with the swearde / and slew him / whom the king of Babylon had made governor
of the land. Ismael also slew all the Jews that were with Godoliah at Mizpa
/ and all the Caldees that he found there waiting upon him.

The next day after that he had slain Godoliah (the matter was yet unknown)
there came certain me^ from Sichem, from Siloh and Samaria / to the nombre of.
lxxx. which had shaven their beardes, rent their clothes, and were al heavy,
bryngyng meat offringes, and ince^se in their hands to offer it in the house
of the Lord. And Ismael the Eccle. xii. c
weeping, to mete them. Now when he met the^ he said: Go your way to Godoliah
the son of Ahica^. And when they came in the midst of the city, Ismael the
son of Nathaniah (with the^ that were sworn unto him) slew them, even at
the myddest of the pyt. Among these. lxxx. men there were ten / that said unto
Ismael: Oh sleye us not / for we have yet a great treasure in the field, of
wheat / bar lie / oil / and honey. So he spared them, and slew them not with
their brethren. Noew the pyt wherein Ismael did cast the dead bodies of the
men (whom he slew because of Godoliah) had king Asa caused to be made, for
fear of Bassa the king of Israel / and the sa^e pytte did Ismael fyl with
slain men. ^s for the remnaunte of 3. Reg. 25.
Nabusaradan the chief capytayne had made Godoliah the son of Ahicam
gouernoure: Ismael the son Nathaniah carried them away presoners toward the
Ammonites. But when Iohanan the son of Careah and all they which had been
captains over the kings host with him / herd of all the wickedness that
Ismael Gene. 14* ^ 1. Re. xxx. ^
the son of Nathaniah had done: 4. Reg. 25* ^
they took their companions / and went out for to fight with Ismael the son
of Nathaniah and found him by the great waters that are in Gibeon. Now when
all the people / whom Ismael led captyue, saw Iohanan the son of Careah and
all the other Capytaynes of the Host, they were glad. So all the people y^
Ismael had carried away from Mizpa, were brought again.

And when they returned, they came to Iohanan the son of Careah. But Ismael
the son of Nathaniah fled from Iohanan with eight of his sworn companions,
Iere. xlii* ^
that they might go into Egypt for fear of the Caldees: of whom they were
afraid / because that Ismael the son of Nathaniah had slain Godoliah
Ahikams son Iere. ^
whom the king of Babylon had made governor in the land.

CAPI. XLII.
The Captains ask council of Ieremye what they ought to do. Jeremy monysheih
the remnaunt of the people not to go into Egypt.

SOAL the captains, and Iohanan I^^^. xxi* a* ^^d. 37. a.
O hear our petycyon / that thou mayeste pray for us unto the Lord thy God
/ namely / for all the remnaunt, where of there be very few of us left of many /
as thou see us: that the Lord / thy God may show us a way to go in, and
tell us / what we should do. Then Ieremye the Prophet said unto them: I have
herd you. Behold, I will pray unto God your Lord / as ye have required me:
and look what answer the Lord gives you / I shall certyfye you thereof / and
keep nothing back from you. And they said unto Jeremy. Ios^^. i. e. i* Math
2* ^ I^^^* xliii. ^
The Lord of truth and faythfulnes be our record, that we will do all that
the Lord thy god commands us, whether I^^^. xxi. b.
If ye will dwell in this land, I shall build you up, and not break you
down: I shall plant you, and not rote you out: for I repent, as concerning the
trouble that I have done to you. Fear not the king of Babylon / of whom ye
stand in awe: O, be not afraid of him, says the Lord: for I will be with
you, to help you, and deliver you from his hand. I will pardon you, I will
have mercy upon you, and bring you again into your own land.

Nevertheless, if ye purpose not to dwell I^^e* 17* ^.
Thus says y^ Lord of hoostes the god of Israel: If ye be wholly purposed to
go into Egypt, and to be there as strangers: Iere. xli* c.
the swearde that ye feared, shall over take you i. Egypt: and the honger
whereof ye be here afraid shall hang upon you and follow you into Egypt / and
there ye shall dye. And all they, that of set purpose undertake to go in to
Egypt / to sogeourne there / shall peryshe with the swearde / with honger and
pestylence: not one of them shall remain / there shall none escape the plage,
that I will bring upon them.

For thus says the Lord of hoostes the God of Israel: like as my wrath and
indignacyon is moved against the inhabytours of Jerusalem, so shall my
displeasure be kindled against you also, if ye go into Egypt:

And forget not that I have warned you earnestly this day, for ye have
dyssembled with me. Iere. xlii. ^.
For ye sent me unto the Lord your God, and said: O pray thou the Lord
our God for us: and look what answer the Lord our God gives the, that
bring us again, and we shall do there after. Now have I showed / and declared
unto you the voice of the Lord your God / for the which cause he has sent
me to you. Now therefore, Deuteronomy. (...). ^.
If ye will not follow it / be sure, y^ ye shall peryshe with the swear^^, with
honger and pestylence: even in the same place, where your lust is to go, and
dwell.

Iohanan caryeth the remnaunte of the pro^l^ into Egypt / contrary to the
mind of Ieremye. Ieremye prophecyeth the desiruceyon of Egypt.

CAPI. XLIII.
Now when Jeremy had ended all the Iere. xlii. a.
Thou lie, the Lord our God has not sent the to speak unto us, that we
should not go into Egypt / and dwell there: But

So Iohanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the hooste, and al y^
people followed not the commandment of the Lord: Namely / to dwell in the
land of Judah: But Iohanan the son of Kareah and all the captains of the
host, carried away all the remnaunt in Judah, Iere. lxi. c.
that were come together again from all the Heythen (among whom they had been
scatred) to dwell in the land of Judah: Men / women / children / the kings
daughters: all those that Nabuzaradan the chief captain had left with
Godoliah the son of Ahikam / the son of Saphan. They carried away also

And in Taphnis the word of the Lord happened unto Jeremy / saying: Take
great stones in thine hand, and hyde them in the brycke wall / under the door
of Pharaos house in Thaphnis / that all the men of Judah may / se and say unto
the^: Thus says the Lord of hoostes the God of Israel: Iere. xlvi. c
Behold, I will send and call for Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon my
servant / and will set his seat upon these stones that I have hyd, and he
shall sprede his tente over them.

And when he comes / he shall smite the

He shall set fire upon the temples of the Egypcyans gods / and burn them up
/ and take the^ selves presoners. Moreover, he shall array him self with the
land of Egypt, like as a shepherde puts on his ^ore / and shall depart
his way from thence in peace. The pylers also of the temple of the Sun that
is in Egypt: shall he break in pieces / and burn the temples of the Egypcyans
gods.

He reproves the people for their Idolatry. They that set light by, the
threatynge of the Lord, are chastenad. The desteruicion of Egypt and the Jews
therein, is prophesied.

CAPI. XLIIII.
THIS is the word that was showed Iere. xxv. ^ and. xxix. ^.
I rose up early, I sent unto the^, and gave them warninge. O do no such
abhomynable things, and things that I hate. But they would not follow nor
harken, to turn from their wyckednes, and to do no more sacryfyce unto strange
gods.

Wherefore mine indygnacyon and wrath was kyndled, and it burnt up the cytyes
of

Yet are ye not sorry this day, ye fear not

Therefore thus says the Lord of hoostes the God of Israel: I am steadfastly
aduysed and determined, to punyshe you, and to rote out all Judah. As for the
remnaunte of Judah that purposly went into Egypt, there to dwell, I will take
them Iere. xiii. c. and. x^^^. ^.
and they shall al be destrayed. In the land of Egipte shall they perish
being consumed with the swearde and with honger. For from the least with the
most, they shall peryshe with the swearde and with honger. Moreover / they
shall be reuyled / abhorred / shamed and confounded. For I will vyset them that
dwell in Egypt, Ie. xxxix. ^.
as I have vysyted Jerusalem: with the swearde, with honger and with
pestylence. So that none of the remnaunte of Judah / which are gone to dwell in
Egypt: shall be left to con^e again into the land of Judah, al though they
think to come thither again, and to dwell there. For none shall come again /
but such as are fled away.

Then all the men which knew that their a great sort of wives that stood
there, ye / and all the people that dwelt there in Egypt in the city of
Patures / answerde Jeremy, and said. As for the words that thou have spoken
unto us in the name of the Lord we will in no wise hear them: but what soever
goes out of our own mouth, that will we do. We will do sacryfyce, and offer
oblacions unto the Queen of heaven, Iere. vii. b.
like as we and our forefathers, our Kings and our heads have done in the
cities of Judah, and in the streets and feldes of Jerusalem. For then had we
plenteousnesse of vytales, then were we in prosperyte / and no mysfortune came
upon us.

^. Mac. i. b.
But sens we left, to offer / and to do sacryfice

Then said Jeremy unto all the people, to the men, to the women and to all the
folcke, which had given him that answer. Did not the Lord remember the
sacryfices that ye, your forefathers, your kings and rulers (with all the
people) have offered in the cities of Judah in the streets and land of Jerusalem?
and has he not consydred this in his mide? In so much, that the Lord might no
longer suffer the wyckednes of your inuencyons / and the abhomynable things
which ye did? Esaias. i. ^.
Is not your land desolate and void, ye and abhorred, so that no man
dwells therein any more, as it is come to pass this day?

3. Reg. 18. b. Ieremi. 2. ^. and, 3 c ^. 5 e
Did not all this happen unto you, because ye made such sacrifice / and sinned
against the Lord, Baruc iii, a
Ye have not followed his voice, to walcke in his law, in his ordynaunces and
statutes.

Ye, this is the cause, that all mysfortune happened unto you, as it is come
to pass this day. Moreover, Jeremy spoke unto all the people and to all the
women. Hear the word of the Lord al Judah, ye that be in the land of Egypt.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts the God of Israel. Ye and your wives have
spoken with your own mouth / the thing that ye have fulfilled in deed.

Iere. 44. c.
Ye, thus have ye said: we will not fail / but perform the vows that we
have vowed, we will do sacryfice and power out drink offrynges to the Queen
of heaven.

Purposly will ye set up your own meanynges, and perform your vows. And
therefore, hear the word of the Lord all Judah, ye that dwell in the land of
Egypt.

Behold, Genesis xxii. c.
I have sworn by my great name, says the Lord, that my name shall not be
rehearsed through any man's mouth of Judah, in all the land of Egypt: to say:
The Lord God lives, For I will watch / to plage them, and not for their
wealth.

Iere. xiii. c.
And all the men of Judah that be in the land of Egypt / shall peryshe with
the swearde and with honger, until they be utterly destroyed.

Nevertheless, those that fled away for the swearde, shall come again into
the land of Judah / but there shall be very few of them. And all the remnaunte
of Judah / that are gone into Egypt, there to dwell, shall know whose words
shall be found true: theyrs or mine. Take this for a token that I will vyset you
in this place / says the Lord / and that ye may know / how that I
(without doubt) will perform my purpose upon you to punish you. Behold,
says the Lord, I will deliver Pharao Hophrea King of Egypt into the hands
of his enemies, that seek after his life: 4. Reg. 25* ^ Iere. 39. b.
even as I gave Zedekias the king of Judah into the hands of Nabuchodonosor
king of Babylon his enemy which sought after his life.

Baruch is reproved of Ieremye.

CAPI. XLV.
THESE are the words that Jeremy Iere. 36. ^.
after that he had written these Sermons in a book at the mouth of Jeremy, In
the fourth year of Iehohakim the son of Josias king of Judah saying.

Thus says the Lord God of Israel unto the, O Baruch: In so much as thou
thoughtest thus (when thou wast writing) woe is me, the Lord has given me
pain for my travail. I have weeryed my self with syghynge / and have found
no rest. Therefore tell him, O Jeremy, that the Lord says thus: Behold, The
thing that I Iere. xxi. b
But thy life will I give the for a pray in a places, where so ever thou go.

He prophecyeth the destruccyon of Egypt. Delyu^^aunce is promised to Israel.

CAPI. XLVI.
HERE follow the words of the Lord

These words following preached he to Esai. xix. a. and. xx. (...)
the Egypcyans concerning the Host of Pharao Necho King of Egypt, Eze. 29.
a. 30. and. 31. 4. Re. 24. b.
when he was in Charcamis beside the water of Euphrates: what time as
Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon slew him. In the fourth year of
Iehohakim the son of Josias king of Judah.

Ier. xxxi. a.
Make ready buckler and shylde / and go forth to fight: harness your horses,
and set your selves upon them: set your salettes fast on, bring forth spears
/ scour your swerdes and put on your breast plates.

But alas, how happens it, that I se you so afraid? why shryncke ye back?
Their worthyes are slain. Ye, they run so fast away, that none of them
looks behind him. Fearfulnes is fallen upon euerychone of them says the
Lord. The lyghteste of foot shall not fle away / and the worthyes shall not
escape.

Toward the North by the water of Euphrates,

And he said I will go up, and will cover the earth: I will destroy the
city, with them that are therein. Get you up ye horses / roll for the ye
Charettes / come for the worthies* ye Morians, ye Lybeans with your bucklers,
ye Lydea^s with your bows:

This day of the Lord God of Hoostes, a day of vengeance / that he may
avenge

But in vain shalt thou go to surgery / for thy wound shall not be stopped.
The Heythen have heard of thy shaine, and the land is full of thy confusion:
for one strong man did stomble upon another / and they are fallen both
together.

Ier. xliii. b.
These are the words that the Lord spoke to the prophet Jeremy, concerning
the coming of Nabuchodonosor the King of Babylon, which was sent to
destroy the land of Egypt: Preach out through the land of Egypt / and
cause it to be proclaimed at Mygool / Noph and Taphnis, and say: Stand still /
make the redye / for the swearde shall consume the round about. How
happens it that thy mighty worthyes are fallen? why stood they not fast.

Even because the Lord thrust them down? The slaughter was great: for one
fell ever still upon another. One cried upon another. Up / let us go again to
our own people / and to our own natural country, from the cruel swearde*

They did cry even there: O Pharao king Es^. 4^^ and. li. ^.
whose name is the Lord of hosts) it shall come as the mount of Thabor, and as
Lybanus if it stood in the sea. O thou daughter of Egypt make ready thy geer to
flit. For Noph shall be void and desolate, so that no man shall dwell therein. The
land of Egypt is like a goodly fair calf, but one shall come out of the north
to prick her forward. Her wagied soudiers that be with her, are like fat
calves.

They also shall fle away together, and not abide: for the day of their
slaughter and the time of their visytacyon shall come upon them.

The cry of them shall make a noise as

Thus says the Lord of hoostes the God of Israel. Behold, I will vyset that
restless people of Alexandria. Pharao and Egypt, ye / both their Gods and
their Kings, even Pharao / and all them that put their trust in him.

Ye, I will deliver them into the hands of those / that seek after their
lives. Namely / into the power of Nabuchodonosor the King of Babylon / and
into the power of his servants. And after all these things it shall be
inhabyted as before time says the Lord.

But be not thou afraid (O my servant not (O Jacob my servant) says the
Lord / for I am with the^ and will destroy all nacyons / among whom I have
scatred the. Nevertheless / I will not consume the / but chasten the and
correct the: ye, and that with discrecion: neither will I spare the as one
that were fautelesse.

The word of the Lord against the Philistirles.

CAPI. XLVII.
THESE are the words, that the Lord

And the men shall cry, and all they that

For the Lord will destroy the Philistines

How long will thou sleye / O thou swearde of the Lord? When wylt thou
cease? Turn again into thy sweet rest / and leave of. But how can it
cease, when the Lord him self has given him a charge against Ascalon / and
raised it up against the cities of the sea cost?

The word of the Lord against the Moabites.

CAPI. XLVIII.
THus says the Lord of Hoostes the Esaias. xv. ^ and. ^vi. a and (...). b
Ezec. xxv* b (...) ephesians. ii. b
Moab: woe be to the city of Nebo / for it is laid waste, brought to
confusyon, and Kariathia^im is taken / Mysgab is brought to shame / and a
frayed: Moab can boste no more of Hesebon for they have devised against it. Come
(shall they say) let us rote them out, that they may be no more among the nombre
of the Gentiles / and that thou Madmen may no more be thought upon: and the
swearde shall persecute the: A voice shall cry from Horonaim: With great
wasting and destruction / is Moab made desolate.

Children could tell of the cry thereof: For at the going up unto Luyth
hearese with lamentacion and mournyng / and down toward Horonaim / they herd
a cruel and a deadely cry: Get you away / save your lives / and be like unto
the heeth in the wyldernes. Esaias. (...). b Iere* xvii. b Ezec. xxix. ^
For because thou have trusted in chine own works and treasure / thou shall
be taken. Chamos with his prestes and princes shall go away into captyuyte.

The destroyet shall come upon al cities none shall escape. The valleys shall be
destroyed / and the feldes shall be laid waste: like as the Lord has spoken.

Make a token unto Moab / that she get her away spedely: for her cities shall be
made so desolate / that no man shall dwell therein. Cursed be he that does the
work of the Lord neglygently / and cursed be he that keeps back his Iere.
47. b
swearde from sheddyng of blood.

Moab has ever been rich and careless from her youth up / she has sytte^ and
taken her ease with her treasure. She was never yet put out of one vessel into
another (y^ is) she never went away into captiuice, therefore her taste
remains, and her sauoure is not yet changed.

But lo, the time comes, says the Lord that I shall send her trussers to
trusse her up, to prepare and season her vessels: ye: her tanckerdes tatell and
shake to and ^ro. And 3. Re, ^xi. ^*
Bethel, wherein she put her trust.

Wherefore do ye think thus: we are mighty / and strong men of war? Moab is
destroyed, and her cities brent up: her chosen young men be slain, says the
king, whose name is the Lord of Hoostes. The destruction of Moab comes on a
pace / and her fall is at hand.

Al her neighbors shall mourn for her / and al they that know her name /
shall say. O how happens it, that the strong staf and the goodly rod is thus
broken? And thou daughter Dibon, come down from thy glory and sit in poverty.
For he that destroys Moab, shall come up to the also / and break down thy
strong holds.

And thou that dwell in Aroer, get the

Mourn and cry / tell it out at Arnon / y^ Moab is destroyed. For misery shall
come upon the plain land. Namely / upon Holon, and Iahazah: upon Mephaath and
Dibon, upon Nabo and the house of Deblathaim / upon Cariathiarim and upon the
house Gamul, upon the house Maon and Carioth / upon Bozrah and all the cities
in the land of Moab, whether they lie far or near.

* The horn of Moab is smyten down and her arm broken, says the Lord.
Make her droncken, for she magnyfieth herself about the Lord, that men may
clappe their hands at her vomit, and that she also may be laughed to scorn:
O Israel, shalt thou not laugh him to scorn, when he is taken a monge thieves.
* Ye, because of thy words that thou have spoken against him, thou shall be
driven away. Ye Moabites shall leave the cities, and dwell in rocks of stone
and become like doves, that make their nestes in holes.

Nume 25 a
As for Moabs pride / we have herd of it / she is very hye minded. I know
her stoutness / her bostynge / her arrogancye

Thy wine branches shall come over Esai. xvi. b Iere. x^ix. c.
the sea / and the branches of Iazer but unto the sea: the destroyer shall
break into thy harvest and grape gatherynge: Mirth and cheer shall be taken
away from the tymbre field / and from the whole land of Moab.

There shall be no sweet wine in the press, the treader shall have no stomach
to cry ye / there shall be none to cry unto him: which before time were herd
from Hesebon to Eleale and Iahaz, which lyfted up their voice from Zoar unto
Horonaim, that bullock of three year old. The waters also of Mem^im shall be
dried up.

Moreover / I will make Moab cease

Esaias. xv. d
All heads shall be shaven / and all beerdes clypped of: all hands bound, and
loins gyrded about with sack clothe. Upon all the house tops and streets
of Moab / there shall be mourning: For I will break Moab like an unprofitable
vessel, says the Lord. Ohowe is she destroyed? O / how mourns she? O /
how does Moab hang down her head / and is ashamed? Thus shall Moab be a
laughyng stock / and had in derision of al them, that be round about her.

For thus says the Lord. Behold, the Deuteronomy. (...). ^ Iere. 49. ^.
enemy shall come flyenge as an Aegle: and sprede his wings upon Moab. They
shall clyme over the walls, and win the strong holds. Then the mighty
men's hertes in Moab shall be like the heart of a woman trauelynge with child.

And Moab shall be made so desolate, y^ she shall no more be a people, because
she has set up her self against the Lord. Esaias. 24. ^.
Fear pyt / and snare / shall come upon the (O Moab) says the Lord. Who so
escapes the fear / shall fall in the pyt / and who so gets out of the pyt
/ shall be taken in the snare

For I will bring a year of visytacyon upon Moab / says the Lord. They that
are able to fly / shall stand under the shadow of Hesebon. For there shall
go a fire out of Hesebon / and a flame from Syon / and shall burn up that
proud people of Moab both before and behind.

Woe be unto the (O Moab) for thou people of Chamos shall perysshe: Ye thy
sons and daughters shall be led away captyue. Yet at the last will I bring
Moab out of captiuyte again / says the Lord. Thus far is of the plage of
Moab.

The word of the Lord against the Ammonytes / against Idumea / Damascus /
Cedar* and Elam.

CAPI. XLIX.
AS concerning the Ammonytes / Ez^. xx^. ^. and. xx^. ^. Amo^. ^. ^.
thus the Lord says: Has Israel no children / or is he without an heir?
Why has your king then taken Gad in? wherefore does his people dwell in his
cities? Behold therefore / the time comes (says the Lord) that I will bring
a noise of war into Rabah of the Ammonytes. Lahel shall be desolate / and her
cities brent up, and the Israelytes / shall be lords over* those that had them
in possession before, says the Lord Hesebon shall mourn / for it shall be
roted out of the ground, says the Lord. The cities of Rabah shall cry out,
and gyrde themselves with sack cloth: they shall mourn, and run about the
walls, for their kings shall be led away presoner: ye his priests and
princes with him.

Wherefore trustest thou in the water streams daughter: and thynkest thou art
so safe (by reason of thy treasure) that no man shall come to the?

Behold, I will bring a fear upon the, says the Lord God of hosts, from
al those that be about the: so that ye shall be scatred every man from another,
and no man shall gather them together again that be fled. But after that / I
will bring the Ammonytes also out of cap^^uite again.

Esaias. xxi. b (...) xxv. b and. xxxii. ^ and. xxxv. a
Upon the Edomites has the Lord of hoostes spoken on this manner. Is there no
more wisdom in Thema^? Is there no more good council among his people? Is
their wisdom then turned clean to naught? Get you hence, turn your backs,
crepe down into the deep, O ye cytesyns of Dedan.

For I will bring destruction upon Esau, ye, and the day of his visitacion. If
y^ grape gatherers came upon the, should they not leave some grapes? If the
night robbers came upon the, should they not take so much as they thought were
enough?

But I will make Esau bare, and discover

Thou shall leave thy fatherless children behind the and I will keep them,
and thy wydowes shall take their comfort in me. For thus has the Lord
spoken. Iere. xxv. b E^cc^^. ix b 1. P^^^^. 4. c
Behold, they that me^ thought were vnmere to drink of the cup, have droken
with the first: and thynkest thou then to be fre?

No, no, thou shall neither be quyte nor fre but thou must drink also. For
why, I have sworn by my self (says the Lord) that Bozrah shall become a
wilderness, an open shame, a laughyng stock and cursyng: and all her cities
shall be a continual deserte.

For I am perfectly infourmed of y^ Lord, ^^^^ ^. a
I will make the but small among the Heathen, and little regarded among men.

Esaias. 4^. b (...). 48. b
Thy hye stomach and the pride of thy heart has disceyued the, because thou
wylt dwell in the holes of stony rocks, and have the hye mountains in
possessyon. Nevertheless, though thy nest were as hye as the Aegles, yet will
I cast the down, says the Lord. Moreover, I dumea shall be a wilderness:
(...). (...). b (...). 19. b. ^. ^. b
Who so goes by it, shall be abashed, and wondre at her miserable plages, (...).
xix. c
Like as Sodom, Gomor, and the cities that lay there about, were turned up
side down (says the Lord) so shall no body dwell in Idumea, and no man shall
have his habitacyon there. Behold, like as the Lion comes up from the
pleasant meadows of Iordane unto the grene pastures of Etham, so will I drive
him, and make him run against her. But who is the young man that I will
ordain thereto? Who is like unto me? What is he yt will strive with me? What
shepherde may stand in my hands?

Psalm. 37. b
Therefore, hear the counsel of the Lord, that he has taken upon Idumea: and
his purpose, that he has devised upon the cytesyns of Theman: The least of
the flock shall Iere. 48. ^
the enemy shall come and fle up hither / like as it were an Aegle, and sprede
his wings upon Bozrah. Then shall the hertes of the worthyes in Edom be as the
heart of a woman trauaylyng of child. E^^* ^vii ^ ^m^^. ^. ^
Upon Damascus, He math and Arphad shall come confusion / for they shall hear
evil tidings: they shall be tossed to and fro like the sea that can not stand
still. Damascus shall be sore afraid, and shall fly, trembling shall come upon
her. Sorrow and pain shall over take her as a woman trauaylyng of child. But
how shalde so worshypfull and glorious a city be forsaken? Hear therefore:
her young men shall fall in the streets / and all her men of war shall be
taken away in that time / says the Lord of Hosts I will kyndle a fire in
the walls of Damascus, which shall consume the place of Benhadad.

Esaias. xxi. ^
As for Cedar and the kingdom of Hazor / whom Nabuchodonosor the king of
Babylon smote down / the Lord has spoken thus upon them: Arise, and get you
up unto Cedar, and destroy the people toward the East. Their tents and their
flocks shall they take away / ye their hangynges and their vessel. Their
Camels also shall they carye away with them. They shall come about them on
every side with a fearful cry.

Fle, get you soon away / ^repe into caves, up against yonder rich and
careless people (says the Lord) which have neither gates nor door bars,
but dwell alone. Their Camels shall be stolen, and the droues of their cattle
driven away.

Moreover, these y^ be shaven will Iscater toward all the wyndes, and bring
them to destruction: ye, and that through their own familiers, says the
Lord. Hazor also shall be a dwelling for Dragons, and an everlasting
wilderness: so that no body shall dwell there, and no man shall have there his
habitacyon.

These are the words, that y^ Lord spoke Ezec. 32. d. Dani. 8. a
Ela^, in the beginning of the reygne of Zedekiah king of Judah. Thus says
the Lord of Hoostes: Behold, I will break the bow of Elam, and take away
their strength: and upon Elam I will bring the four winds from the four
quarters of heaven, and will scatre them against the same four wyndes. And
there shall be no people, but some of Ela^ shall ^lie unto them.

For I will cause Elam to be afraid of their ennemies, and of them that seek
their lives and will bring upon them the indignacyon of my wrath, says the
Lord. And I will persecute them with the swearde / so long till I have brought
them to naught. I will set my stole in Elam, I will destroy both the king and
the princes from thence, says the Lord. But in process of time I will bring
Elam out of captyuite again / says the Lord.

He prohecyeth the destruc^ion of Babylon, and the delyueraunce of Israel,
which was in captivity.

CAPI. L.
THE words that the Lord spoke unto Esaias. xiii a and* xlvii. a Iere. x^v. b
and. li. a.
preach among the Gentyles, let your voice be heard, make a token: cry
out keep no silence, but say: Babylon is won. Esa. xlvi. a
Bell is confounded, and Merodach is overcome

Dani. v. a
Ye, their gods be brought to shame and their images stand in fear. For out
of the North there does come a people against her / which make her land so
wast that no body dwell therein, neither man nor beast / for they fly and
depart from thence 1. Es^^. ^. a
In those days and at that time says the Lord, the Children of Israel shall
come they and the children of Judah, wepyn^ and making haste, and shall seek the
Lord(...) God. They shall ask the way to (...)yther shall they turn their
faces, an(...) and hang upon the, in a couenaunte that never shall be broken.

My people has been a lost Ier. xx^ii. ^ Ezech. 36* ^
flock / my shepherdes have disceyued them, and have made them go astray upon
the hills, They have gone from the mountain to the little hyl, and forgotten
their fold. Al they Iere. l. ^
For ^o, I will wake up an host of people from the Northren land, and bring
them upon Babylon: these shall lay sege to it, and win it. Their arrows shall
not mysse / like as a conning archer shuteth not wrong. And the Caldees shall
be spoiled / and al they that spoil them shall be satysfyed, says the Lord
Esaias. 47^
because ye were so chereful and glad, to tread down mine heritage* and
fulfilled your pleasures, as the calves in the grass, and triumphed over them
like the bulls, when ye had gotten the victory. Your mothers shall be sore
confounded / and they that bare you / shall come to shame. She shall be the leest
set by among the nacyons / void, wasted and dried up: No man shall be able to
dwell there, for the fear of the Lord, but she shall be whole desolate. Iere.
18. ^ 19. b. 49. ^
All they that go by Babylon, shall stand still, and be abashed, and shall
wondre at her plages.

Go forth in your array against Babylon round about, al ye that can handle
bows shute at her, spare no arrows, for she has sinned against the Lord.
Cry out: upon her, upon her, against her round about: she shall yield her
self / her foundacyons shall fall / and her walls shall come down / for it
shall be the vengeance of the Lord. Exo. xx^. ^ Leui. ^4. ^ Io^^ ^. ^^
Ye vengeance shall be taken of her / and as she has done / so shall she be
dealte withal. They shall rote out the sower from Babylon / and him that
handles the syckle in harvest. For fear of the sword of the enemy, every man
shall get him to his own people / and every man shall fly to his own
land. Israel is a scatred flock the Lions have despersed them. 4. Reg. (...)
Esaias ^. ^
First the king of the Assyrians devoured them / 3. Reg. (...)
last of all this Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon has brosed all their bones.

Therefore / thus says the Lord of hosts the God of Israel: Behold, I will
vyset the saying of Babylon and his kingdom (...).
I have visited the king of the Assirians and will bring* Israel again to
his pleasant pasture, that he may ^ede upon Charmel and Bas^u, and be
satysfyed upon the mount of Ep^raim and Galaad. (...). c
In those days and at the same time (says the Lord) if the offense of
Israel besought for, there shall none be found: If men enquere for the sin of
Judah, there shall be none: for I will be merciful unto them, whom I suffer to
remain over.

Go down (O thou auenger) into the enemies land, and viset them that dwell
therein: down with them, and smite them upon the backs, says the Lord: do
according to al, that I have commanded the. There is gone about the land a
cry of a slaughter and ^reat murthur, namely on these manner. How happens it,
that the hammer of the whole world is thus broken and brosed in sonder? How
chau^ceth it, that Babylon is become a wyldernes among the Heathen on this
manner? I my self have laid wait for the, and thou art taken unawares: art
thou trapped and snared: for why, thou haste provoked the Lord unto anger: The
Lord has opened his house of ordinance, and brought forth the weapens of
his wrath. For y^ thing that is done in the land of the Caldees, it is the
Lord of hosts work.

These things shall come upon her at the last, they shall break into her
preuy chambres, they shall leave her as bare as stones, that be laid together
upon heaps. They shall so destroy her, that nothing shall be left* They shall
sleye al their myghtie souldyers, and put them to death. Woe be unto them, for
the day and time of their vysitacion is at hand. Me think I hear all ready
a cry, of them that be fled and escaped out of the land of Babylon, which
show in Syo^ the vengeance of the Lord our God / the vengeance of his
temple: ye, a voice of the^, cry against Babylon: Call up all the archers
against Babylon, pytch your t^ntes round about her, that none escape. (...).
^. ^. Apo xviii. ^
Recompense her / as she has deserved: and according as she has done, so
deal with her again / for she has 2. (...). ^. a
set up her self against the Lord, against the holy one of Israel: Therefore
shall her young men fall down in the streets / and all her men of war shall be
roted out in that day, says the Lord. Behold / I speak unto the (O thou
pro^de) says the Lord God of Hosts: for thy day shall come / even the time
of thy vysytacyon. And the proud shall stomble and fall, and no man shall
help him up. I will burn up his cytyes with fire / and it shall consume all
that is round about him.

Thus says the Lord of Hosts: The Gene. xix. ^.
Sodom and Gomorre, with the cities that lay there about, says the Lord:
So shall no man dwell there also / neither shall any man have there his
habytacyon (...) l. b. Deuteronomy. 28. c.
Behold, there shall come a people from the North with a great bond of men,
and many kings shall stand up from the ends of the earth: They bear bows
and buclers, cruel are they and unmercifully.

Their voice roareth like the ragyng see, they ride upon horses, and come
weapened to fight against the: O Babylon. As soon as the king of Babylon
hereth tell of the^, his hands shall wax feable: Soro ^ee and heaviness shall
come upon hi^, as on a woman trauelynge with child. Behold, Iere. xlix. ^
like as the Lion comes up from the pleasant meadows of Iordane unto the
grene pastures of Ethan, so will I drive the^ forth, and make them ru^^e
against her. But whom shall I chose out / and ordain to such a thing? Job.
xli. a.
For who is like me / or who will stryne with me? or what shepherde may stand
against me? Therefore, hear the council that the Lord has given upon
Babylon, and the deuyce that he has taken upon the land of the Caldees. The
least among the people shall tear them in pieces, and look what pleasant
thing they have: they shall lay it wast. The noise at the winning of Babylon
shall move the earth, and the cry shall be herd among the Gentyles.

How Babylon should be overthrown: Jeremy gives his book to Saraias.

CAPI. LI.
THVS has the Lord said: Iere. xxv. b and* l a.
behold

I^^^^i. l. d.
As for Israel and Judah, they shall not be forsaken of their God, of the Lord
of Hosts, of ye holyone of Israel: no, though they have filled al their land
full of sin.

Esaias. 48. d
Fly away from Babylon, every man save his life Let no man hold his tunge to
her wyckednes, for the time of the Lords vengau^ce is come, ye, he shall
reward her again. Babylon has been in the Lords hand Iere. xxv. c
a golden cup, that makes all lands droncken. Of her wine have all people
droncken / therefore are they out of their wits. Esaias xxi. b Apo^. 18. a.
But suddenly is Babylon fallen, and destroyed. Mourn for her, bring plasters
for her wounds / if she may peradventure be healed again. We would have made
Babylon (whole says they) but she is not recovered. Therefore will we let

Make sharp the arowes / and fill the quyuers: Iudit. ii. c ^. ^^g. xi. c.
for the Lodre shall raise up the sprete of the king of the Meeades / which
has all ready a desire to destroy Babylon. This shall be the vengaunce of the
Lord / and the vengaunce of his temple.

Set up tokens upon the walls of Babylon / make your watch strong, set your
watch men in array / ye, hold preuye watches, and yet for all that shall the
Lord go forth with the deuyce, which he has taken upon them that dwell in
Babylon.

O thou that dwell by the great waters, O thou that have so great treasure
and riches, thine end is come, and the reckoning of thy wynninges. Amos. vi. ^
Iere* xxli. ^
The Lord of hoostes has sworn by him self, that he will over whelme the
with men, like greshoppers in nombre, which with a courage shall cry Alarm
Alarm against the. Iere. 135. b*
Ye, even the Lord of hoostes, that with is power made the earth, with his
wisdom prepared the round world, and with his discrecion spread out the
heavens. As soon as he lets his voice be herd, the waters in the air wax
fearce: Psa. ^35. ^.
He draws up the clouds from the ends of the earth. He turns the
lightenynges to rain, he brings the wyndes out of their secret places. By
the reason of wisdom, all men are become fools. Esa. 44. c. Bar^. vi. ^
Confounded be all the casters of images: for the thing that they make is but
dysceate, and has no breath. Uayne is it and worthy to be laughed at: and in
the time of vysitacion it shall perish.

Nevertheless / the porcyon of Jacob is none such: but he that made all things
/ whose name is the Lord of hoostes / he is the rod of his enheritaunce.
Thou breakest

Set up a toke^ in ye land: blow the tro^pettes among the Heithen, provoke
the nations against her / call ye kingdoms of Ararat, Meum, and Ascanes against
her. Set the prince against her / bring as great a sort of horses against
her, as if they were greshoppers. Prepare against them the people of the
Meedes with their kings / princes and all their chief rulers, ye, and the
whele land that is under them.

The land also shall shake and be afraid, when the device of the Lord shall
come forth against Babylon: to make the land of Babylon so waste, that no man
shall dwell any more therein. The worthyes of Babylon shall leave the batayl,
and keep them selves in strong holds / their strength has failed them, they
shall be like women. Their dwelling places shall be burnt up, their bars shall be
broken. One purseuaunt shall meat another, ye, one post shall come by
another, to bring the king of Babylon tidings: that his city is taken in on
every side, the foordes occupied, the fennes brent up: and the soudyers sore
afraid.

For thus says the Lord of hoostes the

Eso. xii. c.
Babylon shall become an heap of stones a dwelling place for dragons / a
fearfulnes and wondering / because no man dwells there. They shall roar
together like lions, and as the young lions when they be angrye / so shall they
bend them selves. In their heat I shall set drink before the / and they
shall be droncken for joy.

Iere. ii. b.
Then shall they sleep an everlasting sleep, and never wake / says the
Lord. I shall carye them down to be slain like sheep, like wethers and
goats. O, how was Sesach won? O, how was the glory of the whole land
taken? how happens it / that Babylon is so wondered at among the Heathen?
The sea is risen over Babylon, and has covered her with his great waves. Her
cities are laid waste, the land lies vnbuylded and void it is a land where
no man dwells / and where no man trauaylleth through. Moreover, Iere i. a.
Esa. lxvi. ^ Dan. 14. d.
I will vyset Bell at Babylon: and the thing that he has swalowed up* that
same shall I pluck out of his mouth. The Gentyls also shall run no more unto
him, ye, and the walls of Babylon shall fall.

O my people, Esa. lii. b. 2. Cor. vi. c.
come out of Babylon / that every man may save his life / from the fearful
wrath of the Lord: Be not faynte herted / and feate not at every rumoure that
shall be herd in the land, for every year brings new tidings, ye, straung
wickedness and lordeshyppe. And lo / the time comes / that I will vyset the
images of Babylon / and the whole land shall be confounded, ye, and her slain
shall lie in the myddest of her. Heaven and earth vith all that is therein,
shall rejoice over Babylon, when the destroyers shall come upon, her from

Iere. l. c.
Like as Babylon has beaten down and slain many out of Israel, so shall
there fall many, and be slain in all her kingdom. Ye that have escaped the
swearde / have you, stand not still, remember the Lord a far of: and think
upon Jerusalem, for we were ashamed to hear the blasphemies: our faces were
covered with shame, because the strange aleauntes came into the Sanctuary of
the Lord. Wherefore, behold (says the Lord) the time comes, that I will
vyset the images of Babylon, and through the whole land they shall mourn and
fall. Iere. xlix. d
Though Babylon clymed up into heaven, and kept her power an hye: yet shall I
send her destroyers, says the Lord.

A piteous cry shall be heard from Babylon, and agreat mysery from the land or
the Caldees: when the Lord destroys the^ and when he dryueth out the hye
stomach and proud bostynge, wherewith they have been as furious as the waves
of great water floudes / and made great crakes with their words. For the
destroyers shall come upon her (even vopon Babylon (which shall take their
worthyes, and break their bows: for God is dysposed to avenge him self upon
them, and suffycyently to recompense them. Ye, (says the Lord.) I will make
their princes / their wise men, their chief rulers, and all their worthyes,
droncken: so that they shall sleep an everlasting sleep, and never wake. Thus
says the King, whose name is the Lord of Hosts.

Moreover, thus says the Lord of Hosts: and her hye gates shall be brent up.
And the thing that the Gentyles and the people have wrought with great
travail and labor / shall come to naught and be consumed in the fire.

This is the charge that Jeremy gave unto Saraiah the son of Neriah, the
son of Maasiah, when he went toward Babylon with Zedekiah the king of Judah,
in the. iiij. year of his raygne. Now this Saraiah was a peaceable prince.
Jeremy wrote in a book all the mesery that should come upon Babylon, ye, and
all these sermons that be written against Babylon, and gave Saraiah this
charge. When thou come unto Babylon, se that thou read all these words,
and say. O Lord, thou art determined to rote out this place so that neither
people nor catell shall dwell there any more, but to lie wast for ever: and
when thou have read out the book, bind a stone to it, and cast it in the
myddest of Euphrates, and say, Even thus shall Babylon syncke, and be thrust
down with the burden of trouble, that I will bring upon her: so that she
shall never come up again, Thus far are the preachi^ges of Jeremy.

He repeteth the taking of zedekiah. Jerusalem is taken of the Chaldees,
zedekeas sons are killed before his face, and his eyes put out. The city is
burned. The temple spoiled and robbed. They that were lafte in Jerusalem are
carried to Babylon. King Ieoakyn is brought forth of preson, and fed like a
king.

CAPI. LII.
ZEdekiah was 4. Re. 24. d 2 Pat. 36. b
one and. xxx. year old, Iere. 39. a. 4. Re. 25. a.
But in the nynth year of his raygne, In the tenth month, the tenth day of
the month it happened, that Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon with all his
Host came before Jerusalem, and beseged it / and made them bulworkes round
about it. And this besegynge of the city endured unto the eleue^th year of
king Zedekiah.

4. Re. 25. a. Iere. 38. b. xxxix. a.
And in the fourth month, the. ix. day of the month, there was so great
honger in the city: that there were no more vytayles for the people of the
land. So all the soudyers bruke away, and fled out of the city by night
through the way of the port between the two walls by the kings garden. Now
the Chaldees had compassed the city round about, yet went these men their
way toward the wyldernes.

And so the Caldees followed upon the^, and took Zedekiah the king in the field
of Jericho, when his host was run from him. So they carried the king away
prisoner to Reblath, unto the king of Babylon in the land of Hemath, Iere,
3^. ^.
where he gave judgment upon him.

The king of Babylon also caused Zedekias sons to be slain before his face,
ye, and put all the princes of Judah to death at Reblath. Moreover, he put out
the eyes

Now the tenth day of the fyfth month in y^ nynth year of Nabuchodonosor
king of Babylon / Nabusaradan the chief captain and the king of Babylons
servants came unto Jerusalem, and brent up the house of the Lord. He brent
up also the kings palace, all the houses and all y^ gorgeous buyldynges in
Jerusalem. And the whole host of the Chaldees that were with the chief
captain, brake down all the walls of Jerusalem round about.

As for the poor people and such folk

The chief captain took also the two pyllers / the lauer / the twelve brazen
bullockes that stood under y^ seat, 3. Re. ^^^
which king Solomon made in the house of the Lord: and all the vessel
contained so much metal, that it might not be weyed. For every pillar was
eyghtene cupyres hye: and the rope yt went about it, was twelve cubytes / and
four fyngers thycke and round. Now upon the rope were brazen knoppes, and
every knoppe was five cubytes hye: and upon the knoppes were whopes, and
pomgranates round about of clean brass.

After this manner were both the pyllers fashyoned with the pomgranates,
whereof there were an hundredth and xcvj. which hanged upon the whopes round
about. The chief captain also took Sariah the hye pressed and Sophoniah that
was chief next him, and the three kepers of the treasury. He took

In the seueth year of his raygne / he carried away of the Jews, three thousand
and three and twenty. In the. xviij. year Nabuchodonosor carried away from
Jerusalem eight hundredth thirtye and two persons. In the. xxiij. year of
Nabuchodonosor Nabuzaradan the chief captain, took away seven hundredth forty
and five Jews presoners. The whole sum of all the presoners, is four
thousand and six hundredth

* In the. xxxvij. year after that Iehoacin the king of Judah was carried away
in the. xxv. day of the. xij. month, Euilmerodach king of Babylon (the same
year that he reigned) gave Iehoacin the king of Judah his pardon, and let him
out of preson / and spoke louyngly to him. And set his trone above the trones
of the other kings that were with him in Babylon. He changed also the clothes
of his preson, ye, and he did eat with him al his life long. And he had a
contynuall living given him of the king of Babylon, every day a certain
thing allowed him all the days of his life until he dyed.

The end of the Book of the Prophet Ieremye.
The lamentary ons of Ieremye.
It happened after Israel was brought into captyuyte, and Jerusalem destroyed,
that Jeremy the Prophet sat weeping, and sorowfully bewailed Jerusalem and
syghynge and howlynge with an heavy and woeful heart, said:

CAPIVLO. I.
ALas / how sits 2. Reg. 4. d 4. Re. xv. a
which was the Lady of all nacyons? How is she brought under trybute, that
ruled all lands.

She wepeth sore in the night, so that the tears run down her chekes: for
among all her lovers, there is none that gives her any comfort: Job. vi. ^
Ye her next friends abhor her, and are become her enemies.

Judah is taken presoner, because she was defiled: and for serving so many
strange gods / she dwells now among the Heithen. She fyndeth no rest, all
they that persecuted her, took her, and so she dwells among her enemies. The
streates of Sion Ier ^. lii.
her children are led away captive before their enemy. All the beautye of the
daughter of Syon is away, her Princes are become like wethers that

Her skyrtes are defiled / she remembered not what would follow / therefore fore
is her fall so great / and there is no man to comfort her. O Lord, consydre
my trouble, for mine enemy has the vpperhande. The Deute. 23. c
whom thou (nevertheless) haste forbidden to come within thy congregacyon.

4. Rer. vi. c Treno. (...). c
Al her people seek their bread with heuinesse, and look what precious thing
every man has, that gives he for meat, to save his life. Consydre, O Lord,
and se, how vile I am become. O all ye that go fore by, be hold and se, if
there be any sorrow like unto mine / wherewith the Lord has troubled me, in
the day of his fearful wrath.

* From above has he sent down a fire into my bones and chastened me: he
has Iere. 4. ^. Treno. (...). c
Therefore do I weep, and mine eyes gushe out of water: for the comfort

Sion casts out her hands, and there is no man to comfort her. The. Lord
has laid the enemies round about Jacob, and Jerusalem is become
abhominacion in the myddest of them. Dani. ^x a
The Lord is rightuous, for I have provoked his countenance unto anger. O take heed all ye people, and consydre my heaviness. My maidens and my young men are
led away into captivity.

I called for my lovers (but they begyled me) for my prestes and councellers,
but they perished: even while they sought for meat, Treno. (...). c
Consydre (O Lord) how I am troubled, my womb is disqueted, my heart turns
about in me, and I am full of heuinesse. The swearde hurts me with out, and
within I am like unto death.

They hear my mourning, but there is none that will comfort me. All mine
enemies have herd of my trouble? and are glad: there of, because thou have done
it. But thou shall bring forth the time, when they also shall be like unto me.
From the shall come al their adversity: thou shalt pluck them away even as
thou have plucked me, because of all my wyckednes. For my sorrow is very great,
and my heart is heavy.

CAPI. II.
ALAS Treno. 4. b
how has the Lord darkened 1. Pat. 29. a Psalm. 8 8. ^
footstool when he was angrye? The Lord has cast down all the glory of
Jacob with out any favor: all the strong places of the daughter Judah has
he broken in his wrath / and thrown them down to the ground: her kingdom
and her Princes has he suspended. In the wrath of his indignacyon he has
broken all the horn of Israel: he has with drawn hes right hand from the
enemy: ye / a flame of fire is kyndgled in Jacob, and has consumed up al
round about. He has bent his bow

The Lord is become like as it were an enemy, he has cast down Israel and al
hes places: ye / all his strong holds has he destroyed, and filled the
daughter of Judah with much sorrow and heaviness.

Iere. vli. ^
Her tabernacle (which was like a garden of pleasure) has he destroyed: her
hye so le^pne feasts has he put down. The Lord has brought it so to pass,
that the hye solemn feasts and Sabbathes in Sion, are clean forgotten. In
his heuye displeasure has he made the king and prestes to be despised. The
Lord has forsaken his own altar / and is wroth with his own Sainctuary, and
has given the walls of their towers into the hands of the enemy. There

The Lord thought to break down the walls of the daughter of Syon / he
spread out his line / and drew not in his hand / till he had destroyed them:
Therefore mourn the turrettes and the broken walls together.

Her ports are casten down to the ground, her bars are broken and smytten
in sonder Iere. (...). ^
her king and princes are carried away to the Gentyls. They have neither la^^
nor prophets, nor yet any vision from the Lord.

The Senators of the daughter Syon sit upon the ground in silence: they have
strawed asthes upon their heads, and gyrded them selves with sack cloth. The
maidens of Jerusalem hang down their heads to the ground. Mine eyes be
begin to fail me through weeping, Treno. ^. a
my body is

Even when they spoke to their mothers: where is meat and drink? for while
they so said, they fell down in the streets of the city / like as they had
been wounded, and some dyed in their mothers bosom.

What shall I say of the, O thou daughter Jerusalem, to whom shall I lyken
the? To whom shall I compare the. O you daughter Syon, to comfort the withal?
Thy hurt

Iere. v. b 14. b. 23. c. 27. b. and 29. b
Thy prophets have looked out vain and folysh things for the, they have not
showed the of thy wyckednes, to keep the from captivity: but have ouerladen
the, and through falshed scatred the abroad. Al they that go by the, clappe
their hands at the: hissing and waggyng their heads upon the daughter
Jerusalem, and say: is this the cite that men call so fair? wherein the whole
land reioyseth? All thine enemies gape upon the: whysperyng and bytyng their
teth / saying: let us devour, for the time that we looked for, is come: we
have found and seen it.

The Lord has fulfilled the thing / D^ute. 4. c and xxx. ^ Iere. 29. ^
Let thine heart cry unto the Lord, O you cite of the daughter Syon: let thy
tears run down like a river day and night: rest not / and let not the aple
of thine cye leave of. Stand up and make thy prater in the first watch of the
night, pour out thine heart like water before the Lord: lift up thine
hands, for the lives of thy young children, that dye of honger in the streets.
Behold, O Lord, and

CAPI. (...).
IAM the man / that (through the rod

He drove me forth / and led me: ye / into darkness / but not in to light.

Against me only he turns his hand and lays it ever upon me.

My slesshe and my skin has he made old / and my bones has he bruised. He
has builded round about me, and closed me in with gall and travail. He has
set me in darckenes, as they that be dead for ever.

He has so hedged me in / that I can not get out, and has laid heavy lynckes
upon me. Though I cry and call pyteously / yet hears he not my prayer. He
has stopped up my ways with four squared stones, and made my paths crooked.

He lays wait for me like a Bear, and Iere xx. b
I am laughed to scorn of all my people, they make songs upon me all the day
long. He has filled me with bitterness, and given me wormwod

O Remember yet my mysery and my trouble, the wormwod and the gall. Ye / thou
shalt remember them, for my soul melts away in me. While I consider these
things in my heart, I get a hope again.

Namely / that the mercyes of the Lord are not clean gone, and that his
loving kyndnesse ceasseth not. His faythfulnes is great, and renueth it self
as the morning. Psalm. xvi. a
The Lord is my porcyon, says my soul, therefore will I hope in him.

O how good is the Lord unto the^ / that put their trust in him, and to the
soul that seeks after him? O how good is it with stylnes to wait and tarry /
for the health of the Lord? O how good is it for a man / to take the yoke
upon him from his youth up He sytteth alone / he holds him still, and
dwells quyetly by him self.

He lays his face upon the earth, if (percase) there happen to be any hope.
He offers his cheke to the smyter / he will be content with reproues. For the
Lord will not forsake for ever. 3. Reg. ^. d
But though he do cast of yet according to the multitude of his mercyes / he
receaueth to grace again.

For he does not plage / and cast out the children of men from his heart.

To tread all the prisoners of the earth under his fete. To move the
judgment of man before the most highest. To condemn a man in his cause. The
Lord has not pleasure in such things. What is he then that says / there
should somthynge be done

Out of the mouth of the most highest goes not evil and good? Wherefore then
murmureth the lyuinge man? let him murmr at his own sin. Job. xxxi. b
Psalm. 14. u
Let us look well upon our own ways / and remember our selves / and turn
again to the Lord.

Let us lift up our hertes with our hands unto the Lord that is in heaven.

We have been dissemblers / and have offended / wylt thou therefore not be
entreated?

Thou haste covered us in thy wrath / and persecuted us / thou have slain us
without any favor. Eccle. 35. d
Thou have hyd thy self in a cloud, that our prayer should not go through

Thou have made us outcastes / and to be despised among the people. All our
enemies gape upon us. Fear and snare is come upon us, ye, despite and
destruccyon:

* Whole ryuers of water gusshe out of mine eyes, for the great hurt of my
people.

Mine eyes run, and can not cease, for there is no rest. O Lord, when wylt
thou look down from heaven, and cousydre?

Mine eye breaks my heart: because of all the daughters of my city. Mine
enemies hunted me out sharply, like a bird / ye, and that without a cause.
They have put down my life into a pytte, and laid a stone upon me. They
poured water upon my head, then thought I: now am I undone. I called upon thy
name / O Lord, out of the deep pyt. Thou have herd my voice: and have not
turned away thine ears fro my syghynge and cryenge. Thou have enclyned thy
self unto me, when I called upon the / and have said: fear not.

Thou (O Lord) have mayntyened y^ cause of my soul, and have redeemed my life.

O Lord, thou have seen my blasphemers

Thou seyst also their syttyng down and their rysyng up / they make their
songs of nothing but of me. Reward them (O Lord) according to the works of
their hands. Give them the thing / that their own heart is afraid of: even
thy curse.

Persecute them (O Lord) with thine indignacion, and rote them out from under
the heaven.

CAPI. IIII.
O How is the gold become so dymme?

The children of Sion that were always in honor / and clothed with the most
precious gold: how are they now become like the erthen vessels / which be
made with the potters hand? The dragons give their young ones suck with bare
breasts: but the daughter of my people is cruel / and dwells in the
wilderness: like the Estriches.

The tongues of the suckynge children / cleue to the rofe of their mouths for
very thriste. The young children ask bread / but there is no man that gives
it them.

They that were wont to fare delycately peryshe in the streets: they that before
were brought up in purple, make now much of Gene. x^x. ^
the wickedness of Sodom / that suddenly was destroyed, and not taken with
hands. Her absteyners (or Nazarees) were whyter then the snow or milk: their
color was fresh, reed as Coral, their beauty like the Saphyre.

But now their faces very black. In so much, that thou should not know
them in the streets. Psalm. (...). ^
Their skin cleueth to their bones* It is withered, and become like a dry
stock, They that be slain with y^ swerd are happyer then such as dye of
honger, and peryshe away, samyshynge for the fruits of the field. Deuteronomy. (...).
^ 4. Reg. vi. ^
The women (which of nature are pytiefull) have sodden their own c^dren with
their hands; that they might be their meat, in the miserable destruction of
y^ daughter of my peopye. Exe^o. ii. a
The Lord has performed his heavy wrath: he has poured out y^ furiousnes of
his dyspleasure He has kyndled a fire in Sio^, which has consumed the
foundacions thereof.

Nether the kings of the earth, nor all inhabetours of the world / would have
believed that the enemy and aduersarye should have come in at the gates of the
City of Jerusalem.

Which nevertheless is come to pass: Gene. ix. a.
innocents blood within her. So that these blind men went stomblynge in the
streates, and stained them selves with blood / which else would touch no bloody
clothe.

But they cried unto every man? slay the staynynge / away / get you hence /
touch it not. Ye (said they) ye must be burnt / ye must dwell among the
Gentyles, and bide no longer here. The countenance of the Lord has banyshed
them / and shall never look more upon them. For they them selves nether
regarded the prestes / nor pityed their elders. Wherefore yet our eyes fail
us, while we look for vain help: seeing we be ever waiting upon a people
that can do us no good. They lay so

I^^^. ^ii^. b. Ab^c. ^. b.
Our persecuters are swyfter then the Aegels of the air / they followed upon us
over the mountains, and laid wait for us in the wilderness. The very breath
of our mouth: even the anointed Lord Gene. (...). b.
him self shall be taken in our sins / of whom we say: Under his shadow
we shall be preserved among the Heythen. And thou (O daughter Edom) that
dwelleste in the land of Huz, be glad and rejoice: for the cup shall come
unto the also, which when thou suppest of, thou shalt be droncken:

Thy sin is well punyshed, (O thou daugter Sion) he shall not suffer the to
be carried away any more. But thy wyckednes) O daughter Edom) shall he vyset,
and for thy sins sake, he shall led the into captyuyte.

The prayer of Ie^emye.

CAPI. V.
CAll to remembrance (O Lord what

We are said to drink our own water for money, and our own wod must we
bye with money. Our necks are under persecucyon, we are weery, and have no
rest.

Before time we yielded our selves to the Ier. xxxi. ^. Eze. xvii^ a
Our fathers (which now are gone) have syned, and we must bear their
wyckednes. Servants have the rule of us / and no man delyuereth us out of
their hands. We must get our living with the parel of our lives, because of
y^ drouth of the wilderness. Our skin is as it had been burnt in an oven,
for very sore honger. The wives are raueshed in Syon, and the maidens in the
cities of Judah. The princes are hanged up with the hand of the enemies, they
have not spared the old sage men / they have taken young me^nes lives from
them, and the boys are hanged up upon trees. The elders sit no more under the
gates and the young men use no more playenge of musycke. The joy I. ^. xxxi. ^.
O Lord turn thou us unto the and so shall we be turned. Renew our days as in
old tunes for thou haste banyshed us now long enough and haste been sore
dysple sed at us.

The end of the lamentacyons of Ieremye.
The Book of the Prophet Ezechyel.
The time wherein Ezechyel prophesied, and in what place. His offprynge and
office. The vysyon of the ^oure bestes. The vysion of the wheles. The vision of
the throne / and of the image above the throne.

CAPITV. I.
IT chanced in the. xxx. year / the Eze. x. a.
where * the hand of the Lord came upon him

And I looked, and behold a stormy wind

Their legs were straight, but their fete were like bullockes fete, and they
glystered, as it had been fair scoured metal. Under their wings upon all the
four corners they had men's hands. Their faces and their wings were toward
the four corners: yet were the wings so, that one ever touched, another. When
they went, they turned them not about: but each one went straight forward.

Eze x. b.
Upon the right side of these four, their

Their faces also and their wings were fyred out above: so that two wings of
one touched ever two wings of another / and with the other they covered their
body. Every one when it went, it went streyghte forward. Where as the spryte
led them / thither they went / Eze. x. ^. ^
and turned not about in their going.

The fashyon and countenance of the this was the vysyon) and the fire gave a
glystre, and out of the fire there went lightening. When the beasts went
forward and backwarde, one would have thought it had lyghtened. Now when I
had well considered the beasts, I saw a work of wheles upon the earth with
four faces also nigh unto the beasts.

The fashyon and work of the wheles was like the sea. The four wheles were
joined and made (to look upon) as it had been one whele in another. When one
went forward, they went all four / and turned them not about in their
going. They were large, great and horrile to look upon. Their backs were full
of eyes round about them all four. When the beasts went / the wheles went
also with them. And when the beasts lift them selves up from the earth, the
wheles were lift up

Above, over the heads of the beasts there was a fyrmame^t, which was
fashyoned as it had been of y^ most pure Crystal and that was spread out above
upon their heads: under the same fyrmament were their wings laid abroad, one
toward another, and two wings covered the body of every beast And when they
went forth, E^e. viii. ^
I beheld him, and he was like an angel, as it had been all of fire within
from his loins upward.

And beneth, when I looked upon him under y^ loins, me thought he was like a
shynynge fire, that gives light on eue^y side. Ye, the shine and glystre that
lightened round about, was like a raynbowe, which in a raynye day apeareth
in the clouds. Even so was the symylytude / wherein the glory of the Lord
appeared. When I saw it / I fell upon my face, and herkened unto the voice of
him that spoke.

The prophet is send to call again the people from their error.

CAPI. II.
AND then said he unto me: Stand E^^. iii. d.
And as he was communynge with me / the spryte came into me / and set me up
upon my fete: so that I marcked the thing / that he said unto me. And he
said: Behold / thou son of man: I will send the to the children of Israel
/ to those runnagates and Exo. xxii. a.
both they and their forefathers unto this day.

Ye, I will send the unto a people that have rough vysages and styffe
stomakes: unto whom thou shalt say on this manner. This the Lord God him
self has spoken, that whether they be obedient or no (for it is a froward
household) they may know yet that there has been a Prophet among them.

Jeremy. i. ^
Therefore thou son of man) fear

Se that thou speak my words unto them, whether they be obedyent or not / for

So as I was lokynge up, behold, there was sent unto me an hand / wherein was
closed Apo^^. v. ^.
a book: and the hand opened it before me / and it was written within and
without / full of careful mournynges: alas and woe.

The prophet being sedde with the word of God and with the constante
boldenes of the spryte / is sent unto the people that were in captyuite. The
punyshement of a curate that showed not the people their sins.

CAPI. III.
AFTER this / said he unto me: Iere. xv. c. Apo x. b. 4. Esd 14. c
eat that closed book / and go thy way / and speak unto the children of
Israel So: I opened my mouth / and he gave me the book for to eat / and
said unto me: Thou son of man / thy belly shall eat / and thy bowels shall
be filled with the book / that I give the.

Then did I eat the book, Psalm. xix. b and* cxi^. ^, Apoc. (...). ^.
and it was in my mouth sweter then honey. And he said unto me: thou son of
man / Ierem^. 1. c.
get the soon unto the house of Israel, and show them (...). iii. a.
Nevertheless / if I sent the to those people / they would follow the.

But the house of Israel will not follow the / for they will not follow me:
ye, all the house of Israel have styffe foreheades and hard hertes. Much*
iii. b
Behold therefore / I will make thy face prevail against their faces and
harden thy forcheade against their foreheades: so that thy foreheade shall be
harder then an Esaias. ^ b.
Adamant or ^ynt stone: that thou may fear them the less, and be less
afraid of them / for they are a froward household.

He said moreover unto me: thou son

I heard also the noise of the wings of the beasts, that russhed one
against another, ye, and the rattling of the wheles, that were by them, which
russhynge and noise was very great.

Eze 8 a 11 d
Now when the spryte took me up, and carried me away, I went with an heavy and
a sorrowful mind / but the hand of the Lord comforted me right soon.

And so in the beginning of the moves Abib, I came to the presoners, Psa.
137. a
that dwelt And when the seven days were expyred / the Lord said unto me:
Eze. xxxiii b
Thou son of man, I have made the a watchman unto the house of Israel:
therefore take good head to the words, and give them warning at my
commandment.

If I say unto the, concerning the ungodly

Now if a ryghteous man go from Eze. xvii a
his righteousness: and do the thing yt is evil

Nevertheless, if thou exhortest the ryghteous, that he sin not / and so the
ryghteous do not sin: then shall he live, because he has received thy
warning, and thou have discharged thy soul. And there came y^ hand of the
Lord upon me / and he said unto me: Stand up / and go into the field / that
I may there talk with the.

So when I had risen up, and gone forth into the field: Behold, the glory of
the Lord stood there, Ezec. i. a.
like as I saw it before, by the water of Cobar.

Ezec. ii. a.
Then fell I down upon my face, and the

But when I speak unto the / then open thy mouth, and say: Thus says Lord
God: who so hears / let him hear: who so will not, let him leave: for it is
an obstinate household.

The sege of the city of Jerusalem is signified. The long contynuaunce of the
captyuyty of Israel. An honger is prophesied to come in the captyuyty.

CAPI. IIII.
THOU son of man: take a tyle stone,

Moreover / take an iron pan / and set it betwixt the and the cite, in
stead of an yro^ wall. Then set thy face to ward it, besege it, and lay
ordinance against it to win it. This shall be a toke^ unto the house of
Israel. But thou shalt sleep upon thy left side: and lay the sin of the
house of Israel upon the. Certain days appointed, thou shall sleep upon that
side, and bear their sins. Dani. ix. ^.
Nevertheless, I will appoynte the a time (to put of their sins) and the
nombre of the days: Three hundredth and. xc. days must thou bear the
wickedness of the house of Israel. When thou have fulfilled these days lie
down again, and sleep upon thy right side. xl. days, and bear the sins of
the house of Judah.

Number. 14. ^
A day for a year, a day (I say) for a year, will I ever lay upon the.
Therefore set now thy face against that beseged Jerusalem / and dyscouer thine
arm / that thou may prophecye against it.

Behold I will lay chains upon the, that thou shalt not turn the from one
side to another, till thou have ended the days of thy sege.

Wherefore / take unto the wheat barley /

And the meat that thou eateste / shall have a certain wayght appointed:
namely twenty sycles every day. This appointed meat shalt thou eat daily /
from the beginning to the end,

Thou shall drink also a certain measure of water: Namely, the syxte part
of an Hin shall thou drink daily from the beginnynge unto y^ end. Barley
cakes shall thou eat, yet shall thou first struck them over with man's donge,
that they mayese it. And with that said the Lord: Even thus shall the
children of Israel eat their defiled bred in the myddest of the Gentiles /
among whom I will scatre them.

Then said I: Oh Lord God. Behold, my soul was yet never stained: for fro
my youth up unto this hour / I did never eat of a dead carcass, or of that
which was slain of wild beasts, neither ca^ there ever any unclean flesh
in my mouth.

Where unto he answered me, and said: well than, I will grant the to take
cowes donge, for the donge of a man, and to struck the breed over with all /
before them.

And he said unto me: Behold thou son of man, Ezech. v. d and. xiiii. d. ^
Reg. 25. a
I will mynyshe all the provision of bred in Jerusalem, so that they shall wey
their bred, and eat it with scarceness. But as for water, they shall have a
very little measure there of, to drink. And when they have no more bred nor
water, one shall be destroyed with another, and famyshe away for their
wickedness.

The rydle of the hearres, by which is sygnified the destruccyon of the
people. The causes of the anger of God toward the people. The Lord discloseth
the ryddle of the hearres.

CAPI. V.
O Thou son of man / take the then a ^ere. vii. d
As for the third perte that remains / cast it in the wind, and I will draw
out y^ sword after the^

Yet afterward / take a little of the same / and bind it in thy cote lap.
Then take a curtesy of it / and cast in it the myddest of the fire: and burn
it in the fire. Out of the same fire shall there go a flame / upon the whole
Leui. 18. d
For so much as ye with your wickedness far exceade the Heythen / that
dwell round about you: (For ye have not walcked in my laws neither have ye
kept mine ordynaunces nor according to the ryghtuousnes of the Gentyles /
which are about you / ye have not dove.) Therefore thus says the Lord God:

I will also come upon the / for in the myddest of the / will I sit in
judgment / in the Deuteronomy. 28. ^ Treno. 4. b 4. Reg. 16. f
shall be feign to eat their own sons, and the sons their own fathers.
Such a court will I keep in the, and the whole remnaunt of the will I scatre
into all the wyndes.

Wherefore, as truly as I live (says the Lord God) seeing thou have defiled my
Sa^ctuary, with all manner of abhominacio^s and with all thy shameful offenses:
For this cause will I also destroy the. Mine eye shall not ouerse the, neither
will I spare the,

^ere. xv. a
One third part within the / shall dye of the pestylence and of hongre?
Another third part shall be slain down round about the / with the
swearde: The other third part that remains / will I scatre abroad toward
all the wyndes, and draw out the swearde after them. Thus I will Ezech. 4. e
I will increase hunger / and mynyshe all the prouysyon of bread among you.

Plages and mysery will I send you, ye and wild beasts also to destroy you.
Pestylence and blodsheding shall come upon you, and the sword will I bring over
you. Even I the Lord, have said it.

He she weth that the people shall be plaged for the sin of Idolatrye. He
prophecyeth the repentance of the remnaunt of the people, and their
delyueraunce. The destruccyon of the froward is prophesied.

CAPI. VI.
AND the word of the Lord came unto Ezec. 36. a
mountains of Israel / that thou may prophecye unto them / and say: Hear
the word of the Lord God, O ye mountains of Israel: Thus has the Lord God
spoken to the mountains, hills, valleys and dales.

Behold. I will bring a swearde over you / and destroy your hye places: I
will cast down your aulters, and break down your temples. Your slain men
will I lay before your gods / and the deed carcases of the children of
Israel will I cast before their Idolles / your bones will I scatre round
about your aulters, and dwelling places.

The cities shall be desolate, the hylchapels laid waste: your aulters
destroyed / and broken: your gods cast down / and taken a way, your
tempels laid even with the ground, your own works clean roted out.

Your slain men shall lie among you / that ye may learn to know, how that
I am the Lord. Those that among you have escaped the swearde / will I leave
among the Gentyles / for I will scatre you among the nations. And they that
escape from you / shall think upon me among the Heathen, where they shall be in
captivity.

As for that whorysh and unfaithful heart of theyrs, wherwyth they run away
fro me / I will break it: ye, and put out those eyes of theyrs / that
commytte forny cacyon with their Idols.

Then shall they be ashamed / and displea

The Lord said moreover unto me: Smite thine hands together, and stamp with
thy fete / and say: Woe worth all the abhominacions and wyckednes of the house
of Israel for because of them, they shall perysshe with the swearde, with
honger and with pestylence. Who so is farte of, shall dye of the pestyle^ce: he
that is nigh at hand, shall perysshe with the swearde: and the other that are
beseged shall dye of honger.

Thus will I satisfye my wrothfull displeasure

The end of all the land of Israel shall suddenly come. The cause of the
destruction thereof. The Prophet is commanded to show the sum of the
euylles that are at hand.

CAPI. VII.
THE word of the Lord came unto me

But now shall the end come upon the: for I will send my wrath upon the /
and will punyshe the according to thy ways, and reward the after all thy
abhominacyons. Ez^. 7. b. 9. ^
Mine eye shall not ouerse the, neither will I spare the: but reward the,
according to thy ways / and declare thy abhominacyo^s. Then shall ye know,
that I am the Lord.

Thus says the Lord God: Behold, one mysery and plage shall come after
another: the end is here. The end (I say) that wayteth for the, is come all
ready, the hour is come against the, that dwell in the land.

The time is at hand, the day of sedicyon

Ez^. 7. b. 9^
Mine eye shall not ouerse the, neither

The time comes, the day draws nigh: 1. Cor. ^. ^ Iere. xv. ^.
Who so byeth, let him not rejoice: he that sells, let him not be sorry: for
why. 1 These. ^. ^
Trouble shall come in the myddest of all rest: so battle / for I am wroth
with all the whole multitude.

The swearde shall be without, pestylence Deu. xxii. d
shall peryshe with honger and pestylence.

And such as escape and fle from among them, shall be upon the hills, like as
the doves in the field: every one shall be afraid, because of his own
wickedness.

All hands shall be let down, and all knees Esay^. xv. ^
and their heads balde: their silver shall lie in the streets, and their gold
shall be despised: S^pho i. d Ecclesi. v. b Prove. xi. u.
Ye, their silver and gold may not deliver them, in the day of the fearful
wrath of the Lord.

They shall not satisfye their hongry souls, neither fill their emptye bellyes
therewith: For it is become their own decay through their wyckednes: because
they O^ie. v^^i. a
made thereof not only costely Iewelles for their pomp and pride / but also
abhomynable images and Idols. For this cause will I make them to be abhorred.
Moreover, I will give it into the hands of the strangers to be spoiled: and to
the wicked / for tobe robbed, and they shall destroy it. My face will I turn
from them / my treasury shall be defiled: for the thieves shall go in to it / and
suspende it. I will make clean riddaunce, for the land is whole defiled with
vntyghtueus judgment of innocente blood / and Iere. 38. c
Then shall they seek vysions in vain at their Prophets. The law shall be gone
from the prestes, and wisdom from the elders. The king shall mourn, the
princes shall be clothed with heaviness, and the hands of the people in the land
shall tremble for fear. I will do unto them after their own ways, and
according to their own judgments will I judge them: to learn them for to
know, that I am the Lord.

An apperaun^e of the symylytude of God. Ezechiel is brought unto Jerusalem in
the sprete. The Lord shows the Prophet the Idolatryes of the house of
Israel, and the fely of the Preastes.

CAPI. VIII.
IT happened, that in the syxte year the Ezechiel. i. c
I saw as it were a lyckenesse of fire from his loins downewarde, and from
his loins upward it shyned marvelous clear and like an angel to look upon.
Ezech. iii. b and. xi. d
This symylitude stretched out an hand, and took me

And behold, the glory of the God of Israel was in the same place: even
Ezechi. ^. a
as I had seen it before in the field. And he said unto me: Thou sone of man, O
lift up thine eyes, E^^d. (...). d Nume. xi. d
lxx. Lords of the council of the house of Israel: and in the myddest of them
stood Iaazanth the son of Saphan: And every one of the^ had a censoure in his
hand / and out of the incense, there went a smoke / as it had been a cloud.
Then said he unto Job xxii. d Esaias. 29 c Iere (...). d. Ezech. (...). ^
For they say: Tush, the Lord seyth us not, the Lord regards not the
world. And he said unto me: Turn the yet again / and thou shall se the
great abhomynacyons that they do. And with that he brought me to the door of
the port of the Lords house, toward the North. And behold, there sat women
mourning for Thamus. Then said he unto me: haste thou seen this / thou son
of man? Turn the about, and thou shall

And he said unto me: have thou seen this thou son of man? Thinks the house
of Judah / that it is but a tryfle, to do these abhomynacyons here? Should they
fyl the land full of wickedness / and undertake to provoke me unto anger? Ye,
and purposely to cast up their noses upon me? Therefore will I also do some
thing in my wrathefull dyspleasure, so y^ mine eye shall not ouerse the^,
neither will I spare them. Prouer i. ^. Iere. (...). ^. and ^iiii. b M^^^. iii. ^
Ye, and though they cry in mine ears with loud voice / yet will I not
hear them.

The destruccyon of Idolatryes, and the conuersyon of the ryghtuous. They that
shall be saved are marched. They that are vnmarcked are slain. A complaynt of
the Prophet for the destruccyon of the people.

CAPI. IX.
HE cried also with a loud voice in

These went in, and stood beside the brazen Exo. xl. ^. Nume. ^x c 3. Regu^. 8.
b
Cherub which was upon him, and was come down to the thresholde of the house,
and he called the man that had the lynen raymente upon him, and the writers
ynckehorne by his side, and the Lord said unto him: Go thy way through the
cite of Jerusalem, and set a marcke upon the foreheades of them, that mourn
and are sorry for all the abhominacions, that be done therein. And to the other,
he said that I might hear: Iud^. ii. ^
Go ye after him through the city / steye / ouerse none / spare none: kill and
destroy

But as for those, that have the marcke upon them: se that ye touch the^ not,
Iere. xx^. ^ and. x^ix. b 1. P^^^. 4. ^
and begin at my Sanctuary. Then they began at the elders, which were in the
temple, for he had said unto them: When ye have defiled the temple / and
filled the cour^e with the slain, then go your way forth. So they went out,
and slew down through the cite. Now when they had done the slaughter, and I
yet escaped: I fell down upon my face, and cried, saying: O Lord God will
thou Job. 22. b Esaias. 29. ^. Eccle. 2^. ^
Tushe the Lord regards not the earth / he seyth us not. Therefore will I
upon them / Ezec. v^i. ^.
mine eye shall not ouerse the / neither will I spare them / but will recompense
their wickedness upon their heads. And behold / the man that had the lynnen
raymente upon him / and the wrytters ynckehorne by his side: told all the
matter how it happened, and said: Lord / as thou haste commanded me / so
have I done.

Of the man that took whote burning coals out of the mydle of the wheles and
of the Cherubyns, in token of the burning of Jerusalem. I rehersall of the
vysyon of wheles of the beasts, and of the Cherubyns.

CAPI X.
AND as I looked, behold / in the fyrma Ezech. ^x. ^
Then said he that sat therein, to him that had the lynen rayme^t upon him:
Crepe in between y^ wheles that are under the Cherubynes / and take thine hand
full of hoate coals out from between the Cherubyns / and cast them over the
cite And he crepte in / that I might se.

Now the Cherubins stood upon the right side of the house, when the man went
in, and the cloud filled the inner court. 2. P^^. ^. ^
But the glory of the Lord removed from the Cherubyns / and came upon the
thresholde of the house: so that the temple was full of clouds, and the court
was full of the shine of the Lords glory. Ye / and the sou^de of the
Cherubynes wings was heard in to the fore court / like as it had been the
voice of the almyghtye God, when he speaks. Now when he had bydden the man
that was clothed in lynen / to go and take the hoate coals from the myddest of
the wheles / which were under the Cherubyns: he went and stood beside the
wheles. Then the one Cherub reached forth his hand from under the Cherubyns /
unto the fire that was between the Cherubyns / and took thereof / and gave it
unto him that had on the lynen raymente in his hand / which took it /

When they went forth / they went all four together, not turnynge about in
their going: But where the first went / thither went they after also / so
that they turned not about in their going. Their whole bodies, their backs /
their hands and wings / ye, and the wheles also / were all full of eyes
round about them all four. And I heard him call the wheles. Ezech. ^. ^.
Every one of them had four faces: so that one face was the face of a Cherub,
the second of a man / the third of a lion / the fourth of an Aegle, and they
were lyfted up above. This is the beast / that I saw at the water of Cober.
Now when the Cherubyns went / the wheles went with them / and when the
Cerubyns shoke their wings to lift them selves upward, the wheles remained
not behind / but were with the^ also. Shortly, when they stood / these stood
also. And when they were lift up, the wheles were lift up also with them, for
the sprete of life was in the wheles.

Ezech. x^. ^ (...). (...).
Then the glory of the Lord was lift up from the thresholde of the temple /
and remained upon the Cherubins. And the Cherubyns flackred with their wings.
and lift them selves up from the earth: so that I saw when they went, and
the wheles with the^. And they stood at the east side of the port that is in
the house of the Lord. So the glory of the Lord was upon them. This is the
beast that I saw under the God of Israel / by the water of Cobar. And I
perceived / that it was the Cherubyns. Every one had four faces / and every
one four wings / and under their wings / as it were men's hands. Now the
figure of their faces was, even as I had seen them, by the water of Cober, and
so was the countenance of them: Every one in his going went straight
forward.

CAPI. XI.
Who they were that seduced the people of Israel. Against these he
prophecyeth, showing them how they shall be scatred abroad. The rennynge of
the heart of comes God* otherwise can we not walk in his commandments. He
threteneth them that leave unto their own councelles.

Moreover, the sprete of the Lord lift me up, and brought me unto the East
port of the Lords house. And behold / there were. xxv me^ under the door
among whom I saw Iaayaniah the son of Azur and Pheltiah the son of
Bananiah, the rulers of the people. Then said the Lord unto me: Thou son of
man: these men ymagyn myschefe, and a wicked council take they in this city,
saying: Tush, there is no destruccyon at hand, let us build houses: this
Jerusalem is the cauldron, and we be the flesh. Therefore shall thou prophecye
unto them, ye, prophecye shall thou unto them, O son of man. And with Eze.
34. ^.
But I will bring you out of it, Mat. 26. ^.
ye have drawn out the swearde, eue^ so will I also bring a swearde over you
/ says the Lord God. I will drive you out of this city and deliver you into
your enemies hand, and will condemn you. Ye shall be slain in all the coasts
of Israel, I will be avenged of you, to learn you for to know, that I am the
Lord. This city shall not be your cauldron, neither shall ye be the flesh
therein: but in y^ coasts of Israel will I punysh you, that ye may know /
that I am the Lord: in whose commandments ye have not walked, not kept his
laws: Leu^. (...). ^. D^^. xii. ^.
but have done after the customs of the Heathen, that lie round about you.

Now when I preached, Pheltiah the son word of the Lord came to me on this
manner: thou son of man: thy brethren / thy knyffolke / and the holy house of
Judah which dwell at Jerusalem / say. They be gone far from the Lord / but
the land is given us in possessyon. Therefore tell them / thus says the Lord
God: I will send you far of among the Gentyles, and skatre you among the
nacyons, and I will halowe you but a little, in the lands where ye shall come.
Tell them also / thus says the Lord God: I will gather you again out of the
nacyons, and bring you from the countries where ye be scatered / and will give
you the land of Israel again: and thither shall ye come. And as for all
impedimentes / and all your abhomynacyons: I will take them away.

Ier. xxxi ^. Eze xxxvi f
And I will give you one heart / and I Ezechel. x. ^ and. xliii. a
So the glory of the Lord went from the myddest of the city, and stood upon
the mount of the city toward the east. Ezech. iii. b and. viii. a.
But the wind took me up, and in a vision (which came by the sprete of God) it
brought me again into Caldea among the presoners. Then the visyon that I had
seen vanished away fro me. So I spoke unto the presoners, all the words of the
Lord, which he had showed me.

The parable of the vessels of the captyuytie. The exposicyon of the parable,
by which the taking of kings ^e^ikiah is signified. Another parable where by
the dystresse of honger and thryst is sygnyfyed.

CAPI. XII.
THE word of the Lord came unto Esaias. vi. b. Mat. xiii. b Mar. iiii. a Luke
viii. b Act. 28. d. Roma. xi. b
which have eyes to se / and yet se not: ears have they to hear / and yet
hear they not, for they are an obstinate household. Therefore (O thou son of
man) make thy gere rydy to flyt / and go forth by fair day light / that they
may se. Ye, even in their sight shalt thou go from thy place to another
place: if paraduenture they will consydre, that they be an vnobedyent household.
Thy gere that thou haste made ready to flyt withal, shall thou bear out by
fair day light, that they may se: and thou thy self shall go forth also at
eue^ in their sight, as a man does when he flytteth. Dygge through the wall /
that they may se / and bear through it the same thing / that thou tokeste up
in their sight. As for thy self /

And in the mourning, came the word Iere. xx^. ^, xxiii. b. (...) xxxii. b.
The chefest that is among you / shall lade his shulders in the darcke / and
get him away. He shall break down the wall / to carye stuff therthorowe:
Ex^. xvii. ^ and. xxxii. ^
My line will I sprede out upon him / and catch him in my net, and carry him to
Babylon, in the land of the Caldees: which he shall not se / and yet shall he
dye there. As for all his helpers, and all his Hosts / that be about him, I
will scater the^ toward all the wyndes, and draw out a swearde after them.

Ezec. xv. ^ and. xx^^. ^
So when I have scatred them among the Heathen / and strowed them in the
lands, they shall know, that I am the Lord. But, I will leave a little no^bre
of them from the swearde, hunger and pestilence: to tell all their abhominacions
among the Heathen, where they come: y^ they may know, how that I am the
Lord.

Moreover / the word of the Lord came says the Lord God, to them that
dwell in Jerusalem, and to the land of Israel: Ye shall eat your bred with
sorrow, and drink your water with heaviness: Ye, the land with the fullness
thereof shall be laid waste / for the wickedness of them that dwell therein. And
the cities y^ now be well occupied, shall be void, and the land desolate:
that ye may know how that I am the Lord.

Yet came the word of the Lord unto me 1. Pet. 3. b.
seeing that the days are so slack in coming, all the vysyons are of none
effect: Tell them therefore, thus says the Lord God: I will make that by
word to cease, so that it shall no more be commenly used in Israel.

But say this unto them: The days are at hand / that every thing which
has been prophesied, shall be fulfilled. There

Ye, even in your days (O ye froward houshoulde) will I deuyse some thing,
and bring it to pass, says y^ Lord God. And the word of the Lord came
unto me saying Behold / thou son of man: The house of Israel say in this
manner: Tush, as for the vycyon that he has seen / it will be many a day or
it come to pass: It is far of yet, the thing that he prophecyeth. Therefore
say unto them: Thus says the Lord God: All my words shall no more be
slack: Look what I speak, that same shall come to pass / says the Lord
God:

The word of the Lord against false prophets, which teach the people the
councelles of their own hertes.

CAPI. XIII.
THE word of the Lord came unto Ezec. ^4. a.
Woe be it unto those folysh prophets, that follow their own sprete and speak
where they se nothing. O Israel, thy prophets are like the foxes upon the
dry telde: For they stand not in y^ gappes, nether make they an hedge for the
house of Israel, that men might abide the parel in the day of the Lord, Uayne
things they se / and tell lies / to Ier. xxvi^. ^
maintain their preachynges with all. The Lord (say they) has spoken it,
wha^ in very deed the Lord has not sent them. Uayne visyons have ye seen, and
spoken falce prophecyes / when ye say the Lord has spoken it / where as I
never said it.

Therefore, thus says the Lord God: Iere. viii b
and told them of peace, where no peace was. One sets up a wall / and they
dawbe it with lowse claye. Therefore tell them which dawbe it with untempered
mortar: that it shall fall.

Mat. vii. c.
For there shall come a great shower of rain, great stones shall fall upon
it / and a sore storm of wind shall break it / so shall the wall come down.
Sall it not then be said unto you: where is now the mortar, that ye dawbed it
withal? Therefore thus says the Lord God: I will break out in my wrathful
dyspleasure with a stormy wind, so that in mine anger there shall come a
mighty shower of rain / and hayle stones in my wrath, to destroy withal.

As for the wall / that ye have dawbed to catch souls with all. ^^oye. v. c.
Math. ii^. ^
For when ye

Wherefore, thus says the Lord God Be hold / I will also upon the pyllowes,
where with ye catch y^ souls in flyenge: them will I take from your arms, and
let the souls go / that ye catch in flyenge. Your bolsters also will I tear
in pieces, and deliver my people out of your hands so that they shall come no
more in your hands to be spoiled / and ye shall know, that I am the Lord.
Seeing that with your lies ye disconforte the heart of the ryghteous, who^ I
have not discomforted: Again: For so much Os^^. 4. ^.
as ye courage the hand of the wicked so y^ he may not turn from his wicked
way, and live: therefore shall ye spy out no more vanyte, nor pro phecye your
own gessynges: for I will de liver my people out of your hand, that ye may
know, how that I am the Lord.

The Lord denies his word to the people for their sins sake. The dis^ysers
of the word does the Lord sometime deceive by falce prophets. A comfort of
them that fled unto Babylon.

CAPI. XIIII.
THERE resorted Ezech xx. ^.
unto me certain

Wherefore / tell the house of Israel: thus Ezech. xx. c.
Be converted / forsake your Idols, and turn your faces from all your
abhominacyons. For every man, (whether he be of the house of Israel or a
stranger, that so geourneth in Israel) which departs fro me, and caryeth
Idols in his heart / purposynge to go still stomblynge in his own wickedness
/ and comes to a Prophet, for to ask council at me through him: unto that
man, will I the Lord give answer, by mine own self. 3. Reg. 22^ Job. xii. ^.
And if that Prophet be dysceaued / when he tells him a word: then I the
Lord myself have dyfceaued that Prophet, and will stretch forth mine hand
upon him / to rote him out of my people of Israel, and they both shall be
punyshed for their wyckednes. According Ezech. iii. d and. iiii. d.
and destroy all the prouysyon of their bread / and send derth upon them, to
destroy man and beast in the land. Ier^. ^v. ^.
And though Noe / Daniel and Job, these three men were among the^ / yet shall
they i^ their right^ ousnesse deliver but their own souls, says

Or if I bring a swearde into the land / I^r. (...). ^
four troublous plages upon Jerusalem: the swearde honger / perlous beasts,
and pestylence, to destroy man and beast out of it: yet shall there be a
te^naunt saved therein, which shall bring forth their sons and daughters.
Behold, they shall come forth unto you, and ye shall se their way, and what
they take in hand, and ye shall be comforted, as touching all the plages that I
have brought upon Jerusalem. They shall comfort you, when ye se their way
and works: and ye shall known, how that it is not without a cause, that I
have done so against Jerusalem, as I did, says the Lord God.

As the unprofitable wood of the vine tree is cast in to the sire, so says
he that Jerusalem shall be brent.

CAPI. XV.
THE word of the Lord came unto me, saying: Thou son of man: What*

Seeing then, that it was mete for no E^^t. xi^. ^ and* xxii. b.
Then shall ye know / that I am the Lord, when I set my face against them, and
make the land wast: because they have so sore offended / says the Lord God.

The Prophet entendynge to speak of the abhomyncryons of Jerusalem* does
first show the benefytes of God toward i^. Jerusalem is reproved of
vnkind^es, for her fornycacion with Idols. He iustifyeth the wyckednes of
other people in co^paryson of the sins of Jerusalem. The cause of the
abhomynacions into which the ^odomytes fell. Mercy is promised to the
repentaunt.

CAPI. XVI.
Again, the word of the Lord spoke

Then came I by the, and saw the trode^ down in thine own blood, and said
unto the: thou shall be pourged from thine own blood, from thine own blood
(I say) shalt thou be cleansed. Esaias. v. a Icre. x^. c
So I planted the / as the blossom of thy field, thou art grown up / and
waxen great: thou have gotten a marvelous pleasant beutie, thy breasts are
come up / thy hearre is goodly grown, where as thou wast naked and bare before.

Now when I went by the / and looked upon the, behold, thy time was come / ye
/ even Iere. iii. ^ (...). xx^. ^
and married myself with the (says the Lord God) and so thou becamest mine
own. Then washed I the with water, and pourged thy blood from the. I anointed
the with oil. I gave the change of ra^^entes, I made the shues of Taxus
lether: I gyrded the about with white sylke I clothed the with kerchefes, I
decked the with costely apparel, I put tynges upon thy fyngers: a chain about
thy neck spanges upon thy fore head / ear rings upon thine ears, and set a
beutiful crown upon thine head. Thus wast thou deckte with silver and gold,
and thy raiment was of fine white sylcke / of nedle work and of diverse
colors.

Thou dyddest eat nothing but symnels, honey and oil: marvelous goodly waste
thou and beutyfull / ye, even a very Queen wast thou: In so much, that thy
beuty was spoken of among the Nethen, for thou wast excellent in my beauty,
which I put upon the says the Lord God. But thou have put confidence in
thine own beuty, and played the harlot / when thou had gotten the^ name.
Thou have committed whoredom / with all that went by the / and haste
fulfilled their desires: ye / thou have taken thy garments of diverse colors,
and deckte thy^e aulteres therewith / where upon thou myghtest fulfill thine
whoredom / Iere. i. iii. and. ^. h. Esaias. 46. a
of such a fashyon, as never was done / nor shal^e. O^^. (...). ^ and. (...).
a (...) (...). d. ^. xx. d
The goodly ornaments and Jewels which I gave the of mine own gold and
silver / ha^r thou taken, and made the men's images there of, and committed
whoredom withal.

Thy garments of diverse colors have thou taken, and decked them therewith:
mine Leuit. 18. ^ and xx. a Deuteronomy. 18. b ^ xxxii. ^ Iere. vii. d Ezech. xx. d
Psalm. cv. a
Thou haste taken thine own sons and daughters, whom thou had begotten
unto me: and these have thou offered up unto them, to be their meat. Is this
but a small whorewme of thine (think thou) that thou sleyest my children,
and geuest them over, to be brent unto them? And yet in all thy abhominacions
and whoredom, thou have notre membred the days of thy youth, how naked and
bare thou wast at that time, and trodden down in thine own blood. After all
these thy wyckednesses (woe woe unto the, says the Lord God) thou haste
builded thy stews and brodel houses in every place: ye at the head of every
street have thou builded the an altar. Thou have made thy beautye to be
abhorred / thou haste laid out thy legs Ezech. 23. b
Thou have committed fornicacion with the Egyptians thy neighbors, which had
much flesh: and thus have y^ used thine whoredom, to anger me.

Behold, I did stretche out mine hand over the, and will Ezech. (...). d ^. ^.
(...). c
mynish thy store of fode, and deliver the over into the wylles of the
Philistines thine enemies, which are ashamed of thy abominable way. Ezer.
23. ^.
Thou have played the whore also with the Assyryans / which might not satisfye
the: Ye, thou have played the harlot, and not had enough. Thus have thou still
committed thy fornicacion from the land of Canaan unto the Caldees, and yet
thy lust not satysfyed. How should I cir cumcyse thine heart (says the Lord
God) seeing thou do al these things, thou pre cyous whore: building thy
stews at the head of every street, and thy brodell houses in all places? Thou
have not been as an other whore, that makes booste of her mynnynge but was a
wife that breaks wedlock / and takes other in stead of her husband.
Gifts are given to all other whores / but thou geuest rewards unto all thy
lovers: and offrest them gifts, to come unto the out of all places, and to
committee fornicacyon with the. It is come to pass with the in thy whoredoms
contrary to the use of other women: ye / there has no such fornycacion been
committed after the, seeing that thou profrest gifts unto other / and no
reward is given the: this is a contrary thing.

Therefore hear the word of the Lorde' / O thou harlot: thus says the Lord
God: For so much as thou have spent thy money, and discovered thy shame /
through thy whor dome with all thy lovers / and with all the Idols of thy
abhommacions in the blood of thy children, 4. Reg. (...) and. 17. ^
whom thou have given them? Behold therefore. I will gather together al thy
lovers, unto whom thou haste made thy self comen: ye, and all them whom thou
fauourest, and every one that thou hate: and Esaias. 47. ^ N^^^. (...). ^
will discover thy shame before them / that they may se all thy fylthynes.

Ezech. (...). ^
Moreover, I will judge the as a breaker of wedlock and a murderer, and
reco^peuce the thine own blood in wrath and gelousy. I will give the over
into their power, that shall break down thy stews, and destroy Leui. (...).
^
ye, they shall bring the comen people upon the, which shall stone the and
sleye the down with their sweardes. 4. Reg. (...). ^
They shall burn up thy houses, and punysh the in the sight of many women. Thus
will I make thy whoredom to cease, so that y^ shall give out no mo rewards.

Should I make my wrath to be still, take my gelousy from the, be content, and
no more to be displeased? saying thou remembrest not the days of my youth, but
haste provoked me to wrath in all these things? Behold therefore, I will
bring thine own ways upon thine head, says the Lord God: howbeit, I
never did unto the, according to thy wickedness and all thy abhomynact ons.
Behold / all they that use comen proverbs, shall use this proverb also
against the: such a mother, such a daughter.

Thou art even thy mothers own daughter / that has cast of her housbande and
her children: Ye, thou art the sister of thy systers / which forsook their
husbands and their children. Eze^. ^^^^
Your mother is a Cethyte and your father an Amoryte. Thine eldest

But thy yongeste sister that dwells on thy right hand, is Sodoma and her
daughters. Yet haste thou not walked after their ways / nor done after their
adhomynacyo^s: but in all thy ways thou haste been more corrupt then they. As
truly as I live / says the Lord God: Sodoma thy sister with her daughters /
has not done so evil / as thou and thy daughters. Behold, Gene. x^ii. ^ 1.
18. ^. ^. 19. b. ^.
the sins of thy sister Sodoma were these: Pride / fullness of meat /
abundance and Idylnesse: these things had she and he^ daughters. Besides
that / they reached not their hand to the poor and nedy / but were proud,
and did abominable things before me: therefore I took them away / when I had
seen it. Neither has Samaria done half of thy sins / Iere. ^i^. ^.
ye, thou haste exceaded them in wickedness: In so much that in comparysyon
of all the abhomynacy ons which thou haste done / thou haste made thy systers
good women. Therefore bear thine own shame / thou that in sin haste overcome
thy systers: seeing thou haste done so abhomynably / that they were better then
thou. Be ashamed therefore (I say) and bear thine own confusyon / thou that
make thy systers good women.

As for their captivity / namely the captiuyte of Sodoma and her daughters: the
captyuite of Samaria and her daughters: I will bring them again / so will I
also bring again thy captivity among them that thou may take thine own
confusyon upon the, and be ashamed of all that thou have done, and to comfort
them. Thus thy systers (namely) Sodoma and her daughters: Samaria and her
daughters, with thy self and thy daughters, shall be brought again to your old
estate. When thou wast in thy pride / and before thy wickedness came to light:
thou would not hear speak of thy sister Sodoma, until the time that the
Spryans with all their towns, and the Phylystines

For thus says the Lord God: I should (by right) deal with the, as thou
have done Thou haste despised the oath, and broken the covenant.
Nevertheless, I will remember my covenant that I made with the in thy youth,
in so much that it shall be an everlasting couenaunte: so that thou also
remember thy ways, and be ashamed of the^: then shalt thou receive of me thy
elder and yo^ger systers, whom I will make thy daughters, and that beside thy
covenant. Iere. xxi. ^ (...). vi^^. ^
And so I will renew my couenaunte with the, that thou may know that I am
the Lord, that thou may think upon it, be ashamed and excuse thine own
confusyon no more, when I have forgeuen the, all y^ thou haste done, says the
Lord God.

The parable of the two Aegles sygnyfyeth that zedekiah, which contrary to
his oath had forsaken the frendeshyppe of Nabuchodonosor, turns him self to
the King of Egypt, and therefore peryshed. An exposicyon of the parable. A
prophecy of Christ.

CAPI. XVII.
THE word of the Lord unto me, say Ezech. 24. a
a darcke speaking and a parable, unto the house of Israel, and say. Thus
says the Lord God. There came a great Dani. vii. a
Aegle with great wings, ye, with mighty long wings, and full of feathers of
diverse colors, upon the mount of Libanus, and took a branch from a
Cedretre, and brake of the top of his twygge, and carried it into the land of
Canaan, and set it in a cite of merchants. He took also a branch of the
land, and planted it in a fruitful ground, he brought it unto great waters,
and set it as a wyllowe tree thereby. Then did it grow / and was a great
vynestock / out low by the ground: whose branches bowed toward him, and the
rotes thereof were under him. Thus there came of it a vine, and it brought
forth blossoms, and spread out branches. But there was another Aegle, a great

Moreover, the word of the Lord came 4. Re. 24. c.
of Babylon came to Jerusalem, and took the king and his Princes, and led
them to Babylon.

He took of the kings sede, and made a couenaunte with him / and took an oath
of him: The Princes of the land took he with him also / that the land might
be holden in subieccyon, and not to rebelle, but keep the covenant / and
fulfill it. But he fell from him and sent his Embassatours into Egypt that he
might have horses and much people. Should that prospere? Should he be kept
safe / that does such things? Or should he escape / that breaks his
couenaunte? As truly as I live says the Lord God: He

Therefore thus says the Lord God: As (...)
I will cast my net about him / and catch him in my yarne. To Babylon will I
^arye him / there will I punyshe him / because of the great offense that he
made me. As for those that fly from him out of the hooste / they shall be
slain with the swearde. The resydue shall be scatted toward all the winds: and
ye shall know / that I the Lord have spoken it.

Thus says the Lord God: I will also take a branch from an hye Cedre tree,
and

And all the trees of the field shall know that I the Lord have brought down
the hye tree, and set the low tree up: that I have dried up the grene tree /
and made the dry tree to florysh: Even I the Lord that spoke it / have also
brought it to pass.

He shows that every man shall beat his own sin. To him that amendeth, is
salua^yon promised. Death is prophesied to the ryhgtuous, which ^^^^e^h back
from the right way.

CAPI. XVIII.
THE word of the Lord came unto me, on this manner: what mean ye by this Iere.
xxxi. ^
The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the chyldrens teth are set on edge:
As truly as I live, says the Lord God, ye shall use this byworde no more in
Israel.

Behold Psalm. ^. ^
all souls are mine. Like as y^ father is mine, so is the son mine also. The
soul that synneth, shall dye: ^^^^. (...). ^*
If a man be godly, and do the thing that is equal and right / he eats not
upon the hills: he lyfteth not his eyes up to y^ foul Idols of Israel he
defyleth not his neighbors wife: he medleth with no menstruous woman: he
greueth no body: he gives hes detter his pledge again, he takes none other
man's good by violence: Mat. (...)*
he parts his mete with the hongrye: he clotheth the naked: Psalm. (...). ^
he lends nothing upon usury: he takes nothing over: he withdraws his
hand from doyinge wrong he handles faithfully betwyxt man ^ man: he walks
in my commandments and keeps my laws, and perfourmeth the^ faithfully:
Rom^. ^* ^*
This is a ryghtuous man / he shall surely live says the Lord God.

If he now get a son, that is a murderer / a sheder of blood: if he do one
of these things Iaco. ii. ^.
(though he do not al) he eats upon the hills: he defyleth his neighbors
wife: he greueth the poor and nedy: he robs and spoyleth: he gives not the
detter his pledge again / he lyfteth up his eyes unto Idols, and medleth with
abhomynable things: he lends upon usury, and takes more over. Shall this
man live? He shall not live. Seeing he has done al these abhominacions / he
shall dye / his blood shall be upon him.

Now if this man get a son also, that

Namely / he eats not up the mountains: he lyfteth not his eyes up to the
Idols of Israel: he defyleth not his neighbors wife: he vexes no man: he
keeps no man's pledge* he neither spoyleth, nor robs any man: he deals his
meat with the hungrye: he clotheth the naked: he oppresses not the poor: he
receaueth no usury / nor any thing over: he keeps my laws / and walcketh in
my commandments:

This man shall not dye in his fathers sin, but shall live without fail. As
for his father: because he oppressed and spo^led his brother, and did wyckedly
among his people: lo, he is deed in his own sin. And yet say ye: Wherefore
then should not this son bear his fathers ^ynne? Therefore: because

The same soul that synneth, shall dye. Deuteronomy* 24. ^* ^* ^c. 14. a* ^* (...).
25. d
The son shall not bear the fathers offense / neither shall the father bear
the sons offense. The ryghteousnes of the ryghtuous shall be upon him, and the
wyckednes of the wicked shall be upon him self also. ^^^. xviii. a* ^zech. 33. c.
But if the vngoly will turn away from al his sins that he has done / and
keep all my commandments / and do the thing that is equal and right,
doutlesse he shall live, and not dye. As for all his sins that he did before,
they shall not be thought upon but in his righteousness that he has done / he
shall live. ^. ^^it. 3. b.
For have I any pleasure in death of a sinner, says the Lord God, but rather
that he convert, from his ways and live?

Agane, if the ryghtuous turn away from his righteousness, and do iniquite,
according to all the abhominacyons, that the wicked man does: shall he live?
All the ryghtuousnesse that he has done, shall not be thought upon: but in the
fault that he has offended withal / and in the sin that he he has done / he
shall dye.

And yet ye say: Tush Ezech. 33 d.
the way of the Lord is not indyfferente. Hear therefore ye house of Israel:
Is not my way right? Or, are not your ways rather wicked: Ezech. 33. c.


When a ryghtuous man turns away from his ryghtuousnesse, and medleth with
ungodliness: he must dye therein: ye / for the vnryghtuousnesse that he has
done / must he dye. Again: Esaias. ^v. b.
when the wicked man turns away from his wickedness / that he has done /
and does the thing which is equal and right: he shall save

And yet says the house of Israel: Tushe / the way of the Lord is not
equal. Are my ways unright? O ye house of Israel: Are not your ways rather
unequal? As for me, I will judge every man, according to his ways, O ye house
of Israel says y^ Lord God. ^^^^. (...). b. Mat. iii. ^.
Wherefore / be converted, and turn you clean from all your wickedness / so
shall there no sin do you harm. Cast away from you all your ungodliness
that ye have done: Ezech. xi. ^ and. 3^. 8.
make you new hertes and a new spryte. Wherefore will ye dye, O ye house of
Israel? seeing I have no pleasure in the death of him that dies / says the
Lord God. Turn you then, and ye shall live.

The captyuyiye of Iehoahaz ^ of Iehoacin is sygnyfyed by the lions whelpe^,
and by the ^^o^. He sets out the prosperytye of the city of Jerusalem that
is past / and the (...) serye thereof that is present.

CAPI. XIX.
BUT mourn thou for the princes of

Now when the damme saw / that all her

Then came the Heathen together on every side out of all countrees against him
/ laid their nets for him / and took him in their pit. 4. Reg. (...). ^
Iere (...). ^. and. (...)* ^.
So they bound him with chains, and brought him to the king of Babylon:
which put him in preson, that his voice should no more be herd upon the
mountains of Israel. As for thy mother, she is like

So when men saw that she exceaded the heyght and multitude of her branches /
she was roted out in dyspleasure / and cast down to the ground. The East
wind dried up her fruit, her strong stalks were broken of / wythered and
brent in the fire.

But now she is planted in the wilderness / in a dry and thrustye ground.
And there is a fire gone out of her stalckes / which has burnt up her
branches and her fruit: so that she has no mo strong stalckes / to be
staves for officers. This is a pyteous and miserable thing.

The Lord denies that he will answer the^ when they pray / for the offense
of unkindness which he here obiecteth. He promeseth that his people shall
return from captiuyty. By the wod that should be brent is sygnyfyed the
burning of Jerusalem.

CAPI. XX.
IN THE. vij. year the. x. day of the Ezec. xiiii. a
it happened / that certain of the elders of Israel came unto me / for to
ask council at the Lord / and sat them down by me. Then came the word of
the Lord unto me on this manner: Thou son of man: speak unto the elders of
Israel / and say unto them: Thus says the Lord God. Are ye come hither to
ask any thing at me? As truly as I live (says the Lord) I will give you no
answer. Wylt thou not reprove them (thou son of man) will thou not reprove
them? Show them the abhomy nacyons of their fore fathers, and tell them. Exodus
iii. b
In the day when I chose Israel / and lift up mine hand upon the sede of
the house of Jacob / and showed my self unto them in the land of Egipte: Ye,
when I lift up mine hand over them / and said: I am the Lord your God /
even in the day that I lift up mine hand over them / to bring them out of
the land of Egypt / into a land that I had provided for them / which
flows with mylcke and honey / and is a pleasant land among all other. Then
said I unto them: Deu. vii a.
Cast away every man the abhomynacyons that he has before him / and defyle
not your selves with the Idols of Egypt / for I am the Lord your God.

But they rebelled against me, and would not follow me: to cast away every man
the abhomynacyons of his eyes, and to forsake the Idols of Egypt. Then I made
me to pour my indignacion over them, and to satisfye my wrath upon them: ye,
even in the myddeste of the land of Egypt. But I would not do it / for my
names sake: that it should not be unhallowed before the Heathen / among whom
they dwelte / and among whom I showed my self unto them, that I would bring
them out of the land of Egypt. Now when I had carried them out of the land
of Egypt / and brought them into the wilderness: I gave them my
commandments, and showed them my laws, Deu. iiii. b. Gala. iii. b. Luite.
18. a. Exo. xvi. c. 31 c. 32. c.
which woso keeps shall live in them. I gave them also my holy days, to be a
token betwyxte me and them / and thereby to know, that I am the Lord, which
halowe them. And yet the house of Israel rebelled against me in the
wilderness / they would not wallke in my commandments, they have cast
away my laws (which whosoever keeps shall live in them) and my Sabbath days
have they greatly unhallowed.

Nu. xiiii. ^ Psa. xiv. ^
Then I made me to pour out my indygnacyon

Nevertheless / mine eye spared them / so that I woled not utterly sleye them
/ and consume them in the wilderness. Morouer, I said unto their sons in
the wilderness: Exodus 1^. ^.
walcke not in the statutes of your forefathers / keep not their ordynaunces
/ and defyle not your selves with their ydoles / for I am the Lord your God.
But walcke in my statutes / keep my laws and do them halowe my Sabbathes: Ex.
1^ ^^^^
for they are a token betwyxte me and you / that ye may know how that I am
y^ Lord your God. Notwithstanding, their sons Nume. (...) Leu. xviii. ^
Gala. iii. ^. (...)
rebelled against me also: they walked not in my statutes they kept not my
laws to fulfill them (which he that does shall live in them) neither hallowed
they my Sabbath days. Then I made me again to pour out my indyngnacyon over
them / and satysfye my Exo. xiii. ^
(when I appointed for my self all their first borne) to make them desolate:
that they might know, how that I am the Lord.

Therefore (O thou son of man, tell the house of Israel, thus says the Lord
God) Beside all this / your forefathers have yet blasphemed me more, and
greatly offended against me: For after I had brought them in to the land /
that I promised to give them, when they saw every hye hill and all the thycke
trees: they made there their offrynges / and provoked me with their oblacions,
making sweet sauoures there / and poured out their drynck offringes. Then I
asked them: what have ye to do withal that ye go thither? And therefore is it
called the hye place unto this day. Wherefore, speak unto the house of
Israel: Thus says the Lord God: ye are even as unclean as your fore
fathers, and commytte whordome also with their abhomynacions. In all your
Idols, where unto ye bring your oblacions Iere. xix. a. Deuteronomy. xii. d xviii. b.
Ezec. xix. c. 4. Reg. 18. c xxi. a. 2 Par. 28. a
and to whose honor ye burn your children: ye / defyle your selves / even
unto this day: how dare ye then come, and ask any questyon at me? O ye
household of Israel? As truly as I live (says the Lord God) ye get no
answer of me: and as for the thing that ye go about / it shall not come to
pass / where as ye say: we will be as the Heathen and do as other people in
the land / wood and stone will we worship.

As truly as I live / says the Lord God /

Go to now then (says the Lord God) ye house of Israel Esaye. ii. c. xxx.
d. Eze. xiiii. a
cast away / and destroy every man his Idols: then shall ye hear me, and
no more blaspheme my holy name with your offrynges and Idols.

But upon my holy hill / even upon the hye hyl of Israel says the Lord god,
shall all the house of Israel and all that is in the land, worship me: Deuteronomy.
xii. a xiiii. b.
and in y^ same place will I favor the^, and there will I require your heave
offringes and the firstlings of your oblacions, with all your holy things. I
will accept your sweet sauoure, when I bring you from the nations / and
gather you together out of the lands, wherein ye be scatred: that I may be
hallowed in you before the Heathen / and that ye may know / Iere. viii. a 18.
and. 31. c
and ye shall be dyspleased with your own selves / for all your wyckednes /
that ye have done. And ye shall know / that I am the Lord: when I entreat
you after my name not after your wicked ways / nor according to your
corrupt works: O ye house of Israel. says the Lord God.

Moreover, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying: Thou son of man set
thy face toward the South / and speak to the south wind / and say to the
wood toward the south: Hear the word of the Lord, thus says the Lord
God: Behold I will kyndle a fire in the, that shall consume the grene trees
with the dry. No man shall be able to quench his flame, but all that looks from
the southe to the north, shall be brent therein: and al flesh shall se, that I
the Lord have kyndled it, so that no man may quench it. Then said I: O Lord
God / they will say of me: Iere. xx. ^.
Tushe, they are but fables, that he tells.

He threatens the sword, that is to say / destruccyon to the city of
Jerusalem. He shows the fall of King zedekiah He is commanded to prophecy the
destruccyon of the children of Ammon. After the slaughter of other / at the
last the Lord threateneth death unto Nabuchodonosor him self.

CAPI. XXI.
THE word of the Lord came to me

Mourn therefore (O thou son of man)

Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying. Thou son of man,
prophecye / and speak: Thus says the Lord God: speak / the swearde is
sharpened and well scoured. Sharpened it is for the slaughter /

The word of the Lord came yet unto me again saying: Thou son of man,
make the two streets, that the swearde of y^ king of Babylon may come. Both
these streets shall go out of one land. He shall set him up a place, at the head
of the street shall he chose him out a corner. Make the a street that the
swearde may come toward Rabath of the Ammonites: and to the strong city of
Jerusalem. For the king of Babylon shall stand in the turnynge of the way /
at the head of Leul. xix. f. and xx. ^. Deuteronomy. 18. b.
to ask council at the sothe sayers / castyng the lottes with his arrows, to
ask council at the Idol, and to look in the liver. But the sothesaynge shall
point to the right side upon Jerusalem, y^ he may set men of war / to smite
it with a great noise, to cry out Alarm / to set batell rams against the
gates, to grave up dyches / and to make bulworkes.

Nevertheless, as for the sothesayenge, they shall hold it but for vanite, even
as though a ieste were told them: ye, and they them selves remember their
wickedness, so that by right they must be taken and won.

Therefore sateth the lord God: For so much

O thou shameful wicked gyde of Israel whose day is come: even the time that
wic kednes shall have an end: Thus says the Lord God: take away the
garlande, and put of the crown, and so is it away: the humble is exalted, and
the proud brought low. Punyshe / punyshe / ye / punyshe them will I, and
destroy them: and that shall not be fulfilled until he come, to whom the
judgment belongs / and to whom I have given it. And thou (O son of man)
prophecy, and speak: Thus says the Lord God to the children of Ier^. x^^^.
^. Exech. xx^. ^ Amo^. ^. ^.
Ammon / and to their blasphemye, speak you: The swearde, y^ swearde is drawn
forth already to y^ slaughter

The word of the Lord against Jerusalem for man slaughter, and denyinge due
honor unto their fathers and mothers / and other wychednesses. Of the wicked
doctrine of the false prophets and prestes, and of their vnsutiable
covetousness. The Tyranny of rulers. The wyckednes of the people.

CAP XXII.
MOrouer, y^ word of y^ Lord came unto that thou haste shed: and defiled the
in the Idols, which thou have made. Thou have caused the days to draw nigh,
and made the time of thy years to come. Therefore will I make the to be
confounded among the Hea Deute. v. c and. xxvii. c
In the have they despised father and mother / in the have they oppressed the
stranger / in the have they vexed the wydowe and y^ fatherless. Thou have
despised my Sanctuary, and unhallowed my sabbath. Murthe rers are there in the,
that shede blood / and eat upon the hills / and in the they use un
happiness.

Leui. 18. a
In y^ have they discovered their fathers shame, in the have they vexed weme^
in their syckenes. Every man has dealt shamefully Deuteronomy. 27. c. ^zet. xiii. d.
gifts have been received in y^, to shed blood. Exodus 22. c.
Thou have taken usury and encreace, thou have oppressed thy neighbors vy
extorcion, and forgotten me, says y^ Lord God. Behold, I have smytten E^ech.
xii. c and. xv. b
I will scatre y^ among the Heathen / and strowe the about in the lands /
and will cause thy fylthynesse to cease out of the: ye, and I will have the
in possession in the sight of the Heathen / that thou may know, that I am
the Lord.

And the word of the Lord came unto me / saying: Thou son of man, Esaias. ^. ^
the house of Israel is turned to dross. All they that should be brass /
tynne / iron / and lead, are in the fire become dross. Therefore, thus say eth
the Lord God: For so much as ye all are turned into dross / behold: I will
bring you together unto Jerusalem, like as silver / brass, iron / tynne and
lead are put together in the furnace / and the fire blown there under to
melte them: Even so will I

Like as the silver is melted in the fire, so shall ye also be melted therein:
that ye may know, how that I the Lord have powered my wrath upon you.

And the word of y^ Lord came unto me, saying: Thou son of man, tell her:
Thou art an unclean land, which is not rayned Mich. iii.
thy Prophets that are in the, are sworn together to devour souls, like as
a roaryng Lion, yt lives by his pray. They receive riches and good, and make
many wyddowes in the. Thy prestes break my law, and defyle my Sa^ctuary.
Leuiti. x. ^.
They put no dyffere^ce between the holy and unholy, neither discern between
y^ clean and unclean: they turn their eyes fro my sabbathes, and I am
unhallowed among the^. Thy rulers in the are like rauyshynge wolves, to shed
blood, and to destroy souls, for their own covetous lucre. Mich. iii. ^
So^n. iii. ^ Eze^h. 13. ^
As for thy Prophets, they dawbe with vntempe red claye, they se vanytyes, and
prophecye lies unto the^, saying: the Lord God says so, where as the Lord
has not spoken. The people in the land uses wicked extorcyon and robbery.
They vex the poor and nedy and E^odi. 22. ^
oppress the stranger against right. And I sought in the land for a man,
that would make up the hedge, and set him self in the gappe before me in the
lands behalf, that I should not utterly destroy it: but I could find none.
Therefore / will I pour out my cruel dyspleasure upon them, and burn the^ in
the fire of my wrath: their own ways will I recompense upon their heads
says the Lord God.

Of the fornycacion, that is to say, of the Idolat^ye of Samaria and
Jerusalem, under the names of Dholah and Dholivah. In comparyson of Samaria he
shows that the fornycacyon of Jerusalem is the fylthyer. The destrucryon of
Jerusalem so prophesied. The aduoutry of both the who res to found out. Their
destruccyon.

CAPI. XXIII.
THE word of the Lord came unto me Ezech. xx. a
in Egypt. There were their bre stes brosed / and the pappes of their maiden
head destroyed. The eldest of them was call led Dholah and her yo^gest sister
Dholibah These two were mine / and bare sons and daughters. Their names were
Samaria, and that was Dholah: and Jerusalem, that was Dholibah. As for Dholah
she began to go a whoring, when I had taken her to me. 4. Reg. 15. d
She was set on fire upon her lovers the Assyryans which had to do with her:
even the Princes and Lords that were deckte in costely array: fair young men
/ lusty ryders of horses.

Thus through her whordome, she cleaued 4. Re. 17. c
I delivered her into the hands of her lovers, even the Assyryans, whom she so
loved These dyscouered her shame, took her sons and daughters, and siewe her
with the sword: An evil name gat she of all people, and they punyshed her.

Iere. iii. b
Her sister Oholibah saw this / and destroyed herself with inordynate love,
more then she, and exceaded her sister in whoredom 4. Re. 16. b Ezec. (...). ^
she loved the Assyrtans (which also lay with her namely / the princes and great
Lords / that were clothed with all manner of gorgeous apparel, all lusty
horsemen and fair young persons.

Then I saw, that they both were defiled

Now when the Babylonyans came to her / they lay with her, and defiled her
with their whoredom, and so was she polluted with them. And when her lust was
abated from them / Esaias. 4^. ^ (...) 3. d Ezec. (...). d
her whoredom and shame was discovered and seen: then my heart forsook her,
like as my heart was gone from her sister also. Nevertheless / she used her
whordome ever the longer the more / and remembered the days of her youth,
wherein she had played the harlot in the land of Egypt: Ezec. x^^. c
she brent in lust upon them, whose flesh was like the flesh of Asses /
and their sede like the sede of horses. Thus thou have renewed the fylthynesse
of thy youth / when thy lovers brosed thy pappes / and marred thy breasts in
Egypt.

Therefore (O Oholibah) thus says the

Thus will I make an end of thy fylthynesse

Thus says the Lord God: Thou shall drink of thy systers cup, how deep
and far so ever it be to the botome. Thou shall be laughed to scorn, and had
as greatly in derisyon, as is possible. Thou shalt be full of dronckenes and
sorrow, for the cup of thy sister Samaria is a cup of destruccyon and
wasting: the same shall thou drink, and suppe it out even to the dregs,
ye / you shall eat up the broken pieces of it, and so tear thine own breasts:
For even I have spoken it says the Lord God.

Therefore, thus says the Lord God: unto me: Thou son of man, wylt thou not
reprove Oholah and Oholibah? Show them their abhominacyo^s: namely that they
have broken their wedlock, and stained their hands with blood: ye, even
with their ydoles have they committed aduoutry, 4. ^^^e. 21. a Ezec. xvi. c.
and offered them their own children (to be devoured) whom they had borne unto
me. Ye, and this have they done unto me also: they have defiled my Sanctuary
in that same day, and have unhallowed my Sabbath. For when they had slain their
children for their Idols, they came the same day into my Sanctuary to defyle
it. Lo, this have they done in my house: Beside all this, thou have sent thy
messaungers for men out of far countrees and when they came, thou have
bathed, trymmed and set forth thyself of the best fashion: thou sattest upon a
goodly bed, and a table spread before the: whereupon thou have set mine Exo. xxx.
d.
incense and mine oil.

Then was there great chere with her, and the men that were sent from far
countrees over the deserte, unto these they gave bracelettes

O all ye that love virtue and ryghtuousnes, judge them, punysh them: Leui xx.
b. Ezec. xvi. d
as aduoutrers and murderers ought to be judged and punyshed. For they are
brekers of wedlock, and the blood is in their hands. Wherefore thus says the
Lord God: bring a great multitude of people upon them, and make them be
scatred and spoiled: these shall stone them, and gore them with their sweardes.
They shall sleye their sons and daughters / and burn up their houses with
fire:

Thus will I destroy all such fylthynes out of the land: that all women may
learn not to do after your uncleanness. And so they shall lay your fylthynes
upon your own selves, and ye shall be punished for the sins that ye have
committed with your Idols: and ye shall know that I am the Lord God.

He proves the fyrynge of Jerusalem by a parable of a seething pot. The
parable of Ezechi^lo wife being deed, which he after expounds.

CAPI. XXIIII.
IN THE nynth year, in the tenth monethe / LORD unto me / saying. O thou
son of man / write up the name of this day / ye / even the hour of this
present day: when the king of Babylon set himself against* Jerusalem ^
Show that obstynate household Ezec. 17. a.
a parable, and speak unto them: Thus says the Ezech. xi. b
Lord God: Get the a pot, set it on / and pour water into it: put all the
pieces together in it / all the good pieces: the loyne and the shoulder, and fill
it with the best bones. Take one of the best sheep, and an heap of bones with
all: let it boil well, and let the bones sees well therein.

With that said the Lord God on this Naum. 3. ^ ^ba^. 11. b
Woe be unto the bloody cyty of the pot, whereupon the rustynes hangs, and is
not yet scoured away. Take out the pieces that are in it / one after another*
there neade not lottes be cast therefore, for the blood is yet in it. Upon a
plain dry stone has she poured it, and not upon the ground, that it might
be covered with duste. And therefore have I letten her pour her blood upon a
plain dry stony rock / because it should not be hyd, and that I might bring
my wrothful indignacyon and vengeance upon her.

Wherefore, thus says the Lord God: O as I was commanded. And the people said
unto me / will thou not tell us / what that

Like as I have done, so shall ye do also: Ye shall not hyde your faces, ye
shall eat no mournets bread: your bonettes shall ye have upon your heads, and
shues upon your fete. Ye shall neither mourn nor weep, but in your sins ye
shall be sorrowful / and one reyente with another. Thus Ezechiell is your show
token. For look as he has done,

The word of the Lord upon the sons of Ammon which reioysed at the fall of
Jerusalem. Against Moab and Seyr. Against Idume^. Agoynst the Philistynes.

CAPI. XXV.
THe word of y^ Lord came unto me / saying. E^^. xxi. d. Iere xlix. a
Ammonytes / prophecy upon them / and say unto the Ammonytes: hear the word
of the Lord God. Thus says the Lord God. For so much as thou speak over
my Sanctuarye. A / ha / I trow it be now suspended: and over the land of
Israel / I trow it be now desolate: ye, and over the house of Judah / I trow
they be now led away presoners: Behold, I will deliver the to the people of
the east / yt they may have the in possessyon: these shall set their castles
and houses in the. They shall eat thy fruit, and drink up thy mylcke. As
for Rabath, I will make of it a stal for camels / and of Ammon a shepefolde: and
ye shall know that I am the Lord.

For thus says y^ Lord God: In so much as thou have clapped with thine
hands, and

Thus says the Lord God: For so much as Esaias. 15. 16 and. 48. ^ Sopho. 2. ^
Moab and Seir do say: As for the house of Judah / it is but like as all other
Gentiles be. Therefore behold / I will make the cities of Moab weapenelesse /
and take away their strength: their cities and chief coasts of their land,
which are the pleasures of the country. As namely, Bethiesimoth / Baalmeon and
Cariathaim: these will

Moreover / thus says the Lord God: Because that Esaias. 34. ^ Iere. xlix. b
Ezec. (...). ^. ^ xxxv. ^. Psalm. 137. b Genesis xxv. ^
Edom has avenged and eased him self upon the house of Judah, therefore / thus
says y^ Lord: I will reach out mine hand upon Edom / and take away man and
beast out of it. From Theman unto Dedan will I make it desolate, they shall be
slain with the swearde. 2. M^t. v. ^
Through my people of Israel will I avenge me again upon Edom: they shall
handle him / according to my wrath and indignacyon / so that they shall know my
vengeance, says the Lord God.

Thus says the Lord God: For so much Esaias. 14. ^ Iere. 47. ^ Sopho. ^^
Philistines have done this: namely taken vengeance with despytefull stomachs
/ and of an old evil will set them sel^^es to destroy. Therefore / thus says
the Lord God: Behold, I will stretch out mine hand over the Philistines, and
destroy y^ destroyer, and cause all the remnaunt of the sea coast to perysh. A
great vengeance will I take upon them, and punysh them cruellye: that they may
know, how that I am the Lord, which have avenged me of them.

He prophecyeth that Tyrus shall be overthrown because it rejoiced at the
destruccyon of Jerusalem. The wonderyng and astonyshement of the ma^chauntes,
for the desol^ryon of Tyrus.

CAPI, XXVI.
I Thappened, that in the eleventh year, y^ Lord came unto me saying: Thou
son of man, Esa. xxiii. a Ier. xlvii b Eze. xxxii. and. xxviii.
because that Tire has spoken upon Jerusalem: A, ha^ now I trow the ports
of the people be broken, and she turned unto me, for I have destroyed my
belyfull. Ye, therefore, says the Lord God: Behold, O Tire, I will upon
the, I will bring a great multitude of people against the, like as when the sea aryseth with his waves: These shall break the walls of Tire, and cast
down her towers: I will scrape the ground from her and make her a bare stone:
ye, as the dryeng place, where the fyshers hang up their nets by the sea
side. Even I have spoken it, says the Lord God. The Gentyles shall spoil
her: her daughters upon the field shall perysh with the swearde, that they may
know how that I am the Lord.

For thus says the Lord God: Behold, Iere. vii. b.
Thus will I bring y^ melody of thy songs / and the voice of thy mynistrelsy
to an end / so that they shall no more be herd. I will make a bare stone of
the, ye, a dryinge place for nets / and thou shall never be builded again:
For even I y^ Lord have spoken it / says the Lord God: thus has the Lord
God spoken concerning Tire. The Isles shall be moved at the noise of thy fall /
and at the cry of the slain / that shall be murdered in the. All kings of
the sea shall come down from their seats regal: they shall lay away their
robes / and put of their costly clothing. Ye, with trem

They shall mourn for the, and say unto the. Treno. ^. a. Apo. xviii. ^
O thou noble city / that haste been so greatly occupied of old / thou that
haste been the strongest upon the sea with thine inhabytonrs / of whom all men
stood in fear. How art thou now so utterly destroyed? Now at the time of
thy fall the inhabytours of the Isles / ye, and the Isles the^ selves, shall
stand in fear at thine end. For thus says the Lord God: when I make the
desolate city (as other cities be / that no man dwell in) and when I bring
the deep upon the / that great waters may couerthe. Then will I cast the down
unto them / that descend into the pytte: unto a people that has been long
deed, and set the in a land that is beneth / like the old wyldernes, with
them which go down to their graves, so that no man shall dwell more in the.
And I will make the to be no more in honor / in the land of the living. I
will make an end of the / and thou shall be gone. Though thou be sought for,
yet shalt thou not be found for ever more, says the Lord God.

The prophet is moved to bewail the desulacyon of Tyrus. He se^teth our the
pr^yse of Tyrus for the (...) of marchaunt^o ther^o.

CAPI. XXVII.
THE word of the Lord came unto Eze. 2^. 28.
Tire, and say unto Tire, whic^^ ^s a port of the sea, that occupyeth with
much people / and many Isles: thus speaks the Lord God: O Tire, thou haste
said: what, I am a noble city: thy borders are in the myddest of the sea, and
thy buylders have made the marvelous goodly. All thy tables have they made of
Cypre trees of the mount Sanyr. From Libanus have they taken Cedre tre^s, to
make the mastes: and the Oaks of Basan to make the owers. Thy bordes have they
the sea with their shypmen occupied their marchaundies in the. The Perses,
Lidians and Lybians were in thine host, and helped the to fight: these hanged
up their shyldes and helmettes with the, these set forth thy bewty. They of
Atnad were with thine host round about thy walls, and were thy watchmen upon
thy towers, these hanged up their shyldes round about thy walls, E^c^. xxv. c
dedan were thy merchauntes: and many other Isles that occupied with the /
brought the weathers / elephant bones and Peacockes for a present. The Syrians
occupied with the, because of thy diverse works, and increased thy
merchaundyes / with Smaragdes, with scarlet / with nedle work / with white
lynen cloth / with sylcke / and with

The merchants of Seba and Rema have occupied also with the / in all costly
spyces / in all precious stones and gold,

Thus thou art full / and in great worship, even in the myddest of the sea.
Thy maryners were ever bringing unto the out of many waters. But the east
wind shall ouerbeare the into the myddest of the sea: so that thy wares, thy
marchaundyes / thy riches / thy maryners / thy shypmasters / thy

They shall mourn for the with hertfull sorrow / and heavy lamentacyon, ye,
their children also shall weep for the. Alas / what city has so been
destroyed in the sea / as

The word of God against the king of Tyr^ for his pride Daniel. The prophet is
moved to bewalk the king of Tyrus. The word of the Lord against Sydon. The
Lord pro miseth that he will gather together the children of Israel.

THE word of the Lord came unto me saying: Thou son of man, tell the prince
of Eze. 26. 7.
Tire: Thus says the Lord God, because thou have a proud heart and have
said Esai* xiii^
I am a God: I have my seat in the myddest of the sea like a God: where as
thou art but a man and not God, and yet sta^dest in thine own conceyte, that
thou art God: Behold, thou thynkest thy self wyser then Do^i. (...).
Daniel / that there is no secrets hyd from the. With thy wisdom and thy
understanding / that have gotten the great welthynes / and gathered treasure
of silver and gold. With thy great wisdom and occupyenge / have thou
increased thy power, and because of thy great richesse / thy heart is proud.

Therefore / thus says the Lord God: as though thou were God: Behold, I will
bring enemies upon the, even the tyrauntes of the Heathen: these shall draw
out their sweardes upon thy bewty and wisdom, and shall defyle thy glory. They
shall cast the down to the pytte, so that thou shall dye in the myddest of
the sea, as they that be slain. Let se, if thou wylt say then (before them
that slaye the) I am God: where as thou art but a man and not God, in the
hands of them that slaye the. Dye shall thou, even as the uncircumcised in the
hands of the enemies: for I my self have spoken it, says the Lord God.

Moreover, the word of the Lord came unto me, saying: Thou son of man, make
a lamentable complaynte over the king of Tire, and tell him: Thus says the
Lord God: Thou art a seal of a lycknesse, full of wisdom and excellent
bewty. Thou have been in the pleasant garden of God: thou art decte with all
manner of precious stones: with Ruby, Topas, Crystal, Iacyncte, Onix, Iaspis,
Saphyr, Smaragde, Carbouncle, and gold. Thy bewty and the holes that be in
the, were set forth in the day of thy creacyo^. * Thou art a fair Cherub,
stretched wide out for to cover.

I have set the upon the holy mount of Esaye. ii. b
Because of thy great marchaundyse / thy heart is full of wickedness / and
thou haste offended. Therefore / will I cast the from the mount of God (O thou
covering Cherub) and destroy the among the glystrynge stones. Thy heart was
pronde in thy fair bewty, and through thy bewte thou haste destroyed thy
wisdom I will cast the down to the ground, and that in

And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying: Thou son of man, set thy
face Io^. iii. a. ^otha. ix. ^.
Prophecye upon it, and speak: Thus says the Lord God: Behold, O Sydon, I
will upon the, and get me honor in the: that it may be known / how that I
am the Lord: when I punyshe her, and get me honor in her. For I will send
pestilence and blood sheddynge into her streates, so that those which be
slain with the swearde, shall lie round about in the myddest of her: and
they shall know, that I am the Lord. She shall no more be a pryckynge thorn,
and an hurtynge breer unto the house of Israel, nor unto the^ that lie round
about her: and hate her, and they shall know, that I am the Lord.

Thus says the Lord God: when I Deuteronomy. (...). ^. Esa. lxv. ^.
shall they dwell therein: when I have punyshed at those, that despise the^
round about: and then shall they know, that I am the Lord their God.

He prophecyeth against Phardo. He prophe^yeth the ^^sola^yo^ of Egypt, and
the sparklyng abroad of the Egypcyans. The Lord promyseth that he will restoare
Egypt again after. xl. years. Egypt is the reward of king Nabu^hodonosor
for the labor, which he took against Tyruis.

CAPI XXIX.
IN the tenth year, upon the twelueth Esaias. xix. a. x^. a. Iere. 46. a. E^^^.
3^. 31, and xxx^^ a
O thou son of man (set now thy face against Pharao the king of Egypt)
Prophecye against him, and against the whole land of Egypt. Speak, and tell
him, thus says the Lord God: behold, O Pharao thou king of Egypt, I will
upon the, thou great dragon, that lie in the waters: thou that say: the
water is mine. I have made it my self. I will put an hoke in thy chawes and
hang all the fysh in thy waters upon thy skales: after that I will drawethe
out of thy waters, ye, and all the fysh of thy waters that hang upon thy
skales. I will cast the out upon the dry land with the fysh of thy waters,
so that thou shall lie upon the field. Thou shall not be gathered nor taken up
but shalt be meat for the beasts of the field, and for the fowls of the
air: that all they which dwell 4. Re. 18. d. E^^y. xxx. ^ 31. a 36. a.
s^a^fe of read to the house of Israel. When they took hold of the with their
hand thou broke it and pryckedst the^ on every side: and if they leaned upon
the, thou brakest and hurtest the reins of their backs. Therefore / thus says
the Lord God: behold, I will bring a swearde upon the, and rote out of the
both man and beast. Ye, the land of Egypt shall be desolate and waste / and
they shall know, that I am the Lord. Because he said: the water is mine, I
my self have Iere. xlvi. ^
when the. xl. years are expyred, I will gather the Egypcians together again,
out of the nacyons, among whom they were scatred / and will bring the
presoners of Egypt again into ye land of Patures their own natyue country,
that they may be there a lowly small kingdom: ye, they shall be the smallest
among other kingdoms, lest they exalte them selves above the Heathen: for I
will so monysh them that they shall no more rule the Heathen. They shall no more
be an hope unto the house of Israel, neither provoke them any more to
wyckednes / to cause the^ turn back, and to follow them: and they shall know
that I am the Lord God.

In the. xxvij. year, the first day of the

Tho distruccion of Egypt and of his cities is bewailed.

CAPI. XXX.
THE word of the Lord came more

Thus says the Lord: The maynteyners

Thus says the Lord God: I will make

And thus says the Lord God: zoch^ (...)
I will destroy the Idols / and bring the images of Noph to an end. There
shall no more be a prince of Egypt / and a fearfulnes will I send into the
Egipcians land. As for Pathures / I will make it desolat, and kyndle a fire in
Zoan. Alexandria will I punysh, and pour my wrathful indygnacio^ upon Sin,
which is the strength of Egypt. All the substance of Alexandria will I
destroy, and kyndle a fire in Egypt.

Sin shall be in great heaviness, Alexandria

It happened in the eleventh year, upon the seventh day of the first month,
that the Lords word came unto me, saying: Behold, thou son of man, I will
break the arm of Pharao king of Egypt: and lo it shall not be bound up to
be healed, neither shall any plaster be laid upon it, for to ease it / or to
make it so strong, as to hold a swearde. Therefore, thus says the Lord God:
Behold / I will upon Pharao the king of Egypt, and bruise his strong arm

As for the Egyptyans, I will seatre them among the Heathen, and strowe them
in the lands about. Again I will strength the arm of the king of Babylon,
and give him a swearde in his hand: but I will break Pharaos arm so that he
shall hold it before him pyteously / like a wounded

Ye / I will stablyshe the king of Babilons arm / and the arms of Pharao
shall fall down: that it may be known / that I am the Lord / which give the
king of Balyon my swearde in his hand, that he may draw it out upon the
land of Egypt, and that when I scatre the Egyptyans among the Gentyles / and
strowe them in the lands about, they may know, that I am the Lord.

A comparyson of the prosperity of Pharao with the prosperyte of the Assyryans.
He prophecyeth a like destruccyon unto them both.

CAPI. XXXI.
MOREOVER it happened in the eleventh

Moreover, thus says the Lord God: In straygned. I shall cause Lybanus to be
sorowefull for his sake, and all the trees of the field shall be smytten. I
wyl^make the Heathen shake at the sound of his fall / when I cast him down to
Esaias. x^iii ^ Ezech^. 32. ^
Hell with them that descend into the pytte. All the trees of Eden / with all
the chosen and best trees of Lybanus, ye, and all they that are planted upon
the waters, shall mourn with him also in the lower habitacio^s: for they shall
go down to hell with him, unto them that be slain with the swearde, which
dwelte before under

The Prophet is commanded to bewail Pharao the ^ynge of Egypt. He
prophecyeth that destruccyon shall come unto Egypt through the King of Babylon.

CAPI. XXXII.
I N the twelueth year, the first day of the twelueth month / the word of
the E^rth xxix. xxx. xxxi.
Pharao the King of Egypt / and say unto him: Thou art reputed as a Lion of
the Heathen, and as a whalefyshe in the Sea. Thou castest thy waters about the
/ thou troublest the waters with thy fete and stampest in their floudes. Thus
says the Lord God: Ezeth xii. b xvii. ^
I will sprede my net over the, namely / a great multitude of people: these
shall drive the into my yarne, for I will cast the upon the land, and let the
lie upon the field; that all the fowls of the air may sit upon the. I will
give all the beasts of the field enough of the. Thy flesh will I cast upon
the h^lles / and fill the valleys with the highness. I will water the land
Esaias. xiii. b
I will sprede ^loude over the Son / and the Moon shall not give her light.
All the lyghtes of heanen will I put out over the, and bring darckenes upon
thy land, says the Lord God. I will trouble the hertes of many people, when I
bring thy destruccyon among the Heathen and countrees, whom thou know not.
Ye, I will make many people with their kings so afraid through the, that
their hear shall stand up, when I shake my sword at their faces. Suddenly
shall they be astonyed, every man in him self, at the day of thy fall.

For thus says the Lord God: the king

In the. xij. year, the. xv. day of the Month, came the word of the Lord
unto me / saying: Thou son of man. Take up alamentacion upon the people of
Egypt, and cast them down, ye, and the mighty people of the Heathen also,
even with the^, Esaias. 14 ^* Ezec. (...)* ^
that dwell beneth: and with them that go down into the grave. Down (how
fair so ever thou be) and lay the with the uncircumcised Among those that be
slain with the swearde, shall they lie. The swearde is given al ready, he shall
be drawn forth and all his people. The mighty worthyes and his helpers, that
be gone down and lie with the vncyrcumcised and with them that be slain with
the sword: shall speak to him out of the hell.

Assure is there also with his company, and

Iere. (...) ^ (...) (...)
There is Elam also with all his people, and their graves round about: which
al being wounded and slain with the sword / are gone down vncircumcysed
under the earth, which nevertheless sometime brought fear in to the land
of the living: for the which they bear their shame, with the other that be
goue down to the grave.

Their burial is given them and al their people, among them that be slain.
Their

There is Mesech also and Tuball, and their people, and their graves round
about. These all are among the vncircumcysed / and them that be slain with
the swearde be cause before time they made the land of the living afraid.

Should not they then lie also among the worthyes / and vucircumcysed
Gyauntes? which with their weapens are gone down to hell whose sweardes are
laid under their heads, whose wyckenesse is upon their bones: because that as
worthyes, they have brought fear into the land of the living? Ye, among the
vncircumcysed shall thou be destroyed, and sleep with them, that peryshed
through the swearde.

There is the land of Iere. x^ix. b (...). ^xv. b. and. xx^v. a
Edom with her

With their fear and strength they are come to confusion / and lie there
vncircuncised among those that be slain with the swearde: and bear their
own shame / with them that be gone down to the pytte. Now when Pharao seyth
this / he shall be comforted over all his people / that is slain with the
swearde: both Pharao and al his host, says the Lord God. For I have given
my fear in y^ land of the living. But Pharao and all his people shall lie
among the vncircuncysed / and among them that be slain with swearde says
the Lord God.

He sets out the office of a Curate that preaches the Gospel. He
strengthens them that dys^n^re, and boldeneth them with the promise of mercy.
The word of the Lord against the remnaunt of the people. Against the mockers
of the words of the Prophet.

CAPI. XXXIII.
AGAIN the word of the Lord came 3. Reg. 9. ^
watcheman: the same man (when he seyth the swearde come upon the land) shall
blow the trompet / and warn the people.

If a man now hear the noise of the trompette and will not be warned / and
the Swearde come and take him away: his blood shall be upon his own head:
for he herd the sound of the trompet / and would not take heed / therefore his
blood be upon him. But if he will receive warning / he shall save his life.

Again, if the watcheman se the sword

Ezech. iii. ^.
And now (O thou son of man) I have made the a watchman unto the house of
Israel: that where as thou hear any thing out of my mouth, thou may
warn them on my behalf. If I say unto the wicked thou wicked / thou shall
surely dye, and thou geuest him not warnyuge / that he may bewarre of his
ungodly way: then shall the wicked dye in his own sin / but his blood will
I require of thy hand. Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked of his way / to
turn from it, where as he yet will not be turned from it, then shall he dye
because of his sin, but thou have delivered thy soul.

Therefore (O thou son of man) speak Eze. xviii, ^
As truly as I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of
the wicked, but much rather that the wicked turn from his way and live. Turn
you, turn you from your ungodly ways, O ye of the house of Israel, Oh,
wherefore will ye dye.

Thou son of man / tell the children of thy people: Ezech. (...). d
The ryghtuousnes of the rightuous shall not save him / when soever he turns
away unfaithfully. Again, the wickedness of the wicked shall not hurt him /
when soever he conuerteth from his ungod lynesse.

And the ryghtuousnes of the ryghtuous shall not save his life, when soever he
synneth. If I say unto the ryghtuous, that he shall surely live, and so he
trust to his own ryghtuousnesse, and do sin, then shall his ryghtuousnesse
be no more thought upon / but in the wickedness that he has done he Esaias. iv.
^. (...). 18. ^
Again, if I say unto the wicked: thou shalt surely dye: and so he turn
from his sins, and do the thing that is lawful and right: In so much that
the same wicked man gives the pledge again, restores that he had taken away
by robbery walcketh in the commandments of life, and does no wrong. Then
shall he surely live, and not dye. Ye / the sines that he has done, shall
never be thought upon. For in so much as he does now the thing that is
lawful and right, he shall live. And yet the children of thy people say: Tush,
the way of the Lord is not right, where as their own way is rather unright.

When the ryghtuous turns from his ryghtuousnesse and does the thing that
is wicked he shall dye therefore. But if the wicked turn from his wickedness /
doing the thing that is lawful and right, he shall live therefore. Yet ye say:
E^^^^ ^ (...). ^
the way of the Lord is not equal. O ye house of Israel Rom^. ii. ^.
I will judge every one of you after his ways.

In the. xij. year, the. v. day of the tenth Leu^. xvii. d
In the blood have ye eaten / your eyes have ye lift up to Idols, Deu^. iii.
c
and have shed blood: shall ye then have the land in possession?

Yeleane upon your sweardes / ye work abhomynacyons, every one defyleth* his
neighbors wife: and shall ye then possess the land? Say thou these words
unto them. Thus says Lord God. As truly as I live all ye that dwell in this
wilderness / shall be slain with the swearde: what so ever is upon the field
/ will I give unto the beasts to be devoured: those that be in strong holds
and dens / shall dye of the pestylence. For I will make the land so desolate
and wast / and the po^pe of her strength shall come to an end. The mountains
in Israel shall be so waste that no man shall travail thereby.

Ez^^. xxv. ^
Then shall they learn to know, that I Es^^. (...). ^ Mat. xv. ^.
for in their mouths they show them selves as though they were feruente /
but their heart goes after their own covetous lucre. And as a balet that
has a sweet tune, and is pleasant to sing, so shalt thou be unto them: thy
words shall they hear / but they will not do thereafter. When this comes to
pass (for lo / it comes in deed) then shall they know / that there has
been a prophet among them.

Against Bishops and ^urates that despise the flock of Christ, and seake
their own. The Lord says that he will vyset his disparsed flock, and
gather them together. He reproves the malice of certain of the flock. He
promyseth the true shepherde Christ, and with him peace.

CAPI. XXXIIII.
AND the word of the Lord came unto Ezec. ^iii ^ Iere. 14. (...) xxiii. ^
Woe be unto the shepherdes of Israel, that feed them selves. Should not the
shepherdes feed the flocks?

Ye have eaten up the fat, ye have clothed you with the woll: the best fed
have ye slain, but the flock have ye not norysshed. The weak have ye not
holden up Luke. (...)* ^
the syck have ye not healed: the broken have ye not bound together, the out
castes have ye not brought again: the lost have ye not sought: but churlysly
and cruelly have ye 1. Pe^^^ ^^
ruled them. Thus are they scatred here and there without a Shepherde: ye /
all the beasts of the field devour them, and they go astraye.

My sheep go wandringe upon all mountains truly as I live, for so much as my
sheep are robbed / and devoured of all the wild beasts of the field, having
no shepherde: and saying that my shepherdes take no regard of my sheep, but
sede them selves only, and not my sheep. Therefore / hear the word of John.
x. ^. Hebre. 13. d. 1. P^. 2. ^. 5 a
Behold / I will look to my sheep my self, and seek them. Like as a shepherde
among the flock seeks after the sheep that are scatred abroad even so will I
seek after my sheep / and gather them together out of all places / where they
have been scatred in the cloudy and darcke day. I will bring them out from
all people, and gather them together out of all lands. I will bring them into
their own land, and feed them upon the mountains of Israel, by the ryuers,
and in all the places of the country. I will feed them in right good pastures
and upon the hye mountains of Israel shall there foldes be. There shall they lie
in a good fold / and in a fat pasture shall they feed: even upon the
mountains of Israel.

I will feed my sheep my self, and bring them to their rest, says the Lord
God, ^^^. iiii. b. John. x. a.
Such as be lost, will I seek: such as go astray, will I bring again: such as be
wounded, will I bind up: such as be weak, will I make strong: such as be fat
and well likinge those will I preserve, and feed the^ with the Mat. xxv. ^
I will put a difference among the sheep, among the wethers and y^ goats. Was
it not enough for you to eat up the good pasture but ye must tread down the
resydue of your pasture with your fete also? Was it not enough for you to
drink clear water / but ye must trouble the resydue also with your fete?

Thus my sheep must be feign to eat the thing, that ye have trodden down with
your fete, and to drink it, that ye with your fete have defiled. Therefore,
thus sateth the lord God unto them: Behold, I will sever the fat sheep from the
lean: for so much as ye have shot the weak sheep upon the sides and
shoulders, and run upon them with your horns, so long till ye have utterly
scatred them abroad. I will help my sheep / so that they shall no more be
spoiled: ye / I will discern one sheep from another. I will raise up unto them
one only shepherde / even my servant Iere. xxx. v. Acts. ^i. ^. Miche. v ^.
David, he shall feed the^ and he shall be their shepherde. I the Lord will be
their God, and my servant Dauyd shall be their prince: Even I the Lord have
spoken it.

Moreover, I will make a couenaunte of peace with them, and drive al evil
beestes out of the land: so that they may dwell safely in the wyldernes / and
sleep in the woddes. Good fortune and prosperyte will I give them, and unto all that be round about my hill. Deuteronomy. xi. b. and. xxviii. b.
A prosperous shower and rain will I send the^ in due season, that the trees
in the wodde may bring forth their fruits and the ground her increase. They
shall be sa^e in their land, and shall know, that I am the Lord, which have
broken their yoke, and delivered them out of the hands of those, that held
them in subieccyon.

They shall no more be spoiled of the Heathen / nor devoured with the beasts
of the Psa. (...). ^ and. x^^^. ^.
ye are the sheep of my pasture: and I am your God / says the Lord God.

The destruccyon that shall come on the hill Seyr / that is, on the Idumeans,
because they troubled the people o^ the Lord.

CAPI. XXXV.
MOREOVER, the word of the Lord came unto me / saying / Thou Esaias. 34. ^.
Iere. x^^^. b. E^^^. xxv. ^ and. xxxii. f. and. xxxv, a and xxxvi ^
Seir / prophecye upon it and say unto it: Thus says the Lord God: Behold
(O thou mount Seyr) I will upon the / I will reach out mine hand over the /
ye / waste and desolate will I make the.

Thy cytyes will I break down / and thou shalt lie void: that thou may
know, how that I am the Lord. Nume. xx. c Deute. (...). ^.
For so much as thou beareste a old enemyce against the children of Israel
/ and with a cruel hand have made them afraid, what time as they were
troubled and punyshed for their sin: Therefore, as truly as I live / sateth y^
Lord god. I will prepare the unto the: ^. Mac. v. ^
saying thou layeste wait for blood / therefore shall blood persecute the.
Thus will I make the mount Seyr desolate and waste and bring to pass / that
there shall no man go thither / nor come from thence.

His mountains will I fill with his slain men: thy hills / dales and valleys
shall lie full of them / that are slain with the swearde. I will make the a
perpetual wilderness / so that no man shall dwell in thy cytyes: that ye may
know / how that I am the Lord.

And because thou haste said: what both these nations and both these lands
E^^. xxv. c.
where as the Lord was there.

Therefore, thus says the Lord God: As truly as I live / I will handle the
according to thy wrath and gelouse, like as thou have dealte cruelly with
them / that I may be known among the^ how, I have punyshed the. Ye / and
that thou also may be sure / that I the Lord have herd all thydespytefull
words, which thou have spoken

Where unto / thus says the Lord God when the whole world is in wealth /
then will I make the waste. E^e. xxv. a. and. x. vi. ^.
And like as thou (O mount Seyr) wast glad, because the heritage of the house
of Israel was destroyed even so will I do unto the also / that thou and whole
Edom shall be destroyed / and know / that I am the Lord.

He promyseth despueraunce from the Gentyles unto Israel. The vencrytes done
unto the Jews are to be astrybed to the mercy of God / not unto their
deservings. God renueth our hertes that we may walk in his commandments.

CAPI. XXXVI.
THOU son of man, prophecy upon Ezec. v^. ^.
Hear the word of the Lord / Oye mountains of Israel. Thus says the Lord
God. Because your enemy has said upon you: A, ha, the hye everlasting places
are now become ours: prophecye therefore / and speak: thus says the Lord
God. Seeing ye be wasted and trodden down on every side / and become a
possessyon unto the resydue of the Gentyles / which have brought you into men's
mouths and unto an evil name among the people. Therefore / hear the word of
the Lord God / O ye mountains of Israel. Thus says / the Lord God unto the
mountains and hills, valleys and dales, to the void wyldernes and desolate
cities / which are spoiled / and had in derysyon on every side / among the
resydue of the Heathen. Ye, even thus says the Lord God. In the fire of
Ezech. 35. ^
Edom: which have taken in my land unto themselves for a possessyon: which
also reioysed from their whole heart with a dispitefull stomach, to waste it,
and to spoil it:

Prophecye therefore upon the land of Israel, speak unto the mountains and
hills to valleys and dales, thus says the Lord God. Behold, this have I
devised in my gelousy and terryble wrath. For so much as ye have suffered
reprofe of the Heathen / therefore thus says the Lord God I have sworn /
that the Gentyles which lie about you / shall bear your confusyon them
selves. And as for you (O mountains

I will send you much people, which shall be all of the house of Israel, the
cytyes shall be inhabyted, and the decayed places shall be repaired again. I
will provide you with much people and catell / which shall increase and
bring fruit. I will restore you also to your old estate and show you more
kyndnes then ever ye had before: whereby ye shall know, that I am the Lord.

Ye, people will I send unto you (O my folk of Israel) which shall have the
in possessyon, and thou shalt be their inherytaunce / so that thou shalt no
more be without them. Again / thus says the Lord God. For so much as they
say unto you / thou art an eater up of men, and a waster of thy people:
therefore thou shalt eat no mo men / neither destroy thy people any

Moreover / the word of the Lord came unto me, saying. O thou son of man,
when the house of Israel owe^t upon their own ground / they defiled them
selves with their own ways and ymagynacions: so that in my sight their way
was like the vnclenues of a me^struous woman. Wherefore / I poured my wrothful
displeasure upon the^ / because of the blood that they had shed in the land,
because of their Idols / wherewith they had defiled them selves. I scatred them
also among the Heathen / so that they were strowed about in the lands.
According to their ways and after their own inuencyons, so did I punyshe
them.

Esaias. lii. v. Roma. ii. c.
Now / when they were gone unto the Heathen, and come in among the^, they
dishonored my holy name so that it was said of them. Are these the people of
God, and must go out of their own land? Then spared I my holy name / which
the house of Israel had dishonored among the Gentyles / to whom they came.
Therefore tell the house of Israel: Thus says the Lord God I do not this for
your sakes (O house of Israel) but for my holy names sake, which ye
dishonored among the Heathen / when ye came to them. Therefore, I will halowe
my great name again / which among the Gentyles is evil spoken of: for ye
your selves have dishonored it among them. And the Gentyles shall know that I
am the Lord when I am honored in you before their eyes / says the Lord
God.

As for you / I will take you from among the Heathen, and gather you together
out of all countrees, and bring you again into your own land. Esai. 44. ^
^ere xvii. ^
Then will I pour clear water upon you / and ye shall be clean: ye, from al
your uncleanness and from al your Idols shall I cleanse you. A new heart also
will I give you, and a new sprite will I put into you. As for that stony heart, I
will take it out of your body / and give you a fleshly heart. I will give my
spryte among you Deu. xiii. ^
and

And so ye shall dwell in the land / that I gave to your forefathers and ye
shall be my people, and I wylbe your God. I will help you out of al your
uncleanness. I will call for the corn / and will increase it / and let you have no
honger. I will multyply the fruits of the trees and the increase of the feld for
you so that ye shall bear no more reprofe of ho^ger among the Heathen. Then
shall ye remember your own wicked ways, and your ymaginacio^s, which were
not good* so that ye shall take displesure at your own selves by reason of your
sins and abhominacions.

But I will not do this for your sakes (says the Lord God) be ye sure of it.
Therefore / O ye house of Israel, be ashamed of your sins. Moreover, thus
says the Lord God: what time as I shall cleanse you from all your offenses,
then will I make the cytyes to be occupied again / and will repair the places
that be decayed. The desolate land shall be builded again / which before time
lay wast in the sight of al them that went by. Then shall it be said: this
waste land is become like a garden of pleasure / and the void / desolate and
broken down cytyes are now strong / and fensed again. Then the resydue of
of the Heathen that lie round about you / shall know that I am the Lord /
which repair that was broken down, and plant again / that was made waste.
Even I the Lord have spoken it / and will do it in deed.

Thus says the Lord God: I will yet once be found again of the house of
Israel and do this for them: Ieremi. ^* ^
I shall increase them as a flock of men. Like as the holy flock and the
flock of Jerusalem are in the hye sole^pne feasts: so shall also the wild
wasted cytyes be filled with flocks of men: and they shall know that I am the
Lord.

He prophecieth the bringing again of the people being in captyuyte. He
shows the union of the ten trybes with the two.

CAPI. XXXVII.
THe hand of the Lord came upon me and

Thou son of man: think thou these bones may live again? I answered: O
Lord God / thou know. And he said unto me. Prophecy thou upon these bones /
and speak unto them. Ye dry bones / hear the word of the Lord. Thus says
the Lord God Gene. ii. ^.
brethe, that ye may live and know, that I am the Lord.

So I prophesied, as he had commanded me. And as I was prophecyinge there came
anoyse and a great mocio^, so that the bones can every one to another. Now
when I had looked, behold, they had s^nowes, and (...) grew upon them: and
above they were covered with skin, but there was no breath in them. Then said
he unto me. Thou son of man, prophecye thou toward the wind: prophecye /
and speak to the wind. Thus says the Lord God. Come (O thou air) from the
four wyndes, and blow upon these slain that they may be restored to

Moreover, he said unto me: Thou son of man / these bones are the whole
house of Israel. Behold, they say: Our bones dried up, our hope is gone, we
are clean cut of. Therefore prophecy thou, and speak unto

So shall ye know that I am the Lord when I open your graves, and bring you
out of them. My spryte also will I put in you / and ye shall live: I will set
you again in your own land, and ye shall know / that I am the Lord,
which have said it, and fulfilled it in deed.

The word of the Lord came unto me, saying: thou son of man, take a stycke
and write upon it. Unto Judah and to the children of Israel his companyons. Then
take another stick, and write upon it: Unto Joseph y^ stoke of Ephraim, and to
all the household of Israel his companions. And than take both these together
in thine hand, so shall there be one stick thereof. Now if the Os^e. ^. b.
I will take the stock of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim and of the
tribes of Israel his fellows, and will put the^ to the stock of Judah and make
them one stock, and they shall be one in my hand. And the two styckes where
upon thou wrytest / shalt thou have in thine hand, that they may se / and
shalt say unto them*

Thus says the Lord God: behold / I will take away the children of Israel
from

David my servant shall be their king and

Moreover / I will make a bond of peace with the^, which shall be unto them an
everlasting covenant, I will setle them also and multyplye them / my Sanctuary
will I set among the^ for evermore. Leui. ^^^
My dwelling shall be with them: ye, I will be their God, and they shall be my
people. Thus the Heathen also shall know, that I the Lord am the holy maker
of Israel: when my Sa^ctuary shall be among them for evermore.

He prophesied that Gog and Magog shall come with an appoyneed haste into the
land of promise. Their intent. He reherceth that the co^urynge of Gog was
before prophesied of the prophets. The destruccyon of him.

CAPI. XXXVIII.
AND THE word of the Lord came Ezec. 39. ^ Apoca. ^^^
O Gog thou chief prince Meseche and Tubal: behold / I will upon the / and
will turn the about and put a bytte in thy chawes: I will bring the forth
and all thine hooste / both horse and horsemen / which be all weapened of the
best fashyon: a great people / that handle altogether spears / childs, and
swerdes: the Perses, Morians and with them the Libians / which al bear childs
and helmettes: Gomar and al his hoostes: the house of Thogorma out of the
North quarters / and all his hoostes / ye / and much people with the.

Therefore prepare the, set thy self in array with all thy people / that are
come unto the by heaps / and be thou their defense. After many days thou
shall be visited, and in the latter years thou shall come into the land that
has been destroyed with the swearde / and now is replenished again with
diverse people upon the mou^tayues of Israel, which have long lain waste. Ye,
they be brought out of the nations, and dwell all safe. Thou shall come up like
a stormy wether, to cover the land, and as it were a darcke cloud, thou with all thine hosts, and a great multitude of people with the.

Moreover, thus says the Lord God. At the same time shall many things come
into thy mind, so that thou shalt ymagyn myschefe / and say: I will up to
yonder plain land, saying they sit at ease, and dwell so safely (for they
dwell all without any walls /

Therefore / O thou son of man / thou

Thus says the Lord God: Thou art he / of whom I have spoken before time /
by ^^ni. 12. a ^at. 24. b ^^ke. 21. ^.
that there shall be a great trouble in the land of Israel at that time. The
very fyshes in the set, the fowls of the air / the beasts of the field / and
all the men that are upon the earth, shall tremble for fear of me.

The hills also shall be turned up side down, the stayres of stone shall fall,
and al walls shall syncke to the ground. I will call for a swearde upon them in all my mountains says the Lord God: so that every man's swearde shall be upon
another. With pestylence and blood will I punish him: stormy rain and hayle
stones / fire and brymstone, will I cause to rain upon him and all his heap,
ye / and upon all that great people that is with him. Thus will I be
magnyfyed / honored, and known among the Heathen: that they may be sure /
how that I am the Lord.

He shows the destruccyon of Gog and Magog. The grave of Gog and of his
hooste. He prophecyeth that Gog and his company shall be deuouted of birds and
beasts. Wherefore the house of Israel is wasted. Their bringing again from
capt^uite is promised.

CAPI. XXXIX.
Therefore O thou son of man, prophecye Ezech. 38. ^
O Gog: thou chief prince at Mesech and Tuball, I will upon the / and punyshe
the with six plages, and lead the from the North parts and bring the up to
the mountains of Israel. As for thy bow, I will smite it out of thy left
hand, and cast thine arowes out of thy right hand. Thou with all thine heap
and all the people that is with y^ / must fall upon the mountains of Israel.
Then will I give the unto fowls and wild beasts of the field, to be
devoured: there must thou lie upon the field: for even I the Lord have spoken
it, says the Lord God.

Into Magog, and among those that sit

At the same time will I give unto Gog, a place to beburied in, in Israel: eue^
the val ley / where through men go from the Eas^ to shall abhor it. There
shall Gog and al his people be buried: and it shall be called the valley of the
people of Gog. Seven months long shall the house of Israel be buryenge of
them that they may cleanse the land. Ye, all the people of the land shall
burye them. O / it shall be a glorious day, when I get me that honor / says
the Lord God. They shall ordain me^ also to be deed buriers, ever going
through the land, and appoint them certain places to bury those in, which
remain upon the field / that the land may be cleansed. From end to end shall
they seek, and that seven months long. Now those

And thou son of man: thus says the Lord God. Speak unto all the fowls
and every bird, ye, and to all the wild beasts of the field: heap you
together and come / gather you round about upon my slaughter / that I have
slain for you: even a great slaughter upon the mountains of Israel: Apoc.
xix. ^
eat the flesh of the worthies / and drynck the blood of the princes of the
land: of the wethers of the lambs / of the goats, and of the Oxen that be al
slain at Basan. Eat the fat your belly full, and drink blood / till ye be
dro^ken of the slaughter / which I have slain unto you. Fill you at my table
/ with horses and strong horsemen: with captains and all men of war /
says the Lord God.

I will bring my glory also among the Gentyles / that all the Heathen may se
my

For the which cause I hyd my face from them, and delivered them into the
hands of their enemies / that they might al be slain with the swearde*
According to their uncleaness and unfaithful dealings, so have I entreated
them, and hyd my face from them Therefore thus says the Lord God: Now

After that, will I hyde my face no more from the^ E^^^. 36* ^
but will pour out my sprete upon the house of Israel, says the Lord God.

The restorynge of the cytyes and of the temple that was to come is showed unto
the Prophet.

CAPI. XL.
IN the. xxv. year of our captyuite / in the

Thither he carried me / and behold, there was a man, whose similitude was like
brass which had a threde of flax in his hand, and meterodde also. He stood
in the door, and said unto me: Thou son of man, marcke well with thine eyes,
harken to with thine ears, and fasten it in thine heart, whatsoever I shall
show the, for to the intent that they might be showed the, therefore art thou
brought hither. And what soever thou seyst, thou shall certyfye the house of
Israel thereof.

Behold, there was a wall on the out side round about the house: the
meterode that he had in his hand, was six cubytes long and a spanne. So he
measured the bredthe

Every chaumbre was a meterodde long and broad: between the chambers were five
cubytes. The post of the door within the porche, was one meterodde. He
measured also the porche of the innermer door, which contained a meterodde:
Then mesured he the entrye of the door / that contained eight cubytes / and his
pyllers two cubytes: and this entrye stood inward.

The chamber doors Eastward / were three on every side: a like broad and long.
The pyllers also that stood of both the sides were of one measure. After this,
he measured

Then brought he me into the fore court, where as were Chambers and paued
works / made in the fore court round about. xxx. Chambers upon one paued
work. Now the paued work was a long beside the doors and that was the
lower paued work After this he measured the breadth from the lower door / unto
the ynnermer court of the

After that, he brought me to ye southsyde / where there stood a door toward
the south: whose pilers and porches he measured, these had the first measure,
and with their porches they had wyndowes round about / like the first
wyndowes. The heygth was. l. cubytes / the breadth. xxv. with steps to go up
upon: his porche stood before with his pyllers and date trees on either side.
And the door of the ynnermer court stood toward the south, and he measured
from one door to another an. C. cubytes. So he brought me into the innermer
court / through the door of the south side: which he measured, and it had the
measure before said. In like manner, his cha^bers, pylers / and fore entryes,
had even the fore said measure also. And he had with his porches round about,
wyndowes of. L. cubytes heygth / and, xxv. cubytes broad. The porches round
about were. xxv. cubytes long / and. v. cubits broad: and his porche reached
unto the uttermost court: upon his pylers there were date trees, and. viij.
steps to go up upon.

He brought me also into the ynmost court

In the door porche, there stood on either

And he said unto me: This chamber on the South side belongs to the
Priests, ^. P^r. 25. ^
is the Prestes that wait upon the altar: which be the sons of ^. Reg. ii.
f.
Sadoche / that do service before the Lord insteade of the children of Leui.
So he measured the fore court / which had in length an C. cubytes / and as
much in breadth by the four corners. Now the altar stood before the house:
And he brought me to the fore enter of the house, and measured the walls by
the entrye door: which were five cubytes long on either side. The thyckenesse
also of the door on either side / was three cubits. The length of the porche
was. xx. cubytes / the breadth* xi. cubytes / and upon steps went men up to
it: by the walls also were pilers / on either side one.

The disposy^yon and deuyce of building again the ^^^ple, ^ of the other
things thereto belongy^e.

CAPI. XLI.
AFTER this he brought me to the temple /

And he said unto me: this is the holiest of al. He measured also the wall of
the house which was six cubytes. The chambres that stood round about the
house / were every one four cubytes wide, and one stood hard upon another /
whereof there were. xxxiij. there stood posts beneth by the walls round
about the house / to bear them up: but in the wall of the house they were not
fastened: The side chambers were / the hyer the wyder / and had steps through
them

Between the chambers was the wydenes. xx. cubytes round about the house. The
chamber doors stood over against the outwal / the one door was toward the
North / the other toward the South: and the thyckenesse of the outwall was.
v. cubytes round about. Now the building that was separated toward the
West / was. lxx. cubytes wide: the wall of the building was, v. cubytes thycke
round about / and the length four score cubytes and ten. So he measured the
house which was an. C. cubytes long, and the separated building with the
wall were an. C. cubytes long also The wydenes before the house and of it that
was separated toward the East / was an. C. cubytes.

And he measured the length of the building before and behind with the
cha^bers

The by posts of the temple were four squared, and the fashyon of the
Sanctuary was Ez^ch^. ^. ^
even as it appeared unto me a fore in y^ visyon. Exod^. (...). ^
The table was of wodde, three cubits hye and two cubits long: his corners,
the length and the walls were of wodde. And he said unto me: This is the
table, that shall stand before the Lord. The temple and the holiest of all
had either of the^ two doors and every door had two little wyckettes which were
folden in one upon another / on every side two. And upon the doors of the
temple there were made Cherubins and date trees, like as upon the walls: and a
great thycke balke of wod was before on the out side of y^ porche. Upon both
the sides of the walls of the porche, there were made deep windows and date
trees, having beams and balkes / like as the house had.

Of the chambres of the temple for Preastes, and the holy things.

CAPI, XLII.
THEN carried he me out in to the fore

The wall without that stood by the cha^bres

Their intraunce / fashyon and doors were

Now when he had measured all the ynnermer

He seyth the glory of God going into the Temple, from whence it had before
departed He mentyoneth the Idolatry of the children of Israel, for which they
were consumed and brought to nawght. He so commanded to call them again to
repentance.

CAPI. XLIII.
SO he brought me to the door / that turns Eze. x. ^. xi^.
like the first, that I saw, when I went in, what time as the city should
have been destroyed: (...). ^. ^ ^. ^. and. xi. ^
and like the vysyon that I saw by the water of Cobar.

Then fell I upon my face / but the glory of the Lord came into the house
through the East door. So a wind took me up, and brought me into the ynnermer
court: and behold, the house was full of the glory of the Lord. I heard one
speaking Esaias. vi. a. and. lxvi a. ^poc. xxi. a.
place of my fotesteppes: where as I will dwell among the children of Israel
for evermore: so that the house of Israel shall no more defyle my holy name:
neither they / nor their kings, through their whordome, through their hye
places / and through the deed bodies of their kings: which have builded their
thresholdes in manner hard upon my thresholdes / and their posts almost at my
posts: so y^ there is but a bare wall betwyxte me and them.

Thus have they defiled my holy name with their abhomynacyons, that they have
committed. Wherefore, I have destroyed them in my wrath: But now they shall
put away their whordome and the deed bodies of their kings out of my sight,
that I may zacha. (...). a.
Therefore (O thou son of man) show thou the household of Israel a temple,
that they may be ashamed of their wickedness, and measure them selves an
example thereat.

And when they be a shamed of all their works, then show them the form and
fashyon of the temple: the coming in, the going out / all the manner and
descrypcion thereof, ye, all the uses and ordynaunces of it / that they may
keep and fulfill all the fashyons and customs thereof.

This is the description of the house: Above,

Exo xxvii ^
The altar was four cubytes hye, and from the altar upward stood four
horns, and it was. xij. cubytes long and. xij. cubytes broad / upon the four
corners: the covering of the altar was. xiiij. cubytes long and broad upon
the four corners / and E^^^. 44. ^. an^ 4^. b.
Sadoch* and tread before me to do me service, says, the Lord God: Unto
these give thou a young bullock, for a synoffrynge: and take the blood of him
and sprynckle his four horns withal and the four corners of the altar
covering / with the ledge that goes round about: here with shall thou cleanse
it, and reconcyle it. Leui. xvi. f.
Thou shall take the bullock also of the synoffrynge, and burn him in a
several

The next day, take a goatbucke without blemysh for a synoffrynge, to
reconcyle that altar withal: like as it was reconcyled with the bullock.
Now when thou have made it clean, then offer a young bullock Leui. xxii* ^.
without blemysh, and a ram out of the flock without blemysh also: Offer
them before the Lord, and let the pressed cast Leuiti. ii. ^.
salt there upon / and give them so unto the Lord for a burntoffrynge. Seven
days

CAPI. XLIIII.
He shows what door of the temple is shut. He is commanded to vpbrayde the
people with their offense. The vncyrcuncysed in heart and in the flesh, who are
to be admytted to the service of the temple, and who to be refused. He shows
what prestes he would have admytted into the holy place, and also their office.

AFTER this / he brought me again to the outward door of the Sanctuary on the
East side / and that was shut. The^ said the Lord unto me: This door shall be
still shut / and not opened for any man to go through it / but only for the
Lord God of Israel: ye, he shall go through it / else shall it be shut still.
The prince him self shall come through it / that he may eat bread before
the Lord. At the porche shall he come in / and there shall he go out again.
Then brought he me to the door / upon the North side of the house. And as I
looked about me / behold, Exodus, ^4. ^ and. x^. ^. Num^. (...) 4 Reg. 8. ^. 2.
Pat. 7. ^
the glory of the Lord filled the house: and I fell down upon my face. So the
Lord spoke unto me: O thou son of man / fasten this to thine heart / behold
/ and take diligent head to all that I will say

Thus with all your abhomynacyons ye have broken my covenant / and not kept
the holy ordynaunces of my Sanctuary: but set kepers of my Sanctuary / even
after your own mind. Therefore thus says the Lord God: Of all the
strangers that ^. Reg. ii. ^.
For the which cause I have ^^^. ^3. d. x^viii. b.
the holy ordynaunces of my Sanctuary / when the children of Israel were gone
fro me: shall come to me, to do me service, to stand before me, and to offer
me the fat and the blood / says the Lord God.

They shall go into my Sanctuary / and

Leui. xix. ^. and. xxi. a. Leuit. x. ^.
They shall not shave their heads, nor norysh the bushe of their hear but
round their heads only. * All the Prestes that go into the Inmost court, shall
drink no wine. Leui. xxi. b. Ose. 1. ^. 3 ^
They shall mary no wydowe, neither one that is put from her husband: but a
maid of the sede of the house of Israel, or a wyddowe, that has had a priest
before.

Deu. xvii. ^
They shall show my people the dyfference between the holy and unholy, betwixt
Leui. xxi. ^. Nume vi. ^
They shall come at no deed person / to defyle the^ selves (except it be
father or mother, son or daughter, brother or sister that has had yet no
husband) in such they may be defiled. And when he is cleansed / there shall be
rekened unto him. vij. days: and if he go into the Sanctuary again to do
seruyse he, shall bring a synoffrynge says the Lord God. De. xviii. ^ Nume.
^8. c ^osu. x^^^. ^
They shall have an heritage, ye, I my self wylbe their heritage: else shall
ye give the^ no possession in Israel, for I am their possession. The
meatoffryng synoffrynge and treaspaceoffryng shall they eat, and every dedycate
thing in Israel, shall be theyrs. The fyrstlynges of all the first fruits / and
all fre wyloffrynges shall be the prestes.

Ye shall give unto the pressed also the fyrstlynges of your dough / that God
may prospere the resydue. Exo. xxii. d. Leui. xxii. ^
But no deed caryo^ shall the priest eat / nor such as is devoured of wild
beasts / fowls or catell.

Out of all the land of promise are there separate. iiii. porcyons, of which
the first is given to the Prestes and to the temple, the second to the
Levites, the third to the ^ytie, the fourth to the prince. An exhortacyo^ to
the heads of Israel. Of ^ust weyghtes and measures. Of first fruits. etc.

CAPI. XLV.
WHen ye deuyde the land by the lot, Ezec. 48. ^*
part for the Lord, to be holy from other lands: namely. xxv. M. meteroddes
long, and. x. M. broad. This shall be holy, as wide as it is round about. Of
this part there shall belong unto the Sanctuary. v. C. meteroddes in all the
four corners, and. l. cubytes wide round about to the suburbs. And from
this measure, namely of. xxv M. meteroddes long, and. x. M. broad, thou shall
measure, wherein the Sanctuary and the holiest of all may stand.

The resydue of that holy ground shall be the prestes, which do service in the
Sanctuary of the Lord, and goo in before the Lord to serve him / that they
may have ^ome to dwell in.

As for the Sanctuary, it shall stand for ^^^^. 4^. d.
Upon both the sides of the Sanctuaryes part, and by the city, there shall be
given unto the prince what soever lies over against the city, as

This shall be his own land in Israel, that my princes be no more chargeable
unto my people. And such as remains yet over in the land, shall be given to
the house of Israel according to their trybes. Thus says the Lord God: O ye
princes: ye have now oppressed and destroyed enough: now leave of, handle now
according to y^ thing, that is equal and laufull: and thrust out my people
no more, says the Lord God. Leui. (...). x^. b
Ye shall have a true weight, a true Ephah, and a true Bath. The Ephah and the
Bath shall be a like. One Bath shall co^teyne the tenth part of an Homer, and so
shall one Ephah do: their measure shall be after the (...) iii. g
One Sycle makes. xx. Geras. So. xx. Sycles, and. xxv. and. xv. Sycles make a
pound. This is the heaueoffrynge, that ye shall give to be heaued: namely /
the v^. part of an Ephah, out of an homer of wheat, and the. vj. part of an
Ephah, out of an homer of barley. The oil shall be measured with the Bath: even
y^ tenth part of one Bath out of a Cor.

Ten Bathes make one Homer: for one Number. x^. ^
(for such as have sinned of ignorance / or being disceaued) to reconcyle
the house withal. Exodus xii ^ Leuit. (...). ^ Deu. xvi. ^
Upon the. xiiij. day of the first month ye shall keep Easter. Seven days
shall the feast continue, wherein there shall no sour nor leuened bread be
eaten.

Upon the same day shall the prince give for him self and all the people of
the land, a bullock for a synoffrynge And in the

The sacryfyces of the Sabbath and of the new mones. Through which doors they
must go in, or come out of the temple, ^c.

CAPI. XLVI.
THVS says the Lord God: the door LORD upon the Sabbath: six lambs without
blemysh / and a ram without blemysh / and an Ephah for a meatoffrynge / with
the ram. As for lambs / he may give as many meatoffrynges to them / as he will
/ and an Hyn of oil to an Ephah. In the day of the new month / it shall be a
young bullock without blemysh / six lambs and a ram also without blemysh.
With the bullock he shall give an Ephah / and with the ram an Ephah also for a
meat offering: but to the lambs, what he may come by: And ever an Hin of

Upon the solemn and hye feast days,

Moreover, thus says the Lord God: If the Prince give a gift unto any of
his sons, then shall it be his sons heritage perpetual, that he may
possess it. But If he will give one of his servants some of his heritage, it
shall be his to the Leui. xxv. b Number. 36. ^
fre year, and then to return again unto the prince: for his heritage shall be
his sons only. 3. Reg. 21. a ^. Reg. ix. b
The Prince also shall take none of the peoples enherytaunce, nor put them
from their possession: but to his own sons shall he give his possession,
that my people be not scatred abroad, but that every man may have his own.

And he brought me through the entrance at the side of the door to the
habytacyon of the Sanctuary, that belongs to the preastes and stood toward
the North, and behold, there was a place upon the west side, then said he
unto me. This is the place / where the priests shall dyght the trespace and
syn offerynges / and bake the meat offerynges: that they need not bear them
into the outward court / and so to vnhalowe the people. So he brought me into
the vttemoste court, round about all the four corners. Behold / in every
corner of the fore court, there was yet a little court. Ye / in all the four
corners of the court, there was made a little court of. xl. cubits long,
and. xxx. cubytes broad: these four little courts were of one like measure,
and there went a rydge wall round about them all four, under the which
there were harthes made round about. Then said he unto me: This is the kechyn
/ where the mynysters of the house shall dyght the slain offerynges of the
people.

The vysyon of the waters that come out of the Temple. The coasts of the land
of promise, and the ^yuis^on thereof by trybes.

CAPI, XLVII.
AFTER this he brought me again zacha. 13. ^ and. xiiii. ^
Behold, there came forth the water upon the right side. Now when the man
that had the meterode in his hand went unto the east door, he measured a. M.
cubytes, and then he brought me through the water, eue^ to the ancles: so he
measured yet a thousand, and brought me through the water again unto the
knees: yet measured he a thousand, and brought me through the water unto the
loins. After this

Now when I came there, there stood many trees upon either side of the river
ba^cke. Then said he unto me: This water that flows out toward the East /
and runs down into the plain field, comes into the sea: and from the sea
it runs out, and makes the waters whole. Ye, all that live and move, where
unto this river comes, shall recover. Math. 4. ^. and. xiii. f
And where this water comes / there shall be much fyshe. For all that Io^a. 4.
^. and. vii. d
comes to this water / shall be lusty and whole. By this river shall the
fyshers stand from Engaddy unto En Eglaim, and there spread out their nets:
for there shall be great heaps of fyshe, like as in the main see. As for his
claye and pyttes, they shall not be whole / for why / it shall be occupied for
salt.

By this river upon both the sides of the shore / there shall grow all manner
of fruitful Gene. xxii. ^
of the which land I swore unto your fathers / that it should fall to your
enherytaunce.

This is the border of the land upon the Northesyde / from the main see / as
men go to Zadada: namely Hemath, Berotha, Sabarim: from the borders of Damascus
and Hemath unto Hazar Tichon, and that lies upon the coasts of Haueran. Thus
the borders from the sea forth / shall be Hazar Euan / the border of Damascus the
North / and the borders of Hemath: that is the North part.

The east side shall ye measure from Haueran and Damascus, from Galead and the

The southe side is, from Thamar forth to the Number. xx. b. Exo. xvii. b
waters of strife unto Cades / the river to the main see: and that is y^ south
part.

The west part: namely the great see from the borders thereof, till a man come
unto Hemath: this is the west part.

Nume. 33. f
This land shall ye part among you according to the trybes of Israel, and
deuyde it to be an heritage for you, Leuit xix. g Deu^e x. d xxiiii. ^
and for the strangers that dwell among you, and beget children. For ye shall
take them among the children of Israel, like as though they were of your own
houshole and country / and they shall have heritage with you among the
children of Israel.

Look in what tribe the stranger dwells in the same trybe shall ye give him
his heritage, says the Lord God.

The lottes of the. vii. trybes. The parts of the possessyon of the Preastes
and of the temple, of the Leuytes, of the city, of the Prince, are rehearced.
The lottes of the other trybes. The gates of the city.

CAPI. XLVIII.
THese are the names of the trybes that

Upon the borders of Nephthali from the east quarter unto the west, shall
Manasses have his porcyon. Upon the borders of Manasses from the east side unto
the west, shall Ephraim have his porcyon. Upon the borders of Ephraim from the
east part unto the west, shall Ruben have his porcyon. Upon the borders of
Ruben from the east quarter unto the weste shall Judah have his porcyon. Upon
the borders of Judah from the east part unto the weste, ye shall set a side
one porcyon of. xxv. M. meteroddes long and broad (like as another porcyon
from the east side unto the west (wherein the Sa^ctuary shall stand.

Ezec. xiv. ^
As for the porcyon, that ye shall separate out for the Lord, it shall be. xxv.
M. long and. x. M. broad. Which separated holy porcyon shall be long unto
these: namely to the priests, toward the North. xxv. M. and toward the
west. x. M. broad, toward the east. x. M. broad also, and toward the south
xxv. M. long, wherein the Sanctuarye of the Lord shall stand. Ye, this same
place shall be the priests, that are of the children of Ezec. x^iii. ^ and.
xliiii. c
Sadoch, and have kept my holy ordinance: which went not astraye in the
error of the children of Israel / like as the

This shall be on every side. xxv. M. long, and. x. M. broad. Of this porcyon
they shall sell nothing, nor make any permutacyon thereof, least the chief of
the land fall unto other, for it is hallowed unto the Lord.

The other. v. M. after the breadth that lies by the. xxv. M. shall be comen: it
shall belong to the city and to the suburbs for habytacio^s, and the cite
shall stand in the midst thereof. Let this be y^ measure: toward y^ north
part. v. C. and, iiij. M. toward the south part. v. C. and. iiij. M. toward
the east part v. C. and. iiii. M. toward the west part, v. C. and. iiij. M.

The suburbs hard upon the cite, shall have toward the north. L. and. ij C.
toward the south. L. and. ij. C. toward the east. L. and two C. toward the
west also. L. and two. C. As for the resydue of the length / that lies hard
upon the separated holy ground: namely. x. thousand toward the east, and.
x. M. toward the west, next unto the holy porcyon: it and the increase thereof
shall serve for their meat / that labor in the cite. They that labor for
the wealth of the city, shall maintain this also, out of what trybe soever
they be in Israel.

All that is separated of the. xxv. M long and. xxv. M. broad on the four
parts, that shall ye put aside for the separated porcyon

Now of the other trybes. From the east part unto the west / shall Ben Iamin
have his portion. Upon the borders of Ben Iamin from the east side unto the
west, shall Symeon have his porcyon. Upon the borders of Symeon from the east

This is the land with his Nume. 32. Iosu. 13. 14
porcyons / which ye shall dystrybute unto the Trybes of Israel, says the
LORD God. Thus wide shall the cite reach: upon the North part five hundredth
and four thousand measures. The Ports of the City, shall have the names of
the Trybes of Israel. Three Ports of the Northesyde: one Ruben, another Judah,
the third Leuy.

Upon the East side five hundret hand four thousand measures, with three
Ports: the one Joseph, another Ben Iamin: the third Dan. Upon the Southsyde
five hundredth and four thousand measures, with the three Ports, the one
Symeon, another Izakar, the third Sabulon. And upon the west side five
hondreth and four thousa^de measures, with three ports also, the one Gad
another Asser, the third Nephthalye. Thus shall it have. xviij. M. measures
round about. And from that time forth the name of the city shall be: the
Lord is there.

: Here ends the Book of the Prophet Ezechiell.
The Book of the Prophet Daniell.
The Prophet shows the captivity of Iehoakim King of Judah. Of the sons
that were in captiuytie, the King commands to those which of them should
be taught the learning and language of Chaldees. They are allowed the kings
fedyng. Daniel absteyneth from the meat of the King of Babylon.

CAPI. I.
IN the third year of the reign of 4. Re. 24. a 2. Par. 3^. c
and the Lord delivered Iehoakim the king of Judah in to his hand / with
certain ornaments of the house of God, which he carried away unto the land
of Sc^nar, to the house of his God and there he brought them into his gods
treasury. And the king spoke unto Asphanaz the chief chamberlayne, that he
should bring him certain of the children of Israel, that were come of the
kings sede and of princes, young spryngaldes without any blemysh, but fair
and welfauoured, instruct in all wisdom, conning and understanding: which
were able to stand in the kings palace, to read and to learn for to speak
Caldeysh.

Unto these the king appointed a certain Gene. 43. c Tobie. 1 b Iudie. 12 ^
that he would not be defiled through the kings meat / nor the wine which he
drunk. And this he desired of

Then Daniel answered Melassar, whom the chief cha^berlayne had set over
Daniell, Ananias / Misael and Asarias, and said: O prove but ten days with thy
servants / and let us have Potage to eat, and Water to drynck: then look
upon our faces, and theirs that eat of the Kings meat. And as thou seyst /
so deal with thy servants. So he consented to them in this matter / and
proved them ten days. And after the ten days, their faces were betterr
liking and fatter / then all the young spryngaldes / which did eat of the
KINGS meat.

Thus Melassar took a way their meat

CAPI. II.
The dream of Nabuchodonosor. He calls unto him sothsayers, and requires of
them both the dream ^ the interpretacyon thereof. They answer that they cannot
show it. The king commands all the wise men of Babylon to be slayue.
Daniel requires time to solu^e the questyon.

The Lord opens the mystery unto Danyel. Danyel is brought unto the King /
and shows him his dream and the interpretacyon thereof. Of the everlasting
kingdom of Christ.

IN THE second year of the raygne Job. vii. b Danie. 4. a and. v. a
where through his Sprete was vexed / and his sleep brake from him. Then the
king commanded to call together all the sothesayers / charmers / wytches and
Caldees / for to show the king his dream. So they came / and stood before the
king. And the king said unto them: I have dreamed a dream, and my sprete
was so troubled therewith / y^ I have clean forgotten, what I dreamed. Upon this
the Caldees answered the king in the Syryans speech. O king. God save thy
life for ever Show thy servants the dream / and we shall show the, what it
means. The king gave the Caldees their answer, and said: It is gone fro me:
If ye will not make me understand the dream with the interpretacyon thereof,
ye shall dye, and your houses shall be prysed. But if ye tell me the dream and
the meaning thereof, ye shall have of me gifts / rewards and great honor:
only, show me the dream and the sygnyfycacyon of it. They answered again,
and said: the king

Neither is there any, that can certyfye the king thereof, except the gods,
whose dwelling is not among the creatures.

For the which cause the king was wroth Dan. vii. d Luke. ^. c. Job. 34. e.
Iere. 27. a. Dani. iiii. c
he changes the Job xxxii b
he puts down kings / he sets up kings: 1 Timo. ^. c
he gives wisdom unto the wise, and understanding / to those that
understand, he opens the deep secrets: he knows the thing that lies i^
darcnesse 1. John. ^. ^.
for the light dwells with him. I thancke the, and praise the (O you God of my
fathers) that thou haste lent me wisdom and strength, and have showed me the
thing that we desired of the, for thou have opened the kings matter unto me.

Upon this went Daniel in unto Arioch, whom the king had ordained to destroy
the wise at Babylon: he went unto him, and said, destroy not such as are
wise in Babylon, but bring me in unto the king, and I shall show the king,
the interpretacion. Then Arioch brought Daniel into the king in all the haste,
and said unto him: I have found a man among the presoners of Judah that shall
show the king the interpretacyon. Then answered the king, and said unto
Daniel, whose name was Balthazar / Art thou he, that canste show me the
dream / which I have seen, and the interpretacyon thereof? Daniel answered the
king to his face, and said. As for this secret / for the which the king
makes inquysycion, it is neither the wise, the sorcerer, the charmer nor the
devil coniurer, that can certyfy the king of it. Mat. xi. 8*
Only God in heaven can open secrets, and he it is, that shows the king
Nabuchodonosor what is for to come in the latter days.

Thy dream, and that which thou have seen

Mat xxi. c. Luke. xx. b.
This thou saweste till the time that (without any hands) there was hewn of a
stone which smote the Image upon the fete that were both of iron and earth,
and brake them to powder: then was the iron / the earth the copper / the silver
/ and gold / broken al together in pieces / and became like the chaf of corn /
that the wind blows away from the somer floores / that they can no more be
found. But the stone that smote the image became a great mountain / which
fulfylleth the whole earth. This is the dream And now will we show before
the king: what it means.

Dani. v. d
O King / thou art a king of Kings:

Where as thou saw the fete and toes part of earth and part of iron: that
is a divided kingdom, which nevertheless shall have some of the iron ground
myxte with it, for so much as thou haste seen the iron myxte with the claye.

The toes of the fete that were part of iron: and part of claye / sygnifyeth
that it shall be a Kingdom partly strong / and partly weak. And where as
thou saw iron myxte with claye: they shall myngle themselves with the sede
of simple people / and yet not continue one with an other like as iron will not
be souldered with a pot sharde.

In the days of these Kings, shall the Esaye. ix b
everlasting kingdom which shall not peryshe, and his king dome shall not be
given over to an other people: ye, the same shall break and destroy all
these kingdoms / but it shall endure forever.

And where as thou saw, that without any hands there was cut out of y^
Hebr. xii ^
mount Mat. xxi. c
a stone / which brake the iron, the copper the earth / the silver, and gold
in pieces: by that has the great God showed the king what will come after
this. This is a true dream, and the interpretacyon of it is sure.

Then the king Nabuchodonosor Act. xilll. ^.
fell down upon his face, and bowed him self unto Danyell / and commanded
that they should offer meatoffrynges and sweet odoures unto him. The king
answered Daniel. and said: ye / of a truth your God is a God above all
gods / a Lord above all kings / and an opener of secrets: seeing thou
can dyscouer this mysterye. So the king made Daniel a great man, and gave
him many and great gifts.

Gene. 4* ^
He made him ruler of all the countrees of Babylon, and lord of all the nobles,
that were at Babylon. Now Danyel entreated the king for Sidrach, Mysach and
Abednago / so that he made them rulers over all the officers in the land of
Babylon: But Danyel him self remained still in the court by the King.

The king sets up a golden Image, which he commands to be worshypped.
Sydrach, Mysach, and Abednago are accused, because they dispysed the kings
commandment They are brought unto the king and commanded to worship the
image. They refuse to do it and are put into a burning oven. By belyfe in God
they are delivered from the fire. Nabuchodonosor confesses the power of God
after the sight of the miracle.

CAPI. III.
NAbuchodonosor the King caused a

Now when they stood before the Image, which Nabuchodonoror set up, y^ bedil
cried out with all his might: O ye people, kynreddes and tunges, to you be it
said: that when ye hear the noise of the trompettes / which shall be blown /
with the harpes / shawmes / Psalteries, Symphonyes and all manner of Music: ye
fall down and worshipe y^ golden Image, that Nabuchodonosor the king has set
up. Whose then falls not down and boweth him self / shall even the same
hour be cast into an hot burning oven. Therefore, when all the folcke herd
the noise of the tro^pettes that were blown, with the harpes / shawmes /
Psalteryes / Symphomes and al kind of Melody / the^ all the people kynreddes
and nations fell down, and bowed them selves unto the golden Image / that
Nabuchodonosor the king had set up.

Now were there certain men of the Caldees Daui. ii. g.
whom thou haste set over the offices of the land of Babylon: namely /
Sydrache / Mysache and Abednago. These men (O King) regard not thy
commandment / ye / they will not serve thy gods / nor bow them selves to
the golden Image that thou haste set up.

Then Nabuchodonosor in a cruel wrath and displeasure, commanded, that
Sidrach Misach and Abednago should be brought unto him. So these men were
brought before the king. Then Nabuchodonosor spoke unto them / and said:
what? O Sydrach Mysache and Abednago / will not ye serve my gods? nor bow
your selves to the golden Image, that I have set up: well, be ready hereafter
when ye hear the noise of the trompettes blow with the Harpes / shawmes /
psalteries, symphonyes and all the other melodyes: that ye fall down, and
worship the Image which I have made. But if ye worship it not, ye shall be
cast immediately into an hot burning oven. Let se / what God is there, that
may deliver you out of my hands? Sidrach, Misach and Abednago answered the
king, and said: O Nabuchodonosor we ought not to consent unto the in this
matter / for why? our God whom we serve / Number. 16. g
is able to keep us from the hot burninge oven (O King) and can right well
deliver us out of thy hands.

And though he will not / yet shalt thou know (O King) that we will not
serve

So these men were bound in their cotes hosen / shues with their other
garments / and cast into the hot burning oven: for the kings commandment
was so strayte, and the oven was exceeding hot. As for the men that put in
Sidrach / Misach and Abednago / the flamme of the fire destroyed them. And
these three men Sidrach Misach and Abednago fell down in the hot burning
oven, being fast bound. Then Nabuchodonosor the king marueled and stood up in
all have: he spoke unto his council and said: did not ye cast these three men
bound into the fire? They answered / and said unto the king: Ye / O king.
He answered and said: lo for all that / yet do I se four men goinge low^e in
the myddest of the fire / and nothing corrupt: and the fourth is like an
aungel to look upon. Esa. xliii. a
upon whom the fire had no manner of power in their bodies: In so much that the
very hear of their head was not burnt, and their clothes unchanged: Ye /
there was no smell of fire felt upon them.

Then spoke Nabuchodonosor, and said: Blessed be the God of Sidrach, Misach and
Abednago: Psalm. 34. a. Dani. vi. d. Acts. xii. f.
which has sent his Angel / and defended his servants, that put their trust
in him: that altered the kings commandment, and ieoperde their bodies
thereupon: rather then they would serve or worshype any other God, except their
own God only. Therefore I will and command, that all people, kynredes and
tunges / which speak any blasphemy against the God of Sidrach, Misach and
Abednago shall dye, and their houses shall be praised: Because, Esai. 44 ^ Ose.
xiii. ^.
there is no God that may save, as this. So the king promoted Sydrach,
Mysache / and Abdenago / in the land of Babylon.

CAPI. IIII.
Nabuchodonosor dreameth again. Daniel interprets it. Nabuchodonosor is put
out of his realm, and eats with beasts. He confesses the power of God, and
is restored into his kingdom.

N Dani. vi. c
Abuchodonosor King unto al people, kynreddes and tunges that dwell upon the
whole earth: peace be multyplyed among you. I thought it good to show the
tokens and marvelous worckes / that the bye God has wrought upon me. O / how
great are his tokens / and how mighty are his wonders? Psalm. xiv. b Dam.
vii. ^ Luke. ^. c.
His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and his power lasts for ever and
ever.

I Nabuchodonosor being at rest in mine house, and florishynge in my palace /
saw a dream / which made me afraid: and the thoughts that I had upon my
bed, with the vysyons of mine head / troubled me. Dani. ii. a.
Then sent I out a commission / that all they which were of wisdom at Babylon
should be brought before me, to tell me the interpretacyon of the dream. So
there came the sothsayers / charmers / Caldees and coniurers of deuels: to whom
I told the dream but what it betokened / they could not show me: till at the
last / there came one Daniel) otherwise called Balthazar / according to the
name of my God) which has the sprite of the holy gods / in him: to whom I
told

The beasts of the field had shadows under it, and the fowls of the air
dwelt in the bows thereof. Shortly / all creatures fed of it. I saw in my head
a vision upon my bed and behold / a watcher came down from heaven, and cried
myghtely, saying. Hew down the ire, break of his branches / shake of his
leaves / and scatre his fruit abroad: that all the beasts may get them away
from under him, and the fowls from his branches. Nevertheless, leave the
ground of his rote still in the earth, and bind him upon the plain field, with
cheynes of iron and stele. With the dew of heaven shall he be wet, and he shall
have his part in the herbs of the ground with other wild beasts.

That man's heart of his shall be taken from

Then Daniel (whose name was Balthazar) held his peace by the space of an
hour and his thoughts troubled him. So the king spoke, and said: O
Balthazar, let neither the dream nor the interpretacio^ thereof

Even thou (O king) art the tree / great and strong. Thy greatness increaceth,
and reaches unto the heaven so does thy power to the ends of the earth. But
where as the king saw a watcher even an holy angel, that came down from
heaven: and said: hew down the tree / and destroy it: yet leave the ground
of the rote in the earth: and bind him upon the plain field with cheynes of
iron and stele: He shall be wet

Thou shall be cast out from men / and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of
y^ field: with grass shalt thou be fed like an ox. Thou must be wet with y^
dew of the heaven: ye, seven years shall come, and go upon the, till thou
know, Daniel. (...) Iere. ^7. ^
that the highest has power upon the kingdoms of men, and gives the^ to whom
he list. Moreover, where as it was said, that the rote of the tree should be
left still in the ground: it betokens, yt thy kingdom shall remain whole
unto the, after thou have learned to know, that y^ power comes from heaven.
Wherefore, O king, be content with my counsel, that thou may lowse thy
sins with ryghtuousnesse, Eccles. 19. b
and thine offenses with mercy to poor people: for such things shall
prolonge thy peace. All these things touch the King Nabuchodonosor.

So after. xij. months, the king walked

When this time was past, I Nabuchodonosor lift up mine eyes unto heaven, and
mine understanding was restored unto me again. Then gave I thanks unto the
highest. I magnifyed and praised him that lives for evermore, Dani. iii. ^.
whose power endures always, and his kingdom from one generacyon to another:
in comparyson of whom all they that dwell upon the earth / are to be reputed
as nothing.

Psalm. 135. a
He handles according to his will among the powers of heaven and among the
inhabytours of the earth: and there is none y^ may resyst his hand / or say:
what do y^? Io^. xlii. b.
At yt same time was mine understanding given me again, and I was restored to
the honor of my kingdom, to my dignyte / and to mine own shape again. My
great estates and Princes sought unto me: and I was set in my kingdom again
/ so that I had yet greater worship.

Then did I Nabuchodonosor, love / magnifye and praise the king of heaven: for
all his worckes are true / and his ways right. As for those that go on
proudly, he is able to bring them down.

Balthazar King of Babylon, abusing the vessels of the Temple, seyth an
hand writing in the wall. The Sothe sayers called of the King, can not
expound the writing. Daniell is called, which reads it, and interprets
it also. Balthazar being slain, Darius succedeth in his rowme.

CAPI. V.
KING Balthazar made a great Bancket to his thousand Lords: 2 Par. 36. ^
which his father Nabuchodonosor had taken out of the temple at Jerusalem:
that the king and his Lords with his queen and concubynes might drink therout.

So they brought the golden vessel, that was taken out of the temple of the
Lords house at Jerusalem. Then the King and his Lords with his queen and
concubines dron^k out of them. They droncke wine, and praised their Idols of
gold, silver / copper, yro^ wodde and stone.

In the very same hour there appeared fyngers / as it had been of a man's hand
writynge, (...)
Then changed the king his countenance / and his thoughts troubled him, so
that the joints of his body shoke / and his knees smote one against the
other. Wherefore (...)
the King cried myghtelye / that they should bring him the Charmers / Caldees
and Coniurers of Deuylles. The King spoke also to the wise men of Babylon, and
said: Who so can read this writing / and show me the plain meaning thereof:
shall be clothed with purple, have a cheyne of gold about his neck / and rule
the third part of my kingdom.

Upon this / came all the kings wise me^: but they could neither read y^
writing / nor show the king what it signified. The^ was the king sore afraid,
in so much, y^ his color changed / and his Lords were sore vexed So by
reason of this matter, that had happened to the king and his Lords, y^ Queen
kingdom, that has the sprete of the holy gods within him, Daniel. 2 a
as it was seen in thy fathers days. He has understanding and wisdom like
the gods. Ye the king Nabuchodonosor thy father made this man chief of y^
sothsayers / charmers, Caldees and devil co^iurers: because that such an
aboundaunte sprete, knowledge and wisdom (to expound dreams, to open
secrets, and to declare hard dowtes) was found in him: ye, even in Daniel,
whom the king named Balthazar. Let this same Daniel be sent for / and he shall
tell what it means.

Then was Daniell brought before the king. So the king spoke unto Daniel, and
said: Art thou that Daniel / one of the prisoners of Judah, whom my father the
King brought out of Iewry? I have herd speak of the / that thou have the
sprete of the holy gods, experience and understanding, and that there has
been great wisdom found in y^. Now have there been brought me, wise and
connyng charmers / to read this writing

Daniell answered, and said before ye king: 4 Reg. v. d Math. x. a
As for thy rewards, keep the^ to thyself, or give thy rych gifts to another:
yet not thelesse, I will read y^ writing unto the king / and show him y^
interpretacyon thereof. Daniel. 2. c
O king, God the highest gave unto Nabuchodonosor thy father, the dygnyte of a
King / with worship and honor: so that all people kynreddes and tunges stood
in awe, and fear of him, by reason of the hye estate, that he had lent him.
For why / he slew whom he would, he smote, whom it pleased him. Again: who^ he
would, he set up: and whom he list, he put down. Dani. 4. d.
But because his heart was so proud and his stomach set so fast unto wylfulnes:
he was deposed from his kyngely trone / and his magesty was taken from him. He
was shut out from among me^, his heart was like a beasts heart, and his dwelling
was with

And thou his son (O Balthazar) for all this, have not submytted thine heart,
though thou knew al these things: but have magnyfied thyselfe above the
Lord of heaven / so that the vessels of his house were brought before the:
that thou, and thy Lords with thy queen and concubynes, might drink wine
therout: And have praised the Idols of silver and gold, copper and iron, of
wod and stone which neither se, hear nor understand: As for the God Acts. 17.
^
in whose hand consysteth the breadth and all thy ways: thou haste not loved
him.

Therefore is the palm of this hand sent

Then commanded Balthazar, to cloth Daniell with purple, to hang a cheyne of
gold about his neck, and to make a proclamacion concerning him: that he
should be the ruler of the third part of his kyngedome: Esaias. 47. ^
The very same night was Balthazar the king of the Caldees stayne / and Dani.
ix. ^.
Darius out of Media took in the kingdom, being, lxij. year of age.

Daniel is made ruler over the Lords. The ymaginacion of an art against
Daniell. The proclamacion of the art, whereof Daniel is accused unto the king
as a transgressour He is put into a den of Lions by the commandment of the
king. He is delivered by faith in god. Daniels accusars are put unto the Lions
to be corn in sonder. Darius by the proclamacyon of a decree, magnyfyeth the
God of Daniel.

CAPI. VI.
IT pleased Darius so set over his kingdom

But Daniel exceaded al these Princes and lords, for the sprete of God was
plentuous in him: so that the king was minded to set him over the whole
realm. Wherefore the Princes and Lords sought, to pycke out in Daniel some
quarrel against the kingdom yet could they find none occasion nor fault upon
him. For why? he was so faithful, that there was no blame nor dyshonesty found
in him.

Then said these men: we can get no quarrel and Lords together unto the king,
and said thus unto him: king Darius / God save thy life forever. All the great
estates of the realm as the Princes, Dukes, Senators and Judges, are
determined to put out a commandment of the king, and to make a sure statute:
namely, that who so desires any petycion, either of any God or man (within
this. xxx. days) except it be only of the, O king: the same person may be
cast into the Lions den. Wherefore, O king, confyrme thou this statute / and
make a writing: that the thing which the Medes and Perses have ordained be
not altered nor broken.

So Darius made the writing, and confirmed

Then these men made search / and found

Then answered they, and said unto the king: Daniel one of the prisoners of
Judah O king / regards nether y^ nor thy statute, that you haste made, but
makes his petycyon three times a day. When the king heard these words / he
was sore grieved / and would have excused Daniel / to deliver him, and put of the
matter / unto the Sun went down / to the intent that he might save him.

These men perceauyng y^ kings mind said unto him: know this (O king) that
the law of the Medes and Perses is / that y^ commandment and statute which
the king makes / may not be altered. ^^^. ^.
Then y^ king bad them bring Daniel / and they cast him into the Lions den.

The king also spoke unto Daniell, and said: thy God, whom thou always
seruest / even he shall defendethe. And there was

So the king went into his palace / and kept him sober all night / so that
there was no table spread before him, neither could he take any sleep. But by
times in the morning at the break of the day / the king arose / and went in
all haste unto the den of the Lions.

Now as he came nigh unto the den, he cried with a piteous voice unto Daniel,
ye the king spoke / and said unto Daniel: O Daniel / thou servant of the
living God / is not thy God (whom thou always seruest) able to deliver the from
the lions? Daniel said unto the king. O King / God save Daniel. 3. ^
My God has sent his angel, Acts. (...). c Iudic. 14. c 1. Reg 17. e
Hebre. xi f.
which has shut y^ lyo^s mouths so that they might not hurt me. For why?
mine vngyltynesse is found out before him. And as for y^, O king, I never
offended y^.

Then was the king exceadyng glad and commanded to take Daniel out of the
den So Daniel was brought out of the den* and no manner of hurt was found
upon him. For he put his trust in his God. And as for those men which had
accused Daniell, the king commanded to bring them, and to cast the^ in the
Lions den, them, their children and their wives. So y^ lyo^s had the maystrye
Dani. 14. a.
of them, and brake all their bones a sonder / or ever they came at the ground.

Daniel. 3. ^
After this / wrote king Darius unto al people / kynceddes / and tu^ges, that
dwelt in

Dani. 14. ^.
For he is the living God, which abides ever: his kingdom shall not fail,
and his power is everlasting. Esaias. 14. ^ Oser. xiii. ^ Daniel. 3. ^.
It is he that delyuereth, and saves: he dath wonders and marvelous works, in
heaven and earth: he has preserved Daniel from the power of the Lions. This
Daniel prospered in y^ raygne of Darius and Cirus of Persia.

A vysyon of. iiii. beasts is showed unto Daniel. The vysyon is interpreted
of. iiii. kingdoms of the world. Of the power and increase of Antichryst. Of
the everlasting kingdom of Christ.

CAPI. VII.
IN the first year of Balthazar King and behold: the four winds of the
heaven strove upon the sea / and four great beasts came up from the sea one
unlike another.

The first was as Iere. 4. a. b Ezech. 1. b. and. x. b.
a lion, and yet had he Ezech. 17. a
Aegles wings. I saw, that his wings were plucte from him, and he taken
away from the earth: that he stood upon his fete as a man, and that there was
given him a man's heart.

Behold, y^ second beast was like a Prou. 28. c.
bear Daniel. 8. b and. xi. a 1. Mat. 1. a.
even four upon the back. This beast had four heads, and there was power
given him. After this I saw in a visyon by night, and behold / the fourth
beast was grymme and horrible / and marvelous strong. It had great iron teeth,
it devoured and destroyed, and stamped the resydue under his fete. It was far
unlike the other beasts yt were before it: for it had Apo^a ^3. a c
ten horns / whereof I took good head.

And behold, there came up among them, another like horn, before whom there
were ^pe^a. ^. ^. (...). ^. xx. b Daniel. x. a
I looked till the seats were prepared, and till you old aged sat him down. His
clothyng was as white as snow, and the hearres of his head like the pure wol.
His trone was like the fyrye flame, and his wheles as the burning fire. There
drew forth a fyrye stream, and went out from him. ^poca. v. b
A thousa^de times a thousand served him. x. M. times ten thousand stood
before him. The judgment was set / and the books opened. Then took I head
there unto, because of the voice of the proud worde^, which y^ horn spoke I
beheld / till the beast was slain, and his body destroyed, Math. 25. d Apoca.
19. d xx. c.
and given over to be brent in the fire.

As for the power of the other beasts also it was taken away / but their lives
were prolonged for a time and season. I saw in a vysion by night, and behold,
Mat. xiii. ^ Acts. i b Apo^a* i. a
there came one in the clouds of heaven like the son of a man, which went
unto the old aged / before whom they brought him: Then gave he him Phillip. 2.
a
power and dignite regal, that all people tribes and tu^ges should serve him.
Math. 28 c John. xii. d
His power is an everlasting power, which shall never be put down: and his
kingdom endures incorrupt. My heart was vexed, Dani. 14. f
and I Daniel had a troubled sprete within me, and the visio^s of my head made
me afraid: till I gat me unto Deuit. ix. ^
one of them that stood by, to know the truth, concerning all these things.
So he told me, and made me understand the interpretacyon of these things.

These four great beasts / are four Apoca. 13. 13 ^. xvii. ^.
ten horns that he had upon his head, and this other which came up afterward
/ before whose face there fell down three: which horn had eyes and mouth that
spoke presumptuous things / and looked with a grymmer visage then his fellows.
I beheld, and the same horn

zacha. i. c
The ten horns / are ten kings, ye shall arise out of y^ kingdom, after whom
there Daniel. ^. ^
and think that he may change times and laws. They shall be given under his
power / Apoca. xii. ^
until a time / two times, and half a time.

But the judgment shall be kept / so that his power shall be taken from him, for
he shall be destroyed / and peryshe at the last. As for the kingdom / power /
and all might that is under y^ heaven: it shall be given to the holy people of the
most highest, Luke. i. c Dani. 14. ^
whose kingdom is everlasting: ye^ all powers shall serve and obey him. Thus
far extend the words. Nevertheless, I Danyel was so vexed in my thoughts /
that my countenance changed Luke ii ^
but the words I kept still in my heart.

A visyon of a steyfe between a ra(...)e and an he goat. The understanding of
the visyon is of the battle between the king of Persia and the king of the
Ere^yms. Of the shameless king Antichrist.

CAPI. VIII.
IN the thryde year of the raygne of king Dan. vii. a.
first. I saw in a vision (and when I saw it, I was at Susis in the chief
city, which lies in the land of Iere. xlix. f. Ezech. 32. d
Elam) and in the vysyon / me thought I was by the river of Ulai.

Then I looked up / and saw: and behold there stood before the river, a ram,
which had horns: and these horns were hye / but one was hyer then another,
and the highest came up last. I saw that this ram pusshed with his horns
against the west, against the north, and against the south: so that no
beasts might stand before him, nor defend the^ from his power: but he did as
him lysted,

The goat had a meruelus goodly horn betwyxte his eyes, and came unto the
ram, that had the two horns (whom I had seen before by thy river side) and
ran fearcely upon him with his might. I saw him drawenye unto the ram,
being very fearce upon him: ye, he gave him such a stroke, that he

The goat waxed exceadynge great / and when he was at the strongest, his
great horn was broken also. Dan. vii. a. (...). a. ^ath. i. ^.
Then grew there other four such like in the stead, toward the. iiij.
wyndes of the heaven. Ye, out of one of the least of these horns, there came
up yet another horn / which waxed marvelous great: toward the south / toward
the east, and toward the fair pleasant land. It grew up to the host of
heaven, whereof it did cast some down to the ground, and of the stars also /
and trod them under fete.

Ye, it grew up unto the prince of the host, from whom the daylyeofferinge
was taken, and the place of his Sanctuary casten down. And a certain season
was given unto it, against the daylyeofferynge (because of wickedness) that
it might cast down the veryte to the ground / and so to prospere in all
things, that it went about,

Upon this I herd one of the saints

Now when I Daniel had seen this vision,

Then said he unto me / O thou son of man / mark well / for in the last
time shall this vysyon be fulfilled. Now as he was speaking unto me I waxed
faynte, so that I suncke down to the ground. But he took hold upon me, and
set me up again, saying: Behold, I will show the / what shall happen in the
last wrath: for in the time appointed it shall be fulfilled.

The ram which thou saw with the two horns / is the king of the Medes
and Perses: but the goat is the king of Greek land: the great horn that
stood betwyxte his eyes / that is the principal king. But where as it brake,
and four other rose up in the stead: it signifies / that out of this people
shall stand up i. Mat. i. a.
four kingdoms / but not so mighty as it.

After these kingdoms (while ungodliness

He shall be mighty and strong / but not in his own strength. He shall
destroy above measure / and all that he goes about shall prospere: he shall
sleye the strong and holy people. And through his craftynes / falshed shall
prospere in his hand, his heart shall be proud, and many one shall he put to
death in his welthynesse. He shall stand up against the Prince of Princes, 2.
Mat. 9. c 2. These. 2. b
but he shall be destroyed without hand. And this vysyon that is showed unto
the, is as sure as the evening and the morning. Esa. viii. d
Therefore write thou upon this sight, for it wylbe ^onge or it come to pass.

Upon this was I Daniel very faynte, so that I lay sick certain days: but
when I rose up, I went about the kings business, and merueled at the
vision, nevertheless no man knew of it.

Daniel desires to have that performed of God which he had promised
consernynge the retourue of the people from their bannysh: meant in Babylon A
true confession. Daniels prayre is heard. Gabriel the Aungel expounds unto
him the vysyon of the lxx. weakes. The anoyntyuge of Christ The building
again of Jerusalem under Nehemiah. The death of Christ.

CAPI. IX.
IN the first year of Darius the son of Danie. v. t.
which was of the sede of the Medes, and was made king over the realm of the
Caldees: ye, even in the first year of his raygne, I Daniel desired to know
the yearly nombre out of the books / whereof the Lord spoke unto Ac^t. xxv. b.
and. xxix. b.
Jeremy the Prophet: that Jerusalem should lie wast. lxx. years: and I turned
me unto God the Lord, for to pray and make mine intercession, with fasting,
sack cloth and ashes, I prayed before y^ Lord my God, and knowledged, saying.

ii Esdr. i. a. and. ix. c.
O Lord, thou great and fearful God, thou that kepest covenant and mercy
with them, which love the / and do thy commandments. Baruc. i. d
We have sinned / we have offended / we have been disobedient and gone back:
ye, we have departed from all thy precepts and judgments.

We would never follow thy servants ^^eno. i. d
O Lord, righteousness belongs unto the / unto us pertayneth nothing but
open shame: as it is come to pass this day unto every man of Judah / and to
them that dwell at Jerusalem. Ye, unto all Israel / whether they be far or
nigh: through out all lands: wherein thou haste strowed them / because of the
offenses / that they had done against the.

Ye / O Lord, unto us, to our kings and princes / to our forefathers: even
to us all Psalm. cvi a
that have offeded the, belongs open shame. But unto the / O Lord our God /
pertayneth 2. Petri. i d. zacha. vii. b
which he laid before us by his servants the Prophets: ye, all Israel
have tra^sgressed / and gone back from my law / so that they have not
herkened unto thy voice.

Wherefore / the curse and oath Deuteronomy. xxvii xxviii. Leui. xxvi.
that is written in the law of Moses the servant of God / and (against who^
we have offended) is poured upon us. Baruc. ii. a
And he has performed his words, which he spoke against us / and against
our judges that judged us: to bring upon us such a great plage, as never was
under heaven, like as it is now come to pass in Jerusalem. Ye, all this
plage / as it is written in y^ law of Moses / is come upon us. Yet made we not
our prayer before the Lord our God, that we might turn again from our
wickedness / and to be learned in thy verite. Therefore has the lord made
haste / to bring this plage upon us,

Baruc. ii. ^
And now / O Lord our God Exo. 12 (...). and. xiiii. ^
thou that with a myghtie hand have brought thy people out of Egypt / to get
thy self a name which remains this day: we have sinned O Lord / and done
wyckedly against all thy ryghteousnes: yet let thy wrothfull displeasure be
turned away (I beseech the) from thy cite Jerusalem thy holy hill. And why?
for our sins sake, and for the wyekednesse of our forefathers, is Jerusalem
and thy people abhorred of all the^ y^ are about us. Now therefore, O our God
/ hear the prayer of thy servant / and his intercession. O let thy face
shine over thy Sanctuary, yt lies waste.

O my God / enclyne thine ear / and harken

As I was yet speaking at my prayers. knowledgyng mine own sins / and the
sins / of my people Israel / making so mine intercession before the Lord my
God / for the holy hills sake of my God: ye / while I was yet speakinge in my
prayer / behold the man Gabriel: ( Dani. (...) (...). viii. ^
who^ I had seen afort in the vision) came flyinge to me / and touched me
about the offering time in the evening. He informed me / and spoke unto me:
O Danyel said he / I am now come to make the understand it. For as soon as
thou begannest to make thy prayer / it was so dyuised, and therefore am I come
to show the. And why? (...)
For thou art a man greatly beloved.

Wherefore / pondre the matter well / that thou may learn / to understand
the vision. Lxx. wekes are determined over thy people, and over thy holy city:
that the wyckednes may be consumed, that the sin may have an end, that the
offense may be reconcyleo, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, to
fulfill the vysyons and the Prophets / and ^. pat. 36. d. 1. Esdr. i. a.
to go and repair Jerusalem again / unto Christ (or the anointed) prince:
there shall be seven wekes: Then shall the streets and walls be builded again.
lxij. wekes, but with hard troublous time. After these. lxij. wekes, shall
Christ be slain, and they shall have no pleasure in him. Then shall there come
a people with the Prince, and destroy the cytte and the Sanctuary: and his
end shall come as the water floude. But the desolacyon shall continue till the
end of the batell.

He shall make a strong bond with many, for the space of a weke: and when the
weke is half gone / he shall put down the slain and meatoffringe, Mat. ^4.
b. Mat. xiii. b
And in the temple there shall be an abhomynable desolacion, till it have
destroyed all. And it is concluded that this wasting shall continue unto the
end.

CAPI, X.
There appears unto Daniel a man clothed in lynen, whi the shows him
wherefore he is sent.

IN the third year of King Cirus of Persia, there was showed unto Daniel
(other wise called Balthazar) a matter, ye, a true matter, but it is yet a
long time unto it. He understood the matter well, and petreaued what the
vysyon was. At the same time / I Daniel mourned for the space of three wekes, so
that I had no lust to eat bread: as for flesh and wine there came none within
my mouth: No, I did not ones anoynte my self, till the whole three wekes were
out.

Upon the. xxiiij. day of the first month, I was by the great floude /
called Tygris, Dan. vii. b Apoca. i. c.
I lift up mine eyes / and looked: and behold / a man clothed in lynen / whose
loins were gyrded up with fine gold of Araby: his body was like the Chresolite
stone, his face (to look upon) was like lyghtenyng, his eyes as the flame of
fire, his arms and fete were like fair glystering metal, but the voice of his

Dani. iii. e.
I Daniel alone saw this vysion, (...). ix. a.
the men that were with me / saw it not: but a great fearfulness fell upon
the^, so that they fled away / and hyd the^ selves. I was left there my self
alone, and saw this great vy syon / so long till there remained no more
strength within me: ye, I lost my color clean / I wasted away / and my
strength was gone. Yet herd I the voice of his words and as soon as I hard
it / faintness came upon me / and I fell down flat to the ground upon my
face. And behold, an hand touched me, which set me up upon my knees and upon
the palms of my hands, saying unto me. Dani. ix. ^.
O Daniel / thou well beloved man: take good head of the words / that I shall
say unto the, and stand right up, for unto the am I now sent.

And when he had said these words / I Iosue. v. Dani. (...)
Michael one of the chief princes, came to help me / him have I left by the
king of persia / and am come to show the, what shall happen unto thy people
in the latter days. For it wylbe long yet or the vysyon be fulfilled.

Now when he had spoken these words unto me, I cast down my head to y^
ground and held my tunge. Behold / there touched my lyppes one very like
unto a man. Then opened I my mouth, and said unto Dani, ix. d.
and conforted me / saying. O thou man so well beloved / fear not: be
content, take a good heart unto the / and be strong. So when he had spoken
unto me, I recoue red / and said. Speak on my Lord / for thou have refreshed
me. Then said he: know thou wherefore I am come unto the snow will I go
again to fight with the prince of the Perses. As soon as I go forth, lo, the
prince of Grekelande shall come. Nevertheless, I will show the / the thing /
that is fast noted in the scripture of truth. And as for all yonder matters /
there is none y^ helps me in the^ / but Michael your prince.

A prophecy of the kings of Persia. Of the kingdom of Greece. Of the kyngedome
of Egypt. and of the bond euer-of, and of the batell with the kyngedome of
Spirit. Of the Jews that fly unto the King of Egypt, whom Antiochus the
king of Syreya persicuted, which fygureth unto us Antythryst. The pride of
Antiochus.

CAPI. XI.
AND in y^ first year of Darius of Me Dan. vii. ^
Then shall there arise yet a mighty king / that shall rule with great
dominion / and do what him list. ^. Mab, ^. a.
And as soon as his kingdom comes up / it shall be destroyed / and divided
toward the four wyndes of the heaven. They that come after him, shall not have
such power and dominion as he: but his kingdom shall be scatred, ye, even
among other then those. And the king of the south shall be myghtyer, the^ his
other princes. Against him there shall one make him self strong, and shall
rule his domynion with great power.

But after sertayne years they shall be joined together / and the kings
daughter of the south shall come to the king of y^ North,

Then the king of the south shall be angry and shall come forth to fight
against the king of the north: ye, he shall bring a great multitude of
people together, and a great heap shall be given into his hand:

At the same time there shall many stand up against the king of the south /
so that the wicked children of thy people also shall exalte them selves (to
fulfill the vision) and then fall. So the king of the north shall come to lay
sege / and to take the strong fensed cities: And the power of them of the
south shall not be able to abide him / and the best men of the people shall not
be so strong, as to resyst him. Shortly / when he comes / he shall handle
him as he list / and no man shall be so hardy as to stand against him. He shall
stand in the pleasant country / which through him shall be destroyed. He shall
set his face with all his power to obtain his kingdom / and to be like it.
Ye, that shall he do, and give him unto the daughters among women / to
destroy him, But he shall fail / neither shall he obtain his purpose. After
this shall he set his face unto the Isles / and take many of them. A prince
shall stop him, to do him a shame, beside the confusyon that else shall come
unto him. Thus shall he turn again to

So after that he has taken truce with him, he shall handle dysceatfully:
that he may get up, and overcome him with a small flock: and so with
craftynesse to get him to the fattest place of the land, and to deal other
wise, the^ either his fathers or grau^dfathers host shall fall / and many be
slain down.

These two kings shall be minded to do myschefe, and talk of disceyte at one
table: but they shall not prospere, for why / the end shall not come yet, unto
the time apaynted. 2. Mat. v. a
Then shall he go home again into his own land with great good, and set his
heart against the holy covenant, he shall be busy against it, and then return
home. At the time appointed he shall come again, and go toward the South. So
shall it happen otherwise then at the first, yet ones again. And why? ^^. 24. d
the ships of Cithim shall come upon him that he may be smyte^ and turn
again: that he may take indignacy on against the covenant of holiness, to
meddle against it. Ye, he shall turn him / and draw such unto him as leave the
holy covenant.

He shall set mighty men to vnhalowe the Sanctuary of strength, to put down the
dailye offering, and to set up the abhomynable desolacion. And such as break
the covenant shall he flattre with fair words. But the people that will know
their God, shall have the ouerhande and prospere. Those also that have
understanding among the people shall enfourme the multitude: and for a long
season, they shall be persecuted with swerd, with fire, with captivity and with
the taking away of their goods. Now when they fall, they shall be set up with a
little help: but many shall cleue unto them faynedly.

Ye some of those which have understanding shall be persecuted also, that they
may be tried,, purifyed and cleansed, till the time be out: for there is yet
another time appointed. The king shall do what him list 2. These. 2. a
he shall exalte and magnyfie him self against all that is God. Ye, he shall
speak marvelous things against the God of al gods wherein he shall prospere,
so long till the Ap^c. ^5. a
wrath be fulfilled, for the conclusion is devised already. He shall not regard
the God of his fathers, but his lust shall be upon women. ye / he shall not care
for any God, for he shall magnyfie him self above all. In his place shall he
worship the mighty Idols: and the God whom his fathers knew not / shall he
honor with gold and silver, with precious stones and pleasant Jewels.

This shall he do / sekyng help and succoure at the mighty Idols and
strange Apoc. xii. ^
except Edom, Moab and the best of the children of Ammon, which shall escape
from his hand. He shall stretche forth his hands upon the countrees, and the
land of Egypt shall not escape him. For through his going in / he shall have
dominion over the treasures of silver and gold / and over all the precious
Jewels of Egipte, Libia and Ethiopia. Apoca. xi. ^
Nevertheless, the tydinges out of the East and the north shall trouble hi, for
the which cause he shall go forth to destroy and curse a great multitude. The
tents of his palace shall be pytched betwyxte the two sees / upon the hyl of
the noble Sanctuary / for he shall come to the end of it / Apoc. ^^e. v and x^.
and then shall no man help him.

He prophecyeth the resurreccyon of the dead. The darkness of the prophecye
of Daniel.

CAPI. XII.
THe time will come also / that the great Apoc. xi^. ^.
Michael, whihce stands on thy peoples side, shall arise up, for Mat. 425.
there shall come a time of trouble, such as never was, sens there began to be
any people / unto that same time. Then shall thy people be delivered / ye / al
those that be found wryt ten in the book. Job. xv. c 1. Cor^. 15. a
Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake: some to the
euerlastig life, some to perpetual shame and reprofe. Mat xiii. c Sapi. xiii. c
The wise (such as have taught other) shall glyster / as the shynyng of heaven:
and those that have instruct the multitude

And thou O Daniell, shut up these words, and seal the book till y^ last time.
Many shall go abonte here and there, and then shall knoweledge increase. So I
Daniel looked, and behold, there stood?: ( as it were) other two: one upon this
shore of the water / the

Apoca. x. a
Then herd I the man with the lyne^ clothes, which stood above upon the waters
of the floude: when he held up his right and left hand unto heaven, and swear
by him which lyucth for ever Apoca. xi. c and. xii. ^
that it shall tarry for a time, two times and half a time: and when the power
of the holy people is clean scatred abroad, then shall al these things be
fulfilled.

I herd it well, but I understood it not. as it were fire) But the ungodly
shall live wyckedly Mat. xiii. b
and those wicked (as many of them as they be) shall have no understanding. As
for such as have understanding, they shall regard it And from the time forth
that the daily offering shall be put down and the abominable desolacyon set
up, there shall be a thousand two hundredth. and. xc. days. Math. x. ^. and.
xxiiii^
O well is him / that wayteth / and comes to the thousand. iij. C. and. xxxv.
days. Go thou thy way now till it be ended: take thy rest, and bide thy lot /
till the days have an end.

The end of the Prophecye of Daniell.
The Book of the Prophet Oseas.
The time wherein Oseas prophesied. Oseas by taking an hatior his wife,
sygnyfyeth the Idolatrye of the people. The destruccyon of the ofsprynge of
Iehu, and of the Israelytes, is prophesied.

CAPI. I.
THis is the word of the 4. Re. 15. 16 and. xvii c.
in ye days of Oseas, Ioathan / Ahas and Iezekias kings of Judah: and in the
time of Ieroboa^ the son of Ioas king of Israel.

First, when the Lord spoke unto Oseas he said unto him. ^^ui. xxi. ^. Ezec.
44. d.
Go thy way / take an harlot to thy wife / and get children by her: for the
land has committed great whoredom against the Lord. So he went / and took
Gomer the daughter of Deblaim: which conceived, and brought forth a son. And
the Lord said unto him: call his name Iesraell, for 4 Reg. 15 c ^ 17. ^. 18. b.
I will shortly avenge the blood of 3 Reg xxi b
Iesrael upon the house of Iehu, and will bring the kingdom of the house of
Israel to an end. The^ will I break the bow of Israel / in the valley of
Iesrael.

She conceived yet again, and bare a daughter. And he said unto him. Call her
name. Loruhamah (that is / not optayninge mercy) 4. Reg. 17. ^.
for I will have no pitye upon the house of Israel, but forget them / and put
them clean out of remembrance. Genesis 49. b. 4. Re. xix. ^
Nevertheless /

Now, when she had weaned Loruhamah Roma. ix. ^.
ye be^ not my people: even there shall it be thus reported of the^ John. i. a.
they be the children of the living God. Ezech. 37* ^
Then shall the children of Judah and the children of Israel be gathered together
again and chose them selves one head and then depart out of the land: for
great shall be the day of Israel.

The people is called unto repentance.

CAPI. II.
TEll your brethren, that they are my Iere. iii ^
for she is not my wife, neither am I her husband / onelesse she put away her
whoredom out of my sight / and her aduoutry from her breasts. If no I shall
strype her naked, and set her Ezec. xvi* ^
even as she came into the world: ye I shall lay her wast, and make her like
a wilderness / and sleye her for thyrst. I shall have no pite also upon her
children John. 8. d.
for they be the children of fornicacion.

Their mother has broken her wedlock, and she that bare them 4. Re. ^7. ^
is come to confusyon / For she said: I will go after my lovers / Leuit. xv. c.
Then shall she say: well / I will go turn again to my first housbande / for
at that time was I better at ease, then now. But this would she not know /
where as I yet gave her corn / wine, oil / silver, and gold Ezec. ^: vi. b
which she has hanged upon Baal.

Wherefore, now will I go take my corn and wine again in their season, and
set again my woll and my flax / which I gave her / to cover her shame. Iere.
xiii. ^.
And now will I discover her foolyshnesse, even in the sight of her lovers,
and no man shall deliver her out of my hands. Moreover, I will take away ^^^.
xvi. ^.
her holy days, her uewmoones, her Sabbathes and all her sole^pue feasts: I
will destroy her vyneyardes and fygge trees, though she says: lo, here are
my rewards, y^ my lovers have given me. I will make it a wodde, and the wild
beasts shall eat it up. I will punish her also for y^ days of Baal, Iu^ic.
ii. b. and. x. b.
wherein she censed him, deckynge him with her earinges and cheynes: when she
followed her lovers / and forgot me / says the Lord.

Wherefore behold. I will call he^ again bring her into a wilderness, and
speak friendly unto her: there will I give her, her vyneyardes Iosu. vii. d
valey of Achor also to show her hope and comfort. Then shall she fynge
there, ^odic. v. a.
as in the time of her youth and Exodus xv. a
like as in the day, when she came out of the land of Egypt. Then (says y^
Lord she shall say unto me: (O my housbande and shall call me no more Baal /
for I will take away those names of Baal from her mouth / ye / she shall never
remember their names any more. Leuit. ^6. a
The^ will I make a couenaunte with them, with the wild beasts, with the
fowls of the air, and with every thing that crepeth upon the earth.

Esay^. ii. a
As for bow, sword and batel / I will destroy such out of y^ land, and will
make the^ to sleep safely. Eze. xvi. b.
Thus will I marye the unto mine own self for evermore: ye, eue^ to my self
will I mary the / in ryghtuousnesse, in equity, in loving kyndnesse and mercy.
In faith also will I mary the unto my self and thou shall know the Lord. At
the same time will I show my self friendly and gracious unto the heavens,
says the Lord: and the heavens shall help the earth, and the earth shall
help the corn / wine / and oil, and they shall help Iesrael. i Pet. ii. b.
I will sow them upon earth, for a sede to mine own self, Roma. ix. c
and will have mercy upon her, that was without mercy. And to them which were
not my people / I will say: thou art my people and he shall say: thou art my
God.

Of the love of God toward the people.

CAPI. III.
THen said the Lord to me: Ezec. 44. b.
Go yet thy ^^ope. ^8. a ^mos. vi. a
and love the wine kannes. So I gather for. xv. syluerlinges, and for an Homer,
and an half of barlye, and said unto her: Thou shall bide with me a long
season, but se that thou playest not y^ harlot, and look y^ meddle with none other
man, and then will I keep my self for the

2. Pa. xv. a.
Thus the children of Israel shall sit a Ezec. 34. d.
David their king: and in the latter days they shall worshype the Lord, and
his loving kyndnesse.

A co^playnt against the people and the prestes of Israel.

CAPI. IIII.
Hear the word of y^ Lord, O ye children Mala. i. ^.
The preastes which should refourme other me^ / are become like the people.

Therefore stomblest thou in the day time (...) (...) Es^^. (...)
my people perysh, because they have no knoledge. Saying then y^ thou have
refused understanding therefore will I refuse the also: so that thou shall
no more be my priest. And for so much as thou have forgotten y^ law of thy
God, I will also forget thy children. The more they increased in the multitude,
y^ more they sinned against me, therefore will I change their honor into
shame. Leui. vi. d Eze. xiii. d.
They eat up y^ sins of my people, and courage them in their wickedness.
Esaias. ^4. a
Thus y^ pressed is become like the people. Wherefore I will punish them for their
wicked ways, and reward the^ according Leui. 26. d, Mith. vi. ^. ^gge. i. a.
They shall eat, and not have enough. They have used whordome, therefore shall
they not prospere: and why? they have forsaken the lord and not regarded him.

Whordome, wine and dronckenesse takes the heart away. 4. Reg i. ^.
My people ask council at their stocks, their staff must tell the^. For an
whorish mind has disceaued them / so that they committee fornycacion against
their God. 4. (...)* (...)
They make sacrifices upon the hye mountains, and burn their incense upon the
hills / ye / among the oaks / groves and bushes, for there are good shadows.
Therefore Nume. 25. c
saying the fathers the^ selves have meddled with harlottes, and offered with
unthrifts: but the people that will not understand must be punyshed.

Though thou Israel art disposed to play the harlot, yet should not thou have
offended / O Judah: thou should not have run to Gilgal 3. Reg xii. d
nor have gone up to Bethauen, Deute. x* d
nor have sworn / the Lord lives. For Israel is gone back like a wanton
cow* The Lord therefore shall make her feed / as the lamb that goes astraye.
And where as Ephraim is become partaker of Idols, well / let him go. Their
dronckennes has put the^ back, and brought the^ to whordome. Their rulers
love rewards / bring (say they) to their own shame. A wind shall take
hold of their feathers, and they shall be confounded in their offringes.

Against the Prestes and rulers of Israel. The help of man can do nothing
against God.

CAPI. V.
OYe Preastes: hear this / take heed / O Earth. 8. b. Iere. 23. d
I know Ephraim well enough, and Israel is not hyd from: for Ephraim is now
become an harlot: and Israel is defiled. They are not minded to turn unto
their God, for they have an whoryshe heart, so that they can not know y^ Lord

Os^^. vii. b
But the pride of Israel will be rewarded him in his face, ye, both Israel and
Ephraim shall fall for their wickedness, and Judah with the^ also. Iere. iii. b.
Deute. 4. ^
They shall come with their sheep and bullockes Ezer. 14. a.
to seek the Lord, but they shall not find him, for he is gone from the^.
Deuteronomy. (...). ^ and xxvii. ^
that remove the landemarckes, therefore / will I pour out my wrath upon them
like water. Ephraim is oppressed, and can have no right of the law: for why?
they follow the doctrynes of men. Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth,
and to y^ house

When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah his disease / 4. Re. x^i. ^
Ephraim went unto Assure, and sent unto king ^are^: yet could not he help
you, nor ease you of your pain. I am unto Ephraim as a lion / and as a lions
whelpe to the house of Judah. Eue^ / I will spoil them / and go my way. I will
take them with me, and no man shall rescue them. I will go / and return to my
place, till they wax faint, and seek me.

Afflyctyon causes a man to return to God. The wickedness of the Prestes.

CAPI. VI.
IN their aduersytye they shall seek me / Job. v. b
for he has smyten us / and he shall heal us: He has wounded us, and he
shall bind us up again: after two days shall he quycken us / in y^ third
day he shall raise us up, so that we shall live in his sight Then shall we have
understanding, and endeavor our selves to know the Lord. He Pro. ^^^^
as the evening and morning rain upon the earth.

O Ephraim, what shall I do unto the? O Judah / how shall I entreat the?
seeing your love is like a morning cloud / and like a dew that goes early
away. Therefore have I cut down the Prophets, and Math. (...) and xii. ^
For I have pleasure in loving kyndnesse Iere. vi^^
and not in offering: ye / in the knoweledge of God / more then in
burntsacryfyce. But eue^ like as G^^^. ^^^^
Adam did, so have they broken my covenant and set me at naught. Gilead is a
cite of wicked doers of malycyous people and blood shedders. The multitude of
the Prestes is like an heap of the ues / murderers and bloudthurstye: for
they have wrought abhomynacyon. Iere. (...), ^
Horrible things have I seen in the house of Israel / there plays Ephrai the
harlot, and Israel is defiled: but Judah shall have an harvest for him self /
when I return the captyuyte of my people.

Of the vices and wantonnnes of the people.

CAPI. VII.
WHen I undertake to make Israel Roma. i. d.
They make the king and the princes, to have pleasure in their wyckednes

They have devoured their own judges, O^^^. v. ^.
and the pride of Israel is cast down before their face, yet will they not
turn to the Lord their God / nor seek him for all this.

Ephraim is like a dove, that is begyled / and has no heart. ^. (...). xvi* ^
Now call they upon the Egypcians, now go they to the Assyrians: but while they
be going here and there / I shall sprede my net over them, and draw them down
as the fowls of the air: and according as they have been warned, so will I
punyshe them. Esaye, i. ^.
Woe be unto them, for they ^^. P^i. ii, ^.
I am he that have redeemed them, and yet they dyssemble with me. Mat. xv. a
Esaye. xx, ^ Ezech. 33. ^.
They call not upon me with their hertes but lie houlynge upon their beds.
Where as they come together it is but for meat and drink / and me will they
not obey. I have taught them, and defended their arm, yet do they ymagyn
mischefe against me They turn them selves / but not a right / and are become
as a broken bow. Their princes shall be slain with the swearde / for the
malice of their tunges, such blasphemies have they learned in the land of
Egypt.

The destruccyon of Judah and Israel, because of their Idolatrye.

CAPI. VIII.
SET the horn to thy mouth, and Deu xxxi. d.
covenant / and transgressed my law. Israel can say unto me: thou art my
God, we know the: but he has refused the thing that is good, therefore shall
the enemy follow upon him. 3, Reg. xi^. ^
They have ordened kings, but not through me: they have made princes / and I
must not know of it* Ezer. vii. d.
Of their silver and gold have they made them Images, to bring them selves to
destruccyon. 3. Reg. xii. d
Thy calf / O Samaria / shall be taken away, for my wrothful indignacion is gone
forth against the. How long will it

Their sede shall bear no corn, there shall no meal be made of their
increase: though they reap, yet shall strangers devour it up. Israel shall
peryshe, the Gentyles shall entreat him as a foul vessel. Sense they went up
to the Assyryans / they are become like a wild ass in the deserte.

4. Re ^vit. ^ Ezce. xvi. ^
Ephraim gives rewards to get lovers therefore are they scatred among the
Heathen there will I gather the^ up. They shall soon D. ^. ^vii. ^ 4. Reg. 17 ^
Israel turns again into Egipte, they have forgotten him y^ made the^ they
build churches and Judah makes many strong cities: 4. Re. ^^v. ^
therefore will I send a fire into their cytyes / and it shall consume their
places.

Of the hunger and captyuyte of Israel.

CAPI. IX.
DO not thou triumph / O Israel / ^gg^^. ii. ^.
Therefore shall they no more enjoy y^ corn flowers and wine presses, and their
sweet wine shall fail them. They will not dwell in the Lords land ^^^^.
ii^^. c.
but Ephraim turns again into Egipte, and eats unclean things among the
Assyrya^s. They pour out no wine for a drinckofferyng unto the Lord, neither
give they him their slain offringes: but they be unto them as mourners meats,
wherein all they Iu^. xix. a.
at Gabaa. ^. Reg ^ c. 4. Reg. (...) c
Therefore their wyckednes shall be remembered, and their sins. punyshed. I
found Israel like grapes in Iere. 24. a.
fygges in the top of the fygge tree. Nume 25. b
But they are gone to Baal Peor / and run away fro me to that shameful Idol
and are become as abhomynable as their lovers. Ephraim ^^ieth like a bird, so
shall their glory also: In so much, that they shall neither beget, conceive nor
bear^chyldren.

And though they bring up any, yet will I make them chyldeles among men. Ye /
woe shall come to them / when I depart from them. Gene. 48. a
Ephraim (as me think) is planted in welthynes, like as Tyrus, but now must
she bring her own children forth to the Iosu i^^^. ^.
Gylgal / there do Iabhorre them, For the ungraciousness of their own
inuencyons / I will drive them out of my house. I will love them no more, for all
their princes are unfaithful.

Ephraim is hewn down, their rote is dried up / so that they shall bring
no more fruit: ye / and though they bring forth any yet will I sle^e even the
best beloved fruit of their body. My God shall cast them away, for they have
not been obedient unto him, therefore shall they go astraye among the Heathen.

Against Israel and his Idol^.

CAPI. X.
ISrael was a goodly Esaye. ^. ^.
vine / but he has

Then shall they say: we have no king, for Luke (...)* ^ Apoca. ^^^
Then shall they say to the mountains: cover us, and to the hills, fall upon
Iud. (...). ^
Gabaa did before time, where they remained: should not the battle then come
upon the wicked children, as well as upon the Gabao^^tes? I will chasten them,
even after mine own desire, the people shall be gathered together over them,
when I punysh the^ for their great wyckednes. Ephraim was unto me / as a

But now they have plowed them wyckednes / therefore shall they reap sin, and
eat the fruit of lies, Seeing thou put thy confydence in thine own ways:
and ^eaneste to the multitude of thy worthyes: there shall grow a sedicyon
among thy people. Al thy strong cities shall be laid waste / even as Salmana
was destroyed with his famylters, through him that was avenged of Arbell / in
the day of battle / where the mother perished with her children. Even so
shall it go with you (O Bethell) because of your malycyous wickedness. Like
as the morning goes away, so shall the King of Israel pass.

CAPI. XI.
Against the unkindness of Israel.

WHEN Israel was young, I loved him: E^o^. (...). ^ (...). (...). b Math. (...).
c E^o^^. 32. b ^*
and called my son out of the land of Egypt. But the more they were called
/ the more they went back / Reg. xii, ^ ^. Reg. 16 c
offryng unto Idols and censyng Images. * I learned Ephraim to go / and bare
them in mine arms / but they regarded not me, that would have helped them. I
led the^ with coardes of frendshipe, and with bands of love: I was even he,
that laid the yoke upon their necks. Exo. x^^, c.
I gave their foder my self that they should not go again into Egypt. And now
is Assure their king. For they would not turn unto me. Therefore shall the
swearde begin in their cytyes, the stoare that they have laid up / shall be
destroyed and ea^en: and that because E^o^^. x. ^. a. xx^iii. b. (...) (...). b
Luke. xi. d.
their prophets lay the yoke upon them, but they ^ase them not of their
burden.

What great things have I given the, O Ephraim^ how faithfully have I
defended the, O Israel? have I deal^ with the as with (...) (...). d Deuteronomy. 29, d
Adama* or have I entreated the like Seb^im? No, my heart is otherwise minded.
Ye, my mercy is to fervent* therefore have I not turned me to destroy Ephraim
in my wrothful displeasure. For I am god and no man, I am even that holy one in
the midst of the / though I came not within the ey^ye.

The Lord roareth like a lion, that they ^po^ 4. ^. a
as a lion roareth he / that they may be afraid ^yke the children of the sea:
that they may be scatred away from Egypt* as men scatre birds: and frayed
away (as do^es use to be) from the Assyryans land: and that because I would
have them tarry at home, says the Lord. But Ephraim goes about ^e with lies,
and the house of Israel dissembleth. Only Judah holds him with God / and with
the true holy things,

Against the vain trust of the people.

CAPI. XII.
EPhraim is fed with air, and follows ^ Reg 16 d* E^ay (...) b
their oil is carried into Egypt. The Lord has a cour^e to hold with Judah,
and will punish Jacob. After their own ways and according to their own
inuencyons, shall he recompense them. (...)
He took his brother by the hele / when he was yet in his mothers womb: and in
his strength he wrestled with God. He Genesis xxv. c.
strove with the angel / and gat the vyctorye: so that he prayed and G^*
xxxv. ^
desired him. Gene. 32. d.
He found him at Bathell / and there he talks with us.

Ye the Lord God of Hoostes / even the Lord him self remembered him. Then
^po^^. (...). c
Tush, I am ^yche, I have good enough: In all my worckes shall not one fault be
found / that I have offended. Yet am I the Lord thy God, even as when I
brought the out of the land of Egypt / and set the in thy tents / and as in
the hye feast days.

I have spoken through the prophets, and showed diverse visions and declared my
self by the ministracio^ of the prophets. But at Galaad is the abhominacion,
they are ^^lle^ to vanite. At Gylgal they have s^ayne o^^^: as many hep^s of
stones as they had ^ ^h^^r land forowes / so many a^iters have they made.
Gene, ^8. ^
Jacob ^^ed into the land of S^^^a / and Israel served for a wife / and for a
wife he kept sheep.

By a proph^e the Lord brought them out of Egypt, and by a prophet he
preserved them. But Ephraim has provoked him ^o displeasure through his
abhomynacyons / therefore shall his blood be poured upon him self / and the
Lord his God shall reward him his blasphemies.

Of the abhomynacyon of Israel.

CAPI. XIII.
TTE abhomynacyon of Ephraim is Esaias. 46. a E^^^. x^^. ^ O^^^. (...). ^. and.
(...). a.
of their silver / they make them molten images / like the Idols of the Heathes
/ and yet all is nothing but the work of the craftesman: Notwithstanding
they preach of the same: who so will kiss the calves, offreth to men. Therefore
they shall be as the morninge cloud, and as the dew that early passes away,
and like as dust that the wind takes away / from the flore / and as smoke
that goes out of the chymney.

Exodus xx. ^.
I am the Lord God, which brought the Esa^. 43. b.
no Savior but only me. I took vyligent head of the in the wilderness that
dry land, But when they were well ^^dde and had enough, they waxed proud,
and forgot me. Exodus 4^. b.
therefore will I ^e unto the^ as a lion / and as a leoparde in the way to the
Assirians. I will come upon them as a she bear, that is robbed of her whelps
/ and I will break that stubburne heart of theirs. There will I devour them as
a lion: ye / the wild beasts shall tear them.

Job. x^ii. ^.
O Israel, thou do but destroy thy self. In me only is thy help. Where
are thy kings now / that should help the in all thy cities? Ye / and thy
judges / of whom thou (...).
give me a king and princes? well, I gave the a king in my wrath, and in my
dyspleasure will I take him from the again. The wickedness of Ephraim is
bound together / and his sin lies hyd. Therefore, shall sorrows come upon him
/ as upon a woman that trauayleth. An indiscreet son is he: for he consydreth
not / that he should not have been able to have endured in the time of his
birth / had not I defended him from the grave / and delivered him from death.

^. Cor. xv. f. He^r^. ^. a.
O death I will be thy death: O hell, I will be thy styng. Yet can I se no
comfort / for when he is now the goodlyest among the brethren, the east
wind (even the wind of the Lord) shall come down from the wilderness / and
dry up his condyte / and dryricke up his wells: he shall spoil the treasure
of all pleasant vessels.

As for Samaria / it shall be made waste, and why? they are dysobedyente unto
their God. They shall perysh with the swearde / their children shall be slain,
and their women great with child shall be rypte up.

The des^^u^^yon of Samaria.

CAPI. XIIII.
O Israel / I^. xviii* ^. E^^ x^iii. ^. (...) xxxii^* ^
turn the now / unto the Lord thy God / ^ R^g. xii ^
for thou have taken a great fall through thy wickedness.

Take these words with you / when ye turn to the Lord / and say unto him: O
forgive us all our sins, receive us graciously, Psa. x^ii. a. ^ebre. iii. d
and then will we offer the bullockes of our lyppes unto the. Assure shall be
no more our helper / neither will we ride upon horses any more. As for the
works of our hands / we will no more call upon them: For it is thou that
art our God / thou sheweste ever merrye unto the

O (if they would do this) I should heal their sores: ye, withal my heart
would I love them: so that my wrath should clean be turned away from them.
Ye, I would be unto Israel as the dew, and he should grow as the lyly, and
his rote should break out as Lybanus. His branches should sprede out abroad
and be as fair as the olyue tree

O Ephraim, what have I to do with Idols any more? I will gracyously hear
I^^^. i^* ^*
Who so is wise shall understand this: and he that is right enstructe, will
regard it. Psa x^^^^
For the ways of the Lord are ryghteous, such as be Godly will walcke in
them. As for the wicked, they will stomble therein.

The end of the Prophecye of Oseas.
The Book of the Prophet Joel.
A prophery against the Jews. He exhorts the prestes to prayer and ^astynge
for the myserye that was coming at hand.

CAPI. ^.
THis is the word of the Ye / a mighty and an innumerable people shall come up
into my land: these have teeth like the teeth of lions and cha^tbones like the
lyonesses. D^^ie. 32. d
They shall make my vyneyarde wast, they shall pyl of the barckes of my
^ygtrees / strype the^ bare, cast the^ away / and make the branches white.

Make thy moan as a vyrgin does that girdeth her self with sack / because of
her bryde grome. For y^ meat and drink offering shall be taken away from the
house of the Lord, and the prestes the Lords ministtrs shall mourn. The field
shall be wasted / the land shall be in a miserable case: for the corn shall be
destroyed,

Gyrde^ you / and make your moan / O ye prestes / mourn ye mynysters of the
altar: go your way in / and stepe in sack cloth / O ye officers of my God:
for the meat and drinckofferyng shall be taken away from the house of your God.
Proclayme a fasting / call the Io^^. 2. d.
and all the inhabytours of the land together into the house of the Lord your
God, and cry unto y^ Lord: alas, alas for this day. And why? the day of the
Lord is at hand, and comes as a destroyer from the almighty. Shall not the
meats be taken away before our eyes, the mirth also and joy from the house of
our God? The sede shall perysh in the ground the garners shall lie wast, the
flores shall be broken down: for the corn shall be destroyed. O what a syghynge
make the evil? the bullockes are very euel lyking, because they have no
pasture: and the sheep are samyshed away.

O Lord, to the will I cry: for the fire has consumed the goodly pastures of
the wilderness, and the flame has brent up all the trees of the field. Ye,
the wild beasts cry also unto the: for the water rivers are dried up, and
the fire has consumed the pastures of the wilderness.

He propheryeth the coming and cru^^^ye of their enemies. An exhort^cion to
move them to convert.

CAPI. II.
Blow out the trompet in Syon, and cry Sopho. i. ^ Amo^ ^
for the day of the Lord to^meth, and is hard at hand: a darcke day, a
gloomyng day, a cloudy day, ye, and a stormy day, like as the morning
spredeth out upon y^ hills. Namely, a great and mighty people: such as have
not been sens the beginning: neither shall be after them for ever more. Before
him shall be a consumyng fire, and behind him a burning flame. The land
shall be as a garden of pleasure before him, but behind him shall it be a very
wast wilderness, and there is no man, that shall escape him. They are to look
upon like barbed horses, and ru^ne like horsemen. They skyp up upon y^ hills,
as it were the sou^de of charettes as y^ flame of fire y^ consumes y^ straw
and as a mighty people ready to the battle.

The tolke shall be afraid of him, all faces Io^l. i^^. ^ Man. 24. ^.
The sun and the moon shall be darckened / and the stars shall withdraw
their shine. The Lord shall shall show his voice before his hooste / for his
hooste is great / strong / and mighty to fulfill his commandment. This is
that great and marvelous fearful day of the Lord. Apoc. vi. ^.
And who is able to abide it?

Now therefore says the Lord. Deuteronomy. iiii. e and* xxx. a.
Turn you unto me with all your hertes, with fa^ynge, weeping and mournyng,
rent your hertes, and not your clothes. Turn you unto the Lord your God:
Psalm. 86. a. Ione. iiii. a
for he is gracyous and merciful, long suffering and of great compassion: and
ready to pardon wickedness. Then (no doubt) he also shall turn / and forgive:
and after his chastenynge, he shall let your increase remain* for meat and
drinckoffri^ges unto the Lord your God? Io^^. i. c.
Blow out with the trompet in Syon, proclayme a rloset. Let the preastes serve
the Lord betwyxte the porche and the altar, weeping and saying: be favorable,
O Lord, be favorable unto thy people: let not thine heritage be brought to
such confusion, lest the Hethen be Lords thereof. Psalm. 79. b
Wherefore should they say among the Hethen: where is now their God.

Then shall the Lord be gelous over his

Be glad then (O ye children of Syon) and L^uit. 26. a Deu^e xi ^b ^. xxviii. b.
and he it is yt shall send you down showers of rain, early and late in the
first month: so yt the garners shall be full of corn, and the presses plentuous
in wine and oil. And as for the years that the greshoper, locust, blastyng,
and caterpyller (my grethost, which I sent among you) have eaten up, I shall
restore the^ to you again, so that ye shall have enough to eat, and be
satisfied: and praise the name of the Lord your God

And my people shall never be confounded any more. Ye shall well know, y^ I am in
the midst of Israel, and that I am the Lord your God: ye / and that there is
none other, and my people shall no more be brought to confusion.

Nume. ^i. ^ Esaias. 44. a Ezeth. 36. ^ Acts. ii. b.
After this, will I pour out my sprete upon al flesh: and your sons and your
daughters shall prophecy: your old men shall d^^ame dreams, and your young men
shall se vysio^s ye, in those days I will pour out my sprete upon servants
and maidens. I will show wonters in heaven above and tokens in the earth
beneth: blood and fire, and the vapor of smoke. The su^ne shall be turned into
darkness, and the Moon into blood: before the great and notable day of the
Lord come. And the time shall conte, that Roma. x. b.
whosouer calls on the name of the Lord, shall be saved. For upon the mount
Syon and at Jerusalem / there shall be a salvation / like as the Lord has
promised. ^e^ / and among the other re^naunt, whom the Lord shall call,

Of the judgment of God against the enemies of his people.

CAPI. III.
FOr take heed: in those days and at the E^^. (...) xxvii. (...) Amo^. i. b.
Thou Tirus and Sidon and all ye borders of the Philystynes: what have ye to do
with me? Will ye defye me? well / if ye will needs defye me / I shall
recompense you, even upon your head, and that right worthily: for ye have taken
away my silver and gold, my sayre and goodly Jewels, and brought the^ into
your gods houses. The children also of Judah and Jerusalem have ye sold unto
y^ Greeks that ye might bring them far from the borders of their own
countrees.

Behold therefore / I will raise them out of the place, where ye have sold
the^, (...).
and will reward you eue^ upon your head. Your sons and your daughters will I
sell through the hands of the children of Judah, and so they shall give the^
forth to sell / unto the^ of Saba a people of a far country: for the Lord him
self has said it. Cry out these things among the Ge^tyles, proclayme war
/ wake up the gyau^tes, let them draw nigh / let them Esaias. ^. ^*
Lay to your sythes / for the Harvest i^ ^po^^. (...)
ripe: come / get you down: the wine press is full / ye / the wine presses
rounne over, for their wyckednes is waxen great.

In the valley appointed / there shall be many, many people: for the day of
Lord is nigh in the valley appointed. Io^^ (...). i Esaias. (...)*
The sun and Iere. (...).
The Lord shall roar out of Syon / and cry out of Jerusalem / that the
heavens and the earth shall quake wtal. But y^ Lord shall be a defense unto his
own people / and a refuge for the children of Israel. Thus shall ye know /
that I the Lord your God dwell upon my holy mount of Sion. Then shall
Jerusalem be holy, and there shall no strangers go through her any more.

^^os. ix. c.
Then shall the mountains drope sweet wine / and the hills shall flow with
mylcke. All the ryuers of Judah shall have water enough / and out of the Lords
house there shall flow a spryng / to water the broke of Iere. x^vi. a
Sitim: but Egypt shall be laid waste, Iere. x^ix. b
and Edo^ shall be desolate: because they have dealte so cruelly with the
children of Judah / and shed innocent blood in their land. Again / Judah
shall be inhabited for evermore, and Jerusalem from generation to generation: for
I will not leave their blood vnauenged. And the Lord shall dwell in Sion.

The end of the Prophe cye of Joel.
: The Book of the Prophet Amos.
The time of the Propherye of Amos. The word of the Lord against ^^ah,
egaynste Tire, against Edom, and against the tonnes of Ammon.

CAPI. I.
THese are the sermons ^* ^^g. 15 a
Osiah king of Judah, and in the time of ^. ^r. 14. ^
Jeroboam the son of Ioah king of Israel, two year before the earth quake.
And he said. (...). 25. ^ (...). (...). ^
The Lord shall roar out of Syon / and show his voice from Jerusalem: so
that the pastu res of the shepherdes shall be in a miserable case, and the tope
of Charmel dried up. Thus says the Lord: for three and four wicked nesses of
Esaias. 17. a (...). x^^x. ^
Damascus / I will not spare her because they have thresshed Galaad with iron
flayles. But I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, the same shall
consume y^ pa laces of Benadab. Thus will I break the bars of Damascus, and
roce out the inhabyter zacha. ix. a
Gaza, I will not spare her: because they make the prisoners yet more capciue,
and have driven them into the land of Edom. Therefore will I se^de a fire into
the walls of Gaza / which shall de uoure her houses. I will rote out them that
dwell at Asdod and him that holds the scepter of Ascalon, and stretch out mine
hand over Accaron, that the re^mnaunt of the Philistynes shall perish / says
the Lord.

Thus says the Lord: For three and four Ioc^. iii. attire / I will not spare her: because they have increased y^ cap tyutte of the
Edomites, and have not remembered the 3. Reg. v. ^
brotherly covenant. Therefore / will I sede a fire into the walls of Tire /
that shall consume her palaces. Thus says the Lord For three and four
wyckednesses of (...). i. ^ Iere ^^^x. a
Edom I will not spare him / because Gene. ^7. g
he persecuted his brother with the sword / destroyed his mothers wo^de, bare
hatred very long, and so kept indignacyon al way by him. Therefore will I send
a fire in to Theman, which shall de t^oure the palaces of Bosra.

Thus says the Lord: For three and four (...) and. xxv. a
A*n non / I will not spare them: because they rypt up the women great with
child in Galaad / to make the borders of their lands the wider, Therefore, I
will kyndle attire in the walls of Rabbath, that shall consume her palaces: with
a great cry / in the day of barayle, (...) tempest and in the day of storm:
so that their king shall go into captivity he and his Pryaces together, says
the Lord.

Against Moab, Judah, and Israel.

CAPI. II.
THus says the Lord, For three and four Esaias (...). a Iere. (...)* ^ Ezec.
48. a
Moab / I will not spare him: because he brent the bones of the king of Edom
to ashes. Therefore wit I send a fire into Moab, which shall consume y^ palaces
of Carioth: so that Moab shall perysh with noise and the sound of a shaw me. I
will rote out the judge from among them / and sleye all his princes with him,
says the Lord. Thus says the Lord: for three Much i. ^
Judah / I will not spare him: because he has cast a side the law of the
Lord, and not kept his commandments: for why? Iere. 44. ^ Ezech. xx. ^
they would needs be disceyued with the lies that their forefathers followed.
Therefore / will I send a fire into Judah / which shall consume the palaces of
Jerusalem.

Thus says y^ Lord: For three and four wyckednesses of Israel, I will not
spare hi: because he has sold the ryghtuous for money, Number. xiii. c
hye as y^ Cedre trees, and as strong as the oaks: notwithstanding I destroyed
his fruit from above and his rote from under.

Exod^. 14. c (...). viiii, ^.
Again, I brought you out of the land of Egypt, and led you forty years
through the wyldernes, that ye might have the Amorites lands in possession. I
raised up prophets among your children, and absteyners among your young
men. Is it not so / O ye (...). vi. a
But ye gave the absteyners wine to drink, (...). xi. d
ye ye commanded the prophets, saying: Prophecy not. Behold, I will crashe
you in son der / like as a wayne crassheth / that is full of sheaues: so that
the swyfte shall not escape neither the strong be able to do any thing: no / the
gyaunte shall not save his own life The archer shall not abide, and the swyfte
of foot shall not escape. The horsina^ shall not save his life, and he yt is as
manly of stomach as a gyau^t, shall in that day be feign to ru^ne his way naked,
says the Lord.

He reproves the house of Israel of wychednes.

CAPI. III.
Hear, what the Lord speaks unto Deu. iiii c. und. xxii x^
you only have I accepted from all the generacio^s of the earth: therefore will
I viset you in all your wyckednesses. May twain walk together except they be
agreed among themselves? Does a Lion Job. vi. ^.
roar in the wod / except he have a pray? Or cries a lio^s whelpe out of his
den, except he have gotten some thing? Does a bird

Preach in the palaces at Asdod, and in

Therefore / thus says the Lord God: This land shall be troubled and beseged
round about / thy strength shall be plucte from the 4. Re. xvi. and. xvii.
Hear / and bear record in the house of Jacob (says y^ Lord God of
hoostes) that when I begin to vyset the wickedness of Israel / I will vyset
the aulters at Bethell also: so that the horns of the altar shall be broken of
/ and fall to the ground.

As for the wynterhouse and summer house I will smite them down: and the houses
of yuery: ye, and many other houses shall perysh, and be destroyed, says the
Lord.

Against the governors of Samarin.

CAPI. IIII.
O Hear this word ye fat kyne, that

Ye came to Iosu xli. ^ 3. ^^eg. ^d^ Ose^. (...)
Bethel for to work ungraciousness, and have increased your sines at Osce. ix*
^. and* xii. ^.
Galgal: ye brought your sacrifices in the morning, and your tithes unto the
third Deuteronomy. (...). and. 28. ^. Iere. 14. ^. Joel. iii. ^.
I withelde the rain from you: ye I rayned upon one cite: and not upon another
one piece of ground was mostured with rain, and the ground that I rayned not
upon, was dry. Wherefore two, ye, three cities Exodus ix. b.
as I did in Egypt: your young me^ have I sleyne with the sword, and caused your
horses to be taken captive: I made the stynckynge savor of your tents to come
up into your nostrels. Yet will ye not turn unto me, says the Lord. Some
of you have I overthrown, Gene. xix f (...). Pet. ii. ^
as I ouerthrewe Sodom and Gomore: so that ye were

A compl^ynte of the captyuyte of Israel.

CAPI. V.
HEAR this word, O ye house of

Ye turn the law to wormewod / and cast down ryghteousnes unto y^ ground.
Job. ix. a.
The Lord makes the. vij. stars and the Orio^s, he turns the night into
day, and of the day ^mos. ix. d
He calls the waters of the sea, and pours them out upon the plain
ground: the Lord is his name. He rayseth destruccyon upon the mygntye people,
and brings down the strong hold: but they owe him evil will, y^ reproves
the^ openly: and who so tells the^ the plain truth, they abhor hi. For so
much then as ye oppress the pore, and rob him of his best sustenau^ce:
Deuteronomy. 28. c, Sopho. ^. c
therefore / where as ye have builded houses of square stone / ye shall not dwell
in the^. Marvelous pleasant vineyardes shall ye pla^te / but y^ wine of the^
shall ye not dri^ke: and why^as for y^ multitude of your wickedness and your
stout sins / I know the^ right well. Enemies are ye of the ryghteous, Exo.
xxiii a Mich. iii. c.
ye

Seek after y^ thing ye is good / and not euel / so shall ye live: ye / y^
Lord God of hoostes shall be with you / according to your own desire. Psalm.
97. b Romans xii. b
Hate y^ evil / and love the good: Deu. xvii d
sit up right again i^ the port: and (no doubt) the Lord God of hoostes
shall be merciful unto the remnaunte of Joseph. If no (says the Lord God, the
God of hosts) there shall be mournyng in all streets, ye, they shall say in
every street: alas, alas. They shall call the housbandema^ to lame^tacion / and
such as can Joel. ii. b Sopho. i. c ^saye ^, ^. and. lviii a
and not clear? shall it not be cloudy / and no shine in it? Mich. vi. b Mala.
i. a.
I hate and abhor your holy days / and where as ye cense me when ye come
together I will not accept it. And though ye offer me brentoffrynges and
meatoffringes / yet have I no pleasure therein. As for your fat thanck
offerynges / I will not look upon the^: Away with y^ noise of thy son ges, I
will not hear thy plays of musyck, but se y^ equity flow as y^ water, and
righteousness as a mighty stream. O ye house of Ic^e. vii. c. ^^ces. vii. ^
gave ye me offrynges and sacryfices those forty years long in the wylder
nys? yet have ye set up tabernacles to your Leuit. xx. ^ 3. Reg. xi. ^.
Moloch, and images of your Idols, ye, and the star of your God Rempha,
fygures which ye made to worshyppethe^. Therefore will I cause you to be carried
away beyond Damascus, says the Lord, whose name is the God of Hoostes.

Against the princes of Israel living in pleasures.

CAPI. VI.
Luke. vi. c.
OWo be to the proud welthy in Syo^ Job. xxi. b. Ela^^. v. ^.
David: ye that drink wine out of goblettes / and anoynte your selves with
the best oil, but noman is sorry for Joseph's hurt* There fore / now shall ye
be the first of them / that shall be led away captyue / and the lusty chere of
the wylfull shall come to an end.

(...)
The Lord God has sworn even by Deu. viii. d
for * they would not remember the name of the Lord.

Behold, the Lord is minded to smite the great houses, so that they shall
decay, and the little houses, y^ they shall cleue a sunder. Who can run with
horses / or plowe with oxen upon the hard rocks of stone? For why? ye have
turned true judgment into bytternesse and y^ fruit of ryghteusnesse into
wormwode ye, even ye, ye rejoice in vain things: ye that say: have not we
optayned horns in our own strength? well, take heed, O ye house of Israel,
says the Lord God of hoostes: I will bring a people up you, which shall
trouble you, from the way y^ goes to ward Hemath, unto y^ broke i y^ medowe

Of the captiuytie of Israel and Judah.

CAPI. VII.
THE Lord God showed me such a 4. Re. (...)
and as for the house of Jeroboam, I will stand up against it with the sword,
^. Reg. (...). ^.
Amos makes the house of Israel to rebel against the / the land can not
away with his words. For Amos says, Jeroboam shall dye with the swearde /
and Israel shall be led away captyue out of their own land. And Amasiah said
unto Amos, Get the hence Esaias. xx^^
(thou that can se so well) and fle in to the land of Judah: get the there thy
living / and prophecy there: and prophecy no more at Bethell / for it is the
kings chapel, and the kings court.

Amos answered, and said to Amasiah: ^ath. xii. ^
As for me I am neither prophet, nor prophets son: but a keeper of catell.
Now as I was breakinge down molberyes, and going after the catell the Lord
took me / and said unto me: Go thy way / and prophecy unto my people of
Israel. And therefore, hear you now y^ word of y^ Lord: Thou say: prophecy
not against Israel, and speak nothing against y^ house of Isaac. Wherefore,
thus says y^ Lord: Thy wife shall be defiled in the city, thy sons and
daughters shall be slain with the swearde, and thy land shall be measured out
with y^ line. Thou thy self shall dye in an unclean land, 4. Re. (...)
and Israel shall be driven out of his own country.

Against the rulers of Israel. The Lord swears that he will fulfill the
things which he has determined against Israel.

CAPI. VIII.
THE Lord God showed me this vysyon: Esaye. v. b.
Hear this, O ye y^ oppress the poor / and destroy the nedy in the land,
saying: When will the new month be gone, yt we may sell bytayle, and the
Sabbath / that we may have scarceness of corn: to make y^ busshell less /
and the Sycle greater? We shall set up false wayghtes / that we may get the
pore under us with their money / and the nedy also for shoes: ye, let us sell
the chafe for corn.

Amos. vi. b.
The Lord has sworn against y^ pride of Jacob: these works of theyrs will I
never forget. Shall not the land tremble / and all they that dwell therein,
mourn for this? Shall not their destruccyo^ come upon the^ like a water
stream, and flow over the^, as the floude of Egypt? Iere. xv. b.
At the same time (says the Lord God) I shall cause the Sun to go down at
none / and the land to be darcke in the clear day. Tobi. ii. a.
Your hye feasts will I turn to sorrow / and your songs to mourning: I
will bring sack cloth upon all backs, and baldnes upon every head: ye,
such a mourning will I send them, Iere. vi. d.
as is made upon an only begotten son, and they shall have a miserable end.

Behold / the time comes (says the Lord God) that I shall send an hunger
in to the earth: not the hunger of bread, nor the thyrst of water: but an
hunger to hear the word of the Lord: so that they shall go from the one see
to the other, ye, from the north unto the east, runnynge about to seek the
word of the Lord, and shall not find it In that time / shall the tayre
virgins and the young men perysh for thyrst, ye, eue^ they that swear in the
offense of Samaria / and say: as truly as thy God lives at Dan, and as truly
as thy God lives at Bersaba. These shall fall, and never rise up again.

Threatenynges against Israel. No man can escape the hand of God.

CAPI. XI.
I Saw the Lord sta^dynge upon the altar, Psalm, 139. a
They shall not fle away, there shall not one of the^ escape / nor be delivered.
Abdy. i. a.
Though they were buried in the hell, my hand shall fetch the^ from thence:
though they clyme up to heaven / yet shall I cast them down: though they hyde
them selves upon the top of Carmel, yet shall I seek the^ out, and bring them
from thence: though they crepe down fro my sight into the deep of the sea, I
shall command the serpente / even

Thus will I set mine eyes upon the^, for their harm and not for their wealth.
For when the Lord God of hoostes touches a land, it consumes away / and al
they that dwell therein, must needs mourn: And why? their destruction shall
arise as every stream and run over the^ / as the floude in Egypt. 3. Re.
viii. g
He that has his dwelling in heaven / and groundeth his tabernacle in the
earth: Amos. v. b.
He that calls the waters as the sea, and pours them out upon the plyane
ground: his name is the Lord. O ye children of Israel, are ye not unto me,
even of the Moryans / says the: Lord have not I brought Israel outof the
land of Egypt, Gene, x. b.
the Philistynes Iere. xxx. b. ^a^ua xiii b Roma. ix. c
I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob, says y^ Lord.

Forlo, this I promise: though I syfte the house of Israel among al nacyons
(like as they use to syfte in a syue) yet shall not the smallest grauel stone
fall upon the earth: But all the wicked doers of my people, that Acts. xv. c.
Mith, 7. b.
At that time will I build again the tabernacle of David, that is fallen
down / and hedge up his gappes: and look what is broken, I shall repair it:
Ye, I shall build it again, as it was before time, that they may possess
the remnaunt of Edom, ye, and all such people as call upon my name with the^
/ says the Lord, which does these things.

Behold / the time comes (says the Lord) that the plowma^ shall over take
the mower and treader of grapes, him y^ sows sede. Joel. iii. c.
The mountains shall drop sweet wine / and the hills shall be fruteful, and
I will turn the captyuyte of my people of Israel: they shall repair the waste
cities / and have the^ in possessyon: they shall plant vynyardes, and drink
the wine thereof: they shall make gardens / and enjoy the fruits of them. And I
will plant them upon their own ground / so that I will never rote the^ out
again from their land which I have given them says the Lord thy God.

The end of the Prophecye of Amos.
against Edom, and the trust that they had in riches.

The book of the Prophet Abdy.
This is the vision that Ezech. 28. b and xxxv a Amos. i. c.
Edom: we have hard of the Lord that there is an embassage set among the
Heathen: Up, let us arise / and fight against the^. Behold, Ic^e. xlix. ^.
I will make the small among the Heathen, so y^ thou shall be utterly despised.
The pride of thine heart has lift y^ up, thou y^ dwell in the strong holds
of stone, and haste made y^ an hye seat: Thou say in thine heart: who shall
cast me down to the ground? Amon i^ a. Ab^^^^. 2 ^
But though thou we^test up as hye as the Aegle, and made thy Esa. xxix. c.
i. Lorin i. ^.
Shall not I at y^ same time says the Lord destroy y^ wise Gent. 27. ^.
brother Jacob: ye, for evermore shall thou perysh / and that because of the
time / when thou dydest set thy self against him, even when the enemies
carried away his host / and when the aleauntes came in at his ports / and
cast lottes upon Jerusalem, and thou thyselfe waste as one of them.

Thou shalt no more se the day of thy

Thou shall send out no man against I(...)* ^o^l. (...). ^.
Like as thou have done, so shall thou be dealte wthal, ye, thou shalt be
rewarded even upon thine head. For like wise as ye have dronken upon mine holy
hill / so shall all heathen drink continually: ye, drink shall they, and
swalowe up, ^o y^ ye shall be as though ye had never been.

But upon the mount Syon shall ^acha. (...). ^
that had them selves before in possessyon. Moreover, the house of Jacob shall be
a fire / the house af Joseph a flame / and the, Ierem. ^. ^
house of Esau shall be the straw, which they shall kyndle and consume / so
that nothing shall be left of the house of Esau, the Lord himself has ^^ch.
^^Soan^^ ^
and the kingdom shall be the Lords,

The end of the book of the Prophecye of Abdy.
: The Book of the Prophet Jonas.
The flight of Jonas when he was sent to preach. A tempest aryseth, and
casts him in the sea for his dysobedience.

CAPI. I.
THe word of the Lord came unto 4. ^t. 14. ^.
Jonas the son of Jonas. 3. a
Arise, and get y^ to Niniue that Gene. x b
great cite: and preach unto them, how y^ Gene. 18. ^
their wickedness is come up before me. And Jonas made him ready to fle unto
Tharsis from the presence of the Lord, and gat him down to Ioppa: where he
found a ship ready for to go unto Tharsis. So he paid his fare, and went
abroad / that he might go with them unto Tharsis / from the presence of the
Lord. But the Lord hurled a great wind into the sea / and there was a
mighty tempest in the sea: so that the ship was in teoperdy of going in
pieces. Then y^ maryners were afraid, and cried every man unto his God: and the
goods that were in the ship, they cast into the sea / to lyghten it of the^.
But Jonas gat him under the hatches / where he laid him down and slombred.

So the master of the ship came to him and said unto him: why slomberest
thou? Iosne 7. c
And so they cast lottes, and the lot fell upon Jonas.

Then said they unto him: tell us / for whose cause are we thus troubled? what
is thine and when there go thou*) what cou^treman art thou, and of what
nation? He answered the^: I am an Ebrue, and I fere the Lord God of heaven /
which made both y^ see, and dry land. Then were the me^ excedyngly afraid,
and said unto him why dydest you so? (for they knew, y^ he was fled from the
presence of the Lord, because he had told the^) and said moreover unto him:
What shall we do unto y^, that the sea may cease from troublynge us? (for the sea wrought and was troublous) he answered them: Take me, and cast me into the sea, so shall it let you be in rest

Nevertheless, the me^ assayed with rowing / to bring the ship to land:
but it would not be / because the sea wrought so / and was so troublous against
them. Wherefore they cried unto the Lord, and said: Deuteronomy. xxi. ^
O Lord let us not perysh for this man's death / neither lay you innoce^c blood
unto our charge: for you, O lord, have done, eue^ as thy pleasure was.

So they took Jonas, and cast him into the sea / and the sea left ragyng. And
the me^ feared the Lord excedyngly, doing sacryfices and making vows unto
the Lord.

Jonas is swalowed of a whale. The prayer of Jonas.

CAPI. II.
BUt the Lord prepared a great fyshe / to swalow up Jonas Mat. xii. ^
So was Jonas Psalm. 120. e
In my trouble I called unto the Lord, and he herd me out of y^ belly of hell I
cried, and thou herdest my voice. Thou had cast me down deep in the
myddest of the sea, and the sloude co^pa Psalm. xlii. d
all thy waves and roules of water went over me, I thought that I had been cast
away out of thy sight: but I will yet again look toward thy holy temple.

The waters compassed me / eue^ to the very soul: the deep lay about me, and
the wedes were wrapte about mine head. I went down to the botome of the
hills, and was barred in with earth for ever. But thou / O Lord my God, haste
brought up my life again out of corrupcion. When my soul fainted

Jonas is sent again to Ninyue. The repentance of the King of Ninyue.

CAPI. III.
THen came the word of the Lord unto Jonas. i. ^
up / and get the to Ninyue that great City / and preach unto them the
preaching which I bade the. So Jonas arose / and went to Niniue at the Lords
commandment. Niniue was a great city unto God, namely / of three days
journey.

And Jonas went to, and entered into the city: Esaias. 37. ^
And the people of Niniue believed God, and, p^laymed fasting, and arrayed the^
selves in sack cloth, as well the great as the small of them. And the ^y^in ges
came unto the king of Niniue, which arose out of his seat, and did his
apparel of / and put on sack cloth, and sat him down in ashes.

And it was cried and commanded in Niniue, Mat. xii. d Luke. xi. c
se that neither man or be, ox or sheep taste ought at all: and that they
nether feed nor drinck water: but put on sack cloth both man and beast, and
cry myghtely unto God: Iere. 18. a
ye, se that every man turn from his evil way / and from the wickedness /
that he has in hand.

Who can tell* God may turn, and repent, Esaias. 38. b
he repented on the evil, which he said he would do unto them, and did it
not.

Jonas is reproved of God.

CAPI. IIII.
Therefore Jonas was sore discontente and (...) ^. (...). a ^. (...) (...). c
for I know well enough yt thou art a merciful God, full of co^passyon, long
suffryng and of great kindness and repe^test when thou should take punishment,
^* Reg. ^9 a
And now O Lord take my life fro me (I beseech the) for I had rather dye then
live. Then said the Lord: art thou so angrye? And Jonas gat him out of the
city and sat down on the east side there of: and there made him a boothe, and
sat under it in the shadow, till he might se / what should chance unto the
cite.

And the Lord God prepared a wild vine,

But upon the next morrow against the

The end of the Prophecye of Jonas.
: The Book of the Prophet Micheas.
Of the destruction of Samaria because of their ydolatry

CAPI. I.
This is the word of 4. Reg. ^5. ^ 2. Par. 27. ^ 4. Re. 16. ^ 4. Reg. 18 ^
and. xix. a Deuteronomy. ^2, a Esaias. ^. a
Iothan Ahas and Iehezekiah kings of Judah: which was showed hi^ upon Samaria
and Jerusalem. Here al ye people, marcke this well O earth, and all that therein
is: Ye / the Lord God him self be witness among you / eue^ the Lord from
his holy temple. For why? Esaye. 26. ^
behold, y^ Lord shall go out of hes place, and come down, and trede upon the
hye thiges of the earth. The mountains shall consume under him, and the
valleies shall cleue a sunder: like as wax co^sumeth at the fire, and as the
waters ru^ne downwarde And all this shall be for the wickedness of Jacob, and the
sins of the house of Israel.

But what is the wickedness of Jacob? 3. Reg. 1^. ^ 3 Reg (...). a
Samaria? Which are the hye places of Judah? Is not 4. Re. 10, ^ xxi. ^
Jerusalem? Therefore I shall make Samaria an heap of stones in the field / to
lay about the vyneyarde: her stones shall I cast into the valley, and
discover her foundacious. All her images shall be broken down and all her
wynnynges shall be brent in the fire: ye / all her ydols will I destroy: for
why: Deute. 13. ^
they are gathered out of the hyre of an whore, and in to an whores hyre shall
they be turned again. Wherefore I will mourn and make lamentacyon, bare and
naked will I go: I must mourn like the dragous / and take sorrow as the
Estriches: for 2. Reg. ^. ^
Weep not, lest they at Geth perceive it.

Thou at Betaphra, welter thy self in y^ dust and ashes. Thou y^ dwell at
Sephyr / get the hence with shame. The proud shall boste no more for very
sorrow: and why? her neighbor shall take from her what she has. The
rebellyous city hops, yt it shall not be so evil: but for all y^ / the plage
shall come from the Lord, even into the port of Jerusalem The great noise of
the charettes shall fere the^ that dwell at 4. Re. 17. c
Lachis, which is an occasion of the sine of the daughter of Syon, for in y^

The houses of lies will dysceyue the kings of Israel. And as for the (O thou
y^ dwell lest at Morassa) I shall bring a possessioner upon the, and the plage
of Israel shall reath un to Odolla. Make the balde / and shave the / because of
thy tender children: Make the clean balde as an Aegle / for they shall be carried
away captive from the.

Three at^ynges against the sinful people.

CAPI. II.
OWo unto the^, that Imagine to do harm, ^. Reg. 21. a
they take it by violence / they rob men of their houses.

Thus they oppress a man for his house, and every man for hes heritage.
Therefore thus says y^ Lord: Behold Amos. v. b
against this household have I devised a plage, wherout ye shall not pluck your
necks: Ye shall no more go so proudly, for it will be a perlous time. In that
day shall this term be used and a mourning

Nevertheless Nunie. 33 ^
there shall be no man to deuyde the thy porcyon in the congregation of the Lord.
Tush, hold your tunge (say they) It shall not fall upon this people, we shall
not come so to confusion, says y^ house of Jacob Is the sprete of the Lord so
clean away? or is he so minded? Truth it is, my words are

Ye have turned your selves to fight / the women of my people have ye shut out
from their good houses, and taken away my excellent gyfres from their children.
Up / get you hence / for here shall ye have no rest.

Because of their Idolatrye they are corrupt, and shall miserably perysh. If I
were a fleshly fellow, and a preacher of lies, and told them that they might
sit bybbyng and bollynge, and be dronke^: O that were a Prophet

Against the tyranny of Princes, and false Prophets*

CAPI. III.
Hear / O ye heads of the house of Jacob, Deuteronomy. 17. ^ Jeremy. 5. ^ Psalm 82. ^
Esaye. v. c
Should not ye know, what were lawefull and right? But ye hate the good / and
love the evil: ye pluck of men's skynnes, and the flessh from their bones:
ye eat the flessh of my people, and flaye of their skin / ye break their
bones / ye choppe the^ in pieces as it were into a cauldron, and as flesh into
a p^t. Now the time shall come / Esaye 1. b Ezec. viii. c 1. Petr. 3. ^
that when they call unto the Lord / he shall not hear them but hyde his face
from them / because that

And as concerning the Prophets that dysceyue my people, thus the Lord
says against them. Ezech. ^3. ^
When they have any chynge to byte upon, then they preach that al shall be well:
but if a man put not some thing into their mouths / they preach of war
against him.

Deuteronomy. 1^. ^
Therefore your vysyon shall be turned to night / and your prohe^yenge to
darckenesse. Iere. 1. ^ Ezch. (...). ^
As for me / I am full of strength, and of y^ sprete of the Lord, full of
judgment, and boldness: to show the house of Jacob their wyckednes and the
house of Israel their sin.

O hear this ye rulers of the house of Jacob, Abac^^. (...) ^
Ye y^ build up Sion with blood, and Jerusalem with doing wrong. Ezech.
(...), ^
O ye judges, ye give sentence for gifts: O ye preastes / ye teach for lucre.
Iere. vi. ^
O ye Prophets, ye prophecy for money. Yet will they be taken as those that
hold upon god, and say: Is not the Lord among us? Tush / there can no
mysfortune happen us. Therefore shall Sion for your sakes) be plowed like a
field Iere. ^6. ^ Iere (...)* ^ 3. Reg 9. ^ and. xx^. ^ Luk xxvi. ^
Jerusalem shall become an heap of stones / and the hill of the temple shall be
turned to an hye wodd.

Of the calling of the Gentyles, and conu^^cyon of the Jews.

CAPI. IIII.
BUt Leui. 26 g Esaias. ii a
in the latter days it will come to Esaias. ii. a Psalm 122. ^
let us go up to the hill of y^ Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob
that he may teach us his ways, and that we may walcke in his paths. Psalm* 49
^ Esaias. ii. a Luke. 24. ^
For the law shall come out of Syon, and the word of God From Jerusalem / and
shall give sentence among the multitude of the Heathen and re form the
people of far countries: so that of their sweardes they shall make plowshares
/ and sythes of their spears.

Esaias. xi. b. and lxv. d
One people shall not lift up a swearde Sopho. ^.
At the same time, says the Lord, will I gather up y^ lame and the outcastes /
and such as I have chastened: and will give issue unto the lame / and make of
the outcastes a great people, Luke. i. ^
and the Gene. 35. ^
Eder / thou strong hold of the daughter Syon) unto the shall it come: even
the Lordshippe and kingdom of the daughter Jerusalem. Why then art you now so
heavy? is there no king in the? are thy councelers away that thou art so
payned, as a woman in her travail? And now (O thou daughter Syon) be sorye,
let it grieve the as a wife laboryng with child: for now must thou get the out
of the city / and dwell upon the plain field: Ye / unto Babylon shall thou go
/ there shall thou be delivered, Mith. v. ^
and there the Lord shall lowse the from the hand of thine enemies.

Now also are there many people gathered Esaias 14. d
the thoughts of y^ Lord / they understand not his council, that shall
gather them together as the sheeues in the barn. Therefore get the up / O thou
daughter Syon / and thresshe out the corn: For I will make thy horn iron /
and thy claws brass / that thou may grynde many people: their goods shall
thou appropriate un to the Lord / and their substance unto the ruler of the
whole world.

Of the destruccyon of Jerusalem.

CAPI. V.
AFter that shall thou be robbed thy self Math. ii. a ^oh. vii. ^.
And you Bethlee^ Ephrata, art little among the thousands of Judah, Out of the
shall come unto me, which shall be the governor in Israel: whose out going has
been from the beginning, and from everlasting. In the mean while he plageth
them for a season / until the time that she (which shall bear) have borne:
then shall the remnaunt of his brethren be converted unto y^ children of
Israel. He shall stand fast / Ezech. 34. ^
and give fode in the ^oqu^. (...) Roma. ^^
strength of the Lord / and in the victory of the name of the Lord his God:
and when they be converted he shall be magnifyed unto the farthest parts of the
world.

Then shall there be peace / so that the Assyrian Gene. ^. ^
Nymrod with their naked weape^s. Mith. ^iii.
Thus shall he deliver us from y^ Assirian, when he comes within our land /
and sets his foot within our borders.

And the re^naunt of Jacob shall be among Gene. 4* ^
the Gentiles and the multitude of people, as the lion among the beasts of the
wod / and as the Lyo^s whelpe among a flock of sheep which (when he goes
through) tredeth down teareth in pieces / and there is no man that can help.
Thine hand shall be lift up upon thine enemies / and all thine aduersasaries
shall peryshe.

The time shall come also, says y^ Lord / Deuteronomy. 1^ ^
All witchcraftes will I rote out of thine hand, there shall no mo soth
sayings be within the. Naum ^^
Thine Idols and thine Images will I destroy out of y^ so that thou shall
no more bow thy self unto the worckes of thine own hands. Thy groves will I
pluck up by the rotes / and break down y^ cities. Thus will I be aue^ged
also, upon al y^ Heathen yt will not hear,

An ^^hortacyon to hear the judgment against Israel being unkind. What manner
of sacrifyces do please God.

CAPI. VI.
Harken now what the Lord says: Esa. 58. a.
Up, reprove the mountains / and let the hills hear thy voice. O hear the
punysheme^t of the Lord / ye mountains and ye mighty foundacio^s of the
earth: for y^ Lord will reporue his people, and reason with Israel: O my people,
what have I done unto y^? or wherein have I hurt the? give me answer. Exodus
14. ^.
Because I brought the from the land of Egypt, and delivered the out of the
house of Nume 12 ^
Because I made Moses, Aaron and Miriam to lead y^? Remember (O my people Nu.
22 23. ^iiii. xxv.
what Balach y^ king of Moab had Imagyned against the / and what answer that
Balaam the son of Beor gave him, from Sethim unto Galgal / that ye may know
the loving kyndnesses of the Lord.

What acceptable thing shall I offer unto the Lord? shall I bow my kne to the
hye God? Shall I come before him with brent offrynges / and with calves of a
year old? Has the Lord a pleasure in many thousa^de rams / or innumerable
streams of oil? Or shall I give my first borne for mine offenses Esaye. i. d.
that thou may be called a city of the Lord, and that thy name may be
rightuousnesie. Hear (O ye trybes) who would else give you such warnyng? Leui.
xix. g deuteronomy. 25. c. Prou. i^ b. Eze ^. x^v. b
Should I not be displeased, for y^ unrighteous good in y^ houses of the wicked,
and because the measure his mynyshed? Or should I iustifye the false balaunces
and the bag of disceatful weyghtes / among those that be full of riches
vnryghtuously gotten: where the cytesyus deal with falshede, speak lies, and
have disceatfull tunges in their mouths? Therefore, Leui, 26. d. Osee. iiii. ^
^gg^ne. i a Deuteronomy. 28. t.
sword. Thou shall sow, but not reap: you shall press out olyues / but oil
shall y^ not have to anoint thy self with all: thou shalt tread out sweet
must / but shall dricke no wine. Ye keep the ordiuaunces of 3. Re. xvi. ^
Amri / and all the customs of the house of Ahab: ye follow their pleasures,
therefore will I make the wast, and cause thy inhabyters to be abhorted, O my
people: and thus shall thou bear thine own shame.

CAPI. VII.
^ co^playnt of the lyttel no^bre of the rightuouse Against the truth ought we
not to hold with out greatest friends.

WOE is me: I am become as one / that goes a gleanyng i the harvest, There are
no grapes to eat / yet would I feign (with all my heart) have of the best fruit.
Romans iii. ^
There is not a godly man upon earth, there is not one ryghtuous among men.
They labor all to shed blood and every man hunteth his brother to death: yet
they say they do well when they do evil. As the prince will, so says the
judge: that he may do him a pleasure again. The great man speaks what his
heart desires: and the hearers allow him, The best of the^ is but as a thistle,
and the most rightuous of the^ is but as a breer i the hedge. But when the day
of thy preachers comes, that thou shall be visyted: the^ shall they be wasted
away. Iercui. it. ^
Let no man believe his friend, nor put his confyde^ce in a price. Math. ^. c.
Deu. ^iii. ^ ^. xxxiii. ^. Psalm., 7. ^. and (...). b.
for the son shall put his father to dishonor, the daughter shall rise
against her mother / the daughter in law against her mother in law: and a
man's foes shall be even they of his own household.

Nevertheless, I will look up unto y^ Lord / I will pacyently abide God my
savior: my God shall hear me. O thou enemy of mine, rejoice not at my fall,
for I shall get up again: and though I sir in darcknesse, yet the Lord is my
light. I will bear the punisheme^t of y^ Lord (for why / I have offended him)
til he sit in judgment upon my cause, and se yt I have right. He will bring me
forth Pro. xvii ^
Where is thy Lord God? Mine eyes shall behold her, when she shall be trode^
down, as y^ clay Amos, ix. ^
in y^ streets. 4. Be. xix. a
The time will come, that thy gappes shall be made up, and the law shall go
abroad: and at yt time shall they come unto the, from Assure unto the strong
cities, and from the strong cytyes unto the river: from the one see to y^
other, from the one mountain to y^ other.

Notwithstanding, y^ land must be wasted / because of them that dwell therein,
and for the fruits of their own Imaginacions Therefore feed thy people with thy
rod / the flock of thine heritage which dwell desolate in the wodde: that they
may be fed upon the mount of Charmel / Basan and Galaad as before time.
Marvelous things will I Exodus 14. a
like as when they came out of Egypt. This shall the Heathen se, and be
ashamed for all their power, Job. ^9. ^.
so that they shall lay their hand upon their mouth, and stop their ears.
Gene. iii. ^.
They shall lycke the dust like a serpente, and as the worms of the earth,
that tremble in their holes. They shall be afraid of the Lord our God, and they
shall fear the. Where is there such a God as thou? that pard^nest wickedness,
and forgeueste the offenses of the remnaunt of thine heritage? He^ keeps not
his wrath for ever. And why? his delight is to have compassyon: Iere. ix. d.
he shall turn again / and be merciful to us: he shall put down our
wyckednes, and cast all our sins in to the botome of the sea. Thou shall
keep thy truth with Jacob / and thy mercy for Abraham / like as thou hane
sworn unto our fathers long ago.

The end of the Prophecye of Mycheas.
: The book of the Prophet Naum.
Of the destruccyon of Niniue and of the delyueraunce of Israel.

CAPI. I.
This is the heavy burden Deuteronomy. v. b.
The Lord is a gelous God, and a taker of vengeance is the Lord, and
wrothfull. Romans ii. a,
The lord takes vengeance of his enemies, and reserueth displeasure for his
adversaries. Roma. i^. a. Exodus 34. a.
The Lord suffers long, he is of great power / and so inoce^t Iere. xxx. b.
that he leaves no man fautlesse before him. The Lord goes forth in tempest
and stormy wether, the clouds are the dust of his fete. When he reproves the sea, he dries it up, and turns all the floudes to dry land. Iere. x. b.
^^ay. ^4. a. Adaru. iii. a Loph. iii. b
Who may endure before his wrath? Or who is able to abide his gtyme
displeasure? His anger takes on like fire / and the hard rocks burst in
sunder before him.

Full gracyous is the Lord / and a strong hold in the time of trouble, he
knows the^ that put their trust in him: when the floude renneth over, and
destroys the place / and when the darcknesse follows still upon his enemies.
What do ye Imagine the^ against y^ Lord on this manner? (Tush, when he has

Therefore thus says the Lord: Let them M^th^
The carved and casten Images will I rote out of the house of thy God. Thy
grave shall I prepare for the / and thou shall be confounded.

He deseribeth the victory of the Caldees against the Nynyuytes.

CAPI. II.
Behold / Esapt. (...)* Roma. (...)*
upon the mountains come the fete of him / that brings good tydinges / and
preached peace. O Judah / keep thy holy days / perform thy promyses: for
Be^ial shall come no more in the / he is utterly roted out.

The scaterer shall come up against the, and lay sege to the castle. Look
thou well to the streets / make thy loins strong / arm thy self with all thy
might: for the Lord shall restore again the glory of Jacob, like as the glory
of Israel. The destroyers have broken the^ down, and marred the wine
branches. The shylde of his gyau^tes gly stereth / his men of warte are
clothed in purple. His charettes are as fire, when he makes him forward, his
archers are well decked and trimmed ^ob^ 14. ^* Soph. (...)* ^*
Niniue is like a pole full of water, but the^ shall they be feign to fle.
Stand, stand, (shall they cry (and there shall not one turn back. Away with
the silver, away with the gold: for here is no end of tresure. There shall be a
multitude of al manner of costly orname^tes. Thus must she be spoiled / emptied
and clean striped out: that their hertes may be melted away, their knees
tremble, all their loins be weak, and their faces black as a pot.

where is now the dwelling of the lions,

The fall of Niniue.

CAPI. III.
WOE to that bloudthrusty cyty which E^^. 24* a. ^bo^n. ii. b
Behold, I will upon Esai. 47. a E^ec. xvi. d
the (says the Lord of hoostes (and will put thy clothes over thy head: that I
may show thy nakedness among the Heathen / and thy shame among the
kingdoms. I will cast dyrte upon y^ / to make the be abhorted, and a gasynge
stock: Ye, all they that look upon the, shall starte back, and say: Niniue
is destroyed

Who will have pytye upon the: where shall I seek one to comfort the? Art thou
better the^ the great eyte of E^ec. xxx. c.
Alexandria? that lay in the waters / and had y^ waters round about it: which
was strongly fe^ced and walled with y^ see? Ethiopa and Egypt were her
strength,

Behold, thy people within the / are but women: the ports of thy land shall be
opened unto thine enemies / and the fire shall devour thy bars. Draw water
now against y^ be beseged, make up thy strong holds go into the clay, te^pre
y^ mortar, make strong brick: Esa. x. a. 30 f. xxxi. b. zacha. x. b.
yet y^ fire shall consume the, y^ sword shall destroy the: ye, as the
locuste does, so shall it eat y^ up. It shall fall heuely upon y^ as y^ locustes:
ye, right heuely shall it fall upon the, eue^ as y^ greshoppers. Thy merchants
have been no^bred with the stars of heaven: but now shall they sprede abroad as
the locustes, and fle their way. Thy Lords are as the greshoppers / and thy
captains as the multitude of greshoppers: which when they be cold, remain in
the hedges: but when the Sun is up they fle away, and no man can tell where
they are become. Thy shepherdes are a sleep (O king of Assure) thy worthyes are
laid down: thy people is scarred abroad upon the mountains, and no man
gathers them together again. Thy wound cannot be hyd, thy plage is so sore.
All they that hear this of the, shall clappe their hands over the. For what is
he to whom thou have not always been doing hurt.

The end of the Prophecye of Naum.
: The Book of the Prophet Abacuk.
A complaynt against Israel.

CAPI. I.
This is the heavy burden / which Psalm, 2^. ^*
How long shall I complain unto y^ / suffri^ge wrong, and y^ wylt not help?
why letrest thou me se wermes and labor Job, xix. a.
Tyranny Eccle. iiii. a*
and vyolence are before me, power ouergoeth right: for the law is toarue in
pieces, and there ca^ not right judgment go forth. And why? the ungodly is more
set by then the rightuous: this is the cause, that wrong judgment proceeds.
Acts xiii. d
Behold, among the Heathen, and look well, wo^dre at it, and be abashed for I
will do a thing in your time / which though it be told you, ye shall not
believe.

For lo / I will raise up the Caldees / that bitter and swyfte people: which
shall go as wide as y^ land is, to take possession of dwelling places, y^ be
not their own. A grimme and boisterous people is it / these shall sit in
judgment and punish. Their horses are swifter then the cattes of the mountain
/ and byte Deuteronomy. 28. ^.
y^ wolves in the euenyng. Their horsemen come by great heaps from far / they
^le hastily to devour as the Aegle. They come all to spoil: out of them
comes an east wind, which blows and gathers their captyues, like as the
sand. They shall mock the kings, and laugh the princes to scorn. They shall
not set by any strong hold, for they shall lay ordinance against (...), and
take it. Then shall they take a fresh courage unto the^, to go forth and to do
more evil, and so ascrybe the power unto Soph. iii. ^
their God.

But thou O Lord my God Esa xivi. a. 2. (...) 28. ^ Psalm ^9 c. Esaye. ^. ^.
my holy one, thou art from the beginning, therefore shall we not dye. O Lord,
thou have ordened them for a punyshement, and set them to reprove the mighty.
Thine eyes are clean / Iere xii. ^. Ps^^^, 7. ^.
Wherefore then do thou look upon the ungodly / and hold thy tunge / when
the wicked deuoureth the man that is better the^ him self? Thou make me^ as
the fyshe in the sea / and like as the crepynge beasts / that have no gyde,
they take up all with their angle they catch it in their net, and gather it in
the yarne: whereof they rejoice and are glad. Therefore offer they unto their net
/ and do sacryfyee unto their yarne: because that through it their poreyon is
become so fat, and their meat so plenteous. Wherefore / they cast out their
net again / and never cease to steye the people.

Of the vision of the prophet. Against pollyng, covetousness, and I^ol^^tye

CAPI. II.
I STOOD upon my watch / and set me upon my bull work / to look and se

Write the vysyon playuely upon thy tables / that who so comes by / may read
it for the vysyon is yet far of for a time / but at the last it shall come to
pass / and not fail. Da^i. ix. d.
And though he tarry, yet wait thou for him, for in very deed he will come /
and not be slack. Behold, who so will not believe / his soul shall not
prospere: Hebr^. ^^
but y^ just shall live by his faith. Like as the wine disceaueth the
dronckarde, even so the proud shall Roma. (...) Gol^. (...) Heb* ^. (...)
and is as vnse^yable Pro. xxx. ^
as death. All Heathen gathers he to him / and heapeth unto him all people.

But shall not all these take up a proverb against him, and mock him with a
byworde, and say: Woe unto him that heapeth up other men's goods? How long
will he lade him self with thick claye? O how soddenly will they stand up,
that shall byte, and awake, that shall tear y^ in pieces? ye, thou shall be
their pray. ^bdy. (...).
Saying y^ have spoiled many Heathen / therefore shall the remnaunt of the people
spoil the: because of men's blood, and for the wrong done in the land / in
the cyty and unto all them that dwell therein.

Woe unto him, that couetously gathers evil gotten goods into his house: that
he may set his neste an hye, to escape from the power of mysfortune. Thou have
devised the shame of thine own house, for y^ have Esay^. b. ^ ^bdy. ^. ^.
stones of the wall shall cry out of it, and the tymbre that lies betwyxte
the joints of the buyldyng shall answer. Luke xi^. ^*
Woe unto him, that buyldeth the town with blood, and maynteneth the city
with unrighteousness. Shall not the Lord of hos^es bring this to pass, that the
labors of the people shall be brent with a great fire, and that the thing
where upon the people have werted the^ selves, shall be lost? Ezec. 24, ^ Nau^.
^* ^ ^ Mich. (...). ^
For y^ earth shall be full of knowledge of y^ Lords honor, like as the waters
y^ cover the sea. Woe unto him that gives his neighbor Exodus (...) Number. 14 ^
Esaye. ^^^
that he may se his preuityes. Therefore with shame shall thou be filled, in
stead of honor. Drink thou also / ty^ thou slo^ber with all: for the cup
of the Lords right hand shall co^pas the about / and shameful spewyng i stead
of thy worshipe. Gene. ix. ^
For the wrong y^ thou have done in Lybanus, Ier^mi* ^* ^ ^^dy* ^* ^*
shall ouerwhelme the, and the wild beasts shall make the afraid because of
men's blood, and for the wrong done in the land / in the cyty, and unto al
such as dwell therein.

What help then will the image do. who^ the worckma^ has fashioned? Or the
vain cast image / wherein because the craftesman puts his trust, therefore
makes he do^me Idols? Woe unto him / that says to a piece of wod: arise, and
to a do^me stone: stand up. For what istruccion may such one give? Behold it
is laid over with gold and silver, and there is no breath in it. (...). xi. ^
But the Lord in his holy temple is he, whom all the world should fear.

A prayer of the Prophet Aba^ue for the ignorant.

CAPI. III.
O Lord, when I herd speak of the I was

His glory covers the heuens, and the earth is full of his praise. His shine
is as the son, and beams of light go out of his hands / there is power hyd.
Destruction goes before hi^ / and burning cressettes go from his fete. (...).
ix. ^.
He

I saw, ye the pauilyons of the Morians and the te^tes of the land of Madia^
were vexed for werynesse. Wast you not angry, O Lord, in the waters? was not thy
wrath in the stoudes and thy displeasure in the sea? yes, when thou fattest
upon thine horse, and when thy chare^tes had the victory. Thou show thy how
openly / like as y^ had promised with an oath (...). 46. ^
unto the trybes. Selah.

Thou dydst deuyde y^ waters of y^ earth. When the mountains saw the / they
were afraid, the water stream went away: the deep made a noise at the lyftyng
up of thyn (...). x. c.
The Su^ne and Move remained still in their habitacion. Thine arowes went out
glisteryng, and thy spears as the shine of the lyghtnyng. (...). xi. ^
Thou trodest down the land in thine anger, and dydest thressh the Heathen in
thy displeasure. Thou came forth to help thy people, to help anoi^ted. Thou
smotest down the head of the house of the ungodly, and discoueredst his
fou^dacio^s, even unto the neck of him. Selah.

Thou cursest his septers / the Captain of his me^ of war: which come as a
stormy wind to scatre me abroad, and are glad when they may eat up the pore
secretly. Thou make away for thine horses in the sea, even in the mudde of
great waters. When I hear this, my body is vexed, my lyppes trible at the
voice thereof, my bones corrupt, I am afraid where I stand, O that I might
rest in the day of trouble, that I might go up unto our people, which are
already prepared

For the fyg trees shall not be grene, and the vynes shall bear no fruit. The
labor of y^ olyue shall be (...) lost, and the land shall bring no corn: the
^hepe shall be taken out of y^ fold and there shall be no catel in the stalles. But
as for me / I will be glad in the Lord, and will rejoice in God my savior.
Psa. xviii ^
The Lord God is my strength, he shall make my fete as the fete of hertes: and
he which gives the vyctory, shall bring me to my hye places syn gyng upon my
psalms.

The end of the Prophe eye of Abacue.
: The Book of the Prophet Sophony.
Thretnynges against Judah and (...) their Idolatrye.

CAPI. I.
This is the word of 4. R^ (...). 23.
of Josiah the son of 4. Regu^. ^^^
Amo^ king of Judah. I will gather up al things in the land (says the Lord) I
will gather up 4. Re. 24. ^ Deu. ^^^i b
Remurius and prestes: ye, and Iere. v. d.
such as upon their house coppes worship and bow the^ selves unto the host of
heaven: which swear by the Lord, and by their Malchom also: which starte a
back from the Lord, and neither seek after the Lord, nor regard him.

zacha. ii. a.
Be still at the presence of the Lord God, for the day of the Lord is at
hand: ye, the Lord has prepared a slain offering, and called his gestes
thereto. And thus shall it happen in the day of the Lords slain offering. I
will vyset the princes, 4. Re xxv. ^ Iere. 39. b.
y^ kings children / and al such as wear strange ^^o thing. In the same
day also will I vyset all those / that tread over the thresholde so proudly /
which fyl their Lords house with robbery and falshede. At y^ same time (says
(...). a
fysh port and an howlynge from the other port, and a great m^^thur from y^
byli^^. Howl ye that dwell in the myll / for all the merchant people are goue
/ and all they that were laden with silver, are roted out.

At the same time will I seek through Jerusalem with lanternes, and vyset them
that continue in their dregs / and say in their hertes: Iere* v. c De^t. 2^.
c Iere. 23
Tush / the Lord will do nether good nor evil. Their goods shall be spoiled / and
their houses laid waste: Amos. v* b
they shall build houses, and not dwell in them: they shall pla^te vyneyardes,
but not drink y^ wine thereof. For the great Joel. ii. a*
day of the Lord is at hand Ezec. vii. d
Nether their silver nor their gold shall be able to delyuere them in that wroth
full day of the Lord, but the Dopho. 3 b
whole land shall be consumed through the fire of his geiousy: for he shall soue
make clean ryddaunce of all them that dwell in the land.

He moves to return to God, propheryeng unto the one destruccyon, and to the
other delyueraunce.

CAPI. II.
COme together and gather you, O froward 4. R^. xx. a Ia^^^. ^. a E^^^* ^4. c
Iere. 47. a
lowlynesse: y^ ye may be defended in the wrothful day of the Lord: Ezech. ^5.
c
For Gaza shall be destroyed, and Ascalon shall be laid waste. They shall cast
out Asdod at the noone day, and Accaron shall be plucked up by the rotes.

Woe unto you y^ dwell upon the sea coost / Esaias. (...)* ^ Iere. 4^. ^ Ezec. 25.
^
I have herd y^ despyte of Moab / and the blasphemies of y^ children of Ammon
how they have shamefully intreted my people zacha* ^.
This shall happen unto them for their pride / because they have delte so
shamefully with y^ Lord of hosts people, and magnified the^ selves above
the^, The Lord shall be grym upon the^, Esaias* ^
and destroy all the goods in y^ land. And all the Isles of the Heathen shall
worship him, every man in his place.

Ye Morya^s also shall perysh with my sword ^o^. 14. ^
As for Niniue / he shall make it desolate, dry and waste. The flocks and all the beasts of the people shall lie in y^ myddest of it, pellicans and storckes
shall abide in the upper posts of it / fowls shall sing in the wyndowes, and
ravens shall sit upon the balckes, for y^ bordes of Cedre shall be ryuen down.
This is the proud and careless cite, that said in her heart. 4. Reg. (...)
Esaias. ^^^
I am and there is else none. O how is she made so wast / y^ the beasts lie
therm? Who so goes by, mocketh her / and poynteth at her with his finger.

Against the gouerners of Jerusalem, of the calling of all the Gentiles. A
comfort to the resyoue of Israel.

CAPI. III.
WOE to the abhomynable, filthy, and Eze. x^ii. ^ Math* (...) (...). ^. ^
lions: her judges are as wolves in the euenyng, which leave nothing behind
the^ till y^ morrow, Her prophets are light persons and unfaithful men:
her prestes vnhalowe the Sanctuary and do wrong under the precence of the
law. But the just Lord y^ does no unright, was among the^ every morning
showing them his law clearly, and ceased it not. But y^ ungodly will not learn
to be asshamed. Therefore will I rote out this people, and destroy their to
wres: ye, and make their streets so void, that no man shall goo therein. There
cities shall be broken down, so that no body shall be left, nor dwell there
anymore.

I said unto the^: O fear me, and be content ^autt^. i a
dysplesure upon the^. ^opho. 1. c
For all ye world shall be consumed with the fire of my gelousi. And the^ will I
cle^se y^ lips of the people, y^ they may euerychone call vpn the name of the
Lord and serve him with one shoulder. Such as I have subdued, and my children
also whom I have scatered abroad shall bring me presents beyond the waters
of Etheopia.

In that time shall thou no more be confounded, because of all thy
ymagynacyons, where through thou had offended me: for Ieremi. i. b
I will take away the proud boosters of thine honor from the, so that thou
shall no more triumph because of my holy hill. In y^ also will I leave a small
poor simple people, which shall trust in the name of y^ Lord. The remnaunt of
Israel shall do no wyekednes,

In that time it shall be said to Jerusalem: Mith. 4. b.
I will help the lame / and gather up the cast away: ye, I will get them
praise and honor in all lands, where they have been put to shame. At the same
time will I bring you in / and at the same time will I gather you. I will get you
a name and a good report: among all people of the earth / when I turn back
your captivity before your eyes, says y^ Lord.

The end of the prophecye of Sophony.
: The book of the Prophet Aggeus.
The time of the Prophecye of Aggeus. An ethartacyon to build the temple
again.

CAPI. I.
IN the second year 1. Esd^. vi. c Da^. c, ^. a
Darins, in the. vj. month the first day of the month, came the word of y^
Lord (by the Prophet Aggeus unto 1 Es. 234 b
zorobabell the son of Salatyell the price of Judah / and to Iesuathe son of
Iosedech the hye pressed / saying. Thus speaks the Lord of hoostes and
says. This people does say. The time is not yet come to build up the Lords
house. Then spoke the Lord that by pr^^hete Aggeus, and said. Iere. xxii. a
Ye your selves can find time to dwell in syled houses / and shall this lie
wast? Leu. xxvi. d Mich. vi. b Osee. iiii. b Mala. iii. b
ye sow much, but ye bring little i^: ye care, but ye have not enough ye
drynck, but ye are not filled: ye deck your selves, but ye are not warm: and
he that earneth any wages, puts it in a broken purse. Thus says the Lord
of hoostes: Co^sydre your own ways in your 3. Re. viii. d
that it may be acceptable unto me, and y^ I may show mine honor, says y^
Lord. Ye looked for much / and lo it is come to little / and though ye bring it
home / yet do I blow it away. And why so says y^ Lord of hoostes? i. Cor.
iii. b and. ix ^. ii. Cor. vi. c
Even because y^ my house lies so wast / and ye run every man unto his own
house. Wherefore / y^ heaven is forbyden to give you any dew / and the earth is
forbidden to give you increase Deuteronomy. 28. b
I have called for a drouth / both upon y^ land and upon the mountains /
upon corn / upon wine / and upon oil / upon every thing y^ the ground
brings forth / upon men and upon catell / ye, and upon all handy labor.

Now when zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and Iesua the son of Iosidech
the hye priest with the remnau^t of the people, herd the voice of the Lord
their God, and the words of y^ prophet Aggeus (like as the Den. vii. d
I am with you, says the Lord. (...). x^^^ g. (...)gg^u (...) a ^. Ever. ^. ^
So the Lord waked up the sprete of zorobabel the son of Salathiel y^ prince
of Judah, and the sprete of Iesua y^ son of Iosedech the hye pressed, and the
sprete of y^ remnau^t of all the people: y^ they came and labored, in the
house of the Lord of hoostes their God

He shows that the goodlynes of the second temple shall excede the first, be
cause of the coming of Christ.

CAPI. II.
UPON the. xxiiij. day of the. vi. month, (...)
Who is left among you, y^ saw this house in her first bewtye? But what
thyncke ye now by it? Is it not in your eyes, eue^ as though it were nothing?
Nevertheless, be of good ^^ere, O zorobabel says y^ Lord) (...)
be of good comfort, O Iesua y^ son of Iosedech hye priest: take good hertes
unto you also all ye people of y^ land, says the Lord of hoostes / and do
according to ye word ( (...)
for I am with you, says ye Lord of hoostes) like as I agreed with you, when
ye came out of y^ land of Egpt: and my sprete shall be among you, fear ye not.

For thus says the Lord of hosts: (...)
yet E^^y^. lx. ^.
I will move all Heathen / and the comfort of al Heathen shall come, and so will
I fill this house with honor / says y^ Lord of hoostes. Deu. viii. b
The silver is mine / and the gold is mine / says the Lord of hoostes. Thus
the glory of the last house shall be greater the^ the first / says the Lord of
hoostes: and in this place will I give peace / says the Lord of hoostes.

The. xxiiij. day of the nynth month in Ierem. xi. b
if one bear holy flesh in his cote lap / and with his lap do touch the
bread / po^age / wine / oil / or any other meat: shall he be holy also? The
prestes answered and said: No. Then said Aggeus: Now if one being defiled
with a deed carcass / touch any of these: shall it also be unclean? The prestes
gave answer / and said: Le. ^. (...) Nu^. (...)
ye, it shall be unclean. Then Aggeus answered and said: even so is this
people and this nacyon before me, says the Lord: and so are all the works
of their hands, ye, and all that they offer / is unclean.

And now (I pray you) considre from this day forth / and how it has gone
with you before or ever there was laid one stone upon another in the temple of
the Lord: y^ when ye came to a corn heap of. xx. bushels / there were scarce
ten: Agg(...)
and that when ye came to the wine press for to power out. l. pottes of wine /
there were scarce. xx. For I smote you with heat / blastynge and hayle stones
in all y^ labors of your hands: yet was there none of you / y^ would turn
unto me / says the Lord. Consider then from this day forth and before namely
/ from the. xxiiij. day zach* (...)
is not the sede yet in the barn? have not the vynes / the fyggetrees, the
pomgranates / and olyue trees been yet unfruitful? but from this day forth /
I shall make them to prospere.

Moreover, the. xxiiij. day of the month came the word of the Lord unto
Aggeus again / saying: Speak to zorobabell the pryuce of Judah / and say: I
will shake both heaven and earth, and over through the seat of the kingdoms
/ ye / and destroy the mighty kingdom of the Heathen. I will ouerthorowe the
charettes, and those that sit upon them / so that both horse and man shall
fall down / every man through his neighbors swearde. And as for the / O
zorobabell (says the Lord of hoostes) thou son of Salachiel my servant I
will take the (says the Lord) at the same time / and make the as a seal /
for I have chosen the, says the Lord of hoostes.

The end of the prophecye of Aggeus.
: The book of the Prophet zachary.
He moves the people to return to the Lord, and to eschew the wickedness of
their fathers. He prefigureth Christ and the Apostles.

CAPI. I.
IN the eight month ^at. 23. c.
zacharye ye son of Barachias, the son of Addo, y^ prophet, saying: The
Lord has been sore displeased at your forfathers. And say thou unto them:
thus says the Lord of hoostes: ^^te. xxx^. ^ ^ala. iii b
Turn you unto me (says the Lord of hoostes) and I will turn me unto you,
says the Lord of hoostes. Iere. 44. a Psalm. 78. a
Be ye not like your forfathers, unto whom the prophets cried before time,
saying. Thus says the Lord God of hoostes: ^se. xiiii a ^^ob. xiii. b
Turn you now from your euel ways, and from your wicked ymagynacyons.
^^^e. 44. a
But they would not hear nor regard me, says the Lord. What is now become
of your forefathers and the prophets? are they yet still alive? But did not
my words and statutes (which I commanded by my servants the prophets)
touch your forefathers? Upon this, they gave answer and said: like as the
Lord of hoostes devised to do unto us / according to our own ways and
ymagynacyons, even so has zacha. vi. a. ^pora. vi. a
a red horse / and stood still among the myrretrees, that were beneth upon
the ground: and behind him were

Then the Lords angel gave answer, and said: O Lord of hoostes how long
wylt thou be vnmercyful to Jerusalem and to the cities of Judah, Iere. xxv. b
xxxi^. b, ^. Esc^. ^. a
with who^ thou have been displeased now these threscore and ^enne years. So
the Lord gave a louinge and a comfortable answer unto the angel that talked
with me. And the angel that commoned with me, said unto me: Cry thou / and
speak Thus says the Lord of hoostes: I am exceadinge gelous over Jerusalem
and Syon, and sore displeased at the careless Heathen: for where as I was but
a little angrye, they zach. viii. a
I will turn me again in mercy toward Jerusalem so that my house shall be
builded in it, says the Lord of hoostes: ye, and the plommet shall be laid
abroad in Jerusalem.

Cry also / and speak: thus says the Lord of hoostes: My cities shall be in
good prosperity again, the Lord shall yet comfort Sio^: and chose Jerusalem.
Then lift I up mine eyees and saw / and behold four horns. And I said
unto the angel, y^ talked with me: what be these? he answered me: Dan. vii.
These are the horns, which have scatered Judah, Israel and Jerusalem abroad.
And the Lord showed me four carpenters. The^ said I: what will these do? He
answered, and said: Those are the horns, which have so strowed Judah abroad,
that no man durst lift up his head: But these are come to fraye the^ away:
and cast out the horns of the Gentyls, which lift up their horn over y^
land of Judah, to scatre it abroad.

The renewynge of Jerusalem and Judah.

CAPI. II.
I Lift up mine eyes again, and looked: and behold, Ezec. 43. ^ Apo^. xxi. ^
a man with a measure line in his hand. Then said I whether go thou? And
he said unto me: To measure Jerusalem, that I may se how long and how
broad it is. And behold, the angel that talked with me, went his way
forth. Then went there out another angel to mete him / and said unto him:
Run / speak to this young man / and say: Jerusalem shall be inhabited without
any wall / for the very Deu, iiii. d zacha. ix, ^
Ye, I my self (says the Lord) will be unto her a wall of fire round
about, and will behonoured in her.

O get you forth, O fle from the land of the north, says the Lord, ye
Ierem. 23 b
whom I have scatred into y^ four wyndes under heaven, says the Lord. Save
thy self, O Syon: thou that dwell with ye daughter of Babylon / for thus
says the Lord of hoostes: With a glorious power has he sent me out to the
Heathen, which spoyleth you, Ierem. ii. a x^. d ^ xxx, c Psa. xvii b
for who so touches you / shall touch the aple of his own eye. Behold / I
will lift up mine hand over the^, A^^^s. xi. ^ Esaie. 14. ^
so that they shall be spoiled of those / which before served them: and ye shall

Be glad / and rejoice, O daughter of Syo^^ for lo, Ex^. xxv. ^ Ma^^. ^8, c
I am come to dwell in the myddest of the / says the Lord. At the same time,
Sopho. i, a
Let al flesh be still before y^ Lord, for he is risen out of his holy place.

Of the law and hye estate of Christ, under the figure of Iesua the priest. A
prophetye of Christ.

CAPI. III.
AND he showed me Iesua y^ hye priest Psalm. cix. a M^t iiii. a Jude. i, b.
and Satan stood at his right hand to re syste him. And y^ Lord said unto
Satan. The Lord reprove the (thou Satan) ye, y^ Lord that has chosen
Jerusalem, reprove the. Is not this a brande taken out of y^ fire? Now Iesua
was clothed in unclean raiment / and stood before the angel / which answered
and said unto those, y^ stood before him: take away y^ foul clothes from
him. And unto him he said: Behold, I have taken away thy sin from the, and
will deck y^ with change of rayme^t. He said moreover, set a fair myter upon
his head. So they set a fair myter Esa. i^^^ a. Iere. 23. a. and xxxiii. ^
zatha. vi. b.
the branch of my servant: for lo, y^ stone y^ I have laid before Iesua:
upon Esaye. 28. c i, Pe^r. ii. a
one stone shall be. vij. eyes. Behold, I will hew him out (says y^ Lord of
hoostes) and take away the sin of that land in one day. Then shall every
man call for his neighbor, under the vine and under the fygge tree says the
Lord of hoostes.

The vysio^ of the golden candelstycke, and the exposicio^ thereof.

CAPI. IIII.
AND the angel y^ talked with me, came again, and waked me up, as a man that
is raised out of his sleep / and said unto me: What seyst thou? And I said: I
have looked / and behold: a candelstycke all of gold, with a boll upon it and
is. vij. lamps therein / and upon every la^pe. vij. stalks. And Apo^. xi. a.
two Esay^. ^^
Neither through an host of men, nor through strength, but through my sprete /
says the Lord of hoostes. What art thou, you great mountain / before
Zorobabel? Esay^. ^^
stone / so that man shall cry unto him / good Luck / good luck.

Moreover / the word of the Lord came unto me / saying: Phil. ^.
The hands of Zorobabel have laid the fou^dacion of this house / his hands,
shall also fynyshe it: Deuteronomy. ^^
y^ ye may know how y^ the Lord of hoostes has sent me unto you. For he
y^ has been despised a little season / shall rejoice, when he seyth Apo^. (...).
^
These are ye two olyue branches, ye stand before the ruler of the whole
earth.

The vysyon of the flyenge book, sygnyfienge the curse of thieves and such as
abuse the name of God. By the vysion of the measure, ye signified the bryngyng
of Judah to Babylon.

CAPI. V.
SO I turned me / lyftinge up mine eyes, and looked / and behold / a flyenge
book. And he said unto me: what seyst you? I answered: I se a flyenge book of.
xx. cubytes long, and. x. cubytes broad. Then said he unto me: This is the
curse / that goes forth myddest of the measure. And he said: this is
ungodliness. So he cast her into the myddest of the measure, and threw the
lompe of lead upon her mouth.

Then lift I up mine eyes, and looked: and behold, there came out two women,
and the Gene. x. b*
Synear, to build the^ an house: which when it is prepared, the measure shall
be set there in his place.

By the four charettes, he descrybeth the prosperyte of four kingdoms.

CAPI. VI.
Moreover, I turned me, lyftyng up min zacha. i b. Apo^a. vi. a
red horse / in the second charet were black horse / in the third charet were
white horse / in the fourth charet were horses of diverse colors, and strong.
Then spoke I, and said unto the angel that talked with me: O Lord Iere. iiii. b
These are the. iiij. winds of the heaven, which be come forth to stand
before y^ ruler of all the earth. That with the black horse went into the land
of the north, and the white followed them, and the spekled horses went forth
toward the south. These horses were very strong, and went out: and sought to
go and take their journey over the whole earth. And he said: get you hence,
and go through the world. So they went through out the world. Then cried he
upon me, and spoke unto me, saying: behold, these that go toward the North,
shall still my wrath in the North country.

And the word of the Lord came unto me ^acha iii. b
the branch: and he that shall spring up after him, Psalm. 127. a
shall build up the temple of the Lord, ye / even he shall build up the
temple of the Lord. ^p. 4. b. 5. b
He shall bear the praise, he shall sit upon the Lords trone, and have the
domynacion.

Psalm. cx. b Hebr 5. 6. 7 8. 9* 10
A priest shall he be also upon his trone

The estymacyon of fasting without mercy The despysyng of charity, and the
obstyna^ye of the people.

CAPI. VII.
IT happened also in the fourth year of ^. Reg. 25. b
fyfth month, and absteyne as I have done now certain years? Then came the
word of the Lord of hoostes unto me saying: Speak unto all Iere. xli. a 4.
Reg. 25. b
and seventh month (now this. ixx. years) did ye fast unto me? When ye did
eat also and drink, did ye not eat and drink for your own selves? Are
not these the words / which the Lord spoke by his Prophets before time, when
Jerusalem was yet inhabited and welthy, she and the cities ro^de about her:
when there dwelt men, both toward the south and in the plain countrees?

And the word of the Lord came unto zachary 8. c Exodi. 22. c Leui. xix. a.
Job. 24. a Iere. vii. a
Execute true judgment: show mercy and loving kyndnesse, every man to his
brother. Do the wyddowe, the fatherles, the stranger / and poor no wrong: and
let no man ymagen evil against his brother in his heart. Iere. vii. c
Nevertheless, they would not take heed, but turned their backs / and stopped
their ears, that they should not hear: ye / they made their hertes as an
Adama^t stone lest they should hear the law and words / 2. Petr. i. d
which the Lord of hosts sent in his holy sprete by the prophets before time.

Wherefore the Lord of hoostes was very Iere. xi, b
that like as he spoke and they would not hear: eue^ so they cried, and I
would not hear (says the Lord of hoostes) but sca^red the^ among all
Gentyles / whom they (...) not. Thus the land was made so deso (...) that
there trauayled no man in it, neyth (...) nor fro, for that pleasant land was
vtt (...) laid waste.

Of the return of the people unto Jerusalem, and of the mercy of God toward
them. Of good works. The calling of the Gentyles.

CAPI. VIII.
SO the word of the Lord of hosts came Esaias. 1. d
so that Jerusalem shall be called a faithful and true cite, the hill of the
Lord of hosts, ye / an holy hill.

Thus says the Lord of hosts: There shall yet old men and women dwell
again in the streets of Jerusalem: ye, and such as go with staves in their
hands for very age. The streets of the cite also shall be full of young boys and
damsels, playinge upon the streets.

Thus says the Lord of hosts: if the resydue Mat. xix. d
should it therefore be impossible in my sight, says the Lord of hosts? Thus
says the Lord of hoostes: Behold / I will deliver my people from the land
of the east and west / and will bring them again, that they may dwell at
Jerusalem. Iere. iii. f Apoc. xxi. c Hebr. viii. c
They shall be my people, and I will be their God, in truth and ryghtuousnesse.

Thus says the Lord of hosts: let your hands be strong / ye that now
hear these words by the mouth of y^ prophets, which be in these days that
the fou^dacion is laid upon the Lord of hosts house, y^ the temple may be
builded. For why? Aggeus. i* ^
before these days, neither me^ nor catel could wi^ue any thing, nether might
any man come in and out in rest, for trouble: but I let every man go a gaynst
his neighbor.

Nevertheless, I will now entreat the resydue of this people no more as before
time / says the Lord of hoostes, but they shall be Agge. ^i. ^
a sede of peace. The vineyarde shall give her fruit, the ground shall give her
increase / and y^ heavens shall give their dew: and I shall cause the re^naunt
of this people, to have all these

For thus says the Lord of hosts: like as I ^^^ysed to punyshe you / what
time as (...) provoked (...) unto wrath / say^th the Lord of hosts, and
spared not. Even ^o (...) I (...) now in these days, for to do w^^ unto the
house of Judah and Jerusalem / theefore fear ye not. Now the things that ye
shall do / are these: Ephe. (...)* ^^cha (...)* Ma^^. (...)*
Speak every man the truth unto his neighbor / execute judgment truly, and
peaceably within your ports, none of you ymagyn evil in his heart against his
neighbor / and love no false oaths for all these are the things y^ I hate,
says y^ Lord. And the word of the Lord of hosts / came unto me / saying:
thus says the Lord of hosts: The fast of the fourth month / the fast of the
fifth / the fast of the seuenthe, and the fast of the tenth, shall be joy and
gladness, and prosperous hye feasts unto the house of Judah, Only, love the
truth and peace.

Thus says the Lord of hosts: There Esaias ii. ^ Psalm. iiij Iere. (...). ^
Up, let us go, and pray before the Lord, let us seek the Lord of hosts / I
will go with you: ye / much people and mighty Heathen shall come and seek y^ Lord
of hoostes at Jerusalem, and to pray before the Lord. Thus says the Lord of
hosts. In y^ time shall ten men (out of all manner of languages of the
Gentyles) take one Jew by the hemme of his garment? and say: we will go with
you, for we have heard / ye God is among you.

The conversion of the Gentyles. The coming of Christ sitting on an Ass.

CAPI. IX.
THe word of the Lord shall be received I^r^* iii ^
he shall smite down her power into the sea, and she shall be consumed with fire.
This shall Ascalon se / and be afraid. Exodus ^^
Gaza shall be very sorry / so shall Accaron I^^^. 47. Amo^ ^* ^
also, because her hope is come to confusion. For the King of Gaza shall
peryshe, and at Ascalon shall no man dwell.

Strangers shall dwell at Asdod / and as for y^ pride of the Philistynes / I
shall rote it out. (...)* (...). 1. ^oy^^ and x. ^
Their blood will I take away from their mouth, and their abhominacions from
among their teeth. Thus they shall be left for our god, ye / they shall be as a
prince in Judah and Accaron like as a Iebusy. And so will I co^ pase my house
round about with my men of war goying to and fro: that no oppressor come
upon the^ any more. For that have I seen now with mine eyes.

^^y. lxii. c ^at. xxi. a ^^n, xii. b
Rejoice you greatly, O daughter Syon be glad, O daughter Jerusalem. For lo, thy
king comes unto the / even the ryghtuous and Savior, Lowly and simple is he
/ he rides upon an ass, and upon the foale of an Ass. I will rote out the
charettes from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem, the batel bows shall be
destroyed. ^al. 76. b
and his dominion shall be from the one see to the other, and from the floudes
to the ends of the world.

Thou also through the blood of thy couenau^: shall let * thy prisoners out of
the pit wherein is no water. Turn you now to the strong hold / ye y^ be in
prison, ^ay. xlii. a ^o^a. ix. a ^ma. 8. c
and long sore to be delivered. And this day I bring the word / y^ I will
reward the double again For Judah have I bent out as a bow for me and Ephraim
have I filled. Thy sons, O Sio^, will I raise up against the Greeks, and make
the as a gyauntes swearde: the Lord God shall be seen above them, and his darts
shall go forth as the lyghtnyng. The Lord God shall blow the trompet / and shall
come forth as a storm out of the south.

The Lord of hosts shall defend them / ^ha. ii. a ^^g. 17. f
slynge stones. They shall drink and rage / as it were through wine. They
shall be filled like y^ base^s, and as the horns of y^ altar. The Lord their
God shall deliver the^ in the day, as y^ flock of his people: for y^ stones of
his Sayntuary shall be set up in his land. O how prosperous and goodly a thing
shall ye be? The corn shall make ye young men chereful, and the new wine the
maidens.

The people is moved to require the doctrine of truth of the Lord. The Lord
promyseth to vy^^t and comfort the house of Israel.

CAPI. V.
PRay the Lord then bitymes to give you ^ut. 28. b
so shall the Lord make clouds, and give you rain enough for all the increace
of the field. For vain is the answer of Idols. The sothsayers se lies / and
tell but vain dreams: the comfort that they give / is nothing worth.
Therefore / go they astraye like a slocke of sheep, and are troubled because
they have no ^^ch. 13. a
shepherd. My wroth full dispeasure is moved at the shepherdes, and I will vyset
y^ gotes. For the Lord of hosts Genesis xlix. b.
Judah shall come the helmet Esaias, 22. d
the nail the batelbowe / and all the princes together. They shall be as the
giau^tes / which in the battle tread down the mire upon the streets. They
shall fight for the Lord shall be with them, so that the horsemen shall be confounded.

I will comfort the house of Judah / and Esaias. x. a Ezec. 29. a.
Egypt shall be taken away. I will comfort them in the Lord / that they may
walcke in his name / says the Lord.

The destruccyon of the temple. The care of the faithful is committed to
Christ by the father. A grievous vysion against Jerusalem and Judah.

CAPI. VI.
OPen thy doors, O Libanus / that the

Howl ye Fur trees for the Cedre is fallen ye / all the poudre are wasted
away. Howle^ O ye oak trees of Baasan) for the mighty strong wodde is cut
down. Men may here the shepherdes mourn, for their glory is destroyed. Me^
may here y^ lions whelps rore, for y^ pride of Iordane is wasted away

Thus fayeth the Lord my God: Fode the sheep of the slaughter, which shall be
slain of those that possess the^: yet they take it for no sin, but they
that sell them / say. The Lord be tha^cked, I am rych: ye, their own
shepherdes spare them not. Therefore will I no more spare those that dwell in the
land ^sayeth the Lord) but lo. I will deliver the and into the hand of his
king: that they may smite the land / and out of their hands I will not
deliver them.

I my self fed the slaughter sheep (a pore flock verily) and took unto me two
staves: the one I called loving mekenes / the other I called woe / and so I
kept the sheep. Three shepherdes destroyed I in one month for I might not a
way with them / neither had they any delight in me. Then said I: I will feed
you no more ^po^. (...). c*
the thing that dies let it dye: and that will perysh, let it perysh / and let
the remnau^t eat / every one the flesh of his neighbor. I took also my
loving meke staff, and brake it / that I might disanul the ^s^^. li. ^.
covenant, which I made with all people. And so it was broken in that day.

Then the poor simple sheep that had a Math* 27. c
So they wayed down. xxx. silver pe^s, the value that I was prysed at. And the
Lord said unto me: cast it unto the potter (a goodly price for me to be
valued at of them) and I took the. xxx. silver pens / and cast them to the
potter in the house of the Lord. Then brake I my other staf also (namely woe)
that I might lowse the brotherhead betwyxte Judah and Israel. And the Lord
said unto me. Take to the also y^ staff of a foolyshe shepherde: for lo / I
will

O Idols shepherd, that leaves the flock The sword shall come upon his arm
and upon his right eye. Hes arm shall be clean dried up and his right eye shall be
sore blinded.

Of the destruc^^on and building again of Jerusalem.

CAPI. XII.
THe heavy burden which the Lord has ^^^^. (...) c 44. (...), 45 b
which spread the heavens abroad / laid the foundacyon of the earth Gene. ^^.
^
and gives man the breath of life. Behold / I will make Jerusalem a cup of
surfeit / unto all the people that are round about her. ^^cha. 14. c
Ye, Judah him self also shall be in the sege against Jerusalem. At the same time
will I make Jerusalem an heavy stone for all people / so that al such as lift
it up / shall be torn and rent / and all the people of the earth shall be
gathered together against it.

Ab^^* (...)* (...)*
In that day / says the Lord / I will

The Lord shall preserve the te^tes of Judah like as a fore time: so that the
glory of y^ house of Dauyd: and the glory of the cytesyns of Jerusalem / shall be
but little regarded / in co^paryson of the glory of Judah. In that day shall the
Lord defend the cytesyns of Jerusalem: so that the weakest then among them
shall be as ^. (...)*
David: and the house of David shall be like as Gods house, and as the Angel of
the Lord before them.

At the same time will I go about to destroy all such people as come against
Jerusalem. Moreover, upon the house of David and upon the cytesyns of
Jerusalem, (...)
will I pour out the sprete of grace and prayer so y^ (...)
they shall look upon me (who^ they have pearsed: and they shall bewepehi as me^
mourn for their only begotten son: ye / and be sorry for him, as me^ are
sorry for their first child.

(...)*
Then shall there be a great mourning ^. (...)*
like as the lamentacion at Adremnon in the field of Maggadon. And the land
shall be wayle every kynred by the^ selves. The kynred of the house of David
the^ selves alone, and their wives by the^ selves The kindred of the house of 2.
(...)*
Natha^ them selves alone, and their wives by the^ selves. The kindred of y^
house of Leui the^ selves alone, and their wives by the^ selves. The kynred of
the house of Semei them selves alone / and their wives by them selves. In like
manner, all the other generacio^s, every chone by the^ selves alone, and their
wives by them selves.

Of the well of grace and truth. Of the cleue ryddaunce

CAPI. XIII.
IN that time shall the house of Dauyd and the cytesyns of Jerusalem have an
open (...)*
well / to wash of sin and uncleanness. And then (says the Lord of
hosts. (...)*
I will destroy the names of the Idols les out of the land: so that they
shall no more be put in remembrance.

* As for the false prophets also and the unclean sprete, I shall take them
out of the land. So that if any of them prophecy any more, (...). xiiii ^
his own father and mother that begat him, shall say unto him. Thou shall dye
for thou speak lies under the name of the Lord: ye, his own father and
mother that begat him, shall wound him, when he prophecieth. And then shall
those prophets be confounded, Deu, xiii. b.
I am no Prophet: I am an husband man, for so am I taught (...). vii c*
by Gene, ^i^. d.
Ada^ fro my youth up. And if it be said unto

Arise, O thou swearde, upon my shepherde, and upon the Prince of my people,
says the Lord of hosts. Math. 26. ^ Mat. 14. d
Smite the shepherde and the sheep shall be scatred abroad, and so will I turn
mine hand to the little ones. And it shall come to pass (says the Lord) that
in all the land two parts shall be roted out, Amos. ix. b Job. x^iii. a
but the third part shall remain therein. Esaye. 43. a Psa. xvii. a (...),
46. ^ ^* Petri. i. b Pro. xvii. a Sapi. iii. a Eccle. ii. a.
And the same third part will I bring through y^ fire, and will cleanse the^,
as the silver is cleansed: ye, and try the^ like as gold is tried. Then shall
they call upon my name / and I will hear them: I will say: it is my people.
And they shall say: Lord, my God:

The wasting of the church under the figure of Jerusalem. Of the king dome of
the Lord.

CAPI. XIIII.
Behold / the day of the Lord comes / Amos. i. a.
like as ye fled for the earthquake i^ the days of Osiah king of Judah. And the
Lord my God shall come, and all saints with him. In that day shall it not be
light, but cold and frost. Math. 24. c
This shall be that specyal day which is known unto the Lord nether day nor
night, but about the euenyng time it shall be light. zacha. xiii. ^ Apoc. xxii. ^
In that time shall there waters of life run out from Jerusalem: the half
part of them toward the east see / and the other half toward the uttermost
see, and shall continue both somer and winter. ^^^^* ^. d.
And the Lord him self shall be king over all the earth.

At yt time shall there be one Lord only / and 2. Esd. ^i^. ^ (...), xxx^. ^
Hananeel / unto the kings wine presses. There shall men dwell, and there shall be
no more cursinge / but Jerusalem shall be safely inhabyted. This shall be the plage
/ wherewith the Lord will smite all people / y^ have fought against Jerusalem.
Namely, their flesh shall consume away / though they stand upon their fete,
their eyes shall be corrupt in their holes, and their tung shall consume in their
mouth.

In that day shall y^ Lord make a great sedicyon among them, so that one man
shall take another by the hand, and lay his hands upon the hands of his
neighbor zacha. xii. ^*
Judah shall fight also against Jerusalem, and the goods of all the Hethe^ shall be
gathered together round about: gold and silver and a very great multitu^e of
clothes. And so shall this plage go over horses, mules, camels, asses and all
the beasts that shall be in the host / like as yonder plage was. Every one y^
remains then of al y^ people, which came against Jerusalem, shall go up yearly
/ to worship y^ king (even the Lord of hosts) Leu. xxlii* ^ Number. 29. ^ 3.
Esdr. v. ^ (...). Mac. ^. ^
and to keep the^ feast of tabernacles. And look what generacyon upon earth
goes not up to Jerusalem / for to worshype the king (even the Lord of hosts
upon the same shall come no rain. If the kynred of Egypt go not up / and come
not, it shall not rain upon the^ nether. This shall be y^ plage where with the Lord
wit

At that time shall the rydyng gere of the horses be holy unto the Lord / and
the kettels in the Lords house shall be like the base^s before the altar:
ye, all the kettels in Jerusalem and Judah, shall be holy unto the Lord of
hosts: and all they that sleye offeringes / shall come and take of them, and
dyght the^ there in. And at that time there shall be no mo Cananytes in the house
of the Lord of Hosts.

The end of the Prophecye of zachary.
: The Book of the Prophet Malachy.
A complaynt against Israel and her prestes,

CAPI. I.
THe heavy burden which Gene xxv. c
was not Esau Jacobs brother, says the Lord? Romans ix. d. Iosia* 23. a
yet have I loved Jacob, and hated Esau: ye I have made his hills wast, and
his heritage a wilderness for drago^s. And though Edom said: well / we are
destroyed / we will go build up again the places, that be wasted yet (says
the Lord of hosts) ^b^^. ^. a.
what they builded, that brake I down: so that it was called a cursed land,
and a people / whom the Exodus xx. a
Should not a son honor his father, and a servant his master? Deu. 32. a.
If I be now a father where is mine honor? If I be the Lord, where am I feared?
says the Lord of hosts. Now to you prestes yt despise my name. And if ye
say: wherein have we despised thy name? In this yt ye offer unclean bred upon
mine altar. And if ye will say: wherein have we offered any unclean thing unto
y^? In this that ye say: the altar Leuit* 22. ^. Eze. xliii. c.
Ye, offer it unto thy prince, shall he be content with the / or accept thy
perso^ne, says ye Lord of hosts?

And now make your prayer before God, that he may have mercy upon us: for
such thiges have ye done. Shall he regard your perso^nes, think ye, says ye
Lord of hosts? Ye, what is he among you y^ will do so much as to shut the
doors, or to kindle the fire Gene iiii. a
I have no pleasure in you says ye Lord of hosts: Esaye. i. b. Psa. iiii. ^.
and as for ye meatoffringe. I will not accept it at your hand. For from ye
rising up of ye sun unto the going down of the same, my name is great among
ye Gentiles: ye, in every place shall their sacryfyte be done, and a clean
meatoffring offered up unto my name: for my name is great among ye Heathen,
says ye Lord of hosts. But ye have unhallowed it, i^ that ye say, ye altar
of ye Lord is not to be regarded / and the thing that is set thereupon, not
worthy to be eaten. Now say ye: It is but labor and travail, and thus have ye
thought scorn at it (says the Lord of hosts (offering robbery. ye, the
lame and the sick. Ye have brought me i^ a meat offering, should I accept it
of your hand, says the Lord? Cursed be the disse^bler, which has in his
flock one yt is male, and when he makes a vow offers a spotted one unto ye
Lord. For I am a great king (says the lord of hosts) and my name is
fearful among the Heathen.

Threatenynges against the Prestes being seducers of the people.

CAPI. II.
ANd now (O ye prestes (this commandment Deuteronomy* (...)*
I will send a curse upon you, and will curse your blessings: ye, curse them
will I if ye do not take heed. Behold, I shall corrupt your sede, and cast
donge in your faces / even the donge of your solemn feasts and it shall
cleue fast upon you. And ye shall know, that I have sent this commandment
unto you: that my (...)*
covenant which I made with Leui / might stand says the Lord of hosts.

I made a covenant of life and peace with (...)*
For the prestes lyppes should be sure knowledge / y^ men may seek the law at
his mouth / for he is a messaunger of the Lord of hosts. But as for you, ye
are gone clean out of the way, and have caused the multitude to be offended at
the law: Deuteronomy. (...)*
ye have broken the couenau^te of Leui, says the Lord of hoostes. Therefore
will I also make you to be despised, and to be of no reputacyon among all the
people: because ye have not kept my ways, but have been percyall in the law.

Ephesians. iiii. ^.
Have we not all one father (Has not one God made us? (...) vii ^ (...)* c.
why does every one of us the^ despise his own brother / and so break ^.
(...). ix. a ^^ui. xxi. ^*
for Judah has defi led the Sa^ctuary of y^ Lord, which he loved, and has
kept the daughter of a strange God, But the lord shall destroy the man that
does this: (ye, both the master and the scoler) out of the tabernacle of
Jacob, with him y^ offreth up meatoffring unto the Lord of hosts. Now have ye
brought it to these point again, that the altar of the Lord is covered with
teres, weeping and mourning so that I will no more regard the meat offeringe /
nether will I receive or accept any thing at your hands. And yet ye say:
wherefore? Even because that where as the Lord made a coue nau^t betwixt the and
thy wife of thy youth, thou have despised. Gene. ii. d.
Yet is she thine own companyon and married wife.

So did not the one / and yet had he an ex / P^nt. 24. ^ (...). iii. ^.
put her away / says y^ Lord God of Israel and give her clothing for the
scorn / says the Lord of hosts. Look well then to your sprite, and
despise her not. Ye grieve the Lord with your words, and yet ye say:
wherewith all have we grieved him? In this that ye say. All that do evil are
good in the sight of God / and such please him. Or else where is the God that
punysheth?

Of the messau^ger of the Lord John Baptyst^. Of the ^aye of the Lord, and of
Eliah.

CAPI. III.
Behold / Math. xi. b (...). ^* ^, Luke* vii. c (...). ii^^. ^ ^. ^.
I will send my messaunger, which shall prepare the way before me: (...). 64. ^
whom ye would have / shall soon come to his temple / ye, even the messaunger
of the couenaunte whom ye long for. Behold / he comes / says the Lord of
hosts. But who may abide the day of his coming? Who shall be able to
endure / when he appears? For he is like a goldsmythes fire / and like
wasshers soap. He shall sit him down to try and to cleanse the silver / he
shall pourge the children of Leui, and puryfy them like as gold and silver:
that they may bring meatofferynges unto the Lord in righteousness. Then
shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be acceptable unto the Lord / De^.
(...)* ^ 4. (...). (...). ^.
ye are gone away fro mine ordynaunces / and sens the time of your forefathers
have ye not kept them.

^^^ha^i. ^. ^
Turn you now unto me / and I will turn me unto you / says y^ Lord of
Hosts ye say. Wherein shall we turn? Should a Leuit. 27. d
Tithes and heave offringes. ^gg^. ^^^. ^*
Therefore are ye cursed with penury, because ye disse^ble with me all the sort
of you.

Pro. (...). b.
Bring every Tithe into my barn, that there may be meat in mine house: and
prove me withal (says the Lord of hoostes) if I will not open the wyndowes
of heaven unto you / and pour you out a blessing with plenteousnesse. Ye, I
shall reprove the consumer for your sakes, so that he shall not eat up the fruit
of your ground / neither shall the vy^^rde be baren in the fold, says the
Lord of hosts: In so much that all people shall say / that ye be blessed /
for ye shall be a pleasant land / says the Lord of hoostes. Ye speak
hard words against me / says the Lord. And yet ye say: what have we spoken
against the? ye have said.

It is but lost labor / to serve God Io^ xxi. (...) P^^^. (...). ^.
What profyt have we for keeping his commandments, and for walkyng humbly
before y^ Lord of hoostes? ^^^. xxi. ^. (...). xii. ^.
Therefore may we say, that the proud are happy / and that they which deal with
ungodliness, are set up: for they tempte God, and yet escape. But they that
fear god, say thus one to another: y^ Lord consydereth and hears it. Ye,
it is before him a memory all book / written for such as fear the Lord, and
remember his name. And in the day that I will make (says the Lord of hosts)
they shall be mine own possession: and I will favor them / like as a man
favors his own son / that does him ser uy^e. Turn you therefore / and
consydre what difference is betwyxte the ryghteous and ungodly: betwixt him
that serves God, and him that serves him not.

CAPI. IIII.
Psa. ^^iii ^*
For marcke, the day comes that shall burn as an oven:and all the proud,
ye, and all such as do wickedness / shall be straw: and the day that is for to
come, shall burn them up (says y^ Lord of hoostes) so that it shall leave
them nether rote nor branch.

But unto you that fear my name / shall that Son of righteousness arise /
and health shall be under his wings:ye shall go forth, and multyply as the fat
calves. Ye shall tread down the ungodly: Psalm. i. b.
for they shall be like the ashes under the soles of your fete in the day
that I shall make / says the Lord of hoostes.

Remember the law of Moses my servant / Deu. 4. v a
which I committed unto him in Oreb for all Israel / with the statutes and
ordynaunces. Behold / I will send you, Mat. xi. ^. xvii. b.
Elias the prophet:before the coming of the day of the great and fearful
Lorde^ He shall turn the hertes of the fathers Luke. ^. ^.
to their children, and the hertes of the children to their fathers, y^ I come
not and smite the earth with cursynge.

: The end of the prophecy of Malachy: and consequently of all the Prophets.
To the Reader.
IN consideracion that the books before are found in the ^ebrue tongue /
received of all men: and that the other following / which are called Hagriog
^apha (because they were wo^re to be read / not openly and in come^ / but as
it were in secret and aparte (a^e neither found in the Hebrew nor in the
^alde: in which tongues they have not of long been written (in less then it
were happly the book of Sapie^^ce) where up on it were now very hard / to
repair and amend them: And that also they are not received nor taken as
legyitymate and leafull / as well of the Hebrews of the whole Church / as. S.
Hierome she weth:we have separat them / and set them aside / that they may the
better In the pro loge to the Prouer.
be known: to the intent that men may know of which ^oked witness ought to be
receued / and of which not. For the said. S. Hierome speaking of the book of
Judith (which is Hagiogriphe) says that the auctorite thereof is not esteemed
worthy and suffycyent to confyrme and stablysh the things that light in disput
acyon. And generally of all the books called Hagiogripha / he says / that men
may read the^ to the edyfying of the people:but not to confirm and
strengththen the doctrine of the Church. I leave out here the law (as they call
it of Canon. c. Sancta Romana. xv distine. where he she with his judgment.
Like wise the Blose of. c. Canones. rvi. distin. which sath / that men read
the^ / but in general: as though be should say / that generally and thoroughly
they are not allowed And not without a cause: For that they have been corrup^ch
and faisy^yed in many places / it appeateth suffycyently by Eusebius in his
book called Historia Ecclesiastica: which thing is easy to be known even In
the. iiii book the. 22 chap.
now a days ^ certain poites ^ namely in the books of the Ma^^^ces: whose
second book S. Hie. confesses that he found not i^ the Hebrew* by the means
whereof it is become unto us the more suspect and the less received. In like
manner is it of the third and fourth book of Esdras / which S. Hierome
protests that In the (...). log of (...).
he would not have translated / esteamyng the^ fordreames: where as Josephus
yet in his book of his Autyquy^yes declateth the sum of the matter after the
manner of a story / as well of the book of Machabees In (...) 13. o(...)
t^qu(...)
as of the.^ii. of Esdras: al though be esteame the books co^pyled from the
raygne of king Artaxerses unto his time. to be Agiogrtpha. Wherefore then / when
thou wylt maynteyne any thing for certem re^dringe a reason of thy faith / take
head to proceade therein by the living and piththy Scriptures / following S.
Peter / which i. Pet(...) i. Pe(...). ^ ii. P(...)
says: He that speaks / let him speak as though he spoke the word of God He
says the word of God / as a thing most true and cert^ / opened by Prophets
and Apostles / inspyred with the holy ghost: of i Co^^. ^. Ephesians(...).
whom we have witness moare clear then the day. Lawers having great desire
to confyrme and stablysh In the (...). loge (...) Ino^^^.
their opynyo^s by the law of man / say that they shame to speak without law:
How much more scare and dread the^ ought he tohaue / that says be is a
Christian / the which holds not him self / or reasteth not in the laws of
the living god: but in me^nes inue^cyons / iudgyi^ge In the (...)og^ (...)
Prou^^.
of all things according to them / and lening to an uncertain ymaginacion and
phantasy: Let us therefore that are builded on the fou^datyan of the In the
(...) loge (...) the be(...) o^ the (...) ge^.
hely Prophets and Apostles / and on the head corner stone (on which they
them selves were founded / and which they preached / that is Jesus Christ / the
su^e stone) leave the things that are ^ncerien to follow the certain: holding
us and ^eas^inge us in them / and fastening our ancre there / as in asure
place. For our Chriten In the (...) book (...). Appied.
faith consysteth not in doubtetull things / but in plain and most certain
assurau^ce / and in most true per suasyon / taken and confyrmed by infallible
verite. In which God grant us to walcke perpetuallye / to Eru(...) Hi(...)
ge lo^^^.
thyntent that according to (...) (fulfyllynge his holy will in us / and
setting aside all mu^cyo^s contrary unto him) we may live to his honor /
and to the edyfyinge of his Church.

SO BE IT,
The volume of the Books called Hagiographa.
The third Book of Esdras. The fourth Book of Esdras. The Book of Tobiah. The
Book of Judith, The rest of the Book of Hester. The Book of wisdom.
Ecclesiasticus. Baruch the Prophet. The song of the. iij. children in the
oven. The story of Susanna. The story of Bell and of the Dragon. The prayer of
Manasseh. The first Book of the Machabees. The second Book of the Machabees.
The third Book of Esdras.
Iosios holds passover. After his death is Iechonias ^is son made King in
his stead: whom the King of Egypt puts out, and sets in his brother
Ioachim. Ierusalein is destroyed, and Sedechis taken.

CAPI. I.
ANd Josias held Exodus xii. ^
for the children of Israel. (...). 25. ^ Reg. 23. ^
Kyl the passover, and prepare offringes for your brethren and do according
to the commandment of y^ Lord / which was given unto Moses. And unto the
people y^ was found Josias gave. xxx, M. of sheep, la^bes, kyddes, and Goats;
and

And when these things were brought to pass, the Prestes and the Levites
stood goodly in their order, and had the unleavened bred through out the tribes.
And after the ordring of the principal me^ in the tribes, they offered un to the
Lord in the sight of the people according Exodus xii. b
as it is written in the book of Moses and so they roasted the Easter la^be as
according was. As for the thank offeringes and the other they dyght the^ in
kettels and pottes, and set the^ before the people with good will, and afterward
before the^ selves, and the prestes. For the prestes offered the fat, until the
time was expyred, but the Leuytes prepared for the^ selves and for their
brethren the children of Aaron. The holy syngers also the children of Asaph
stood in their order / according as Dauyd devised So did Asaph Zachary and
Iouthun, which were appoyuted by the king. Moreover the porters and door kepers
stood by the doors and that diligently, so that none went out of his

So the children of Israel which were the^ present held an honorable
Passover, and the teast of sweet bread. vij. days long. Ye such a Passover
was not kept in Israel, from the time of y^ Prophet Samuel. And all the kings
of Israel held not such an Easter / as this which king Josias held, and the
prestes the Levites, the Jews and al Israel, of all the^ y^ were at Jerusalem.
And in the. xviij. year of the raygne of Josias was this Passover kept. And
with a parfecte heart did king Iosyas order al his works / before the lord
and the things that were written of him in times paste, concerning those that
sinned and were ungodly against the Lord: before all people / and that
sought no^* the word of the Lord upon Israel. 4. Reg. 2^. ^ 3, Pu^. ^5. ^
After al these acts of King Iosyas Pharao the king of Egypt went up and
came toward Carmis by Euphrates, and Iosyas went to mete him. Then sent the
king of Egypt unto Josias saying: what have I to do with the / O king of Judah? I
am not sent of the Lord to fight against y^, for my war is upon Euphrates,

These things are written in the book of the stories of the kings of Judah /
namely / all the acts and works of king Josias / his kyngly power and
majesty, his understanding in the law of God, and what he did, ye things
which are not written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah. 3. Reg. 33.
^ 2. Pa. 2^. a
And the people took Iechonias the son of Josias and 4. Re. 24. a
Nabuchodonosor y^ king of Babilo^ came up, and bound him with bands of iron,
and carried him unto Babylon. Nabuchodonosor also took also the vessels y^ were
hallowed in the temple of the Lord, and all the Jewels and carried the^ unto
Babylon, and brought the^ into his own temple at Babylon. Of his uncleanness and
ungodliness, it is written in ye book of the acts of the kings. And Ioachim
his son raygned in his stead: He was made king being. xviij. year old,
and raygned

And he did evil also in the sight of the Lord, and cared not for the words
yt were spoken unto hi I^^e. 36. ^
by the prophet Jeremy at the mouth of the Lord. And where he had made an
oath unto king Nabuchodonosor, he forswore hi self, and fell from him hauig a
styfneck and a heart, and trangressed all the statutes and ordinances of the
Lord God of Israel. The rulers also and heads of the people of the Lord did
much evil, and became ungodly, more then the Heathen, being defiled in all
manner of abhominacions: Ye / and defiled the holy temple of the Lord at
Jerusalem. And the God of their fathers sent his messaungers unto the^, to
turn them back and to call them again from their sines: for he would feign
have spared them for his holy tabernacles sake. Nevertheless, they had his
messau^gers in derision: and look what god spoke unto I^^^. ^9 ^ and. (...), ^
As for the house of the Lord, they went up into it / and brent it, and brake
down the walls of Jerusalem / set fire upon her towers / destroyed al her
noble buyldiges and brought them to naught / and the people that were not
slain with the swearde / they carried un to Babylon.

Thus became they presoners and bo^de me^ of the king of Babylon, till they
were delivered and raygned for them selves / I^^^. (...). and. (...).
when the words of the Lord were fulfilled, which he promised them by the
mouth of the Prophet Jeremy, and till the land had her rest namely / all the
time that it lay waste / had it rest and quytnes. lxxvij, years.

Cyru^ gives lyeence to the I^^^es to return to Jerusalem, and restores them
the vessele of the temple. After that a^e there letters send to Artaxerses,
which ac^use the Jews for building of the city: and so is the buyldyng
^r^uen of until the. 11. year of Darius.

CAPI. II.
N ^. Pat. 36. d ^* Esdr, s. a.
Owe when the king Cyrus raygned uer the Persians / and when the Lord

Then the principal men out of the trybes and vyllages of Judah and Benjamin
stood up: so did the prestes also and the Levites (whom the Lord had moved) to
go up, and to build the house of the Lord at Jerusalem. And they that were
about them, helped them with all manner of gold, and silver, and catell also and
with many lyberall gifts, and this did many one, whose mind was stered up
there to. ^. Esdr^. ^. ^
King Cyrus also (...). iiii. ^
Now in y^ time of king Artaxerses the king of Persia / these men: Balemus
and Mithridatus / Sabellius / Rathimus / Balthemus, Semelius the Scribe, and
other that dwelt in Samaria and in other places under y^ dominion thereof, wrote
a letter unto king Artaxerses, wherein they complained unto the king of them
in Iewry and Jerusalem The letter was made after this manner.

Sir, thy servants Rathimus the story

Then wrote the king to Rathimus the story writer / to Balthemus / to Sabelius
ye Scribe / and to ye other officers and dwellers in Syria and Phenices / after
this manner: I have red the epistle which thou se^test unto me, and have
commanded to make dilligent search / and have found / yt the city has even
resysted kings / yt the same people are dysobedient / and have caused much
war, and that mighty kings have raygned in Jerusalem / which also have
raised up taxes of Syria and Phenices. Whereof / I have commanded

Now when Rathymus and Sabellius the Scribe / and the rulers in the land had
^e^ the writing of king Artaxerses / they gat them together, and came in all
the haste to Jerusalem with an host of horsemen / and with much people of
foot, and forbad the^ to build. And so they left of from building of the
temple of Jerusalem unto the second year of y^ raygne of Darius king of
perseans.

Dari^s makes a feast. The three sentenses of the three young men, of which the
first is declared.

CAPI. III.
King Darius made a great feast unto his servants, unto all his court,

So, every one wrote his meaning, sealed it / and laid it under the kings
pyllowe / and said: when the king aryseth, we will give him our wrytynges,
and look whose word the king and his chief Lords judge to be the most wisely
spoken / the same shall have the victory. One wrote: Wine is a

Then began the first (which had speke^ P^on. xx. ^.
wine is marvelous strong and overcomes the^ y^ drink it: it disceaueth y^
mind. and brings both y^ poor man and the King to dotage and vanyte. Thus
does it also with the bond man and with the fre / with the poor and rich: it
takes away their understanding, and makes the^ careless and merry / so that
none of the^ remembers any heaviness debt or dewty: It causes a man to think
also y^ the thing which he does / is honest and good: and remembers not that
he is a king / nor that he is in auctoryte / and that he ought not do such
things. Moreover / when men are drynckynge / they forget all frendshype / all
brotherly faith fulness and love: but as soon as they are dronke^ / they draw
out y^ sword and will fight: and when they are laid down from the wine, and
so risen up again, they can not tell what they did: judge ye now is not wine
y^ strongest? For who would else take in hand to do such things? And when he
had spoken this / he held his tongue.

The declar ^^yon of the. ii. last sentences of the young me^, propounded in
the Chapter before: of which the last, that to, the and ve^^^ye bears the
vyctory in all things is most commended and allowed. Durius writes letters to
all the rulers under him, tha^ they should ^yde zo^o ba^ell to the building
of Ierusalefn.

CAPI. IIII.
THEN the second (which had said, third, whose name was Zorobabel, which
had spoken of women and of truth, began to say after this manner: O ye men /
it is not the great king / it is not the multitude of men / neither is it
wine that excels: who is it then that has the Lordshyp over them Have not
women borne the king / and all the people that rule those things? Have not
women borne the^ / and brought the^ up, that pla^te the vynes, wherout the wine
comes? They make garments for all men, they give honor unto all men, and
without weme^ cannot men live. If they gather gold and silver and all precious
things, and se a fair well favored woman, they leave all together, and turn
their eyes only unto y^ woman, and gape upon her, and have more desire unto
her, the^ unto the silver and gold, or any Eene. it ^ ^^t. xix. ^ ^. ^o^. ^. b
Ephe. v. ^
A man leaves his father y^ brought hi up, leueth his own natural country,
and cleaves unto the woman ye he ^eopardeth his life with the woman / and
remembers nether father / nor mother / nor country. By this then ye must needs
know, that women have the dominion over you.

Does it not grieve you? A man takes his sword, and goes his way to steal,
to kill / to murder, to sail upon the sea, and seyth a lion, and goes in the
darckenes: and when he has stolen, disceyued and robbed, he brings it unto
his love. Again / a man loves his wife better then father and mother: ye
many one there be / y^ run out of their wits, and become bo^dmen for their
wives sakes: many one also have peryshed, have been slain, and have sinned
because of women.

And now believe me / I know a king which is great in his power, and al
lands stand in awe of him, and no man dare lay hand upon him: yet did I se
/ that Apame (the daughter of the great king Bartacus) the kings concubyne /
sat beside the king upon the right hand / and took of his crown from his
head, and set it upon her own head, and smote the king with her left hand,
Moreover,

O ye men / are not women then stronger? Great is the earth, and hye is the
heaven. Who does these things? The^ y^ king and y^ Princes looked one upon
another. So he began to speak of y^ truth: O ye men, are not weme^
stronger* Great is the earth, hye is the heaven, swyft is the course of the
son* Eccle, i. a
he co^paseth the heaven round about, and fetches his course again to his
own place in one day. Is he not excellent that does this* ye great is the
truth, and stronger then al things. All the earth calls upon the truth /
the heaven prayseth it / all worckes shake and tremble at it / and with it is
no unrighteous thing. Wine is unrighteous: the King is unrighteous: weme^ are
unrighteous: al y^ children of men are unrighteous, ye all Esaye. (...) a
Psalm. (...). a
it lives and co^quereth for evermore world without end.

The truth accepts no persons, it puts no difference betwixt the rych
or poor, be twyxt the mighty or simple, but does right unto every man,
whether they be evil or good and all men are louyngly delte withal in the
works of it. In the judgment of it there is no unrighteous thing, but
strength kingdom and power and magtesty for evermore Blessed be thae God of
truth.

And with that he held his tongue, and all the people cried, and said: Great is
the truth, and above all. Then said the king unto him: Ask what thou wylt /
more then is appointed in the writing, and I shall give it the / for thou art
found wyser then thy companyons: thou shall sit next me, and be called my
kynsma^. Then said he unto the king: Remember thy promise and vow, which
thou ha^^ vowed and promised (in the day when thou came to y^ kingdom) to
build up Jerusalem, and to send again all the vessels and Jewels, that were
taken away out of Jerusalem: which Cyrus separated, when he offered in Babylon,
and would send the^ again. And thy mind was to build up the temple which
the Edomytes brent, when Jerusalem

Then Darius the king stood up / and kyssed him, 2. Es^^. 2. b 3. Esor. 6. d
and wrote a letter unto all the debites and Shreues / to all the Lords and
nobles / that they should convey him forth, and at the^ y^ would go up with him
to build Ieru sale^. He wrote a letter also unto al y^ shreues y^ were in
Celosiria and Phenices, and unto Libanus, that they should draw ^^dretre^s from
Lybanus unto Jerusalem, to build the city withal. Moreover he wrote unto all
the Jews that were gone out of his realm into Iewry because of ye fredome,
that no officer no ruler / nor shreue, should come to their doors / and that
all their land which they had conquered, should be fre and not tributary: And
that ye Edomites should give over the cities and villages of the Jews, which
they had taken in: ye and that they should yearly give xx. talentes to the
buyldyng of the temple, until the time that it were fynyshed / and to the
daily halowyng of y^ brent offeri^ges (as it is commanded) ten talentes
yearly also And that all they which come from Babylon to build the city,
should have fre liberty / they and their children, and all the Prestes.

He wrote the greatness also, and commanded

He gave over also all the vessels that Cyrus had separated from Babylon, and
all that Cyrus had given in commandment / the same charged he also / that it
should be done and sent unto Jerusalem. Now when this young man was gone forth,
he turned his face toward Jerusalem / and praised y^ king of heaven / and
said* * Of the comes the victory / of the comes wisdom and clearenesse
and I am thy servant. Blessed art thou / which have given me wisdom: the will
I praise / O Lord / thou God of our fathers.

And so he took the letters, and went unto Babylon: And when he came there, he
told this unto all his brethren that were at Babylon / and they praised the
God of their fathers, that he had given them refreshyng and liberty to go up,
and to build Jerusalem and the temple (wherein the name of the Lord is called
upon) and they reioysed with instruments and gladness seven days long.

They that return to Jerusalem are nombred. They begin to lay the
foundacyon of the temple, but are let by the means of enemes: and so is the
building driven of by the space of two years.

CAPI. V.
AFter this were the pryncypall men of Math. ^^
Zorobabel the son of Salathiel (of the kynred of David, out of y^ kindred of
Phares of the trybe of Judah) which spoke wonderful things under Darius the
King of Persia in the second year of his reign in y^ first month of Nisan.

These also are they of Iewry, which came up / and turned again unto Jerusalem
/ out of the captyuyte that Nabuchodonosor the King of Babylon had brought
unto Babylon. And every man sought his porcyon again in Iewry, his city /
they that came with Zorobabel, and with Jesus. Nehemias, Saraias / Ra^laias,
El^^eus, Emmanius, Mardocheus, Beelserus, Mechpsa Rochor, Oliorus, Emonias, one
of their Princes.

And the no^bre of the^ according to their kynredes and rulers were. The
children of Phares two thousand, an hundredth and. lxxij. The children of Ares.
iij. M. an. C. and. lvij iij. C. and. lxx. Of the sons of Suadon and Elimon.
iij. C. and. lxxviij. Of the sons of Ericus. ij. M. an. C. and. xlv. The
sons of Anaas. iij. C. and. lxx.

The Prestes: The sons of Ieddus: The

The whole no^bre of these. from. xij. years was. xxx. M. iiij. C. and lxij. Of
the sons / daughters and wives, the whole sum was xl. M. ij. C. and. xlij.
The sons of the prestes that praised God in the temple. The sons of Asaph.
C. and. xxviij. But the door kepers were: The children of Esmenus: the children
of Aser: the children of Amon: the children of Acuba, Toba the children of
Tobi: an. C. and xxxix. in all.

The Priests that served in the temple: The sons of Sell, the sons of
Gaspha / the sons of Tobloch, the sons of Caria, the sons of Sub, the
sons of Hel^u / the sons of Sabana / the sons of Armacha the sons of
Acub, the sons of Utha / the sons of Cetha / the sons of Aggab / the
sons of Obey / the sons of Anam / the sons of Canna, the sons of Geddu
/ the sons of ^n, the sons of Rad^ / the sons of Desanon / the sons of
Nechoba, the sons of Caseba, the sons of Goz^ / the sons of Ozui, the
sons of S^^ona / the sons of A^ra, the sons of Haste^, the sons of
Asiana / the sons of Manei / the sons of Nasisin / the sons of Accua /
the sons of Agista / the sons of Azui / the sons of Fauon / the sons of
Phasalon / the sons of Meeda / the sons of Susa / the sons of Cared / the
sons of Barcus / the sons of Sarea / the sons of Coesi / the sons of
Nasit, the sons of Agista / the sons of Pedon: Solomon his sons / the
sons of Asophot, the sons of Phazida / the sons of Cel^, the sons of
Dedon / the sons of Gaddahel / the sons of Zapheus / the sons of Aggia,
the sons of Sacharet, the sons of Sabathem, the sons of Saroneth the
sons of Malsit / the sons of Ania, the sons of Sasus, the sons of Addus
/ the sons of Suba, the sons of Eara / the sons of Rabotis / the sons
of Phasphat, the sons of Malmon. Al these ministered in the Saynctuary, and
were servants of Solomon: even. iiij. C. and. lxxxij.

These following are they / that went up

Their heads also and the rulers in the

i. E^. ^iii. a.
So when the seventh month came, and when the children of Israel were every
man at his busynes, they came al with one consent in to the court, which was
before y^ East door. And there stood Iesua the son of Iosedec and his
brethren the Prestes, and Zorobabell the son of Salathiel, and his brethren,
setting up an altar, to offer brent sacrifices upon it, as it is written in
the law of Moses.

There came people also of other countries and the Heathen out of al lands to
see up ye altar in his place, and offered sacrifices and brent offerynges unto
the Lord in the morning. And so they held the feast of tabernacles, (...).
(...) ^ Number. (...)
as it is commanded in the law. And daily offered they as accordnge was, and
made y^ sacrifices appointed, the offri^ges also of the Sabbathes and of the
new mones, and all holy feasts. 1. Esdr. 3. b
And al they that vowed offerynges unto the Lord, began at the new moan of
the. vij, month to offer unto God / for the temple of the Lord was not yet
builded. And they gave unto y^ Masons and Carpenters, money / meat / and
drink

And in the second year they came into y^ temple of God at Jerusalem. Eccl.
29. b c
In the second month began Zorobabel the son of Salathiel, and Iesua the
son of Iosedec and their brethren the Prestes and Levites, and all they that
were come unto Jerusalem out ot the captivity of Babylon, and laid the
fou^dacion of the temple, in the new moan of the second month in y^ second
year that they were came into Iewry and Jerusalem. And they appointed the
Levites (that were above. xx. year old) unto the service of the Lord: so Iesua
and his sons and his brethren, all the Levites stood together, and performed
the law and ordinance in the house of the Lord.

And the Prestes stood, and had their garments and tro^pettes, and the
Leuytes, the sons of Asaph had Cimbals geuyng thanks and praises unto the
Lord, according 1. Par. 16 b
as Dauyd the king of Israel had ordained. And the song that they did sing
unto y^ Lord, was after this matter. Psalm. 135. a Esaias. xii ^
O sing unto the Lord for he is gracious, and his goodness upon Israel endures
forever. And al y^ 1. Esor. 3. d
There came also from among the Prestes and Levites the rulers and elders,
accordig to the tribes and kynredes (such as had seen the house before) to the
buyldyng of this temple with great cry and great mourning, many also with
tro^pettes and great toy: In so much, that the tro^pettes might not well be
heard for the weeping and mournyng. For the common people blewe goodly upon the
tro^pettes, so that it might be hard far of.

1. Esor. 4. a
Then came the enemies of the tribes of Judah and Bemamin, to know what that
trompettyng and noise of shawmes might be. And they perceive yt it was they
which were come again out of captyuite, and would build the temple up a new
unto the Lord God of Israel. So they went to Zorobabell and Iesua, and to the
rulers of the villages and said unto them. Shall we build with you also? For
we like wise have herd your Lord, and we walk after the same manner, from the
days of Asbazareth the king of Assiria, which brought us hither. Then
Zorobabel and Iesua and the rulers of the villages of Israel said unto them.
It is not mete, that ye should build the temple of our God with us: we our
selves alone will build unto the Lord of Israel like 1. Esdr. (...)
as Cyrus y^ king of the Persya^s has commanded us.

But the Heathen in the land laid themselves against those yt were in Iewry,
held up y^ buylding from them, laid wayt upon them preuely / stopped such as
brought any thing to them, forbad them to build, and hidered those yt made
the^ passage, that ye buildyng should not be finyshed: and this co^tynued so
long as king Cyrus lived: and so they put of the buylding for the space of two
years, until the raygne of king Darius.

Aggeus and zachary prophecye They build the temple without let or
hynderaunce, by the commandment of Darius.

CAPI. VI.
Notwithstanding in the second year Agg(...)
of the God of Israel. 1. Esdr* ^
Then zorobabell the sone of Salathiell, and Iesua the son of Iosedec stood
up / and began to build the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, when the
Prophets of the Lord helped them. At the same time came Sysennes the under
Shreue in Syrya and Phenices / with the land lords and his companyons, and
said unto them. Who has bydden and commanded you to build this house, to
make y^ rofe and al other things again? And who are the work men / that
build them? Nevertheless the elders of the Jews had such grace of the Lord
/ that they would not be let(though they were provoked thereto) builded on still
/ until that King* Darius were certifyed thereof, and an answered received from
him. The letter that these me^ sent unto king Darius, was after this manner.

Sysennes the under Shreue in Syrya and Phenyces, and the landlordes with their
companyons, which are head rulers in Syrya and Phenices, send their salutacion
unto Darius the King. We certyfy the Lord the king, yt we came into the
land of Iewry / and went to Jerusalem; where we found the building and went
to Jerusalem: where we found the^ buylding the great house of God and the
^ple, with great costely fre stone and with goodly tymbre for the walls: ye
they make great haste with the work / and help one another / and it goes
forth prosperously in their hands, and with great dylygence and worship is it
made. Then asked we the elders, who 3. Reg. vi. a
it has been builded and set up before time by the great and mighty King of
Israel. But when our fathers provoked God unto wrath / and sinned against the
God of Israel, ^ Re. 24. 25 Iere. 39. ^ii.
he gave them over into the power of Nabuchodonosor King of Babylon the King
of the Caldees / which brake down the house / and brent it / and carried away
the people presoners unto Babylon. ^ Esdr. ^, c.
Nevertheless, in ye first year yt king Cyrus raygned at Babylon, Cyrus ye
king wrote and commanded to build up this house again: and all the holy
vessels of gold and silver that Nabuchodonosor carried away from Jerusalem unto
Babylon, and appropriated un to his own temple: these brought Cyrusforth
again, and delivered them to Zorobabel and to Salmanasar, the under Shreue,
commaundynge them that they should bring those same vessels to Jerusalem into
the temple, and to begin from y^ time forth / to build ye temple again i
his own place. The^ Salmanasat laid y^ fou^dacyo^ of ye Lords ^ Esd. vi. c.
^i. Es. iiii. a
Then commanded King Darius, to seek in the Lybraryes: and so at Egbathanis
in a little cite in medea there was found such a writing: In the first year of
the raygne of Cyrus, the same King Cyrus commanded that the house of ye Lord
at Jerusalem should be builded again (and odours to be made there co^tynually
unto ye Lord (whose heygth shall be x. cubits, and the bredeth, three score
cubits / and four square with three hewn stones with a loft of tymbre of the
same country / ye with a new loft, and the expenses thereof to be given of the
house of king Cyrus. And the orname^tes of gold and silver / that
Nabuchodonosor took out of ye house of ye Lord at Jerusalem, shall be set again
in ye temple at Jerusalem, where they were before. Sysennes also the under
shreue i Syria and Phenices, ye Princes and their companions, and the other yt
be head rulers in Syria and Phenices, shall not meddle nor have any thing to do
with yt place.

I Cyrus have commanded also, yt they Esor. vi. b.
which the Prestes that be at Jerusalem, show to be made daily: this shall be
given unto them without delay / y^ they may offer sacrifices daily to the
highest God, for the king and for his servants, and to pray for their lives.
Let it be proclaimed also on every side, that whosoever breaks or despyseth
this commandment of the king, shall be hanged upon a galowes (made of hes own
good) and all his goods shall be seasoned unto ye king. The Lord therefore (whose
name is there called upon) rote out and destroy all the kings and people / that
undertake by vyolence to hinder the same / orto deal vnturteously with the house
of the Lord at Jerusalem. I Daryus the King have ordained / that these things
shall be done with all dylygence.

The temple is fynyshed and dedicate: and the feast of unleavened brebde is
holden.

CAPI. VII.
THen Sysennes the under shreues in

And thus was our house finished unto the. xxiii. day of the month Add ni
the. vi. year of king Darius. And the children of Israel the prestes and the
Leuytes / and the other that were come out of captyuyte / and such as were
joined unto them, did according as it is written in the book of Moses And in
the dedication of the temple: they offered an hundred oxen two hundred rams,
four hundred lambs / and twelve goats for ye sins of al ye people of
Israel / after ye nombre of the trybes of Israel. The prestes

And the children of Israel (with those ye were come out of captyuite (held
the passover the fouretene day of the first month / when the prestes and the
Leuytes were sanctified. They ye came out of captiuyte / were not all
sanctyfyed together: but the leuytes were all sanctyfyed together, and so al
they that came out of captyuite, killed the easter lamb / for their brethren /
for the prestes and for them selves. And the children of Israel that came out
of captyuyte, and escaped from

Esdras causes the people to assemble and come together, and then reads them
the law. They keep the feast of Tabernacles.

CAPI. VIII.
ANo after him i. Esd. vii. d
when artaxerses the king of the Persyans raygned, there

In the seuenthe year of the raygne of king Artaxerses / in the fyfth month
that is in the seventh year of y^ raygne, they went from Babylon in the new
moon of the. v. month, and came the hye way to Jerusalem after his
commandment, like as the Lord had prospered their journey. For i these
Esdras gat great instruccyon that he should leave none of y^ things behind,
which are in the law and commandments of God. And he taught whole Israel al
ryghtuousnes and judgment.

Then came the Secretaries of king Artaxerses, and delivered the wrytinges
(that were come from Artaxerses the king) to Esdras the priest and reder of
the law of ye Lord And this is the copye of the letter: King Artaxerses
sends his gretynge unto Esdras the priest and reder of the law of the Lord.
Of frendshype and good will I have ordained and charged / if there be any of
the Jews / of the prestes and Leuytes in my realm / which desires and is
content to go with the unto Jerusalem, yt he may do it. Therefore / if any be
mided to bear the company, of silver, and of gold in like manner. Of corn
also an hundredth measures, and till an hundredth vessels of wine, and other
ple^teous things without nombre. Let all things be done after the law of God,
unto the highest God yt the wrath of God arise not in the realm of the king, and
of his sons. I command you also that ye require no tax nor tribute of y^
prestes / Leuytes / syngers, and ministers of the temple, nor of the writers:
and that no man have auctorite to meddle any thing against the^ As for the (O
Esdras) set thou judges and

Then said Esdras the writer 1. Esdr 7. a
Blessed be the God of our fathers, that has given so good a mind and will
into the heart of the king to magnify his house that is at Jerusalem and has
made me to be accepted in the sight of the king, of his council / of his
friends / and of his nobles. And so I was steadfast in my mind / according as
the Lord my God helped me / and I chose out me^ of Israel to go up with me. 1.
Esdr. 8. b
And these are y^ hedes, (after their kynredes and houses of their fathers)
that went up with me from Babylon / out of the kingdom of Artaxerses: Of the
sons of Phares / Gersonius. Of the sons of Siemarith / Amenus. Of the
sons of David / Accus / the son of Cecilia.

Of the sons of Phares, Zachary: and with him turned again an hundredth and
fyftye men. Of the sons of the captain of Moabylon / Zaraei, and with him.
ij. C, and l. men. Of the sons of Zachnes, Iechonias Zecholy, and with him
two hundredth and fyftye men. Of the sons of Salamasias / Gotholy / and. lxx.
with him. Of the sons of Zaphacia. Zarias Mihely / and with him four score.
Of the sons of Job / Abdias Ieheli, and with him two hundredth and twelve men.
Of the sons of Ba^ia, Salimoth y^ sons of Iosapha / and with him an
hundredth an three score men. Of the sons of Beer Zachari Behei / and with him
two hundredth and. viij. men. Of the sons of Esead, Johannes Ezecham, and with
him an hundredth and ten men. Of the sons of Adoniram those that were the
last, and these are their names. Eliphalam the son of Gebeil and Semeias /
and with him. lxx. men. All these called I together by the water Thia, where we
pitched our tents three days, and there I mustered them.

1. Esdr. 8. b
As for the sons of the prestes and Levites /

^. Esdr. i. a
Then commanded I a fasting unto the young men before the Lord / that I might
desire of him a prosperous journey and a good way for us / ye for us, for our
children and for the catell, because of the layenges awayt / and I durst not
require of the king horsemen and footmen, to convey us safely against our
enemies, for we had said unto the king that the power of the Lord our God
should be with them / that seek hi with their whole heart. And therefore / we
besought God our Lord earnestly because of these things, and he was merciful
unto us, and herd our prayer. And I separated from among the rulers of the
people, and from the prestes of the temple. xij. men and Sebebia and Asania,
and ten men of their brethren with them. And I weied the^ the gold and the
silver and all the prestly ornaments of the house of our God, which the king /
and his counsel, and his Princes, and whole Israel had given. And when I had
weyed it / I gave them an hundredth and fyfty tale^tes in silver / and an
bu^dreth tale^tes of silver vessel an hundredth talentes of gold / and of
golden vessel seven times twentye / and vessels of other metal (ye, of good
metal) twelve, glisteryng as the gold, and said unto them: ye are holy unto
the Lord / and the Uessels are holy, and the gold and the silver is promised
unto the Lord God of our fathers. Be dilygente now and keep it / until the
time that ye deliver it to the Rulers of the people / to the priests, to the
Leuytes / and to the princypall men of the cities of Israel in Jerusalem / and
in the chamber of the house 1. Esdr. 8. d
of our God. So the Priests and the Leuytes which received of me the gold /
the silver, and the vessel / brought it into Jerusalem into the temple of the
lord. And from the river of Thyawe brake up the twelueth day of the first
month / till we came to Jerusalem. And when the third day was past the weyed
gold / and silver was delivered in the house of the Lord our God the fourth
day, unto Marimoth the son of Ior the pressed / and with him was Eleazar the
son of Phinees, and with them were Iosabdus the sons of Iesnet, Medias and
the son of Banus, and certain of the Levites to the no^bre and to the
weight: and the weight of the^ was written up the same time. As for those that
were come out of captivity, they offered sacryfyce unto the Lord God of Israel:
eue^ twelve oxen for all Israel. lxxxvj. Ramines lxxij. sheep. xij, goats for
sin, twelve kine for a thankofferyng / al to the sacrifyce of the Lord. And
the kings co^myssion delivered they unto the stewardes and debytes of the
king, and to the vndershreues in Celosyria and Phenices, and they honored the
people and the temple of the Lord.

1. Esdr. ix. a
Now, when these things were done, the rulers came unto me / and said: The
generation of Israel / the Princes, the Prestes and Levites, the strange
people and indwellers of the land / have not put away their uncleanness, from
the Cananites / Hethytes Pheresytes, from the Moabites, Egyptia^s, and
Edomytes. For both they and their sons have mingled them selves we the
daughters of them / and the holy sede is mixte with the out landysh Heathen,
and sens the beginning of their raygne have the rulers and heads been
partakers of their wickedness.

1. Esdr. ix. ^
As soon as I had herd these things / immediately I rent my holy garments,
and pulled out the hear of my head and my beerd / and sat me down sorrowful
and heuye. So al they that were moved through the word of the Lord God of
Israel, came unto me: be yng sorrowful for this wyckednes, and I sat still, full
of heaviness until the evening sacrifice. Then stood I up from fasting /
having rent clothes and the holy garment, kneled down upon my knees, held
out my hands unto the Lord, and said: O Lord / I am confounded and ashamed
before thy fa^e for our sins are become many upon our heads, and our
wyckednesses are exalted unto the heaven: for sens the time of our fathers we
are in great sin unto this day. And for the sins of us and our fathers /
we with our brethren and with our Prestes have been delivered unto the kings
of the earth, into the swearde / and into captivity: and became a spoil with
confusion and shame unto this day. And now, O Lord God / how great is the
mercy that we have gotten of the^in that you have left us a rote and a name i y^
place of thy sa^ctuary, to discover our light i the house of the Lord our God,
and have given us meat at all times of our minystracyon. And when we were in
captiuyte, we were not forsaken of the Lord our God: but he made the kings of
Persia gracyous and favorable unto us, so that they gave us vytayles and
meat, ye and leave to buyld up the temple of our Lord God again, to repair
the wasted places of Syon, and to dwell in Iewry and Jerusalem. And now, O
Lord, what shall we say / having al these things in possessyon? For we have
broken thy commandments / which thou gave un

1. (...)
And when Esdras with this prayer had knoledged the sin, weeping, and lyenge
stat upon the ground before the temple, there gathered unto him from Jerusalem
a great multitude of men and women / of young me^ and maidens, for there was a
very great weeping and mourning in the co^gregacyon. So when Iechonias the
son of Iehely one of the children of Israel cried, he said unto Esoras: we
have sinned against the Lord, because we have married out landysh weme^ of the
Heathen. Now axt you over all Israel. We will swear an oath therefore unto the
Lord, that we shall put away all our wives, which we have taken of the
Heathen, with their children: like as it is appointed the by our fore elders.
Stand up then, open thou it / and declare it plainly unto us, according to
the law of the Lord: for the matter belongs unto the, and we will help
the, quite thy self manly. So Esdras arose, and took an oath of the rulers of
the prestes, and of the Leuytes / and of all Israel / to do after these
things: and they swear.

After Esdras had read the law, the people put a way their strange wives:
and then returns every man merely unto his own dweyllynge.

CAPI. IX.
THEN Esdras stood up from the court of the temple without, and went in to the
^ Esdr. x. b.
and remained there, and did eat no meat, nor drunk drink, for the multitude
of the people. And there was made a proclamacion in all Iewry and at Jerusalem,
for all such as were gathered at Jerusalem out of captivity, yt who soever came
not to Jerusalem within two or three days (according to the judgment of y^
old lords of council) his goods should be taken from him / and be excluded
from the congregation of the captyuyte. And in three days were all they of the
trybe of Judah and Benjamin gathered together at Jerusalem, the twe^tyeth day
of the nynth month. And the whole multitude sat trem blynge in the court of
the temple, for it was winter. So Esdras arose up, and said unto them: ye have
done vnryghteously, in that ye have taken outlandysh wives to marriage, and so
to in crease the sins of Israel. And now knoledge the same, and give praise
unto the Lord God of our fathers / and perform his will / departing from
the Heathen of the land / and from the outlandy she wives. Then cried the
whole multitude

Then Ionathas the son of Ezely, and Ozias and Thecan received the charge of
this matter / and Bozoramus, and Leius / and Sabatheus helped them thereto.
After this, all they stood up that were come out of captyuyte. And Esdras the
pressed chose unto him the pryncypall men from among the fathers according to
their names / and in the new moan of the tenth month they sat together, to
examen this matter. And so the 1. Esdr x. ^.
Of the sons of Jesus the son of Iosedec and his brethren, Mazeas / Eleazar
/ Ioribus and Ioadeus / which offered them selves to put away their wives /
and to offer a ram for their ignorance. And of the sons of Semmeri /
Masseas / and Esses / and I^elech Azarias. Of the sons of Fosera, Limosias,
Hismaen / Nathanea / Iussio, Ieddus, and Talsas. And of the Leuytes Iosabdus,
Semeis / and Colnis / Caletas / Fa^teas, Colnas / and Elionas. Of the syngers
of the Sanctuary / Eliarib, Zackarus. Of the porters, Sallumus and Tolbanes.
And of Israel / of the children of Foro, Osi / and Remias, and Geddias, and
Melchias / Michilus, Eleazarus / Iemmebias / and Bannas. And the children of
Iolama^ / Chamas^ Zachari / Ieizrelus / Ioddius, Erimoth / and Elias. And of y^
sons of Iathoim / Eliadas, Liasamus

And of the sons of Naue, Nones, Afeas, Melchias, Sameas, Simon / Benjamin,
Malchus and Marras. And of the sons of Asom, Carianeus / Mathathias, Ba^nus,
Eliphalach, Manasses, Seme^. Of the sons of Bauues, Jeremy, Moodias, Abramas,
Joel / Baneas / Peliaas / Iona / Marimoth, Eliasib, Mathaneus, Eliasis, Ozias,
Dielus / Semedius, Zambris, and Joseph. Of the sons of Nobeus, Idelus, Matha
thias, Sabadus, Zecheda, Sedmi, Iesseus, and Baneas. All these bad taken
outla^dysh women to marriage, and they put the^ a way with their children. The
prestes and Levites / and ii. Esd. iii. ^ ^ Esdr. iii. n
in the new moan of y^. vii. month. And he red in the flore y^ is before the
holy port of the temple / from the morning early unto the evening before men
and women. And they applied their mind all unto the law.

And Esdras the Pressed and reader of the 2. Esdr. ^. ^
Depart your way then / and eat y^ best / and drink the swetest, and send
gifts unto them that have nothing: for this day is holy unto the Lord and
be not ye sorry / for the Lord will bring you to honor. And the Leuytes
showed it openly to them all, saying: This day is holy be ye not sorry. Then
went they their way every chone, and did eat and drink, and were merry, and
sent rewards unto them that had nothing, y^ they also might eat with
gladness: for they were excedyngly reioysed, through the words that were red
unto them in the law. And so they were all gathered together at Jerusalem to
hold the feast, according to the couenaunte of the Lord God of Israel.

The end of the thryde book of Esdras.
The. iiij. book of Esdras.
The people is reproved for their vnthanckfulnes. God will find another people
if these will not be informed.

CAPI. I.
THe second book of i. Esd* v^^ ^. Esdr. ^. ^
Esdras (the son of Saraias, y^ son of Azarias, the son of, Helchia the
son of Sallum, the son of Sado^, y^ Son of Achitob, the son of Achia,
the son of Phinees the, son of Hely the son of Amerias, the son of
Azarias, the son of Maraioth, the son of Sarahias / the son of Uzi, the
son of Boccus y^ son of Abisu / the son of Phinees / the son of Elezar,
the son of Aaron / of the trybe of Live) which was presoner in the land of
Mades / in the raygne of Artaxerses King of Persia.

Esaias. (...)
And the word of the Lord came unto me / saying: go thy way, and she we my
people their synful deeds / and their children their wyckednesses / which they
have done against me, that they may tell their chylders children the same: for
the sins of their fathers are increased in them. And why? they

It is a people without learning and nourtoure. How long shall I forbear
them, unto whom I have done so much good? Number. 21. d. Iosu. 8. 10. and. xii.
Many kings have I destroyed for their sakes: Exo. xiiii g.
Pharao with his servants and all his power have I smytten down and slain:
All the nations have I destroyed and roted out before the^, and in the East
have I brought two lands and people to naught, even Tire and Sydo^, and have
slain all their enemies. Speak thou therefore unto them, saying. Thus says
the Lord: Exo. xiiii. ^.
I led you through the sea / and have given you sure streets sense the
beginning. Exo. iii. b.
I gave you Moses to be your captain, and Aaron to be the pressed:

^^. xviii. a Exo. xiii. d.
I gave you light in a pyler of fire, and great wonders have I done among
you: yet have ye forgotten me, says the Lord.

Thus says the almyghte Lord: I gave you quayles to eat, and tents for
your succoure: Nevertheless ye murmured, and ascribed not the vyctory of your
enemies unto my name: ye, this same day do ye yet mur moure. Where are the
benefytes, y^ I have done for you? When ye were hongrye in the wyldernes, ^^.
(...). ^.
did ye not cry unto me saying: why have thou brought us into this wyldernes,
to kill us? It had been better for us, to have served the Egypcyans / then to
dye in this wilderness. Then had I pytye upon your mournynges, and gave you
Manna to eat. Ye did eat angels food. Sapi. xvi. ^ Number. xx, b.
When ye were thyrstye, did I not hew the hardestone / and caused water to
flow therout? For the heat I covered you with the leaves of Esa. v. ^.
What shall I do more for you / says the Lord.

Thus says y^ Almyghtye Lord: ^^^. xv. ^.
When ye ware in the wilderness, in the water of the Amorytes, being a thyrst,
and blasphemynge my name, I gave you not fire for your blas phemyes, but cast a
tree into the water, and made the river sweet. What shall I do unto the, O
Jacob? Thou Judah would not obey me Deuteronomy. 32. ^.
I will turn me to another people / and unto those. Wit I give my name that
they may keep my statutes. Sayng ye have forsaken me. I will forsake you also.
When ye desire me to be gracious unto you, I shall have no mercy upon you. Esa.
i. ^.
When ye call upon me, I will not hear you. For ye have defiled your hands
with blood / and your fete are swyft to commyt manstaughter. Ye have not
forsaken me (in a manner) but your own selves, says the Lord.

Thus says the almyghtye Lord: have I not prayed you, as a father his
sons, as a mother her daughters / and as a norsse her young babes / that ye
would be my people / and I should be your God: that ye would be my children,
and I should be your own fathers? Math. 23. d.
I gathered you together / as an hen gathers her chekens under her wings.
But now what shall I do unto you? I shall cast Esaye. ^ ^. and. lxv. a.
When ye offer unto me / I shall turn my face from you: for your solemn feast
days, your new moons / and your circumcysyons have I forsake. I sent unto
you my servants the Prophets, whom ye have taken and stayne, and torn their
bodies in pieces / whose blood I will requere of your hands, says the Lord.

Thus says the Almighty Lord: your house must be desolate. I will cast you
out as the wind does the straw, your children shall not be fruteful, for
they have despised my commandment / and done the thing that is evil before
me. Your houses will I give unto a people that shall come, and Esa. ^xv. ^.
R^ma* x. ^.
they that never hard me / shall believe in me: and they unto whom I never
showed toke^, shall do the thing y^ I command the^. They have seen no
Prophets, yet shall they call their sins to remembrance / and knowledge
them. I report me unto the grace, y^ I will do for the people which is come /
whose children rejoice in gladness: and though they have not seen me with bodily
eyes, yet in sprete they believe the thing that I say. And now brother,
behold what great worship / and se the people that comes from the East /
unto whom I will give the dukedom Esa. xli. d. Luke. xiii. f. Mat. viii. d
of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, of Oseas, Amos, and Micheas, of Joel, Abdy /
Jonas / Naum / and Abacu^ / of Sophony^ Aggeus, Zachary / and Malachy, which is
called also an angel (or messenger) of the Lord.

CAPI. II.
The Synagoge syndeth fault with her own children. The Gentles are called.

THVS says the Lord: I brought this people out of bondage, I gave them my
commandments by my seruairtes the Prophets / which they wholde not hear /
but despised my counsels. The mother that bare them / says unto them: Go
your way ye children / for I am a wyddowe and forsaken: I brought you up with
gladness / but with sorrow and heaviness have I lost you: for ye have sinned
before the Lord your God, and done the thing that is evil before him. But
what shall I now do unto you? I am a wyddowe and forsaken: go your way, O my
children, and ask mercy of the Lord. As for me, O father / I call upon the
for a witness over the mother of these children, which would not keep my
covenant, that thou bring them to confusyon, and their mothers to spoil,
that she bear no more. Let their names be scatred abroad among the Heathen,
let them be put out of the earth, for they have thought scorn of my couenaunte.

Woe be unto the Assure / thou that hydest y^ unrighteous by the. Thou wicked
people, remember Gene. xix. ^
what I did unto Sodom and Gomorre, whose land is turned to pytch and ashes.
Even so also will I do unto all them / that hear me not, says y^ almighty
Lord. Thus says the Lord unto Esdras: Tell my people / yt I will give the^
the Kingdom of Iesusalem, which I would have given unto Israel. Their glory
also will I take unto me / and give them the everlasting tabernacles / which
I had prepared for those.

The tree of life shall be unto them a sweet

And those that be dead will I raise up again from their places, and bring
them out of the graves / for I have known my name in Israel. Fear not thou
mother of the children / for I have chosen the, says the Lord. And for thy
help I shall send the my servants Esaias and Jeremy / after whose council I
have sanctified and prepared for the twelve trees loded with diverse fruits /
and as many wells, flowynge with milk and honey / and seven mountains /
whereupon there grow roses and lylyes / wherein I will fill my children with
joy. Execute justice for the wyddowe, be judge for the fatherles: give to the
poor: defend the comforteles: clothe y^ naked: heal the wounded and sick:
laugh ^at a lame man to scorn: defend the crepel, and let the blind come
into the sight of my clearnes, keep the old and the young within thy walls.
Tobi. i. d.
Whersoeuer thou fyndest the dead / take them, and burye them / and I shall give
the / the ty^st place in my resurreccyon. Hold still (O my people) and take
thy rest, for thy quietness is come. Feade

For when the day of trouble and heaviness comes / other shall weep and be
sorrowful / but thou shall be merry and plenteous. The Heathen shall be gelous,
but they shall be able to do nothing against the / says the Lord. My hands
shall cover the / so that thy children shall not se the fire enerlastyng. Be
joyful, O thou mother with thy children / for I will deliver the / says y^
Lord. Remember thy deed children / for I shall bring them out of the earth /
and show mercy unto them / for I am merciful / says the Lord almighty.

Embrace thy children / until I come, and show mercy unto them / for my
wells run over / and my grace shall not fail.

I Esdras received a charge of the Lord upon the mount Oreb / that I should go
unto Israel. But when I came unto Israel they set me at naught and despised
the commandment of the Lord. And therefore I say unto you, O ye Heathen
that hear and understand: Look for your shepherde / he shall give you
everlasting rest, for he is nigh at hand / that shall come in the end of the
world. Be ready to the reward of the kingdom, for the everlasting light
shall shine upon you for evermore. Fle the shadow of this world / receive the
ioyfulnes of your glory. I testify my savior openly: O receive the gift that
is given you / and be glad, geuynge thanks unto him y^ has called you to the
heavenly kingdom.

Arise up, and stand fast: behold the

(...)
I Esdras saw upon the mount Syon a great people / whom I could not nombre,
and they all prysed the Lord with songs of thankesgeuynge. And in the myddest
of them there was a young man of an hye stature, more excellent then al they,
and upon every one of their heads he set a crown, and was ever higher and
higher, which I marueled at greatly. So I asked the angel, and said: Sir, what
are these? He answered and said unto me: These be they, that have put of the
mortal clothing and put on the immortal, and have testified and knowledged
the name of God. Now are they crowned, and receive the reward.

Then said I unto the Angel: what young person is it, that crowns them /
and gives the^ the palms in their hands? So he answered, and said unto me:
It is y^ son of God, whom they have knowledged in the world. Then began I
greatly to commend the^, y^ stood so styfly for the name of the Lord And so
the angel said unto me: Go thy way, and tell my people, what manner of things
and how great wonders of the Lord thy God, thou have seen.

The wondrous works which God did for the people are recited. Esdras
marueleth that God suffers the Babilonia^s* to have rule over his people,
which yet are siners also.

CAPI. III.
IN the thyrtyeth year of the fall of the city, ^^^^. vi. ^.
And every people walcked after their own will / and did nyce things before
the: and as for thy commandments, they despised them.

^^ne. vii. ^
But in process of time thou broughtest the water floude / upon those that
dwelte in the world, and destroyedst them. And like as the death was in Adam,
so was y^ water floude also in these. Nevertheless one of the^ thou leftest:
namely Noe with his house hold, of whom came all ryghtuous men. And it
happened that when they that dwelt upon the earth / began to multyplye, and
had gotten many children, and were a great people / they began to be more
ungodly the^ the first.

Now when they all lived so wyckedly before the / Gene. 12. 15.
thou dydest chose the a man from among them, whose name was Abraham. Him thou
louedst, and unto him only thou shewedst thy will, and made an everlasting
covenant with him, promising him, that thou would never forsake his sede.
(...)
And unto him thou gave Isaac, * unto Isaac also thou gave Jacob and Esau.
As (...) Jacob thou dydest chose him / and put ba^^^ Esau. * And so Jacob
became a great multitude.

And it happened that when thou leddest his sede out of Egypt, (...)
thou broughtest the^ up to the mount Syon bowyng down the heavens, setting
fast the earth, mouynge the ground, making the depthes to shake / and
troublynge the world: And thy glory went through four parts of fire, and
earthquakes, and wyndes / and cold: that tho^ myghtest give the law unto the
sede of Jacob / and diligence unto y^ generation of Israel.

And yet tokest thou not away from them that wicked heart, y^ thy law might
bring forth fruit in them. For the first Adam ^a^^ a wicked heart /
transgressed, and was overcome, and so be all they that are borne of (...) (...)
Thus remains wickedness with th(...) in the heart of the people, with the
wycke^^^^ of the rote: so that the good departed away and the evil abode
still. So the times passed away / and the years were brought to an end. 1.
(...)
Then dydest thou raise the up a servant called David, 2. Reg.
whom thou co^mau^dedst to build a cite unto thy name, and to offer up incense
and sacryfyce unto the therein. This was done now many years. The^ the
inhabiters of the cite forsook the and in all things did eue^ as Ada^ and al
his generacions had done: for they also had a wicked heart.

And so thou gave thy cite over into the thine own people have thou roted
out / and preserved thine enemies, and this have thou not showed me.

I cannot perceive how this happened. Do they of Babylon then better, then
they of Syon? Or is there any other people / that knows the / saving the
people of Israel? Or what generation has so believed thy couenau^tes, as Jacob?
And yet their reward appears not, and their labor has no fruit. For I have
gone here and there through y^ Heathen, and I se that they be rich and wealthy,
and thyncke not upon thy commandments. Wey thou therefore our wickedness now
in the balau^ce, and theirs also yt dwell in the world, and so shall thy name be
no where found but in Israel. Or where is there a people upon earth / that
has not sined before the? Or what people has so kept thy commandments?
Thou shall find / that Israel by name has kept thy precepts / but not the
other people and Heathen.

The angel reproves Esoras because he seemed to enter into the profounde
judgments of God.

CAPI. IIII.
AND the angel that was sent unto me

He said moreover unto me: Thine own things, and such as are grown up with
the, can thou not know: how should thy vessel then be able to comprehend
the way of the Highest / and now outwardely in the corrupt world, to
understand the corrupcion that is evident in my sight? Then said I unto him:
It were better that we were not at all / then that we should live in
wickedness / and to suffer / and not to know wherefore. He answered Iudi ix. ^
2. Pat. ^
the trees took such a deuyse and said: Come let us go and fight against the sea, that it may depart away before us, and that we may make us yet more
woddes.

The floudes of the sea also in like manner took this deuyse, and said: Come
let us go up / and fight against the trees of the wood yt we may make our
land the wyder. The thought and deuyce of the wod was but vain and nothing
worth, for the fire came and consumed the wod: The thought of the floudes of
the sea came likewise to naught also, for the sand stood up and stopped them.

If thou were judge now betwyxte these two, whom would thou iustyfie, or
whom would thou condemn? I answered and said: Uerely it is a folyshe
thought that they both have devised. For the ground is given unto the wod, and
the sea also has his place to here his floudes. Then answered he me / and
said: Thou have given a right judgment, why iudgest thou not thyselfe also?
For like as the ground is given unto the wod / and the sea to his floudes:
even so Eso^^. (...) Johan. ^* ^ 1. Corin. ^^
they yt dwell upon earth, may understand nothing, but that which is upon
earth: and he that dwells above the heavens, may only understand the things,
y^ are above the heavens. Then answered I / and said: I beseech y^, O Lord, let
me have understanding: for it was not my mind to be curyous of thy hye
things, but of such as we daily meddle withal / namely, wherefore that
Israel is blasphemed of the Heathen, and for what cause the people (whom thou
ever have loved) is given over / to be punisshed of ungodly nacyons: and why y^
law of our fathers is brought to naught, and the written couenauntes come to
none effect, and we pass away out of the world as the greshoppers, and our
life is a very fear and we are not worthy to obtain mercy. What will he do
then unto his name / which is called upon over us? Of these things have I
asked a questyon.

Then answered he me, and said: The more for the world hastes fast to pass
away / and cannot comprehend the things y^ are promised for the rightuous in
time to come, for ^. John. v. ^
this world is full of unrighteousness and weakness.

But as concerning the things whereof thou ask me / I will tell the. The
evil is sowed, but the destruction thereof is not yet come. If the evil now
that is sowed, be not turned vpsyde down, and if the place where the evil is
sown, pass not away / then cannot the thing come that is sown with good for
the corn of evil sede has been sown in the he^t of man from the beginning,
and how much ungodliness has he brought up unto this time? and how much shall
he yet bring forth, until he come into the barn?

Po^dre now by thyself, when the corn of evil sede is cut down, how great
a barn shall it fill? I answered and said. How and when shall these things
come to pass? wherefore are your years few and evil? And he answered me,
saying: Have not thou to much upon the highest, for thy hastynes to be above
him is but vain / thou make to much a do. Did not the souls also of y^
rightuous ask questyon of these things in their holiness / saying: ^pora. 6. b
How long shall I hope of this fashyon? When comes the fruit of my barn /
and my reward? And upon this Ieremiel y^ Archangel gave the^ answer, and said:
Eue^ when y^ no^bre of the seeds is filled in you / for he has weyed y^ world
in the balau^ce: in mesure and no^bre has he measured y^ time, and moves it
not, until y^ same measure be fulfilled. The^ answered I and said: O Lord,
Lord, now are we al full of sine, and for our sake peradventure it is not / yt
the barn of the ryghtuous shall not be filled, because of the sines of the^
that dwell upon the earth.

So he answered me, and said: Go thy way

And he said unto me: Stand up upon the right side / and I shall expound the
symylitude unto the. So I stood, and behold, an whote burning oven went over
before me: and it happened that when the flamme was gone by / the smoke had the
upper ha^d^ After this there went over before me a watery cloud, and sent
down much rain with a storm: and when the stormy rain was past the drops
remained still. Then said he unto me: like as the rain is more then the
drops / and as the fire exceadeth the smoke / even so the measure of the
things that are past, has the vpperhande. Then went the drops and the
smoke above: and I prayed and said: May I live (thynkest thou) until that
time? Or what shall happen in those days? He answered me, and said: As for
the tokens whereof thou ask me / I may tell the of them in a part: but as
touching thy life, I may not show the / for I am not sent therefore.

Esdras and the Angel comen together.

CAPI. V.
Nevertheless / as concerning the tokens / mark Mat. 24. ^
iniquite shall have the vpperhande, like as thou have seen now, and as thou
have herd long ago: And y^ land that thou seyst now to have rule, shall thou
shortly se waste. But if God grant the to live, thou shall se after the
third tro^pet, that the su^ne shall suddenly shine again in the night, and the moon three times i^ the day, and blood shall drop out of wodde, and the stone
shall give his voice, and the people shall be vnquyete: and even he shall rule,
whom they hope not / that dwell upon earth / and the fowls shall flyt, and
the Sodomytshe see shall cast out his fysh, and make a noise in the night which
many shall not know / but they shall all hear the voice thereof.

There shall be a confusion also in many places, and the fire shall be often sent
again / and the wild beasts shall go their way / and menstruous women shall
bear monstres / and salt waters shall be found in the sw^te^one friend shall
fight against another: then shall all wit and understanding be hyd and put aside
i^to their secret places, and shall be sought of many, and yet not be fou^de^
then shall unrighteousness and voluptuousnes have the vpperhande upon earth. One
land also shall ask another / and say: Is ryghtuousnes gone through the? And
it shall say: No. At the same time shall men hope, but nothing obtain: they
shall labor / but their ways shall not prospere.

To show the such tokens I have leave / and if thou will pray again, and
weep as now and fast seven days, thou shall hear yet greater things. Then I
awaked, and a

And in the second night it happened / ye Salathiel the captain of the people
came unto me / saying: Where have thou been? and why is thy countenance so
heavy? Know thou not, that Israel is committed unto the, in the land of
their captivity? Up then / and eat, and forsake us not, as y^ shepherde that
leaves his flock in the hands of wicked wolves. Then said I unto him: Go thy
way fro me, and come not nigh me, and he herd it / as I said: so went he his
way fro me. And so I fasted seven days, mournyng and weeping, like as Uriell
the angel commanded me. And after seven days it happened y^ the thoughts of
my heart were very grievous unto me again / and my soul received the sprete of
understanding / and I began to talk with the most highest again / and said:
O Lord, Lord / of every wood of the earth and all the trees thereof ^ thou have
chosen the one only vyneyarde: and of all lands of the whole world thou have
chosen one pyt: and of al flowers of the ground thou have chosen the one
lylye: and of all the depthes of the sea thou have filled the one river: and of
all builded cities thou have hallowed Syon unto thy self: and of all the fowls
that are created, thou have named the one dove: and of all the catell that are
made thou have provided the one sheep: and among all the multytudes of folckes
thou have gotten the one people, and unto this people whom thou louedst / thou
gave a law / that is proved of all.

And now, O Lord, why haste thou given this one people over unto many? and
upon the one rote thou have prepared other, and why have thou seat^ed thy one
only people among many? which tread them down / ye which have ever
withstand thy promyses, and never believed thy couenauntes? And though thou
werest enemy unto thy people / yet should thou punysh them with thine own
hands. Now when I had spoken, these words y^ angel y^ came to me y^ night
before, was sent unto me, and snyde unto me:

And he said unto me: No^bre the things that are not yet come: gather me
together y^ drops, ye are scatred abroad: make me the flowers grene again,
that are withered: open me the thing that is closed: and bring me forth the
wyndes, ye are shut up: Show me the image of a voice, and then shall I declare
the thing, that thou labourest to know. And I said: O Lord / Lord, who may
know these things, but he that has not his dwelling with men? As for me / I
am unwise, how may I then speak of these things whereof thou ask me? Then
said he unto me: like as you can do none of these things that I have spoken
of, eue^ so can thou not find out my judgment, or in the end y^ love that
I have promised unto my people. And I said: Behold, O Lord / yet art thou nigh
unto them that have no end: and what shall they do / y^ have been before me /
or we that be now / or they that shall come after us? And he said unto me: I
will lyken my judgment unto a ryng. Like as there is no slackenesse of the
last, even so is there no swyftnesse of y^ first So I answered and said:
could thou not make those (that have been made, and be now / and that are
for to come) in one, that thou myghtest show thy judgment the sooner? Then
answered he me / and said: The creature may not haste above the maker, neither
may the world hold the^ at once, that shall be

And I said: How have thou said then unto thy servant, that thou living
maker, have made the creature living at once, and the creature bare it? eue^
so might it now also bear them that be present, at once. And he said unto me:
Ask the chyldebed of a woman, and say unto her: If thou bryngest forth
children, why do thou it not to gether, but one after another? Pray her
therefore / to bring forth ten children at once. And I said: she cannot / but
must do it one after another.

Then said he unto me: Even so have I given a chyldebed unto the earth, for
those y^ be sown upon it by process of time. For like as a young child may
not bring forth y^ things that belong to the aged: eue^ so have I or dayned
the world which I made.

And I asked and said: Seeing thou have now given me away. I will speak before
the: for our mother of whom thou have told me / is yet young / and now she
draws nigh unto age: He answered me, and said. Ask a woman that bears
children, and she shall tell y^. Say vnto^ her: wherefore are not they (whom
thou haste now brought forth) like those that were before y^, but less of
stature? And she shall answer the: They that be borne in the youth of
strength, are of one fashyon and they that are borne in the time of age / (when
the chyldebed fails) are other wise. Consydre now thy self, how that ye
are less of stature, then those yt were before you / and so are they yt come
after you, less the^ ye: as the creatures which now begin to be old, and
have passed over the strength of youth. Then said I: Lord I beseech the, if I
have found favor in thy sight, show thy servant / by whom do thou
vyset thy creature?

The Angel instructs Esdras, and gives him answer to his questyons

CAPI. VI.
AND he said unto me. In the beginning when the ground was made: before

I answered then, and said: O Lord, Lord / if I have found favor in thy
sight / I beseech the, show thy servant the end of thy tokens, whereof thou
shewedst me part the last night. So he answered and said unto me: Stand up
upon thy fete, and hear the perfect voice of sound. There shall come a
great mocyon / but the place where thou stand shall not be moved. And
therefore when thou herest the words, be not afraid:

The Books shall be opened before the firmament, and they shall se all together,
and the children of a year old shall speak with their voices: the women with
child shall bring forth untimely children of three or four months old, and
they shall live / and be raised up: and suddenly shall the sown places appear
as the vnsowen / the full store houses shall suddenly be found emptye: and the
trompet shall give a sound, which when every man hears, they shall be suddenly
afraid. Mich. vii. a Math. x. c
At ye time shall fre^des fight one against another like enemies, and the
earth shall stand in fear with them.

The sprynges of the wells shall stand still / and in three hours they shall
not run Whosoever remains from all these things that I have told the /
shall escape, and se my salvation, and the end of your world. And the men
that have received / shall se it / they that have not tasted death from their
birth: and the heart of the in dwellers shall be changed, and turned into
another meaning for evil shall be put out / and disceyte shall be quenched. As
for faith, it shall floryshe, corrupcion shall be overcome: and the truth, which
has been so long without fruit, shall be declared. And it happened when he
talked with me, that I looked demurely upon him, before whom I stood / and these
words said he unto me: I am come to show the / the time of the night for to
come.

If thou will pray yet more, and fast seven days again, I shall tell the
more things, and greater then before, for thy voice is heard before the
Highest: for why? y^ mighty has seen thy ryghtuous dealing / he

And it happened after this / that I wept again / and fasted seven days in
like manner, y^ I might fulfill the three wekes: which he told me. In the eight
night was my heart vexed withi me again, and I began to speak before the
highest: for my sprete was greatly set on fire / and my soul was in destresse,
and I said, O Lord, thou spakest unto thy creature from the beginning (even the
first day) and saydest. ^ene. i. a
Let heaven and earth be made / and thy word was a perfect work. And then
was there the sprete, and the darckenesses were yet on every side / and
silence: there was no man's voice as yet from the. Then commanded thou a fair
light to come forth out of thy treasures, that thy works might appear and be
seen.

Upon the second day thou made est the sprete of the firmament, and
commau^dest it to part in sunder, and to make a deuysion be twixte the waters,
that the one part might remain above / and the other beneth. Upon the third
day thou broughtest to pass, that the waters were gathered in the seventh part
of y^ earth: Six parts have thou dried up / and kept them, to thyntent that
me^ might sow and occupye husbandry therein. As soon as thy word went forth
/ the work was made. For immediately there was great innumerable fruit / and
many diverse pleasures and desires of te^ptacyon, flowers of chaungeable
color and smell / and this was done the third day.

Gen^. ^
Upon the. iiij. day thou co^maundedst y^ Deuteronomy* ^^
waters were gathered) that Gene. ^.
they should bring forth diverse beasts / fowls and fysshes. And so it came
to pass, that the domme water and without soul / brought forth living
beasts / at the commandment of God, that all people might praise thy
wondrous worckes. Then dydest thou preserve two souls / the one thou calledst
Enoch and the other Leuiathan, and did separate the one from the other: for
the seventh part (namely, where the water was gathered together) might not
hold them both. Unto Enoch thou gave one part / which was dried up the
third day / that he should dwell in the same part / wherein are a thousand
hills. But unto Leuiathan thou gave the seventh part, namely y^ moist and
haste kept him to devour what thou will, and when. Upon the syxte day thou
gave commandment unto the earth, that before the / it should bring forth
beasts, caxell / and all that crepe, and (besides this) Adam also, whom thou
made Lord of all thy creatures. Of him come we all, and the people also,
whom thou have chose^ specially unto thy self. All this have I said now and
spoken before the O Lord, yt I might show how that the world is made for our
sakes. As for the other people which also come of Adam thou have said that
they are nothing / but be like a spetle, and have lyckened the abou^daunce of
them unto a drop (that falls) from the rofe of the house:

And now, O Lord / the Heathen which have ever been reputed as nothing /
have bego^ne to be Lords over us / and to devour us: but we thy people (whom
thou have called the first borne, thy only begotten, and thy feruente lover
(are given into their hands and power. If the world now be made for our
sakes, why have we not the inherytau^ce in possessyon with the world? How
long shall this endure?

The Angel shows Esdras many things to come.

CAPI. VII.
AND it happened after that I had spoken also the nights before, and he said
unto me: Up Esdras / and here the words that I am come to tell the. And I
said: speak on Lord my God. Then said he unto me. The sea is set in a wide
place / that it might be deep and great: but the entrance is narowe and small
like a river. For who would go into the sea / to look upon it / and to rule it?
If he went not through the narowe, how might he come into the broad.

Item another: A city is builded and set upon a broad field / and is full of
al goods, the entrau^ce is narowe and sudden, like as if there were a fire at
the right hand, and a deep water at the left, and as it were only one
strayte path betwixt the^ both, so small that there could but one man go
there.

If this cite now were given to an heir / and he never went through the
parlous way / how would he receive his enheritau^ce? And I said: It is so
Lord. Then said he to me: Even so is Israel also a porcyon. And why? for their
sakes have I made the world: and when Adam transgressed my statutes, then was
the thing judged that was done. The^ were the entrau^ces of the world made
narowe, full of sorrow and travail. They are but few ^ evil, full of parels and
labor. For the entraunces of the fore world were wide and sure, and brought
immortal fruit.

If they now which are entered into this world, may not comprehend these
strayte and vain things, much less may they co^prehende and understand the
secret things: Why disquietest thou thy self the^, seeing thou art but a
corruptyble man? And what would thou know where as thou art but mortal? And
why have thou not received in to thine heart the thing that is for to come,

Then said I: O Lord Lord, Deute. 8. a
thou have ordained in thy law, that the ryghtuous should inherete these
things, but that the unfaithful and ungodly should perysh. Never thelesse, the
rightuous shall suffer strayte things / and hope for wide: for they that have
lived ungodly and suffered strayte things / shall not se the wide.

And he said unto me: There is no judge above God / and none that has
understanding above the Highest. For there be many ye peryshe, because they
despise y^ law of God that is set before them. For God has given strayte
commandment to such as come, that they know what they do / and how they
should live: and if they kept this they should not be punyshed.

Nevertheless, they were not obedient unto him, but spoke against him:
ymagyned vain things / and purposed to sin, and said moreover, that there
was no God / and that God regarded it not. His ways have they not known, his
law have they despised / and denied his promyses: in his statutes and
ordynaunces have they not been faith full and steadfast, and have not
performed his works.

And therefore Esdras: unto the full, plenty: and to the emptye / emptynesse.
Behold / the time shall come / that these tokens which I have told the shall
come to pass / and the bryde shall appear / and the earth that now passes
away / shall be showed: and whosoever is delivered from the forsayde euyls, shall
se my wonders. For my son Jesus shall be openly declared, with those that be
with him. and they that remain, shall be merry in four hundredth years.

After these same years shall my son Christ dye / and al men that have life,
and y^ world shall be turned into the old silence seven days / like as in the
fore judgments, so that no man shall remain. And after seven days, the world
that yet a waked not / shall be raised up / and shall dye corrupt. And the earth
shall restore those that have slept i^ ^er and so shall the dust those that dwell
in silence / and the secret places shall deliver those that be committed unto
the^. And the most highest

Then said I: Gene. 18. d.
Abraham prayed first for the Sodomites / Exodi. ^2.
and Moses for y^ fathers that sinned in the wyldernes, and he that came after
him for Israel, in the time of Achas and Samuel: and 2. Reg. 2^ ^
David for the destruccyon ^. Pa^ ^ 3. Re^
and Solomon for them that came into the Saynctuary, (...)
and Helias for those that received rain, and for the dead, that he might
live, and Ezechias for the people in the time of Se^^acherib: and diverse other
in like manner which have prayed for many.

Eue^ so now, seeing the corrupt is grown up / and wyckednes increased, and
the ^yg^teous have prayed for y^ ungodly, wherefore shall it not be so now also?

He answered me / and said: This present world is not the end / there
remains much honor in it, therefore have they prayed for the weak. But the
day of dome shall be the end of this time / and the beginning of the
immortalite for to come, wherein all corrupcion vanished, al volupteousnes is
loused, al misbeleue taken away, ryghtuousnesse grown and the veryte spronge
up. Then shall no man be able to save him that is destroyed, nor to oppress
him that has gotten the vyctorye. I answered then, and said: This is my first
and last saying: that it had been better / not to have given the earth unto
Ada^: or else when it was given him, to keep him that he should not sin. For
what profit is it for me^ now in this present time to live in heuinesse, and
after death to look for punishment. O thou Adam / what have thou done? For
though it was thou that sinned, thou art not fallen alone, but we all that
come of the. For what profit is it unto us, if there be promised us an
immortal time, where as we meddle with deadly worckes? and that there is
promised us an everlasting hope, where as our selves are evil and vain, and
that there are laid up for us dwellynges of health and fredome, where as we
have lived evil, and that the worship of the hiest is kept to defend them,
which have led a paciente life, where as we have walked in the most wicked
ways of all? And that there shall be showed a paradyse, whose fruit endures for
ever, wherein is fredome and medycyne, where as we shall not go in? for we have
walcked in vnpleasau^t places: And that the faces of them which have
absteyned, shall shine above the stars, where as our faces shall be black

Then answered he me, and said: This is the consyderacyon and thought of the
battle, which man has upon earth: that if he be over come, he shall suffer
as thou haste said. But if he get the vyctorye, he shall receive the thing
that I say. For this is the life whereof Moses spoke unto the people, while he
lived / sayng: Deuteronomy. xxx. b
Chose the life, that thou may live. Nevertheless / they believed him not /
neither the Prophets after him. No nor me which have spoken unto them / that
heaviness should not reach unto them to their destruccyon, like as joy is for to
come over those that have suffered them selves to be enfourmed in salvation.

I answered then, and said: I know Lord / that the highest is merciful / in
that he has mercy upon them / which are not yet in the world / and upon those
also that walcke in his law: and that Roma. ^
he is pacient and long sufferynge toward those that have sinned in their
worckes / and that he is lyberall to give where as it requires: and that he is
of great mercy / for he multiplied his loving kyndnesses toward those y^ are
present / and that are paste / and to them which are for to come. For if he
multiplye not his mercyes / the world shall not be made living / with those
y^ dwell therein. He gives also / for if he gave not of his goodness, that they
which have done evil / might be^ eased, from their wyckednes, the ten
thousand part of men should not be made living. And if the judge forgave not
those that be healed with his word, and if he would destroy the multitude
that stryueth, there should be very few left in an innumerable multitude.

Esdras prays God rather to love upon his own mercy, then on the sins of
the people.

CAPI. VIII.
ANd he answered me, saying: The most Highest made this world for many, but
Math^* (...) and (...)
There be many created / but few shall be saved. Then answered I and said:
The^ swalo we up the wit (thou soul) and devour the understanding / for
thou art agreed to harken and to give ear, and wyllyng to prophecy / for thou
have no longer space given the, but only to live. O Lord / will thou not give
thy servant leave, that we may pray before the / and that thou may give
sede unto our heart, and tyllynge to our vndestandyng, that there may come
fruit of it: and that every one which is corrupt / and bears the state and
place of a man / may live?

For thou art alone, and we al are one work manshyppe of thy hands, like as
thou have said / and like as the body is fashioned now in the mothers womb /
and thou geuest the me^bres, and thy creature is preserved in fire and water:
and.ix. months does thy work suffer thy creature, which is fashyoned in
her: but the thing that preserves / and it that is preserved / shall both be
kept together: and when time is / the womb delyuereth the thing that is kept
and grown in her.

For thou have commanded the breasts to give mylcke unto the fruit, that the
thing which is created and fashyoned, may be noryshed for a time: and then thou
dysposest and ordrest it with thy mercy / bringeste it up with thy righteousness,
nurturest it in thy law, and refourmest it with thy understanding, mortifiest
it as thy creature, and make it living as thy work. Seyunge then that thou
destroyest

And this I speak now of all men in general / as you know: but of thy
people / for whose sake I am sorry: and of thy inheritance: for whose cause I
mourn: and of Israel / for whom I am woeful: and for Jacob / for whose sake I
am grieved / therefore begin I to pray before the, for my self and for them /
for I se the fall of us, even of us / that dwell upon earth. But I have herd
the swiftnes of y^ judge, which is to come: therefore hear my voice, and
understand my words, and I shall speak before the. This is the beginning of
the words of Esdras / before he was received. And I said, O Lord / thou that
dwell in euerlastignesse, whose eyes are lift up in the air, whose stool
is exceadynge hye, whose glory and majesty may not be comprehended, before whom
the Hosts of angels stand with tre^bling, whose keeping is turned in wind
and fire / whose word is true, whose talckynge is steadfast, whose
commandment is strong, whose ordinance is fearful, whose look dries up the
depthes, whose wrath makes the mountains to melte away / and whose truth
bears wytnes: O hear the prayer of thy servant / and mark with thine ears
the petycyon of thy creature.

For while I live, I will speak, and so long as I have understanding, I will
answer. O look not upon the sins of thy people / which serve the in truth.
Have no respect unto the wicked studies of the Heathen, but to the desire of
those that kept thy testimonies with sorrows. Thyncke not upon those that have
walked fame^ly before the / but upon them / which with will have known thy
fear.

Let it not be thy will to destroy them, which have had beastly manners, but to
look upon the^ that have clearly taught thy law. Take thou no indignacyo^ at
the^, which are worse then beasts: but love them / that all way put their
trust in thy ryghteousnes and glory: for we and our fathers have all the same
sycknes and disease, but because of our sins thou shall be called merciful.

For if thou have mercy upon us / y^ shall

3. Pe viii. g 2. Pat. vi. f 1. John. 1. ^
For of a truth there is no man among them that be borne, but he has dealte
wyckedly: and among the faithful there is none which has not done amysse. For
in this (O Lord (thy ryghteousnes and thy goodness shall be praised and declared,
if thou be merciful unto them, which are not rych in good worckes.

Then answered he me and said: Some things have thou spoken a right, and
according unto thy words it shall be. For I will not verily consydre the
worckes of them / which have sinned before death / before the judgment, before
destruccyon, but Genesis iiii. a.
I will rejoice over the work and thought of the ryghteous. I will remember
also the pylgremage the holy making and the reward. Like as I have spoken
now, so shall it come to pass. For as the husband man so weth much sede upon
the ground / and planteth many trees, and yet always the thing that is sown
or planted is not al kept safe, nether does it all take rote: Even so is it of
the^ that are sown in the world / they shall not all be salued.

I answered then and said: If I have found grace, then let me speak. Like as
the husband man's sede perishes, if it receive not rain in dew season, or it
there come to much rain upon it: Even so perysheth man also, which is created
with thy hands, and is like unto thine own image and to thy self, for whose
sake thou have made al things / and lykened him unto the husband man's sede.
Be not wroth at us / O Lord / but spare thy people / and have mercy upon thine
own inherytaunce: O be merciful unto thy creature.

Then answered he me and said: Things the / and haste not regarded thine own
self / that thou art had i^ such honor among the ryghteous. Therefore shall
great wrechednes and mysery come upon the^, that in the latter time shall dwell
in the world, because they have walcked in great pride.

But understand thou for thy self / and seek out glory for such as be like
the: for un to you is paradyse opened / the tree of life is planted, the time to
come is prepared, plenteousnes made ready: a city is builded for you, and a
rest is prepared, ye perfect goodness and wisdom. The rote of euel is marcked
from you / the weakness and mothe is hyd from you, and into hell flies
corrupcyon in forgetfulness. Sorrows are vanyshed away / and in the end is
showed the treasure of immortalyte. And therefore ask thou no more questions,
concerning the multitude of the^ that peryshe. For they have taken liberty /
despised the Hyeste / thought scorn of his law / and forsaken his ways.

Morouer / they have trodden down his ryghteous, and Psa. xiiii. ^
said in their heart / that there is no God, ye and that wyttingly, for they
dye. For like as the thige that I have spoken of, is made ready for you: Even
so is thyrst and pain prepared for them. For it was not his will that man
should come to naught: but they which be created have defiled the name of him
that made them, and are vnthanckful unto him / which prepared life for them.
And therefore is my judgment now at hand. These thiges have I not showed unto
all men / but unto few / namely unto the, and to such as be like the. Then
answered I and said, Behold O Lord, now have y^ showed me the multitude of
the tokens, which y^ wylt begin to do at the last: but at what time and when,
thou have not showed me.

Esdras has visyon^ unto him.

CAPI. IX.
HE answered me then and said: Measure

For like as all that is made in the world has a beginning and end / and the
end is manifest: Even so the times also of y^ Highest have plain begynnynges in
wonders and signs, and the end in worcking and in tokens. And every one that
shall be saved / and shall be able to escape by his worckes and by faith, wherein
ye have believed* shall be preserved from the said parels, and shall se my
sauyoure in my land and within my borders, for I have hallowed me from the
world. The^ shall they be in carefulnes, which now have abused my ways: and
they y^ have cast the^ out despytefully, shall dwell in pains.

For such as in their life have received benefytes, and have not known me /
and they that have abhorred my law / while they had yet fredome, and when they
had yet open leisure of amendeme^t and conuersyon, and understood not, but
despised it: y^ same must know it after death in pain. And therefore be thou
no more careful, how the ungodly shall be punished, and how the ryghteous shall
be saved, and whose the world is, and for who^ the world / and when it is.
Then answered I and said: 4. (...)
I have talcked before and now I speak, and will speak also herafter, that

And he answered me / saying, like as the field is, so is also the sede: as
the flowers be / so are the colors also: such as the workman is, such is
also the work: and as the husband man is him self, so is his husbandrye also
/ for it was the time of the world.

And when I prepared for them that are now or ever the world was made / where
in they should dwell / then was there no man that withstode me. Now when every
one was / and the maker also in the world which is now prepared / and the
month that cease not / and the law which is unsearchable, their manners
were corrupt. So I consydred the world / and behold / there was parell /
because of the thoughts that were come into it. And I saw / and spared them
greatly / and have kept me a wynebery of the grapes / and a plant from among
many generacyons. Let the multitude peryshe then / which are grown up in
vain / and let my grape and wynebery be kept: even my plant: for with great
labor have I made it up.

Nevertheless, if thou wylt take upon the yet seven days mo (but thou shall not
fast in them (go thy way then in to the field of flowers, where no house is
builded, and eat only of the flowers of y^ field, taste not flesh, drink no
wine, but eat flowers only.

Pray unto the Highest contynually, so will I come / and talk with the.

So I went my way and came into the Exodus xix. d (...). xxiiii a Deu. iiii. b.
thou haste declared and opened thy self unto our fathers in the wyldernes,
in a place where no man dwells / in a baren place / when they came out of
Egygpt, and thou spakest, saying: Hear me O Israel, and mark my words you
seade of Jacob. Behold, I sow my law in you / and it shall bring fruit in
you and ye shall be honored in it for ever. For our fathers which received y^
law / kept it not and observed not thy ordinances and statutes, and the
fruit of thy law was not declared: for it might not / for why? it was thine.
Deute. 32. f.
For they that receaeud it, perished, because they kept not the thing that
was sown in them.

It is a custom when the ground receaueth sede, or the sea a ship, or a
vessel meat and drink, that when it perishes or is broken wherein a thing
is sown, or wherein any thing is put: the things also peryshe and are broken,
which are sown or put therein. ^saye. xl a ^^mo ^^
the law perysheth not / but remains in his labor.

And when I considered these things in my heart after this manner / I looked
about me with mine eyes, and upon the right side 4. Esdr. x. d
I saw a woman, which mourned sore / made great lamentacyon / and wept with
loud voice: her clothes were rent in pieces, and she had ashes upon her head.
Then let I my thoughts go, that I was in and turned me unto her, and said
wherefore wepest thou? why art thou so sorry and discomforted? And she said unto
me: Sir, let me bewail my self and take yet more sorrow: for I am sore vexed i
my mind / and brought very low. And I said unto her: what ay^eth y^? Or who
has done any thing to y^? tell me. She said: I thy hand maid have been
unfruitful and baren, and have had an husband thyrtie years. And these, xxx.
years I do nothing else day and night and all hours but make my prayer to y^
Highest. After thyrtie years God herd me thy handmayden, looked upon my
humylite. co^sydred my trouble, and gave me a son, and I was glad of him, so
was my husband also and al my neighbors, and we gave great honor unto the
Myghtie. And I noryshed him with great travail. So when he grew up, and came
to the time, that he should have a wife / I made a feast.

Esdias and the woman that appears unto him commen together.

CAPI. X.
ANd it happened that when my son

Then let I my meditacyons and thoughts fall, that I was in, and spoke to her
in displeasure: Thou most foolysh woman, seist thou not our heaviness and
mournyng / and what happens unto us? how Syon our mother is all woeful and
sorry / and how she is clean brought down and in misery? saying we be all
now in heaviness, and make our move (for we be all sorrowful.) As for the
heuines that thou take, it is but for one son. Demand the earth, and she
shall tell the, that it is she which ought (by reason) to mourn / for the fall
of so many that grow upon her.

For from the beginning all men are borne of her, and other shall come: and
behold they walk almost al into destruccyon, and many of them shall be roted
out. Who should then (by reason) make more mourning / then she, that has lost
so great a multitude? and not thou / which art sorry, but for one. But if thou
woldeste say unto me: My mourning is not like y^ mournyng of the earth, for I
have lost the fruit of my body, which I bare with heuines and sorrow: but the
earth is according to the manner of the earth, and the present multitude goes
again into her as it is come to pass: Then say I unto the: like as thou have
borne with travail and sorrow / eue^ so the earth also from the beginning
gives her fruit unto man, for him y^ made her. And therfere withholde thy
sorrow and heaviness by thy self Hebr. xii. a.
and look what happens unto the, bear it strongly. For if thou ludgest the
marcke and end of God to be righteous and good, and receauest his cou^celi^
time, thou shall be co^me^ded therein. Go thy way then into the cite to thy
husband.

And she said unto me: that will I not do / I will not go into the city, but
hear

And therefore shake of thy great heaviness / and put away the multitude of
sorrows: that the Mighty may be mercy full unto the, and that the Hyeste may
give the rest from thy labor and travail. And it happened / that when I was
talking with her, her face did shine and glyster, so that I was afraid of
her, and mused what it might be. And immediately she cast out a great voice /
very fearful / so that the earth shoke at the noise of the woman: and I looked,
and behold the woman appeared unto me no more but there was a cite builded, and
a place was showed from the ground and foundation.

Then was I afraid / and cried with loud voice / and said: where is Uriel
the 4. Esd 4. a
which came to me at the first? For he has caused me to come in many
consideracyons and hye thoughts, and mine end is turned to corrupcion, and my
prayer to rebuke. And as I was speaking these words, he came unto me, and
looked upon me, and I lay as one that had been deed, and mine understanding was
altered, and he took me by the right hand, and comforted me, and set me upon
my fete, and said unto me: what ayleth the? and why is thine understanding
vexed? and the understanding of thy heart, and wherefore art thou sorry? And I
said: Because thou have forsaken me: and I have done 4. Es^. ^*
according unto thy words / I went in to the fold, and there have I seen
things, that I am not able to express. He said unto me: Stand up and be
manly / and I shall give the exortacyon.

Then said I: Speak on to me my Lord forsake me not, lest I dye in vain: for
I have seen that I knew not, and herd that I do not know. Or shall my
understanding be disceaued / and my mind? But now I beseech the, that thou
wylt show thy seruau^te of this wonder. He answered me then and said: hear
me, and I shall enfourme the, and tell the wherefore thou art afraid / for the
highest has opened many secret things unto the.

He has seen that thy way is right, and that thou take sorrow continually
for thy people, and make great lamentacyon for Sion: and therefore
understand the visyon which thou saw a little while ago after this manner:
Thou saw a woman mourninge, and thou have comforted her. Nevertheless now
seyst thou the lykenes of the woman no more, but thou thoughtest there was a
cite builded: and like as she told the of y^ fall of her son, so is this the
answer: The woman whom thou saweste / is Syon / and where as she told the /
that she has been thyrtye years unfruitful and baren, those are the. xxx.
years, wherein there was no offering made in her.

But after. xxx. years Solomon builded

And therefore I bad the remain in y^ field where no house is builded. For I
knew that the Highest would show this unto the / therefore I commanded the to go
into the field / where no foundacyon of building is. For in the place where
the Highest will show his city, there shall be no man's buyldyng. And therefore
fear not / and let not thine heart be afraid / but go thy way in, and se the
glorious and fair building, and how great it is, and how great thou
thynkest it after the measure of thine eyes, and then shalt thou hear as
much as thine ears may comprehend. For thou art blessed above many other,
and art called with the Highest, as the few. But to morrow at night thou shall
remain here, and so shall the Highest show the vysio^s of hye things, which
he will do unto them, that dwell upon earth in the last days. So I slepte y^
same night and the other like as he commanded me.

In this Chapter and in the. ii. next ensuynge, he entreats of certain vysyons
and of the interpretacyons thereof.

CAPI. XI.
THEN saw I a dream: and behold, there came up from the sea an Aegle,

Then came there a voice unto it, and said, Hear thou that haste kept in the
earth so long this I say unto the, before thou begynnest to appear no more:
There shall none after the atteyne unto thy time. Then arose the third, and
raygned as the other before, and appeared no more also. So went it with all the
residue one after another / so that every one raygned / and then appeared
no more. Then I looked / and behold / inprocesse of time the feathers that
follows were set up upon the right side / that they might rule also: and some
of them ruled / but within a while they appeared no more: for some of them were
set up, but ruled not. After this I looked, and behold the. xij. feathers
appeared no more / and the two wings: and there was no more upon the Aegles
body / but two heads that rested, and six feathers. Then saw I also / that
the six feathers were parted in two / and remained under the head, that was
upon the right side, for the four continued in their place. So I looked, and

But this head put the whole earth in fear / and bare rule in it / over all
those that dwelt upon earth with much labor / and he had the governance of
the world / over all the fowls y^ have been. After this I looked, and behold /
the head that was in y^ myddest, suddenly appeared no more, like as the wings:
then came the two heads, which ruled upon earth / and over those y^ dwell
therein. And I beheld / and lo, the head upon the

And the fourtth came, and ouerwanne all the beasts that were paste / and had
power over the world with great fearfulnes, and over the whole compass of the
earth with the most wicked labor, and so long time ^welt he upon the earth
with disceate / and the earth have thou judged not with truth. For thou have
troubled the meke, thou haste hurt the peaceable and quyete, thou have loved
liars, and destroyed y^ dwellynges of the^ that brought forth fruit, and have
cast down the walls of such as did y^ no harm. Therefore is thy wrongeous
dealing and blasphemye come up unto the Highest, and thy pride unto the Mighty.
The Highest also has looked upon the proud times, and behold / they are ended,
and their abhomynacyons are fulfilled. And therefore appear no more thou Aegle,
and thy horrible wings, and thy wicked feathers, and thy ungracious heads, and
thy sinful claws, and all thy vain body: that the earth may be refreshed /
and come again to her self / when she is delivered from thy vyolence / and
that she may hope for the judgment and mercy of him that made her.

CAPI. XII.
AND it happened when y^ Lion spoke

And he said unto me: this is the interpretacyon of this sight. The Aegle whom
thou saw come up from the sea, is the kingdom Danie. 7. c.
which was seen in the vysyon of thy brother Daniel, but it was not expounded
unto him / for now I declare it unto ye, Behold

And where as thou saw three heads resting / this

Therefore write all these things y^ thou have seen in a book, and hyde the^ /
and teach the^ the wise in y^ people, whose hearts thou know may
comprehend and keep these secrets. But wayt thou here thy self yet seuene
days mo, that it may be showed the, whatsoever it pleases the Highest to
declare unto the, and with that he went his way.

And when all the people perceived / that the seven days were past / and I not
come again into the city / they gathered the^ all together from y^ least unto
the most, and came unto me, and said: what have we offended the^ and what
evil have we done against the, that thou forsakest us / and syttest here in
this place? For of all people thou only art left us / as a grape of the vine,
and as a candel in a dark place / and as an haven and shype preserved from the
tempest. Have we ^at else aduersite enough, but thou must forsake us? Were it
not better for us / that we had been brent with Syon? For we are not better,
the^ they that dyed there: and they wept with loud voice. Then answered I them
I said: Be of good comfort O Israel / and be not heavy thou house of Jacob:
for the Highest has you in remembrance, and the Myghtie has not forgotten you
in temptacion. As for me / I have not forsaken you, neither am I departed from
you: but am come into this place to pray, for the desolacyon of Syon, that I
might seek mercy for the low estate of your Sa^ctuary. And now go your way
home every man, and after these days will I come unto you. So the people went
their way into the city / like as I ^mom^unded them, but I remained still in
the field seven days / as the Angel bad me / and did eat only of the
flowers of the field / and had my meat of the herbs in those days.

CAPI. XIII.
AND it happened after y^ seven days,

After these I saw / and behold, there was gathered together a multitude of
men out of nombre from the four wyndes of the heaven / to fight against the
man / that came out from the sea. And I looked / and behold, he graued him
self a great mountain, and flewe up upon it. But I would have seen the border
or place, wherout the hill was graued / and I could not.

I saw after these, that all they which came to fight against him, were sore
afraid and yet burst they fight. Nevertheless, when he saw the fearsnesse and
violence of the people / he neither lift up his hand nor held sword, nor
any weape^: but only (As I saw) he sent out of his mouth / as it had been a
blast of fire, and out of his lyppes the wind of the flamme: and out of his
tongue be cast out sparks and storms, and they were all myxte together: the
blast of fire, the wind of the flammes, and the great storm, and fell with a
russhe upon the people, which was prepared to fight and brent them up
euerychone: so that of the innumerable multitude there was nothing seen / but
only dust and smoke. When I saw this: I was afraid.

Afterward saw I the same man come

Then was I sick through great fear, and I a waked, and said: thou have
showed thy servant all thy wonders from the beginning / and haste counted me
worthy, that thou myghtest receive my prayer, show me now yet the
interpretacion of this dream. For thus I consydre in my understanding: Woe
unto them that shall be left in those days and much more woe unto the^ that
are not left behind: for they that were not left / were in heaviness.

Now understand I the things that are laid up in the latter days which
shall happen unto them / and to those that are left behind. Therefore are they,
come into great parelles / and many necessities / like as these dreams
declare. Yet is it easier, y^ he which suffered hurt / come in these, then to
pass away as a cloud out of the world, and now to se the things that
shall happen in the last

Then answered he me / and said: The interpretacion of the sight shall I show
the, and I will open unto the, the thing y^ thou have required. For thou have
spoken of them that are left behind / and this is the interpretacyon. He that
takes away the parell in that time, has kept him self. They that be fallen
into harm, are such as have works and faith unto the Most myghtie. know this
therefore / that they which be left behind, are more blessed, the^ they that
be deed. This is the meaning of the visyon. Where as thou saw a man
coming up from ye deep of the sea, the same is he whom God the Highest has
kept a great season, which by his own self shall deliver his creature, and
he shall order the^ that are left behind. And where as y^ saw, that out of
his mouth there came a blast of wind, fire and storm, and how that he lift
up nether sword nor weapen / but that the rushynge in of him destroyed the
whole multitude, that came to fight against him: it signifies, that ye days
come, wha^ God will deliver them that are Mat. (...). ^.
one people against another, and one realm against another, when this comes
to pass / then shall the tokens come, that I showed the before: and the^ shall
my son be declared, whom you saw clyme up as a man. And when all the people,
hear his voice, every man shall in their own land leave the battayll yt they
have one against another / and an innumerable multitude shall be gathered
together / as they that be willing to come / and to overcome him by fighting.
But he shall stand upon the top of the mount Syo^. Nevertheless Syon shall
come, and shall be showed, being prepared and builded for all men, like as thou
saw the hill graven forth without any hands. But my son shall rebuke the
people ye are come, for their wyckednes, with the tempest, and for their evil
ymagynacyons: and their pains wherewith they shall be punyshed, are lyckened unto
the flamme: and with out any labor / shall he destroy them / even by the
law / which is compared unto the fire.

And where as thou saw, that he gathered another peaceable people unto hi^:
those are the ten tribes which were carried away presoners out of their own
land, 4. Re. 17. a.
in the time of Oseas the king / whom Salmanasar the king of Assyria took
presoner, and carried them over the water, and so came they into another land.

But they gave them this council, that they should leave the multitude of the
Heathen, and to go forth into a forther country where never mankind dwelt:
that they might there keep their statutes, which they never kept in their own
land. And so they entered in at the narowe passages of the water of Euphrates /
and God showed tokens for them, E^o. (...). Iosu^. ^. (...)
and held still the floude till they were passed over: for through ye country
there was a great way, namely of a year and a half journey, for the same
regyon is called Asareth. Then dwelt they there unto the latter time: and when
they come forth again, the Highest shall hold still the sprenges of the stream
again, that they may go through, therefore saw thou the multitude with
peace. And they that he left behind of thy people, are those that be found
within my border. Now when he destroys the multitude that is gathered
together, he shall defend his people that remain, and then shall he show
them great wonders.

Then said I O Lord, Lord, show me this, wherefore have I seen the man
coming up from the deep of the sea? And he said unto me: Like as thou can
nether seek out nor know these things that are in the deep of the sea, even
so may thou not se my son, or those that be with him / but in the time of
the day. This is the interpretacyon of the dream which you saw, therefore
thou only art here lyghtened: for thou haste forsaken thine own law, and
applied thy dylygence unto mine, and sought it. 3. (...)
Thy life have thou ordered in wisdom, and Pro^^. ^^. ^
haste called understanding thy mother, and therefore have I showed the, the
treasure of the Highest. After three days I will show the more, and talk with
the at more large / ye heavy and wondrous things will I declare unto the.

Then went I forth into the field, geuyng praise and thanks greatly unto God,
because of his wonders which he did in time / and because he governs the
same / and such as is in time / and there I sat three days.

God appears unto Esdras in the bush, and shows him what he shall do.

CAPI. XIIII.
UPON the third day I sat under an oak tree / then came there a voice Exods.
(...). ^
In the bush did I appear unto Moses / and talked with him / when my people
served in Egypt / and I sent him / and led my people out of Egypt / and
brought him upon the mount Syon / where I held him by me a long season, and
told him my wondrous worckes / and showed him the secrets of the times and
the end, and commanded him, saying: These words shall thou declare, and not
hyde them. And now I say unto the, that thou lay up in thine heart the
dreams that thou have seen / and the interpretacions which I have showed the:
for thou shalt be received of all, thou shall be turned and remain with my
council, and with such as be like the, until the times be ended. For the
world has lost his youth, and the times begin to wax old. For the time is
divided into twelve parts / and ten parts of it are gone all redye / and
half of the tenth part: yet remains there yt which is after the half of the
tenth part.

Therefore, prepayre and order thy house / and refourme thy people: comfort
such of Mat. ^4. a 2 John. 2. c
For the weaker that the world and the time is / the more shall sin and
wyckednes increase in them that dwell upon earth. For the truth is fled far
away, and lesyng is hard at hand. For now hastes the vysion to come / that
thou have seen.

Then answered I before the, and said: Behold Lord, I will go as y^ have
commanded me, and refourme the people which are present But they y^ shall be
borne afterward, who wylexhorte or rebuke the^? Thus the world is set in
darkness: and they that owel therein, are with out light: for thy law is kyndled,
because no man knows the things that are done of the, or y^ shall be done.
If I have found grace before the, se^de the holy ghost into me, and I shall
write all that has been done in the world seus the beginning / which was wryt
ten in thy law, that me^ may find the path, and that they which will live in
the latter days, may live.

And he answered me, saying: Go thy way gather the people together, and say
unto them that they seek the not for fourtye days, but look thou gather the
many box trees / and take with the Sarea, Dabria, Selemia, Ecanus and Asiel /
these five / which are ready to write swyftely / and come hither / and I shall
light a candle of understanding in thine heart, which shall not be put out /
till the things be performed which thou shall begin to wryt. And then shall
thou declare some things openly unto the perfect, and some things shall thou
show secretly unto the wise. Tomorowe this hour shalt thou begin to write.

Then went I forth (as he commanded Deute. 4. d
which they kept not / which ye also have transgressed after them. Then was
this land and the land of Syon parted among you by lot to possess. But your
fathers and ye your selves also have done unrighteousness, and have not kept
the ways which the Highest commanded you. And for so much as he is a
rightuous judge, he took from you in time the thing that he had given you. And
now are ye here and your brethren among you. Therefore if so be that ye will
subdue your own understanding, and refourme your heart, ye shall be kept
alive, and after death shall ye obtain mercy. For after death shall the
judgment come / when we shall live again: and then shall the names of the
ryghtuous be manifest, and the worckes of the ungodly shall be declared. Let no
man therefore come now unto me, nor ask any question at me these fourtye days.

So I took the five men (as he commanded Ezech. 3. ^. Apoca. x. d
open thy mouth, and drink that I give the. Then opened I my mouth, and
behold, he reached me a full cup which was full as it were with water / but y^
cou^er of it was like fire. And I took it and drancke. And when I had droncke
it / my heart had understanding, and wisdom grew in my breast: for my sprete
was kept in remembrance, and my mouth was opened and shut no more. The highest
gave understanding un to the five men / that they wrote the hye things of the
night / which they understood not But in the night they did eat bread: as for
me / I spoke in the day and held my tongue by night. In. xl. days, they wrote
two hundredth and four books.

And it happened when the fourtye days were fulfilled / that the Highest spoke,
saying: The first that thou have written / speak openly, the worthy and
unworthy may read it. But keep the. lxx. last / that thou may show it only
to such as be wise among thy people. For in them is the spring of
understanding, the fountain of wisdom, and the stream of knowledge. And I
did so.

The punishment that evil people shall have, which God commands Esdras to
show unto them.

CAPI. XV.
Behold, speak thou in the ears of my

Therefore says the Lord: I will hold my tongue no more unto their wickedness
/ which they do so ungodly: nether will I suffer the^ in the things / that
they deal with all so wyckedly. Behold Apoc. vi b. and. xix. a.
the innocente blood of the troubled cries unto me, and y^ souls of the
rightuous complain continually: and therefore (says the Lord) I will surely
avenge, and receive unto me all the innocent blood from among them.

Psalm. 44. c. Rom^, ^ c 1. Cor. 4. b.
Behold / my people / is led as a flock of sheep to be slain / I will not
suffer them now to dwell in Egypt / but will bring the^ out with a mighty
hand and a stretched out arm, and smite it with plages as before, and will
destroy all the land of it. Egypt shall mourn, and the foundacions of it
shall be smytten with the plage and punishment, that God shall bring upon it.

They that till the ground^, shall mourn:

Behold, I gather and call together all the Kings of the earth which are from
the

Behold, an horrible vysyon comes

And then shall the Dragons have the upper hand, not remembryng their birth,
and shall turn about swearynge together in great power, to persecute them.
But these shall be afraid, and keep silence at their power and shall fle: and
one out of the land of the Assirians shall besege them, and consume one of them
/ and in their host shall be fear and dread, and strife among their kings.

Behold clouds from the East, and from

And then shall there come great raynes from the South and from the North,
and part from the West, and from the stormy wind from the East, and shall
shut the^ up again and the cloud which he raised up in wrath, and the star
to cause fear toward y^ East and west wind, shall be destroyed: and the great
clouds shall be lift up, and the myghtie clouds full of wrath / and the
star / that they may make all the earth afraid and them that dwell therein*
and that they may pour out over all places an horrible star / fire and
hayle and flyenge sweardes / and many waters: that all feldes may be full, and
al ryuers / and they shall break down the cities and walls, mountains and
hills / al trees, wood / and the grass of the meadows / and al their fruit.
And they shall go steadfast unto Babylon / and make her afraid / they shall come
to her and besege her / the star and all wrath shall they pour out upon her.

Then shall the dust and smoke go up unto

Therefore says God: I will send plages upon the / wyddowhode, pouerte /
ho^gre, wars / and pestylence / to wast thy houses with destruction and
death, and the glory of thy power shall be dried up as a flower, when the heat
rises yt is sent over the: Thou shall be sick as a pore wife that is plaged
and beaten of weme^: so that the myghtie and lover shall not be able to receive
the. Would I so hate the says the Lord? If thou had not always slain my
chosen, exalting the stroke of thy hands / and said over their death / when
thou wast dronken: set forth the beauty of thy countenance.

The reward of thy whoredom shall be recompensed the in thy bosom / therefore
shall tho^ receive reward.

Like as thou have done unto my chosen (says the Lord) eue^ so shall God do
unto

In the passage they shall cast down the slain city, and shall rote out one
part of thy land, and consume the porcyon of glory. They shall tread the
down like stubble, and they shall be thy fire and shall consume the: thy cities
and thy land, thy wood and thy fruitful ^rees shall they burn up with the
fire. Thy children shall they carry away captive, and look what y^ have, they
shall spoil it, and mar the bewtye of thy face.

The Heathen shall be punysshed.

CAPI. XVI.
WOE be unto the Babylon and Asia, woe be

Behold the plages are sent, and shall not

/ honger, and plage / trouble and anguysh are sent, as scourges for
amendeme^t. But for all these things they shall not turn from their
wickedness, nor be always mind full of the scourges.

Behold, vitailes shall be so good cheap

Even so in those days there shall be three

O my people, hear my word / make you ready to the battle: and in all evil
be even as pylgrems upon earth. 1. Cor ^
He that sells / let him be as he that flies his way: and he that byeth as
one that will see. Whosoever occupyeth marchaundyes / as he that wynneth not: and
he that buyldeth / as he that shall not dwell therein: he that sows, as one
that shall not reap: he that twysteth the vineyarde, as he that shall not
gather the grapes: they that mary / as they that shall get no children: and they
that mary not: as the wyddowes: and therefore Psa. (...) Prou(...) Eccle x. ^
they that labor, labor in vain For strangers shall reap their fruits, and
spoil their goods, overthrow their houses, and take their children captive,
for in captivity and hongre shall they get children. And they that occupye their
marchaundies with robbery, how long deck they their cytyes / their houses /
their possessions / and persons? the more will I punyshe them for their
sins, says the Lord. Like as an whore enuyeth an honest woman / so shall
ryghtuousnes hate iniquite, when she decketh her self / and shall accuse her
to her face, when he comes that defends / which shall make inquisicion for
all sin upon earth. And therefore be not ye like thereunto, nor to the works
thereof: for or ever it be long, iniquite shall be taken away out of the earth /
and righteousness shall raygne among you.

Let not the symer say / that he has not Gene. li
For he spoke but the word: let the earth be made / and it was made: let the
heaven be made, and it was made. In his word were the statres made / and he
knows the no^bre of them. He searches the ground of the deep, and the
treasures thereof: he has measured the see^ and what it conteyneth. He has
shut the sea in the myddest of the waters* and with his word has he hanged
the eart^ upon the waters. He spredeth out the heauen^ like a vawte, upon the
waters has he founded it. In the deserte and dry wyldernes has he made
springes of water / and poles upon the top of the mountains / that the
floudes might pour down from the stony rocks to water the earth. He made
man / and put his heart in the myddest of the body / and gave him breath / life
and understanding, ye and the sprete of the Almighty God, which made al
things, and has serched the ground of all the secrets of the earth.

He knows your ymagynacyons and inuencions / and

For unto the places there shall be a place / and in the next cytyes a great
insurreccyon

Who so keeps my commandments and precepts (says the Lord God) let not
your sins weye you down / and let not your vnryghtuousnesse be lift up.
Woe be unto them that are subdued unto their sins / and tangled in their
wickedness: like as a field is hedged in with busshes / and the path thereof
covered with thorns, that no man may travail through: and so is he taken / and
cast in the fire / and brent.

The end of the. iiij. Book of Esdras.
Here be ginneth the Book of Tobias.
Tobias being taken prisoner, forsakes not the law of truth. The mercy and
charity of Tobias and the manners of him in his youth. He takes Hannah to wife.
by whom he has a son named Tobias. He succoureth Gabel with money. He and
his are feign to fly, but after the death of Dennaherib they return again.

CAPI. I.
TObias was of the try

Though he was taken presonerin the days of Salmanasar king of the Assyrya^s
nevertheless being in captivity, he forsook not the way of truth: In so
much y^ what soever he might ger / he parted it daily with his fellows
presoners and brethren / that were of his kynred. And though he were younger
then all in the tribe of Nepthali, yet did not he behave him self childeshly
in his works And when all the other went to y^ golden calves, which Ieroboa^
the king of Israel had made he him self alone fled al their companies and gat
him to Jerusalem unto y^ temple of the Lord, and there worshypped y^ Lord God
of Israel, faithfully offering of all his first fruits and tithes, so that
in the third year he ministered all the tithes unto the strangers and
conuertes. These and such like things did he observe according to the law of
God, when he was yet but young.

But when he was a man, he took out of his

Now when he with his wife, his son and with all his kynred was come in
captivity unto the city of Niniue / what time as they al did eat of the
meats of the Heathen / he kept his his soul / and was never defiled in their
meats. And for so much as he was myndeful of the Lord in all his heart. God
gave him favor in the sight of Salmana far the king / which gave him power
to go where he would, and so had he liberty to do whatsoever him list.

So went Tobias unto all them y^ were to Rages a city of the Medes, having
ten tale^tes of silver (of the things where with the king had honored him)
and saw among a great company of people of his kynred / one Gabelus (which
was of his own tribe) being in necessite, he gave hi^ the said weight of
silver under an hand writing.

After a long season when Salmanasar the king was deed, and Sennaherib his
son reigned in his stead, which hated the children of Israel, Tobias went
daily through out al his kynred / and comforted the^, and gave of his goods to
every one of them / as much as he might: he fed the hongrie, clothed the naked,
and buried the dead and slain and that diligently.

And when Sennaherib the king came

Tobias byddeth such of his friends as fear God, to a Ban^quet or Feast. He
is reproved of his friends He fears God more then the King He becomes
blind by the permyssyon and sufferaunce of God, His kynsfolckes mock him.

CAPI. II.
AFter these things upon a solemn

But when the Sun was down, he

It happened upon a day, that he had buried

For like as blessed Job was had in derysion

And when her husband herd it cry / he said: look y^ it be not stolle^ /
restore it again to the owners: for it is not lawful for us / to eat or to
touch any thing of theft. Then was his wife angry, and said: Now is thy hope
become vain openly / and thy alms deeds are manifest. With these and such
like words did she cast him in the tethe.

The prayer of Tobias. Sara the daughter of Raguel is sclaundred of her fathers
servant. The prayer and fasting of Sara. And also the innocency and chastyte
of her. The prayers of Tobias and of Sara are herd.

CAPI. III.
THen Tobias took it heuely / and with brought into captivity, into death /
into derision and shame unto al nations, among whom thou have scatred us. And
now O Lord, thy judgments are great, for we have not done according to thy
commandments, nether have we walcked innocently before the. And now O
Lord, deal with me according to thy will / and command my sprete to be
received in peace, for more expedyente were it for me to dye / then to live.

At the same time it happened / that Sara

Upon the third day it chanced, y^ when

Now peradventure either I have been unworthy

For thou have no pleasure in our dampnacyon: and why? after a storm thou
makeste the wether fair and still: after weeping and heaviness thou geuest great
joy. Thy name O God of Israel be praised for ever. At the same time were both
their prayers herd in the sight of the majesty of the highest god. And Raphael
the holy Angel of the Lord was sent to help them both, whose prayers came at
one time together before God.

CAPI. IIII.
Tobias thynckynge to dye gives a goodly exhortacyon and monycion to his son.

SO when Tobias thought his prayer to be herd / that he might dye / he called
unto him his son Tobias and said unto him: My son, hear the words of my
mouth and lay them in thine heart as a foundation When God takes away my
soul, burye thou my body and hold thy mother in honor all the days of her
life. For thou ought to remember, what and how great parels she suffered
for the in her womb. And when she also has fulfilled the time of her life /
bury her beside me. Have god in thy thought all the days of thy life, and
beware / least at any time thou consent unto sin, and lest thou let slyppe
the commandments of the Lord our God.

Give alms of thy goods, and turn never

My son / keep the well from all whordome,

Whosoever works any thing for the / immediately give him his hire, and look
that thy hired servants wages remain not by the over night. Look that thou
never do unto another man / the thing that thou would not another man should
do unto y^. Eat thy bred with the hongrye and poor / and cover the naked with
thy clothes. Set thy bredde and wine upon the burial of the righteous* and do
not thou eat and drink thereof with the synnees. Ask ever council at the wise.

Be always thanckefull unto God / and beseech him / that he will order thy
ways / and y^ whatsoever y^ deuysest or take in hand / it may remain in
him. I certyfie the also my son, y^ (when thou wast yet, but a babe) I
delivered ten tale^tes of silver unto Gabelus, at Rages a city of the Medes,
and his hand wryttynge have I by me. And therefore seek some means, how y^
may come by him / and receive of him the said weight of silver / and give
him his handwrytyng again.

My son, be not afraied: truth it is we lead here a poor life: but great
good shall we have / yt we fear God, and depart from all sin / and do well:

The obedyence of young Tobias to his father, which is sent into Rages. An
Angel accompanyeth with him in his journey.

CAPI. V.
THEN answered Tobias his father /

And Tobias said unto him? know y^

Now when the Angel came in / he saluted him, and said: Joy be with y^
forever more.

Then answered Tobias, and said: well,

Would God that money had never been, for the which thou have sent him away.
If we had been content with our pouerte, this had been great riches unto us /
that we saw our son here. Then said Tobias unto her: weep not, our son
shall come to us again safe and sound, and thine eyes shall se him. For I
trust, that the good Angel of God shall bear him company, and order well all the
things that he does: so yt he shall come to us again with joy. At these
words his mother left of from weeping, and held her tongue.

Young Tobias is delivered from the fyshe, by the angel The Angel exhorts
Tobias to take ^ar^ to his wife.

CAPI. VI.
SO Tobias went on his way / and a dog land. And the fyshe begane to leap
at his fete.

Then said the Angel unto him: take

The Angel answered him and said: If thou layeste a piece of the heart upon
the coals / the smoke thereof dryueth away all manner of evil sprytes /
whether it be from man or from woman, so that from thence forth the same shall
come no more unto the^. The gall is good to anointe or to stryke the eyes
withal / where as there is any blemith in then, so that they shall be whole.

And Tobias said unto him: where wylt

Then said ye Aungel Raphael unto him:

And in the first night, roast the liver of the fysh. and the deuel shall be
driven away. The second night shall thou be received into the company of the
holy patriarchs. The third night shall thou obtain y^ blyssyng of God so that
whole children shall be borne of you. After the third night take the maiden in
the fear of God, and more for the desire of children, then for any fleshly
lust: that in the sede of of Abraham thou may optaine the blessing in
children.

Young Tobias and the Angel come to the house of Raguell. He requyieth
Raguels daughter to wife and obtayneth her.

CAPI. VII.
THen went they into Raguell, which

Now when they had talked together, Raguel

And while he stood so in doubt and gave the young man no answer, the aungel
said unto him: Fear not to give him thy daughter, for unto this man that
fears God, belongs thy daughter to wife, therefore might none other have her.

Then said Raguell: I doubt not / but his daughter / and gave her into the
right hand of Tobias, and said: The God of Abraham / the God of Isaac / and
the God of Jacob be with you, join you together, and fulfill his blessyng in
you. And they took a letter, and made a writing of the marriage. And the^ made
they merry, and praised God. And Raguell called Anna his wife unto him / and bad
her prepare another chamber and thither he brought Sara his daughter and she
wept. Then said be unto her: Be of good chere my daughter / the Lord of
heaven give the joy, for the heaviness that thou have suffered.

The Angel binds the devil. Tobias exhorts his wife to prater, and they
pray three days before they lie together.

CAPI. VIII.
Now after that they had supped / they

For we are the children of holy men and we may not come together as the
Heathen / that know not God.

Then stood they up both together / and Gene. ii. a.
moulde of the earth / and gave him Eua for an helper And now Lord thou
know that it is not because of voluptuousnes / y^ I take these sister of mine
to wife, but only for the love of children / in who^ thy name be blessed for
ever. And Sara said: have mercy upon us (O Lord) have mercy upon us / and let
us both come whole and sound together to a good age.

And about y^ cock crowynge it happened / that

And immediately Raguel commanded his servants / to fill the grave / that
they had made / with earth / a fore it was light / and bade his wife prepare a
feast / and to make ready all things that were necessary for meat / to such
as went by the way.

He caused two fat kyne also / and four wethers to be slain, and meats to be
prepared for all his neyhbours and friends. And Raguel charged Tobias to
remain with hi^ two wekes. As for all the good that he had, he gave Tobias the
half of it, and made this writing, that the half which remained, should
fall unto Tobias after their death.

The aungel goes to Gabellus, at the desire of Tobias which desyuereth the
letter, and receaueth the ^uonye.

CAPI. IX.
THEN Tobias called unto him the

Then took Raphaell four of Raguels servants, and two Camels, and went unto
Rages the cite of the Medes: and when he had found Gabelus he gave him his
ha^dwrityng, and received all the money. He told him also of Tobias the son
of Tobi, how

Tobias and his wife are sad for the t^riau^c^ of their son. Raguel seudeth
again. Tobias with his wife.

CAPI. X.
NOw while young Tobias made long

But Raguell said unto his son in law* O carry here, and I shall send a
messaunger

So when Raguell prayed Tobias with many words, and would in no wise hear him
/ he delivered Sara unto him, and the half part of all his good: in servants
and handmaydens, in sheep, in Camels, and in kyne, and much money, and so sent
him away from him with peace and joy, and said: The holy angel of the Lord
be with you

Young Tobias leuing his wife and household in the mydhe way / comes before
with the Aungel The ^^came of his mother loking after her su^ne. He is (...)
received of his father and mother. Sar^ comes seven dares ^^t^r.

CAPI. XI.
AS they now were going home ward

So the blind father arose and began gave a servant his hand, ran to mete
his son, received him, and kyssed him, he and his wife / and they began to
weep for joy.

Now when they had worshypped and thanked God / they sat down. Then took
Tobias of the fyshes gall / and anointed his fathers eyes: and tarried helfe an
hour and than began the blemysh to go out of his eyes like as it had been
the white skine of an egg: which Tobias took / and drew from his eyes, and
immediately he received his sight.

Then they praised God, he and his wife,

Young Tobias rechened by unto his father the pleasures that the angel did
him. He offered unto the angel holfe the goods that he brought with him.

CAPI. XII.
THen Tobyas called his son unto

So the father and the son called him /

Wherefore I tell you the truth, and will

When they heard this / they were sore

You thought that I did G^. x^^^* ^ Iudi, (...)*
eat and drink with you / but I use meat that is inuysyble / and drink
that cannot be seen of men,

Now therefore is the time that I must rurne again, unto him that sent me:
but be ye thanckfull unto God, and tell out all his wondrous worckes.

And when he had spoken these words / he was taken away out of their syghte /
so that they saw him no more. Then tell they down flat upon their faces by the
spaces of three hours, and praised God: when they rose up, they told all his
wondrous worckes.

Tobias the elder gives thanks unto God.

CAPI. XIII.
THen old Tobias opened (...) mouth

For among the Heathen which know him not has he scatered you, to the
intent that ye should show forth his marvelous worckes: and cause them for to
know, that there is none other God almyghtye but he. He has chastened us for
our misdeeds / and for his own mercy sake shall he save us.

Consydre then, how he has dealt with you / and praise him with fear and
dread, and magnyfye the everlasting king in your worckes. I will pray him
even in the land

Cursed shall they be that despise the / and all that blaspheme the / shall be
condemned: but blessed shall they be that build the up. As for the / thou
shall rejoice in the chyldre, for they all shall be blessed / and gathered
together unto the Lord. Blessed are they all that love the / and that be glad
of thy peace. Praise thou the Lord, O my soul, for the Lord our God has
delivered his city Jerusalem from all her troubles. I will count my self
happy / if my sede remain to se the clearnes of Jerusalem.

The gates of Jerusalem shall be builded with Saphyre and Smarage / and all the
compass of her walls with precious stones. All her streets shall be paued with
white marble stone / and in all streets shall Alleluya be song. Praised be the
Lord / which has exalted her / that his kingdom may be upon her for
evermore. Amen. And so Tobias made an end of his talking.

Tobias prophecyeth the destruction of Niniue His so^me returned to Raguel,
alter the decesse of h^ father and mother.

CAPI. XIIII.
AND after that Tobias had gotten his sight again, he lived. xlii* years, and

But in the hour of his death he called

And therefore my children, hear your father:

After the death of his mother, Tobyas

The end of the book of Tobias.
: The book of Judith.
The buyidynge of Egbathanis. The vyctory of Nabuchodonosor against Arphaxat.
The messengers of Nabuchodonosor are despised.

CAPI I.
ARphaxat the King of

So in the twelfth year of his raygne it

Then was y^ Kingdom of Nabuchodonosor exalted, and his heart was lift up and
he sent unto all them y^ dwelt in Celicea, in Damascus, in Libanus, and unto
y^ Heathen that dwelt in Carmel and Cedar, and to such as dwelt in Galtle in ye
great field of Esdrelon,

Holoferne^ is sent of Nabuchodonosor, to sub due all the world. The
preparacyon and pursuit of Holofernes.

CAPI. II.
IN the thyrtenth year of King Nabuchodonosor,

Then Holofernes called together all the

And when he was gone past the borders of the Assyrians, he came toward the
great mountains of Ange, which lie upon y^ left side of Celicia: and so he
went up into al their castles, and wanne every strong hold. As for the welthy
city of Melothus, he brake it down / and spoiled all the children of Tharsis
and the Ismaelites, which lay toward the wyldernes, and upon the South side
of y^ land of Chelon. He went over Euphrates also, and came into Mesopotamia
and brake down all the hye cities that were there, from

Kings become wyllyngly subject to Holofernes The* tyranny and crueltye* of
him.

CAPI. III.
SO the Kings and Princes of al cities came to Holofernes, and said: Let thy
wrath cease toward us: It is better for us to serve y^ great king
Nabuchdoonosor with our lives, and to be subject unto the, then y^ we should
dye, and be slain, and receive greater hurt. All our cities and possessions,
al mountains and hills, all feldes, great and small catel, sheep, goats,
horses and camels, all our goods and housholdes, be in thy power, under thy
subieccyon be it al together. We our selves also and our children wylbe
thyneowne, come unto us a peaceable Lord, and use our service at thy pleasure.

Then came Holofernes down from the

Nevertheless, though they did this, yet

Israel required help of God, against Holofernes. They f^^t and pray.

CAPI. IIII.
WHen the children of Israel y^ dwelt

Eliachim also the Priest wrote unto all them that dwelte toward Esdrelon
(which lies over against y^ great field by Dothaim) and unto all those by whom
men might have passage unto them, that they should take in the ways of y^
mountains / whereby there might be any way and passage to Jerusalem / and that
they should hold dilygent watch where any strayte was betwixt the mountains.
And the children of Israel did, as Eliachim the Pressed of the Lord had
commanded the^. And all the people cried unto

Then Eliachim the hye Pressed of y^ Lord went round about all Israel, and
spoke unto them saying: Be ye sure / that the Lord will hear your peticyons
/ if ye continue steadfast in fastings and prayers in the sight of the Lord.
Remember Moses the servant of the Lord / which overthrow the Amalechites
(that trusted in their might and power, in their host / in their shyldes in
their charrettes and horsemen) not with weapens, but with holy prayers. Even so
shall all the enemies of Israel be / if ye continue in this work / that ye
have begone. So upon this exhortacyon they continued in prayer before the
Lord. In so much yt they which offered bre^t sacrifyces unto the Lord /
offered the offringes unto the Lord / being arrayed in hearye clothes and had
ashes upon their heads. And they all be sought God from their whole heart / y^
he would vyset his people of Israel.

Holofernes is discontent with the Jews, Iehior ^hewith unto Holofernes the
m^ruelles of God done unto the Jews, for which thing the ^^^ers under
Holofernes were very angry with him.

CAPI V.
AND word came to Holofernes the Prince of y^ wars of the Assyryans, is
their power? Or what manner of Hooste have they? who is their Captain? And why
do they despise us (more then all those that dwell in the East) and come not
forth to mete us, that they might receive us with peace? Then Achior the
Captain of all the Ammonites answered, and said: Sir, if it please the to
hear, I will tell the truth before the concerning this people y^ dwell in the
mountains, and there shall no lie go out of my mouth. This people is of the
generacyo^ Gene xv. ^. Acts. vii. a Exodus xii. f. Gala. iii. c.
four hundredth years, in the which they multiplied so greatly, that their
Host might not be nombred. And when the king of Egypt oppressed them, and
subdued the^ in building of his cities with making of claye and bryck, they
cried unto God their Lord, which punished the whole land of Egypt with
diverse plages.

Now when the King of Egypt let the^

Moreover / they slew the King of the Cananites / Iebusites / Pheresites /
Hethites / Euites / and Amorites / and all y^ mighty in Hesebon / and took
their lands and cities in possession: and so long as they sinned not in the
sight of their God / it went well with the^ / for their God hates
unrighteousness. For in times paste when they went out of

And therefore my Lord, make dilygent inquysyon / if this people have done
wickedness in the sight of their God, then let us go up against them / for
douteles their

Now when Achior had spoken out these words, all the great men of Holofernes
were wroth, amd thought to sleye him / and said one to another: what is he
this / which darre say, that the children of Israel are able to withstand
Nabuchodhnosor the king and his host? where as they are an vnwepened people /
without strength or understanding of the feats of war? That Achior therefore
may know that he has disceaued us / we will go up into the mountains: and
when the mighty men of them are taken, that he also shall be styckte with the
sword, that al people may know, that Nabuchodonosor is the God of the earth,
and that there is none other without him.

Achior is committed into the hands of the Jews by Holofernes. He is tied to
a ^^^e, but is lowsed of the Jews The prayer of the people, Achior is
comforted of the Jews.

CAPI. VI.
SO when they had left of speaking, Holo fernes took sore indignacyon / and
said

So Holofernes commanded his servants to take Achior, and to carry him unto
Bethulia, and to deliver him into the hands of the children of Israel. Then
Holofernes servants took him, and went through the plain field. But when they
drew nigh unto the mountains, the stynge casters came out against them:
Nevertheless they gat them away by the side of the mountain / and bound
Achior hand and foot to a tree / and so left him bound with wythes / and
turned again unto their Lord.

Notwithstanding y^ children of Israel went down from Bethulia / came unto
him / lowsed him / brought him into Bethulia / set him in the myddest of the
people, and asked him what the matter was, that y^ Assirians had left him
bound?

Osias the son of Micha of the tribe of

Now when Oseas had ended the counsel he took him into his house, and made a
great supper, called the elders to it / and so they refresshed them selves
after the fasting. And afterward was all the people called together / which
made their prayers all the nygh^ long in the congregation / and besought the
God of Israel for help.

Bethulia is beseged of Holofernes. The people requyteth help of God. They of
Bethulia would give over the city for want of water. The prayer of the people
with tears and lamentacyon.

CAPI. VII.
THe next day / Holofernes commanded his host / to go up against Bethulia.

Now when the children of Israel saw so great a multitude of the Assirians /
they fell down flat upon the ground / strawed ashes upon their heads, and
prayed with one accord, that the God of Israel would show his mercy upon his
people. And so they took their weapens, and sat betwixt the mountains in the
naro we place, and kept the way day and night. But while Holofernes was
going about / he found the water spring / which from the South side was
conveyed into ye city by a co^dite: this commanded he to be direct another
way / and to cut their co^dite in sunder. There were wells also not far
from the walls / which they used secretly / more for pleasure then for
necessyte.

Then went the Ammonites and y^ Moabytes

And when this watch had endured twentye days / the Cisternes and all that had
water,

When they had spoken out these words,

And when they were so weary with this cryenge and weeping, that they held
their tongues / Osias stood up with watrye eyes / and said: O take good hertes
unto you / (dear brethren) and be of good cheer / and let us wait yet these
five days for mercy of the Lord: peradventure he shall cut away his
indignacyon, and give glory unto his name. But if he help us not when these
five days are paste / we shall do as ye have said.

Of the virtuous woman Judith, which reproves the aunci^^t^s because they
tempted the Lord. She also moves them to encorage and herte^ the people, and
shows her council against the enemies of the Jews.

CAPI. VIII.
AND it happened when these words came to the ears of Judith a wyddow, with
every one, for she feared y^ Lord greatly, and there was no body that spoke an
euel word of her.

When this Judith herd, how Osias had promised the people, yt after the fyfte
day he would give up the cite unto the Assiria^s, she sent for the elders
Cha^bri and Charmy, and when they came to her, she said: what thing is this,
wherein Osias has consented that if god help not wtin five days, he will give
over the city to the Assirians? What are ye, y^ ye tempte the Lord? This
device optayneth no mercy of God, but provoke hi unto wrath and displeasure.
Will ye set the mercy of the Lord a time and appoyute him a day after your
will?

Nevertheless, for so much as the Lord is

Therefore dear brethren, seeing ye are Genesis xxii. a.
our father Abraham being tempted, and tried through many trybulacyons / was
found a lover and friend of God. So was Isaac / so was Jacob / so was Moises /
and al they that pleased God / being tried through many troubles / were found
steadfast in faith. Again / they that received not their te^ptacyons with the
fear of God, but put them selves forth with vnpaciency and murmuring against
God / peryshed of the destroyer / and were slain of serpents. And therefore
should not we undertake to be avenged / for the thing that is done unto us: but
to consydre / that all these punyshementes are far less then our sins and
misdeeds. Beleuinge also that this correccyon comes unto us (as to the
servants of God) for amendment / and not for our destruction.

Then said Osias and the elders unto Judith:

Thus have I devised: Ye shall stand this night before the port / and I will
go forth with Abra my maiden. Pray ye therefore unto God / that he will
graciously remember his people of Israel wtin five days, as ye have said As
for the thing that I go in hand wtal / ask ye no questions of it, till I open
it unto you my self: do ye nothing else but pray unto the Lord our God for me.
Then Osias the prince of the people of Judah said unto her: Go thy way i peace,
the Lord be with the / that we may be aue^ged of our enemies. And so they
went from her again.

The prayer of Judith for the vyctory.

CAPI. IX.
Now when they were gone their way / Iudyth Gene. 34. ^ and. xlix. a
Symeon / which gave him a sword for a defense against the enemies / that
used vyolence and wylfulnes and that rauisshed the vyrgin and put her to
dyshonesty. Thou that gave their wives into a pray / and their daughters into
captivity / and al their pray for a spoil unto thy servants, which bare a
zele unto the, help me wyddowe, O Lord my God / I beseech the. For thou have
done all things from the beginning: and look what thou have taken in hand
and devised, it came ever to pass. For all thy ways are prepared / and thy
judgments are done in thy everlasting for knoweledge. O look now upon the
armies of the Assyrians, like as it was thy pleasure sometime to look upon the
host of y^ Egipcia^s, when they being weapened: persecute thy servants, and
put their trust in their charettes, horsemen / and in the multitude of their men
of war. But you lokedst upon their host / castyng a thycke darkness before
them: and when they came into the deep / the waters overwhelmed them.

Even so Lord, let it go with these / that trust in the power and multitude
of their men

This shall bring thy name an everlasting remembrance, if the hand of a
woman over throw him. For thy power (O Lord) stands not in y^ power of men,
neither have you any pleasure in the strength of horses. There was never proud
person yt pleased the, but in the prayer of y^ humble and meke has thy
pleasure been evermore.

O thou God of the heavens / thou maker

Iudish decketh her self ^o go to Holofernes. The blessing that the Elders
gave Judith. Holofernes is in love with Judith.

CAPI. X.
ANd when she had left of cryeng unto the

The Lord gave her also a special beautye and fayrenes (for all this deckyng
of her self was not done for any voluptuousness and pleasure of the flesh,
but of a right discrecyon and virtue, therefore did the Lord increase her
bewtye) so that she was exceadyng amiable and welfauoured in all men's eyes. She
gave her maid also a botell of wine / a pot with oil, pottage, cake bread and
chese / and went her way.

Now when she came to the port of the

And as she was going down the mountain / it happened that about y^ spring
of the day / the spies of the Assyria^s met with her / and took her, saying:
whence co^mest you? Or whither go you? She answered: I am a daughter of the
Hebrews / and am fled from them: for I know, yt they shall be given unto you to
be spoiled: because they thought scorn to yield the^ selves unto you / that
they might find mercy in your sight. Therefore / have I devised by my self
after this manner: I will go before the prince Holofernes, and tell him al their
secrets, and will show him, how he may come by them, and win them, so that
not one man of his host shall perysh.

And when these men had heard her words, bewty. Then said his servants to
him: who would despise the people of the Jews, that have so fair weme^? Should
we not by reason fight against the^ for these? So when Judith saw Holofernes
sitting in a canapy* that was wrought of purple sylke / gold, Smaradge, and
precious stones, she looked fast upon him, and fell down upon the earth. And
Holofernes servants took her up again / at their Lords commandment.

Holofrenes requires of Judith the cause of her coming which gives him a
^uttell answer.

CAPI. X.
THen said Holofernes unto her: Be of

And Judith said unto him: Sir / understand y^ words of thy hand maiden: for
if you wylt do after the words of thy hand maiden / the Lord shall bring thy
matter to a prosperous effect. As truly as Nabuchodonosor a Lord of the land
lives / and as truly as his power lives, which is in the to the punishment
of al men that go wrong, al me^ shall not only be subdued unto him through the /
but all the beasts also of the field obey him. For all people speak of thy
prudent actyuite, and it has ever been reported, how thou only art good and
mighty in all his kingdom, and thy discrecion is commended in all lands.

The thing is manifest also, that Achior

They suffer great hongre also, and for want of water; they are dead now in
a manner. Moreover, they are appointed to slaye all their catell, that they may
dryucke the blood of them: and are purposed to spend all the holy ornaments
of their God (which he has forbydde^ them to touch) for corn, wine and
oil. Seeing now, that they do

These words pleased Holofernes and all

Holofernes commands that Judith be well entreat ^ She desires lycen^e to
go out in the night c^^^o^ to (...)neth it. ^^ga^ is set unto h^^ to (...) her
to* come into Holofernes to a Banckes, and the comes. Holo^^^^es is (...).

CAPI. XI.
THen commanded he her to go in, where

So his servants brought her into the

And so in the night season she went forth into the valley of Bethulia, and
washed her self in the well water. Then went she up / and besought the Lord
God of Israel that he would prospere her way, for the delyueraunce of his
people. And so she went in / and remained clean in her tente, till she took
her meat in the euenyng.

Upon the fourth day it happened / that

Then went Uagao unto Judith, and said: Let not y^ good daughter be afraied, to
come into my Lord, that she may be honored before him / that she may eat and
drink wine and be merry with him. Unto whom Judith answered: Who am I / that
I should say my Lord nay? whatsoever is good before his eyes / I shall do
it: and look what is his pleasure, that shall I thyncke well done, as long as
I live.

So she stood up / and deckte her self with

Holofernes slepet^^ for very droncke^ne^, and Judith cut ^eth of his head,
and goes there with to her own people of who^^ she is r^^^yued with ^oy. They
give thanks unto God (...) their deliverance. Judith speaks unto Achior.
Which maru^leth at her fe^^e done to Holofernes.

CAPI. XIII.
Now when it was late in the night, his

Then commaunced Judith her maiden, to stand without before the door, and to
wait. And Judith stood before the bed / making her prayer with tearess, and
moved her lyppes secretly, and said: Strengthen me / O Lord God of Israel,
and have respect unto the works of my hands in this hour, y^ thou may
set up thy cite of Jerusalem, like as y^ haste promised: O grant that by the
I may perform y^ thing, which I have devised through the believe that I have
in the.

And when she had spoken this, she went to

And so these two went forth together after their custom, as though they
would pray and so passed by the host, and came through the valey unto the port
of the city. And Iudyth cried a far of unto the watcheme^ upon the walls:
Open the gates (said she) for God is with us, which has showed his power ^
Israel And when they heard her voice, they called the elders of the cite
together. And they came a^ to mete her, little and great, young and old, for
they thought not y^ she should have come so sone. So they lyghted candels, and
gathered a boute her every ^hone: but she went up into an hye place, and
caused silence to be proclaimed.

When every man now held his tongue /

And with that she took forth the head of Holofernes out of the wallet / and
showed it them / saying. Behold the head of Holofernes the captain of the
Assyryans, and this is the canapy, wherein he lay in his droncke^nes: where the
Lord our God has slain h^ by the hand of a woman.

But as truly as the Lord lives / his Angel has kept me, going thither /
remaynyng there, and coming hither again from thence. And the Lord has not
suffered me his hand maiden to be defiled / but without any fylthines of sine
has he brought me again unto you: and that with great vyctorye, so y^ I am
escaped, and ye delivered / O give thanks unto him euerychone, for he is
gracious and his mercy endures for ever.

So they praised the Lord al together, and

Blessed be y^ Lord, the maker of heaven and earth, which has gyded y^ a right
to wound and to smite of the head of the Captain of our enemies. For this
day he has made thy name so honorable, ye thy praise shall never come out of
the mouth of me^ / which shall always remember the power of the Lord / seying:
thou have not spared thine own self, but put the in ^eopardy, considering the
anguysh and trouble of thy people, and so have helped their fall before God our
Lord. And all the people said. Amen. Amen.

Achior also was called, and he came. Then

The council of Judith. Achior being an Heathen man, turns to God. The
Assirians are afraid of the Jews.

CAPI. XIIII.
Judith said unto all the people* Brethren,

Then Achior seying y^ power of God which he had showed unto y^ people of
Israel, fell of from hes Heathenish belefe, and put his trust in God, and let
him self be circumcised, and so was he no^bred among the people of Israel, he
and all his posterite unto this day.

Now as soon as it was day, they styckt

But when the captains and princes and all the chief in the king of the
Assyria^s host came together, they said unto the Cha^berlay^es. Go your way in
and wake him up, for the myse are crept out of their holes, and darre provoke
us unto battle.

Then went Uagao into his chamber /

But when he had herkened perfectly with his ears / and could perceive no
sterynge, he went nyer to the bed / and lift it up, and the^ saw he ye deed
body of Holofernes lye^ge there without a head / weltred in his blood upon the
earth. Then cried he with loud voice / and with weeping rent his clothes /
and went into Iudithes tent, and found her not: And so he leapt out unto the
people and said: one woman of y^ Jews, has brought all Nabuchodonosors
people to shame. For lo / Holofernes lies upon the ground and has no head.

When y^ chief of the Assyrians host herd that, they rent their clothes, and
there fell an intolerable fear and trembling upon the^, so that their minds
were sore afraid. And there was an exceeding great cry in the whole host.

The flight of the Assyryans / The ^^^su^^ of Israel after (...). Israel
becomes ^^che, by the spoils of the Assyria^s Judith is praised of Ioachim
and of the people.

CAPI. XV.
NOw when al y^ host herd y^ Holofernes them, that they undertook to defend
the^ selves by flieng away: one spoke not to another but hanged down their
heads, left all behind them / and made haste to escape from the Hebrews: for
they herd / that they were hastyng to come after with their weapens, and so
they fled by the ways of the feldes / and through all the fo^e paths of the
dales.

And when the children of Israel saw that they fled / they followed upon them
/ and went down with trompettes / blowyng and making a great cry after
them. As for the Assirians, they had no order and kept not the^ selves
together, but fled their way. Nevertheless, the cyldren of Israel fell upon
them with one company and order / and discomfited as many as they might get.
And Os^as sent messaungers unto all the cytyes and countrees of Israel.

So all the regyons and every city sent

Now when she came out unto them / they

In thyrty days could the people of Israel scarce gather up the spoils of
the Assirians. But all that belongs unto Holofernes / and had been his
specially (whether it were of gold / of silver, precious stones / clothyng, and
al ornaments) they gave it unto Judith. And all the people reioysed / both
women / maidens / and young people / with pypes and harpes.

The ^onge of Judith for the vyctory. After the v^c^^^ye o^tayned, the people
comes to Jerusalem, to worship and praise God.

CAPI. XVI.
THen song Judith this song unto the

He would have carried away my children Judgment wylhe vyset the^. For he shall
give fire and worms into their flesh, that they may burn and feel it for
evermore.

After this it happened / that after the

So after these days / every man went home again, and Judith was in great
reputacyon at Bethulia / and right honorably taken in all the land of Israel.
Unto her virtue also was chastyte joined / so that after her husband Manasses
dyed / she never knew man all the days of her life. Upon the hye solemn
days she went out with great worship. She dwelt in her husbands house an
hundred and five year, and left her hand maiden fr^, and dyed, and was buried
beside her husband in Bethulia. And all the people mourned for her seven days.
So long as she lived / there was none that troubled Israel / and many years
also after her death. The day wherein this vyctory was gotten / was solemp^y
holden, and rekened of the Jews in the no^^er of the holy days, and it is yet
greatly holden of y^ Jews ever se^ce / unto these day.

The end of the Book of Iudyth.
: The reaste of the Chapters of the book of Esther which are nether found in
the Hebrew, nor in the Chalde.
The dream of Mardocheus.

The. xi. Chapter after the Latin.
MArdocheus the son of Iair, the son Semei, the son of Cisei of y^ tribe
of Be^^a^in, a Jew: which had his dwell^ge i^ the cite of Susis, a man of great
reputacion, and excellent among al them y^ were in the kings court*
(Nevertheless, he was one of the presoners / who^ Nabuchodonosor y^ king of
Babilo^ had carried away from Jerusalem unto Babylon with Iechonias the king of
Judah.) In the second year of y^ reign of great Artaxerses in the first day
of the month Nisan, had this Mardocheus such a dreme: He thought he herd a
great tempest / horrible tho^derclappes, erthquakes, and great vproure in the
land, and that he saw two great dragons / ready to fight one against another.
Their cry was great. At the which roaryng and cry all Heathen were up, to
fight against the righteous people. And the same

Mardocheus v^^^^eth the ^reason devised against the King, and to therefore
rewarded of him.

CAPI. XII.
AT the same time dwelt Mardocheus

This the king caused to be put in y^ Cronicles for an everlasting
remembrance / and Mardocheus wrote up y^ same matter. So

The copy of the letters of Artaxerses against the Jews. The prayer of
Mardocheus.

CAPI. XIII.
THe great king Artaxerses which reigns

But Mardocheus thought upon all the

All the people of Israel in like manner cried as earnestly as they could unto
the Lord, for their death and destruccyon stood before their eyes.

The prayer of Es^her for the delyueraunce of her au^ her people.

CAPI. XIIII.
Queen Esther also being i^ the battayl

O my Lord, thou only art our king / help me desolate woman / which have
no helper but the, for my mysery and destruccyon is hard at my hand. Fro my
youth up I have hetde out of the kindred of my father y^ thou tokest Israel from
among all people (and so have our fathers of their fore elders) y^ they
should be thy perpetual inherytau^ce / and look what thou did promise the^,
thou have made it good unto them.

Now well Lord, we have sinned before the /

O Lord, give not thy scepter unto them

Thou know my necessite / that I hate the token of my preemynence and
worship, which I bear upon my head / what time as I must show my self and be
seen, and that I abhor it as an unclean cloth, and that I wear it not when
I am quyete and alone by my self. Thou know also that I thy hand maiden
have not eaten at Amans table, and that I have had no pleasure nor de lyte in
the Kings feast / that I have not dro^cke the wine of the drinckoffringes,
and that I thy hand maiden have no joy sense the day that I was brought
hither / unto this day / but only in the O Lord. O thou God of Abraham, O
thou mighty God above all, hear the voice of them, that have none other hope,
and deliver us out of the hand of the wicked / and deliver me out of my fear.

Mardocheus moves Hester to go into the King / and make intercession for her
people / and she performs his request.

CAPI. XV.
MArdocheus also bad Hester go in unto

Nevertheless, God turned y^ kings mind G^ xx^^li. l^
I saw y^ (O Lord) as an Angel of God, and my heart was troubled for fear of
thy magesty and clear nesse: For excellent and wonderful art thou (O Lord) and
thy face is full of amite. But as she was thus speaking unto him, she fell down
again for fayntnes: for the which cause the king was afraied, and all his
servants comforted her.

The Copye of the letters of Arthaxerses, whereby he reuoketh those which he
first send forth.

CAPI. XVI.
THe great King Artaxerses / which

Now is it profitable and good / that we

What time now as Aman the son of Amadathu the Macedonian (a stranger
verily of the persians blood / and far from our goodness) was come in among
us as an aleaunt, and had optained the friendship that we bear toward all
people / so that he was called our father / and had in hye honor of every
man / as the next and principal unto y^ King, he could not forbear him self
from his pride, has undertake not only to rob us of the kingdom / but of our
life.

With manyfolde disceate also has he desired

And upon this ye shall puplysh and set up

Moreover, among the hye sole^pne days y^ ye have ye shall hold this day
also with all gladness: that ^ow and in time to come, this day may be a
remembrance to good / for all such as love the prosperity of the Persians: but
a remembrance of destruccyon to those that be sedycious unto us.

All cities and lands that do not this, shall horribly peryshe and be destroyed
with the sword and fire / and shall not only be no more inhabyted of men / but
be abhorred also of the wild beasts and fowls.

The end of the reast of the book of Esther.
: The book of wisdom.
How we ought to search and inquire after God, and who ^e those that find
him. Of the holy ghost, we ought to fly from backbytynge and murmuring. (...).

CAPI. I.
O Set your affeccion

Therefore, he that speaks unrighteous

O seek not your own death in y^ error

The ymaginacyons and desires of the wicked, and the^e council against the
faithful.

CAPI. II.
FOR the ungodly talk and ymagin

For our time is a very shadow y^ passes away / and after our end there
is no returning, calls him self Gods son. He is the be wrayer of our
thoughts. It greueth us also to look upon him, for his lite is not like other
men's, his ways are of another fashyo^. He counts us but vain persons, he
withdraws him self from our ways as from fylthyues: he commends greatly
the latter end of the iuit, and makes his boast that God is his father. Let
us se then yt his words be true, let us prove what shall come upon him: so
shall we know what end he shall have. For if he be y^ true son of God,

Such things do the ungodly ymagin, and go astraye, for their own wyckednes
has blinded them. As for the mysteries of God, they understand the^ not: they
neither hope for the reward of righteousness, nor regard the worship that
holy souls shall have. For God created man to be vnde stroied: ye after y^
Gene. i. d.
image of his own lyckenesse made he him. Nevertheless through envy of the
deuell came death in to the world: and they that hold of his side, do as he
does.

The conseruatyon and assurance of the ryghteous. The reward of the faithful.

CAPI. III.
BUT the souls of the ryghteous are in the hand of God, and the pain of

The ryghteous shall shine as y^ sparks

Who so despyseth wisdom and uurtoure,

Of the chaste generacyon of the faithful, and of them felicite. Of the death
of the ryghteous, and of the condemn ^yon, of the unfaithful.

CAPI. IIII.
O How fair is a chaste generacyo^ with virtue? The memorial thereof is
immortal /

Age is an honorable thing: nevertheless nor in the multitude of years: but a
man's wisdom is the graye hearre, and an undefiled life is the old age. He
pleased God, and was beloved of him: so that where as he lived among sinners,
he translated him (...). v. s,
Ye suddenly was he taken away, to the intent that wickedness should not
alter his understanding, and that ypocrysie should not be gyle his soul. For
the craftye bewitthynge of lies make good things darck, the vnsted fastness
also and wyckednes of bolupteous desyreturne aside the understanding of the
simple. Though he was soon deed, yet fulfilled he much time: For his soul
pleases God: therefore hasted he to take him away from among the wicked. This
the people se, and understand it not: they lay not up such things in their
hertes, how that the loving favor and mercy of God is upon his saynctes /
and that he has respect unto his chosen.

Thus the ryghteous that is deed, conde^neth

The constantue^ of the ryghteous before their persecuters. The hope or the
unfaithful is vndurable and vain. The blessedness of the saynctes and godly.

CAPI. V.
THEN shall the ryghteous stand in

These are they, whom we sometime had in derisyo^, and iested upon. We fools
thought their life very madness, and their end to be with out honor. But lo
/ how they are counted among the children of God, and their porcyo^ is among
the saints. Therefore we have erred from the way of truth, the light of
righteousness has not shyned unto us, and the sun of understanding rose not
up upon us. We have weried our selves in y^ way of wickedness and
destruction. Tedyous ways have we gone: but as for the way of the Lord we
have not known it.

What good has our pride done unto us? Or, what profyt has the pomp of
riches

Such words shall they that have sinned

Then shall the thonder bolies go out of the lyghtenynges / and come out of the
raynebowe of the clouds to the place appointed: out of y^ hard stony
indignacion there, shall fall thycke hayles, and the water of the sea shall be
wroth against them, and the floudes shall run roughly together. Ye a mighty
wind shall stand up against them, and a storm shall scater them abroad. Thus
y^ unrighteous dealing of the^ shall bring all the land to a wyldernes, and
wyckednes shall overthrow the dwellynges of the mighty.

The calling of Kings, Princes, and Judges: which are also exhorted to
search wisdom.

CAPI. VI.
Wisdom is better then strength, and a man of understanding is more

Unto you therefore (O ye Kings) do I speak / that ye way learn wisdom and
not go amysse. For they y^ keep his ryghteousnes shall be ryghteously judged /
and they that are learned in ryghteous things, shall find to make answer.
Wherefore, set your lust upon my words, and love them, so shall ye come by
nurtour. Wisdom is a noble thing seen and never faydeth away: ye she is
easily of them that love her, and found of such as seek her. She preuenteth
them that desire

Wisdom ought to be preferred before all things.

CAPI. VII.
I My self also am a mortal man like as good things. Now as I my self
learned unfeignedly, so do I make other men partakers of her, and hyde her
riches from no man: for she is an infynite tresure unto me^, which who so use,
become partakers of the love and frendshype of God, and are accepted unto him
for the gifts of wisdom.

God has granted me to talk wisely,

The effect of wisdom.

CAPI. VIII.
Wisdom reaches from one end to

Now when I considered these things by my self / and pondered them in my
heart, how that to be joined unto wisdom is immortalyte / and great pleasure
to have her frendshyp: how that in the worckes of her hands are infynyte
riches, how that, who so keeps company with her shall be wise: and that he
which talks with her, shall come to honor: I went about sekyng, together
unto me. For I was a lad of a ripe wit / and had a good understanding.

But when I grew to more understanding, I came to an undefiled body.
Nevertheless when I perceived that I could not keep my self chaste / except
God gave it me (and that was apoynte of wisdom also / to know whose gift it
was) I stepped unto the Lord / and besought him / and with my whole heart I
said after this manner.

A prayer of Solomon to obtain wisdom.

CAPI. IX.
O God of my fathers / and Lord of mercyes (thou that haste made all things
Gene. ^. ^
domynyon over the creature which thou haste made: that he should order the
world according to equity and ryghtuousnes / and execute judgment with a
true heart) give me wisdom, which is ever about thy seat, and put me not out
from among thy children: for I thy servant and son of thy handmayden, and a
feeble person / of a short time / and to young to the understanding of
judgment and the laws. And though a man be never so perfect among the
children of men / yet if thy wisdom be not with him / he shall be nothing
regarded. But thou have chosen me to be a king unto thy people / and the judge
of thy sons and daughters.

Thou have commanded me to build a

The delyueraunce of the righteous comes through wisdom.

CAPI. X.
Wisdom preserved the first man, Gene. (...). ^.
moulde of the earth, and gave hi^ power to rule all things. Gene. 4. ^
When the unrighteous went away in his wrath from this wisdom, the brotherhed
perysshed through the wrath of murthur. Again / when the Gene. v^^.
water destroyed the whole world / wisdom preserved the ryghtuous through a
poor tree, whereof she was gouerner herself. Moreover when wickedness had
gotten the upper hand so that the nations were puffed up with pride she knew the
ryghtuous, preserved him fautlesse unto God, and laid up sure mercy for his
children. She preserved the rightuous / Gene. xix. ^
when he fled from the ungodly that e^pyshed / what time as y^ fire fell down
upon the. v. cities: Like as yet this day the unfruitful waste / and smokynge
land gives testimony

And for a token of a remembrance of the unfaithful soul / there stands a
pyler of salt. For all such as regarded not wisdom, gat not only this hurt,
yt they knew not the things which were good, but also left behind them
unto me^ / a memorial of their foolishnes: so that in ye things wherein they
sinned / they could not be hyd. But as for such as take heed unto wisdom,
she shall deliver them from sorrow.

Gene. 2 ^* ^
When the ryghtuous fled because of his Gent. 37. ^ (...). vii. b
When the ryghtuous was sold / she forsook him not / but delivered him from
sinners. She went down with him into the dongeon, and failed him not in the
bands: Gent. xii. s
^yll she had brought him the scepter of the realm, and power against those
that oppressed him* As for them that had accused him / she declared them to be
liars / and brought him to perpetual worship.

Exodi. i. b. (...). b
She delivered the ryghtuous people and fautelesse led / from the nations that
oppressed them. She entered into the soul of the servant of God, and stood by
him in wonders and tokens against the horrible kings. She gave the ryghtuous
the reward of their labors, and led the^ forth a marvelous way / on the day
time she was a shadow unto them, and a light of startes in the night season.
Exodi. 13. f
She brought the^ through y^ reed see / and carried them through the great
water. She drowned their enemies in the sea, and brought them out of the deep.
So the rightuous took the spoils of the ungodly, Exodus xv. a
and praised thy holy name, O Lord, and magnified thy victoryous hand with
one accord. Psa. viii. a Math. ii. c
For wisdom opens the mouth of the do^me / and makes the tongues of babes to
speak.

The miracles done for Israel. The vengeance of sinners The great power and
mercy of God.

CAPI. XI.
SHe ordered their worckes in the hands of Exodus 27. a Number. xx. a
avenged of their adversaries. Exodi. 16. a
When they were thyrstye / they called upon the / and water was given the^ out
of the most hye rock / and their thyrst was quenched out of the hard stone.
For by the things / where through their enemies were punished, were the
children of Israel helped in their need / to their comfort. For unto the
enemies thou gave man's blood in stead of living water. And where as they
had scarceness in y^ rebuke, when the children were slain, thou gave unto
thine own a plentuous water unlooked for: declarynge by the thyrste that was at
that time / how thou would bring thine own unto honor / and sleye their
adversaries.

Deute. 8. a
For when they were tried and nourtured Sapi. xii, ^ Roma. ^. ^
Where as certain men now (through error) did worship do^me serpents and
vain beasts thou sendedst a multitud: of domme beasts upon them for a
vengeance: that they might know, y^ look where withal a man synneth / by the
same also shall he be punysshed. Leuit.. 26. ^ (...). 16. a Iere. vii. c
For unto thy almyghtye hand, that made the world of naught, it was not
impossible / to send among them an heap of Beeres, or wood Lions, or cruel
beasts of a strange kind / such as are unknown / or spou^e fire or cast
out a smoking breath / or shote horrible sparks out of their eyes / which
might not only destroy them with hurtynge / but also kyl them with their
horyble sight. Ye without these beasts might they have been slain with one
wind, being persecuted of there own works, and scatered abroad through the
brethe of thy power.

Nevertheless, thou have ordered all things Roma. ii. a
and make the as though thou saw not the sins of men / because they
should amend. For thou love all the things that are / and hate none of
the^ who^ thou have made: neither dydest thou ordain or make any thing, of
evil will.

How might any thing endure / if it were not thy will? Or how could any
thing be preserved / except it were called of the? But thou sparest all / for
all are thine (O Lord) you lover of souls.

The mercy of God toward sinners, the works of god are unreprovable. God
gives leysoure to repent us.

CAPI. XII.
O Lord / how gracyous and sweet is thy Deuteronomy. ix. a xii. d. xviii c
As for those old inhabiters of thy holy land, thou myghtest not away with
the^, for they committed abominable worckes against the: as witch craft,
sorcery and Idolatry, they slew their own children without mercy: they did
eat up men's bowels / and devoured the blood: ye because of such
abhominacio^s, mysoeleuers and offeringes / thou slewest the fathers of the
desolate souls by the hands of our fathers: y^ the land which thou love
above al other, might be a dwelling

Nevertheless, thou sparedst them also (as men) and sendedst y^ foreru^ners of
thine hooste even hornettes to destroy them out by little and little. Not that
thou wast unable to subdue the ungodly unto the rightuous in battle / or with
cruel beasts / or with one roughe word to destroy them together: Exodi 23 d
Deuteronomy. vii. d
But thy mind was to drive them out by little and little geuynge the^ time and
place to amend: knowing well, that it was an unrighteous nacyon and wicked of
nature, and y^ their thought might never be altered. For it was a cursed sede
from the beginning / and feared no man: Yet have thou pardoned their sins.
For who will say unto the: why have thou done that? Or who will stand against
thy judgment? Or ^. Petr. v. a
none other god but you, that carest for all things y^ thou may declare how
that thy judgment is not unright. There darre nether king, nor tyrau^t in thy
sight require acco^ptes of them whom thou have destroyed.

For so much then as thou art ryghtuous thy self, you ordrest all things
ryghtuouslye Io^. ix. a
and punishest even him that has not deserved to be punyshed, and take him
for a stranger and an aleau^t in the land of thy power. For thy power is the
beginning of ryghtuousnes: and because thou art Lord of all things /
therefore art thou gracious unto al. When me^ think y^ not to be of a full
strength thou declarest thy power: and boldly deliuerest thou the^ over that
know the not. But thou Lord of power iudgest quietly / and ordrest us with
great worship / for thou may do as thou will.

By such works now have thou taught thy people, that a man also should be
just and

Wherefore, where as men have lived ignorauntly and vnryghtuously thou have
punyshed Sap(...) Roma. (...)
For they went astraye very long in the way of error, and held the beasts
(which even their enemies despised) for gods / lyuinge as children of no
under standing. Therefore have thou sent a scornful punishment among the^, as
among the children of ignorance. As for such as would not be reformed by
those scorns and rebukes / they felt the worthy punyshme^t of God. For the
things that they suffered, they bare them impatiently, being not content in
the^, but unwilling. And when they peryshed by the same things yt they took
for gods, they knowledged then / that there was, but one true God, whom before
they would not know: therefore came the end of their damnacyon upon them.

At things be vain, except the knowledge of God. Idolaters and Idols are
mocked.

CAPI. XIII.
Vain are al men, which have not knowledge Roma. ^^
as were they that out of the good things which are seen, knew not him, y^
of him self is everlasting. Neither took they so much regard of the works
that are made / as to know, who was the craftesman of them but some took the
fire / some the wind or air, some the course of the stars / some the water
/ some took Sun and Moon / or the lyghtes of heaven which rule the earth /
for gods. But though they had such pleasure in their beuty / that they
thought them to have been gods: yet should they have known / how much more
fayrer he is that made them. For the maker of bewtye has ordained all these
things. Or if they marueled at the power and worckes of them / they should
have perceived thereby / that he which made these things, is myghtyer then
they.

For by the greatenesse and bewty of the creatures, the maker thereof may
plainly be

But unhappy are they, and among the dead is their hope, that call them
Gods which are but the works of men's hands: gold / silver / and the
thing that is found out by conning, the similitudes of beasts. or any vain
stone that has been made by hand of old. Esaias. 44. b Iere, x. a
Or as wha^ a carpe^ter cutteth down a tree out of the wod / and pareth of the
bark of it co^ningly: and so with the one perte makes a vessel to be used, and
dresseth meat with the resydue. As for the other part y^ is left / which is
profitable for nothing (for it is a crooked

Then makes he a convenient tabernacle for it / sets it in the wall, and
makes it fast with iron, prouydynge so for it / least it happen to fall: for
it is well known / that it can not help it self: And why? it is but an image
/ and must of necessyte be helped.

Then goes he and offreth of his goods unto it, for his children and for his
wife: he seeks

The detestacyon and abhomynacion of images. A curse of them, and of him that
makes them. The euyls that come of Idolatrye.

CAPI. XIIII.
Again / another man / purposynge to sail / and beginning to take his iournye
Exodus 14. b
for thou have made away in the sea / and a sure path in the myddest of the
waves: declarynge there by / that thou haste power to help in all things, ye
though a man went to the sea without ship. Nevertheless / that the worckes
Gene. vi. b.
thou have caused an arcke to be made: and therefore do men commytte their lives
to a small piece of wodd, passing over the sea in a ship / and are saved.

Gene. vii. d
For in y^ old time also when the proud grauntes peryshed / he (in who^ the
hope was left to increase the world) went into the ship / which was
governed through thy hand / and so left sede behind him unto the world. For
happy is y^ tree, where through ryghtuousnes comes: but cursed is the ydol
that is made with hands / Psalm. 115. a and. 135. c. Baru. vi. d
ye both it and he that made it. He / because he made it: and it / because it
was called God / where as it is but a frail thing. Psalm. vii. d
For the ungodly and his ungodliness are both like abominable unto God. Even so
the work and he that made it also, shall be punyshed together. Therefore shall
there a plage come upon the ydols of the Heythen: for out of the creature of
God they are become an abhomynacyon / a temptacyon unto the souls of men / and
a snare for the fete of the unwise. And why? y^ seeking out of ydoles is the
beginning of whordome / and the bringing up of the^ is the destruccyon of
life. For they were not from the beginning / nether shall they continue has
found them out upon earth, therefore shall they come shortly to an end.

When a father mourned for his son y^ was taken away from him / he made him
an image (in all y^ haste) of his deed son: and so began to worship him
as God, which was but a deed man, and ordened his saruau^tes to offer unto him.
Thus by process of time and through an ungracious custom, this error was
kept: as law, and tyrauntes compelled men by violence to honor images. As
for those that were so far of, that men might not worship them presently,
their pycture was brought from far (like the image of a King who^ they would
honor) to the intent that with great diligence they might worshypp him which
was far of / as though he had been present, Again / the synguler connyng of
the cratesman gave the ignoraunte also a great occasyon to worship images. For
the workman wylling to do him a pleasure that set him a work / labored with
all his conning

Moreover, this was not enough for the^ that they erred in the knowledge of
God: but where as they lived in the great wars of ignorauncy / those many
and great plages called they peace. For either Deuteronomy* ^8. b Iere. vii. b and.
xix. a
they slew their own children, and offered them / or did sacrifice in the night
season / or else held un reasonable watches: so that they kept neither life
nor marriage clean: but either one slew another to death malyciously / or else
grieved

Therefore comes a great plage upon them, and that worthily: for they have an
evil opinion of God / gyuyng head unto Idols / swearyng unjustly to disceyue,
and despysynge righteousness. For their swearing is no virtue, but a plage of
the^ y^ sine, and goes ever with the offense of the ungodly.

The voice of the faithful, praysynge the mercy of God, for whose graces sake
they serve not Idols.

CAPI. XV.
BUt you (O our God) art sweet, long sufferyng

Nevertheless, they that love such evil thiges,

Notwithstanding, he cares not the more

All y^ enemies of thy people and that hold the^ in subieccyon, are unwise,
unhappy, and

The punishment of Idolatrers, and the benefytes done unto the faithful,

CAPI. XVI.
FOr these and such other things have Nume. xi. ^
preparynge them quales to be their meat: to the intent that (by the things
which were showed and sent unto them) they that were so gredy of meat / might
be withdrawn even from the desire that was necessary. But these with in shorce
time were brought unto pouertye / and tasted a new meat. For it was requysite
that (without any excuse) destruction should come upon those which used
tyranny, and to show only unto the other, how their enemies were destroyed.
Nume. 2^. b
For when the cruel woodnesse of the beasts came upon them, they peryshed
through the stinges of the cruel Serpents.

Notwithstanding, thy wrath endured Exodi. x. d.
when they were bytte^* with greshoppers and flies, they dyed / for they were
worthy to perysh by such: But neither y^ teth of drago^s nor of venomous worms
overcame thy children, for thy mercy was ever by the^ and helped the^. Therefore
were they punyshed to remember thy words, but hastily were they healed again /
lest they should fall into so deep forgetfulness, y^ they might not use thy help.

It was nether herb nor plaster that restored the^ to the health / but thy
word (O lord) Deute. 32. ^ i. Regu^. ii. b
: thou ledest unto deaths door / and bryngest up again. But man through
wickedness slays his own soul, and when his sprete goes forth / it turns
not again, neither may he call again the soul that is taken away: It is not
possible to eskape thy hand. For the ungodly that would not know y^ / were
punyshed by y^ strength of thine arm: with strange waters / hayles and raynes
were they persecuted, and through fire were they consumed. For it was a
wondrous thing that fire might do more then water which quenches all
things: but the world is the auenger of the ryghtuous. Sometime was the fire
so tame / that the beasts which were sent to punysh the ungodly, burnt not:
and that because they should se and know / that they were persecuted with the
punyshmente of God. And some time brent the fire in the Exodi. 16. ^
Again thou haste fed thine own people with Angels fode, and sent the bread
ready from Heaven (without their labor) being very pleasant and of good
taste. And to show thy riches and sweetness unto thy children, thou gave
every one their desire, so that every man might take what lyked him best. But
the snow and yse abode the vyolence of the fire and melted not: that they
might know / that the fire burning in the hayle and rain / destroyed the
fruit of the enemies: the fire also forgot his strength again / that the rygh
tuous might be noryshed. For the creature that serves the (which art the
maker) is fearse in punyshyng y^ unrighteous, but is easy and gentle to do good
/ unto such as put their trust in the. Therefore did all things alter Deute.
8. a. Math. 4. ^
that it is not nature and the growing of fruits that fedeth men, but that it
is thy word, which preserves them that put their trust in the. For look
what might not be destroyed with the fire / as soon as it was warmed with a
little Su^ne beam / it meltetd: y^ al me^ might know, that thanks ought to be
given unto the before the Sun rise, and that thou ought to be worshypped
before the day spring. For the hope of the unthankful shall melt away as
the winter yse, and perysshe as water, that is not necessary.

The judgments of God upon the Egyptions.

CAPI. XVII.
Great are Roma ^ ^. c
thy judgments (O Lord) Exod^. x. c
For when y^ vnryghsuons thought to have thy holy people in subieccyon, they
were bound with the bands of darkness and long night, shut under the rofe,
thinking to escape the everlasting wisdom And while they thought to be hyd
in the darckenesse of their sins / they were scatred abroad in the very
midst of y^ dark covering of forgetfulness / put to horrible fear and
wo^derously vexed: for the corner where they might not keep them from fear
(because the sound came down and vexed them) ye many terrible and strange
visions made them afraid.

No power of the fire might give them Exodi. 7. b.
As for the sorcery and enchauntme^t that they used / it came to derysyon / and
the proud wisdom was brought to shame. For they that promised to drive away
the fearefulnes and dread from that weak souls, were sick for fear them
selves / and y^ with scorn And though none of the wonders feared the^ / yet
were they afraid at the beasts which came upon them, and at the Hyssyng of
the serpents. In so much that with tre^blyng they swowned, and said they
sawnot y^ air, which no man yet may escape:

For it is an heavy thing / when a man's Psalm. 46. a
Fearefulnes is nothing else / but a declaring that a man seeks help and
defense / to answer for him self. And look how much less the hope is within,
the more is the vncertentye of the matter, for the which he is punyshed. But
they y^ came in the mighty night: sleep the sleep that fell upon them from
under and from above: sometime were they afraid through the fear of the
wonders / and sometime they were so weak that they swowned withal: for an
hastye and sudden ferfulnes came upon them. Afterward / if any of them had
fallen / he was kept and shut in preson / but without chains. But if any
dwelt in a vyllage / if he had been an heyrde or husbandman he suffered
intolerable necessyte: for they were all bound with one cheyne of darkness.

Whether it were a blasynge wind / or

The Fire light that the Israelytes had in Egypt. The persecucyon of the
faithful. The Lord smote all the first borne of Egypt. The sin of the
people in the wilderness. Aaton stood betwyte the live and the deed, with his
censoure.

CAPI. XVIII.
Nevertheless / thy Saynctes had a very Exodi (...)
Therefore had they a burning pyler of fire to lead them in the unknown way,
and thou gaueste them the Sun for a fre gift without any hurt. Reason it was
that they should want light, and be put in y^ preson of darcknes / which kept
thy children Exodi (...)
When they thought to slaye the ba bes of the ryghtuous (one being laid out,
and preserved to be leader unto the other) Exodi (...)
thou broughtest out ye whole multitude of the children / and destroyedst these
in the mighty water. Of that night were our fathers certyfyed before / that
they knowing unto what oaths they had given credence / might be of good
cheer, Thus thy people received y^ health of the ryghteous / but the ungodly
were destroyed. For like as thou have hurt our enemies / so have thou promoted
us whom thou calledest before. For the ryghteous children of the good men
offered secretly / and ordered the law of ryghteousnes unto unite: that the just
should receive good and cuyll in like manner, singing praises unto the father of
all men. Again / there was herd an vnconuenie^t voice of the enemies / and a
pyteous cry for children that were bewailed. The master and the servant were
punyshed in like manner. For they altogether had innumetable that died one
death.

Exodus, xii, c.
Neither were the lyuinge sufficient to

Then lay there one here / another there / half deed, half quycke, and
showed the cause of his death. For the vysyons that vexed them showed them
these things before: so that they were not ignoraunte / wherefore they peryshed.

The te^tacion of death touched the ryghteous Exo. 28. b. c
And whyem his long garment was all the bewtye / and in the four rows of the
stones was ye glory of the fathers graven / and thy majesty was written in the
crown of his head. Unto these the destroyer gave place / and was afraid of
them: for it was only a temtacio^ worthy of wrath.

The deeth of the Egypcyans, and the great joy of the Hebrews. The meat that
was given at the despre of the preople. The elements serut not only to the
will of God / but also to the will of man.

CAPI. XIX.
AS FOR the ungodly / the wrath Exo xiiii a
For when they were yet mourning and making lamentacyon by the graves of the
dead, they devised another fooly shenes: so that they persecuted them in their
flyenge. whom they had cast out before with prayer. Worthy necessyte also
brought them unto this end, for they had clean forgotten the things that
happened unto them before. But the thing that was wantinge of their
punyshemente / was requysyte so to be fulfilled upon them with torments / that
thy people might have a marvelous passage through, and that these might find
a strange death.

The^ was every creature fashioned again

Exo. ^vi c. Nam. xi. g
But at the last they saw a new creacion of birds / what time as they were
diceaued with lust / and desired delicate meats. For when they were speaking
of their appetite, the quails came up unto them from the sea / and
punyshementes came upon the sinners, not without the tokens which came to pass
before by the veheme^^ye of the streams: for they suffered worthily according to
their wyckednesses / they dealt so abhomynably and churiyshly with strangers.
Some received no unknown gestes / some brought the strangers into bondage
that did them good. Beside all these things there were some / that not only
received no strangers with their wylles / but persecuted those also / iii.
John. b,
and did them much evil / that received them gladly. Therefore were they
punished with Gene. xix. c.
blyndnesse / like as they that were covered with sudden darcknesse at the doors
of the ryghteous / so that every one sought the en^rau^^e of bys door.

Thus the elements turned into them

: Here ends the Book of wisdom.
The book of Jesus the son of Syrach / which is called in Latin /
Ecclesiasticus.
The Prologe of Jesus the son of Syrach unto his book.
MAny and great men have declared wisdom unto us out of the law / out of the
Prophets and out of other that followed them. In the which things Israel
ought to be commended / by the reason of doctrine and wisdom: Therefore they
that have it and read it / should not only them selves be wise there through,
but serve other also with teaching and writing.

After that my graunde father Jesus had given dylygente labor to read the
law, the Prophets and other books that were left us of our fathers, and had
well exercysed himself therein: he purposed also to write some thing of
wisdom and good manners, to the intent that they which were willing to learn
and to be wise / might have the more understanding / and be the more apt to
lead a good conuersacyon.

Wherefore / I exhort you to receive it louyngly, to read it with diligence /
and to take it in good worth, though our words be not so eloquent as the
famous orators.

For the thing yt is written in the Hebrew tongue / sounds not so well when
it is translated into another speech. Not only this book of mine but also the
law, the Prophets and other books sound far otherwise, then they do, when
they are spoken in their own language. Now in the. xxxviii. year when I came
into Egypt i^ the time of Prolomy Euerges and co^tinueo there al my life / I
gat lybertye to read and write many good things. Wherefore / I thought it good
and necessary, to bestow my dylygence and travail to interpret this book.
And co^syderyng that I had time / I labored and did my best to perform this
book, and to bring it unto light: that the strangers also which are dysposed
to learn / might apply the^ selves unto good manners, and live according to the
law of the Lord.

Eccleciasticus.
Wisdom proceadeth and comes of God. A praise o^ the fear of God.
Righteousness to a degree to come by wisdom.

CAPI. I.
AL wisdom comes Re. iii b (...). iiii, d. ^d. ^8, c. ^cob. 1. ^.
Wisdom has been before all things (...). xi. c
/ and the understanding of prudence from everlasting. (Gods word in the
heygth is the well of wisdom, and the everlasting commandments are the
entrau^ce of her.) Unto whom has the rote of wisdom been declared? Or who
has known her wit? Unto who^ has the doctrine of wisdom been discovered and
showed? and who has understand y^ many fold entrau^ce of her?

There is one: even the Highest / the maker

The fear of the Lord is worship and triumph / gladness and a joyful
crown: The fear of the Lord makes a merry heart, gives gladness, joy and
long life. Who so fears the Lord / it shall go well with him at the last,
and in the day of his death he shall be blessed.

The love of God is honorable wisdom: (...). ixi. b. ^ou^. ix. ^
The fear of the Lord is y^ beginning of wisdom, and was made with the
faithful in the mothers womb: it shall go with the chosen women, and shall be
known of the ryghteous and faithful. The fear of the Lord is the right Gods
service, that preserves and iustifyeth the heart, and gives mirth and
gladness. Who so fears y^ lord shall be happy: and when he has need of
comfort, he shall be blessed. To fear God is the wisdom that makes rich, and
brings al good with her. She fills the whole house with her gifts / and
the garners with her treasure. The fear of the Lord is y^ crown of wisdom /
and gives plenteous peace and health. He has seen her and nombred her (both
these are the gifts of God) knowledge and understanding of wisdom has he
poured out as rain / and the^ that held her fast, has he brought unto honor.

The fear of the Lord is the rote of wisdom / and

He exhorts the servants of god to righteousness love, understanding, and ^
cyence / ^^d exhorts him that (...), teth God / to believe / to hope, and to
love because God ^^ither confounds nor forsakes them / that trust in him. A
curse upon the sotell, fearce, and impacyent of heart.

CAPI. II.
My son / Mar. iiii. a 2. Tim iii. ^
if thou will come into the

Hold the fast upon God, join thy self unto him, and suffer that thy life
may increace at the last. Whatsoever happens unto y^ receive it: suffer i^
heaviness / and be pacient in thy trouble. Sapi. iii. a. Pro. xvii. a
For like as gold and silver are tried in the fire / even so are acceptable
me^ in y^ furnace of aduersite. Believe i^ God, and he shall help the: order
thy way a right, and put thy trust in him. Hold fast his fear and grow
therein. O ye that fear the Lord, take sure hold of his mercy: shrincke not a
way from him, that ye fall not. O ye that fear the Lord, believe hi^, and your
reward shall not be emptye. O ye that fear ye Lord: put your trust in him /
and mercy shall come unto you for pleasure. O ye yt fear ye Lord / set your
love upon him and you hertes shall be lyghtened.

Consydre the old generacions of me^ O Ps. xxxi* a Esa. xxvi. b
was there ever any one confounded, that put his trust in the Lord? Who ever
continued in his fear and was forsaken? Or whom did he ever despise, that
called faithfully upon him? For God is gracyous and merciful / he forgeueth
sins in the time of trouble / and is a defender for all them that seek him in
the truth. Woe be unto him, yt has a double heart, wicked lips and evil
occupied hands, and to the sinner that goes two manner of ways. Woe be unto
them y^ are loose of heart, which put not their trust in god, and therefore
shall they not be defended of him. Woe be unto the^ that have lost patience,
forsaken y^ right ways, and are turned back into froward ways. What will
they do, when the Lord shall begin to vyset them?

They that fear the Lord, will not mistrust John. 14. c.
love him, will keep his commandment. They that fear the Lord, will seek out
the things, that are pleasant unto him, Roma. 13. c
and they that love him: shall fulfill his law. They that fear the Lord,
will prepare their hertes, and humble their souls i^ his sight. They that
fear the Lord, keep his commandments, and will be pacient till they se him
self, saying: ^. Reg 24. c Susan. d,
better it is for us to fall into yt hands of ye Lord / then into the hands
of men: for his mercy is as great as him self.

To our father and mother ought we to give double honor. Of the blessing and
ruesse of the father and mother No man ought ouce curyously to searthe our the
secrets of God.

CAPI. III.
THe children of wisdom are a congregacyon

Exodus* Deu^* (...)*
For y^ Lord will have the father honored of the children: and look what a
mother commands her children to do / he will have it kept. Who so honors
his father his sins shall be forgeuen him: Ep^^*
and he that honors his mother is like one y^ gathers treasure together.
Who so honors hes father shall have joy of his own children: and when he
makes his prayer he shall be herd. He y^ honors his father, shall have a
long life: and he that is obedyent for the Lords sake / his mother shall have
joy of him.

He that fears the Lord, honors his

Gen* (...)
The blessing of the father buyldeth up the houses of the children / but the
mothers curse roteth out the foundacyons. Rejoice not when thy father is
reproved, for it is not honor unto the / but a shame. For the worshype of a
ma^s father is his own worship / and where the father is without honor, it
is the dishonesty of the son. My son, make much of thy father in his age /
and grieve him not as long as he lives. And if his understanding fail / have
patience with him / and despise him not in thy strength. For the good deed y^
thou show unto thy father / shall not be forgotten: and when thou thy self
wanteste / it shall be rewarded the (and for thy mothers offense thou shall be
recompensed with good, ye it shall be founded for the in ryghteousnes) and in
the day of trouble y^ shall be remembered: the sins also shall melte away /
like as the yse in the fair warm water.

He that forsakes his father / shall come

Ps^. (...) Prou. (...)
Seek not out the things y^ are above thy capacyte / and search not the
ground of such things as are to mighty for the: but look what God has
commanded the: think upon that all way / and be not curyous in many of his
worckes. For it is not nedeful for the / to se with thine eyes the things that
are secret. Make not thou to much search i^ superssuous things, and be not
curious in many of his works: for many things are showed unto the al ready,
which be above the capacite of men. The medlyng with such has begyled many a man
/ and tangled their wits in vanyte.

An hard heart shall fare evil at the last: (and he that louethe peril /
shall peryshe Psalm. xii. a.
and mercy reconcileth sins. God has respect unto him that is thanckeful:
he thyncketh upon him against the time to come: so that when he falls / he
shall find a strong hold.

Alme^ must be done with all menkenes. The study of wisdom and her fruit. A
judge ought to be merciful. An exhortacyon to eschew evil and to do good.

CAPI. IIII.
MY son, ^^^. xv. d.
defraude not the poor of his alms, and turn not away thine eyes

^en^. 14. c.
Deliver him that suffers wrong from

He that believes her, shall have her in possessyon

My son, make much of the time, eschew (...)
Accept no person after thine own will / that thou be not confounded to thine
own decay. Be not a shamed of thy neighbor in his aduersyte / and keep not
back thy counsel who^ it may do good / nether hyde thy wisdom in her bewty.
For in the tongue is wisdom known / so is understanding knowledge / and
lernyng in the talkinge of the wise, and steadfastness in the works of
righteousness. In no wise speak against the word of truth / but be ashamed
of the lies of thine own ignorance. Shame not to co^tesse thine error / and
submytte not thy self unto every man because of sin. Withstand not the face
of the mighty, and strive y^ not against the stream. But for righteousness
take pains with all thy soul, and for the truth strive thou unto death / and
God shall fight for the against thine enemies. Be not hasty in thy tongue /
nether slack and negligent in thy works. Be not as a lion in thine own
house, destroying thy household folks, and oppressing the^ that are under the.
Act^^. xx. g.
Let not thine hand be stretched out to receive, and shut when thou should
give.

CAPI. V.
In ^ythc^ may we not put any confydence. The vengeance of God ought to be
feared, and to repentance may we us^ be slow.

TRust not unto thy riches, Luke. ^ii. ^. Eccle. xi. ^.
and say not: tush, I have enough for my life (For it shall not help in the
time of vengaunce and temptacyon.) Follow not the lust of thine own heart in
thy strength, and say not: tush, how have I had strength or who will bring me
under because of my works? for douties God shall avenge ^t. And say not. I
have sinned and what evil has happened me? For the almighty is a pacie^t
rewarder. Romans vii. ^
Because thy sin is forgeuen the, be not therefore without fear, nether heap
one sin upon another. Eccl^. (...). a.
And say not rush the mercy of the Lord is great, he shall forgive me my
sins, be they never so many. Eccle. 16. b
For like as he is mercyful, so goes wrath from him also, and his indygnacion
comes down upon sinners. Make no taryenge to turn unto the Lord, and put
not of from day to day: for suddenly shall his wrath come, and in the time of
vengaunce he shall destroy the.

Prou. (...). a and. (...). a. Exc. vii. d. soph. ^. ^.
Trust not in wicked riches for they shall not help the in the day of
punishment and wrath. Be not carried about to every wind, James. ^. ^.
Be swyft to hear, but slow and pacyent in geuynge answer. If y^ have
understanding / shape thy neighbor an answer: If no, lay thine hand upon
thy mouth: lest thou he trapped in an indiscreet word / and so confounded.
Honor and worship (...) a man's wise talking, but the tongue of the
vndiscrese is his own destruction. L^u^. (...). d.
Be not a preuy accuser as long as thou lyuest / and use no sclaunder with thy
tongue. For shame and sorrow goes over the these / and an euel name over him y^
is double longed: but he y^ is a preuy accuser of other men, shall be hated,
enuyed and confounded. Se that thou iustyfie the small and great alyke.

It is the propertye of a sinner to be evil longed. The (...) and good
council of the wise is to be embraced. (...) should be searched for. The
profet thereof.

CAPI. VI.
BE not thy neighbors enemy for thy Romans (...)* P^^^ ^^
Be not proud in the deuyce of thine own understanding (left thy strength be
hurt by foolyshnes / and) left thy leaves wither / and thy fruit be destroyed
/ and so thou be left as a dry tree (in the wyldernes.) For a wicked soul
destroys him y^ has it / makes him to be laughed to scorn of his enemies,
(and brings him to the porcyon of the ungodly.) Eccle. ^.
A sweet word multiplieth friends / and pacifie^h them that be at varyaunce /
and a thankful tongue will be plenteous in a good man. Hold frendshyppe with
many / nevertheless have but one counceler of a thousand.

If thou gettest a friend, Deu. 1^. ^. and. 33. ^. M^^^^. ^* Math. (...)*
prove him first, and be not hastye to give him credens. For some man is a
friend / but for a time / and will not abide in the day of trouble. And there
is some friend that turns to enemyt^ / and takes part against the: and if
he know any hurt by the / he tells it out. Eccl. 37^
Again, some friend is but a companyon at the table, and in the day of need
he continues not. But a sure friend will be unto the even as thine own self,
and deal faithfully with thy household folk. If thou suffer trouble and
aduersyte, he is with the, and hydeth not himself from the. Depart from thine
enemies, ye and beware of thy friends.

A faithful friend is a strong defense:

Give ear (my son) receive my doctrine, and refuse not my council. Put thy
foot into her lynckes, Math ^^^^
and take her yocke upon thy neck: bow down thy shoulder unto her, bear her
patiently, and be not weary of her bands. Come unto her with thy whole heart /
and keep her ways with all thy power. Seek after her, and she shall be showed
the: and when thou haste her / forsake her not. For at the last thou shall
find rest in her, and that shall be turned to thy great toye. Then shall her
fetters be a strong defense for the,

My son, if thou wylt take heed, thou shall have understanding, and if thou
wylt apply thy mind / thou shall be wise. If thou wylt bow down thine ear
/ thou shall receive doctrine / and if thou delight in hearing, thou shall be
wise. Stand with the multitude of such elders as have understanding, and
consent unto their wisdom which thine heart: Eccle. 8. a.
that y^ may hear all godly sermons / and that the worthy sentences eskape
the not. And if thou seyst a man of descrete understanding, get the soon unto
him, and let thy foot tread upon the steps of his doors. Psalm. ^. ^.
Let thy mind be upon the commandments of God / and be earnestly occupied
in his laws: so shall he stablysh thy heart, and give the wisdom at thine
own desire.

^e must forsake evil, and yet not in^^^fy^ our selves. The behavior of the
wise toward his wife, his frynde, his children, his servants, his father and
mother, the prestes it.

CAPI. VII.
DO no evil / so shall there no harm happen Psa. 143. a Eccles. 7. ^. Io^.
(...). a. ^u^^. 18. b.
Iustifye not thy self before God (for he knows the heart) and desire not to
be reputed wise in the presence of the king. Make no labor to be made a
judge, except it so were, that thou could myghtely put down wyckednes: for
if thou should stand in awe of the presence of y^ mighty, thou should
fail in geuynge sentence. Offend not in the multitude of the city, and put
not thy self among the people. Eccle. 12. ^.
Bind not two sins together, for in one sin shall thou not be unpunished.
Say not: rush, God will look upon the multitude of my oblacions, and when I
offer to the highest God, he will accept it.

Be not faynte herted when thou make thy prayer, nether slack in giving of
alms. 1. Reg. 2. b.
that can bring down / and set up again. Accept no lesyng against thy
brother / nether do the same against thy friend. Use not to make any manner of
lie / for the custom thereof is not good. Make not many words, when thou art
among the elders: Mat. vi. a.
and when y^ prayest, make not much babbling. Romans xii. b.
Let no laboxyous work be tedyous unto the, nether the housbandrye which the
Almyghtye has created. Make not thy boast in the multitude of thy wickedness /
but humble thy self even from thine heart: and remember that the wrath shall
not belong in taryinge / and that y^ vengeance of the flesh of y^ ungodly is
a very fire and worm. Give not over thy friend for any good, nor thy faithful
brother for y^ best gold

Depart not from a discrete and good Luke. xix. ^.
Where as thy servant works truly / entreat him not euel / nor the
Hyrelinge that is faithful unto the, Love a dyscrete servant as thine own
soul / defraude him not of his liberty, nether leave him a poor man. Deu.
2^. b.
If y^ have catell / look well to them: and if they be for thy profet, keep
the^. Eccle. 30. ^
If y^ have sons, bring them up in nourture and learning, and hold them in
awe from their youth up. If thou have daughters, keep their body, and show not
thy face chereful toward them. Marie thy daughter, and so shall thou perform
a weyghtie matter: but give her to a man of understanding. If thou have ^ wife
after thine own mind, forsake her not (^ but commytte not thy self to the
hateful.

Eccles. 3. a. T^b^. 4. a.
Honor thy father from thy whole heart, and forget not the soroufull travail
that thy mother had with the: remember y^ thou wast borne through them, and
how caust thou recompense them the things that they have Deute. 12. ^
^ forsake not his servants. Fear the Lord with all thy soul, and honor
his Prestes. Number. 18. b
Give them their portion of the first fruits and increase of the earth, like as
it is commanded the: (and reconsyle thy self of thy negligence with the little
flock) give them the shulders, and appointed offringes and fyrstlynges. Reach
thine hand unto the poor, yt God may bless the with plenteousnes. Gala. vi.
a.
Be lyberall unto all men living, To^^ ^. d.
yet let not but do good even to them that are deed.

Romans 12. b.
Let not the^ that weep, be without comfort / but mourn with such as mourn,
Math. 25. d
Let it not grieve the to vyset the sick / for that shall make the to be
beloved. Whatsoever thou take in hand / remember the end, and thou shall
never do amysse.

Against thy better is no stryuynge. Of the deeth of thine enemy may thou
not rejoice, nor delpyse thy neighbors nor the wordc^ of the wise.

CAPI. VIII.
Strive not with a mighty man, lest thou Math. v. d
Make no varyaunce with a rych man, lest he happen to bring up an hard quarrel
against the. Eccle. 3^. a.
For gold and silver has undone many a man, ye even the kertes of kings
has it made to fall. Strive not with a man that is full of words, and lay no
styckes upon his fire. Keep no company with the unlearned, lest he give thy
kynred an euel report. G^lo vi a. 2. Cor. 2. b
Deipyse not a man that turns him self away from sin, and cast him not
in the teeth withal: but remember that we are frail euerychone. Leu^t. 19. g.
Think scorn of no man in his old age, for we wax old also. Be not glade
of the death of thine enemy / but remember y^ we must dye al y^ sort of us
(and feign would we come into joy.) Eccle. 6. b.
Despise not y^ sermons of such elders as have understanding / but acquaynte
thy self with the wise sentences of the: for of them you shall learn wys dome and
the doctrine of understanding, and how to serve great men without complaint.

Go not from the doctrine of the elders, Eccle. 29. a.
Lend not unto him that is myghtter then thy self: If thou lendest him,
count it but lost. Be not surtye above thy power: if thou be, then think
surely to pay it. Go not to law with the judge / for he will judge according
to his own honor. Gene. 4. b.
Trauaylle not by y^ way with him that is braynelesse, lest he do the

Prou. 22. d Esa. iii. a.
Strive not with him that is angry and cruel / and go not with him into the
wylderues: for blood is nothing in his sight, and where there is no help /
he shall murder the. (...). xxx^^^
Take no council at fools, for they love nothing but the things that please
them selves. Make no council before a stranger / for thou can not tei what
wyllcome of it. Open not thine heart unto every man / lest he be unthankful
to the, and put the to reprofe.

The ieopardyes of chastenes are to be eschued. An old, tread is to be
preferred before a new. The glery ^ richesse o^ sinners. Rightwes men should be
bydden to gest. Labor is the chief thing in a work man, and wisdom in a
prince.

CAPI. IX.
BE not gelous over the wife of thy bosom, pro. (...)
Give not the power of thy life unto a woman, lest she come in thy strength /
and so thou be co^ founded: Look not upon a woman yt is desirous of many men /
lest thou fall into her snares. Use not the company of a woman that is a player
and a daunser / and hear her not, lest thou perysh through her entysynge.
Behold not a maiden / that thou be not hurt in her bewry. Prou. ^
Cast not thy mind upon harlottes in any manner of thing / lest thou destroy
both thy self and thine heritage. Go not about gasynge in every lane of the
city, nether wandre thou abroad in the streets thereof. M^th. ^*
Turn away thy face from a bewtyfull woman, and look not upon the fayrnesse
of other.

Many a man has peryshed through the (...) Iu^ (...).
bewtye of women, for through it the desire is kyndled as it were afyre (. An
aduouterous woman shall be trodden under foot as mire / of every one that goes
by the way: Many a man wonderynge at the bewtye of a strange woman / has
been cast out / for her words kyndie as a fire. Sit not with another man's wife
by any means, lie not with her upon the bed / make no words with her at the
wine: lest thine heart consent unto her / and so thou with thy blood fall
into destruction. Forsake not an old friend. for the neve shall not be like
him.

A new friend is new wine: let him be old and thou shall drink him with
pleasure. Desire not the honor and riches of a syn ner, for thou know not
what destruccyon is for to come upon him. Delight not thou in the thing that
the ungodly have pleasure in, being sure, that the vngobly shall not be
accepte^d until their grave.

Keep the from the man that has power to sleye, so nedest thou not to be
afraid of death. And if thou come unto him, make Eccl. viii. c ^ xxxvii. a.
and meddle with such as be wise and have understanding. Let just men be thy
gestes, let thy mirth be in the fear of God, let the remembrance of God be in
thy mind, Deuteronomy. vi. b and. xi. c.
and let al thy talking be in y^ commandments of the Hiest. In the hands
of craftesmen shall the worckes be co^me^ded, ^^. Re. iii. c.
so shall the Princes of the people in the wisdom of their talking. A man
full of words is perelous in his city: and he that is rasshe in his talkyng
shall be abhored.

Of kings and Judges. Pride, and covetousness are to be abhored. Labor is
praised.

CAPI. X.
A Wise judge will order his people with ^^o. xxix. a
As the judge of the people is him self, eue^ so are his officers, and look
what manner of man the ruler of the cite is, such are they yt dwell therein
also. ^^* Re. xi^ a Prou. 28. b ^uz. xxix. a.
An unwise king destroys his people, but where they that be in auctorite are
men of understanding, there the city prospers.

The power of the earth is in the hand of God (and all iniquyte of the people
is to be abhorred) and when his time is / he shall set a profitable ruler upon
it. In the hand of God is the power of man, and upon the Scribes shall he lay
his honor. ^eui. xix. d
Remember no wrong of thy neighbor / and meddle thou with no unrighteous
works. Pride is hateful before God and man, and all wyckednes of the Hethe^
is to be abhored. Iere. 27. a Daniel. 4. c
Because of unrighteous dealing / wrong / blasphe myes and diverse disceyte, a
realm shall be translated from one people to another.

There is nothing worse then a covetous man? Why art thou proud, O thou earth
and

And though the physician show his help never so long, yet in conclusion it
goes after this manner, to day a king, to morrow deed. For when a man dies /
he is the heir of serpents / beasts, and worms. The beginning of man's
pride / is to fall away from God: and why? his heart is gone tro^ his maker,
for pride is the orygynal of all sin Who so takes hold thereof, shall be
filled with cursings, and at the last it shall overthrow him. Therefore has
y^ Lord brought the congregacyons of the wicked to dishonor, and destroyed
them unto the end.

Sapi. vi. b Luke 1. c. 14 c. and. 18. b
God has destroyed the seats of proud princes, and set up the meke in their
stead. God has wythered the rotes of the proud Heathen, and planted the
lowly among them. Gene. 29. c.
God has overthrown y^ lands of the Heythen, and destroyed the unto the
ground. He has caused them to wyther away, he has brought the^ to naught,
and made the memorral of them to cease from out of the earth. (God has
destroyed the name of yt proud, and left the name of ye humble of mi^de.)
Pride was not made for man, nether wrothfulnes for men's children. The sede of
men yt fears God, shall be brought to honor: but the sede which transgresses
the commandments of the Lord / shall be shamed. He yt is the ruler among
brethren, is holden in honor among the^, and he that regards such as fear
the Lord. The glory of y^ rich, of the honorable, and of the poor is the
fear of God.

Despise not y^ the just poor man, and magnyfye Prou. 17. a
Unto the servant yt is discrete, shall the fre do service. 2. Reg. 12. ^
He that is wise and well nurtoured, will not grudge when he is reformed, and an
ignorant body shall not come to honor. Be not proud to do thy work, and
dispare not in time of aduer syte. Pro. xii. b.
Better is he that labors, and has ple^ tuousnes of al things, then he
that is gorge ous and wants bread.

My son, keep thy soul in mekenes, and

The praise of humslite. After the outward apperaunce o^ght we not to judge Of
heady and rash iuogement. The rich to not without offense All things rome of
God. Al me^ are not to be brought into thine house.

CAPI. XI.
THe wisdom of him that is brought not thou a man in his bewtye, neither
despise a man in his utter aperaunce. The Be is but a small beast among the
fowls, yet is her fruit exceeding sweet. Be not proud of thy raiment / Acts.
xii. d
and exalte not thy self in the day of thy honor: for the worckes of the
Highest only are wonderful: ye glorious, secret, and unknown are his
worckes. Many tyrauntes have been feign to sit down upon the earth, ^. Reg.
^v. f ^etth. vi. a
and the vnlyckely has worn the crown. Many mighty men have been brought
low / and the honorable have been delivered into other men's hands. Deute. 13.
d
Co^de^ne no man / before thou have tried out the matter: and when thou have
made inquisicio^, then refourme ryghtuously. Prou. 18. c.
Give no sentence / before you have herd the cause but first let men tell out
their tales.

Strive not for a matter that touches not thy self / and stand not in the
judgment Man xix. c (...)
and if thou will be rich, thou shall not be without offense, for though thou
folo ^est it, you shall not get it: and though y^ re^utst thy way before, yet
shall y^ not escape. ^rouer ^. c Psa. 127. ^
There is some man yt labors, and the more he weryeth him self, the less
he has. Again / some man is slothful / has need of help: wants
strength, and has great pour^tye and Gods eye looks upon him to good,
settech him up from his low estate / Job. xlii. ^
and lyfteth up his heed: so that many men marvel at him, and give honor
unto God.

Job. i. c Ezech. 28. b
Prosperyte and aduersyte / life and death, pouerte and rythes come all of the
Lord. Wisdom / nurtoure and knowledge of the law are with God: love and the
ways of good are with him. Error and darkness are made for sinners (and
they that exalte them selves leuyll, wax old in evil. (The gift of God
remains for the ryghtuous / and his good will shall give prosperyte for ever.
Some man is rich by living nygardly / and that is the porcyon of his reward /
in that he says: Luke. xii* c
now have I gotten rest, and now will I eat and drink of my goods my self
alone. And yet he consydreth not / yt the time draws nigh (and death
approaches) yt he must leave all these things unto other men, and dye him
self. Stand thou fast in thy covenant / and exercise thy self therein / and
remain in ye work unto thy age. Co^tynue not in the works of sinners, but
put thy trust in God / and bide in thine estate: for it is but an easy thing
in the sight of God / to make a poor man rich, and that suddenly / The
blessing of God hastes to the reward Ezech (...)
When thou art in welfare / forgette not aduersite: and when it goes not well
with the / have a good hope, that it shall be better. For it is but a small thing
unto God, in the day of death to reward every man according to his ways. The
aduersite of an hour makes one to forget all pleasure: and when a man dies /
his works are discovered. Praise no body before his death, for a man shall be
known in his children.

Bring not every man into thine house / for the dysceatfull lays wait
dyuersly.

Unto whom we ought to do good. Ehan^^es ought to be eschued.

CAPI. XII.
WHen thou will do good, know Gala (...)
Do good unto the ryghtuous and thou shalt find great reward though not of
him / yet (no doubt) the Lord him self shall reward the. He stands not in
a good case that is always occupied in evil, and gives no alms: for the Highest
hates the sinners / and has mercy upon them that show the works of
repentance. Give thou unto such as fear God / and receive not a sinner. As
for the ungodly and sinners, he shall recompense ve^geau^ce unto them, and keep
the^ to the day of wrath. Give thou unto the good / and receive not the
sinner: do well unto him that is lowly, but give not to the ungodly. Let not
the bred be given him / that he be not myghtyer then thy self therein: For so
shall y^ receive twyse as much evil / in all the good that thou do unto him:
And why? y^ Highest hates sinners, and shall reward vengeance to the ungodly.

In prosperity / a friend shall not be known / and in aduersyte an enemy shall
not be hyd. For when a man is in wealth / it greueth his enemies: but in
heuinesse and trouble a man shall know his friend. Trust never thine enemy,
for like as an iron rusteth, so does his wickedness. And though he make much
crout thing and knelynge, yet keep well thy mind, and beware of hi. Set him not
by y^, neither let hi^

Who will have pytie of the charmer, that is stynged of the serpent / or of al
such as come nigh the beasts? Even so is it with him that keeps company with a
wicked man, and lappeth ^^^^. xi^. b.
An enemy is sweet in his lips and ymagineth disceyt in his heart, to throw
the into the pit. Ye he can weep with his eyes, and if he may find oportunite,
he will not be satisfied with blood. If aduersyte come upon y^ / thou shall
find him there first, and though he pretend to do the help, yet shall he
under mine the. He shall shake his head, and clappe his ba^des over y^ for very
gladness: and while he makes many words, he shall dysguyse his countenance.

The co^^anyes of the proud and of the rich (...) to be eschued. The love of
God. Like do company with their life.

CAPI. XIII.
WHo so touches pytche, shall be fyled

Beware / that thou be not bysceyued and

Now when thou hear his words / 2. L^^. (...). ^
What fellowship should an holy man have with a dog? How can the rich and the
pore agree together? The wild Ass is the lions pray in the wyldernes, even so
are poor men the meat of the rich. Like as y^ proud may not away with
lowlynes, even so does the rych abhor the poor. If a rich man fall, his
fre^des set hi^ up again: but when y^ poor fall leth his acquayntau^ce forsake
him. If a rich man fall into an error, he has many helpers: he speaks proud
words, and yet men justify him.

But if a poor man go wrong, he is punyshed:

The offense of the tongue. Man is but a vain thing. Happy is he that
conepnurth in wisdom.

CAPI. XIIII.
BLessed is the man, yt has not fallen with Prou. 17. c Eccles. i. a
own soul. Eccle. xix. c and. xxv. c Iato, iii. a
A covetous ma^s eye has never enough in the porcyon of wyckednes, until the
time yt he wither away, and have lost his own soul.

A wicked eye spares bread, and there is Eccles. 4 a Tobi. 4 b Luka. 16. b
Do good unto thy friend before thou dye / and according to thy abylite teach
out thine hand / and give unto the pore. Be not disapoynted of ye good day,
and let not the porcyon of ye good day over pass the. Shall thou not leave thy
trauales and labors unto other men? In the dividing of the heritage give and
take, and sanctyfye thy soul. Work you righteousness before thy death for in
the hell there is no meat to find. Esaye xl. a 1 Pritl. ^ d Iacobi. ^. b
Al flesh shall fade away like grass, and like a floryshyng leaf in a grene
tree. Some grow / some are cast down: even so is the generation of flesh and
blood: one comes to an end, another is borne.

All transitorye things shall fail at the

The goodness that follows him which f^raith God. God rejects and casts
of the syuuer. God is not the auetor of evil.

CAPI. XV.
HE that fears God, will do good: and Mas^ ^
With the bred of life and understanding shall she feed him, John. ^ ^
and give him the water of wholso me wisdom to drink. If he be constant in
her / he shall not be moved: and if he hold him fast by her / he shall not come
to confusion. She shall bring him to honor among his neighbors / and in the
myddest of y^ co^gregacyon shall she open his mouth With y^ sprete of wisdom
and understanding shall she fyl him, and clothe him with the garment of glory.
She shall heap y^ treasure of mirth and joy upon him / and give him an eueria
stynge name to heritage. Foolyth men will not take hold upon her: but such as
have understanding, will mete her (Folysh me^ shall not se her) for she is far
from pride and dysceat. Men yt go about with lies / will not remember her* but
me^ of truth shall be found in her, and shall prospere eue^ unto y^ beholding
of God Praise is not semely in y^ mouth of the ungodly, for he is not sent of
the Lord. For of God comes wisdom, and the praise shall stand by the wisdom
of God, and shall be plentuous in a faithful mouth / and the Lord shall give her
unto him.

Say not y^: It is the Lords fault yt I (...)
God made man from the beginning, and left him in the hand of his counsel.
He gave him his commandments and precepts: if y^ wylt observe the
commandments, and keep acceptable faythfulnes for ever / they shall preserve
the. Iere ^^^
He has set water and fire before y^, reach out thyn hand unto which thou
wylt. Before man is life and death, good and evil: look what him lyketh, shall be
given him. For the wisdom of God is great and mighty in power / and beholds
all men contynually. The eyes of the Lord are upon the^ that fear him / and
he knows all the worckes of man. He has commanded no man to do ungodly,
nether has he given any man space to sin.

Of unhappy and wicked children. No man can hyde him self from God. An
exhortacyon to the receyuynge of instruccyon.

CAPI. XVI.
DELIGHT not thou i the multitude of Eccle. xxi. b
In the congregation of the ungodly shall a fire burn, and among unfaithful
people shall y^ wrath be kyndled.

Gene. vi. a
The old giau^tes optayned no grace for their sins / which were destroyed /
trusting to their own strength. Nether spared he the^ among whom Loath which
was a Gene. xix. e
stranger / but smote them and abhorred them because of the pride of their
words. He had no pytie upon them / but destroyed all the people / that were
so stout in sin. Number. 14. ^ ^^d. xxvi. t
And for so much as he ouersawe not the six hu^breth thousand / that
gathered themselves together in y^ hardenesse of their heart: it were marvel if
one being hardnecked / should be fre. Eccles. v. a
For mercy and wrath is with him / he is both mighty to forgive and to pour
out displeasure. Like as his mercy is great, even so is his punishment also /
he judges a man according to his works. The ungodly shall not escape in his
spoil / and the long patience of him that shows mercy, shall not bide
behind. All mercy shall make place unto every man according to the worthynes of
his works / and after the understanding of his pylgremage.

Say not thou: I will hyde my self from God, for who will thyncke upon me
from above? I shall not be known in so great a heap of people / for what is
my soul among so many creatures? Behold / the heaven / ye the heaven of
heavens / the deep, the earth / and all that therein is / shall be moved at his
presence: the Mountains / the hills / and the foundaryons of the earth shall
shake for fear / when God visits them. These things does no heart
understand, but he understands every heart, and who understands his ways?
No man seyth his storms, and the most part of his worckes are secret. Who
will declare the worckes of his ryghtuousnes? Or who shall be able to abide them?
For the couenaunte is far from some / and tryenge out of men is in the end.
He that is humble of heart / thyncketh upon such things: but an vnwyso and
erronyous man casts his mind unto foolysshe things.

My son, harken thou unto me, and learn

CAPI. XVII.
The creacyon of man, and the goodness that God haths done unto him. Of aulmes
and repentance.

GOd Gene. ^. d
shope man of the earth, and made him after his own image, and turned him unto
earth again, and clothed him with his own strength. He gave him the nombre
of days and certain time / ye and gave him power of the things that are
upon earth. He made all flesh to stand in awe of him / so that he had the
domynyon of all beasts and fowls. Gene. (...). d.
He made out of him an helper like unto him self / and gave them dyscrecyon
and tongue / eyes and ears / and a heart to understand, and filled them with
instruceyon and understanding. He created for the^ also the knoweledge of the
sprete / filled their hertes with understanding / and showed the^ good and
evil. He set his eye upon their hertes, declarynge unto them his great and
noble worckes: that they should praise his holy name together, rejoice of his
wonders / and be telling of his noble Acts. Beside this / he gave them
instruccyon, and the law of life Exodi. xx. a Deute. 4. ^ and* ix.
for an heretage.

He made an everlasting covenant with them and showed them his ryghtuousnesse
and judgments. They saw his glory with their eyes / and their ears herd
the matesty of his voice. And he said unto them: beware of all unrighteous
things. He gave every man also a commandment concerning his neighbor.

Their w^^yes are ever before him, and are not hyd from his eyes. Roma. 1^ a
He has set a ruler upon every people, Deu^e. 4. c and x. c
but Israel is y^ Lords porcyon. All their works are as y^ Sun / in sight
of God, and his eyes are always lo king upon their ways. All their
vnryghtuousnesses are manifest unto him, and all their wyckednesses are open in
his sight.

E^^^e. 29. b
The mercy y^ a man shows is as it were a purse with him, and the grace that
is given to man preserves him as the aple of an eye. Math. 25. c
At the last shall he awake, and reward every man upon his head, and shall
turn them together into the nethermost parts of y^ earth: Acts. iii. c
But unto the^ that will repent, he has geeuen the way of ryghtuousnes. As
for such as be weak, he comforted them, suffered them and sends them the
porcyon of the veryte. O turn then unto the Lord, forsake thy sines, make thy
prayer before the Lord / do the less offense, turn again unto y^ Lord,
forsake thine unrighteousness / be an utter enemy to abhomynacion, learn to
know the ryghtuousnes and judgments of God / stand in the porcyon that is
set forth for the and in the prayer of the most hie god. Go in the porcyon of
the holy world, with such as be living and give thanks unto God.

Psalm. vii. ^ Esaye. 38. d
Who will praise the Lord in the hell? Abide not thou in the error of the
ungodly / but give him thanckes before death. As for the dead, thanckefulnesse
peryshed from him as nothing. Give thou thanckes in thy life, ye while thou
art living and whole shall thou give thanckes, and praise God, and rejoice in
his mercy. O how great is the loui^g kyndnesse of the Lord, and his mercyful
good nesse unto such as turn unto him? For all things may not be in man: and
why the son of man is not immortal, and he has pleasure in the vanite of
wyckednes. What is more clear then the Sun? yet shall it fail. Or what is
more wicked then the thing that flesh and blood has ymagyned? and that same
shall be reproved. The Lord seyth the power of the hye heaven / and al are but
earth and ashes.

The marvelous worckes of God* the ^nysetye and wretchedness of man. Against God
ought we not to complaynt. Pray must we contynuallye.

CAPI. XVIII.
HE that lives for evermore, Gene. i. ^
made all Psalm. ii Eccle, ^^
Who shall be able to express the works of him? Who will seek out the gron^de
of his noble Acts? Who shall declare the power of his greatenesse? Or, who
will take upon him to tell out his mercy? As for the wondrous works of the
Lord, there may nothing be taken from them / nothing may be put unto them
/ neither may the ground of them be found out. But when a man has done his
best / he must begyune again: and when he thyncketh to become to an end / he
must go again to his labor. What is man? Whereto is he worth? What good or
evil can he do? Psalm. ^^^
If the nombre of a ma^s days be almost an hundredth ye re / it is much.

Like as the drops of rain are unto 2. P^^^*
so are these few years to y^ days of everlasting. Therefore is the Lord
pacient with them, and pours out his mercy upon them. He saw and perceived
the thoughts and ymaginacyons of their heart, that they were evil, therefore
heaped he up his merciful goodness upon them / and showed them the way of
ryghtuousnes. The mercy that a man has / reaches to his neygh boure: but the
mercy of God is upon all flesh He chasteneth / he teaches and nurtoureth: ye
even as a shepherde turns again his flock, so does he all them that
receive chastenyng, nurtoure and doctrine. E^^^. (...)*
Mercyful is he unto them, that stand in awe of his judgments.

My son, when thou do good, make P^ou. (...) ^ and, (...). ^
Is not a fre^dly word a good honest gift? but a gracious man gives the^
both. Eccle. ^^^
A fool shall cast a man in ye teeth, and that roughly / and a gift of the
nygarde puts out the eyes. Get the ryghtuousnesse before thou come to
judgment. Learn before thou speak / and go to physic or ever thou be sick:
1. Cro^
examen judge thy self, before the judgment come, and so shall thou find
grace in the sight of God. Humble thy self before thou be sick, and in time of
thy dyscease she we thy conuersacyon. Luke. (...). ^ ^. (...). ^^
Let not to pray always and stand not in fear to be reformed unto death, for
the reward of God endures for ever. Before thou prayest / prepare thy soul /
and be not as one that tempted God. Think upon the wrathful indingnacyon, ye
shall be at the end / and the hour of vengeance, ^^^les. ^l. d
when he shall turn away his face. When y^ have enough, remember the time of
hongre: and when thou art rich, think upon the time of pouer te and
scarceness.

From the morning until the euenyng the time is changed / and al such
things are sone done in y^ sight of God. A wise man fears God in all
things, and in the days of tra^sgressyon he keeps him self from s^^ne. A
discrete man has pleasure in wisdom / and he that finds her / makes much
of her They ye have had understanding, have dealt wisely in words, have
understand the truth and ryghtuousnes, and have sought out wise se^tences and
judgments. (...). viv (...)xiii. ^
Follow not thy lusts, but turn the from thine own will. For if y^ geuest
thy soul her desires, it shall make thin enemies to laugh the to scorn. Take
not thy pleasure in great voluptuousnes, and meddle not to much wtal. Make not
to great chere of the thing that thou have wo^ne by auau^tage, lest thou fall
into pouerte, and have nothing in thy purse.

Wine and whoredom bring men to pouertye* In thy words must thou use
dyscrecyon The difference of the wisdom of God and man. Whereby thou maye^i
know what is in a man. Correc^yon must be used without ang^e.

CAPI. XIX.
A Labouryng man that is given unto dro^ ^ere. 19. ^
Wine and women ^ Reg. ii. a
make wise men re^nagates, and put men of understanding to reprofe: and he
that accompanies aduo^iterers, shall become a wicked man. Moches and worms
shall have him to heritage / ye he shall be set up to a greater example, and his
soul shall be roted out of the no^bre. I^sut. 22. c
He that is hastye to give credence, is light minded, and does against him
self. Who so reioyseth in wyckednes, shall be punyshed: he that hates to be
reformed his life shall be shortened, and he that abhors babbling of words /
quenches wickedness. He that offends against his own soul, shall repent
it: and he that reioyseth in wickedness / shall be punyshed.

Rehearse not a wicked and churlysh word Eccle. 22. b and. xxvii. c
If y^ have herd a word against thy neighbor, let it be dead with in the: and
be sure thou shalt have no harm thereby. A fool trauayleth with a word, like
as a woman that is payned with bearing of a child. Like as an arowe shot in a
dogs thyghe, so is a word in a fools heart. Leui. xix. d Math. 18. b
Tell thy friend his fault, least he be ignorant / and say. I have not done
it, or if he have spoken, that he do it no more. Reprove thy neighbor that he
keep his tongue, and if he have spoken, that he say it no more.

Tell thy neighbor his fault, for often times Eccle. 14. a and. xxv. b Iame.
iii. c
what is he / y^ has not offended in his tongue. Give thy neighbor warnyng /
before thou threaten him / and give place unto the law of the Lord. The fear
of God is all wisdom / and he that is a right wise man, keeps y^ law. As for
the doctrine of wickedness / it is no wisdom / and the prudence of sinners is
no good understanding: it is but wyckednes, and abhominacio^ and a blaspheming
of wisdom. A simple man of small understanding that fears God / is better
then one y^ has much wisdom, and trangresseth the law of the Highest. A crafty
sotell man can be wise, but Mat. vi. ^
and disguiseth it: and because he should not be known, he preuenteth the.

And though he be so weak y^ he can do y^ no harm, yet when he may find
oportunite / he shall do some evil. A man may be known by his face, and one
that has understanding / may be percyeued by the look of his countenance.
Eccles. 31. ^
A man's garment, laughter, and going, declare what he is.

Of correccion and repentaunte. Of the gift of the wise man and of the fool.
Of ly^age.

CAPI. XX.
SOME man Eccle. 31. d
reproves his neighbor good a thing is it, a man that is reproved / to
show openly his repentance: for so shall thou escape wylfull sin.

Some man keeps silence / and is found wise: but he that is not ashamed what
he says / is hateful. Some man holds his tongue, because be has not y^
understanding of the language: and some man keeps silence waytyng a conuentent
time. Eccle iii. a Eccl^s. 32. a
A wise man will hold his tongue till he se oporcunyte / but a want on and
indiscreet body shall regard no time. He that uses many words / shall hurt
his own soul: and he y^ takes auctoryte upon him vnryghtuously, shall be
hated. Some man has often times pro^peryte in wicked things: Again, some man
gets much, and has harm and loss. There is some gift that is nothing
worth: Again thece is some gift, whose reward is double. Some man gets a
fall for being to proud. and some comes to worship from low estate. Some
man bieth much for a little price, and must pay for it seven fold.

Eccle. vi. d
A wise man with his words makes Eccle. 18. c
He shall give little, and say he gave much: he opens his mouth and cries
out / as it were one that cries out wynd. To day he lends, to morrow asks
he again and such a man is to be hated. The fool says: I have no friend / I
have no thank for all my good deeds: ye even they y^ eat my bread, speak no
good of me. O how often, and of how many shall he be laughed to scorn? He
takes a more perelous fall by such words then if he fell upon the ground:
even so shall the falses of wicked me^ come hastily. In the mouth of him y^ is
vutaught, are many inconvenient and unmeet words. A wise sentcce shall not be
allowed at y^ mouth of the fool for he speaks it not in due season.

Some man synneth not / because he has

A wise man shall bring him self to honor Gene (...) Dan^^^
and he that has vnderitandynge / shall be set by among great men. Prou.
(...) and. ^^^
He that tylleth his land / shall increase his heap of corn: he that
worcketh ryghtuousnes, shall be exalted, and he that pleases great me^, shall
escape much evil. Eccle. ^ Deuteronomy. ^^
Rewards and gifts blind the eyes of y^ wise / and make him do^me, that he
ca^ not tell me^ their fautes. Eccle. ^^
Wisdom y^ is hyd, and treasure that is hoorded up, what pfyte is in the^
both? Better is he that keeps his ignorance secret, then a man that hydeth
his wisdom.

Of the repentance of sin. We in aye not heaye sin upon sin. The
boldness of an hery tyhe. The end of syn nere. Of the fool and of the wise
man. Of him that curses the devil.

CAPI. XXI.
My sone, if thou have sinned, do it no more: Eccl ^. ^. ^. and. (...) Psalm
(...) Luke. (...).
but pray for thy fore sins / that they may be forgyuen the. Fle from sin
/ even as from a serpent / for if thou co^mest to nigh her, she will byte the.
The teth thereof are as the teeth of a lion, to sley the souls of me^. The
wyckednes of man is as a sharp two edged sword, which makes such wou^des
that they can not be healed.

Scryfe and wrongeous dealing shall waste away a man's goods, and through
pride a rich house shall be brought to naught / so the riches of the proud
shall be rored out. Exodus (...) and. (...)
The prayer of the poor goes out of the mouth, and comes unto the ears,
and his vengeance (or defense) shall come, and that hastily. Who so hates to
be reformed, it is a token of a ungodly person: but he that fears God,
will remember him self. A mygh tie man is known a far ot by his tongue / but
he y^ has understanding / perceyueth y^ he shall have a fall.

Who so buyldeth his house with other Eccl xv.
The congregation of y^ ungodly is like stubble gathered together / their end
is a flamme of fire. The way of the ungodly is set with stones, but in their
end is hell, darcknes, and pains. He that keeps the law. will hold fast y^
understanding thereof, and the end of the fear of God is wisdom and
understanding. He that is not wise, will not be taught in good: but the unwise
man abounds in wickedness: and where bytternesse is, there is no
understanding. The knowledge of the wise shall flow like water that runs
over, and his council is like a fountain of life.

The heart of a fool is like a broken vessel, he can keep no wisdom. When a
man of understanding bears a wise word / he shall comme^de it, and make much
of it. But yfa voluptuous man hear it, he shall have no pleasure therein / but
cast it behind his back. The talckynge of a fool is like an heavy burden by
y^ way: but to hear a wife man speak / it is a pleasure. Where a doubt is in
the congregacyon / it is asked at the mouth of the wise, and they shall pondre
his words in their hertes. Like as is a house y^ is destroyed / even so is
wisdom unto a fool:

As for the knowledge of the unwise / it is but dark words. Doctrine is unto
him that has no understanding / even as fetters about his fete, and like
manicles upon his right hand. ^^^^ 19. b.
A fool lifts up his voice with laughter / but a wise man shall scarce laugh
secretly.

Leruynge is unto a wise man a Jewel of

The lyppes of the unwise wylbe telling folyshe things / but the words of
such as have understanding, shall be weyed in the balaunce. The heart of foles is
in their mouth, but the mouth of the wise is in their heart. When the ungodly
curses the blasphemer, he curses his own soul. ^^euit. xix. d
A preuy accuser of other men shall defyle his own soul, and be hated of every
man:) but he that keeps his tongue and is discrete, shall come to honor.)

The purgacyon of the slothful. Of the foolyshe son and dauughter, we must
have dyscrecyon how and to whom we ought to preach, of sorowynge upon the
dead. A fool is not to be much talked with all. Iniuryes and wrongs do brenke
frendshypy and amytye.

CAPI. XXII.
A Slothful body is molded of a stone

Who so teaches a fool, is even as one y^

Talk not much with a fool, and go not Pro^. ^7. a
Sand, salt / and a lu^pe of iron is easier to bear then an unwise, folish,
and ungodly man, Like as y^ band of wod bound together in the foundation of
the house cannot be lowsed: even so it is with the heart y^ is stablyshed in y^
thought of council. The thought of the wise shall neither fear / nor be
offended at any time.

Like as a fair playitred wall in a winter

He that nyppeth a man's eye / brings forth tears: and he y^ prycketh y^
heart, brings forth the meaning and thought, Who so casts a stone at y^
birds, frayeth the^ away: and he that blasphemeth his friend, breaks the
frendshyppe: though y^ drewest a sl^^rde at thy friend yet despair not / for
you may come again to thy friend. If he speak sowrely, fear not, for ye
may be agreed together again: except it be that thou blaspheme him, dysdayne
him, open his secrets and wound him traytorously: for all such things shall
drive away a friend.

Be faithful unto thy neighbor in his Psalm. 141. b
Who shall set a watch before my mouth / and a sure seal upon my lyppes / y^
I fall not with them, and that my tongue destroy me not?

A proper against pride* ^echery, and glotony Of othrs, blasph^my, and of wise
communicacion. Of the three ky^des of s^^nes. M^hy sins proceade of abuou^ry.
Of the fear of God.

CAPI. XXIII.
O Lord / father and gouernoure of my

Hear me (O ye children.) I will give you a doctrine, how ye shall order your
mouth: who so keeps it, shall not perish through his lips, nor be hurt through
wicked worckes As for the sinner / he shall be taken in his own vanyte: he
that is proud and cursed, shall fall therein. Exodi. xx. b Eccle. 27. d Ma^n. v. b
Let not thy mouth be acustomed with swearynge / for in it there are many falls.
Let not the naming of God be co^tynually ithy mouth: (and meddle not with the
names of saints / for you shall not be excused of the^) for like as a servant
which is often punished cannot be without some fore / even so whatsoever he be y^
sweare^^ and names god shall not be clean pourged from sin, A man y^ uses
much swearing, shall be filled with wic kednes / and the plage shall never go from
his house. If he begyle his brother / his faure shall be upon him: if he
knowledge not his sine, he makes a doble offe^re, and if he swear in vain /
he shall not be found ryghteous for his house shall be full of plages*

(...)
The words of y^ swearer brings death

Ephesians(...)
Use not thy mouth to unhonest and fylthy talking, for in it is the word of
sin. Remember thy father and thy mother / when thou art set among great men:
lest God forget the in their sight / and lest thou dotyng in thy custom,
suffer rebuke / and wyshe not to have been borne, and so curse y^ day of thy
naryuite. ^ (...)
The man ye is accustomed with the words of blasphemy, will never be reformed
all y^ days of his life. To sin twyse is to much, but the third brings
wrath and destruction. An hot stomach cannot be quenched (even like a burning
fire) till it have swalowed up something: even so an unchaste man has no rest
in his flesh, till he have kyndled a fire.

All bred is sweet to an whoremonger, he will not leave of / till he have his
purpose. A man that breaks wedlock* and regards Esa. (...)
Tush, who seyth me? I am compassed about with barcknes / the walls cover me,
nobody seyth me: who^ need I to fear? The Highest will not remember my sins. He
understands not y^ his eyes se all things / for all such fear of men
dryueth away the fear of God from him:for he fears only the eyes of men,
and consydereth not that the eyes of the Lord are much clearer the^ the Su^ne,
beholdig all the ways of men and the ground of the deep, and lokynge even to
men's hertes in secret places. The Lord God knew all things or ever they
were made / and after they be brought to pass also he looks upon the^ al.
Leui(...)
The same man shall be openly punished in the streets of y^ cite: and shall be
chased abroad like a young horse foale: and when he thinks lest upon it, he
shall be taken. Thus shall he be put to shame of every man, because he would not
understand the fear of the Lord-And thus shall it go also with every wife /
that leaves her housbande / and gets enherytau^ce by a strange marriage.
Exodus (...)
First, she has been unfaithful unto the law of the Hyeste: Secondly / she
has forsaken her own housbande. Thyrdly, she has played the whore in
aduoutry, and gotten her children by another man. She shall be brought out of
the congregacyon / and her children shall be looked upon Her children shall not
take rote: and as for fruit, her branches shall bring forth none. A shameful
report shall she leave behide her, and her dishonor shall not be put out. And
they that remain, shall know / that there is nothing better / then the fear
of God: and that there is nothing sweter then to take heed unto the
commandments of the Lord. A great worship is it to follow the Lord, for
long life shall be received of him.

^ praise of wisdom proceadyng forth of the mouth of God. Of her wo^ike^ and
place where she ceasteth.

CAPI. XXIIII.
Wisdom shall praise her self / and be

In all these things also I sought rest, (...). viii. ^.
I was created from the beginning and before the world, and shall not leave of
unto the world to come. (...), xxxi. ^
In the holy habytacio^ have I served before him / and so was I stablyshed in
Sio^. Psalm, 132. a
In the holy city reited I in like manner: and in Jerusalem was my power, I
roke rote in an honorable people / even in the porcyon of the Lord and in his
heritage / and kept me in the fulness of y^ saynctes. I am set up an hye like a
Ceder upon Libanus, and as a Cipers tree upon y^ mount Hermo^. I am exalted like
a palmetre in Ca des, and as a rose plant in Jericho: As a fair Olive tree in
the field, and am exalted like as a pla^teyne tree by y^ water side. I have
given a smell in the streets, as y^ Cinnamon and Balm, y^ has so good a sauoue:
ye a sweet odoure have I given as it were Myrre of the beast.

I have made my dwellynges to smell as John. xv. a
As the vine have I brought forth fruit of a sweter sauoure / and my flowers
are the fruit of honor and riches. I am the mother of bewtye / of love / of
fear / of knowledge and of holy hope. John. 1^* a
In me is all grace of life and truth. In me is al hope of life and virtue. O
come unto me all ye that be desirous of me, and fill your selves with my
fruits: for my spryte is sweter then honey / and so is my inheritance more then
the honey comb: the remembrance of me endures for evermore. They that eat me
/ shall have the more ho^ger: and they that drink me, shall thyrst y^ more.
Who so herkeneth unto me / shall not come to co^fusyon: and they that work in
me, shall not offend. They that make me to be known, shall have everlasting
life.

All these things are the book of life, the covenant of the Hiest / and the
knowledge of the truth. Exodus (...). ^. and. xxiiii. ^
Moses commanded the law in the precepts of righteousness for an heritage
unto the house of Jacob, and committed y^ promyses unto Israel. Psalm. 131. b.
Ac^^s. (...). d.
(Out of David hes servant he ordened to raise up a most might king / sytting
in the seat of honor for evermore). Deuteronomy iiii, ^ and. xxix. b.
This fylleth with wisdom like as the floude of Physon / and as the floude of
Tygris / when the new fruits are a growing

This brings a plenteous understanding Iosus. iii. ^
dane in the time of harvest. This makes nourture to break forth as the
light, and as y^ water Gyhon in the harvest. The first has not known her
perfectly / no more shall the last seek out y^ ground of her. For her thought is
fuller then the sea, and her council is profounder then the great deep.

I wisdom have cast out floudes. I am as a great waterbroke out of y^ river I
am as the river Dorix, and as a water condyte am I come out of the garden of
pleasure. I said: I will water the garden of my young plants, and fill the
fruit of wy birth. So my waterbroke became exceadynge great, and my river
approached unto the sea. For I make doctrine to be unto all men as sight as the
fair morning, and I shall make it to be ever the clearer. I will pearse through
all the lower parts of the earth / I will look upon all such as be a sleep,
and lighten al the^ that put their trust in the Lord. I shall yet your out
doctrine / like as prophecye / and leave it unto such as seek after wisdom /
and their generacions shall I never fail, unto the holy everlasting world.
Eccle. 33. b.
Behold, how that I have not labored for my self only / but for all them
that seek after the truth.

Of three things which please god, and of three which he hates. Of nine things
that be not to be suspecte, and of the tenth: the fely of the malice of a woman.

CAPI. XXV.
Three things there are / that my spryte Gene. xiii. b.
The unity of brethren / Ro^a. xi. a
the love of neighbors, Eccles. xi. d.
and man and wife that agree well together. Three things there be which my
soul hates and I utterly abhor the life of them: A poor man that is
proud. A rich man that is a liar / Ge. xviii. b.
and an old body that dotethe / and is unchaste.

If thou haste gathered nothing in thy youth / what will thou find then in
thine age. O how pleasant a thing is it, when gray headed me^ are dyscrete,
and when y^ elders ca^ give good counsel: O how comely a thig is wisdom unto
aged men: ye understanding and council is a glorious thing. The crown of old
men is to hane much experience: and the fear of god is their worship.

There be nine things / which I have Eccle. xix. c and xxiiii a ^^d^c iii. c.
and that has not fallen with his tongue, and that has not been feign to serve
such as are unmeet for him. Well is him, that fyndeth a faithful friend: and
well is him which talks of wisdom to an ear that hears hi. O how great is
he / that fyndeth wisdom and knowledge? Yet is he not above him, y^ fears
the Lord. The fear of God has set it self above all things. Blessed is the
man, unto whom it is granted to have the fear of God. Unto who^ shall he be
lyckened, that keeps it fast? The fear of God is the beginnynge of his love,
and the beginning of faith is to cleue fast unto it. The heaviness of the heart
is all the punysheme^t, and the wyckednes of a woman goes above al. All
punishment and plage is nothing in comparyson of the plage of the heart, even
so all wyckednes is nothing to the wyckednes of a woman.

Whatsoever happens unto a man is nothing

There is not a more wicked head then the head of the serpent / and there is
no wrath above y^ wrath of a woman. Pr(...)
I will rather dwell with a lion and dragon, then to keep house with a wicked
wife. The wickedness of a woman chau^geth her face, she shall moffel her
countenance as it were a Bear, and as a sack shall she show it among the
neghbours. Her husband is brought to shame among his neghbours, and when he
hears it, it makes him to syghe. All wyckednes is but little to the wyckednes
of a woman / the portion of the ungodly shall fall upon her:

Like as to clymme up a sandy way is Eccle ^ (...) (...) (...) (...)
Look not to narowly upon the bewtye of a woman, lest thou be provoked i^
desire toward her* The wrath of a woman is dishonor and great confusion. If
a woman get the mastrey, then is she contrary to her husband. A wicked wife
makes a sorry heart / an heavy countenance and a deed wound. (...) ^. (...)
(Weak hands and feeble knees is a woman that her husband is not the better
for.) Of the woman came the beginning of sin / and through her we all are
deed. Give thy water no passage / no not a little, nether give a wicked woman
her will. If she walcke not after thy hand, she shall confound the in the
syehgt of thy enemies. Cut her of then from thy flesh, that she do not always
abuse the.

The p^ap se of good a woman. Of the fear of three things and of the fourth.
Of the Ielouze and droncken woman. Of two things that cause sorrow, and of the
third which moves wrath.

CAPI. XXVI.
Happy is the man that has a verteous death. But when one is gelous over his
wife / it brings pain and sorrow unto the heart: and a woman that tells
out all things / is a scourge of the tongue. When one has an evil wife / it
is even as when an vnylke pair of oxen must draw together, ^^. 16. a
he that gets her / he gets a scorpyon. A droncken woman is a great
plage, for she cannot cover her own shame.

The whordome of a woman may be ^^. 42. b
If thy daughter be not shamefast, hold her straytly, lest she abuse herself
through ouermoche lyberte. Beware of all the dishonestye of her eyes, and
marvel not if she do against the. Like as one yt goes by the way and is
thirsty, so shall she open her mouth and drink of every next water that she
may get. By every hedge shall she set her down / and open her quyuer against
every arowe. A loving wyre reioyseth her husband, and fedeth his bones with
her wisdom. A woman of few words is a gift of God / and to all well
nurtured minds may nothing be compared.

An honest and manerly woman is a gift above other gifts / and there is no
weight (...). v. d.
Like as the golden puers are upon the sockettes of silver / so are the fair
legs unto a woman that has a costant mind. Perpetual are the foundacio^s
that be laid upon a whole stonye rock / so are the commandments of God
upon the her^e of an holy woman.

There be two things that grene my heart and in the third is a displeasure
come upon

Of the po^e that would be rich The probacyon of the man that fears God The
vnconstantnesse of a fool. The ^^tretes of a trende are not to be vttred. The
wicked ymagineth evil, which ^. turns upon him self.

CAPI. XXVII.
BEcause of pouerte have many one offended: and he that seeks to be rich /
S^^i. iii. a.
so does temptacyo^ of trouble try ryghteous men S^^i. iii. a.
The tree of the field is known by his fruit so is the thought of man's heart
known by his words. Praise no man except thou have herd him, for a man is
known by his words. If thou folowest ryghteousnes, thou shall get her, and
put her upon the as a fair garmente. And thou shall dwell with her, and she
shall defend the for ever, and in the day of knowledge thou shall find sted
fastness. The birds resort unto their like, so does the truth turn unto
them that be occupied withal. The lion wayteth the pray: so does sinners
lurk upon the workers of wyckednes. The talking of him that fears God, is
nothing but wisdom: as for a fool, he chau^geth as the Moon. If thou be
among the indiscreet, keep thy wor^^ to a convenient time / but among such
as be wise / speak on hardely. The talking of Eccle. ^2. b.
Much swearynge makes the hearre to stand up: and to strive with such /
stops the ears.

The strife of the proud is bloudesheddynge / and their blasphemynge is heavy
to hear. Eccle. 19. ^. (...) xxii. d.
Who so discovers secrets, leseth his credence, and fyndeth no friend after
his will. Love thy friend, and bind thy self in faythfulnes with him: but if
y^ bewrayest his secrets, thou shall not get him again For like as the man is
that destroys his enemy, so is he also that deals falsely in the frendshyp
of his neighbor.

Like as one that lets a bird go out of his hand, cannot take her again:
Even to thou / if thou give over thy friend, thou can not get him again: Ye
thou can not come by him, for he is to far of. He is unto the as a Roo
escaped out of the snare / for his soul is wounded. As for wounds, they may
be bound up again, and an evil word may be reconcyled: but who so
bewrays the secres of a friend, there is no more hope to be had unto him.

Prove. x. b.
He y^ wyncketh with the eyes, ymageneth some cuell, and no man shall take him
from it when thou art present, he shall hylie comme^de and praise thy words:
but at the last he shall turn his tail / and scau^der thy saying. Many
things have I hated, but nothing so evil / for the Lord himself also

Exodi. 21. b
Who so casts a stone on hye, it shall fall upon his own head: and he that
smyteth with gyle, wounds him self. Who so dyggeth a pyt, shall fall therein:
(and he that lays a stone i^ his neghbours way, shall stomble thereon) and he
that lays a snare for another, shall be taken in it him self. Hester. 7. b.
Psalm. 7. ^. Prou. 20. c. Eccles. 10. a
Who so gives a wicked noisome council, it shall come upon him self, and he
shall not know from whence. The proud blaspheme, and are scornful, but
vengeance lurketh for them as a lion. They that rejoice at the fall of ye
ryghteous, shall be taken in the snare, anguysh of heart shall consume them
before they dye. Anger and rygorousnesse are two abominable things, and the
ungodly has the^ both upon him.

We ought not to desire vengeance but to forgive the office, of the wyces of
the tongue, and of the daughters thereof.

CAPI. XXVIII.
HE D^n 32, c. Roma. 12. c.
that seeks vengeance, shall find vengeance of the Lord / which shall
surely keep him his sins. Math 5. b. 6. b. 18. b.
Forgive thy neighbor the hurt that he has done the, and so shall thy sins
be forgiven the also, whc^ thou prayest. Ama^ that bears hatred against
another / how darre he desire forgiveness of God? He that shows no mercy to
a man which is like him self, how darre he ask forgiveness of his sins?
If he that is but flesh / bears hatred and keeps it / who will entreat for
his sins? Remember the end / and let enemyte pass / which seeks death and
destruccyon / and abide thou in the commandments. Remember the commandment
/ so shall thou not be Eccle. 58. a.
Beware of strife / and thou shall make thy sins fewer. For an angry man
kindles variau^ce, and the ungodly disquyeteth friends, and puts discord
among them that be at peace. Prou. 26. c
The more wod there is, ye more vehement is the fire: and the myghtier that me^
be / the greater is the wrath: and the longer the strife endures / the more it
burns.

An hastye brawling kynleth a fire, and an Eccle. (...)
The sclau^deret a dubble tonged is cursed, for many one y^ be friends sets
he at varyaunce. The third tongue has disquieted many one, and driven them
from one land to another. Strong cities of the rich has it broken down /
and overthrown the houses of great men. (The strength of the people has it
brought down and been the decay of mighty nacyons.) The third tongue has
cast out many an honest woman / and robbed them of their labors. Who so
herkeneth unto such, shall never find rest / and never dwell safely. The
stroke of the rod makes yedders / but the stroke of the tongue smyteth the
bones in sunder. Their be many that have peryshed with the sword / but many mo
through the tongue.

Well is him that is kept from an evil

How we ought to lend our monye, and do alms. Of a faithful man answering
for his friend. Of lyberalite and hospytalyte.

CAPI. XXIX.
WHo so will show mercy, Deuteronomy. (...) Luce. 6. ^.
let him lend unto his neighbor: and he that is able / let him keep the
commandment. Lend unto thy neighbor in time of his need, and pay thou thy
neighbor again in due season. Keep thy word, and deal faithfully with him
/ and thou shalt allwaye find the thing that is necessary for the. There
have been many that when a thing was lent them, reckened it to be found, and
made them travail and labor, that helped the^. While they receyne anythinge
/ they kiss the hands of such as give them / and for their neighbors good
they humble their voice. But when they should pay again / they keep it back,
and give evil words / and make many excuses by reason of the time: and though
he be able / yet gives he scarce y^ half again, and rekeneth the other to be
found. And if he with hold not his money yet has he an enemy of him / and
that undeserved.

He pays him with cursynge and rebuke, and gives him evil words for his
good deed. There be many one which are not glad for to lend, not because of
euel, but they fear to lose the thing that they lend. Yet have thou pacyence
with the simple / and withholde not mercy from him. Help the poor for the
commandments sake / and let him not go empty from the because of his
necessite. Lose thy money for thy brother and neighbors sake / and bury it
not under a stone / where it rusteth and corrupts. Math. 6. ^. ^^ce. 12. d.
Eim. 6. d.
Gather thy treasure after the commandment of the Highest, and so shall it
bring the more profyt then gold: ^^no. 4. b
Lay up the alms in the heart of the poor and it shall keep the from all
euel. Dan. 4, d. (...). 12. d. (...). x. a
A man's alms is as a purse with him / and shall keep a man's favor as the
apple of an eye: and after ward shall it arise / and pay every man his
reward upon his head. It shall fight for the against thine enemies / better
then the child of a

A good honest man is suertie for his neighbor / but a wicked person
lets him come to shame. Forget not the frendeshyp of thy suertye, for he
has given his soul for the. The ungodly despyseth the good deed of his
suertye, and the unthankful and ignoraunte leaves his suertie in danger.
Some man promeseth for his neighbor: and when he has lost his honest, he
shall forsake him. Suertishyppe has destroyed many a rich man / and removed
them as the waves in the sea. Myghtie people has it driven away, and caused
them to wandre in strange cou^tres. An ungodly man transgressynge the
commandment of the Lord / shall fall into an evil suertishyppe: and though
he force him self to get out / yet shall he fall into judgment. Help thy
neighbor out after thy power / and beware / that thou thy self fall not into
such dett. ^^les. 39. c
The chief thing that keeps in the life / is water / and bred / clothinge and
lodging / to cover the shame.

Better is it to have a poor living in a man's own house, then delicate fare
among the strange. Psalm. 35. b. i. Tim. vi. b Hebre 13. a.
Be it little or much that thou have, hold the content withal / and thou shall
not be blamed as a vagabounde: for a miserable life is it, to go from house to
house: and where a man is fremde / he darre not open his mouth. Though one be
lodged, and have meat and drink, yet shall he be taken as unworthy / and
hear many bitter rough words, namely thus: Go thy way thou stranger, and
prepare a table for thy self, and feed me also of that thou have. A way thou
stranger (so, that he regards his honor no more) my brother comes into
my house / and so he tells him the necessite of his house These things are
heavy to a man that has under standing: namely / the forbyddynge of the house,
and that y^ le^oer casts him in the teth.

Of the correccyon of children. Of the commodytye of health. Deeth is better
then a sorowefull life Of hid wisdom. Of the joy and sorrow of the heart.

CAPI. XXX.
WHo so loves his child, Prou. 13. f. and. xxiii. ^
holds him still under coreccion, that he may have joy of him after ward
and y^ he grope not after his neighbors doors. Deuteronomy. vi a.
He that teaches his son, shall have joy in him / and need not to be ashamed
of him among his aquayntaunce.

Whose enfourmeth and teaches his son, greueth the enemy: and before his
friends he may have joy of him. Though the father dye, yet is he as though he
were not deed: for he has left one behind him that is like him. In his life
he saw him and had joy in him / and was not sorry in his death / neither was
he ashamed before the enemies. For he left behind him an auenger against his
enemies, and a good doer unto the fre^des. For the life of children he shall
bind the wounds together, and his heart is grieved at every cry. An untamed
horse wylbe hard / and a wanton child wylbe wylfull. If thou bring up thy
son delicatly, he shall make y^ afayed: and if thou play with him,

Eccles. 7. c.
Give him no liberte in his youth / and excuse not his folly. Bow down his
neck while he is young / hit him upon the sides while he is yet but a child /
lest he wax stubberne / and give no more force of the / and so shall thou have
heaviness of soul. Teach thy child / and be diligent therein / lest it be to thy
shame. Better is the poor being whole and strong / then a man to be rich,
and not to have his health: Health and welfare is about all, gold, and a
whole body above al treasure. There is no tyches above a sound body / and no
joy above the joy of the heart. Death is better then a wreched life, and
eternal rest better then contynuall syckenes. The good things y^ are put in a
close mouth are like as when meat is laid upon y^ grave.

What good does the offering unto an ^e^. b.
For he ca^ nether eat, taste, nor smell. Even so is he that is chased of the
Lord / and hears the rewards of iniquytte. He seyth with is eyes / and
groneth like a gelded man, that lies with a vyrgin and sygheth. Prou 12. d. 15.
^. 17. d.
Give not over thy mind into heaviness, and vex not thy self in thine own
council. Eccles. (...). c ^rou. 14. ^
The joy and chearfulnes of y^ heart is y^ life of man / and a man's gladness
is the prolongyng of his days. Love thine own soul, and comfort thine heart:
as for sorrow and heaviness drive it far from y^, 2, Cor, 7. b.
for heaviness has slain many a man / and brings no profyt, zele and anger
shorten y^ days of the life: carefulnes and sorrow bring age before y^ time.
Unto a merry heart every thing has a good taste y^ he eats

We ought to give dilygent head to honesty. Of the^ that ^ake payue to gather
riches. The praise of a rich man without a fault. We ought to fle dronckenesse
and follow so^^^nt^.

CAPI. XXXI.
Travail and carfulnes for i. Tim. vi. ^
riches takes Eccles. ^. ^.
Many one are come in great mysfortune by the reason of gold / and have
found their destruccyon before them. It is a tree of falling unto them that
offer it up, and all such as be foolysh fall therein. Blessed is the rich /
which is found without blemysh / and has not gone after gold / nor hoped
in money and tresures. Where is there such a one? and we shall commend him, and
call him blessed, for great things does he among his people. Who so is
tried / and found parfecte in such things / shall be commended and praised. Who
might offend, and has not offended? Who could do euel, and has not done
it? Therefore shall his good be stablyshed, and the whole co^gregacio^ shall
declare his almesses. If thou sit at a great man's table / open not thy mouth
wide upon it / and make not many words. Remember, that an euel eye is a shrowe.

What thing created is worse then a wicked Math. ^
Ponder by thy self what thy neighbor would feign have, and be discrete in
every point. Eat the thing that is set before the manerly, as it becomes a
man: and eat not to much / lest thou be abhorred. Leave y^ of first of al /
because of nurtoure, lest thou be he whom no man may satisfye, which may turn
to thy decay. When thou syttest among many men / reach not thine hand out
first of all. Eccl. ^^
Oho we well content is a wise man with a little wine? so that in sleep y^ shall
not be sick thereof, nor feel any pain. A sweet whosome sleep shall such a
one have / and feel no inward grefe. He ryseth up by times in y^ morninge /
and is well at ^ase in him self But an insatiable eater slepeth unquietly /
and has ache and pain of the body. It y^ felest that y^ have eaten to much,
arise, go thy way, cast it of thy stomach / and take thy rest: and it shall
ease the so that thou shall bring no syckenesse unto thy body.

My son, hear me / and despise me not: and at the last you shall find as I
have told the. (...)
In all thy works be diligent and quycke, so shall there no sycknes hap unto
y^. Prou. ^^
Who so is liberal in dealyng out his meat many men shall bless him / and
praise him with their lyppes: and the same is a sure token of his love and
faythfulnes. But he that is unfaithful in meat / the whole city shall
compain of him: and that is a sure experience of his infidelite and
wyckednes. Ephe. (...). Iud^t. (...).
Be not thou a wine bybber, for wine has destroyed many a man. The fire
proves the herd iron / even so does wine prove hertes of the proud / when
they be droncken.

Prou. (...) ^. (...) ^.
Wine sobrely droncken / queckeneth the life of man. If thou drynckest it
measurably, thou shall be temperate. What life is it that may continue without
wine (^ What takes away the life? even death.) Wine was made from the
beginning to make men glad (and not for dro^ckennes) Wine measurably droncken
is a reioysyng of the soul and body. (A measurable drink is health to soul
and body. But if it be droncken with excess, it makes bytternes and sorrow
unto the mind. Dronkennes fylleth the mind of the foolysh with shame and
ruin, mynysheth the strength, and makes wounds. Eccle. xx. ^
Rebuke not thy neighbor at the wine, and despise him not in his mirth. Give
him no despytefull words and preasse not upon him with contrary sayings.

Of the discrecyon and praise of the preacher, and of the hearer. Of the fear,
faith, and co^fydence of God.

CAPI. XXXII.
IF thou be made a ruler, ^^u^e. 17. d
pride not thy ^^ma. xii b
Take dylygent care for them and look well thereto: and when thou have done all
thy duty / sit the down / that thou may be merry with them / and receive a
crown of honor. Talk wisely and honestly / for wisdom becomes the right
well. Hinder not musycke. Speak not, where there is no audyence: Eccles. iii. a
Eccle. xx. ^.
and pour not forth wisdom out of time / at an importunite. Like as the Car
buncle stone shyneth that is set in gold / so does a song garnysh the wine
feast: and as the Smaragde that is set in gold, so is the swetnesse of Musycke
by the mirth of wine, (Give ear, and be still / and for thy good behauour thou
shalt be loved.)

Thou young man / speak that becomes

Who so fears the Lord / will receive his doctrine: and they that get them
to him

The delyueraunce of him that fears God. The answer of the wise. The little
dyscrecyon of a fool. Man is in the hand of God, as the earth is in the
hand of the Potter. We ought not to dyspose our selves, to become subject to
other.

CAPI. XXXIII.
THere shall no evil happen unto him Gene. ii. a
ground, and out of the earth of Adam.

In the multitude of science has the Lord Roma. ix. ^.
Like as the claye is in the potters hand, and all the ordrynge thereof at his
pleasure: so are men also in the hand of him that made them, so that he may
give them as it lyketh him best. 1. Corin. 6. ^
Against evil is good, and against death is life: so is the ungodly against
such as fere God. Behold these are the works of the Highest, and there are ever
two against two, and one set against another. I am awaked up last of all, as
one that gathers after in harvest. In the gifts of God and in his blessinge.
I am increased, and have filled my wine press, like a grape gatherer. Eccle.
24. b
Behold, how I have not labored only for my self, but for all such as love
nurtoure and wisdom.

Hear me, O ye great men of the people

If thou set thy servant to labor, thou Eccle. vii. c
If thou have a (faithful) servant let him be unto the as thine own soul:
(intreade him as a brother) for in blood have y^ gotten him. If thou have a
servant / hold him as thy self, for thou have need of him as of thy self.
If thou intreatest him evil, and kepest him hard, and make him to be proud
and to run away from the / thou can not tell what way thou shall seek him.

Of dreams, diuinacyons, and euchauntementes. We ought to confute vain hope,
and lying. The praise of them that fear God. Of diverse works of men God does
not allow the works of an unfaithful man.

CAPI. XXXIIII.
Unwise people begile them selves with

The law shall be fulfilled without lies /

When I was yet in error / I learned much also: ye I was so learned, that I
could not express it all / and came often in parell of death therouer / till I
was delivered from it (through the grace of God.) Now I se / that they which
fear God, have the right sprete: for their hope stands in him, that can
help the^ And the eyes of the Lord are on them that love him. Who so fears
the Lord, stands in awe of no man, and is not afraid, for the Lord is his
hope and comfort.

Blessed is the soul of him that fears the P^^. ^6 ^
For the eyes of the Lord have respect unto them / that love him. He is their
mighty proteccion, and strong ground: A defense for the heat, and refuge for
the hot none day / a succore for stumblynge, and an help for falling. He
sets up the soul / and lyghteneth the eyes: He gives life / and blessing.
He that gives an offringe of vnrygh tuous good, his offeringe is refused: and
the scornful dealings of the unrighteous please not God (The Lord is theyrs
only / y^ pacientely abide him in the way of the truth and of ryghtuousnes.
The highest does not allow the gifts of the wicked.) And Prou. x(...)
God has no delight in y^ offeringes of the ungodly, nether may sin be
reconcyled in the multitude of oblacyons. Who so brings an offering out of
the goods of the poor / does even as one that kylleth the son before the
fathers eyes.

The bred of the needful is the life of the Deuteronomy. ^4^ Eccle. (...)
He y^ defraudeth the laborer of his hyre, is a blood shedder. When one
builds and another breaks down / what profit have they then but labor?
When one prays and another curses, whose voice will y^ Lord hear? Number. xix.
b
He y^ washes hi self because of a deed body, and then touches Prou. 26. b
Pe^. ii. b
y^ deed again, what does his washyng? So is it with a man yt fasteth for his
sins, and does the^ again: who will hear his prayer? Or what does his
fasting help him?

It is well done to pray, and to do sacryfice. The prayer of the fall heels,
and of the widdowe: and him that humbles him self.

CAPI. XXXV.
WHo so keeps the law, (...). vii. ^
brings (...). 13. (...). 4. c
Who so is merciful and gives alms / that is the right thankeoffrynge. God
has pleasure / when one departs from sin, and to forsake unrighteousness
reconcyleth us with him. ^xod. 34. 8
Thou shall not appear empty before the Lord / for all such is done because
of the commandment. Gene. 4. ^
The offringe of the rightuous makes the altar fat, and a sweet smell is it
before the Highest. The offering of the ryghtuous is acceptable unto God, and
shall never be forgotten. Give God his honor with a chereful heart, and keep
not back the fyrstlynges of thy hands. (...). ix. ^
In all thy gifts show a mercyful countenance, and halowe thy tithes unto
God with gladness. Give unto God, according as he has enryched and prospered
the: ^ob^. 4. b
and look what thin hand is able, give with a chereful eye: for the Lord
recompenseth, and gives the seven times as much again.

Give no unrighteous gifts, for such Iudit. 4. b
He despyseth not the desire of the fatherless / nor the wyddowe, when she
pours out her prayer before him. Does not God se the tears, that run down
the chekes of the wyddowe? Or hears he not the co^playnte over such as make
her to weep For from her chekes do the tears go up unto heaven / and the Lord
which hears the^ / does accept them? Who so serves God after his pleasure,
shall be accepted, and his prayer reaches unto the clouds. ^^^no. iii d (...).
x. ^
The prayer of him y^ humbles

A prayer to God in the person of all faithful men: with the praise of a good
woman.

CAPI. XXXVI.
Have mercy upon us / O Lord / thou

Gather all the trybes of Jacob together again, y^ they may know / how that
there is none other God but only thou, that they may show thy wondrous
works / and be thou thy peoples heritage, like as from the begyynnynge. O Lord
have merey upon the people that has thy name, and upon Israel / Exodi. 4. e.
who^ you have lyckened to a first borne son. O be merciful unto Jerusalem
the city of thy Sanctuary, 1. Per. 6. g
the city of thy rest. Fill Syon with thy unspeakable virtues, and thy people
with thy glory. Give wytnes unto thy creature, whom thou made from the
beginnynge / and raise up the prophecyes that have been showed in thy name.
Reward the^ that wait for the / that thy Prophets may be found faithful. O
Lord hear the prayer of thy servants, according to the blessing of Aaron
over thy people (and gyde thou us in the way of ryghteousnes) Nume. 6. d
that all they which dwell upon the earth, may know, that thou art the Lord
the eternal God, which is from everlasting.

The belly deuoureth all meats, yet is one ^. Cor^. 2. d
so does an heart of understanding marcke false words. A froward heart gives
heuines, but a man of experience lifts him up again. The woman receives
every man / yet is one daughter better then another. A fair wife reioyseth her
husband / and a man loves nothing better. If she be loving and virtuous with
all, then is not her husband like other men. He that has gotten a virtuous
woman / has a goodly possession: she is unto him an help / and pyler whereupon
he rests. Where no hedge is, there y^ goods are spoiled: and where no
huswyfe is / there the frendles mourns. Like as there is no crede^ce given to
a robber / that goes from one city to anoher: So is not the man believed /
that has no nest, and must turn in / where he may abide in the night.

How a man should know friends and councellers, and search the company of a
holy man.

CAPI. XXXVII.
Every friend says: I will be frendely Eccle. vi. ^
There is some co^panyon which in prosperity reioyseth with his friend: but in
the time of trouble, he takes part against him. There is some companyon that
mourns with his friend for the belly sake: but when trouble comes, he takes
hold of the shylde. Forget not thy friend in thy mind / and think upon him
in thy riches. Seek no council at thy kyns men / and hyde thy council from
such as bear the no good will. Eccl. viii. ^ and ix. ^
Every cou^celer brings forth his counsel. Nevertheless, there is some that
counceleth / but for his own profit: Beware of the counceller, and be aduysed
before whereto thou will use him, for he will council for him self. Lest he
cast the lot upon the, and say unto the, Thy way and purpose is good, and after
ward he stand against the, and look what shall become of the.

Ask no council at him / that suspecteth y^

And hold thy council fast in thine heart:

A wise man makes his people wise, and ye i. Cor. vi, ^ and. x. ^.
For all things are not profitable for all men, nether has every soul
pleasure in every thing. Be not gredye in every eating, and be not to hastye
upon all meats. Eccle. xxx. ^
For excess of meats brings syckenes, and glotony comes at the last to an
unmeasurable heat. Through surfeit have many one perisshed: but he that dyeteth
him self temperatly, prolongeth his life.

A physicion in syckenes ought we to pray, and to find a Physycion which
heals by prayer. The ^ew^pynge of the deed. S^du^^. Wisdom. Artificers or
craftesmen.

CAPI. XXXVIII.
Honor the Physician, honor him because of necessite. God has created hi^

The Lord has created medycyne of the earth / and he that is wise / will
not abhor it. Exodus xv. d ^. Reg. 4. c
Was not the bitter water made sweet with a tree? that men might learn to know
the virtue thereof. The Lord has given men wisdom / and understanding, that
he might be honored in his wondrous works. With such does he heal men /
and takes away their pains, Of such does the Apotecarye make a con^eccyon /
yet can no man perform all his works. For of the Lord comes prosperous
wealth over all the earth.

My son, despise not this in thy sycknes, ^. Pat. 16, d (...) ^8. a
pray unto the Lord / and he shall make the whole. Leave of from sin / and
order thy hands a right / cleanse thine heart from all wyckednes. Give a sweet
sauoured offering and the fine flower for a token of remembrance, make the
offering fat / as one that gives the first fruytes, and give rowme to the
Phisycion. For the Lord has created him let him not go from the / for thou
haste need of him. The hour may come, that the sick may be helped through
the^, when they pray unto the Lord, that he may recover / and get health to
live longer. He that sins before his maker shall fall into the hands of the
Phisycion.

My son, Eccle. 22. ^
bring forth thy tears over the dead: and begin to mourn / as yt thou
had suffered great harm thy self: and then cover his body after a
conuenyent manner / and despise not his buryall. Enforce thy self to weep / and
provoke thy self to mourn, 1. Ehe^. 4.
and make lamentacyon expedientlye / and that a day or two / leest thou be
euel spoken of: and then comfort thy self because of the heaviness. Prou. xii.
d and. xviii. d Eccle. xxx. d
For of heaviness comes death / the heaviness of the heart breaks strength.
Heaviness and pouerte greueth the heart in temptacyon and offente. Take no
heaviness to heart / drive it away / and remember the last things. Forget it
not / for there is no turning again. Thou shalt do him no good / but hurt thy
self. Remember his judgment, thine also shall be like wise: unto me yester
day, unto the to day. 2. Reg. xii. e
Let the remembrance of y^ deed cease in his rest / and comfort thy self
again over him / seeing his spirit is departed from him. The wisdom of the
scrybe is at conuenyent time of rest: and he that ceasseth

So does the potter sit by his work, he

A wise man. The works of God. Unto the good / good things do profet: but
unto the evil, even good things are evil.

CAPI. XXXIX.
HE that applies his mind to understand Eccle. 44 b
science of his learning / and rejoice in the covenant of the law of the
Lord. The whole congregacyon shall commend his wisdom / and it shall never be
put out. The remembrance of him shall never be forgotten / and his name shall
continue from one generacio^ to another. His wisdom shall be spoken of / among
the people, and the whole congregacyo^ shall openly declare his praise. While he
lives, he has a greater name then a thousa^de beside: and after his death,
the same name remains unto him. Yet will I speak of mo men of understanding
/ for I am full as the Moon.

Harken unto me (ye holy virtuous children) Gene. ^, d
All the worckes of the Lord are exceadynge good, and all his co^,
maundementes are mete and conueniente in due season.

A man need not to say: what is that? what is that? for at time convenient
they shall all Gene. vii. b
In his commandment is every thing acceptable and reconcyled, and his health
can not be mynisshed. The worckes of al flessh are before him, and there is
nothing hyd from his eyes. He seyth from everlasting to everlasting / and
there is nothing to wonderful or hye unto him. A man need not to say then /
what is this / or that? For he has made all things to do good unto man. His
blessing shall run over as the stream, and moisture the earth like a flood
of water. Like as he makes the water for drouth / so shall his wrath fall upon
the Heathen.

Osce. 14. ^ Rome. ^. ^
His ways are plain and right unto the Eccles. (...) ^
Al things necessary for y^ life of man are created from the beginning: water
/ fire / iron and salt, meel, wheat, and honey milk and wine, oil and
clothyng. 1. Eim. ^. ^
All these things are created for the best to the faithful: But to the un
godly shall al these things be turned to the hurt and harm. There be spretes
yt are created for vengeance, and in their rigorusnes have they fastened their
torments. Math. (...)
In the time of the end they shall pour out their strength and pacify the
wrath of hi^ that made the^. Eccles. (...). ^
Fire hayle / ho^gre and death: al these things are created for vengeance.

The teeth of wild noisome beasts, the scorpions, serpe^tes, and the sword
are created

Thefore have I taken a good courage unto me from the beginning / and thought
to put these things in wrytinge / and to leave the^ behind me. Gene. ^. ^
All the works of the Lord are good / and he gives every one in due season,
and when need is / so that a man need not to say: this is worse then that. For
in due season they are al pleasant and good: And therefore praise the Lord with
whole heart and mouth, and give thanks unto his name.

Many myseryes light in a man's life. All things pass away, but a fyrme
and stablyshe faith remains. Of the blessing of the ryghtuous, and
prerogatyue of the fear of God.

CAPI. XL.
A GREAT travail is created for all men / and an heavy yocke upon the children
buried in (the earth) ye mother of al things: namely, their thoughts and
ymaginacyons / fear of the heart, council, meditacions / longyng and desire,
the day of death: from the hiest that sytteth upon the glorious seat / unto ye
lowest and most simple upon the earth: from him that is gorgyously arrayed and
wears a crown / until him that is / but homely and symply clothed. There is
nothing but wrath zele / fearfulnes / unquietness / and fear of death /
rygorous, anger and strife. And in the night when one should rest and sleep
upon his bed / the sleep changes his understanding and knowledge. A little
or nothing is his rest, in the sleep as well as in the day of labor.

He fears and is disquieted in the vision Eccle. 39. ^
these things are all created against the ungodly, and for their sakes came y^
floude also. Gene. vii. d and. iii. d
All y^ is of ye earth, shall turn to earth again: and all waters ebb again
into the sea. All brybes and unrighteousness shall be put away / but faythfulnes
and truth shall endure for ever. The substance and goods of y^ ungodly
shall be dried up and syncke away as a water floude, and they shall make a
sound like a great thonder in the rain.

Like as the rightuous reioyseth when he Eccle. 41. b
The children of the ungodly shall not obtain many branches: and the unclean
rotes upon the hye rocks shall be roted out before the grass by the water side
and upon the river banckes.

Frendlynes and liberalite in the increase and blessyng of God / is like a
paradyse and garden of pleasure: such mercy also and kindness endures for ever.
^. Eym. 6. b Philip. 4. b
To labor and to be content with that a man has, is a sweet pleasauntlyfe:
and that is to find a treasure above all treasures. To beget children and to
repair the city, makes a perpetual name but an honest woman is more worth
then they both. Wine and mynstrelsye rejoice the heart / but the love of
wisdom is above them both.

Pypynge and harpynge make a sweet noise, but a friendly tongue goes beyond
the^ both. Thine eye desires favor and bewtye / but a grene sede time /
rather then they both. A friend and companyon come together at oportunyte, but
above them both is a wife that agrees with her husband. One brother helps
another in the time of trouble, but alms shall deliver more then they both.
Gold and silver fasten the fete / but a good council is more pleasant then
they both. Temporal substance and strength lift up the mind: but the fear
of the Lord more then they both. The fear of the Lord wants nothing, and
needs no help. The fear of the Lord is a pleasant garden of blessing,
and nothing so beautyful as it is. My son, led not a beggars life, for
better it were to dye then to beg. Who so look the to another ma^s table,
takes no thought for his own living how to uphold his life, for he fedeth
him self with other men's meat But a wise and well nurtoured man will bewarre
thereof. Begging is sweet in the mouth of the unshamefast, but in his belly there
burns a fire.

Of the remembrance of deeth. Deeth is not to be feared A cuiffe upon them
that forsake the law of God. Good name and fame, An exhortacyon to give head
unto wisdom. Of what things a man ought to be ashamed.

CAPI. XLI.
O Death / how bitter is the remembrance of the / to a man that seeks rest
Gene. 8. d
And why would thou be against this pleasure of the highest? Whether it be
ten, an hundredth / or a thousand years: death asks not how long one has
lived,

The children of the ungodly are abhomynable Eccles. xl. c
The inheritance of ungodly children shall come to naught / and their
posterite shall have perpetual shame and confusyon. The children complain of
an ungodly father: and why? for his sake they are rebuked and despised. Woe be
unto you (O ye ungodly) which have forsaken the law of the highest God: if ye be
borne / ye shall be borne to cursynge / if ye dye, the curse shall be your
porcyon.

Eccle. xi. b.
All that is of the earth / shall turn to earth again: so go the ungodly
also out of the curse into destruccyon. The sorrow of me^ is in their body:
but the name of the ungodly shall be put out. Eccl. xxii. a
Labor to get the a good name, for that shall continue su^er by the / then a
thousand great treasures of gold. A good life has a number of days / but a
good name endures ever.

Eccle. xx. d.
My children / keep wisdom in peace:

Be ashamed of whoredom, before father and mother: Be ashamed of lesynge,
before the Prince and men of auctoryte: Of sin, before the judge and ruler:
Of offense before the Congregacyon and people: Of vnryghtuousnesse, before a
companyon and friend: Of theft, before thy neighbors. Rome. i. b.
As for the truth of God and his covenant / be not ashamed thereof.

Be ashamed to lie with thine elbowes upon the bred: Be ashamed to look upon
harlottes: Be ashamed to turn away thy face from thy friend: Be ashamed to
take and not to give: Be ashamed also to look upon a another man's wife / and to
make many triflyng words with her maiden, or to stand by her bedsyde. Be
ashamed to vpbrayde thy friend when thou geuest any thing, cast him not in
the te^he withal.

Secrets may not be opened. The law of God must be taught. A daughter. A
woman. God knows all things / ye even the secrets of the he^^e.

CAPI. XLII.
REhearse not a thing twyse, and dysclose

The daughter makes y^ father to watch secretly: Eccle. (...)* ^*
If thy daughter be wa^ton, keep her straytly, leest she cause thine enemies to
laugh y^ to scorn, and the holy city to give the an evil report, and so y^
be feign to hear thy shame of every man, and be confounded before all y^
people. Eccle. ^. ^*
Behold not every bodies beautye, and have not much dwelling among women.
For like as the worm and moth comes out of clothing, so does wickedness of
women. Gene. ^* ^*


It is better to be with an evil man, then Io^. (...) Esaias(...)
No thought may escape him / neither may any word be hyd from him. He has
garnyshed the hye excellent works of his wisdom, and he is from everlasting
to everlasting. Unto him may nothing be added neither can he be mynished he
has no need also of any man's council. O how amiable are al his works, and as
a spark to look upon? They live all / and endure for ever: and when soever
need is they are al obedient unto him. They are al double, one against another:
he has made nothing that has fault or blemysh. (...).
He has stablyshed the goods of every one: and who may be satysfyed with his
glory, when he seyth it.

The sum of the ^reacyon of the worckes of God.

CAPI. XLIII.
THe glory of the heyght, is ^sal. v^ii. ^*
the fair

Who so keeps an oven when it is hot* ^hre times more does the Sun burn
upon the mountains, when it bretheth out the fyrye beams and shynethe: with
the brightness of it, it blyndeth the eyes. Great is the Lord that made it,
and in his commandment he causes it to run hastily.

(...). i. ^.
The moon also is in all, and at conueniente season it shows the times, and
is a toke^ of the time. (...)
The token of the sole^pne feast is taken of the Moon, a light that minisheth
and increases again. The Month is called after the Moon, it grows
wonderously in her chaungynge.

The army of heaven also is in the Heygth Gene. ix. d.
Look upon the raynebowe* and praise him that made it: very bewtyfull is it in
his shine. He co^paseth the heaven about with his clearnes and glory, the
hands of the Hiest have bended it. Through his commandment he makes the
snow to fall, and the thonder of his judgment to smite hastly. Through his
commandment the treasures are opened, and the clouds fle as the fowls. In
his power has he strengthened the clouds, and broken the hayle stones.

The mountains melt at y^ sight of him,

When the cold Northwynde blows, hard Crystal comes of the water. He
lyghteth down upon all the gatherynges together of water / and puts on the
waters as a breast plate. He deuoureth the mountains, and burns the
wildernesses: and look what is grene / he puts it out like fire. The
medicine of all these is / when a cloud comes hastily: and when a dew
comes upon the heat, it shall be refreshed again.

In his word he stylleth the wind: In his council he sets the deep, and
(the Lord) Jesus planted it.

They that sail over the sea / tell of the parels and harms thereof, and when
we hear it with our ears / we marvel thereat. For there be strange
wondrous worckes / diverse manner of nyce beasts and wha^fyshes. Through him
are all things set in good order and performed, and in his word all things
endure.

I speak much, but I can not sufficiently Psa. x^vi. ^*
and marvelous is his power. Praise the Lord / and magnify him as much as ye
may / yet does he far exceade all praise. Psalm ^vi. ^*
O magnifye him with all your power / and labor earnestly, yet are ye in no
wise able suffycye^tly to praise him. Who has seen him, yt he might tell us?
Deute. v ^. Ihon. ^. ^.
Who ca^ magnify him so greatly as he is? For there are hyd yet greater
things then these be: as for us / we have seen but few of his worckes. For
the Lord has made all things / and given wisdom to such as fear God.

CAPI. XLIIII.
The praise of certain holy men* Hen^^^* Noe, Abr^ha^, Isaac, and Jacob.

LET US commend the noble famous men / and the generacyon of our fore elders
and fathers. Many more glorious acts has the Lord done, and showed his
great power ever sens the beginning. The noble famous men raygned in their
kingdoms / and bare excellent rule. In their wisdom and understanding /
they followed the council showed in the prophecyes. Exodi. 18. ^*
They led the ^ol^ke through the council and wisdom of the Scribes of the
people. Wise sentences are found in their instruccyon. They sought the
swetenes and melody of Musycke and brought forth the pleasant so^ges in
scripture. They were rich also, and could comfort and pacifye those that
dwelt with them. All these were very noble and honorable men i^ their
generacyo^s / and were well reported of in their times. These have left a name
behind the^, so that their praise shall always be spoken of. Afterward there
were some / whose remembrance is gone. Genesis vii. d.
They came to naught and peryshed / as though they had never been: and became
as though they had never been borne / ye and their chyloren also with them.

Nevertheless these are loving men, whose Eccl. 49. ^. Gene. v. t.
Enoch walked right and acceptably before the Lord: therefore was he translated
for an example of ame^dement to the generacio^s, Gene. vi. a ^. vii. viii.
Noe was a steadfast and righteous man, and in y^ time of wrath he became a
reconcylynge.

Therefore was he left a remnaunt unto the earth, when the floude came. An
everlasting covenant was made with him, that all flesh should Gene. ix. ^.
perish no more with the water. Abraham was a Gen xvii. ^
great father of many people / in glory was there none like unto him. He kept
the law of the Hyeste, and came into a covenant with him. He set the
covenant in his flesh, and when he Genesis xxii. a
was proved, he was found faithful. Therefore swore god unto him with an oath,
that he would bless al people in his sede, that he would multiply and increase
him as the duste of the earth, and to exalt his sede as the stars: ye and
that his sede should have the possessyo^, an inherytaunce of the land from see
to see, and from the river unto the borders of the world. Gen xxvi. a
With Isaac did he stablysh the same covenant, for Abraham his fathers sake.
Ye that gracious blessing and health of al me^, and covenant did he stablysh
with Isaac, and made it to reit upon the head of Jacob. He knew him Genesis
xxviii ^. xxi^. xxx.
in that he prospered him so well and richely, and gave him an heritage, and
sundered his porcyon by it self, Iosul (...) and. ii^.
and parted it among the twelve tribes. Merciful men brought he out of him,
which found favor in the sight of all flesh.

The praise of Moses, Aaton, and Phinehes.

CAPI. XLV.
MOses Exodus (...) A^t^^. (...)
beloved of God and men, whose Number(...)
He stablyshed him with faythfulnes and mekenes, and chose him out of all men.
For he herd his voice*, and he led him in the darcke cloud, Exodus i(...)
and there he gave him y^ commandments, ye the law of life and wisdom
that he might teach Jacob hes covenant, and Israel his laws:

He chose Aaron his brother also out of the trybe of Leui, exalted him, and
made him such like. Exodus (...)
An everlasting cauenau^t made he with him, and gave him the presthode in the
people. He made him glorious i bewtyfull array, and clothed him with the
garment of honor. He put perfect joy upon him, and gyrded him with
strength. He deckte him with side clothes, and a tunycle, with an ouerbody cote
also and a gyrdle. Round about made he him belles of gold, and that many:
Exodi. (...)
that when he went in, the sound might be herd, that they might make a
noise in the Sanctuary, and give the people warning. The holy garment was
wrought and brodred with gold, yalowe sylcke and purple. And in the brestlappe
there was a goodly work, wherein was fastened light and perfectness.

Exodus (...)
Upon y^ same also there was a work fastened, Leui. (...)
Moses filled his hands, and anointed him with holy oil.

This was now confyrmed him with

Before all men living chose he him / that he should offer incense before the
Lord, and make odours for a sweet sauoure and remembrance / that he should
reconcyle the people of the Lord with him again. (...). xvi^ (...). xxi. a*
Mala. ii. ^
He gave him auctorite also in his commandments and in the covenant, that
he should teach Jacob the statutes and testymonyes and to enfour me Israel in
his law,

(...). xvi. (...).
Therefore there stood up certain against Nu. xvii. b
Besides this / he made Aaron yet more honorable and glorious.

He gave him an heritage / and parted the first fruits unto him. (...), xxv. ^
Leuit. 24. ^
Unto him specially he appointed the bred for sustenaunce / (for the prestes
did eat of the offrynges of y^ Lord) this gave he unto him and his sede. D^^^.
x^i. b and. xviii. Eze^. 44. d
Else had he no heritage nor portion in the land and with the people. For the
Lord him self is his porcyon and enherytaunce.

The third noble and excellent man is Number. xv* c.
Phinehes

CAPI. XLVI.
The praise of Iosue, Caleb and Samuel.

MAnly and strong in battayll was Jesus the son of Naue, which insteade of
Moses y^ Prophet was given to be captain of the people which according unto
his name was a great sauyoure unto the elect of god, to punish the enemies
that ^ose up against Israel, y^ Israel might optaine their inheritance. O how
great, noble and excellent was he, when he lift up his hand / and drew out
his sword against the cytyes? Who stood so manly before him? For the Lord him
self brought in the enemies. Iosut. xii ^ Number. 27. d
Stood not the su^ne still at his commandment / and one day was as long as
two? He called upon the Highest and most mighty when the enemies preassed upon
him on every side: and the Lord herd him with the hayle stones. They smote
the Heytheneshe people myghtely / and in falling down they slew all the
adversaries / so that the Heathen knew his host, and al his defense, yt the
Lord him self fought against the^ / for he followed upon the myghtie men of
the^. Deuteronomy. 34. d Iosue. ^. a.
In the time of Moses also, he and Ca^ch the son of Iephune / did a good
work / which stood against the enemies / with held the people from sin, and
stylled the wicked murmuring. Iosac. x. c.
And of six hundredth thousa^de Nu. xxvi g
people of foot, they two were preserved / to brige the^ into ye heritage,
namely, a ^ande that flows with mylcke and honey. Nu. xiiii. a
The Iosu xiiii c
Lord gave strength also unto Caleb, which remained with him unto his age: so
that he went up into the hye places of the land, and his sede conquered the
same for an heritage: that all the children of Israel might se, how good a
thing it is, to be obedient unto the Lord. And the judges or rulers (every
one after his name) whose heart went not a whoryng, nor departed from the Lord,
and that forsook not the Lord unfaithfully, whose remembrance has a good
report: ye their bones flourish out of their place, and their names shall never
be changed, (but honor remains still with the children of those holy me^)

1. Reg. x. a. and. xvi. ^.
Samuel the Prophet beloved of the i. Reg. vii a
He called upon the Lord the almyghtye, when the enemies preased upon him on
every side, what time as he offered y^ suckyng lambs. And the Lord tho^dred
from heaven and made his voice to be herd with a great noise, He discomfyted
the princes of Tire, and all the rulers of the Philistines.

ii. Re. xii. a
Before his last end he made protestacyon in the syghte of the Lord / and
his anointed that he took neither substance nor good of any man / no not so
much as a sho / and no man might accuse him. After this he told / that his
end was at hand / and showed the king also his end and death / and from
the earth lift he up his voice in the prophecy, that the ungodly people
should peryshe:

The praise of Nathan, David, and Solomon.

CAPI. XLVII.
AFterward in the time of king David / 2. Reg. xii. ^
Slew he not a gyaunte when he was yet but young / and took away the rebuke
from his people? what time as he took the stone in his hand / and smote down
proud Goliath with the s^inge? For he called upon the highest Lord, which gave
him strength in his right hand / so that he ouerthrewe the mighty gyaunte in
the battyll, that he might set up the horn of his people again. ^. Re. xvii. f
Thus brought he 3. Reg. 18. b
For he destroyed the enemies on every side, roted out the Philystynes his
adversaries / and brake their horns in sunder / like as it is broken yet this
day. In all his worckes he praised the Highest and Holiest / and asc^ybed the
honor unto him. With his whole heart did he praise y^ Lord and loved god that
made 2. Pa. 26. a
him. 2. Reg. v. b.
He set syngers also before the altar / and in their tune he made sweet
songs, He ordained to keep the holy days worshypfully / and that the solemn
feasts through the whose year should be honorably holden, with praysynge the
name of the Lord, and with singing by times in the morning in the Sanctuary.

2. Re. xii. o.
The Lord took away his sins, and 3. Reg. iii. ^
After hi there rose up the wise son called Solomon, and for his sake he
drove the enemies away far of. This Salomo^ reigned with peace in his time
(for God gave him rest from his enemies on every side, yt he myghe build him
an house in his name, and prepare the Sa^ctuary for ever) like as he was well
instruct in his youth / and filled with wisdom and understanding, as it
were with a water floude.

He covered and filled the whole land with similitudes and wise prudent
sentences.

His name went abroad in the Isles, because iii. Reg.
He gathered gold as tynne, and he had as much silver as lead. (...)
He was moved in inordynate love toward women / and was overcome in affection.
He stained his honor and worship / ye his posteryte defiled he also, in
bringing the wrath of the Lord upon his children / and sorrow after his
joy: iii. Re. xi. ^
so y^ his kingdom was divided, and Ephraim became an unfaithful / and an
vnco^sta^t kingdom. ii. Re. (...) ^
Nevertheless God forsook not his mercy, neither was he utterly destroyed
because of his worckes, y^ he should leave him no posterite.

As for y^ sede that came upon him, which he iii. Re. (...) ^
even, Roboam, which turned away the people through his council, and Jeroboam
the son of Nabat, iii. Re. (...)* ^
which caused Israel to sin, and showed Ephraim y^ way of ungodliness: In so
much that their sins and misdedes had the upper hand so sore, that at the
last they were driven out of the land for the same: Ye he sought out and
brought up all wyckednes, till the vengeance came upon them.

The praise of Eliah, Elizeas, Hezekiah, and Esaye.

CAPI. XLVIII.
THEN stood up 3. Re. xv^. ^
Eliah the Prophet iii. Re. (...)* ^ 4. Reg. ^. ^
and three times brought he the fire down. Thus became Eliah honorable in his
wondrous deeds. Who may make his boast to be like him? 3. Re. x^^* ^.
One that was deed raised he up from death, and ithe word of the highest he
brought him out of the grave again.

* He cast down kings and destroyed them / and the honorable from their
seat. Upon the mount Syna he herd the punishment, and upon Horeb the
judgment of the vengeance. He prophesied reco^pensynge unto kings, ^^. Re.
19. ^
and ordained prophets after him. ^. Reg. ii. c.
He was taken up in the storm of fire: in a charet of horses of the Lord. He
was ordaned in the reprouynges in time to pacyfye the wrath of the Lord, Luke.
^. ^.
to turn the hertes of the fathers unto the children, and to set up the trybes
of Jacob again. Blessed were they that saw the, and were garnyshed in love:
for we live in life: (but after death

^^. Reg. ii. (...)
Elias was covered in y^ storm, but Helyseus was filled with his sprete. While
he lived he was afraid of no prince / and no man might overcome him. There
could no word disceaue him, ^. Re. 13. ^.
and after his death his body prophesied. ^. Reg. b. ^ vii viii.
He did wonders in his life, and in death were his works marvelous. For all
this, the people amended not, nether departed they from their sins: 4. Re.
1^. b
till they were carried away presoners out of the land, and were scatred abroad
in all countrees, so that of them there ramayned, but a very little people / and
a prince unto the house of David. How be it some of them did right,

^ Pa. 32. a
Hezekias made his city strong / conveyed water in to it / dygged through the
stony rock with iron / and made up a well by the water side. ^. Re. (...). 36.
^.
In his time came Sennaheryb up and sent Rabsakes / lift up his hand against
Syon / and defied the^ with great pride. Then trymbled their nets and hands
/ so that they sorowed like a woman trauaylinge with child. So they called
upon the Lord / which is mercyful / and lift up their hands before him.
Immediately the Lord hard them out of heaven: (he thought no more upon their
sins / nor gave them over to their enemies:) but delivered them by the hand
of Esaias the holy prophet. ^. Re. 19. ^.
He smote the host of y^ Assyrians, and his angel destroyed the^. For
Hezekias had done the thing y^ pleased the Lord / and remained steadfastly in
the way of David his father, as Esaias the great and faithful prophet / in the
sight of God, had commanded him. ^. Reg. xx. b ^e^. 38, b
In his time the Sun went backwarde, and he lengthened the kings life. With
a right sprete prophesied ^e, what should come to pass at the last: and to
such as were sorrowful in Syon he gave co^solacion, where with they might comfort
them selves for evermore. He showed things y^ were ^or to come and secret, or
ever they came to pass.

Of Josiah, Hezethiah, David, Jeremy, Ezechiel, zo^o babel, Iesua, Nehemiah,
Enoch, and Joseph

CAPI. XLIX.
THE remembrance of 4. Re. 22. a. and. 23. 2. pat. 34. a.
Josias is like

Therefore was the elect cyt^e of y^ Sanctuary brent with fire, 4. Re. 25. d.
and the streates thereof lay desolate and wast in the hand of Jeremy: for
they entreated him evil / which nevertheless was a prohpet ordained from his
mothers womb / yt he might rote out / break of, Iere. i. a.
and destroy: and that he might build up, and plant again. Eze. ^. a
Ezechiel saw the glory of the Lord in a vysion / which was showed him upon
y^ charet of y^ Cherubins. For he thought upon the enemies in y^ rain, to do
good unto such as had ordered their ways a right. And the bones of the twelve
prophets floryshed from out of their place: for they gave comfort and
consolatyon unto Jacob, and delivered the^ faithfully. Agg. ii. a 1. Esor. iii
a 3. Esor. v. a
How shall we praise Zorobabel / which was as a ring in the rght hand?

Agge. i. ^ and. ii. ^
So was Jesus also the son of Iosedec: 2. Esor i. a.
And Nehemias is all way to be commended, 2. Esor. 7. a
which set up for us the walls that were broken down / made the ports and
bars again / and builded our houses of the new. Gene. v. ^. Eccle. 44. b.
Hebre. 12. ^
But upon the earth is there no man created like Enoch, for he was taken up
from the earth. Gene. 4^. f. 4^. ^. 45. c.
And Joseph / which was Lord of his brethren, and the up holder of his people:
his bones were covered and kept. Seth and Sem were in great honor among the
people: and so was Adam above all the beasts / when he was created.

Of Simon the son of Onias.

CAPI. L.
Simon 1. Man. 3. 4
the son of Onias the hye pressed, which in his life set up y^ house again,
and in his days made fast the temple. The heygth of the temple also was
founden of him, the double buyldinge, and the hye walls of the temple. In his
days the wells of water flowed out, and were exceadynge full as the sea. He
took care for his people, and delivered them from destruccyon. He kept his
city and made it strong, that it should not be beseged. He dwelt in honor
and worship among his people, and enlarged the intrau^ce of the house, and
the court. He gave light as the morning star in the myndest of the clouds,
and as the moon when it is full. He shyned as the sun in the temple of God.
He is as bright as the rain bow in the fair clouds / and florysheth as the
flowers and roses in the spring of the year, and as lylyes by the ryuers of
water: Like as the branches upon the mount Libanus in the time of summer: as a
fire and incense that is kindled. Like as an whole orname^t of pure gold, set
with all manner of precious stones, and as an Olyue tree that is fruitful / and
as a Cipres tree which grows up an hye.

When he put on the garment of honor,

Then began the sons of Aaron to

There be two manner of people that I abhor

I Jesus the son of Sirach Eleazarus of Jerusalem, have tokened up these
informacyons and documentes of wisdom and understanding in this book / and
poured out the wisdom of my heart. Blessed is he that exercyseth him self
therein: and who so takes such to heart, shall be wise for ever. If he do these
things, he shall be strong in all. For the light of the Lord leads him.

The prayer of Jesus the ^ou^e of Sirach.

CAPI. LI.
I Will thank the, O Lord and king,

They compassed me round about on every side, and there was no man to help
me. that would socoure me, but there was none. Then thought I upon thy mercy, O
Lord, and upon thy acts that thou haste done ever of old: namely, that thou
delyuerest such as put their trust in the, and ryddest the^ out of the hands
of the Heathen. Thus lift I up my prayer from the earth / and prayed for
delyueraunce from death. I called upon the Lord the father of my Lord, that
he would not leave me without help, in the day of my trouble and in the time
of the proud: I will praise thy name co^tynually, yeldynge honor and thanks
unto it: and so my prayer was herd. Thou sauedest me from destruction, and
deliueredest me from the unrighteous time. Therefore will I a knowledge and
praise the / and magnyfye thy name O Lord.

When I was yet but young, or ever I

My heart longed after her / and I gat a good treasure. Through her the Lord
has given me a new tongue, wherewith I will praise him. Esaias. ^v. a.
O come unto me ye unlearned, and dwell in the house of wisdom: withdraw not
your selves from her, but talk and comen of these things / for your souls
are very thyrsty. I opened my mouth, and spoke. O come and bye wisdom without
money, bow down your neck under her yocke, and your soul shall receive
wisdom. She is hard at hand and is content to be found. Behold with your
eyes, Eccles. vi. c
how y^ I have had but little labor, and yet have found much reast. O
receive wisdom, and ye shall have plenteousnes of silver and gold in
possession. Let your mind rejoice in his mercy, and be not ashamed of his
praise. Work his work by times, and he shall: give you your reward in due
time.

The end of the book of Jesus the son of Strach / which is called in Latyne
/ Ecclesiasticus.
: The book of the Prophet Baruch.
CAPI. I.
Baruch wrote a book, during the captiuyte of Babylon, which he read before
Iecontah and all the people. The Jews sent the book with money, unto Jerusalem
to their other brethren: to the intent that they should pray for them.

ANd these are the words of the book, which were written by Baruch the son
of Nerias, the son of Maasias, the son of Sedechias / ye son of Sedeias /
the son of Helchias / at Babylon in the fyfte year / and in the seventh day
of the month / what time as y^ Caldees took Jerusalem / and brent it up with
fire.

And Baruch did read y^ words of this book, that Iechoniah the son of
Ioac^^ king of Judah might hear: and in the presence of all the people, y^
were come to hear the book: ye and before all the noble kings sons /
before the Lords of the counsel and elders: and before the whole people, tro^
the lowest unto the highest: before all them that dwelt at Babylon, by y^ water
of Sody. Which when they herd it / wept, fasted, and prayed before the Lord.

They made a colleccyon also of money,

And they said: Behold, we have sent you money, Den. xiiii c. Iere. 29. b.
to bye you burnt offerynges and insence withal: make you unleavened bred, and
offer for sin upon the altar of the Lord our God. 1. Tim. 2. b.
And pray for the prosperyte of Naburchodonosor king of Babylon / and for the
welfare of Balthazar his son: that their days may be upon earth / as the
days of heaven: that God also may give us strength, and lyghten our eyes:
that we may live under the defense of Nabuchodo nosor king of Babylon, and
under the proteccyon of Balthazar his son: y^ we may long do them service /
and find favor in their sight. Pray for us also unto the Lord our God, for
we have sinned against the Lord our God and unto this day is not his wrath
turned yet away from us. And se y^ ye read this book (which we have sent unto
you to be rehearced in the temple of y^ Lord) upon the hye days, and at a
time convenient.

Thus shall ye say: Baru^. ii b. Da^^, ix. ^.
The Lord our God is ryghteous, but we are worthy of confusyon and shame:
like as it is come to pass this day / unto all Judah, and to every one that
dwells at Jerusalem: to our kings princes, prestes, prophets and to our
fathers. We have sinned before the Lord our God, we have not put our trust in
him / nor given him credence / we have not obeyed him, we have not herkened
unto y^ voice of y^ Lord our God, to walk in the commandments that the
gave us. Sens the day that he brought our forfathers out of the land of
Egypt unto this present day, we have been ever amys beleuyng and an unfaithful
people unto the Lord our God: destroyng our selves utterly, and shrynkynge
back, that we should not hear his voice.

Leui. 26 Deu. 28
Wherefore there are come upon us great plages and diverse curses, like as the
Lord Exodi. 12, 23, 14.
which brought our forefathers out of the land of Egypt / to give us a
land, that flows with mylck and honey, like as it is to se this day,
Nevertheless, we have not herkened unto the voice of the Lord our God,
according to all the words of the prophets, whom he sent unto us and to our
rulers: but every man followed his own mind and wicked ymaginacyon: to offer
unto strange gods, and to do evil in the sight of the Lord our God.

The Jews confess that they suffer Justly for their sins. The true
co^fessyon of the Christen. The Jews desire to have the wrath of God turned
from them. The Lord will that we obey unto pr^u^^^ although they beeuel. He
promyseth that he will call agayue the people from captivity, and give them a
new and an everlasting testament.

CAPI. II.
FOR the (...)
which cause the Lord our God has performed his deuyce, Deui. ^ 4. (...)
acordynge as it is written in the law of Moses: that a man should eat the
flesh of his own son / and the flesh of his one daughter. Moreover, he has
delivered them into the hands of all the kings, that are round about us (to
be confounded and desolate) and scatred them abroad in all lands and nations.
Thus are we brought beneth and not above, because we have sinned (...)
Therefore y^ Lord our God is ryghteous / and we with our fathers (as reason
is) are brought to oye^ shame, as it is to se this day. And as for these
plages yt are come upon us all ready, the Lord had devised them for us: yet
would we not pray unto the Lord our God, y^ we might every man turn from his
ungodly ways. So the Lord has caused such plages to come upon us: for he is
ryghteous in all his works, which he has commanded us: which we also have
not done / nor harkened unto his voice / for to walk in the commandments of
the Lord / that he had given unto us.

Da^^. (...)
And now, O Lord God of Israel thou that Exo. 7. (...) 10. 11. 1^, xiiii.
haste brought thy people out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, with
tokens and wondres / with thy great power and out stretched arm: and have
gotten thy self a name / as it is come to pass this day. O Lord our God /
we have sinned / we have done wyckedly / we have behaved our selves ungodly in all thy ryghteousnesses. Turn thy wrath from us (we beseech the) for we are but
a few left among the 2. Pat. ^*
Hear our prayers (O Lord) and our peticyons, bring us out of captiyte / for
thine own sake: get us favor in the sight of them, which have led us away:
that all lands may know / y^ thou art the Lord our God, and that Israel and
his generacyon calls upon thy name. O Lord / look down from thy holy house
upon us: enclyne thine ear, and hear us / open thine eyes Lord and se us.

Deu. ^. 261. Esaias. 41. ^. Psalm. 113. 1.
For the deed / y^ be gone down to their graves / and whose souls are out of
their bodies, * ascribe unto y^ Lord / nether praise nor ryghteous making: but
the soul that is vexed for the multitude of her sins which goes on heuely
and weakly / whose eyes be begin to fail: ye such a soul ascrybeth
praise and ryghtuousnesse unto the Lord. O Lord, we pour out our prayers
before

^^t. 27. a
Thus says the Lord: Bow down your shulders and necks / and serve y^ king
of Babylon / so shall ye remain still in the land / that I gave unto your
fathers. If ye will not do this / nor hear the voice of the Lord your God /
to serve the king of Babylon: I shall destroy you in y^ cities of Judah /
within Jerusalem and without. I will also take from you the voice of mirth and
the voice of joy / the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bryde, and
there shall no man dwell more in the land. But they would not harken unto thy
voice, to do the king of Babylon service: and therefore have thou performed the
words that thou spakest by thy servants the prophets: namely / that the
bones of our kiges, and the bones of our fathers should be translated out of
their place.

And lo / now are they laid out in y^ heat Deute. 4. d and, xxviii.
If ye will not harken unto my voice / then shall this great multitude be
turned into a very small people / for I will scatre them abroad.
Notwithstanding I am sure / that this folk will not hear me: for it is an
hard Hebre. 8. ^ zacha. 8. b Apoc. xxi. b
And I will make another covenant with them: such one as shall endure for
ever: namely / that I will be their God / and they shall be my people: and I will
no more drive my people the children of Israel, out of the land that I have
given them.

The people contynueth in their prayer beg^nne for their delyueraunce. He
prayseth wisdom unto the people, shewinge that so great adversities came unto
them for the dyspysynge thereof. Only God was the fynder of wisdom. Of the
incarnocyon of Christ.

CAPI. III.
AND now, O Lord almyghtye, thou Ephe. ii. ^
of the deed Israelites and of their children, which have sinned before the,
and not herkened unto the voice of the Lord their God, for the which cause
these plages hang now upon us. O Lord, remember not the wyckednes of our
forefathers, but think upon thy power and name now at this time: for thou
art the Lord our God, and the (O Lord) will we praise. D^ui. iii. c Iere. ^.
c. 3, ^ and ^. c
For thou have put thy fear Number. 14. a Psalm 77. a
in our hertes, to the intent that we should call

Behold, we are yet this day in our captyuyte, where as thou have scatred us,
to be an abhominacion, curse / and sin: Psalm. 79. a
like as it has happened unto our fathers also / because of all their
wickedness and departing from the.

O Israel, here the commandments of life: po^dre them well with thine ears
/ that thou may learn wisdom. But how happens it Israel, that thou art
in thine enemies land? thou art waxen old in a strange country, and defiled
with the deed. Why art thou become like them, y^ go down to their graves? Eue^
because thou have Iere. ii. b
forsaken the well of wisdom. For if thou had waleked Prove. i. a and.
iii. a
in y^ way of God, truly y^ should have remained still safe in thine own
land.

O learn then where discrecion is / where virtue is / where understanding is,
that thou may know also from whence comes Psalm. xix. b and. xxix. ^
long life, a necessary living / the light of the eyes / and quyetnes. Who
ever found out her place? or who came ever into her treasures.

Where are the princes of the Heathen become / and

The Agarenes sought after wisdom, but Deute. 4. ^ Ier. xx^* ^ Psa. xx^^. ^
Great is he, and has none end: ye and unmeasurable. What is become of
those famous gyauntes, that were so great of bodies and so worthy men of
war, Those had not the Lord chosen, nether have they found the way of
reformacyon, therefore were they destroted and for so much as they had no
wisdom, they perysshed because of their foolyshnesse.

Who has gone up into heaven, to take Gene. ^ d
This same is he which prepared the earth at y^ beginning, and filled it with
all manner of fowls and beasts. Iosue. i. ^ Esaias. 38. ^. E^^^. xi^^. a
When he sends out y^ light, it goes: and when he calls it again, it
obeys him with fear. The Stars keep their watch, and give their light,
ye and that gladly. When he calls them, they say: here we be. And so with
cheerfulness they show light unto him that made them. Psalm. (...) Deuteronomy. ^.
^^
This is our God, and there shall none other be compared unto him. It is he,
that has found out all wisdom, and has given her unto Jacob his servant,
and to Israel his beloved. Johan. ^. 1. Io^^. ^
After ward did he show him self upon earth, and dwelt among men.

The reward of them that keep the low, and the punyshement of them that
despise it. A comfortynge of the people being in captyn^^ A complaynte of
Jerusalem, and under the figure thereof, of the Church: A consolacyon and
comtortynge of the same.

CAPI. IIII.
THis is the Book of the commandments of God / and the law that endures
Psa. ^^^^
how happy are we seeing that God has showed us such things as are
pleasant unto him? Be of good chere / thou people of God, O thou ancient
Israel. ^. (...). (...) and. xx^.
Now are ye sold among y^ Heath^, howbeit / not for your utter destruccyon:
but because ye provoked God the Lord to wrath and displeasure, therefore were ye
delivered unto your enemies: for ye displeased y^ everlasting God that made
you, offeringe unto deuels and not to God. Ye have forgotten him that brought
you up / and your nursse have ye grieved, O Jerusalem.

When she saw y^ the wrath of God was

Let no man rejoice over me wyddowe and forsaken: which for the sins of my
children am desolate of every man. For why? they departed from the law of God:
they would not know his ryghtuousnes, nor walcke in the way of his
commandments: and as for the paths of the truth and godlynes, they had no
lust to go in them.

O ye dwellers about Syon: come / and Deute. (...). ^ Iere. ^. ^
He has brought a people upon them from far, an discourteous people and of a
strange language: which nether regard the old, nor pytie the young.

These have carried away the dear beloved of my wyddowes, leaving me alone /
both desolate and chyldlesse. But alas, what can I help you? Now he that has
brought these plages upon you, deliver you also from the hands of your enemies.

Go your way (O my children) go your way: for I am desolate and forsaken,
Deute. 4. ^ (...). ^ Esa. ^xxx. a
I have put of the clothing of peace, and put upon me the sack cloth of prayer
/ and for my time I will call upon the most Highest. Be of good cheer O my
children: cry unto the Lord / and he shall deliver you from the power of y^
princes, your enemies,

For verily / I have ever a good hope of your prosperous health: ye a very
gladness is come upon me from the holy one / because of the mercy that ye shall
have of our everlasting savior.

With mourning and weeping did I let you go fro me / but with loye and
perpetual

O my children, ^. (...). (...). ^
suffer pacie^tly the wrath that shall come upon you. For the enemy has
persecuted the / but shortly thou shalt se his destruccyon / and shalt
tread upon his neck. My derlynges have gone rough hard ways / for they are
led away as a flock that is scatred abroad with the enemies. But be of good
comfort (O my children) and cry unto the Lord: For he that led you away /
has you yet in remembrance: and like as ye have been minded to swerve from
your God, Esaias. iv. ^
so shall ye now endeavor your selves. x. times more, to turn again and to
seek him. For he y^ has brought these plages upon you, shall bring you
everlasting ^oy again with your health. Take a good heart unto the, O Jerusalem:
for he which gave the ye name, exhorts the so do.

I^^^. ^. a. b c
The wicked doers that now put the to trouble, shall perysh: and such as have
reioy sed at thy fall / shall be punyshed. The cytyes whom thy children serve /
and that have carried away thy sons, shall be correct. For like as they be
now glad of thy decay (and rejoice at thy fall) so shall they mourn in their
own destruccio^. The joy of their multitude shall be taken away / and their
cheer shall be turned to sorrow. For a fire shall fall upon them from the
everlasting God, long to endure: and it shall be inhabyted of deuels for a great
season.

Jerusalem is moved unto gladness for the return of he^ people, and under the
figure thereof, the Church.

CAPI. V.
O Jerusalem, look about the toward

Put of thy mournyng clothes (O Jerusalem) and thy sorrow, and deck the with
the worship and honor / that cammeth unto the from God, with everlasting
glory. God shall put the garmente of ryghtuousnes upon the, and set a crown of
everlasting worship upon thine head: for upon y^ will God declare his
brightness, y^ is under the heaven. Ye an everlasting name shall be given the
of god, with peace of ryghtuousnesse, and the honor of Gods fear.

Arise, O Jerusalem, stand up on hye:

I copye of the epistle that Jeremy sent unto the Jews, which were led away
presoners by the king of Babylon: wherein he certifieth them of the thing,
that was commanded him of God.

CAPI. VI.
BEcause of the sins that ye have done Iere. (...). ^. ^
led away captyue unto Babylon / even of Nabuchodonosor the King of Babylon.
So when ye become into Babylon / ye shall remain there many years, and for
alonge season: namely seven generacions: and after that will I bring you away
peaceably from thence. Now shall ye se in Babylon gods of gold, of silver,
of wod and of stone: borne upon men's shulders, to cast out a fearfulness
before the Heathen. But look that ye do not as the other: be not ye afraid,
and let not the fear of them over come you.

Therefore, when ye se the multitude of people Deute. us. c
Yet ^Iere. x a
can not these gods deliver themselves from ruste and mothes. When they have
covered them with clothing of purple, they wype their faces for the dust of
the temple, whereof their is much among them. One has a scepter in his hand /
as though he were judge of the country: yet can he not fley such as offend
him. Another has a swearde or an axe in his hand / for all that, is he neither
able to defend him self from battle / nor from murderers.

By this ye may understand / that they be no gods: therefore se that ye
neither worship

By this ye may be sure, that they are not Sepi. 14*
They must be borne upon men's shoulders / as those that have no fere: whereby
they declare unto men / that they be ntohynge worth. Psalm. 114*
Confounded be they then that worship them. For if they fall to the ground
they can not rise up again of themselves. Ye though one help them up and set
them right / yet are they not able to stand a lone: but must have proppes set
under them like deed men. As for the thing that is offered unto them / their
prestes sell it, and abuse it: ye the prestes wives take thereof, but unto the
sick and poor they give nothing of it / the women with child and the
menstruous lay hands of their offringes. By this ye may be sure, yt they are
no gods, therefore be not ye afraid of the^. From whence comes it then,
that they be called gods? The women sit before the gods of silver / gold
and wodde / and the prestes sit in their temples / having open clothes, whose
heads and beerdes are shaven and have nothing upon their heads: toryng and
crieng upon their gods, as men do at the feast / when one is deed.

The prestes also take away the garments Eccle. v, ^
Though a man make a vow unto the^ and keep it not / they will not require it.
They can save no man from death / neither deliver the weak from the mighty.
They can not restore a blind man to his sight / nor help any man at his need.
They can show no mercy to y^ wyddowe / nor do good to the fatherless. Their
gods of wood, stone / gold / and silver / are but even as other stones*
that be hewn of the mountain. They that worship them / shall be confounded.
How should they then be taken for Gods? Ye how darre men call them gods?
And though the ^aldees worshypped them not, hearing that they were but domme
and could not speak. Yet they themselves offer unto Bell / and would feign have
him to speak: as who say / they could feel / that may not move. But when
these men come to understanding / they shall forsake the^ / for their gods
have no feeling. A great sort of women gyrde with coardes / sit in the streets
/ and burn olyue beryes. Now if one of them be conveyed away / and lie with
any such as come by: she casts her neghbours in y^ teth* because she was not
so worthily reputed / nor her coorde broken. What so ever is done for them / it
is but in vain and lost. How may it then be thought or said / that they
are gods? Carpenters and gold smythes make them / nether be they any other
thing, but even what the work men will make of them. Ye the gold smythes
them selves that make them / are of no long contynuaunce. How should then the
things that are made of them / be Gods? Uayne therefore are the things (ye
very shame is it) that they leave behind them for their prosperyte. For as
soon as there comes any war or plage upon them / then the prestes ymagyn,
where they may hyde themselves with them. How can men thyncke then that they
be Gods / which neither may defend themselves from war / nor deliver them
from mysfortune? For seeing they be but of wood / of stone / of silver and of
gold: all people and kings shall know herafter / that they be but vain
things: ye it shall be openly declared / that they be no gods: but even the
very works of men's hands / and that God has nothing to do with the^. (It is
manifest then that they are no gods, but the worckes of men's hands / and no
work of God in them. (They ca^ set no king in the land / nor give rain unto
men. They can give no sentence of a matter / nether defend the land from
wrong. For they are not able to do so much as a crow / that flies betwixt
heaven and earth.

When there happens a fire into the house

The end of the Book of the Prophet Baruch / which is not in the Canon of
the Hebrew.
The Song of the three children / which were put into the hot brenning oven.
The common tra^slacion reads this song in the. iij. chap. of Daniel.
ANd they walked in the myddest of the fla^me. praysynge God and magnyfyenge
the Lord. Asarias stood up, and prayed on this manner. Even in the myddest of
the fire opened he his mouth, and said: Blessed be thou (O Lord God of our
fathers) right worthy to be praised and honored is the name of thine for
evermore: for thou art ryghtuous in all things that thou have done to us: Ye
faithful are all thy worckes / thy ways are right, and all thy judgments
true. In all the things that thou haste brought upon us, and upon the holy
city of our fathers (even Jerusalem) thou haste executed true judgment: ye
according to right and equity have thou brought all these chynges upon us,
because of our sins.

For why? we have offended, and done wyckedly, departing from the: Daniel. ix. ^
In all things have we trespaced, and not obeyed thy commandments, nor
kept them, neither done as y^ have bydde^ us, y^ we might prospere. ^a^^. ii b.
Wherefore all that thou have brought upon us, and every thing that thou have
done to us, thou have done them in true judgment: As in deliuerynge us in to
the hands of our enemies / among ungodly and wicked abhomynacions, and to an
unrighteous king, ye y^ most froward upon earth. And now we may not open
our mouths, we are become a shame and reprofe unto thy servants, and to
the^ that worship the. Yet for thy names sake (we beseech the) give us not up
for ever, break not thy covenant, and take not away thy mercy from us / for
thy beloved Abraha^s sake / for thy servant Isaacs sake and for thy holy
Isreal's sake. To who^ you have spoken and promised Gene. xv. ^ 22 ^ xxvi b.
Deut^. x. d
y^ thou would multyplye their sede as the stars of heaven, and as the
sand that lies upon the sea shore. For we (O Lord) are become less then any
people, and be kept under this day in all the world, because of our sins:
So y^ now we have nether prince, duke, prophet, burnt offering, sacrilyce,
oblacyon incence, nor Sanctuary before the.

Nevertheless, in a contryte heart and an humble sprete let us be received, y^
we may obtain thy mercy. Like as i^ the burnt offering of rams and
bullockes, and like as in thousands of fat lambs so let our offering be in
thy sight this day, that it may please y^, ^. (...) Rom^ (...) Esaye. ^ Rom^.
^
for there is no co^fusyon unto the^, y^ put there trust in the. And now we
follow the with al our heart / we fear the, and seek thy face. Put us not to
shame, but deal with us after thy loving kyndnesse, and according to the
multitude of thy mercies. Deliver us by thy miracles (O Lord) and get thy name
and honor: that all they which do thy servants evil, may be confounded.
Let them be a shamed through thy almyghtye power, and let their strength be
broken: that they may know how y^ thou only art the Lord God, and honor
worthy through out all y^ world.

And the kings servants that put them in, ceased not to make the oven hot
with wild fire, dry straw, pytche and fagot^es so that the slame went out of
the oven upon a. xlix. cubits: ye it took away and brent up those Caldees,
that it gat hold upon beside the oven. But the Angel of the Lord came down
into the oven to Asarias and his fellows, and smote the flamme of the fire out
of the oven, and made the midst of the oue^ as it had been a cold wind
blowynge: so y^ the fire nether touched them, grieved them, nor did them hurt.
Then these three (as out of one mouth) praised, honored, and blessed god in the
furnace, saying.

^. M^^. ^ ^
Blessed be thou, O Lord god of our fathers: for thou art praise and honor
worthy, ye and to be magnyfied for evermore. Psalm. ^^^
Blessed be y^ holy name of thy glory, for it is worthy to be praised, and
magnyfyed in all worlds. Blessed be thou in the holy temple of thy glory, for
above all things thou art to be praised, ye and more then worthy to he
magnified for ever, Blessed be you in the trone of thy kingdom, for above all
y^ art worthy to be well spoken of, and to be more then magnified for ever.
Blessed be thou / that lokest through the (...), and syttest upon the
Cherubyns: for thou art worthy to be praised / and above all to be magnyfyed
for ever. Blessed be thou in the firmament of heaven, for thou art praise and
honor worthy for ever.

O al ye works of y^ Lord: speak good of the Lord / praise him, and set him
up for ever.

Psalm. (...). ^ and. (...) ^
O ye angels of the Lord / speak good of the Lord, praise him / and set him
up for ever.

O ye heavens, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him up for ever.

O all ye waters that be above the firmament, speak good of the Lord: praise
him, and set him up for ever.

O all ye powers of the Lord, speak good of y^ Lord / praise him, and set him
up for ever.

^^al. ^49 ^
O ye Sun and Moon, speak good of y^ Lord: praise him / and set him up for
ever.

O ye startes of heaven* speak good of the Lord: praise him / and set him up
for ever.

^^al. ^36. ^
O ye showers and dew, speak good of y^ Lord: praise him / and set him up
for ever.

O all ye wyndes of God, speak good of y^ Lord: praise him / and set him up
for ever.

O ye fire and heat, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him up for
ever.

O ye winter and sammer, speak good of y^ Lord: praise him, and set him up for
ever.

O ye dewes and frostes / speak good of the Lord: praise him / and set him up
for ever.

O ye frost and cold, speak good of y^ Lord: praise him / and set him for
ever.

O ye yse and snow, speak good of the Lord: praise him / and set him up for
ever.

O ye nyghtes and days: speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him up
for ever.

O ye light and darcknes, speak good of the Lord: praise him / and set him up
for ever.

O ye lyghtnynges and clouds / speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set
him up for ever.

O let the earth speak good of the Lord: ye let i^ praise him, and set him
up for ever.

O ye mountains and hills, speak good of y^ Lord: praise him / and set him
up for ever.

O all ye grene things upon the earth / speak good of the Lord: praise him
/ and set him up for ever.

O ye wells, speak good of y^ Lord: praise him / and set up for ever.

O ye sees and floudes, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him up
for ever.

O ye whalles and all that move in the waters, speak good of the Lord: praise
him / and set him up for ever.

O all ye fowls of the air, speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him
up for ever.

O all ye beasts and catel, speak good of y^ Lord, praise him / and set him
up for ever.

O ye children of men / speak good of the Lord, praise him, and set him up
for ever.

O let Israel speak good of the Lord: praise him, and set him up for ever.

O ye prestes of the Lord, speak good of the Lord / praise him / and set him
up for ever.

Psalm. 113. ^ ^34. a. and ^xxxv. a ^po^a x^x. c
O ye servants of y^ Lord / speak good of the Lord: praise him / and set
him up for ever.

O ye spretes and souls of the rightuous speak good of the Lord, praise him,
and set him up for ever.

O ye holy and humble men of heart / speak ye good of the Lord: praise ye him
/ and set him up for ever.

O Ananias, Asarias and Misael / speak ye good of the Lord: praise ye him, and
set him up for ever. Iere. xx. ^. Esaias. 43. a
Which has delivered us from y^ hell / kept us from the hand of death, ryd us
from the myddest of the burning flamme, and saved us even in the myddest of
the fire, Psa ^xvi^ a and. ^vi. a
O give thanks therefore unto the Lord: for he is kind hearted, and his mercy
endures for ever. O all devout men / speak ye good of the Lord, even the
God of all gods: O praise him / and give him thanckes / for his mercy
endures world without end.

The story of Susa^ na / which is the. xiij. chapter of Daniel after the Latin.
THere dwelte a man in Babylon /

Now when the people came again at after

When they returned again, they came together, enquyryng out y^ matter
betwyxte them selves: ye the one told y^ other of his wicked lust. Then
appointed they a time, when they might take Susanna alone.

It happned also y^ they spyed out a convenient Exodi. ii. a 2, Reg. xi. a
to wasshe her self in the garden, for it was an hot season. And there was
not one person there, except the two elders, had y^ hyd them selves, to
behold her. So she said to her maidens: go fet me oil and soap, and shut the
orcharde door, that I may wash me. And they did as she bad them, and shut the
orchard door, and went out them selves at a back door, to fet the thing that
she had commanded, but Susanna knew not, that the elders lay there hyd
within. Now when the maidens were gone forth, the two elders gat them up, and
ran upon her, saying: now the orcharde doors are shut, that no man can se us:
we have a lust unto the, therefore co^sente unto us, and lie with us.

If thou wylt not, we shall bring a testymoniall against the: that there was a
young

Then ra^ne there one to the orchard door, and smote it open. Now when the
servants of the house herd the erye in the orchard, they russhed in at the
back door, to se what the matter was. So when the elders told

Those two elders stood up in the myddest of the people, Leu^^^. ^^
and laid their hands upon the head of Susanna: which wept, and looked up
toward Heaven / for her heart had a sure toust in the Lord. And the elders
said: As we were walking in the orchard alone, this woman came in with her
two mayde^s: whom she sent away from her, and sparred the orcharde doors: with
that a young fellow (which there was hyd) came unto her, and lay with her. As
for us / we stood in a corner of the orcharde. And when we saw this wyckednes
/ we Hebre. 4. ^
thou sercher of secrets, thou that know al things before they come to pas:
thou wotest, that they have borne false wytnes against me: and behold, I
must dye, where as I never did any such things, as these men have
malycyously invented against me. And the Lord herd her voice. For when she
was led forth to death, the Lord raised up the sprete of a young child /
whose name was Daniel, which 2. Reg. ^* ^ (...). xx. ^
I am clean from this blood. Then all the people turned them toward him, and
said. What mean these words / that thou have spoken? Daniel stood in the
myddest of the^, and said: Are ye such fools, O ye children of Israel, that
ye can not discern nor know the truth? Ye have here condemned a daughter of
Israel unto death, and know not y^ truth wherefore: Go sit on judgment again
/ for they have spoken false witness against her.

Wherefore the people turned again in all the have. And the elders (that is, the
pryncypall heads) said unto him: come sit down here among us, and show us
this matter / seeing God has given the as great honor as an elder. And
Daniel said unto the^. 2. Reg. (...). ^
Put these two aside one from another / and then shall I hear the^. When they
were put asunder one from another he called one of them and said unto him: O
thou old canckerd earl, that have used thy wickedness so long: thine
ungracious deeds which you have done before / are now come to light. For thou
have given false judgments, thou have oppressed the innocent / and letten the
gyltye go fre / where as yet y^ Lord says: ^od. 22. a (...). xvii. ^
The innocent and ryghtuous se thou sley. not. Well tha^ / if thou have seen her
tell me under what tree saw thou them talkyng together? He answered: under a
Molbery tree. And Danyel said: very well / now thou lie even upon thine
head. Lo the messaunger of the Lord has received the sentence of him, to cut
the in two. Then put he him aside / and called for the other, and said unto
him: O thou sede of Canaan / but not of Judah: Fayrenesse has disceaued the,
and lust has subverted thine heart. Thus dealte ye before with the daughters of
Israel, and they (for fear) consented unto you: but the daughter of Judah would
not abide your wickedness. Now tell me tha^ under what tree dydest y^ take
the^, speakinge together? He answered: Under a Po^granate tree. Then said
Daniel unto him: very well, now thou lie also eue^ upon thine head. The
messaunger of the Lord stands waytyng with the sword, to cut the in two,
and to sleye you both.

With that, all the whole multitude gave a great shoute, and praised God, Psa.
xvi. ^
which always delivered them that put their trust in him. And they came upon
the two elders (whom Danyell had conuycte with their own mouth: that they
had given false witness) and dealte with them / even like wise as they would
have done with their neighbors: ye they did ^^^^. xix d (...). xix ^
according to the law of Moses, and put the^ to death. Thus the innocent
blende was saved the same day.

Then Helthiah and his wife praised God for their daughter Susa^na, with
Ioachim her husband and all the kynred: y^ there was no dishonestye found in
her. From that day forth was Danyel had in great reputacion in the sight of the
people. (And king Astiages was laid with his fathers, and Cirus of Persya
reigned in his stead.)

The end of the storye of Susanna.
: The storye of Bell / and of the Dragon / which is the. xiiij. chapter of
Daniel after the Latin.
O Aniel did eat at the kings table, and was had in reverence above al his
fre^des. There was at Bavilo^ an yma ge, called Bell: and there were spent upon
him every day. xij. cakes. xl. sheep and six great pottes of wine. Him did
the king worship him self, and went daily to honor him: but Daniel
worshipped his own God. And the king said vnty him: Why do not thou
worship Bell? He answered and said. * Because I may not worship things
that be made with hands, Deuteronomy. iiii. e and. v. c Exodi. xx. a Deute. vi. d
Mat. iiii. a
but the living God, which made heaven and earth, and has power upon all
flesh. The king said unto him: thinckest thou not, yt Bell is a living God?
Or seyst y^ not how much he eats and dryncketh every day? Daniel smyled,
and said: O king, disceaue not thy self: for this is but made of claye within,
and of metal without, Eccle. xxx. ^
neither eats he ever any thing,

Then the king was wroth, and called for his prestes, and said unto them: If
ye tell me not who is this, that eats up these expenses, ye shall dye: but if
ye can certify me, that Bell eats them, then Daniel shall dye, for he has
spoken blasphemy against Bell. And Daniel said unto the king: let it so be
according as thou have said. The Prestes of Bell were. lxx. beside their wives
and children. And the king went with Danyel in to the temple of Bell. So Bells
prestes said: Lo / we will go out / and set thou the meat there (O king) and
pour in the wine: then shut the door fast / and seal it with thine own
sygnet: and to morrow when thou come in / if thou fyndest not that Bell has
eaten up all, we will suffer death: or else Danyell that has lied upon us. The
Prestes

So when they were gone forth, the king set meats before Bell. Now Daniel had
commanded his servants to bring ashes, and these he syfted through out all
the temple / that the king might se. Then went they out, and sparred the
door, sealyng it with the kings signet / and so departed. In the night came
the prestes with their wives and children (as they were wo^te to do) and did
eat and drink up al. In the morning by times at the break of the day / the
king arose / and Yet (O king) they be whole. Now as soon as he had opened y^
door, the king looked un to the aultare, and cried with a loud voice Great art
thou O Bell / and with the is no disceate. The^ laughed Danyel, and held y^
king that he should not go in, and said. Be hold the pauement, marcke well,
whose totesteppes are these? The king said: I se the fotesteppes of men, women
and children.

Therefore the king was angrye / and I^rem. li. g Es^. xlvi. a Iere. l. ^.
and delivered Bell into Daniels power / which destroyed him and his temple.

And in that same place there was a great Dragon, which they of Babylon
worshypped. And the king said unto Daniel, satest thou / that this is but a
God of metal also? lo / he lives / he eats and dricketh: so that thou can
not say / y^ he is no living God / therefore worshype him. Daniel said unto
the king: I will worship the Lord my God, Daniel. 6. c
he is y^ true lyuinge god: as for this / he is not the god of life. But give
me leave (O King) and I shall destroy this Dragon without swearde or staff.
The King Dani. vi. c
he delivered Daniel unto them: which cast him into the lio^s den, where he
was six days. In y^ den there were seven lyo^s, and they had give them
every day two bodies and two sheep: which then were not given them, to the
intent that they might devour Daniel.

There was in Iewry a Prophet called

And Abacuc said: Lord / I never saw Babylon: and as for the den / I know
it not. Ez^^. ^*
Then the Angel of the Lord took him by the top / and bare him by the hear
of the head, and (through a mighty wind) set him in Babylon upon the den.
And Abacuc cried. saying: O Danyel 3. Re. ^*
y^ servant of God, have, take y^ breakfast / that God has sent the. And
Daniel said: O God / have y^ thought upon me? well / thou never saylest them
that love the. So Daniel arose, and did eat: and the Angel of the Lord set
Abacuc in his own place again immediately.

Upon the seventh day, the king went Iere (...) Hest. ^* D^^^* ^*
and he drew him out of the lyo^s de^ne. Dani* ^* Luke* ^ Es(...)*
As for those that were the cause of his destructyo^, he did cast the^ into the
den, and they were devoured in a moment before his face. After these, wrote
the king unto all people, kynredes and tongues / that dwelt in all countrees,
saye^ge: peace be multiplied with you. My commau^ demente, is in all the
dominion of my realm: that men fear and stand in awe of Daniels god, for he
is y^ lyui^ge god, which endures ever: his* kingdom abides vncorrupt, and
his power is everlasting. It is he that ca^ deliver and save he does wonders
and marvelous works i^ heaven and i^ earth, for he has saved Daniel from the
power of the Lions.

The end of the Storye of Bell.
: The prayer of Manasses king of Judah when he was holden captyue in Babylon.
O Lord almyghtye / high, above all the earth, long suffryng, and exceadynge
mercyful, and repentau^t for the malice of me^. Thou Lord after thy goodness
have promised repentance of the remission of sins: and thou that art the
God of the rightuous / have not put repentance to the rightuous, Abraham Isaac
/ and Jacob, unto the^ that have sinned against the: But because I have sinned
above the nombre of the sands of the sea, and that mine iniquytyes are
multyplyed / I am humbled with many ba^des of iron, and there is in me no
breathynge. I have provoked thine anger, and have done evil before the / in
commyttinge abhomynacyons and multyplyinge offenses. And now I bow the knees
of my heart / requyring goodness of the O Lord, I have, sinned Lord I have
sinned / and know mine inyquytye. I desire the by prayer / O Lord forgive me:
forgive me and destroy me not with mine inyquytyes / neither do thou always
remember mine euylles to punysh them, but save me (which am unworthy) after
thy great mercy: and I will praise the euerlastyngly / all the days of my
life: for all the virtue of heaven prayseth the, and unto the belongs glory,
world with out end. Amen

: The first book of the Machabees.
After the death of Alexander the King of Macedonia. Antio^hu^ takes the
kingdom. Many of the children of Israel moke covenant with the Ge^tyles.
Antiochus subdueth Egypt ^ Jerusalem unto his dominion. Jerusalem being burnt
makes laws of her own, and forbyddeth to keep Gods laws. Ant^^ch^^
sets up an Ibol over the alt^r of god.

CAPI. I.
AFter that Alexandre Iudi^. i. b.
and therefore was he proud in his heart. Now when he had gathered a mighty
strong host and subdued the lands and people with their princes, so y^ they
became tributaries unto him, he fell syck. And when he perceived y^ he mu^ needs
dye / he called for his noble estates (which had been brought up with him of
children) D^^^ vii ^ and. viii. ^.
and parted his kingdom among them / while he was yet alive. So Alea^der
raygned. xii. year, and then dyed.

After his death fell the kingdom unto his princes, and they optained it every
one in his rowne / and caused them selves to be crowned as kings: and so did
their children after them many years, and much wickedness increased i the
world. Out of these came y^ ungracious rote, noble Anty^chus the son of
Antiochus y^ king ( 1. Mac ^ ^
which had been a pledge at Rome) and he raygned in the. C. xxxvij. year of
the empire of the Greeks.

In those days went there out of Israel Deu. v^^ a. Iud^^*
Let us go and make a covenant with the Heathen / y^ are round about us:
(...)
for sense we departed from them / we have had much sorrow. So this deuyce
pleased them well, and certain of y^ people took upon the^ for to go unto y^
king, which gave the^ license to do after the ordinance of y^ Heathen. 1. (...)
Then set they up an open scole (at Jerusalem) of the laws of the Heathen /
and were no more cyrcum^ised: but forsook the holy Testamente, and joined them
selves to y^ Heathen ^. (...) ^^i. d
, and were clean sold to do mischefe,

So when Antiochus began to be mighty in his kingdom, he went about to
obtain y^ land of Egypt also, that he might have the domynio^ of two realms*
^ M^^ v* a
Upon this entered he into Egypt with a sto^ge host / with charettes, elephantes,
horsemen and a great nombre of ships / and begaune to war against Ptolomy
the king of Egipte.

But Ptolomy was afraid of him / and fled: and many of his people were wounded
to death. Thus Antiochus wanne many strong cities, and took away great good
out of the land of Egypt.

2. M^^. v. c
And after that Antiochus had smytten

none other answer, neither cast they one stone at them, nor made fast their
preuy places, but said: We will dye all in our innocency, heaven and earth
shall testyfie with us, that ye put us to death wrongeously. Thus they fought
against the^ upon y^ Sabbath / and slew both men and catell, their wives and
their children, to the no^bre of a thousand people.

When Mathathias and his friends herd

Thus Mathathias and his friends went about, and destroyed the aulters / and
circu^cysed the children, that had not yet received circu^cisyon: as many as
they found within the costs of Israel: and followed myghtely upon the children
of pride / and this act prospered in their hands: In so much, that they kept
the law against the power of the Gentyles and the kings / and gave not over
their domynion unto wicked doers.

After this when the time drew on fast,

Jacob. ii. d Roma. 4. d Gene. 22. b
Remember Abraa^, was not he found faithful in temtacion / and it was reckened
unto him for righteousness? Hebre. xi d. Eccle. 44. c Gene. 41. b
Joseph i time of his trouble kept the commandment and was made a Lord of
Egypt. Number. 25. c Eccles. 45. ^
Phinehes our father was so fervent for y^ honor of God, that he optayned the
covenant of an everlasting presthode. Number. 27. d Iosu^. i. a
Iosue for fulfyllinge y^ word of God, was made the captain of Israel. Number.
14. ^
Caleb bare record before the co^gre gacyon and received an heretage. 1. Reg.
^^
David also in his merciful kyndnesse / optayned the trone of an everlasting
kingdom.

4. Reg. ^ Daut. ^^
Elias being gelous and fervent in the law, was taken up into heaven. Hananias
/ Asarias and Mysael remained steadfast in faith, and were delivered out of the
fire. In like manner Daui. (...) ^
Daniel being vngyltye / was saved from the mouth of the Lions.

And thus ye may consydre through out Hebre. ^
that whosoever put their trust in God, were not over come Math. ^
Fear not ye then y^ words of an ungodly man, Esaias. ^ and. 51. ^ ^. Petri ^
Jacob. ^ Ecle^s. ^ Psalm. ^
for his glory is but donge and worms: to day is he set up, and to morrow is
he gone: for he is turned into earth / and his memoryal is come to naught.
Wherefore (O my sons) take good hertes unto you / and quyte your selves like
men in the law: for if ye do the chynges that are commanded you in the law
of the Lord your God, ye shall obtain great honor therein.

And behold / I know that your brother Simon is a man of wisdom: se y^ ye
give ear unto him always / he shall be a father unto you. As for Judas Machabeus
/ he has ever been mighty and strong from his youth up, let him be your
captain / and order the battayll of y^ people: thus shall ye bring unto you al
those y^ favor the law, and se that ye avenge the wrong of your people, and
recompense the Heathen again. and apply yourselues whole to the commandment
of the law. So he gave them his blessing, and was laid by his fathers: and
died in the: C. and. xlvi. year at Modyn, where his sons buried him in his
fathers sepulcre / and all Israel made great lamentacyon for him.

Judas is made ruler over the Jews. He kylleth Appollonius and Scran the
Prince of Syrta. The confydence of Judas toward God. Judas determyneth to
fight against Lysias, whom Antiochus had made cuptayne over his host. The
prayer of the absteyncts.

CAPI. III.
THEN stood up Judas Machabeus in his fathers stead / and all his brethren
Joseph ^ cap. 85 12. ar^ ^
He Psalm. ^
was an enemy to the wicked, and hunted the^ out: ^. Mat. 8. ^
and brent up those y^ vexed his people: So that his enemies fled for fear of
him, and all y^ workers of ungodliness were put to trouble: such luck and
prosperyte was in his hand. This grieved diverse kings, but Jacob was greatly
reioysed through his acts, and he gat him self a great name for ever.

He went through the cities of Judah / destroyenge the ungodly out of the^,
turnynge away the wrath from Israel / and receauynge such as were oppressed:
and the fame of him went unto the utter most part of the earth. Then
Appollonius (a prince of Syria) gathered a mighty great host of the Heathen,
and out of Samaria, to fight against Israel. Which when Judas perceived / he
went forth to mete him / fought with him, slew him / and a great multitude
with him, the remnau^t fled, and he took their substance, Judas also took
Appolonius own sword, and fought with it all his life long.

Now when Seron (an other prince of Siria)

1. Reg. 14. a
But Judas said: It is a small matter for many to be ouercomed with few, ye
there is no difference to the God of heaven, to deliver by a great multitude,
or by a small company: 2. Pat. 25. b
for the victory of the battle stands not in y^ multitude of the host, but
y^ strength comes from heaven. Behold, they come against us with a
presumptnous and proud multitude, to destroy us, our wives and our children
/ and to rob us. But we will fight for our lives / and for our laws, and the
Lord him self shall destroy the^ before our face: therefore be not ye afraid
of them.

As soon as he had spoken these words,

So when king Antiochus heard these

Nevertheless when he saw / that there was not money enough in his
treasuries, and that through the dyscorde and persecucyon, which he made in
the land (to put down the laws that had been of old times) his customs and
trybutes of the land were mynyshed: he feared that he was not able for to
bear the costs and charges any longer / nor to have such gifts / to give so
lyberally, as he did before, more then y^ kings that were before him.

Wherefore, he was heavy in his mind, and thought* ^. Mat. ^. a.
to go in to Persides / for to take trybutes of the land / and so to gather
much money. So he left Lysyas (a noble man of the kings blood) to ouerse
the kings busynesses / from the water Euphrates unto the borders of Egypt:
and to keep well his son Antiochus / till he came again.

Moreover / he gave him half of his host, Joseph. ca^t. li. antiq.
them: Thus the king took the other part of the host / and departed from
Antioch (a city of his reame) over the water of Euphrates, in the hundredth
and. xlvij. year, and went through the hye countries.

2. Mat. ^. d.
And Lysyas chose unto him Ptolomy the son of Doriminus, Nicanor, and Gorgias
mighty men, and the kings friends. These he sent with.xl. thousand footmen
and. vii. thousand horsemen, for to go in to the land of Judah and to destroy
it / as the king commanded. So they we^re forth with all their power / and
came to Emuians into the plain field. When the merchants heard the rumoure
of them / they and their servants took very much silver and gol^^, for to
bye the children of Israel to be their bond men. There came unto them also yet
^^o men of war on every side / out of Syria and from the Palestynes.

Now when Judas and his brethren saw

^. M^^h. ^ d
As for Jerusalem, it lay void, and was as it had been a wilderness. There
went no man in nor out at it / and the Sanctuary was trodden down. The
al^au^tes kept y^ castle, there was the habytacyon of the Heathen. The mirth
of Jacob was tak^ away, y^ pipe and the harp was gone from among them.

The Israelytes gathered the^ to gether, and came to Maspha before Jerusalem:
for in Maspha was the place ^. Reg. 7. b.
where they prayed before time in Israel. So they fasted that day, and put
sackclothes upon them, ^ast ashes upon their heads / tente their clothes /
and laid forth the books of the law (wherout the Heathen sought the likeness
of their images) and brought the Prestes ornaments, the fyrstlinges and the
tithes. They set there also the Number. 6. a.
absteyners (which had fulfilled their days) before God / and cried with a
loud voice toward heaven, saying: What shall we do with these? and

They blewe out the tro^pette also with a loud voice. The Judas ordened Exod^.
28. d
captains over the people: over thousands / over hundredes, over ^yfrye, and
over ten. But as for such as builded the^ houses, married wives / planted them
vyneyardes, and those that were fearful he: co^ma^^ed the^ every man to go
home again, according Deu^. xx ^. Iudi. 7. a.
to the law. So the host removed / and pytched upon the southsyde of Emmaus.

And Judas said: Arm your selves: be strong (O my children) make you ready
against to morrow in the mourning / that ye may fight with these people /
which are agreed together to destroy us and our Sanctuary. Better is it for
us to dye in battayl / than to ^e our people and our sanctuary in such a
miserable case. Math. ^ Luke. ^.
Nevertheless / as thy will is in heaven / so be it.

Iuda^ goes against Gorgias which ^^eth ^n wait. He pu^^^th Gorgias and his
host to ^^yght. ^ysya^ ^^^^deth ^^wrye* but Judas dryueth him out. Judas
pu^^^y^th the temple and de^y^at^th the ^u^^^re.

CAPI. IIII.
THEN took Gorgias five thousand ^o (...) li^. ^ (...)
best horsemen: and removed by night to come nigh where the Jews host lay /
and so to slaye them suddenly. Now the men that kept the cast^ll / were the
co^^eyers of the^. Then arose Judas to smite the chief and principal of the
kings Host at Emmaus, for the army was not yet come together. In the mean
season came Gorgias by night in to Judas tents: and when he found no man
there / he sought them in the mountains / and thought they had been fled away
because of him. But when it was day, Judas showed him self in the field with
three thousand men only, which had nether harness nor swardes to their minds.

But on the other side, they saw that the Heathen were mighty and well
harnessed, and their hors^^e^ about them / and all these well expert in
feats of war. Then said Judas to the me^ that were with him: Fear not ye
the multitude of them / be not afraid of their vyolente runnynge: remember,
how our fathers were delyue^ed Exodus ^4.
in the reed see, when Pharao followed upon them with a great Host.

Even so let us also cry now toward heaven: and the Lord shall have mercy
upon us, and remember the covenant of our fathers, ye and destroy this Host
before our face this day: And all the Heathen shall know / that it is God
him self / which delyuereth and saves Israel.

Then the Heathen left up their eyes: and 2. ^^ac. ^^
So they buckled together, and the Heathen were discomfyted and fled over the
plain field: but the hynmost of them were slain. For they followed upon them
unto Assaremoth, and in to the feldes of Idumea toward Azot and Iam^^a: so
that there were slain of them upon a three thousand men. So Judas turned
again with his Host, and said unto the people: Be not gredy of the spoils /
we have yet a battle to fight: for Gorgias and his host are here by us in the
mountains / but stand ye fast against our enemies / and over come them: then
may ye safely take the spoils.

As Judas was speaking these words,

So Judas turned again to spoil the tents / where they gat much gold and
silver, precious stones, purple and great riches. Thus they went home / and
song a Psalm of thankesgeuynge, and praised God in heaven: Ps^ (...). a Psa.
118. a
for he is gracyous, and his mercy endures for ever: And so Israel had a great
victory in that day.

Now all the Heathen that escaped / came and told Lysias every thing as it
happened. Wherefore Lisias was sore afraid, and grieved in his mind / because
Israel had not gotten such misfortune as he would they should / neither as the
King commanded. The next year following, gathered Lysias three score
thousand chosen me^ of foot / and five thousa^de horsemen, to fight against
them.

So they came into Iewry, and pytched ^. Reg. 17. g
which dyddest destroy the violent power of the gyaunt, in the hand of thy
servant Dauyd, ^. Reg. 14. b
and gave the host of the Heythen into the hand of Ionathas (the son of
Saul) and of his weapen bearer.

Put this host now into the hand of thy people of Israel / and let them be
confounded in their multitude and horsemen. Make them afraid, and discomforte
the boldness of their strength / that they may be moved through their
destruction. Cast them down through the swearde of thy lovers / then shall all
they that know thy name / praise the with thankesgeuyng.

So they stroke the battayl, and their were slain of Lysyas host, five
thousand men. Then Lysias seeing the discomfitynge of his men / and the
manlynesse of the Jews / how they were ready, either to ^yue or to dye like
men: He went unto Antyoche / and chose out men of war: that when they were
gathered together, they might come again in to Iewry. Then said Judas and his
brethren: behold, our enemies are discomfited: Let us now go up / to cleanse*
and to repair the Sanctuary.

^^. Mac. ^. a
Upon this / all the host gathered them

Then Judas appointed certain men to fight against those which were in the
castle till they had cleansed the Sanctuary. So he chose prestes y^ were
undefiled, such as had pleasure in the law of God: and they cleansed the
Sanctuary, and bare out the defiled stones into an unclean place. And for so
much as the altar of burnt offeringes was unhallowed, he took aduysemente,
what he might do with all: so he thought it was best to destroy it (least it
should happen to do the^ any shame) for the Heythen had defiled it, and therefore
they brake it down. As for the stones / they laid them up upon the mountain
by the house in a convenient place: till there came a Prophet, to show, what
should be done with them.

Erod. (...). d D^ut 27. ^ Ios^^. 8. g
So they took whole stones accordige to ^^. Mac. x. a
And upon the. xxv. day of the. ix. month, which is called the month of
Ca^^eu, in the. Cxl viij. year: they rose up by times in the morning for to do
sacryfyce (according to the law) upon the new burnte offering altar that
they had made: after the time and season that the Heythen had defiled it. The
same day was it set up again, with songs pypes / harpes and cymbales.

And all the people fell upon their faces / 3. Par. 7. b
So they kept the dedicacion of the altar. vii^. days, offrynge burnt
sacrifyces and tha^kofferynges with gladness.. They deckte the temple also
with crowns and shyldes of gold and hallowed the ports and celles, and hanged
doors upon the^. Thus there was very great gladness among the people, because
the blasphemy of the Heythen was put away. So Judas and his brethren with the
whole congregation of Israel / ordained, y^ the time of the dedicacions Johan.
x. c
of the altar should be kept in his season from year to year / by the space
of. vii^. days, from the. xxv. day of the month Casieu: with mirth and
gladness.

And at y^ same time builded they up the mount Syon with hye walls and strong
towers round about: lest the Gentiles should come and tread it down / as
they did before Therefore Judas set men of war in it, to keep it: and made it
strong / for to defend ^. Math^. 6. d. c
Be thsura: that the people might have refuge against the Edomytes.

CAPI. V.
Iud^s vaynquyshed the Heathen that go about to destroy Israel and is helped
of his brethren Simon and Iona th^s. He overthrows the city of Ephron
because they denied him passage through it.

IT happened also that when the Heythen round about herd, how that the altar
and the Sa^ctuary were set up i^ their old estate it displeased them very
sore, wherefore they thought to destroy y^ generation of Jacob y^ was among
the^: In so much y^ they began to sley and to persecute certain of the
people Ios^p. ^ap. xii. lib. xii.
Then Judas fought against the children Ezec. x^^. ^ and * xxxv. a ii. Man. x.
^
of Esau in ^dumia, and against those which were at Arabathane (for they
dwelte round about the Israelites) where he slew and spoiled a great
multitude of them. He thought also upon the malice and unfaithfulness of the
children of Bean / how they were a snare and stop unto the people, and how
they laid wait for them in the hye way: wherefore he shut them up into towers
/ and came unto them, destroyed them utterly, and brent up their towers / with
all that were in them.

Afterward went he against the children of Ammon / whereof he found a
mighty power and a great multitude of people / with Timothy their captain.
So he stroke many battayles with them / which were dystroyed before him. And
when he had slain them, he wanne Gazer the city / with the towns belonging
thereto, and so turned again into Iewry. The Heathen also in Galaad gathered
the^ together against the Israelites that were in their quarters / to s^ey^
the^: but they fled to the Castle of Dathema^ / and sent letters unto Judas
and his brethren,

While these letters were yet a reading, behold, there came other messaungers
from Galile, with rent clothes: which told even the same tidings / and
said / that they of Ptolomais / of Tyrus and of Sydon were gathered against
them, and that all Galilee was filled with enemies to destroy Israel 2, M^^^*
When Judas and the people herd this / they came together (a great
congregation) to deuyse, what they might do for their brethren / that were in
trouble and beseged of their enemies. And Judas said unto Simo^ his brother:
chose the out certain men, and go deliver thy brethren in Galile: As for me
and my brother Ionathas / we will go into Galaadithim. So he left Josephus the
son of Zachary / and Azarias to be Captains of the people, and to keep the
remnaunt of the Host in Iewry, and commanded them / saying: Take the
ouersyght of this people / and se yt ye make no war against the Heythen /
until the time that we come again. And unto Simon he gave three thousand men,
for to go into Galile / but Judas him self had eight thousand in Galaadithim.

Then went Symeon into Galile / and journey in the wilderness: where the
Nebuthees met them, and received them lovingly / and told them every thing
that had happened unto their brethren in Galaadithim, and how that many of them
were beseged in Barasa / Bosor, Al^mis Casphor, Mageth and Carnaim (all these
are strong walled and mighty great cities) and that they were kept in other
cities of Galaad also: and to morrow they are appointed to bring their host unto
these cities, to take them / and to win them in one day.

So Judas and his host turned in all the haste in the wilderness ward Bosor,
and wanne the city / slew all the males with the swearde, took all their
goods, and set fire upon the city. And in the night they took their iourneye
from thence, and came to the castle: And by times in the morning when they
looked up / behold / there was an innumerable people bearing ladders and other
instruments of war / to take the castle and to overcome them.

When Judas saw that the battayll began, and that the noise thereof went up
and range in to the heaven, and that there was so great a cry in the city:
He said unto his host fight this day for your brethren. And so came behind
their enemies in three companyes, and blewe up the trompettes / and cried in
their prayer to God.

But as soon as Timothes host perceived y^ Machabeus was there, they fled
from him, and the other slew them down right sore: so that there were killed
of the^ the same day / almost eight thousand men. Then departed Judas unto
Maspha, laid sege unto it, and wanne it, slew all the males in it, spoiled it
/ and set fire upon it. From thence went he and took Casbon, Mageth, Bosor /
and the other cities in Galaad.

2. Mat. x. d
After this gathered Timothy another

And Timothy said unto the captains of his host: when Judas and his hooste
come nigh the river: if he go over first, we shall not be able to withstand
him: for which will be to strong for us. But if he dare not come over / so
that he pytch his tent beside the water: then will we go over / for we shall be
strong enough against him. Now as soon as Judas came to y^ river, he
appointed certain scrybes of the people, and commanded them, saying: se that
ye leave none behind upon this side of the river, but let every man come to
the battle. So he went first over unto them and his people after him.

And all the Heythen were dyscomfyted before him, and let their weapens fall,
and ra^ne into the temple that was at Carnaim. Which city Judas wanne, and
burnt the temple with all that were in it: So was Carnaim subdued, and might
not withsta^de Judas. Then Judas gathered all the Israelites that were in
Galaadithim / from the lest unto the most, with their wives and their children
(a very great host) for to come into the land of Israel.

2. Mac. 1^^
So they came unto Ephro^, which was

Wherefore Judas commanded a proclamacyon to be made through out the Host,
that every man should keep his order: and so they did there best like valeaunt
men.

And Judas beseged y^ city all that day and all that night, and so wanne it:
where they slew as many as were males, and destroyed the city, and spoiled
it, and went through all the city over them yt were slain. Then went they
over Iordane into the plain feld before Betsan. And Judas helped those forward
yt came behind, and gave the people good exhortacion all the way through, till
they were come into the land of Judah. Thus they went up unto the mount Syon,
where they offered with mirth ^. Pa^. 20. a
and tha^kesgeuynge: because there were none of them slain, but came home
again peaceably.

Now what time as Judas and Ionathas were in the land of Galaad, and Simon
their brother in Galilee before Ptolomays: Then Josephus the Son of Zachary
and Asaryas the captains, hearing of the acts that were done and of the
^attales that were stricken, said: Let us get us a name also / and go fight
against the Heathen that are round about us.

So they gave their host a commandment / and went toward Iamnya. Then i.
Mat. v. b
and all because they were not obedient unto Judas and his brethren, but
thought they should quyte the^ selnes manfully. Nevertheless they came not of
the sede of these men, by whom Israel was helped. But the men that were with
Judas, were greatly commended in the sight of all Israel and all Heythen,
where so ever their name was herd upon, and the people came unto them, byddyng
them welcome.

After this went Judas forth with his brethren, and fought against the
children of Esau, in the land y^ lies toward the south where he wanne the
city of Hebron and the towne^s that lie beside it: and as for the walls and
towers round about it, he burnt them up. Then removed he to go into the
land of the Philistines, and went through Samaria. At the same time were
there many prestes slain in the battle, which wylfully and without
aduysemente went out for to fight to get the^ honor. And when Judas came to
Azot in y^ Philistines land, Deuti. vi a
he brake down their aulters / bren^e the images of their Idols, spoiled the
cities, and came again in to the land of Judah.

Antiochus wyllyng to take the cyti^ of Elynas for a pray is d^y^^^ ^ way of
the (...). He tells into syckenesse and dies. His son Anti^ch^s (...) ^a^^
king. The be^^g^ of the tower of Sion. Eu^^tor co^m^^h into Iewrye with a
great army. The boldness of E^^az^r.

CAPI. VI.
NO we when king Antiochus trauayled through the hye countrees, he herd y^
Elymas Joseph. (...). xiii. li. xii entiq.
that his hoostes which were in the land of Judah / were driven away, and how
that Lysias went forth first with a great power, and was driven away of the
Jews: how y^ they had wo^ne the victory, and gotten great goods out of the
hosts y^ peryshed: how they had broken down the abhomynacion, i. Matha. iii.
c. and. iiii
which he set up upon i Math (...)
the altar at Jerusalem, and fenced the Sa^ctuary with hye walls, like as it
was before: ye and Bethsura his cite also.

So it chanced, that when the king had ii. M^^^ (...) ^. (...)
So the king Antiochus dyed there, in the. cxlix. year Iose(...) (...). li. ^
1. Ma^^ (...)
who^ he had brought up) to raygne in his fathers stead, and called him
Eupator. Now they that were in the castle (at Jerusalem) kept in the Jews
round about the Sanctuary and sought ever still to do them harm, for the
strengthenynge of the Heythen.

Wherefore Judas thought to destroy the^ and called all the people together /
that they might lay sege unto the^. So they came together in the. Cl. year,
and beseged them / layinge forth their ordinance and instruments of war.
Then certain of them that were be seged / went forth (unto whom some ungodly
men of Israel joined them selves also) and went unto the king, saying: How
long will it be / or thou punysh and avenge our brethren? We have ever been
minded to do thy father service / to walk in his statutes / and to obey his
commandments: Therefore our people fell from us / and whersoeuer they found
any of us / they slew them: (and spoiled our inherytaunce) and they have not
only meddled with us / but with all our countries: and behold / this day are
they besegyng the castle at Jerusalem, Math^. (...) g
and have made up the strong hold in Bethsura: And if thou do not preuente
them right sone / they will do more then these / and thou shalt not be able to
overcome them.

^. Math^. (...). d
When y^ king herd this / he was very i Math. iiii (...). xi ^
beseged it a long season, and made diverse instruments of war against it.
But ye Jews came out and brent the^, and fought like men. Then departed Judas
from the castle at Jerusalem, and removed the host toward Bethzacaran over
against the kings army.

So the king arose before the day, and brought the power of his Host into
the way

As for the remnaunt of the horsemen / he set them upon both the sides in two
parts with trompettes, to provoke the host, and to stere up such as were
slow in the army. And when the sun shone upon their shyldes of gold and
stele, the mountains glistred again at them, and were as bright as the
cressettes of fire. The kings host also was divided, one part upon the hye
Mountains, the other low beneth: so they went on, taking good head / and
keeping their order. And all they that dwelt in the land / were afraid at the
noise of their host, when the multitude went forth, and when the weapens smote
together / for the host was both great and mighty. Judas also and his host
entered into the battle, and slew. vj. C. men of the kings army. Now when
Eleasar y^ son of Saura did se one of y^ Elephantes decked with the kings badge
/ and was a more godly be then the other: he thought y^ king should be upon
him and ieoparde him self to deliver his people, and to get him a perpetual
name.

Wherefore he ran with a courage unto i. Machab^ iiii. ^. vi. d. (...). Mat.
x^. ^ ^. xv. d
Bethsura.

But when they came out of the cite because they had no vytailes within, and
the land lay untilled) the king took bethsura, and set me^ to keep it, and
turned his hooste to the place of the Sanctuary / and laid siege to it a great
while. Where he made al manner ordinance handbowes, fyrye darts, rackettes to
cast stones, scorpions to shut arowes, and slinges The Jews also made
ordinance against theirs, and fought a long season.

But in the city there were no vytayles / for it was the seventh year of the
wars / and those Heythen y^ remained in Iewrye / had eaten up all their
stoare. And in the Sanctuary were few me^ left,* for y^ hungre came so upon
the^, that they were scatred abroad every man to his own place.

So when Lysyas heard that Phylyppe ( 2. Mat. 6. ^
who^ Antiochus the king while he was yet living / had ordained to bring up
Antiochus his son / that he might be king) was come again out of Persia and
Medea with the kings host, and thought to obtain the kingdom. He gat him to
the king in all grieved and do all these things against us, because we have
despised their law. So the king and the princes were content, and sent unto
them to make peace, and they received it. Now when the king and the princes had
made an oath unto the^, they came out of the castle, and the king went up to
mount Syon. But when he saw that the place was well fenced / he brake the
oath that he had made, and commanded to destroy the wall round about. Then
departed he in all the haste, and returned unto Antioche / where he found
Philyppe having dominion of the city. So he fought against him, and took the
city again into his hands.

Demetrius raygned after he had killed Antiochus and Lysyas. He troubles the
children of Israel through the counsel of certain wicked persons. The
prayer of the Prestes against Nicanor. Judas kylleth Nicanor, after he had
made his prayer.

CAPI. VII.
IN the. C^^. year came Demetrius the son

Then the king chose Bachides a friend 1. Math. i b
Therefore Judas and his people believed not their saying, for they saw that
they were come with a great Host.

After this came the scribes together unto Alcimus and Bachides, trusting the
best unto them. And first the Assideans required peace of them, saying:
Alcimus the priest is come of the sede of Aaron, how can he disceyue us? So
they gave them loving words, and swore unto them, and said: we will do you
no harm: neither your fre^des: and they believed them. But the very same day
took they. lx. men of them and slew them according to the words that are
written: Psalm. 79. ^
They have cast the flesh of thy saynetes, and shed their blood

Now when Judas saw all the mischefe that Alcimus and his company had done
(ye more then the Heythen them selves) unto the Israelites: He went forth
round about all the borders of Iewrye / and punysshed those unfaithful
rennagates, so that they came no more out into the country. So when Alcimus
saw, that Judas and his people had gotten the vpperhande, and that he was not
able to abide them: he went again to the king, and said all the worste of
them that he could. Then the king sent Nicanor one of his chief princes
(which bare evil will unto Israel) and commanded him, that he should utterly
destroy the people.

2. Mat. (...) ^
So Nicanor came to Jerusalem with gat him away from him, and would se his face
no more. When Nicanor perceived that his council was bewrayed / he went out to
fight against Judas / beside Carpharsamala: where there were slain of
Nicanors host. v. M. men: and the resydue sled unto the Castle of Dauyd.

After this came Nicanor up unto mount Syon: and the prestes with the elders of
the people went forth to salute him peaceably / and to show him the burnt
sacrifices that were offered for the king. But he laughed them and the people
to scorn, moked them / defiled their offeringes, and spoke disdaynedly / ye
2. Mar. 14 ^
If Judas and his host be not delivered now into my hands, as soon as ever
I come again (and fare well) I shall burn up this house. With that / went he
out in a great anger. Then the prestes came in / and stood before the altar
of the temple, weeping and saying. 2. Para. 3. c 3. Regu^. 8. ^. Esap. 56. b
for so much as thou (O Lord) haste chosen this house / that thy name might
be called upon therein, and that it should be Math. 21. b
an house of prayer and peticion for thy people: Be avenged of this man and his
host / and let the^ he slain with the sweard: remember ye blasphemies of them,
and suffer them not to continue any longer.

When Nicanor was gone from Jerusalem, he pytched his tente at Bethoron / and
there an host met him out of Syria. And Judas came to Adarsa with three
thousand men / and made his prayer unto God, saying: O Lord, Esaias. 37. ^ 2.
Mat, 8. d and xv. d 4. Re. 19. g
because the messengers of king Senacherib blaphemed the / the Angel went
forth and slew an hundredth four score and five thousa^de of them. Even so
destroy thou this host before us to day: y^ other people may know how that
he has blasphemed thy Sanctuary: and punysh him according to his
malyciousnesse.

And so the hoostes stroke y^ field, the thyrtene day of the Month Februar^^.
Adar: and Nicanors host was discomfyted, 2. Mat. 15 d
and he him self was first slain in the battle. When Nicanors men of war
saw that he was killed, they cast away their weapens and fled: but the Jews
followed upon them an whole days journey / from Adazer unto Gazara / blowynge
with the tro^pettes, and making tokens after them. So the Jews came forth of
all y^ towns there about / and blewe out their horns upon them, and turned
against them. Thus were they all slain / and not one of them left.

Then they took their substance for a pray / and smote of Nicanors heed and
his right hand ( 2. mat. 14. ^
which he held up so proudly) and brought it with them, and hanged it up
before Jerusalem. Wherefore, the people were excedyngly reioysed / and passed
over that day in great gladness. And Judas ordained, y^ the same day (namely
the thyrtynth day of the month Adar) should be kept in mirth every year.
Thus the land of Judah was in rest a little while.

Judas considering the power and godly polly^y^ of the Romans, makes peace
with them. The re^ceypt of the Romaync^ sent unto the Iewee.

CAPI. VIII.
Judas herd also the fame of the Romans / that ^. Math. ^ ^
kingdoms and Isles, which sometime wtstode them, they destroyed the^, and
brought them under their domynyon. But helped ever their own friends and
those that were confederate with them, and conquered king domes both far and
nye^ and that whosoever herd of their renown, was afraid of the^: for who^
they would help to their kingdoms, those raygned: and who^ it lyked not the^ to
raygne, they put hi^ down. And how they were come to great preemynence:
having no king among them, nether any man clothed in purple, to be magnified
there through, but had ordained them selves a parlame^t, where in there sat three
hundredth and twenty Sena tours daily upon the council, to dyspatche ever the
business of the people, and to keep good order. And how that every year they
chose a Mayre, to have the governance of all their land: to whom every man was
obedyent, and there was neither evil will nor discencion among them.

Then Judas chose Eupolemus the son

According to these articles, the Romans

After the death of Nycanor, Demetrius sends his army against Judas. Judas
is slain. Ionathas is put in the ste^de of his brother. The stryte between
Ionathas and Bachydes Al^ymus is taken with the palsye and dies. Bachydes
returns again unto the king He comes upon Ionathas by the count. ^ of
certain wicked persons, and is overcome. The truce of Ionathas with Bachydes.

CAPI. IX.
IN the mean season when Demetrius herd 1. Ma(...) Iosep in 17. lib. (...).
Nicanor and his host was slain in the field / he proseded further to send
Bachides and Alcimus again into Iewry, and those that were in the right winge
of his host with the^. So they went forth by the way yt ledeth unto Galgala / and
pytched their tents before Mesaloth which is in Arbellus, and wanne the city
and slew much people. In ye first month of ye. Clij. year, they brought
their host to Jerusalem, and rose up and came to Berea, with. xx. M. fotemen,
and. ii. M. horsemen.

Now Judas had pytched his tents at Laysa, with three thousand chosen me^.
And when they saw the multitude of the other army that it was so great, they
were sore afraied, and many conveyed them selves out of the host / In so much
that there abode no mo of them but eight hundred men. When Judas saw that his
host failed him, and yt he must needs fight: it brake his heart, that he had
no time to gather them together: wherefore the man was in extreme trouble.
Nevertheless, he said unto them, that remained with him. Up, let us go
against our enemies, peradventure we shall be able. to fight with them. But
they would have stopped him, saying: we shall not be able, therefore let us
now save our lives, and turn again to our brethren and then will we fight
against the^, for we are here but few. And Judas said: God forbid, yt we
should and let us not stayne our honor. Then the host removed out of the
tents, and stood against them. The horssmen are divided in two parts: the
sling casters and archers went before the host / and all the mighty me^ were
foremost in the field. Bachides him self was in the right wyng of the battayll,
and the hooste drew nigh in two parts, and blewe the trompertes. They of Judas
^yde blew the tro^pettes also, and the earth shoke at the noise of the hoostes,
and they stroke a field from the morrow till night. And when Judas saw that
Bachides host was stro^gest of the right side / he took with him all the
hardye men / and brake the right wynge of their order / and followed upon them
unto the mount Azot.

Now when they which were of y^ left wing, saw that y^ right side was
discomfyte, they persecuted Judas and them that were with him. Then was there a
sore battaylle / for many were slain and wo^ded of both the parties / Judas
also him self was killed, and the re^naunt fled. So Ionathas and Simon took
Judas their brother, and buried him in his fathers sepulcher in the cite of
Moden. And all the people of Israel made great lamentacyon for nym / and
mourned long, salenge: Alas / that this worthy should be slain / which
delivered the people of Israel. As for other things perteyninge to the
battles of Judas / the noble acts that he did and of his worthynesse: they
are not written / for they were very many.

Joseph (...). ^. lib, 13. an
And after the death of Judas, wicked

Then came all Judas friends together, and said unto Ionathas: For so much as
thy brother Judas is deed, there is none like him to go forth against cur
enemies, against Bachides, and such as are adversaries unto our people.
Wherefore this day we chose the for him / to be our prince and captain to
order our battaille. And Ionathas took the governance upon him at the same
time, and ruled isteade of his brother Judas When Bachides gat knowledge
thereof, he sought for to sley him. But Ionathas and Simon his brother /
perceiving that, sled into the wilderness of ^hec^a with all their company, and
pytched their tents by the water pole of Asphar.

Which when Bachydes understood, he came over Iordane with all his host upon y^
Sabbath day. Now had Ionathas sent his brother Ihon (a captain of the people)
to pray his friends the Nabuthites, that they would lend them their
ordiuaunce, for they had much. So the children of Iambry came out of Madaba,
and took Ihon and all that he had, and went their way withal. Then

So they lift up their eyes, and looked: and behold, there was much a do, and
great repair: for the brydegrome came forth* and his friends and his brethren
met the^ with tympanyes / instruments of music / and many weape^s. Then
Ionathas and they that were with him / rose out of their lourkynge places
against them, and slew many of them. As for the remnaut, they fled into the
mountains, and they took all their substance.

Thus the marriage was turned to morninge, and the noise of their melody into
lamentacyon. And so when they had avenged the blood of their brother, they
turned again unto Iordane.

Bachides hearing this / came unto the very border of Iordane with a great
power upon y^ Sabbath day. And Ionathas said ^. Para x. a ^. Mat. 4. b
Wherefore cry now unto heaven, that ye may be delivered from the power of
your enemies. So they stroke y^ battaille. And Ionathas stretched out his
hands to smite Bachy des, but he fled bacwarde. The Ionathas and they that
were with him leapte into Iordane, and swymmed over Iordane unto him, and there
were stain of Bachides side that day, a thousand men.

Therefore Bachydes with his host turned again to Jerusalem, and builte up the
castles and strong holds that were in Iewrye / Jericho / Emaus / Bethoron /
Bethell / Thamnata / Phara and Topo, with hye walls, with ports and with
locks: and set me^ to keep them, that they might use their malice upon
Israel. He walled up the city Bethsurah / Gazarah and the castle / and
provided the^ with me^ and vitayles. He took also the chefest men's sons in
the country for pledges, and put them in the castle at Jerusalem to be kept.

Afterward in the hundred fyftye and three year in the second month, Alcimus
commanded, that the walls of the inmost Sanctuary should be destroyed, and the
buyldi^ges of the prophets also. And when he began to destroy the^ / the
things yt he went about / were hindered, for he was smytte^ with a pal sey,
and his mouth shut, so that he could no more speak, nor command any of his
house concerning his business. Thus dyed Alcimus in great misery at the same
time. And when Bachides saw that Alcimus was dead, he turned again to the
king, and so ye land was in reast two years. Then all the ungodly

So they went and gave Bachydes this council / which arose to come with a
great host, and snet letters preuely to his adherentes, which were i Iewry,
to take Ionathas / and those that were with him: but they might not for the other
had gotten knowledge of their device. And Ionathas took fyfty men of the
country (which were the ryngleaders of the^) and slew them. Then Ionathas and
Simo^ with their company departed unto the cite Bethbessen which lies in the
wilderness / and repaired y^ decay thereof / and made it strong. When Bachydes
knew this, he gathered all his host / and sent word to them that were of
Iewry. Then came he and laid sege to Bethbessen and fought against it a long

As for Simon and his company / they went out of the city / and brent up the
instruments of war, and fought against Bachides, and disco^fyted him. And
Bachides was sore vexed, because his council and trauayl was in vain. Wherefore
he was wroth at the wicked men (that gave him council to come into their
land) and slew many of them. Then purposed he with his company to go away
into his own country: whereof when Ionathas had knowledge, he sent embassytours
unto him, for to make peace with him, and that he should deliver him his
presonners again. To the which Bachides consented gladly, and did according
to his desire: ye and made an oath / that he should never do him harm all the
days of his life. So he restored unto him all the presonners that he had taken
out of the land of Judah, and then turned and went his way into his own
land, nether proceeded he any further to come unto ye borders of Judah. Thus
Israel had no more war. And Ionathas dwelt at Machemas, and began there to
govern ye people, and destroyed y^ ungodly me^ out of Israel.

Demetrius desires to have peace with Ionathas Alexander moves war against
Demetrius. Demetrius is slain. The frendshippe of Ptolomeus and Alexander.

CAPI. X.
IN the hundred and three score year came Iosep^* ii. i(...)
and took Ptolomays / whose cytezyns received him / and there he rayghned.

When King Demetrius herd thereof, he gathered an exceadynge great host, and
went for the against him to fight. Wherefore Demetrius sent letters unto
Ionathas with loving words / and praised him greatly. For he said: we will
first make peace with him, before he bind hi^ self with Alexander against us:
else he shall remember y^ evil yt we have done against hi^, his brother and his
people. And so he gave Ionathas leave to gather an host, to make weapens, and to
be co^federate with him, and commanded the pledges that were i^the castle, to
be delivered unto him.

Then came Ionathas to Jerusalem, and red the letters in the audience of all the
people, and of them that were in the castle. And therefore were they sore
afraied, because they herd, that the king had given him license to gather an
host. Thus were the pledges in yt castles which Bachides had made up / they
fled: so that every man left the place / and went into his own country. Only
at Bethsura remained certain of ye Jews. which had forsaken the law and
commandments of God, for Bethsura was their refuge.

Now when king Alexander herd of the promyses that Demetrius had made unto
Ionathas, and when it was told him of the battles and noble acts / which he
and his brethren had done, and of the great trauayles that they had taken, he
said: where shall we find such a man? well / we will make him our friend, and
be confederat with him. Upon this he wrote a lettre unto him, with these
words: king Alexander saluteth his brother Ionathas. We have herd of ye, that
thou art a valeau^t man, and mete to be our friend: Wherefore this day we
ordeyne the to be the hye priest of thy people / and to be called the kings
friend.) Upon this, he sent him a purple clothing / and a crown of gold)
that thou mayeste consydre what is for our profyt, and keep frendshyppe
toward us.

So in the seueth month of the hundred

All the solemn feasts. Sabbathes, new moons, the days appointed, the three
days before and after the feast, shall be fre for all the Jews in my realm:
so that in them no man shall have power to do any thing, or to move any
business against any of the^ in any manner of cause. There shall thyrtye
thousand also of the Jews be written up in the kings host / and have their
wages paid, as all other men of war of the kings should have: and of them
shall be ordained certain, to keep the kings strong holds: ye and some of
them shall be set over the kings business, that they may faithfully deal with
the same. The Jews also shall have princes of their own / and walcke in their
own laws / as the king has commanded in the land of Judah.

And the; three cities that are fallen unto

Item whosoever they be that fle unto the temple at Jerusalem or within the
liberties thereof, where as they are fallen into the kings danger for any
manner of busynes, they shall be pardoned and all ye goods that they have in my
reaime / shall be fre. For the buyldyng also and repayring of the work of the
Sanctuary / expenses shall be given out of the kings Checker: Ye and for the
making of the walls round about Jerusalem, for the breaking down of the
old and for the settinge up of the strong holds in Iewry, shall the costs and
charges begeuen out of the kings Checker.

^. Mat, 7. d
But when Ionathas and the people heard these words / they gave no credence
unto them / neither received them: for they remembered the great wickedness
that he had done unto Israel, and how sore he had vexed them. Wherefore / they
agreed unto Alexander, for he was a prince that had dealte friendly with them /
and so they stood by him always. Joseph. ^a. v. lib. xiii.
Then gathered king Alexander a great host / and brought his army against
Demetrius. So the two kings stroke bataylle together / but Demetrius host
iled / and Alexander followed after and fell upon them. A mighty sore field was
it / contynuynge till the Son went down, and Demetrius was slain the same
day.

And Alexandre sent ambassitoures unto

So it happened, that when his accusers saw the worship which was proclaimed
of him, and that he was clothed in purple: they sled euerychone. And the King
made much of him, wrote him among his chief friends, made him a duke, and
partaker of his domynyon. Iosep^* c^. (...).
Thus Ionathas went again to Jerusalem with peace and gladness. In the. Clxv.
year came Demetrius the son of Demetrius from Creta into his fathers land:
whereof when Alexander herd tell, he was right sorry, and returned unto
Antioche. And Demetrius chose (...)
Appollonyus, (which had the governance of Celosyrya) to be his captain.

So he gathered a great host and came unto Iamnta / and sent word unto
Ionathas the hye pressed, saying: Darteste you withstand us thy self alone? As for
me, I am but laughed to scorn and shamed, because thou prouedst thy strength
against us in the mountains. Now therefore / if thou trust este in

Which say, that your foot is not able to stand before our face, for thy
fathers have been twice chased into their own land. And now / how wylt you be
able to abide so great an host of horssine^ and foteme^ in y^ feld, where as
is nether rock, stone nor place to fle unto? When Ionathas herd the words of
Appollonius, he was moved i his mind: wherefore he chose ten thousand me^,
and went out of Jerusalem / and Simon his brother met him for to help him:
And they pitched their tents at Ioppa, but ye city kept him forth / for
Ioppa was an hold of Appollonius. Then Ionathas laid sege to it, and they
that were in the cite, for very fear let him in: and so Ionathas wanne Ioppa.
Appollonius hearing of this, took three thousand horssmen / with a great
host of foot, and went as though he would go to Azotus, and came immediately
into the plain field: because he had so many horssmen, and put his trust in
the^. So Ionathas followed upon him to Azotus, and there they strocke the
battayll. Now had Appollonius left a thousand horsemen behind the^ privily in
y^ te^tes. And when Ionathas knew ye such wait was laid behind them, they
went round about the enemies host / and shot darts at ye people from the
morninge to ye evening. As for Ionathas people, they kept their order as he
had commanded them, and the enemies horses were ever labourynge.

Then brought Simon forth his host, ^* M^t. xi. a.
brent up the temple of Dagon, with all them that were fled into it.

Thus were slain and brent well nigh. viij. M. men. So Ionathas removed the
host from thence, and brought the^ to Ascalon: where the men of the city came
forth / and met him with great worship. After this went Ionathas and his host
a gain to Jerusalem, with great substance of good. And when king Alexander
herd these things / he thought to do Ionathas more worshype, and sent him a
colar of gold, as ye use is to be given unto such as are of the kings next
blood. He gave him also the city of Accaron (with the lands belonging
thereto) in possessyon.

CAPI. XI.
The dissencion betwyre Ptolomes and Alexan^der his son in ^^we The deeth of
Alexan^der. Demetrius taygneth after the deeth of Ptolom^us. Syon is besegid of
Ionathas. De netriu^ saying that no m^ resisted him, se^deth his army (...)pho
moves A^^^^chns against Demetr^us. De me^^nus is desiuered by the suciour of
Ianathas. After his dcly g^r^unce he meaketh his couenau^^ that he had made.

AND the king of Egypt gathered ^an host (like the sand ye lies upon ye
sce s^bore) and many ships: Io^rphus. (...). 7. lib. 13.
and went about thor^we dysceate to obtain ye kingdom of Alexander / and to
join it unto his own realm^e. Upon this he took his journey into Siri^, and
was letten into ye cities, and me^ came forth to mete him: for king Alexander
had commanded them so to do, because he was his father in law. Now when
Ptolomy entered into any city, he left men of war to keep it / and this he
did through out all the cities. And when he came to Azotus, Mat. x. c.
they showed him the temple of Dagon and Azotus that was brent up / with the
other things which were destroyed, the deed bodies cast aborde / and the
graves that they had made by ye way side, for such as were slain in ye
field. And told the king ye Ionathas had done all these things, to ye intent
they might get him evil will. But the king said not a word thereto. And
Ionathas met the king with great honor at Ioppa, where they saluted one
another, and took their rest. So when Ionathas had gone with the king, unto y^
water that was called Eleutherus, he turned again to Jerusalem. Now Ptolomy
had gotten yt domynyon of the cities unto Selencia upon yt see coast, ymagyning
wicked councels against Alexander, and sent ambassitours unto Demetrius,
saying

Thus he took his daughter from him gave her unto Demetrius, and forsook
Alexander, so that his malice was openly known. And Ptolomy came to Antioch,
where he set two crowns upon his own head, the crown of Egypt and of Asia.
In the mean season was king Alexander in Cilicia / for they that dwelt in
those places, had rebelled against him. But when Alexander herd of this / he
came to war against him. So king Ptolomy brought forth his host and met hi
with a mighty power, and chased him away. Then fled Alexander into Araby, there
to be defended / and king Ptolomys honor incrased. And Zabdiel y^ Arabian
smote of Alexa^dets head, and sent it unto Ptolomy. But the third day after /
dyed king Ptolomy him self: and they whom he had set in the strong holds /
were stayne of those that were with

At ye sametyme gathered Ionathas the^ that were in Iewry, to lay sege unto ye
castle which was at Jerusalem, and so they made many instruments of war
against it. The^ went there certain ungodly persons (which hated their own
people) unto king Demetrius / and told him that Ionathas be seged y^ castle.
So when he herd it / he was angry, and immediately came unto Ptolomeus / and
wrote unto Ionathas / yt he should not lay sege to the castle, but come and
speak with him in all y^ haste. Nevertheless, when Ionathas herd this, he
commanded to besege it. He chose also certain of y^ elders and(...)

Arius king of the Sparcians sends gretynge unto Omas the hye pressed. It is
found

When Ionathas herd, that Demetrius princes were come forth to fight against
him with a greater host then before, he went from Jerusalem, and met them in the
land of Hemath, for he gave them not space to come into his own country. And
he sent spies unto their tents, which came again and told him, y^ they were
appointed to come upon him in the night season. Wherefore when the sun was
gone down, Ionathas commanded his men to watch all the night, and to be ready
with weapens for to fight: and set watchmen

Then Ionathas followed upon them, but he might not overtake them, for they were
gone over the water Eleutherus. So Ionathas departed unto the Arabians (which
were called Zabadei) slew the^, and took their goods. He proceaded further
also, and came unto Damascus, and went through al yt country. But Simo^ his
brother took his journey and came to Ascalon and to the next strong holds:
departing unto Ioppa, and wanne it. For he herd y^ they would stand of
Demetrius party: wherefore he set me^ of war in the city, to keep it. After
this came Iona thas home again / and called the elders of the people together:
and devised with the^ for to build up the strong holds in Iewry and the
walls of Jerusalem, to set up an hye wall betwixt the castle and the city /
for to separate it from the city yt it might be alone / and that men should
neither bye nor sell in it.

Upon this they came together for to build up the city / and for so much as
the wall upon the broke of the westsyde (called Caphecah) was fallen down,
they repaired it. And Simo^ set up Adiadath i Sephelah, and made it strong
setting ports and locks upon it. Now when ^. ^^Sapn^^ xxix ^^
Tryphon purposed to raygne in Asya / to be crowned / and to sleye the king
Antiochus: he was afraid that Ionathas would not suffer him / but fight
against him. Wherefore he went about to take Ionathas / and to kill him.

So he departed / and came unto Bethsan. Then went Ionathas forth against him

And said unto Ionathas: why haste thou caused this people to take such
travail / seeing there is no war betwixt us* Therefore send them home again
/ and chose certain men to wait upon the / and come thou with me to
Ptolomais: for I will give it the / with the other strong holds / men of war
and their officers: As for me I must depart, this is only the cause of my
coming.

Now as soon as Ionathas entered in to Ptolamais, the cytesyns sparred the
gates of the city / and took him, and slew all them with the swearde / that
came in with him. Then sent Triphon an Host of footmen and horsemen into
Galilee and into the great plain field / to destroy all Ionathas company.
But when they knew that Ionathas was taken, and all they slain that waited
upon him: they took council together / and came forth ready to the battayll.
So when they which followed upon them / saw that it was a matter of life, they
turned back again. As for the other, they went in to the land of Judah
peaceably, and bewailed Ionathas, and them that were with him right sore. And
Israel made great lamentacyon. Then all the Heathen that were round about
the^, sought to destroy them. For they said: now have they no captain, nor
any man to help them. Therefore let us overcome them, and rote out their name
from among men.

After Ionathas w^^ tak^. Simon to chosen captain, of whom Triphon t^^^^^^ hy^
ch^lo^^ and monn^y for the redempeyon of Jonathan hylleth him and his children.
The grave o^ Ionathas. Triphon kylleth Antiochus, and possesses the (...)
truce with Simon: Simon wy^^^^h E^z^ (...) possesses the tower of Syon. He
makes his son (...).

CAPI. XIII.
Now when Simo^ herd yt Triphon gathered ^. ^a^. 6. c ix, b. xiii. b
al my brethren are slain for Isreal's sake, and I am left alone And now let
not me spare mine own life in any manner of trouble, for I am no better the^ my
brethren: but will aue^ge my people and the Sanctuary, our children and our
wives: tor all the Heythen are gathered together, to destroy us of very malice.

At these words the hertes of the people were kyndled together, so that they
cried with a loud voice, saying: Thou shall be our captain in stead of Judas
and Ionathas thy brethren, order y^ our battle, and whatsoever y^ co^mau^dest

But when Triphon knew that Simon stood up in stead of his brother Ionathas,
and that he would war against hi: he sent messe^gers unto hi, saying, where
as we have kept Ionathas thy brother, it is for money y^ he is owyng in the
kings account, concerning the business that he had in hade. Wherefore se^de
now an. C. tale^tes of silver and ^is two sons for suretye, that when he is
let forth he shall not forsake us: and we shall send him again. Nevertheless
Simon knew, that he disse^bled in his words: yet commanded he the money and
children to be delivered unto hi: lest he should be the greater enemy against
the people of Israel: and say: because he sent him not the money and the
children, therefore is Ionathas deed.

So Simon sent him the children and an

Then sent Simon for to fet his brothers deed coarse, and buried it in Modin
his fathers cite. So al Israel beway^ed him with great lame^tacion, and mourned
for ^^^ery long. And Simon made upon the sepulcre of his father and his
brethren, a buylding hye to look unto of fre stone behind and before: and set
up seven pillars, one against another (for his father / his mother and four
brethren) and set great pillars round about, with arms upon the^ for a
perpetual memory, and carved ships beside the arms: that they might be seen
of me^ saylyng in the sea. This sepulcre which he made at Modin, stands yet
unto this day.

Joseph. ca. x. (...). xii^
Now as Triphon went for the to walk

Demetrius the king sends gretynge unto Simon the hye priest his friend,
with the elders and people of the Jews. The golden crown and precious stone
that ye sent unto us, have we received: and are redye to make a steadfast peace
with you / ye and to write unto our officers, for to release you / concerning
the things wherein we made you fre: and the appointment that we make with you,
shall be ^yrme and stable. The strong holds which ye have builded, shall be
your own. As for any ouersyghte or fawte committed unto this day / we forge
ue it, and the crown care hat ye ought us also. And where as was any other
trioute i Jerusalem, it shall now be no cry^^^^* and look who are mete among
you to be in our court, let them be written up, that there may be peace
betwyxte us.

Thus the yocke of the Heythen was taken 1. Mac. 14 d
In the first year of Simon the hye pressed, and prince of the Jews.

In those days went Simon unto Gaza / and beseged it round about: where he
set up or dinau^ce of war. And wa^ne a tower, which he took. So they that
gat into the towrelept into the cite, which was in great a fear: In so much
that the people of the city re^t their clothes, and clymmed up upon the walls
with their wives and children besechynge Simon to be at one with them, saying.

O reward us not after our wyckednes, but be gracious unto us, and we shall do
the service. Then Simon for very pitye, would fight no more against them / but
put the^ out

Now when they in the castle at Jerusalem were kept so straytely, that they
could not come forth into the country, and might nether bie nor sell: they
were very hungrye, and many of them famished to death: In so much that they
besought Simo^ to be at one with them, which he granted them. So he put them
out from thence, and cleansed the castle from fylthynesse. And upon the. xxiij.
day of the second month in the. C. lxxj. year they entered i^to it with
thankesgyuyng and branches of palm trees, with harpes, crowdes, cymbales /
and lutes / singing Psalms, and songs of praise unto God / for that the
great enemy of Israel was overcome.

And Simon ordained, that the same day should be kept every year in
gladness, and made strong the hyl of the temple that was beside the castle,
where he dwelte him self with his company. Simon also perceyuyng that Ihon his
son was a mighty man of arms, made him captain of all the hosts and caused
him to dwell at Gaza.

Demetrius is overcome of Arsaces. Simon being captain there is great
quycenesse in Israel, The covenant of frendshyppe with the Romans and with
the people of Sparta is renewed.

CAPI. XIIII.
IN the. Clxxij. year gathered king Demetrius his host, and departed unto
Media,

Simon wa^ne the city of Ioppa also for an haue^ town, and made it an
entrau^ce into the Isles of the sea. He enlarged the borders of hes people, and
conquered them more land. He gathered up many of their people that were
prisoners: he had the dominion of Gaza, Bethsura and the castle, which he
cleansed from fylthynes, and there was no man that resisted hi^. So that every
man tylled his ground in peace, the (...) 3. (...)
For he made peace through out the land, and Israel was full of mirth and joy.

Every man sat under his vine and fygg trees, and there was no man to fray them
away. There was none in the land to fight against the^, for then the kings
were overcome. He helped those that were in aduersite among his people, he was
dilligent to se the law kept: as for such as were ungodly and wicked, he took
them away. He set up the Sanctuary, and increased the holy vessels of the
temple.

When the Romans and Sparcyans had gotten word, that Ionathas was deed they
were right sorry. But when they herd that Simon his brother was made hie pressed
in his stead, and how he had won the land again with the cities in it:
they wrote unto him in tables of brass, to renew the fre^dshyp and bond of
love, which they had made before with Judas and Ionathas his brethren. ^. Mat.
and. xii. ^
Which wrytynges were red before the congregacyon at Jerusalem.

And this is the copye of the letters / that the other people of the Jews
their brethren: When your ambassytours that were sent un to our people,
certifyed us of your worship / honor and prosperous wealth: we were glad of
their coming, and have written the earande which they spoke before the
council of the people: namely / that Numenius the son of Antiochus. And
Antipater the son of Jason the Jews embassitours are come unto us, for to
renew the old friendship with us. Upon this the people consented, that the men
should be honorably entreated, and that the copy of their earande should be
written in the special books of the people, for a perpetual memory unto the
Sparcians: ye and that we should send a copy of the same unto Simon the great
Priest.

After this did Simon se^de Numenius unto

The. xviij. day of the month August.
Elul in y^ Clxxij. year in the third year of Symo^ y^ hye pressed, in the great
co^gregacio^ the prestes, rulers of the people, and elders of y^ country at
Asatame, were these words openly declared.

For so much as there was much war in

After that would their enemies have trodden their holy things under foot,
destroyed their land, and utterly waysted their Sanctuary. Then Simon
withstode them / and fought for his people, spent much of his own money,
weapened the valeaunt men of his people, gave them wages, made strong the
cities of Judah / with Bethsura that lies upon the borders of Iewry (where the
ordynasice of the enemies lay sometime) and set Jews there for to keep it.

He made fast Ioppa also, which lies upon

And king Demetrius co^fyrmed hi in his

So all the people consented to allow Simon, and to do according to these
words: Simon also himself took it upon him, and was content to be the hye
Pressed, the captain and prince of the Jews and prestes / and to govern them
all. And they commanded to make this writing in tables of brass, and fasten
it unto the compass of the Sanctuary in an open place: and to lay up a copy of
the same in the treasury, that Simon and his post rite might have it.

Antiochus makes a covenant of frendshyppe with Simon, and Tryphon is
persecuted. The Romaynee write letters. unto kings and nacyons in the defense
of the Jews. Antiochus refusing the help that Simon sent him, breaks his
covenant.

CAPI. XV.
Moreover, king Antiochus the son of the sea, unto Simon the hye priest and
prince of the Jews, and to all the people co^taynynge these words: Anttochus
y^ king sends gre tyng unto Simon the hye pressed and to the people of the
Jews. For so much as certain wicked me^ have gotten y^ kingdom of our
progenitors, I am purposed to challenge y^ real me again, and to restore it to
the old estate

Wherefore I have gathered a great host, and made ships of war, y^ I may go
through

In the. Clxxiiij. year went Antiochus in to his fathers land, and all the me^
of war came together unto hi, so y^ few were let with Criphon. So the king
Antiochus followed upon him, but he fled unto Dora, which lies by the sea
side: for he saw y^ there was myschefe coming unto him, and that his host
had forsaken him. Then came Antiochus unto Dora with an hundredth and twentye
thousand men of arms upon foot, and eight thousand horsemen. So he co^pased
the citte round about, and the ships came by the sea. Thus they vexed the
city by land and by water, in so much that they suffered no man to go in nor
out.

In the mean season came 1. Math ^. (...). ^.
Numenius (and they that had been with him) from the cite of Rome, having letters
written unto the kings

The same words wrote the Romans also unto Demetrius the king, to Attaius,
Araba, Arsaces and to al regio^s: as Sa^sanes, to the^ of Sparta, Delo, Mido,
Cicio^, Carea, Samos, Pamphilia, Lycia, Alicarnassu^, and to the

He sent Athenobius also a friend of his unto Simo^, for to reason with him,
saying: Ye wtholde fro me Ioppa. and Gaza (with the castle y^ is at Jerusalem)
which are cities of my realm whose borders ye have destroyed, and done great
evil in the land, having the dominacio^ in many other places of my kingdom.
Wherefore deliver now y^ cities which ye have take, with y^ trybutes of the places
y^ ye have rule upon without y^ borders of Iewry: Orels give me v. C. talentes
of silver, ye and for the harm that ye have done in y^ cities and for the
trybutes of the same, other fine hundredth tale^tes.

So Athenobius the kings friend came to Jerusalem, and when he saw the great
worship and honor of Symo^ in gold, silver and so great plenty of ornaments:
he marueled, and told Simon as y^ king commanded hi. Then answered Simon and
said unto hi. ^^^^. ^^^^
As for us, we have nether taken other men's lands, nor wthold the^, but only
our fathers heritage, which our enemies had vnrightuously in possession a
certain time. This heritage of our fathers have we challenged in process of
time. And where as y^ co^planest concerning Ioppa and Gaza, they did great harm
to our people and in our land, yet will we give an. C. taletes for them.

Nevertheless Athenobius answered hi not one word, but curned again wrothfully
unto the king, and told him al these words, and the great dignite of Simon,
with all y^ he had se^ie, and the king was very angry. In the mean time fled
Tripho^ by ship unto Orthosaida. Then the king made Ce^debens captain of the sea coast, and gave hi an host of footmen and horsemen, co^maundyng him to
remove the host toward Iewry, and to build up y^ cite of Cedron, to make up
the ports, and to war against the people of the Jews. As for y^ king him
self, he followed upon Tripho^. So Cendebeus came unto Iamnia, and bega^ue to
vex the people, to tread down Iewry, to take y^ people presoners, to sley
them, and to build up ^ ^at. 16 b
Cedron: where he let horsemen and other men of war, that they mygnt come
forth and go through the streets of Iewry, like as the king had commanded him.

Cendebeus the Captain of Antiochus hooste is put to flight of the sons of
Simon Ptolomeus: the (...) of A^^bus hylleth Simon and his two sons at a
bancket. Ihon kylleth them that lie in wait for his life.

CAPI. XVI.
THen came Thon up from ^at. 13. ^
Gaza, and told Simon his father, what Cenoebeus had done among their people.
Upon this called Simo^ two of his eldest sons, Iubas and Ihon, and said unto
them, I and my brethren and my fathers house, have ever from our youth up unto
this day, foughten against the enemies of Israel, and God gave us good
fortune to deliver Israel often times. And now for so much as I am old, be ye
insteade of me and my brother, to go forth and fight for our people, and the
help of God be with you. So he chose. xx. M. fightyng men of the country with
horsemen also, which went forth against Cendebeus, and rested at Modin:

In the morning they arose, and went in

Then Ihon set his horimen and footmen in order, the one by y^ other, for
their enemies horsemen were very many. But when they blew up the prestes
tro^pettes, Cendebeus fled with his host, whereof many were slayue, and the
remnaunt gat them to their strong hold Judas also Ihons brother was wounded at
the same time. And Ihon followed still upon the enemies, till he came to Cedro^,
^. ^at. 15. ^
which he builded. The enemies fled also unto the towers that were in the
feldes of Azotus, and those did Ihon burn up. Thus there were slain. i^. M.
men of them, and Ihon turned again peaceably into Iewry.

And in the field of Jericho was Ptolomy the son of Abobus made captain:
which because he had abundance of silver and gold (for he had married the
daughter of Simo^ the hye pressed) waxed proud in his mind, and thought to
conquer the land, ymagenyng January.
Sabat. Then Ptolomy the son of Abobus received them (but with disceyte) into
a strong house of his called Doch, which he had builded, where he made them a
bancket.

So when Simon and his sons were merry and had dronken well, Ptolomy stood up
with his men (whom he had hyd there) and took their weapens, entered into the
bancket house, and slew Simon with his two sons, and certain of his
seruaunces. Such great unfaithfulness did Ptolomy in Israel, and reco^pensed
evil for good. Then wrote this Ptolomy the same unto king Antiochus, requyryng
him, that he should send him an host to help him: and so should he de liver
him the lanoe, with the cities and trybuces of the same. He sent other ^e^^
also his to Gaza, for to take Ihon: and w^ot^ (...) the captains to come to
him, and (...) ^hul^e

Then ran there one before, and told Ihon in Gaza, that his father and his
brethren were slain, and how that Ptolomy ha^ se^re to sleep him also When
John herd this, he was sore abashed, and laid hands of them that were come
to destroy him, and slew them: for he knew, that they went ^^^^te to kill
him.

As for other things concerning Ihon: of his wars, of his noble acts
(wherein he behaved him self manfully) of the buylding of wastes which he made,
and other of his deeds: They are written in the cronicles of his presthode,
from the time forth that he was ma^^ hye pressed after his father.

The end of the first Book of the Machabees. Eee. v.
The second book of the Machabees.
An Epistle of the Jews that dwelt at Jerusalem sent unto them which dwelt in
Egypt, wherein they exhort them to give thanks for the death of Antiochus. Of
the fire that was hyd in the pyt. The prayer of Nehemias.

CAPI. I.
THe brethren of the Jews

God be gracious unto you / and thyncke upon his covenant that he made with
Abraham Isaac and Jacob his faithful servants: Deuteronomy. xxx. ^
and give you all such an heart, that ye may love and serve him, ye and
perform his will with an whole heart and of a wyll^g mind: He open your
hertes in his law and in his commandments / send you peace: hear your
prayers / be at one with you, and never forsake you in time of trouble. This is
here our prayer for you.

What time as Demetrius raygned, ^ the Clxix. year, we Jews wrote unto you in
the trouble and vyole^ce that came unto us. In those years / after that Jason
departed out of the holy land and kingdom / they bre^t up the ports / and
shed innocent blood. Then made we our prayer unto y^ lord, and were herd: we
offered: and lyghted the ca^dels, setting forth cakes and bred. Leui 23. ^
And now come ye unto the feast of tabernacles in the month November
Casieu.

In the* Clxxxvii^. year / the people that

Now when Antiochus entered by openyng

Where as we now are purposed to keep the puryficacyon of the temple upon the.
xxv. day of the month Cas^le^, we thought necessary to certifye you thereof:
that ye also might (...). Number. (...). 3. (...)
keep the tabernacles feast day / and the day of the fire, which was given us
when Nehemias offered, after that he had set up y^ temple and the altar. For
what time as our fathers were led away unto Persis, the prestes (which then
sought the honor of God) took the fire preuely from the altar, and hyd it in
a valley, where as was a deep dry pyt: and therein they kept it, so that the
place was unknown to every man. Now after many years when it pleased God,
that Nehemy as should be sent from the king of Persia, (...). (...). ^. a x^^^.
he sent the chylders children of those prestes (which had hyd the fire) to
seek it. And as they told us they

And Nehemias prayer was after this manner: O Lord God maker of al things, y^
fearful and strong, thou ryghteous, and mercyful, y^ that art only a
gracious king, only liberal, only just, Almyghtye / and everlasting / thou
that delyuerest Israel from all trouble, thou that have chosen the fathers, and
hallowed them: receive the offering for the whole people of Israel, preserve
thine owne^ portion / and halowe it. Gather those together / that are scarred
abroad from us: deliver them that are under the Heythens bondage / look upon
them / which are despised / and abhorred / that the Heythen may know / and se
/ how that thou art our God: Punyshe them that oppress / and proudely put us
to dishonor. Set thy people again in thy holy place / Deu^. (...)*
like as Moses has spoken.

And the prestes song Psalms of thanckesgeuyng, (...). vi. d (...) 18. 18. ^
(...). 48. ^
Which when it was done, there was kyndled a flamine of them also: but it was
consumed through the light, that shyned from the altar. So when this matter
was known / it was told the king of Persia / that in the place where the
prestes / which were led away / had hyd fire / there appeared water insteade
of fire / and that Nehemias and his company had puryfied the sacrifices
wythall. Then the king considering and ponderynge the matter diligently, made
him a temple to prove the thing that was done. And when he found it so in
deed / he gave the prestes many gifts and diverse rewards: ye, he took them
with his own hand and gave the^, And Nehemias called ye same place Nephthar,
which is as much to say, as a clensynge: but many men call it Nephi.

How Jeremy hid the tabernacle, the Arche, and the altar in the hyl. Of
the. v. books of Jason cont^y^ed in one.

CAPI. II.
IT is found also in the wrytinges of Jeremy ^. Man. i. ^
as it is said before. Iere. 29. b. (...). vi. ^
He co^mauded the^ also, that they should not forget the law and
commandments of the Lord, and that they should not err in their minds,
when they se Images of silver and gold with their ornaments. These and such
other things commanded he them, and exhorted them yt they should not let the
law of God go out of their hertes.

It is written also how the Prophet (at the commandment of God) charged
them to take the Tabernacle / and the arcke with them: and he went forth unto
the mountain, where Moses clymed up, Deuteronomy. 34. a
and saw the heritage of God. And when Jeremy came there, he found an open
cave, wherein he laid the tabernacle / the arc and y^ altar of incense / and
so stopped the hole. There came certain men together also following him, to
marcke the place, but they could not find it. Which (...). (...). ^ ^.
(...). 8. ^
and y^ cloud also like as it was showed unto Moses, and like as where
Solomon desired that ye place might be sanctified and it was showed him.

For he being a wise man, handled honorably and wisely, offering unto God in
the halowynge of the temple, when it was fynisshed. Leuit. ix. d
And like as when Moses prayed unto the Lord, the fire came down from heaven
/ and consumed the burntofferynge: Even so prayed Solomon also, 2. Pat. 7. a
and the fire came down from heaven / and consumed the burnt offering. And
Moses said: because the siofferynge was not eaten, therefore it is consumed. In
like manner Solomon kept the dedycacion (or halowyng) eight days.

In the Annotacions and wrytynges of Some r^de Nehemias.
Jeremy, were these things put also and how he made a lybrary: and how he
gathered out of all countrees the books of the prophets, of Dauyd, the
epystles of the kings, and of the presents. Even so Judas also / look what he
learned by experyence of war / and such things as has happened unto us, he
gathered them all together / and so we have them by us. If ye now desire to
have the same / send some body to fetch the^ unto you. Where as we then are
about to celebrate the puryf^cacyon / we have written unto you. Therefore ye
shall do well, if ye keep the same days. We hope also, that the God (which
delivered his people, and gave the^ all the heritage, kingdom, presthode and
Sanctuary Deuteronomy. xxx. ^
that he promised them in the law) shall shortly have mercy upon us, and
gather us together from under the heaven into his holy place: for he has saved
us from great parels, and has cleansed the place.

As concerning Judas Machabeus, and ^. Man. vi. a
Eupator his son, of y^ shynynges that came down from heaven upon those /
which manfully defended the Jews. For though they were but few / yet
defended they the whole land / drove away the enemies host, recovered again
the temple / that was spoken of through out all the world / delivered the
city / doing their best / that the law of the Lord which was put down /
might with all ^ranquylyte be restored again unto the Lord, that was so
merciful unto them. As touching Jason also of Cyren, we have undertaken
compendiously to bring into one bok^, the things that were comprehended of him
in five. For we considering the multitude of the books, and how hard it
should be for the^ that would meddle with stories and acts (and that because of so
diverse matters) have under taken so to comprehend the stories: y^ such as are
disposed to read, might have pleasure and pastyme therein: and that they which
are dilligent in such things, might the better think upon them: ye and that
whosoever read them, might have profit thereby.

Nevertheless, we our selves that have meddled

For he yt buyldeth an house a new / must provide for many things, to y^
whole building: but he that paynteth it afterward / seeks but only what is
comely / mete and convenient to garnysh it withal. Even so do we also in like
manner. And why? He that begins to write a story for y^ first, must with his
understanding gather the matter together, set his words in order / and
diligently seek out of every part: But he that afterward will shorten it /
uses few words / and touches not the matter at y^ largiest, Let this be
sufficient for a Prologe / now will we begin to show the matter: for it is
but a foolyshe thing to make a long Prologe / and to be short in the storye it
self.

O^ the honor done unto the temple by the kings of the Gentyles. Simon utter
teth what treasure to in the temple. Heliodorus is sent to take them away. He
is strycken of God, and healed at the prayer of O^^as.

CAPI. III.
WHat time as the holy city was inhabited ^. Math. 1. ^
that even the kings and princes them selves did the place great worship and
garnyshed the temple with great gifts: In so much that Seleueus king of Asia
of his own rentes / bare all the coasts belongyng to the service of the
offrynges. Then i^. M^^^, iii
Simon of the tribe of Ben Iamin / a ruler of the temple, labored to work
some mischefe in the cite: but the hie priest resysted him.

Nevertheless when he might not overcome Onias / he gat him to 2. Mat. iii. b
Appollon^us y^ son of Thersa) which then was chief Lord in Celosyria and
Phenices) and told him, y^ the treasury in Jerusalem was full of innumerable
money / and how that the common goods (which belonged not unto the offerynges)
were exceadyng great also: ye and how it were possible / y^ all these might
come under the kings power.

Now when Appolonius had showed the

So at the day appointed / Heliodorus Ero^. ^^
which had made a law conceruynge stuff given to keep that they should be
safely preserved, for such as committee them unto keeping. Then who so had looked
the hye priest in the face* it would have grieved his heart: For his
countenance and the chaungynge of his color / declared the inward sorrow of
his mind. The man was all in heaviness, and his body in fear. Where by they
that looked upon him, might perceive the grefe of his heart. The other people
also came out of their houses by heaps unto the common prayer, because the
place was like to come into confusion. The weme^ came together through the
streets, with hearrye clothes about their breasts:

The vyrgyns also that were kept in, ra^ne to O^ias, some i the walls, other
some looked out of the wyndowes: ye they all held up their hands toward
heaven, and prayed A miserable thing was it, to look upon the comen people,
and the hye pressed being in such trouble. But they besought almighty god, that
the goods which were committed unto them, might be kept whole, for those y^
had delivered the^ unto their keeping. Nevertheless the thing that Heliodorus
was determined to do, that performed he in the same place, he him self
personally being about the treasury with his men of war. But y^ spryte of
almighty God showed him self openly, so that al they which presumed to obey
Helyodorus, fell through the power of God into a great fearfulness and dread.
^. M^^. x ^ (...). xi. ^
For there appeared unto them an horse, with a terrible man sytting upon him,
deckce in goodly array, and the horse smote at Heliodorus with his fore fete.
Now he that sat upon the horse / had harness of gold upon him.

Moreover there appeared. (...). fair and beutyfull yo^ge men in goodly array,
which stood by him, scourged him of both the sides, and gave him many strypes
without ceassinge. ^ M^^. v. ^
With that fell Heliodorus suddenly unto the

The^ certain of Heliodorus fre^des prayed Onias / that in all have he would
call upon God, to grant him his life / which was geuynge up the ghost. So the
hye pressed considered the matter, and lest the king should suspecte that the
Jews had done Heliodorus some evil: he offered an health offrynge for him. Now
when the hie Pressed had opteined his peticion, the same young men in y^ same
clothyng appeared, and stood beside Heliodorus, saying: Thancke Onias the hye
pressed / ^^^^. 27. ^
, for his sake has granted y^ thy life: therefore seeing y^ god has scourged
the give him praise and thanks / and show every man his might and power. And
when they had spoken these words, they appeared no more.

So Heliodorus offered unto God, made great vows unto him, which had granted
him his life, tha^cked Onias, took his host / and went again to the king.
Then testified he unto every man of the great worckes of God, y^ he had seen
with his eyes. And when the king asked Heliodorus who were mete to be sent yet
once again to Jerusalem, he said: if thou have any enemy or adversary unto
thy realm, send him thither, and thou shall have him punished, if he escape
with his life: for in y^ place (no doubt) there is a special power and worcking
of god. For he y^ dwells i^ heaven, visits and defe^deth y^ place: and all that come to do it harm, he punishes and plageth the^. This is now the matter
concerning Heliodorus, and the keeping of the tresury at Jerusalem.

Simon reports ^uyll of Onias. I^^on desy^^ng^ the o^^yce of the hye Pressed
corrupts the king with (...) ^^rdes* The wicked intent of Iosan.

CAPI. IIII.
This Simon now 2. M^^. ^. ^
(of who^ we spoke things y^ the Jews had set up of love, by John y^ father
of Eupolemtus, which was sent ambassytour unto Rome, for to make y^ bo^de of
fre^^shippe and love. He put down all the Jews and Liberties of y^ Jews, and
set up the wicked statutes. He durst make a fighting scole under y^ castle, and
set fair yo^ge me^ to learn the manners of whores and brothels.

This was now the beginning of the Heathenysh These we (...) ^^pt ^u^ (...)
(...).
to bear the money unto y^ king. and to bring him answer of other necessary
matters. But he (when he was praised of the king for magnifying of his power)
turned y^ presthod unto him self, layinge up. iij. C. talentes of silver for
Jason. So when he had gotten co^manndemetes from the king (he came having
nothing that becomes a pressed, but bearyng the stomach of a cruel tyrau^t and
y^ wrath of a wild brute be. ^. Man. 4. c
The^ Jason (which had disceued his ^. (...)
own brother) seeing that he him self was begyled also was feign to fle into
the land of the Amnionites, and Menelaus gat the dominion. But as for the
money that he had promised unto ye king, he did nothing therein / when Sostratus
the ruler of the castle required it of him. For Sostratus was y^ man that
gathered the customs: wherefore they were both called before y^ king. Thus was
Menelaus put out of the presthode, and Lysimachus his brother came in his
stead. Sostratus also was made lord of the Cypr^^s. It happened in the mean
season, that the

And when the king was come again from Cilicia, the Jews and certain of the
Greeks went unto him, complayninge for y^ unrighteous death of Onias. Ye
Antio chus him self was sorry in his mind for Onias, so that it pitied him,
and he wept / remembrynge his soberness and manerly behauoure. Wherefore he
was so kyndled in his mind, that he commanded Andronicus to be striped out of
his purple clothing, and so to be led through out the cite, ye: and y^
ungracious man to be slain in the same place / where he committed his
wickedness upon Onias. Thus the Lord rewarded him his punishment, as he had
deserved. Now when Lysymachus had done many wicked deeds in the temple through
the council of Manelaus / and the voice came abroad: the multitude gathered
them together against Lysimachus: for he had carried out now much gold.

So when the people arose, and were full of displeasure / Lysymachus armed. ^ii.
M. unthrifts to defend him: a certain tira^it being their captain, which
was grown both in age and woodnesse. But when the people understood the
purpose of Lysymachus, some gat stones, some good strong clubbes, and some cast
ashes upon Listmachus Thus there were many of the^ wounded, some being slain,
and all the other chased away.

But as for the wicked churchrobber him

Thus were they soon punyshed, which followed upon the matter for the cite,
for the people, and for the holy vessel. Wherefore they of Tyrus took
indignacion, and ^^cied the^ honorably. And so through the couecousnes of them
that were in power, Manelaus remained still in auethorite, increasing in malice,
to the hurt of the cytesyns.

Of the signs and toh^^^ seen in Jerusalem. Of the end and offense of ^asan.
The puri^t^ of ^ n^ochus against the Jews. The ^ poy^y^g^ of the temple.

CAPI. V.
AT the same time Antiochus made hi

The shine of the gold weapens was seen, and all of manner of armure. Wherefore
every man prayed, that those tokens might turn to good. Now when there was
gone forth a false rumor, as though Antiochus had been deed: Jason took a. M.
me^, and came suddenly upon the city. The cytesyns ran unto the walls, at the
last was the city taken, and Manelaus fled in to the castle.

As for Jason, he spared not his own cytesyns ^. Man. 4. ^
and and led again like a vagabunde into the land of the Ammonytes.

Finally, for a reward of his wickedness, he was accused before Aretha the
king of the Arabia^s: In so much that he was fa^e to fle from cite to cite,
being despised of every man as a forsaker of the laws, and an abhomynable
perso^ne. And at the last (as an open enemy of his own natural country and of
the cytesyns) he was driven in to Egypt.

Thus he that before put many out of their own natyue land, perished from home
him self. He went to Lacedemon, thinckyng there to have gotten succor by
reason of kindred, And he that before had casten many one our unburied, was
thrown out him self / no man mourning for him, nor putting^ him in his
grave: so that he nether enjoined the buryall of a stranger, nether was he
partaker of his fathers sepulcre.

Now when this was done, the king suspecte, ^ Ma^h ^ ^
and took ye city by vyolence. He commanded his m^ of war also / yt they
should kyl and no^ spare, but sley down such as with stood them, or climed up
upon the houses. Thus was there a great slaughter of young men, oldemen, women,
children and virgins. In. iii. days were there slain. lxxx. M. xl. M. put in
preson, and no less sold. Yet was he not content with this, but durst go into
the most holy temple (Menelaus that traitor to y^ laws and to his own
natural country, being his gyde) and with his wicked hands took the holy
vessel, which other kings and cities had given thither for the garnyshing and
honor of the place: them took he in his hands unworthily, and defiled them.

So mad was Antiochus, that he considered (...). ^
And why* if it had not happened the^ to have been lapped in many sins / this
Antiochus (as soon as he had come) had so denly been punyshed / and shut out
for his presu^peyon, 2. Man. 3. d
like as Heliodorus was, who^ Seleucus the king sent to rob the treasury.
Nevertheless, God has not chosen the people for the places sake / but the place
for the peoples sake: and therefore is y^ place become partaker of y^ peoples
trouble, but afterward shall it enjoy the wealth of them. And like as it is
now forsaken in the wrath of Almyghtye G^d, so when the great God is
reconciled, it shall be set up i hye worship again. So when Antiochus had taken
a. M. and 1. Mac. 1. ^.
Now as he was thus set in malice against the Jews, he sent Appol lonius an
hated prince / with xxij. M. commau^ding him to sley those y^ were of perfect
age, and to sell the women, maidens and children. When he came now to Jerusalem,
he feigned peace, and kept him still until the Sabbath day. And then he
commanded his men to take them to their weapens (for the Jews kept holy day)
and so he slew all the^ that were gone forth to the open play, runnyng here and
there through the city with his men weapened / and murthured a great no^bre. ^.
Match. ^ c
But Judas Machabeus which was the tenth, fled into y^ wilderness / led his life
there with his company among wild^ ^eastes and upon the mountains, dwelyng
there and eating grass / lest they should ^e partakers of the fylthynesse.

The Iewe^^^^ compelled to leave the law of god. The temple is defy^^^. The
^end^r^ are monyshed that they shall not abhor the aduersyte wherewith the
^o^^^ afflycte^h them. The grievous pain of Eleazarus.

CAPI. VI.
NOt long after this, sent the king a messaunger Pro^ (...)
it is a toke^ of his great loving kyndnes. For this grace have we of

Now will we come to the declarynge of y^ matter. Eleazar one of y^ principal
Scrybes, an aged man and of a well favored conute naunce, was constrained to
gape with open mouth, Lou^^. x^^
and to eat swynes flesh. But he desyryng rather to dye gloriously then to
live with shame, offered him self wyllyngly to y^ martyrdom. Now when he saw
y^ he must needs go to it, he took it pacie^tly: for he was at a point with
him self / that he would co^sente to no unlawful thing for any pleasure of
life. They y^ stood by being moved

But he began to co^sydre his discrete and honorable age, hes noble and
worshypful stock, and now y^ from his youth up he had been of an honest and
good co^uersacyon: ye and how constantly he had kept the ordinances and
laws commanded by God, wherefore he gave them this answer, and said: Yet had
I rather first be laid i^ my grave. (...). ^. ^.
For it becomes not mine age (said he) in any wise to disse^ble, whereby many
young persons might think, that Eleazar being. ^xxx. year old and. x. were
now gone to a strange life: and so through mine ypocrisy (for a little time of
a transytory life) they might be disceaued: by this means also should I defyle
mine age, and make it abhomynable. For though I were now delivered from the
torments of me^, yet should I not escape y^ hand of almighty (...). i. a.
God nether alive nor deed. Wherefore, I will

When he had said these words, immediately he was drawn to the tormente. Now
they y^ led him and were mylde a little before began to take displeasure
because of y^ words yt he said: for they thought he had spoken the^ of an hye
mind. But when he was in his mariyrdome, he mourned and said: Thou (O Lord)
which haste the holy knowledge, know openly: yt where as I might be
delivered from death, I suffer these sore pains of my body: but i^ my mind I
am well content to suffee the^ because I fear the. Thus this ma^dyed, leauinge
y^ memorial of his death for an example, not only unto young men, but unto all
y^ people, to be steadfast and manly.

The punishment of the* vii. brethren and of they^ mother.

CAPI. VII.
IT happened also that there were. vij. brethren (with their mother) taken, and
compelled (...). xi. ^.
against the law to eat swynes flesh: namely with scourges and ^er^ren whyppes.
And one of them which was the these, said: what sekest thou, and what
requirest thou of us? As for us, we are ready rather to suffer death, then to
offede the laws of God and the fathers. Then was the king angrye, and ^ad
heat cauldrons and brazen pottes. Which when they were made hot, immediately
he commanded the tongue of him that spoke first, to be cut out to put y^ skin
over his head, to pare of the edges of his hands and fete: ye and y^ in the
sight of his mother and the other of his brethren. Now when he was clean
marred, he commanded a fire to be made, and so (while there was any breath in
him) to be fried in the caudron: In the which when he had been long payned,
the other brethren with their mother exhorted him to dye manfully, saying: The
Lord God shall regard the truth, ^ comfort us, like as Moses testifyeth
D^ut. 32. c.
and declares in his song, saying: and he will have compassyon on his
servants.

So when the first was deed after this manner, they brought the second to have
him

After him, was the th^rde had in derysyon: and when he was required, he put
out his tongue, and that right soon, holdyng forth his bands manfully, and
spoke with a steadfast faith: These have I of heaven, but now for the law of God
I despise the^: for my trust is, yt I shall receive the^ of him again. In so
much yt the king and they which were with him, marueled at the young man's
boldness, that he nothing regarded the pains.

Now when he was deed also, they vexed the fourth with tornementes in like
manner. So when he was now at his death, he said: It is better y^ we being
put to death of men, have our hope and trust in God, for he shall raise us up
again. John. v. c.
As for the, thou shall have no resurreccyon to life.

And when they had spoken to the fyfth, they tormented him. The^ looked he unto
the king, and said: thou have power among men, for thou art a mortal man also
the self, to do what thou wylt, but think not, that God has forsaken our
generation. A^yde the tarry still a while, and thou shall se the great power of
God, how he will punysh the and thy sede. After him they brought the syxte,
which being at the point of death, said: Be not disceaued (O king) for this
we suffer for our own sakes, because we have offe^ ded our God, and therefore
marvelous things are showed upon us. But think not thou, which take in
hand to strive against God, that thou shall escape unpunished.

This excellent mother (worthy to be well

Now thought Antyochus that she had despised him, therefore he let her go with
her reproues, and began to exhort the youngest son (which yet was left)
not only with words but swore unto him with an oath, that he should make him
a rich and welthy man (if he would forsake the laws of his fathers) ye, and
that he should give him, what soever were necessary for him.

I beseech the (my son) look upon heaven and earth and all that is therein,
and consydre, that God made them and man's generacyo^ of naught: so shall thou
not fear this hang man, but suffer death steadfastly, like as thy brethren have
done: y^ I may receive the again in the same mercy with thy brethren.

While she was yet speaking these words, the young man said: Whom look ye
for? Wherefore do ye tarry? I will not obey the kings commandment, (...)
D(...)
but the law that God gave us by Moses. As for thou that ymagyneste all
myschefe against the Jews, thou shalt not escape the hand of

And though God be angry with us a little while for our chastenynge and
reformacyon) yet shall he be at one again with his servants. But thou. (O
shameful and most abhomynable person.) Pride not thy self through vain
hope, in being so malycyous upon the servants of God: for thou have not yet
escaped the judgment of the God which is almyghtye, and seyth all things. My
brethren that have suffered a little pain, are now under the couenau^^ of
everlasting life: but through the judgment of God, thou shall be punyshed
right ously for thy pride.

As for me (like as my brethren have done) I offce my soul and my body for the
laws of our fathers, calling upon God, that he will soon be merciful unto
our people: ye and with pain and punyshme^t ^. (...)
to make the grant, that he only is God, In me now and in my brethren the
wrath of almyghtye God is at an end, which ryghteously is fallen upon all
our people.

Then the king being kyndled in anger, was more cruel upon him then upon all
the other, and took indygnacyon, that he was so lightly regarded. So this young
man dyed undefiled, and put his trust still in the Lord. Last of al after the
sons, was the mother put to death also. Let this now be enough spoken,
concerning the offrynges, and extreme cruelnesse.

Judas gathers together his host. Nicanor is sent against Judas. Judas
exhorts his soudyars to co^stantnes Nicanor is over come. The Jews give
thanks after they have put their enemies to flight, dyuidynge the spoils unto
the fatherles and unto the wydowes. Nicanor flies unto Antiochus.

CAPI. VIII.
THEN Judas Machabeus, and they

So they called upon the Lord, that he would have an eye unto his people,
which was trodden down of every man: to be gracyous unto the temple that was
defiled of the ungodly: to have co^passyon upon the destruccyon of the city,
which was shortly like to be laid waste, to hear the voice of the blood
that cried unto him: to remember the most unrighteous deaths of young
innocent children, y^ blasphemies also done unto his name, and to punysh them.

Man. ii. a.
Now when Machabeus had gathered this multitude together, he was to mighty
for the Heathen (for the wrath of the Lord was turned into mercy) he fell upon
y^ towns and cities unawares, brent them, took the most commodious places, and
slew many of the enemies. But specially he made such chases by night, in so
much that his manlynesse was spoken of every where.

So when Phylippe saw that the man Man. 3. ^.
(a special friend of his) in all the halt, and gave him of the comen sort of
the Heathen no less then. xx. M. harnessed men, to rote out y^ whole
generacyon of the Jews, having to help him one Gorgias a man of war, which
in matters concerning battayls, had great experience. Nicanor ornened also the
tribute (which the Romans should have had) to be given unto the king, out of
the captyuyte of the Jews, namely. ij. M. tale^tes. And immediately he sent to
y^ cities of the sea coast, requyrynge them for to bye Jews to be their
servants and bond men, promisynge to sell the^. lxxx. and ten for one
talente: but he considered not y^ wrath of almyghtye God, that was to come upon
him.

When Judas knew of this, he told the Mat. v. b
And so Machabeus called his men together, namely about. vj. M. exhorting them
not to agree unto their enemies, Deuteronomy. 20. a. Pa^. xx. c.
nether to be afraid for y^ multitude of their adversaries coming against
them vuryghteously: but to fight manly, co^syderynge the reprofe y^ they had
done to y^ holy place without cause, how they had despised and oppressed the
city, ye, and destroyed the laws of the fathers. (...). 17. d Psalm. xix. b.
For they (said he) trust in they are weapens and boldness, but our confidence
is in y^ almighty Lord, which in the twyncklyng of an eye may both destroy
them y^ come against us, and all the world.

He exhorted the^ also to call to remembrance 4. Reg. 19. g Esaye. 37. a 1.
Man. 7. c.
as when there perished an. C. and. lxxxv. M. of Sennacheribs people: And of
the battayll that they had in Babylon against the Gallacyans: how all the
Macedonians yt came to help the^, stood in fear: and how they being but only.
vj. M. slew an. C. and. xx. M. through the help yt was given the^ from heaven,
whereby they also had received many benefytes.

Through these words the me^ took good hertes unto them, ready to dye for the
law and the country. So he set upon every company a captain, one of his own
brethren: Simon, Joseph and Ionathas: geuynge each one. xv. C. men He caused
Esdras also to read the holy book unto the^, and to give them a token of the
help of God.

i. Man. a. ^.
Then he him self being captain in the fore front of the battayll, buckled
with Nicanor. And God was their help, in so much y^ they slew above. ix. M.
men and conpelled the more part of Nicanors host to Nume. 31. d 1. Reg xxx e
Deuteronomy. 2^. b.
they distributed the spoils to the sick, to the fatherless and to wyddowes,
and the resydue had they them selves with theyrs. When this was done, and they
all had made a general prayer: they besought the merciful Lord to be at one
with his servants.

Of those also that were with Timotheus and Bachides, which fought against
them, they slew. xx. M. wanne hye and strong holds, and divided mo spoils:
ever geuynge an equal porcyon unto y^ sick, to the father les, to wyddowes and
to aged persons. And when they had dylygently gathered their weapens together,
they laid them all in co^ueniente places, and the remnaunt of the spoy les
brought they to Jerusalem. They slew also Phylarches y^ wicked person, which
was with Timotheus, and had vexed many Jews. And when they held the
thankesgeuyng

had ordered the^ selves manly with their weapens and hands, they slew in the
two Castles mo then twentye thousand.

1. Man. v. ^
Now Timotheus 2. Man. 8. ^.
who^ the Jews had overcome before, gathered a multitude of strange people,
brought an host also of horse men of the Asia^s, to wine Iewry by strength But
when he drew nigh, Machabeus and they that ^. Man. xi. d
fell to their prater, sprinkled as shes upon their heads, being gyrded with
hearrye cloth about their loins, fell down before the altar, and besought the
Lord that he would be merciful to them, but an enemy unto their enemies, and to
take perte against their adversaries, Deuteronomy. 28. a.
according as it is promised in the law So after the prayer, they went on
further from the city: and when they came nigh the enemtes, they prepared them
selves against the^.

And by times in the morning at the break of the day, both the hosts buckled
to gether. Iere. 17. d. f. Pat. 32. b
The one part had the Lord for their refuge, which is the gyuer of prosperyte,
strength and vyctory. The other had a manly stomach, which is a captain of
war.

The battayl now being great, 4. Reg. 6. a. ^. M^^ ^. a and. xi. d.
there appeared unto the enemies from Heaven. v. men upon horsbacks with brydels
of gold, ledyng the Jews, and two of them having Machabe us betwyxt the^,
that kept hi^ safe on every side with their weapens, but shot darts and light
nynges upon the enemies: where through they were confounded with blyndnesse and
so sore afraied, yt they fell down. There were stain of fore men. xx. M. and.
v. C. and. vi. C. horsemen. As for Timotheus hi self, he fled unto Gazar a very
strong hold, wherein Cereas

Now they y^ were within trusting to the strength of y^ place, cursed and
ba^ued exceeding ly, and made great crakyng with wicked words. Nevertheless
upon the fyft day in the morning. xx. young men of Machabeus co^pa ny, being
set on fire in their minds (because of y^ blasphemy) came ma^fully unto the
wall, and with bold stomachs they and their other companions clymmed up upon
the towers, vndertakyng to set fire upon the ports, and to burn those
blasphemous persons quycke Two days were they destroyng the castle, which
when they found Timotheus (that was crept into a corner) they killed hi, and
slew Cereas his brother in like manner with Appollo phanes. When this was done,
they song Psalm mes, with praises and thanckesgiuynges unto the Lord, which had
done so great things for Israel, and given them the vyctory.

Lysias goes about to overcome the Jews. Succoure ^o sent from heaven unto
the Jews. The letter of Lysias to the Jews. The letter of king Intiochus
unto Lysias. A letter of the same unto the Jews. A letter of the Romoynes to
the Jews.

CAPI. XI.
NOt long after this, Lysias the kings ^^^^^. (...)
and the temple would he have to be an house of lucre, like as the other Gods
houses of the Heythen are, and to sell the prestes office every year: Not
considering the power of God, but was wild in his mind, Esaias. ^^^
trustyng in y^ multitude of footmen, in thousands of horse men, and in his.
lxxx. Elephantes.

So he came into Iewry and then to Bethsura a. (...)
they fell to their prayers with weeping and tears before the Lord. And all the
people in like manner besought hi^, that he would send a good angel to deliver
Israel. Machabeus him self was the first that made him ready to the battayl,
exhortyng the other that were with him, to ieoparde them selves, and to help
their brethren. And when they were going forth of Jerusalem together with a
ready and wyllyng mind, ^. (...)
there appeared before the upon horsbacke a man in white clothing with
harness of gold, shaking his spear. Then they praised the Lord all
together, which had showed them mercy, and were comforted in their minds: in
so much that they were ready, not only to fight with men, but with the most
cruel beasts, ye, and to run through walls of iron.

Thus they went on wyllyngly having to al things which were reasonable, and
to make the king their friend. To the which prayer of Lisias, Machabeus agreed,
seking in all things the comen wealth: and whatsoever Machabeus wrote unto
Lysias concerning the Jews, the king granted it. For there were letters
written unto the Jews from Lysias, contaynyng these words.

Lysias sends gretynge to the people of the Jews. Thou and Absalon which
were sent from you, delivered me wrytynges, and required me to fulfill the
things concerning their earande. Therefore look what might be granted, I
certifyed the king thereof: and what soever was co^uement. I agreed thereto If
ye now will be faithful in the matters, I shall endeavor my self hereafter
also to do you good. As concerning other things by every article thereof: I
have committed them to your messaungers, and to those whom I sent unto you, to
comen with you of the same, fare ye well, In the hundredth and. xlviij. year,
the.xxiiij. day of the month Discorinthius.

Now the kings lettre contained these words. King Antiochus sends gretyng
unto his brother Lysias. For so much as our father ^ Man. (...). b
is now dead, our will is, that they which are in our realine, live without
any insurreccion, and every man to be dilligent in his own matters. We
understand also y^ the Jews would not consent to our father, for to be brought
unto the custom of the Gentyles, but styfly to keep their own statutes: for
the which cause they require of us also, to let them remain still by their
own laws.

Wherefore, our mind is, y^ this people

And this was the letter, that the king wrote unto y^ Jews: king Antiochus
sends gretynge unto the council and y^ other people of y^ Jews: If ye fare
well, we have our desire: as for us, we are in good health. Menelaus came and
told us, how y^ your desire was to come down to your people, which are
with us.

Wherefore those that will come, we give

The Romans also sent a letter, contaynynge these words: Quyntus Memin^us
and Titus Manilius embassitours of the Romans, send gretynge unto the people
of the Jews. Look what Lysyas the kings kynsman has granted you, we grant
you the same also. But as conceryng the things which he referred unto the
king, send by there some with speed: and pondre the matter diligently among
your selves, that we may casth the best to your prefyte, for we must depart
now unto Antioche. And therefore write shortly again, y^ we may know your
mind: Fare well. In the hundredth. xiviij. year, the fyftenth day of the
Month of Apryll.

Timotheus troubles the Jews. The wyther deed of the Iepites against the
Jews. Judas is avenged of the (...) He sets fire on the gate of (...). The
pursure of the Jews against Tymothy. Tymothy is taken (...) go unhurt. Judas
pursues Gorgyas. Judas sacryfyes for the dead, shows the hope of the
resur^^^^yon.

CAPI. XII.
WHen these couenauntes were ma^e

When Judas knew of this cruelte showed unto his people, he commanded those
that were with hi^ to make them ready, exhortyng them to call upon God the
ryghtuous judge: went forth against those murderers of his brethren, set fire
in the haue^ by night, burnt up the ships, and those that escaped from the
fire, he slew with the swearde. And when Ioppa. But when he had gotten word,
that the Ia^nites were minded to do in like manner unto y^ Jews which dwelt
among the^, he came upon the Iamnites by night, and set fire on the haven with
the ships: so that the light of the fire was seen at Jerusalem, upon a. ij.
C. and. xl. furlonges:

Now when they were gone from thence ix: furlonges, in their journey toward
Tymotheus. v. M. me^ of foot and. v. C. horsemen of the Arabians fought with him.
So when y^ battle was earnest, and prospered with Judas through the help of
God: the resydue of the Arabians being overcome, besought Judas to be at one with
them, and promised to give him certain pastures, and to do hi^ good in other
things. Judas thynking that they should in deed be profitable concerning many
things, promised them peace: whereupon they shoke hands, and so they departed
to their tents. Judas went also unto a city, which was very fast kept
with brydges, fensed round about with walls, and diverse kinds of people
dwelling therein, called Caspin.

They that were within it, put such trust in the strength of the walls, and
in their stoare of vitayles: that they were the slacker i^ their doings,
cursynge and reuylynge Judas with blasphemies, and speaking such words as it
becomes not. But Machabeus calling upon the great Prince of the world
(which without any battle ra^mes, or ordinance of war, did Iosue. vi. c
cast down the walls of Jericho, in the time of Iosue) fell ma^fully upon the
walls, took the city, and through the help of the Lord) made an exceadynge
great slaughter: In so much y^ a lake of two furlonges broad which lay
thereby, seemed to flow with the blood of the slain.

Then departed they from thence. vij. C. and I. fourlonges, and came to Taraca
unto the Jews that are called Tubianei. But as for Timotheus, they could not
get him there: for (not one matter dispatched) he was departed from thence, and
had left certain men in a very strong hold. But Dositheus and Sosipater,
which were Captains with Machabeus, stewe those y^ Timotheus had left in the
house of defense, even. x. M. men. And Machabeus prepared him with the. vj. M.
men y^ were about him, set them in order by companyes, and went forth against
Timotheus, which had with him an. C. and. xx. M men of foot. ij. M. and. v. C.
horsemen.

When Timotheus had knowledge of Judas Iudi. vi^ 1. Reg ^ 2. Pa^ ^*
and wounded with y^ strokes of their own sweardes. Judas also was very earnest
in following upon them, punishyng those ungodly, and slew. xxx. M me^ of the^.
Timotheus also him self fell into the hands of Dositheus and Sosipater, who^
he besought with many tears, to let him go with his life: because he had many
of the Jews fathers and brethren in prison, which (if they put hi^ to death)
might be dysapoynted. So when he had promised faithfully to deliver them again
according to the co^dicio^ made, they let him go without harm, for the health
of the brethren. And when Judas had slain xxv. M. he went from Carmon.

Now after y^ he had chased away and slain i. Math. ^
Ephrom a strong city, wherein dwelt many diverse people of the Heythen, and
the strong young men kept the walls, defendyng them myghtely. In this city
was much ordinance and provision of darts. But when Judas and his company had
called upon Almyghtye God (which with his power breaks the strength of the
enemies) they wa^ne the city, and slew. xxv. M. of the^, y^ were within. From
thence went they to the city of the Scithyans, which lies. vi. C. furlonges
from Jerusalem. But when the Jews which were in the city testyfied, that the
cytesyns dealte louyngely with them, ye, and entreated them kyndely in the
time of their aduersyte, Judas and his company gave them thanckes, desiring
them to be fre^dly still unto them: and so they came to Jerusalem the hye
feast of the wekes being at hand. And after the feast of Pentecost they went
forth against Gorgias the gouernoure of Idumea, with. iij. M. men of foot and.
iiij. C. horsemen. Which when they met together, it chaunsed a few of y^ Jews
to be slain. And Dositheus one of y^ Bachenors a mighty horsma^ took hold
voice to take up a song of praise, and a cry: In so much y^ he made the
enemies afraid, and Gorgias me^ of war took their flight. So Judas gathered
his host, and came into y^ cite of Odolla. And when the seventh day came upon
them, they cle^sed them selves (as the custom was) and kept the Sabbath in the
same place. And upon the day following, Judas and his company came to take up
the bodies of the^ that were slain, and to bury them in the fathers graves.
Now under the cotes of certain Jews which were slain, they found Jewels
that they had taken out of the temple and from the Idols of the Deuteronomy. vii. ^.
^osu. vii. a
Iamniters: which thing is forbidden the Jews by the law. Then every man saw,
yt this was the cause,

The coming of Enpater into Iewrye. The death of Menel mo* Machabeus going to
fight against Eupater, month his soudrats unto prayer. He kylleth.xiiii. Women
in the te^tes of Antiochus. Robocus the betraier of the Jews is taken.
Antiochus retayneth frendshipe with the Jews.

CAPI. XIII.
IN y^. Cxlix. year gat i. Mat. vi. d
Judas knowledge, ii. Mat. 4 ^
that this Menelaus was the cause of all myschefe: so that the king commanded
to take him, and (as the manner of them is) to put him unto death in the same
place.

There was also in the same place a tower of. L. cubits hye, heapped with
ashes: but above it was so made, that men might look down on every side.
Where into the king commanded that shameful person to be cast among the
ashes, as one that was cause of all ungraciousness. And reason it was that the
unthrift should dye such a death, and not to be buried for he had done much
mischefe unto the altar of God (whose fire and ashes were holy) therefore was
it right, y^ he him self also should be destroyed with ashes.

But y^ king was wood in his mind, and came to show him self more cruel
unto the Jews, then his father was. Which 2. Mat. 19. ^
he commanded the people to call upon y^ Lord night and day: that he would now
help the^ also, like as he had done always: For they were afraid to be put
from their law, from their natural country and from the holy temple: and not
to suffer the people (which a little while before began to recover) to be
subdued again of the blasphemous nations.

So when they had done this together,

Wherefore he ascrybed the power of all things unto God the maker of y^ world,
exhorting his people to fight ma^fully (ye, even unto death) for the laws,
the temple, the cite, their own natyue country, and to defend the eytesins:
and set his host before Modyn. He gave them also that were with him, a token of
the victory of God, chosyng out the ma^lyest young men, went by night into the
kings pauylyo^, slew of the host xiiii. M. men, 1. Mac. vi. f
and the greatest Elephantes, with those that sat upon them.

Thus when they had brought a great Now when the king perceived the
manlynesse of the Jews, he went about to take ye strong places by craft, and
removed his hooste ^. Mat. xi. ^
unto Bethsura, which was a well kept house of defense of the Jews: but they
were chaced away, hurt, and disconfyted. And Judas sent unto the^ that were in
it, such things as were necessary. In ye Jews host also there was one
Rhodocus, which told the enemies their secrets: but they sought him out, and
when they had gotten him, they put him in preson. After this did ye king comen
with them that were in Bethsura, took truce with them, departed, and stroke a
battayl with Judas, which overcame him. But when he understood,

Nevertheless when he came to Ptolomays, ye people of the city were not
content with the bond of frendshype: for they were afraied, that he would
break the covenant.

Then went Lysias up into the seat, and enfourmed the people, showed the^ the
cause why, and pacifyed the^. So he came again to Antioche. This is now the
matter concerning the kings journey, and his return.

By the mocyon of the Lord, Demetrins se^deth Nicanor to kill the Jews. Nicanor
makes a co^pare^ with the Jews which he yet breaks through the mocyon of
the king. Nicanor commands R^aia to be taken. The boldness of Razia.

CAPI. XIIII.
AFter three years was Judas infourmed,

For I being depryued of my fathers honor

When he had spoken these words, other friends also having evil will at
Judas, set the king Demetrius on fire against hi^. ^. M^^* ^*
Which immediately sent Nicanor (ruler of the Elepha^tes) a captain, into
Iewrye: co^maundinge him, to take Judas him self alive, but to stay the^ that
were with him, and to make Alcimus hye pressed of ye great temple.

Then the Heathen which fled out of 2. M^^ (...)
and be sought him, which made them his people, and ever defended his own
portion with euyde^t tokens, that he would preserve them still. So at the
commandment of the captain, they removed from thence, and came to a town
called Dessason. And Symo^ Judas brother fell i^ hand with Nicanor, but through ye
sudden coming of the enemies, he was afraid.

Nevertheless Nicanor hearing the manlynes of them that were with Judas, and
the bold stomachs that they had to fight for their natural country, durst
not prove the matter with bloudsheddynge. Wherefore he sent Possidonius,
Theodocius and Mathias before, to give and to take peace. So when they had
taken long aduisement there upon, and the captain showed it unto the
multitude, they were agreed in one mind, to have peace. And they appointed a
day to sit upon these matters quyecly among them selves, the stoles also were
brought and set forth. Nevertheless Judas commanded certain men of arms to
wait in co^enient places, lest there should suddenly arise any evil through the
enemies. And so they co^moned reasonably ^* Mat. 7. ^.
and made an oath, saying: If ye will not deliver me Judas captyue. I shall
remove this temple of god i^ to ye plain field, I shall break down the
altar, and consecrate this temple unto Bachus. After these words he departed.
The^ the prestes lift up their hands ^. Mat. 4. ^. ^. (...). x. a
which lately was cleansed. Now was there accused unto Nicanor, one Razi^ an
Alderman of Jerusalem, a lover of the whole ^p^^^, and a man of good report:
which for y^ kind heart yt he bare unto the people, was called a father of ye
Jews. This man often times, when the Jews were minded to keep the^ selves
undefiled, defended and delivered the^ being content steadfastly to spend his
body and his life for his people. So Nicanor wyllyng to declare

Nicanor goes about to come upon Judas on the (...) both day. The blasphemy
of Nicanor. Machabeus expou^dyng unto the Jews the visyo^ ^^^deneth their
h^ries. The prayer of Machabeus. After the host of Nicanor is ones overcome*
Machabeus commaunoeth his h^^d and his hands to be ^u^ of, and his tongue to be
given unto fowls.

CAPI. XV.
Now when ^. M^^. 7. ^.
Nicanor knew ye Judas 3. Reg. xx. ^.
Is there a mighty one in heaven, that commanded the Sabbath day to be kept?
And when they said ye the living God, the mighty Lord in heaven Exodus xx.
^.
commanded the seventh day to be kept, he said: And I am mighty upon earth,
to commau^de them for to arm themselves, and to perform the kings
business. Notwtsta^dyng he might not have his purpose.

Nicanor had devised with great pride to

So when their hearts were plucte up, he showed them also the disceatfulnesse
of the Heathen, and how they would keep no covenant nor oath. Thus he weapened
them not with the armoure of shylde and spear, but with wholesome words and
exhortacyo^s. He showed ^. Para. 14. Iudi. vii. b.
which gives n^^ (...) (...) after the multitude of weapons and power of the
host (but to them that please him) according to his own will. Therefore in his
prayer he said these words. O Lord, 4. (...) (...) (...) i. (...) ii. (...)
thou y^ dyddest send thine Angel in the time of Ez^kyah king of Judah, and in
the host of Sennaherib slewest an hundredth four score and five thousa^de:
send now also thy good angel before us (O lord of heavens) in the
fearfulness and dread of thy mighty arm, that they which come against thy
holy people to blaspheme them, may be afraid. And so he made an end of his
words. The^ Nicanor and they that were with him, drew nigh with shawmes and
so^ges: but Judas and his copany with prayer and calling upon God. With their
hands they smote, but with their hertes they prayed unto the Lord, and slew no
less then. xxxv. M. me^: For through the present help of god they were
gloriously comforted.

Now when they left of, and were turning again

The end of the second book of the Machabees.
The new Testament in English after the last recognicion and setting forth
of Erasmus, containing these books.

The Gospels. Matthew Mark Luke John^.
The Acts. The Epistles of. S. Paul. To the Romans The. i. Corynthyans The.
ii. Corynthyans To the Galathyans To the Ephesians To the Philippians To the
Collossians The. i. Thessalonyans The. ii. Thessalonians The. i. Tymothe The.
ii. Tymothe To Titus To Philemon To the Hebrews.
The Epistle of Saint James. The. i. of. S. Peter The. ii. of. S Peter The
Pistle of, S. Jude The. i. of. S. John^ The. ii. of. S. John^ The. iii. of. S,
John^. The Reuelacion of. S. John^.
The Gospel of Saint Mathewe.
The genealogye of Christ, and marriage of his mother Mary. The Angel
satisfyeth Joseph's mind

CAPI. Primo.
THis is the book of the generation

(...). xx^. ^ (...) 24 a
Abraham begat Isaac:

(...). xxv d
Isaac begat Jacob:

(...) x^l^ d
Jacob begat Judas and his brethren:

(...). 38. ^.
Judas begat Phares and Zaram of Thamar

(...). 46. b
Phares begat Esrom:

^ara. (...). ^ (...). ii^i. d
Esrom begat Aram:

Para. ii. b
Aram begat Aminadab:

(...). i. a
Aminadab begat Naasson:

(...). iiii. d
Naasson begat Salmon:

(...). iiii. d
Salmon begat Boos of Rahab:

(...). iiii. d
Boos begat Obed of Ruth:

(...). iiii. d
Obed begat Iesse:

Reg. xvi. ^
Iesse begat David the king:

^. Reg. xii. f
David the king begat Solomon, of her that was the wife of Uri:

^ Par. iii. b
Solomon begat Roboam:

^. Par. xi. d
Roboam begat Abia:

^. Pa. xi. i d
Abia begat Asa:

^. Reg. ^v. f
Asa begat Iosaphat:

^. Pa. 17. a ^. Pa. xxi. ^
Iosaphat begat Ioram:

^4. Re. xi a.
Ioram begat Osias:

(...)* Pa.: 6. c.
Osias begat Ioatham:

(...). Pa. 27. d
Ionatham begat Achas:

(...). Pa. 28. d
Achas begat Ezechias:

^4. Reg xx. d
Ezechias begat Manasses:

^4. Re. xxi. d.
Manasses begat Amon:

^4 Re. xxi. d
Amon begat Josias:

4. Re. 24. b Iere. xxii. f
Josias begat Ieconias and his brethren about the time they were carried away
to Babylon.

And after they were brought to Babylon, ^. Par. iii. d
Iechomas begat Salathiell:

Agge. i. a ^. ^sdr. iii a i.
Salathiell begat Zorobabell:

Par. iii. d
Zorobabell begat Abiud:

4. Reg. 18 d
Abiud begat Eliachim:

Eliachim begat Azor:

Azor begat Sadoc:

Sadoc begat Achin:

Achin begat Eliud:

Eliud begat Eleasar:

Eleasar begat Matthan:

Matthan begat Jacob:

Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary: of whom was borne Jesus, even he that
is called Christ.

And so all the generacyons from Abraham Philip. ii. b ^ctes. iiii. b
Jesus. For he shall save his people from thyr sins.

All this was done, that it might be fulfill led, which was spoken of the Lord
by the prophet, saying: Esai. ^ii. c.
Behold, a maid, shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son / and
they shall call his name Emanuel, which if a man interpret, it is asmoche to
say, as God with us. And Joseph as soon as he awoke out of sleep, did as the
angel of the Lord had bydden him, and he took his wife unto him, and knew
her not, till she had brought forth Luke. ^i. ^
her first begotten son / and called his name Jesus.

The time and place of Christ's birth. The wise men offer their presente^.
Christ flees in to Egypts, the young children are sleyne, Christ turns in to
Gal^le.

CAPI. II.
WHen Jesus was borne at Bethleem a Nu. xxiii^. ^
sterre in the East, and are come to worship him. When Herod the king had
herd these things, he was troubled, and all the city of Jerusalem with him:
And when he had gathered all the cheyfe Priests and scrybes of the people
together, he demanded of them, where Christ should be borne.

And they said unto him: at Bethleem in Jury. For thus it is written by the
prophet: Mith^. ^. ^
And thou Bethleem in the land of Judah, art not the least among the Princes
of Judah. For Iohsi. vii ^
out of the shall there come unto me the captain, that shall govern my people
Israel.

Then Herod (when he had privily called what time the sterre appeared, and he
bad them go to Bethleem and said: Go your way thither, and search
dilygently for the child. And when ye have found him / bring me word again,
that I may come and worship him also. When they had herd the king, they
departed: and lo, the sterre which they saw in the East, went before them /
till it came, and stood over the place, wherein the child was: When they saw
the sterre, they were exceeding glad: and went in to the house / and found the
child with Mary his mother Psalm. 72. b. ^sai. lx ^
and fell down flat and worshypped him, and opened their treasures, and
offered unto him gifts, gold, frankynsence, and myrte. And after they were
warned of god in sleep (that they should not go again to Herod) they returned
in to their own country another way. When they were departed:

For it will come to pass, that Herod shall seek the child, to destroy him.
So when he awoke, he took the child and his mother by night, and departed in
to Egypt, and was there unto the death of Herod: that it might be fulfilled,
which was spoken of the lord by the Prophet, saying: Osee. xi. ^ Nu. xxiiii. e
out of Egypt have I called my son. Then Herod when he saw that he was
mocked of the wise men, he was exceeding wroth, and sent forth men of war,
and slew all the children that were in Bethleem, and in all the coostes (as
many as were two year old or under) according to the time, which he had
diligently known out of the wise men. Then was fulfilled that, which was
spoken by the Prophet Jeremy: where as he said: in Rama was there a voice
herd ^^^^. xxxi. c
lamentacyon, weeping, and great mourning: Rachell weeping for her children,
and would not be conforted because they were not.

But when Herod was dead: behold, an Exodi. iiii. ^
For they are dead which sought the chyldes life. And he arose, and took the
child and his mother, and came in to the land of Israel. But when he herd,
that Archelaus did reygne in Jury, in the rowme of his father Herod, he was
afraid to go thither. Notwithstanding, after he was warned of god in a sleep,
he turned aside into the parties of Galile, and went and dwelte in a city
which is called Nazareth: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
Prophettes: he shall be called a Nazarite.

The Baptym, preaching, and office of John^: and how Christ was baptized of
him in Iordane.

CAPI. III.
IN those days came John^ the Mark. i. ^ Luke. iii. ^. John^. iii. d.
Baptyst, Mat. iiii ^
Repent, of the life that is past, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.
John^. i b
For this is he of whom the prophet Esaias spoke, which says. Esai. x^. a
The voice of a crier in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord: and
make his paths straight. This John^ had his garment of camels here. 4. Re 18.
b.
And a gyrdell of a skyn about his loins. Mark. i. ^
His meat was locustes and i. Reg. 14. d
wild honey. Then went out to him, Jerusalem and all Jury, and all the regyon
round about Iordane, and were baptized of him in Jordan, confessyng their
sins.

But when he saw many of the Pharisees, Luke. iii. ^*
O generacyon of vypers: who has taught you to flee from the vengeance to
come? Bring forth therefore the fruits that be long to repentance. And be not
of soch mind that ye would say within yourselues: we have Abraham to our
father. For I say unto you, that God is able to bring to pass, that of these
stones there shall rise up children unto Abraham. Even now is the are also put
unto the rote of the trees: so that Mat. vii. ^, Luke. iii. b.
every tree which brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down, and cast
into the fire

I baptize you in water Mark. i. ^ Luke. iii. c John^. i. d
unto repentance / but he that shall come after me is myghtyer then I, whose
shoes I am not worthy to bear. He shall Baptyse you with the holy gooste and
with fire: Luke. iii. d
Whose fan is in his hand, and he will pourge his floor, and gather his wheat
in to the barn, but will burn the chafe with unquenchable fire.

Then comes Jesus from Galile to Iordane Mark. i, ^
to be Baptized of him. But John^ forbad him, saying, I have need to be
baptized of the: and come thou to me? Jesus answered and said unto him: Let
it be so now. For thus it becomes us to fulfill all ryghtewysenesse. Then he
suffered him. And Jesus when he was baptized, came straight way out of the
water. And lo Mark. i. ^ Luke. iii. d* John^. i. ^.
heaven was open unto him: and he saw the spirit of god descendynge like a
dove, and lyghtynge upon him. And lo, there came a voice from heaven, saying.
Esai. xiii. ^ Mat. xvii b Mathe. i. b Luke. iii. d. ii. P^^^ ^
This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased*

Christ fasteth and so tempted: he calls Peter, Androwe, James, and John^,
and heals all the sick.

CAPI. IIII.
THen was Jesus Mathe. i. b Luke. iiii. b
led away of the spirit Deute. ^. ^* Luke. iiii a. Depi. xvi. e
Man shall not live by bread only, but by every word that proceeds out of
the mouth of god. Then the devil takes him up in to the holy city, and
sets him on a pynacle of the temple / and says unto him: if thou be the
son God / cast thy self down headlyng. For it is written: Psalm. 92. ^.
He shall give his Angels charge over the: and with their hands they shall
hold the up, leest at any time thou dasshe thy foot against a stone. And Jesus
said to him: it is written again. Deute. vi. ^ Luke. iiii. b.
Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.

Again, the devil takes him up in to Deute. vi. c and. x. d Luke. iiii. b.
i. Reg. vii* a
Thou shalt worship the lord thy god, and him only shall thou serve. Then the
devil leaves him, and behold, Mark. i. b
the angels came and minystred unto him.

When Jesus had herd Mark. i. b
that John was taken, he departed in to Galile, and left Nazareth, and went
and dwelte in Capernaum, which is a city upon the sea coost, in the borders
of Zabulon and Neptalim: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias
the prophet, saying: Esai. ix. a.
The land of Zabulon and Nephtalim, by the way of the sea beyond Math. iii.
a Mark. i. a
preach, and to say: Mark. i. a Math. iii* a
repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.

Mar. i. b
As Jesus walked by the sea of Galilee he saw two brethren: Simon, which was
called Peter, and Andrewe his brother, castyng a net in to the sea (for they
were fysshers) and he says unto them: follow me, and I will make you ( to
become) Iere. xvi. b Ezech. 47 b
fysshers of men. And they straight way left the nets and followed him. And
when he was gone forth from thence, he saw other two brethren, James the son
of Zebede, and John^ his brother / in the ship with Zebede their father,
mendynge their nets, and he called them. And Luke. v. b
let the ship and their father, and followed him. And Jesus went about all
Galile, teaching in their synagoges, and preaching the Gospel of the
kingdom, and healynge al manner of sycknesse, and all manner of disease among
the people.

And his fame spread abroad thorowout all Siria. And they brought unto him all
sick people, that were taken with diverse dyseases and grypynges, and them that
were possessed with deuyls, and those which were lunatyke, and those that had
the palsy: and he healed them. Ma
And there followed him great multitudes of people, from Galile, and from the
ten cities / and from Jerusalem, and from Jury, and from the regyons that lie
beyond Iordane.

In this Chapyter and in the next following in contained the most excellent and
loving sermon of Christ in the mou^e: which Sermon. is the very heye that
opens the understanding in to the law. In this ^y^th Chupiter, specially he
preaches of the viii. bearitudes or blessings, of manslaughter, wrath and
anger of aduoutrey, of (...), of (...) ferynge wrong and of love, even toward
^ man's enemies.

CAPI. V.
WHen he saw the people he went up in Luke. vi. d
Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theyrs is the kingdom of heaven. Esai.
66. ^
Blessed are they that mourn: for they shall receive comfort. Blessed are the
meke: for they shall receive the inherytaunce of the earth. Blessed are they
which Iere. xxx^
hunger and thyrst after ryghtwysenesse: for they shall be satisfied. Blessed
are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart:
for they shall se God. Blessed are the peace makers: for they shall be called
the children of God. Blessed are they which suffer persecucyon for
ryghtwysenesse sake: for theyrs is the kingdom of heaven.

i. Peter. (...) iii. c. ^. iiii
Blessed are ye, when men reuyle you / and pesecute^ you, and shall falsely say
al manner Acts. v. ^
Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in heaven. For so persecuted
they the prophettes, which were before you.

Ye are the salt of the earth: Mark. ix. Luke. xiii Leu iii. ii
But if the salt have lost the saltness, what shall be seasoned therewith? It is
thence forth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden down of
men. Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an hill, can not be
hyd / Mar. iii^ Luke. ^. and. xi. ^
neither do men light a candell, and put it under a busshell, but on a
candelstycke, and it gives light unto all that are in the house Let your light
so shine before men, ^^^^^. ii. ^
that they may se your good works, and glorify your father which is in
heaven.

Think not that I am come to destroy ^th. i. d (...) ^, d
to fulfill. For truly I say unto you, ^e. (...). d ^i. xl. ^.
till heaven and earth pass, one jot, or one title of the law shall not
escape, till all be fulfilled. Whosoever therefore breaks me^. i^. b ^he. 38 b
one of these least commandments / and teaches men so, he shall be called
the least in the kingdom of heaven. But whosoever does and teaches the same,
shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven. For I say unto you: except your
ryghteousnes excede the ryghteousnes of the Scrybes and pharisees, ye can not
enter in to the kingdom of heaven.

Ye have herd that it was said unto them ^^ (...). c. (...) ^. ^ c. ^8. d.
Thou shall not kill: whosoever kylleth, shall be in danger of judgment. But
I say unto you: that whosoever is angrye with his brother (unadvisedly). shall
be in danger of judgment. And whosoever says unto his brother Racha, shall be
in danger of a counsel. But whosoever says thou fool, shall be in danger
of hell fire. Therefore if thou offerest thy gift at the altar, and there
reme^brest that thy brother has ought against the: leave there thine offering
before the altar ^iii. ^
and go thy way first, and be reconcyled to thy brother, and then come, and
offer thy gift.

^xii. ^.
Agree with thine adversary quycklye / whiles thou art in the way with him,
leest ^^^. ^. xiii. ^
Thou shall not commit aduoutrye. But I say unto you, (...) ^ xxi. ^.
that whosoever looks on another man's wife to lust after her / has committed
aduoutrye, with her all ready in his heart. ^. (...). ^
If thy right eye hinder the, pluck him out, and cast him from the. For better
it is unto the, that one of thy members perysshe, then that thy hole body
should be cast in to hell. And if thy right hand hinder the / cut him of, and
cast him from the. For better it is unto the, that one of thy members
perysshe, then that all thy body should be cast in to hell.

It is said, whosoever puts away his wife ^^ ^ ^. ^.
let him give her a letter of the deuorcement. Math. (...) Mark. ^. ^
But I say unto you: that who soever does put away his wife (except it be
for forninacyon) causes her to break matrymony. And whosoever maryeth her
that is deuorsed, co^mytteth aduoutrye. Again / ye have herd how it was
said to them of old time: Leuiti. (...). ^
Thou shalt not forswear thy self, but shalt perform unto the Lord those
things that thou swearest. James. v. v
But I say unto you, swear not at all: neither by heaven Esai. 66. ^. Mat.
xxiii ^.
for it is gods seat, nor by the earth, for it is his footstool: neither by
Jerusalem: for it is the city of the great king: neither shall thou swear by
thy head, because thou can not make one here white or black. But your
co^municacion shall be, yea, yea: nay nay. For what soever is added more then
these, it comes of evil. Ye have herd that it is said: Exodi. x^^. ^ Deuteronomy.
xix. d Leuiti. 24 d
an eye for an eye: and a toth for a toth. But I say unto you / that ye resyst
not evil. But Luke. v^. ^.
who soever gives the a blow on the right cheke / turn to him the other also.
And if any man will sue the at the law, and take a way thy cote / let him
have thy cloak also.

And whosoever will compel the to go a Leuti. x^^. ^ Mat. xxii. ^
Thou shall love thine neighbor / and hate thine enemy. But I say unto you,
love your enemies. Roma. (...). ^
Bless them that curse you Leuit. xix. d
do good to them that hate you. Pray for them which hurt you and persecute
you / that ye may be the Children of your father which is in heaven: for he
makes his son to arise on the evil / and on the good / and sends rain on
the just and unjust. For Luke. vi. ^
if we love them, which love you: what reward have ye? Do not the publicans
also even the same? And if ye make much of your brethren only / what singular
thing do ye? Do not also the publicans like wise? Leuit. xix. d
Ye shall therefore be perfyte, even as your father which is in heaven / is
perfyte.

Of alms, prayer, and fasting. He forbyddeth the carefulnes of worldly
things.

CAPI. VI.
Take heed, that ye give not your alms But when thou will give alms, let
not thy left hand know what thy right hand does, that thine alms may be
in secret: and thy father which sees in secret / shall reward the openly.
And when thou prayest 3. Reg. 18. c. Esai. xxix. d
thou shall not be as the ypocrytes are. For they use to stand prayeng in the
synagoges / and in the cornors of the streets, that they may be seen of men.
Uerely I say unto you: they have their reward. But when thou prayest 4. Reg.
4. f
enter in to thy chamber, and when thou have shut thy door pray to thy father
which is in secret: and thy father which sees in secret, shall reward the
openly.

But when ye pray Esai. ^d
babble not much, as the Heathen do: for they think it will come to Roma. 8. d.
For your father knows what things ye have need of before ye ask of him:
after this manner therefore pray ye.

Luke. xi. a
Our father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be done as well in earth, as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily
bread. And forgive us our dettes, as we forgive our detters. And lead us not
in to temptacion: but deliver us from evil. For thine is the kingdom and the
power, and the glory forever: Amen. Therefore Mat. viii. d Mark. xi. d
if ye forgive other men their trespasses, your heavenly father shall forgive you
your trespasses.) But if ye will not forgive men their trespasses, no more shall
your father forgive you your trespasses

Moreover Esai. 58. a Mat. ix. b Iere. xvii. b
when ye fast, be not sad as the ypocrites are. For they disfigure their faces
that it may appear unto men, how that Luke. x^i. d. Eccle xxii b
But lay up for you treasures in heaven, where neither rust, nor moth does
corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal. For where your
treasure is, there will your heart be also. Luke. xi. c.
The light of the body is the eye. Wherefore if thine eye be syngle, all thy
body shall be full of light. But and if thine eye be wicked, al thy body shall be
full of darkness. Wherefore, if the light that is in the be darkness how
great is that darkness.

Luke. xvi. c
No man can serve two masters. For either he shall hate the one, and love the
other / Luke. xii. c. Psalm. ^v. d. 1. Peter. v. c
be not careful for your life, what ye shall eat / or drink: nor yet for your
body, what raiment ye shall put on. Is not the life more worth then meat, and
the body more of value then raiment? Behold, the fowls of the air: for they
sow not, neither do they reap, nor carry in to the barnes: and your heavenly
father fedeth them. Are ye not much better then they? Luke. xii. d
Which of you (by taking careful thought) can add one cubyt unto his
stature? And why care ye for raymente? Consydre the lilyes of the field how
they grow. They labor not, neither do they spynne. And yet I say unto you,
that even Solomon in all his royalte was not arrayed like unto one of these.
Wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field (which though it stand to
day / is to morrow cast into the fournace) shall he not much more do the same
for you, o ye of lytie faith?

Therefore, take no thought saying: what shall we eat, or what shall we drink,
or where with shall we be clothed? after al these things do the gentyls seek.
For your heavenly father knows, that ye have need of all these things. But
rather seek ye first the kingdom of god, and the right wyse^^else thereof, and
al these things shall be minystred unto you. Care not then for the morrow, for
the morrow day shall care for it self: sufficient unto the day, is the
travail thereof.

He forbyddeth folysshe and rasshe judgment, reproves ypocrisye, exhorts
unto prayer. warns to beware of false prophets, and wylleth the hearers of
his word, to be doers of the same.

CAPI. VII.
I Luke. v^. ^
Urge not, that ye be not judged. ( condemn) Roma. ii.. a
For as ye judge, so shall ye be judged. Luke. vi. ^ Luke. vi. ^
And with what measure ye meat / with the same shall other men measure to you.
Luke. vi. ^
Why see thou a more in thy brothers eye, but co^syderest not the beam that
is in thine own eye? Or how say thou to thy brother (brother) suffer me, I
will pluck out a more out of thine eye, and behold a beam is in thine own
eye: Thou ypocrite / first cast out the beam out of thine own eye, and then
shalt thou se clearly to pluck out the more out of thy brothers eye. Give not
ye that which is holy unto dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before swyne,
lest they tread them under their feet, and the other turn against you, and
all to rent you. Ask, and it shall be given you. ^ere. xxix. c John^. 16. f.
Luke. xi. b
Seek, and ye shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For
whosoever asks, receives, and whosoever seeks fyndeth: Eccle. 31. b Tobi.
^iii. ^ Luke. vi. e.
whatsoever ye would that men should do to you: do ye even so to them also. For
this is the law and the prophettes.

Luke. xiii. e
Enter in at the strayte gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that
leads to destruction: and many there be which go in thereat. For strayte is
the gate, and narowe is the way, which leads unto life: and few there be
that find it.

Det^ xiii. d i. John^. 4. a
Beware of false Prophettes, which come to you in shepes clothyng, but
inwardly they are rauenyng wolves. Ye shall know Luke. vi. g.
Do men gather grapes of thorns? or fygges of thystels? Even so every good
tree brings forth good fruytes But a corrupt tree / brings forth evil
fruits. Math. xii ^
A good tree cannot bring forth bad fruit: neither can a bad tree bring
forth good fruytes. Meth. iii. b Luke. iii. b.
Every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down / and cast into
the fire. Wherefore, by their fruytes ye shall know them. Not every one that
says unto me Mat, 25. b. Luke. vi. g. and. x^^^^. e
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven: but he that does the will
of my father which is in heaven. ( He shall enter into the kingdom of heaven.)
Many will say to me in that day: Lord, Lord / have we not prophesyed
through thy name.

Act^^. xix. ^
And through thy name have cast out deuyls? And done many miracles, through thy
name? And then will I knowledge unto them: I never knew you. Psalm. vi. b*
Luke. xiii. d
Depart from me, ye that work iniquite.

For whosoever hears of me these words, Luke. vi. ^.
buylte his house upon a rock: and a shower of rain descended, and the
floodes came, and the wyndes blew, and bet upon that house, and it fell not /
because it was grounded on the rock. And every one that hears of me these
words, James. i. b.
and does them not, shall be lykened unto a folysh man / which buylte his house
upon sand: and a shower ^^^the. 13 b
of rain descended, and the floodes came, and the wyndes blewe, and bet upon
that house and it fell, and great was the fall of it. And it came to pass,
that when Jesus had ended these sayenges, the people were astonyed at his
doctrine. Mark. ^ ^ Luke. i^i^. ^
For he taught them as one having power, and not as the Scrybes. ( of them,
and the Pharyses.)

Christ cleanses the leper, heals the captains servant, and many other
dyseases: he helps Peter's mother inlawe, stylleth the sea, and the wind: and
dryueth the deuyls out of the possessed into the swyne.

CAPI. VIII.
WHen he was come down from the mountain, Luke. v. e Mark. i. ^
there came a leper / and worshypped him saying: Master, if thou wylt, thou
can make me clean. And Jesus put forth his hand and touched him saying: I
will, be thou clean, and immedyatly his leprosye was cleansed. And Jesus says
unto him: se thou tell no man Leuiti. 14 ^
but go and show self to the Priest, and offer the gift (that Moses
commanded to be offered) for a witness unto them.

And when Jesus was entered Luke. vii. d John^. iiii ^
into Capernaum, there came unto him a Centurion, and besought him, saying:
Master / my servant lies at home sick of the palsye, and is greuouslye
payned. And Jesus says: when I come unto him, I will heal him. The Centurion
answered, and said: Sir, I am not worthy, that thou should come under my
rofe: but Psalm. (...)
speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed.

For I also my self am a man subject to Luke. xiii. ^ Esai. xli. ^
many shall come from the East and west / and shall rest with Abraham and Isaac
and Jacob in the kingdom or heaven: but the children of the kingdom shall be cast
out into utter darkness: there shall be weeping and guasshynge of deeth. And
Jesus said unto the Centurion: go thy way, and as thou byleuest, so be it
unto the. And his servant was healed in the self same hour. Mark. ^. ^.
Luke. iiii. ^.
And when Jesus was come in to Peter's house, he saw his wives mother lyenge in
bed, and sick of a fever. And he touched her hand, and the fever left her:
and she arose, and minystred unto them. When the euenyng drue on, they brought
un to him many that were possessed with deuyls And he cast out the spirytes
with a word / and healed all that were sick, that it might be fulfilled,
which was spoken by Esaias the prophet, when he says: Psalm. ^^ii. v. Pe^. ii. d
He took on him our infirmityes, and bare our syckenesses.

When Jesus saw much people about Luke. ix. g
Master, I will follow the whyther soever thou go. And Jesus says unto
him: the foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nestes, but the
son of man has not where to rest his head. An other of the nombre of his
disciples said unto him: Luke. ix. g
Master, suffer me first to go and bury my father. But Jesus said unto him:
follow me, and let the dead butye their dead*

And when he entered in to a ship, his disciples followed him. And behold, Mat.
iiii. d. Luke. viii. c
there arose a great tempest in the sea, in so much that the ship was covered
with waves, but he was a sleep. And his disciples came to him, and awoke him,
saying: Master, save us, we perysshe. And he says unto them: why are ye
fearful, O ye of little faith.

Then he arose Job. xxvi. d Psalm. cvii. c
and rebuked the wyndes and the sea, and there followed a great calm. But the
men marueyled saying: What manner Mark. v a Luke. viii. d
And when he was come to the other side, in to the country of the Gergesites,
there met him two possessed of deuyls, which came out of the graves, and were
out of measure fearce, so that no man might go by that way. And behold, they
cried out, saying: Math. v. a.
O Jesus, thou son of god Luke. viii d xii. ^o. vi. ^
what have we to do with the?

Art thou come hither to tourmente us before the time? And there was a good
way of from them Mat. viii. ^
a heerde of many swyne, fedynge. So, the deuyls besought him, saying: If thou
cast us out, suffer us to go our way in to the heerde of swyne. And he said
unto them: go your ways. Then went they out, and departed in to the heerde of
swyne. And behold, the hole heerde of fwyne was carried headlynge in to the sea, and perysshed in the waters. Then they that kept them, fled and went
their ways in to the City, and told every thing, and what had fortuned unto
the possessed of the deuyls.

And behold, the hole City came out to mete Jesus: and when they saw him,
(...). xv. ^
they besought him that he would depart out of their coostes.

He heals the palsye, calls Matthew from the custom, answers for his
disciples, heals the woman of the bloody issue, helps Iairus daughter,
gives two blind men their sight, makes a dombe man to speak, and dryueth
out a devil.

CAPI. IX.
HE entered also in to a ship, and passed

And behold, Mark. (...) a. Luke. v. d
they brought to him a man sick of the palsye, lyenge in a bed. And when Jesus
saw the faith of them, he said unto the sick of the palsye: son, be of
good cheer, thy sins be forgyuen the. And behold, certain of the Scrybes
said within them selves: this man blasphemeth.

And when Jesus saw their thoughts, he said: Wherefore think ye evil in
your hertes? Whyther is easyer to say, thy sins be forgyuen the, or to
say, arise and walk? But that ye may know, that the son of man has power
to forgive sins in earth. Then says he unto the sick of the palsye: Acts.
iii. b. and (...). f Math. (...) b Luke. v. c John^. ^. ^
Arise, take up thy bed, and go unto thine house. And he arose, and departed to
his house. But the people that saw it, meruayled, and glorified god, which had
given such power unto men.

And as Jesus passed forth from thence he saw a man (named Mathewe) sitting
at the receyte of custom, and he says unto him: follow me. And he arose and
followed him. And it came to pass as Jesus sat at meat in his house: behold
many publicans also and sinners that came, sat down with Jesus and his
disciples.

And when the Pharisees saw it, they said Ose^. vi. e Math. xii ^
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. For I am not come to call the ryghteous,
but sinners to repentance:

Then came the disciples of John^ unto him, saying: Math. vi. b Mark. ii. ^.
Luke. v. ^
Why do we and the Pharisees fast, for the most part: but thy disciples fast
not? And Jesus said unto them: Can the brydegromes children mourn, as long
as the brydegrome is with them? But the days will come, when the brydegrome
shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast. No man puts a piece of
new cloth in an old garment. For then takes he away the piece from the
garment, and the rent is made worse.

Neither do men put new wine in to old bottels: else the bottels break, and
the wine runs out, and the bottels perysshe. But they put new wine in to
new bottels, and both are saved together.

Mark. v. d. Luke. viii. ^
behold there came a certain ruler, and worshypped him, saying: My daughter
is even now deceased, but come and lay thy hand upon her, and she shall
live. And Jesus arose, and followed him, and (so did) his disciples, Mark. v. c
Luke. viii. ^ Leuiti. xv. ^
And behold, a woman which was dyseased with an issue of blood twelve years,
came behind him, and touched the hemme of his vesture. For she said within her
self: if I may touch but even his vesture only, I shall be safe. But Jesus
turned him about, and when he saw her, he said: Daughter, be of good comfort,
thy faith has made the safe. And the woman was made hole, even that same time,

Mark. v d Luke. viii g
And when Jesus came in to the rulers house, and saw the mynstrels, and the
people making a noise, he said unto them: get you hence, for the maid is not
dead, but John^. xi. b.
slepeth. And they laughed him to scorn. But when the people were put forth,
he went in, and took her by the hand, ( and said, damsel, arise) and the
damsel arose. And this noise went abroad in to all the land.

And when Jesus departed thence, two Math. 8. b.
according to your faith, be it unto you. And their eyes were opened. And
Jesus charged them, saying: Se that no man know of it. But they, when they
were departed, spread abroad his name in all that land. As they went out,
behold Mat. vii. d. Luke. xi. b
they brought to him a dombe man possessed of a devil. And when the devil was
cast out, the dombe spoke. And the people merueyled, saying: it was never so
seen in Israel.

But the Pharisees said. Math. xii b Mark. iii. b Luke. xi. b
He casts out deuyls, through the prince of deuyls. Mar. vi ^
And Jesus went about all cities and towns, teaching in their synagoges: and
preaching the glad tidings of the kingdom, and healynge every sycknes and
every disease among the people. But when he saw the people: Mar. vi. d.
he was moved with compassyon on them, because they were destitute, and scattered
abroad, eue^ as sheep having no shepherde. Then says he unto his disciples,
Luke. x. ^
the harvest truly is plenteous, but the laborers are few. Pray ye therefore
the Lord of the harvest, that he will send laborers in to his harvest.

Christ sends out his. xii. apostles to preach in I^^y^, syueth them charge,
teaches them, and conforteth ^he^^^ against persecucyon and trouble.

CAPI. X.
ANd when his Mark. ^ Luke. ^^
twelve disciples were Mark. ^
Jesus sent forth these. xii. in nombre, whom he commanded, saying. Go not
into the way of the gentyls, and in to the city of the Samaritans enter ye
not. But go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

Go and preach, saying: The kingdom of heaven is at hand: Heal the sick,
cleanse the lepers, raise the dead, cast out deuyls. Acts. x. ^
Freely ye have received: give freely. Mat. (...) Luke. ^^^
Possess not gold nor silver, nor brass in your purses, nor yet scryp toward
your journey: i. Timo. ^^
For the workman is worthy of his meat. But to what soever city or town ye
shall come, inquire who is worthy in it, and there abide till ye go thence.
Luke. ix^ and ^. ^.
And when ye come in to an house, salute the same. And if the house be worthy,
let your peace come upon it. But if it be not worthy, let your peace return
to you again.

And who soever shall not receive you, nor will hear your preaching: When ye
depart out of the house or that city, Mat. v^^ Ac^^^ xii^^
shake of the dust of your feet. Uerely I say unto you: it shall be easyer
for the land of Zodom / and Gomor in the day of judgment, then for that
city. Behold, I send you forth, as sheep among wolves. Be ye therefore wise
as serpents Mat. ^ii^ Luke. (...) John^. x^^^
/ and innocent as doves. Luke. x^
But beware of men, for they shall deliver you up to the counselles, and shall
scourge you in their Synagoges. And ye shall be brought unto the head rulers,
and kings, for my sake, in witness to them and to the gentyls:

But Mat. xi^ ^ Luke. xi. ^
when they deliver you up, take ye no thought, how or what ye shall speak:
Exodus ^iii* ^
For it shall be given you, even in that same hour, what ye shall speak. For
it is not ye that speak, but the spirit of your father which speaks in you.

Miche. 7. ^
The brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the son.
And the children hated of all men for my name sake. Mat* 14. a.
But he that endures to the end, shall be saved.

But Math. ii. ^. (...). 8. a (...). xii^^. ^.
when they persecute you in this city flee ye in to an other. For verily I
say unto you: ye shall not go through all the cities of Israel, till the son
of man be come. Luke. vi. ^
The discyple is not above the master: nor the servant above his lord. It is
enough for the disciple, that he be as his master is, and that the servant be
as his lord is. If they have called the lord of the house Beelzebub: how
much more shall they call them of his household so? Fear them not therefore.
Mat. ^ii^. ^. Luke. viii. ^ ^d. xii, a
For there is nothing close, that shall not be opened: and nothing hyd, that
shall not be known. What I tell you in darkness, that speak ye in light.
And what ye hear in the ear, that preach ye on the house tops. Luke. xii.
a.
And fear ye not them which kill the body, but are not able to kyl the soul.
But rather fear him, which is able to destroy both soul and body in to hell.
Are not two little sparowes sold for a farthynge? And one of them shall not
light on the ground without your father. Yea, even all the heeres of your head
are nombred. Fear ye not therefore: ye are of more value then many sparowes.
Mat. viii. d Luke. ix. ^, and* xii. ^
Every one therefore that shall knowledge me before men, him will I knowledge also
before my father which

Think not Luke. xii. g.
that I am come to send peace into the earth. I came not to send peace but a
sword. For I am come to set a man at varyaunce Miche. 7. a
against his father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter in
law against her mother in law. And a man's foes shall be they that are of his
own hausholde. Luke. xiiii. c
He that loves father or mother more then me, is not worthy of me. And he that
loves son or daughter more then me, is not worthy of me. And he that takes
not his cross and follows me, is not worthy of me.

Mat. xvi. d Mat. viii d Luke. xii* b.
He that fyndeth his life, shall lose it: and he that loses his life for my
sake, shall find it. Luke. ix. ^ John^. xiii. c
He that receives you, receives me: and he that receives me, receives him
that sent me. He that ^ Reg. 18. b
receives a prophet in the name of a prophet, shall receive a prophets
reward. And he that receives a ryghteous man, in the name of a ryghteous man,
shall receive a ryghteous man's reward.

Mark. ix. ^.
And who soever shall give unto one of these little ones to drink, a cup of
cold water only (in the name of a disciple) verily I say unto you: he shall
not lose his reward.

John^ Bapiyst, sends his disciples unto Christ.

CAPI. XI.
ANd it came to pass, that when Jesus

When John^ being in prison herd the words of Christ, he sent two of his
disciples and said unto him. Art thou he that shall come: or do we look for
an other. Jesus answered, and said unto them. Go, and show John^ again, what
ye have herd and seen. Esa. xxx
The blind receive their syghte: the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and
the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor Esai. ^xi. a
receive the glad tidings of the gospel. And happy is he, that is not
offended by me.

Luke. xi. ^
And as they departed, Jesus began to say unto the people concerning John^.
What Mala. ^ii* ^ Mark. ^. ^
Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way
before the.

Uerely I say unto you: among them that are borne of women, arose not a
greater then John^ the Baptyst. Notwithstanding he that is less: in the
kingdom of heaven is greater then he. From the days of John^ Baptyst until
this day, the kingdom of heaven suffers violence, and the violent pluck it
unto them. Luke. xvi. d
For all the prophettes, and the law it self prophesyed unto John^. And if ye
will receive it Mala. iii. d Luke. i. b John^. i. ^
this is Helyas, which was for to come. He that has ears to hear let him
hear.

Luke. vi^. ^.
But whereunto shall I lyken this generacyon? It is like unto children which

For John^ came neither catynge nor drinking, and ye say, he has the
devil. The son of man came eating and drinking, and they say: behold a
glutton, and an unmeasurable drynker of wine, and a friend unto publicans and
sinners. And wisdom is Justified of her children.

Luke. x. ^
Then began he to vpbrayde the cities which most of his miracles were done
in, because they repented not of their sins. Woe unto the Chorasin. Woe unto
the Bethsaida: for if the miracles which were showed in you, had been done in
the city of Tire or Sidon, they had repented of their sins long agone in
sack cloth and ashes. Nevertheless I say unto you: it shall be easyer for
Tire and Sidon at the day of judgment, then for you. And thou Capernaum,
which ^ete lift up unto heaven, shalt be brought down to hell.

For if the miracles which have been done Meth. 2^. d Luke. x. d John^. ^i^. d.
All things are given over unto me of my father. John^. 7. d and. viii. ^
And no man knows the son but the father: neither knows any man the
father, save the son, and he to whom soever the son will open him. Come
unto me all ye that labor: and are laden, and I will ease you. Eccle. vi. d.
Take my yocke upon you, and learn of me, for I am meke and lowly in heart:
and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yocke is easy, ^ John^. v. ^
and my burden is light.

The disciples pluck the ^^^es of corn. Christ heals the dried hand,
helps the possessed that was blind and dombe, and shows who is his
brother, sister, and mother.

CAPI. XII.
AT that time Jesus went on the Sabbath Mark. i^ d
through the corn, and his disciples were an hungered, and began to Deu. xxiii.
d
pluck the ears of corn, and to eat. But when the Pharisees saw it, they
said un to him: Behold, thy disciples do that, which is not lawful (for them)
to do upon the Sabbath day. But he said unto them: Have ye not red what David
did, when he was an hungered, and they that were with him? ^. Reg. xxi. a
How he entered in to the house of god, and did eat the show breades, which
were not lawful for him to eat, neither for them which were with him, but
only for the priests? Or have ye not red in the law, how that (on the
Sabbath days) the priests in the temple break the Sabbath, and are
blameless? But I say unto you: that in this place is one greater then the
temple. Wherefore, if ye wist what this means, ^^^^. vi. ^. Mark. ix. ^
I require mercy, and not sacrifice: ye would not have condemned innocents.
For the son of man also, is lord even of the Sabbath day. And he departed
thence Mat. iii. ^ Luke. v^. ^
and went in to the synagoge: and be hold, there was a man which had his hand
dried up. And they asked him saying: Luke. (...)* ^
Is it lawful to heal upon the Sabbath days? that they might accuse him. And
he said un to them: which of you will it be, that shall have Deu. xxii ^
a sheep, and if it fall into a pyt on the Sabbath day, will he not take it and
lift it out? How much more then is a man better then a sheep? Wherefore, it
is lawful to do a good deed on the Sabbath days.

Then says he to the man: stretche forth thy hand. And he stretched it
forth. And it

Math. (...) John^. x. ^ and. xi. ^
Then the Pharisees went out, and held a counsel against him, how they might
destroy him. But when Jesus knew it, he departed thence, and much people
followed him, and he healed them all, and charged them, that they should not
make him known: that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Esaias the
prophet, which says: Esai, x^^^* ^
Behold my child, whom I have chosen, my beloved in whom my soul delyteth. I
will put my spirit upon him, and he shall show judgment to the gentyls. He
shall not strive nor cry, neither shall any man hear his voice in the
streets, a brosed reed shall he not break and smokyng flax shall he not
quench, till he send forth judgment unto victory, and in his name shall the
gentyls trust.

Luke. (...). ^
Then was brought to him a blind and dombe man, that was vexed with a devil:
and he healed him, in so much, that the blind and dombe, both spoke and saw.
And all the people were amassed, and said: Is not this that son of David?
Math. i^. ^ Mark. (...) Luke. xi. ^
But when the Pharisees herd it, they said. This fellow dryueth the deuyls none
otherwise out, but by the help of Beelzebub the cheyfe of the deuyls. But when
Jesus knew their thoughts, he said unto them: Every kingdom divided against
it self, shall be brought to naught.

And every city or house divided against Luke. xi. ^
how can one enter in to a strong man's house, and spoil his Iuels except
he first bind the strong man, and then spoil his house?

He that is not with me, is against me. And he that gathers not with me,
scatters abroad. Wherefore, I say unto you, all manner of sin and blasphemye
shall be forgyuen unto men, Math. iii d Luke. xii. d.
but the blasphemye against the spirit, shall not be forgyuen unto men. Regu^.
ii. ^
And who soever speaks a word against the son of man, it shall be forgyuen
him. But whosoever speaks against the holy ghost, it shall not he forgyuen
him, neither in this world, nor in the world to come: Mat. vii. ^.
Either make the tree good, and the fruit good, or else make the tree evil,
and his fruit evil. Luke. vi. ^
For the tree is known by his fruit O generacyon of vypers, how can ye
speak good things, when ye your selves are evil? Psalm. x^. b Luke. vi. g.
For out of the aboundau^ce of the heart, the mouth speaks. A good man out of
the good treasure of the heart, brings forth good things. And an evil man,
out of evil treasure, brings forth evil things. But I say unto you, of every
idle word that men shall have spoken, they shall give accountes in the day of
judgment. ^. Regu^. i. ^ Luke. xix. b.
For out of thy words thou shalt be justified: and out of thy words thou
shalt be condemned.

Then certain of the scribes and of the pharisees asked him, saying. Mat. viii
b Luke. xi. b
Master, we will se a sign of the. But he answered and Mat. xvi. ^
The evil and aduouterous generation Mar. viii ^ Luke. ii. d John^. vi. d.
Jonas. ii. a
seeks a sign and there shall no sign be given to them, but the sign of the
prophet Jonas. Jonas. ii. a
For as Jonas was three days and three nyghtes in the whales belly: so shall the
son of man be three days and three nyghtes in the heart of the earth. The men
of Niniue shall rise in the judgment with this nation, and condemn it,
because Jonas. iii. c
they amended at the preaching of Jonas. Behold, here is one greater then
Jonas. ^. Regu^. x. a ii, Pat. (...). a Luke. xi. d
The queen of the south shall rise in the judgment, with this generation, and
shall condemn it: for she came from the uttermost parts of the world to hear
the wisdom of Solomon. And behold, in this place is one greater then Solomon.
Luke. xi. d
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man, he walks thorowout dry
places, sekyng rest, and fyndeth none. The^ he says: I will return in to my
house, from whence I came out. And when he is come, he fyndeth it emptye, and
swepte, and garnysshed. Then goes he, and takes unto him seven other spirits
worse then him self, and so enters he in, and dwells there. And ii. Pet.
ii. d. Hebru. vi. a
the end of that man is worse then the beginning. Even so shall it be also,
unto this froward generation While he yet talked to the people: Mark. iii. d
Luke. viii. ^
behold his mother and his brethren stood without, desyryng to speak with him.
Then one said unto him: Behold, Mark. iii. d Luke. v^i. c
thy mother and thy brethren stand without, desiring to speak with the. But
he answered, and said unto him that had told him: Who is my mother? or who
are my brethren? And he stretched forth his hand toward his disciples, and
said: John^. xv. ^
behold, my mother and my brethren. For whosoever does the will of my father
which is in heaven, the same is my brother, sister, and mother.

The parable of the ^ede, of the tares, of the mustarde ^ede, of the leven, of
the treasure hyd in the field, of the pearls, and of the net.

CAPI. XIII.
THe same day went Jesus out of the Mat. iiii. ^
and sat by the sea side, and much people were gathered together unto him so
greatly that he went, and sat in a ship, and all the people stood on the shore.
And he spoke many things to them by similitudes, saying: Behold, the sower
went forth to sow. And when he sowed, some scedes fell by the ways side, and
the fowls came, and devoured them up. Some fell upon stony places, where they
had not much earth, and anon they sprang up, because they had no depenes of
earth, and when the son was up, they caught heat, and because they had no
rote, they wythered away Again, some fell among thorns, and the thorns
sprange up and chooked them. But some fell in to good ground, and brought
forth fruit: some an hundred fold, some si^ty fold, some thirtye fold. Who
soever has ears to hear, let him hear.

And the disciples came, and said unto him: Mat. iiii. ^ Luke. viii ^
it is given unto you to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to
them it is not given. Math. 25* ^ Mat. iiii. c. Luke. vii^. ^
For who soever has, to him shall be given, and he shall have abundance. But
who soever has not: from him shall be taken away eue^ that also which he has.
Therefore speak I to them by similitudes: for they seeing, se not: and
hearing, they hear not, neither do they understand. And in them is fulfilled
the prophecye of Esasas* which says: Esai. vi. ^ Mat. iiii. ^ Luke. viii b
John^. xii. ^. A^t^^. 28. ^. Roma. xi. b
with the ears ye shall hear, and shall not understand, and seeing, ye shall
se, and shall not perceive. For these peples hertes is wared gross and their
ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes have they closed, leest at any time
they should se with their eyes, and hear with their cares, and should
understand with their heart, and be converted, that I also might heal them.

Luke. x. d
But blessed are your eyes, for they se: and ^. Peter. i. d
that many prophettes and ryghteous men have desired to se those things which
ye se, and have not seen them: and to hear those things which ye hear, and
have not herd them. Mat. iiii b. Luke. viii ^
Hear ye therefore the similitude of the sower. When one hears the word of
the kingdom, and understands it not, then comes the evil man, and takes
away that which was sowe^ in his heart: this is he, which was sown by the way
side. But he that received the seed which was cast in to stonye places, the
same is he that hears the word, and anon with joy receives it, yet has he
no rote in him self, but dureth for a season: for when tribulacyon or
persecucyon happens because of the word, by and by he falls. He also that
received seed in to the thorns, is he that hears the word: and the care of
this world, and the deceytefulnes of riches, choke up the word, and so is he
made vnfruytful. But he that receives sede in to the good ground, is he that
hears the word, and understands it: which also bears fruit, and
brings forth, some an hundred fold, some syxtye fold, some thyrtye fold.

An other similitude put he forth unto them Mat. iiii. ^.
The kingdom of heaven is lykened unto a man, which sowed good seed in his
field. But while men slepte, his enemy came, and sowed tares among the wheat,
and went his way. But when the blade was spronge up, and had brought forth
fruit, then appeared the tares also. So the servants of the householder came,
and said unto him. Sir, dydest not thou sow good seed in thy field? from
whence then has it tares? He said unto them: the enuyous man has done this.
The servants said unto him: will thou then that we go, and wede them up?
but he said, nay, lest while ye gather up the tares, ye pluck up also the
wheat with them, let both grow together until the harvest, and in time of
harvest, I will say unto the reapers: gather ye first the tares, and bind
them together in sheaues to be burnt: but gather the wheat in to my barn.

An other parable put he forth unto them saying: Mat. iiii. ^. Luke. xiii. d
The kingdom of heaven is like unto a grain of mustarde seed, which a man
took and sowed in his field, which is the least of all seeds. But when it is
grown, it is the greatest among herbs, and is a tree: so that the birds of
the air come, and make their nestes in the branches thereof.

An other similitute spoke he unto them: Luke. (...)
The kingdom of heaven is like unto leue^ Mat. (...)
All these things spoke Jesus unto the people by similitudes, and without a
parable spoke he nothing unto them: that it might be fulfilled, which was
spoken by the prophet, that says, Psalm (...)
I will open my mouth in parables: I will speak forth things which have been
kept secret from the beginning of the world. When the people were sent
away, then came Jesus in to the house. Mat. (...)
And his disciples came unto him, saying: declare un to us the parable of the
tares of the field. He answered and said unto them: He that sows the good
seed, is the son of man. The field is the world. And the children of the
kingdom, they are the good seed: the tares are the children of the wicked: the
enemy that sows them, is the devil. The harvest is the end of the world:
the reapers be the angels. Eue^ as the tares therefore, are gathered and burnt
in the fire: so shall it be in the end of this world.

^^^^. (...)
The son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall gather out of
his kingdom (...) Sapi (...)* i. (...)
Then shall the righteous shine as the son in the kingdom of their father. Who
so ever has ears to hear, let him hear.

Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hyd in the field, the
which a man has found and hyd: and for joy thereof goes and sells all that
he has, and byeth the field. Again the kingdom of heaven is like unto a
merchaunt man, sekyng goodly pearls, which (when he found one precious
pearl) went and sold all that he had, and bought it. Again the kingdom of
heaven is like unto a net, that was cast into the sea and gathered of all kind
( offysshes) which when it was full me^ drew to land, and sat down and
gathered the good in to vessels, but cast the bad away. So shall it be at the
end of the world. The angels shall come and sever the bad from among the
good, and shall cast them in to the fournace of fire: Mat. (...) and. xx^^
there shall be waylyng and gnasshynge of teeth. Jesus says unto them: have ye
understand all these things? They say unto him: yea lord. Then said he
unto them.

Therefore every s^^^be which is taught unto Ma^^. ^^^
he departed thence. And when he came into his own country, he taught them in
their synagoges, in so much that ^^^. iiii. ^.
they were astonyed, and said: Whence comes this wisdom, and powers unto him?
^^^. iiii. ^ (...). vi. ^.
Is not this the carpenters son? Is not his mother called Mary? and his
brethren James and Ioses and Simon and Judas? And are not all his systers with
us? Whence has he then al these things. And they were offended at him. Jesus
said unto them. ^^^. vi. ^. ^^ke. iiii. d ^^h^. v. f
A prophet is not without honor, save in his own country, and in his own
house.

And he did not many miracles there, because of their vnbylefe.

John^ was taken and beheaded. Christ fedeth five thousand men with five
loves, and two fysshes: and appears by night unto his disciples upon the sea.

CAPI. XIIII.
AT that time ^a^^. v^. ^ ^^^e* ix. ^
Herod the Tetrarcha ^a^^. vi. ^ ^^ke. iii. d.
taken John^, and bound him, and put him in prison because of Herodias, his
brother Philips wife. For John^ said unto him: ^ ^iii. 18. ^
It is not lawful for the to have her. And when he would have put him to
death, he feared the people, ^a^. xxi. b.
because they counted him as a prophet. But when Herodes (...). x^. ^
birth day was kept, the daughter of Herodias dau^sed before them, and pleased
Herod. ^^^^. v^. ^
Wherefore he promised with an oath, that he would give her what soever she would
ask. And she being instruct of her mother before, said: Give me here John^
Baptystes head in a platter.

And the king was sorry. Nevertheless, for the oaths sake, and them which sat
at the table, he commanded it to be given her: and sent tourmentours, and
beheaded John^ in the prison, and his head was brought in a platter, and given
to the damsel, and she brought it to her mother. And his disciples came and
took up his body, and buried it, and went, and told Jesus.

When Jesus herd of it, he Ma^^. vi. d Luke. ix. b John^. vii. ^
departed

And when the even drew on, his disciples came to him, saying: this is a
deserte place, and the hour is now past, let the people depart, that they
may go in to the towns, and bye them vytayles. But Jesus said unto them. They
have no need to go away. Give ye them to eat. They say unto him: we have here
but. v. loves and two fysshes. He said: bring them hither to me. And he
commanded the people to sit down on the grass, and he took the. v. loves and.
i^. fysshes, and lift up his eyes toward heaven and blessed: And when he had
broken them, he gave the loves to his disciples, and his disciples gave them to
the people. And they did all eat, and were suffysed. And they gathered up (of
the fragmentes that remained) xii. baskettes full. And they that did eat, were
about five thousand men, beside women and children.

Ma^^. vi. ^ John^. vi. b.
And straight way Jesus made his Luke. vi. ^.
went up in to a mountain to pray alone. And when night was come / he was
there him self alone. But the ship was now in the mids of the sea, and was
tossed with waves, for it was a contrary wind. And in the fourth watch of the
night. Jesus went unto them walkyng on the sea. And when the discyples saw him
walkyng on the sea, they were troubled saying, it is some spyryte, and they
cried out for fear. But straight way, Jesus spoke unto them, saying: be of
good cheer, it is I, be not afraid. Peter answered him, and said: Lord, if
it be thou, bid me come unto the on the water.

And he said, come. And when Peter was Man. vi. ^.
And when they were come in to the ship, the wind ceased. Then they that were
in the ship, came and worshypped him, saying: of a truth thou art the son of
God. And when they were gone over / they came into the land of Genesereth. And
when the men of the place had knowledge of him, they sent out messengers in to
all that country round about the coost and brought unto him all that were
sick, and besought him, that they might touch the hemme of his vesture only.
And as many as touched it, were made safe.

Christ excuses his discyples / and rebukes the Scrybes and Pharyses for
transgressynge the commandment of God through their own tradicyons. The
thing that goes in to the mouth defyleth not the man. He delyuereth the woman
of Can^^^ye^ boughter: heals the multitude: and with seven loves, and a few
little fysshes fedeth four thousand men, beside women and children.

CAPI. XV.
THen Man. vii. a
came to Jesus Scribes and pharisees Erod^. (...), ^ Mar. vii. b
honor father and mother, and he that curses father or mother: let him dye
the death. But ye say, every one shall say to his father and mother Erodi
xxi. ^ Deute. v. b. Ephe. vi. a.
what gift so ever should have come of me, the same is turned unto thy
profit: and so shall he not honor his father or his mother. And thus have ye
made the commandment of God of none effect, because of your own tradicion.
Ypocrites, full well did Esaye prophesye of you, saying: Esai. x^ix ^ I^re. 33.
^* Mar. vii. ^
This people draws nygh unto me with their mouth, and honors me with
lips, howbeit, their hertes are far from me: but in vain do they serve me,
teaching the doctrines and precepts of men.

And he called the people to him, and said

And Jesus went thence, and departed (...)
but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Then came she, and worshypped
him, saying: Lord, help me. He answered, and said: It is not mete, to take the
chyldrens beade, and to cast it to dogs. She answered, and said Truth lord,
for the dogs eat of the crommes, which fall from their masters table. Then
Jesus answered, and said unto her. O woman, great is thy faith, be it unto
the, even as thou will. And her daughter was made hole even at that same time.

And Jesus went away from thence, and

And much people came unto him, bringing with them those that were lame,
blind deaf, maimed, and other many: and cast them down at Jesus feet. Esa
(...)
And he healed them: in so much, that the people wondered, when they saw the
dombe speak, the maimed to be hoole, the lame to walk, and the blind to se.
And they glorified the God of Israel. Math* ^*
Then Jesus called his disciples unto him and said: I have compassyon on the
people, because they continue with me now. iii. days and have nothing to eat:
and I will not let them depart fasting, lest they mysse carry by the way. And
his disciples say unto him, whence should we get so much bread in the
wyldernes, as to suffice so great a multitude? And Jesus say the unto them:
how many loves have ye? And they say Math* (...)
seven, and a few little fysshes. And he commanded the people to sit down on
the ground: and took the seven loves, and the fysshes: and after that he had
given thanks, he brake them, and gave to his discipiples, and the disciples
gave them to the people. And they did all eat, and were suffysed. And they
took up (of the broken meat that was left) seven baskettes full. And yet they
that did eat were four thousand men beside women and children. And he sent
away the people, and took ship, and came in to the parties of Magdala.

The Pharys^^ require a token. Jesus warns his disciples of the pharisees
doctrine. The co^fessyon of Petet. The keys of heaven. The faithful must bea^e
the Cross after Christ.

CAPI. XVI
THe Mat. vili b John^. vi. d. Lu^e. xi. d
Pharisees also with the Saduces Luke. xii. ^.
even, ye say, it will be fair wether, for the sky is red. And in the morning:
It will be foul wether to day, for the sky is glowmynge red. O ye ypocrites,
ye can discern the outward appearau^ce of the sky: but can ye not discern
the signs of the times? (...). xii. c
The froward and aduouterous nacyo^ requires (...). 8. b (...). xi. d (...).
vi. d.
a sign, and there shall no sign be given unto it, but the sign of the ^^as.
ii, a
Prophet Jonas. And he left them, and departed.

And when his disciples were come to the (...). xii. a.
Take heed and beware of the leven of the Pharisees / and of the Saduces. And
they thought in them selves saying: we have taken no bread with us. which when
Jesus understood, he said unto them: O ye of little faith, why take ye thought
with in your selves, because ye have brought no bread? Do ye not yet perceive,
neither remember those five loves / when there were (...) 14. ^
five. M men / and how many baskettes took ye up? (...) x^. d.
Neither the seven loves when there were four thousand men: and how many
baskettes took ye up? how happens it that ye do not understand, that I
spoke it not unto you concerning bread, that ye should beware of the leven of
the Pharisees and of the Saduces? Then understood they, how that he had not
them beware of the leven of bread but of the doctrine of the Pharyses / and of
the Saduces.

When Jesus came in to the coostes of (...). vlli ^ (...), ix. ^
whom do men say that I the son of man am? They said: Some say that thou
art John^ Baptist, some Elyas, some Ieremias, or one of the nombre of the
Prophettes. He says unto them: but whom say ye that I am? Simon Peter
answered and said: (...). ix. ^ (...), vi. g.
Thou art Christ the son of the living God. And Jesus answered, and said
unto him: happy art thou Simon the son of Jonas, for flesh and blood has
not opened that unto the, (...). vi. d.
but my father which is in heaven. And I say also unto the, that thou art
Peter: and upon this (...). x. a
rock I will build my congregation. And the gates (...)
of hell shall not prevail against it. And I will give unto the, the keys of
the kingdom of heaven: And ^^th* ^8. ^
whatsoever thou byndest in earth, shall be bound in heaven: and whatsoever thou
losest in earth, shall be losed in heaven. Then charged he his discyples / that
they should tell no man, that he was Jesus Christ. (...). viii d (...) i^* ^
From that time forth began Jesus to show unto his disciples, how that

Then said Jesus unto his disciples: It any man will follow me, let him forsake
himself and take up his cross, and follow me. Math. x. ^. Mathe. (...) Luke*
i^. ^ John^. vi. ^.
For who so will save his life, shall lose it. Again who so does lose his life
for my sake, shall find it. For what does it profet a man / if he win all the
hole world: and lose his own soul?

Or what shall a man give to redeem his soul again withal? For the son of
man shall come in the glory of his father, with his angles: and Roms. ^. ^.
Mark. ^. d. Luke. ix. ^
then shall he reward every man according to his deeds. Uerely I say unto
you, there be standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they se the
son of man come in his kingdom.

The transfiguratyon of Christ. He heale^^ the Luna^yke, and pays trybute.

CAPI. XVII.
ANd Mark. (...)* ^ Luke ix. ^
after sire days, Jesus takes Acts. ^. ^
and his face did shine as the son, and his clothes were as white as the light.
And behold, there appeared unto them Moses and Elias talkyng with him. Then
answered Peter, and said unto Jesus: Lord, here is good being for us. If
thou will, let us make here three tabernacles: one for the, and one for Moses,
and one for Elias.

While he yet spoke, behold, a bright cloud Math. iii. ^ and* x^^, ^
this is my beloved son Esa. xiii a De^. xviii. ^
in whom I delight Mark. i. ^ and. (...). a.
hear him. And when the disciples herd these things / they fell on their
faces and were fore afraid. And Jesus came and touched them / and said:
arise, and be not afraid. And when they had lift up their eyes, they saw no
man, save Jesus only. Mark. (...). ^
And when they came down from the mountain, Jesus charged them, saying: show
the vision to no man / until the son of man be risen again from the dead.
And his disciples asked him saying. Why then say the scrybes, that Elias must
first come? Jesus answered and said unto them, Mala. iii* d
Elias truly shall first come, and restore all things. But I say unto you,
that Math. xi. b.
Elias is come all redye, and they knew him not: but have done unto him
whatsoever they lusted. In likewise shall also the son of man suffer of them.
Then the discyples understood, that he spoke unto them of John^ Baptyst. And
when they were come to the people, Math ix. f. Luke. ix. e
And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not heal him. Jesus
answered and said: O faythles and crooked nacio^: how long shall I be with
you? how long shall I suffer you? bring him hither. And Jesus rebuked the
devil / and he departed out of him. And the child was healed even that same
ryme. Mark. ix. d
Then came the disciples to Jesus secretly and said: Why could not we cast him
out? Jesus said unto the^: Because of your vnbylefe. For verily I say unto you:
Luke. 17. ^.
if ye have faith as a grain of musterde seed, ye shall say unto this
mountain: remove hence to yo^der place, and it shall remove: neither shall any
thing be impossible unto you. How be it this kind goes not out, but by
prayer and fasting. While they were occupied in Galile, Jesus said unto them:
Mat. xvi. ^. ^^d xx ^. Mar. v^^i. d ix ^ and. x. ^ Luke. ix. ^
It will come to pass that the son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of
men, and they shall kill him, and the third day shall he rise again. And
they were excedyng sorye.

And when they were come to the city of

He teaches his disciples to be humble, and haemeles: to avoid occasion^ of
^uyll / and one to forgive another offense.

CAPI. XVIII.
AT the same time came the disciples un Mark. ^^. g Luke. ix. f
who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven? Jesus called a child unto him
and set him in the mids of them, and said: Uerely I say unto you, Mathe. x.
h Luke xviii d
except ye turn, and become i. Pet. ii ^
as children / ye shall not enter in to the kingdom of heaven. Whosoever
therefore humbles him self, as this child, the same is the greatest in the
kingdom of heaven. And who so receives such a child in my name, receives me
Mark. ^^. ^ Luke. xv ^
. But who so does offend one of these little ones which believe in me: it were
better for him / that a millstone were hanged about his neck and that he were
drowned in the depth of the sea Woe unto the world because of offenses. i.
Corin. xi* ^
Necessary it is that offenses come: But woe unto the man, by whom the offense
comes. Wherefore Math. v. e. Mathe. ix. f
if thy hand or thy foot hinder the / cut him of and cast it from the. It is
better for the to enter into life halt or maimed, rather then thou should
(having two hands or it. fete) be cast in to everlasting fire. And if thine
eye offend the, pluck him out, and cast it from the. It is better for the to
enter into life with one eye, rather then (having two eyes) to be cast into
hell fire. Take heed: that ye despise not one of these little ones. For I say
unto you / that in heaven their angels do always behold the face of my father,
which is in heaven: For the son of man is come to save that which was lost.
How think ye. Luke. xv. ^
If a man have an hundred sheep, and one of them be gone astray / does he not
leave nynty and nine in the mountayn, and goth and seeks it that was gone
astraye? And if it happen that he find it, verily I say unto you: he reioyseth
more of that sheep then of the nyntye and nine which went not astray Even so
it is not the will of your father in heaven, that one of these little ones should
peryshe. Moreover Luke xvii ^ Leuit. iix. ^ Eccle. xix b.
if thy brother trespass against the, go and tell him his fault between him
and the alone. If he hear Deuteronomy. xix. ^ (...). Cori. 13. ^ Hebr^. x. ^
in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every matter may be stablyshed. If he
hear not them, tell it unto the congregation. If he hear not the co^gregacyo^
lee him be unto the as an heathen man / and as a Publican. Uerely I say unto
you: Math. x ^
whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven. And what so ever ye
lose on earth, shall be losed in heaven. Again I say unto you that if ii. of
you agree in earth upon any manner of thing, what soever they desire: they shall
have it of my father which is in heaven. For where two or three are gathered
together in my name, there am I in the mids of them. Then came peter to him,
and said: Lord how often shall I forgive my brother, if he syn against me:
Till seven times? Jesus says unto him: I say unto the until seven times:
but seuentye times seuentymes. Therefore is the kingdom of heaven lykened unto a
certain man that was a king which would take accountes of his servants. And
when he had begone to reken, one was brought unto him, which

And his fellow fell down / and besought him saying: Have patience with me /
and I will pay the all. And he would not / but went / and cast him into
prison / till he should pay the det. So when his fellows saw what was done /
they were very sorry / and came / and told unto their lord all that had
happened. Then his lord called him and said unto him: o thou ungracious
servant, I forgave the all that det, when thou desyredst me, should not thou
also have had compassion on thy fellow, even as I had pitye on the? And his
Lord was wroth / and delivered him to the sailors, till he should pay all
that was due unto him.

So Iamea. ii. ^ Math. vi. ^ Mark. xi. ^
likewise shall my heavenly father do also unto you if ye from your hertes,
forgive not (every one his brother) their trespasses.

Christ gives answer concerning marriage, and ^^acheth not to be careful,
nor to love worldly ryched.

CAPI. XIX.
ANd it came to pass, M^^^^. x. ^
that when Jesus ^^^^. xii. d. Ephesi. v. g ^* Cori. vi. ^
made them man and woman: and said, for this cause shall a man leave father and
mother, and shall cleue unto his wife / and they twain shall be one flesh.
Wherefore now / they are not twain / but one flesh. Let not man therefore put
a sunder, that which God has coupled together. They say unto him: why did
Moses then command to give a testimonyall of deuorcement, and to put her
away? He said unto them: Moses (because of the hardness of your hertes /
Deuteronomy. (...), ^ Iere. iii. a Mala. ii. d.
suffered you to put away your wives: But from the beginning it was not so.
Math v e. Mark. x. b Luke. xvi. ^
I say unto you: whosoever puts away his wife (except it be for
fornicacyon) and marieth another / breaks wedlock. And who so maryeth her
which is deuorced, does commit aduoutrye.

His discyples say unto him: if the matter Sa^^^ (...). ^
save they to whom it is given: for there are some chaste, which are so borne
out of their mothers womb. And there are some chaste which be made chaste of
men. And there be chaste / which have made them selves chaste for the kingdom
of heuens sake. He that can comprehend it / let him comprehend.

Mark. x ^ Luke xviii ^
Then were there brought unto him young children, that he should put his hands
on them, and pray. And the disciples r^^^^ked them. But Jesus said unto them:
Suffer the children, and forbid them not to come unto me: for of soche is the
kingdom of heaven. And when he had put his hands on them, he departed thence.
And behold / one came: and said unto him: Mark. x. ^ Luke. (...). d.
good master, what good thing shall I do that I may have eternal life? He
said unto him: why call thou me good ( Psalm. ^xi^*
there is none good but one, and that is God. But if thou will enter into life
keep the commandments. He says unto him. Which? Jesus said:

Exodi. xx. ^. Deute. v. b.
Thou shalt not commit manslaughter. Thou shalt not commyt aduoutrye: Thou
Romans xii^. ^ Galat. v. ^.
and thou shall love thine neighbor as thy self The young man says unto
him: All these things have I kept from my youth up: what lack I yet? Jesus
said unto him / if thou will be perfyte Mark. ^ ^ Luke. xii. ^.
go and sell (all) that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have
treasure in heaven, and come and follow me. But when the young man herd that
saying, he went away sorye. For he had great possessions. Then Jesus said
unto his discyples: Uerely I say unto you: Mark. ^ ^ Luke xviii. ^
it shall be hard for the rich to enter into the kingdom of heaven. And again
I say unto you: it is easyer for a camel to go through the eye of a nedle,
the^ for the rich to enter into the kingdom of god. When the disciples herd
this, they were excedyngly amassed, saying: who then can be saved? But Jesus
beheld them, and said unto them: with men this is impossible zacha. viii b
but with god all things are possible. Then answered Peter, and said unto
Mark. x. d Luke xviii. ^
we have forsaken all, and followed the, what shall we have therefore? Jesus said
unto them: verily I say unto you: that when the son of man shall sit in the
seat of his majesty, ye that have followed me in the regeneracyon Luke. xxii. c
shall sit also upon xii. seats, and judge the. xii. trybes of Israel. Deute.
33. b
And every one that forsakes house, or brethren, or systers, or father, or
mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my names sake / Job. xiii. c
shall receive an hundred fold, and shall in heryte everlasting life. Math. xx.
d Luke xiii. ^
But many that are first, shall be last: and the last shall be first.

Christ teaches by a similytude that god is dettour unto no man. He teaches
his disciples to be lowly, and gives two blind men their sight.

CAPI. XX.
FOr the kingdom of heaven is like unto

But when the first came also, they supposed that they should have received
more, and they likewise received every man a penny. And when they had received
it, they murmured against the good man of the house / saying: These last have
wrought but one hour, and thou have made them equal unto us, which have
borne the burden and heat of the day. But he answered unto one of them and
said: friend, I do the no wrong: dydest thou not agree with me for a penny?
Take that thine is, and go thy way: I will give unto this last / even as unto
the. Is it not lawful for me to do as me lysteth with mine own goods? Is
thine eye evil / because I am good?

Mat. xix. d. Mark. ^. ^. Luke. xiii. ^.
So the last shall be first, and the first shall be last. For many be called,
but few be chosen.

And Jesus going up to Jerusalem / Ma^^. ix. ^.
Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the son of man shall be betrayed unto the
cheyfe Priests, and unto the scrybes, and they shall condemn him to death /
and shall deliver him to the Gentyls, to be mocked, and to be scourged / and to
be crucified: and the third day he shall rise again. Mark. x. ^
Then came to him the mother of Zebedes children, with her sons, worshyppyng
him and desyryng a certain thing of him.

And he says unto her / what will thou? She said unto him: Grant, that
these my two Sons may sit, the one on the right hand, and the other on the
left, in thy kingdom. But Jesus answered and said: Ye wot not what ye ask.

Are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of: and to be Baptized
with the baptyme, that I am baptized with? They say unto him: we are. He said
unto them: ye shall drink in deed of my cup: and be baptized with the baptym
that I am baptized with. But to sit on my right hand and on my left, is not
mine to give: but it shall chance unto them, that it is Mat. xxv. ^
prepared for of my father.

Mark. x. ^
And when the ten herd this, they disdayned at the ii. brethren: But Jesus
called them unto Luke xxii. ^
ye know that the princes of the nations have dominion over them. And they that
are great men, exercise auctoryte upon them. It shall not be so among you.
But whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister, and who so
will be cheyf among you, let him be your servant: even as Mathe. ^. ^
the son of man came, not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give
his life a redemcio^ for many Mark. ^. ^ Luke. xviii.
And as they departed from Ierico, much people followed him And behold, two
blind men syttyng by the way side, when they herd that Jesus passed by, they
cried saying: O Lord thou son of David, have mercy on us. And the people
rebuked them, because they should hold their peace. But they cried the more
saying: have mercy on us, O lord thou son of David. And Jesus stood still,
and called them, and said: what will ye that I shall do unto you: They say
unto him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened: So Jesus had compassion on them,
and touched their eyes, and immediately their eyes received sight. And they
followed him

He rydeth in to Jerusalem, dryueth the merchants out of the temple, curses
the fygge tree, and rebukes the Pharisees with the similitude of the two
sons, and of the husband men, that slew soche as were sent unto them.

CAPI. XXI.
ANd when they Math. ix. a Luke. xix. ^
drew nygh unto Jerusalem, Esai. lxii. d. zacha. ix. b John^. xii. ^.
Tell ye the daughter of Sion behold / thy king comes unto the / meke /
sittynge upon an ass and a colte, the fool of the Ass used to the yocke. The
disciples went, and did as Jesus commanded them / and brought the ass, and
the colte, and put on them their clothes / and set him thereon. And many of the
people spread their garments in the way. Other cut down branches from the
trees / and strawed them in the way.

Moreover, the people that went before / and Luke xix. f John^. xii. b. Psalm.
118. ^
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the lord: Mar. xi. b
Hosanna in the highest. And when he was come to Jerusalem / all the city was
moved, saying: who is this? And the people said: this is Jesus Mat. xiiii a
the Prophet of Nazareth (a city) of Galile. Luke. xix. g.
And Jesus went into the temple of god, and cast out al them that sold and
bought in the temple, and ouerthrewe the tables of the money chaungers, and the
seats of them that sold doves, and said unto them: It is written, 3. Reg.
18. d Esai. lvi. c.
my house shall be called the house of prayer. But ye have made it Iere. vii. c
a den of thieves

And the blind and the halte came to him in the temple, and he healed them.
When the cheyf Priests and Scrybes saw the wonders that he did, and the
children cryeng in the temple (and saying: Hosanna to the son of David) they
disdayned, and said unto him: heatest thou what these say? But Jesus says
unto them Why not? have ye never red. Psalm. viii a
Out of the mouth of babes and suckelynges thou have ordained praise? And he
left them, and went out of the city to John^. 8. a
Bethanie, and had his abydyng there. Math. xi. c.
In the morning as he returned in to the city again, he hungered: and when he
had spyed a Luke. xiii. b
fyg^re in the way, he came to it, and found nothing thereon, but leaves only,
and said unto it: Never fruit grow on the hence forwards. And anon the
fygge tree wethered away. And when his disciples saw it, they marueyled
saying. How soon is the fygge tree wethered away? Jesus answered, and said
unto them: Uerely I say unto you, Mat. xvii ^ Luke. xvii. a
if ye have faith and dout not, ye shall not only do this that is happened
unto the fygge tree: but also if ye shall say unto this Math. xi. ^ John^. 14.
^ xv. b. xvi. ^
And all things whatsoever ye ask in prayer (if ye believe) ye shall receive
them. Math. xi. ^ Luke. xx. a
And when he was come in to the temple, the cheyfe priests and the elders of
the people came unto him (as he was teaching) and said. Exodi. ii. c. Acts.
iiii. ^ and. vii. ^
By what auctorite do thou these things? and who gave the this power? Jesus
answered and said unto them: I also will ask of you a certain thing, which if
ye tell me, I in likewise will tell you by what auctorite I do these things.
The baptyme of John^: whence was it? from heaven, or of men? And they thought
among them selves, saying: if we say from heaven, he will say unto us: why did
ye not then bileue him? But if we shall say of men, then fear we the people.
Mat. ^iiii. a
For all men hold John^ as a Prophet. And they answered unto Jesus / and said:
we can not tell. And he said unto them: neither tell I you, by what auctoryte I
do these things. What say ye to this? A man had two sons, and came to the
first, and said: son / go and work to day in my vineyarde. He answered and
said / I will not, but afterward he repented, and went. Then came he to the
second, and said likewise. And he answered / and said: I will sir, and went
not. Whyther of them twain did the will of the father? And they say unto him:
the first. Jesus says unto them: verily I say unto you, the Publicans and
harlottes go in to the kingdom of God before you. For Math. iii. ^
John^ came unto you by the way of ryghtwysenes, and ye byleued him not: but
Publicans and harlottes byleued him. And ye (when ye had seen it) were not
moved afterward with repentance, that ye might have byleued him.

Harken another similitude. Gene. ^x ^ Esai. v. ^ Iere. xii. c Math. xii. ^
Luke. xx. ^.
There was a certain man an householder, which planted a vineyarde, and hedged
it round about, and made a wynepresse in it, and buylte one, killed another /
and stoned another. Again, he sent other servants, mo then the first: and
they did unto them likewise. But last of all, he sent unto them his own son,
saying: they will stand in awe of my son. But when the husbandmen saw the
son / they said among them selves: Gene. 37. b
This is the heir: come / let us kill him, and let us enjoy his inheritance.
And they caught him, and thrust him out of the vineyearde, and slew him. When
the Lord therefore of the vineyarde comes / what will he do unto those
husbandmen? They said unto him: For asmoch as they be evil / he will cruellye
destroy them / and will let out his vineyard to other husband men / which
shall deliver him the fruit in due seasons. Jesus says unto them: did ye
never read in the scryptures. Psalm. 118. c Man. xii. ^. Luke. xx. c ^^tro.
iiii. b ^. Pet. ii. b.
The stone which the buylders refused / the same is become the head of the
corner: this is the lords doing / and it is merueylous in our eyes. Therefore
say I unto you, the kingdom of god shall be taken from you / and given to a
nacyon / which shall bring forth the fruytes thereof. And ^^cha. xii. ^.
whosoever falls on this stone, shall be broken in pieces: but on Deute. (...). ^
whomsoever it falls it shall all to grynde him. And when the cheyfe Priests
and Pharisees had herd his parables, they perceived, that he spoke of them.
Iohfi. vii. ^
And they went about to lay hands on him, but they Mark. xi. c. Luke. xix. g
(...). xx. ^
feared the people, because they took him as a Prophet. And Jesus answered, and
spoke unto them again by parables, and said.

The marriage of the hynges son. Trybute to be given to the Emperor Christ
confuteth the op^^yon of the Saduces concerning the resurreccyon, and
answers the sery be unto his questyon.

CAPI. XXII.
THe kingdom of heaven is like unto Luke xii^^. ^
a Esal. (...) ^
wedding garment, he said unto him: friend, how came thou in hither Mat.
xx^^ and. xxv. ^
there shall be weeping and gnasshyng of teethe. For many be called but few
are chosen:

Mat. (...) ^
Then went the Pharisees, and took counsel how they might tangle him in his
words. And they sent out unto him their discyples with Herodes servants,
saying: Luke. (...). ^
Master, we know that thou art true, and teach the way of god truly,
neither carest thou for any man, for thou regardest not the outward appearaunce
of men. Tell us therefore: how thynkest thou? Is it lawful that tribute be
given unto Caesar, or not? But Jesus perceiving their wickedness, said: Why
tempte ye me ye apocrites? Show me the tribute money. And they took him a
penny. And he said unto them: whose is this image and superscrypcion? They say
unto him / Cesars. Then said he unto them. Mat. (...) T^^ (...) ^
Give therefore unto Caesar, the things which are Cesars: and unto God / those
things that are gods. When they had herd these words, they marueyled, and
left him, and went their way

Mat. x^^. ^. Luke. xx^ Acts. 23. b.
The same day came to him the Saduces Deuteronomy. xxv ^
if a man dye having no child / his brother should marry his wife, and raise
up seed unto his brother. There were with us vii. brethren: and the first
married a wife / and deceysed without issue, and left his wife unto his
brother. Like wise / the second and the third unto the seventh. Last of all
the woman dyed also. Therefore in the resurrection, whose wife shall she be of
the seven? For they all had her. Jesus answered and said unto them: ye do err,
not knowing the scryptures / nor the power of god. For in the resurrection /
they neither marry / nor are married but are as the angels in heaven. But as
touching the resurrection of the dead: have ye not red that which is spoken
unto you of god, which says: Exodi. iii. ^ Mark. xii ^ Luke. xx. ^
I am the god of Abraham and the God of Isaac / and the god of Jacob? God is
not god of dead / but of living* And when the people herd this / they were
astonyed at his doctrine. But when Deute. vi. b
love the lord thy god with all thy heart / and with all thy soul / and with all
thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like
unto it. Leuit. xix. d Math. v. g Mark. xii. c Romans xiii. ^ Galat. v. b James.
ii. ^
Thou shalt love thine neighbor as thy self. In these two commandments
hang all the law and the Prophets. While the pharisees were gathered together
/ Jesus asked them, saying: What think ye of christ? Whose son is he? They
say unto him: the son of David. He said unto them, Math* x^^. d
how then does David in spirit, call him lord, saying: The lord said unto
my lord, Psalm. ^x. ^
sit thou on my right hand till I make thine enemeys thy foot stole. If David
then called him lord / how is he then his son? And no man was able to answer
him any thing: neither durst any man (from that day forth) ask him any mo
questions.

Christ tries woe to the Pharyses, Scrybes and ypocrytes, and prophesyeth the
destruccyon of Jerusalem.

CAPI. XXIII.
THen spoke Jesus to the people, and to his Deu. xvii. b
The scribes and the Pharisees sye in Moses seat. All therefore what soever they
bid you observe / that observe and do: but do not ye after their works: for
they say, and do not. Esal x. a Luke. xi. f
Yea they bynd together heuye burdens, and grievous to be borne, and lay them
on men's shoulders: but they them selves will not heave at them with one of
their fyngers. All their works do they for the intent, that they may be seen
of men. They set abroad their philateries, and make large the borders of their
garments, and love the uppermost seats at feasts, and to sit in the chief
place in counsels, and gretynges in the market, and to be called of men* Rabbi.

James. i^. ^
But be not ye called Rabbi. For one is your master, even Christ / and all ye
are brethren. And call no man your father upon the earth, for one is your
father which is in heaven. Neither be ye called masters, for one is your
master, even Christ. He that is greatest among you, shall be your servant.
But Luke xiiii. ^ and. xviii. ^.
whosoever exalts him self / shall be brought low. And he that hu^bleth him
self / shall be exalted. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees / ye ypocrites, for
ye shut up the kingdom of heaven before men, Luke. xi. g
ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer ye them that come / to enter in.
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, ye ypocrites: for ye devour wyddowes houses:
and that under a pretense of long prayer: therefore shall ye be the sorer
punisshed Woe be unto you scrybes and Pharisees, ye ypocrites: for ye compass
see and land, to make one proselite: and when he is become one, ye make him
two fold more the children of hell, then ye your selves are. Woe be unto you ye
blind gydes, for ye say: whosoever does swear by the temple, it is nothing:
but who soever swears by the gold of the temple / he is gyltye. Ye fools
and blind: For whyther is greater: the gold, or the temple that sanctifies
the gold? And whosoever swears by the altar, it is nothing, but whosoever
swears by the gift that is upon it^ he is gyltie, ye fools and blind, for
whyther is greater^ the gift: or the altar that sanctifyeth the gift? Who so
therefore swears by the altar, swears by it, and by all things that are
thereon. And who so swears be the temple, swears by it, and by him that
dwells (...)

Math. v ^
And he that swears by heaven, swears by the seat of God, and by him that
(...) Luke. xi. ^
for ye tithe myn^^, and (...), and common, and have left the weygheyer matters
of the law: judgment, mercy, and faith. These ought ye to have do^e / and not
to l^^ue the other undone. Ye blind gydes ^ which strain out a goat / and
swalowe a Camel.

Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, ye ypocrites: for ye make clean the utter
side of the cup, and of the platter: but within they are full of brybery and
excess. Thou blind Pharise / cleanse first that which is within the cup and
platter, that the out side of them may be clean also. Luke. xi. ^
Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, ye ypocrites: for ye are like unto painted
sepulcres which in deed appear beautiful outward, but are within full of
dead men's bones and of all fyithynes. Even so ye also: outward ye appear
ryghteous unto men: But within, ye are full of faynednesse and iniquite. Luke.
x^ ^
Woe unto you scribes and Pharisees / ye ypocrites, ye build the tombs of the
Prophettes / and garnysshe the sepulcres of the ryghteous, and say: if we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been parteners with them in
the blood of the Prophettes. And so ^. These. (...) ^
ye be witnesses unto your selves, that ye are the children of them which
killed the Prophettes. Fulfill ye likewise the measure of your fathers.

Ye serpents, ye generation of vipers / how Math x. b Luke. xi. ^ John^. 16.
^. ^^tes. v. ^ and. vii. g.
I send unto you prophettes and wise men, and scribes, and some of them ye
shall kill and crucifye, and some of them shall ye scourge in your smagoges,
and persecute them from city to city: that upon you may come all the
ryghteous blood which has been shed upon the earth, from the blood of
ryghteous Gene. iiii. b.
Abell, unto the blood of Zachary, son of Barachias, ii. Pa. 24. f
whom ye slew between the temple and the altar. Uerely I say unto you: all
these things shall come upon this generation. Luke. xiii. g
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that kyllest the Prophettes, and stonest them
which are sent unto the: how often would 4. Esdra. ^ c
I have gathered thy children together, even as the hen gathers her
chyckens under her wings, and ye would not? Behold, Psalm. ix. f
your house is left unto you desolate. For I say unto you: ye shall not se me
hence forth, till that ye say: Psalm. 118. d Luke. xix. f.
blessed is he / that comes in the name of the Lord.

Christ shows his disciples the destruceyon of the temple: the inde of the
world, and the tokens of the latter doyes, and warueth them to wake, for the
world shall sodeyuly peryshe.

CAPI. XXIIII.
ANd Jesus went out, and departed from Math. iii. a Luke. xxi. ^.
his discyples came to him, for to show him the buyldynges of the temple.
Jesus said unto them: Se ye not all these things: Uerely I say unto you Luke.
xxi. a
there shall not be here left one stone upon an other, that shall not be
destroyed. And as he sat upon mount Oliuete, his disciples came unto him
secretly, saying: Tell us: when shall these things be, and what shall be the
token of thy coming, and of the end of the world? And Jesus answered, and
said unto them: Collos. ii. b. Ephesi. v. b
Take heed, that no man deceive you. For many shall come in my name, saying: I
am Christ, and shall deceive many. Ye shall hear of wars, and tidings of
wars: be not troubled. For all ( these things) must come to pass / but the
end is not yet. 4. Esd. 13. c
Nation shall rise against nacyon, and tealme against realm: and there shall be
pestilence, and hunger and earthquakes in all places. All these are the
begynnynges of sorrows. Math. x. h Mat. xiii. b Luke. xxi. c. John^. 16. a.
Then shall they put you to trouble, and shall kill you: and ye shall be hated
of all nations for my names sake. And then shall many be offended, and shall
betraye one another, and shall hate one an other. 4. Esd. 14 b
And because iniquite shall have the upper hand, the love of many shall abate.
Math. x. c
But he that endures to the end / the same shall be safe. Mat. xiii. b
And this gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a
wytnes unto all nations, and then shall the end come. Mat. xiii ^ Luke. xx^^
When ye therefore shall se the abhominacion of desolacion (that was spoken of by
Dani. ix ^
Daniell the prophet) stand in the holy place: who so redeth it let him un
derstande. Then let them which be in Jury / ^lee into the mountains. And let
him which is on the house top, not come down to fet any thing out of his
house. Neither let him which is in the field, return back to fetch his
clothes. Woe shall be in those days to them that are with child, and to them
that give suck. But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter, neither on
the Sabbath day. For then shall be great tribulacions Dani. xii ^
such as was not since the begyn^yng of the world to this time, nor shall be.
Yea, and except those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be
saved: but for the chosens sake, those days shall be shortened. Mat. xiii. ^.
Luke. xvii ^
Then if any man say unto you: lo here is Christ, or there: believe it not. For
there shall arise false christ's, and false prophettes, ii. these. ii ^ Deuteronomy.
xiii. ^
and shall show great miracles, and wonders. In so much (that if it were Job.
xxxi^ ^ Luke xvii. ^
For where soever a dead carkas is, even thither will the Egles also be gathered
together. Immediately Mat. xiii. ^ Luke. (...) ^. Ioell. ii. ^
after the tribulacions of those days / shall the son be darkened: and the
moon shall not give her light, and the sterres shall fall from heaven, and the
powers of heaven shall be moved. And then shall appear the token of the son of
man in heaven

And then shall all the kynreds of the earth mourn, and they shall se Acts.
i. ^
the son of man coming in the clouds of heaven, with power and great glory.
Dani (...). ^. ^. These. 4. ^
And he shall send his angels with the great voice of a trompet, and they
shall gather together his chosen, from the four wyndes: even from the highest
parts of heaven, until the ends thereof. Mat. xiii. ^. Luke. xxi. ^.
Learn a similitude of the fygge tree: when his drau^ce is yet tender, and the
leaves spronge, ye know that the so^mer is nygh. So likewise ye, when ye se
all these things / be ye sure that it is near, even at the doors. Uerely I
say unto you: this generation shall not pass, till all these things be
fulfilled, Esal. ii. b
Heaven and earth shall pass, Esai. (...) ^ Math. v. c
but my words shall not pass. But of that day and hour Acts. i. ^
knows no man / no not the angels of heaven, but my father only.

Gene. vii. b Luke. xvii. f
But as the days of Noe were, so shall also the coming of the son of man be.
For as in the days (that went before the floode) they Luke xvii. g
two women shall be gryndyng at the myll, the one received, and the other
refused. (Two in a bed, the one shall be received, and the other refused.)
Mat. xxv. b Mar. xiii. d Luke. xii. e
Watch therefore, for ye know not what hour your lord will come. Of this yet
be sure, that if the good man of the house knew what hour Reave. xvi. c
the thief would come: he would surely watch, and not suffer his house to be
broken up. Therefore, be ye also ready: for in such an hour as ye think not,
will the son of man come. Who is a faith full and wise servant, whom his
lord has made ruler over his household, to give them meat in season. Blessed
is that servant whom his lord (when he comes) shall find so doing. Uerely
I say unto you, that he shall make him ruler over all his goods. But and if
that evil servant say in his heart, my lord will be long a coming (and so
begin to smite his fellows, yea, and to eat and drink with the dronken) the
same servants lord shall come in a day when he looks not for him, and in
an hour that he is not ware of, and shall hew him in pieces, and give him his
portion with ypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnasshyng of teeth.

The ten virgyns. The talentes delivered to the servants, and of the general
judgment.

CAPI. XXV.
THen shall the kingdom of heaven be like and the bride.) But five of them were
foolysshe, and five were wise. They that were foolyshe, took their Lamps, but
took none oil with them. But the wise took oil with them in their vessels
with the lamps also. While the bryde grome tarried, they all slombred and
slept: and even at mydnyght, there was a cry made: Behold, the brydegrome
comes, go out to mete him. The^ all those virgins arose and prepared their
lamps. So the foolyshe said unto the wise: give us of your oil: for our
lamps are gone out. But the wise answered saying: not so, lest there be not
enough for us and you: but go ye rather to them that sell, and bye for your
selves.

And while they went to bye, the hrydegrome came, and they that were ready,
went in with him to the marriage: and the gate was shut up. Afterward came
also the other virgyns, saying: Math. vii. ^
lord, lord, open to us. But he answered and said: verily I say unto you I
know you not. mat. xxiiii. d Mar. xiii. d Luke. xii. ^
Watch therefore, for ye know neither the day nor yet the hour where in the
son of man shall come.

Mat. xiii d Luke. xix. b
Likewise as a certain man redye to take his journey to a strange country,
called Mat. xiii. c. Mar. iiii. ^
For unto every one that has shall be given, and he shall have abundance: But
he that has not, from him shall be taken away, eue^ that which he has. And
cast the unprofitable servant in to utter darkness, Mat. xii^ ^ and. ^x^^. d
there shall be weeping and gnasshynge of teethe.

t. The^^. i. d
When the son of man comes in his glory, and all the holy angels with him,
then shall he sit upon the seat of his glory, and before him shall be
gathered all nations.

E^ech^. 34 t
And he shall separate them one from an other, as a shepeheerde deuydeth the
sheep from the gootes: and he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the
gootes on the left. The^ shall the king say to them that shall be on his right
hand. Come ye blessed of my father, inherit the kingdom Math. tx. d
prepared for you from the beginning of the world. E^a. lviii. b E^e xviii. a
For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat. I was thyrstie, and ye gave me
drink. I was harbourlesse, and ye took me in: Naked, and ye clothed me: Eccle.
vii. d
Sick, and ye visited me.

^. T^mo. i d
I was in prison, and ye came unto me.

Then shall the ryghteous answer him, Psalm. vi. b Mat vi^ d. Lu^^ ^^ii f
Depart from me ye cursed Esa r^^ g ^an^. vii. d (...). xix. d
in to everlasting fire: which is prepared for the devil and his angels. For
I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat. I was thirsty, and ye gave me no
drink. I was harbourlesse, and ye took me not in. I was naked, and ye clothed
me not. I was sick and in prison, and ye visited me not. Then shall they also
answer him, saying: lord, when saw we the an hungered, or a thirst or
harbourlesse, or naked or sick, or in prison and did not minister unto the?
Then shall he answer them, saying: Uerely I say unto you, in as much Prou.
^iii. c and. x^ ii. a
as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. And John^.
v. g
these shall go in to everlasting pain: the ryghteous in to life eternal.

The Magdalen anoynteth Christ. They eat the Easter lamde and the supper of
the Lord, Christ prays in the garden. Judas terrayeth him. Peter smote of
Ma^^^^ care, Christ is accused by false witnesses, Peter denies him.

CAPI. XXVI.
ANd it came to pass, when Jesus had finisshed Mat. xiii a Luke. x^ii. a
Ye know that after two days shall be Easter, and the son of man shall be
delivered over, to be crucified.

John^ xi. ^
Then assembled together the cheyfe priests and the scribes and the elder of
the people unto the palace of the high Priest / which was called Cayphas) and
held a counsel* that they might take Jesus by subteltie, and kill him: but
they said: not on the holy day, lest there be an vproute among the people.

When Mat. 14. ^ John^. xii. ^
Jesus was in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper, there came unto him a
woman Luke. vi^ ^
having an alabaster box of precious ointment, and powered it on his head, as
he sat at the board. But when his disciples saw it, they had indignacion,
saying. Whereto serves this waste? This ointment might have been well sold,
and given to the poor. When Jesus understood that, he said unto them: why
trouble ye the wama^? For she has wrought a good work upon me. Deuteronomy. xv, ^
For ye have the poor always with you: But me shall ye not have always. And
in that she has cast this ointment on my body, she did it to burye me. Uerely
I say unto you: where soever this gospel shall be preached in all the world,
there shall also this that she has done be told for a memoryall of her.

Mat. 14. b Luke ^xii a John^. ^^^^
Then one of the twelve (which was called Judas Iscarioth) went unto the
cheyfe priests, and said unto them: What will ye give me, and I will deliver
him unto you? And they appointed unto him thyrtie pieces of silver. And from
that time forth, he sought oportunite to betray him. Mat. 14. b. Luke. xxii. ^
The first day of sweet bread, the disciples came to Jesus, saying unto him:
where wylt thou that we prepare for the, to eat the Passover? And he he said:
go in to the city, to such a man, and say unto him, the master says: My
time is at hand, I will keep mine Easter by the, with my disciples. And the
disciples did as Jesus had appointed them, and they made ready the Passecuer.
Mat. ^^iii. e Luke. xxii. b
When the even was come, he sat down with the twelve. And as they did eat, he
said. Uerely I say unto you that John^. xiii. ^
one of you shall betraye me. And they were excedyng forowfull, and began every
one of them to say unto him: Lord, is it I? He an swered and said: he that
dyppeth his hand with me in the dysshe, the same shall betray me.

Psalm. xli. ^
The son of man truly gothe, as it is written of him: but woe unto that man,
by

He said unto him: thou have said. When they were eating, Jesus took brende,
and when he had given thanks, he brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and
said: i. Lo^in ^^e Luke. xxii b Mat. 14. ^
Take, eat, this is my body. And he took the cup, and thanked, and gave it
them, saying: drink ye all of this. For this is my blood (which is of the
new testament) that is shed for many, for the remyssyon of sins. But I say
unto you: I will not drink hence forth of this fruit of the vine tree, until
that day, when I shall drink it new with you in my fathers kingdom. Mat.
xiiii. ^
And when they had said grace, they went out unto mount Oliuete. Then says
Jesus unto them: all ye shall be offended because of me this night. For it is
written:

(...). 13. t M^^. xiiii. t
I will smite the shepeheerde, and the sheep of the flock shall be scattered
abroad. But after I am risen again, I will go before you in to Galile. Peter
answered, and said unto him: Mat. xiiii. t Luke. xxii. d
Though all men be offended because of the, yet will I not be offended. Jesus
said unto him: Uerely I say unto the, that in this same night, before the cock
crow, you shalt deny me thryse. Peter said unto him. Yea, though I should
dye with the, yet will I not deny the. Likewise also said all the disciples.

Mark. 14 d
Then came Jesus with them unto a farm Mat. 14. d. John^. xii. ^
My soul is heuye even unto the death. Tarry ye here: and watch with me.

And he went a little further, and fell flat on his face, and prayed, saying.
O my father, if it be possible, Luke. xxii. d Mat. xiiii d
let this cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou wylt. And
he came unto the disciples, and found them a sleep, and says unto Peter:
What, could ye not watch with me one hour: watch and pray, that ye enter not
into temptacyon. Gala. b. c
The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weyke. Mat. xiiii. c
He went away once again and prayed, saying. O my father, if this cup may not
pass away from me, except I drink of it, thy will be fulfilled. And he came
and found them a sleep again: for their eyes were heavy. And he left them and
went again, and prayed the third time, saying the same words.

Then comes he to his disciples, and says unto them. Sleep on now, and take
your rest. Behold, the hour is at hand, and the son of man is betrayed in to
the hands of sinners. Rise, let us be going: Behold, he is at hand that
does betray me.

While he yet spoke: lo, Judas one of the Mat. xiiii ^ Luke. xxii. ^
nombre of the twelve, came, and with him a

Gene ix ^ John^. i^. d. Reave. xiii. e Ez. ^h. ^i. ^
For all they that take the sword, shall peryshe with the sword. Thynkest
thou that I can not now pray to my father, and he shall give me (even now)
more then. xii. l^gions of angels? But how then shall the scriptures be
fulfilled? for Lu. xxiiii. d
this must it be. In that same hour said Jesus to the multitude: Mat. xiiii. t
Luke xxii. t.
ye be come out as it were unto a there, with swerdes and staves, for to take
me. I sat daily with you, teaching in the temple, and ye took me not. Psalm.
xix. and. xxi.
But all this is done, that the scriptures of the prophettes might be full
filled. Mat. xiiii t Luke. xxii. t John^. 18. ^
Then all the disciples forsook him, and fled. And they took Jesus, and led him
to Cayphas the high priest, where the Scribes and the elders were assembled.

But Peter followed him a far of, unto Mat. xi^^i t Acts. vi. d.
The theyf priests and the elders, and all the counsel, sought false witness
against Jesus (for to put him to death) but found none: yea, when many false
witnesses came, yet found they none. At the last came two false witnesses, and
said. This fellow said. Mat. xi^i^ t John^. ii. d
I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to build it again in three days.
Mat. xiiii ^
And the cheyfe priest arose, and said unto him: answerest thou nothing? Why
do these bear witness against the?

But Jesus held his peace. Mat. xiiii ^
And the cheyfe priest answered and said unto him: I charge the by the living
God, that thou tell us whyther thou be Christ the son of God. Jesus says
unto him, thou have said. Nevertheless I say unto you, Mat ^iiii ^ Luke xxii
^
here after shall ye se the son of man syttyng on the right hand of power,
and coming in the clouds of the sky.

Mat. 14. ^
Then the high priest rent his clothes say enge: he has spoken blasphemye:
what need we of any mo witnesses? Behold, now ye have herd his blasphemye:
what think ye? They answered, and said: he is worthy to dye. Esai. ^. ^
Then did they spyt in his face, and bufferted him with fystes. And other smote
him on his face with the palm of their hands, saying: tell us thou Christ,
who is he that smote the?

Peter sat without in the palace. And a damsel came to him, saying: Thou also
wast with Jesus of Galile: but he denied before them al, saying. I wot not
what thou say When he was gone out in to the porche, an other wenche saw
him, and said unto them that were there. This fellow was also with Jesus of
Nazareth. And again he denied with an oath: (saying) I do not know the man.
And after a while, came unto him they (that stood by) and said unto Peter. Mat.
14. ^ Luke xxii. f John^. 18. c.
surely thou art even one of them, for thy speech be wrayeth the. Then began
he to curse and to swear, that he knew not the man. And immediately Math. 2^.
c
the cock crew. And Peter remembered the word of Jesus, which said unto him:
before the cock crow, thou shalt deny me thryse: and he went out, and wept
bytterly.

CAPI. XXVII.
Christ so delivered unto Pilate. Judas hangs him self Christ is crucified
among thieves. He dies and is buried Watch men keep the grave.

WHen the morning was come, all the cheyfe priests and the elders of the
people held a counsel against Jesus, to put him to death, and brought him
bound Psalm. ii. a Mat. iv. a. Luk xxiii. a John^. 18. c
and delivered ^^^^. iii. c
him unto Poncius Pilate the debite

Then Judas (which had betrayed him) seeing that he was condemned, repented
him self, and brought again the thyrtie plates of silver to the cheyfe
Priests and elders, saying: I have sinned, betrayeng the innocent blood. And
they said: What is that to us? Se thou to that. And he cast down the syluet
plates in the temple, and departed ii. Re. 17. d. Acts. i. ^
and went and hanged him self. And the cheyfe priests took the silver plates
and said: It is not lawful for to put them in to the treasure, because it is
the price of blood.

And they took counsel: and bought with them a potters field to bury
strangers in. Wherefore that field is called (Haceldema, that is) the field of
blood, until this day. Then was fulfilled, that which was spoken by Jeremy
the prophet, saying: zacha. xi. c
and they took thyrtie silver plates, the price of him that was valued, whom
they bought of the children of Israel, and gave them for the potters field, as
the Lord appointed me.

Mat. xv. a. Luke. 23. a John^. 18. f.
Jesus stood before the debite: and the Esai. iiii. c
And he answered him to never a word in so much that the debite marueyled
greatly

Mat (...). ^.
At that feast, the debite was wont to dedelyuer unto the people a prisoner,
whom they would desire. He had then a notable prisoner, called Barrabas.
Therefore, when they were gathered together, Pilate said: Mat. (...). ^. John^.
(...) ^
Why there will ye that I give loose unto you? Barrabas, or Jesus, which is
called Christ? For he knew, that for envy they had delivered him. When he was
set down to give judgment, his wife sent unto him, saying: have thou nothing
to do with that just man. For I have suffered many things this day in sleep
because of him. Math. (...) ^ Luke. xx^^ ^
But the cheyfe priests and the elders persuaded the people, that they should
ask Barrabas, and destroy Jesus.

The debite answered, and said unto Acts. iii ^
Barrabas. Pilate said unto them: Mat. xv. ^
What shall I do then with Jesus, which is called Christ They all said unto
him: let him be crucified. The debite said: What evil has he done? But they
cried the more, saying: let him be crucified. When Pylate saw that he could
prevail nothing, but that more busynes was made, he took water, and washed
his hands before the people, saying: I am innocent of the blood, of this
just person, ye shall se. Then answered all the people, and said: Acts. v. ^
his blood be on us, and on our children. Mat. xv. ^. Luke xxiii. ^
Then let he Barrabas lose unto them and scourged Jesus, and delivered him to
be crucified.

Mat. xv. ^
Then the soldiers of the debite took Jesus in the comen hall, and gathered
unto him all the company. And they stryped him, and put on him a purple robe,
and platted a crown of thorns and put upon his head and a reed in his right
hand: and bowed the knee before him: and mocked him, saying: Nail king of
the Iues: and when they had spyt upon him, they took the reed, and smote him
on the head. And after that they had mocked him, they took the robe of him
again, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify him.

And as they came out, Mat. xv. ^. Luke xxiii. ^
they found a man of Cyren (named Simon) him they compelled Mat. xv. ^. John^.
xix ^
And they came unto the place which is called Golgotha (that is to say, a
place of dead men's sculles) and gave him vyneger to drink, mengled with gal.
And when he had tasted thereof, he would not drink When they had crucified him,
they parted his garments, and did cast lottes: that it might be fulfilled
which was spoken by the prophet.

Psalm. xxii. d Math. xv. c Luke xxiii. ^
They parted my garments among them: and upon my vesture did they cast lottes.

And they sat and watched him there, and Luke xxiii. c John^. xix. d
set up over his head the cause of his death, written: This is Jesus the king
of the Iues. Mark. xv. c Luke xxiii. d Esai. iiii. ^
Then were there two thieves crucified with him, one on the right hand, and an
other on the left.

Math. xv. c Luke. xxiii f
They that passed by, reuyled him, wagynge their heads, and saying: thou that
destroyedst Sapi. ii. d
If thou be the son of god, come down from the cross. Likewise also the
high priests, mocking him with the Scribes, and elders said. He saved other,
him self can he not save. If he be the king of Israel: let him now come
down from the cross, and we will believe him.

Psalm. xxii. b
He trusted in God, let him deliver him now, if he will have him: for he
said, I am the son of God, The thieves also, which were crucified with him,
cast the same in his teeth. Mark xv c Luke. xxiii. f
From the syxte hour was there darkness over all the land unto the nynth
hour. And about the nynth hour, Jesus cried, with a loud voice, saying:
Eli, Eli lamasabachthani. That is to say: Mark. xv. c Psalm. xxii. a
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Some of them that stood there, when
they herd that, said:

This man calls for Elias. And streyghte way Mar. xv d. John^. xix. f
one of them ran, and took a sponge, and when he had filled it full of vyneger,
he put it on a teede, and gave him to drink. Other said, let be: let us se
whyther Elias Mat. xv. d. Luke. xxv. f
veil of the temple did rent into two parts, from the top to the bottom, and
the earth did quake, and the stones rent and graves did open: and many bodies
of saints which slepte, arose, and went out of the graves after his
resurreccion and came in to the holy City, and appeared unto many. Mat. xv. d.
Luke xxiii ^
When the Centurion and they that were with him watchynge Jesus, saw the earth
quake, and those things which happened, they feared greatly, saying. Truly,
this was the son of God. Mat. xv. d. Luke xxiii. g
And many women there were (beholdynge him a far of) which followed Jesus from
Galile, ministryng unto him. Among which was Mary Magdalen, and Mary the
mother of James and Ioses, and the mother of Zebedes children.

When the even was come Mat. xv. d. Luke xxiii. g John^. xix. g
there came

And when Joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean lynnen cloth,
and laid it in his new tomb, which he had hewn out even in the rock, and
rolled a great stone to the door of the sepulcre and departed. And there was
Mar. xv. d.
Mary Magdalen and the other Mary syttyng over against the sepulcre. The next
day that followed the day of preparynge, the high priests and Pharisees came
together unto Pilate, saying. Sir, we remember, that this deceyuer said while
he was yet alive. Mat. xvi c. and. xvii. b. Mark. ix. ^ Luke xviii. ^
After three days I will arise again. Command therefore that the sepulcre be
made sure until the third day, lest his disciples come, and steal him away,
and say unto the people: he is risen from the dead, and the last error shall
be worse the^ the first. Pilate said unto them: Ye have the watch go your way
make it as sure as ye can. So they went, and made the sepulcre sure with
watch men and sealed the stone.

The resurreccion of Christ. The high priests give the soldiers money to say
that Christ was (...) o^^ of his grave. Christ appears to his disciples, and
sends them forth to preach, and to baptyse.

CAPI. XXVIII.
Upon an euenyng of the Sabbothes Mat xv. ^. L^. x^i^ii. ^. John^. xx. ^.
Sabbothes, came Mary Magdalen, and the other Mary, to so the sepulcre. And
behold, there was a great earth quake. For the angel of the lord descended
from heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it.
His countenance was like lightening, and his raiment white as snow. And for
fear of him the kepers were astonyed, and became as dead men.

Mat. xvi. ^ Luke. 24. ^.
The angel answered, and said unto the women: fear ye not. For I know, that
ye seek Jesus which was crucified: he is not here: he is risen as he said.
Come se the place where that the lord was laid: and go quicklye and tell his
disciples, that he is tysen again from the dead. And behold, he goes before
you in to Galile, there ye shall se him. Lo, I have told you.

Mat. xvi. ^ Luke. (...). ^
And they departed quycklye from the sepulcre, with fear and great joy, and
did kepers came in to the city and showed unto the high priests, all the
things that had happened. And they gathered them together with the elders, and
took counsel, and gave large money unto the souldyours, saying: Say ye, that
his disciples came by night, and stole him away while ye slepte. And if this
come to the rulers cares, we will persuade him, and save you harmless. So
they took the money, and did as they were taught. And this saying is noysed
among the Iues unto this day.

Then the.xi. disciples went away in to Math. xi. ^. John^. 17. ^
All power is given unto me in heaven, and in earth. Man. xvi. ^
Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptisyng them in the name of the
father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost. Teaching them to observe al
things, what soever I have commanded you. And lo John. 14. ^
I am with you always, even until the end of the world.

Here ends the Gospel of Saint Matthew.
The Gospel of Saint Mark.
The O^^yer of John^ the Baptyst. The baptyme of Christ his fasting, his
preaching, and the calling of Peter, Andrewe, James and John^, Christ heals
the man with the unclean spirit, helps Peter's mother in law, and cleanses
the leper.

CAPI. Primo.
THe beginning of the Gospel Mala. iii. ^ Math. xi ^. L^^^. vii. d.
Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way
before the. The voice of a crier in the wyldernes: Esai. xl. ^*
prepare ye the way of the lord, and make his paths straight. Math. iii. a
Luke. ^^i. ^
John^ did baptyse in the wyldernes, and preached the baptyme of Math. iii. ^
Luke. iii. ^.
repentance, for the remyssyon of sins. And all the land of Iurye and they
of Jerusalem, went out unto him, and were all baptized of him in the river
Jordan confessyng their sins. Math. iii. ^
John^ was clothed with camels here, and with a gyrdell of a skyn about his
loins. And he did eat locustes and wild honey, and preached, saying. Math.
iii. ^ Luke. iii. ^ John^. i. ^.
He that is stronger then I, comes after me, whose shoo latchet I am not
worthy to stoop down, and unloose: I have baptized you with water: but he
shall babtyse you with the holy ghost.

And it came to pass in those days, that Math. i^^ ^
and was baptized of John^ in Jordan. And as soon as he was come up out of the
water. Math. iii ^
he saw heaven open, and the spirit descendyng upon him like a dove: And there
came a voice from heaven. Thou art my dear son in whom I delight. And
immediately, Math. i^^ ^ xii. ^. xvii ^
the spirit drove him into wyldernes: and he was there in the wyldernes. xl.
days, and was tempted of Satan and was with wild beasts. Math. 4 ^ Esai.
^li^ ^ Math. i^. ^
And the angels ministered unto him. After that John^ was taken Mat. iiii ^.
Luke (...). ^
Jesus came in to Galile Mat. (...). ^
preaching the gospel, of the kingdom of god, and saying. The time is come,
and the kingdom of God is at hand Math. 4. ^.
repent, and believe the Gospel.

Math. iii. ^ Mat. iiii. ^.
As he walked by the sea of Galile, he saw Simon and Andrew his brother,
castyng nets into the sea, for they were fysshers. And Jesus said unto them:
follow me, and I will make Iere. xvi. ^.
you to become fyshers of me^. And straight way, they forsook their nets,
and followed him. And when he had gone a little further thence, he saw James the
son of Zebede, and John^ his brother, which also were in the ship mendyng
their nets. And anon he called them. And they left their father Zebede in
the ship with the hired servants, and followed him.

Mat. iiii. ^.
And they came in to Capernaum: and straight way on the Sabbath days, he
entered Mat. vii. ^. Luke. i^^. ^
For he taught them as one that had auctoryte, and not as the Scribes Mat.
vii. ^. Luke. (...).
And there was in their Synagoge a man vexed with an unclean spirit, and he
cried, saying. Alas, what have we to do with the, thou Jesus of Nazareth? Art
thou come to destroy us?

I know the what thou art, even that holy one of God. And Jesus rebuked him
saying: Hold thy peace, and come out of the man. And when the unclean
spirit had torn him, and cried with a loud voice, he came out of him. And
they were all amassed, in so much that they demanded one of an other among
them selves, saying: What thing is this? What new doctrine is this? For with
auctorite commanded he the foul spirits, and they obeyed him. And immediately
his fame spread abroad throughout all the region borderynge on Galile.

And forthwith, when they were come out of the synagoge Mat. viii. ^ Luke.
iiii. ^.
they entered in to the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John^. But
Simons mother in law lay sick of a fever. And anon they tell him of her. And
he came, and took her by the hand: and lift her up: and immedyatly the fever
forsook her, and she ministered unto them. And at even when the son was down,
they brought unto him all that were dyseased, and them that were vexed with
deuyls.

And all the city was gathered together Luke. iiii. g. Math. iii. ^
cast out many deuyls, and suffered not the deuyls to speak, because they
knew him. And in the morning very early, Jesus (when he was risen up)
departed, and went out in to a solitarye place, and there prayed. And Simon
and they that were with him, followed after him. And when they had found him,
they said unto him: all men seek for the. And he said unto them: let us go in
to the next towns, that I may preach there also: for therefore am I come.
And he preached in their Synagoges in all Galile, and cast the deuyls out. Mat.
viii. ^ Luke. v. ^
And there came a leper to him, besechynge him, and knelynge down, and saying
unto him, if thou wylt, thou caust make me clean. And Jesus had compassyon on
him, and put forth his hand, touched him, and says unto him: I will, be thou
clean. And as soon as he had spoken, immediately the leprosye departed from
him, and he sent him away forthwith, and says unto him. Man. vii. ^
Se thou say nothing to any man: but get the hence, show thy self to the
Priest, and offer for thy clensynge, those things which Moses commanded, for
a witness unto them. But he (as soon as he was departed) began to tell many
things, and to publysshe the saying: in so much that Jesus could no more
openly enter in to the city, but was without in deserte places. And they came
to him from every quarter.

He heals the man of the palsye, calls Leui the customer, ^ateth with open
sinners, and excuses his disciples.

CAPI. II.
AFter a few days also, he entered in to Math. (...) ^ Luke. v. d
And they came unto him, bringing one sick of the palsye, which was borne of
four men. And when they could not come nygh unto him for prease, they
uncovered the roof of the house that he was in. And when they had broken up
the rofe, they did (with coordes) let down the bed wherein the sick of the
palsye lay. When Jesus saw their faith, he said unto the sick of the palsye:
Luke. v. ^
son thy sins be forgyuen the.

But there were certain of the scribes sitting Esai. xliii. ^. and. xli^^i. ^
Who can forgive sins, but God only?

And immediately when Jesus perceived in his spirit, that they so thought
within them selves, he says unto them: Why think ye such things in your
hertes? Whyther is it easyer to say to the sick of the palsye: Thy sins be
forgyuen the: or to say, arise, take up thy bed, and walk? But that ye may
know that the son of man has power in earth to forgive sins, he spoke
unto the sick of the palsye: I say unto the, Math. ix ^ Luke v. ^ John^. v. ^
arise, and take up thy bed, and get the hence unto thine own house. And
immediately he arose, took up the bed, and went forth before them all: in so
much that they were all amassed, and glorified God, saying: we never saw it
on this fassyon.

Math. ^x. ^
And he went again ^ned the sea, and all the people resorted unto him, and he
taught them. And as Jesus passed by, he saw L^u^ the son of Alphene,
sitting at the receyte of custom, and said unto him: follow me. And he
arose, and followed him. And it came to pass that when Jesus sat at meat in
his house, many publicans and sinners sat also together at meat with Jesus and
his disciples. For there were many that followed him.

And when the scribes and Pharisees same i. Tim^. ^. ^
I came not to call the ryghteous, but sinners to repentance. Math (...). ^
Luke. v. ^.
And the disciples of John^ and the pharisees did fast: and they come and say
unto him. Why do the disciples of John^ and of the Pharisees fast, but thy
disciples fast not. And Jesus said unto them: can the children of the wedding
fast while the brydegrome is with them? As long as they have the brydegrome
with them, they can not fast. But the days will come, when the brydgrome shall be
taken away from them, and then shall they fast in those days.

No man also sows a piece of new cloth un bottels are marred. But new wine
must be put in to new bottels. Math. xii. a Luke. vi. a
And it chaunsed, (again) that he went through the corn feldes on the Sabbath
days, and his disciples began by the way to pluck the ears of corue And the
pharisees said unto him: behold, why do they on the sabbath days, that which
is not lawful? And he said unto them: Have ye never red what David did when
he had need, and was an hungered, both he, and they that were with him? ^. Reg
xxi. b
Now he went in to the house of god in the days of Abiathar the high priest,
and did eat the shewbreade (which is not lawful to eat, but for the priests
only) and gave also to them which were with him? And he said unto them: the
Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath. Therefore is the son of
man, lord also of the Sabbath.

He helps the man with the dried hand, choseth his aposties, and casts out
the unclean spirit, which the pharisea ascribe unto the devil. The brother,
sister and mother of Christ.

CAPI. III.
ANd he entered again in to the Synagoge, Math. xii a Luke. vi. a
wethered hand. And they watched him, whyther he would heal him on the Sabbath
day, that they might accuse him. And he said unto the man which had the
wethered hand: arise, and stand in the mids. And he says unto them,
whyther is it lawful to do good on the Sabbath days, or to do evil? to save
life, or to kill? but they held their peace. And when he had looked round
about on them, with anger, mournyng on the blyndnes of their hertes, he says
to the man Math. xii. b Luke. vi. b
stretch forth thine hand. And he stretched it out. ^. Reg. 13. b
And his hand was restored, even as hole as the other.

Math. xii. b
And the Pharisees departed, and straight way gathered a counsel (with them
that belonged to Herod) against him, that they might destroy him. But Jesus
avoided with his disciples to the sea. Mat. iiii. d. Luke. vi. c.
And a great multitude followed him from Galile: and from Iurye, and from
Jerusalem, and from Idumea, and from beyond Iordane, Mat. iiii. d. Luke. vi. c
John. vi. a
and they that dwelled about Tire and Sidon, a great multitude of men: which
(when they had herd what things he did) came unto him.

And Jesus commanded his disciples, that Math. ^. ^
And he ordained the twelve that they should be with him, and that he might
send them forth to preach: and that they might have power to heal
sycknesses, and to cast out deuyls.

And he gave unto Simon to name, Peter. Math. ix ^ and. xii. b Luke. xi. b
hy the cheyfe devil, casts he out deuyls. And he called them unto him, and
said unto them in parables.

Now can Satan drive out Satan? And

Math. xii. c Luke. xii. ^.
But he that speaks blasphemye against the holy ghost, has never
forgyuenesse, but is in danger of eternal damnacyon. For they said: he has
an unclean spirit.

Mat. xii. ^. Luke. viii. ^
There came also his mother and his brethren, and stood without, and sent unto
him to call him out. And the people sat about him, and said unto him: behold,
thy mother and thy brethren seek for the without. And he answered them,
saying: Who is my mother and my brethren? And when he had looked round about
on his disciples, which sat in compass about him, he said: Behold, my
mother and my brethren. For who soever does the will of God, the same is my
brother and my sister and mother.

The parable of the sower. Christ stylleth the tempest of the sea, which
obeyed him.

CAPI. IIII.
ANd he began again, to teach by the Mat. xiii. a
and sat in the sea, and all the people was by the sea side on the shore. And he
taught them many things by parables / and said unto them in his doctrine?
Harken to: behold / Luke viii. a
there went out a sower to sow. And it fortuned as he sowed / that some fell
by the way side / and the fowls of the air came, and devoured it up: Some
fell on stony ground where it had not much earth: and immediately sprange up,
because it had not depth of earth: but as soon as the son was up, it caught
heat: and because it had not rotynge, it wethered away. And some fell among
thorns, and the thorns grew up, and choked it / and it gave no fruit. And
some fell upon good ground, and did yield fruit that sprang up, and grew /
and brought forth / some thyrtye fold / and some syxtye fold / and some an
hundred fold. And he said unto them: he that has ears to hear let him
hear. And when he was alone, they that were about him with the twelve asked
him of the parable. And he said unto them. Mat. xiii. b Luke. viii b
To you is it given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God.

But unto them that are without, al things Esai. vi. c Mat. xiii. b Luke. viii
b John^. xii. f. Acts. 28. f. Roma. xi. ^
they may hear, and not understand: lest at any time they should turn, and
their spn^es should be forgyuen them. And he said unto them: know ye not this
parable? and how then will ye know all other parables? Mat. xiii. c. Luke
viii. v
The sower sows the word. And they (whereof some be rehearsed to be by the
way side) are those, where the word is sown: And when they hear / Satan
comes immediately, and takes away the word that was sown in their hertes.
And likewise the other that receive seed in to the stony ground, are they:
which when they hear the word / at once receive it with gladness, yet have
no tote in them selves / and so endure but a time: and anon when trouble and
persecucion aryseth for the words sake / they fall immediately. There be other
also that receive seed in to thorns and those are soche as hear the word,
and the cares of this world and the deceytfulnesse of riches and the lusts of
other things / enter in and choke the word / and it is made vnfruytfull: and
other there be that have received seed in to a good ground: they are soche
that hear the word / and receive it / so that one corn does bring forth
thyrtye, some sixtye, some an hundred.

And he said unto them: Math. v. ^. Luke viii. c and. xi, e
is the candle lyghted, to be put under a busshell / or under the table? Is it
not lyghted to be put on a Math. x. c Luke viii d and. xii. a.
For there is nothing so preuy / that shall not be opened: neither has it ben
so secret, but that it shall come abroad. If any man have ears to hear / let
him hear. And he said unto them: take heed what ye hear. Mat. vii. a Luke.
vi. f
With what measure ye meat, with the same shall other men measure unto you
again. And unto you that hear, shall more be given. For Mat. xiii. b Luke.
viii. ^ and. xix. ^
unto him that has, shall it be given, and from him that has not, shall be
taken away / even that which he has. And he said: so is the kingdom of God
/ even as Mat. xiii. d
if a man should sow seed in the ground and should sleep, and rise vy night
and day / and the seed should spring and grow up, while he is not aware.
For the earth brings forth fruit of her self: first the blade, then the
ear, after the full come in the ear. But when the fruit is brought forth,
anon he thrusts in the syckle / because the harvest is come. And he said:
where unto shall we lyken the kingdom of God? or with what comparyson shall we
compare it? Mat. ^iii. ^ Luke. xiii. d
It is like a grain of mustarde seed: which when it is sown in the earth /
is less then all seeds that be in the earth: when it is sown, it grows up
/ and is greater then all herbs: and bears great branches so that the
fowls of the air may make their nestes under the shadow of it. Mat. xiii. ^.
And with many soche parables spoke he the word unto them after as they might
hear it.

But without parable spoke he nothing Mat. xiii. ^
And there arose Mat. viii. c Luke. viii c
a great storm of wind / and the waves dashed in to the ship, so that it was
now full. And he was in the stern a sleep on a pelowe. And they awaked him, and
said unto him: Master / carest thou not, that we perysshe? And he rose up /
and rebuked the wind / and said unto the sea: peace, be still. And the wind
ceased, and there followed a great calm. And he said unto them: why are ye so
fearful? How happens it. that ye have no faith /

And the people spyed them when they departed: and many knew him, and ran a
foot thither out of all cities, and came thither before them, and came
together unto him. And Jesus went out and saw much people, Math. ix. d and.
xiiii. b.
and had compassion on them / because Ezech. 34 a
they were like sheep, not having a shepherde. And he began to teach them many
things.

Mat. xiiii b Luke. ^x. ^ John^. vi. a.
And when the day was now far spent / his discyples came unto him, saying:
this is a deserte place, and now the time is far passed / let them depart,
that they may go in to the country round about / and in to the towns / and
bye them bread: for they have nothing to eat. He answered and said unto
them, give ye them to eat. And they said unto him: shall we go and by two
hundred penny worth of bread, and give them to eat? He said unto them: Mat.
viii. a
how many looues have ye? Go and look. And when they had searched, they said:
five and two fysshes. And he commanded them, to make them all sit down by
companyes upon the grene grass. And they sat down here arowe, and there
arowe, by hundreds and by fyftyes. And when he had taken the five looues, and
the two fysshes, and looked up to heaven, he blessed and brake the looues, and
gave them to his discyples, to set before them: and the two fysshes divided he
among them all. And they all did eat / and were satisfied. And they took up
twelve baskettes full thereof / and of the fysshes. And they that did eat /
were about five thousand men.

Mat. xiiii. ^
And straight way he caused his discyples to go in to the ship / and to go
over the Mat. xiiii. c John. vi. b,
And as soon as he had sent them away / he departed in to a mountain to
pray. And when even was come, the ship was in the mids of the sea, and he
alone on the land / and he saw them troubled in rowyng, for the wind was
contrary unto them. And about the fourth watch of the night, he came unto
them / walkyng upon the sea, and would have passed by them. But when they saw
him walkyng upon the sea / they supposed it had been a spirit, and cried out:
for they all saw him, and were afraid.

And anon he talked with them, and said Mat. xiiii. c
And he went up unto them in to the ship, and the wind ceased, and they were
sore amassed in them selves beyond measure / and meruayled. For they remembered
not of the looues, because their heart was blinded.

And when they were over the water, they came in to the land of Genezareth and
drue up into the haven. And as soon as they were come out of the ship,
straight way they knew him, and ran forth through out all the regyon round
about, and began to carry about in beds those that were sick / when they
herd that he was there. And whyther soever he entered in / to towns cities /
or vyllages / they laid the sick folks in the streets / and prayed him that
they might touch / and it were but the hemme of his vesture. And as many as
touched him, were safe.

The disciples eat with vnwasshen hands. The commandment of god is
transgressed by man's tradicyons. Of the woman of Syrophenissa. Of the Sabbath.

CAPI. VII.
ANd Math. xv ^
the Pharyses came together unto

Then asked him the Pharyses and Scrybes: why walk not thy discyples
according Esai. xx^^. d Math. xv ^
This people honors me, with their lyppes / but their heart is far from me:
howbeit, in vain do they serve me, teaching the doctrynes and commandments
of men. For ye lay the commandment of god aparte / and observe the
co^stitucyons of men / as the washing of cruses and of cups / and many
other soche like things ye do. And he said unto them: well, ye cast a side
the commandment of God, to maynteyne your own constitucyons. Exodus ^^i ^
Deute. v. b. Ephe. xi. a.
For Moses said: honor thy father and thy mother: and Exo. xx. b. Leuiti. xx
b Prove. xx. c
who so curses father or mother, let him dye the death. But ye say: a man
shall say to father or mother / Corban: which is: what gift soever comes
fro me / shall be for thy prophet. And so ye suffer him no moore to do ought
for his father or his mother, and make the word of God of none effect,
through your own constitucyon which ye have ordained. And many soch things
do ye.

And when he had called all the people unto Math. xv ^
There is nothing with out a man that can defyle him, when it enters into
him, but the things which proceed out of a man, those are they that defyle
the man. If any man have ears to hear / let him hear. And when he came in to
the house away from the people / his disciples asked him of the similitude.
And he said unto them: are ye also so greatly without understanding? Do ye
not yet perceive, that what soever thing from without, enters into a man, it
can not defyle him, because it enters not in to his heart, but in to the belly
/ and goes out in to the draught / pourgynge out all meats? And he said:
that which comes out of a man, defyleth the man. For from within, even out of
the heart of men proceed evil thoughts / aduoutrye / for nicacyo^, murder /
theft, covetousness, fraud deceyte / uncleanness / a wicked eye / blasphemies /
pride / folyshnesse: all these evil things come from within / and defyle a
man. Math. xv. c
And from thence he rose / and went in to the borders of Tire and Sydon: and
entered in to an house, and would that no man should have known. But he could
not be hyd. For a certain woman (whose daughter had a foul spirit) as soon
as she herd of him / came / and fell at his feet. The woman was a Greek out
of the nation of Syrophenicia / and she besought him / that he would cast out
the devil from her daughter. But Jesus said unto her: let the children first
be fed.

For it is not mete, to take the chyldrens Math. xv. c
nevertheless, the whelps also eat under the table of the chyldrens crommes.
And he said unto her: for this saying go thy way, the devil is gone out of
thy daughter. And when she was come home to her house, she found that the
devil was departed, and her daughter lyenge on the bed.

And he departed again from the coostes of Tire and Sydon, and came unto the sea of Galile through the mids of the coostes of the ten cities. Math. xv d
And they brought unto him one that was deaf and had an impedyment in his
speech / and they prayed him to put his hand upon him. And when he had taken
him aside from the people / he put his fyngers in to his ears / and did spyt /
and touched his tongue / and looked up to heaven / and syghed, and said unto
him: Ephata / that is to say, be opened. And straight way his ears were
opened, and the string of his tongue was losed / and he spoke plain. Math.
ix. d
And Mark. i. d
he commanded them / that they should tell no man. But the more he forbad them
/ so much the more a great deal they publysshed, saying: He has done all
things well / he has made both the deaf to hear / and the dombe to speak.

The miracle of the seven loves. The Pharisees ask a sign. The leven of the
Pharyses. The blind receives his sight.

CAPI. VIII.
IN those days when there was Math. xv d
a very Esai. (...). a Tobi. xii^. ^
For diverse of them came from far. And his discyples answered him: where
should a man have bread here in the wilderness to satysfye these? And he
asked them: how mano looues have ye? They said: seven. And he commanded the
people to sit down on the ground. And he took the seven looues: and when he
had given thanks / he brake / and gave to his discyples, to set before them.
And they did set them before the people. And they had a few small fysshes. And
when he had blessed, he commanded them also to be set before them. And they
did eat, and were suffysed. And they took up of the broken meare that was
left seven baskettes full. And they that did eat: were about four
thousand. And he sent them away.

And anon he entered in to a ship with Mat. xvi. ^ Luke. xi. d John^. vi. d
And the Pharyses came forth / and began to dyspute with him, sekyng of him a
sign from heaven, temptyng him. And when he had syghed in his spirit / he
says: why does this generacyon seek a sign? Uerely I say unto you, there
shall no sign be given unto this generacyon. And he left them, and went in to
the ship again, and departed over the water. And they had forgotten to take
bread with them / neither had they in the ship with them more then one loofe.
And he charged them / saying.

Mat. xvi. b Luke. xii^. ^
Take heed, beware of the leven of the Pharisees, and of the leven of Herod.
And they reasoned among them selves, saying: we have no bread. And Jesus
knew it, and says unto them: why take ye thought, because ye hsue no bread?
perceive ye not yet, neither understand? Have ye your heart yet blinded? Have
ye eyes and se not? and have ye ears and hear not? Do ye not also remember?
Mat. xiiii. c
When I brake five looues among five thousand men, how many baskettes full of
broken meat took ye up? They say unto him, twelve. Math. xv. d
When I brake. vii. among four thousand, how many baskettes of the
leauynges of the broken meat took ye up? They said: seven. And he said unto
them: how happens it that ye do not understand?

And he came to Bethsayda, and they

Math. 16. c Luke. ix. c
And Jesus went out, and his discyples into the towns that long to the city
called Cesarea Philippi. And by the way he asked his disciples saying unto
them, whom do men say that I am? And they answered: some say that thou art
John^ Baptyst, and some say Elyas: Again, some say that thou art one of the
nombre of the prophettes. And he says unto them: but whom say ye that I am?
Peter answers and says unto him: Mat. xvi. c. Luke i^. ^ John^. vi. g.
Thou art very Christ.

And he charged them, that they should tell no man of him. And he began to teach
them Mat. xvi. c, and. xx. c. Luke. ix. c
how that the son of man must suffer many things, and be reproved of the
elders / and of the high Priests, and Scrybes, and be killed, and after three
days arise again. And he spoke that saying openly. And Peter took him aside,
and began to chyde him. But he turned about, and looked on his discyples, and
rebuked Peter, saying: Go after me Satan. For thou sauerest not the things
that be of God, but the things that be of men. Mat. xvi. d Luke. ix. c and.
x^iii. f
And when he had called the people unto him with his discyples also, he said
unto them: Whosoever will follow me, let him forsake him self / and take up
his cross / and follow me. For who soever will save his life / shall lose it.
But who soever shall lose his life for my sake and the Gospels, the same shall
save it. For what shall it profette a man / if he win all the world, and
loose his own soul? or what shall a man give to redeem his soul withal
again?

Math. ^. ^ Luke. xii. ^
Who soever therefore shall be a shamed of me and of my words / in this
aduouterous and sinful generacyon: of him also shall the son of man be
ashamed / when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy Angels.

The transfiguracyon. The ^una^yhe is healed. The disputacyon who should be the
greatest. Offenses are forbidden.

CAPI. IX.
ANd he said unto them: Uerely I say Mat. xvi ^ Luke. ix. ^
There be some among them that stand here / which shall not taste of death,
till they have seen the kingdom of God come with power. Math. 17 ^ Luke. ix. ^
And after six days Jesus takes Peter, and James, and John^, and leads
them up into an high mountain out of the way alone / and he was transfygured
before them. And his raiment did shine, and became very white, even as snow:
so white as no fuller can make upon the earth. And there apeared unto them
Elias with Moses, and they talked with Jesus.

And Peter answered and says to Jesus: Master, here is good being for us /
let us make also three tabernacles, one for the, and one for Moses, and one for
Elyas. For he wist not what he said: for they were afraid And there was a
cloud that shadowed them And a voice came out of the cloud, saying: Math.
(...). ^ and. xvii. ^. Luke. ii^. ^. and. i^, ^ Mark. ^. ^ Esai. lii. ^
This is my beloved son, hear him. And suddenly when they had looked round
about, they saw no man more then Jesus only with them: Math. 17 ^ Mark. i. ^
And as they came down from the hill, he charged them, that they should tell no
man those things that they had seen, till the son of man were risen from death
again.

And they kept that saying with them / Mala. ^^^ii ^
Elyas verily when he comes first, restores all things. And the son of man
(as it is Esai. liii. ^
written of him) shall suffer many things, and be set at naught. But I say
unto you, that Elias is come, and they have done unto him what soever they
would, as it was written of him. And when he came to his discyples / he saw
much people about them, and the scrybes disputyng with them. And straight
way all the people (when they beheld him) were amassed, and ran to him, and
saluted him. And he asked the Scrybes: what dyspute ye among them?

Mat. xvii. c Luke. ix. c
And one of the company answered, and said: Master, I have brought unto

He answers him, and says: O faythlesse nacyon, how long shall I be with
you? How long shall I suffer you? Bring him unto me. And they brought him
unto him. And as soon as the spirit saw him, he tare him. And he fell down
on the ground, walo wyng and fomynge. And he asked his father: how long is
it ago, since this happened him? And he said, of a child: and often times it
has cast him in to the fire, and into the water, to destroy him. But if thou
can do any thing, have mercy on us, and help us. Jesus said unto him: if
thou could believe Mat. xvii d
all things are possible to him that byleueth. And straight way the father of
the child cried with tears, saying: Lord, I believe, help thou mine
vnbylefe.

When Jesus saw that the people came Mat. xvii d
his discyples asked him secretly, why could not we cast him out? And he said
unto them: this kind can come forth by nothing, but by prayer and fasting.

And they departed thense, and took their Mat. xvii d Luke. ix. ^
the son of man shall be delivered into the hands of men, and they shall kill
him: and after that he is killed, he shall arise again the third day. But
they wyste not what he said, and were afraid to ask him. And he came to
Capernaum. And when he was come in to the house, he asked them: what was it
that ye disputed among your selves by the way? And they held their peace:
for by the way they had reasoned among them selves, who should be the
cheyfest. And when he was set down, he called the twelve to him, and said
unto them: if any man desire to be first, the same shall be last of all, and
servant to all.

Math 18. ^ Luke. ix. f
And he took a child / and set him in the mids of them: and when he had
taken him in his arms, he said unto them: whosoever receives any soche a
child in my name, receives me. And whosoever receives me, receives not me /
but him that sent me.

John^ answered him, saying: Master, i. Cor^. xii. a
there is no man which (if he do a miracle in my name) can lightly speak evil
of me. For he that is not against us, is on our part. Math. x. d
Whosoever shall in my name give you a cup of water to drink, by cause ye
belong to Christ, verily I say unto you: he shall not lose his reward. Math.
^8. a
And who soever shall offend one of these little ones, that believe in me, it
were better for him if a mylstone were hanged about his neck / and he were
cast in to the sea. Math. 18. ^
Wherefore if thy hand hinder the, cut it of.

It is better for the, to enter in to life maimed, Esai. (...) ^
their worm dies not, and the fire goes not out. And if thy foot be an
hynderaunce unto the, cut it of. It is better for the to go halte in to life,
then (having two feet) to be cast in to hell, into fire that never shall be
quenched: where their worm dies not, and the fire goes not out. Math. v. ^
And if thine eye hinder the, pluck it out. It is better for the to go in to
the kingdom of God with one eye / then (having two eyes) to be cast in to hell
fire: where their worm dies not, and the fire goes not out.

Every man shall be salted with fire. Leuiti. ii. d.
And every sacrifyce shall be seasoned with salt. Math. v. b. Luke xiiii. g
Salt is good. But if the salt be un sauery, what shall ye season therewith?
have salt in your selves: and have peace among your selves, one with another.

Of deuorcement. The rich man questyoneth with Christ. Of the sons of
zebede. Ba^thimens the blind man.

CAPI. X.
ANd when he rose from thence, he Math xix ^
went

And the Pharyses came, and asked him. Is it lauful for a man to put away his
wife: to prove him. And he answered, and said unto them: Deute. 24 a Math. xix ^
what did Moses bid you do: and they said, Moses suffered to write a
testymonyall of deuorsement / and to put her away. And Jesus answered and said
unto them: For the hardness of your heart he wrote this precepte unto you. But
at the first creacyon, Gene. i. d
God made them man and woman. Therefore i. Cori. vi. d Mat xix. a. Gene. ii. d
Ephe. v. g
shall a man leave his father and mother, and bide by his wife, and they twain
shall be one flesh. So then, are they now not twain, but one flesh. Therefore,
what god has coupled together, let not man separate.

And in the house his discyples asked him Math. v. ^. and. xix. a Luke xvi. d
Whosoever puts away his wife, and maryeth another, breaks wedlock
toward her. And if any woman forsake her husband, and be married to another,
she committed aduontrye.

Mat. xix. b. Luk xviii. d
And they brought children to him / that he should touch them. And his
disciples rebuked those that brought them. But when Jesus saw it / he was
displeased and said unto them: Suffer the children to come unto me, forbid
them not. For of soche is the kingdom of God. Uerely I say unto you,
whosoever does not receive the kingdom of God Math. 18. ^ Luke ^xvii. a
as a child / he shall not enter therein. And when he had taken them up in his
arms / he put his hands upon them, and blessed them.

And when he was gone forth in to the way / there came one runnynge and kneled
to him / and asked him: Mat (...). b. Luke. 18. d.
good master, what shall I do, that I may enheryt eternal life? Jesus said
unto him, why call thou me good? There is no man good, but one, which is
God. Thou know the commandments: break not matrymony: kill not: steal
not: bear no false witness: defraude no man: honor thy father and mother.

He answered, and said unto him: Master / all Math. xix^ b Luke. 18. d
Go thy way, Sell all that thou haste / and give to the poor / and thou
shalt have treasure in heaven, and come, follow me and take up my cross upon
thy shoulders. But he was dysco^forted because of that saying / and went away
mournyng for he had great possessions. And when Jesus had looked round about
/ he said unto his discyples. Math. xix. c Luke. ^8. e.
How uneasy shall they that have money: enter in to the kingdom of God. And
the disciples were astonyed at his words.

But Jesus answers again / and says ^^^h^. vi^^
with God all things are possible.

And Peter began to say unto him: Lo / Math. (...) Luke. ^^^
we have forsaken al, and have followed the Jesus answered / and said: Uerely I
say unto you, there is no man that has forsaken house / or brethren / or
systers / or father / or mother / or wife / or children / or lands for my sake
and the Gospels, but he shall receive an hundred fold now in this life /
houses and brethren / and systers / and mothers / and children / and lands
with persecucions: and in the world to come / eternal life:

Math ii^ Luke x^^^
But many that are first / shall be last: and the last / first. And they were
in the way going up to Jerusalem. And Jesus went before them / and they were
amassed / and followed / and were afraid. And Jesus took the twelve again / and
began to tell them what things should happen unto him. Math. xvi^ xvii. c. and
(...) Luke. xv. ^ and. xv^* ^
Behold / we go up to Jerusalem / and the Son of man shall be delivered unto
the high Priests and unto the Scrybes: and they shall condemn him to death,
and shall deliver him to the Gentyls / and they shall mock him / and scourge
him / spytte upon him / and kill him. And the third day he shall rise again.

Math. x^* ^
And James and John^ the sons of Zebede came unto him / saying: Master: we
would / that thou should do for us what soever we desire. He said unto them:
what would ye that I should do for you? They said unto him: grant unto us /
that we may sytte / one on thy right hand / and the other on thy left hand
/ in thy glory. But Jesus said unto them: Ye wore not what ye ask. Can ye
drink of the cup / that I drink of? And be baptized with the baptyme / that I
am baptized with? And they said unto him: that we can.

Jesus said unto them: ye shall in deed

Math. xx. d
And when the ten herd it, they began to disdain at James and John^. But
Jesus when he had called them to him, said unto them: Ye know, that Math. xx.
d Luke. xxii. ^
they which are seen to bear rule among the people, reygne as Lords over
them. And they that be great among them, exercise anctorite upon them.
Nevertheless, so shall it not be among you: but who soever of you will be
great among you, shall be your minister. And who soever of you will be cheyfe,
shall be servant of all.

For Math. xx. d
the son of man also came not to be ministered unto: but to minister, and to
give his life for the redemption of many.

And they came to Ierico: Math. ^x. d Luke xviii g
And as he went out of the cuye of Ierico with his disciples, and a great
nombre of people: Blind

Christ rydeth to Jerusalem. The fygge tree dries up. The dyers and sellers
are cast out of the temple* The Pharised questyon with Christ.

CAPI. XI.
ANd when they came nygh to Jerusalem Mat. xxi. a. Luke. xix. c.
mount Olyuete, he sends forth two of his disciples, and says unto them:
Go your way in to the town, that is over against you. And as soon as ye be
entered in to it: ye shall find a colte bound, whereon never man sat: lose
him, and bring him hither.

And if any man say unto you, why do ye so? Say ye, that the Lord has need
of him: and straight way he will send him hither. And they went their way,
and found the colte tied by the door without, in a place where two ways met,
and they losed him. And diverse of them that stood there, said unto them:
John^. xii. b.
What do ye, losing the colte? And they said unto them, even as Jesus had
commanded. And they let them go. And they brought the colte to Jesus and cast
their garments on him: and he sat upon him.

And many spread their garments in the Psalm. ^^8 d Mat. xxi. b. Luke. xix. ^
John^. xii. b.
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord. Blessed be the kingdom,
that comes in the name of him that is Lord of our father David: Hosanna in
the highest.

And the Lord entered in to Jerusalem, and in to the temple. And when he had
looked round about upon all things, and now the euentyde was come, he went
out unto Bethany with the twelve. Mat. xxi. b.
And on the morrow when they were come out from Bethany, he hungered. And when
he had spyed a Fygge tree a far of, having leaves, he came to se, if he
might find any thing thereon. And when he came to it, he sound nothing but
leaves: For the time of Fygges was not yet. And Jesus answered, and said unto
the Fygge tree: Never man care fruit of the hereafter while the world
stands. And his disciples herd it*

And they came to Jerusalem. And Hesus Mat. xxi. b. Luke. xi. ^ John^. ii ^
cast out them that sold and bought in the temple, and ouerthrewe the tables
of the money chaungers, and the stoles of them that sold doves: and would not
suffer, that any man should carry a vessel through the temple. And he taught,
saying unto them: Esai. ii e 3. Regu^. 8. ^ Iere. vii. ^
Is it not written? My house shall be called the house of prayer unto all
nacyons: But ye have made it a den of thieves.

And the Scribes and high Priests herd it, and sought how to destroy him.
Mat. xxi. ^.
For they feared him, because all the people meruayled at his doctrine. And
when even was come, Jesus went out of the city Mat. xxi. d. Luke. xiii. b
And in the morning as they passed by, they saw the Fygge tree dried up by
the ^o^es. And Peter remembered, and said unto him: Master, behold, the Fygge
tree which thou cursedst, is wethered away. And Jesus answered, and said unto
them: have confidence in God.

Uerelye I say unto you, that whosoever shall say unto this mountain:
Remove,

Therefore I say unto you, Mat. xxi. c. John^* ^4. b
what things soever ye desire when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and
ye shall have them. And when ye stand and pray, Math. vi. b and. xviii. d
forgive, if ye have ought against any man, that your father also which is in
heaven, may forgive you your trespasses.

And they came again to Jerusalem. Luke. (...). a Math, ^1. ^.
And as he walked in the temple, there came unto him the high Priests, and the
Scribes, and the elders, and say unto him: by what auctorite do thou these
things? and who gave the this auctorite, to do these things? Jesus answered,
and said unto them: I will also ask of you a certain thing, and answer ye
me, and I will tell you by what auctoryte I do these things. The baptyme of
Iohsi, whyther was it from heaven, or of men? Answer me. And they thought in
them selves, saying: if we say, from heaven: he will say, why then did ye not
believe him? But if they had said, of men, they feared the people. For all me^
counted John^, that he was a very Prophet. And they answered, and said unto
Jesus: We can not tell. And Jesus answered, and said unto them: neither will I
tell you by what auctorite I do these things.

The vyneyarde is let out. Give to Caesar that belongs to* Caesar: of the
Saduces, of the doctoure of law: ypocrites must be eschued: the offering of
the poor wydowe.

CAPI. XII.
ANd he began to speak unto them by Esai. v. a Iere. xii. c. Mat. xxi. d.
Luke. xx. b Iohsi ^x. c
a vyneyarde, and compassed it about with an hedge, and ordained a wine press,
and buylt a toure, and let it out to hyre unto husband men, and went in to a
strange country. And when the time was come, he sent to the husband men a
servant, that he might receive of the husbandmen of the fruit of the
vyneyarde. And they caught him and bet him, and sent him away again emptye.
And more over, he sent unto them an other servant, and at him they cast
stones, and brake his head, and sent him away again al to reuyled. And
again, he sent an other, and him they killed: and many other, beatynge some,
and killing some.

And so when he had yet but one byloued son, he sent him also at the last
unto them, saying: they will fear my son. Math xxi d
But the husband men said amongst them selves: this is the heir: come Gene.
37. d. Luke. xx. c
let us kill him, and the enheritaunce shall be ours. And they took him, and
killed him, and cast him out of the vyneyarde. What shall therefore the Lord of
the vyneyarde do? He shall come, and destroy the husband men, and let out the
vyneyarde unto other. Have ye not red this scripture? Psalm. (...) ^ Math. x^^^
Acts. (...). ^
The stone which the buylders did refuse, is become the cheyfe stone of the
corner? this is the Lords doing, and it is meruaylous in our eyes. They went
about also to take him, and feared the people. For they knew, that he had
spoken the parable against them And they left him, and went their way.

Mat. xx^^* ^ Luke. xx ^
And they sent unto him certain of the Pharisees and Herodes servants, to
take

And he says unto them: Whose is this image and superscripcyon? And they
said unto him: Cesars. And Jesus answered, and said unto them: Math. 17. ^
and. xxii. ^ Romans xiii* ^
Give to Caesar the things that belong to Caesar: and to God, the things
which perteyne to God. And they meruayled at him,

There came also unto him the Saduces Mat. xxii. ^ Luke. xx. ^ Acts. 23. b.
which say that there is no resurreccyon. And they asked him, saying: Master
Deu. 25. b
Moses wrote unto us, if any man's brother dye, and leave his wife behind him,
and leave no children, that his brother should take his wife, and reyse up
seed unto his brother. There were seven brethren, and the first took a wife:
and when he dyed, left no seed behind him. And the second took her, and
dyed: neither left he any seed. And the third likewise. And seven had her, and
left no seed behind them. Last of all the wife dyed also. In the resurreccion
therefore, when they shall rise again: whose wife shall she be of them? For
seven had her to wife. And Jesus answered, and said unto them: Do ye not
therefore err, because ye understand not the scriptures, neither the power of
God?

For when they shall rise again from

As touching the dead, that they rise again: have ye not red in the book of
Moses, how in the busshe God spoke unto him, saying, Exodi. iii b Mat. xxii.
b Luke. x. f
I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? He is no
God of dead, but the God of living. Ye are therefore greatly dcceyued.

Mat xxii. d
And when there came one of the Scrybes, and had herd them dysputynge
together, (and perceived that he had answered them well) he asked him: which
is the first of all the commandments? Jesus answered him. the first of all the commandments is: Hear O Israel: Deuteronomy. vi. a. Mat. xxii. d
The Lord our God is Lord only? And thou shall love the lord thy god with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy
strength. This is the first commandment. And the second is like unto this.
Leu^ti. xix. d Math. v. c. Mat. xxii. b Romans xiii. c Calath. v. c James. ii. b
Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thy self. There is none other
commandment greater then these.

And the Scrybe said unto him: well master, thou have said the truth, for
there

Mat. xxii. d Psalm. ^x. ^
The Lord said to my lord, sit on my right hand till I make thine enemies
thy foot s^ole. David him self calls him lord: and how is he then his son?
And much people herd him gladly. And he said unto them in his doctrine: beware
of the Scribes, which Math. 23. a Luke. xx. ^.
love to go in long clothing: and love salutacyons in the market places, and
the cheyfe seats in the congregacyons, and the uppermost rowmes at feasts:
Which devour wydowes houses, and under a pretense, make long prayers. These
shall receive greater damnacyon.

And when Jesus sat over against the treasurye, he beheld, Luke. xxi. a.
how the people put money in to the treasurye. And many that were rich, cast
in much. And there came a certain poor wydowe, and she threw in two mytes,
which make a farthynge. And he called unto him his disciples, and says unto
them. Uerely I say unto you, that this poor wydowe has cast more in, then al
they which have cast into the treasurye. For they all did cast in of their
superfluyte: but she of her pouerte, did cast in all that she had, even all her
living.

The end of the world. The days and the hour (...) unknown,

CAPI. XIII.
ANd as he went out of the themple, one mat. xxiii^. a Luke. xxi. a
se what stones, and what buyldynges are here. And Jesus answered and said unto
him: See thou these great buyldynges? There shall not be left one stone upon
an other, that shall not be thrown down.

And as he sat on mount Olyuete, over against the temple, Peter and James, and
John^ and Andrew, asked him secretly: tell us, when shall these things be? And
what is the sign when all these things shall be fulfilled? And Jesus answered
them, and began to say: mat. ^^^ii^ a Luke. xxi. b.
Take heed lest any man deceive you. For many shall come in my name, saying: I
am Christ, and shall deceive many. When ye shall hear of wars, and tidings
of wars, be ye not troubled. For such things must needs be? But the end is
not yet. For there shall nation arise against nation, and kingdom against
kingdom. And there shall be earth quakes in all quarters, and famyshment shall
there be, and troubles.

These are the beginning of sorrows. But John^. xvi. a
take ye head to your selves. math. x. b Luke. xxi. c. John^. xvi. a
For they shall bring you up to the counsels, and in to the Sinagoges, and ye
shall be beaten: Yea, and shall be brought before rulers and kings for my sake,
for a testimonial unto them. mat. xxiiii b
And the Gospel must first be publysshed among al nations. Math x ^
But when they lead you and present you take ye no thought, neither ymagyn
before hand what ye shall say: but what soever is given you in the same
hour, that speak, for it is not ye that speak, but the holy ghost. The
brother shall deliver up the brother to death, and the father the son: and the
children shall rise against their fathers and mothers, and shall put them to
death. And ye shall be hated of al men for my names sake: But who so endures
unto the end, the same shall be safe, mat. x^iiii. d Luke. xxi. d. Danie. ix. ^
More over, when ye se the abhominacyon of desolacion (whereof is spoken by
Daniel the prophet) stand where it ought not: let him that redeth understand.
Then let them that be in Jury, flee to the mountains. And let him that is on
the house top, not go down in to the house, neither enter therein, to fetch
any thing out of his house. And let him that as was not from the begynnyge of
creatures (which god created) unto this time neither shall be. And except that
the Lord should shorten those days, no flesh should be saved. But for the
electes sake, whom he has chosen, he has shortened those days.

Math. 24 b Luke xvii. ^.
And then, if any man say to you: lo, here is Christ: lo, he is there, believe
not. For false Christ's and false prophettes shall rise, and shall show
miracles and wonders, to deceive if it were possible, even the elect. But take
ye head: Behold, I have showed you all things before. Io^ll. ii. c Math. 24.
c Luke, xxi. c.
Moreover, in those days after that tribulacion, the son shall wax dark,
and the moon shall not give her light, and the sterres of heaven shall fall: and
the powers which are in heaven, shall move: Dani. ^ii. c
And then shall they se the son of man coming in the clouds, with great
power and glory. And then shall he send his angels, and shall gather together
his elect from the four wyndes, from the end of the earth, to the uttermost
part of heaven.

Math. 24 d Luke. xxi. f
Learn a similitude of the Fygge tree, when his branch is yet tender, and
has

Math. 24 d Luke. xxi. c
Take heed, watch and pray, for ye know not when the time is: As a man which
is gone in to a strange country, and has left his house, and given his
substance to his servants, and to every man his work, and Mat xxv. b Luke.
xix. b
commanded the porter to watch. Watch ye therefore, for ye know not when the
master of the house will come, at even, or at mydnyght, whyther at the cock
crowynge, or in the dawning: leest if he come suddenly, he find you slepyng.
And that I say unto you, I say unto all, watch.

Mary Magdalen anoynteth Christ. The Easter lamb is eaten. Christ is taken.
Peter denies him, with many other things that were dem^^ded of Christ.

CAPI. XIIII.
AFter two days was Easter, and the Math, 26 a Luke. xxii. a
And the high priests and the Scribes sought, how they might take him by
craft, and put him to death. But they said: not in the feast day, lest any
busynes arise among the people. mat. xx^^^ John^. xi^
And when he was at Bethania, in the house of Simon the leper, even as he sat
at meat, there came a woman having an alabaster box of oyntmente, called
Narde, that was pure and costly: and she brake the box, and powered it on his
head. And there were some that were not content within them selves, and
said: What neded this waste of ointment? For it might have been sold for more
then CCC. pence, and have been given unto the poor. And they grudged against
her.

And Jesus said: let her alone, why trouble ye her? She has done a good work
on me. Deute. xv^
For ye have poor with you always: and when soever ye will, ye may do them
good: but me have ye not always. She has done that she could: she came
beforehande, to anoint my body to the buryenge. Uerely I say unto you: Where
soever this Gospel shall be preached thorowout the hole world: this also that
she has done, shall be rehearsed in remembrance of her.

mat. xx^^^ Luke. (...) John^. xiii. ^
And Judas Iscarioth, one of the twelve went away unto the high Priests, to
betray mat. xxvi. b Luke. xxii. ^
And the first day of sweet bread (when they offered passover) his disciples
say unto him: Where will thou that we go and prepare, that thou may eat
the Passover? And he sends forth two of his disciples, and says unto them:
Go ye into the city, and there shall mete you a man bearing a pytcher of
water, follow him. And whyther soever he goes in, say ye to the good man of
the house, the master says: Where is the geste cambre, where I shall eat
Passover with my disciples? And he will show you a great parloure, paued and
prepared: there make ready for us. And his disciples went forth, and came in to
the city, and found as he had said unto them: and they made ready the
Passover.

mat. xxvi b Luke. xxii. d
And when it was now euentyde he came with the twelve. And as they sat at board
and John^ xiii. ^
one of you (that eats with me) shall betray me. And they began to be sorry,
and to say to him one by one: is it I? And an other said is it I? He answered
and said unto them. It is one of the twelve, even he that dyppeth with me in
the platter.

The son of man truly goes, as it is written of him: but woe to that man by
whom the son of man is betrayed. Good were it for that man, if he had never
been borne. And as they did eat, Jesus took bread: and Math. 26. c Luke.
xxii. b ^ Corin. xi. e
when he had given thanks he brake it, and gave to them, and said: Take,
eat, this is my body. And he took the cup, and when he had given thanks, he
took it to them, and they all drank of it. And he said unto them: This is my
blood of the new testament, which is shed for many. Uerely I say unto you:
I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine: until that day, that I
drink it new in the kingdom of god. And Math. 26. c
when they had said grace: they went out to mount Olyuete.

And Jesus says unto them: All ye shall ^^ba. xiii. c Math, 26. c Luke. xxii.
d John^. xiii. d
I will smite the shepeheerde, and the sheep shall be scattered: But after that
I am risen again, I will go into Galile before you. Peter said unto him: And
though al men be offended, yet will not I. And Jesus says unto him. Uerelye I
say unto the, that this day, even in this night before the cock crow twyse,
thou shalt deny me three times. But he spoke more vehemently: no, if I should
dye with the, I will not deny the. Likewise also said they all.

Math. 26. d
And they came in to a place which was named Gethsemani. And he says to his
disciples: Sit ye here, while I go aside, and pray. And he takes with him
Peter and James and John^, and began to wax abashed, and to be in an agonye,
and says unto them: Math. 26. d John^. xii. d.
My soul is heavy, even unto the death, tarry ye here and watch. And he went
forth a little and fell down flat on the ground, and prayed: that if it were
possible, the hour might pass from him. And he said: Math. 26 d Luke. xxii. d
Abba father all things are possible unto the, take away this cup from me.
Nevertheless, not that I will, but that thou will, be done. And he came and
found them slepynge, and says to Peter: Simon, slepest thou? Could not
thou watch one hour? Watch ye, and pray, lest ye enter in to temptacyon:
the spirit truly is ready, but the flesh is weyke.

Math. 26 d
And again he went aside, and prayed, Math. 26. d Luke. xxii. e
And immediately while he yet spoke, comes Judas, (which was one of the
twelve) and with him a great nombre of people with swerdes and staves from the
high priests and Scribes and elders. And he that betrayed him, had given them
a general token, saying: Who soever I do kiss, that same is he: Take him and
lead him away warely. And as soon as he was come, he goes streyghte way to
him, and says unto him: Master, master and kyssed him: And they laid their
hands on him, and took him. And one of them that stood by, drue out a sword,
and smote a servant of the high priest, and cur of his care.

And Jesus answered and said unto them: Math. ^6. 8 Luke. xxii. ^
ye be come out as unto a thief with swerdes and with staves, for to take me. I
was daily with you in the Temple, teaching, and ye took me not: but these
things come to pass, that the scriptures should be fulfilled. Math. 26. ^
Luke xxii ^ John^ xviii.
And they al forsook him, and ran away. And there followed him a certain young
man, clothed in lynnen upon the bare, and the young men caughte him, and he
left his lynnen garment, and fled from them naked. Math. 26. f Luke. xxii. f
John^. 18. ^.
And they l^d Jesus away to the highest priest of all, and with him came all
the high priests, and the elders, and the Scribes.

And Peter followed him a great way of (even till he was come in to the palace
of the high priest) and he sat with the (...) and warmed him self at the
fire. Math. 26. ^ Acts. (...). d.
And the high priests, and all the counsel sought for wytnes against Jesus,
to put him to death, and found none: for many bare false witness against him,
but their witnesses agreed not together. And there arose cer^ayn, and brought
false wytnes against him, saying. We her^e him say: Mat. xxvi ^ John^. ii. d
I will destroy this temple that is made with hands, and within three days I
will build an other, made without hands: but yet their witnesses agreed not
together.

mat. xxvi. f.
And the high Priest stood up amongst them, and asked Jesus, saying:
Answerest thou nothing? How is it that these bear witness against the? But
he held his peace and answered nothing. Again mat. xxvi. f
the highest priest asked him, and said unto him: Art thou Christ the son of
the blessed? And Jesus said: I am.

mat xxvi. ^ Luke. x^ii g John^. v ^. g.
And ye shall se the son of man syttyng on the right hand of power, and
coming in the clouds of heaven. Then the high Priest

And as Peter was byneth in the palace, there came one of the wenches of the
highest priest: and Math. 26 g Luke. xxii. f John^, 18. c.
when she saw Peter warmyng him self, she looks on him, and says.

Wast not thou also with Jesus of Nazareth? And he denied, saying: I know him
not, neither wot I what thou say. And he went out in to the porche, and the
cock crewe And a damsel (when she saw him) began again to say to them that
stood by, this is one of them. And he denied it again. And anon after they
that stood by, said again to Peter: surely thou art one of them, for thou
art of Galile, and thy speech agrees thereto.

But he began to curse and to swear, saying. I know not this man of whom ye
speak. And again Math. 26 g Luke. xxii. g
the cock crewe, and Peter remembered the word that Jesus said unto him:
before the cock crow twyse, thou shalt deny me three times. And he began to
weep.

Of the Passion, death, and buryall of Christ.

CAPI. XV.
ANd anon in the downyng, Mat. 27. a. Luke xxiii. a John^. 18. c
the high Math. 27 b Luke xxiii. b
Answerest thou nothing? Behold, how many things they lay unto thy charge.
Jesus yet answered nothing, so that Pilate meruayled.

At that feast Pilate did deliver unto them a prisoner: whom soever they would
desire. And there was one that was named Barrabas, which lay bound with them
that made insurreccyon: he had committed murder. And the people called unto
him, and began to desire him, that he would do, according as he had ever done
unto them. Pilate answered them, saying: Will ye that I let loose unto you the
king of the Iues? For he knew, that the high priests had delivered him of
envy. But the high priests moved the people, that he should rather deliver
Barrabas unto them. Pilate answered again, and said unto them.

Math. 27 b Luke. xxiii b
What will ye then that I do unto him, whom ye call the king of the Iues? And
they Math. 27. b
let loose Barrabas unto them, and delivered up Jesus (when he had scourged
him) for to be crucified. And the souldioures led him away into the comen hall,
and called together the hole multitude, and they clothed him with purple, and
they platted a crown of thorns and crowned him withal, and began to salute
him: Hayle king of the Iues. And they smote him on the head with a reed, and
did spyt upon him, and bowed their knees, and worshypped him. And when they had
mocked him, they took the purple of him, and put his own clothes on him, and
led him out, to crucify him. And they compelled one that passed by, called
Simon of Cyrene (the father of Alexander and Rufus) which came out of the
field, to bear his cross. Mat. (...)* Luke xx^^*
And they Mat. 27 ^
brought him to a place named Golgotha, (which is if a man interpret it: the
place of dead men's sculles) and they gave him to drink, wine menglyd with
myrre, but he received it not.

And when they had crucified him Mat. 27 ^ Psalm. x^^^
they parted his garments, casting lottes upon Mat. 27 ^ Luke xxiii ^
And they crucified with him two thieves: the one on the right hand, and the
other on his left. And the scripture was fulfilled which says: Esai. li^ ^
Mat. 27. ^
He was counted among the wicked.

Mat. 27. ^ Luke xx^^ ^
And they that went by, rayled on him: waggynge their heads, and saying: A
wretch thou that destroyest the temple, and buyldest it in three days, save
thy self, and come down from the cross, Likewise also mocked him the high
priests among them selves with the Scribes and said, he saved other men, him
self he can not save. Let Christ the king of Israel descend now from the
cross, that we may se, and believe. And they that were crucified with him
checked him also.

Math. 27. ^ Luke 23. ^
And when the syxte hour was come, darkness arose over all the earth, until
the nynth hour. And at the nynth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice, saying:
Eloi, Eloi, lamazabachthani? which is (if one interpret it,) Math. 27. ^
Psalm. x^i. ^.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

And some of them that stood by, when they Math. 27. ^
And one ran, and filled a sponge full of vyneger, and put it on a reed, and
gave him to drink, saying: let him alone, let us se, whyther Elias will come
and take him down.

But Jesus cried with a loud voice, and gave up the ghost. Math. 27. ^ Luke.
23. ^
And the veil of the temple did rent in two pieces, from the top to the
bottom. (...) xxvii. ^ (...). 23. g.
And when the Centurion, (which stood before him) saw, that he so cried and
gave up the ghost, he said: truly this man was the son of God. (...). xxvii.
f (...). xxiii g
There were also women a good way of, beholdynge him: among whom was ^at.
xxvii g
Mary Magdalen, and Mary the mother of James the little: and of Ioses, and Mary
Salome, (...). viii a
(which also when he was in Galile had followed him, and ministered unto him)
and many other women which came up with him unto Jerusalem.

And now when the even was come (because it was the day of preparyng that
goes before the Sabbath) ^at. xxvii g Luke ^xiii. g John^. xix. g
Joseph of the city of Aramathia, a noble counselor which also looked for
the kingdom of God, came, and went in boldly unto Pilate, and begged of him
the body of Jesus. And Pilate meruayled that he was already dead, and called
unto him the Centurion, and asked of him, whyther he had been any while dead.
And when he knew the truth of the Centurion, he gave the body to Joseph. And he
bought a lynnen clothe, and took him down, and wrapped him in the lynnen
clothe, and laid him in a sepulcre, that was hewn out of the rock, and
rolled a stone before the door of the sepulcre. Luke xxiii. c.
And Mary Magdalen and Mary Ioses behold where he was laid.

Christ is risen again, and appears to the apostles: to whom he co^mytteth
the preaching of the Gospel.

CAPI. XVI.
ANd when the Sabbath was past, Mary Math, 28. a Luke. 24. a John^, xx. a
And early in the morning the first day of the Sabbath they came unto the
sepulcre, when the Son was risen. And they said among them selves: Who
shall roll us away the stone from the door of the sepulere? And when they
looked, they saw how that the stone was rolled away, for it was a very great
one. And they went in to the sepulere, and saw a young man sitting on the
right side, clothed in a long white garment, and they were afraid.

Math. 28. a Luke. 24. a
And he says unto them, be not afraid: ye seek Jesus of Nazareth, which was
crucified.

Mat. 28. a. Luke. 24. a
And they went out quyckely, and fled from the Sepulcre: for they trembled and
were amassed. Neither said they any thing to any man, for they were afraid.

When Jesus was risen early the first Luke. 24. ^
he appeared first to Mary Magdalen, out of whom he had cast seven deuyls.
And she went, and told them that were with him, as they mourned and wept.
And they, when they herd that he was a live, and had appeared unto her,
byleued it not. Luke. 24. ^
After that, appeared he unto two of them in a strange figure, as they walked,
and went in to the country. And they went and told it to the remenaunt. And
they byleued not these also.

Afterward he appeared unto the eleven as they sat at meat: and cast in their
teeth their vnbylefe, and hardness of heart: because they byleued not them,
which had seen that he was risen again from the dead. And he said unto them:
Math. 28. ^
Go ye in to all the world, and preach the Gospel to all creatures: he that
byleueth and is baptized, shall be saved.

But he that byleueth not, shall be damned. And these tokens shall follow them
that believe. Acts. viii ^ xvi. b. (...) c
In my name they shall cast out deuyls, they (...) b
shall speak with new tongues, they shall Luke. c ^ and xviii. ^
drive away serpents. And if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt
them. They shall lay their hands on the sick* and they shall recover.

So then, when the lord had spoken unto them, Lu. xxiiii. ^ Ec^es. i ^.
he was received in to heaven, and is on the right hand of God. And they went
forth, and preached every where: the Lord workyng with them, Hebru. ii. ^
and confyrmynge the word with miracles following.

Here ends the Gospel of Saint Mark.
The Gospel of Saint Luke.
FOR as much as many have taken in hand to set forth the declaracion of
those things which are most surely to be byleued among us, even as they
delivered them unto us, which from the beginning saw them with their eyes,
and were ministers of the things that they declared: I determined also (as
soon as I had searched out diligently all things from the beginning) that
the^ I would write unto the, good Theophilus: that thou might know the
certente of those things whereof thou haste been enfourmed.

The concepcion and birth of John^ the Baptist. The concepcion of Christ. The
thankful songs of Mary and zachori.

CAPI. Primo.
THere was in the days of Para xxv b
of the course of Abia. And his wife was of the daughters of Aaron: and her
name was Elizabeth: they were both ryghteous before God, and walked in all the
laws and ordynaunces of the Lord, that no man could find fawte with them.
And they had no child, because that Elizabeth was ba^eyn and they both were
now well stryken in age.

And it came to pass, that when Zacharye executed the priests office before
god, as his course came (according to the custom of the priests office) his
lot fell to burn insence.

And he Exodus xx^. b Hebru. ix. b
went into the temple of the Lord, and the hoole multitude of people were with
out in prayer, while the insence was a burning. And there appeared unto him an
angel of the Lord, standing on the right side of the altar of insence. And
when Zacharias saw him, he was abashed, and fear came on him.

But the angel said unto him: fear not Math xi. v.
Elias, to turn the hertes of the Fathers to the children, and the vnbyleuers
to the wysdom of the just men, to make ready a perfyte people for the Lord. And
Zacharias said unto the angel: by what token shall I know this?

For Gene. xvii ^ and. xviii. b
I am old, and my wife well stryken in years. And the angel answered, and
said unto him: I am Gabriell, that stand in the presence of God, and am sent
to speak unto the: and to show the these glad tidings. And behold, it shall
come to pass, that thou shall be dombe, and not be able to speak, until the
day that these things be performed, because thou byleu^dst not my words,
which shall be ^ufylled in their season. And the people waited for Zacharias, and
meruayled that he tarted in the temple. And when he came out he could not
speak unto them. And they perceived that he had seen a vision in the temple.
And he beckened unto them, and remained spechlesse.

And it fortuned, that as soon as the Esai. vi. ^
thou shalt conceive in thy womb, and bear a son, and Math ^. ^ Luke.
(...). ^
shall call his name Jesus. He shall be great, and shall be called the son of
the highest. And the Lord God shall give unto him the seat of his father
David, and Esai. ix. ^
he shall reygne over the house of Jacob for ever, and Deuteronomy. (...). ^ Mich. ^^^^
of his kingdom there shall be none end.

Then said Mary unto the angel: How zacha. 8 ^ Math. (...). ^ Mathe. x. ^
with god shall nothing be impossible: And Mary said: behold the hand maiden
of the Lord be it unto me according to thy word. And the angel departed from
her.

And Mary arose in those days, and went into the mountains with haste in to
the city of Iurye, and entered in to the house of Zachary, and saluted
Elizabeth. And it fortuned, that when Elizabeth herd the salutacion of Mary,
the babe sprange in her womb.

And Elizabeth was filled with the holy

And blessed art thou that haste byleued: for those things shall be performed,
which were told the from the Lord. And Mary said. Esai. ^xi. d
My soul magnifyeth the Lord. And my spirit has reioysed in God my
sauyoure.

For he has looked on the low degree of his hand maiden: for lo: now from
henseforth shall all generacions call me blessed. Because he that is mighty,
has done to me great things, and holy is his name. And his mercy is on them
that fear him, from generation to generation. He has showed strength with his
arm / he has scattered them that are proud in the ymaginacyo^ of their
heart. Regu^. ii. b Ecclesi. x. c.
He has put down the mighty from their seats, and exalted them of low
degree. He has filled the hungrye with good things: and sent away the rich
emptye. He has helped his servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy.
^^^^. xxii. c
Even as he promised to our fathers, Abraham, and to his seed for ever. And
Mary abode with her about iii. months, and returned again to her own house.

Elizabethes time came that she should Gene. 17. b. and. xxi. a Leuiti. xii. ^
to circumcise the child: and called his name Zacharias, after the n^me of his
father. And his mother answered and said: not so but he shall be called John^.
And they said unto her: There is none in thy kynred, that is named with this
name. And they made signs to his father, how he would have him called And he
asked for writing tables, and wrote / saying: his name is John^. And they
maruay led all. And his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue also, and
he spoke, and praised god. And fear came on al them that dwelt nygh unto them.
And all these sayenges were noysed abroad thorowout all the hill country of
Iurye: and all they that herd them laid them up in their hertes, saying:
What manner of child shall this be? And the hand of the Lord was with him.

And his father Zacharias was filled with the holy ghost, and prophesyed
saying? Pray sed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visyted and redeemed
his people:

And has raised up Psalm. 132. c
an horn of salvation unto us, in the house of his servant David

Even as he promised by the mouth of his Gene. xxii. ^
And that he would perform the oath, which he swear to our father Abraham, for
to give us. Esai. 38. ^
That we delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him with out
fear, all the days of our life, in soche holiness, and ryghtwysenesse as are
accept before him. And thou child shall be called the prophet of the highest:
for thou shall go before the face of the Lord, to prepare his ways: to give
knowledge of salvation unto his people for the remissyon of sins. Through the
tender mercy of our God, whereby the day spring from an high has visyted us.

Esai. ix ^ Math. iiii. e
To give light to them that sat in darkness / and in the shadow of death, to
gyde our fete in to the way of peace. And the child grew and wared strong in
spirit / and was in wilderness, till the day came, when he should show him
self unto the Israelites.

The birth and circumcisyon of Christ. How he was received in to the temple.
How Simeon and Anna prophesye of him: and how he was fo^^^^ in the temple
among the doctors.

CAPI. II.
ANd it chanced in those days: that there i. Reg. xx. ^.
the city of David, which is called Bethleem, because he was of the house and
lynage of David, to be taxed with Mary his spoused wife, which was with child.

And it fortuned that while they were there, her time was come that she should
be delivered. And she brought forth her first begotten son, and wrapped him
in swadlynge clothes, and laid him in a mau^ger, because there was no rowme
for them in the ynne.

And there were in the same region shepeheerdes, And straight way there was
with the Angel a multitude of heavenly souldyers, praysynge God, and saying:
Glory to God on high, and peace on the earth: and unto men a good will.

And it fortuned, as soon as the Angels

And when the eight day was come that the child should be Gene. 17. b.
circumcysed Math. ^. ^
his name was called Jesus, Luke. i. ^
which was named of the Angel, before he was conceived in the womb.

And when the time of their purifycacyon Leuiti. xii. d
(after the law of Moses) was come, they ^. Regu^. i. d
brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord (as it is written in the
law of the Lord Exodus xiii a and. xxii. ^ Nume. 8. g.
every man child that first opens the matrix, shall be called holy to the
Lord) and to offer (as it is said in the law of the Lord) a pair of turtle
doves, or two young pigyons. And behold, there was a man in Ierusulem whose
name was Simeon. And the same man was just and godly, and looked for the
consolacion of Israel, and the holy gooste was in him. And an answer had he
received of the holy ghost that he should not se death, except he first saw
the Lords Christ. And he came by inspiracyon in to the temple. And when the
father and mother brought in the child Jesus: to do for him after the custom
of the Leuiti. xil. d
law, then took he him up in his arms, and praised god, and said: Lord, now
let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy promise. For mine
eyes have seue thy salvation: which thou have prepared before the face of al
people. Esai. xlix. ^ Acts. xiii g
A light to lyghten the gentyls, and the glory of thy people Israel.

And his father and mother, meruayled at those things, which were spoken of
him.

And there was a Prophettysse, one Anna, the daughter of Phanuell / of the
trybe of Aser: which was of a great age, and had lived with an husband seven
years from her virginite. And she had been a wydowe about four score and
four year, which departed not from the temple, but served God with fastings
and prayers night and day.

And she came forth that same hour, and ^. Regu^. ^^
the child grew, and wared strong in spirit, and was filled with wisdom,
and the grace of god was upon him. And his father and mother went to Jerusalem
every year Exodi. (...) xxiii. ^. and xxxiiii. c. Leui. xx^^^. ^
at the feast of Easter.

And when he was. xii, year old, they went up to Jerusalem after the custom
of the feast day. And when they had fulfilled the days: as they returned home,
the child Jesus abode still in Jerusalem, and his father and mother knew not
of it: but they supposyng him to have been in the company, came a days journey
and sought him among their kynsfolke and acquayntaunce.

And when they found him not, they Mat. (...) and. xlii. g Mark. ^. ^ Luke.
^iii* ^
And all that herd him / were astonyed at his understanding and answers. And
when they saw him, they marueyled. And his mother said unto him: son, why have
thou thus delte with us* Behold, thy father and I have sought the, sorowynge.
And he said unto them: how is it that ye sought me? Wist ye not, that I must
go about my fathers business? And Luke. ix. ^ and. xvi^^. ^
they understood not that saying which he spoke unto them. And he went down with
them and came to Nazareth, and was obedient unto them. But his mother kept al
these sayenges together in her heart. And Jesus prospered in wisdom and age,
and in favor with god and men.

The preaching, baptyme, and prysonment of John^. The baptym of Christ, and a
rehersall of the generacyon of the fathers.

CAPI. III.
IN the fyfteneth year of the reygne of Tiberius Luke xx^^^. a
Herod being Tetrach of Galile, and his brother Philip Tetrach of I^uria and
of the regyon of the Traeonites, and Lisaniath the Tetrach of Abilyne, (when
Anna and Cayphas were the high Priests) the word of the Lord came unto John^
the son of Zacharias in the wilderness. And he came in to all the coostes
about Iordane, preaching Math. iii. a Mark. ^. a John^. i. d
the baptyme of repentance for the remyssyon of sins, as it is written in
the book of the words of Esaias the prophet, saying: Esai. xl. a Math, lii. a
Mark. i. ^ John^. i. c.
The voice of a crier in wyldernes: prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his
patthes straight. Every valey shall be filled, and every mountain and hill
shall be brought low. And things that be crooked, shall be made straight: and the
rough ways shall be made plain: and all flesh shall se the salvation of god.

Then said he to the people, that were Math. ^ii. b
O ye generacyon of vypers, who has taught you to flee from the wrath to come?
Bring forth therefore due fruytes of repentance, and begin not to say within
your selves: we have Abraham to our father. For I say unto you. God is able of
these stoones to raise up children unto Abraham. Now also is the axe laydevn to
the rote of the trees: Math. lil. b and. vii. ^
every tree therefore which brings not forth good fruit is bewen down, and
cast in to the fire. And the people asked him, saying: Acts. ii. ^ ^
What shall we do then? He answers and says, unto them: He that has two
cootes? let him part with him that has none, and he that has meat, let him
do likewise.

Then came the Publicans also to be baptized, Math. iii. b Mathe. ^. a John^.
i. ^
I baptyse you with water / but one stronger then I shall come after me, whose
shoo latchet I am not worthy to unloose: he shall baptyse you with the holy
ghost, and with fire: Math. iii. ^
which has his fan in his hand, and will pourge his floor, and gather the
corn in to his barn: but the chafe will he burn with fire that never shall
be quenched. And many other things in his exhortacyon preached he unto the
people.

Mat. 14. ^. Math. vi. c
Then Herod the Tetrach (when he Math. iii. ^ Mark i. ^ John^. ^. ^
when Jesus was baptized and did pray) the heaven was opened, and the holy
ghost came down in a bodily shappe like a dove upon him, and a voice came from
heaven, which said: Esai. xlii. ^.
Thou art my beloved son, in the do I delight. And Jesus him self began to be
about thyrtye year of age, so that he was Mat. xiii. ^ Mar. iiii. ^ Luke.
li^^ ^. John^ vi. c.
supposed to be the son of Joseph:

Which was the son of Hely:

Which was the son of Mathat:

Which was the son of Leui:

Which was the son of Melchi:

Which was the son of Ianna:

Which was the son of Joseph:

Which was the son of Matthathias:

Which was the son of Amos:

Which was the son of Naum:

Which was the son of Hesly:

Which was the son of Nagge:

Which was the son of Maath:

Which was the son of Matathias:

Which was the son of Semei:

Which was the son of Joseph:

Which was the son of Judah:

Which was the son of Ioanna:

Which was the son of Rhesa:

Which was the son of Zorobabell:

Which was the son of Salathiell:

Which was the son of Neri:

Which was the son of Melchi:

Which was the son of Addi:

Which was the son of Coosam:

Which was the son of Helmadam:

Which was the son of Her:

Which was the son of Ieso:

Which was the son of Heliezer:

Which was the son of Ioram:

Which was the son of Mattha:

Which was the son of Leui:

Which was the son of Simeon:

Which was the son of Judah:

Which was the son of Joseph:

Which was the son of Ionam:

Which was the son of Heliachim:

Which was the son of Melcha:

Which was the son of Menna:

Which was the son of Mathatha:

Which was the son of Nathan:

Which was the son of David:

Which was the son of Iesse:

Which was the son of Obed:

Which was the son of Boos:

Which was the son of Salmon:

Which was the son of Naassan:

Which was the son of Aminadab:

Which was the son of Aram:

Which was the son of Esron:

Which was the son of Phares:

Which was the son of Judah:

Which was the son of Jacob:

Which was the son of Isaac:

Which was the son of Abraham:

Which was the son of Charra:

Which was the son of Nachor:

Which was the son of Saruch:

Which was the son of Ragau:

Which was the son of Phalec:

Which was the son of Heber:

Which was the son of Sala:

Which was the son of Cainan:

Which was the son of Arphaxat:

Which was the son of Sem:

Which was the son of Noe:

Which was the son of Lameth:

Which was the son of Mathusala:

Which was the son of Enoch:

Which was the son of Iareth:

Which was the son of Malaleell:

Which was the son of Cainan:

Which was the son of Enos:

Which was the son of Seth:

Which was the son of Adam:

Which was the son of God.

Jesus is led in to the wilderness, and fasteth all the time of his
temptacyon, he ouercometh the devil, goes in to Galile, preaches at Nazareth
and Capernaum. The Iues despise him: the deuyls knowledge him: he comes into
peter's house, heals his mother in law and does great miracles.

CAPI. IIII.
Jesus being full of the holy ghost, returned Mat. iiii. a. Mark. i. b
was led by the spirit in to wilderness, and was. xl. days tempted of the
devil. And in those days did he cate nothing. And when they were ended / he
afterward hungered. And the devil said unto him: if thou be the son of god
command this stone that it be bread. And Jesus answered him, saying: It is
written Deute. ^. a. Mat. iiii. a.
man shall not live by bread only / but by every word of God. And the devil
took him in to an high mountain, and showed him all the kyngdoms of the
world, even in the twyncklynge of an eye.

And the devil said unto him: all this Deute. vi ^ and. x. d Mat. xiii. ^
Thou shalt worship the lord thy god, and him only shall thou serve. And he
carried him to Jerusalem, and set him on a pynacle of the temple, and said unto
him: If thou be the son of God, cast thy self down from hence. For it is
written: Psalm. (...) Mat. iiii. ^
He shall give his angels charge over the, to keep the, and in their hands
they shall bear the up, that thou dasshe not thy foot against a stoone. And
Jesus answered, and said unto him, it is said: Deute. vi. ^ Mat. iiii ^
Thou shall not tempte the Lord thy god. And as soon as all the temtacyon was
ended, the devil departed from him for a season.

And Jesus returned by the power of Mat. xiii ^ Math. vi. ^
And he came to Nazareth where he was nursed and (as is custom was) he went in
to the synagoge on the Sabbath day, and stood up for to read. And there was
delyueted unto him the book of the Prophet Esaias. ii. Es^. ^. ^
And when he had opened the book, he found the place, where it was written:
Esai. lxi. ^
The spirit of the lord upon me, because he has anointed me: to preach the
Gospel to the poor he has sent me: to heal the broken hearted: to preach the
delyucraunce to the captyue, and sight to the blind: freely to set at liberte
them that are brosed, and to preach the acceptable year of the Lord.

And he closed the book, and gave it again to the minyster, and sat down. And
the eyes of all them that were in the synagoge, were fastened on him. And he
began to say unto them: This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears.
And all bare him wytnes Mat. vii. ^ Mark. i. ^ Luke. ii. ^
and wondered at the gracyous words, which proceeded out of his mouth, and
they said: Is not this Joseph's son? And he said unto them: Ye will utterly
say unto me this proverb: Phisician, heal thy self.

What soever we have herd done in Capernaum, do the same here likewise in
thine own country. And he said: verily I say unto you. Mat. xiii. ^. Mat.
vi. ^
No Prophet is accepted in his own country.

But I tell you of a truth: 3. Regu^. 7 ^ James. v. d
many wydowes were in Israel in the days of Elias when heaven was shut three
years and six them was Elias sent, save into Sarepta vesydes Sidon, unto a
woman that was a wydowe. 4. Reg. v. d
And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus the Prophet: and noone
of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Siryan. And all they in the synagoge
(when they herd these things, were filled with wrath: and rose up, and thrust
him out of the city, and led him even unto the edge of the hill (whereon their
city was buylte) that they might cast him down headlynge. But he departed,
and went his way even through the mids of them: and came down to Capernaum a
City of Galile, and there taught them on the Sabbath days. Math. vii. d and.
xiii. g Mark. i. c.
And they were astonyed at his doctrine: for his preaching was with power.

Mathe. i. c
And in the synagoge there was a man which had an unclean spirit of a
devil,

Mat. viii b Mathe. i. c.
And when he was risen up and come out of the synagoge, he entered in to Simons
house. And Simons mother in law was taken with a great fever, and they made
intercession to him for her. And he stood over her, and rebuked the fever, and
the fever left her And immedyatly she arose / and mynystred unto him.

When the son was down, all they that Mark. i. a and. iii. d
And deuyls also came out of many, cryenge and saying: thou art Christ the
son of God. And he rebuked them, and suffered them not to speak: for they
knew that he was Christ As soon as it was day, he departed, and went in to a
desert place, and the people sought him / and came to him, and kept him that
he should not depart from them. And he said unto them I must preach the
kingdom of god to other cities also: for therefore am I sent. And he preached in
the synagoges of Galile.

Christ preaches in the ship. The disciples forsake all and follow him. He
cleuseth the Leper: heals the man of the palsye: calls matthew the customer,
and eats with open sinners.

CAPI. V.
IT came to pass that (when the people preased Mat. iiii. ^.
and saw two ships stand by the lake side / but the fysshermen were gone
out of them / and were wasshyng their nets. And he entered into one of the
ships, (which perteyned to Simon) and prayed him that he would thrust out a
little from the land. And he sat down, and taught the people out of the ship
When he had left speaking, he said unto Simon: Launche out in to the deep,
and let slyppe your nets to make a draught. And Simon answered, and said
unto him: Master, we have labored all night / and have taken nothing.

Nevertheless, at thy commandment I Mat. iiii. d
and forsook all, and followed him.

mat. viii. ^. Mark. i. ^
And it fortuned that when he was in a certain city: behold, there was a man
full Leui. xiiii. ^
and show thy self to the Priest, and offer for thy clensynge according, as
Moses commanded, for a witness unto them. But so much the more went there a
fame abroad of him, and much people came together to hear, and to be healed
of him from their infyrmytyes. And he kept him out of the way in the
wyldernes, and gave him self to prayer.

And it happened on a certain day: that he taught: and their sat the Pharyses
and doctors of law, which were come out of all the towns of Galile, and
Iurye, and Jerusalem. And the power of the Lord was present, to heal them.
Math. ix. a Math. ii. a
And behold, men brought in a bed, a man which was taken with a palsy: and
they sought means to bring him in, and to lay him before him. And when they
could not find on what side they might bring him in (because of the prease)
they went up on the top of the house, and let him down through the ^ylynge,
bed and all, even in the mids before Jesus. When he saw their faith he said
unto him: man thy sins be forgyuen the.

And the scrybes and the Pharyses began to think, saying. What fellow is this
/ which speaks blasphe mye? Math. ii ^. Esai. xiiii ^ and. x(...). d
who can forgive syfies but God only? But when Jesus perceived their thoughts,
he answered, and said unto them: What think ye in your hertes? Whyther is
easyer to say, thy sins be forgyuen the, or to say: rise up and walk. Math.
ix. a Acts. iii. a. and. ix. f
But that ye may know that the son of man has power to forgive syfies on
earth, he said unto the sick of the Palsye: I say unto the: arise, take up
thy bed, and go unto thy house. And immediately he rose up before them, and took
up his bed (whereon he lay) and departed to his own house, praysynge God. And
they were all amassed, and they gave the glory unto God. And were filled with
fear, saying: We have seen strange things to day.

Math. ix. a. Mark. ii. b
And after this / he went forth / and saw a Publican named Leui, sitting at
the receyte Math. ix. ^. Math. ii b Luke. vii. c and. xv. a
And the scrybes and Pharyses murmured against his discyples, saying: Why do
ye eat and drink with publycans and syfiers? And Jesus answered / and said
unto them: They that are hole, need not the phisician: but they that are sick.
I came not to call the ryghteous, but sinners to repentance.

And they said unto him: Math. ix. b. Mark. ii. c
Why do the discyples of John^ fast often, and pray, and Math. ix. b. Mark.
ii. c
Can ye make the children of the wedding fast / while the brydegrome is with
them? The days will come, when the brydegrome also shall be taken away from
them: then shall they fast in those days. He spoke also unto them a
similytude: No man puts a piece of a new garment, in to an old vesture: for
if he do: then breaks he the new, and the piece that was taken out of the
new, agrees not with the old. And no man pours new wine into old
bottels: For if he do, the new wine will brast the bottels, and run out it
self, and the bottels shall peryshe. But new wine must be put into new
bottels, and both are preserved. No man also that drynketh old wine, straight
way can away with new: for he says the old is better.

He excuses the disciples that pluck the ears of corn. he heals the man
with the wethered band, choseth his twelve Apostles, makes a ^w^^^ sermon,
and ^eacheth to do good for evil.

CAPI. VI.
IT happened on an after pryncypall Math. (...) Mark. ^^
through the corn field, and his discyples plucked the ears of corn, and did
eat, and rubbed them in their hands. And certain of the Pharisees said unto
them: Why do ye that, which is not lawful to do on the Sabbath days? And
Jesus answered them, and said: i. Rig. xx. ^
Have ye not red what David did, when he him self was an hungered, and they
which were with him: how he went into the house of god, and did take and eat
the i. Reg. xxi. ^
show bread, and gave also to them that were with him: which are not lawful
to eat, but forth Exodus xxv ^
Priests only? And he said unto them: The son of man is Lord also of the
Sabbath day.

Mat. xii. ^. Mark. ^^^^
And it fortuned in another Sabbath also / that he entered into the Synagoge,
and

Then said Jesus unto them: I will ask you a questyon: Whyther is it lawful
on the Sabbath days to do good, or to do evil? To save ones life, or to
destroy it? And beheld them all in compass, and said unto the man: Stretche
forth thyn hand. And he did so: 3 Reg. xiii ^ Mat xii. ^. Mat. ^ii. ^.
and his hand was restored again as hoole as the other. And they were filled
with madness / and co^muned together among them selves, what they might do to
Jesus.

And it fortuned in those days, Mat. xiiii. ^
that he went out in to a mountain for to pray, and

And as soon as it was day, he called his dyscyples / Math. x. a. Mark. iii b
and of them he chose twelve / whom also he called Apostles. Simon whom he
also named Peter, and Andrewe his brother. James and John^, Philip and
Bartelmewe, Mathewe and Thomas: James the son of Alpheus / and Simon which is
called Zelotes / and Judas James son, and Judas Iscarioth, the same that was
the traytoure. And he came down with them, and stood in the plain field / and
the company of his discyples, Mat. iiii. d. Mark. iii. a
and a great multitude of people (out of all Iurye and Jerusalem, and from the sea cooste Mat. iiii. d (...) vi. a.
of Tire and Sydon) which came to hear him / and to be healed of their
dyseases, and they that were vexed with foul spirytes and they were healed.
And all the people preased to touch him for there went virtue out of him, and
healed them all.

And he lift up his eyes upon the discyples, Math. v. a
Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the kingdom of God. Blessed are ye that
hunger now: for ye shall be satisfied Blessed are ye that weep now: for ye
shall laugh. Blessed shall ye be, when men hate you, and thrust you out of their
company, and rail on you, and abhor your name as an evil thing, for the
son of man's sake. Rejoice ye in that day / and be glad: for behold, your
reward is great in heaven.

For thus did their fathers unto the Prophettes. ^^os. vi. a
But woe unto you that are rich: for ye have your consolacyon. Woe unto you that
are full: for ye shall hunger. Woe unto you that now laugh: for ye shall wayle
and weep. Woe unto you when all men praise you: for so did their fathers to the
false prophettes

But I say unto you which hear: Love your enemies. Do good to them which
hate you. Bless them that curse you: and pray for them which wrongfullye
trouble you. And unto him that smyteth the on the one cheke / offer also the
other.

Math. v. ^^^
And him that takes away thy gown / forbid not to take thy coote also. Give
to Mat. vii. b Eccles. 32. b Tobi. iiii. c
And as ye would that men should do to you, do ye also to them like wise. Mark:
v. ^
And if ye love them which love you, what thank have ye? For sinners also love
their lovers. And if ye do good for them which do good for you, what thank
have ye? For sinners also do even the same. And if ye lend to them of whom ye
hope to receive: what thank have ye? for sinners also lend to sinners, to
receive soche like again. But love ye your enemies / and do good / and lend
/ lokynge for nothing again: and your reward shall be great, and ye shall
be the children of the highest: for he is kind unto the unkind and to the
evil.

Be ye therefore merciful, as your father Math vii a
Judge not, and ye shall not be judged. Condemn not: and ye shall not be
condemned. Forgive, and ye shall be forgyuen. Prove. xi. d
Give, and it shall be given unto you: good measure and pressed down, and
shaken together and ru^nynge over, shall men give in to your bosoms. Mat. vii
^. Mat. iiii. c.
For with the same measure that ye mete withal shall other men mete to you
again.

And he put forth a similytude unto them: Mat. xv. ^.
Can the blind lead the blind? Do they not both fall in to the dytche?
Math. ^ c John^. xiii. d
The disciple is not above his master. Every man shall be perfyte, even as his
master is. Math. vii. ^
Why see thou a mote in thy brothers eye / but consyderest not the beam that
is in thine own eye? Either how cannest thou say to thy brother: Brother, let
me pull out the moote that is in thine eye, when thou see not the beam that
is in thine own eye. Thou ypocryte / cast out that beam out of thine own
eye first, and then shall thou se perfytly, to pull out the mote that is in
thy brothers eye.

Math. xii. ^
For it is not a good tree, that brings

For every tree is known by his fruit. For of thorns do not men gather
fygges / nor of busshes gather they grapes. A good man out of the good treasure
of his heart / brings forth that which is good. And an evil man, out of
the evil treasure of his heart brings forth that which is evil. Math. xii.
^. Psalm. xi. ^
For of the abundance of the heart, his mouth speaks. Why call ye me Math.
vii. b and. xxv. ^.
Lord, Lord, and do not as I bid you: whosoever comes to me and hears my
sayenges, and does the same / I will show you to whom he is like. Mat. vii.
d. James. ^. ^.
He is like a man which buylte an house, and dygged deep, and laid the
foundation on a rock. When the waters arose, the floode bet upon that house,
and could not move it. For it was grounded upon a rock. But he that hears
and does not, is like a man that without foundacyon buylte an house upon the
earth, against which the floode did beat: and it fell immediately. And the
fall of that house was great.

He heals the captains setuaunt: rayseth the wydowes son: enfourmeth the
disciples whom John^ Baptyst sent unto him: commends John^: reproves the
Iues, and eats with the Bha^ise. The woman wassheth his feet with her
^ear^s, and he lor^yueth her her sins.

CAPI. VII.
WHen he had ended all his sayenges in Mat. viii a John^. iiii. ^.
he entered in to Capernau^. And a certain Centurions servant which was
dear unto him lay sick and was in parell of death. And when he herd of
Jesus, he sent unto him the elders of the Iues, besechynge him that he would
come, and heal his servant. And when they came to Jesus, they besought him
instantly, saying: He is worthy that thou shul dest do this for him: for he
loves our nacyon and has buylte us a synagoge. And Jesus went with them.

And when he was now, not far from Mat. viii. a
Lord, trouble not thy self: for I am not worthy: that thou should enter
under my rofe. Wherefore I thought not my self worthy to come unto the: but
say thou the word, and my servant shall be hoole. For I also am a man set
under power / and have under me souldyers, and I say unto one: go, and he
goes: and to an other* come: and he comes: and to my servant do this: and
he does it. When Jesus herd this, he marueyled at him / and turned him
about, and said to the people that followed him: I say unto you, I have not
found so great faith, no, not in Israel. And they that were sent / turned
back home again and found the servant hole that had ven sick.

And it fortuned after this / that he went in to a city which is called Naim,
and many of his disciples went with him, and much people. When he came nygh the
gate of the city: behold there was a dead man carried out, which was the
only son of his mother, and she was a wydowe, and much people of the city
was with her.

And when the Lord saw her, he had co^passyon 3 Re. xvii. d 4. Reg. 4. f
Acts. xx. c
And he delivered him to his mother. And there came a fear on them all. And
they gave the glory unto god, saying. John^. iiii. ^ and. vi. b
A great Prophet is risen up among us, and GOD has visyted his people.

And this rumor of him went forth throughout al Jury, and throughout all the
regions which lie round about. And the discyples of John^ showed him of al
these things. Math. ^
And John^ called unto him two of his discyples, and sent them to Jesus,
saying: Art thou he that should come: or shall we look for a another? When the
men were come unto him, they said: John^ Baptyste sent us unto the, saying:
Art thou he that should come? or shall we wait for an other? And in that same
hour he cured many of their infyrmytes and plages, and of evil spirytes, and
unto many that were blind he gave sight.

And he answered, and said unto them: Go your ways, and bring word again
to John^, what things ye have seen and herd, how that Esai. ^5. ^ and. ^xi. ^
the blyndese, the halte go, the lepers are cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead
rise again: to the poor is the glad tidings preached, and happy is he, that
is not offended at me.

Math. xi. ^
And when the messengers of John^ were departed, he began to speak to the
people concerning John^. What went ye out in to the wilderness for to se? a
reed shaken with the wend? But what went ye out for to se? A man clothed in
soft raiment? Behold / they which are gorgeously apparelled / and live
delycatly, are in kings courts. But what went ye forth to se? A Prophet? Yea
I say to you / and more then a Prophet. This is he, of whom it is written.
Math. xi ^ Mathe (...) Mala. iii. ^
Behold, I send mine Angel before thy face which shall prepare thy way
before the. For I say unto you, among women's children, is there not a greater
Prophet then John Baptyste. Nevertheless, he that is less, in the kingdom of
God is greater then he.

And all the people and the Publycans Math. xi. ^.
whereunto shall I lyken the men of this ge neracyon: and what thing are they
like? They are like unto children sitting in the market place, and cryenge one
to an other, and saying: We have ^yped unto you, and ye have not dau^sed: We
have mourned to you / and ye have not wept. For John Baptyste came, neither
Math. iii. ^
eating bread, nor drinking wine, and ye say: he has the devil. The son
of man is come, and eats and drynketh, and ye say: behold a glotonous man,
and an unmeasurable drynker of wine a friend of publicans and sinners. And
wisdom is justified of all her children.

And one of the Pharisees desired him Mat. ^x vi. a Mat. xiiii a John^ xi. a
And behold, a woman in that city (which was a sinner) as soon as she knew
that Jesus sat at meat in the pharisees house she brought an alabaster box of
ointment, and stood at his fete behind him weeping, and began to wasshe his
fete with tears, and did wype them with the heeres of her head, and kyssed
his feet, and anointed them with the ointment. When the Pharise (which had
bydden him) saw, he spoke within him self saying: if this man were a
prophet, he would surely know who, and what manner of woman this is that
touches him, for she is a sinner. And Jesus answered, and said unto him:
Simon, I have somewhat to say unto the. And he said: Master, say on. There
was a certain lender which had two detters the one ought five hundred pence,
and the other fyftye. When they had nothing to pay, he forgave them both.
Tell me therefore, which of them will love him most? Simon answered and said: I
suppose, that he to whom he forgave most. And he said unto him. Thou have
truly judged.

And he turned to the woman, and said unto Mathe. v. c
Thy faith has saved the: Go in peace.

Christ with his apostles goes from town in town and preaches, she weth the
parable of the seed, tells who is his mother and his brother, stylleth the
ragynge of the sea, delyuireth the possessed, and dryueth the deuyls in to the
heerde of swyne, helps the sick woman and Iairus daughter.

CAPI. VIII.
ANd it fortuned afterward, that he him ^^^. xxiii. d
certain women, which were healed of evil spirits, and infirmites. Mary
which is called Magdalen (out of whom went seven deuyls) and Ioanna the wife
of Chusa. Herodes steward, and Susanna and many other, which ministered unto
him of their substance. When much people were gathered together, and were
come to him out of all cities, he spoke by a similitude.

Mat. xiii ^ Mar. iiii. a.
The sower went out to sow his seed: and as he sowed, some fell by the way
side, and it Mat. xiii. ^ Mar. iiii. ^
And his disciples asked him, saying: what manner of similitude is this? And he
said: unto you is it given to know the secrets of the kingdom of God: but to
other by parables: that when they se, they should not se, Esai. ci. ^. Mar.
xiii. ^ Mar. iiii. ^ John^ xii. f Acts. ^8. f Roma xi. ^
and when they hear they should not understand. The parable is this. mat.
xi^^. ^ Mar. iiii. ^
The seed is the word of God. Those that are beside the way, are they that
hear, then comes the devil, and takes away the word out of their hertes,
lest they should believe and be saved. They on the stones, are they, which when
they hear, receive the word with joy: and these have n^ roots: which for a
while believe, and in time of temptacyon go away. And that which fell among
thorns, are they, which when they have herd, go forth, and are choked with
cares and riches, and voluptuous living, and bring forth no fruit. That
which fell in the good ground, are they which with a pure and good heart,
hear the word, and keep it, and bring forth fruit through patience.

Math. v. ^. Mar. (...). i. ^. and* xi. ^
No man, when he lyghteth a candel, covers it with a vessel, or puts it
under a table, but sets it on a candelstycke, that they which enter in, may
se the light. Math. ^. ^ Mark (...). ^ Luke. xii. ^.
No thing is in secret, that shall not come abroad. Neither any thing hyd,
that shall not be known and come to light. Take heed therefore how ye hear.
For who soever has, to him shall be given: Mat. ^^^i^ ^ and. xxv. ^ Mar. i^^^
^. Luke. xix d.
And who soever has not, from him shall be taken: even that same which he
supposes that he has. Mat. xii. d Mar. i^i. ^
Then came to him his mother and his brethren, and could not come at him for
prease. And it was told him, and said. Thy mother and thy brethren stand with
out, and would se the. He answered and said unto them: my mother and my
brethren are these, which hear the word of God, and do it.

And it chanced on a certain day, that he went in to a ship, and his
disciples also, and he said unto them: Let us go over unto the other side of
the lake. And they lau^ched forth But as they sailed, he fell a sleep, math.
viii. c Mar. iiii. d
and there arose a storm of wind in the lake, and they were filled with
water, and were in ieoperdy.

math. viii. d Mark. v. a
And they sailed unto the region of the Gederenites, which is over against
Galile.

And when he went out to land, there met him out of the city a certain man,
which had a devil long time, and ware no clothes neither abode in any house:
but in graves.

When he saw Jesus, and had cried, he fell down before him, and with a loud
voice said. math. viii d Mark. v. a.
What have I to do with the Jesus, thou son of the God most highest? I
beseech the tourment me not: for he commanded the foul spirit to come out of
the man. For often times he had caught him, and he was bound with cheynes, and
kept with fetters: and he brake the bonds, and was carried of the fend in to
wilderness.

And Jesus asked him, saying: What is math. viii d Mark. v. b
And he gat him up in to the ship and returned back again.

Then the man (out of whom the deuyls Math. ^ Mark. ^
And behold, there came a man named Iairus (and he was a ruler of the
Synagoge) and he fell down at Jesus fete prayenge him, that he would come into
his house for he had but one daughter only, upon a twelve year of age, and she
lay a dyenge. But as he went, the people thronged him.

Math. i^. Mark. ^
And a woman having an issue of blood twelve years (which had spente all her
substance upon Phisicians, neither could be helped of any) came behind him,
and touched the hemme of his garment, and immediately her issue of blood
staunched. And Jesus said: who is it that touched me? When every man denied,
Peter (and they that were with him) said. Master, the people thruste the and
vex the: and say thou, who touched me? And Jesus said: Some body has
touched me. For I perceive, that virtue is gone out of me. When the woman saw
that she was not hyd, she came tremblyng, and fell at his fete, and told him
before all the people, for what cause she had touched him, and how she was
healed immediately. And he said unto her: daughter, be of good comfort, Math.
(...) ^ Mark. ^^
Thy faith has saved the, go in peace.

While he yet spoke, there came one from the rulers of the synagoges house,
which said to him: thy daughter is dead, disease not the master. But when
Jesus herd that word, he answered the father of the damsel.

Math. (...) ^ Mark. ^. ^
Fear not, believe only, and she shall be made hoole. And when he came to the
house, he suffered no man to go in with him, save Peter, James and John^, and
the father and the mother of the maiden. Every body wept, and sorowed for her:
and he said: Weep not: the damsel is not dead, John^. xi. ^
but slepeth. And they laughed him to scorn, knowing that she was dead. And
he thrust them all out, and caught her by the hand: and cried, saying.
Maid, arise. And her spirit came again, and she arose streyghte way. And he
commanded to give her meat. And the father and mother of her were astonyed.
But he warned them, that they should tell no man what was done.

He sends out the. xii. apostles to preace. He rode hears (...) of him. He
fedeth five thousand men with five looues and two fysshes, the disciples
confess him to be the son of God, he transfigureth him self upon the mount,
delyuereth the possessed, and teaches his disciples to be lowly, they desire
vengeance, but he reproves them.

CAPI. IX.
Jesus called the Math. x. b Mark. iii. ^ and. vi. b Luke. vi. c
twelve together, and Math. vi. ^
and to heal the sick. And he said unto them: Take nothing to your journey:
neither staff, nor scrip, neither bread, Math. x a
neither money, neither have two cootes. Mark. vi b Mat. x. b.
And what soever house ye enter into, there abide, and thence depart. And who
soever will not receive you, when ye go out of that city, shake of the very
dust from your feet, for a testimony against them. And they departed and
went through the towns, preaching the gospel and healynge every where.

Mat. xiii. a Mark. vi b
And Herod the Tetrarch herd of all that was done by him, and he doubted,
because that it was said of some, that John^ was risen again from death: and
of some, that Elias had appeared, and of some, that one of the old Prophets
was risen again. And Herod said: John^ have I beheaded: but who is this of
whom I hear such things, and he desired to se him.

And the apostles returned: and told him Mat. xiiii b Mark. vi d John^. vi. a.
And he took them, and went aside in to a solitarye place nygh unto the city
that is called Bethsaida, which when the people knew they followed him. And he
received them, and spoke unto them of the kingdom of God, and healed them that
had need to be healed. And when the day began to wear away, then came the
twelve, and said unto him: send the people away, that they may go in to the
towns and next villages and lodge, and get meat, for we are here in a place
of wilderness. But he said unto them: Give ye them to eat. And they said.
We have no mo but five looues and two fysshes, except we should go and bye
meat for all this people: And they were about a five thousand men. And he
said to his disciples: Cause them to sit down by fyfties in a company. And
they did so, and made them al to sit down. And he took the five looues, and
the two fysshes, and looked up to heaven, and blessed them, and brake, and gave
to the disciples, to set before the people. And they al did eat, and were
satisfied. And there was taken up of that remained to them, twelve baskettes
full of broken meat.

Mat xvi. c. Mark. 8. c
And it fortuned as he was alone prayeng his disciples were with him, and he
asked them Mat. xvi. c. Mar. viiii. c
Who say the people that I am? They answered, and said. John^ Baptyst: Some
say Elias. And some say that one of the old Prophettes is risen. He said
unto them. But whom say ye, that I am? Simon Peter answered, and said. Mat.
xvi. c. John^. vi. g.
Thou art the Christ of God. And he warned and commanded them that they
should tell no man that thing, saying. Math. 18. c and. xx. c. Mark. 8. d ^x.
^. and. x c Luke. 17. ^. and. xviii. f.
The son of man must suffer many things, and be reproved of the elders, and of
the high priests, and scribes. and be sleyne, and rise again the third day.

And he said to them all, if any man will come after me, let him deny him
self, and take up his cross daily, and follow me.

Mat. xvi. ^ John^. (...). ^. Luke. 17. g.
For who soever will save his life, shall lose it. But who soever does lose his
life for my sake, the same shall save it. For what aduauntageth it a man, if he
win the hoole world, and loose him self, or run in damage of him self? For
Math x. ^. mar. viii ^ Luke. xii. ^.
who so is ashamed of me, and of my words, of him shall the son of man be
ashamed, when he comes in his majesty, and in the majesty of his father, and
of his holy angels. I tell you of a truth: math. xvi. d mark. viii c
There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they se the
kingdom of God. mat. xvii a. Mark. ix. c.
And it fortuned that about an eight days after these sayenges, he took Peter,
and John^ and James, and went up in to a mountain to pray. And as he prayed
the fassyon of his countenance was changed, and his garment was white, and
shone.

And behold, there talked with him two men, which were Moses and Elias, that
appeared in the majesty, and spoke of his departing, which he should end at
Jerusalem.

But Peter and they that were with him, were heavy with sleep. And when they
awoke, they saw his majesty, and two men standing with him.

mat. xvii. ^ Mark. ix. ^
And it chanced as they departed from him, Peter said unto Jesus. Master,
it is good being here for us: Let us make also three tabernacles, one for the,
and one for Moses, and one for Elias (and wist not what he said). While he
thus spoke, there came a cloud and ouershadowed them, and they feared when
they were come in to the cloud.

And there came a voice out of the cloud ii. Peter. f ^
This is my dear son, mat. xvii. ^. Mark. ^. ^. Luke. iii. d. ^ Deuteronomy. (...). 6
hear him. And as soon as the voice was past, Jesus was found alone. And
they kept it close: and told no man in those days, any of those things
which they had seen.

Mat xvii. ^ Math. ix. b
And it chaunsed that on the next day (as they came down from the hill) much
people met him. And behold, a man of the company cried out, saying. Master, I
beseech the behold my son, for he is all that I have: and se, a spirit takes
him, and suddenly he cries, and (he knocks and) teareth him that he fometh
again, and with much pain departs from him, when he has rent him, and
Mat. xvii. c. Math. ix. c.
I besought thy disciples to cast him out, and they could not. Jesus answered
and said:

O faythlesse, and crooked nation, how long shall I be with you? and shall
suffer you?

Bring thy son hither. As he was yet Mathe. i. c. Luke. iiii. d
And they were all amassed at the mighty power of god. But while they wondered
every one at all things which he did, he said unto his disciples: Let these
sayenges synke down in to your ears. For it will come to pass: that Math
xvi c Mar. viii. d Luke. ix c
the son of man shall be delivered in to the hands of men. Luke. ii. g and.
xviii. f
But they wist not what that word mente, and it was hyd from them, that they
understood it not. And they feared to ask him of that saying. And there
entered a thought among them, which of them should be the greatest. When
Jesus perceived the thought of their hertes, Math. 18. a Mark. ix. c Luke. 18.
d.
he took a child, and set him hard by him, and said unto them: Who soever
receives this child in my name, receives me. Math. x. d. Luke. x. c John^.
xiii. c
And who soever receives me, receives him that sent me. For he that is least
among you all, the same shall be great.

And John^ answered, and said: Master, we saw one casting out deuyls in
thy name, and we forbad him, because he followed not with us. And Jesus said
unto him: Nume. xi. g
forbid ye him not. For he that is not against us is with us.

And it fortuned when the time was come 4. Regu^. i. c
Elias did? Jesus turned about, and rebuked them, saying: ye wot not what
manner a spirit ye are of. For the son of man is not come to destroy men's
lives, but to save them. And they went to an other town. And it chaunsed that
as they were walkyng in the way, a certain man said unto him: Mat. (...)
I will follow the whyther soever thou wylt go. Jesus said unto him: Foxes have
holes, and birds of the air have nestes: but the son of man has not where to
lay his head.

And he said unto an other: follow me. And the same said: Lord, suffer me
first to go and burye my father. Jesus said unto him: Leuiii (...)
Let the dead burye their dead: But go thou, and preach the kingdom of god.
And an other said: Lord 3. Reg. x^
I will follow the, but let me first go and bid them farewell which are at home
at my house. Jesus said unto him: No man that puts his hand to the plowe
and looks back, is apt to the kingdom of God.

He sends the seventy before him to preach, and gives them a charge how to
behave them selves: he prayseth his heavenly father: answers the Scrybe that
tempts him: and (by the exemple of the Samarytane) shows who is a man's
neighbor. Martha receives the lord into her house. Mary Magdalen is dilygent
in hearing his word.

CAPI. X.
AFter these (things) the Lord appointed (and two) also, and sent them two
and two before him into every city and place, whyther he him self would come.
Therefore said he unto them: Math. i^. ^
The harvest is great, but the laborers are few. Pray ye therefore the Lord
of the harvest, to send forth laborers in to his harvest. Go your ways:
Math. x. ^.
Behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves. Bear no wallet, neither
scryppe, nor shoes, and 4. Reg. 4^
salute no man by the way.

Math. ^. ^. Luke. ix. ^ Acts. xiii ^
In to what soever house ye enter, first say: Peace be to this house. And if
the son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon him: if not, it shall
return to you again.

And in the same house tarry still, eating

Go not from house to house: and into what soever city ye enter, and they
receive you, eat such things as are set before you, and heal the sick that
are therein, and say unto them, the kingdom of god is come nygh upon you Math.
x. ^
But into what soever city ye enter, and they receive you not, go your ways
out in to the streets of the same, and say: even the very dust of your City
(which cleueth on us, do we wype of against you: Notwithstanding, be ye sure
of this, that the kingdom of god was come nygh upon you. I say unto you: that
it shall be easyer in that day for Zodome, then for that city.

Math. xi. c.
Woe unto the Chorazin? woe unto the Bethsaida. For if the miracles had been done
Mathe. x. d John^. xiii. c
He that hears you, hears me: and he that despyseth you, despyseth me: and
he that despyseth me, despyseth him that sent me. And the seuentye turned
again with joy, saying: Lord, even the very deuyls are subdued to us through
thy name. And he said unto them Esai. xiiii. c ^^^e. xii. c.
I saw Satan (as it had been lyghtnyng) falling down from heaven. Mar. xvi. d
Acts. 28. b.
Behold, I give unto you power, to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over
all manner power of the enemy and nothing shall hurt you. Nevertheless, in
this rejoice not, that the spirits are subdued unto you: but rejoice, that
Ph^^. iiii. a Leave. 17. b.
your names are written in heaven.

That same hour reioysed Jesus in (the holy) ghost, and said. I thank the O
father Math. xi. d
Lord of heaven and earth, that thou haste hyd these things from the wise and
prudent, and have opened them unto babes. Even so father, for so pleased it
the. Mat. ^xvi. b and. 28. d
All things are given me of my father. Mat. xi. d John^. vii. d and. viii. c
No man knows who the son is, but the father: and who the father is, save
the son, and he to whom the son will show him.

And he turned to his disciples, and said secretly. Mat. xiii. c.
Happy are the eyes, which se the things that ye se. For I tell you, that
many prophettes and kings have desired to se those things which ye se, and
have not seen them: and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not
heard them.

And behold, a certain lawyer stood up, Mat. xxii. d
Master, what shall I do, to enherite eternal life? He said unto him: What
is written in the law? How redest thou? And he answered and said: Deuit. vi a
Mat. xxii. d Mark. xii. c
love the lord thy God, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy strength, and with all thy mind: and thy neighbor as thy self. And he
said unto him: Thou have answered right. This do, and thou shalt live. But he
willing to justify him self, said unto Jesus: And who is my neighbor?
Jesus answered, and said. A certain man descended from Jerusalem to Jericho,
and fell among thieves which robbed him of his ray meant and wounded him, and
departed, leaving him half dead.

And it chanced, that there came down a

It fortuned that as they went, he entered

He teaches his disciples to pray, dryueth out a devil, and rebukes the
blasphemous pharisees They requ^re signs and tokens He eats with the Pharise,
and reprometh the ypocrisy of the Pharisees, scrybes and ypocrytes.

CAPI. XI.
ANd it fortuned as he was prayenge in Math. vi. ^
O our father which art in heaven hallowed be thy name. Thy kingdom come. Thy
will be fulfilled, even in earth also as it is in heaven. Our daily bread give
this day. And forgive us our sins: For even we for give every man that
trespasseth us. And leede us not in to temptacyon. But deliver us from evil.
And he said unto them: If any of you shall have a friend, and shall go to him
at mydnight, and say unto him, friend: lend me three looues, for a friend of
mine is come out of the way to me, and I have nothing to set before him, and he
within answer, and say: trouble me not, the door is now shut, and my children
are with me in the chamber, I can Mat. vii. a John^. xvi. f James. i. a
Ask, and it shall be given you. Seek, and ye shall find: Knock, and it shall
be opened unto you. For every one that asks, receives: and he that seeks,
fyndeth: and to him that knocks, shall it be opened. If the son shall ask
bread of any of you that is a father, will he give him a stone? Or if he ask
fysshe, will he for fysshe give him a serpent? Or if he ask an egg, will he
offer him a scorpion? If ye then being evil, can give good gifts unto your
children, how much more shall your father of heaven give the holy spirit to
them, that desire it of him?

Math. ix. d Mar. vii. d
And he was castyng out a devil, and the same was dombe. And when he had cast
out the devil, the dombe spoke, and the people wondered. But some of them
said: Math. ix. d Mar: iii. d.
He casts out deuyls through Beelzebub the cheyfe of the deuyls. And other
tempted him and required of him a sign from heaven.

But he knowing their thoughts, said

Math. xii. b
When a strong man armed watches his house: the things that he possesses
are in peace. But when a stronger the^ he comes upon him, and ouercometh him,
he takes from him all his harness (wherein he trusted) and deuideth his
goods. He that is not with me, is against me. And he that gathers not with
me, scatters abroad. Mat. xii. d
When the unclean spirit is gone out of a man he walks through dry places,
sekyng rest.

And when he fyndeth none, he says: I

When the people were gathered thycke together, he began to say: This is an
evil nacyon, Math. ^ Mark ^
they seek a sign, and there shall no sign be given them, but the sign of
Jonas the prohet. For as John ^ Iona^.
Jonas was a sign to the Ninevites, so shall also the son of man be to this
nacyon. 3. Re^^. ^ ii. Pa^^. Math. ^^
The queen of the southe shall rise at the judgment, with the men of this
nacyon, and condemn them: for she came from the uttermost parts of the earth,
to here the wisdom of Solomon. And behold, a greater then Solomon is here.
The men of Niniue shall rise at the judgment with this nation: and shall
condemn them: for they were brought to repentance by the preaching of
Jonas. And behold, a greater the^ Jonas is here.

Math. (...). Mat. (...). Luke. v^.
No man lyghteth a candell, and puts it in a preuy place, neither under a
busshell: but on a candelstycke, that they which Math. ^^
The light of the body is the eye. Therefore, when thine eye is syngle, all thy
body also shall be full of light. But if thine eye be evil, thy body also shall
be full of darkness. Take heed therefore, that the light which is in the, be
not darkness. If all thy body therefore be clear, having no part dark: then
shall it all be full of light, even as when a candell does light the with
bryghtnesse.

And as he spoke, a certain Pharise besought him, to dyne with him, and Jesus
went in, and sat down to meat. When the Pharyse saw it, he meruayled, that
he had not first washed before dinner. And the Lord said unto him. Math. ^^
Now do ye Pharyses, make clean the out side of the cup, and the platter: but
your inward part is full of ^^uenyng and wickedness. Ye fools, did not he
(that made that which is without) make that which is within also?
Nevertheless Esai. 5^. i.
give alms of that ye have, and behold, all things are clean unto you.

Math. (...). ^
But woe unto you Pharyses, for ye tithe

These ought ye to have done, and yet not to leave the other undone. Mat.
xxiii ^
Woe unto you Pharyses: for ye love the vppermoost seats in the Synagoges, and
gretynges in the market.

Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, ye ypocrites, for ye are as graves which
appear not, and the men that walk over them, are not ware of them. Then
answered one of the lawyers, and said unto him: Master, thus saying thou
put us to rebuke also. And he said: (...). x. a (...). xxiii. b
Woe unto you also ye lawyers: for ye lade men with burdens, which they be not
able to bear: and ye your selves touch not the packes with one of your
fyngers,

Woe unto you: (...). xxiii. d.
ye build the sepulcres of the Prophettes, and your fathers killed (...).
xxiii. d.
I will send them Prophettes and apostles, and some of them they shall they
and persecute, that the blood of al Prophettes (which is shed from the
beginning of the world) may be required of this generacyon, from the blood of
Gene. iiii. b ^. Pat. 24 f
Abell unto the blood of Zachary, which perysshed between the altar and the
temple. Uerely I say unto you: it shall be required of this nacyon.

* Woe unto you lawyers: for ye have taken away the keye of knowledge, ye
entered not in your selves, and them that came in, ye forbad. When he thus spoke
unto them, the lawyers and the Pharisees began to wax busye about him, and
capciously to ask him many things, layenge wait for him, and sekyng to
catch some thing of his mothe, whereby they might accuse him.

The leven of the ^haris^o, Christ conforteth his disciples against persecucyo^
warns them to beware of courtousnesse: by the similitude of a certain rich
man, he will not have them to hang upon carthly things, but to watch, and to
be ready against his coming.

CAPI. XII.
AS there gathered together an innumerable Mat. ^xvi. b Mat. viii. b
beware of the leven of the Pharisees which is ypocrisye: Math. x. c Mat. ^ii^.
c. ^uke. viii. c
For there is nothing covered, that shall not be uncovered: neither hyd, that
shall not be known. Math. x. c. Luke. viii. b
For what things ye have spoken in darkness, shall be herd in the light.

And that which ye have spoken in to the ear, even in secret places, shall
be preached on the top of the houses. Math. x. ^. Mat. xiii. b
I say unto you my friends: be not afraid of them that kill the body, and
after that have no more, that they can do. But I will show you, whom ye shall
fear. Fear him which after he has killed, has power to cast into hell. Yea,
I say unto you: fear him. Are not five sparowes bought for two farthynges? And
not one of them is forgotten of god.

Also, even the very heeres of your head Math. x. ^
every one: who soever confesses me before men, him shall the son of man
knowledge also before the angels of God. And he that denies me before men,
shall be denied before the angels of god. Math. xii. ^ Math. iii. d
And who soever speaks a word against the son of man, it shall be forgyuen
him. Math. xii. ^ Luke. xii. ^
But unto him that plasphemeth the holy ghost, it shall not be forgyuen. When
they bring you unto the Synagoges, and unto the rulers and officers, take ye no
thought, how or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall speak. For the
holy ghost shall teach you in the same hour, what ye ought to say.

One of the company said unto him: Master, speak to my brother, that he
deuyde the enheritaunce with me. And he said unto him.

Man, who made me a judge or a deuyder, over you? And he said unto them: take heed Ecclesi. xi. ^
thou have much goods laid up in stoore for many years, take thine ease:
eat, drink, be merry. But God said unto him. Iere. xvii. ^
Thou fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul again from the. Psalm.
29 b.
Then whose shall those things be, which thou have provided? So is it with
him that gathers riches to him self, and is not rich toward god. And he
spoke unto his disciples: Therefore I say unto you. Math. vi. d 1. Peter. v. ^
Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat: neither for the body, what
ye shall put on. The life is more then meat, and the body is more then
raiment. Consider the ravens, for they neither sow nor repe, which neither
have storehouse nor barn, and God fedeth them. How much are ye better then
fethered fowls?

Math. vi. d
Which of you (with his taking thought) can add to his stature one cubit? If
ye then Consider the lylyes how they grow: They labor not: they spyn not:
and yet I say unto you, that Solomon in all his royalte, was not clothed like
one of these. If god so clothe the grass (which is to day in the field, and to
morrow is cast in to the fournace) how much more will he clothe you. O ye of
little faith? And ask not ye what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink,
neither clyme ye up on high: for all such things do the heathen people of the
world seek for. Your father knows, that ye have need of such things.
Wherefore Math. vi. c ^. ^^m. vi. b Eccle. 2^. b. Prove. 23 ^
seek ye after the kingdom of god, and all these things shall be ministered
unto you. Fear not little flock, for it is your fathers pleasure, to give
you the kingdom. Math. xix. c Mark. x. x
Sell that ye have, and give alms. And prepare you bags, which wax not
old, even a treasure that fails not in beue^ where no thief comes, neither
moth corrupts. For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.

Ephe. vi. c ^. Peter. i. c.
Let your loins be gyrde about, and your lyghtes burning (in your hands)
and ye your selves like unto men that wait for their lord when he will
return from the wedding: that when he comes and knocks, they may open unto
him immediately. Happy are those servants, whom the Lord (when he comes)
shall find waking. Clearly I say unto you, that he shall gyrde him self
about and make them to sit down to meat, and walk by, and minister unto
them. And if he come in the second watch, yea if he come in the third
watch, and find them so, happy are those servants. This understand, that if
the good man of the house knew what hour the thief would come, he would surely
watch, and not suffer his house to be broken up. Math. 24 d and* xxv. a. Mar.
xiii. ^
Be ye therefore ready also: for the son of man will come at an hour when ye
think not.

Peter said unto him: Mat. 24. d. Mar. xiii. ^.
Master, tellest thou this similitude to us, or to all men? And ^eue. xvi. c
Happy is that servant, whom his lord when he comes, shall find so doing.
Of a truth I say unto you, that he will make him ruler over all that he has.
But and if the servant say in his heart: Mat. 24. d.
My Lord will defer his coming (and shall begin to smite the servants and
maidens, and to eat and drink, and to be dronken) the Lord of that servant
will come in a day when he thinks not, and at an hour when he is not ware,
and will hew him in pieces, and give him his reward / with the vnbyleuers.
(...)* ^
The servant that knew his masters will, and prepared not him self, neither
did according to his will, shall be beaten with many strypes. But he that knew
not, and did commit things worthy of strypes, shall be beaten with few
strypes. For unto whom soever much is given, of him shall be much required. And
to whom men have committed much: of him will they ask the more* I am come to
send fire on earth: and what is my desire: but that it were already kyndled?
Notwithstanding I must be Math. ^*
baptized with a baptyme, and how am I payned, till it be ended?

Math. ^
Suppose ye, that I am come to send peace on earth? I tell you nay, but rather
deuysyon. Mat. xxii
When ye se a cloud rise out of the West, straight way ye say: there comes
a shower, and so it is. And whe^ye se the south wynd blow, ye say it will be
hot, and it comes to pass. Ye ypocrytes, ye can discern the outward
apperaunce of the sky and of the earth: but how happens it that ye can not
skyl of this time? Yea, and why judge ye not of your selves that is right.

Math. ^* ^* Prove. ^* ^*
When thou go with ^^yne adversary to the ruler, as thou art in the way,
give diligence that thou may be delivered from him, leest he bring the to
the judge, and the judge deliver the to the taylour, and the taylour cast the
in to prison. I tell the, thou shall not depart thence, till thou have made good
the uttermost myte.

Of the Galyleans whom Pylate slew, and of those that dyed in Syloe The
similitude of the fygge tree. Christ heals the sick woman. The parable of
the mustarde seed and leven* Few enter into the hyngdom. Christ reproves
Herod and Jerusalem.

CAPI. XIII.
THere were present at the same season, certain Acts. v. f
Galileans were greater sinners then all the other Galyleans / because they
suffered such punysshment? I tell you nay, but except ye repent, ye shall
all likewise perysshe. Or those. xviii. upon which the toure in Syloe fell,
and slew them, think ye, that they were sinners above all men that dwelte in
Jerusalem? I tell you nay: But except ye repent, ye all shall likewise
perysshe.

He told also this similytude: a certain Mat. xxi. b.
fygge tree planted in his vyneyearde and he came and sought fruit thereon, and
found noone. Then said he to the dresser of his vyneyearde: behold, this
three year have I come and sought fruit in this fygge tree, and find none: cut
it down: why combreth it the ground? and he answered and said unto him:
Lord, let it alone this year also, till I dygge round about it, and donge
it, to se whyther it will bear fruit: and if it bear not then, after that
shalt thou cut it down. And he taught in one of their Synagoges on the
Sabbath days. And behold, there was a woman, which had a spirit of
infirmyte. xviii. years: and was bowed together, and could in no wise lift up
her head:

When Jesus saw her / he called her to (...). x^^^^. a
lose his ox, or his Ass from the stall, and lead him to the water? And
ought not this daughter of Abraham, whom Satan has bound (lo. xviii. years)
be losed from this bond on the Sabbath day? And when he thus said, al his
adversaries were ashamed, and all the people reioysed on all the excellent
deeds, that were done by him.

Then said he: what is the kingdom of God like? or whereto shall I compare it?
Mat. xvi. d Mat. ^iii. ^.
It is like a grain of mustarde seed, which a man took, and sowed in his
garden: and it grew and waxed a great tree, and the fowls of the air made
nestes in the branches of it. And again he said: whereunto shall I lyken the
kingdom of God? Mat. ^^ii. ^.
It is like leven, which a ^^ue. (...). d.
woman took, and hyd in three peckes of meal, till all was leuened. And he went
through all cities and towns, teaching / and iourneyenge toward Jerusalem.
Math. vii^*
enter in at the strayte gate: for many (I say unto you) will seek to enterin,
and shall not be able. When the good man of the house is risen up, and has
shut to the door, and ye begin to stand without, and to knock at the door,
saying: Lord, lord, opon unto us (and he answer and say unto you: I know
you not whence ye are.) Then shall ye begin to say: we have eaten and dronken
in thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets

And he shall say: I tell you, I know you Mat. vi^^* ^
And they shall come from the East, and from the West, and from the North, and
from the south, and shall sytdowne in the kingdom of god. And behold / Mat.
xix. ^* and xx. b. Mark. x ^
there are last, which shall be first: And there are first / which shall be
last. The same day came there certain of the Pharyses, and said unto him:
get the out of the way, and depart hence: for Herod will kill the.

And he said unto them: Go ye, and tell Mat xxiii ^
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which kyllest Prophettes, and stonest them that are
sent to the: how often would I have gathered thy children together, as a bird
does gather her young under her wings, and ye would not? Behold, your
habitacyon is left unto you desolate. I tell you, ye shall not se me, until
the time come that ye shall say math. xxi. b. Luke. xix. ^ John^. x^i. ^.
Psalm. x^^. ^
blessed is he that comes in the name of the lord

Jesus eats with the Pharyses, heals the dropsye upon the Sabbath, teaches
to be lowly, tells of the great supper, and warns them that will follow him,
to lay their accomptes before, what it will cost them. The salt of the earth.

CAPI. XIIII.
ANd it chaunsed, that he went in to the Math. xi^. ^ Math. iii ^ Luke. vi. ^*
Is it lawful to heal on the Sabbath day? And they held their peace. And he
took him and healed him, and let him go* and answered them, saying: which of
you shall have Pro. xxiii. a Deu. xxii. a Math. xii a
an ass or an ox fallen in to a pyt, and will not straight way pull him out
on the Sabbath day? And they could not answer him again to these things.

He put forth also a similytude to the gestes, Prove. 25 a
friend sit up higher.

Then shall thou have worship in the presence mat. xxiii. b Luke. 18. c
For whosoever exalts him self, shall be brought low. And he that humbled him
self / shall be exalted.

Then said he also to him / that had desired him to dinner: When thou make a
dinner or a supper, call not thy friends, nor thy brethren / neither thy kynsmen
/ nor thy rich neighbors: lest they also bid the again, and a recompense be
made the. But when thou make a feast / call the poor / the feeble / the lame
/ and the blind, and thou shalt be happy / for they can not recompense the.
But thou shalt be recompensed at the resurrection of the just men.

When one of them (that sat at meat also)

Mat. xxii a ^^^e. xix. b
A certain man ordained a great supper / and bad many / and sent his servant
at supper time / to say to them that were bydden, come: for all things are
now ready. And they all atonce began to make excuse. The first said unto him: I
have bought a ferme and I must needs go, and se it / I pray the have me
excused. And an other said: I have bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to prove
them, I pray the / have me excused. And an other said: I have married a wife,
and therefore I can not come.

And the servant returned and brought Gene. xix ^
compel them to come in, that my house may be filled. For I say unto you /
that none of those men which were bydden / shall taste of my supper.

There went a great company with him, and Math. ^. ^ Luke. ^x. ^
If a man come to me, and hate not his father and mother, and wife and
children, and brethren / and systers, yea and his own life also he can not be
my discyple.

And whosoever does not bear his cross and come after me, can not be my
discyple. Which of you dysposed to build a toure / sytteth not down before,
and counts the cost / whyther he have sufficient to perform it? lest after
he has laid the foundacyon / and is not able to perform it / all that
behold it, begin to mock him / saying: this man began to build, and was not
able to make an

Math. v. ^ Luke, ix. ^
Salt is good / but if salt have lost the saltness, what shall be seasoned
therewith? It is neither good for the land / nor yet for the donge hill, but
men cast it out at the doors. He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

The loving mercy of god is openly set forth in the parable of the hundred
sheep, and of the son that was lost.

CAPI. XV.
THen resorted unto him Math. (...) Mark. (...) Luke. v. ^
all the Publycans mat. xviii. ^
What man of you having an hundred sheep (if he loose one of them) does not
leave nynty and nine in the wilderness / and go after that which is lost /
until he find it? And when he has found it / he lays it on his shoulders
with joy: And as soon as he comes home, he calls together his lovers and
neighbors / saying unto them: Rejoice with me / for I have found my sheep /
which was lost.

I say unto you / that likewise joy shall which need no repentance. Either
what woman (having ten grotes, if she lose one) does not light a candell / and
swepe the house / and seek dilygently till she find it? And when she has
found it / she calls her lovers and her neighbors together, saying: Rejoice
with me / for I have found the grote which I had lost.

Likewise I say unto you / shall there be joy in the presence of the Angels
of God / over one sinner Luke. v. f
that repents.

And he said: A certain man had two Prove. 29 a
he wasted his goods with ryotous living. And when he had spent all there
arose a great derth in all that land and he began to lack / and went / and
came to a citezyn of the same country: and he sent him to his farm / to keep
swyne And he would feign have filled his belly with the coddes that the swyne did
eat: and no man gave unto him.

Then he came to him self, and said: how Job. xiii. e Psalm. 32. a
But when he was yet a great way of / his father saw him, and had
compassyon, and ran, and fell on his neck, and kyssed him. And the son said
unto him: father, I have sinned against heaven / and in thy sight / and am no
more worthy to be called thy son.

But the father said to his servants:

And he said unto him: thy brother is come, and thy father has killed the fat
calfe because he has received him save and sound And he was angrye, and would
not go in.

Then came his father out, and entreated

The parable of the wicked Mammon. Not one title of gods law shall perysshe. Of
the rich man, and of poor Lazarus.

CAPI. XVI.
ANd he said also unto his discyples.

So when he had called all his masters

And I say unto you: make you friends of the unrighteous mammon, that when ye
shall have need, they may receive you in to everlasting habitacyons.

He that is faithful in that which is

kept from my youth up. When Jesus herd that, he said unto him: Yet lackest
thou one thing. Math. xix c Mathe. x, c
Sell all that thou have / and dystrybute unto the poor, and thou shall have
treasure in heaven, and come / follow me.

When he herd this, he was sorry: for he was very rich.

When Jesus saw that he was sorye, he Math. xix ^ Mathe. x. c
with what defycultye shall they that have money, enter into the kingdom of god?

It is easyer for a camel to go through a nedles eye, then for a rich man to
enter in to the kingdom of God. And they that herd it, said: And who can then
be saved? And he said: Math. viii. b.
The things which are impossible with men, are possible with God.

Then Peter said: Math. xix. ^ Man. (...). d
lo, we have forsaken all / and followed the. He said unto them: Uerely I say
unto you: there is no man that has forsaken house / either father or mother
either brethren / or wife, or children (for the kingdom of Gods sake) which
shall not receive much more in this world, and in the world to come / life
everlasting.

Jesus took unto him the twelve / mat. xvii. d mar. viii. d. ^x. d. and. x. ^
Luke. ix, ^ and. xvii. ^.
Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and all shall be fulfilled / that are written
by the Prophettes / of the son of man. For he shall be delivered unto the
Gentyls / and shall be mocked / and despytefullye entreated / and spytted on:
and when they have scourged him, they will put him to death, math. xvi. b and.
xvii. b. Mark. ix. a
and the third day he shall rise again. Luke. ii. g and. ix. f
And they understood none of these things. And this saying was hyd from them
/ so that they perceived not the things which were spoken.

Math. xx. b Mark. x. d.
And it came to pass / that as he was come nygh unto Hierico, a certain
blind man Mark. x. ^
thou son of David, have mercy on me. And Jesus stood still, and commanded him
to be brought unto him. And when he was come near / he asked him, saying:
what will thou that I do unto the?

And he said: Lord, that I may receive my sight. And Jesus said unto him:
receive thy sight: thy faith has saved the. And immedyatly he received his
sight, and followed him, praysynge god. And all the people, when they saw it,
gave praise unto God.

Of ^atheus, and the ten servants to whom the talentes were delivered. Christ
rydeth to Jerusalem, and wepeth over it.

CAPI. XIX.
ANd he entered in, and went through Ierico. (...), (...)
received him joyfully. And when they saw it / they all grudged / saying, He
is gone in to tarry / with a man that is a sinner.

And Zache stood forth / and said unto the

Jesus said unto him: this day is health happened unto this house / because
that he also is become the child of Abraham. Math. xv^
For the son of man is come to seek / and to save that which was lost.

And as they herd these things / he added thereto / a parable, because he was
nygh to Jerusalem / and because they thought / that the kingdom of God should
shortly appear.

He said therefore: Math. (...). ^. Mat. xi. ^
A certain noble man went in to a far country, to receive him a kingdom /
and to come again. And he called his ten servants / and delivered them ten
pound / saying unto them: Occupye / till I come. But his citizens hated him /
and sent a message after him, saying: we will not have this man to reygne over
us.

And it came to pass, that when he had received Mat. xxv. ^
Well thou good servant: because thou have ben faithful in a very little thing
/ have thou auctorite over ten cities. And an other came, saying: Lord, thy
pound has made five pound. And to the same he said: be thou also ruler over
five cities.

And an other came / saying: Lord, behold here is thy pound / which I have
kept in a napkyn: for I feared the, because thou art a strayte man: y^ take
up that thou laydest not down / and rea^est that thou dyddest not ^Regu^. i. c
Math. xii. d
Of thine own mouth / will I judge the, thou evil servant. Knew thou that
I am a strayte man, taking up that I laid not down / and reapyng that I did
not sow? And wherefore gave not thou my money in to the bank / and at my
coming I might have required mine own with vauntage. And he said unto them
that stood by: take from him that pound / and give it him that has ten
pound. And they said unto him: Lord, he has ten pound. For I say unto you
/ that Mat. xiii. b and. xxv. ^ Mat. iiii. c. Luke. viii. c
unto every one which has, shall be given (and he shall have abundance) and
from him that has not shall be taken away, even that which he has.

Moreover, those mine enemies / (which

Math. xxi. a. Mark. xi a
And when he had thus spoken, he proceeded forth: taking his journey, to go up
to Jerusalem. math. xxi. ^. Mark. xi. a
And it fortuned when he was come nygh to Bethphage and Bethany, besides the
mount which is called Oliuete / he sent two of his discyples / saying: go ye
in to the town^ / which is over against you: In to the which as soon as ye
are come, ye shall find an asses colte tied / whereon yet never man sat. Loose
him, and bring him hither. And if any man ask you, why do ye loose him? thus
shall ye say unto him: the lord has need thereof. They that were sent / went
their way, and found / even as he had said unto them. And as they were a
losyng the colte, the owners thereof said unto them / why loose ye the colte*
And they said: for the Lord has need of him.

And they brought him to Jesus, and cast math. xxi. b. Luke. 13. g and. xix. b
Mark. xi. b John^. xii. b Psalm. 118. d
Blessed be the king that comes in the name of the Lord: peace in heaven, and
glory in the highest. And some of the Pharyses of the company said unto him:
Master / rebuke thy discyples. He said unto them: I tell you, that if these
hold their peace, Abacu^. ii ^
then shall the stones cry.

And when he was come near, he beheld John^. xi. ^
wept on it, saying: If thou had known those things which belong unto
thy peace, even in this thy day thou would take heed. But now are they hyd
from thine eyes. For the days shall come upon the, Iere. ^ii. ^ Math. 24 ^
that thine enemies also shall cast a bank about the, and compass the round,
and keep the in on every side, and make the even with the ground, and thy
children which are in the.

And miche iii. ^. Mat. xiii. ^ Luke. xxi. a.
they shall not leave in the, one stone upon an other, because thou know not
the time of thy visitacyon. math. xxi b. Mark. xi. ^. John^. ii. c
And he went in to the temple, and began to cast out them that sold therein,
and them that bought, saying unto them: It is written: 4. Re. ^. d. e Esai.
lvi. c
my house is the house of prayer: but ye have Iere. vii. c
made it a den of thieves: And he taught daily in the temple.

John^. vii. d Mark. xi. c. Luke. xx. c and. xxii. ^
But the high Priests and the scrybes and the cheyfe of the people went
about to destroy him: and could not find what to do. For all the people
stacke by him, when they herd him.

They ask Christ one questyon, and he asks them an other. The parable of the
vineyarde. Of trybute to be given unto Caesar, and how Christ stops the
mouths of the Saduces.

CAPI. XX.
ANd it fortuned in one of those days

math. xxii. c Mark. xi. ^
Tell us: by what auctorite do thou these things? Either who is he, that
gave the this auctorite? Jesus answered, and said unto them: I also will ask
you one thing / and answer me. The Baptyme of John^: was it from heaven or of
men? And they thought with in them selves, saying: if we say from heaven, he
will say: why then byleued ye him not? But and if we say: of men, all the
people will stoone us. For they be persuaded / that John^ is a Prophet. And
they answered, that they could not tell whence it was. And Jesus said unto
them: neither tell I you / by what auctoryte I do these things.

Then began he to put forth to the people Mat. xxi. d. Mar. xii. a. Esai. v. a
Genesi. ix. c Iere. vii. c
A certain man planted avyne yearde, and let it forth to husband men, and
went him self in to a strange country for a great season. And when the time
was come, he sent a servant to the husband men, that they should give him of
the fruit of the vyneyearde. And they bet him, and sent him, away emptye. And
again, he sent yet an other servant. And him they did beat, and entreated
him shamefully, and sent him away emptye. Again, he sent the third also, and
him they wounded, and cast him out. Then said the Lord of the vyneyarde: what
shall I do? John^. iii. b. ^om. viii a Gala. iiii. ^
I will send my dear son: per adventure they will stand in awe of him /
when they se him.

But when the husband men saw him / Gene. 27. c. Math. xxi d Math. xii. ^
come / let us kill him, that the enheritaunce may be ours. And they cast him
out of the vyneyearde, and killed him. What shall the Lord of the vyneyard
therefore do unto them? He shall come, and destroy these husband men, and shall
let out his vineyarde to other. When they herd this, they said: God forbid.
And he beheld them / and said: what is this then that is written: Psalm. ^^8.
t. Math. xxi d Mat. xii. ^.
The stoone that the buylders refused, the same is become the head of the
corner? Who soever does stomble upon that stone, shall be broken: but on
whomsoever it falls, it will grynde him to powder. And the high priests and
the Scribes the same hour went about to lay hands on him, Math. xxi d Mark.
xi ^ Luke. xix. s.
and they feared the people. For they perceived that he had spoken this
similitude against them?

And they watched him, and sent forth spies / Mat, xxii. b Mat. xiii. b
to take him in his words, and to deliver him unto the power and auctorite of
the debite. And they asked him, saying: May ster, we know that thou say and
teach right, neither consyderest thou the outward appearaunce of any man,
but teach the way of God truly. Is it lawful for us to give tribute unto
Caesar, or no? He perceived their craftynesse, and said unto them Mat. xxii ^.
Mat. xii. ^.
: why tempte ye me? Show me a penny. Whose image / and superscrypcyon has it?
They answered and said: Cesars. And he said unto them, give then unto Caesar,
the things which belong unto Caesar: and to God the things that pertayne unto
God. And they could not reprove his saying before the people: and they
meruayled at his answer, and held their peace.

Then Mat. xxii. ^. Mat. xii. b.
came to him certain of the Saduces, Acts. 23 b
which deny that there is any resurrection. And they asked him, saying: Deu.
xxv. b
Master, Moses wrote unto us, if any man's brother dye having a wife, and he
dye without children, that then his brother should take his wife, and raise up
seed unto his brother. There were therefore seven brethren, and the first took
a wife, and dyed without children. And the second took her, and he dyed
chyldelesse. And the third took her: and in likewise the residue of the seven,
and left no children behind them, and dyed. Last of all the woman dyed also.
Now in the resurrection, whose wife of them shall she be? For seven had her to
wife.

Jesus answered and said unto them. John^. (...) i. John^*
the sons of God, in as much as they are children of the resurrection. And
that the dead shall rise again: Moses also shows besides the bushe, when he
calls Erodi (...)* Mat. (...)* Mark* ^
the lord the god of Abraham, and the God of Isaac / and the God of Jacob. For
he is not a God of dead, but of living. For all live unto him. Then certain
of the Pharisees answered, and said: Master, thou have well said.

And after that durst they not ask him math. (...) Mark. ii^
How say they that Christ is David's son? And David him self says in the
book of the Psalms: Psalm. ^x^*
The Lord said unto my lord: sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine
enemies thy footstool. David therefore calls him lord: and how is he then
his son? Then in the audience of all the people, he said unto his disciples:
mat. (...) Mark. x^^
beware of the Scrybes / which will go in long clothing: and love gretynges
in the markettes, and the highest seats in the synagoges, and the cheyfe
rowmes at feasts, which devour wydowes houses, faynynge long prayers: the
same shall receive greater damnacyon.

Christ commends the poor wydowe: tells of the destruccyon of Jerusalem.
Of false teachers: of the tokens, and troubles for to come: of the end of the
world, and of his own coming.

CAPI. XXI.
AS he beheld, Mark. x^i^.
he saw the rich men, i. Corin. (...)*
that this poor wydowe has put in more then they all. For they al have of
their superfluyte added unto the offerynges of God: but she, of her penurye
has cast in all the substance that she had.

And unto some that spoke of the temple, how it was garnysshed with goodly
stones and Jewels, he said. mat. xxii^^. ^ Mar. xiii. ^
The days will come / in the which (of these things which ye se) there shall
not be left one stone upon an other that shall not be thrown down. And they
asked him, saying: Master, when shall these things be, and what sign will
there be when sothe things shall come to pass?

And he said: ^ollos ii. b. Ephesi. v. b
take heed, that ye be not deceived. For Iohsi. 4. a
many shall come in my name and say that they are Christ: and the time Esai.
xix. a. Esdr. 13 c
Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and great
earthquakes shall be in all places, and hunger, and pestylence, and fearful
things. And great signs shall there be from heaven.

But before all these, Math. x. b Mat. xiii. b John^. xvi. a
they shall lay hands on you, and persecute you, delyuerynge you up to the
Synagoges, and into prysons Erod. iiii. d Math. x. ^
I will give you a mouth and wisdom, where against, al your adversaries Acts.
vi. t
shall not be able to speak nor resyst. Moreover ye shall be M^th. vii. b
betrayed of your fathers and mothers, and brethren, and kynsfolke, and
friends, and some of you shall they put to death. And hated shall ye be of al
men for my names sake, and there shall not one here of your head perysshe.
Possess ye your soul by patience.

mat. xxiiii. b Mat. xiii. b Deui. ix. g
And when ye se Jerusalem beseyged with an host, then be sure that the
desolacion of the same is nygh. The^ let them which i. Ehe^. ii. d
wrath over all this people. And they shall fall through the edge of the
sword, and shall be led away captyue in to al nations. And Jerusalem shall be
trodden down of the Gentyls, until the time of the gentyls be fulfilled.

Mat. xxiiii. t Mat. xiii. c. ^oc^^. ii. t.
And there shall be signs in the Son and in the Moon, and in the sterres: and
in Ezeche 38. f
the people shall be at their wits end, through despair. The sea and the
water shall rore, and men's hertes shall fail them for fear, and for lokynge
after those things which shall come on the earth. For the powers of heaven
shall move. And then shall they se the son of man come in a cloud with power
and great glory.

When these things begin to come to

mat. xxiiii e Mat. xiii. ^
And he showed them a similitude: behold the fygge tree, and all the trees when
they shut forth their buddes, ye se and know of your own selves, that summer
is then nyghe at hand. So likewise ye also (when ye se these things come to
pass) be sure, that the kingdom of God is nyghe. Uerely I say unto you: this
generation shall not pass, till al be fulfilled. Heaven and earth shall pass
but my words shall not pass.

Ecclesi. 31. ^ ^. xxxvi^. t. Rom xiii. d
Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hertes be overcome with
surfettyng and dronkennes, and cares of this life, mat. xxiiii d Mat. xiii. ^
Watch ye therefore contynually, and pray, that ye may escape all these
things that shall come, and that ye may stand before the son of man.

In the day time, he taught in the temple: and at night, he went out, and
abode in the mount that is called Olyuete. John^. viii ^
And all the people came in the morning to him in the temple, for to hear him.

Christ is betrayed. They eat the Eastet lamb. The institucyon of the
sacrament. They strive who shall be greatest / he reproves them: He prays
three times upon the mount. They take him, and bring him to the high priests
house: Peter denies him thryse, ^ they bring him before the counsel.

CAPI. XXII.
THe mat. x^vi. ^ Mat xii^i ^
feast of sweet bread drew nygh, John^. vii. d
sought how they might kyl him, for they feared the people.

John^. xiii. ^
Then entered Satan in to Judas, whose sir name was Iscarioth (which was of the
nombre of the twelve) and he went his way and comoned with the high Priests
and officers, how he might betraye him unto them. And they were glad, and
promised to give him money.

And he consented, and sought oportunyte to betraye him unto them, when the
people were away. mat. xxvi. b mat. xiiii. ^
Then came the day of sweet bread, when of necessyte Passover must be
offered. And he sent Peter and John^ saying: Go and prepare us the Passover,
that we may eat. they said unto him. Where will thou, that we prepare?

And he said unto them: Behold, when

and lamented him. But Jesus turned back unto them, and said: Ye daughters of
Jerusalem, weep not for me: but weep for yourselues, and for your children. For
behold, the days will come, in the which they shall say: Esai. liiii. ^ Sapi.
i^i. c G^^^. iii^. d
happy are the bareyne and the wombes that never bare, and the pappes which
never gave suck. Then shall they begin to say to the mountains, fall on us:
and to the hills, cover us. For if they do this in a grene tree, what shall be
done in the dry? And there were two evil doers led with him to be slain.

Mat. 27. d. Mark. xv. c John^. xxi. d
And after that they were come to the place (which is called Caluarye) there
they cruci^^ed him, and the evil doers, one on the right hand, and the other
on the left. Then said Jesus: Father forgive them, for they wot not what
they do. Mat. 27. d. Mat. xv. c Psalm. xxii. d
And they parted his raiment / and cast lottes. And the people stood, and
beheld.

And the rulers mocked him with them,

Mat* 27. d. John^* xix. d
And a superscripcyon was written over him, with letters of Greek, and Latin,
and Ebrue. This is the king of the Iues. And one of the evil doers which
were hanged, rayled on him, saying. If thou be Christ, save thy self and us.
But the other answered, Math. 27. ^ Math. xv. ^
and rebuked him, saying: Fear thou not God, seeing thou art in the same
damnacyon? We are ryghteously punysshed, for we receive according to our deeds.
But this man has done nothing amysse. And he said unto Jesus: Lord remember
me, when thou come in to thy kingdom. And Jesus said unto him: Uerely I say
unto the: to day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Math. ^7. ^ Math. xv. c
And it was about the syxte hour. And there was darkness over all the earth,
until the nynth hour and the son was darkened. Math. 27. ^ Math. xv d
And the veil of the temple did rent, even through the mids. And when Jesus
had cried with a loud voice, he said.

Father, in to thy hands I commend my Math. 27. ^ Man. xv. d.
had happened, he glorified God / saying. Uerely, this was a ryghteous man.
And all the people that came together to that sight, and saw the things
which had happened, smote their breasts, and returned.

And al his acquayntaunce, Math. 27. ^ Man. xv. d.
and the women that followed him from Galtle, stood a far of, beholdynge these
things.

And behold, Mat. (...) M^^ (...) John^* ^^Sapn^^
there was a man (named Joseph) a counselor, and he was a good man and a
just: the same had not consented to the counsel and deed of them, which was of
Aramathia, a city of the Iues, which same also waited for the kingdom of
God: he went unto Pylate, and begged the body of Jesus and took it down, and
wrapped it in a lynnen cloth, and laid it in a sepulcre that was hewn in
stone, wherein never man before was laid.

And that day was the preparynge of the Sabbath, and the Sabbath drew on. The
women that followed after, which had come with him from Galile, beheld the
sepulcre, and how his body was laid. And they returned and prepared sweet
odours and oyntmentes: but rested the Sabbath day, according to the
commandment.

The women come to the grave. Christ apeareth unto the two dyscyples that go
toward Emaus, stands in the myddest of all his dyscyples, opens their
vnderstandyn^e in the Scripture, gives them a charge, and ascends up to
heaven.

CAPI. XXIIII.
BUt upon the first day of the Sabbothes, (...)
Math. (...)* Man. (...) John^. ^^Sapn^^
very early in the morning, they came unto the sepulcre, and brought the sweet
odoures which they had prepared, and other women with them. And they found
the stone rolled away from the Seulcre, and they went in: but found not the
body of the Lord Jesus.

And it happened, as they were amassed thereat: Behold, two men stood by them in
shynynge garments. Math. (...). ^ Mat. ^^Sapn^^
And as they were afraid* and bowed down their faces to the earth they said
unto them: Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not here, but is
risen. Remember, how he spoke unto you, when he was yet in Galile, saying,
that the son of man must be delivered in to the hands of sinful men, and be
crucyfyed, and the third day arise again.

And they remembered his words, and returned from the Sepulcre, and told al
these things unto those eleven, and to all the remenaunt. Math. 2^. ^. Man.
(...)*
It was Mary Magdalen, and Ioanna, and Mary Iacobi, and other that were with
them, which told these things unto the apostles. And their words seemed unto
them feigned things, neither byleued they them. Then arose Peter and tan unto
the Sepulcre, and looked in, and saw the lynnen clothes laid by them self,
and departed, wondering in him self at that which had happened.

^at. xv^. ^.
And behold, two of them went that same day to a town (called Emaus) which
Math. 1^. c
and went with them. But their eyes were holden, that they should not know
him. And he said unto them: What manner of comunicacions are these that ye have
one to an other, as ye walk and are sad? And the one of them (whose name was
Cleophas) answered, and said to him: art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem,
and have not known the things which have chaunsed there, in these days? He
said unto them: what things. And they said unto him: of Jesus of Nazareth,
which was a prophet, mighty in deed and word before God, and all the people:
and how the high priests, and our rulers delivered him to be condemned to
death: and have crucified him. But we trusted that it had been he, which
should have redeemed Israel. And as touching all these things, to day is
even the third day, that they were done.

^^ke. (...). ^. John^ xx. ^
Yea, and certain women also of our company made us astonyed, which came
early unto the sepulcre, and found not his body: and came, saying, that they
had sen^ a vision of angels, which said that he was alive. And certain of
them which were with us, went to the sepulcre, and found it even so, as the
women had said: but him they saw not.

And he said unto them. O fools and slow Mat xxvi. ^ Es^^. liii ^
Ought not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter in to his glory?
And he began at Moses, and all the prophettes and interpreted unto them in all
scriptures, which were written of him. And they drew nygh unto the town,
which they went unto. And he made, as though he would have gone further. And
they ^ene. (...). ^ (...). x^iii. ^
constrained him saying: abide with us, for it draws toward night and the
day is far past. And he went in, to tarry with them. ^^^. xv. b*
And it came to pass, as he sat at meat with them, he took bread, and
blessed it, and brake, and gave to them. And their eyes were opened, and they
knew him: and he vanysshed out of their sight. And they said between
themselves: did not our hertes burn within us, while he talked with us by the
way, and opened to us the scryptures? And they rose up the same hour, and
returned again to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and them
that were with them, saying: the Lord is tysen in deed and has appeared to
Simon. And they told what things were done in the way, and how they knew
him* in breakyng of bread.

As they thus spoke, Jesus him self John^. xx. ^
the mids of them, and says un to them: peace be unto you, (It is I, fear
not) But they were abashed and afraid, and supposed that they had seen a
spirit, and he said unto them: Why are ye troubled: or why do thoughts arise
in your hertes? Behold my hands and my fete, that it is even I my self
Handle me and se: for a spirit has not flesh and bones, as ye se me have.
And when he had thus spoken, he showed them his hands, and his fete. And while
they yet byleued not for joy, and wondered, he said unto them: John^. xx^ ^
Have ye here any meat? And they offered him a piece of a broyled fysshe, and
of a honey comb* And he took it, and did eat before them.

And he said unto them. Mat. xvi. ^*
These are the words which I spoke unto you, while I was yet with you: that
all must needs be fulfilled, which were written of me in the law of Moses and
in the Prophettes, and in the Psalms.

(...). 17. ^
Then opened he their wits, that they might understand the scryptures, and
said (...)
But tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on
high And he led them out in to Bethany, and lift up his hands, and blessed
them. Mat. xvi* ^ (...)
And it came to pass, as he blessed them, he departed from them, and was
carried up in to heaven. And they worshypped him, and returned to Jerusalem with
great joy, and were contynually in the temple, praysyng, and laudyng God.

Amen. Here ends the Gospel of Saint Luke.
The Gospel of Saint John^.
The everlasting birth of Christ, and how he became man. The testymony of
John^. The calling of Andrewe, Peter. etc.

CAPI. Primo.
IN the beginning was Genesis. i a Prouer. 8 d
All things were made by it, and without it, was made no thing that was made.
John^. 14. b
In it was life, and the life was the John^ vi^i b and* ix. a.
light of men, and the light shyneth in darkness, and the darkness comprehended
it not.

There was sent from God a man, whose name was John^. The same came as a wytnes
to bear wytnes of the light, that al men through him might believe. John^. v. d
He was not that light: but was sent to bear wytnes of the light. That light
was the true light, which lyghteth every man that comes into the world. He
was in the world, and the world was made by him: and the world knew him not.
He came among his own, and his own received him not. But as many as received
him, Esai. lvi. b. Osee. i. b Roma. i. b Gala. i^i. a
to them gave he power to be the sons of God: even them that byleued on his
name: which were borne, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor yet
of the will of man: but of God.

And the same word became flesh, and Mat. 27. a. ^. Peter. i. c i. John^. i.
a.
and we saw the glory of it, as the glory of the only begotten son of the
father, full of grace and truth.

Math. iii. b Mark. i. a
John^ bears wytnes of him, and cries, saying: This was he of whom I
spoke: which though he came after me, went before me, for he was before me.
Collos. ii. b.
And of his fulness have al we received, even grace for grace. For the law was
given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. Grods. 33. d ^.
John^. 4 b
No man has seen God at any time. The only begotten son, which is in the
bosom of the father, he has declared him.

John^. v. d
And this is the record of John^: when the Iues sent priests and Levites from
Jerusalem, to ask him, what art thou. And he confessed and denied not, and
said plainly: I am not Christ. And they asked him: what then? Math. xi. ^.
Art thou Elias? And he says: I am not, Deuteronomy. 18. c
Art thou that Prophet? And he answered no. The^ said they unto him: what art
thou, that we may give an answer to them that sent us. What say thou of
thy self? He said, Math. ^ Mark Luke. ^^
I am the voice of a crier in the wyldernes, make straight the way of the
Lord, Esai. xi*
as said the prophet Esaias.

And they which were sent, were of the Math* ^ Mark Luke. (...) A^tes. ^^
I baptyse with water: but there stands one among you, who^ ye know not, he
it is which though he came after me, was before me, whose shoo latchet I am not
worthy to unloose. These things were done in Bethabara beyond Jordan John^. ^
and* x. ^.
where John^ did baptyse.

The next day, John^ sees Jesus coming unto him, and says, Esai. (...) i.
Lord* ^*
behold the lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world. This is
he of whom I said: After me comes a man, which went before me, for he was
before me, and I knew him not: but that he should be declared to Israel,
therefore am I come baptysyng with water.

Math* (...) Mark ^ Luke. (...). ^
And John^ bare record, saying: I saw the spirit descend from heaven, like
unto a dove, and abode upon him, and I knew him not. But he that sent me to
baptyse in water, the same said unto me: upon whom thou shalt se the spirit
descend, and tarry still on him, the same is he which baptyseth with the holy
ghost. And I saw, and bare record, that he is the son of god.

The next day after, John^ stood again, and two of his disciples. And he
beheld Jesus as he walked by, and says: behold the lamb of God. And the
two disciples herd him speak, and they followed Jesus. And Jesus turned
about, and saw them follow him, and says unto them: what seek ye? They
said unto him: Rabbi (which is to say if one interpret it, Master) where
dwell thou? He says unto them: Come and se. They came, and saw where he
dwelte: and abode with him that day. For it was about the tenth hour. One of
the two which herd John^ speak, and followed him, was Andrewe Simon Peter's
brother. The same found his brother Simon first, and says unto him: we have
found Messiah (which is by interpretacyon, anointed) and brought him to
Jesus. And Jesus beheld him, and said: thou art Mat. xvi. ^.
Simon the son of Jonas, thou shalt be called Cephas: which is by
interpretacyon, a stone.

The day following Jesus would go into John^. xii. ^
Philip was of Bethsaida the city of Andrewe and Peter. Philip found
Nathanael, and says unto him: We have found him, of whom (...). iii c ^x^i* c
Moses in the law and the (...). 18. ^ (...)* vii. c
Prophettes did write, Jesus the son of Joseph of Nazareth.

And Nathanaell said unto him. (...). vii. c
Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? Philip says unto him, Come
and se.

Jesus saw Nathanaell coming to him, and says of him? Behold a right
Israelyte, in whom is no gyle. Nathanaell says unto him: whence know thou
me? Jesus answered, and said unto him. Before that Philip called the, when thou
wast under the fygge tree, I saw the. Nathanael answered and said unto him:
Rabbi, thou art even the very son of god, thou art the king of Israel.
Jesus answered, and said unto him: Because I said unto the, I saw the under
the fygge tree, thou byleuest. Thou shalt se greater things then these. And
he says unto him. Uerely verily, I say unto you: hereafter shall ye se heaven
open, and the angels of God ascendynge and descendyng over the son of man.

Christ turns the water in to wine, and dryueth the buyers and sellers out of
the temple.

CAPI. II.
ANd the third day, was there a marriage Luka ii. ^
what have I to do with the, mine hour is not yet come His mother says unto
the ministers: what soever he says unto you, do it. And there were standing
there. vi. waterpot^es of stone after the manner of the purifieng of the Iues
containing two or three fyrkyns a piece.

Jesus says unto them: fill the water pottes with water. And they filled them
up to the brym. And he says unto them: draw out now, and bear unto the
gouernoure of the feast. And they bare it. When the ruler of the feast had
tasted the water that was turned unto wine, and knew not whence it was (But the
ministers which drue the water knew) He calls the brydegrome, and says un
to him: Every man at the beginning does set forth good wine, and when men be
drunk, then that which is worse. But thou have kept the good wine, until
now.

This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galile, and showed his glory,
and his disciples byleued on him. Mat. iiii. b. Mark. i. b Luke. iiii. d
After this he went down to Capernaum, he and his mother, and his brethren,
and his disciples, and there continued not many days.

Mat. xxi. ^. Mark. xi. c Luke. xix. ^.
And the Iues easter was even at hand and Jesus went up to Jerusalem, and
found sitting in the temple, those that sold oxen and sheep, and doves, and
chaungers of money. And when he had made (as it were) a scourge of small
coordes, he drove them all out of the temple, with the sheep and oxen, and
powered out the chaungers of money, and overthrew the tables, and said unto them
that sold doves: Have these things hence, and make not my fathers house an
house of marchaundyse And his disciples remembered it that is written: Psalm. 79. b
the zele of thine house has even eaten me.

Then answered the Iues, and said unto Mat. xvi. f. Mar. xi^^i. f
destroy this temple, and in three days I will tear it up.

Then said the Iues. xlvi. years was this temple a buyldyng: and wylt thou
rear it up in three days? But he spoke of the temple of his body. As soon
therefore as he was risen from death again, his disciples remembered that he
thus had said. And they byleued the scripture, and the words which Jesus had
said. When he was in Jerusalem at Easter in the feast day, many byleued on
his name, when they saw his miracles which he did. But Jesus did not commyt
him self unto them, because he knew all men, and neded not, that any man
should testify of him, Iere. xvii. d Revels. i. d.
For he knew what was in man.

The co^municacyon of Christ with Ni^ddem^s. The doctrine and baptym of John^,
and what wytnes he teareth of Christ

CAPI. III.
THere was a man of the pharisees named John^. vii. ^
The same came to Jesus by night, and said unto him: Rabbi, we know that thou
art a teacher come from god: for no man could do such miracles as thou
do, except God were with him. Jesus answered and said unto him. Uerely,
verily I say unto the: except a man be borne from above, he can not se the
kingdom of God. Nicodemus says unto him, how can a man be borne when he is
old? Can he enter in to his mothers womb and be borne again? Jesus answered
John^. iiii. ^ and. vii. d Titu^. ^ii. ^.
Uerely, verily, I say unto the: except a man be borne of water and of the
spirit, he can not enter in to the kingdom of God. Roma. ^. a.
That which is borne of the flesh, is flesh, and that which is borne of
the spirit, is spirit. Marvel not thou that I said to the, ye must be
borne from above.

The wind blows where it lysteth, and Ecclesi. xi. a
but can not tell whence it comes and whyther it goes. So is every one that
is borne of the spirit.

Nycodemus answered and said unto him how can these things be? Jesus answered
and said unto him: art thou a master in Israel, and know not these
things? Uerely verily, I say unto the: We speak that we do know, and
testify that we have seen: and ye receive not our witness. If I have told
you earthly things, and ye believe not: how shall ye believe if I tell you of
heavenly things. Ephe. iiii. a
And no man ascends up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the
son of man which is in heaven. Nume. xxi ^
And as Moses lift up the serpent in the wilderness, even so must the son of
man be lift up, that who soever byleueth in him, peryshe not but have eternal
life.

Roma. v. a.
For God so loved the world, that he Luke. xix. ^
For God sent not his son in to the world, to condemn the world, but that
the world through him might be saved. He that byleueth on him, is not
condemned. But he that byleueth not, is condemned all ready, because he has not
byleued in the name of the only begotten son of God. And this is the
condemnacyon, John^. i. ^. and. xii. ^.
that light is come in to the world, and men loved darkness more then light,
because their deeds were evil. For Ephe. v. b
every one that evil does, hates the light: neither comes to the light
leest his deeds should be reproved. But he that does truth, comes to the
light, that his deeds may be known, how that they are wrought in God.

After these things came Jesus and his John^. iiii. a Math. iii a Mark. i. a
Luke. iii a
and baptized. And John^ also baptized in Enan beside Salim, because there was
much water there, and they came and were baptized. Mat, iiii. b.
For John^ was not yet cast in to prison.

And there arose a questyon between Iohn^s disciples and the Iues, about
purifienge. And they came unto John^, and said unto him: Rabbi, he that was
with the beyond Jordan (to whom thou barest wytnes) behold, the same
baptiseth, John^. iiii. a
and all men come to him, John^ answered, and said: A man can receive nothing,
except it be given him from heaven. Ye your selves are witnesses, John^. i. b
how that I said: I am not Christ, but am sent before him. He that has the
bryde, is the brydegrome. But the friend of the brydegrome, which stands,
and hears him, reioyseth greatly because of the bryde gromes voice. This my
joy therefore is fulled. He must encreace: but I must decreace.

He that comes from on high, is above al: Roma ^xi ^
has set to his seal, that God is true. For he whom God has sent, speaks
the words of God: Esai. ^xi ^
For God gives not the spirit by measure unto him. The father loves the
son Math. xi. ^ Luke. x. d
and has given all things into his hand. John^. vi. ^ i. John^. ^^
He that byleueth on the son has everlasting life: He that byleueth not the
son, shall not se life, but the wrath of God abides on him.

The loving co^municacyon of Christ with the woman of Samaria by the wells
syds, How he heals the rulers son.

CAPI. IIII.
AS soon as the Lord knew, how the Mat. ii^. d
he left Iuery, and departed again in to Galile. For it was so that he must
needs go through Samaria. Then came he to a city of Samaria (which is called
Sichar) besides, the possessyon Gene. 48^
that Jacob gave to his son Joseph, and there was Jacobs well. Jesus then
being werye of his journey, sat thus on the well. And it was about the syxte
hour: and there came a woman of Samaria to draw water. Jesus says unto her,
give me drink. For his disciples were gone away unto the town, to bye meat.
Then says the woman of Samaria unto him: how is it, that thou being a Iue,
ask drink of me, which am a Samaritane? 4. Res. (...) d John^. ^. ^
For the Iues meddle not with the Samaritans.

Jesus answered and said unto her: if Ie^e. ii. ^ John^ vii. ^
the water of life. The woman says unto him: Sir, thou have nothing to draw
with, and the well is deep: from whence then have thou that water of life? Art
thou greater then our father Jacob which gave us the well, and he him self
drank thereof, and his children, and his cattle? Jesus answered, and said
unto her: who soever drynketh of this water, shall thyrst again. But who soever
drynketh of the water that I shall give him shall never be more a thyrst: but the
water that I shall give him, shall be in him a well of water, spryngynge up in
to everlasting life.

The woman says unto him: Sir, give me of that water, that I thyrst not,
neither come hither to draw. Jesus says unto her: Go call thy husband, and
come hither. The woman answered, and said unto him: I have no husband. Jesus
said unto her: Thou have well said I have no husband. For thou haste had
five husbands, and he whom thou now have, is not thy husband. In that
saydest thou truly.

The woman says unto him: Luke, vii. b
Sir, I 3. Reg. ix. a. ii. Para. 7 c
and ye says that in Jerusalem is the place, where men ought to worship. Jesus
says unto her: woman believe me, the hour comes, when ye shall (neither in
this mountain / nor yet at Jerusalem) worship the father. Ye worship ye
wot not what: we know what we worship. Exodi. xxi. ^
For salvation comes of the Iues. But the hour comes and now is, when the
true worshyppers shall worship the father Roma. i. a
in spirit, and in the truth. For soche the father also requires to
worship him ^. Corin. iii ^
God is a spirit: and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and
in the truth.

The woman says unto him: I wot / mat. xxii. ^, Mat. xiii. ^ Luke. xxii. ^
John^. ix. d and. x. c
I that speak unto the am he. And immediately came his disciples, and meruayled
that he talked with the woman. Yet no man said: What meanest thou or why
talkest thou with her? The woman then left her waterpot, and went her way in
to the city, and says to the men: Come, se a man which told me all things
that ever I did. Is not he christ? Then they went out of the city, and came
unto him.

In the mean while his disciples prayed him, saying: Master, eat. He said
unto them: I have meat to eat, that ye know not of. Therefore said the
disciples among them selves: has any man brought him ought to eat? Jesus
says unto them: my meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to
fynisshe his work. Say not ye: there are yet four months / and then
comes harvest? Behold I say unto you: lift up your eyes / and look on the
regyons: for they are white

Math. ix. b Luke. x. a.
And he that reapeth, receives reward, and gathers fruit unto life
eternal: that both he that sows, and he that reapeth / might rejoice
together. And herein is the saying true, that one sows and an other reapeth.
I sent you to reap whereon ye bestowed no labor. Other men labored, and ye
are entered in to their labors.

Many of the Samaritans of that city byleued on him, for the saying of the
woman, which testified that he told her all that ever she did. So, when the
Samaritans were come unto him, they besought him, that he would tarry with them.
And he abode there two days. And many mo byleued because of his own words,
and said unto the woman. Now we believe, not because of thy saying: for Ioh.
xvii. b
we have herd him our selves, and know that this is even Christ, the sauyoure
of the world.

After two days he departed thence, and Mat. xiii. g Math vi. a Luke. i^^^. ^.
For Jesus himself testified / that a Prophet has noone honor in his own
country. Then, as soon as he was come in to Galile, the Galileans received
him, when they had seen all the things that he did at Jerusalem at the day of
the feast.

For they went also unto the feast day, So Jesus came again into Cana of
Galile John^. ii. a
where he turned the water in to wine.

And there was a certain ruler, Mat. viii. a Luke. vii. a
whose soune was sick at Capernaum. As soon as the same herd that Jesus was
come out of Iurye in to Galile, he went unto him, and besought him, that he
would come down / and heal his son. For he was even at the point of death.
Then said Jesus unto him: except ye se signs and wonders, ye will not believe.
The ruler says unto him: Sir / come down, or ever that my son dye.

Jesus says unto him: Go thy way, thy

Then enquired he of them the hour when he began to amend. And they said
unto him: Yester day at the seventh hour, the fever left him. So the father
knew, that it was the same hour / in the which Jesus said unto him: Thy
son lives. Acts. 18. ^
And he byleued, and all his household. This is again the second miracle,
that Jesus did, when he was come out of Iuery in to Galile

He heals the man that was sick eight and thyrtye year. The Iues accuse
him: he answers for him self, and reproves them.

(...)

Then said they unto him: Lord, ever more give us this bread. And Jesus
said unto them. I am the bread of life. He that comes to me shall not
hunger, and he that byleueth on me shall never thyrst.

But I said unto you: that ye also have seen me, and yet ye believe not. All
that the father gives me shall come to me: and him that comes to me, I cast
not a way. For I came down from heaven: Luke. xxii. e
not to do that I will / but that he will, which has sent me. And this is the
fathers will which has sent me / that of all which he has given me, I shall
loose nothing: but raise them up again at the last day. And this is the will
of him that sent me: that every one which sees the son / John^. v. ^
and byleueth on him / have everlasting life. And I will raise him up at the
last day The Iues then murmured at him, because he said: I am that bread (of
life) which came down from heaven.

And they said: Mat. xiii. ^ Mark. vi. ^
Is not this Jesus the soune of Joseph, whose father and mother

John^. vii. ^
No man can come to me, except the father which has sent me, draw him: And I
will raise him up at the last day. It is written in the Prophettes: Esai.
iiiii. d ^. John^. ii. d
and they shall be all taught of God. Every man therefore that has herd, and
has learned of the father / comes unto me. Erodi. 33. d Drut. iiii. d
Iuditu^. vi^ and. ^iii. d John^. i. c ^. Ioh iiii. b
Not that any man has seen the father, save he which is of God: the same has
seen the father. Uerely, verily I say unto you, he that puts his trust in me
/ has everlasting life. I am that bread of life. Your fathers did eat Manna
in the wilderness, and are dead? This is that bread / which comes down
from heaven, that a man may eat thereof, and not dye. I am that living bread,
which came down from heaven. If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for
ever. Luke, xxii.
And the bread that I will give / is my flesh, which I will give for the
life of the world.

The Iues therefore strove among themselves,

For my flesh is meat in deed: and my blood is drink in deed. He that
eats my flesh and drynketh my blood, dwells in me, and I in him. As the
living father has sent me, and I live for the father: Even so he that eats
me, shall live by the means of me. This is that bread, which came down from
heaven: not as your fathers did eat Man na, and are dead. He that eats of
this bread / shall live ever.

These things said he in the synagoge, as he taught in Capernaum. Many
therefore of his discyples (when they had herd this) John^. vii ^
no man can come unto me, except it were given unto him of my father.

From that time many of his disciples went back, and forsook him, and walked
no more with him. Then said Jesus to the twelve: will ye also go away? Then
Simon Peter answered him: Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou haste the words of
eternal life Mat. xvi. ^ Mar. viii ^ Luke. i^. ^ John^. xi. ^
and we believe and are sure that thou art Christ the son of the living god.
Jesus answers them: Have not I chosen you twelve, and Luke. xxii ^ John^.
xiii. ^
one of you is a devil? He spoke of Judas Iscariot the son of Simon. For he
it was, that should betraye him, being one of the twelve.

Jesus comes to Jerusalem at the least: teaches the Iues and reproves them.
There are diverse opinyons of him among the people. The Pharyses rebuke the
officers because they have not brought him, and chyde with Nicodemus for
taking his part.

CAPI. VII.
AFter these things, Jesus went about Leui ^xxiii. ^ Number. xix. b 3. Esora. v^
ii. Mata. v.
feast of tabernacles was at hand. His brethren therefore said unto him: get
the hence, and go in to Jury / that thy discyples also may se thy works that
thou do. For there is no man that does any thing in secret / and he him
self seeks to be known openly. If thou do soch things / show thy self to
the world. For his brethren byleued not in him.

Then Jesus said unto them: My time is not yet come: but your time is always
ready. The world can not hate you. John^ xv. a
But me it hates: because I ^^stifye of it, that the works thereof are evil.
Go ye up unto this feast I will not go up yet unto this feast, for my time is
not yet full come. When he had said these words unto them, he abode still in Ga
lile. But as soon as his brethren were come then went he also up unto the
feast, not open ly: but as it were preuely.

Then sought him the Iues at the feast, John^. xi. f
where is he? And moth murmuring was there of him among the people. For some
said: Mat. xxi. d. John^. iiii. ^ and. vi. c
He is good, other said nay / but he deceyueth the people. Howbeit John^.
xii. f.
no man spoke openly of him / for fear of the Iues.

Now when half of the feast was done, Jesus went up in to the temple, and
taught. And the Iues meruayled, saying: How knows he the scryptures, seeing
that he never learned? Jesus answered them, and said: My doctrine is not mine:
but his that sent me. If any man will be obedyent unto his will / he shall know
of the doctrine, whyther it be of God, or whyther I speak of my self

He that speaks of him self, seeks his own praise. But he that seeks his
praise that sent him, the same is true, and no vnryghtwysenesse is in him.

Exodi. xx. a Deute. v. a.
Did not Moses give you a law, and yet none of you keeps the law? Why go ye
John^. v. a
I have done one work, and ye all marvel. Moses therefore gave unto you the
circumsicion: not because it is of Moses, but Eene. xvii b
of the fathers: And yet ye on the Sabbath day, circumcise a man. If a man on
the Sabbath day receive circumsicion without breakyng of the law of Moses:
disdain ye at me, because I have made a man every whyt hole on the Sabbath
day? Leuiti. xi^. ^ Dcute i. c Prove. 24 e
Judge not after the utter appearaunce, but Judge with a ryghteous iuogement.
Then said some of them of Jerusalem: is not this he / whom they go about to
kill: But ^o, he spea keth boldly, and they say nothing to him.

Do the rulers know in deed, that this is very Christ? Howbeit Mat. xiii. g
Mark. vi. a John^. vi. c
we know this man whence he is: but when Christ comes, no man knows whence
he is.

Then cried Jesus in the temple (as he And if I say that I know him not, I
shall be a liar like unto you, but I know him) for I am of him / and he has
sent me. Mark. xi. c. Luke. xi^. g. xx* ^ and xxii. ^
Then they sought to take him: but no man laid hands on him, because his
hour was not yet come. John^. 8. d
Many of the people byleued on him and said: when Christ comes, will he do mo
miracles then these, that this man has done? The Pharyses herd that the
people murmured soche things concerning him.

And the Pharisees and high Priests, Mat. xxii. ^ Mark xii. ^ Luke. xx. d
sent ministers to take him. Then said Jesus unto them: Yet am I a little while
with you, and then go I unto him that sent me. Ye shall seek me, and shall not
find me: John^. viii c and. xiii. ^
and where I am, thither can ye not come. Then said the Iues among them
selves: whyther will he go, that we shall not find him? will he go among the
Gentyls (which are scattered abroad) and teach the gentyls: What manner of
saying is this that he said: ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and
where I am, thither can ye not come?

In the last day, that great day of the feast Jesus stood, and cried, saying:
Esai i^. a
if any man chyrst, let him come unto me, and drink. He that byleueth on me
(as says the scripture) out of his belly shall flow ryuers of water of life.
But this spoke he of the spirit, which they that believe on him, should
receive. For the holy ghost was not yet there, because Jesus was not yet
glorified.

Many of the people therefore (when they John^. (...). c. and. v. b. Luke. vii. ^
of a truth this is a prophet: but other said, Mat. xxi. b.
this is Christ: But some said: shall Christ come out of Galyle: M^r^e. v. ^
Math. ii. ^.
Says not the scripture, that Christ shall come of the seed of David: and
out of the town of Bethleem where David was? So was there dissencyon among
the people because of him.

And some of them would have taken him but no man laid hands on him. The^
came the minysters to the high Priests and pharyses. And they said unto them:
why have ye not brought him? The minysters answered: never man spoke as this
man does. Then answered them the Pharyses: are ye also disceyued? Does any of
the rulers, or of the pharyses believe on him? But this common people which
know not the law, are cursed. Nicodemus says unto them, ( John^. iii. ^.
he that came to Jesus by night, and was one of them) Does our law judge any
man, before it hear him, and know what he has done? They answered, and said
unto him: art thou also of Galile? Search and look. For out of Galile aryseth
no Prophette. And every man went unto his own house.

A woman is taken in aduoutrye, Christ delyuereth her. The fredom of such as
follow Christ, whom they accuse to have the devil within him, and go about to
stone him.

CAPI. VIII.
Jesus went Mat. xxi. ^. Mark. xi. a Luke. xix. c.
unto mount Olyuete, and Luke. xx. b
Moses in the law commanded us, that soch should be stoned. But what say
thou?

This they said to tempte him, that they might accuse him. But Jesus stouped
down and with his finger wrote on the ground. So, when they continued askyng
him, he lift him self up, and said unto them: let him that is among you
without syn, cast the first stone at her. And again he stouped down / and
wrote on the ground. And as soon as they herd this, they went out one by
one, beginning at the eldest.

And Jesus was left alone, and the woman John^. v. ^
sin no more.

Then spoke Jesus again unto them / saying: John^. ^. a ^x. ^. ^. xii ^.
I am the light of the world. He that follows me, does not walk in darkness
but shall have the light of life. The Pharyses therefore said unto him: thou
bear record of thy self, thy record is not true. Jesus answered, and
said unto them: though I bear record of my self, yet my record is true:
for I know whence I came, and whyther I go. But ye can not tell whence I come,
and whyther I go. Ye judge after the flesh I judge no man. And if I judge, my
judgment is true. For I am not alone: but I and the father Number. 35. ^. Deuteronomy. 17
^. and. xix. d Math. 18. c. ii. Cori. 13. a i. Timo. v. c Hebrew. x. c
It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true. I am
one that bears witness of my self / and the father that sent me, bears
wytnes of me. Then said they unto him: where is thy father? Jesus answered: ye
neither know me, nor yet my father: If ye had known me, ye should have known
my father also. These words spoke Jesus in the treasurye, as he taught in the
temple, and no man laid hands on him, Math. v^. ^
for his hour was not yet come. Then said Jesus again unto them:

I go my way, and John^. v^^. ^ and. xiii. ^.
ye shall seek me, and shall dye in your sins. Whyther I go, thither can ye
not come. Then said the Iues: will he kill him self, because he says:
whyther I go, thither can ye not come? And he said unto them: ye are from
beneath, I am from above. Ye are of this world, I am not of this world. I
said therefore unto you, that ye shall dye in your sins. For Mat. xv^. ^
John^. ^ii. ^
if ye believe not that I am he / ye shall dye in your sins

Then said they unto him, who art thou? John^. 14. ^
And I speak in the world, those things, which I have herd of him. Howbeit
they understood not that he spoke of his father. Then said Jesus unto them:
when ye have lift up an high the son of man, then shall ye know, that I am
be / and that I do nothing of my self: but John^. ii^. d and. x^iii. b
as my father has taught me / even so I speak these things: and he that sent
me is with me. The father has not left me alone, for I do always those
things, that please him. As he spoke these words John^. vii. d
many byleued on him.

Then said Jesus to those Iues, which byleued on him: If ye continue in my
word / then are ye my very disciples, and ye shall know the truth: and the
truth shall make you free. They answered him: We be Abraham's seed, and were
never bond to any man: how say thou then: ye shall be made Rome. vi. ^ and.
viii. ^
free?

Jesus answered them: verily, verily I Rome. v^. c ii. Petr. (...). ^
who soever co^mytteth sin, is the servant of sin. And the servant
abides not in the house for ever: But the son abides ever. If the son
therefore shall make you free, then are ye free in deed. I know that ye are
Abraham's seed: but ye seek means to kill me, because my word has no place
in you. I speak that which I have seen with my father: and ye do that,
which ye have seen with your father. They answered and said unto him:
Abraham is our father. Jesus says unto them: If ye were Abraham's children, ye
would do the deeds of Abraham. But now ye go about to kill me, a man that
has told you the truth which I have herd of God: this did not Abraham. Ye
do the deeds of your father Then said they to him: we were not borne of
fornicacio^. We have one father, even god. Jesus said unto them: If God were
your father, truly ye would love me. For I proceeded forth, and came from god.
Neither came I of my self, but he sent me. Why do ye not know my speech? Even
because ye can not abide the hearing of my word.

Ye are of your father the devil, and the Gene. iii. a. i John^. iii. a
He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the truth, because
their is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie / he speaks of his own.
For he is a liar, and the father of the same thing: And because I tell you the
truth, therefore ye believe me not.

Which of you rebukes me of sin? If I say the truth, why do ye not bileue
me? John^. x. ^
He that is of God, hears gods words Ye therefore hear them not / because
ye are not of God. Then answered the Iues / and said unto him: Say we not well
/ that thou art a Samaritane, and John^. x. d
haste the devil? Jesus answered: I have not the devil: but I honor my
father / and ye have dishonored me. I seek not mine own praise: there is one
that seeks, and judges.

Uerely / verily I say unto you: if a man keep my saying / he shall never se
death.

Jesus answered: If I honor my self / mine honor is nothing. It is my
father that honors me / which ye say / is your God / and yet ye have not
known him: but I know him. And if I say, I know him not, I shall be a liar
like unto you. But I know him, and keep his saying. Your father Abraham was
glad to se my day: Gene. 17. a. and. xxii. a
and he saw it, and retoysed. Then said the Iues unto him: thou art not yet.
l. year old, and haste thou seen Abraham? Jesus said unto them. Uerely,
verily I say unto you: ere Abraham was borne E^odi. iii. d
I am John^. x. f.
. Then took they up stoones, to cast at him. But Jesus hyd him self, Luke.
iiii. e
and went out of the temple.

Christ makes the man to se, that was borne blind.

CAPI. IX.
ANd as Jesus passed by, he saw a man,

And his disciples asked him, saying: Master, who did sin, this man / or
his father and mother, that he was borne blind? Jesus answered: Neither has
this man sinned, nor yet his father and mother: but that the works of God
should be showed in him.

I must work the works of him that sent me, while it is day. The night
comes / when no man can work. As long as I am in the world, John^. ^ a.
vi^^ b. (...) ^
I am the light of the world.

As soon as he had thus spoken, he spatte Esai. viii. b
Syloe / which (by interpretacyo^) is as much to say as: sent. He went his
way therefore, and washed / and came again seeing. So the neighbors and they
that had seen him before (how that he was a beggar) said: is not this he that
sat and begged? Some said: this is he. Again other saybe (No, but) he is like
him.

He him self said: I am even he. Therefore Math. xii. and Mark. ii d Luke.
vii. a. John^. v. b and. vii. ^
Sabbath day, when Jesus made the claye, and opened his eyes. Then again the
pharisees also asked him, how he had received his sight. He said unto them: he
put claye upon mine eyes, and I washed and do se. Therefore said some of the
Pharyses: this man is not of God, because he keeps not the Sabbath day. Other
said: John^. vi^. ^ and. x. d
how can a man that is a sinner, do soche miracles? And there was a strife
monge John^. vii. ^
He is a Prophet. But the Iues did not believe of the man, (how that he had been
blind, and received his sight) until they called the father and mother of him
that had received his sight. And they asked them, saying: Is this your son /
whom ye say was borne blind? How does he now se then? His father and
mother answered them / and said: we know, that this is our son, and that he
was borne blind: but by what means he now sees, we can not tell: or who
has opened his eyes, can we not tell.

He is old enough, ask him, let him answer his father and mother / because
they feared the Iues. For the Iues had conspyred alredye, that if any man did
confess that he was Christ, John^. vii. ^
he should be excommunicate out of the Sinagoge. Therefore said his father and
mother: he is old enough / ask him. Then again called they the man that was
blind, and said unto him: Give God the praise: we know / that this man is a
sinner. He answered therefore, and said: Whyther he be a syn^er or no, I can
not tell: One thing I am sure of: that where I was blind, now I se. Then
said they to him again: What did he to the? How opened he thine eyes? He
answered them again: I told you ere while, and ye did not hear.

Wherefore would ye hear it again? Will

Jesus herd that they had excommunicate John^. iiii. ^
and he it is that talks with the. And he said: Lord I believe / and
worshypped him.

And Jesus said unto him: I am come unto judgment in to this world: that
they which se not / might se: and they which se, might be made blind. And
some of the Pharisees which were with him, herd these words / and said unto
him: are we blind also? Jesus said unto them: John^. xv. d
If ye were blind, ye should have no sin. But now ye snye: we se, therefore
your sin remains.

Christ is the true shepheerde, and the door of the sheper he tells the
truth, and therefore the Iues take up slone^ to cast at him, and call his
preaching blasphemye, and go about to take him.

CAPI. X.
Verily, verily I say unto you: he that enters Prouet. ^
he calls his own sheep bye name, and leads them out. And when he has
sent forth his own sheep, he goes before them, and the sheep follow him: for
they know his voice. A stranger will they not follow, but will fley from him:
for they know not the voice of strangers. This proverb spoke Jesus unto
them. But they understood not what things they were / which he spoke unto
them.

Then said Jesus unto them again: Uerely John^. 14. ^
I am the door of the sheep. All (even as many as came before me) are thieves
and murderers: but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door, by me if any
man enter in, he shall be safe, and shall go in and out, and find pasture. A
thief comes not but for to steal, kill, and to destroy I am come, that they
might have life and that they might have it more abundantly.

I am Ezeche. (...) Miche. v. ^
the good shepheerde. A good shepheerde gives his life for the sheep.

An hired servant, and he which is not ii. Tim. ii. ^
and know my sheep, and am known of mine. Math. xi. d Luke. x. d
As my father knows me / even so know I also my father. And Mark. x. ^
I give my life for the sheep: and other sheep I have, which are not of this
fold. Them also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice / and there shall be
one fold and one shepheerd.

Therefore does my father love me, because Math. ix. d and. xii. b Marh. iii. b
Luke. xi. b John^. viii ^
He has the devil, and is mad: why hear ye him? Other said John^. 7. g
these are not the words of him that has the devil. Can the devil open the
eyes of the blind?

And it was at Jerusalem the feast of walked in the temple, even in ^. Regu^.
6. a ^uen. iii. b. and. v, c
Salomons porche. Then came the Iues round about him, and said unto him: How
long do thou make us doubt? If thou be Christ tell us plainly. Jesus answered
them: I told you, and ye believe not. The works that I do in my fathers name,
they bear witness of me. But ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep.
As I said unto you: John^, viii f
my sheep hear my voice: and I know them, and they follow me / and I give unto
them eternal life, and they shall never perysshe, neither shall any man pluck
them out of my hand.

My father which gave them me, is greater John^. xiiii a and. xvii. c
I and my father are one

John^. vii^ g
Then the Iues again took up stones, to stone him withal. Jesus answered
them: many good works have I showed you from my father: for which of them do
ye stone me? The Iues answered him, saying. For thy good works sake we stone
the not, John^. v. d
but for thy blasphemy, and because that thou being a man, make thy self
god. Jesus answered them: Is it not written in your law, Exodus xxii d Psalm. 82. a
I said year gods? If he called them gods, un to whom the word of God was
spoken (and the scripture can not be broken concerning Math. 26. f Mar xiiii.
g Luke. xxii. g
because I said, I am the son of God? John^. ix a and. xv. d
If I do not the works of my father, believe me not. But if I do, and if ye
believe not me, believe the works: that ye may know and believe, that the
father is in me, and I in him.

Mat. xxi. b. John^. vii. g
Again they went about to take him: and he escaped out of their hand, and
went away again beyond Iorda^, into the place John^. i. d
where John^ before had baptized, and there he abode. And many resorted unto
him, and said. John^ did no miracle, but John^. iii. d.
all things that John^ spoke of this man were true. And many byleued on him
there.

Christ reyseth Lazarus from death. The high priests and Pharisees gather a
counsel against him. He gets him out of the way.

CAPI. XI.
A Certain man was sick, named Lazarus Luke. vii. f.
which anointed Jesus with ointment, and wyped his fete with her here, whose
brother Lazarus was sick. Therefore, his systers sent unto him, saying: Lord,
behold, he whom y^ love, is sick. When Jesus herd that, he said: this
infirmite is not unto death but for the praise of God, that the son of god
John^. ix. ^
might be praised by the reason of it. Jesus loved Martha and her sister and
Lazarus.

When he had herd therefore, that he was sick, he abode two days still in the
same place where he was.

Then after that said he to his disciples: John^. vii. d viii. g and ix. ^
sought to stone the, and will thou go thither again? Jesus answered: are
there not twelve hours of the day? If a man walk in the day he stombleth
not, because he s^^th the light of this world. But if a man walk in the
night, he stombleth, because there is no light in him. This said he, and
after that he said unto them: Our friend Lazarus Math. ix. c Math. v d Luke.
viii g
slepeth, but I go to wake him out of sleep. Then said his disciples: Lord,
if he sleep, he shall do well enough. How beit, Jesus spoke of his death: but
they thought, that he had spoken of the natural sleep. The^ said Jesus unto
them plainly. Lazarus is dead and I am glad for your sakes, that I was not
there, because ye may believe. Nevertheless, let us go unto him.

Then said John^ xx. f
Thomas which is called

Then said Martha unto Jesus: Lord John^. xi. d.
if thou had been here, my brother had not dyed: nevertheless, now I
know, that what soever thou ask of God, God will give it the. Jesus says
unto her: Thy brother shall rise again. Martha says unto him: I know that he
shall rise again in the resurreccyon at the last day. Jesus says unto her: I
am the resurreccyon and the John^. i. ^ and. xiiii. a
life John^ u^ b Roma. i. b Aba^u^. ii a Hebrew. x. g
He that byleueth on me, yea though he were dead, yet shall he live. And who
soever lives and byleueth on me, shall never dye:

Byleuest thou this? She said unto him: yea Lord, I believe, that thou art
Christ the son of God which should come in to the world.

And as soon as he had so said, she went her Martha met him. The Iues then
which were with her in the house and comforted her (when they saw Mary, that
she arose up hastily, and went out) followed her, saying: She goes unto the
grave, to weep there.

Then when Mary was come where Jesus was, and saw him, she comes nygh unto
his fete, and says unto him: Lord, John^. xi. c
if thou had been here, my brother had not been dead. When Jesus therefore
saw her weep (and the Iues also weeping which came with her) he groned in the
spirit, and was troubled in him self, and said. Where have ye laid him? They
say unto him: Lord, come and se. And Luke. xix. ^
Jesus wept. Then said the Iues: Behold how he loved him. And some of them
said:could not he which John^. ix. b
opened the eyes of the blind, have made also, that this man should not have
dyed?

Jesus therefore again groned in him self John^. xii. d
because of the people which stand by, I said it, that they may believe,
that thou have sent me. And when he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud
voice Lazarus, come forth. John^. v. e
And he that was dead, came forth, bound hand and foot with grave clothes, and
his face was bound with a napkin. Jesus says unto them: loose him, and let him
go. Then many of the Iues which came to Mary (and had seen the things which
Jesus did) John^. vii. f
byleued on him.

But some of them went their ways to the

Math. 26 a Mar. xiiii a Luke. xxii a
Then gathered the high Priests and the Pharisees a couusell, and said: Acts
iii^. ^
what do we? For this man does many miracles. If we let him escape thus, all
men will believe on him, and the Romans shall come, and take away both our
rowme and the people. And one of them named Cayphas (being the high priest that
same year) said unto them: Ye perceive nothing at all, nor consider, that
John^. 18. b
it is expedient for us, that one man dye for the people, and not that all the
people perysshe. This spoke he not of him self, but being high Priest that
same year, he prophesied that Jesus should dye for the people, and not for the
people only, but that he should gather together in one the children of God,
that were scattered abroad.

Math. 16 Mar. ^^^^
Then from that day forth, they took counsel together, for to put him to
death.

Jesus therefore walked no more openly among Math 2^. ^ Mat. xiii^ Luke. xx^^
And the Iues Easter was nygh at hand, and many went out of the country up
to Jerusalem before the easter, to purify them selves. The^ sought they for
Jesus, and spoke among them selves, as they stood in the temple: John^. (...).^
What think ye, seeing he comes not to the feast day? The high Priests and
Pharisees John^. ^^
had given a commandment, that if any man knew where he were, he should show
it, that they might take him.

Mary anoynteth Christ's fete. Judas murmureth, Christ ^r cuseth her, and
rydeth in to Jerusalem.

CAPI. XII.
THen Jesus (six days before Easter) Mat. xvi. ^ Mar xiii^. ^ Luke. xxii ^
Then took Mary a pound of ointment (called Nardus, perfect and precious) and
anointed Jesus fete, and wyped his fete with her here, and the house was
filled with the odoure of the ointment. Luke. vii, ^
Then said one of his disciples (even Judas Iscarioth Symons son, which
afterward betrayed him) why was not this ointment sold for three hundred
pence, and given to the poor. This he said, not that he cared for the poor,
but because he was a thief, and Math, 26 ^ Mar. xiiii ^
had the bag, and bare that which was John^. xiii. d
given. Then said Jesus: Let her alone: against the day of my burieng, has
she kept this. For the poor always shall ye have with you, but me have ye not
always.

Much people of the Iues therefore had John^. xi. b.
whom he raised from death But the high Priests held a counsel, that they
might put Lazarus to death also, because that for his sake many of the Iues
went away and byleued on Jesus.

Mat. xxi. ^. Mark. xi. ^
On the next day much people that were come to the feast, when they herd
that Jesus should come to Jerusalem, took branches of palm trees, and went
forth to mete him, and cried: Hosanna, Psalm. 11^ d Luke. xix. f.
blessed is he that in the name of the Lord, comes king of Israel. And Jesus
got a young ass, and sat thereon as it is written: Psalm. ixii. d ^tha. xi. b
John^. xii. r.
Fear not daughter of Syon. Behold, thy king comes, sitting on an asses
colte. These things understood
(all the hole) world goes after him. 3. Rega^. ^. ^ Acts. viii. e ii, Pet,
vi, f
There were certain Greeks among them, that came to worship at the feast: the
same came therefore to Phylip (which was of Bethsaida a city in Galile) and
desired him, saying: Sir, we would feign se Jesus. Philip came and told
Andrew. And again Andrew and Philip told Jesus. And Jesus answered them,
saying: John^. xiii. d and. xvi, a
the hour is come, that the son of man must be glorified.

Uerely, verily I say unto you, ^sal. ^iii. d, ^^o^, xv. e.
except Math. x. d Luke. xvi. d Met. vi^^. d Luke, xii. b
He that loves his life, shall destroy it: and he that hates his life in this
world, shall keep it unto life eternal. If any man minister unto me, let him
follow me: and Ioh. xiiii. a and, xvii. d.
where I am, there shall also my minister be. If any man minister unto me, him
will my father honor.

Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father, deliver me from this
hour: but therefore came I unto this hour, Father glorify thy name. Then came
there a voice from heaven, saying: I have both glorified it, and will glorify
it again. The people therefore that stood by and herd it, said, that it
thundered. Other said, an angel spoke to him Jesus answered and said: this
voice came not because of me, John^. xi. ^
but for your sakes.

Now is the judgment of this world: John^. xv. d and. xvi. b
now shall the prince of this world be cast out. And I (if I were lift up
from the earth) will draw all men unto me. This he said signifienge, what
death he should dye. The people answered him: We have herd out of the law,
Psalm. (...). ^ Esai. ix. b Dani. vii. d Mithe, v. a
that Christ abides ever, and how say thou: the son of man must be lift
up? Who is that son of man? Then Jesus said unto them: yet a little while is
the light with you. Ephesi. v. ^
Walk while ye have lygh, leest the darkness come on you. He that walks also
in the dark, woteth not whyther he goes. While ye have light, believe on the
light, that ye may be the children of the light.

These things spoke Jesus, and departed, Esai. liii. ^. Roma. x. c
Lord, who shall believe our saying? And to whom is the arm of the Lord
declared? Therefore could they not by leave, because that Esaias says again:
Esai. vi. a. Mat. xiii. b Mar. iiii. b Luke viii. b Acts. 28, f.
he has blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart that they should not se
with their eyes, and lest they should understand with their heart and should be
converted, and I should heal them. Soche things said Esaias when he saw his
glory, and spoke of him. Nevertheless, among the cheyfe rulers also, many
byleued on him. But (because of the Pharisees) they would not be a known of it
John^. i^. ^
lest they should be excommunicate. John^. v. ^
For they loved the praise of men, more then the praise of God.

Jesus cried, and said: He that byleueth John^. ^. ^ iii. c ^ viii. ^
I came not to judge the world: but to John^. i^i. ^.
save the world. He that refuses me, and receives not my words, has one
that judges him. The word that I have spoke, the same shall judge him in the
last day. For I have not spoken of my self: but the father which sent me, he
gave me a commandment what I should say, and what I should speak. And I
know that his commandment is life everlasting. What soever I speak
therefore, even as the father bad me, so I speak.

Christ was sheth the disciples feet, tells them of Judas the traytoure, and
commands them car^estly to love one an other.

CAPI. XIII.
BEfore the feast of Easter, when Jesus Mat. 26. b mar. xiii, b.
put in the heart of Judas Israrioth Symons son, to betraye him.

Jesus knowing that Math. xi. d. ^xxiii. d. Luke. x d. John^. iii, d.
the father had given al things into his hands, and that he was come from
God, and went to God: he arose from supper, and laid aside his upper
garments: and when he had taken a towell, he gyrded him self. After that, he
powered water into a basyn, and began to wasshe the disciples feet, and to wype
them with the towell, wherewith he was gyrded. Then came he to John^. vi. g.
but not al. For he knew who it was that should betray him. Therefore said he:
ye are not all clean. So after he had washed their fete, and received his
clothes, and was set down, he said unto them again: wot ye what I have done
to you? Ye call me master and Lord, and ye say well, for so am I. If I then
your Lord and master have washed your fete, ye also ought to wasshe one an
others feet. For Ephess. v a ^. Peter. ii d
I have given you an ensample, that ye should do, as I have done to you.

Uerely, verily I say unto you: Math x. c Luke. v^. f John^. xv e.
the servant is not greater then his master, neither the messenger greater
then he that sent him.

If ye understand these things, Luke. xl, d
happy are ye, if ye do them. I speak not of you all, Psalm. xli. b
He that eats bread with me, has lift up his hele against me. Now John^.
14. d and. xvi. a
tell I you before it come, that when it is come to pass, ye might by leave
that I am he. Uerely, verily I say unto you: Math. x. d Luke. ix. c Mark. ix. e
he that receives whom soever I send, receives me. And he that receives me,
receives him that sent me: When Jesus had thus said, he was troubled in the
spirit, and testified and said: Uerely, verily I say unto you: that Math.
(...) b Mar. xiiii c Luke. xxii. ^
one of you shall betray me. Then the disciples looked one on an other, doutynge
of whom he spoke. There was one of Jesus disciples (which leaned on him) John^.
xix. c. xx. ^. ^. xxi. ^
even he whom Jesus loved. To him beckned Simon Peter therefore, that he should
ask, who it was of whom he spoke. He then when he leaned on Jesus breast, said
unto him: Lord, who is it? Jesus answered: Hett is to whom I give a soppe. And
he wet the bread and gave it to Judas Iscarioth Symons son. And after the
soppe, Satan entered into him.

Then said Jesus unto him, that John^. (...)
Judas had the bag, that Jesus had said unto him Bye those things that we
have need of against the feast: or that be should give some thing to the
poor. As soon then as he had received the soppe, he went immediately out and
it was night. Therefore, when he was gone, out. Jesus said. John^. (...) and.
(...)
Now is the son of man glorified, and god is glorified by him. If god be
glorified by him, God shall also glorify him by him self: and shall streyghte
way glorify him.

Little children, yet a little while am I with you. John^. vi ^
Ye shall seek me, and as I said unto the Iues, whyther I go, thither can ye
not come. Also to you say I now. John^. (...)
A new commandment give I unto you, that ye love together, as I have loved
you, that even so ye love one another. ^. John^. (...)
By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to an
other. Simon Peter said unto him. Lord: whyther go thou? Jesus answered
him: whyther I go, thou can not follow me now, but John^. (...) Ac^e^. (...)
thou shalt follow me afterward.

Peter said unto him: Lord, why can not I follow the now: math. (...) Mar. ^i^^
Luke. xxii
I will ieoperde my life for thy sake? Jesus answered him: will thou ieoperde
thy life for my sake? Uerely, verily I say unto the: John^. (...). (...)
the cock shall not crow, till thou have denied me thryse.

He armeth his disciples with consolacyon against trouble, and promyseth them
the holy ghost.

CAPI. XIIII.
ANd he said unto his disciples: let not John^. x^^. d. and. xvii ^
where I am, there may ye be also. And whyther I go, ye know, and the way ye
know. Thomas says unto him: Lord, we know not whyther thou go. And how
is it possible for us, to know the way? Jesus says unto him: I am the way and
the truth, and the John^. ^. ^ and. xi. c
life. Mat. (...). ^ John^. vi. c*
No man comes unto the father, but by me. If ye had known me, ye had known
my father also. And now ye know him, and have seen him.

Philip says unto him: Lord, show us the father, and it suffyseth us. Jesus
says unto him, have I been so long time with you, and yet have thou not
known me? Philip, he that has seen me, has seen the father. And how say
thou then: show us the father?

Byleuest thou not, that John^. ^. f
I am in the father, and the father in me? The words that John^. xvi. g
the father in me. Or else believe me for the works sake. Uerely, verily I say
unto you: he that byleueth on me, the works that I do, the same shall he do
also, and greater works then these shall he do, because I go unto my father:
Mat. vii. a (...). xxi. c Luke. xi. b Mark. xi. d ^a^a^^. i. a. John^. 14. b.
^^d. xv b John^. iii. d ^^d. v. c
And what soever ye ask in my name, that will I do, that the father may be
gloryfyed by the son.

If ye shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it.

If ye love me, keep my commandments and I will pray the father, and he
shall give you an other comforter, that he may abide with you for ever: even the
spirit of truth whom the world can not receive, because the world sees him
not, neither knows him. But ye know him, for he dwells with you, and
shall be in you. Math. 28. d
I will not leave you comfortles: but will come to you. Yet a little while

John^. xv. a. ^. John^. v. a ii. John^. i. a
He that has my commandments, and keeps them: the same is he that loves
me. And he that loves me, shall be loved of my father: and I will love him,
and will show mine own self to him. I^^^^. xv. d.
Judas says un to him (not Judas Iscarioth) Lord what is done that thou
will show thy self unto us, and not unto the world? Jesus answered, and
said unto him: if a man love me, he will keep my sayenges, and my father will
love him, and we will come unto him, and dwell with him. He that loves me not,
keeps not my sayenges. And the word which ye hear* is not mine, but the
fathers which sent me. These things have I spoken unto you, being yet present
with you.

But the comforter which is the holy ghost John^. xv. d and. xvi. b. (...). ii.
a
whom my father will send in my name, he shall teach you all things, and
bring all things to your remembrance what soever I have said unto you.

Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you. Not as the world gives,
give I unto you. Let not your hertes be grieved, neither fear. Ye have herd
how I said unto you: I go, and come again unto you. If ye loved me, ye would
verily rejoice, because I said: I go unto the father. For the father is
greater then I. John^ xiii. c and. xvi. a
And now have I showed you before it come, that when it is come to pass, ye
might bileue. Hereafter will I not talk many words unto you. For the prince of
this world comes, and has naught John^. xii. e and. xvi. b
in me. But that the world may know that I love the father. And as the father
gave me commandment, even so do I. Arise, let us go hence.

The true vine, the husband man and the branches. A doctrine of love and a
sweet comfort against persecucyon.

CAPI. XV.
I Am Eccle. 24. ^
the true vine, and my father is the John^. xiii. b Acte^. xv. b.
Now are ye clean through the words which I have spoken unto you. Abide in
me, and I in you. As the branch can not bear fruit of it self, except it
abide in the vine: no more can ye, except ye abide in me. I am the vine, ye
are the branches. He that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth
much fruit. For without me can ye do nothing. If a man abide not in me, he
is cast forth as a branch, and is wethered: and men gather them: and cast
them into the fire, and they burn. Math xxi c Mark (...) d John^ 16. f James
i. ^ i John^. iii. ^
If ye abide in me, and my words abide in you: ask what ye will, and it shall
be done for you.

Herein is my father glorified: that ye bear

John^ xiii. d i John^. iii d.
This is my commandment: that ye love together, as I have loved you. Greater
love has no man, then this: that a man bestow his life for his friends. Ye
are my friends, if ye do what soever I command you. Henceforth call I you not
servants: for the servant knows not what his lord does: but you have I
called friends: for all things that I have herd of my father, have I opened
to you. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, to go
and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain, that what soever
ye ask of the father in my name, he may give it you.

This command I you, that ye love together. If the world hate you, ye know
that he hated me before he hated you. If ye were of the world, the world
would love his own.

Howbeit, because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
world. Therefore John^. 17. c.
the world hates you. Remember the word that I said unto you: the servant
is not greater then the lord. Math. x. ^ Luke. xii. ^ Mark. x. c
If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you. If they have kept
my saying, they will keep youres also.

John^. xvi ^
But all these things will they do unto you for my names sake, because they
have Psalm. 35. ^ and. lxix. a.
they hated me without a cause.

But when the conforter is come John^. ^4. d and. xvi. b Acts. ii. ^
whom I will send unto you from the father (even the spirit of truth, which
proceeds of the father) he shall testify of me. And ye shall bear witness
also, because ye have been with me from the beginning.

CAPI. XVI.
Consolacyon against trouble. Prayers are herd through Christ.

THese things have I said unto you, because ye should not be offended.

Math. x. b Mar. xiii. b Luke. xxi. ^
They shall excommunicate you: yea the time shall come, that Acts. ix a
who soever kylleth you, will think that he does God service. John^. xv. d
And such things will they do unto you, because they have not known the
father, neither yet me. But these things have I told you, that when the time
is come, ye may remember them, that I told you.

These things said I not unto you at the beginning, because I was present with
you.

But now I go my way to him that John xiiii d and. xv. b Acts. ii* a
I will send him unto you. And when he is come, he will rebuke the world of
sin, and of ryghteousnes, and of judgment. Of sin, because they believe not
on me: Of righteousness, because I go to my father, and ye shall se me no more.
Of judgment, because John^. xii. ^
the prince of this world is judged already.

I have yet many things to say unto Math. (...) and. xxviii^. Luke. x. ^.
John^. iii ^
All things that the father has, are mine. Therefore said I unto you, that he
shall take of mine and show unto you.

John^. vii^
After a while ye shall not se me, and again after a while ye shall se me: For
I go

Jesus perceived, that they would ask him and said unto them: Ye inquire of
this between your selves, because I said, after a while, ye shall not se me:
and again after a while, ye shall se me. Uerely, verily I say unto you: ye
shall weep and lament, but contrary wise, the world shall rejoice. Ye shall
sorrow, but John^. (...). ^
your sorrow shall be turned to joy. A woman when she trauayleth, has sorrow,

Uerely, verily, I say unto you: Mat. vii. ^ and. xxi. c Luke. xi. ^ Mark. xi.
d James. i. a. John^. 14. ^. and. xv. b
What soever ye shall ask the father in my name, he will give it you. Hitherto
have ye asked nothing in my name. Ask, and ye shall receive: that your joy
may be full. These things have I spoken unto you by proverbs. The time will
come, when I shall no more Mat. x^^^. ^
by proverbs: But I shall show you plainly from my father. At that day shall
ye ask in my name.

And I say not to you that I will speak unto my father for you. For the father
himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and have byleued, that I came
out from god.

I went out from the father, and came in to the world. Again, I leave the
world, and John^. xx. d
go to the father.

His disciple said unto him: lo, now talkest John^. xxi. e.
thou know all things, and nedest not, that any man should ask the any
questyon. Therefore believe we, that thou came from God.

Jesus answered them. Now ye do believe. ^^^^. xiii ^ Mat. xxvi c Mat. xiiii. c
Behold, the hour draws nyghe, and is already come, that ye shall be
scattered every man to his own, and shall leave me alone. And yet am I not
alone: For John^. 14. b
the father is with me. These words have I spoken unto you, that in me ye
might have peace. For in the world shall ye have tribulacyon: but be of good
cheer, I have overcome the world.

The most hearty and loving prayer of Christ unto his father, for all such as
receive the truth.

CAPI. XVII.
THese words spoke Jesus, and lift up John^. ^3. d.
the hour is come: glorify thy son, that thy son also may glorify the:
as thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life
to as many as thou have given him: This is ^. John^. ^. ^.
life eternal, that they might know the, the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent.

I have glorified the on the earth. John^. xix. f.
I have finisshed the work, which thou gave me to do. And now glorify
thou me (O father) with thine own self, with the glory, which I had with
the, or the world was. I have declared thy name unto the men, which thou
gave me out of the world. Thine they were, and thou gave them me, and
they have kept thy word. Now they have known, that all the things what
soever thou haste given me, are of the.

For I have given unto them the words ^ John^ ii. e.
the world: but for them Esai* viii* b
which thou have given me, for they are thine. And all mine are thine, and
thine are mine, and I am glorified in them. And now am I not in the world,
and they are in the world and I come to the.

Holy father, keep through thine own name, them which thou have given me,
that they also may be one, as we are. While I was with them in the world. I
kept them in thy name. John^. 1^. ^.
Those that thou gave me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but that
Psalm. ^ix. a.
that the scripture might be fulfilled. Now come I to the, and these words
speak I in the world, that they might have my joy full in them. I have given
them thy word, and John^. xv. ^. Sap^. ii. d
the world has hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I also
am not of the world: I desire not, that thou should take them out of the
world: but that Math. vi. b Luke. xi. a
thou keep them from evil. They are not of the world, as I also am not of the
world. Sanctify them through thy truth.

Thy word is the truth. As thou dyddest send me in to the world, even so
have I also sent them in to the world, and for their sakes sanctify I my
self, that they also might be sanctified through the truth. Nevertheless I
pray not for them alone, but for them also which shall believe on me through
their preaching: that they all may be Gala. ^ii. d
one, as thou father art in me, and I in the, and that they

I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfyte in one, and that the
world may know, that thou have sent me, and have loved them, as thou have
loved me.

Father, I will that they which thou have given me, John^. x^^* d. and* xi^ii.
a
be with me where I am, that they may se my glory, which thou have given me.
For thou louedst me before the making of the world. Ma^^. (...). d Luke. x. d
O ryghteous father, the world also has not known the: But I have known
the: and these have known, that thou have sent me. And I have declared unto
them by name, and will declare it, that the love wherewith thou have loved me,
may be in them, and I in them.

Christ is betrayed. The words of his mouth smite the officers to the ground.
Peter smyteth of Malchus care. Jesus is brought before Anna Cayphas, and Pylate.

CAPI. XVIII.
WHen Jesus had spoken these words, Mat. 2^. d. Mat. xi^^^ d Luke. xx^i. d
he went forth with his disciples over the broke Cedron, where was a garden, in
to the which he entered, and his disciples. Judas also which bytrayed him,
knew the place: for Jesus often times resorted thither with his disciples.
Judas then after he had received a band of men, (and ministers of the high
priests and pharisees) came thither with lanterus, and fyrebrandes, and
weapons. And Jesus knowing al things that should come on him, went forth, and
said unto them: whom seek ye? They answered him: Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus
says unto them: I am he. Judas also which betrayed him, stood with them.

As soon then as he had said unto them, John^. 17. b
of them which thou gave me, have I not lost one. Then Simon Peter having a
sword, drew it, and smote the high Priests servant, and cut of his right
ear. The servants name was Malchus. Therefore says Jesus unto Peter: Eene.
ix. a mat. xxvi. ^.
Put up thy sword in to the sheathe: shall I not drink of the cup, which my
father has given me?

Then the company and the captain and ministers of the Iues took Jesus, and
bound him, and led him away to Anna first: for he was father in law unto
Cayphas, which was the high priest that same year. Cayphas was he, which gave
counsel to the Iues John^. xi. ^
that it was expedient, that one man should dye for the people.

math. xxv of Mar. xiiii. f Luke. xxii. f
And Simon Peter followed Jesus, and so did an other dyscyple: that dyscyple was
known unto the high Priest, and went in with Jesus into the palace of the
high priest. But Peter stood at the door without. Then went out that other
dyscyple (which was known unto the high Priest) and spoke to the damsel that
kept the door, and brought in Peter. Then said the damsel that kept the
door, unto Peter. Art not thou also one of this man's disciples? He said: I
am not. The servants and the ministers stood there, which had made a fire of
coals: for it was cold, and they warmed them selves. Peter also stood among
them, and warmed him.

Man. xiiii. f ^. (...). xxii. g
The high Priest then asked Jesus of his disciples and of his doctrine. Jesus
answered Acts. 23. ^
answerest thou the high Priest for Jesus answered him: If I have evil spoken,
bear witness of the evil: But if I have well spoken, why smytest thou me?
And Annas sent him bound unto Cayphas the high Priest.

Simon Peter stood, and warmed him John^. xiii.
Peter therefore denied again: and immediately the cock crewe. Mat. 17 ^. Mark.
xv ^ Luke xxiii. ^
Then led they Jesus from Cayphas in to the hall of judgment. It was in the
morning and they them selves went not in to the judgment hall, lest they
should be defiled, but that they might eat Passover. Pylate then went out
unto them, and said: What accusacyon bring ye against this man?

They answered and said unto him: If he were not an euyldoer, we would not
have delivered him unto the.

Then said Pylate unto them: Take ye Math. xx. ^
which he spoke, sygnyfyenge, what death he should dye. mat xxvii^ Mark. xv
Luke. 2^. ^
Then Pylate entered into the judgment hall again, and called Jesus, and said
unto him: Art thou the king of the Iues? Jesus answered: say thou that of
thy self, or did other tell it the of me? Pilate answered. Am I a Iue? Thine
own nacyon and high Priests have delivered the unto me. What haste thou done?
Jesus answered: my kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this
world, then would my ministers surely fight, that I should not be delivered to
the Iues, but now is (...). vi. ^
my kingdom not from hence.

Pylate therefore said unto him. Art mat. xxvii. Mark. xv Luke. xxiii*
I find in him no cause at all. Ye have a custom, that I should deliver you
one loose at Easter. Will ye that I loose unto you the king of the Iues? Then
cried they all again, saying: Acts. iii. c
Not him, but Barrabas: the same Barrabas was a murderer.

Christ is crucified* He commits his mother unto John^, dies, and is
turyed.

CAPI. XIX.
THen Pilate took Jesus therefore, and Math. 27. c Mar. xv. b.
And the souldyers wound a crown of thorns, and put it on his head. And
they did on him a purple garment, (and came unto him) and said: Hayle king of
the Iues: and they smote him on the face. Pylate went forth again / and said
unto them: behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may know, that I find
no fault in him. Then came Jesus forth / wearynge a crown of thorn, and a
robe of purple. And he says unto them: behold the man. Math. 27. c Math. xv
a Luke xxiii. d
When the high Priests therefore and minysters saw him / they cried, saying:
crucifye him, crucifye him. Pilate says unto them: Take ye him, and crucifye
him: for I find no cause in him. The Iues answered him: We have Leui xxi. ii. c
a law, and by our law he ought to dye: because John^. v. b
he made him self the son of God.

When Pylate herd that saying, he Sapi. vi. a. John^. iii. d Romans xiii. a
except it were given the from above. Therefore he that delivered me unto the,
has the more syn. Math. 26 d Math. xv. c Luke. xxiii ^
And from thence forth sought Pilate means to loose him: but the Iues cried,
saying: if thou let him go, thou art not Cesars friend. For Act. xvii. b
whosoever makes him self a king, is against Caesar.

When Pilate herd that saying, he brought Math. 27 ^ Math. xv. c Luke. xxiii e
Then delivered he him unto them, to be crucified.

And they took Jesus, and led him away. (...). xiii ^
Pilate wrote a title, and put it on the Mat. 27. b. Mat. xv* c. Luke xx^^^. ^.
cross. The writing was. Jesus of Nazareth king of the Iues. This title red
many of the Iues. For the place where Jesus was crucified, was nygh to the
city. And it was written in Hebrew, and Greek and Latin. Then said the high
Priests of the Iues to Pilate: write not king of the Iues, but that he said,
I am king of the Iues. Pilate answered: what I have written, that have I
written.

The souldyers, Math. 27 ^ Mark. xv. ^ Luke. xxiii ^
when they had crucified Jesus, took his garments and made four parts to
every souldyer a part, and also his cote. The cote was without seame / wrought
upon throughout. They said therefore among them selves: Let us not deuyde it,
but cast lottes for it, who shall have it. That the scripture might be
fulfilled, saying: Psalm. xxii. d
They parted my raiment among them, and for my coote did they cast lottes. And
the souldyers did soch things in deed

There stood by the cross of Jesus his mother, and his mothers sister. Mary
the wife of Cleophas, and Mary Magdalene. When Jesus therefore saw his mother,
and the discyple standing John^. xiii. ^
whom he loved, he says unto his mother: woman, behold thy son. Then
said he to the discyple: behold thy mother. And from that hour the discyple
took her for his own.

After these things Jesus knowing that Psalm. lxix. ^
the scripture might be fulfilled, he says: I thyrst. So there stood a
vessel by, full of byneger. Math. 27. ^ Mark. xv ^
Therefore they filled a sponge with vyneger, and wound it about with yscope /
and put it to his mouth. As soon as Jesus then received of the vyneger / he
said: John^. 17. ^
It is finyshed, and bowed his head, and gave up the gooste. The Iues therefore
because it was the preparyng of the Sabbath / that the bodies should not
remain upon the cross on the Sabbath day (for that Sabbath day was an high
day) besought Pilate* that their legs might be broken and that they might be
taken down. Then came the souldyers, and brake the legs of the first / and
of the other which was crucified with him. But when they came to Jesus: and
saw that he was dead already, they brake not his legs: but one of the
souldyers with a spear / thrust him in to the side, and forthwith came there
out blood and water.

And he that saw it, bare record / and his

For these things were done, that the scripture should be fulfilled. Exodi.
xii. g Num^. ix. b
Ye shall not break a bone of him. And again an other scripture says:
ze^h^. xii. ^
they shall look on him, whom they pearsed. Math. 26 ^ Mar. xv. d. Luke xxiii. ^
After this, Joseph of Aramathia (which was a disciple of Jesus: but secretly
for fear of the Iues) besought Pilate that he might take down the body of
Jesus And Pilate gave him license. ( He came therefore, and took the body of
Jesus) And there came also Nicodemus (which at the beginning came to Jesus by
night) and brought of mire and aloes myngled together, about an hundred pound
weight. Then took they the body of Jesus, and wound it in lynnen clothes with
the odours, as the manner of the Iues is to burye. And in the place where he was
crucified, there was a garden, and in the garden a new sepulcher, wherein was
never man laid. There laid they Jesus therefore, because of the prepatynge of
the Sabbath of the Iues / for the sepulcher was nygh at hand.

The resurteceyon of Christ / which appears to Mary Magdalene, and to all his
discyples, to their great comfort.

CAPI. XX.
The first day of the Sabbothes came Math 28. a Mar. xvi. a Luk xxiiii a
whom Jesus loved, and John^. xiii. ^ xix. e. ^ xxi. ^
says unto them: They have taken away the Lord out of the grave, and we can
not tell where they have laid him. Peter therefore went forth, and that other
disciple, and came unto the sepulcre. They ran both together, and that other
disciple did out run Peter / and came first to the sepulcre. And when he had
stouped down he saw the lynnen clothes lyenge / yet went he not in.

Lu. xxiiii a.
Then came Simon Peter / following him / and went in to the sepulcre / and
saw Psalm. xvi. b Acts. i^. b xiii. ^. xvii. f
scripture, that he should rise again from death. Then the discyples went
away again unto their own home.

Lu. xxiiii. a.
Mary stood without at the sepulcher weeping. So as she wept, she bowed her
self

Sir: if thou have borne him hence, tell Psalm. xxii. ^ Hebru. il. ^
brethren, and say unto them? John^. 16 ^ (...). xxiiii. ^.
I ascend unto my father and your father: and to my God, and your God. (...).
xxiiii. ^.
Mary Magdalene came and told the discyples, that she had seen the Lord, and
that he had spoken soche things unto her.

Lu. xxiiii. d.
The same day at night: which was John^. xvi. d
were the disciples glad when they saw the Lord. Then said Jesus to them
again: peace be unto you. As my father Esai. ^^i a. Math. xi. ^ Luke. ^ii^. ^
John^. xvii^
sent me, even so send I you also. And when he had said those words / he
breethed on them / and says unto them: Receive the holy gooste.

Whosoeuers sins ye remytte / they are

But John^. xi. b
Thomas one of the twelve (which is called Didimus) was not with them, when
Jesus came. The other discyples therefore said unto him: we have seen the
Lord. But he said unto them: except I se in his hands the prynt of the
nails, and put my finger in to the prynte of the nails, and thrust my hand
in to his side, I will not believe. And after eight days, again his discyples
were within, and Thomas with them.

Then came Jesus when the doors were leuynge. Thomas answered, and said unto
him: my Lord, and my God: Jesus says unto him: Thomas because thou have seen
me / thou have byleued: blessed are they that have not seen / and yet have
byleued.

John^. xxi. g
And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his discyples /
which are not written in this book. These are written / that ye might believe,
that Jesus is Christ the son of God, and that (in byleuynge) ye might have
life through his name.

He appears to his disciples again by the sea of Tyberias, and commands
Peter earnestly to feed his sheep.

CAPI. XXI.
Afterward did Jesus show him self John^. i. f
Nathanaell of Cana in Galile, and the sons of Zebedei, and two other of his
discyples. Simon Peter says unto them: I will go a fysshynge. They say unto
him: we also will Luke. v. a
cast out the net on the right side of the ship, and ye shall find. They cast
out therefore / and anon they were not able to draw it for the multitude of
fysshes.

Then said the discyple John^. xiii. c and. xix. e
whom Jesus loved unto Peter: It is the Lord: When

Jesus says unto them: Luke xxii^i f
Bring of the

This is now the third time that Jesus appeared to his discyples, after that
he was risen again from death.

So when they had dyned / Jesus says John^. xvi. ^
know all things / thou know that I love the. Jesus says unto him:
feed my sheep.

Uerely, verily I say unto the: when thou John^. xiii. d Acts. xii. a.
thou shalt stretche forth thine hands, and an other shall gyrde the, and
lead the whyther thou would not. That spoke he signifyenge, by what death he
should glorify God. And when he had spoken this, he says unto him: Follow me.
Peter turned about, and saw the disciple John^. xiii ^ xix. ^. ^ (...). ^
whom Jesus loved / following (which also leaned on his breast at supper, and
said: Lord, which is he that betrayeth the?)

When Peter therefore saw him, he says John^. x^. ^
There are also many other things which Jesus did, the which if they should
be written every one, I suppose the world could not conteyne the books that
should be written.

Here ends the Gospel of Saint John^.
The Acts of the Apostles.
The asce^syon of Christ. Mathias is chosen in the stead of Judas.

CAPI. Primo.
IN the former treatise / John^. xx. a ^^d. xxi. c.
showed him self alive after his passion (and that by many tokens) appearing
unto them fourtye days, and speaking of the kingdom of god, and gathered
them together, Lu. xxiiii g.
and commanded them / that they should not depart from Jerusalem: but to
wait for the promise of the father John^. iiii. d xv. d. xvi. v.
whereof (says he) ye have herd of me. For John^. i. e. Acts i. a Math. iii.
b Luke. iii. c.
John^ truly baptized with water: but ye shall be baptized with the holy
gooste after these few days. When they therefore were come together, they
asked of him saying: Lodre, will thou at this time, restore again the
kingdom to Israel? And he said unto them: Math. 24. c
It is not for you to know the times, or the seasons / which the father has
put in his own power: but Lu. xxiiii. g. Acts. i^. a
ye shall re ceyue power after that the holy ghost is come upon you. And Acts.
ii. ^ John^. xv. d
ye shall be witnesses unto me / not only in Jerusalem / but also in all Iurye
and in Samary, and even unto the worlds end.

And when he had spoken these things, Mat. xvi. d Lu. xxi. ii. d
he was taken up an high, and a cloud received him up out of their sight. And
while they looked stedfastlye up toward heaven / as he went / behold / two men
stood by them in white apparel / which also said: ye men of Galile / why stand
ye gasynge up in to heaven? This same Jesus which is taken up from you in to
heaven / Dani. vii. d Math. 24. ^ and. xxv. t Mat. xiii. e Luke. xvii e and* xxi
e Reuela. i. b.
shall so come, even as ye have seen him go in to heaven.

Then returned they unto Jerusalem from the mount (that is called Olyuete)
which is from Jerusalem, a Sabbath days journey. And when they were come in,
they went up into a parler, where abode both Math. x. a Math. iii. c Luke. vi. c
Peter and James, and John^ and Andrewe, Philip and Thomas, Barthelmew and
Matthew / James the son of Alpheus, and Simon Zelotes, and Judas the brother
of James.

These all continued with one accord in prayer and supplicacyon with the women
and Mary the mother of Jesus and with his brethren

And in those days Peter stood up in Math. 2^^ Mar. xiiii^ Luke. xxii^
which was gyde to them that took Jesus. Math. ^. ^ Mark. (...) Luke. iii. ^
For he was nombred with us, and had obtained fellowship in this ministracion.
And the same has now possessed a plat of ground with the reward of iniquite:
and when he was Math. 27^ ii. Reg. 17. ^
hanged, he brast a sondre in the mids, and all his bowels gusshed out. And
it is known unto all the inhabiters of Jerusalem: in so much that the same
field is called in their mother tongue, Acheldama, that is to say, the blood
field. For it is written in the book of Psalms: Psalm. ^xix^
his habitacyon be void, and no man be dwelling therein: and Psalm. ^i^. ^
his Bysshoprycke let an other take.

Wherefore of these men which have companyed ^. Par. i^. ^ Psalm. vii. ^.
know the hertes of all men, show whyther of these two thou have chosen:
that he may take the rowme of this ministracion and Apostleshyppe, from which
Judas by transgressyon fell, that he might go to his own place. And they gave
forth their lottes and the lot fell on Mathias, and he was counted with the
eleven Apostles.

CAPI. II.
The coming of the holy ghost. The sermon of Peter before the congregacyon at
Jerusalem, and the increase of the faithful.

WHen Deuteronomy. xvi. ^ Luke. xxiii ^
the fyftye days were come to an end, they were all with one accord to
gyther in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as it had been
the coming of a mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they sat. And
there appeared unto them cloven tongues, like as they had been of fire, and it
sat upon each one of them: Acts. iiii. ^ and. xi. ^
and they were al filled with the holy ghost and began to speak with other
tongues / even as the same spirit gave them vtteraunce. There were dwelling
at Ierusalme, Iues, devout men, out of every nacyon of them that are under
heaven. When this was noysed about, the multitude came together, and were
astonyed, because that every man herd them speak with his own language. They
wondered all, and meruayled, saying among them selves: behold, are not all
these which speak, of Galile?

And how hear we every man his own Math. 24 b
Proselites. Greeks and Arabians: we have herd them speak with our own
tongues, the great works of God.

They were all amassed, and wondered, saying one to an other: what means this?
Other mocked / saying: these men are full of new wine. But Peter stepped forth
with the eleven and lift up his voice, and said unto them:

Ye men of Iuiye / and all ye that dwell at Iohell. ii. g.
And your son^es and your daughters shall prophesy / and your young men shall
se visyons / and your old men shall dream dreams. And on my servants / and
on my hand maidens I will power out of my spirit in those days / and they
shall prophesye. And Math. 27. e (...). xxiii. f
I will show wonders in heaven above / and tokens in the earth beneath / blood
and fire and the vapor of smoke. The son shall be turned in to darkness /
and the moon in to blood / before that great and notable day of the Lord
come. And it shall come to pass, that Roma. x. t
whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord / shall be saved.

Ye men of Israel / hear these words: Psalm. x^i. c.
A forehande I saw God always before me: for he is on my right hand, that I
should not be moved. Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad.

Moreover also my flesh shall rest in hope, because thou wylt not leave my
soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thine holy to se corrupcion. Thou
have showed me the ways of life: thou shall make me full of joy with thy
countenance.

Ye men and brethren, let me freely speak 3. Regu^. ii^
For he is both dead and buried, and his sepulcher remains with us unto this
day. Therefore, seeing he was a Prophet, and knew that God had sworn with an
oath to him, that Christ (as concerning the flesh) should come of the fruit
of his loins, and should sit on his seat, he knowing this before, spoke of
the resurreccion of Christ, that his soul should not be left in hell, neither
his flesh should se corrupcyon. This Jesus has God raised up, Acts. i. a.
whereof we all are witnesses.

Since now that he by the right hand of God is exalted, and has received of
the father the promise of the holy ghost, he has shed forth this (gift)
which ye now se and hear. For David is not ascended in to Psalm. (...). ^
Mat. xxi^. ^
The Lord said to my Lord: sit thou on my right hand, until I make thy
foes thy fore stool. So therefore, let all the house of Israel know for a
suretye, that God has made that same Jesus (whom ye have crucified) the Lord
and Christ. When they herd this, they were prycked in their hertes, and said
unto Peter, and unto the other Apostles: Ye men and brethren Luke. iii. b.
what shall we do? Peter said unto to them: repent of your sins / and be
baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remissyon of
sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy ghost. For the promise was
made unto you / and to your children, and to all that are a far of, even as
many as the Lord our God shall call. And with many other words bare he
witness, and exhorted them, saying: Save your selves from this untoward
generacyon. Then they that gladlye received his preaching, were baptized: and
the same day / there were added unto them about three thousand souls.

And they continued in the Apostles doctrine were showed by the Apostles, ( at
Jerusalem. And great fear came upon all men.) And all that byleued, kept them
selves together, and had all things comen, and sold their possessions and
goods, and parted them to all men, as every man had need. And they continued
daily with one accord in the temple / and brake bread from house to house,
and did eat their meat together with gladness and synglenes of heart,
praysynge God, and had favor with all the people. And the Lord added to the
congregacyon daily, soche as should be saved.

The halte is restored to his fecte. Peter preaches Christ unto the people.

CAPI III.
PEter and John^ went up together in to

In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, Math. ix. ^
rise up and walk. And he took him by the right hand, and lift him up. And
immediately his feet and ancle bones received strength. And he sprange, stood,
and walked, and entered with them in to the temple / walking / and leaping /
and praysyng God. And all the people saw him walk and praise god. And they
knew him, that it was he / which sat and begged at the bewtyfull gate of the
temple. And they wondered and were sore astonyed at that which had happened
unto him. And as the halte which was healed, held Peter and John, all the
people ran amassed unto them in 3. Reg. vi. ^ John^. x. ^ Acts. v. c
the porche that is called Salamons.

When Peter saw that, he answered unto Math. ^7 a Mat. x^. ^. Luke xxiii. ^
denied in the presence of Pylate, when he had judged him to be losed. But ye
denied the holy and just, Math. 27. c John^. 18. ^.
and desired a murderer to be given you / and killed the Lord of life, whom
God has raised from death / of the which we are witnesses. And his name
through the faith of his name, has made this man sound / whom ye se and
know. And the faith which is by him / has given to him this health in the
presence of you all. And now brethren, I wot that through Ignorance ye did
it, as did also your rulers. But god (which before had showed, by the mouth of
al his prophets how that Christ should suffer) has thus wise fulfilled.

Let it Math. (...)
repent you therefore, and convert, that your sins may be done away, when

Moses truly said unto the fathers: Deuteronomy. (...). Arts. vii^
a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you, even of your brethren
like unto me: him shall ye hear, in all things whatsoever he shall say unto
you. For the time will come / that every soul which will not hear that same
Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the people. All the Prophettes also
from Samuel and thence forth (as many as have spoken) have in likewise told
of these days. Ye are the children of the prophettes: and of the covenant
which God made unto our fathers, saying to Abraham: Reave. xii. ^. and. xiii.
^.
Even in thy seed shall all the kynreds of the earth be blessed. First when God
had raised up his son Jesus unto you, he sent him to bless you, that every
one of you should turn from his wickedness.

The Apostles are taken, and brought before the counsel. They are forbyden to
preach, but they turn them to prayer, and are more obedyent unto god, then
unto men

CAPI. IIII.
AS they spoke unto the people, the Priests

And it chaunsed on the morrow, that their rulers and elders and Scrybes, (and
Annas the cheyfe Priest, and Cayphas, and John^ and Alexander / and as many as
were of the kyured of the high Priests) gathered together at Jerusalem. And
when they had set them before them, they asked Erobi. ii. c Math. xxi. c Arts.
vii. d
by what power / or in what name have ye done this?

Then Peter full of the holy gooft said Math. i. c Philip. ii. b
Jesus Christ of Nazareth / whom ye crucified / whom God raised again from
death: even by him does this man stand here present before you hole Math. xxi
b Mat. xii a. Luke. xx. c
This is the stone which was cast aside of you buylders, which is become the
cheyfe of the corner. Neither is there salvation in any other. Math. ^. c
Philip. (...). b
For among men under heaven there is given none other name / wherein we must be
saved.

When they saw the boldness of Peter and John^. xi. ^
what shall we do to these men? For a manifest sign is done by them, and is
openly known to all them that dwell in Jerusalem, and we can not deny it. But
that it be noysed no further among the people, let us threaten and charge
them, that they speak hence forth to no man in this name.

And they called them, Acts. v. g
and commanded them, that in no wise they should speak nor Acts. iii. b
that, which was done: for the man was above fourtye year old, on whom this
miracle of healyng was showed. As Soon as they were let go, they came to their
fellows, and showed all that the high Priests and elders had said.

And when they herd that, they lift up in the holy ghost) by the mouth of thy
servant David ( our father) have said: Psalm. ii ^
Why did the hethen rage, and the people ymagen vain things? The kings of
the earth stood up, and the rulers came together, against the Lord and
against his anointed. For of a truth, agayust thy holy child Jesus (whom
thou have anointed) both He rode and also Poncius Pilate, with the Gentyls and
the people of Israel, gathered them selves together ( in this city) for to do
whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined Acts. xvi ^
the place moved where they were assembled together Acts. ii. and. xix. b
and they were all filled with the holy ghost, and they spoke the word of God
boldly.

And the multitude of them that byleued, Acts (...) ^ and. ^. b
were of one heart, and of one soul.

Neither said any of them, that ought of

And Acts. ^. ^
Ioses, which was also called of the Apostles, Barnabas (that is to say, the
son of consolacy on) being a Leuyte, and of the country of Cipers when he had
land, sold it, and laid the pryer down at the apostles fete.

The desemblynge of Ananias and Saphirs is punysshed: miracles are done by the
Apostles, which are taken, but the angel of god brings them out of prison.
They are brought before the counsel. The sentence of Gamaliell. The Apostles
are ^et, they rejoice in trouble.

CAPI. V.
A Certain man named Ananias with it was sold / was it not in thine own
power Why haste thou conceived this thing in thine heart? Thou haste not lied
unto men / but unto God. When Ananias herd these words, he fell down, and
gave up the gooste. And great fear came on al them that herd these things.
And the young men rose up / and put him aparte, and carried him out / and buried
him.

And it fortuned, that (as it were about

By the hands of the Apostles Mar. xvi. d
were many 3. Reg. vi. a John^. x. ^ ^^^es. iii. ^.
Salomons porche. And of other durst no man join him self to them:
nevertheless the people magnifyed them. The no^bre of them that byleued in the
Lord both of men and women / grew more and more: in so much that they
brought the sick in to the streets / and laid them on beds and couches,
that at the least way the shadow of Peter when he came by, might shadow some
of them (and that they might all be delivered from their infyrmytyes.) There
came also a multitude out of the cities round about, unto Jerusalem /
bringing sick folks, and them which were vexed with unclean spirytes. And
they were healed every one.

Acts. iiii. a
Then the cheyfe Priest rose up, and all they A^^e^. xii. a. ^^d. xvi* f
But the angel of the lord by night opened the prison doors, and brought them
forth, and said: go, and stand / and speak in the temple to the people all the
words of this life. When they herd that / they entered in to the temple early
in the morning: and taught. But the cheyfe Priest came and they that were with
him, and called a counsel together, and all the elders of the children of
Israel, and sent men to the prison to fetch them. When the minysters came /
and found them not in the prison / they returned and told, saying: the
prison truly found we shut with all dilygence, and the kepers standing
without before the doors.

But when we had opened, we found no man within.

When the cheyfe Priest, and the ruler

And when they had brought them, they set them before the counsel. And the
cheyfe Priest asked them / saying: Acts. iiii ^
did not we straytely command you, that ye should not teach in this name?
And behold, ye have filled Jerusalem with your doctrine, and intend to
bring Math. 27 ^
this man blood upon us. Peter and the other Apostles answered, and said:
Acts. iiii ^
We ought more to obey God then men.

The God of our fathers raised up Jesus / whom Acts. xxii. ^
Gamaliell / a doctor of law (had in reputacyon among all the people) and
commanded the Apostles to go aside a little space, and said unto them: ye men
of Israel / take heed to your selves, what ye entende to do, as touching these
men.

For before these days rose up one Thudas, Luke. xiii. ^
Galile in the days of the trybute / and drew away much people after him. He
also perysshed and all (even as many as herkened to him) were scattered abroad.
And now I say unto you: refrain your selves from these men, and let them a
lone. For if this counsel, or this work be of men, it will come to naught.

But and if it be of God, ye can not destroy it, leest happily ye be found to
strive against god. And to him agreed the other: and when they had called the
apostles, they bet them, Acte^. iiii. d
and commanded, that they should not speak in the name of Jesus, and let them
go.

And they departed from the counsel, Math. v. d.
reioy sing, that they were counted worthy, to suffer rebuke for his name. And
daily in the temple and in every house they ceased not, to teach and preach
Jesus Christ.

Mynysters (or deacons) are ordained in the congregacyon to do service in
necessary things of the body, that the apostles may wait only upon the word
of god Steven is accused.

CAPI. VI.
IN those days (when the nombre of the 1. Timo. 3. c
of honest report, and full of the holy ghost and wisdom, to whom we may
commyt this business. But we will give our selves contynually to prayer, and
to the ministracyon of the word.

And the saying pleased the hole multitude. ^e^ela. ii. ^
Nocholas a convert of Antioche. These they set before the apostles: and when
they had prayed, they Rome. 27 d 1. Timo. 4 d ^. Timo. i d
laid their hands on them. And the word of God increased, and the nombre of
the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly, and a great company of the
priests were obedient to the faith.

And Steven, full of faith and power, Luke. xxi. c.
And they could not resyst the wisdom, and the spirit, Math. ^. ^
which spoke.

Then sent they in men, which said: We

Steven makes answer to his accusacyon: rebukes the styffe necked Iu^^, and
is stoned unto death.

CAPI. VII.
THen said the cheyfe priest: it is even so? Gene. xii. ^.
Get the out of thy country, and from thy kynred, and come in to the land,
which I shall show the. Then came he out of the land of Chaldey, and dwelt
in Charran. And from thence, when his father was dead, he brought him in to
this land in which ye now dwell, and he gave him none enheritan^ce in it, no
not the breadth of a foot: Gene. xii. d. x^ii c xvii. d and. xxvi. a
and promised that he would give it to him to possess and to his seed after
him when as yet he had no child.

God verily spoke on this wise Gene. xv. c*
that his seed should soiourne in a strange land, and that they should keep
them in bondage, and Exodi. xii. ^ Judith. v d Gala. iii. c
entreat them evil. iiiii. C. years. And the nacyon (to whom they shall be in
bondage) will I judge, said God. And after that shall they come forth and serve
me in this place. Gene. xvii ^
And he gave him the covenant of circumcision. Gene. x^i. a
And he begat Isaac, and cyrcumcised him the. viii. day, and Genesis xxvi. c
Isaac begat Jacob, and Gene. ^xi^.
Jacob begat the. xii. Patriarchs. Gene. 37. f. Sapien. x. c
And the Patriarchs having indygnacion fold Joseph into Egypt. And god was with
him, and delivered him out of all his adversities, and gave him favor and
wisdom in the sight of Pharao king of Egypt. And he Gene. xi. a
made him governor over Egypt, and over all his household. Gene. xi. ^
But there came a derthe over all the land of Egypt and Canaan, and great
affliccyon, that our fathers found no sustenaunce. But when Jacob herd that
there was corn in Egypt he sent our fathers first: Gene. x^v. ^
and at the second time, Joseph was known of his brethren, and Joseph's kynred
was made known unto Pharao. Then sent Joseph a message, and caused his father
to be brought, and all his kyn, three score and. xv. souls. And Jacob descended
in to Egypt Genesis xiv^. a Gene. xiix. d
and dyed both he and our fathers, and were carried over in to Sichem, and laid
in the sepulcre, Genesis xx^ii. ^
that Abraham bought for money of the sons of Emor, the son of Sichem.

But when the time of the promise drew Exodi ii. a. Psalm. ^v. t
people grew and multiplied in Egypt, till an other king arose which knew
not of Joseph. The same dealt subtelly with our kynred, and evil entreated our
fathers, and made them to cast out their young children, that they should not
remain a live. Erodi. ii. a. Hebrew. xi e
The same time was Moses borne, and was acceptable unto God, and nourysshed up
in his fathers house three months. When he was cast out, Pharoes daughter took
him up, and nourysshed him up for her own son. And Moses was learned in all
manner a wysdom of the Egypcyans, and was mighty in deeds and in words. And
when he was full fourtye year old, it came in to his heart, to visit his
brethren the children of Israel. And when he saw one of them suffer wrong, he
defended him, and avenged his quarrel that had the harm done unto him, and
smote the Egypcian. For he supposed his brethren would have understand how that
god by his hand should deliver them. But they understood not.

And the next day he showed him self Gene. xix. b Exodi ii. t Math. xii. c
Acts iiii. ^
Who made the a ruler and a judge over us? Will thou kyl me, as thou dydest
the Egypcyan yesterday? Exodi. ii c
Then fled Moses at that saying, and was a stranger in the land of Madian,
where he begat two sons.

Exodi. iii. a
And when fourtye years were expired, there appeared to him in the wilderness
of mount Sinay, an angel of the Lord in a flambe of fire in a busshe. When
Moses saw it, he wondered at the sight. And as he drew nere to behold, the
voice of the Lord came unto him: Exodi. iii. b Mat. xxii. ^ Mark. xii. c Luke
xx. ^
I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God
of Jacob. Moses trembled, and durst not behold. Then said the Lord to him.
Joshua v. ^.
Put of thy shoes from thy fete, for the place where thou stand, is holy
ground. I have perfytely seen the affliccyon of my people, which is in
Egypt, and I have herd their grenynge, and am come down to deliver them. And
now come, and I will send the in to Egypt.

This Moses whom they forsook (saying Exodi. ii. c.
who made the a ruler and a judge) the same did God send to be a ruler and a
delyuerer, by the hands of the angel which appeared to him in the busshe.
And the same brought them out, showing wonders and signs in Egypt, and in
the reed see, and in the wilderness fourtye years. This is that Moses which
said unto the children of Israel. A prophet shall the Lord your god raise up
unto you of your brethren, like unto me, him Exodi. xix. Gala. iii. t
shall ye hear. This is he De^^. xviii ^ Acts. iii. ^
that was in the co^gregacyon in the wilderness with the angel (which spoke
to him in the mount Sinay) and with our fathers.

This man received the word of life to give unto us, to whom our fathers
would not obey, but cast it from them, and in their hertes, turned back
again in to Egypt / saying unto Aaron: Make us gods to go Exodi. 32. ^
before us: for as for this Moses that brought us out of the land of Egypt,
we wot not what is become of him. And they made a calfe in those days, and
offered sacrifice unto the image, and reioysed over the works of their own
hands.

Then God turned him self, and Rome. l. t
gave Amoe. v d Iere. vii. ^
O ye of the house of Israel, gave ye to me sacrifices and meat offerynges by
the space of fourtye years in the wilderness? And ye took unto you the
tabernacle of Moloch, and the sterre of your god Rempham, fygures which ye
made to worship them. And I will translate you beyond Babylon.

Our fathers had the tabernacle of witness in the wyldernes, as he had
appointed them speaking unto Moses: Exodi. (...). ^ Hebr. (...). ^
that he should make it, according to the fassyon that he had seen. Which
tabernacle also our fathers that came after, Joshua. iii. ^
brought in with Joshua in to the possessyon of the Gentyls, whom God drove out
before the face of our fathers, unto the time of David: Psalm. 29. ^
which found favor before god, and would feign have found a tabernacle for
the god of Jacob. 3. Reg. vi. ^
But Solomon buylte him an house.

Acts. (...). t.
Howbeit he that is highest of all, dwells not in temples made with hands,
as says the prophet: Esa. ^^vi. ^ 3. Reg^. 8. c li. Pat. viii
Heaven is my seat, and earth is my footstool. What house will ye build for
me, says the Lord? or which is the place of my rest: has not my hand made
all these things.

Ye styffe necked and of vncircumcysed Deuit. ix. d
as your fathers did, so do ye. Which of the Prophettes have not your
Fathers persecuted? And they have sleyne them which showed before of the
coming of that just, whom ye have now betrayed, and murdered. And ye also
have received the law John^. vii. b
by the minystracyon of angels, Acts. xv. b
and have not kept it.

When they herd these things, their hertes claue a sonder, and they gnasshed
on him with their teethe. But he being full of the holy ghost, looked up
steadfastly with his eyes in to heaven and saw the glory of god, and Jesus
standing on the right hand of god, and said: Behold I se the heuens open and
the son of man standing on the right hand of god. Then they gave a shoute
with a loud voice, and Psalm. 58. a.
stopped their ears, and ran upon him all atonce, and cast him out of the
city and stoned him. And the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young
man's feet whose name was Saull. And they stoned Seven calling on, and
saying. Lord Jesus, 3. Reg. xxi. d
receive my spirit. And he kneled down, and cried with a loud voice: Lord,
Psalm. 31. ^
lay not this sin to their charge. And Luke xxiii ^
when he had thus spoken he fell a sleep.

Saull persecuteth the Christen. The Apostles are fattered abroad Philyp comes
into Samaria. Sy^non Magus is baptized: he dissembleth. Philyp baptyseth the
chamberlayne.

CAPI. VIII.
SAull ^i^te. xxii. d
consented unto his death. And at Math. x. ^ ^^^t^. xi. g.
scattered abroad through out the regyons of Jury, and Samaria, except the
Apostles. But devout men dressed Steven, and made great lamen tacyon over him.
As for Sauil ^^t^. ix. a and. xxii. a. ^^ori xv. b Galat. ^. ^
he made havoc of the congregacyon, and entered in to every house, and drue
out both men and women, and thrust them in to prison. Therefore, they that were
scattered abroad, went every where preaching the word of god.

Then came Philyp in to a city of Mat. xvi. d
unclean spirits cryenge with loud voice came out of many that were
possessed of them. And many taken with palsyes, and many that halted were
healed.

And there was great joy in that city. But there was a certain man called
Simo^, which before time in that same City used witchecrafte, and bewytched
the people of Samaria: saying that he was a man, that could do great things:
Whom they regarded, from the least to the greatest, saying: this man is the
power of god which is called great. And him they set much by, because that of
long time he had bewytched them with sorceryes.

But as soon as they gave credence to Acts. vi ^. and xiii a. ^. Aimo. ^ d
and. v. b Nume. 27 b ii Timo. i ^
Then laid they their hands on them and they received the holy ghost.

When Simon saw, that through layinge on of the Apostles hands, the holy
ghost Math. x. ^.
that the gift of God may be obtained with money. Thou have neither part nor
fellowship in this busynes. For thy heart is not right in the sight of god.
Repent therefore of this thy wyekednes, and pray God that the thought of thine
heart may be forgyuen the. For I perceive that thou art full of bitter gall,
and wrapped in iniquite.

Then answered Simon, and said: Erodl. ^. d. Rama 8. b. 3. ^e. iiii. ^ Luke.
xxi. ^.
pray ye to the lord for me, that none of these things which ye have
spoken, fall on me. And they when they had testified, and preached the word of
God, returned toward Jerusalem, and preached the gospel in many cities of the
Samaritans.

The Angel of the Lord spoke unto

And behold: a man of Ethiopia (a chamber layne, and of great auctorite with
Candace queen of the Ethiophians, and had the rule of al her treasure,) 3. Reg.
vii. ^ John^. xii. ^.
came to Jerusalem for to worship. And as he returned home again syttyng in
his charet, he red Esaye the Prophet. Then the spirit said unto Philip: Go
near, and join thy self to yonder charet. And Philip ran to him, and herd
him read the Prophet Esaias, and said: Understandest thou what thou redest?

And he said: how can I, except I had a gyde?

And he desired Philip, that he would come up, and sit with him. The tenoure of
the scripture which he red, was this: Esai. liii. c.
he was led as a sheep to be sleyne: and like a lamb dombe before his sherer,
so opened he not his mouth Because of his humbleness, he was not esteemed. But
who shall declare his generacon? for his life is taken from the earth. The
chamberlayne answered Philip, and said: I pray the, of whom speaks the
Prophet this? of him self? or of some other man?

Philip opened his mouth, and began at the same scripture, and preached unto
him Jesus. And as they went on their way, they came unto a certain water, and
the chamberlayne said: Se, here is water, Acts. x. g
what does let me to be baptized? Philip said unto him:

If thou believe with all thine heart, thou

Paull is converted, and confounds the Iues. Peter reyseth Tabitha.

CAPI. IX.
ANd Saul yet brethynge out threatenings Act. viii. a. xxii a xxvi b ^. Cori^.
xv. b Gala. i. c
that if he found any of this way (whyther they were men or women) he might
bring them bound unto Jerusalem. And when he iourneyed, it fortuned that as he
was come nygh to Damasco, suddenly there shyned round about him a light from
heaven, and he fell to the earth, and herd a voice, saying to him: Acts. xxii
v
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said: what art thou Lord? And
the lord said: I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest. It is hard for the to kycke
against the pryckes. And he both trembling and astonyed, said: Lord, Luke.
iii. ^ Acts. ii. f and. xxvi. f.
what will thou have me to do? And the lord said unto him: Arise, and go in
to the city, and it shall be told the, what thou must do.

The men which iourneyed with him,

And there was a certain disciple at Damasco, named Ananias, and to him said
the Lord in a vision: Ananias? And he said, behold, I am here Lord. And the
Lord said unto him: Arise, and go in to the street (which is called
streyghte) and seek in the house of Judas after one called Saul Acts. (...) ^
and. xxii. ^
of Tharsus. For behold, he prays, and has seen in a vision a man named
Ananias coming in to him, and putting his hands on him, that he might
receive his sight.

Then Ananias answered: Lord, I have Acts. 8. ^ xxii a xxvi, ^ Cori^. xv b
Galat. ^. ^
how much evil he has done to thy saints at Jerusalem: and here he has
auctoryte of the high Priests, to bind all that call on thy name. The lord
said unto him: go thy way, for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name
before the Gentyls, and kings, and the children of Israel. For I will show
him, how great things Acts. ^xi ^ ii. Cori^. (...) ^
he must suffer for my names sake. Acts, xxi^:
And Ananias went his way, and entered in to the house, and put his hand on
him, and said: brother Saul, the Lord that appeared unto the in the way as
thou came, has sent me, that thou myghtest receive thy sight, and be filled
with the holy ghost. And immediately there fell from his eyes as it had been
scales, and he received sight: and arose and was baptized, and received meat
and was comforted.

Then was Saul a certain days with

But all that herd him, were amassed, and said: is not this he, that spoiled
them which called on this name in Jerusalem, and came hither for that intent,
that he might bring them bound unto the high Priests? But Saul increased the
more in strength, and confounded the Iues which dwelte at Damasco affyrmynge:
that this was very Christ.

And after a good while the Iues took counsel together, to kill him. But their
layynge awayte was known of Saull. And they watched the gates day and night to
kyl him. ^^. Cori^ xii a i. Regu^ xii c
Then the discyples took him by night, and put him through the wall, and let
him down in a basket.

And when Saul was come to Jerusalem, he assayde to couple him self to the
disciples but they were all afraid of him, and believed not / that he was a
discyple. But Barnabas took him, and brought him to the apostles, and declared
to them, how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him,
and how he had done boldly at Damasco in the name of Jesus. And he had his
conversation with them at Jerusalem, speaking boldly in the name of the Lord
Jesus. And he spoke and disputed against the Greeks: but they went about to
sley him. Which when the brethren knew, Acts. xxi. ^.
they brought him to Cesarea, and sent him forth to Tharsus. Then had the
congregacyon rest thorowout al Iuery and Galile and Samary, and were edified,
and walked in the fear of the Lord and multiplied by the comfort of the holy
ghost. And it chaunsed as Peter walked thorowout all quarters, he came also to
the saints which dwelte at Lydda. And there he found a certain man named
Eneas, which had kept his bed. viii. years, and was sick of the palsye. And
Peter said unto him. Eneas: the Lord Jesus Christ make the hole: arise, and
make thy bed. Math. ix a Math. li. b. Luke. v. c John^. v. ^ Acts. iii. b.
And he arose immediately. And all that dwelte at Lydda and Assaron, saw him,
and turned to the Lord.

There was at Ioppa a certain woman,

But for as much as Lydda was nygh to Ioppa, and the disciples had herd that
Peter was there, they sent unto him two men, desiring him, that he would not
be grieved to come unto them.

Peter arose and came with them. And when he was come they brought him in to
the chamber. And all the wydowes stood round about him, weeping, and showing
the cootes and garments which Dorcas made, while she was with them. And Peter
put them al forth, and kneled down and prayed: and turned him to the body, and
said: Tabitha ^. Re. xvi. d ^ Reg iiii f Luke. vii. ^
arise. And she opened her eyes, and when she saw Peter she sat up. And he
gave her the hand, and lift her up. And when he had called the saints and
wydowes, he showed her alive. And it was known thorowout al Ioppa, and many
byleued on the Lord. And it fortuned, that he tarried many days in Ioppa, with
one Simon a tanner.

The visyon that Peter saw: How he was sent to Cornelius. The heathen also
receive the spirit and are baptized.

CAPI. X.
THere was a certain man in Cesarea Eccles. 35. ^
before god. And now send men to Ioppa, and call for one Simon, whose syrname
is Peter. He lodges with one Simon a tanner whose house is by the sea side. He
shall tell the, what thou ought to do. And when the angel which spoke unto
him, was departed, he called two of his household servants and a devout
soldier of them that waited on him, and told them all the matter, and sent
them to Ioppa.

On the morrow as they went on their Math. vi. ^ 4 Reg. iiii ^
upon the top of the house to pray about the. vi. hour. And when he waxed an
hungered, he would have eaten. But while they made ready, he fell into a trance,
and saw heaven opened, and a certain vessel came down unto him, as it had been
a great shere, knyt at the four corners, and was let down to the earth,
wherein were Leuiti. xi. ^ Deu. xiiii. ^
all manner of four foted beasts of the earth, and vermyn and worms and
fowls of the air. And there came a voice to him: Rise Peter, kyl, and eat.
But Peter said, not so Lord, for I have never eaten any thing that is common
or unclean. And the voice spoke unto him again the second time: Math. xv ^
Romans xiiii c
what God has cleansed that call not thou common. This was done thryse, and the
vessel was received up again in to heaven.

While Peter also mused in him self

They said, Cornelius the captain, a just man, and one that fears God, and
of good report among all the people of the Iues, was warned by an holy
angel, to send for the into his house, and to hear words of the Then called
he them in, Gene. xix. a.
and lodged them.

And on the morrow, Peter went away Acts. xi. b.
certain brethren from Ioppa accompanied him. And the third day entered they
into Cesarea. And Cornelius waited for them, and had called together his
kynsmen, and special friends. And as it chaunsed Peter to come in, Cornelius
met him, and fell down at his feet, and worshypped him. But Peter took him up,
saying: stand up, Acts. x^^ii. c Reave. xix. ^. and. xxii. c
I my self also am a man. And as he talked with him, he came in, and found
many that were come together. And he said unto them: Ye know how that Deuteronomy.
vii. a
it is an unlawful thing for a man that is a Iue, to company or come unto an
alyent: but god has showed me, that I should not call any man common or unclean:
therefore came I unto you without delay, as soon as I was sent for. I ask
therefore, for what entente have ye sent for me.

And Cornelius said: This day now. iiii.

Then sent I for the immediately, and thou have well done, that thou art come.
Now therefore are we all here present before God, to hear all things that are
commanded un to the of god. Then Peter opened his mouth and said: Of a truth
I perceive, that ii. Par. ^ix c Roma. ii. b Ephe. vi. b. Lollos. iii. d Eccle.
35. b.
there is no respect of persons with God, Esa ^vi. b
but in all people, he that fears him, and works righteousness, is
accepted with him.

Ye know the preaching that God sent Mat. ^^ii. ^.
and began in Galile, after the baptyme which John^ preached) how Esai. lxi.
a. Luke. iiii. c.
God anointed Jesus of Nazareth, with the holy ghost, and with power. Which
Jesus went about doing good, and healynge all that were oppressed of the
devil, for God was with him. And we are witnesses of althynges which he did in
the land of the Iues, and at Jerusalem: whom they slew and hanged on tree. Him
god raised up the third day, and showed him openly, not to all the people, but
unto us witnesses (chosen be fore of God for the same entente) which did eat
and drink with him, after he arose Luke xxlii. ^ John^. xx^. ^
from death. And Mat. (...). ^ Mar. xv^ ^.
he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify, that it is he,
which was ordained of god to be the judge of quycke and dead. To him give
Esai. iiii. ^.
all the prophettes witness, that through his name who souer byleueth him shall
receive remyssion of sins.

While Peter yet spoke these words, Acts. v^^^. ^
the holy ghost fell on all them which herd the preaching. And they of the
circumcision, which byleued, were astonyed, as many as came with Peter,
because that on the Gentyls also was shed out the gift of the holy ghost. For
they herd them speak with tongues and magnify God, Then answered Peter: Acts.
vli^ ^
can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have
received the holy ghost as well as we? And he commanded them to be baptized in
the name of the Lord. Then prayed they him, to tarry a few days.

Peter shows the cause wherefore he went to the heathen. Barnab as and Paull
preach unto the heathen. Ababus prophesyeth of the derth for to come.

CAPI. XI.
ANd the apostles and brethren that were Deuteronomy. vii. ^
Thou wentest in to men uncircumcised, and dydest eat with them. But Peter
rehearsed the matter from the beginning, and expounded it by order unto them
saying: Acts. x. d
I was in the city of Ioppa, prayenge, and in a trance, I saw a vision, a
certain vessel descend, as it had been a great shete, let down from heaven
by the four corners, and it came to me. Into the which when I had fastened
mine eyes, I considered, and saw Leuiti. xi. ^ Deuteronomy. xii^^. ^
four foted beasts of the earth, and vermen and worms, and fowls of the
air.

And I herd a boyce syenge unto me: arise Peter, sley and eat.

But I said: not so Lord, for nothing

And behold, immediately there were three men alredye come to the house where I
was sent from Cesarea unto me. And the spirit said unto me, that I should go
with them, without doutyng. Moreover Acts. x. d
these six brethren accompanied me: and we entered in to the man's house. And he
showed us, how he had seen an angel in his house, which stood and said to
him: send men to Ioppa, and call for Simon, whose syrname is Peter: he shall
tell the words, whereby thou and al thy house Acts. ii. a
as he did on us at the beginning. Then came it to my remembrance, how that
the Lord said: John^. i. d ^^ues. ^. a
John^ baptized with water: but ye shall be baptized with the holy ghost. For
as much then as god gave them like gifts as he did unto us, when we byleued
on the lord Jesus Christ

What was I, that I should have withstand god? When they herd this, they
held their peace, and glorified god, saying: then has God also to the
Gentyls granted repenta unce unto life.

Acts. viii a
They also which were scattered abroad through the affliccion that arose about
Steven, walked thorowout unto Phenices and Cypers, and Antioche, preaching the
word to no man, but unto the Iues only. Some of them were men of Cypers and
Cyren: which when they were come to Antioche, spoke unto the Greeks, and
preached the lord Jesus. And the hand of the Lord was with them, and a great
nombre byleued and turned unto the lord. Tidings of these things came unto
the ears of the congregacyon, which was in Jerusalem. And they sent forth
Barnabas, that he should go unto Antioche.

Which when he came, and had seen the grace of God, was glad, and Acts. xiii. ^
exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart, they would contynuallye cleue
unto the Lord. For he was a good man, and full of the holy ghost and of faith:
and much people was added unto the lord. Then departed Barnabas to Tarsus for
to seek Saul.

And when he had found him, he brought him unto Antioche. And it chaunsed that
a hole year they had their conuersacyon with the congregacyon there, and taught
much people: in so much that the disciples of Antioche were the first that
were called christen.

Acts. xxi. b
In those days came Prophettes from the city of Jerusalem unto Antioche. And
there stood up one of them named Agabus, and signified by the spirit, that
there should be great derthe thorowoute all the world, which came to pass
in the Emperor Claudius days. Then the disciples every man according to his
abilite, purposed to send i. Cori. xvi a ii. Cori^. 8. a. and ix. a
succoure unto the brethren which dwelte in Iuery. Which thing they also
did, and sent it to the elders, by the hands of Barnabas and Saul.

Herod persecuteth the Christen, hylleth James, and puts Peter in prison,
whom the lord delyuereth by an angel. The shameful death of Herod.

CAPI. XII.
AT the same time Herod the king stretched Mat. iiii. d. and. xvii. a.
James the brother of John^ with the swerd. And because he saw that it pleased
the Iues he proceeded further, and took Peter also.

Then were the days of sweet bread. And when he had caught him, he put him in
prison also and delivered him to four qua^ernions of soldiers to be kept,
entendynge after Easter to bring him forth to the people. And Peter was kept in
prison. But prayer was made without ceasynge of the congregacyon, unto God for
him. And when Herod would have brought him out unto the people, the same night
slepte Peter between, ^. souldyours, bound with two cheynes, and the kepers
before the door kept the prison. And behold Acts. v. ^
the angel of the lord was there present, and a light shyned in the habitacyon.

And he smote Peter on the side, and styrred Acts. v. d and. xvi. f*
which opened to them by the own accord. And they went out, and passed
through one street, and forth with, the angel departed from him. And when
Peter was come to him self, he said: Now I know of a suretye, that the
Lord has sent his angel, and has delivered me out of the hand of Herod,
and from all the waiting for, of the people of the Iues.

And as he considered the thing, he Acts. i. d
in prayer. As Peter knocked at the entry door, a damsel came forth to harken,
named Rhoda.

And (...)

But when they had gone through Mysia, they came down to Acts. 18. c.
Troada. And a vision appeared to Paul in the night. There stood a man of
Macedonia and prayed him, saying: come into Macedonia, and help us. After he
had seen the vysyon, immedeatly prepared to go into Macedonia, being certified
that

We were in that city abiding certain days. And on y^ Saboth days we went
out of the city besides a river, where men were wont to pray. And we sat
down, and spoke unto the weme^ which resorted thither. And a certain woman
(named Lydia) a seller of purple, of the city of Thyatira, which worshipped
God, gave us audience. Whose heart the Lord opened, that she atte^ded unto the
Gene. xix. a. Lukc. ^ii. ^. c and xxiiii. c
constrained us.

And it fortuned as we went to prayer a certain damsel possessed with (...).
a spirit y^ prophesyed, met us, which brought her master and mastres much
vauntage with Prophe sying. The same followed Paul and us, and cried, saying:
Math. v. a.
these men are the servants of the most hye God, which show unto us y^ way
of salvation. And this did she many days. But Paul not content, turned about,
and said to the spirit. I command the Mat. xvi. d
in the name of Jesus Christ, that you come out of her. And he came out the same
hour.

And when her master and mastres saw that Acts. xix ^.
the hope of their gaynes was gone, they caught Paul and Sylas, and drue the^
into ^. Cori xi. f.
be beaten with rods. And when they had beaten the^ sore, they cast the^ into
preson, co^mau^dinge the tailor of the preson to keep the^ diligently. Which
when he had received such commandment, thrust the^ into the inner preso^,
and made their fete fast in the stocks.

At mydnight Paul and Sylas prayed, and Acts. v^ and. xii. ^
immediately all the doors opened and every man's bands were losed. When the
keeper of y^ preso^ waked out of his sleep and saw the preson doors open, he
drue out his swearde and would have killed him self, supposinge that the
presoners had been fled. But Paul cried with a loud voice, saying do thy
self no harm, for we are all hear. Then he called for a light and sprange in
and came tre^blyng unto Paul and fell down at the fete of Paul and Sylas, and
brough the^ out, and said: Syrs Luke. (...) Acts. (...) and. (...) ^
what must I do to be saved? And they said Ihon. vi.
believe on the Lord Jesus, and you shall be saved and thy household. And Luke.
xvi
ioyed that he with all his household, believed on God.

And when it was day, the officers sent the ministers, saying: let those men
go. The keeper of the preso^ told this saying to Paul: the officers have sent
word to lose you. Now therefore, get you hence, and go in peace. Then said
Paul unto the^ they have beaten us openly uncondemned, for all that we are
Romans, and have cast us into preso^: and now would they send us away
preuely? Nay Uerely, but let the^ come the^ selves, and fet us out. When the
ministers told these words unto y^ officers, they feared when they heard, y^
they were Romans Met. viii. ^
they came and besought them and brought the^ out, and desired the^, to depart
out of the city. And they went out of y^ preson, and entered into the house of
Lydia and when they had seen the brethren, they comforted them, and departed.

Paul comes to Thessalonica, where the Jews set the city on ^ r^re Paul
of capeth, and comes to ^te^s* where he preached the true and unknown God.

CAPI. XVII.
AS they made their journey through Luk ^ 14. ^.
Christ must needs have suffered, and rise again from deeth* and that this
Jesus was Christ, whom (said he) I preached to you And Act. lx vii^. ^
some of the^ believed, and came and companyed with Paul and Sylas, and of the
devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief weme^, not a few.

But the Jews which believed not, had in dignacion and took unto the^ evil men,
which were vagabu^des, and gathered a company and set all the city on a roar,
and made assaute unto y^ house of Iaso^, and sought to bring the^ out to y^
Ihon. xix. c
And these al do contrary to the decrees of Caesar, affirmig another king, one
Jesus. And they troubled the people, and the officers of the city, when they
herd these thiges. And when they were sufficiently answered of Jason, and of
the other, they let the^ go.

And the brethren immediately sent away Paul a Sylas by night unto Berrea. Which
when Ihon. v. g
the scriptures daily, whither those thiges were even so. And many of the^
believed: also of worshypful women which were Greeks, and of men not a few. When
y^ Jews of Thessalonica had knowledge, y^ the word of God was preched of Paul
at Berrea: they came, and moved the people there. And then immediately the
brethren sent away Paul, to go as it were to the sea: but (...)* (...). d*
Silas and Timotheus abode there still. And they y^ gided Paul,

Paul stood in the mids of Marce street, and said: ye men of Athens, I
perceive y^ in all thiges ye are to supersticious. For as I passed by, and
beheld the manner how ye worship your Gene. 1. a. Acts. 14. c Psalm. 46 a
God ye made the world and all that are in it (seeing ye he is Lord of heaven and
earth) Apoca. 14. b Acts. vii. ^ Esa. lxvi. a 3. Reg. 8 c
dwells not in temples made with hands, nether is worshypped with men's hands,
as though he neded of any thing, seeing he hi self Da^. vi. c Gene. il. b
gives life and breath to all men every where, and has made of one blood al
nations of men, for to dwell on al y^ face of the earth, and has assigned
before, how long time, and also the ends of their inhabitacio^, ye they should
seek god, if they might feel and find him, though he be not far from every
one of us. For in him we live, move, and have our being, as certain of your
own Poets said: For we are also his generacio^, For as much then as we are the
generation of God, we ought not to think that the

Ro^^. ^. ^.
And the time of this ignorance God regarded not. Luke. 24. ^
But now bids al men every where repent, because he has appointed a day, in
the which he will judge the world with ryghtuousnes, by that man by who^ he has
appointed, and has offered faith to al men, after that he had raised him from
death.

When they herd of the resurreccyon from death, some mocked, and other said:
we will hear the again of this matter. So Paul departed from among the^.
Howbeit certain men claue unto hi and beleued^ among y^ which was Diomsius a
senatoure, and a woman named Demaris, and other with them.

Paul preached at Corinthum, contynuing there a year and a half, goes again
into Syrta* comes to Ephesus Cesar^ and Antioche. Of Apollos Aqnda and
Priscilla.

CAPI. XVIII.
AFter this, Paul departed from Athens, Roma. 16. ^ 2. ^im. 4. d
Aquila, borne in Po^thus, lately come from Italy with his wife Priscilla
(because ye the Emperor Claudius had commanded al Jews to depart from Rome)
and he drue unto them, because he was of the same craft, he abode with the^, and
wrought: there craft was to make te^tes. And he preached in the sinagoge every
Sabbath day* (setting forth in the mean while the name of the Lord lesus) and
exhorted the Jews and the Gentyls.

When Silas and Timotheus were come Acts. xvii. d
from Macedonia, Paul was constrained by the spirit, to testifye to the Jews
that Jesus was very Christ. And when they said contrary and blasphemed Math.
^. b Mar. vi. b Acts. 1^. ^
he shoke his raiment and said unto them: your blood be upon your own
heads: from hence forth will I go blameless unto the Gentiles. And he departed
thence, and entered into a certain man's house, named Iustus, a worshypper of
God, whose house joined hard to the synagoge. Howbeit, one Crispus the chief
ruler of the sinagoge John. 4. ^.
believed on the Lord with all his household, and many of the Corin th^a^s when
they gave audience, believed, and were baptized.

Then spoke the Lord to Paul in y^ night Acts. xvi b
by a vision: be not afraid, but speak, and hold not thy peace: for I am with
the, and no man shall muade the, that shall hurt the. For I have much people in
this city. And he continued there a year and six mouethes, and taught them
the word of God.

When Gallio was ruler of the country of Aca^a, the Jews made insurreccion*
with one accord against Paul, and brought him to the judgment seat, saying:
this fellow cou^celeth men to worship God contrary to the law. And wha^ Paul
now was about to open his mouth, Gallio said unto the Jews: if it were a
matter of wrong, or an evil deed (Oye Jews) reason would that I should hear
you: but if it be a question of words or of names, or of your law, look ye to
it your selves. For I will be no judge of such matters, and he drove them from
the seat: Then all the Greeks took Sostenes the chief ruler of the Synagoge,
and smote him before the judges seat. And Gallio cared for none of those
things.

Paul after this, tarried there yet a good Number. vi. b
he shore his head in Cenchrea, for he had a vow. And he came to Ephesus and
left the^ there: but he him self entered into the Synagoge, and reasoned with
the Jews. When they desired him to ^ary longer time with them, he consented
not, but bad them fare well saying. I must needs (at this feast that comes) be
in Jerusalem: but I will return again unto you Hebre. vi a Ia^o. ^^i. ^
if god will. And he departed from Ephesus: and when he was come unto Cesarea:
and ascended up and saluted the congregacyon, he departed unto Antioche: and
when he had tarried there a while, he departed: and went over all the country of
Galacia and Phrigia by order, strengthyng all the discyples.

And a certain Jew named i. Corin. ^. ^ ^ii. ^. xvi. ^.
Appollos

And when he was disposed to go into Acaia, the brethren wrote, exhorting the
dyscyples to receive him. Which wha^ he was come, helped them much which had
believed through grace: For he over came the Jews myghtely: and that openly,
showing by the scriptures, that Jesus was Christ.

Of the xii. me^ that were baptized at Ephesus, and what miracles were done by
Paul. Demecrius moves s^dicio^ in the cite

CAPI. XIX.
IT fortuned that while Apollo was at Corinthum, (...) and. (...)
John verily baptized with the baptyme of repentance, saying unto the people
that they should believe on him, which should come after him: that is on Christ
Jesus. When they herd this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
And when Paul (...)
laid his haudes upon them, (...)
the holy ghost came on them, and they (...)
spoke with tongues, and prophesyed, and all the men were about twelve.

And he went into the sinagoge, and behaved him self boldly for the space of
three months, disputyng and gyuyng them exhortacions of the kingdom of God.
when diverse waxed hard herted and believed not, but spoke evil of the way of the
Lord (and that before the multitude) he departed from them, and separated the
disciples. And he disputed daily in the scole of one called Tira^nus. And this
co^tynued by the space of two years: so Mar. 16. d. Acts. ^. ^.
wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul, so that from his body, were
brought unto the sick, napkis and partlettes, and the diseases departed from
them, and Mat. 17. ^
the evil spirits went out of them.

Then certain of the vagab^nde Jews exorcistes, took upon them to call over
them (which had evil spirits) the name of the Lord Jesus, sayige: We adjure
you by Math. 7. ^
Jesus, who^ Paul preaches. And there were seven sons of one Sceua a Jew and
chief of y^ prestes which did so. And the evil spirit answered and said:
Jesus I know, and Paul

And many that believed, came, and Mark. ^. ^
confessed and showed their works. Many of the^ which used curtous crafts,
brought their books and burned the^ before all me^, and they counted the price
of the^, and found it. l. M. siluerlinges, So mightily grew y^ word of God,
and prevailed. After these thiges were ended Paul purposed in y^ spirit wha^ he
had passed over Macedonia and Achaia) to go to Jerusalem, saying. After I have
been there, I must also se Rome. So sent he into Macedonia two of the^ yt
ministered unto hi^, even Timotheus, and Erastus: but he hi^ self remained in
Asia for a season.

The same time there arose no little a do Acts. xvi. d
we have auau^tage. Moreover, ye se ^ here that not alone at Ephesus, but
almost through out al Asia, this Paul has persuaded and turned away much
people, saying, that Psalm. ^xv. ^
they be not Gods which are made with hands. So that not only this our
craft comes into parell to be set at naught: but also that the temple of the
great Goddess Diana should be despised, and her magnyfice^ce should be
destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worshyppeth.

When they herd these sayings, they were full of wrath, and cried out saying.
Great is Diana of the Ephesia^s. And all the cite was on a rore, and they rushed
into the come^ hal with one assent, and caught Gaius and Aristarcus, me^

Some of the company drue forth Alexander, the Jews thrustyng hi forwards.
Alexander: Acts. 21. ^.
beckened with the hand, and would have given y^ people an answer. When they
knew that he was a Jew, there arose a shoute almost for the space of two
hours, of al men, crying: great is Diana of the Ephesians.

When the town clarke had ceased the people,

Paul goes into Macedonia and into Greece. At Troa^ he raised up a dead body.
At Ephesus he calls the elders of the Congregacyon together, commy^^^th the
keeping of Gods flock unto them, warns them of false teachers, ^^^keth his
prayer with them, and departs to ship.

CAPI. XX.
AFter that the rage was ceased, Paul Acts. (...). f ^. Tim. 4. ^
Trophimus. These going before, tarried us at Troas. And we sailed away from
Philippos after the days of sweet bread, and came unto them to Troas in five
days, where we abode seven days.

And upon one of the Saboth days, wha^ y^ disciples came together for to break
breed Paul preached unto them (ready to depart on the morrow) and continued the
preaching unto to mydnyght. And there were many lyghtes in the chamber, where
we were gathered together, and there sat in a wyndow a certain young man
(named Euticus) being fallen into a deep sleep. And as Paul was preaching he
was the more overcome with sleep, and fell down from the third lofte, and was
taken up deed. But when Paul went down, he 3. Reg. 7 d 4. Reg. 4. f Luke. 7.
c Acts. ix g
and embrased him, and said: make nothing a do, for his life is in him. So when
he was come up again, and had broken the bread and eaten, and talcked a long
while (even till the morning) at the last he departed. And they brought the
young man alive, and were not a little comforted.

And we went before to ship, and lowsed unto Asson there to receive Paul. For
so had he appointed, and would him self go a foot. When we were come together
at Asson we took him in, and came to Mytilnes. And we sailed thence, and came
the next day over against Chios. And the next day we aryued at Samos, and
tarried at ^rogylon. The next day we came to Myleton: for Paul Luke. 24. ^
repentance, that is toward God, and ye faith which is toward our Lord Jesus.
And now behold I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, Acts. 21. ^
the holy Ghost witnesses in every city, saying: that bands and trouble
abide me. But none of these things move me ii. Tim. ii. b
nether is my life dear un to my self, that I might fulfill my course with joy,
and the ministracion * (of the word) which I have received of the Lord Jesus,
to testifye the Gospel of the grace of God.

And now behold. I am sure, y^ he^ceforth ye al (through whom I have gone
preching the ki^gdome of god) shall se my fate no more Wherefore, I take you to
record this day that I am pure from the blood of all men. i. Tim. 4. ^ 2.
Tim. 3. ^ ii. Petr. 2^ and. 3. ^ Iudit. ^, ^
For I am sure of this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in
among you, not sparyng the flock. Moreover, of your own selves shall men
arise, speaking perverse things to draw disciples after the^, Therefore awake,
and remember, that by the space of. iii. years: I ceased not to warn every
one of you night and day with tears.

And now brethren, I commend you to god Eccl. xlvi. t i. Reg. 12. ^
I have desired no man's silver, gold, or vesture. Ye ye your selves know
that 2. Co^i. xi. a and. xii. d Gene. iii. e 1 Corin. ^. b 2. Tessa. 3. b
these hands have ministered unto my necessities, and to them that were with
me. I have showed you all things, how that so laboring ye ought to receive
the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how that he said: it is
more blessed to give then to receive.

And when he had thus spoken, he kneled down Acts. xxi. ^
and prayed with them all. And they all wept sore and fell on Paul's neck, and
kyssed him, sorowyng, most of all for the words which he spoke, that they
should se his face no more. And they conuayed him unto the Ship.

Paul's journey by ship. Of Phyllyppe the Euangelyst and Agabus the Prophet
which warned Paul not to go to Jerusalem, He remained steadfast in his
purpose, and is taken in the temple.

CAPI. XXI.
ANd when it chaunsed that we had lau^ched Acts. xx. ^
that he should not go up to Jerusalem. And when the days were ended we
departed and went our way, and they all brought us on our way, with wives
and children, till we were come out of the city. And we kneled down in the
shore Acts. 20. ^
and prayed. And when we had taken our leave one

When we had full ended the course from Tire, we went down to Ptolomaida, and
saluted the brethren, and abode with them one day. The next day, we that were
of Paul's company departed, and came unto Cesarea. And we entered into the house
of Acts. vi. d. and, viii. a
Philyp the Evangelist, which was one of the seven, and abode with him. The
same man had four ^oil. ii. g.
prophesy And as we tarried there a good mayny of days, there came a certain
prophet from Jury, named Agabus. When he was come unto us, he took Paul's
gyrdell, and bound his fete, and hands, and said: Thus says the holy ghost
Acts. ix. e. 2. Lo^. ii. ^. ^
so shall the Jews at Jerusalem bid the man that owes this gyrdel, and shall
deliver him into the hands of the Gentyls.

When we herd this, both we and other which were of the same place be sought
him that he would not go up to Jerusalem. Then Paul answered: and said: what do
ye weping and vexynge mine heart? I am ready, not to be bound only, but also
to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. When we could not turn
his mind, we ceased, saying Math. vi. b
the will of the Lord be fulfilled. After those days we took up our burdens,
and went up to Jerusalem. Acts. ix. e.
There went with us also certain of the dysciples of Cesarea

^um. vi. a
We have four men, which have a vow on them. Them take, and purify thy self
with the^, and do cost on the^, that they may shave their heads: and all shall
know, that those Acts. xv. ^
we have written and concluded, that they observe no such thing: save only
that they keep the^ selves from things, offered to ydolles, and from blood,
and from strangled, and from fornicacion. Then the next day Paul took the men,
Acts. ^4. d.
and purifyed him self with them and entered into the temple, declarynge that
he observed the days of the purificacio^, until that an offering should be
offered for every one of them.

And when the seven days were now almost ended, the Jews which were of Asia
(when they saw him in the Temple) moved all the people, and laid hands on
him, cryinge: men of Israel, help. This is the Acts. 20. ^. ^. Tim. 4. d
Trophimus an Ephesia^, whom they supposed that Paul had brought into the
temple. And all the city was moved, and the people swarmed together. And they
took Paul and drue him out of the temple, and forth with, the doors were shut.

As they went about to kyl him tidinges came unto the hye captain of the
soudyers, that al Jerusalem was moved. Which immediately took souldyers and
under captains, and ran down unto the^. When they saw the upper captain
and the souldyers: they left smiting of Paul. Then the

And when Paul began to be carried into the castle, he said unto the hye
Captain: may I speak unto the? Which said: Can thou speak Greek? Art not
thou that Egypcyan, which before these days made an vproure, and leddest
out into the wilderness. iiij. thousand men that were murderers? But Paul
said: I am a man which am a Jew of Acts. ix b and. xxii. a
Tharsus a city in Cicill, a Citisin of no vile cite, I beseech y^ suffer me
to speak unto the people. And when he had given him lyce^c^, Paul stood on the
steps, Acts. xix. b
and beckned with the hand unto the people: and when there was made a great
silence, he spoke unto the^ in the Hebrew tongue saying.

Paul answers the Jews, He is scourg^d, and laid in prison again.

CAPI. XXII.
MEn, brethren, and fathers, hear ye mine Acts. ix. b and. xxi. g.
Tharsus, a cite in Cicyl: nevertheless yet brought up in this city, at the
fete of Gamaliel, and informed diligently in the law of the fathers, and was
fervent minded to god ward, as ye al are this same day, and Acts. 5. ^.
I persecuted this way unto the Acts. 8. a. and 1^. a. and. 26. b i. Cori.
15. b Go^la. ii. b.
death byndyng and delivering into prison both men and women, as the chief pressed
does bear me wytnes, and all the estate of the elders: of whom also I received
letters unto the brethren, and went to Damasco to bring them (which were there
bound) unto Ierulem for to be punyshed.

And it fortuned (that as I made my journey Acts ix. ^
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And I answered: what art thou Lord? And
he said unto me. I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest. And they that
were with me: saw verily a light and were afraid: but they herd not the
voice of him that spoke with me. And I said: what shall I do Lord? And the
Lord said unto me: Arise and go into Damasco, and there it shall be told the
of all things, which are appointed for the to do. And when I saw nothing for
the brightness of that light, I was led by the hand of them that were with me,
and came into Damasco.

(...), ix. c
And one Ananias a perfect man, (and as pertaining to the law having good
SAVLE, receive thy sight, And the same hour I received my syghte, and saw
him. And he said: the God of our Fathers has ordained the before, that thou
should know his will, and se the thing that is ryghtefull, and should
hear the voice of his mouth: for thou shalt be his witness unto all men of
those things, which thou haste seen and herd. And now: why taryest thou?
Arise, and be Baptized, and wasshe away thy sins Rome. x^
in calling on the name of the LORD. And it fortuned, that when I was come
again to Jerusalem and prayed

And I said: Lord, they know, that I prysoned and bet in every synagoge the^
that believed on the.

Act^. viii ^
And when the blood of thy witness Steven was shed, I also stood by, and
consented unto his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him. And he
said unto me depart, for Acts. xiii^ Gala. i. ^.
I will send the far hence unto the Gentyles.

They gave him audyence unto this word, and then lift up their voices and
said: away with such a fellow from the earth: for it is no reason that he
should live. And as they cried, and cast of their clothes, and thrue duste
into the air, the captain commanded him to be brought into the Castle, and
bad that he should be scourged, and to be examined, that he might know,
wherefore they cried so on him. And when they bound him with thonges, Paul
said unto the Centurion that stood by him: Is it lawefull for you to scourge a
man that is a Romayne and uncondemned? When the Centurion heard that, he went
and told the upper Captain saying: What intendest thou to do? For this man is
* (a cytezen) of Rome.

Then the upper Captain came, and said unto him: tell me, art thou a Romayne?
He said: Ye, And the captain answered, with

On y^ morrow (because he would have known the certayntie wherefore he was
accused of the Jews) he losed him from his bonds, and commanded the hye
Priests and and all the counsel to come together and Acts. xxii.
brought Paul forth, and set him before them.

Paul comes before the council. Debate aryseth among the people, the
Capytayne delyuereth him. God comfort him.

CAPI. XXIII.
PAul beheld the counsel, and said: men and brethren Acts. 24. b
I have lived in all good conscience before god until this day. And the hye
pressed Ananias commanded them that stood by, to smite him on the mouth.

Then said Paul unto hi^: God shall smite the you painted wall. Deuteronomy. 18. d
Syttest you and iudgest me after the law: and co^mau^dest me to be smiten
contrary to the law? And they yt stood by said John. 17 d
reuylest you Gods hye priest? Then said Paul: I wist not brethren, that he
was the hye pressed. For it is written: thou shall not ^xo. xxii. d
curse the ruler of thy people.

When Paul perceived yt the one part were ^hil. iii. a,
I am a Pharisey, the son of a Pharisey. ^de. xxiii. ^ ^d, 26. b
Of the hope and resurrecyon from death, I am judged.

And when he had so said, there arose a debate between the Pharisees and the
Saduces, and the multitude was divided. ^al. xxii. ^ Mar. xii. b. Luke. xx. c.
For the Saduces say, that there is no resurreccion, neither angel, nor spirit:
But the Phariseys grant both.

And there arose a great cry: and wha^ the scribes which were of the Pharisyes
part arose they strove sayig: we find none evil in this man. Though a spirit
or an angel has appeared to him, let us not strive against God.

And when there arose a great debate, the

(...). xvl. b and. xviii. c Acts. 27. d
The night following, God stood by him, and said: be of good cheer Paul: for
as thou have testified of me in Jerusalem so must thou bear wytnes also at
Rome. And when it was day, certain of the Jews gathered them selves
together, and made a vow, saying: that they would neither eat nor drink,
till they had killed Paul. There were mo then fourtye men, which had made this
conspiracion. And they came to the chief Prestes and elders, and said: we have
bound our selves with a vow, that we will eat nothing, until we have slain
Paul.

Now therefore give ye knowledge to the upper Captain and to the council, that
he

When Paul's systers son herd of their laying awayt, he went, and entered into
the castle, and told Paul: And Paul called one of the under Captains unto
him, and said bring this young man unto the hye Capytayne: for he has a
certain thing to show him. And he took him and brought him to the hye
captain, and said: Paul the prisoner called me unto him, and prayed me to
bring this young man unto the, which has a certain matter to show the.

The hye Captain took him by the hand,

The upper Captain then let the young For he did fear lest happly the Jews
should take him away and kill him, and he him self should be afterward blamed,
as though he would take money) and he wrote a letter after this manner.

Claudious Lysias unto the most mighty ruler Felix, sends gretynge. Acts.
xx. f.
This man was taken of the Jews, and should have been killed of them. Then came
I with soudiers, and reskued him, and perceived that he was a Romayne. And when
I would have known the cause, wherefore they accused him Acts. 22. g.
I brought him forth into their Council. There perceived I that he was accused
of questyons of their Law: Acts. xx^
But was not gylty of any thing worthy of death or of bonds. And when it was
showed me, how that the Jews laid wayre for him, I sent him straight way to
the and gave commandment to his accusets ye the things which they have
against him they should tell before y^: fare well. Then the foudiers (as it was
commanded the^) took Paul, and brought hi^ by night to Antipa^ras. On the
morrow they left the horsemen to go with hi^, and returned unto the castle. Which
when they came to Cesarea, (and delivered the Epistle to the debite) p^sented
Paul also before hi^. When y^ debite had red the lettre, he asked of what
country he was. And when he understood yt he was of Celicia Deuteronomy. 17. ^
I will here the (said he) when thine accusers are come also: and he commanded
him to be kept in Herodes judgment hall.

Paul is accused before Felix, he answers for him self.

CAPI. XXIIII.
After five days, Ananias Acts. xxv. b
y^ hye pressed

For we have found this man a pestilent fellow, Acts. xxi. ^
Whom we took, and would have judged according to our law: but the hye
captain Lysias came upon us, and with great violence took him away out of our
hands, co^maundyng his accusers to come unto the. Of who^ y^ may (if thou will inquire) know the certayntie of al these things, whereof we accuse hi^,
The Jews likewise affirmed, saying, that these things were even so.

Then Paul (after y^ the debite hi^ self had beckened unto him y^ he should
speak) answered: Acts. xxv. b and, 28. d
they neither found me in y^ temple disputyng with any man, either raysyng up y^
people, nether in y^ Sinagoges, nor in y^ cite: Nether ca^ they prove the
things whereof they accuse me.

But this I confess unto the, that after y^ Math. (...)*
the same resurreccion of the dead (which they them selves look for also (shall
be, both of lust and unjust. And therefore Act. ^^^^
study I to have always a clear conscience toward God, and toward men.

But after many years, I came Roman Acts. x^^.
and brought alms to my people and offriges * (and vows) in the which they
found me purified in the temple, nether with multitude, nor yet with unquietness
*( and they took me, and cried, saying, away with our enemy, How be it there
were certain Jews out of Asia, which ought to be here present before y^, and
accuse me, if they had ought against me: or else let these Acts. 23, 4.
of the resurreccion from death am I judged of you this day.

When Felix herd these thiges, he deferde the^, for he knew very well of y^
way, and said: when Lisias the captain is come down, I will know y^ utmost of
your matter. And Iere. 3^. ^. (...). 2^. ^
he commanded an under captain to keep Paul and to let hi^ have rest, and
that he should forbid none of his acquaynctau^ce to ministre unto him, or to
come unto him.

And after a certain days, when Felix Act. xxv. d.
left Paul in prison bound.

The Jews accuse Paul before Festus, he appealeth unto the Emperor and is
sent unto Rome.

CAPI. XXV.
When Festus had received y^ office, after thither. Let them therefore (said he)
which among you are able, come down with us, and accuse him, if there be any
fault in the man.

When he had tarried there among them Act. xxiiii. ^ and* ^8, b
that he had nether against the law of the Jews, nether against the temple,
nor yet against Caesar offended any thing at all.

Festus Act. xxiii. ^
wyllyng to do the Jews a pleasure, Acts. 24, f
there is a certain man left in preson of Felix, about whom when I came to
Jerusalem Acts. 24, ^
the ^ye Prestes and elders of the Jews enfourmed me and desired to have
judgment against him. To Acts. 23. ^.
they brought none accusacio^ of such things as I supposed: but had certain
questions against him of their own supersticyon, and of one Jesus which was
deed, whom Paul affirmed to be alive. And because I douted of such manner of
questions I asked him, whether he would go to Jerusalem,

King Agryppa hears Paul which tells him hy^ calling from the beginning.

CAPI. XXVI.
AGrippa said unto Paul: thou art permytted Phili. iii. ^
after the most straytest sect of our relygion, I lived a Pharisey. And now I
stand Acts. 23, ^ xxiiii. ^. and xxviii. ^
and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God unto our fathers: unto
which promise our. xij. trybes (instantly seruyng God day and night hope to
come. For which hopes sake, King Agrippa, I am accused of the Jews. Why
should it be Acts. 8. ^. (...). ^. xxii. a. ^. Cor^. xv. ^ Gala. i^. c.
thought in my self, that I ought to do many contrary things, clean against
the name of Jesus of Nazareth: which thing I also did in Ieresalem. And many of
the saynctes did I shut up in preson, and had received auctoryte of the hye
Prestes. And when they were put to deeth, I gave the sentence. And I punysshed
them often in every synagoge, and compelled them to blaspheme: and was yet more
mad upon them, and persecuted them, even unto strange cites. About which
things as I went to Damasco with au^ toryte and license of the hye Prestes,
even at mydday (O king) I saw in the way a light from heaven above the
bryghtnes of the son shine round about me, and them which iorneyed with me.
When we were al fallen Arts. 9. ^ and xx^^ b.
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

It is hard for the to kick against the pryckes. And I said. Who art thou
Lord And he said: I am Jesus whom thou persecutest, but rise and stand upon
thy fete.

For I have apered unto the for this purpose, to make the a mynyster and a
wytnes both of those things which thou have seen, and of those things in the
which I will appear unto the, delyuering the from the people, and from the
gentiles, unto whom now I send the, to open their eyes, that they may turn
from the darcknes to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they
may receive forgeuenes of sins, and inheritance among them which are
sanctified by faith that is toward me. Wherefore

Paul ^hppeth toward Rome, Iulyus the Captain intrenteth him courteously ^* at
the last they suffer ship wrake.

CAPI. XXVII.
When it was concluded, that we should Collo. 4. 2.
Aristarcus out of Macedonia, of the country of Thessalonia being with us. And
the next day we came to Sidon. And Julius I^^e. 30 (...) A^^^^ (...). ^
courteously entreated Paul, and gave him lyberte, to go unto his friends, and
to refresshe him self. And when we had launched fron^ thence, we sailed hard
by Cypers, because the wyndes were contracye. And when we had sailed over the sea of Cylycya, and Pamphilia, we came to Myra which is i Lycya.

And there the under captain found a

And because the haven was not commodious to winter in, many took counsel to
depart thence, if by any means they might attain to Phenices and there to
winter, which is an haven of Candy, and lies toward the southwest and
northwest wind. When the south wind blewe, they supposing to obtain their
purpose, loosed unto Asson, and sailed past all Candy. But not long after,
there arose against their purpose, a flawe of wynd out of the northeast. And
when the ship was caught and could not resist the wind, we let her go, and
drove with the wether. But we (...) 25. ^.
thou must be brought before Caesar. And lo, God has given the all them that
sail with the. Wherefore syrs be of good chere: for (...). 2^. ^.
a certain ylonde. But when the fourtenth night was come (as we were saylyng
in Abria about miduyght) the shypmen demed, that there appeared some country
unto them and sounded, and found it. xx. feddoms. And when they had gone a
litel further, they sou^ded again, and found. xv. feddo^s. Then fearing
lest they should have fallen on, some rock, they cast. iiij. ancres out of
the stern and wysshed for the day. As the shipmen were about to sle out of the
ship (when they had let down the vote into the sea, under a conlour, as though
they would have cast an^ars out of the forship) Paul said unto the under
captain and to the soudiers: except these Math. ^. Luke. 12. ^*
there shall not an heet fall from the heed of any of you. And when he had thus
spoken, he took breed and Math. v^. ^ and. viii. a. ^ Tu^. 4. ^
gave thanks to God in presence of them al: and when he had broken it, he
began to eat. Then were they all of good cheer, and they also took meat. We
were al together in the ship, two hundred three score and sixtene souls. And
when they had eaten enough, they lightened the ship, and cast out y^ wheat
into the sea. When it was day, they

The vyper hurts not Paul's hanne, he heals Pu^lyu^ father, and preaches
Christ at Rome.

CAPI. XXVIII.
ANd when they were escaped, then they Act. xxvii. ^
the isle was called Milete. And the people of the country showed us no little
kyndnes: for they kindled a fire, and received us every one, because of the
present rain, and because of the cold. And when Paul had gathered a bondell
of styckes, and laid the^ on the fire, there came a vyper out of the heat, and
lept on his hand. When the men of the country saw the beast hang on his
hand, they said among them selves: this man must needs be a mortherer. Whom
(though he have escaped the sea) yet vengau^ce M^^. ^vi. ^ (...). x. ^.
felt no harm. Howbeit they waited when he should have swol^e, or fallen down
deed suddenly. But after they had looked a great while, and saw no harm come
to him, they changed their minds, and said Acts. xiii. b
that he was a God*

In the same quarters were lands of the

After three months we departed in a ship of Alexandry, which had wyntred in
the isle, whose badge was Castor and Pollux. And when we came to Cyracusa, we
tarried there three days. And from thence we fet a compass, and came to Regium.
And after one day the south wind blewe, and we came the next day to Putiolus:
where we found brethren, and were desired to tarry with them seven days, and
so came we to Rome. And from

And after three days, Paul called the chief of the Jews together. And when
they were come, he said unto them: Men and brethren, though, Acts. ^3. ^. and.
xxv. b.
I have committed nothing against the people or laws of the Elders Act.
xxiii. c
yet was I delivered presoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans.
Which when they had examyned me, would have let me go, because there was no cause
of death in me. But when the Jews spoke contrary, I Act. xxiii. b xxiiii. e.
and. xx vi. b
because that for the hope of Israel I am bound with this cheyne. And they said
unto him: we neither received letters of Iewry pertaynyng unto the, neither
came any of the brethren that showed or spoke any harm of the. But we will
hear of the what thou thynckest.

For as concerning this sect, we know that Luke. ^^
every where it is spoken against.

And when they had appointed him a day, there came many to him into his
lodgyng. To whom he exposided and testified the kingdom Act. (...)
some believed the things which were spoken, and some believed not.

And when they agreed not among them selves, they departed, after that Paul
had spoken one word: well spoke the holy ghost by Esaias the Prophet unto our
fathers, saying: Es^y. (...) Mat. (...) Mat. (...) Luke (...) John. (...)
Go unto this people, and say: with your ears shall ye hear, and shall not
understand: and with your eyes shall ye se, and not perceive.

For the heart of this people is wexed gross and with their ears have they had
no lust to hear, and their eyes have they closed: lest they should se with
their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hertes, and
should be converted, and I should heal them. Be it known therefore unto you,
that this salvation of God is sent to the gentyls, and they shall hear it.
And when

And Paul dwelt two years full in his lodginge, and received all that came in
unto him, preaching the kigdome of God and teaching those things which
concern the Lord Jesus with all confydence, no man forbydding him.

Here ends the Acts of the Apostles.
: The Epistle of the Apostle Saint Paul to the Romans.
Paul declares his love toward the Romans, shows what the Gospel is
with the fruit thereof, and rebu: keth the ^^astlynce of the Heathen.

CAPI. I.
Paul the servant Acts. 13. ^.
put a part for y^ Gospel of God Deuteronomy. 18. c. Acts. iii. d and. vii. e.
which he had promised before by his prophets in the holy scriptutures of his
son, which was borne * (unto him) Math. i. a. ^im. ii. b
of the seed of David after the flesh: and has been declared to be the son
of God with power, after the sprere that sanctyfyeth, sense the time that Jesus
Christ our Lord rose again from deeth (...). ix. b.
by whom we have received grace and Apostle ship, that obedience might be given
unto the faith in his name among all Heathen, of whose nombre you be that are
called of Jesus Christ.

To all you that be at Rome, beloved of God and called saints. Loiii. i. a.
^^la. ^. ^.
Grace be with you and peace from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ.

First verily I thank my God through Jesus Christ for you all, that your
faith is spoken of in all the world. For God is my wytnes (whom I serve John.
iiii. e ^xo^. iii. c.
with my sprete in the Gospel of his son) that with out Philip. i. a ^^ll^.
i. a.
in my prayers, besechynge that by some mean, at the last (out time or other)
a prosperous journey (by the will of God) might fortune me, to come unto you.
For I long to se you, that I might bestow among you some spyritual gift, to
strength you withal: that is, that I might have consolacyon together with you,
through the common faith which both ye and I have.

I would that ye should know (brethren) how that I have often times purposed
to come unto you (...). 16. b.
but have been let hitherto to have some fruit also among you, as among other
of the Gentyls. I am detter both to the Greeks and to the vngrekes, to learned
and to the unlearned. So that (as much as in me is) I am ready to preach the
Gospel to you that are at Rome also. ^ccle. 43. ^. (...). i. d.
For I am not asshamed of the gospel of Christ, because Corin. i. e.
it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believes, to the Jew
fryst, and also to the gentyle.

For by it is the ryghtewesnes of God Aha^ue ^ a Gala. iii ^. Hebre. x. g.
the just shall live by faith. For y^ wrath of God apeareth from heaven against
all ungodliness and vnryghtewesnes of men, which withholde the truth in
vnryghtewesnes: seeing Acts. 17. f.
that it which may be known of God, is manifest among them. For God has
showed it unto the^. Acts ^4. e. Hebre. xi. a.
Ye, his inuisyble things (that is to say, his eternal power and godhed)
are seen, for as much as they are understand Psalm. xi^ a
by the works from the creacyon of the world: So that they are without excuse
because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, nether were
thankful but wexed full of vanities in their ymagynacyons, Deute. 1^. ^
and their folysh heart was blinded. When they counted them selves wise, they
became fools Psalm. ^^6. ^ ^^r^. ii. e
and turned the glory of the immortal God, unto an image, made not only after
the similitude of a mortal man, but also of birds, and four foted Eze. xiiii.
b.
beasts and of crepynge beasts. Wherefore, God gave them up unto their hertes
iustes, to uncleanness, to defyle their own bodies among the^ selves: which
turned his truth unto a lie, and worshypped and served the things that be
made, more then him that made them, which is blessed for ever. Amen. Wherefore,
God gave them Leuit. 18. ^.
For even their women did change the natural use in to that which is
against nature. And like wise also the men, left the natural use of the woman,
and brent in their lusts one with another, Leuit* (...)* ^*
me^ with men wrought filthynes, and received to them selves the reward of
their error, as it was according*

And as they regarded not to know God, A^te^. vii. ^.
even so God delivered them up unto a lewd mind, that they should do those
things which were not comely, being full of al vnrightteousnesse, fornicacion,
wyckednes, coueteousnes, malycyousnes, full of envy murder, debate,
dissey^te, evil co^dicyoned, whysperers, backbyters, haters of God, doers of
wrong, proud, boasters, bringers up of evil things, disobedyent to father
and mother, without understanding, couenaunte breakers, vnlouynge, trace
breakers, unmerciful. Which men, though they knew the ryghtewesnes of God, *
(consydred not) how that they which commit such things, are worthy of deeth,
not only * they that) do the same Osee. vii. a
but also * (they which) have pleasure in them that do them.

He rebukes the Jews, which as touching sin are like the Heathen.

CAPI. II.
Therefore art thou inexcusable. O man, Mat. vii. a.
iudgest. For in that same wherein thou iudgest another 2. Reg. 12. ^
thou condemnest thy self. For thou that iudgest, do even the same self
things. But we are sure, that the judgment of God is according to truth,
against the^ which commit luch things. Thynkest thou this, O thou man that
iudgest them which do such things, and do even the very same thy self,
that thou shall escape the judgment of God? Either despysest thou the riches of
his goodness, and pacyence and long sufferaunce, not knowing ^^^r. 30. ^ ^^^^s.
17. g
that the kyndnes of God leads the to repentance?

But thou after thy stubburnesse, and ^at. xvi d Psalm. (...). ^.
which will reward every man according to his deeds: that is to say,
praise, honor and immortalyte, to them which continue in good doing, and
seek immortalyte. But unto them that are rebels, and that do not obey the
truth, but follow unrighteous, shall come indignacyon and wrath,
trybulacyon and anguyshe upon the soul of every man that do the evil: of the
Jew first, and also of the Gentyle. To every man that do the good, shall come
praise, and honor, and peace, to the Jew first and also to the Gentle. For
^. Pa^. xix. ^ ^^^^s x. ^. Ephe. vi. ^. ^ollo. i^. ^
there is no respect of parsonnes, with God. For whosoever has sinned without
law, shall also peryshe without law. And as many as have sinned in the law,
shall be judged by the law. For in the sight of God, they James. ^. ^.
are not ryghteous which hear the law. But the doers of the law shall be
justified. For wha^ the Gentyls which have not the law, do of nature the
things contained in the law: then they having not the law, are a law unto
them selves, which show the deed of the law written Math. (...).
when the Lord shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to
my Gospel.

Behold, Ihon. vii. ^
thou art called a Jew, and trustest in the law, and make thy boast of God,
and know his will, and alowest the things that be excellent, and art
infourmed by the law: and beleuest that thou thy self art a gyde of the
blind, a light of them which are in darcknes, an infourmer of them which
lack dyscrecyon, a teacher of the unlearned, which have the ensample of
knowledge, and of the truth by the law. Thou therefore which teach another,
teach not thy self Mat. (...)
Thou preachest, a man should Es^r. (...) Ez^. (...)
you as yt is written. For cyrcumcisyon verily avails, if thou keep the law.
But if thou be a breaker of the law, thy cyrcumcysyon is turned to
vncyrcumcysyon, Therefore, if the vncyrcu^cysed keep the right things contained
in the law, shall not his vncyrcumcisyon be counted for cyrcumcysyon? And
shall no vncyrcumcysyon which is by nature* if yt keep the law) judge the,
which being under the letter and circumcisyon, dos^ transgress the law? He
is not a Jew, which is a Jew outward. Nether is it circumcisyon, which is
outwardes in the flesh. But Ihon. ^. ^.
he is a Jew which is hyd within, and Rom^. (...) ^ollo. (...)
the cyrcumsyon of the heart is the true cyrcumcysyon, which consysteth in the
spyrit and not in the letter: whose praise is not of men, but of God.

He shows what preferme^t the Jews have, and that both the Jews and Gentilo
are under sin, and are iustyfyed only by the grace of God in Christ.

CAPI. III.
WHat preferment then has the Jew? or what aduauntageth circumcysyon? Roma.
(...)
shall their unbelieve make the promise of God without effect? God forbyde. 2.
Tim. (...)
Let God be true, and John. (...)
every man a liar, as it is written: Psa. (...) Psalm. (...)
that y^ might be justified in thy sayi^ges, and overcome, when thou ar
judged.

If our vnryghtwesnes make the ryghtewesnes of God more excellent: what God
appear more excellent through my lie, unto his praise, why am I hence forth
judged as a sinner? and not rather (as me^ speak evil of us, and as some
affirm that we say) let us do evil, that good may come thereof. Whose
damnacyon is just.

What then? Are we better then they? No, Psalm. 14. a. and. ^2. ^.
there is none ryghteous, no not one: there is none that understands, there
is none that seeks after God: they are al gone out of the way, they are all
unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one. Psalm. v. b.
Their throat is an open sepulcre, with their tounges they have deceived: the
poison of aspes is under their lyppes, Psalm. v. b. ^^oue^. ^. ^
whose mouth is full of curssynge and bytternes. Esaias. 59. b.
Their fete are swyft to shede blood. * Destruccyon and wretchedness are in
their ways, and the way of peace have they not known. Psalm. 36. ^.
There is no fear of God before their eyes.

We know that what things soever the law says, it says it to them which
are under the law. That all mouths may be stopped, and that all the world
may be subdued to God, because that Gala. ii. ^.
by the deeds of the law there shall no flesh be iustyfied in his ^yght. For
by the law comes the knowledge of sin: But now is the ryghtewysnes of God
declared without the law, for as much as it is allowed by the testimonye of the
law and of the Prophets. The ryghtewesnes of God, comes by the faith of
Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all them that believe. * (on him.)

There is no dyfference: for all have sinned, and are destitude of the glory
of God: but ^^^. 53. ^.
are justified freely by his grace, through the redempcyon that is in Christ
Jesus, whom God has set forth (...). ii. ^.
to be the obtayner of mercy through faith, by the means of his blood, to
declare his ryghteousnes, in that he forgeueth the sins that are passed,
which God did suffer, to show at this time his ryghtewesnes, that he might be
counted just, and the iustyfyar of him which believes on Jesus.

Where is then thy reioysynge? It is excluded. By what law? of works? Nay:
but by the law of faith.

Therefore we hold, that (...). ii. ^.
a man is iustyfyed by faith without the deeds of the law. Is he the God of
the Jews only? Is he not also the God of the Gentyles? Yes, even of the
Gentyls also. For it is God only which iustyfyeth the circumcysyon that is of
faith, and vncircumcysyon through faith. Do we then destroy y^ law through
faith? God forbid. But we rather maintain the law.

He declares by the example of Abraham, that fayeth iustyfyeth, and not the
law nor the works thereof.

CAPI. IIII.
WHat shall we say then, that Esaias. 51. ^.
Abrahan Gene. xv. b. Gala. iii. ^. Jacob. ii. ^.
Abraham believed God, and it was counted unto him for ryghtewesnes. To him that
works, is the reward not reckned of favor, but of duty. To him y^ works
not, but believes on him that iustyfieth the ungodly, is his faith counted for
rightewesnes. * (according to the purpose of the grace of God) Eue^ as David
descrybeth the blessedfulnes of that man unto who^ God imputes rightewesnes
without deeds. Ps^^. 32. ^.
Blessed are they, whose vnryghtewesnesse are forgeuen, and

Came this blessedness then upon the vncyrcumcysyon, or upon the cyrcumcysyon
also? For we say, that faith was rekened to Abraham for ryghtewesnes. How was
it then rekened? when he was in the circumcisyon, or when he was in the
uncircumcision? Gene. xv. ^.
Not in the time of circumcision: but when he was yet uncircumcised. And he
received the Genesis xvii. ^
sign of circumcisyon, as a seal of the ryghtewesnes of faith, which he had
yet being uncircumcised: that he should be the father of all them that believe,
thought they be not circu^cysed, that ryghtewesnes might be imputed to them
also: and that he might be father of circumcisyon, not unto them only which
came of the circumsised, but unto them also that walk in the steps of the
faith that was in our father Abraham, before the time of circumcisyon.

For the promise (that he should be the heir Gala. iii. ^.
For if they which are of the law, be heirs, the^ is faith but vain, and the
promise of none effect. Because the law causes wrath. For where no law is,
there is no transgressyon. Therefore by faith is the inheritance given, that it
might come of favor: that the promise might be sure to all the seed. Nor to
the^ only which are of the law: but to them also which are of the faith of
Abraham, Esaias. 51. a.
which is y^ father of us al (*As it is written: Gene. 17. a.
I have made the a father of many nacyo^s) even before God, whom he believed,
which restored the deed unto life: and calls those things which be not as
though they were.

Which Abraham, contrary to hope, believed in hope, that he should be the Gene.
17. a Gene. xv. b.
father of many nacyons, according to that which was spoken: even so shall thy
sede be. * (as the stars of heaven, and the sand of the sea) And he faynted
not in the faith, nor yet considered his own body which was now deed, even
when he was almost an hundred year old: nether yet that Sata was paste
chyldeberynge. He stackered not at the promise of God through unbelief: but
became strong in faith, and gave God the praise, being full certyfyed, that
he which had promised, was able also to make it good. And therefore was it
reckened to him for ryghtewesnes.

Romans xv. ^.
Nevertheless it is not written for him only, that it was reckened to him for
ryghtewesnes: but also for us, to whom it shall be counted for ryghtewesnes, so
y^ we believe on him, that rayseth up Jesus our Lord from deeth: which was
delivered for our sins, and rose again for to iustifye us.

The power of faith, hope and love: and how death raygned from Adam unto
Christ, by whom only we have forgiveness of sins.

CAPI. V.
BEcause therefore that we are iustyfyed John. 16. g.
peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also it chaunsed unto
us to be brought in through faith, unto this grace, wherein we stand, and
Hebre. iii. a.
rejoice in hope of the glory * (of the children) of God. Not that only: but
also we rejoice in tribulacyons: knowing, that Jacob. i. a.
tribulacyon brings patience, brings experience, experience brings hope.
And hope makes not ashamed: for the love of God is shed abroad in our hertes,
by the holy ghost which is given unto us. For Ephe. ii. a. Co. i. ^. 1. ii. ^
when we were yet weak according to the time, Christ dyed for us which were
ungodly. Yet scace will any man dye for a ryghtewis man. Paraue^ture for a good
man durst a man dye. But Ihon. iii. ^. 1. John. ^. b
God sets out his love toward us, seeing that while we were yet sinners *
(according to the time) Christ dyed for us. Much more the^ now (seeing we are
justified by hes blood)

For if when we were enemies, we were reconcyled to God by the deeth of his
son: much more, seeing we are reconcyled, we shall be preserved by his life.
Not only this, but we also joy in God by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ,
by whom we have now optayned the attonment.

Wherefore, as by one man, sin entered into the world, and (...) (...)
deeth by the means of sin. Even so deeth also went over all men, in so
much as all men sinned. For even unto the law was sin in the world, but
sin is not imputed, when there is no law: nevertheless deeth raygned from
Adam to Moses, even over them also that had not sinned with like transgressyon
as did Adam: which bears the similitude of him that was to come. But the
gift is not like as the sin. For if through the sin of one, many be deed:
much more plenteous upon many was the grace of God and gift by grace: John* ^
which was given by one man Jesus Christ.

And the gift is not over one sin: as

Like wise then as by the sin of one there sprange up evil on all men to
condemnacyon: even so by the ryghteousnes of one, spryngeth good upon all men
to the ryghteousnes of life. For as by one man's dysobedience many became
sinners: so by the obedience of one, shall many be made ryghteous. But Gal^. ^i^
the law in the mean time entered in, that sin should encreace.
Neuerthelater where abundance of sin was, there was more plenteousnes of of
grace. That as sin had raygned unto deeth, even so might grace raygne through
ryghtewesnes, unto eternal life, by the help of Jesus Christ.

For so much as we be delivered through Christ from sin, we must fassy on
our selves to live as the servants of God, and not after our own iustes. The
unlikely reward of righteousness and sin.

CAPI. VI.
WHat shall, we say then? shall we deed as touching sin, live any longer
therein? Know ye not that ^^l^. iii. d ^ollo. ii. b.
all we which are baptized into Jesus Christ, are baptized to dye with him? We
are buried then with him by baptime, for to dye: that likewise as Christ was
raised up from death by the glory of the father, even so Ephe. 4. ^.
we also should walk in a new life. For if we be graft in death like unto him:
even so shall we be partakers of the resurreccyon: knowing this, that our old
man is crucyfyed with him also, that the body of sin might utterly be
destroyed, that hence forth we should not be servants unto sin. For he that
is dead, is iustyfyed

Wherefore (...). ii. b
if we be dead with Christ, we believe, that we shall also live with him:
knowing, that Christ being raised from death, Apoca. i. d.
dies no more. Death has no more power over him. For as touching that he
dyed, he dyed concerning sin, once. And as touching that he lives, he
lives unto God. Likewise consydre ye also, that ye are dead as touching
sin, but are alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Let not sin
raygne therefore in your mortal body, that ye should thereunto obey by the
lusts of it. Neither give ye your members as instruments of unrighteousness
unto sin:

What then? Shall we sin, because we are not under the law: but under grace?
God forbid. Know ye not, how that ^bon. ^. ^. ii. Petr. i. d
to whom soever ye commit your selves as servants to obey, his servants ye
are to who^ ye obey: whether it be of sin unto death, or of obedience unto
righteousness? God be thanked, that though ye were the servants of Iho. viii.
d Roma. 8. a.
Ye are then made fre from sin, and are become the servants of
ryghtuousnes. I speak grossly, because of the infyrmitie or your flesh. As ye
have given your members servants to uncleanness and to iniquitye, (from one
iniquitye to another) even so now give over your members servants unto
ryghtuousnes, that ye may be sanctyfied. For when ye were the servants of
sine, ye were not under righteousness. What fruit had ye then in those things,
whereof ye are now shamed, For the end of those things, is death. But now
are ye desyuered from sin, and made y^ servants of God, and have your
fruit to be sanctified, and the end uerlastynge life. For the reward of
sin is Gene. ii. ^. Roma. v. ^
death, but eternal life is the gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Christ has delivered us from the law and death. ^ani shows what the
flesh and outward man is, and calls is the law of the members.

CAPI. VII.
KNow ye not brethren (I speak to them y^ know the law) how that the law
has power over a man, as long as it endures. For i. Cor. vii. ^
the woman which is in subieccyon to a man, is bound by the law to the man,
as long as he lives. But if the man be dead, she is loosed from the law of
the man. So then Math. v. ^.
if while the man lives she couple her self with another man, she shall be
counted a wedlock breaker. But if the man be dead, she is fre from the law
of the husband, so that she is no wedlock breaker, though she couple her
self with another man.

Even so ye also (my brethren) are dead concerning the law by the body of
Christ, that ye should be coupled to another (I mean to him that is risen
again from death) that we should bring forth fruit unto God. For when we were
in the flesh, the iustes of sin which

What shall we say then? is the law sin? God forbid: nevertheless Roma v. e
Gala. (...). ^.
I knew not ^ine, but by the law. For I had not known what lust had mente,
except the law had said, Exodi. xx. e Deute. v. ^
thou shalt not lust. But sin took an occasyon by the means of the
commandment and wrought in me all manner of concupyscence. For verily without
the law, sin was dead. I once lived without law. But when i. Timo. i. b
Gala. iii. c.
the law is holy, and the commandment holy, just and good.

Was that then which was good, made death unto me? God forbid. Nay it was
sin: that sin might appear (by it which was good) to work death in me:
that sin by the commandment might be out of measure sinful. For we know,
that the law is spiritual: but I am carnal Esaias. (...)* ^
sold under sin, because I allow not that which I do. For what I would, that
to I not: but what I hate, that do I. If I do now that which I would not, I
consent unto the law that it is good. So then now, it is not I that do it
Gene. vi ^
no good thing. For to will is present with me: but I find no means to
perform that which is good. For the good that I would, do I no^: but the
evil which I would not, that do I. If I do that I would not, then is it not I
that do it, but sin that dwells in me. I find then by the Law, that when
I would do good, evil is present with me. For I delight in the law of God,
after the inward man. But I se another law in my members, rebellynge against
the law of my mind, and subduyng me un to the law of sin, which is in my
members. O wretched man that I am: who shall deliver me from this body subdued
unto death? I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then, with the
mind I serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin.

The law of the spyryte gives life. The spyryte of God makes us Gods
children and heirs with Christ. The aboundaune ^our of God can not (...)
separated.

CAPI. VIII.
THere is then no dampnacyon to them Ihon. 8. d. Roma. vi d
fre from the law of sin, and death. For Hebre. 7. c
what the law could not do (in as much as it was weak because of the flesh)
that performed God, and Luke. xx b. Ihon. (...). b.
sent his son in the symylitude of synful flesh, and by sin damned sin
in the flesh: that the ryghtuousnes of the law, might be fulfilled in us,
which walk not after the flesh, but after the spyryte.

For they that are carnal, are carnally minded. ^ut they that are spiritual,
are ghostly GOD: neither can be. So then they that are in the flesh, can not
please God.

But ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit: if so be that the spirit
of God dwell in you. If any man have not the spirit of Christ, the same is
none of his. If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin: but the
spirit is life for ryghtuousnesse sake. Wherefore, if the spirit of him that
raised up Jesus from death, dwell in you: even he that raised up Christ from
death, shall quycken your mortal bodies, because of his spirit that dwells
in you.

Therefore brethren, we are detters, not Gala. 4. ^. ^. Timo. i. v ii. ^or^. ^.
d. a 10. v. a. Ephe. ^. a.
The same spyryte certyfyeth our spyryte that we are the sons of God. If we
be sons, then are we also heirs, the heirs I mean of God, and heirs
anexed with Christ: if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also
gloryfyed together with him.

For I suppose that the afflyccyons of ^^. Lor. v. ^.
For the fervent desire of the creature abides lokyng, when the sons of God
shall appear, because the creature is subdued to vanyte, against the will
thereof, but for his will which has subdued the same in hope. For the same
creature shall be delivered from the bondage of corruptyon, into the glorious
lybertye of the sons of god. For we know, that every creature groneth with us
also, and trauayleth in pain, even unto this time.

Not only it, but we also which have the first fruits of the spyryte, mourn
in ourselves also, and wait for the adopcyon * ( of the children of God) even
the delyueraunce of our body. For we are sauyd by hope. But hope that is seen,
is no hope. For how can a man hope for that, which he seyth? But and if we
hope for that we se not, then do we with patience abide for it.

Likewise, the spirit also helps our in ^ Par. 28. b. Psalm. vii ^.
he that searches the hertes Iere 17. ^. ^^al. vii. ^.
knows, what is the meaning of the spyryte: for he makes intercessyon for
the Saynctes according to the pleasure of God.

We know that all things work for the best unto them that love God, which
also are called of purpose. For those which he knew before, he also ordained
before, that they should be like fashyoned unto the shape of his son, that he
might be the first begotten son among many brethren. More over, whom he
appointed before, them also he called. And whom he has called, the^ also he
iustyfied, and whom he iustyfied, the^ he also gloryfyed.

What shall we then say to these things? Number. ^4. b Luke. xx. b.
if God be on our side, who can be against us? which spared not his own son,
Ihon. iii. ^. ^loy. ^iii. d
but gave him for us al: how can it be, that with him he should not give us
all things also? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? it
is God that iustyfyeth: who is he that can condemn? it is Christ which
dyed, ye rather which is risen again, which is also on the right hand of
God, and makes intercessyon for us.

Who shall separate us from the love of Good shall tribulacion? or anguyshe? or
persecucion? either honger? either nakedness? either parel? either swearde? As
it is written: Psalm. 44. d
for thy sake are we killed al day long, and are counted as Sheep appointed to
be slain. Nevertheless, in all these things we overcome through him that
loved us. For I am sure, that neither death, neither life, neither Angels, nor
rule, nether power, neither things present, neither things to come, neither
heygth, neither loweth, nether any other creature shall be able to depart us
from the love of God, which is in Christ ^esu our Lord.

Paul^ complayneth upon the hard hertes of the ^ewes that would not receive
Christ, and how the Heythen a^^ chosen in their slende.

CAPI. IX.
I Say the truth in Christ, and lie not, Exodi. 32. ^
I have wyshed my self to be cursed from Christ, for my brethren (my kynsmen
as pertaynyng to the flesh) which are the Israelites. To whom partayneth
the adopcyon * ( of the children) and the glory, and the couenauntes Roma. 3. ^
and the law that was given, and the service of God, and the promises: whose
also are the fathers, and they of whom (as concernyge the flesh) Christ
came, which is God in all things to be praised for ever Amen.

I speak not these things, as thought Roma. (...). ^
they are not all Israelytes, which are of Israel: neither are they al
children straight way, that are the sede of Abraham. But Gene. xxi. b
in Isaac shall thy sede be called: that is to say: Johan ^. ^ Roma. (...). ^
they which are the children of the flesh, are not the children of God. But
they which be the children of promise, are counted the sede. For this is a
word of promise, Gene. 1^. ^.
about this time will I come, and Sara shall have a son.

Not only this, but also Rebecca was with child by one, even by our father
Isaac. For er the children were borne, when they had neither done good neither
bad (that the purpose of God by eleccyon, might stand) it was Gene. 25. ^.
the elder shall serve the younger. As it is written: Jacob have I loved, but
Esau have I hated. What shall we say then? is there any unrighteous with
God? God forbid. For he says to Moises Exodi. (...). d
I will show mercy to whom soever I show mercy: and will have compassyon, on
whomsoever I have compassion. So lies it not then in a man's will or cunning,
but in the mercy of God. For the scripture says unto Pharao: Exodus ix. d.
even for this same purpose have I stered the up, to show my power on the, and
that my name might be declared through out all the world. So has he mereye on
whom he will, and whom he will, he makes hard herted.

Thou will say then unto me: why then Esaias xiv ^ ^ne. (...). ^. E^. (...)*
(...) ^. (...) x^^^. ^*
to resyst his will? But O man, what ar^e thou, which disputest with God*
Shall the work say to the work man: why have thou made me on this fashyon.
Has not the potter power over the clay, eue^ of the same ^o^pe to make one
vessel unto honor, and another un to dyshonoure? Even so, God wyllyng to show
his wrath, and to make his power known suffered with long pacyence the
vessels of wrath, ordained to dampnacyon, and to declare the riches of his
glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had prepared unto glory: whom also
he called, not Ose^. (...). d. ^. (...). (...). ^
my people which were not my people: and her beloved, which was not beloved.
(and her to have optained mercy, yhat had not optayned mercy) And it shall come
to pass: that in the place where it was said unto them: ye are not my people:
there shall they be called the children of the living god.

But (...)

doctrine. Let him that exhorts, give attendaunce to his exhortacion. If any
man give, let him do it with synglenes. Let him that rules, do it with
dilygence. If any man ^. Pete. ii. d
In gyuyng honor, go one before another. Eccle. 3^. ^.
Be not slouthful in the busynes which ye have in hand. Be fervent in the
spirit. Apply your selves to the ryme. Rejoice in hope. Be pacyente in
tribulacy on. Continue in prayer. Distribute unto the necessite of the
Saynctes: D^b^ xiii. ^
be ready to harbor. Math. v. ^
Bless them which persecute you: bless (I say) and course not. Be merry with
them that are merry. Weep also with them not only before God, but also) in the
sight of all men. If it be possible, (as much as is in you) live pea ceably
with all men. Derely beloved aue^ge not your selves, but rather gyne place unto
wrath. For it is written: Drute. 32. d
vengeance is mine, I will reward, says the Lord.

Therefore, if thine enemy ho^ger, feed him, if he thyrst, give him drink. For
in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire on his head. Be not overcome of
evil, but overcome evil, with goodness.

The obedyence of men unto their rulers. Love fulfylleth the law. It is now
no time to follow the worckes of darckenesse.

CAPI. XIII.
LET every soul submyt him self unto Sapi vi a Ihon. iii. d. and xvii. b.
there is no power but of god. The powers that be, are ordained of God.
Whosoever therefore resysteth power, resysteth the ordinance of God. But they
that resyst, shall receive to them self damnacyon. For rulers are not fearful
to them that do good, but to them that do evil. Wyite thou be without fear of
the power* Do well then: and so shall

Give to every man therefore his duetye: Math. (...) and. xxii.
tribute to whom tribute belongs: custom, to whom custom is due: fear, to
whom fear belongs: honor, to whom honor pertayneth. Owe nothing to any
man: Exodus x^. ^ Deute. ^. ^ Math. v. ^ Luke. (...). ^
Thou shall not commyt aduoutry: thou shall no^ kyl: y^ shalt not steal: thou
shalt not bear false wytnes: thou shall not lust, and so forth (if there be
any other commandment) it is al comprehended in this saying. Namely: Leuit
xix. ^ Math. (...) Mark. xiii Gala. v. ^. Iaco. (...). ^
Love thy neighbor as thy self. Love hurts not his neighbor. Therefore is
love the fulfyllyng of the law..

This also, we know the season how that it is time that we should now awake
out of sleep. For now is our salvation nerer, then when we believed. The night
is passed, the day is come nigh. Let us therefore cast away the deeds of
darkness, and let us put on the Armoure of light. Let us walkee honestly as it
were in the day light: Luke. xxi. ^. Eccle (...). ^. ^. 10. 37. ^
not in eating and drynckyng, neither in chamburyng and wantonness, nether in
strife and envying: but put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ. And make not
prouysyon for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of it.

The weak ought not to be despised. No man should offend another conseyence.
Again, for out ^^roc things should no man condemn another.

CAPI. XIIII.
Him that is weak in the faith, receive unto you, not in dysputynge and
troublynge R^^. xii. ^
judge him that eats. For God has received him. Jacob. 4. b
What art thou that iudgest another man's servant whether he stand or fall,
that pertains unto hes master: ye, he shall be holden up, yt he may stand.
For god is able to make him stand.

This man puts difference, between day gives God thanks. For none of us
lives for him self, and no man dies for him self. For if we live, we live
unto the Lord. And if we dye, we dye unto the Lord. Whether we live therefore,
or dye, we are the Lords: For Christ therefore dyed, and rose again, and
revived, that he might be ^de^. (...). ^. Philip. ii. b
Lord of deed and quycke.

But why do thou than judge thy brother? Either, why do thou despise thy
brother? Esaias. xlv. e. Philip. ii. b
al knees shall bow to me, and all tongues shall give a knoweledge to God. So
shall every one of us give accomptes of him self to God. Let us not therefore
judge one another any more.

But judge this rather, that no man put a stomblynge block, or an occasyon to
fall in his brothers way. For I know, and am full certyfied by the Lord
Jesus, that Math. xv. ^ ^des. x. b. ^ Tim 4. ^ Mark 7. d.
there is nothing comen of it self: but unto him that judges it to be comen:
to him is it comen. If thy brother be grieved with thy meat

Let us therefore follow those things which make for peace, and things
wherwyth one may edifye another. Destroy not the work of God for a little
meats sake, (...). i. d.
All things are pure: but it is enyll for that man, which eats with hurt
of conscience. It is good nether to eat flesh, nether to drink wine, neither
any thing, whereby thy brother sto^bleth, either falls, or is made weak
Haste thou faith? have it with thy self before God. Happy is he that
condempneth not him self, in the thing which he aloweth. For he that makes
conscience, is dampened if he eat: because he eats not of faith For what
soever is not of faith, that same is sin.

The infyrmyti^ and fraylenesse of the weak ought to be ^orne with al love and
kyndenesse, after the insample of Christ.

CAPI. XV.
WE which are strong Gala. vi. a.
ought to Psalm. 69. ^
The rebukes of them which rebuked the, fell on me. Romans iiii. d.
Whatsoever things are written before time, they are written for our learning,
that we through patience and comfort of the scryptures, might have hope

The God of pacyence and consolacion, grant you, to be like minded one
toward Leuit. xix. d
that ye all agreynge together may with one mouth praise god the father of our
Lord Jesus. Wherefore, receive ye one another, as Christ received us, to the
praise of God. And I say, that Jesus Christ was a mynister of the circumcision
for the truth of God, to confyrme the promyses made unto the fathers: Deute.
xx. ^ 2. Reg. 22 d.
that the Gentyles might praise God for his mercy, as it is written. Psalm. 18.
g.
For this cause I will praise the among the gentyls, and sing unto thy name.
And again he says: Deute. 32. ^
rejoice ye gentyles with his people: And again, Psalm 117. ^
praise the Lord al ye gentiles, Esaye. xi. ^
the cote of Iesse, and he that shall rise to reign over the gentyles: in him
shall the gentyles trust. The God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in
beleuyng: that ye may be rich in hope, through the power of the holy ghost.

I my self am full certyfied of you (my brethren) that ye also are full of
goo^nes, and filled with all knoweledge, and are able to exhort one another.
Nevertheless (brethren) I have some what more boldly written onto you, partly
to put you in remembrance, through the grace that is given me of God, that I
should be the minister of Jesus Christ among

So have I enforced my self to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was
named, least Esaias. iii. d. and. (...) v. ^ Roma. x. ^
To whom he (...) shall se: and they that herd not shall understand. For this
cause I have been ofre let * ( and am let as yet) that I could not come unto
you: but now, seeing I have no more to do in these countrees, and also have
been desirous many years to come unto you, when soever I take my journey into
Spain, I will come to you. For I trust to se you in my journey, and to be
brought on my way thy therward by you, after that I have

Now go I unto Jerusalem, and ^^^^^. xi. d. a^^. xx^i* ^. d 1. Cor^. 1^. a
(...)* Cor^ 8. a and. ix. a
mynister unto the Saynctes. For it has pleased them of Macedonia and Achaia
to make a certain distrybucion upon the poor Santes, which are at Jerusalem.
It has pleased them verily, and their detters are they. For if the Gentyles be
made partakers of their spyritual things, their duty is to mynister unto them
in bodily things. When I have performed this, and have brought them this
truyte sealed, I will come back again by you into Spain. I am sure that when
I come unto you I shall come with abou^dau^ce of the blessing of the Gospel of
Christ, I 1. Cor^. 14. ^
of peace be with you.

AMEN.
A Chapter of salutacyons. He warns them to beware or men's doctrine, and
commands unto them certain godly men, that were lovers and brethren in the
truth.

CAPI. XVI.
I Commend unto you Phebe, our sister Acts. 18. a. 2* Tim. 4. d
Aquila my helpers in Christ Jesus, which have for my life laid down their
own necks. Unto whom not I only give thanks, but also all the congregacyons
of the Gentyles. Likewise, great the congregacyon that is in their ^^. Cor. ^^^
which are with them. Salute one another with an holy kiss. The congregacions
of Christ salute you.

Colloss. ii. ^ Ephesians. ^. ^
I beseech you brethren, mark them which cause division and give occasions of
evil, contrary to the doctrine, which ye have learned: and avoid them. For
they that are such, serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, Phil^. ^^^
but their own bellyes, and with sweet and flattering words, deceive the
hertes of the innocents. For your obedience is gone abroad unto all men. I am
glad therefore no dout, of you. But yet I would have you wise unto

Tymotheus my work fellow, and Lucius, and Jason, and Sos^pater my kinsme^,
salute you, I Tercius salute you, which wrote this Epistle in the Lord. Acts.
x^^. ^
Gayus mine host and the host of all the congregation, saluteth you. Erastus
the chamberlayne of the city, saluteth you. And Quartus a brother saluteth
you. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

To him that is of power to stably she you, according to my Gospel, and
preaching of Jesus Christ in vtterynge of the mystery which was kept secret
sense the world began, but now is opened by the Scryptures of the Prophets
at the commandment of the everlasting God, to stere up obedience to the
faith, publyshed among all nations: To the same God, which alone is wise, be
* ( honor and) praise through Jesus Christ for ever. AMEN.

To the Romans. This Epistle was sent from Corinthum by Phebe, she that was
the minyster unto the Congregacyon at Cenchrea.

: The first Epistle of Saynct Paul the Apostle to the Corynthians.
He commends the Lorynthians, exhorts them to be of one mind, and rebukes
the veuision that was amoge them. Wordly wisdom is folishnes before God, y^^
there to no wysdom but in the despised cross of God.

CAPI. I.
PAul called an Apostle

^o^n* i. ^. Gala. i. ^*
Grace be unto you and peace from God our father, and from the lord Jesus Christ

I thank my God always on your behalf, for the grace of god, which is given
you by Jesus Christ, that in all things ye are made rich by him, in all
vtteraunce and in all knowledge, by the which things the testimony of Jesus
Christ was confermed in you, so that ye are behind in no gift, waiting for
the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, which sha also strength of the
coming) of our Lord Jesus Christ. Number. ^3 c. ^. Corin. x. c
God is faithful, by whom ye are called unto the fellishyppe of his son
Jesus Christ our Lord. I beseech you brethren by the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that ye all speak one thing, and that there be no discencion among you
but that ye may be a whole body: of one mind and of one meaning. For it is
showed unto me (my brethren) of you, by them which are of the house of Cloe,
that there is strife among you. I speak of the same that every one of you
says: I hold of Paul: I hold of Acts. 18. d. ^ Cori iii* a and. xvi. c.
Apollo: I hold of Gephas. I hold of Christ. Is Christ divided? Was Paul
crucified for you? either were ye baptized in the name of Paul? I thancke God,
that I baptized none of you, but Crispus of you) or no. For Christ sent me not
to baptyse, but to preach the Gospel, not with wisdom of words, lest the
cross of Christ should have been made of none effect. For the preaching of
the cross; is to them that perisshe, foolishnes: but unto us which are saved
Roma. ^. v.
it is the power of god. For it is written: Esaias. 2^. ^.
I will destroy the wysdom of the wise, and will cast away the understanding of
the prudent. Where is the wise? Esaye. 33. ^
Where is the scrybe? Where is the dysputer of this world? Has not God made
the wisdom of this world folishnes? For after that the Math. 8. ^. Luke. xi.
d. John. ^i. d.
the Jews require a sign, and the Greeks seek after wisdom. But we preach
Christ crucified, unto the Jews an occasyon of falling and unto the Greeks
folisshnes: but unto them which are called both of the Jews and Greeks, we
preach Christ the power of god and the wisdom of god. For the folyshnes of
god, is wyser then men: and the weakness of god is stronger then men. Brethren,
ye se your calling, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many
mighty, not many of hye degree, are called: But God has chosen the folish
things of the world to co^founde the wise. And god has chosen the weak
things, of the world, to confound things which are mighty. And vile
things of the world, and things whiare despised, has God chosen, ye and
things of no reputacion, for to bri^ge to ^ought things of reputacyon, that
no flessh should rejoice in his presence. And of him are ye, in Christ Jesus,
which of god is made unto us, wisdom, and rightwesnes, and sancrifyinge, and
redempcyon. That according as it is written: he which reioyseth, should
rejoice in the Lord.

It is not cloquence and glorious painted words of wordly wisdom, that can
edyfye, and convert souls unto Christ, but the plain words of the
scryptur^, for they make mencyon of him and his cross.

CAPI. II.
ANd I brethren (when I came to you)

^^ (...)

brother, but one brother goes to law with onother, and that under the
unbelievers? Now therefore, there is utterly a faut among you, because ye go to
law one with another. Why rather suffer ye not wrong? why rather suffer ye not
your selves to have harm nay, ye your selves do wrong, and rob: and that
the brethren. Do ye not know, how y^ y^ unrighteous shall not inheret y^
kingdom of God? Be not deceived. For Gal^. v. d. Ephe. v. a.
nether fornicatours, nether worshippers of Images, nether aduoutrers,, nether
weaklinges, nether abusers of the^ selves with mankind, nether thieves, nether
couerouse, nether dro^ kardes, nether cursed speakers, nether pillars,

I may do al things, but Eccle 37. ^ 1. (...). x. ^
all things are not profitable. I may do all things: but I will be brought
under no man's power. Meats are ordained for the belly, and the belly for
meats: but god shall destroy both it and the^. Let not the body be applied unto
f^rnicacyon, but unto the Lord, and the Lord unto the body, god has raised
up the lord, and shall raise us up by his power.

^. Cor. (...)
Either know ye nor, y^ your bodies Gene* ii* d. ^^* at x^x ^ (...). ^. ^. and
and (...). ^. ^
For two (says he) shall be one flesh. But he that is joined unto the Lord
is one sprete.

Fle fornicacion. Every sin y^ a man does, is without the body. But he that
is a fornicator, sineth against his own body. Either know ye not, how that
your bodies are the temple of the holy gooste, which dwells in you, whom ye
have of god, and how that ye are not your own? For ye are dearly bought.
Therefore gloryfye god in your bodies, and in your spyrytes, which are
Gods.

Of marriage, vyrgynyte and wyddowheade.

CAPI. VII.
AS concerning the things whereof ye T^bi. (...) and. (...)
Wythdrawe not your selves one from another, except it be with consent for a
time, for to gene your selves to fasting and prayer.

And afterward come together again, lest Satan tempte you for your
incontinencye.

This I say of favor, and not of commandment. For I would that all men
were as I my self am: but every man has his proper gytte of God, one after
this manner, another after that. I say unto them that be unmarried and
wyddowes: it is good for them, if they abide even as I do. But and ^. (...). ^^
if they cannot abstain, let them mary. For it is better to mary then to burn.

Unto the married command, not I, but the Lord: Math. v. ^. ano. xix. ^.
Let not the wife be separated from the husband. If she separate her self, let
her remain unmarried, or be reconciled unto her husband again. And let not
the husband put away his wife from him.

To the remnaunt speak I, not the Lord:

Ephe. 4. ^.
As the Lord has called every man, so ^. Tim. vi. ^
Art thou called a seruau^^? care not for it. Nevertheless if thou may be
fre, use it rather. For he that is called in the Lord, being a servant* is
the Lords freman. Likewise he that is called being fre, is Christ's
servant. Ye

As concerning virgins, I have no commandment of the Lord: yet give I
counsel, as one that has obtained mercy of the Lord, to be faithful. I
suppose therefore that it is good for the present necessyte. For it is good for
a man so to be. Art thou bound unto a wife? seek not to be losed. Art thou
losed from a wife? seek not a wife. But and if thou marye a wife, thou have not
sinned. Likewise, if a virgen mary, she has not sinned. Nevertheless such
shall have trouble in their flesh: but I favor you.

This say I brethren, Psalm. (...). ^. (...). Pet. iii. b
the time is short. It remains, that they which have wives, be as though
they had none: and they that weep, be as though they wept not: and they that
rejoice, be as though they reioised not: and they that bye, be as though they
possessed not: and they that use this world, be as though they use it not. For
Esaias. 40. b 1. John. 2. c.
the fassyon of this world goes away. Math. vi. d Luke. vi. ^.
I would have you without care. He y^ is unmarried, cares for the things that
belong to the

If any man think that it is vncumly for his virgin, if she pass the time of
marriage, and if so need require, let him do what he lysteth, he synneth not:
let them be coupled in marriage. Nevertheless, he that purposes surely in his
heart, having no need: but has power over his own will: and has so
decreed in his heart, that he will keep his virgin, does well. So then, he
that joins his virgin in marriage does well. But he that joins not his
virgin in marriage, does better. Romans vii. e.
The wife is bound to the marriage, as long as her husband lives. If her
husband dye, she is at liberte to mary with whom she will, only in the Lord.
But she is happyer, if she so abide, after my judgment. And I think verily,
that I have the spyrit of God.

He rebukes the^ that use lyberte to the sclander of other, and shows how
men ought to behave them toward such as be weak.

CAPI. VIII.
AS touching things Acts. v. ^.
offered unto

As concerning the earynge of those things that are offered unto ydols, we are
sure, that 1. Cor^. 10. ^.
the image is nothing in y^ world and that there is none other God but one.
And though there be y^ are called Gods, whether in heaven other in earth (as
there be Gods many, and Lords many) yet unto 1. Cor^. ^. ^.
Some having conscience because of the image, until this hour, eat as a
thing offered unto images: and so their co^cie^ce being weak is defiled. But
meat makes us not acceptable to God. Nether if we eat are we the better.
Nether if we eat not, are we the worsse.

But take heed, lest by any means this liberte of yours be an occasyo^ of
fallig to the^ y^ are weak. For if some man se y^ which have knowledge, sit
and eat of meat offered unto images, shall not y^ conscience of him which is
weak, be boldened to eat those things, which are offered to images. And so
through Roma. 14. ^
if meat hurt my brother, I will never eat flesh, lest I should offend my
brother.

Love forbeareth the thing that she may do ^y the law. He exhorts them to
t^nne on forth in the course that they ha^^ begone.

CAPI. IX.
AM I not an Apostle? am I not fre? Acts. xi. ^.
other Apostles, and as the brethren of the Lord, and Cephas? Either only I
and Barnabas have not power this to do? Who goes a warfare any time at his
own cost? who pla^^eth a vyneyarde, and eats not of the fruit thereof? Or who
fedeth a flock and eats not of the mylcke of the flock?

Say I these things after the manner of men? Says not the law the same also?
For it is written in the law of Moses. De^l. 25. ^. 1. (...). ^. ^.
Thou shall not mossel the mouth of the ox that treads out the corn. Does
God take Rom^. ^5. ^. Gala. ^i. b.
If we sow unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap
your bodily things? If other be partakers of this power over you, wherefore
are not we rather?

Nevertheless (...). (...). ^.
we have not used this power: but suffer all things, lest we should hinder the
Gospel of Christ. Do ye not know, how that they which minister about Math.
^. ^. A^^^s.
that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. (...). ^.
(...). ^. ^
But I have used none of these things.

Nevertheless I wrote not these things, that it should be so done unto me. For
it were better for me to dye, then that any man should take this reioysinge from
me. For yt I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to rejoice of. For necessyte
is put unto me. But woe is it unto me, if I preach not the Gospel. If I do it
with a good will I have a reward. But if I do it against my will, an office is
committed unto me. What is my reward then? Uerely that when I preach the
Gospel, I make the Gospel of Christ fre, that I misuse not mine auctorite in
the Gospel.

For though I be fre from all men, yet have I made my selte servant unto all
men, that, I might win the mo. Acts. 16. ^. Gala. 11. ^
Unto the Jews, I became as a Jew, to win the Jews. To them that were
under the law, when I was not under the law) to win the^ that were under
the law. To them that were without law, became I as though I had vene without
law (when I was not without law as perteyninge to God, but under the law of
Christ) to win the^ that were without law. To the weak became I as weak,
to win the weak. In all things ^. C^^^. ^. ^.
I fasshyoned my self to all men to save at the least way some. And this I do
for the gospels sake, that I might have my part thereof.

Perceive ye not, how that they which run in a course, ru^ne al, but one
receaueth the reward? So ru^ne, that ye may obtain. Every man that proves
masteryes, abstay neth from all things. And they do it to obtain a crown y^
shall perisshe: but we to obtain an 2. Tim. 4. ^ i. P^^^. ^. ^
everlasting crown. I therefore so run, not as an uncertain thing. So
fight I, not as one that beats the air: but I came my body, and bring it
into subieccyon, lest by any means it come to pass, that when I have
preached to other, I my self should be a cast away.

He fears them with the ensamples of the old Testamente, and exhorts them
to a godly conuersacyon.

CAPI. X.
BRethren, I would not that ye should be Exo. xiii. ^.
in the cloud and Exodus 14. ^.
in the sea: and Exodus 10 ^. Exodus 17. ^ (...) 20 ^.
did al eat of one spiritual meat, and Exodus 17. ^ (...) 20 ^.
did all drink of one manner of spiritual drink. And they drink of that
spiritual rock that followed them, Math. 16^
which rock was Christ. But in many of them had God no delight. For Number. 14. ^
they were overthrown in the wyldernes.

These are ensamples to us that we Exodus (...). ^.
The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. Nether let us
be defiled with fornicacyon, as some of t^e^ were defiled with fornicacio^, and
fell in one day Number 14 ^ (...). xxv. ^.
xxiii. thousa^de. Nether let us te^pte Christ, as some of the^ tempted, and
were destroyed of Number. 21. ^.
serpents. Nether murmr ye as some of them murmured, and were destroyed of
the destroyer.

All these things happened unto them for ensa^ples, but they are written to
put us in remembrance, whom the ends of the world are come upon. Wherefore,
let him that thinks he stands, take heed, lest he fall. There has none
other tempracyon taken you, but such as follows the nature of man. But Number.
(...). ^.
God is faithful 1. Corin. ^. c. 1 ^essa. 5. d ^ Petr. ^. ^^
which shall not suffer you to be te^pled above your strength: but shall in
the myddest of the te^ptacyon make away, that ye may be able to bear it.
Wherefore my dear beloved, fle from worshyppynge of images.

I speak as unto the^ which have discrecyon, and of one cup) Behold Israel
after y^ flesh. Are not they which eat of the sacrifyce, partakers of the
temple.

What say I then? (...). 8. ^.
that the image is any thing? or that it which is offered to images, is
anything? Nay, but this I say: that the things which the gentyls offer, they
offer to deuyls and not to God.

I would not that ye should have felly ship with the deuyls. Ye can not drink of
the cup of the Lord, and of the cup of deuyls. Ye cannot be the partakers of
the Lords table, and of y^ table of deuelles. Either do we provoke (...). 37. ^.
all things are not expedient. I may do all things, but (...). 13. ^.
all things, edifye not. Let no man seek that which is his own: but let
every man seek that which belongs to another.

Whatsoever is sold in the flesh market, that eat, and ask no questyon for
conscience sake. For Psalm. ^4. a.
the earth is the Lords, and all that therein is. If any of them which believe
not, bid you to a feast, and ye be dysposed (...). ^. ^
but of the other. For why is my liberte, judged of another man's conscience?
For (...). iiii. ^.
if I take my part with thanks, why am I evil spoken of for that thing
wherefore I give thanks?

(...). iii. ^.
Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the praise
of God. Se that ye give none accasyon of evil, nether to the Jews, nor yet to
the gentyls, nether to the congregacyon of God: even as ^ Cori. ix. d.
I please all men in all things, not seeking mine own profet, but the profet
of many, that they might be saved.

He rebukes them for the abuse and misordre that they had about the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, and brings them again to the
first instruccyon.

CAPI. XI.
BE ye the folowers of me, as I am the Gene. ii. ^ E^^^. ^. ^.
woman's heed. And God is Christ's heed. Every man prayenge or prophesyinge
having any thing on his heed, shameth his heed. Every woman y^ prayth or
prophesieeh bare headed, dishonesteth her head. For y^ is even all one, as if
she were shaven. If the woman be not covered, let her also be shorn. Deuteronomy. 22.
^.
If it be shame for a woman to be shorn or shaue^, let her cover her heed.

A man ought not to cover his heed, for as much as he is the image and glory of
God. But the woman is the glory of the man. For Gene. ^. ^
the man is not of the woman: but the woman of the man. Nether was the man
created for the woman's sake: but the woman for the man's sake. For this cause
ought the woman to have power on her heed, for the angels sakes: Nevertheless,

Judge in your selves, whether it be co^ly yt a woman pray unto God bare
heeded Does not nature it self teach you, that it is a shame for a man, if he
have long heete: and a praise to a woman: if she have long here For her here
is given her to cover her with all. If any man lust to strive, we have no such
custom, nether the congregacyons of God.

This I warn you of, and commend not, that ye come not together after a
better manner, but after a worsse. For first of all Math. 1^ ^
there must be sects among you, that they which are perfect among you, might
be known When ye come together therefore in one place, the Lords supper can
not be eaten. For every man begins before to eat his own supper. And one is
hongry, and another is dronken. Have ye not houses to eat and to drink in?
Despyce ye the congregacyon of God and shame them that have not? What shall I
say unto you? shall I praise you? In this praise I you not.

That which I delivered unto you, I received of the Lord. For the Lord Jesus
the same night, in which he was betrayed, took breed: and when he had given
thanks, he brake it and said: Math. (...) ^ Math (...).
Take ye, and eat: this is my body, which is broken for you. This do ye in
the remebraunce of me. After the same manner also h^ took the cup, when supper
was done, saying: This cup is the new Testament in my blood. This do as often
as ye drink it, in remembrance of me. For as often as ye shall eat this
breed, and ^. Petr. ii. d
Ye shall show the Lords deeth Act. i* ^.
till he come. Wherefore, whosoever shall eat of this bread, or drink of the
cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be gylty of the body and blood of the Lord.
ii. Cor. (...). b Eccles. 18. ^
But let a man examen him self, and so let him eat of the breed, and drink
of the cup. For he y^ eats or drynketh unworthily, eats and drynketh his
own damnacion, because he makes no dyffere^ce of the Lords body. For this
cause many are weak and sick among you, and many sleep For If we had judged
our selves, ^. Ihon. i^. ^.
world. Wherefore my brethren when ye come together to eat, carry one for
another. If any man honger, let him eat at home, that ye come not together
unto co^de^nacyon Other things will I set morder, when I come.

The dyuersite of the gifts of the holy g^o^^e, given to the comforth and
edyfyenge of one another, as the members of a man's body s^^ue one another.

CAPI. XII.
Concerning spyrituall things (brethren) Mark. ix. ^.
no man speaking by the spirit of God, defyeth Jesus. Also no man can say
that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy ghost. Romans xii. a.
There are dyuersytes of gifts, yet but one spirit. And there are dyfferences
of admynystracyons, and yet but one Lord. And there are diverse manners of
operacions, and yet but one God which worcketh all in all. Ephe. 4. b.
The gift of the spirit is given to every man, to edifye withal. For to one is
given through the spiryt the vtteraunce of wisdom. To another is given the
vtteraunce of knowledge by the same spirit. To another is given faith, by the
same spirit. To another the gifts of healynge by the same 1. Ihon. 4. ^
judgment to ^^cerue spyrites. To another diverse tongues. To another the
interpretacyon of tongues: But these all works even the self same spirit,
diuydynge to every man a several gift, even as he will.

Romans xii. ^. Ephe. (...). ^
For as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of one body
though they be many, yet are but one body, even so is Christ. For by one
spirit are we all baptized to make one body, whether we be Jews or Gentyls,
whether we be bond or fre, and have Es^y. 55. ^.
all droncke of one spyrit. For the body is not one member, but many. If the
fo^e say: I am not the hand, I am not of y^ body: is he therefore not of the
body?

Ye are the body of Christ, and me^bres one of another. And God has also
ordained in the co^gregacyon, first Math. x. ^. Luke. ^x. ^. Eph^ (...). ^.
Apostles, secondarely prophets, thridly teachers, then them that do miracles:
after y^, the gifts of healing, helpers, gouerners, diversity of ^^ges.

Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are al teachers? Are al doars of miracles?
Have all the gifts of healynge? Do all speak with tongues? Do all interpret?
Covet after the best gifts. And yet show I unto you ^ more excellent way.

The natures and condicyons of love.

CAPI. XIII.
THough I speak with the tongues of men and of angels: and have no love. Math.
^. ^. Luke. (...). ^
though I could prophesy, and understand all secrets, and all knowledge: ye
if I have all faith* Luke. ^7. ^.
so y^ I could move mountains out of their places, and yet have no love, I am
nothing And though I bestow al my goods to feed the poor, and though I give
my body even that I burn, and yet have no love, it profyteth me nothing.

Love suffers long, and is courteous. Love ^. Corin. x. ^ Philip. ii. ^
seeks not her own, is not provoked to anger, thi^keth no evil, reioyseth not
in iniquity: but reioyseth in the truth, suffers all things: believes all
things, hops all things, endures al things. Though that prophesyinges
fail, other tongues cease, or knowledge vanysshe away, yet love falls never
away.

For our knowledge is imperfect, and our prophesyinge is imperfect. But when
that which is perfect is come, then that which is imperfect, shall be done
away. When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I
ymagyned as a child. But as soon as I was a man, I put away chyldishnes. Now
we se in a glass, even in a darcke speaking: but then shall we se face to
face. Now I know imperfectly: but then shall I know even as I am known. Now
abides faith, hope, and love, eue^ these three: but the chief of these is love.

Paul shows that the gift of prophecye, interpreting or pr^achyng, excels
the gift of tongues and how they both ought to be used.

CAPI. XIIII.
Labor for love, and covet spiritual gifts: Romans xv. b.
he that prophesyeth, edifyeth the congregation ^um. (...). ^.
I would that ye all spoke with tongues: but rather that ye prophesyed. For
greater is he that prophesyeth, then he that speaks with tongues, except he
expound it: that the congregation may have edifying Now brethren, if I come
unto you speaking with tongues: what shall I profit you,

Moreover, when things without life give sou^de (whether it be a pipe or an
^arpe) except they make a distinccion in the sou^des, how shall it be known
what is pyped or harped? For if the tro^pe give an uncertain voice, who shall
prepare him self to the war? Even so likewise when ye speak with tongues,
except ye speak words that have signyficacion, how shall it be understand
what is spoken? For ye shall but speak in

Many kinds of voices are in the world, and none of them are without
significacio^. If I know not what the voice means, I shall be unto him that
speaks an aleant: and he that speaks shall be an aleaunt unto me Even so ye
(for as much as y^ cou^^ spiritual gifts) seek, that ye may excel, unto the
edyfyinge of the congregacyon.

Wherefore, let him that speaks with tongue pray, that he may interpret also.
For if I pray with tongue, my spiryt prays, but my understanding does no good.
What is it then? I will pray with the spyrit, and will pray with the
understanding. I will sing ^^th the spirit* and will sing with the
understanding. For else, when thou blessest with the spiryt, how shall he that
occupyeth the rowme of the unlearned, say. Amen, at the giuynge of thanks,
seeing he understands not, what thou say? Thou verily gyuest thanks well,
but the other is not edyfied.

Brethren, be not ye children in wit. Howebeit, as concerning ma^^ciousnes,
be children: but in wit be perfect. In the law it is written: ^^^^. (...). ^.
with sondrye tongues, and with sundry lyppes will I speak unto this people,
and yet for all that, will they not hear me, says the Lord. Wherefore tongues
are for a sign, not to them that believe: but to them that believe not. Contrary
wise, prophesyinge serves not for them that believe not: but for them which
believe.

If therefore, when all the congregation is come together, and all speak with
tongues, there come in they that are unlearned, or they which believe not: will
they not say, that ye are out of your wits? But and if all prophesye,

How is it then brethren (...) soft as ye come together, every one of you
has a so^g, has a doctrine, has a tongue, has a reuelacion* has an
interpretacion. Let al things be done unto edityinge: If any man speak with
tongue, let it be by two or at the most by three, and that by course, and let
another interpret it. But if there be no interpreter,

Let the Prophets speak two, or three, and i. Ihon. 4. ^
let the other judge. If any reuelacyon be made to another that sytteth by, let
the first hold his peace. For ye may all prophesy one by one, that all may
learn, and that all may have comfort. And the spirits of the Prophets are
in the power of the Prophets. For God is not causer of strife: Romans xv. g.
but of peace, as * ( I teach (in all congregacio^s of the Saints.

1. Tim. 2. b Gent. iii. c* ^ Lori. xi. ^
Let your women keep sylente in the congregacions. For it is not permitted unto
the^ to speak but to be under obedience, as says the law: If they will
learn any thing, let the^ ask their husbands at home. For it is a shame for
women, to speak in the congregation. Spronge the word of God from you? Either
came it unto you only? If any man think him self to be a prophet, either
spiritual: let him know, what things I write unto you. For they are the
commandments of the Lord. But and if any man be ignorant, let him be
ignorant. Wherefore brethren, covet to prophecy, and forbid not to speak with
tongues, let al things be done honestly and in order * ( among you).

The resurreccyon of the dead.

CAPI. XV.
BRethren, as pertaining to the Gospel

For first of al I delivered unto you, that which I received: how that Math.
^8. b John 20. ^
Christ dyed for our sins, agreinge to the scriptures: Math. ^8. b John 20. ^
And that he was buried, and that he arose again the third day according to
the scriptures: and that he was seen Luke. 24.
of Cephas, then of the twelve. After that he was seen of moo then five
hundredth brethren atonce: of which many remain unto this day, and many are
fallen a sleep. After that appeared he to James, then to all the Apostles.

And last of al he was seen of me, as of one that was borne out of due time.
For I am the least of the Apostles, which am not worthy Acts. iii. ^* ix. ^.
xxii ^ an^* (...). (...). Gala. (...). ^.
I persecuted the congregacyon of God. But by the grace of god, I am that I am.
And his grace which is in me, was not i vain: but I labored more aboundauntly
then they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which is with me. Therefore
whether it were I or they, so we preach, and so have ye believed.

If Christ be preached how that he rose from the dead: how say some among
you, that there is no resurreccyon of the dead? If there be no rysynge again
of the dead: then is Christ not risen again. If Christ be not risen again,
then is our preaching in

But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become Collo. i. ^.
the first fruits of them that ^^epte. For by a man came death, and by a man
came the resurreccyon of the dead. For as by Adam all dye: even so by Christ,
shall all be made alive, but every man in his own order. The first is Christ,
then they that are Christ's at his coming. Then comes the end when he has
delivered up the Psalm. (...). ^ M^t 22 ^. Hebre. i. ^. ^ ^. 8. (...)
till he have put all his enemies under his fete. The last enemy that shall be
destroyed, is death. Hebre. ii. ^.
For he has put al things under his fete. But when he says al things are
put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted, which did put all things
under him. When all things are subdued unto him, then shall the Son also him
self be subject unto him, that put all things under him, that God may be all
in all. Else what do they, which are baptized over the dead, if the dead rise
not at al? Why are they then baptized over theme Ye and why stand we always
then in icoper^y? By our re^oysyng which I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, I dye
daily. That I have the dead rise not again: Esaias. 22. b. ^^^i. ii. ^.
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. Be not ye deceived, evil
words corrupt good manners. Awake truly out of stepe, and sin not. For some
have not the knowledge of god: I speak this to your shame.

But some man will say: how arise the dead? with what body shall they come?
Thou fool, Ihon. 12. d.
that which thou sowest, is not quickened, except it die. And what sowest
thou? Thou sowest not that body that shall be: but bare corn (as of wheet, or of
some other) but God gives it a body at his pleasure, to every seed his own
body.

All flesh is not one manner of flesh but there is one manner of flesh of
men, another manner of flesh of beasts, another of fysshes, and another of
birds. There are also Gene. ii* b*
Adam was made a living soul, and the last Ada^ was made a quyckenyng spirit.
Howbeit, that is not first which is spiritual, but that which is natural,
and then y^ which is spiritual. The first man is of the earth, erthy: the
second man is the Lord from heaven * ( heavenly) As

This say I brethren that flesh and blood can not inheret the kingdom of
god Nether does corrupcyon enheret vncorrupcion. Behold, I show you a
mystery. i. ^ess. 4. ^.
We shall not all sleep: but Ph^^^. iii. ^.
we shall all be changed, and that in a moment, in the twyncklyng of an eye by
the last trompe. For the trompe shall blow, and the dead shall rise
incorruptible, and we shall be changed. For this corruptible must put on
incorrupcion: and this mortal must put on immortalite.

When this corruptyble has put on incorrupcion, and this mortal has put on
immortalite: then shall be brought to pass the sayi^g that is written: Esaias.
xxv. c
Death is swalowed up in victory: (...). xli^. ^
Death where is thy stynge? Hell where is thy victory? The stinge of death is
sin: and the strength of sin is the law. But thanks be unto God which
has given us ^. Ihon. v. a.
vyctory, through our Lord Jesus Christ Therefore my dear brethren, be ye
steadfast and immovable, always rich in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as
ye know, how that your labor, is not in vain in the Lord.

CAPI. XVI.
He puts them in remembrance of the gatherynge for the pore Christen at
Jerusalem, and concludes his Epistle with the salutacyons of certain loving*
brethren.

Concerning the Acts. xi. ^ Roma. (...) ii. Co(...). and. ix. ^.
gatherynge for the Saynctes, as I have ordained in the congregacyons of
Galacia, even so do ye. Upon some Saboth day let every one of you put aside at
home, and lay up what soever is mete, that there be no gatherynges when I
come. When I am come, whom soever ye shall allow by your letters, them will I
side, to bring your liberalite unto Jerusalem. And if it be mete that I go
also, they shall go (...) me. I will come unto you when I go o^^^ (...) (...).
(...)
to Macedonia. For I will go through ou^^ Macedonia. With you perauenture I
wy^^byde a while: or else tarry al winter, y^ ye may bring me on my way, whyther
soever I go.

I will not se you now in my passage: but i. (...). x^. ^
and there are many adversaries. If ^^^. xix. ^
Timotheus come, se that he be wtont fere with you. For he works the work
of the Lord, as I do^let no man therefore despise him, but conuaye him forth in
peace, that he may come unto me. For I look for him with the brethren.

To speak of brother Appollo * ( I certyfye Act. xviii* ^. 1. ^o^^. ^. ^ and.
iii* ^.
you, that) I greatly desired him, to come unto you with the brethren, but his
mind was not at all to come at this time. Howbeit* he will come, when he shall
have conueniente time. Watch ye, stand fast in the faith quyte you like
men, be strong. Let al your busynes be done with love.

Brethren, ye kn^owe the house of i. Corin. i. ^.
Stephana * ( and of Fortunatus and Archa^cus) how that they are the first
fruits of Acha^a, and that they have appointed them selves to minister unto the
Saynctes: I beseech you that ye be obedyent unto such, and to all that help
and labor. I am glad of the coming of Stephana and fortunatus and Achaicus:
for that which was lackyng unto me on your part they have supplied. For they
have comforted my spirit and yours. Look therefore that ye know them that are
such.

The congregacyons of Asia salute you Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in
the Lord, and so does the congregation that is in their house * with whom also
I am lodged). All the brethren great you. Roma. 16. c
Great ye one another with an holy kiss. The salutacion of me Paul with mine
own hand. If any man love not this Lord Jesus Christ, the same be Anathema
maranatha. The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you: My love be with you
al in Christ Jesus Amen.

The first Epistle to the Corintha^ns / was sent from Philippos by Stephana /
and fortunatus / and Achaicus / and Timotheus.

The Second Epistle of S. Paul the Apostle to the Corinthians.
The consolacion of God in trouble. The love of Paul toward the Corynthyans,
and his excuse that he came not unto them.

CAPI. I.
PAul an Apostle of Jesus Christ by the will of God, and brother Tymotheus.

Unto the co^gregacyon of God, which is at Corynthium, with all the Saynctes
which are in all Achaia. Roma. i. a. i Corin. i. a Gala. i. a. Ephe. i. a
Grace be with you and peace from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ.

i. ^etri. i a ^. ^etri. i. a.
Blessed be God (the father of our Lord Jesus Christ) which is the father of
mercy* and the God of al comfort, which comfort us in all our tribulacio^,
in so much that we are able to comfort them which are in any manner of
trouble, with the same comfort, wherewith we oureselues are comforted of God.
For as the Coll^. ^. ^.
affliccions of Christ are plentuous in us, even so is our consolacion

Whether we be troubled for your consolacyon and health, * ( Or whether we be
comforted, it is for your comfort and salvation) which salvation shows her
power in that ye suffer the same afflyccions, which we also suffer: or whether
we be comforted for your consolacion and salvation: our hope also is steadfast
for you: in as much as we know, how that as ye are parttakers of the
affliccyons, so shall ye be parttakers also of the consolacyon.

Brethren, I would not have you ignorant of our trouble, which happened unto
us in ^^^^. xix. ^. ^
Asia. For we were grieved out of measure passing strength, so greatly that we
despayred even of life. Also we received an answer of death in ourselves that
we should not put our trust in ourselves: 1. Reg. ii. d Deute. 8. d
but in God, which rayseth the dead to life again, and which delivered us
from so great a death: and does deliver. On whom we trust, that yet hereafter he
will deliver, by the help of your prayer for us, that by the means of many
occasions thanks may be given of many ii. Cori. 4. c
on our behalf, for the grace given unto us.

For our reioysynge is this, even the testymony of heart) and godly pureness, and
not in fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, we have had our co^uersacyon
in the world, and most of all to you wards. We write none other things unto
you, then that ye read and also know. Ye and I trust ye shall find us unto
the end, even as ye have found us partly: for we are your rejoicing, even ^.
(...)* 2* ^
as ye are ours in the day of the Lord Jesus.

^. Cor. xvi. ^
And in this confydence was I minded first to have come unto you that I might
have had one pleasure more with you, and to pass by you into Macedonia, and to
have come again out of Macedonia unto you, and to be led forth of you toward
Iewry. Wha^ Math. v. ^ Iacobi. ^. ^
ye, ye, and nay nay. God is faithful: For our preaching to you, was not
ye and nay For Gods son Jesus Christ which was preached among you by us
(even by me and Syluanus and Timotheus) was not ye and nay: but by him it was
ye: For all the promises of God, by him are ye: and are in him Amen, unto the
lawde of God through us. For it is God, which stablyssheth us with Roma. 8. c
Ephe. 4. c
has given the ernest of the spirit in our hertes.

I call God for a record unto my soul, that for to fauer you with all I came
not any more unto Corynthium. 1. Petr. v. ^.
Not that we be Lords oueryoure FAITH: but are helpers of your joy. For by
Faith ye stand.

He shows the cause of his absence and exhorts them to forgive the man that
was fallen, and to receive him again with love.

CAPI. II.
BUt I determined this in myself, that upon heuines) of them, of whom I ought
to rejoice. This confidence have I toward you al, that my joy is the joy of you
all. For out of great afflyccyon and anguyshe of heart. I wrote unto you with
many tears: not that ye should be made sorry, but that ye might perceive the
love, which I have, most specially unto you.

If any man has caused sorrow, the same has not made me sorry, but partly:
least I should grieve you all. i. Cori. v. b.
It is suffycyent unto the same man, that he was rebuked of many. So that now
contrary wise, ye ought rather to forgive him, and comfort him: least that
same person should be swalowed up with over much heaviness. Wherefore, I exhort
you, that love may have strength over him. For this cause verily did I writ
that I might know the proof of you, whether ye should be obedyent in all
things. To whom ye forgive any thing, I forgive also. For if I forgave any
thing, to whom I forgave it, for your sakes forgave I it, in the sight of
Christ, lest Satan should prevent us. For his thoughts are not unknown unto
us.

When I was come to Troada for Chrstes Gospels sake (and a great door was
opened unto me of the Lord) I had no rest in my spirit, because I found not
Titus my brother: but took my leave of them, and went away into Macedonia.
Thanckes be unto God, which always gives us the vyctorye in Christ, and
opens the sauer of hes knowledge luke. ii.* ^
To the one part are we the sauoure of death unto death. And unto the other
part are we the savor of life unto life. And who is mete unto these things?
For we are not as the most part are, which choppe and change with the word
of god, but even out of pureness, and by the power of God, in the sight of God,
so speak we in Christ.

He prayseth the preaching of the Gospel at ou^ the preuchynge of the law.

CAPI. III.
WE begin to praise oureselues again. Exodi 24. Deute. v. ^
not in tables of stone, but in Iere. 31. ^.
flesshly tables of the heart.

Such trust have we through Christ Phil^ ii ^
the same comes of god, which has made us able to ^. Cori. 4. ^.
ministre the new testament, not of the letter, but of the spirit. For the
letter kylleth, but the spirit gives life.

If the ministracyon of death through the letters fygured in stones, was
glorious, to that the children of Israel could not behold the face of Moses,
for the glory of his countenance (which glory is done away)

Seeing then that we have such trust, we use great boldness, and do not as
Moses, which Exodus 24. ^
put a veil over his face, that the children of Israel should not se for what
purpose that served which is put away. Man 13. ^. Det. iiii. ^ Luke. viii ^
Acts. 28 f Ihon. x^^ f Roma. x^ ^
But their minds were blinded. For until this day remains the same covering
undertaken away in the lecture of the old testament, which veil shall be put
away in Christ. But even unto this day when Moses is read Exodus 14. ^
the veil Roma (...). ^
when they turn to the Lord, the veil shall be taken away. John. iiii. ^
The Lord no doubt is a spirit. And where the spirit of the Lord is, there
is liberty. But we al behold in a myrroure the glory of the Lord with his
face open, and are changed unto the same similitude, from glory to glory, even
as of the spirit of the Lord.

A true preacher (...) o^^^^^t / he corrupts ^o^ the word ^^ God, but seeks
the honor of Christ. yet thought it b^ with the parell of his list.

CAPI. IIII.
Therefore, seeing that we have such an Ihon. xii. t. Esaias. xi. c.
the God of this world (...) xiii. b Mat ^iii. b. Luke. 8. b. John. xii. t
Acts. ^8. f
has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
Gospel of the glory of Christ (which is the image of God) should shine unto
them.

For we preach not our selves, but Christ Jesus to be the Lord, and our selves
your servants, for Jesus sake. For it is God, that Gene i. a.
commanded the light to shine out of darcknes, which has ii. Petr i. d.
shyned in our hertes, for to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God, in the face of Jesus Christ.

But we have this treasure in ii. Cori v. ^
erthen vessels, that the excellency of the power might be Gods, and not ours.
We are troubled on every side, yet are we not without shyfte. We Gala. vi. d.
bear about in the body, the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus
might also appear in our body.

Roma. ^. c.
For we which live, are always delivered unto death for Jesus sake, that the
life also of Jesus might appear in our mortal flesh. So then, death worcketh
in us, but life in you. But seeing that we have the same spirit of faith
(according as it is written: Psalm. 1:6. b
I believed, and therefore have I spoken). We also believe, and therefore speak.
For we know, that he which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise up us also
by the means i. Corin. i. n
that the plentuous grace by thanckes given of many, may red^u^de to the
praise of God.

Wherefore, we are not weryed. But though our vtwarde man peryshe, yet the in
ward man is renewed day by day. Psalm. xxx. b Romans viii. d
For our trybulacyon which is momentany and light, prepares an exceeding and
an eternal wayght of glory unto us, while we look not on the things which
are seen: but on the things which are not seen. For the things which are
seen, are temporal: but things which are not seen, are eternal.

CAPI. V.
The reward for suffrynge trouble.

FOr we know that if our 2. Cor. iiii. ^
earthy mancion of this dwelling were destroyed, we have a byldyng of God, an
habytacyon not made with hands, but eternal in heaven. For Roma. 8. ^
therefore syghe we, desiring to be clothed with our mansyon which is from
heaven: so yet, if that we be found clothed, and not naked. For we that are in
this 2. Petri. 1 ^
tabernacle, syghe and are grieved because we would not be unclothed, but would
be Apoca. iii. d
clothed upon, that mortalite might be swalowed up of life He that has
ordained us for this thing, is God: which very same has given unto us Roma 8.
c. 2. Corin. i. ^
the ernest of the spirit.

Therefore, we are always of good cheer, and know, that as long as we are at
home in the body, we are absent from god. For we walcke in faith, not after
outward appearau^ce. Nevertheless, we are of good comfort, Mat. xxv. ^ Roma.
14. ^
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man
may receive the worckes of his body according to that he has done, whether
it be good or bad.

Seeing then that we know, how the Lord is to be feared. We fare fair with
men. For we are known well enough unto god. I trust also that we are known in
your consciences.

For we praise not our selves again unto you, but give you an occasyon to
rejoice of us, that ye may have some what against the^, which rejoice in the
face, and not in the 2. Ti^. v. c
he dyed for all: that they which live, should not hence forth live unto them
selves, but unto him which dyed for them, and rose again.

Wherefore, hence forth know we no man after Esaias. 43. ^. Ap^c xxi. a.
new. Nevertheless, al things are of God, which has Roma. iii. d ^o^^o^. i. ^
reconcyled us unto him self by Jesus Christ, and has given to us the office
to preach the atonement. For Collo. ii. c
God was in Christ, and made agreement between the world and him self, and
imputed not their sins unto them, and has committed to us the preaching of
the atonement. Now then are we messengers in the rowme of Christ eue^ as
though God did beseech you through us. So pray we you in Christ's stead, that
ye be reconcyled unto God: for Esaias. liii. b Roma. ^. ^
he made him to be sin for us, which knew no sin, that we by his means
should be that ryghtuousnesse, which before God is allowed.

An exhortacyon to receive the word of God with thankfulness and amendment
of life. The dyligence of Paul in the Gospel, and how he warns them to
exchewe the company of the Heythen.

CAPI. VI.
WE also as helpers exhort you that Esaias. xlix. c
I have herd the in a time accepted: and in the day of salvation, have I
suckered the. Behold, now is that accepted time: behold, now is the day of
salvation. Let us give no occasyon of evil, that in our office be found no
fault: but in all things let us behave our selves ^. Cori. 4. a
as the ministers of God.

In much patience, in affliccyons, in necessyties,

O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you. Our heart is made large: ye are
in no Deute. 7. ^,
bear not ye the yocke with the unbelievers. For what fellyshyp has
ryghtuousnes with unrighteousness? Or what company has light with dackenesse?
Math. 8. d.
Or what concord has Christ with Beliall? Either what part has he that
believes, with an infydell? Or how agrees the temple of God with images? For
ye ^ Corin. 3. b (...). vi. d
are the Temple of the living God, as said God? Exodi. 29. ^ Leuit. 26. ^
Ezech. 37. ^
I will dwell among them, and walcke among them, and will be their God: and
they shall be my people. Wherefore Esaias. lii. ^.
come out from among them, and separate your selves from them (says the Lord)
and touch none unclean thing: so will I receive you, and will be a father unto
you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord almighty.

^e exhorts them to receive the promyses of God tha^kefully. The Corynthyans
are commanded for ^he^^ (...) (...) and love toward Paul.

CAPI. VII.
Seeing that we have such promyses (de Acts. 16. ^.
our flesh had no rest, but we were troubled on every side. Outward was
fyghting, inward was fere. Nevertheless 1. Cori. i. a,
God that comfort the absecte, comforted us by the coming of Titus.

And not by his coming only: but also by the consolacyon which we received
of Eccle. 30. 8.
worldly sorrow causes death.

For behold, what dylygence this godly hurt: but that your good mi^de for us
might appear among you in the sight of God.

Therefore, we are comforted, because ye are comforted: ye and excedyngely the
more ioyed

He puts them in remembrance to help the pore saints at Jerusalem,
according as the Macedonians did.

CAPI. VIII.
I Certyfie you brethren, of the grace of god Acts. xi. d. ^ Cor. xvi. ^
(...). Cor. ix. a Roma. xv. t
in ministering to the sanctes. And this they did, not as we looked for: but gave
their own selves first to the Lord, and after unto us by the will of God: so
that we could not but desire Tytus, to accomplish the same benyuolence among
you also, even as he had begone.

Now therefore, as ye are rich in all parties, Roma. x ^
rich, yet for your sakes he became poor: that ye through his pouertye, might
be made rich.

And I give council hereto. For this is expe^ tent for you, which began, not
to do only, but also to will a year agoo. Now therefore perform the thing
which ye began i. Pet. iiii. ^ Prove iii. b Mat xii. d
of that which ye have. For Luke. xxi. a.
if there be first a wyllyng mind, it is accepted according to that a man
has, and not according to that he has not.

It is not my mind that other be set at ease: and ye brought into combraunce:
but that there be egalnes now at this time: and that your abou^dance may sucker
their lack: and that their abundance may supplye your lack: that there may
be equalite agreynge to that which is written: Ex^. xvi. ^
He that had much, had not the more abundance: and he that had little, had
nevertheless. Thanks be unto God, which put the same good mi^de for you in
the heart of Titus, which accepted the request: ye rather he was so well
willing, that of his own accord, he came unto you.

We have sent with him that brother, whose

For this we exchewe, that any man should rebuke us in this plentuous
distribucyon Roma. xii. c
that is ministered by us * (to the glory of the Lord) and make provision for
honest things: not only in the sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of
men.

We have sent with the^ a brother of ours, whom we have often times proved
dyligent in many things, but now much more dilygent. The great confidence
which I have i^ you, has caused me this to do: partly for Titus sake which
is my fellow and helper as concerning you. Partly because of other which are
our brethren, and the messe^gers of the congregacions, and the glory of
Christ. Wherefore, show ye unto them the proof of your love, and of our i.
(...). ii. ^.
boastyng of you in the sight of the congregacions.

In this Chapyter does he the same that he did in the Chapyter going before,
that is, he moves them to help the poor brethren at Jerusalem.

CAPI. IX.
OF the Acts. xi. ^ t. Cori. 16 ^ ii. Cori. 8. ^. Romans (...). ^.
mynystryng to the saynctes, come with me, and find you unprepared, we (I will
not say ye) should be ashamed in this matter of boasting.

Wherefore, I thought it necessary, to exhort Prou. xi. b. Gala. vi. d.
he that sows plenteously shall reepe plenteously. And leteuery man do
according as he has purposed in his heart not groudgyngly, or of necessyte
Exo. xxv. a (...). xxxv. ^ (...). (...). ^.
For God loves a cheerful geuer.

God is able to make you rich in all grace, that ye in all things having
sufficient unto Psa. xxii. b.
He has sparsed abroad, and has given to the poor, his rightewesnes
remains for ever. He that mynystreth seed unto the sower mynyster breed also
for fode, and multyplye your seed, and increace the fruits of your ryghtwesnes
that on all parts, ye may be made rich into all synglenes, which causes
through us that thanks are given unto God.

For the office of this mistracyon, not only

Thanckes be unto God for his unspeakable gy^ce.

He ^ou^h has the false Apostles, and defends his auctoryte and calling.

CAPI. X.
I Paul my self beseech you by the mekenes Ephe. vi. ^.
For the weapens of our warrefare are not carnal things, but things, mighty in
God, to cast down strong holds wherewith we overthrow councels and every hye
thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bring into
capty-uyte all ymagynacyon to the obedyence of Christ, and are ready to take
vengeance on al disobedyence, when your obedience is fulfilled. Look ye on
things after the utter apperaunce?

If any man trust in him self, that he is 2. Cor. xiii. t
to edyfye and not to destroy you) it shall not be to my shame: lest I should
seem as though I went about to make you afraid with letters. For the epystles
(says he) are sore and strong: but his bodyly presence is weak, and his
speech rude. Let him that is such, thyncke on this wise: that as we are in
words by letters when we are absent, such are we in deeds, when we are
present.

For we cannot find in our hertes to

Paul (under sufferaunce) cominendeth him self and defends his auctoryte
against the false prophets.

CAPI. XI.
Would to God, ye could have suffered

For I have coupled you to one man, to make you a chaste vyrgyn to Christ. But
I fear, lest it come to pass that as the serpente Give. iii. ^.
begyled Eve through his su^teltye, even(...)

: The Epistle of Sayncte Paul the Apostle unto the Galathyans.
Paul rebukes them, because they were fallen away from the Gospel, shows
his own conversion, magnifyeth his office and Apostelshippe, and declares him
self to be equal with the hye Apostles.

CAPI. I.
Paul an Apostle / Roma. i. a. i. Cori. ^. a. ii. Cori. ^. a.
Grace be with you and peace from God the father, and from our Lord Jesus
Christ, which gave him self for our sins, to deliver us from this present
evil world according to the will of God our father, to whom be praise for
ever and ever. AMEN.

I maruayle, that ye, are so sone turned (from Christ, which called you by
grace) unto another Gospel: which is nothing else, but that there be some,
which trouble you, and ^^^^^. xv a.
intend to peruerte the Gospel of Christ. Nevertheless, though we our
selves, or an angel from heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you, then that
which we have preached unto you, let him be acursed. As we said before, so
say I now Job. xxxi a.
For if I had hitherto studied to please men, I were not the servant of Christ.

I certifye you brethren, that the Gospel which was preached of me, was not
after the manner of men. For I neither received it, nor learned it of man, but by
the reuelacion of Jesus Christ. For ye have heard Act. viii. a ix. a. xxii. a
and. xxvi b. ^. Cori. x^. ^
I persecuted the congregation of god, and spoiled it: and prevailed in the
Jews way above many of my co^panio^s in mine own nation Phili. iii a.
being a very fervent mayntener of the tradicions of the elders.

But when it pleosed God, which separated me from my mothers womb, and Acts.
ix. ^.
called me hereunto by his grace, for to declare his son by me, that I should
preach him among the heathen: immediately I commened not of the matter with
Mat. x^^ ^
flesh and blood, neither returned to Jerusalem, to

Act^. xxii. ^.
After that came I into the coasts of Siria and Cilicia, and was unknown as
touching my person unto the congregacions of Iewrye, which were in Christ.
But this they heard only, that he which persecuted us in time paste, now
preaches the faith, which before he destroyed. And they gloryfyed God in me.

He withstandeth Peter in the face, and proves that the law and circumcision
are not necessary to salvation.

CAPI. II.
THen. xiiij. years thereafter, I went up Acts. x^. ^
with Barnabas, and took Titus with me. I went up also by reuelacyon, and
commened with them of the Gospel which I preach among the Gentyls (but
specially) with them which were counted chief, leest I should run, or had
run, in vain. Also Titus which was with me, though he were a Greek, yet was
not compelled to be circumcysed: and that because of incommers being false
brethren, which came in preuely to spy out our lybertye which we have in
Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage.

To whom we gave no rowme, no not for the time (as concerning to be brought
insubieccyon) because that the truth of the Gospel might continue with you.

Of them which seemed to be somewhat ^. Pat. x^x. ^ Roma. ii. ^. Acts. x. ^.
Ephe. 6. ^. Collo. iii. ^ Eccle. ^5. ^.
God looks on the outward apperaunce of no man) nevertheless they which seemed
great, added nothing to me. But contrary wise, when they saw that the Gospel
over the vncyrcumcysion was committed unto me, as the Gospel over the
circumcysyon was committed unto Peter (for he that was mighty in Peter in the
Apostleshyppe over the cyrcumcysyon, the same was mighty in me among the
Gentyles) when they perceived the grace that was given unto me, then James,
Cephas and John, which seemed to be pyllers. gave to me and Barnabas the right
hands of that feloshippe, that we should be Apostles among the Heathen, and
they in the circumcisyon: only that we should remember the poor. ^^^^. xi. d.
(...). Cori. ix a
Wherein also I was diligent to do the same.

But when Peter was come to Antioche, Philip. 3. a (...). iii c
Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentyls, know, that a man is not
justified by the deeds of the law, but by the faith of Jesus Christ: And we
have believed on Jesus Christ, that we might be justified by the faith of
Christ, and not by the deeds of the law: because that by the deeds of the
law no flesh shall be justified.

If whyll we seek to be made ryghtewes Ephesians. v. ^.
which loved me, and gave him self for me. I despyce not the grace of God.
For (...). 4. c.
if ryghtewesnes come of the law, then Christ dyed in vain.

He rebukes the unsteadfastness of the Galathyans showing the vnparfectnesse
of the law and declares nevertheless that it was not given for naught.

CAPI. III.
OYe folysshe Galathyans: who has

So many things ye have suffered in vain, if it be also in vain. Moreover, he
that ministers to you the spyrite, and works miracles among you, does he it
through the deeds of the law, or by prachyng of the faith? Gene. xv. ^. Roma.
4. a. Jacob. (...). d.
Even as Abraham believed God, and it was asscrybed to hi^ for ryghtewesnes, ye
know therefore, that they which are of faith, the same are the children of
Abraham.

For the scripture seeing before hand, that Gene. xi^. a and. xxii. b.
In the shall all nacyons be blessed. So then, they which be of faith, are
blessed withfaythfull Abraham. For as many as are of the deeds of y^ law, are
subject to the curse. For it is written Deue. 27. d.
cursed be every one, y^ co^tynueth not in all things which are written in the
book of the law, to fulfill them. That no man is justified by the law in the
sight of God it is evident. A^a^^^. ^. ^ Roma. ^. c. Hebre. x. ^. Leuit. ^^. ^
For the just shall live by faith. The law is not of faith Ez* x^, ^ Roma x. ^.
but the man that fulfylleth the things contained in the law, shall live in
the^. Christ has delivered us from the curse of the law, in as much as he
was made a curse for us. For it is written: Deu. xx^^. ^.
cursed is every one, that ha^geth on tree, that the blessing of Abraham might
come on the Gentyls through Jesus Christ, ye we might receive the promise of the
spirit through faith.

Brethren, I spoke after the manner of me^. Gene. xv. ^. Exodi. xii. f Judith.
v. b Acts. vii. a
four. C. and thyrtye years, does not disanul the testamente, that was
confermed before of God unto Christ ward, to make the promise of none effect
Romans iiii. c.
For if the inheritance come of the law, it comes not now of promise. But
God gave it unto Abraham by promise.

Wherefore the^ serves y^ law? Roma v ^* and. vii. b.
The law was added because of tra^sgressio^ (till y^ seed came, to whom the
promise was made) and it was ordained Acts. viii. ^
by Angels in the hand of a mediator. A mediator is not a mediator of one. But
God is one. Rom vii. c. ^. Timo. i. ^.
Is the law then against the promise of God? God forbid. For if there had been
a law given which could have given life: then no doubt ryghtewesnes should
come by the law But the scripture(...)

: The epistle of Saint Paul the apostle unto the Ephesyans.
The everlasting ordinance and eleccyon of God in saving all men through
Christ Jesus his son, we are ordened unto good works. The dominion of
Christ.

CAPI. I.
PAul an apostle of

To the Saynctes / which are at Ephesus / and to them which believe on Jesus
Christ. Roma. i. a. i. Corin. i. a 11. Cori. i. a.
Grace be with you and peace from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ. i. Pete. i. a. Gala. i. a. i. Petri. i^.
Blessed be God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which has blessed us
with all manner of spiritual blessing in heavenly things by Christ,
according as he had chosen us in him, before the foundacions of the world
were laid, that we should be holy, and without blame before him, through love.
which ordained us before through Jesus Christ to be heirs unto him self
'accordynge to the good pleasure of his will, to

Collo. i. ^
By whom we have redempcyon through his blood, even the forgeuenes of sins,
according to the riches of his grace: where of he has ministered unto us
abundantly in all wisdom, and prudence. And has opened unto us the mystery
of his will, according to his good pleasure, which he had purposed in him
self, to have it declared Gala. iiii. a
when the time was full come, that he might set up all things perfectly by
Christ (both the things which are in

In whom also ye believe, for as much as we have hard the word of truth, even
the Gospel of your salvation: wherein when ye had believed Roma. ^. ^. ii. Corin.
i. d and. v. a
ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our in
herytau^ce for the recoueringe of the purchased possession, unto y^ praise of
his glory. Wherefore, I also (after that I heard of the Roma. i. b. Philip. ^.
^. ^oll^. ^. ^ 2. (...)
cease not to give thanckes for you, making mencyon of you in my prayers: that
the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of glory, may give unto you the
spyryte of wisdom and of reuelacion by the knowledge of him self and lyghten
the eyes of your minds: that ye may know what the Romans xv. ^.
hope is, where unto he has called you, and how rich the glory is of his
inherytaunce upon the saints, and what is y^ exceeding greatness of his power
to us ward, which believe according to the workyng of that his mighty power,
which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the deed, Psalm. ix. ^.
and set him on his right hand in heavenly things, above Dani. vii. d
all rule, and power, and might and domynyon, and above every name that is
named, not in this world only, but also in the world to come: and Psalm.
viii. b Hebre. ii. ^. 1. Cori. x^. ^
has put al things under his fete, and has made him above all things
Ephesians. v. ^. Collo. i. c
the heed of the congregacyon, which is his body and the fulness of him, that
fylleth all in all.

Paul shows them what manner of people they were before their conuersyon, and
what they are now in Christ.

CAPI. II.
AND you has he quyckened, where Roma. v. ^. Collo. i. c
in time passed ye walked, according to the course of this world, even after
the gouerner that rules in the air, the spirit that now works in the
children of unbelief Collo. iii. ^
among whom we al had our conuersacyon also in time past, in the lusts of
our flesh, and fulfilled the lusts of our flesh, and fulfilled the will
of the flesh and of the mind: and were by nature the children of wrath, even
as well as other.

But God which is rych in mercy (for his great love wherewith he loved us, even
when we were deed by sins) quickened us together in Christ ( E^ay. 25. d.
by garce are ye saved) and raised us up together with him and made For we are
his worckmanshyppe, created in Christ Jesus unto ^i^us. i. d
good works, which god ordained, that we should walk in them.

Wherefore, remember that ye being in time Phil. iii. a ^^lio. ii, b
vncircumcysyon from that which is called circumcision in the flesh, which
circumcisyon is made by hands: Remember (I say) that at that time ye were
without Christ, being al^a^tes from the co^me^ wealth of Israel, and strangers
from the testamentes of the promise, and had no hope, and were without God in
this world. But now by the means of Christ Jesus, ye which sometime were
far of, are made nigh by the blood of Christ.

For he is our peace, which has made of both one, and has broken down the
wall that was a stop bitwene us, and has also put away through his flesh,
the cause of hatred, even the law of commandments contained in the law
written, for to make of ^wane one new man in him self, so making peace: and
to reconcile both unto God in one body through the cross, and slew hatred
thereby: and came, and preached peace to you

Now therefore, ye are not strangers and foreners: but cytesyns with the
saints, and of the household of God: and are bylt upon the i. ^or. i^. b ^^ay
(...) d. Acts. iiii. b
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Roma. ix. ^ Psalm. (...). ^ Mat. xxi.
d Acts. iiii. ^ i. Petr. ii. b
Jesus Christ him self being the head corner stone, in whom what buyldyng
soever is coupled together, it grows unto an holy temple in the Lord, in
whom ye also are buylt together, to be an habitacion of God through the * (
holy) ghost.

He shows the cause of his presonmente, desires them not to saint because
of his trouble, and prays God to make them steadfast in his spirits.

CAPI. III.
FOr this ^ause, I Paul am a prisoner of Jesus Christ for you Heythen: If ye
have heard of the ministracyon of the grace of God, A^eo. xiii. a
which is given me to you ward for Gala. i. b
by reuelacyon showed he the mystery unto me, as I wrote before in few words,
whereby when ye read, ye may understand my knowledge in the mystery of Christ,
which mystery in times passed was not opened unto the sons of men, as it is
now declared unto his holy Apostles and Prophets by the spyrit, that the
Gentyls should be inheritours also, and of the same body, and partakers of his
promise in Christ by the means of the Gospel, whereof I am made a mynyster,
according to the gift of the grace of God which is given unto me after the
workyng of his power.

Unto me the i. Cori. xv. ^
least of al saynctes is this grace given, that I should preach among the
Gentylles the unsearchable riches of Christ, and to make al men se, what
felowshyppe of the mysterye is, * which from the beginning of the world has
been hyd in God which made al things through Jesus Christ: to the intent,
that now unto the rulers and powers in heavenly things might be known by the
congregation, the manyfold wisdom of God, according to the eternal purpose,
which he wrought in Christ Jesus our Lord, by whom we have boldness and
entrau^ce with the confydence which is by the faith of him. Wherefore I desire
that ye faint not because of my trybulacio^s Collo. ^. d.
that I suffer for your sakes: which is your praise.

For this cause I bow my knees unto the

Unto him that is able to do exceeding abou^dantly above all that we ask or
think according to the power that works in us, be praise in the co^gregacyon
by Jesus Christ thoroweout all generacyons from time to time.

Amen.
He exhorts them unto mekenes, to lay aside the old conuersacyon of gredy
lusts, and to walcke in a new life.

CAPI. IIII.
I Therefore (which am a prysonner of the Lords) exhort you, ^. Co* 7. d.
that ye walk worthy of the vocacyon wherewith ye are called with all lowlynes
and mekenes, with humblenes of mind, forbearynge one another through love, and
be diligent to keep the unite of the spirit through the bond of peace being
one body, and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling.
Let there be but one Lord, one faith, one baptyme:

Roma. xii. ^ Cori. xii. d
Unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of
Christ. Wherefore he says Psalm. (...). ^
: when he went up an hye, he led captiuitye captyue, and gave gifts unto
men. That he ascended: what means it, but that he also descended first into
the lowest parts of the earth? Ihon. iii. ^.
He that descended, is even the same also that ascended up, above all heavens,
to fulfill al things.

And the very same made ^. Cori. xii. d* Math. x. ^ (...). (...). ^
some Apostles, ^^ll^. ii. b
waueryng and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the wylynes of men,
through craftynes, whereby they lay a wait for us, to deceive us. But let us
follow the truth Ephesians. i. ^. and ^. ^ ^^llo. i. ^.
which is the head, even Christ, in whom if all the body be coupled and knet
together through out every joint wherewith Romans xii. b ^. ^o^^. xii. ^
one mynistreth to another (according to the operacyon as every part has his
measure) he increseth the body, unto the edifying of it self through love.

This I say therefore, and testyfye through the Lord, that ye hence forth walk
not Rom^. ^. ^. ^. P^^^. 4. ^
as other Gentylles walcke, in vanyte of their mind, while they are blinded in
their understanding, being far from a godly life, by the means of the
ignorancy that is in them, and because of the blyndnes of their hertes: which
being past repentance, have given them selves over unto wanto^nes, to work
all manner of uncleanness, even with gredines. But ye have not so learned Christ
If so be that ye have heard of him, and have Roma. 6. a Collo iii. a
to put on that new man, which after God is shapen in righteousness and true
holiness.

Wherefore, L^uit. 19. c
put away lyinge, and speak every man truth unto his neighbor, for as
much as we are members one of another. Psalm. ii^^. ^
Be angrye, and sin not: let not the son go down upon your wrath, neither
give place unto the backbiter. Leuit. xix. ^
Let him that stole, steal no more ^. Tessa. ^. ^
but let him rather labor with his hands the thing which is good, that he
may give unto him that needs.

Let no fylthy communicacion proceed out of your mouth: but that which is good
to edyfy withal, as often as need is: that it may mynyster grace unto the
hearers. And grieve not ye the holy spirit of God Rom^. ^. ^ (...). ^or^. ^. ^
by whom ye are sealed unto the day of redempcyon. Let all bytternes, and
fearsnesse and wrath and rorynge and cursed speaking, be put away from you,
with all malycyousnes. Be ye courteous one to another, mercyful, forgeuyng one
another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgeuen you.

He exhorts them unto love, warns them to be ware of al uncleanness. He
teaches how women should obey their husbands, and how louyngly men ought to
entreat they^ wives.

CAPI. V.
BE ye ^. P^^^. ^. ^ ^ohn (...). ^
therefore folowers of God as dear (...). (...). ^.
Christ loved us, and gave him self for us an offering and a sacrycye of a
sweet sauer to God. ^^^^^. (...). ^
As for fornicacyon and al uncleanness, or covetousness let it not be once named
among you, as it becomes sanctes: or fylthynes or folyshe talking, or
testyng, which are not comely: but rather gyuynge of thanks. For this ye know
that Gala. ^. ^ 1. Cor. ^. ^
no whoremonger, either unclean person, or covetous person, (which is a
worshypper of images)

Math. (...). ^ Co^^. ^. (...). ^ M^r (...). ^ Lu^^. (...). ^
Let no man deceive you with vain words. For because of such things comes
the wrath of God, upon the children of dysobedyenc^. Be not ye therefore
companyons of the^. Ye were sometime darckenes, but now are ye light in the
Lord.

John (...). ^ ^. Co^^. ^. ^
Walcke as children of light. For the

Take heed therefore how ye walcke ^irc^^spectly: not as unwise, but as wise
me^: avoiding occasyon, because the days are evil. Wherefore, be ye not
unwise, but understand what the will of the Lord is, and be not droncke with
wine wherein is excess: but be filled with the spirit, speaking unto your
selves Psalm. 33. a ^ollo. iii. c
in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual songs, syngyng and making melody to the
Lord in your hertes, gyuyng thanks always for all things unto God the father,
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, submyttyng your selves one to another
in the fear of God,

Ye weme^, submyt your selves unto your Gene. ii. d.
the husband is the wives head, eue^ as Christ is ^. Cori. xi. ^ (...). ^. ^.
the head of the congregation, and the same is he that ministers salvation
unto the body. Therefore as the congregation is in subieccyon to Christ, like
wise let the weme^ also be in subieccion to their husbands in all things. Ye
husbands, love your wives, eue^ as Christ also loved the congregation, and
gave Gene. ii. d M^^. (...). ^ Mark. ^ ^ ^. Cori. (...). ^ (...). ^ ^.
For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall be joined unto his
wife, and of two shall be made one flesh. This is a great secret, but I speak
of Christ and of the congregation. Nevertheless, do ye so, that every one love
his wife even as him self. And let the wife fere her husband.

How children should be have them selves toward their ^^rtutes. Servants
toward their maystees, An exhor^^^yon to the spirit^^l ba^^ayl^.

CAPI. VI.
C Collo. (...). ^
Hyldre^, obey your fathers and mothers Exod^. ^^. b
Honor thy father and mother, (the same is the first commandment in the
promise) that y^ may prospere, and live long on the earth. Ye fathers move
not your children to wrath: but Deu^^. 4. b
ye shall bring them up through the nurtur and informacion of the Lord. Ye
servants be obedyent unto the^ that are your bodily masters, with fear and
tremblyng, even with the synglenes of your heart, as unto Christ: not doing
service unto the eye* as they that go about to please men: but as the
servants of Christ, doing the will of god from the heart with good will, seruyng
the Lord, and not men. Knowing this, that what soever good thing ^^. P^^. 19.
c Act^^. ^. ^. Rom^. ^. ^. Eccle. 35 C^^. (...). ^. ^
nether is there any respect of person with him.

Finally my brethren, be strong through the Lord and through the power of his
might. Put on all the armor of God, that ye may stand against the assautes of
the devil. For we wrestle not against blood and flesh: but against rule,
against power, against worldly rulers, eue^ gouerners of the derckenes of this
world, against spiritual craftynes in heavenly things.

Wherefore take unto you the whole armor

Stand therefore, Luke. (...). ^. ^. Petri. ^. ^.
and your loins gyrde with the truth, having on the breast plate of
ryghtuousnes, and having shoes on your fete that ye may be prepared for the
Gospel of peace. Above al, take to you the sh^ld of faith wherewith ye may
quench, all the fyrie darts of the wicked. And take the helmet of salvation,
and the sweard of the spirit, which is the word of God. Luke. ^8. ^. ^.
(...). ^. d.
And pray always with al manner of prayer and supplicacion in the spirit and
watch thereunto with all instaunce and supplicacion for all sanctes and for me,
and that vtteraunce Collo. 4. ^.
may be given unto me, that I may open my mouth freely, to utter the secrets
of my Gospel (whereof I am messenger in bonds) that therein I may speak freely,
as I ought to speak.

But that ye may also know what condycyon

Sent from Rome unto the Ephesyans by Tichicus.

The Epistle of Saint Paul the Apostle to the Phyllippians.
He exhorts them to increase in love, in knowledge, and experyence of Godly
things.

CAPI. I.
Paul and Timothe the servants of Jesus Christ.

Grace be unto you and peace from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ.

I thancke my God with all remembrance of you Roma. i b. Collo. i. a.
all ways in all my prayers for all you, and pray with gladness: because ye are
come into the fellowshyppe of the Gospel from the first day unto now: and am
surely certyfyed of this, that he which has bego^ne a good work in you,
shall perform it until the day of Jesus Christ, as it becomes me so judge
I of you all, because I have you in my heart: forasmuch as ye all are
co^panyons of grace with me, even in my bonds, and in the defendyng and stably
shynge of the Gospel.

For God is my record, how greatly I Ephe. i. d,
And this I pray, that your love may increace yet more and more in knowledge,
and in all understanding, that ye may accept the things that are most
excellent, that ye may be pure, and such, as hurt no man's conscience until
the day of Christ: being filled with the fruit of ryghtuousnes, which fruit
comes by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God.

I would ye should understand (brethren) that the things which happened unto
me, chanced unto the great furtheraunce of the Gospel: So that my bands in
Christ, are manifest through out all the judgment hal and in all other places:
In so much that many of the brethren in the Lord being encoraged through my
ba^des, dare more boldly speak the word without fere. Some preach Christ of
envy and strife, and some of good will. The one part preaches Christ of
strife and not sincerely, supposyng to add more aduersyte to my bands; Again
the other yt preach of love, because they know that I am set to defend the
Gospel.

What then? So that Christ be preached any manner of way, whether it be by
occasion, or of true meaning, I am glad thereof, ii Corin. i. ^
through your prayer and mynystrynge of the spirit of Jesus Christ, according
to my expectacion and hope, that in nothing I shall be ashamed: but that with
all boldness, (as all ways even so now also) Christ shall be magnyfyed in my
body, whether it be through life, or through death. For Christ is to me life,
and death is to me advantage.

If it chance me to live in the flesh, that thing is to me fruitful for the
work, and what I shall chose I wot not. For I am constrained of these two
things, ii. Cori. v. ^
I vesyre to be loosed: and to be with Christ is much better. Nevertheless, to
abide in the flesh is more needful for you. And this am I sure of, that I
shall abide, and continue with you all, for your furtheraunce and joy of your
faith, that your reioysyng may be the more abundant through Jesus Christ in
me, by my coming to you again.

Only let your conuersacyon be, Ephe. iiii a
as it becomes the Gospel of Christ: that whether

He exhorts them to unity and brotherly love, and to beware of strife and
vain glory: And for a sure ensample, he says Christ before them.

CAPI. II.
IF there be therefore any consolacyon in i. Corin. x. ^ and. 13. b
Look not ye every man on his own things, but every man on the things that
are other men's: Let the same mind be in you, that was also in Christ Jesus:
which wha^ he was in the shape of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with
god: Nevertheless he made him self of no reputacion, taking on him the shape of
a servant, and Hebre. v. ^
became like unto men, and was found in his apparel as a man. He humbled him
self, and became obedyent Math. i. ^
the name of Jesus Romans 14. ^ Esaias. 45. ^
every knee should bow, both of things in heaven and things in earth, and
things under the earth, and that all tongues should confess, that Jesus Christ
is the Acts. 2. ^. Roma. 14 b
Lord, unto the praise of God the father.

Wherefore (my derely beloved) as ye have always obeyed, not when I was
present only, but now much more in mine absence, even so work out your
own salvation with fear and trembling. ii. Corin. 3. b
For it is God, which works in you, both the will and also the deed, even of
good will.

1. Petr. 4. ^.
Do all thing without murmuring, and dysputynge, that ^. Petr. ^i. b
ye may be such as no man can compain on: and unfeigned sons of god
without rebuke, in the mids of a crooked ii. Corin. i. c i. Tessa, ii. c
reioise in the day of Christ, how that I have not run in vain, nether have
labored in vain.

Ye and though I be offered up upon the offering and sacrifice of your faith:
I rejoice, and rejoice with you all. For the same cause also do ye rejoice, and
rejoice with me.

I trust in the Lord Jesus, for to Acts. xvi. d
send Timotheus shortly unto you, 1. Tessa. 3. b
that I also may be of good comfort, when I know what case ye stand in. For
I have no man that is so like minded to me, which with so pure affection will
care for your matters. For all other seek their own, and not the things
which are Jesus Christ's. Ye know the proffe of him, how that as a son with
the father, so has he with me bestowed his service in the Gospel. Him therefore
I hope to send, as soon as I know how it will go with me. I trust in the Lord,
that I also my self shall come shortly.

But I supposed it necessary to soude brother Roma. xv. ^ i. Tessa. v. c
and make much of such: because that for the work of Christ he went so
far, that he was nigh unto death, and regarded not his life: to fulfill that,
which was lackyng on your part toward me.

He warns them to beware of false teachers, whom he calls dogs and
enemies of Christ, and reproves man's own ryghtuousnes.

CAPI. III.
MOre over, (brethen) rejoice ye in the Roma. ii. d Eph^. ii. c.
For we are circumcision, which serve God Ihon. iiii. c Roma. i. ^
in the spirit and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no co^fyde^ce in the
flesh: though I might also rejoice in the flesh. If any other man thinks
that he has whereof he might trust in the fleshe^ I have more: being
circumcised the eight day of the kynred of Israel, of the trybe of Benjamin ii.
(...)
an Ebrue borne of the Ebrues (...)
as concerning the law, a Pharisaye: as concerning feruentnes, I persecuted
the co^gregacyon, as touching the ryghtuousnes which is in the law, I was
vnrebukable.

Math. 13. ^.
But the things that were vauntage unto me, those I counted loss for Christ's
sake. Ye I think all things but loss for the excellencye of the knowledge
of Christ Jesus my Lord. For whom I have counted al thing lost, and do judge
them but vile, that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine
own ryghtuousnes of the law: but that which is through the faith of Christ:
even the ryghtuousnes which comes of God through faith: that I may know him
and the virtue of his resurreccion, and the fellowshyp of his passions, while I
am comfortable unto his (death) if by any means I might attain unto the
resurreccyon of the dead.

Not that I have attained unto it al ready, calling of God through Christ Jesus.
Let us therefore as many as be perfect, be thus wise minded: and if ye be other
wise minded, God shall open the same also unto you. Nevertheless, unto that
which we have attained unto, let us proceed by one rule, that we

i. Corin. 4. c and. x. d.
Brethren, be folowers together of me, and look on them which walcke even so,
as ye have us for an ensample. For many walk (of whom I have told you often
and now tell you weeping) that they are the enemies of the cross of Christ,
whose end is damnacion Roma. 16. ^
whose belly is their God and glory to their shame, which are worldly minded.
But our co^uersacion is in heaven, from whence we look for the savior, even
the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall i. Cor. xv. g
change our vile body, that he may make it like unto his glorious body
accordig to the workyng, whereby he is able also to subdue al things unto him
self.

He saluteth certain of them, exhorts them to be of honest conuersacyon, and
thanketh them because of the prouisyon, that they made for him, being in
prison.

CAPI. IIII.
Therefore my brethren (derely beloved and Luke. ^. ^. ^p^^ 17. b.
whose names are in the book of life. i. Tessa. v. d
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice. Let your softenes be
known unto al men. The Lord is even at hand. Be careful for nothing: but in
all prayer and supplicacion let your peticions

Furthermore, brethren, whatsoever thyn ges are true, whatsoever things are
honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pare, whatsoever
things are conuenyent, whatsoever things are of honest report: if there be
any virtue, if there be any praise, ( of lernyng) those same have ye in your
mind, which ye have both learned and received, herd also and seen in me: those
things do, and the God of peace shall be with you. I rejoice in the Lord
greatly, that now at the last your care is reuyued again for me, in that
wherein ye were also careful, but i. Tim. ^. d.
therewith to be content. I can both be low and I can be hye. Every where and
in all things I am instructed, both to be full and to be hongry, both to have
plenty and to suffer nebe. I can do al things through Christ which strengneth
me. Notwithstanding ye have well done, that ye bare part with me in my
tribulacyon.

Ye of Philippos know also that in the be gynnynge of the Gospel, when I
departed from Macedonia, no congregation bare part with me, as concerning
geuynge and receyuynge, but ye only. For when I was in Thessalonica, ye sent
once and afterward Roma. est ^ Hebre. 13. c.
sacrifice accepted and pleasant to God My God shall supplye all your need
through his glorious riches by Jesus Christ. Unto God and our father be praise
for evermore. Ame^. Salute all the saynctes in Christ Jesus. The brethren which
are with me, great you. All the saynctes salute you: most of all they which
are of the emperors household The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you
all. Amen.

This Epistle was written from Rome by Epaphrodytus.

The Epistle of Saint Paul the Apostle to the Collossyans.
He gives thancked unto God for their says, love and hope: prays for their
increase, and shows how we are the kyngedome of God, optayned by Christ,
which to the head of the Congregacyon.

CAPI. I.
PAul an Apostle of

To the Saynctes which are at Collossa, and brethren that believe in Christ.

Gala. i. ^. Ephe. i. d.
Grace be with you and peace from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ.

^ We give thanks to God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ Ph^^^. i. a. i.
(...). i a. Roma. ^ ^. Philip. i. a. Ephe. i. d.
always for you in our prayers. For we have heard of your faith in Christ
Jesus, and of the love which ye bear to al sanctes for the hopes sake which
is laid up in store for you in heaven, of which hope, ye herd before by the
true word of the Gospel, which is come unto you: eue^ as it is into all the
world, and is fruitful * (and grows) as it is also among you, from the day
in the which ye herd of it, and had experyence in the grace of God through the
truth, as ye learned of Collo. (...). ^
Epaphra our dear fellow seruasit which is for you a faithful minyster of
Christ, which also declared unto us your love which ye have in the spirit.

Ephe. i. ^,
For this cause we also, sense the day John. xv. ^
being fruteful in all goad works, and encreasynge in the knowledge of God,
stre^gtned withat might through his glorious power, unto all pacyence and long
sufferyng with ioyfulnes geuyng thanks unto the father, which has made us
mete to be partakers of the inheritance of saints in light.

Which has delivered us from the power of derknes, and has translated us into
the kingdom of his dear son Ephesians i b
by whom we 2. Cor. iiii. ^
which is the image of the invisible God, first begotten of al creatures,
Hebre. i. a.
For by him were al things created, that are in heaven, and that are in earth:
vylible and invisible, whether they be majesty or Lordshyp, either rule or
power. Al things were created by him and for him, and he is before al things,
and by him al things have their being.

Ephe i. d.
And he is the head of the body, even of the congregacyon: he is the beginning
and (...) ^. (...) xv. ^
first begotten of the dead, that in all things he might have the preeminence.
For it pleased the father, that in him should all fulness ^wel, and by him to
(...)
reconcyle al thing unto him self, and to set at peace by him through the blood
of his cross, both things in heaven and things in earth.

And you Roma. v. a Ephe. ii. a. Collo. ii. ^
which were sometime far of, and enemies, because your minds were set in
evil worckes has he now yet reconcyled in the body of his flesh through
death, to make you holy, and unblameable, and with out fault in his own sight,
if ye continue grounded and stablysshed in the faith, and be not moved away
from the hope of the Gospel, whereof ye have herd, how that it is preached
among all cratures which are under heaven, whereof I Paul am made a mynister.

Now joy I ii, Cori. i. a.
in my suffrynges Ephe. iii. ^
for you, and fulfill that which is behind of the passions of Christ in my
flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the congregacyon: whereof I am made a
minyster, according to the ordinance of God, which ordinance was given me
unto you ward to fulfill the word of God, that Ephe. iii. b
mystery which has been hyd sense the world began, and sense the beginning
of generacyons: Math. xi. d ii. Cori. 2 c Ephe. i. d.
but now is opened to his Saints, to whom God would make known what the
glorious riches of this mystery is among the Gentyls, which riches is Christ
in you, the hope of glory, whom we preach, warnyng all men, and teaching all
men in as wisdom, to make all men perfect in Christ Jesus. Wherein I also
labor and strive, even as farforth as his strength works in me myghtely.

What great care Paul took for all Congregacyons. He eruorteth the^ to be
sted fast in Christ, to be ware of (...) teachers and worldely wisdom, and
descrybeth^ the (...) Prophets.

CAPI. II.
FOr I would that ye knew how great Ephe. v. ^*
This I say, lest any man should begyle you with entisyng words. For though I
be absent in the flesh, yet am I with you in the spirit, ioyinge and be
holding your order, and your steadfast faith in Christ. As

Man. 24. ^ Mar xiii. a Luke. xxi a Ephe. v. b.
Beware, least any man spoil you through Pholosophy and dysceatful vanytye,
after the tradicyon of men, and after the ordynaunces of the world, and not
after Christ. For in him dwells at the fulness of the god head bodily, and ye
are ^^plete in him: which is the head of al rule and power, by who^ also ye
are Roma. ii d Ephesians. ii. c. Collo. ii. b.
circu^cysed with circu^cisyd which is done without hands, for as much as ye
have put of the synful body of the flesh through the circumcision that is in
Christ, in that Roma. vi a Gala. iii, d
ye are buried with him through bap time, in whom ye are also risen again tho
row faith, that is wrought by the operacy on of God which raised him from
death.

Roma. v. a Ephe. ii. a. Collo. i. c.
And ye wha^ ye were dead through sin Gene. iii. c Luke. xi. c. Ihon. xii. c.
spoiled rule and power, and has made a show of them openly, and has
tryumphed over them in his own person.

Let no man therefore trouble your co^scyen ce about meat and drink or for a
piece of an holy day, or of the new Moan, or of the Saboth days, Debr^ 8. a.
and. x. a.
which are shadows of things to come: but the body is in Christ. Let no man
make you shot at a wrong marcke

Wherefore, if ye be dead with Christ from Gala. iiii. b
the ordinances of the world, why as though ye yet lived in the world, are ye
led with tradicions? Touch not, taste not, handle not: which al peryshe
through the very abuse: after the commandments and doctrynes of men: which
things outwardly have the symilitude of wisdom by superstycion and humblenes,
and by hurting of the body, and in that they do the flesh no worship unto
the need thereof.

He puts them in remembrance of the spirytuall resurreccyon, to lay aside
all manner of corrupt living, to be fruitful in all godlynisie and virtue, and
shows all degrees their duetye.

CAPI. III
IF ye be then risen again with Christ, Ephesians i. d Hebre i a x, c. xii, ^.
on the right hand of God Set your affection on things that are above, and
not on things which are on the earth. For ye are dead, and your life is hyd
with Christ in God. When soever Christ (which is our life) shall show him
self, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.

Mortyfie therefore your earthy members: fornycacion, uncleanness, unnatural
lust, evil coucupyscence, and covetousness, which is worshyppyng of ydoles: for
which things sake the wrath of God uses to come on the children of unbelief
Ephe. ii. a.
among whom ye walcked sometime, when ye lived in them.

But now put ye also away from you all Roma 6. a Ephe. iiii. ^
put on the new man which is renewed into the knowledge and image of him that
made him, Gala. 6. d
where is nether Gentyle nor Jew, circumcision nor vncircumcysyon, Barbaius or
Sythian, bo^de or fre: but Christ is all in all.

Therefore as elect of God, holy and beloved, Math. 22. d
love, which is the bond of perfetnes. And the peace of God rule in your
hertes: to the which peace ye are called in one body. And se that ye be
thankful. Let the word of Christ dwell in you plentuously with all wisdom.
Teach and exhort your own selves, Psalm. 33. a. Ephesians. v. d
in Psalms and Hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your
hertes to the Lord. And i. Curi. x. g
whatsoever ye do (in word or deed) do al in the name of the Lord Jesus,
geuyng thanks to God the father by him.

Ephesians. v. c ^ P(...) a
Ye wives, submytte your selves unto your own husbands, as it is comely in the
Ephe. vi. ^
Ye children, obey your fathers and mothers in all things, for that is well
pleasynge unto the Lord. Ye fathers, provoke not your children * (to anger)
lest they be of a desperate mind. Ephe. vi. a Cirus ii. c i. Pe^^. ii. ^
Ye seruau^ tes be obedient unto the^ that are your bodily masters in all
things: not with eye service as me^ pleasers, but i^ singlenes of heart,
fearyng God. And whatsoever ye do, do it hertely, as though ye did it to the
Lord, and not unto men: and be sure, that of the Lord ye shall receive the
reward of inheritance: for ye serve the Lord Christ. But he that does sin,
shall receive for his sin. ii. Pa^. 19. c Acts. ^. c. Eccle. 35. b Roma. ii,
b Collo. iii. ^
Neither is there any respect of persons * ( with God).

He exhorts them to be scenent in prayer, to walk wisely unto them that are
not yet come to the true knowledge ^f Christ, and saluteth them.

CAPI. IIII.
M Ephe. vi a
Asters, do unto your servants that

Ephe. vi. c.
Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanckes geuynge, praying also
for us Ephe. vi. c. (...). v. ^.
that god may open unto us the door of vtteraunce that we may speak the
mystery of Christ (wherefore I am also in bonds) that I may utter it, as it
becomes me to speak: Ephe. v. d.
Walk wisely toward them that are without, and lose no oportunite.

Let your speech be always well favored and powdered with Leuiti. ii. d (...)
c.
salt, that ye may know, how ye ought to answer every man.

Of all my busynes shall ye be certifyed by Tichicus, the beloved brother and
faithful mynyster and fellow servant in the Lord, whom I have sent unto
you for the same purpose, that ye might know what ye do, and that he might
comfort your hertes, with one Onesimus a faithful and beloved brother, which
is one of you. They shall show you of all things which are adoynge here.

Acts. ^7. a.
Aristarchus my preson fellow saluteth you, and 2. Tim. 4. b
Marcus Barnabas sisters son:

Collo. iii. a
Epaphras the servant of Christ (which is one of you) saluteth you and always
laboreth fetuently for you in prayers, that ye may stand perfect and full, in
all the will of god. For I bear him record, that he has ^. Tim. 4. ^.
Demas. Salute the brethren which are of Laodacia, and salute Nymphas, and the
congregacyon, which is in his house. And when the epistle is read of you, make
that it be read also in the congregation of the Laodicians: and that ye like
wise read the Epistle of Laodicia. And say to Archyppus: take heed to the
office that thou haste received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it. The
salutacyon by the hand of me Paul Remember my bonds, the grace (of our
Lord Jesus Christ) be with you. AMEN.

Sent from Rome by Ti chicus and Onesi mus.

: The first Epistle of Sayncte Paul the Apostle to the Thessalonyans.
He thanketh God for them, that they are so steadfast in faith and good works,
and receive the Gopell with such carnestnes.

CAPI. I.
PAul and Syluanus and

Roma i. a. ^. Corin. i. a ii. Cori. i. a
Grace be unto you, and peace from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ. We give God thanckes Gala. i. a. Ephe. i. a Roma. i b. Philip. i. a.
Ephesians. i. d. Collo. i. a.
always for you all, making mention of you in our prayers without ceasynge,
and call you to remembrance because of the work of faith, and labor in i.
Tess 4. d.
love, and because ye have continued in the hope ^. Tim. i. a.
of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the sight of God our father. we know
brethren) beloved of God) i. Cori. ii. a
word only, but also by power, and by the holy gooste, and by much
certayntye, as i. These. ii. ^
ye know, after what manner we behaved our selves among you, for your sake.
And ye became folowers of Acts. i. b.
from heaven, whom he raised from deeth: even Jesus, which delyuereth us from
Ihon. iii. b.
the wrath to come.

CAPI. II.
He puts them in mind of the Godly conuersacyon that he led among them
(when he preached the gospel unto them) thanketh God that they receive his
word so frutefully, and excuses his absence.

FOr ye your selves ( i. These. i. b.
brethren) know of our entrance in unto you, how that it was not in vain:
but even after that we had suffered before, and were Acts. xvi. c
shameful entreated at Philippos (as ye know) then were we bold in our God,
to speak unto you the Gospel of God, in Z^^^. xv^i. ^
much striving. For our exhortacyon was not to bring you to error, nor yet
to uncleanness, neither was it with gyle: but as we were allowed of God, that the
Gospol should be committed unto us: even so we speak, not as they that Gala.
i. b.
please men, but God, which tries our hertes. Neither led we our connersacy
on Philip. ^. a.
God is record: neither sought we praise of men, neither of you, nor yet of
any other, when we might have been in auctoryte, as the Apostels of Christ,
but we were tender among you, even as a norsse cherissheth her children, so
were we affeccyoned toward you: our good will was to have

Ye remember brethren our labor, and travail. Ze^^^. (...). g. ^. Tessa. ^.
b ^. Lori. ^x. c
For we labored day and night because we would not be chargeable unto any of
you, and preached unto you the Gospel of God. Ye are witnesses, and so is God,
how holyly and justly and unblameably we behaved out selves among you that
believed, as ye know how that we bare such affeceyon unto every one of you as
a father does unto children, exhorting, comfortyng, and besechynge you, that
ye would walcke worthy of God, which has called you unto his kingdom and
glory. For this cause thank we god also without Luhe. xxi. ^.
the wrath of God is come on them, even to the utmost.

For as much brethren as we are kept from you for a season, as concerning the
bodyly presence (but not in the heart) we enforced the more to se you
personally with great desire. And therefore we would have corn unto you, I Paul
once and again: Dani x. ^.
but Satan with stood us. For what is our hope or toye, or crown of
reioysynge* ii. Corin. ^. ^. and. viii. ^.
are not ye it in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? yes,
ye are our glory and joy.

He she weth how greatly he was reioysed, when Timothe told him of their
faith and love.

CAPI. III.
Wherefore, sense we could no longer Act. xvii. ^
Athens alone, and sent Timothe our brother and mynyster of God, and the helper
forth of our labor in the Gospel of Christ, to stablisshe you: and to
comfort you concerning our faith Ephe. iii. t. Ihon. xv. c Acts. (...). ^
that no man should be moved in these affliccyons. For P^^l. 24. ^ Pro. 24. b.
2. Tim. iii. c
ye your selves know, that we are even appointed there unto. For when we were
with you we told you before, that we should suffer tribulacyon, even as it came
to pass and as ye know. For this cause when I could no longer for bear, I
sent, that I might have knowledge of your faith, lest by some means the
tempter had tempted you, and lest our labor had been bestowed in vain.

But now lately, when Timothe cause

Therefore brethren we received consolacion by you, in all our aduersite and
necessyte, through your faith. For now are we alive, if ye stand steadfast in
the Lord.

For what thanckes can we recompense to God again for you, over all the joy,
that

God him self our father, and our Lord Jesus Christ shall gyde our journey
unto you: the Lord also shall increace you and make you slow over in love one
toward another, and toward all men, even as we do toward you, that he may
make your hertes stable and unblameable, in holiness before God our father,
at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ with all his saynctes.

He exhorts them to ^^^^fastnesse, to hepe them s^luc^ tio^ sin and
uncleanly conuersacyon to love oue and ^^er (...) ydelnesse. and speaks of the
resurreccyon.

CAPI. IIII.
FUrthermore, we beseech you (brethren) Romans xii. a Ephe. ^. ^.
even your holiness, that ye should abstain from fornicacion, and that every
one of you should know ^. Cor. vii. ^
how to keep his vessel in holiness and honor, and not in the lust of
concupyscence Rom^. ^ ^.
as do the heathen, which know not God, that no man oppress and Luke. x. ^.
He therefore that despyseth, despyseth not man, but God, which has sent ^
Cor. ^ii. ^ and. (...). d.
his holy spyryte among you.

But as touching brotherly ^. T^ss^. ^. a
love, ye need not, that I write unto you. Ihon xiii. ^ and. x^. ^. Ihon. iiii,
b
For ye ^^^^^. xx. ^ ^. Lori. ix. ^ (...). ^. b
to work with your own hands, as we commanded you: that ye may behave
your selves honestly toward them that are without, and that nothing be
lackyng unto you.

I would not brethren that ye should be ^ap. ii. a. b
no hope. For if we believe, that Jesus dyed and rose again, even so them also
which sleep by Jesus, will God bring again with him. For this say we unto you
in the word of the Lord, that we which shall ^. Cor. xv. ^
live, and shall remain in the coming of the Lord, shall not come yer they
which stepe. For the Lord him self shall descend from heaven with a showte
and the voice of the Mat. 24. c Du^^. xij. ^
Arch angel and trompe of God. And the deed in Christ shall arise first: then
we which shall live even we which shall remain) shall be caught up with them
also in the clouds, to mete the Lord in the air. And so shall we ever be
with the Lord. Wherefore, comfort your selves one another with these words.

He enfourmeth them of the day of dome, and coming of the Lord, exhorts,
them to watch, and to regard such as preach Gods word among them.

CAPI. V.
OF the times and seasons (brethren) it Mat. 24. ^ ^. P^^^. ^. c Apoc. i^^. ^
and. xv. c
the day of the Lord shall come, even as a thief in the night. For when they
shall say, peace and all things are safe, then shall Iere. xv. ^
soden destruction come upon them (as sorrow comes upon a woman traualynge
with child) and they shall not escape. But John. ^ii. ^ Ephe. v. c.
ye brethren are not in darcknes, that that day should come on you as a thief.

Ye are all the children of light, and the Romans xiii. d
Therefore let us not sleep as do other* but let us watch, and be sober. For
they that sleep in that night: and they that be droncken, are droncken in the
night. But let us which are of the day, be sober Ephe. vi. b
armed with the breast plate of faith and loue^, and with hope of salvation for
an helmet. For God has not appointed us to provoke wrath unto our selves,
but to obtain salvation by the means of our Lord Jesus Christ ^^ Cori. ^. ^
which dyed for vs^tu^t whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with
him. Wherefore, comfort your selves together, and edify every one another,
even ^^^^. v^. ^. ^. (...). ^ ^ Philip. (...). ^
which labor among you, and have the over sight of you in the Lord, and give
you exhortacyon, that ye have them in hye reputacyon through love, for their
worckes sake, and be at peace with them.

We desire you (brethren) warn them that are unruly, comfort the feeble
minded, lift up the weak, be pacyente toward all men. Math. v. ^.
Se that none recompense evil for Ph^^. ii^i. ^
Rejoice ever. Luke. (...). ^.
Pray contynually. In all things give thanks. For this is the will of God
through Christ Jesus toward you.

Quench not the spyrite. ^. ^o. xiiii ^
Despise not prophesyinges. Examen all things, keep that which is good.
Abstain front all cuyl appearaunce. The very God of peace sanctyfye you
through out. And I pray God that your whole spirit, and soul and body may be
preserved: so that in nothing ye may be blamed in the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

(...). Corin. i. ^ and. x. c.
Faithful is he which called you which will also do it. Brethren, pray for
us. Romans xvi. c ^. Cor^. ^v. ^ ^. (...) xiii
Great all the bethren with an holy kiss. I charge you in the Lord, that this
Epistle he red unto all the holy brethren. ^ (...). iii. ^
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ be with you.

Amen.

The first Epistle unto the Thessalonyans was written from Athens.

: The second Epistle of Saint Paul the Apostle to the Thessalonyans.
He thanketh God for their faith and (...), and prays for the increase of the
same.

CAPI. I.
Paul and Syluanus

Rome. ^ a. 1 Corin. i. a Ephesians. i. a
Grace be unto you, and peace from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ.

We are bound to Roma. i. b. (...). ^. b. Ephesians. ^. ^ Co^^^. ^. a.
thank god always for you brethren (as it is mete) because that your faith
grows exceadyngly, and every one of you swymmeth in love toward Roma. (...) b
and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ Sapi. v. ^
which shall be punysshed with LORD, and from the glory of his power, Mat.
xxv. ^
when he shall come to be glorified in his saynctes, and to become marvelous in
all them that believe: because our testymony that we had to you, was believed
even the same day. Collo ^. ^. Philip. ^. b
Wherefore, we pray always for you, that our God will make you worthy of this
calling, and fulfill all delectacyon of goodness and the work of faith, with
power: that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be gloryfyed by you, and
ye by him, according to the grace of our God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ.

He shows them, that the day of the Lord shall not come, till the depu^ting
from the cay^h come first, and therefore he exhorts them not to be dis^^^ued,
but to sta(...) in the things that he has taught them.

CAPI. II.
WE beseech you (brethren) by the Dani. (...). ^ ^. (...). ^. ^
a departing first, and that that sinful man be opened, the son of
perdicion, which is an adversary: and is exalted above all that is called god,
or that is worshypped: so that he does sit ^. Coz. iii. ^ and. (...). ^
in the temple of god, boastynge himself to be god.

Remember ye not, that when I was yet John. ii^.
For the mysterye of the inyquyte does all ready work till he which now
only lets, be taken out of the way. And then shall that wicked be
uttered, Esa^^. xi. ^
whom the Lord shall consume with the spyryte of his mouth, and shall
destroy with the appearaunce of his coming even him whose coming is after
the workynge of Satan, with all lyinge power Mat. ^4. ^
signs and wonders: and with all deceuablenes of vn^ightwesnes, among them
that peryshe* because they received not the love of the truth. that ^oma. ^. ^.
And therefore, God shall send them strong delusyon, that they should believe
lies: that all they might be damned, which believed not the truth: but had
pleasure in vnryghtwesues.

But we are bound to give thanckes always to god for you (brethren beloved of
the Lord) for because that god has from the beginning chosen you to
salvation, through sanctyfyinge of the spyryte, and through beleuynge of the
truth, where unto be called you by our Gospel, to obtain the glory of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

Therefore brethren stand fast, and keep the

He desires them to pray for him, that the Gospel may prospere, and gives
them warning to reprove the ydole / and if they will not labor with their
hands / that they shall not eat,

CAPI. III.
FVR thermore brethren pray ye for us / Ephe. vi. c. Collo. ^^ii. ^
that the word of God may have passage / and be glorified as it is also with
you and that we may be delivered from unreasonable and froward men. For all
men have not faith, but the Lord is faithful which shall stably she you / and
preserve you from evil. We have confydence through the Lord to you ward,
that ye both do, and will do the things which we command you. And the Lord
gyde your hertes to the lofte of God and pacyence of Christ.

We require you brethren by the name ^ Cori. v. b.
that ye wtdrawe your selves from every brother, y^ behaueth him self
inordinatly, and not after the instytucyon which he received of us. For ye
your selves know, how ye ought to follow us. For we behaved not our selves
mordinatly among you. Nether took we breed of any man for naught: but (...).
xx. g. (...). ix. c. (...). (...) c (...), (...). ^
wrought with labor and sweat night and day, because we would not be
chargeable to any of you:

For we have heard say that there are some which walk among you inordinatly
workynge not at all, but being busy bodies. Them that are such, we command
and exhort, by our Lord Jesus Christ, that they work with quietness, and eat
their own bread: Gala. vi. b.
Brethren be notye weery in well doing. If any man obey not our (...). iii. d
have no company with him, that he may be a shamed. And count him not as an
enemy: but warn him as a brother.

The very Lord of peace give you peace always, by all means. The Lord be
with you al. The salutacyo^ of me Paul, with mine own hand. This is the toke^
in all Epystles So I write. i. These. v. d Phili. iiii. ^
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.

Amen.

Sent from Athens.

: The first Epistle of Saint Paul un to Timothe.
He exhorts Timothe to wait upon his office: namely, to se that nothing be
taught but Gods word. He shows also wherefore the law is good, and relleth
that Christ Jesus came in to the world, to save sinners.

CAPI. I.
PAul an Apostle of Jesus Acts. ix. ^.
by the co^myssyon of God our sauyoure, and Lord Jesus Christ, which is i.
These. i. a
our hope. Unto Act. x^i. a.
Tymothehys natural son in the faith.

i. C^^^. i. a. Gala ^. ^
Grace mercy and peace from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ
our Lord. As I besought the to abide still at Ephesus (when I departed into
Acts. rix. and. (...).
Macedonia) even so do, that thou command some, that they follow no strange
doctrine, nether give head ii. Tim. ii. ^ ^itus. iii. ^ 1. Tim. 4. ^
to fables and endless genealogies which bread doutes more then Godly
edifyinge, which is by faith: for the ^oma 13. ^
lou^ out of a Acts. xv. ^.
pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned: from the which
things, because some have erred, they are turned unto vain iangelynge,
because they would be doctors of the law, and yet understand not what they
speak, nether whereof they affirm.

We know, that Romans vii. ^. Gala. ^ii. c
the law is good, if a man use it lawfully: knowing this Gala. v. d.
how that the law is not given unto aryghteous man, but unto the unrighteous
and disobe dyent, to the ungodly and to sinners, to unholy and unclean: to
murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, to manslears, to Leui, xxi. b.
Roma. ^. d.
whormongers: to them that defyle the^ selves with mankind: to menste^lers: to
lyares, to pertured, and if there be any other thing that is contrary to the
wholesome doctrine, accorynge to the Gospel of the glory of the blessed God,
which Gospel is committed unto me.

And I thank Christ Jesus our Lord, Acts. ix ^ and. xxii. a.
and a persecuter, and a Tyrant. But I obtained mercy, because I did it
ignorauntly through unbelief. Nevertheless, ^. ^or. xv. b. Go^^. i. b
the grace of our Lord was exceadinge aboundaunt with faith and love, which
is by Christ Jesus.

This is a true saying (and by all means worthy to be received of us) y^ Math.
ix. b Math^ ii.x ^uk^. ^. ^, ^. Ihon. iii.c.
Christ Jesus came into the world, to save sinners, of whom I am chief. Not
withstanding for this cause optained I mercy, that Jesus Christ should first
show on me all long patience, to declare an ensample unto them which should
believe on him unto eternal (...). i. t
inuisyble, wise only, be honor and praise for ever and ever. Amen.

This commandment commyt I unto the son Timotheus according to the
prophesyes, which in time paste were prophesyed of the, that y^ in them
should fight a good fight, having faith and good conscience: which some
have put away from them, and as consernynge faith have made shypwracke. Of
whose nombre is ^^. T^m. ii. c ^. T^mo. 3. c
Hymeneus and M^th. 17 ^
Alexander whom ^. ^or^^. v. a
I have delivered unto Satan, that they may learn not to blaspheme.

CAPI. II.
He exhorts to pray for all men He will not have we, men to be over costly
apparelled, nor to teach in the co^gregacyon, but to be in silence, and is
obey their husbands.

I Exhort therefore, that above all things, prayers, supplicacions,
intercessyo^s, and geuenge of thanks be had for all men: Iete. 29. ^. (...).
1. c.
for kings, and for all that are in auctoryte, that we may live a quiet and a
peasable life, with all Godlynes and honestye. For that is good and accepted in
the sight of God our savior, which will have all men to be saved, and to
come unto the knowledge of the truth. For there is John ^7. ^
one God, and one (...). ix. ^. Ga^^. iii. c.
(mediator) between God and man, even the man Christ Jesus, which gave him
self a ransom for all men, that it should be testified at his time, Roma. i.
a and. ^. c. (...), i. c
where unto I am ordained a preacher and an Apostle. I tell the truth in Christ
and lie not: beyenge the teacher of the gentyles with faith and verytie.

I will therefore that the men Ihon. iiii. e.
pray every where, ^yttynge up pure hands without wrath, or dow^ynge.
Likewise also the women, that they a^aye them selves in comely apparel with
shamfastnes and discrete behaueour, not with broyded hear, either gold or
pearls, or costly array: but as becomes women, that protesse godiynesse
through good works. 1. Lo. (...). g
Let the woman learn in in silence with all subieceyon. I suffer not a woman
to teach, neither to usurp auctoryte over the man: but to be in silence. For
Adam was first fourmed, and then Eve. Adam also was not deceived, but the woman
was deceived, and was subdued to the transgressyon. Notwithstanding through
bearing of children she shall be saved, if they continue in faith and love, and
holiness. with discrecyon.

What manner of man a bishop or pressed ought to be. The proper^^^ also
requ^red in a deacon or mynyster.

CAPI. III.
THIS is a true saying: If a man desire

Likewise must the mynysters be A^^es. vi. ^.
honest, not double tonged, not given unto much wine, neither gredy of fylthy
lucre: but holding the mystery of the faith with a pure conscience. And let
them first be proved, and then let them mynyster so, that no man be able to
reprove them.

Even so must their wives be honest, not evil speakers: but sober and
faithful in all things. Let the Deacons be the husbands of one wife, and
succh as rule their children well, and their own houshouldes, For Math. ^. ^
they that mynyster well, get themselves a good degree and greatly bextye in
the faith, which is in Christ Jesus.

These things write I unto y^, trusting Ihon. i. ^.
God was showed in the ^^es^he, was justified in the spyrit, was seen among
the Angels, was preached unto the ge^tyls, was believed on in earth, and
received up in glory.

He Prophreyeth of the latter days / and exhorts Tymothe to be dilygent in
reading of the holy Scripture,

CAPI. IIII.
THE spirit speaks euydently / that (...). xx. f (...). (...), 3. ^
in the latter times some shall 2. (...). 2. ^ and. iii. a. Judith. i. c ^.
(...). ii. ^.
depart from the faith, and shall give head unto spirytes of error / and
deuely she doctrines of them which speak false through ypocrysie, and have
their consciences marked with an hot iron / forbyddinge to marye / and
commaundyng to abstain from meats Gene. i. d Math. 26. c Acts. 27. f.
which God has created to be received (...). 1. d E^^^i. 39. c. Mark. 7. d.
with geuyng thanks, of them which believe, and know the truth. For Roma. 14.
c Titus. 1. d
all the creatures of god are good, and nothing to be refused / if it be
received with thankesgeuyng. For it is sanctified by the word of god and
prayer. If thou put y^ brethren in remembrance of these things, y^ shall be a
good minister of Jesus christ 2. Timo. 3. d
which have been noryshed up in y^ words of the faith and of good doctrine,
which y^ have contynually followed. But ^. Esmo. s. a 2. Esmo. 2. c E^^us.
(...). c
cast away vngostly and old wives fables.

Exercise thy self rather unto godlynes. ^ollos. i^. d.
bodily exercise profyteth little, but godlynes is profitable unto all things,
as a thing which has promyses of the life that is now, and of the life to
come. This is a sure saying, and by all means worthy to be allowed. For
therefore we labor and suffer rebuke, because we believe in y^ living God,
which is the saueour of all men, specially of those that believe. Such things
command and teach. Titus. ii. c. Titus. ii. b.
Let no man despice thy youth 1. Petr. v. a ^^. Timo. ^ c
but he unto them that believe, an ensample, in word, in co^uersacyon, in love,
in spyrit, in faith, in pureness.

Till I come, give atte^dau^ce to rea^dinge, (...). vi. b. (...). ^. xiii. ^
(...). xix. a. Number. 27 d. 11. ^un. ^. b.
layinge on of hands by the auctoryte of presthode. These things exercise,
and give thy self unto them, that it may be seen, how thou profetest in all
things. Take heed unto thy self, and unto learning, and continue therein. For
if thou shall so do, thou shall save thy self, and them that hear the.

He teaches him how he shall behave him self in rebukynge of all degrees An
order concerning wyddowes.

CAPI. V.
REbuke not an elder, (...). xix. g.
but exhort him Eccl. iii. b. ^
and to recompense their elders. For that is good and acceptable before God.
She that is a true Luke. ii. ^.
wyddowe and fre^delesse, puts her trust in God, and contynueth in
supplicacyons and prayers night and day. But she that lives in pleasure, is
deed, even yet alive. And these things command, that they may be without
rebuke. But if any provide not for is own (and specially for the^ of his
houshoulde, the same has denied the faith, and is worsse then an infydell.

Let no wyddowe be chosed under threscore year old, and such a one as was the
wife of one man, and well reported of in good works: if she have brought up
children, Gene. xlx. a. (...). x. ^. ^. (...). 4. b Roma. x^^. c (...). 13. ^.
if she have lodged strangers, if she have wesshed the saynctes fete, if she
have mynystred unto them which were in aduersytye, if she have been
contynually given unto all manner of good works. The younger wyddowes refuse.
For when they have begone to wexe wanton against Christ, they will mary,
having damnacyon, because they have cast away their first faith. And also
they learn to good from house to house idle: ye not idle only, but also
tryflynge and besybodyes, speaking things which are not cumly.

I will therefore, that the younger women 1. (...). v^^. b
mary, to bear children, to gyde the house, and give none occasyon to the
adversary to speak evil. For many of them are all ready turned back, and are
gone after Satan. And if any man or woman that believes have wyddowes, let the^
mynyster unto them, and let not the congregation be charged: that there may be
sufficyent for them that are wyddowes in deed.

The elders that rule well, are worthy of double honor, most specially they
which labor in the word and teaching. For the scripture says: Deute. 2^.
b i. (...). ix. a
thou shall not mossel the mouth of the ^xe yt treads out the corn. And
Math. 1^. b
the labourer is worthy of his reward. Against an elder, receive ^one
accusacion: but Deuteronomy. xix. d
under two or three witnesses. Them that sin, rebuke openly, that other also
may fear.

I testifye before God and the Lord Jesus Christ and the elect angels. that
thou observe these things without hastynesse of judgment, and do nothige
parcially. Number. ^7. d ^ctco. vi. b. vii. c. xiii. a. and. xix. a. 1. ^im. 4. d
ii. ^im. i. b.
Lay hands suddenly on no man, nether be partaker of other men's sins: keep
thy self pure. Drink no longer water, but Eccle. 31. d.
use a little wine for thy sto^mackes sake and thine often dyseases.

Some me^nes sins are open before hand, and go before unto judgment, and
some men's sins follow after. Likewise also good works are manifest before
hand, and they that are otherwise, cannot be hyd.

The duty of servants toward their masters* Against such an are not
satisfied with the word of God* Against covetousness, A good lesson for rich
men.

CAPI. VI.
LEt as many ^ (...) v^^. ^. (...). v^ ^ Collo. ^ii d. (...). ii. b. ^. P^^^.
(...). d
servants as are under

These things teach and exhort. Gala. i. a.
If any man follow other doctrine, and incline not unto the wholesome words of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is according to Godliness,
he is pufte up / and knows nothing: but wastes his brains about questions
and ^. Timo. i. ^* Titus. iii. ^
strife of words, whereof spring envy, strife, raylynges, evil surmisynges /
vain disputacyons of men that have corrupt minds / and that are ^. These.
(...). ^
robbed E^^le^. ^9 d Heb^^. ^3. ^.
If a man be content with that he has. Io^ ^. d. Eccle^^. v. ^
For we brought nothing into the world, nether may we carry any thing out.

But when we have fode and raiment we must therewith be content. They that wylbe
rich, fall into temptacyon and snares, * (of the deuell) and into many folyshe
and noisome lusts, which drown me^ into perdicion and destruccyon. For
coueteousnes of money is the rote of all euel: which while some lusted after,
they erred from the says, and tauglyd the^ selves with many sorrows. But thou
man

I give y^ charge i y^ sight of God, Act. xvii ^
which quickneth all things, and before Jesus Christ (which under Poncius
Pylate wytnessed a good witnessyng (that y^ keep the commandment, and be
without spotte and vurebukeable, until the apperynge of our Lord Jesus
Christ, ^^^^ xvii. ^ and* x^x. ^
which appearyng (in his time) he shall show, that is blessed and mighty
only, king of kings, and lord of lords, which only has immortalite,
and dwells in the light that no man can attain, Exods. 33. ^ Ihon. ^. ^.
and. vi. ^ 1. Ihon. ^. b
whom no man has seen, nether can se, unto whom be honor and rule
everlasting. Amen.

Charge the^ which are rych in this world, Math. vi. ^ Luke. xii d. Eccl. xx^x b
trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God (which gives us
abou^dau^tly all things to enjoy the^) that they do good: that they be rich
in good works that they be ready to give and gladly to dystribute, Math. vi. ^
layinge up in store for them selves a good foundacyon against the time to
come, y^ they may obtain eternal life. O Timothe, save y^ which is ge^en the
to keep / and a void vngostly vanytyes of voices and oposicions of science
falsely so called: which science while some profyssed, they erred as
concerning y^ faith Grace be with the.

Amen.

Sent from Laodicea which is the chefest city of Phri gia. Pacaciana.

The second Epistle of Saint Paul the Apostle unto Timothe.
Pan^ exhorts Timothe to steadfastness and pacyence (...) persecucyon, and to
continue in the doctrine that he had taught him. A commendacyon of Onesyphorus.

CAPI. I.
PAul an Apostle of

To Tymothe his beloved son. Grace, mercy and peace, from God the father, and
from Jesus Christ our Lord.

I think God, ^^re. xx^^. a Rom^. ^. ^. Philip. ^. ^
whom I serve from mine elders with pure conscience, that without any ceasynge
I make mention of the in my prayers night and day, desyringe to se the,
myndfull of thy tears: so that I am filled with joy, when I call to
remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in the, which dwelt first in thy
graund mother Lois, and in thy mother Eunica, and I am assure that it dwells
in the also.

Wherefore I warn the that thou stere up the gift of God which is in y^ ^.
(...). 4. ^.
by the putting Ro^^. 8 ^
For God has not given to us the spirit of fear: but of power, and of love,
and of sobrenes. Rom^. ^. ^
Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testymony of our Lord, neither be ashamed
of me Ephesians. iii. a
which am his prisoner: but suffer thou aduersite with the Gospel, according to
the power of God, which ^itus. iii. b Ephesians ^. a
saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our deeds,
but according to his own purpose and grace, i. Cori. xv. g Hebre. 2. d.
which has put away death, and has brought life and immortalite unto light
through the Gospel Roma. 1. a. and. xi, c. i. Tim. 2. b.
whereunto I am appointed, a preacher and Apostle, and a teacher of the Gentyls:
for the which cause* I also suffer these things. Neuerthe less, I am not
ashamed. For I know, and am sure, that he (in whom I have put my trust) is
able to keep that which I have committed to his keeping, against that day.

^. Tim. 4. b Titus. ii. b ^. Petr. v. a
Se that thou have the ensample of the wholesome words, which thou have heard
of me with faith and love that is in Christ Jesus. That good thing, which was
committed Math. 25. ^ Roma. ^. ^
and was not ashamed of my cheyne: but when he was at Rome, he sought me out
very diligently and found me. The Lord grant unto him, that he may find
mercy with the Lord at that day. And in how many things he ministered unto me
at Ephesus, thou know very well.

Like as in the first Chapter, so here he exhorts him to be constant in
trouble, to suffer manly, and to abide fast in the wholesome doctrine of our
Lord Jesus Christ.

CAPI. II.
THou therefore my son, be strong in the ^itus. ^. b*
to faithful men, which shall be apt to teach other also. Thou therefore suffer
afflyccyons as a good soudier of Jesus Christ. No man that warreth, enta^glith
him self with worldly busynes, and that because he may please him, which has
chosen him to be a soudier. And though a man stryne for a mastery, yet is he
not crowned, except he strive lawfully ^. Cor^. ^x. a
The husband man that labors, must first receive of the fruits. Consider
what I say. The Lord give the understanding in all things.

Remember that Jesus Christ Math. i. a, Roma. ^. a.
of the sede Acts. xx. ^.
I suffer all things, for the electes sakes, that they might also obtain that
salvation, which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory.

It is a true saying Roma. vi. b
for if we be dead with him, we shall also live with him. Roma. 8. ^
If we be paciente, we shall also raygne with him. Luke. xii. b. Roma. iii. ^
If we deny him, he also shall deny us If we believe not, Number. 23* c
yet abides he faithful. He cannot deny him self. Of these things

Study to show thy self laudable unto god, a workman y^ needs not to be
ashamed distributing the word of truth justly. ^. Timo. i. a and. vi. b
As for vnghostly vanities of voices, pass y^ over them. For they will encreace
unto greater ungodliness, and their words shall fret even as does the disease
of a cancre: of whose no^bre is. 1. Timo. i. d
Hymeneus and Philetus, which (as concerning the truth) have exced, saying,
that the resurreccyon is past all ready, and do destroy the faith of some.

But the sure ground of god stands still, and has this seal Ihon. ^. ^*
: the Lord knows the^ that are his. And let every man that calls Roma ix. d
in a great house are not only vessels of gold and of silver: but also of
wood and of earth: some for honor, and some unto dishonor. If a man therefore
pour ge hi^ self from such men, he shall be a vessel sanctified unto honor,
mete for the uses of y^ Lord, and prepared unto al good works.

Lusts of youth avoid, but follow righ tuousnes, faith, love and peace, with
the^ that call on the Lord with a pure heart. ^. Timo. i. ^ and. vi. ^
Folysh and unlearned questions put from the, knowing, that they do but gendre
strife. The servant of the Lord must not strive: but be gentle unto al men
^. Timo. 3. a
apt to teach, and one that can suffer the evil with mekenes, and can Gala.
vi. a.
infourme the^ that resyst * (the truth) if that God at any time will give
the^ repentance, for to know the truth: and that they may come to them
selves again out of the snare of the devil, which are holden captyue of him
at his will.

He prophecyeth of the pa^clous times, s^^t^^h o^t ypocry^^. Persecu^ion for
the Gospel.

CAPI. III.
THis know, that Acts. xx. f. (...). Tim. 4. ^ (...). (...). ^. a Iud^. ^. c
in the last days shall ^itue. ^, c
this sort are they, which enter into houses, and bring into bondage women
laden with sin, which women are led with diverse lusts, ever lernig, and ueuer
able to come unto the know ledge of the truth.

Exodus vii. b
As Iannes and Iambres with stood Moses, ^ct^s. ^4. d Psalm. 34. d Pron. 24. b
E^^l^. ii. a.
all they that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecucion. But the
evil men and dysceyuers shall wexe worsse and worsse, while they deceive and
are deceived them selves.

But continue thou in the things which thou have learned, which also were
committed ^. Tim. 4. ^
of a child thou have known the holy scriptures which are able to make the
learned unto salvation through the faith which is in Christ Jesus: ^. Peir. ^. d
All scripture given by inspiracyon of God, is profitable to teach, to
improve, to amend and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be
perfect and prepared unto all good works.

He exhorts Timothe to be fervent in the word and to sus^^e Aduersite,
moketh mention of his own death, and bid death Tymothe come unto him.

CAPI. IIII.
I Testify therefore before God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, which shall
judge the Be sober). ^^


For I am now ready to be offered, and the time ^. ^o^^. (...). d ^. Petri. ^. ^
a crown of righteousness, which the Lord (that is a rightuous judge) shall give
me at that day: not to me only, but unto al the^ also that love hes coming. Do
thy diligence, that you may come shortly unto me

For Demas has forsaken me, and loves this present world, and is departed
unto Thessalonica. Crescens is gone to Galacia Titus unto Dalmacia. Only Lucas
is with ^^^e. (...). ^
Mark, and bring him with the, for he is profitable unto me for the
ministracion. And Tichi^us have I sent to Ephesus The cloak that I left at
Troada with Carpus, (when thou come) bring with the, and the books, but
specially the partch^^^t, Alexander the copper smyth did me much evil: the
Lord reward him according to his deeds, of whom be thou ware also. For he
has greatly withsta^de our words.

At my first answeryng, no man assysted me, but also forsook me. I pray God,
that it may not be laid to their charges: Notwithstanding

Salute Prisca and Acts. 18. ^ Roma. ^^ ^
Aquila and the household of ii. Tim. ^. ^
Onesiphorus, Erastus abode at Corinthum. Acts. x^. ^ and xxi. ^
Trophimus have I left at Mylctu^ sick. Do thy dylyge^ce, that y^ may come
before witer. Eubolus gretith the, and so does Pudens, and Lynus, Claudia, and
all the brethren The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit. Grace be with you.

Amen.

The. ij. Epistle unto Tymo the / was written from Rome / when Paul was
presented the second time unto the Emperor Nero.

The epistle of Saint Paul the Apostle unto Tytus.
Paul exhorts Citus to ordain Prestes or Bishops injeuery Lytie, and
declares what manner of men they ought to be that are chosen to that office,
and charge Titus to rebuke such as withstand the Gospel.

CAPI. I.
Paul the servant of God, and Apostle of Jesus Roma 3. ^
(that cannot lie) promised before the world began: but has opened his
word at the time appointed through preaching, which is committed unto me,
according to the commandment of God our savior. To ^. Cor. viii ^
Titus his natural son after the common faith. (...) ^ ^ ^. Timo. ^. a
Grace mercy and peace from god the father and from the Lord Jesus Christ our
savior.

For this cause left I the in Creta, that ^^. Tim. 2. a
For a bishop must be blameless, as the steward of God: not stubborn, not
angrye ^. Timo. 3. a
not given ^^^it. 10. b Ephesians. v. ^
to much wine, no fyghter, not given to fylthy lucre: but a keeper of
hospitalite, one that loves goodness * ( prudent) sobre, righteous godly,
temperate, and such as eleueth unto the true word of doctrine, that he may be
able also to exhort by wholesome learning, and to improve them that say
against it.

For there are many unruly and talkers of vanite, and disceyuers of minds,
specially 2. Tim. 3. b
which pervert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not because of
fylthy lucre. One of them selves (even a prophet of their own) said: The
Cretyans are always liars, evil beasts, flow belyes. This witness is true:
wherefore rebuke thou them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith, not
taking head to Jews fables and commandments of men that turn away the
truth. Roma. 14. d
Unto the pure are al things pure: but unto them that are

He tells him how he shall teach all degrees to be have them selves,

CAPI. II.
BUt speak thou the things which be 1. ^^^o. ^. ^
women likewise, that they be in such raymente as becomes holiness, not being
false accusers, not given to much wine, but that they teach honest things to
make the young women sobre minded, to love their husbands, to love their
children, to be discrete, chaste, huswyfly, good, obedient unto their husbands,
that the word of God be not evil spoken of. Young men likewise exhort, that
they be sobre minded.

1. Eim. iiii and 1. Petr. v. ^
In all things show thy self an ensample Ephe. v^. ^ 1. Petri. 2. ^ Collo.
iii. ^ ^. (...). ^. ^
Exhort servants, to be obedient unto their own masters, and to please the^
in all things, not answering again, neither to be pyckers, but that they
show all good faythfulnes, that they may do worship to the doctrine of God
our savior in all things. For the grace of god, that brings salvation unto
all men, has appeared and teaches us that we should deny ungodliness and 1.
John. 2. 2
worldly lusts, and that we should live soberly, and ryghtuously, and godly in
this present world, lokige for that blessed hope and appearing of the glory
of the great God, and of our Sauyoure Jesus Christ, which Roma. ^. ^ Gals. 1.
a
gave him self for us, to redeem us from al unrighteousness, and Ephe. v. ^
to pourge us a peculyer people unto him self Ephe^. ^. ^
fervently given unto good worckes. These things speak, and exhort, and
rebuke, with all feruentnes of commaundynge. 1. Tim. 4. b
Se that no man despise the.

Of obedyence to such as be in auctorytye. He warns Cities to beware of
folyshe and unprofitable questions,

CAPI. III.
Warn them Roma. 1^. ^ 1. Petti. 2. ^
that they submytte no fighters, but gentle, showing al mekenes unto al me^.
For we our selves also were sometime foolysh disobedient, deceived, serui^g
diverse lusts and voluptuousnes, living in maliciousnes and envy, full of hate,
hating one another.

But after that the kyndnes and love of ii. Timo. i. ^
not by y^ deeds of ryghtuousnes which we wrought, but according to his mercy
he saved us Ihon. 3. a.
by the fountain of the new birth, and renewing of the holy ghost, which he shed
on us abou^dauntly, through Jesus Christ our savior, y^ we justified ^d^^. ^
Ephesians. (...). b
by his grace, should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life.
This is a true saying. Of these things I will that thou certyfie, that they ^.
Timo. i, a 2. Tim. ii. c
Foolish questions, and genelogies, and brauling, through striuynges about the
law, avoid: for they are unprofitable and superfluous. A man that is an
auctor of sects, after the first and the second Math. (...). c
admonicion avoid: knowing, that he (that is such) is perverted and synneth
even damued by him self.

When I shall send Artemas unto the, or

Amen

Written from Nicopolis a city of Macedonia.

He reioyseth to hear of the faith and love of Philemon whom he desires to
forgive his setuaunt Onesimus, and louyngly to receive him again.

The Epistle of S. Paul unto Philemon.
Paul the prysonner of

^. Corin. i. a li. Cori. i. a Gala. i. a
Grace be unto you, and peace, from God our father, and from the Lord Jesus
Christ.

I thank my God, making me^cyon always of the in my prayers, when I hear of
thy love and faith, which thou have toward the Lord Jesus, and toward all
saints, so work) which is in you toward Jesus Christ. For we have great joy
and consolacion in thy love: because that by the (brother) the saints hertes
are comforted.

Wherefore, though I might be bold i^ Christ to command the, y^ which was thy
duty to do: yet for loves sake I rather beseech the, though I be as I am,
eue^ old Paul, and now a presoner of Jesus Christ. I beseech the for my son
Collo. (...).
Onesimus who^ I have begotten in my bo^des, (which in time passed was to y^
unprofitable but now profitable both to the and to me) who^ I have sent home
again. Thou therefore receive hi^, that is to say mine own

For happly he therefore departed for a season, that thou should receive him
for ever, not now as a servant: but above a servant, even a brother beloved,
specially to me: but how much more unto the, both in the flesh, and also in
the Lord? If thou count me therefore a fellow, receive him as my self. If he

Amen.

Sent from Rome by Onesymus a Servant.

The epistle of Saint Paul the Apostle unto the Hebrews.
How God deals louyngely with them of the old time in sendyng them his
Prophets, but much more mercy has he showed us in that he sent us his own
son Of the most excellent glory of Jesus Christ, which in all things is like
to his father.

CAPI. I.
GOd in time paste Collo. ^. c.
by whom also he made the world. ^api. 7. ^
Which (son) being the bryghtnes of his glory / and the very image of his
substance rulynge all things with the word of his power / has by his own
person pourged our sins / and sytteth on the right hand of the majesty
on hye: being so much more excellent then the Angels, as he has by
inherytaunce obtained a more excellent name then they.

For unto which of the Angels said he at any time: Psalm. ii. a Acts. xiii. c
Thou art my son / this day have I begotten the? And again ^. Reg. vii. ^
I will be his father / and he shall be my son. And again / when he brings
in the first begotten son into the world, he says. And Psalm. 97. a
let all the angels of God worship him And unto the Angels he says Psalm. 114. a
He makes his Angels spirytes, and his minysters a flamme of fire. But unto
the son he says Psalm. 45. b
thy seat (O God) shall be for ever and ever The scepter of thy kingdom is a
right scepter. Thou have loved righteousness, and hated iniquytie. Wherefore God,
even thy God has anointed the with the oil of gladness above thy fellows.

Psalm. c^i. b
And thou Lord in the beginning have Psalm. ix. a Math. 22. d ^. Cori. xv. d
Sit on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy footstool? Are they not
al ministering spirits, that are sent to minister, for their sakes which shall be
heirs of salvation?

He exhorts us to be obedient unto the (...) law which Christ has given
us and not to be offended at the infyrmytie and low degree of Christ, because
it was necessary that for our sakes he should take such au vmble state upon
him, that he might be like unto his brethren.

CAPI. II.
Wherefore, we ought to give the Man. xvi. d
God bearyng wytnes thereto, both with signs and won^ets also and with diverse
miracles, and gifts of the holy ghost, according to his own will.

For unto the angels has he not subdued the world to come, whereof we speak,
but one in a certain place wytnessed, saying, Psalm. viii. a and. 144. ^
What is man, that thou art myndfull of him Psalm. viii. ^ ^. Cor. x^. ^
have set him above the worckes of thy hands. Thou have put al things in
subieccyon under his fete. In that he put al things under him, he left nothing
that is not put under him. Nevertheless, we se not yet all things subdued
unto him: but him that was made less then the Angels, we se that it was Jesus,
which is crowned with glory and honor for the suffryng of death: that he by the
grace of God, should cast of death for all men.

For it became him, for whom are all things Psalm. ^^il. ^ Ihon xx. d
brethren, in the mids of the Congregacyon will I praise the. And again: I
will put my trust in him. And again: behold, here am I and the children whom
God has given me.

For as much then as the children are partetakers of flesh and blood, he
also him self lord ship over death, that is to say the devil, and that he
might deliver them, which through fear of death were all there life time
subdued unto bondage. For he in no place takes on him the Angels: but the sede
of Abraham takes he on him. Wherefore, in all things it became him to be made
like unto his brethren, that he might be merciful, and a faithful hye priest
in all things concerning God, for to pourge the peoples sins. For in that
it fortuned him self to be tempted, he is able to sucker them also that are
tempted.

He reqyureth us to be obedient unto the word of Christ, which is more worth
then the ceremonial law of Moses. The punishment of such as will needs hatden
their herted.

CAPI. III.
Therefore holy brethren: partakers of Roma. v. a
the reioysynge of that hope, unto the end.

Wherefore (as the holy ghost says:) to day if ye will hear his voice, harden
not your hertes, as in the provoking, in the day of temptacion in the
wilderness, where your

We are made partakers of Christ, if we

The Sabbath or rest of the Christen: punysshemente of unbelievers; the nature
of the word of God.

CAPI. IIII.
LEt us fear therefore, lest any of you (for Gine. ^. ^
And God did rest the seventh day from all his worckes. And in this place
again: They shall not enter into my rest.

Seeing therefore it follows, that some

Let us study therefore to enter into the rest

Seeing then, that we have a great hye of our hope) For we have not an hie
pressed, which cannot have compassion on our infirmyties: but Philip. ii. a
was in all points tempted, like as we are: but yet with out sin. Let us
therefore go boldly unto the Exodi. 25. b
seat of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of
need.

Christ is our hye priest, and seat of grace, and more excellent then the hye
prestes of the old law.

CAPI. V.
FOr every hye pressed that is taken from Leuiti. ix. b
to offer gifts and sacryfyces for sin: which can have compassion on the
ignoraunte, and on them that are out of the way, for as much as he him self
also is compased with infirmity: And for the same infirmities sake he is
bound to offer for sins, as well for him self, as for the people. And no man
takes honor unto him self, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.

Even so Christ also glorified not hiself, Psalm. ii. b Acts. 23. c Hebre. i. b.
thou art my son, this day have I begotten the, glorified him. As he says
also in another place: Psalm. ix. b.
thou art a Pressed for ever after the order of Melchisedech which in the dates
of his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and supplicacions, with strong crying
and tears (unto him that was able to save him from death) and was heard
because of hes reverence, though he were the son * ( of God) yet learned he
obedience, by those things which he suffered: and he being parfecte, was the
cause of eternal salvation unto all them that obeyed him: and is called of God
an hye Pressed, after the order of Melchisedech.

Wherefore we would speak many things 1. Co^^. iii. a
mylcke: and not of strong meat: for every man that is fed with milk, is
inexperte in the word of rhghtuousnes. For he is but a babe. But strong meat
belongs to the^ that are partecte eue^ those, which (by reason of use) have
their wits exercised to discern both good and evil.

He goes for the with the thing that he began in the latter end of the
tyf^c Chapyter, and exhorts them not to faynt^, but to be steadfast, and
pacyent: for so much^ as God is sure in his promise.

CAPI. VI.
Therefore leuynge the doctrine that pertayneth to the beginning of Christen
Acts. iiii. ^ and. xvii^
If God permit. For it can not be that they which were once lyghted, and
have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were become partakers of the holy Ghost,
and have tasted of the good word of God, and of the power of the world to
come: Math. 12. d ii. Petri. ii Hebre. x. b.
if they fall away (and as conceruyng them selves crucyfie the son of God a
fressh, and make a mock of him) that they should be renewed again by
repentance.

For the earth which dryncketh in the rain that comes often upon it, and
brings Math. 25. ^
that he should forget your work and labor that proceeds of love, which
love ye show in his name, which have ministered unto the saints, and yet
ministre. Ye, and we desire, that every one of you show the same diligence, to
the fui stablishynge of hope, even unto the end: that ye faint not, but be
folowers of the^, which through faith and patience receive the enherytau^ce of
the promysse.

For when God made promise to Abraham because he had none greater to swear by
Geni. xli. c
he swear by him self, saying: Surely I will bless the, and multyply the in
deed. And so Exodi. 22. ^
an oath to confyrme the thing, is to them an end of all strife. So God
willing very aboundauntly to show unto the beyres of promise, the stablenes of
his counsel, added an oath: that by two immutable things (in which it was
impossible that God should lie) we might have a strong consolacio^, which
hitherto have sled, for to hold fast y^ hope that is set before us, which hope
we hold as an ancre of the soul both sure and steadfast, which hopealso
enters in, ito those things which are within the veil, where the fore
tu^ners for us entered in, even Jesus that is made an Hebre. 8. a
hye pressed for ever, after the order of Melchysedech.

He compares the presthode of Christ unto Melchisedech, but to be far more
excellent.

CAPI. VII.
THis Melchisedech king of Gene. 14. d
Salem Nume. 18. d 1. Per. 31. b
those children of Leui, which receive the office of the prestes, have a
commandment to take (according to the law) tithes of the people, that is to
say, of their brethren, ye though they spronge out of the loins of Abraham.
But he whose kin red is not counted among them, received tithes of Abraham,
and blessed him that had the

Roma. ii. t Gala. iii. c
If now therefore perfeccion came by the presthod of the Levites (for under that
presthod the people received the law) what neded it furthermore, that another
pressed should rise to be called after the order of Melchisedech, and not after
the order of Aaron? For if the presthod be translated, then of necessity must
the law be translated also.

For he of whom these things are spoken pertayne unto another trybe, of whom
never man served at the altar. For it is euydente that our Lord spronge
Math. ^. a
of the trybe of Judah, of which trybe spoke Moses nothing Psalm. 110. b Hebre.
4. c
thou ar^ a priest forever, after the order of Melchisedech) Then the
commandment that went before, is disanulled, because of weakness and
vnprofytablenes. For *
the law brought nothing to perfeccion: but was an introduccyo^ to a better
hope, by the which we draw nigh unto God. And therefore is it a better hope,
because the thing was not done without an oath. For those prestes were made
without an oath, but this priest with an oath, by him that said unto him. Roma. 8.
a Gala. iii. c
The Lord swear, and will not repent: Psalm. 110. ^
Thou art a pressed for ever after the order of Melchisedech. And for that cause
was Jesus a stablysher of a better testament.

And among them many were made prestes, because they were not suffered to
endure by the reason of death. But this man (because he endures ever) has an
everlasting pressed i. Timo. 2. ^ i. John. 2. ^
to make intercession for us. For such an hye Priest it became us to have which
is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, made hyer then heaven.
Which needs not daily (as yonder hye prestes) Leuit. ix. b
to offer up sacrifice. First for his own sins and then for the peoples
sins. For that did he once, when he offered up him self. Hebre. v. a
For the law makes men prestes, which have infirmity: but the word of the
oath that came se^ ce the law, makes that son pressed, which is perfect for
evermore.

CAPI. VIII.
The office of Christ is more worthy then the Priests office of the old
law, which was imperfect, and therefore abrogate.

OF the things which we have spoken, this is the pyth: that Hebre. vi. d and.
x. c
we have such an hye priest as sytteth on the right hand of the seat of
majesty in heaven, and is a mynister of holy things, and of the true
tabernacle, which God pyght, and not man. For every hye Pressed is ordained to
offer gifts and sacryfices: Wherefore it is of necessity, ye this man have
some what also to offer. For he were not a Priest, if he were on the earth
where are prestes, that according to the law offer gifts which serve unto the
ensample and Collo. ii. ^ Hebre. x. ^
shadow of heavenly things: eue^ as the answer of God was given unto Moses,
when he was about to finysh the tabernacle Erod (...) Acts. vii. f.
Take heed (said he) that thou make al thiges according to the patron which is
showed to the in the mount.

But now has he optayned a presthode of a better testamente, which was
confyrmed in better promyses. For if that first testament had been such, that
no fault could have been found in it, then should no place have been sought
for the second. For in rebukyng them, he says unto them. Ier^. ^xxi. f
Behold the days come (says the Lord) and I will fynysshe upon the house of
Israel, and upon the house of Judah, a new testamente: not like the testamente
that I made with their fathers in that day, when I took them by the hands, to
lead them out of the land of Egypt. For they continued not in my testamente,
and I regarded them not says the Lord.

For this is the testamente, that I will make with the house of Israel: After
those days (says the Lord) I will put my laws in their minds, and in their
hertes I will write them, and I will be their god, and they shall be my people. And
they shall not teach, every man his neighbor and every man his brother,
saying: know the Lord: for they shall know me, from the least to the most
of them: For I wylbe merciful over their vnrightewesnes, and their sins and
their iniquytyes will I thyncke upon no more. In that he says a new testament,
he has worn out the old. For that which is worn out and wexed old, is ready
to banishe away.

CAPI. IX.
The proffyte ^ worthynesse of the old testament and how surre the new
excels it.

THE old Testament then had verily ordynaunces, and seruynges of God, and
wordly holiness. For Exodus xxv. d
there was a fore tabernacle made, wherein was the light and the table, and the
show breed, which is called holy. But within the second veil was there a
tabernacle, which is called holiest of all, which had the golden senser, and
the arcke of the testament ouerlaide round about with gold, wherein was the
golden pot with Exo. xvi. g
Manna, and Leu, xvii. a
Aarons rod that Exodi. xi ^
the tables of the testament. Over the arcke were the Cherubyns of glory,
shadowynge the seat of grace. Of which things we cannot now speak
particularly.

When these things were thus ordained, the Prestes went all ways into the
first tabernacle, which executed the service of the holy things. But into the
second went the hye pressed alone Exo. xxx. b
once every year: not with out blood Leui. xvi. b
which he offered for him self, and for the ignorauntes of the people.

Wherewith the holy ghost this sygnyfyed, that the way of holy things was not
yet opened, while as yet the first tabernacle was standing. Which was a
symilytude for the time then present, in which were offered gifts and
sacrifyces, that could not make the mynyster parfecte, as pertaining to the
conscience, with only meats and drinckes, and diverse wasshinges and
iustifyinges of the flesh, which were ordained until the time of
reformacyon.

But Hebre. vi. d (...). viii. b
Christ being an hye Pressed of good things to come, came by a greater and a
more parfecte tabernacle, not made with hands: that is to say, not of this
building, i Petri. i.
by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, and found eternal
redemcion.

For if the ^eui. xvi. ^
blood of oxen and of gotes and the ashes of a young cow, when it was
sprynckled, puryfyeth the unclean, as touching the puryfyinge of the flesh:
how much more shall the blood of Christ) which through the eternal spyrite,
offered him self without spot to God) pourge your conscience from deed
worckes, for to serve the lyuinge God?

And for this cause is he the i. (...). ^
mediator of the new testament, that through death which chaunsed, for the
redempcyon of those transgressions that were under the first testament they
which are called, might receive the promise of eternal inherytaunce. For Exodus
14. b
this is the blood of the testament, which God has appointed unto you,
Moreover, he sprinkled the tabernacle with blood also, and all the ministringe
vessels. And almost al things are by the law purged with blood, and with out
sheadynge of blood is no remyssyon. It is need then, that the similytude of
heavenly things be puryfyed with such things: but that the heavenly things
them selves be puryfyed with better sacrifyces then are those. Acts. vii. ^
and. xvi^.
For Christ is not entered into the holy places that are made with hands
(which are symilitudes of true things (but is entered into very heaven, for 1.
John. ii. ^
to appear now in the sight of god for us: not to offer himself often ^^^^
xvi. ^
as the hye pressed enters into the holy place every year with strange blood,
for them must he have often suffered sense the world began. But now in the
end of the world, has he appeared once, to put sin to flight by the
offeringe up of him self. And as it is appointed unto all men that they shall
once dye, and then comes the judgment Roma. v. b 1. Pet. iii. d
even so Christ was once offered, to take away the sins of many, and unto
them that look for him shall he appear again without syue unto salvation.

The old law had no power to cleanse away sin, but Christ did is with
offering of his body once for all. An exhortacyon to receive this goodness of
god thanckfully with pacyence and steadfast faith.

CAPI. X.
FOR the law (having the Collo. ii. ^ Heb. viii. ^
shadow Leui. xvi. c.
For the blood of oxen and of goats can not take away sins

Wherefore, when he comes into the world he says: Psalm. xi. b.
Sacrifyce and offering thou would not have: but a body haste thou ordained
me: Burnt offeriges also for sin have thou not allowed. Then said I: lo, I am
here. In the beginning of the book it is written of me, that I should do thy
will, O God. Above, when he says: sacryfyce and offering, and burnt
sacrifyces and sin offerynges thou woldeste not have, neither have thou
allowed the^ (which yet are offered by the law) then said he: Lo, I am here, to
do thy will, O God: he takes away the first to stablysshe the latter, by the
which will we are sanctified by the offeringe up of the body Ephesians. i. d Collo*
iii. ^ Hebre. i. b. and xii. a.
on the right hand of God, and from hence forth tarieth till his foes be made
his forestole. For with one offering has he made perfect for ever them that
are sanctyfyed. The holy ghost himself also bears us record, even when he
told before: This is the testament that I will make unto them, after those
days (says the Lord) I will put my laws in their heart, and in their
minds will I write them, and their sines and iniquities will I remember no more,
And where remyssyon of these things is, there is no more offering for sin.
Saying therefore brethren, that by John. x. a. and. xiiii. a Roma. v. a Hebre.
ix. b.
we have lyberty to enter into that holy place, by the new and living way
which he has prepared for us, through the veil (that is to say, by his
flesh.) And seeing also that we have an hye pressed which is ruler over the
house of God, let us draw nigh with a true heart in a sure faith sprynckeled in
our hertes from an evil conscience, and wesshed in our bodies with pure water:
let us keep the profession of our hope, without waueryng (for he is faithful that
promised) and let us consider one another, to the intent that we may provoke
unto love, and to good worckes, not forsakynge the fellyshyppe that we have
among our selves, as the manner of some is, but let us exhort one another, and
that so much the more, because ye se that the day draws nigh. Mat. xii. d
Hebre. vi. a ii. Petr. ii. d
For if we sin wilfully after that we Deu. xix. ^. Math. 18* ^ 2. Cor^. 13. ^
under two or three witnesses: how much sorer (suppose ye) shall he be punisshed
which treads under foot the son of God: and counts the blood of the
testamente, wherewith he was sanctified, as an unholy thing, and does
dishonor to the spyryte of grace. For we know him that Deute. 32. d Psalm.
^4. ^ Romans xii. d
It belongs unto me to take vengeance. I will recompense says the Lord.
And again: the Lord shall judge his people. It is a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God.

Call to remembrance the days that are passed, in the which after ye had
received light, ye endured a great fight of adversities, partly while all men
wondered and gased at you for the shame and trybulacyon that was done unto you:
partly, while ye became co^panyons of them which so passed their time. For ye
became partakers also of y^ afflyccyo^s which happened through my bonds, and
took in worth the spoylynge of your goods, and that with gladness: knowing in
your selves, how that ye have in heaven a better and an enduring substance.
Cast not away therefore your confidence which has a great recompense of
reward. For ye have need of pacyence, that after ye have done the will of god,
ye might receive the promise. For yet a very little while, and he that shall
come will come, and will not tarry. But the Ab^^^^. 2. a Roma i* c Gala. iii. b
just shall live by faith. And if he withdraw him self, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him. It is not we that withdraw our selves unto dampnacyon, but
we partayne unto faith, to the wynnyng of the soul.

What faith is, and a commendacyon of the same. The sted fast believe of the
fathers in old time.

CAPI. XI.
Faith is a sure confydence of things, Gene. i. a.
the world was ordained by the word of God, and that things whith are seen,
were made of things Acts. xiii. c Roma 1. c
which were not seen. Gene. iiii. a
By faith Abel offered unto God a more plenteous sacryfyce then Cayn: by
which he obtained wytnes that he was ryghteous, God testyfyinge of his gifts:
by which also he being deed, yet speaks.

By faith was Gene. v. g Sapi. 4. d Eccle. 44. b and. x^ix. c
Enoch translated, that he should not se deeth nether was he found: for god had
taken him away. For before he was taken away, he obtained a good report that he
pleased God: but without faith it can not be that any man should please him.
For

By faith Gene. vi. d E^^l. 44. b
Noe being warned of God, eschued the things which were as yet not seen, and
prepared the arcke to the saving of his houssholde, through the which arcke he
Math. 12. d
condemned the world and became heir of the ryghtwesnes which is according
to faith.

By faith Gene. xii. a Acts vii a
Abraham, when he was called obeyed, to go out into a place, which he should
afterward receive to inheritance: and he went out, not knowing whether he
should go. By faith he removed into the land of promise, as into a strange
country, when he had dwelte in tabernacles: and so did Isaac and Jacob heirs
with him of the same promise. For he looked for a city having a foundacyon,
whose buylder and maker is God. Gene. xxi. ^
Through faith Sara also received strength to conceive and be with child, and
was delivered of a child when she was past age, because she judged him
faithful which had promised.

And therefore sprange there of one (even of one which was as good as deed)
Gene. xv. ^
so many in multitude as are the stars of the sky, and as the sand the which
is by the sea shore, innumerable. These all dyed according to faith, when
they had not received the promyses: but Johan. 8. ^ Gene 47. b
saw them a far of, and believed them, and saluted them, and confessed, 1.
Par. 29. ^ Psalm. 39. ^
that they were strangers and pylgremes on the earth. For they that say such
things, declare, that they seek a country. Also if they had been myndfull of
that country, from whence they came out, they had leisure to have returned
again: but now they desire a better (that is to say) a heavenly. Wherefore
God is not ashamed Exodus xii, ^
to be called their god for he has prepared for them a city.

Gene. ^ii. a Eccle. 44. ^
By faith Abraham offered up Isaac, when he was proved, and he offered him
being his only begotten son, in whom he had received the promyses. And to him
it was said, in Isaac shall thy seed be called: for he considered, that god
was able to raise up again from deeth. Therefore, received he him also for an
ensample of the resurreccyon. Gene. 27. b
By faith did Isaac bless Jacob and Esau, concerning things to come*

Gene. 49. ^
By faith Jacob when he was a dying, blessed both the sons of Joseph, and
bowed himself toward the top of his scepter. Gene. ^. d.
By faith Joseph when he dyed, remembered the departing of the children of
Israel Exodi. 2. a Acts. vii. ^
By faith Moses when he was borne, was hyd three months of his father and
mother because they saw he was a proper child, neither feared they the Kings
commandment.

Exodi. ii. b
By faith Moses when he was great, refused to be called the son of Pharaos
daughter, and chose rather to suffer aduersitye with the people of god, then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, and esteemed the rebuke of Christ
greater riches then the treasures of Egypt. For he had respe^ct unto the
reward.

Exodi. xii. ^
By faith he forsook Egypt, and feared not the fearcenes of the king. For he
endured, even as though he had seen hi which is invisible. Exodus xii. b
Through faith he ordained the passover and first borne, should touch them.
Exo. xiiii. ^
By faith they passed through the reed see as by dry land: which when the
Egypcyans had assayed to do they were drowned. Iosus. v^. ^
By faith the walls of Ierico fell down after they were compassed about
seven days. Iosus. (...). a and. v^. ^
By faith the hariot Raab perysshed not with them that were disobediente, when
she had received the spies to lodging peaseably.

And what shall I more say: for the time will be to short for me to tell of
Gedeon, of Iudi. vii. a Iud. iiii. d.
Barach: and of Iud. xiiii. a
Sa^pson, and of Iudit. xi a i.
Iephthae, i. Re. xvii. ^
of David also i. Reg. xii. a
and Samuel, and of the Prophets: which through faith subdued ki^gdomes:
wrought righteousness: obtained the promises: stopped the mouths of lio^s:
quenched the violence of fire: escaped the edge of the swearde: i. Re. xvii. d
Danie. vi. ^ Dani. iii. c
out of weakness, were made strong: waxed valyente in fight: turned to flight
the armies of the alie^tes ^. Re. xix a
the women received their deed raised to life again.

Other were racked, and would not be delivered, 3. Re. xxi. b Esaye. (...) b
were stoned, were hewn asunder, 3. Re. viii. c 3. Reg. 4. ^
were tempted, were slame* with sweard, walcked up and down in shepes skins,
and goats skynnes, being destitute, troubled and vexed: which me^ the world
was not worthy of: they wa^dred in wyldernesses, and in mountains, and in
de^nes, and caves of the earth.

And these al through faith obtained good report, and received not the promise,
because God had provided a better thing for us that they without us should not
be made perfect.

An exhortacion to be pacient and steadfast in trouble and aduersyte, upon hope
of everlasting reward. A commendacyon of the new Testament About the old.

CAPI. XII.
Wherefore, let us also (seeing that we are compassed with so great a multitude
Ephesians. 4. a Collo. iii a i. Petri. 2. ^
lay away all that presses down, and the sin that hangs so fast on let
us ru^ne with patience unto the battle that is set before us, loking unto
Jesus the auctor and finyssher of our faith, which (for the joy that was set
before him) abo^e the cross, and despised the shame, and is set down Ephesians.
4. d Collo. iii* a Hebre. i a. and. x. ^
on the right hand of the throne of god. Consider therefore, how that he
endured such speaking against him of sinners, lest ye should be weryed and
faint in your minds. For ye have not yet resysted unto blood, striving
against sin. And have forgotten the exhortacion, which speaks unto you, as
unto children: my son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord, neither
faynte when thou art rebuked of him: for whom the Lord loves, him he
chasteneth: ye he scourges every son that he receaueth. If ye endure
chastening, god offers

Stretch forth therefore the hands which were let down, and the weak knees:
and se that ye have straight steps unto your fete, lest any halting turn
you out of the way ye let it rather be healed. Follow peace with all men and
holiness: without the which no man shall se the Lord. And look, that no man be
destitute of the grace of god, lest any rote of bytternes spring up and
trouble, and thereby many be defiled: that there be no fornicator, or unclean
person, as Esau Esaias. (...). ^
which for one mease of meat sold his byrthryght. For ye know how that
afterward when he would by inherytaunce have optayned blessing he was put by.
For he fonnde no place of repentance, though Gene. ^7. ^
Gene. ^5. ^
he sought it with tears.

For ye are not come unto the Exodus xix. b
mount that Exodi. xx. c
voice, they (that heard it) wysshed away that the communycacyon should not be
spoken to the^. For they could not abide that which was commanded. Exo. xix. b
If a beast touch the mountain, it shall be i^oned, or thrust through with a
darte: so terrible was the sight which appeared. Moses said, I fear and
quake. But ye are come unto the mount Sion, and to the cite of the living God,
the celestyal Jerusalem: and to an innumerable sight of angels, and unto the
congregation of the first borne sons, which are written in heaven, and to
God, the judge of al, and to the spirits of just and parfecte men, and to
Jesus the mediator of the new testament, and to the ^. Petri. i. a. Hebre.
(...). d. Gene. iiii. ^
sprinklynge of blood that speaks better then that blood of Abel.

Se that ye despyce not him, yt speaks. For if they escaped not, which
refused him that spoke on earth: much more shall we not escape, if we turn
away from him, that speaks from heaven: whose voice the^ shoke the earth,
and now has declared saying: yet once more will I shake, not the earth
only, but also heaven. Where as he says: yet once more, it sygnifyeth the
remouynge away of those things which are shaken as of things which have
ended their course: that the things which are not shaken, may remain.
Wherefore, if we receive the kingdom which is not moved, we have grace, whereby
we may so serve God, and that we may please him with reverence Deuteronomy. iiii. d
and godly fear. For our God is a consumynge fire.

He exhorts us unto love, to hospitalite, to think upon such as be in
aduersyte, to maintain wedlock, to avoid coueteousnesse, to make much of
them that preach Gods word, to beware of strange learning: to be co^^ten^^
to luster rebuke with Christ, to be thankful unto God, and p^eby^^t unto
such as ^e (...) auctoryte.

CAPI. XIII.
LET brotherly love continue Roma 1^. ^. Acts. x. ^.
Be not ^ Petr. 4. b ^. Tim. 4. b. Gene. xix. a.
lodged angels unawares: Remember the^ that are in bonds, even as though ye
were bound with them your selves. Be myndefull of them which are in aduersyte,
as ye which are yet in the body. Wedlock is to be had in honor among all
me^, and the bed undefiled. As for whore kepers and aduoutrers God shall judge
them. Let your conuersacyon be without coueteousnes and Eccl^. 29. d. ^ Tim.
vi. ^
be content with such things as ye have all ready. For he has said: Iosu.
i. a.
I will not fail the, nether forsake the: so that

Jesus Christ yesterdaye and to day, and the same contenueth for ever. Be not
carried about with diverse and strange learning. For it is a good thing that
the heart be stablysshed with grace, not with meats, which have not proffeted
them that have had their pastyme in the^. We have an altar, whereof they may
not eat, which serve Number. xix. a
For the bodies of those beasts whose blood is brought into ye holy place by
the hye priest to pourge sin, are burnt with out the te^tes. Therefore Jesus
also to sa^ctifye the people with his own blood, suffered John. xix. d.
without the gate. Let us go forth therefore unto him, out of the tents, and
suffer rebuke with him. For here have we no contynuynge city: but we seek one
to come,

By him therefore do we offer sacrifyce of laud always to God: that is to
say, the fruit of those lyppes, which confess his name. To do good and to
distribute, forget not, for Eccl^. 35. a. Acts. x. a Roma. 12. a Phili. iiii. d
with such sacrifyces God is pleased. Obey the^ that have the oversight of
you, and submyt your selves unto them, for they watch for your souls, eue^ as
they that must give a co^ptes: that they may do it with joy, and not with
grefe. For that is an vnproffytable

The God of peace that brought again from deeth our Lord Jesus E^^. 34. b.
Iosu. ^. a. ^. Petri. v. ^
the great shepperde of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
testament, make you parfecte in all good works, to do his will, and bring to
pass, that the thing which ye do, may be pleasant in his sight through Jesus
Christ. To who^ be praise for ever while the world endures. Amen.

I beseech you brethren, suffer the word of exhortacyon: for we have written
unto you (...) feawe words. Ye know our brother Timothe, that he is at
lybertye: with whom (if he come shortly) I will se you. Salute the^ that have
the ouersyght of you, and all the saints. They of Italy salute you. Grace be
with you all:

Amen.

Sent from Italy by Timotheus.

The Epistel of Saynct James.
He exhorts to rejoice* in trouble, and thankfully to receive the word of
God, true religion or deuocio^ what it is.

CAPI. I.
James the servant of Job. xxii. a. Sapi. iiii. a Roma. v. ^.
the trying of your faith gendreth pacyence: and let patience have her parfect
work, that ye may be perfect and sound, lacking nothing.

If any of you lack wisdom, Aob. xviii. ^ Eccle. vii. ^. Math. xii. a Luke.
xi. b
let him ask of him that gives it: even God, which gives to all men
indifferently, and castech no man in the teeth: and it shall be given him. But
let him ask in faith, and waver not. For he that douteth, is like a wave of
the sea, which is tossed of the wyndes and carried with violence. Nether let that
man think, that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. A waueryng minded
man, is unstable in all Esayi. (...). b. Eccle. 14. b. 1. Petri i. d.
For even as the flower of the grass: shall he pass away. For the son
ryseth with heat, and the grass wydereth, and his flower falls away, and
the beautye of the fassyon of it peryssheth: even so shall the rich man
perysshe with his ways.

Happy is the man that endures tempta cyon: for when he is tried, he shall
receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love
him.

Let no man say when he is tempted, that he is tempted of God. For Gene. xxii.
a
God cannot tempte unto evil, because he tempts no man. But every man is
tempted, when he is drawn away, and entysed of his own

Do not err my dear brethren, 1. Cor. iiii. b
Every good gift, and every parfayt gift, is from above, and comes down
from the father of lyghtes, with whom is no variabienes, nether is he changed
unto darcknes. Ihon. i. a. and (...). d.
Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth, that we should be the
first fruits of his creatures.

Wherefore (dear brethren) P^o. xvii. d Eccle. v. a.
let every man be swyfte to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath. For the
wrath of man works not that which is ryghteous before God.

Roma. 13. d ^ollo. ^ii. a.
Wherefore lay a part all fylthynes and superstuyte of malicyousnes, and
receive with mekenes, the word that is graffed in you, which is able to save
your souls.

And Roma. ^i. b. Math v. d.
se that ye be doaers of the word Luke. xi. g.
if any man hear y^ word, and declares not the same by his works, he is
like unto a man beholoyng his bodily face in a glass. For as soon as he has
looked on himself, he goes his way, and forgets immediately what his
fassyon was. Mat. v^^ d.
But whosoever looks in y^ parfayt law of liberty, and continues therein (if he
be not a forgetful hearer, but a doar of the work) the same shall be happy in
his deed.

If any man among you seem to be denoute, refrayneth not his tongue, but
deceaueth his own heart, this man's devotion is in vain. Pure devotion and
undefiled before God the father, is this: to vysyt the fatherless and widows
in their aduersyte, and to keep him self unspotted of the world.

He for byddeth to have any respect of persons, and not to boast of faith
where no deeds are.

CAPI. II.
MY brethren, esteem not the faith of our Leui. xix. c
with respect of persons. For if there come into your company a man wearinge a
golden ring, clothed in goodly aparell, and there come in also a poor man in
vile rayme^t, and ye have a respect to him that wears the gaye clothyng, and
say unto him: Sit you here in a good place: and say unto the poor: stand
thou there, or sit here under my ^ote stole: are ye not parcyal in your
selves, and have judged after evil thoughts?

Harken my dear beloved brethren Has not God chosen y^ poor of this world,
such as are rich in says, and heirs of the kingdom, which he promised to
them that love hyme But ye have despised the poor. Do

If ye fulfill the royal law, according to the scripture. Leui. xix. d. Mat.
xxii. d Mark. x^i. c Romans xii^^. ^ Ga^^. v. b
Thou shall love thine neighbor as thy self, ye do well. But yt ye regard
one person more then another, ye commyt sin, and are rebuked of the law, as
transgressors. Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and Math. v. c.
yet fail in one point, he Math. 18. b
that shows no mercy: and mercy reioyseth against judgment.

What avails it my brethren, though a man say he has ^ayth, if he has no
deeds? Can says save him? If a brother or a sister be naked and destitute of
daily ^ode, and one of you say unto the^: depart in peace* God sede you
warmnes and fode, notwithstanding ye give the^ not those things which are
nedfull to the body, what shall it help? Even so faith, if it have no deeds: is
deed in it self:

But some man will say: you have faith, and I have deeds: show me thy faith by
thy deeds: and I will show y^ my faith by my deeds. Beleuest you that there is
one god? Thou do

But wylt thou understand(. O thou vain man) that faith without deeds is
deed? Was not Abraham our father justified through works, when he had Genesis
xxii. b.
offered Isaac his son upon the altar? Thou see, how that faith wrought
with his deeds, and thorugh the deeds, was the faith made parfecte, and the
scripture was fulfilled, which says: Gene. xv. b Romans (...). a G^l^. iii. a.
Abraham believed God, and it was reputed unto him for ryghtewesnes: and he was
called the friend of God. Ye se then how that of deeds a man is justified, and
not of faith only. Like wise also, was not Raab the harlot justified through
works, Iosu. ii. a.
when she had received that messengers, and had sent the^ out another way? For
as the body, without the spirit is deed, even so faith without works is deed
also.

What good and evil comes through the tongue. The duty of su^he as belerned
The difference betwyxte the wisdom of the Gospel, and the wisdom of the
world.

CAPI. III.
MY brethren, Math. 23. ^
be not every man a master, Pro. xvii. a
If a man sin not in worce, the same is a perfect man, and able also to tame
all the body, behold, we put byttes in to the horses mouths, y^ they may
obey us, and we turn about all the body of the. Behold also the ships,
which thought they be so great, and are driven of fearce wyndes yet are they
turned about with a very small helm whyther soever the violence of the gouerner
will. Even so the tongue is a syctel member also, and boasts great things.

Behold, how great a thing a little

All the natures of beasts, and of birds, and of serpents, and things of
the sea are meked and tamed of the nature of man. But the tongue can no man
tame. It is an unruly evil, full of deedly poison. Therewith bless Gene. i. d
which are made after the * (image and) symilitude of God. Out of one mouth
proceadeth blessinge and cursyng. My brethren, these things ought not so to
be. Does a fountayn send forth at one place sweet water and bitter also? Can
the fygge tree (my brethren) bear olyue bertes: either a vine bear fygges? So
can no fountain give both salt water and fresshe also. If any man be wise and
endued with knowledge among you, let him show his works out of good
conuersacyon with mekenes of wisdom.

But if ye have bitter enuyeng and strife

CAPI. IIII.
War and fighting comes of voluptcousnesse. The frendshype of the world
is enimyte before God* (...) or^acyon to (...) sclaunder and the vany^e of this
like.

FROM whence comes war, and fighting among you? come they not here hence?
eue^ of your lusts, that fight in your me^bres. Ye lust, and have not. Ye
envy and have indignacyon, and cannot obtain. Ye fight and war. Ye have not
because ye ask not. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask a mys^e: even to
consume it upon your iustes. Ye aduouterars, and weme^ that break matrimonye:
know ye not how y^ G^iath. i. b. 1 Ihon. ii. c.
the fre^dshype of the world is enemyte with God whosoever therefore wylbe a
friend of yt world, is made the enemy of God. Either do ye think ye ye
scripture says in vain. The spirit yt dwells in us, lusts even contrary
to envy: our gives more grace. ( wherefore he says: God resists the proud,
but gives grace unto the lowlye.

Submit your selves therefore to God, but i. (...). v. b
resyst y^ devil, and he will fly from you. Draw nigh to God, and he will
drawenye to you. Cle^fe your hands ye sinners, and pourge your hettes ye
wauerynge minded. Suffer affliccions: and mourn, and weep. Let your laughter
be turned to mournyng, and your joy to heaviness. i. Pe^^i v. a
Humble your selves in y^ sight of y^ lord, and he shall lift you up. Backbyte
not one another, drethren. He y^ backbyteth his brother, and he that judges
his brother, backbyteth the law, and judges the law. But and if thou judge
the law, thou are not an obseruer of the law: but a judge. There is one law
geuer ( and judge) which is able to save and to destroy. Rome. 14. a
What art thou that iudgest another.

Go to now ye that say: Eze. xviii. a Luke. xii. b.
todaye and tomorowe let us go into such a city, and continue there a year,
and bye and sell, and win: and yet cannot ye tell, what shall happen on ye
morrow. For what thing is your life? It is even a vapor, that apereth for a
little time, and then vanyssheth a way: For that ye ought to say: A^^. xviii.
c. Hebre. vi. ^
if the Lord will, and if we live, let us do this or yt. But now ye rejoice in
your boastynges. All soch reioysynge is evil. Therefore Luke. xii
to him yt knows how to do good, and does yt not, to him it is sin.

He threteneth the wicked rich men, exhorts unto pacyence, to beware of
swerynge One to knoweledge his ^autes to another, one to pray for another, and
one to labor to bring another to the truth.

CAPI. V.
GO to now ye rich men. Weep and eue^ wrath to your selves) in your last
days: Behold Leui, xi^. ^ Deuteronomy. 24. c. Tobi. iiii. c
the hyre of the laborers which have reaped down your feldes (which hyre is
of you kept back by fraud) cries: and the cries of them which have reaped,
are entered into ye ears of the Lord Sabbath. Ye have lived in pleasure on
the earth, and been wantan. Ye have norysshed your hertes, as in a day of
slaughter ye have condemned and killed the just and he has not resysted you.

Be pacie^t therefore brethren, unto the Math. v. a.
we count them happy which endure. Ye have hard of the pacyence of Job, and
have known what end the Lord made. For the

But above all things my brethren Math. v. f.
swear not* nether by heaven, nether by earth, nether any other oath: Let your
ye be ye, and your nay nay: lest ye fall into ypocrisy, If any of you be
vexed, let him pray. If any of you be merry, let him sing Psalms. If any be
diseased among you, let him call for the elders of the congregacyon, and let
them pray over him, and Man. vi. b.
anoynte him with oil in the name of the Lord, and the prayer of faith shall
save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him up, and if he have committed
sins, they shall be forgeuen him.

Knowledge your fautes one to another: 3. Reg. 17. ^ Luke. (...). ^.
and is rayned not on the earth by the space of three years and syx months.
And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth brought forth
her fruit.

Brethren, if any of you do err from the truth and another convert him, let
the same know that he which conuerteth the sinner from going a straye out of
his way, shall save a soul from deeth, and shall hyde the multitude of sins.

The end of the epistle of Saint James.
: The first Epistle of Saint Peter the Apostle.
He shows that through the aboundaunt mercy of God we are begotten again to
a lively hope and how faith must be tried, how the salvation in Christ is no
News* but a thing prophesied of old. He exhorts the to a godly
conuersacyon, for so much as they are now borne a new by the word of God.

CAPI. I.
PEter an Apostle of Acts. 8. a.
here and there as strangers thorowout Pontus, Galacia, Capadocya: Asia, and
Bethynia, elect according to the for knowledge of God the father through the
sanctifynge of the spirit unto obedience and Hebre. ix. ^ and. xii. d.
spryncklynge of the blood of Jesus Christ.

Roma. i. ^.
Grace be with you and peace be multiplied. i Corin. i a. ii. Cori. i. a. Gala.
^. a. ^ ii. Cori. i. ^.
Blessed be God the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his
abundant mercy begat us again? unto a Ephe. i. ^.
lively hope (by that that Jesus Christ rose again from death) to an
inherytaunce immortal and undefiled, and that peryssheth not reserved in
heaven for you, which are kept by the power of God through faith, Job. xxiii.
b Sapi. 3. a Jacob: ^. a Roma. v. a
tried with fire) might be found unto laud, glory and honor, at the
appearyng of Jesus Christ, whom ye have not seen, and yet love him, in whom
eue^ now, Ihon. xx, g
though ye se him not, yet do you believe, and rejoice with joy unspeakable and
glorious receyuynge the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.

Of which salvation have Acts. x. ^. Ela^e ix. a Da^^. ii. g ^gg^. ii. b
the Prophets inquired and searched, which Prophesyed of the grace that should
come unto you, searchynge when or at what time the spirit of Christ (which was
in them) should sygnyfye, which spirit testyfyed before, the passions that
should happen unto Christ, and the glory that should follow after, unto which
Prophets it was also declared, that not un to them selves, but unto us, they
should minister the things which are now showed un Acts. ii. a
sent down from heaven) have in the Gospel preached unto you the things,
which the angels defyre to behold.

Wherefore Luke. xi^. ^. Ephe. vi. c
gyrde up the loins of your mide, be sober, and trust perfectly on the grace
that is brought unto you (by the declaryng of Jesus Christ (as obedyent
children that ye give not your selves over unto your old lusts, by which ye
were led, when as yet ye were ignorant of Christ: but as he which called you,
is holy, even so be ye holy also in all manner of conuersacyon, because it is
written L^^it. xi, g and. xix. a
Be holy, for I am holy.

And if so be that ye call on the father, which without respect of person
judges Mat. xii. d Psa. xviii. c Roma. (...). b
accordig to every man's work, se that ye pass the time of your pylgremage
in fear. For Hebre. ix. b ^. Ihon. ^. b Apoca. i. b
with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb undefiled, and without spot,
which was ordained before hand, even before the world was made: but was
declared in the last times Esaye. ix b Luke. (...). b
for your sakes, which by his means do believe on God, that raised hi^ up from
death, and Philip. ^. ^
glorified him, that ye might have faith and hope toward God: even ye which
have puryfyed your souls through the spirit, in obeyng the truth with
brotherly love unfeigned, se that ye love one another with a pure heart ferue^tly:
for ye are borne a new, not of mortal sede, but of immortal, by the word of
God, which lives and lasts for ever.

Esaye. xl. b Eccle. 14. b James. i. b
For all flesh is grass, and all the glory of man is as the flower of
grass. The gras wyddereth, and the flower falls away but the word of the
Lord endures ever. And this is the word, which by the Gospel was preached
unto you.

He exhorts men to lay aside al vice, to abstain from fleshely lusts, and
to obey worldly rulers. How servants should behave them selves towade their
masters. He exhorts to suffer after the ensample of Christ.

CAPI. II.
Wherefore lay aside all maliciousnes Math. 18. ^
as new borne babes, desire ye that myleke (not of the body but of the soul)
which is with out disceyte: that ye may grow thereby ^ ( unto salvation). If so be
that ye have ^^sted, how gracious the Lord is, to (...) ^e (...), as unto a
living stone, disalowed of (...)* but chosen of god and precious: and ye as
(...) stones, are made a spiritual house (...) (...) presthode, for to offer
up spiritual sacrifices. acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Wherefore it is
contained also in the scripture: ^ behold (...)
the stone which the buylders refused, the same is bego^ne to be the head of
ye corner, and a stone that men stomble at, and a Rock whereat they be offended
which stomble at the word, and believed not that, whereon they were set. But ye
are a chose^ generacio^, a royal (...)
presthode, Psalm. 118. c (...). 21. ^
an holy nation, a people, which are wo^ne: that ye should show the virtues of
him, that called you out of darkness into Oser. ii d Roma. (...). e
his marvelous light, Exodus xix. ^ Deuteronomy. vii. a
which in time past were not a people, but are now the people of God: which
sometime had not optayned mercy, but now have optayned mercy.

Gala. v. c
Derely beloved, I beseech you as strangers and pylgrems, abstain Roma. 1^. ^
from fleshly lusts, which fight against the soul, and se that ye have honest
co^uersacion among the Gentyls, that where as they backebyte you as evil doers
Math. ^ b
they may se your good works, and praise God in the day of visitacion.

Roma. (...). a Citas. ^. a
Submyt your selves therefore unto all manner ordininau^ce of man for the lords
sake, whether it be unto the king, as unto the chief head: either unto rulers,
as unto them that are sent of him, for the punyshement of evil doers, but for
the laud of them, that do well. For so is the will of God, that with well
doyngye may stop the mouths of foolysh and ignorant men: as fre, and not
as having the lybertre for a cloak of ma^ciou snes, but even as the servants
of God Roma. 12. c
Honor all men. Love brotherly fellyshyppe. Fear God, honor the king.

Ephe. vi. a Co^o iii. d 1. T^m. ^. a Eitu^. ii. ^ Math. v. a
Servants, obey your masters with fear not only if they be good and
courteous: but also though they be froward. For it is tha^k worthy if a man for
conscience toward god cudure grefe, and suffer wrong undeserved. For what
praise is it, if when ye be buffered for your fautes, ye take it pacie^tly? But
and if when ye do well, ye suffer wrong and take it patiently, then is there
thank with God.

For here unto verily were ye called: for John x^ii b Ephesians. v a.
leaving us an ensample, that ye should follow his steps, which did no sin,
neither was there gyle found in his mouth: which when he was reuyled, reuyled
not again: when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed the vengeance to
him that judges ryghtuously Mat. viii. ^ Esaya. 53. d
which his own self bare our sines in his body, on the tree, that we being
delivered from sine should live unto righteousness. By whose strypes ye were
healed. For ye were as sheep going astray: but are now turned unto the
shepherde and Bishop of your souls.

How wives ought to order them selves toward their husbands, and in their
^pparel. The duty of men toward their wives. He erhorteth all men to v^ytie
and love, and pa^iently to suffer trouble. Of baptyme.

CAPI. III.
Likewise Ephesians. v. e Co^o. iii. ^
ye wives be in subieccyon to

Likewise ye me^, dwell with them according to knowledge: gyuyng honor unto
the wise, as unto the weaker vessel, and as unto the that are heirs also of
the grace of life that your prayers be not hyndred. In conclusion, be ye all of
one mind, of one heart and love as brethren, be p^tifull, be courteous * ( m^ke)
not re^dryng evil for evil, or rebuke for rebuke, but co^trarywise, bless:
knowing Psalm. 34. ^
For be that does long after life, and loves to se good days, let hi refrain
his tongue from evil, and his lips y^ they speak not gile. Let hi eschew evil,
and do good: let hi seek peace, and ensue it. For the eyes of the Lord are over
the righteous, and his ears are open unto their prayers. Again: the face of
the Lord is over them that do evil.

Moreover, who is it that will harm you, if ye follow y^ which is good? Ye,
Math. v. ^
happy are ye, if any trouble happen unto you for righteousness sake? Be not
ye afraid for any terror of them, neither be ye troubled but sanctify the
Lord God in your hertes Be ready always to give an answer to every man that
asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, and that with mekenes and
fear: having a good conscience Esa. ^ viii. c Math. x. ^
that where as they i. Petr. ii. ^ Tirus. 2. ^
backbyte you as evil doers, they may be ashamed, that falsely accuse your good
co^uersacion in Christ.

i. Petr. ii. ^ Math. v. ^
For it is better (if the will of God be so) that ye suffer for well doing,
then for evil doing.

Roma. v. a
For as much as Christ has once suffered for sins, y^ just for the unjust, to
bring us to God, and was killed, as pertaynyng to the flesh: but was
quyckened in the spyryte.

In which spirit he also went and preached unto the spirits that were in
prison, which some time had been dysobedient, when the long suffrynge of God
was once looked for in the days of Noe Gene. vi. a
while the Arcke was a preparyng: Gene. vii. c
wherein few, that is to say. viij. souls, were sauid by the water, like as
Roma. 6.
baptyme also now sauyth us, not the puttyng away of the fylth of the flesh,
but in that a good conscience consents to god, by the resurreccyon of Jesus
Christ, which is on the right hand of God: and is gone into heaven, Hebre. i.
^ and. ii. b, c
Angels, powers, and might subdued unto him. Hebre. i. ^. (...), ii. b. c


He exhorts men to ce^si^ from sin, and no man to suffer (...) an evil
door, but as a Christen man.

CAPI. IIII.
FOr as much then as Christ has suffered Roma. ^. d Ephesians. 4. d
in excess of wynes, in excess of eating, in excess of drynkyng * ( in
dronkennes) and in abominable ydolatry.

And it seems to the^ an inconuenie^t thing, that ye run not also with the^
unto the

Be ye therefore sober, and watch unto prayer. But above all things have
fervent love among your selves. For love shall cover the multitude of sins.
Gene xix. a ^ct^^ ^. c
Be ye herberous one to another, ^hil^. (...), b
without gruogynge. As every man has received the gift, even so ministre the
same one to another, as good mynisters of the manifold grace of God. If any
man speak, let him talk as the words Roma. (...). b ^orin. ^. c
If any man mynistre, let him do it as Math. v b ^. (...). iii. ^. c and iii, c
of the abylite, which God mynystreth unto him. That God in all things may be
glorified through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise and dominion for ever and
ever. Amen.

Derely beloved, maruayl not that ye are proved by tire (which thing is to
cry you) as though some strasige thing happened unto you: but rejoice, in as
much as year partakers of Christ's passions: that when his glory appears, ye
may be merry and glad. If ye be rayled upon for the name of Christ, happy are
ye. For the glory and the spiryt of god rests upon you. On their part he is
evil spoken of: but on your pact he is glorified.

Se that none of you be punysshed as a Pro^. xi. d
if y^ rightuous scarcely be saved: where shall the ungodly and the sinner
appear? Wherefore, let the^ that are troubled according to the will of God,
commit their souls to him with well doing, as unto a faithful creator.

A special exhortacyon for all Bishops and Prestes. He exhorts young persons to
submyt them selves to the elder, and every one to love another.

CAPI. V.
THe elders which are among you, I exhort, Acts. xx. ^
Feed ye Christ's flock, as much as lies in you, taking the ouersyght of
the^, not as compelled thereto, but wyllyngly: * ( after a godly sort) not for
y^ desire of fylthy lucre: but of a good mind, 2. Corin. ^. e
not as though ye were lords over the parishes: but 1. Ti^. 4. d Titus. ii. b
that ye be an ensample to y^ flock ^. Tim, ii. ^
( and that with good will) And when the chief sheperd shall appear, ye shall
receive, 2. Cori. 9 d 2. Tim. ^. ^
Mark. vi. d (...). x^^ c,
Cast al your care upon him: for hecareth for you.

Be sobre and watch, for your adversary the Job. i. ^.
walks about sekyng whom he may devour: Jacob. 4. ^
whom resyste steadfast in the faith, knowing, y^ the same afflyccions are
appointed unto your brethren, that are in y^ world. But the God of al grace
which has called us unto his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, shall his own
self (after that ye have suffered a little afflyccion) make you perfect: setle,
strength and stablysh you To him be glory and dominion for ever, and ever. Amen.

By Syluanus a faithful brother unto Romans xvi ^ i. Co. xvi. d
Great ye one another with the kiss of love. Peace be with you al, which are
in Christ Jesus.

Amen.
The second epistle of Saint Peter.
For so much as the power of God has given us all things ^^^taynyng unto
life, he exhorts us to make our tallynge known by good wor^kes and fruits of
faith, He makes men^yon of his own death.

CAPI. I.
Simon Peter a Servant,

1. P^^^i. i. a
Grace be unto you, and peace be multi plied through the knowledge of God and of
Jesus our Lord. According as his godly power has given unto us al things
that pertayne unto life and godlynes, through the knowledge of hi that has
called us by glory, and virtue, by the which are given unto us excellent and
most great promyses, that by the means thereof ye might be Ihon. ^, e Collo.
^i.
partakers of the godly nature, if ye fly y^ corrupcyon of worldly lust.

And hereunto give all diligence: in your 1. Corin. ^. a
in knowledge temperaunce, in temperau^ce patience: in patience godlynes, in
godlynes brotherly kyndnes, in brotherly kidnes love. For if these things be
among you, and be ple^tuous, they will make you that ye neither shall be idle nor
vnfruytefull in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. But he that lacks
these things, is blind and gropeth for the way with his hand, and has
forgotten, that he was pourged from his old sins.

Wherefore brethren, give the more dilyge^ce by good worckes) For if ye do such
things, ye shall never fall. Ye and by this means an entryng in shall be
ministered unto you about dasitly into y^ everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
savior Jesus Christ.

Wherefore I will not be neglyge^t to put you always in remembrance of such
things though ye know them your selves, and be stablyshed in the present
truth. Not with standing I thyncke it mete (as long as I am in this
tabernacle) to stere you up by put tyng you in remembrance, for as much, as I
am sure, that shortly I must put of this my tabernacle, 2 Cori, v. a
even as our Lord Jesus Christ showed me. I will ever also give my dylygence,
that ye may have where with to stere up the remembrance of these things after
my departing. For we have not followed dysceytfull fables, when we opened unto
you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but Ihon. xxi. d
with our eyes we saw his majesty: even then verily when he received of God
the father honor and glory, and when there came such a voice 1. Ihon. ^. a
This is Mat. 17. b and. iii. d Mathe. i. ^ Luke. iii* ^
my dear beloved son, in whom I have delight. This voice we heard come from
heaven, when we were with him, in the holy Mount.

We have also a right sure word of prophecye, whereunto if ye take heed, as
unto a 2. Cori. 4. ^
light, that shines in a darcke place, ye do well, until the day dawne, and
the day star arise in your hertes. So that ye first know this: that no
prophecye in the scripture has any pryuate interpretacyon: For the scripture
came never by the will of man: but holy men of god spoke, as they were moved by
the holy ghost.

He prophecyeth of false teachers, and shows their punyshemente.

CAPI. II.
THere were false prophets also among Actis. ^y. (...) 1. Tim. 4. a 2. (...).
^. d 2. (...). i. d (...). ^^
there shall be false techers among you: which privily shall bring in damnable
sects (even denyeng the Lord that has bought the^, and bring upon the^ selves
swyft da^nacion, and many shall follow their damnable ways, by whom the way
of truth shall be evil spoken of, and through covetousness shall they with sayned
words make marchau^dise of you, whose judgment is now not far of, and their
damnacyon slepeth not.

For if God spared not the angels that sined, to be punyshed) to be kept unto
judgment: neither spared the old world, but saved Gene. 7. ^
No^ the eight preacher of ryghtuousnes, and brought in the flood upon the
world of the ungodly, and turned the cities of Zodom and Gomor into ashes:
ouerthre we them, damned them, and made on them an ensample unto those that
after should live ungodly. And just Gene. (...). ^
Lot vexed with the uncleanly co^uersacyon of the wicked, delivered he. For he
being ryghtuous, and dwelling among them in seeing and hearing, vexed his
rightuous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds. Job. xv ^. 1.
Cor^^. x. ^
The Lord knows how to deliver the un godly out of temptacyon, and to
reserve the unjust unto to the day of judgment for to be punyshed: but chefely
them that walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, and despise
auctoryte. Presu^ptuous are they, and

They count it pleasure to live delycyously for a season. Spots they are and
fylthynes: which live at pleasure in their own disceyuable ways, feastynge
with you: having eyes full of aduoutry, and that cannot cease from sin,
begylyng unstable souls. Hertes they have exercysed with covetousness. They are
cursed children which have forsaken the right way, and are gone astraye Number.
22. ^
way of Bala^ the son of B^for, which loved the reward of unrighteousness:
but was rebuked of his iniquytie. The tame and dome beast, speaking with
man's voice, forbade the madness of the Prophet.

These are wells without water: clouds that are carried with a tempest, to
who^ the mist of darckenes is reserved for ever. For when they have spoken the
great swellynge words of vanity, they enuse through iustes in the
voluptuousnes of the flesh, the^ that were clean escaped: even the^ that now
live in error, while they promise them lybertye, where as they the^ selves are
the bo^d servants of corrupcyon. Jude. i. d
For of whom a man is overcome, unto y^ same is he brought in bondage, John. 8.
d Roma. vi. c
For if they (after they have escaped from the fylthynes of the world through
the knowledge of the Lord and the savior Jesus Christ) are yet ra^gled again
therein, and overcome Hebre. vi. a (...). d. x. ^
then is the latter end worse with them then the beginning. For it had been
better for them, not to have known the way Math. ^2. d
of ryghtuousnes, then after they have known it, to turn from the holy
commandment that was given unto the^: But the same is happened unto the that
is used to be spoken by the true proverb. Prou^r. xxi
The dog is turned to his vomet again, and the sow that was washed is turned
again to her walowyng in the myer.

Of the day of the Lord, whose long tarying so salvation

CAPI. III.
This is the second epistle that I now

Acts. x^ ^ (...), P^te. 2. a Iudi^. ^. c i. (...). ^. c ii. (...). ^.
This first understand, that there shall come in y^ last days, mockers (in
dysceaytfulnes) which will walk after their own lusts, and say: Where is the
promise of his coming? For sense the fathers dyed, all things continue Job
(...) b Esaias. (...). ^
But the heavens and earth which are now, be kept by his word in store, and
reserved unto fire, against the day of judgment and perdicion of ungodly me^.

Derely beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, how that Psalm (...)
one day is with the Lord, as a thousand year, and a thousand year as one
day. The Lord that has promised, is not slack, as some me^ count slacknes:
but is pacient to us ward: for as much as he would have no man lost, but will
receive al men to repentance.

Nevertheless (...)
the day of the Lord will Apo^^ xxi. a
Nevertheless, we (according to his promise) look for a new heaven and a new
earth, wherein dwells rightousnes.

Wherefore derely beloved, seying that ye look for such things, be delige^t
that ye may be found of him in peace, without sport and undefiled. And
suppose that the long suffrynge of the Lord is salvation, even as our dearly
beloved brother Paul also (according to the wisdom given unto him) has
written unto you, ye, almost in every Epistle, speaking of such things:
among which are many things hard to be understand, which they that are
unlearned and unstable, pervert, as they do also the other scriptures unto
their own destruction. Ye therefore beloved, (seeing ye be warned before hand)
beware, least ye, with other men be also plucked away through the error of
the wicked, and fall from your own sted fastnes: but grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and sauyoure JESUS Christ. To whom be glory both now
and for ever.

Amen.
The first epistle of Saint John the Apostle.
True witness of the euerla stynge word of God. The blood of Christ is the
purga^yon from sin, No man to wytho ut sin.

CAPI. I.
THat which was from Math. 17. ^
that eternal life, which was with the father, and appeared unto us. That which
we have seen and herd, declare we unto you, y^ ye also may have fellishyp with us
and that our felly ship may be with the father and his son Jesus Christ, And
this writ we unto you that ( ye may rejoice, and that) your joy may be full.

And this is the tydinges which we have (...). (...). ^. Apoca. ^. b
the blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sins:

3 Reg. (...) 3. Par. vi g
If we say that we have no sin, we de ceyue ourselves, and the truth is not
in us: Job xiii. ^. Psalm. (...). d. and* (...) ^. Luke. xv. ^
If we knowledge our sins, he is faithful and just, to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If we have not sinned, we make him a
liar, and his word is not in us.

Christ is our advocate. Of true love, and how it is tried

CAPI. II.
MY lyttel children, these things write I Ihon. 13. ^
we keep his commandments. He that says I know him, and keeps not his
commandments is a liar, and the verite is not in him. But whosoever keeps his
word, in hi is the love of God perfect in deed: hereby know we that we are in
him. He y^ says he bydeth in him, ought to walk even as he walcked.

Brethren, I write no new commandment ^ en^^. xix. ^
hates his brother, is in darkness, and walks in darcknes: and cannot tell
whither he goes, because yt darckenes has blinded his eyes.

Babes I write unto you, how yt your sins are forgyue^ you for his names
sake. I write unto you fathers, how that ye have known him that is from the
beginning. I write unto you young men, how that ye have overcome yt wicked: I
write unto you little children, how yt ye have known the father. I have written
unto you fathers, how that ye have known him that is from the beginning. I
have written unto you young men, how that ye are strong, and the word of god
abides in you, and ye have overcome that wicked.

Se that ye love not Job. xvii ^
the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the
world, the love of the father is not in him. For all that is in the world (as
the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life) is not
of the father, but of the world. And the world passes a way and the lust
thereof, but he that fulfylleth the will of God, abides for ever.

Little children, it is the last time, and as Acts (...).
They went out from us, but they were not of us. For yt they had been of us,
they would no dout have co^tynued with us. But that it might appear, that they
were not of us.

Nevertheless, ye have an oyntme^t of hi^ y^ is holy, and ye know all things. I
have not written unto you, as though ye knew not the truth: but as though ye
knew it, and know also, y^ no lie comes of truth. Who is a lier, but he that
denies that Jesus is Christ the same is Antechriste, that denies the father
and the son. Whosoever denies the son, the same has not the father. * (
he that knowlegeth the son has the father also.) Let therefore abide in you
that same which ye heard from the beginning. If that which ye heard from the
beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the
Father. And this is the promise that he has promised us even eternal life.

These things have I written unto you, concerning them that disceiue you. And
the anoyntyng which ye have received of him dwells in you. And ye need not,
that any man teach you: but Esaias. 54. d ^ho^. v. c
as the anointyng teaches you of al things, and is true, and no lie, and as
it has taught you, even so bide therein. And now babes abide in him: that when
he shall appear, we may be bold, and not be made ashamed of him at his
coming: If ye know that he his ryghtuous, know also yt every one which does
ryghtuousnes, is borne of him.

The synguler love of God toward us: and how we again ought to love one
another.

CAPI. III.
BEhold, what love the father has showed Luke xx. ^ John. ^. ^
( at. d be in deed) the sons of God. For this cause ye world knows you
not, because it knows not hi^. Derely beloved, no we are we the sons of God
and yet it does not appear, what we shall be. But we know, that when it shall
appear, we shall be like him. For we shall se hi as he is. And every man that has
this hope in him, pourgeth himself, even as he also is pure. Whosoever
commytteth sin, commytteth unrighteousness also, and sin is vurightuousnes.
And ye know, that he appeared, to take away our sins, and in him is no
sin. As many as bide in him, sin not: whosoever synneth, has not seen him,

Babes, let no man deceive you. He that both ryghtuousnes, is ryghtuous, even
as he is ryghtuous. He that commits sin, Gene. iii. ^ John. v^^^. ^
is of the devil: for the devil synneth sense the beginning. For this purpose
appeared the son of God, to lowse the works of the devil. Whosoever is
borne of God synneth not: for his sede remains in him, and he can not sine,
because he is borne of god. In this are the children of god known, and the
children of the devil. Whosoever does not righteousness is not of god, nether he
that loves not his brother.

For this is the tidings, that ye heard Gene. iiii. b
Cayn which was that wis ked, and slew his brother. And wherefore i will we he him?
Because his own works were evil, and his brothers good. Maruayle not my
brethren though ye world hate you. We know that we are translated from death
unto life, because we love the brethren. Leuit. xi^. d
He that loves not his brother, abides in death. Whosoever hates his
brother, is a man (...). And ye know, that no man ^^a^, has eternal life
abydyng in him.

Hereby perceive we love: because he gave his life for us: and we ought to give
out lives for the brethren. But whosoever has this worlds good and Deute. 15. b.
seyth his brother have need: and shuts up his compassyon from him: how
dwells the love of God in him? My babes, let us not love in word, neither in
tongue: but in deed and in verite. Hereby we know, that we are of the verite, and
can quiet our hertes before him. For if our heart conde^pne us* God is greater
then our heart, and knows all things. Derely beloved, if our heart condemn
us not, then have we Math. 7. a and (...). c. Ihon xv. b and. xv^. t, Iaco. i. a
what soever we ask we receive of him, because we keep his commandments,
and do those things which are pleasyng in his sight.

And this ^. Ihon ^, c John. xii* ^
is his commandment, that we believe on the name of his son Jesus christ,
and love one another, as he gave commandment. And he that keeps his
commandments, dwells in him, and he in him, and hereby we know that he
abides in us, eue^ by the spirit which he has given us.

Difference of spirits, and how the spirit of God may be known from the
spirit of error. Of the love of god and of our neighbors.

CAPI. IIII.
Dearly beloved belue not every spycyt: Mat. vii, ^ Deute. (...). ^ Mat 24. ^
^ (...). (...). ^ Luke. 21. ^
many false Prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby shall ye know the
spirit of God. Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh is of God. And every spirit which coufesseth not that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh, is not of God. And this is that spirit of Antichrist, of
who^ ye have herd how that the should come: and even now al ready is he in the
world.

Lyttel children, ye are of God, and have overcome them: for greater is he that
is in

Derely beloved John. ^3. d and. xv. b i. Thessalo.
let us love one another: for love comes of God. And every one that loves,
is borne of God, and knows God. He that loves not, knows not God: for God
is love. In this appeared the love of God to us ward, because that Ihon. iii. c
Roma. v. b
god sent his only begotten son into the world, that we might live through
him. Herein is love, not y^ we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his
son to make agreement for our sins.

Derely beloved, if God so loved us, we Exodi. 33 o Iudit. v. ^ and. xiii. d
Deute. 4. d John. i. c and. vi. ^
No man has seen God at any time. If we love one another, god dwells in us,
and his love is perfect in us. Hereby know we y^ we dwell in him, and he is in
us: because he has given us of his spirit. And we have seen, and do testyfie,
that the father sent the son to be the savior of the world. Whosoever
confesses, that Jesus is the son of god, in hi^ dwells God, and he in God.
And we have known, and believed the love that God has to us.

God is love, and he that dwells in love,

We love him, for he loved us first. If a man say, I love God, and yet hate
his brother he is a liar. For how can he that loves not his Brother whom he
has seen, love GOD whom he has not seen? And this commandment have we of
him: that he which loves God, should love his brother also.

To love God, is to keep his commoundementes. Faith overcomes the world.
Everlasting life ^o in the son of God. Of the son unto death.

CAPI. V.
Whosoever believes that Jesus is Christ, is borne of God. And every Ihon. 14. ^
By this we know, that we love the children of God, when we love God, and keep
his commandments. For this is the love of God, that we keep his
commandments, and Math. ii. d
his commandments are not grievous For all that is borne of God, overcomes
the world. And this is the ^. Cor. xv. ^
vyctory that overcomes the world, eue^ our faith. Who is it that overcomes
the world: but he which believes, that Jesus is the son of God?

This Jesus Christ is he that came by water For there are three which bear
record in Heaven, the father, the word, and holy Ghost And these three are
one.) And there are three which bear record * ( in earth) the spirit and
water, and blood: and these three are one. It we receive the wytnes of me^, the
wytnes of God is greater. For these is the witness of god * ( that is greater)
which he testyfieth of his son. He that believes on the son of God has
the wytnes in him self. He that believes not god, has made him a liar,
because he believed not the record that God gave of his son. And this is that
record, how that god has given unto us eternal life, and this

These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the son of
god, that ye may know, how that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe
on the name of the son of god. And this is the trust that we have in him:
that Math. 7. a and xxi. c Math. xi. d Luke. (...). b Ihon 14. b xv. b. xvi. f
Iacobi. i. ^. Ihon. 3. d
if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us. And if we know that
he hear us what soever we ask, we know, that we have the petycyons, that we
desire of him.

If any man se his brother sine a sin not unto death, let him ask, and he
shall give him life for the^ that sin not unto death. There

We know that whosoever is borne of God, synneth not: but he that is begotten
of God keeps him self, and that wicked touches him not. We know, that we
are of God, and the world is al together set on wyckednes. We know, that the
son of god is come, and has given us a mind to know him which is true: and
we are in him that is true, through his son Jesus Christ. This same is very
God, and eternal life. Babes, keep your selves from images.

AMEN.
He writes unto a certain lady, reioyseth that her children walcke in the
truth, exhorts them unto low, warns the^ to beware of such dysceauers as
deny that Iosus Christ came in the flessh, prays them to continue in the
doctrine of Christ, and to have nothing to do with them that bring not thye
learning.

: The Second Epistle of Sayncte Ihon.
THe elder to the elect Ihon. 14. c. ^. Ihon. v. a
love one another. And this is the love, that we should walk after his
commandment. This commandment is (that as ye have heard from the
beginning) ye should walk in it. For many deceauers are entered into the world,
which confess not that Jesus Christ is come in the flessh. This is a deceauer
and an Antichrist. Look on your selves that we loose not that we have wrought:
but that we may have a full reward. Whosoever Behold I have told you before,
that ye should not be ashamed in the day of the lord.) I had many things to
write unto you, nevertheless I would not write with paper and ink. but I
trust to come unto you, and speak with you mouth to mouth. that our joy may
be full. The sons of thy elect sister great the.

AMEN.
He is glad of Gayus, that he well^eth in the truth exhorts them to be
souyng unto the poor Christen in their perseruryon, shows the unkind
dealinge of D^otrophes, adn the good report of Demetrius.

: The third Epistle of Saynct Ihon.
THe elder unto the

I wrote unto the congregation: but Diotrephes which loves to have the
preempnence among them, receaueth us not. Wherefore if I come, I will declare
his deeds which he does, iestyuge on us with malycyous words, neither is there
with content. Not only he him self receaueth not the brethren: but also he
forbyddeth them that would, and thrusts them out of the congregacyon,

Beloved, follow not that which is evil,

He rebukes such as being blinded with their own ^ust^^* resyst the truth,
and that we may know the^ the better, he says they be such as sin beastly
against nature and despise rulers. etc. He exhorts us to edyfy one another,
to pray in the holy gooste to continue in love, to look for the coming of
the Lord, and one to help another out of the fire.

: The epistle of Saint Jude.
Judas the servant of

Beloved, when I gave all dylygence to write unto you of the commen salvation,
it was needful for me to write unto you, to exhort you, that ye should
contynually labor in the faith, which was once given unto the saints. For
there are certain ungodly men craftily crept in of which it was written before
time unto such judgment. They turn the grace of our god unto wantannes, and
deny God (which is the only Lord) and our Lord Jesus Christ.

My mind is therefore to put you in remembrance, for as much as ye once know
this, how that the Lord (after that he had delivered the people out of Egypt)
destroyed them which afterward believed not. The Gene. xix. ^
even as Sodom and Gomor, and the cytyes about them (which in like manner
defiled them selves with fornicacyon, and followed strange flesh) are set
forth for an ensample, and suffer the pain of eternal fire. Likewise, these
being disceaued by dreams, defyle the flesh, despise rulers and speak
evil of them that are in auctoryte. Yet Michaell the archangell when he Gene
iiii. b Nu. xvi. c
Cayn, and are utterly given to the errouce of Balan * for lukers sake and
perisshe in the treason of Core.

These are spots which of your kindness

Enoch the seventh from Adam prophesyed before of such, saying. Apoca. i* b
Esaias. iii. c
Behold, the Lord shall come with thousands of saynctes, to give judgment
against al men, and to rebuke all that are ungodly among them of all their
ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their cruel
speakynges, which ungodly sinners have spoken against him.

These are murmurers, complayners walking Acts. xx. ^. 1. Tim, 4. 8 2. Tim.
3. ^. 2. Petr. (...). ^ and. iii. ^.
that there should be begylers in the last time, which should walcke after
their own ungodly lusts. These are makers of sects, fleshlye, having no
spyryte.

But ye de^lye beloved, edyfye your selves in your mos^e holy faith,
prayinge in the holy ghost, and keep your selves in the love of God, lokynge
for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto eternal life. And have
compassion of some, separatynge and have compassyon on the other) and hate the
fylthy vesture of the flesh.

Unto him that is able to keep you fre from sin, and to present you fautlesse
before the presence of his glory with joy * ( at the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ) to god our sauyoure: ( through Jesus christ our Lord) which only
is wise, be glory, majesty. domynion, and power, * ( before al worlds) now
and ever Amen.

: The Reuelacyon of Saint Ihon the dyuyne.
Happy are they that hear the word of God and keep it. He writes to the
seven congregacyons in Asi^, ^re^h seven candelstyckes, and in the mids of
them, one like unto the (...) of man.

CAPI. I.
THe Reuelacyon of Jesus

John to the seven congregacions in Asia: Grace be unto you and peace, from him
which is and which was, and which is to come, and from the seven spirits
which are before his trone, and from Jesus Christ, which is a faithful Hebre.
xi. d ^. Petr. (...). d ^. Ihon. ^, b
loved us, and wesshed us from our sins in his own blood, and made us
Kings and Prestes unto God his father, be glory and dominion for evermore.
Amen. Math 24. c (...). x^v. c D^n, (...). d
Behold, he comes with clouds, and al eyes shall se him, and they also
which pearsed him. And all kynredes of the earth shall wayle. * ( over him) Even
so: Amen. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the
Lord almighty, which is, and which was, and which is to come.

I John your brother, and companion in

And I turned back to se the voice that M^^. vii. a
And his face shone, even as the son in his strength. And when I saw him, I
fell at his fool, even as deed. And he laid his right hand upon me, saying
unto me: fear not. Esa. 44. b
I am the first and the last, and am a live, and was deed. And behold Romans vi.
b
I am alive for evermore and have the keys of hell and of deeth. Write
therefore the things which thou have leave, and the things which are, and the
things which must be fulfilled hereafter: the mystery of the. vi^. stars
which thou saw in my right hand, and the. vi^. golden candelstyckes. The.
vi^. stars are the messengers of the. vi^. congregacyons.

And the seven candelstyckes which thou saw, are the seven congregacyons.

He exhorts four congregacyons (...) amend, and (...)* weth the reward of
him that overcomes.

CAPI. II.
Unto the messenger of the congregacyon Acts. ^* (...)*
Nicolaitans, which deeds I also hate. Let him that has ears, hear what the
spirit says unto the congregacions. To him that overcomes, ^^^^. ^. ^
will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in the mids of the
Paradyse of God.

And unto the Angel of the congregacyon

And to the messenger of the congregation ^^ (...)* c
which taught in Balake, to put occasyon of sin before the children of
Israel, that they should eat of meat dedicate unto ydoles, and commyt
fornicacyon. Even so have thou them that maintain the doctrine of the
Nycolaytans, which thing I hate. But be converted, or else I will come unto the
shortly, and will fight against the with the swearde of my mouth. Let him

And unto the messenger of the congregation of Thiatira write. This says the
sone of god, which has eyes like unto a flamme of fire, and his fete are like
brass: I know thy worckes and thy love, service, and faith, and thy pacye^ce,
and thy deeds, which are mo at the last then at the first. Notwithstanding 3.
Re. 16. ^ 4. Reg. x. d
Iesabel, which called her self a Prophetise, to teach and to deceive my
servants, to make them commyt fornicacyon, and to eat meats offered up unto
ydols. And I gave her space to repent of her fornycacyon, and she repented
not. Behold, I will cast her into a bed: and them that commyt fornycacyon with
her, into great aduersyte, except they turn from their deades. And I will kyl
her children with deeth. And all the congregacyo^s shall know, that Iere. 27. ^.
I am he which searches the reins and hertes. And I will give unto every one
of you acordynge unto his worckes. Unto you I say, and unto other of them of
Thiatira, as many as have not this Psalm. (...). b
and he shall rule them with a rod of iron: and as the vessels of a potter,
shall they be broken to sheuers. Even as I received of my father, so will I
give him the morning star. Let him that has ears, hear, what the spirit
says to the congregacyons.

He instrueteth and enfourmeth the Angels of the co^^ gregacyons, declarynge
also the reward of him that overcomes.

CAPI. III.
ANd write unto the messenger of the my) God. Remember therefore, how thou have
received and heard, and hold fast, and repent. 1. The. v. ^ 2. Pet. iii. ^
If thou shall not watch, I will come on the as a these, (...) thou shalt not
know what hour I will come upon the. Thou have a few names in Sardys, which
have not defiled their garments, and they shall walcke with me in white, for
they are worthy. He that overcomes, shall be thus clothed in white array, and I
will not put out his name out of the book of life, and I will confess his name
before my father, and before his angels. Let him that has ears, hear, what
the spirit says unto the congregacyons.

And write unto the angel of the congregacyon of Phyladelphia: this says he
that is holy and true, which has the keye of David Esa. xx^i. ^ Job. x^^. ^.
which opens and no man shuts, and shuts, and no man opens, and know
thy worckes. Behold, I have set before the an open door, and no man can shut
it, for thou have a little strength, and have kept my sayings: and have not
denied my name. Behold, I make them of the co^gregacyon of Satan, which call
them selves Jews, and are not, but do lie: Eeholde, I will make them that they
shall come, and worship before thy fete: and shall know, that I have loved
the.

Because thou have kept the words of my patience, therefore I will keep the
from the hour of temptacyon, which will come upon all the world, to tempte
them that dwell upon the earth. Behold, I come shortly.

And unto the messenger of the congragacyon which is in Laodicia, write: This
says (Amen) the faithful and true wytues, the beginning of the creatures of
God. I know thy works, that thou act neither cold nor hot: I would thou
were cold or hot. So then because thou art between ^^. Cori. ^. a
clothed, that thy filthy nakedness do not appear: and anoynte thine eyes with eye
salve that thou may se.

Prove. ii. b (...). xi^. ^
As many as I love, I rebuke, and chaste^. Be fervent therefore, and repent.
Behold, I stand at the door, and knock. If any man hear my voice, and open
the door, I will come into him, and will suppe with him, and he with me. To him
that overcomes will I grant to sit with me in my seat, even as I ouercam,
and have sytten with my father in his seat Let him that has ears hear,
what the spirit says unto the ^angregacyons.

He sees the heaven open, and the sent and one sitting upon it* but* xx^ii^.
seats about it with* xxi^^i. ^^ders syt^^^g upon the^, and four beasts
praising God day and night.

CAPI. IIII.
AFter this I looked, and behold a door

And out of the seat proceeded lyghtnynges, and thondringes, and voices, and
there were seven lamps of fire, burning before the seat, which are the seven
spirits of God. And before ye seat there was a see of glass, like unto
cristall, and in the mids of the seat, and round about the seat were four
beasts, full of eyes before and behind. And Esa^^. vi. ^
Holy, holy, holy, Lord God almyghtye, which was and is, and is to come.

And when those beasts gave glory and (our God) to receive glory and honor,
and power, for y^ haste created all things, and for thy wylles sake they are,
and were created.

He sees the lamb opening the book, and therefore the four beasts, the.
xx^i^^. elders, and the angels praise the lamb, and do him worship.

CAPI. V.
AND I saw the right hand of him, ye

And one of the elders said unto me: weep

And when he had taken the book, the four

And I beheld, and I herd the voice of

The lamb opens the. vi. seal. s, and many things follow the openyng ^
thereof.

CAPI. VI.
AND I saw, when the lamb opened Esaias. 27. ^.
And there was given unto him a great swearde.

And when he had opened the third seal

And when he had opened the fyft seal, I Job. xxii. ^.
the souls of the^ that were killed for the word of God, and for the
testimony which they had, and they cried with a loud voice, saying: How
long ^aryest you Lord, holy and true, to judge and to avenge our blood on the^
that dwell on y^ earth? And long white garments were given unto every one of
them. And it was said unto the^, that they should rest yet for a little season
until the nombre of their fellows, and brethren, and of them that should be
killed as they were, were fulfilled.

And I beheld, when he had opened the Dsec. ^. ^ Luke xxiii. d
and said to the hills and rocks: fall on us, and hyde us from the presence
of him that sytteth on the seat, and from the wrath of the lamb: for the
great day of his wrath is come, and who is able to endure?

He sees the servants of God sealed in their forheades out of all nacyo^^
and people, which though they suffer trouble, yet the lamb feo^^^ them,
^e^eth them to the fountaynes of living water, and God shall wype away all
^^^^^s from their eyes.

CAPI. VII.
AND after that, I saw. iiij. Angels on any tree. And I saw another angel
ascend from the risynge of the sun, which had the seal of the living God,
and he cried with a loud voice to the four Angels (to whom power was given to
hurt y^ earth and the sea) saying: hurt not the earth nether the sea, nether the
trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their forheades.

And I heard the nombre of them which

After this I beheld, and lo, a great multitude (which noman could nombre)
of all nations and people, and to^ges, stood before y^ seat, and before the
la^be, clothed with long white garments, and palms in their hands, and cried
with a loud voice, saying: saluacyo^ be ascrybed to him yt sytteth upon the
seat of our God, and unto the la^be. And all ye angels stood in the co^pase
of the seat, and of y^ elders and of the four beasts, and fell before the
seat on their faces, and worshypped God saying. Ame^: Blessinge and glory and
wisdom and thanks, and honor, and power, and might, be

And one of the elders answered, laying unto me: what are these which are
arrayed in long white garments, and whence came they? And I said unto him:
Lord you wotest. And he said to me: these are they, which came out of great
tribulacyon, and made their garments large, and made them white by the blood
of the lamb: therefore are they in the presence of the seat of God and serve
him day and night in his temple, and he y^ sytteth in y^ seat will dwell
among them. They shall hong^^r no more neither thyrst, neither shall the sun
light on the^, nether any heat. For the lamb which is the myddest of the
seat, shall f^^de them, and shall lead them unto fou^taynes of lyuinge water,
and God shall wype always all tears from their eyes.

The seventh seal ^o opened, there is silence in heaven, the four angels
blow their trompetes, and great plages follow v^^on the earth.

CAPI. VIII.
AND when he had opened the seventh

And the seven Angels which had the seven tro^pettes, prepared the^ selves to
blow. The first Angel blewe; and there was made hayle and fire, which were
myngled with blood, and they were cast into the earth: and the third part *
( of the earth was set on fire, and the third part) of trees was burnt,

And the third angel blewe, and there fell a great star from heaven,
burning as it were a lamp, and it fell into the third part of the ryuers,
and into fountaynes of waters, and the name of y^ star is called wormwod. And
the third part was turned to wormwod.

The fyfte and syxt Angel blow their trompettes: the star falls from
heaven: the locustes come out of the smoke The first woe is pa^^e: the fo^^^
angels that were bound are losed, and the third part o^ men is killed.

CAPI. IX.
AND the fyft angel blewe, and I saw a star fall from heaven unto y^ earth.
And ^o him was given the kaye of the bottomless pytt. And he opened the
bottomless pytt, and the smoke of the pytt arose as the smoke of a great
furnace. And the sun, and the air were darckned by the reason of the smoke
of the pytt. And there came out of the smoke locustes upon the earth, and unto
the^ was given power, as the scorpions of the earth have power. And it was
commanded them, that they shude not hurt the grass of the earth: nether any
grene thing: nether any tree: but only those men which have not the seal in
their forheades. And to them was commanded, that they should not kill the^,
but that they should be vexed. v. months, and their pain was as the pain yt
comes of a scorpion, when he has stonge a man. Esaye. ii. d. Oset. x. i
Luke xxiii. d
And in those days shall men seek deeth, and shall not find it, and shall
desire to dye, and deeth shall fly from them.

And the symilitude of the locustes was

And the syxt Angel blewe, and I herd avoyce from the. iiij. corners of the
golden aultre, which is before God, saying to the syxt Angel, which had the
tro^pe: Lose the four Angels, which are bound in y^ great river Euphrates.
And the four Angels were loosed, which were prepared for an hour, for a
day, for a month, and for a year, for to slay the iii. part of men. And the
nombre of horsemen of war were.xx. tym es.x. M. And I herd the nombre of
them: and thus I saw the horses in a vision, and them that ^ate on them,
having fyry habergions of a Iacincte couloure, and brymstone, and the heads
of the horses were as the heads of lions. And out of their mouths went forth

The Angel has the b^ke open: he swears there shall be no more time he gives
the book unto Ihon, which eats it up

CAPI. X.
AND I saw another mighty angel

And the Angel which I saw stand upon

And the voice which I herd from heaven, spoke unto me again, and said Eze.
ii. ^
go and take the little book which is open in the hand of the angel which
stands upon the sea, ^ upon the earth. And I went unto y^ angel, and said to
him: give me the little book, and he said unto me: take it, and eat it up, and
it shall make thy belly bitter, but it shall be in thy^ nouth as sweet as honey.
E^e. iii. ^.
And I took y^ lytl ^ book among the people, and nations, and to^ges, and to
many kings.

The temple is measured. The second woe io past.

CAPI. XI.
ANd then was given me a read, like unto

And if any man will hurt them, fire shall

And when they have fynyshed their testimony,

And after. iii. days and an half, the spirit

And the seventh angel blewe, and there were made great voices in heaven,
saying: the kingdoms of this world are our Lords, and his Christ's, and he
shall reign for evermore And the. xxiiij. elders, which sit before God on their
seats, fell upon their faces, and worshypped God, saying: we give the thanks
O Lord God almightye: which art and wast, and art to come, for thou have
received thy great might, and have raygned. And the nations were angrye, and
thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead that they should be judged and that
thou should give reward unto thy servants the Prophets and Saynctes, and
to them that fear thy name small and great and should destroy them, which
destroy the earth. And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was
seen in his temple, the arcke of his testament, and there followed lyghtnynges,
and voices, and thondrynges and earthquake, and much hayle.

The seventh Angel blows his crompet. There appears in heaven a woman
dothed with the son: Michael ^igh teth with the dragon, which persecuteth
the woman.

CAPI. XII.
ANd there appeared a great wonder in

And the dragon stood before the woman

And there was a great battle in heau^,

And I heard a loud voice saying: in heaven is now made salvation and
strength and the kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ. For he is
cast down which accused them before God day and night. And they overcame him
by the blood of the la^be and by the word of their testimonye, and they

And when the dragon saw, that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted the
woman which brought forth the man child. And to the woman were given two
wings of a great Egle, that she might fly into the wyldernes into her place,
where she is noryshed for a time, times, and half a time, from the presence of
the serpent. And the dragon cast out of his mouth water after the woman as it
had been a river, because she should have been caught of the flode. And the
earth help the woman, and the earth opened her mouth and swalowed up the river,
which the dragon cast out of his mouth. And the dragon was wroth with the
woman, and went, and made war with the remnaunt of hyrsede, which keep the
commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. And I stood on
the sea sand.

A beast ryseth out of the sea with seven heads and ten hururs. Another beast
comes out of the earth with two horns.

CAPI. XIII.
ANd I saw a beast tyse out of the sea,

And there was given unto him a mouth, Mat 26. ^. Gene. ix. a
he that kills with a swearde, must be killed with a swearde. Hear is the
pacyence, and the faith of the Saynctes.

And I beheld another best coming up out of the earth, and he had two horns
like a lamb, and he spoke as did the Dragon. And he did all that the first
beast could do in his presence, and he caused the earth, and them which dwelt
therein, to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed. And he
did great wonders, so that he made fire come down from heaven into the earth in
the sight of men. And deceived the^ that dwell on the earth, by the means of
those signs which he had power to do in the sight of the beast, saying to
them that dwelt on the earth: that they should make an image unto the beast,
which had the wound of a swearde, and did live.

And he had power to give a spirit unto

CAPI. XIIII.
The lamb stondeth upon the mount Syon, and the vndesyled congregacyon with
him, The angel exhorts to the fcare of God and tilleth of the fall of Babylon.

ANd I looked, and lo, a lamb stood on the mount Syon, and with him an. C and,
xliuj. thousand having his * (name and his) fathers name written in their
forhedes. And I herd a voice from heaven, as the sound of many waters, and as
the voice of a great thondre. And I herd the voice of harpers harpyng with their
harpes. And they so^ge as it were a new so^ge before the seat, and before y^
four beestes, and the elders, and no man could learn that so^ge, but the. C.
and. xliiij. M. which were redeemed from the earth. These are they, which were
not defiled with women, for they are virgyns. These follow the lamb whyther
soever he goes. These were redeemed from men being the first fruits unto God
and to the la^be, and in their mouths was found no gile. For they are without
spot before the trone of God.

And I saw, another angel fly in the mids of heaven having the everlasting
gospel, to preach unto them that sit and dwell on the earth, and to all nacyons,
kynredes, and to^ges and people, saying with a loud voice: Acts. ^4. c
Fere God, and give honor to him, for the hour of his judgment is come: and
worship him, that made heaven and earth, and the sea, and fountaynes of water.
And there followed another angel, saying: Es^ye. 2^. ^ H^^re. ^, ^.
Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great city, for she made al nations
drink of the wine of her fornicacion.

And the third angel followed the^ saying with a loud voice: If any man
worship

And the smoke of their torment asce^deth up evermore. And they have no rest
day nor night, which worship the beast and his image and whosoever receives
the prynt of his name. Here is the patience of saints. Here are they that
keep the commandments and the faith of Jesus.

And I herd a voice from heaven saying unto me: write. Blessed are the dead,
which hereafter dye in the Lord, even so says the spirit: that they rest from
their labors, but their works follow them.

And I looked, and behold a white cloud, and upon the cloud one sitting like
unto the son of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a
sharp syckle. And another angel came out of the temple, cryinge with a loud
voice to him that sat on the cloud. Joel. ii^ c.
Thrust in thy sykle and repe, for y^ time is come to repe, for the corn

And another angel came out of the temple, which is in heaven, having also a
sharp syckle. And another angel came out from the altar, which had power
over fire, and cried with a loud cry to him that had the sharp sykle, and
said: thrust in thy sharp sykle, and gather the clusters of the earth, for her
grapes are ripe. And the angel thrust in his sykle on the earth, and cut down
the grapes of the vyneyarde of the earth: and cast the^ into the great wynefat
of the wrath of God, and the winefat was trodden without the city, and blood
came out of the fat, even unto the horse brydels, by the space of a thousand
and vj. C. furlonges.

CAPI. XV.
He seyth seven Angels, having seven Uyalles full of wrath.

ANd I saw another sign in heaven great and maruaylous, seven angels, having
the seven last plages, for in them is fulfilled the wrath of God. And I saw
as it were a glassye see, mingled with fire, and them that had gotten victory
of the beast, and of his image, and of his mark, and of the nombre of his
name, stand on the glassye see, having the harpes of God, and they song the
song of Moses the servant of god, and the song of the lamb, saying: Great and
marvelous are thy worckes: Esaias (...). ^ (...)
Lord God almyghtye, just and true are thy ways, thou king of Saynctes. Who
shall not fear O Lord, and gloryfy thy name? For thou only at holy, and all
gentels shall come and worship before the, for thy judgments are made
manifest.

And after that, I looked, and behold, the temple

The Angels power out their vyalles full of wrath.

CAPI. XVI.
ANd I herd a great voice out of the fountaynes of waters, and they turned to
blood. And I herd an angel say: Lord, which art and waste, thou art
ryghtuous and holy, because thou have given such judgments, for they shed
out the blood of saites, and Prophets, and therefore haste you gene^ the^ blood
to drink: for they are worthy. And I herd another out of the altar say:
even so Lord God almyghtye, true and rightuous are thy judgments.

And ye fourth angel powered out his vial on the sun, and power was given unto
him to vex men with heat of fire. And the men raged in great heat: and spoke
evil of the name of god, which has power over those plages and they repented
not, to give him glory. And the fyft angel powered out his vial upon the seat
of the beast, and his kingdom wexed darcke, and they gnewe their tongues for
sorrow and blasphemed the God of heaven for sorrow and pain, of their sores,
and repented not of their deeds.

And the syxt Angel powered out his vial Mat. (...). d. (...). (...). iii. ^ ^.
(...). ^. ^
Behold, I come as a thief. Happy is he that watches and keeps his
garments, left he walk naked, and men se his (...). And he gathered them
together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armagedon.

And the seventh angel powered out his vial into ye air. And there came a great
voice out of the temple of heaven from the seat, saying, it is done. And there
(...), voices, thondrynges, and lyghtnynges, and there was a great earthquake,
such as was not sense me^ were upon the earth, so mighty an erthquake and so
great. And the great city was divided into three parties, and the cities of all
nacyons fell. And great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto
her the cup of the wine of the fearcenes of his wrath. Every isle also fled
away, and the mountains were not found. And there fell a great hail (as it
had been talentes) out of heaven upon the men, and the men blasphemed God:
because of the plage of the hayle, for it was great and the plage of it sore.

He descrydeth the woman sitting upon the ^^ast with ten horns.

CAPI. XVII.
ANd there came one of the seven angels, which had the seven vyalles: and
talked

And the angel said unto me: wherefore maruaylest thou? I will show the the
mystery of the woman, and of the beast that beryth her, which has seven heads
and ten horns The beast that thou see, was, and is not, ^ shall ascend out
of the bottomless pyt, and shall go into perdicion, and they that dwell on the
earth shall wondre (whose names are not written in the book of life from the
begin nyng of the world) when they behold the beast that was, and is not. And
here is a mind that has wisdom.

The seven heads are seven mountains, ^. (...), vi. ^
For he is Lord of Lords, and King of kings, and they that are on his side,
are called, and chosen, and faithful.

And he said unto me^the waters which and folk, and nations, and to^ges. And
the ten horns, which thou saw upon the beast, are they that shall hate the
whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall ^at^ her flesh, and
burn her with fire. For God has put in their hertes to fulfill his will, and
and to do with one consent, for to give her kingdom unto the beast, until the
words of god be fulfilled. And the woman which you saw is that great cite,
which raygneth over the kings of the earth.

The (...) of the world are ^o^y for the fall of Babylon, but the^ that be of
God have cause to rejoice for h^^ (...) Leuccyon.

CAPI. XVIII.
ANd after that, I saw another angel Es^^^. 21. c (...). ^. (...)
Great Babylon is fallen, is fallen, and is become the inhabytacion of deuyls
and the hold of al foul spirits, and a cage of all unclean and hateful
birds, for all nations have dronken of the wine of the wrath of her
fornicacion. And the kings of the earth have committed fornicacyon with her,
and the merchants of the earth are wexed rich of the abundance of her
pleasures.

And I herd another voice from heaven, say, come away from her my people, that
ye E^^. xivii* ^
I sit beyinge a queen, and am no wyddowe,

And the kings of the earth shall be weep her and wayle over her, which have
committed fornicacion with her, and have lived wan^only with her, when they
shall se ye smoke of her burning, and shall stand a far of, for fear of her
punyshement saying. (...). (...). ^
Alas, Alas, that great city Babison, ye mighty

And the aples that thy soul lusted after, are departed from the. And al
things which were deyntie, and had in price, are departed from the, and thou
shall find the^ no more. The merchants of these things which were wexed
rich, shall stand a far of from her, for fear of the punysheme^t of her,
weping, and waylyng, and saying: Alas, Alas, that great (...). (...). ^.
city, that was clothed in raynes and purple,

And every ship gouerner, and all they that occupied ships, and shypmen
(...) work in the sea stood a far of, and (...), when they saw the smoke of
her (...)* saying: what city is like unto this great^^ tytie? And they cast
dust on their hedes, and cried weeping, and waylyng, and sayd^* (...)* (...)*
(...)
Alas, that great city, wher^^ (...) (...)

Rejoice over her thou heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets: for (...)
(...) (...)uen your judgment on her. And a mighty angel took up a stone like
a great (...), ^ cast it into the sea, saying, with such (...)

Pray^e is given unto God for iudg^^^ the whore, and for auengyng the blood of
his (...). The Angel (...) not be worshypped. The (...) and dyr^^^ are failed
to the slaughter.

CAPI. XIX.
ANd after that, I herd a great voice of power be ascrybed to the Lord our God,
for true and rightuous are his judgments, for he has judged the great whore
which did corrupt the earth with her fornicacyon, and has aue^ged the blood of
his servants of her hand. And again they said. Alleluia. And smoke rose up
for evermore. And the. xxiiij. elders, and the. iiij. bestes fell down, and
worshypped God that sat on the seat, saying: Amen, Alleluia. And a voice
came out of the seat, saying: praise our Lord God al ye that are his
se^ruau^tes, and ye that fete him both small and great.

And I herd the voice of much people, eue^ Math. 22. a Luke. ^4. a
happy are they which are called unto the la^bes supper. And he said unto me:
these are the true saynges of god. And I fell at his fete, to worship him. And
he said unto me: se thou do it not. For I am thy fellow servant, and one of
thy brethren, eue^ of the^ that have the testimony of Jesus. Worship God. For
the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophesy.

And I saw heaven open, and behold, a whyt horse: and he that sat upon him was
faithful Esaias, (...).
And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood, and his name is called the
word of God. And the warriers which were in heaven, followed him upon white
horses, clothed with white and pure raines: and out of his mouth went out a
sharp two edged sword, that with it he should smite the heythen.

And I saw an angel stand in the son, and he cried with aloude voice,
saying: to all the fowls that fly by the mids of heaven: come and gather
your selves together unto the supper of y^ great god, that ye may eat the
flesh of kings, and the flesh of hye captains, and the flesh of mighty
men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh
of all fre me^ and bond men, and of small and great. And I saw the beast, and
the kings of the earth, and their warriers gathered together to make battle
against him that sat on the horse, and against his soldiers.

And the beast was taken, and with him that false prophet that wrought miracles
before him, with which he deceived them that received the beasts mark, and
them that worshypped his image. These both were cast quick i^to a po^de of
fire burning with brymstone: and the re^nau^t were slain with the sword of him
y^ sat upon the horse, which sword proceaded out of his mouth, and all the
fowls were fulfilled with their flesh.

The Dragon is bound for a. M. years. The dead arise and receive judgment.

CAPI. XX.
ANd I saw an Angel come down from

And I saw seats, and they sat upon the^,

And when the thousand years are expired, Ezechiel 38 and. 39.
Satan shall be lowsed out of his prison, and lake of fire and brymstone, where
the beast and the false prophet shall be tormented day and night for ever more.

And I saw a great white seat, and him that fate on it, from whose face fled
away both y^ earth and heaven, and their place was

In this Chapyter is descrybed the new and spiritual Jerusalem.

CAPI. XXI.
ANd I saw a new heaven and a new earth. Esaias. xlv. ^ and. lxvi. (...). (...).
iii.
And God shall wype away all reares from their eyes. And there shall be no more
death, nether sorrow, nether cryinge, neither shall there be any more pain, for
the old things are gone. And he that sat upon the seat, said: Esaias. 25.
Behold, I Esa. xliii d ^. ^orin. 5. d
make all things new. And he said unto me: write, for these words are
faithful and true.

And he said unto me: it is done, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the
end. I will give to him that is a thrist of the well of the water of life, fre.
He that overcomes, shall inheret all things, and I will be his God, and he
shall be my son. But the fearful and unbelieving, and the abominable

And there came unto me one of y^ seven angels which had the seven vya^^^ full
of the seven last plages: and talked with me saying: come hither, I will show
the the bryde, the lambs wife. And he carried me away in the spirit to a great
and an hye mountain, and he showed me the great cite holy Jerusalem,
descendyng out of heaven from God having

And he that talked with me, had a golden read to measure the city withal and
the gates thereof, and the wall thereof. And y^ city was bylt. iiij. square, and
the length was as large as the breadth, and he measured the city with the golden
read. xij. M. furlonges: and the length and the breadth, and y^ heyth of it,
were equal. And he measured the wall thereof, an. cxliiij. cubytes: the measure
y^ the angel had, was after the measure that man uses. And the bilding of the
wall of it was of Iaspar. And the C^tie was pure gold, like unto clear glass,
and the foundacions of the wall of the city w^^^ garnished with all manner of
^^^cious ^^ones* The first foundation was Iaspis, y^ second Saphyre, the third
a Calcedony, the four^^

The twelve gates were. xi^. perles, every gate was of one perle, and the
street of the city was pure gold as through shynyng glass. And I saw no
temple therein. For the Lord God almyghtye and the lamb are the temple of
^^^ye. (...). d
and the city has no need of the son neither the moon to lyghten it. For
the bryghtnes of God did light it and the lamb was the light of it. And the
people which are sauyd shall walk in the light of it. And the kings of the
earth shall bring their glory * ( and honor) unto it. Esaias. lx. c
And the gates of it are not shut by day. For there shall be no night there * (
And in to it shall they bring the glory and honor of the nations). And there
shall enter into it none unclean thing, neither what soever works
abhommacio^ or makes lies: but they only which are written in the lambs book
of like.

The river of the water of life, the frutefulnes and light of the city of God.
The Lord gives ever his servants w^^^ynge of things for to come, the
angel will not be worshypped. To the word of God may nothing be added nor
^^ynisshed.

CAPI. XXII.
ANd he showed me a pure river of water of life, clear as Crystal: procedyng
Esaye. ^x. d
And there shall be no night there, and they need no candle, neither light of the
Sun: for the Lord gives them light, and they shall raygne for evermore.

And he said unto me: these sayings are faithful and true. And the Lord God
of Saints and Prophets sent his Angel to show unto his servants, the
things which must shortly be fulfilled. Behold, I come shortly. (...). ^. ^
Happy is he that keeps the saying of the prophesy of this book. I am John
which saw these things and herd the^. And ^^o^. xix. ^.
I fell down, to worship before the fete of the Angel which showed me these
things. And he said unto me: se thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant,
and the fellow servant of thy brethren the Prophets, and of the^ which keep
the sayings of the prophesy of this book. But worship God.

And he said unto me: seal not the sayings of the prophesy of this book. For
the time is at hand. He that does evil, let him do evil still: and he which is
fylthy, let him be fylthy still: and he that is ryghtuous, let hi^ be more
rightuous: and he yt is holy, let him be more holy. And behold, I come
shortly, and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his deeds
shall be. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end: the first and the
last. Blessed are they that do his commandments, that their power may be in
the tree of life, and may enter in through the gates into the city. ^^ay. 44.
^ ^p^c^. ^. b
For without shall be dogs and inchaunters, and whoremongers, and mortherers,
and ydolaters, and whosoever loves or makes leasynges,

I Jesus sent mine Angel, to testifye unto Esaias. (...). ^ John. 7. ^
And let him yt is a thyrst: come. And let whosoever will* take of the water of
life, fre.

I testyfy unto every man that hears the words of the prophesy of this
Book: Deute. 4. ^ and. xii. d. Prou. 30, ^
if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plages
that are written in this Book. And if any man shall mynishe of the words of
the Book of this prophesye, God shall take away his part out of the Book of
life, and out of the holy city, and from the things which are written in
this Book: He which testyfyeth these things, says: be it. I come quyckely.
Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you
all.

Amen.
: The end of the new Testament.
: A Table to find the Epystles and Gospels usually red in the church / after
Salysbury use, whereof the first line is the Epistle, and the other the Gospel:
whose beginning thou shall find in the book marked with a cross and the end
with half a cross, contained within the letters. A. B. C. D. etc.
On the first Sunday in aduent.
Roma, xiij. B This time also. Math. xxi. A And when he dreweny^
On the wednisdaye.
Jacob. v. B Be pacyent therefore bre. Marcke. i A The beginning of.
On the frydaye.
Esaye. li. A Harken unto me. Math. iij. A Than came Jesus from
On the second sunday in aduent.
Roma. xv A For what things soever Luke xxi C And there shall be tokens
On the wednisdaye.
Zacha. viij A Thus says the Lord Math. xi B Uerely I say unto
On the frydaye.
Esa. lxii B I will set watchmen Ihon. i B Ihon bears witness
On the third sunday in aduent.
^. Corin. iiii A Let men so esteem us Mat. xi. A But when Ihon herd
On the wednisdaye.
Esa. ii A This is the word Luce. i. B And in the syxte month
On the frydaye.
Esa. xi A There shall come a rod Luke. i D And Mary rysyng in
On the fourth sunday in aduent.
Philip. iiij A Rejoice in the Lord John. i B And this is the recor.
On the wednisdaye.
Joel. ii E. iij. C. Be glad than Luce. vij B And this saying of
On the frydaye.
Zacha. ij B Be glad and rejoice Mar. viij. B Take heed and beware
On Chrystmasse even
Roma. i A Pavl the servant Math. i C The generacyon of
In Chrystmasse night at the. i. mas.
Tit. ij B For the grace of god Luke. ii A And it be fell in those
At the second mass.
Titu^. iij. A But when the kyndnes Luce. ii C The shepherde spoke to
At the third mass.
Hebre. i A God speaking in times John, i A In the beginning was
On saint Steuens day.
Actu. vi B Steven full of faith Mat. xxiiij E Therefore I say to you
On. S. John the euangelyst day.
Eccle. xv A He that fears God John. xxi D Follow me. Peter being
On Chyldermasse day.
Apo. xiiij A And I saw and behold Math. ii C The angel of the Lord
On the sunday after Christmasse.
Galat. iiij A But I say as long as Luce. ii E And his father and mother
On new years day.
Tit. ii B For the grace of God Luce. ii C And when eight days
On the twelfe even.
Tit. ii B For the grace of God Math. ii D When Herod was deed
On the twelfe day.
Esa. lx A Get the up by times Math. ii A Wha^ Jesus therefore was
On the, i. sunday after. xii. day.
Esa. xiij A O Lord I thank the John. i D The next day again stood
On the. ii. sunday after. xii. day.
Roma. xij A I beseech you therefore Luce. ii F And wha^ he was twelve
On the. iij. sunday after xii. day.
Romans xii A Like as we have many John. ii A And upon the third day
On the. iiij. sunday after. xii. days.
Romans xii C Be not wise in your Math. viii A When Jesus came
On the. v. sunday after. xii. daye^
Roma. xii B Owe nothing to any man Math. viij C And wha^ he went into
On the. vi. sunday after. xii. day
Colo. iij B Put ye on therefore Mat. xiii D The kingdom of heaven
On Septuagesima sunday.
i. Corin. ix D Know ye not that they Math. xx A The Kingdom of heaven.
On Sexagesime sunday.
ii. Corin. xi C Ye suffer fools gladly Luce. viij. A When much people came
On Quinquagesima sunday
i. Corin. iij. A If I speak Luce. xviij D And Jesus took to him the
On ash wednisdaye.
Joel. ii. C And now therefore (...) Math. vi A(...) Mat. vE Ye have herd that
it is
On the first sunday in lent.
ij. Corin. vi A But we as helpers ex. Math. iiij A Then was Jesus led of
On the wednysdaye.
Exo. xxiiij C And. iii. Reg. xix. A Mat. xii D Then answered him cer.
On the frydaye.
Ezee. xviij C Thus says the Lord John. v* A After that there was ^.
On the second sunday in lent.
i. Tessa. iij A Farthermore brethren Math. xv C And Jesus departed
On the wednisdaye.
Hest. xiij D But mardoch thought Math. xx B And Jesus going up to
On the frydaye.
Gene. xxxviij A Joseph said unto his bre Math. xxi D Hear another parable
On the. iii. sunday in lent.
Ephe v A Be ye therefore the Luke. xi B And he was castinge out
On the wednysdaye.
Exo. xx B Honor thy father Math. xv A Then came unto him
On the frydaye.
Nume. xx A And the congregation had John. iiij A He came therefore into
On the fourth sunday in lent.
Gala. iiij C For it is written that John. vi A When Jesus lift up his
On the wednisdaye.
Esa. i C And Eze. xxxvi. D John. ix A And Jesus going by
On the frydaye.
^^^. Re. xvij C And after these acts Ihon. xi A There was one syck called
On the. v. sunday in lent.
Hebre. ix B But Christ being John. viij. D Which of you can rebuke
On the wednisdaye.
Leui. xix A And the Lord talked John. x C And it was the ^ dicacion
On the frydaye.
Iere. xvii C Lord, all they that for John. xi E Then gathered the high
On Palm sunday.
Phili. ii A Let the same mind be Math. xxvi A Ye know that after two
On the wednisdaye.
Esa. iiij A Lord who gives Luce. xxii A The feast day of sweet.
On good frydaye.
(...)* xii A The Lord said unto (...)ii* (...)as spoken
Mat. xxviij A Upon the euenyng of the
On easter day.
^. Corin. v B Pourge therefore the old Math. xvi A And wha^ y^ sabbath was
On the monday.
Actu. x D But Peter openyng Luce. xxiiij B And behold two of them
On the tewesdaye.
Actu. xiij C Ye men, and brethren, ye chil. Luce. xxiiii C Jesus stood in the
myd
On the wednisdaye.
Actu. iii B* Ye men of Israel, why John. xi A Afterward did Jesus
On the thursdaye.
Actu viii C The angel of the Lord John. xx B Mary stood without at
On the frydaye.
i. Pet. ii C Christ also suffered for us Math. xxviij C Then the eleven
disciples
On the saterdaye.
i. Pet. ii A Lay away therefore John. xx A On the first day of the
On the first sunday after Easter
i. John. v A For all that is borne of John. xx C When it was now late.
On the second sunday after Easter.
i. Pet. ij C Christ also suffered for John. x B I am a good shepherde
On the. iii. sunday after Easter.
i. Pet. ii B Dearly beloved I. John. xvi B It is yet a little while, and
On the. iiij. sunday after easter.
Iaco. i B Every good gift John. xvi A And now I go unto him
On the. v. sunday.
Iaco. i C Beye doers of the John. xvi C Uerely. etc. if ye ask
On the mondaye.
Iaco. v C Knowledge your sins Luce. xi A Which of you shall
On the twesdaye.
i. Timo. ii A I exhort therefore Mar. xii D And as Jesus sat over
On the wednysdaye.
Actu. iiij D The multitude of the John. xiiij A This said Jesus, and
On the Assension day.
Actu. i A The first treatise Mar. xvi B But, at the last he
On the sunday after the ascension.
i. Pet. iiij B Be ye therefore wise an* John. xx C But when the comfort
On whytson even.
Actu. xix A It fortuned, when apol. John. xiiij B If ye lone me, keep my
On wytsondaye.
Actu* ii A And when the days John. xiiij C If any man love me
On the mondaye.
Acts. x E And he commanded us John. iiij C For God did so love the
On the twesdaye.
Actu. viij B When the apostles John. x A Uerely verily. etc. He that
On the wednisdaye.
Acts. ij B Than Peter lift up John. vi C No man can come unto
On the Thursdaye.
Acts. viij A And Philyp going Luke. ix A wha^ the twelve apostles
On the frydaye.
Acts. ij C Ye men of Israel, hear Luke. ii C And it befell upon a day
On the saterdaye.
Acts. xiij E But on the next Sab. Luke iiij E And Jesus rose up out of
On the Trinite Sunday.
Apo. iii^ A After this I looked, and John. iij A There was a man of the
On corpus Christi day.
i. Corin. xi C I received of the Lord John. vi F For my flessh is meat
On the first sunday after Trini.
i. John. iiij C God is love, and he that Luke. xvi C There was a certain
On the second soudaye after Trini.
i. John. iii B Marvel not brethren Luke. xiiij B A certain man made
On the third sunday after Trini.
i. Pet. v A Beye therefore Luke. xv. A There were approchyng
On the fourth sunday after Tri.
Roma. viij C For I suppose that the Luke. vi D Be ye therefore mercy
On the. v. sunday after Tri.
i. Pet. iii B But in conclusyon beye Luce. v A It came to pass when
On the. vi. sunday after Tri.
Romans vi B Know ye not, that Math. v B I say unto you that
On the. vij. sunday.
Romans vi C I speak after the ma. Mar. viij A In those days when
On the. viij. sunday.
Romans viij B Therefore brethren ^^ Math. vii. B Beware of ^a^se
On the. ix. sunday
i. Corin. ^ A We should not lust after Luke. xvi A And he said also unto
On the. x. sunday.
i. Corin. xii A Ye know that when Luke. xix D And as he was come
i. Corin. xv A I declare unto you bre. Luke x ^iij B And unto certaye
On the twelueth sunday.
ii. Corin. iij. A We have such trust Mark. vii. A And he went forth
On the. xiij. sunday.
Galat. iii C Unto Abraham and his Luke. x C Blessed are the eyes
On the. xiiij. sunday.
Gala. v C I say in Christ ^ walcke Luke. xvii C And it fortuned as he
On the. xv. sunday.
Gala. v C If we live in the spirit. Mat. vi C No man may serve two
On the. xvi. sunday.
Ephe. iii B Wherefore I desire the Luke. vii B And if fortuned after
On the. xvii. sunday.
Ephe. iiii A I therefore a presoner Luke. xiiii A And it happened when
On the xviii sond ye.
i. Corin. i A I thank my God Mat. xxii D The Pharisees herd
On the. xix. sunday.
Ephe. iiii C But be ye renewed in Math. ix A And Jesus going
On the. xx. sunday
Ephe. v B Take heed therefore Math. xxii A And Jesus answered
On the. xxi. sunday.
Ephe. vi B Finally brethren be ye John. iiij F And there was a certain
On the. xxii. sunday.
Philip i A I thancke my God Math. xviij C Therefore is the king do,
On the. xxiii. sunday.
Philip. iii C Be ye followers Mat. xxij. B Then the Phacyses went
On the. xxiiii. sunday.
Colos. i A Therefore we also send Math. ix. C while he spoke these
On the last sunday after Trini.
Iere. xxiii. A Behold, the time come Ihon. vi. A Alter these things
On the wednisdaye in the Ember weke before Michaelmasse.
Amos. ix C Behold the time come. Mar. ix B And one of the people
On the frydaye.
Osee. xiiii A Turn the now Luke. vii A And one of the Phari.
On the satyrdaye.
Hebre. ix A For that fyrst^a^er. Luke xiii A A certain man had
In the dedica^ion of the Church.
On the ascension day.
Apo. xiiA And I John sa^^ the Luke. ix A And he went in and

Here ends the Table of the Epystles and Gospels of the Sondayes.
: Here follows the table of the Epystles and Gospels which are used to be red
on diverse saints days in the year.
On saynent Andrews day
Roma. x B For to believe with Math. iiij C Jesus wal^kynge by
On the concepeyon of our lady*
Eccle xxiiij C As the vine have I Math. i A The book of the gene
On S. Thomas the apostle day.
Ephesians. ii C Therefore are ye not John. xx C But Thomas one of
On cande^^nasse day.
Mala. iii I Behold, I will send Luke. ii D And when the days
On S. Mathias the apostle.
Acts. i C And in those days Pe. Math. xi E In that time Jesus
On the day of the Annunriacion* or gretynge of our lady
Esa* vii B God spoke unto Achas Luke. i B And in the syxt month*
On S. George day.
Io^o. i A Count it all manner ^ope John. xv A I am the true vine
On S. Marks day.
Ephe. iii A But unto every one of John. xv A I am the true vine*
On S. Philippe and Jacobs day
Sap* v A Then shall the right John xiiij A And he said unto his
On the Natiuite of S. Ihon ^a.
Esa. xlix A Harken unto me ye Luke. i E And Elysabeths time
On S. Peter and Paul's day
Acts. xii A And at the same time Math. xvi B Jesus came into the
On S. James the apostle day
Ephe. ii C Therefore are ye not Mat xx C Then came unto him
On the Assumpeyon of our lady
Eccle. xxiiij B In all these things Math. i D It fortuned as they
On S. Barthy^^ews day.
Ephe. ii C Therefore are ye not Luke. xxii B But there rose a ^^ry^e
On the natiuite of our lady.
Eccle. xxiiij. C As the vine have I Math. i A The book of generacyon
On S. Mathewes day*
Ezehe. i B The symylytude of the. Math. ix B And when Jesus went
On S. Michaels day.
Apoca. i A And he showed it. Math. xviij A In the boure came the
On S. Lukes day.
Ezech. i B The symylytude of the Luke. x A After this appointed
On S. Simon and Jude day.
Roma. viij D But we know that John. xv. B This is my comma^n.
On all halowe day.
Apoca. vii A And I saw another Math. v A Jesus sayng the people
On all souls day.
1 Tessa. iiij B But we will not have John. xi C Then said Martha
: The end of the Table*
The end of the new Testament: and of the whole Bible. Finisshed in Apryll.
ANNO. M. CCCCC. XL.
Imprynted at London by Robert Redman / and Thomas Pe^yt / for Thomas
Berthelet: Prynter unto the kings Grace.

CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRI MENDVM SOLVM.


