ARISTIPPVS, OR THE IOVIALL PHILOSOPHER: Presented in a private Show. To which
is added, THE CONCEITED PEDDLER.

Omnis Aristippum decuit color and status and res.
Semel insaniuimus.
LONDON. Printed for ROBERT ALLOT, MDCXXX.

THE PRAELVDIVM.
Shows having been long intermitted, and forbidden by authority for their
abuses, could not be raised but by coniuring.
Enter Prologue in a Circle. BE not deceived, I have no bended knees,
No supple tongue, nor speeches steeped in Oil,
No candied flattery, nor honied words.
I come an armed Prologue: armed with Arts,
Who by my sacred charms and mystic skill,
By virtue of this all-commanding Wand
Stolen from the sleepy Mercury, will raise
From black Abyss and sutty hell, that mirth
Which fits this learned round. Thou long-dead Show,
Break from thy Marble prison, sleep no more
In myrie darkness, henceforth I forbid thee
To bathe in Lethe's muddy waves, ascend
As bright as morning from her Tithons bed,
And red with kisses that have stained thy cheek,
Grow fresh again: What? is my power contemned?
Do thou not hear my call, whose power extends
To blast the bosom of our mother Earth?
To remove heavens whole frame from off her hinges,
As to reuerse all Natures laws? Ascend,
Or I will call a band of Furies forth,
And all the Torments wit of hell can frame
Shall force thee up.

Enter Show whipped by two Furies. Show. O spare your too officious whips a while,
Give some small respit to my panting limbs,
Let me have leave to speak, and truce to parlie,
Whose powerful voice has forced me to salute
This hated air! are not my pains sufficient,
But you must torture me with the sad remembrance
Of my deserts, the Causes of my exile?

Prolog. It Is thy release I seek, I come to file
Those heavy shackels from thy wearied limbs,
And give thee leave to wa^^e the Stage again,
As free as virtue: Burn thy withered Bays,
And with fresh Laurel crown thy sacred Temples,
Cast off thy mask of darkness, and appear
As glorious as thy sister Comedy.
But first with tears, wash off that guilty sin,
Purge out those ill-digested dregs of wit,
That use their ink to blot a spotless fame,
Let Us have no one particular man traduced,
But like a Noble Eagle seize on vice,
As she flies bold and open! spare the persons:
Let us have simple mirth, and innocent laughter;
Sweet-smiling lips, and such as hide no fangs,
No venomous biting teeth, or forked tongues,
Then shall thy freedom be restored again,
And full applause be wages of thy pain.

Show. Then from the depth of truth I here protest,
I do disclaim all petulant hate and malice,
I will not touch such men as I know vicious,
Much less the good: I will not dare to say
That such a one paid for his fellowship,
And had no learning but in's purse; no Officer
Need fear the sting of my detraction,
I Will give all lcaue to fill their guts in quiet:
I make no dangerous Almanacks, no gulls,
No posts with envious News and biting Packets,
You need not fear this Show, you that are bad,
It is no Parliament: you that nothing have
Like Scholars, but a Beard and Gown, for me
May pass for good grand Sophies: all my skill
Shall beg but honest laughter and such smiles
As might become a Cato: I shall give
No cause to grieve, that once more yet I live.

Prolog. Go then, and you Beadles of hell auaunt,
Return to your eternal plagues.

Exeunt Furies. Prolog. Here, take these purer robes, and clad in these,
Be thou all glorious and instruct thy mirth
With thy sweet temper, whilst my self entreat
Thy friends that long lamented thy sad fates,
To sit and taste, and to accept thy Cates.

Exit Show. Prolog. Sit, see, and hear, and censure he that will,
I come to have my mirth approved, not skill:
Your laughter all I beg, and where you see
No jest worth laughing at, faith laugh at me.

ARISTIPPVS.
Enter Simplicius. SEcundum gradum compossibilitatis, and non secundum gradum
incompossibilitatis. What should this Scotus mean by his possibilities and
incompossibilities? my Cooper, Rider, Thomas, and Minshew are as far to seek
as my self: not a word of compossibilitas or incompossibilitas is there. Well,
I know what I Will do. I have heard of a great Philosopher: I Will try what he can
do; They call him Aristippus, Aristippus, Aristippus: sure a Philosophers
name. But they say he lies at the Dolphin, and that me thinks is an ill sign:
yet they say too, the best Philosophers of the town never lie from thence:
they say it is a Tavern too; for my part I cannot tell, I know no part of the
Town but the Schools and Aristotle's Well: but since I am come thus far, I
will enquire: for this same compossibilitas and incompossibilitas sticks in my
stomach.


Knocks. Boy within. Anon, Anon Sir.

Sim. What Philosophy is this?

Knocks. Boy. Anon, Anon Sir.

Enters. Boy. Please you see a Room Sir? what would you have Sir?

Sim. Nothing but Aristippus.

Boy. You shall Sir.
Exit.
Simp. What is this? the Dolphin? now verily it looks like a Green Fish:
what is yonder Greek too? Now surely it is the Philosophers Motto:
Hippathi-happathi; aut disce, aut discede incontinenter, a very good
disjunction.


Boy. A pint of Aristippus to the Bar.

Enters. Boy. Here Sir.

Sim. Ha? what is this?

Boy. Did you not ask for Aristippus Sir?

Sim. The great Philosopher lately come hither.

Boy. Why, this is Aristippus.

Sim. Verily then Aristippus is duplex, Nominalis and Realis; or else the
Philosopher lives like Diogenes in dolio: the President of Hogges-head
College: but I mean one Aristippus (...) the great Philosopher.


Boy. I know not what you mean by Losopher, but here be Scholars in the
house, I Will send them to you: Anon, anon Sir, I cannot be here and there too.
Anon, anon Sir.


Simp. This boy would have put a fallacy upon me, in Interrogatione plurium.
This boy is a mere Animal; ha, ha, he. He has not a jot of Language in him
more then Anon, anon, Sir. O Giggleswicke, thou happy place of education! This
poor wretch knows not what a Philosopher means. To see the simpleness of
these people; They do ever thing (...), and have not a jot, not an inch of
(...) in them. O what had become of me, if I had not gone barefoot to my
Praeceptor, with a Satchell at my back?

Enter two Scholars. Slaves are they that heap up mountains,
Still desiring more and more,
Still let us carouse in Bacchus fountains,
Never dreaming to be poor,
Give us then a Cup of liquor,
Fill it up unto the brim,
For then me thinks my wits grow quicker,
When my brains in liquor swim.
Ha brave Arstippus.
Pox of Aristotle and Plato, and a company of dry Raskalls:
But hey brave Aristippus.

Sim. Certainly, there are Aristippus his Scholiers: Sir, pray can you resolve
me what is Gradus compossibilitatis?


1 Schol. What ailes thou, thou musing man?
Diddle diddle do.

2 Schol. Quench thy sorrows in a Can,
Diddle diddle do.
Compossibilitas? Why, that is nothing man, when you never drink beyond your
poculum necessitatis, you are in gradu incompossibili to all good fellowship:
Come, hang Scotus, we will lead you to Aristippus, one Epitome of his in quarto,
is worth a volume of these Dunces.


Sim. O Gentlemen, you will bind me to thank you in Poculo Gratiarum. But
what Philosophy does he read, and what hours does he keep?


1 None at all precisely, but indistinctly all: Night and day he powers forth
his instructions, and fills you out of measure.


2 He Will make the eyes of your understanding see double, and teach you to
speak fluently, and utter your mind in abundance.


Sim. Has he many Scholars, Sir?

1 More than all the Philosophers in the Town besides. He never rests but is
still called for. Aristippus says one, Aristippus says another: He is generally
asked for, yea, and by Doctors sometimes.


2 And as merry a man: There can be no Feast, but he is sent for, and all the
company are the merrier for him.


3 Did you but once hear him, you would so love his company, you would never
after endure to stand alone.


Sim. O pray help me to the sight of him.

2 We will, brave boy: and when you have seen him, you will think your self in
another world, and scorn to be your own man any longer.


Sim. But I pray you at what price reads he?

1 Why truly his price has been raised of late, and his very name makes him
the dearer.


2 A diligent Lecturer deserves eight pence a Pint tuition: Nay, if you will
learn any thing, Schollerships must be paid for. Academicall Simonie is
lawful: Nay did you ever hear of a good Preacher in a fat Benefice, unless
his purse were the leaner for it? Make much of him, for we shall have no more
such in haste.


Enter Wilde-man. Sim. But who is this?

1 The University Ramist, a Malt Heretic; alias the Wild man that is grown
mad to see the daily resort to Aristippus: but let us leave him to his frenzi^^.

But come you Lads that love Canary,
Let us have a mad fegarie:
Hither, hither, hither, hither,
All good Fellows flock together.
Exeunt. Wilde-man. Brains, wits, senses, all sly hence: let fools live
limed in Cages: I am the Wilde-man, and I will be wild: is this an age to be
in a man's right wits, when the lawful use of the throat is so much neglected,
and strong drink lies sick on his deathbed? It Is above the patience of a
Malt-horse, to see the contempt of Barley, and not run mad upon it. This is
Aristippus, Aristippus, now a Devil or two take his rednos'd Philosophy: It Is
he, my beer, that has vowed thee to the Vinegar-bottle; but I Will be revenged:
when next I meet him, I Will twist and twitch his bush-beard from his Tavern
face: It Is not his hypathie happithi can carry him out. Let him look to be
sound^^er dashed by me, then ever he was by Dr^wer for his impudence. I Will
teach my Spanish Don a French trick, I Will either plague him with a Pox, or
have some Claret whore burn him for an heretic, and make him challenge
acquaintance of M^ld-Sack^: If he was not either sent hither from the Britch
Politic, or be not employed by Spinola to seduce the Kings lawful Subjects
from their allegiance to strong Beer, let me hold up my hand at the bar, and
be hanged at my Signe-post, if he had not a hand in the Powder Treason! Well,
I say nothing, but he has blown up good store of men in his days, house and
land and all. If they take no order with him here in the University, the poor
Country were as good have the man in the Moon for their Pastor, as a Scholar.
They are all so infected with Aristippus his Arminianisme, they can preach no
Doctrine but Sack and red Noses. As for the Wilde-man, they have made him
horne-mad already.

Enter a Fellow crying Wine pots. Heighday, there goes the Hunts-vp: this is
the Mandrakes voice that vndoe's me: you may hear him in faith. This is the
Devil of his that goes up and down like a roaring-Sheeps-head to gather his
Pewter Library. I Will fit him I faith.

Beats him. Now you Calues-skin impudence, I Will thresh your Iacket.


Beats him out. Enter Aristippus and his two Scholars. Aristip. What a coyl's
here? what fellowe's that? he looks like a mad hogs-head of March-beere that
had run out, and threatened a deluge: what is he?


1 O'tis the Wilde-man sir! a zealous brother that stands up against the
persecution of Barly-broth, and will maintain it a degree above the reputation
of Aquavitae.


2 I have heard him swear by his horaoctaua, that Sack and Rosa Solis is but
Water-grewell to it.


Wila. O art thou there, Saint Dunstar? thou have undone me, thou cursed Friar
Bacon, thou hellish Merlin: but I Will be revenged upon thee. It Is not your
Mephostopho is, nor any other spirits of Rubie or Carbuncle, that you can
raise, nor your good father in law Doctor Faustus, that coniures so many of us
into your Wives Circle, that with all their Magique, he shall secure you from
my rage, you have set a Spell for any man's coming into my house now.


Arist. Why, none of my credit has choked up your doors.


Wilde-man. But thou have bewitched my threshold, disturbed my house, and I Will
have thee hanged in Gibbets for murdering my Beer: I Will have thee tried by a
Jury of Tapsters, and hanged in Anon anon Sir, thou dismal and disastrous
Coniurer.


Arist. Why do thou call me Coniurer? I send no Fairies to pinch you, or
Elues to molest you: has Robin Good fellow troubled you so much of late? I
scarce believe it, for I am sure, since Sack and I came to town, your house
has not been so much haunted.


Wilde-man. I Will put out thine eyes, Don Canario, I Will scratch thee to atoms,
thou Spanish Guzman.


Arist. If he and his Beer will not be quiet, draw vm both out.


Wilde-man. Yet I Will be revenged, you rascal, I do not fear the Spanish
Inquisition, I Will run to the Council, and betray thy villainy; I Will carry
thee bound for a Traitor: but for you Sir, we had taken Cales, and might
afterward have conquered Lisbon, and Civil. You notorious villain, I knew
thee for a Rogue at first, thy Ruff looked so like the Moon Crescent in 88.
thy very breath is invincible, and stinckes of an Armado.


Arist. Kick him out of the presence, his company will metamorphose us to
balderdash.


Wilde-man. Well Diogen^s, you were best keep close in your tubbe, I Will be
revenged on you; I Will complain on you for keeping ill hours, I suffer noue
after eight, by Saint Iohus, not I.


1 Schol. Well Domine, though the hora octaua be not come, yet you may be gone.

Kicks him. Exit.
Arist. Come Pupil, have you any mind to study my Philosophy?


Sim. Yes Mehercule Sir, for I have always accounted Philosophy to be omnibus
rebus ordine, natura, Tempore, honor prius; and these Schoolmen have so pusled
me, and my Dictionaries, that I despair of understanding them either in summo
gradu, or remisso. I lay sick of an Ha^ceitas, a fortnight, and could not
sleep a wink for it; therefore good Sir teach me us (...), as you can, and pray
let it be Conceptis vorbis, and exmente Philosophi.


Arist. I warrant thee a good proficient, but ere you can be admitted to my
Lectures, you must be matriculated, and have your name recorded in A^b^
Academic.


Simp. With all my heart Sir, and totaliter, for I have as great a mind as
materia pri^^ to be informed with your instructions.


Arist. Give him the oath.


1 Schol. Lay your hand on the book.


Sim. Will tactus virtualis serve the turn Sir?


2 Schol. No* it must be reale quid, and extra intellectum.


Sim. Well Sir, I will do it qu^ad poten^iam obedientialem.


1 Schol. First, you must swear to defend the honor of Aristippus, to the
disgrace of Brewers, Alewiues, and Tapsters, and profess your self a foe ^,
to Maltmen, Tapsters, and red Lettices.


2 Schol. Kiss the book.


He Drinks. 1 Schol. Next, you shall swear to observe the customs and
ordinances instituted and ordained by an Act of Parliament in the reign of
King Sigebert, for the establishing of good government in the ancient
foundation of M^er College.


Schol. Kiss the book.


Drinks again. Sim. I Sir, Secundum veritatem intrinsecam, and non equiu^ce.


1 Schol. That you keep all acts and meetings, tam priuatim, in private
houses, quam public, in the Dolphin Schools: that you dispute in tenebris,
yet be not asleep at reckonings: but always and every where show your self
so diligent in drinking, that the Proctor may have no just cause to suspend you
for negligence.


2 Schol. Kiss the book.


1 Schol. Lastly, that you never walk into the Town, without your habit of
drinking, the Fudling Cap, and casting Hood; especially when there is a
Convocation, and of all things take heed of running to the Assizes.


Sim. 1. Is this the end, I pray you Sir, is this the Finis? (...)


2 Schol. It is vltimum Sir.


Sim. How pray you Sir, intention, or executione?


1 Schol. (...), that follows the Assizes.


Sim. But me thinks there is one Scrupulum, it seems to be actus illicitus,
that we should drink so much, it being lately forbidden, and therefore Contra
formam statuti.


2 Schol. I but therefore you are sworn to keep customs, Non omnino secundum
formam statuti.


Arist. What, have you enrolled him in Albo? have you fully admitted him into
the society, to be a member of the body Academicke?


Sim. Yes Sir, I am one of your Pupils now, vnitate n^^erica, we have made an
end of it, secundum vltimum Complementum, and actualitatem.


Arist. Well then, give the attendance.

Most grave audience, considering how they thirst after my Philosophy, I am
iuduced to let you taste the benefit of my knowledge, which cannot but please a
judicious pallat: for the rest I expel them my Schools, as fitter to hear
Thales, and drink Water.


Sim. We will attend Sir, and that bibulis auribus,


Arist. The many errors that have crept into the science, to distract the
curious Reader, are sp^ung from no other causes, then small Beer, and sober
sleeps; whereas were the laudable custom of Sack drinking better studied, we
should have fewer Gowns, and more Scholars.


1 Schol. A good note, for we cannot see wood for trees, nor Scholars for
Gowns.


Arist. Now the whole University is full of your honest Fellows, that
breaking loose from a Yorkshire Belfrey, have walked to Cambridge with
Satchels on their shoulders: these you shall have them study hard for four or
five years, to return home more fools then they came; the reason whereof, is
drinking College taplash, that will let them have no more learning, then they
size; nor a drop of wit more then the Buttler sets on their heads.


2. Schol. 'Twere charity in him to sconce'vm soundly, they would have but a
poor Quantum else.


Arist. Others there be that spend their whole lives in Athen^, to die as wise
as they were borne; who as they brought no wit into the world, so in honesty
they will carry none out on it. It Is Beer that drownes the souls in their
bodies: H^sons Cakes, and Paix his Ale has frothed their brains: hence is the
whole tribe contemned, every Prentice can ieere at their brave Cassockes, and
laugh the Velvet Caps out of countenance.


1. Schol. And would it not anger a man of Art to be the scorn of a what lake
you Sir?


Arist. It Is Beer that makes you so ridiculous in all your behavior: hence
comes the Bridelike simpering at a Justice of Peace his Table, and the not
eating methodically, when being laughed at, you show your teeth, blush, and
excuse it with a Rhetorical Husteron Proteron.


Sim. It Is very true, I have done the like my self, till I have had a disgrace
for my Mittimus.


Arist. It Is Beer that has putrified our Horsmanship, for that you cannot
ride to Ware, or to Barkway, but your Hackneyes sides must witness your
iourneyes. A Lawyers Clarke, or an Innes a Court Gentleman that has been fed
with false Latin, and Pudding Pie, contemn you as if you had not learning
enough to confute a Nou^rint vniuersi.


Sim. Per prasentes me Simplicium.


Arist. If you discourse but a little while with a Courtier, you presently
betray your learned Ignorance, answering him he concludes not Syllogistically,
and asking him in what Mood and figure he sp^akes in, as if Learning were not
as much out of fashion at Court, as clothes at Cambridge. Nor can you
entertain discourse with a Lady, without endangering the half of your
Buttons; all these, and a thousand such errors, are the friends of Beer, that
nurse of Barbarism, and foe to Philosophy.


Simp. Oh I am ravished with this admiral Metaphysicall Lecture, if ever I
drink Beer again, let me turn civil Lawyer, or be powdered up in one of
Luthers barrels, pray lend me the book again, that I may forswear it. Fie
upon it, I could love Sir Gyles for presenting those notorious Alewiues. Oh,
Aristippus, Aristippus, thou art equally divine (...) the only father of
Quodlibets, the Prince of Formalities, I ask my Stars whose influence does
govern this ^rbem sublunarem, that I may live with thee, and die like the
royal Duke of Clarence, who was sowsed up to immortality in a But of Malmesey.


2 Schol. You interrupt him Sir, too much in his Lecture, and prevent your
ears of their hoppinesse.


Sim. Oh heavens, I could hear him, ad ^ternitatem, and that ^am a part ante
quam a part post. O proceed, proceed, thy instructions are mere. Orthodoxall,
thy Philosophy canonical, I will study thy scieutiam both speculatiuam and
practicam. Pray let me once more forswear the pollution of Beer, for it is an
abominable heretic, I Will be his perfect enemy, till I make him and bottle-Ale
fly the Country.


Aristip. But Sack is the life, soul, and spirits of a man, the fire which
Prometheus stole, not from Jove's Kitchen, but his Wine-Cellour, to increase the
native heat and radical moisture, without which, we are but drousie dust, or
dead clay: this is Nectar, the very Nepenthe the gods were drunk with, it is
this that gave Ganymede, beauty, Hebe youth, to Jove his heaven and eternity;
do you think Aristotle drank Perry, or Plato Cider? do you think Alexander
had ever conquered the world, if he had bin sober? he knew the force and valor
of Sack, that it was the best armor, the best encouragement, and that none
could be a good Commander, that was not double drunk, with Wine and Ambition.


1 Schol. Only here is the difference: Ambition makes them rise, and Wine makes
them fall.


Aristip. Therefore the Garrisons are all drinking Schools, the Soldiers
trained up to the mustering of pewter pots daily, learning to contemn death,
by accustoming to be deaddrunke: scarres do not so well become a Captain, as
Carbuncles. A red nose is the grace of a Serieant Mayor, and they unworthy the
place of Ancients that have not good colors, the best shot to be discharged is
the Tavern bill, the best Alarm is the sounding of healths, and the most
absolute March is reeling.


2 Schol. And the best Artillery yard is the Dolphin.


Aristip. Thus you may easily perceive the profit of Sack in military
discipline, for that it may justly seem to have taken the name of Sack from
sacking of Cities.


Simp. Oh wonderful, wonderful Philosophie^ If I be a coward any longer, let
me swear a little to drink Sack, for I will be as valiant as any of the
Knights Errant: I perceive it was only culpa ignorantiae, not pra^ae
disposition^s that made me a coward: but O Enthusiastique, rare, Angelical
Philosophy, I will be a Soldier, a Scholar, and every thing, I will
hereafter nec peccare in mat^rid, nec informd. Beer, raskally Beer was the
first parent of Sophisters, and the fallacies: But proceed, my Pythagoras, my
ipse dixit of Philosophy.


Arist. Next, it is the only Elixar of Philosophy, the very Philosophers
stone, able, if studied by a young Heir, mu^drererum specus, to change his
House, Lands, Livings, Tenc^^ents, and Liueries into aurum potabile: So that
though his Lordships be the f^wer for it, his manners shall be the more; whose
L^nds being dissolved into Sack, must needs make his soul more capable of
divine meditation, he being almost in the state of separation, by being purged,
and freed from so much earth.


2 Schol. Therefore why should a man trouble himself with so much earth? he is
the best Philosopher, that can omnia sua secum portare.


Aristip. And since it is the nature of light things to ascend, what better
way, or more agreeing to nature can be invented, whereby we might ascend to
the height of knowledge, then a light head? A light head being as it were
allied with heaven, first found out, that the motion of the orbs was circular
like to its own, which motions, test Arist^tele, first found that
intelligence: so that I conclude all intelligence, intellect, and understanding
to be the invention of Sack, and a light head; what mists of error had
cloaded Philosophy, till the never sufficiently praised Copernicus found out
that the earth was moved, which he could never have done, had he not been
instructed by Sack, and a light head?


Simp. Hang me then when I turn grave.


Aristip. This is the Philosophy, the great Stagirite read to his Pupil,
Alexander, wherein how great a proficient he was, I call the faith of History
to witness.


Simp. It Is true, per sidem Historicam, for I have read how when he had
vanquished the whole world in drink, that he wept there was no more to conquer.


Aristip. Now, to make our demonstration to prove, no wine, no Philosophy, is
that admirable Axiom, in vino veritas, and you know that Sack and truth are
the only Buts which Philosophy aims at.


1 Schol. And the Hogshead is that puteus Democriti, from whence they might
both be drawn.


Aristip. Sack, Clarret, Malmsey, White Wind and Hipocras are your five
Predicables, and Tobacco your indiuiduum, your Money is your substance, full
cups your quantity, good wine your quality, your Relation is in good company,
your action is beating, which produces another predicament in the Drawers,
called passion, your quando is midnight, your v^i the Dolphin, your situ^
leaning, your habitus carousing, afterclaps are your post predicaments, your
priorums breaking of jests, your post^riorums of glasses, false bills are your
fallacies, the shot is subtili^ obiectio, and the discharging of it is,
verasolutio, several humors are your moodes, and figures, where quarta sigura,
or gallons must not be neglected, your drinking is Syllogismes, where a pottle
is the mayor terminus, and a pint the minor, a quart the medium, beginning of
healths are the premises, and pledging the conclusion, for it must not be
divided, Topics or common places are the Ta^ernes, and Hamon, Wolf, and
Farlowes are the three best Tutors in Universities.


Simp. And if I be not entered, and have my name admitted into some of their
books, let forma misti be beaten out of me.


Aristip. To persuade the Vintner to trust you, is good Rhetoric, and the
best figure is Synechdoche to pay part for the whole, to drink above measure,
is a Science beyond Geometry, falling back-ward is star-gazing, and no lacobs
Staff comparable to a Tobacco pipe, the sweet harmony of good-fellowship, with
now and then a discord, is your excellent music, Sack it self is your
Grammar, sobriety a mere solecisme, and Latin be it true, or be it false, a
very cudgel to your Priscianus pa^es, the r^ckoning is Arithmetique enough, a
receipt of full cups are the best physic to procure vemit, and forget^ing of
debts an art of memory; and here you have an Encuelopoedia of Sciences, whose
method being circular, can never be so well learned, as when your head runs
round.


Simp. If mine have any other motion, it shall be pr^ter naturam, I, and contra
too, if I li^e: I like that art of music wondrous well, life is not life
without it; for what is life but an harmonious lesson, played by the soul upon
the Organs of the body. O witty sentence! I am mad already, I see the
immortality, ha brave Aristippus: but in Poetry, it is the sole predominant
quality, the sap and juice of a verse, yea, the spring of the Muses is the
fountain of Sack, for to think Helicon a bartell of Beer, is as great a
sin, as to call Pegasus a Brewers Horse.


Aristip. I know some of these halfe-penny Almanac makers do not approve of
this philosophy, but give you most abominable counsel in their Beggars Rhymes,
which you are bound to believes as faithfully, as their predictions of foul
and fair weather, you shall hear some of Erra Paters Poetry.

I wish you all carefully,
Drink Sack but sparingly,
Spend your coin t^^ifuly,
Keep your health warily,
Take heed of ^,
Wine is an enemy*
Good is sobriety,
Fly baths and Venery.
For your often potations much crudities cause, by hindering the course of
mother Natures laws, therefore he that desires to live till October, ought to
be drunk in July, but I hold it to be a great deal better that he went to
bed sober. And let him alone, thou man in the Moon, yet had thou but read a
leaf in this admired Author, this aureum flumen, this torrens cloquentiae,
thou would have scorned to have bin of the water Poets Tribe, or Skeltons
family, but thou have never tasted better Nectar than out of Fennors Wassaile
Bowl, which has so transformed him, that his eyes look like two Tunnels, his
nose like a Fausset with the Spicket out, and therefore continually dropping:
the Almanackemakers, and Physicians are alike grand enemies of Sack, as for
Physicians being fools, I cannot blame them if they neglect Wine, and minister
simples, but if I meet with you, I Will teach you another receipt.


Sim. Why meet him Tutor? you may easily meet him. I know him Sir, and
cognitione distincta and confu^a I warrant you, do you not smell him Tutor? I
know who made this Almanac against drinking Sack? ha Stroffe? have I found
you Stroffe? you will show your self, I see, when all is done, to be but a
Brewers Clarke.


Aristip. But far better speaks the divine Ennius against your Ale, and
Barly-broth, who knew too full well the virtue of Sack, when Nunquam ^isi
potus ad arma prosiluit dicenda; his verses are in Latin, but because the
audience are Scholars, I have translated them into English, that they may be
understood. Here read them.


1 Schol. There is a drink made of the Stygian Lake,
Or else of the waters the suries do make,
No name there is bad enough by which it to call,
But yet as I wist, it is ycleped* Ale;
Men drink it thick, and piss it out thin.
Mickle filth by Saint Loy that it leaves wit^in,
But I of complexion am wondrous sanguine,
And will love by the Morrow a cup of wine,
To live in delight was ever my won,
For I was Epicurus his own son,
That held opinion that plainly delight
Was very felicity perfect:
A Bowl of wine is wondrous boon cheer
To make one blyth, buxome and deboneere,
'Twill give me such valor and so much courage,
As cannot be found 'twixt Hull and Carthage.

Aristip. But above the wit of humanity, the divine Virgil has extolled the
Encomium of Sack in these verses.


2 Schol. Fill me a Bowl of Sack with Roses crowned,
Fill't to the brim, I Will have my temples bound
With flowery Chaplets, and this day permit
My Genius to be free, and frolique it;
Let me drink deep, then fully warmed with wine,
Ill' chaunt Aeneas praise, that every line
Shall prove immortal, till my moistened quill
Melt into verse; and Nectar-like distill;
I Am sad, or dull, till bowls brim filled infuse
New life in me, new spirit in my Muse,
But once revived with Sack, pleasing desires
In my childhood kindle such Active fires,
That my gray hayres seem fled, my wrinckl'd face,
Grown smooth as Hebes, youth, and beauties grace,
To my shrunk veins, fresh blood and spirits bring,
Warm as the Summer, sprightfull as the spring,
Then all the world is mine: Croesus is poor
Compared with me, he is rich that asks no more:
And I in Sack have all, which is to me
My home, my life, health, wealth, and liberty,
Then have I conquered all, I boldly dare
My Trophies with the Pelcan youth compare,
Him I will equal, as his sword, my pen
My conquered world of cares, his world of men,
Do not, Atrides, Nestors ten desire
But ten such drinkers as that aged sire,
His stream of ho^yed words flowed from the Wine,
And Sack^ his Counsel was, as he was thine.
Who ^u^r purchased a rich Indiaen mine,
But Bacchus first, and next the Spanish wine?
Then fill my bowl, that if I dye to morrow,
Killing cares to day, I have out-liu'd my sorrow.

Aristip. Thus resting in the opinion of that admirable Poet, I make this
draught of Sack, this Lectures period.


Dixi. Simp. Dixi, do thou say? I, and I Will warrant thee the best Dixi in
Cambridge: who would sit poring on the learned Barbarism of the Scholemen,
that by one of thy Lectures might confute them all, pro and con? I begin to
have distinction, and actualiter, and habitualiter, yet a pox to see, I cannot
leave them, nec principaliter, nec formaliter; yet I begin to love the Fox
better than subtilnesse. Oh Tutor, Tutor, well might Fox be a College Porter,
that he might open the Gates to none but thy Pupils: come fellow Pupils, if I
did not love you, I were (...), and an absurdity in the abstract; Let Us
practice, let us practice, for I Will ^ollow the steps of my Tutor night and day:
by this Sack, I shall love this Philosophy: before I heard this Lecture,
Banks his Horse was an Aristotle; in comparison of me: I can laugh to think
what a foolish Simpli^^us I was this morning, and how learn^dly I shall sleep
to night.


2 Schol. Sleep to night! why? that is no point of our Philosophy; we must sit
up late, and roar till we rattle the Welkin: Sleep! what have we to do with
deaths Cater-cousin? do you think Nature gave stars to sleep by? have you
not day enough to sleep in, but you must sleep in the night too? it is an
arrant Paradox.


Sim. A Paradox? let me be crampt if I sleep then, but what, must we sleep in
the day then?


Schol. Yes, in the morning.


Sim. And why in the morning?


2 Schol. Why, a pox of the morning, what have we to do with the sober time
of the day?


Sim. It Is true, I see, we may learn something of our fellow Pupils, and what
must we do now, fellow pupils? What must we do now?


1 Schol. Why? confer our notes.


Sim. What is that?


2 Schol. Why? conferring of notes, is drinking off cups, half pots are saying
of parts, and the singing of Catches is our repetition.


Sim. Fellow Pupil, I Will confer a note with you.


1 Schol. Gramercy brave lad, and it is a good one, an excellent Criticisme; I
would not have lost it for Eustathius and his Bishopric, it is a general
rule, and true without exception.


Sim. Fellow Pupil, I Will confer a note with you too.


2 Schol. Faith, let me have it, let us share and share like boon Rascals.


Simp. I Will say my part to you both.


2 Schol. By my troath, and you have a good memory, you have con'd it quickly
Sir.


Sim. But what shall we have for repetitions now?


2 Schol. I, what for repetitions?


1 Schol. Why the Catch against the Schoolmen in praise of our Tutor
Aristippus: Can you sing Simplicius?


Sim. How begins it pray you?


1 Schol. Aristippus is better.


Sim. O God Sir, when I was in the state of ignorance, I co^'d it without
book, thinking it had been a Position.

Aristippus is better in every letter,
Then Fab^r the Parisiensis,
Then Scotus, Soncinas, and Thomas Aqui^as,
Or Gregory Gandanensis:
Then Cardan and ^amus, then old Paludanus,
Albertus and Gabriella,
Then Pico Mercatus, or Scaliger Natus,
Then Niphus or Zabarella.
Hortado, Trombetus, were fools with Toletus,
Zanardus, and Will de Hales,
With Occham, Ia^ellus, and mad Algazellus,
Philoponus and Natali^,
The Conciliator, was but a mere prater,
And so was Apollinaris:
Iandunus, Plotinus, the Dunc^ Eugubinus,
With Masius, Sauil, and Swarez,
Fonseca, Durandus, Becanus, Holandus,
Pererius, Auienture:
Old Trismigistus, whose volumes have mist us,
Ammonius, Bonauenture,
Mirandula Comes, with Proclus and So^^es,
And Guido the Carmelita:
The nominall Schools, and the College of fools,
No longer is my delighta:
Hang Brirewood and Carter, in Crakenthorps garter,
Let Keckerman too be^oane us,
I Will be no more beaten, for greasy lack Seato^,
Or conning of Sandersonus.
The censure of Cato's, shall never amate us,
Their frosty beards cannot nip us:
Your Ale is too muddy, good Sack is our study,
Our Tutor is Aristippus.

Enter the Wild-man, with two Brewers. Wild-man. There they be, now for the
valor of Brewers, knock um soundly, the old Rogue, that is he, do you not
see him there? soundly, soundly, let him know what Champions good Beer has.

They beat out Aristippus and the Scholars* Wild-man solus. Now let them know
that Beer is too strong for them, and let me be hanged, if ever I be milder to
such Rascals, they shall find these but st^le courtesies, He finds Po^s.
How now? what is her^? the learned Library, the Philosophical volumes: these
are the books of the black-Art; I hate them worse than Bellarmine, the golden
Legend, or the Turkish Alcharon. I wonder what virtue is in this p^w^er-faced
Author, that it should make every one fall into love with it so deeply: I'^l
try if I can find any Philiru^^, He finds empty Papers.
any loue-potion in 't: by my Domine not a drop; O stultum ingeniur^ hominum,
to delight in such vanitie^! Sure these are Comments upon Tobacco, dry and
j^icelesse vanities. I Will try again, by my bonafide, but this does relish
some learning, still better, an admirable witty rogue, a very flash. I Will turn
another leaf, still better, has he any more Authors like this? what is here,
Aristippus? a most incomparable Author, O Bodly, Bodly, thou have not such a
book in all thy Library, here is one line worth the whole Vatican. O
Aristippus, would my brains had been broken out when I broched thy hogs-head:
O cursed Brewers, and most accursed am I, to wrong so learned a Philosopher as
Aristippu^? what penance is enough to clear me from this impardonable offense?
twenty purgations are too little; I Will suck up all my Beer in Toasts to
appease him, and afterward live by my Wife and Hackneyes. Oh, that I had never
undertook this selling of Beer, I might have kept my house with Fellows
Commons, and never have come to this: But now I am a Wild-man, and my house a
Bedlam: Aristippus, Aristippus, Aristippus.


Enter Medico de Campo. Medico. How now neighbor Wild-man?


Wild-man. O Aristippus, Aristippus, what shall I do for thee, Aristippus?


Medico. What ecstasy is this?


Wilde-man: O Aristippus, Aristippus, what shall I do for thee Aristippus?


Medico. Why neighbor Wilde-man, disclose your griefs to me, I am a Surgeon,
and perchance may cure vm?


Wilde-man. O cry you mercy, you are the welcommest man on earth, Sir Signior
Medico de campo, the welcmomest man living, the only man I could have wished
for, O Aristippus, Aristippus.


Medico. Why what is the matter, neighbor? O I hear he has seduced away your
Parishioners, is this the cause of your Lamentation?


Wilde-man. O no Sir, a learned Philosopher, one that I love with my soul: but
in my rage I cannot tell you Sir, it is a dismal tale, the sharpest Razor in
your shop would turn edge at it.


Medico. Never fear it, I have one was sent from a -- faith I cannot think
on's name, a great Emperor, he that I did the great cure on, you have heard
on it I am sure: I fetched his head from China, after it had been there a
fortnight buried, and set it on his shoulders again, and made him as lively,
as ever I saw him in my life; and yet to see I should not think on's name. O I
have it now, Prester John, a pox on it, Prester John, 'twas he, he, I faith,
'twas Prester John; I might have had his Daughter if I had not been a fool;
and have lived like a Prince all the days of my life; nay, and perchance have
inherited the Crown after his death; but a pox on it, her lips were too thick
for me, and that I should not think on Prester John.


Wild man. O Aristippus, Aristippus, pox on your Prester John Sir, will you
think on Aristippus?


Med. What should I do with him?


Wild man. Why? in my rage Sir, I have almost killed him, and now would have
you cure him in sober sadness.


Medico. Why call him out Sir.


Enter Simplicius. Wilde-man. Sir, yonder comes one of his Pupils.


Medico. Salve Mr. Simplicius.


Simp. Salve me, it is but a Surgeons complement, Signior Medico de Campo; but
you are welcome Sir, my Tutor wants help. Are you there you Vsquebaugh
Rascal, with your Metheglin juice? I Will teach you Sir to break a Philosophers
pate; I Will make you leave your distinctions as well as I have done.


Wilde-man. O pardon, pardon me, I repent Sir heartily, O Aristippus,
Aristippus, I have broken thy head, Aristippus, but I Will give thee a plaster,
Aristippus, Aristippus.


Medico. I pray Sir bring him out in his Chair, and if the house can furnish
you with Barbers provision, let all be in readiness.


Exit Simplicius. Wilde-man. Pray Sir do you think you can cure him?


Medico. Him? why neighbor, do you not remember the Thumb?


Wilde-man. What of the Thumb? I have not heard of it as yet Sir.


Medico. Why the Thumb, the Thumb, do you not know the cure of the Thumb?


Wilde-man. No Sir, but I pray tell the cure of the Thumb, do you still
remember't Sir.


Medico. Remember't? I, and perfectly, I have it at my fingers end, and thus it
is. Two Gentlemen were fighting, one lost his Thumb, I bychance coming by,
took it up, put it in my pocket, some two months after, meeting the
Gentleman, I set on his Thumb again; and if he were now in Cambridge, I could
have his hand to show for it: why did you never hear of the Thumb Sir? it is
strange you never heard me speak of the Thumb Sir.


Enter three Scholars bringing fo^rth Aristippus in his Chair. 1 Schol.
Signior de Medico Campo, if you have any art or skill, show it now, you never
had a more deserving Patient.


Medico. Yet I have had many, and royal ones too; I have done Cures beyond
Seas, that will not be believed in England.


2 Schol. Very likely so, and Cures in England, that will not be believed
beyond seas, nor here neither, for in this kind, half the world are infidels.


Medico. The great Turk can witness, I am sure, the eyes that he wears, are
of my making.


1 Schol. He was then an eyewitness: but I hope he wears spectacles,
Signior.


Medico. Why, will not you believe it? why I tell you I am able to say it, I saw't,
I saw't my self, I cured the King of Poland of a Wart on's nose, and Bethlem
Gaber of a Ringworme.


1 Schol. The one with raw Beef, and the other with Inkehornes.


Medico. Pox of your old Wi^es medicines; the worst of mine Ingredients is an
Unicorns Horn, and a Bezars stone: Raw Beef and Inkehornes! Why, I cured
Sherley in the Grand Sophies Court in Persia, when he had bin twice shot
through with Ordinance, and had two bullets in each thigh, and so quickly, that
he was able at night to lie with his wife the Sophies niece, and beget a whole
Church of Christians; and could this have been done with Raw Beef and
Inkehornes?


Sim. No sure, this could not have been done without Eggs and Greene-sauce,
or an Oatmeale Poultice at least.


Medico. The King of Russia had dyed of the worms, but for a powder I sent him.


2 Schol. Some of that you mean, that stuck on the bullet which you took out
of Sherleyes legs.


Medico. In the siege of Ostend, I gave the Duchess of Austria a receipt to
keep her Smock from being animated, when she had not shifted it of a
tweluemoneth.


1 Schol. Believe me, and that was a Cure beyond Scoggins Fleas.


Medico. I am able by the virtue of one Salve, to heal all the wounds and
breaches in Bohemia.


2 Schol. I, and cloze up the Bung-hole in the great Tub at Heidlebergh, I
warrant you.


Medico. I cured the state of Venice of a Dropsy, the Low Countries of a
Lethargy, and if it had not been treason, I had cured the Fistula, that it
should have dropped no more then your nose. By one Dram on a knifes point, I
restored Mansfield to his full strength and forces, when he had no men left,
but was only skin and bones. I made an Arm for Brunswicke, with so great art
and skill, as nature her self could not have mended it; which had it not come
too late, and after his death, would have done him as much service as that
which was shot off.


2 Schol. I easily believe that I faith.


Medico. I could make a Purgation, that should so scour the Seas, that never a
Dunkerke durst show his head.


1 Schol. By my faith, and that would be a good State Glister.


Medico. I have done as great wonders as these, when I extracted as much
chastity from a Sanctimony in the English Nunnery, as cured the Pope of his
lechery.


2 Schol. And yet had as much left, as served five Cardinals on Fasting-dayes.


Medico. And there was no man in the Realm of France, either French or Spanish
or Italian Doctors, but my self, that durst undertake the King of France his
Corns, and afterward having cured him, I drank a health to him.


Sim. Would we had the pledging on it. O happy man that have conferred a note
with the King of France!


Medico. And do you seem to misdoubt my skill, and speak of my Art with ifs
and ands? Do you take me for a Mountebank? and has mine own tongue been so
silent in my praise, that you have not heard of my skill?


2 Schol. No, pardon us Signior, only the danger our Tutor is in, makes us so
suspicious; we know your skill Sir, we have heard Spain and your own tongue
speak loud on it, we know besides, that you are a Trauailer, and therefore give
you leave to relate your words with authority.


Med. Danger? what danger can there be, when I am his Surgeon?


1 Schol. His head Sir is so wondrously bruised, it is almost past cure.


Med. Why, what if he had never an head? am not I able to make him one? or if
it were beaten to atoms, I could set it together, as perfectly as in the womb.


Wild. Believe me neighbor, but that would be as great a wonder, as the
Thumb, or Prester John's head.


Med. Why? I Will tell you Sir, what I did, a far greater wonder then any of
these, I was a Trauailer.


2 Schol. There is no such great wonder in that, but what may be believed.


Med. And another friend of mine travailed with me, and to be short, I came
into the Country of Cannibals, where missing my friend, I ran to seek him, and
came at last into a Land where I saw a company feeding on him, they had eaten
half of him, I was very pensive at his misfortune, or rather mine* at last I
bethought me of a powder that I had about me, I put it into their wine, they
had no sooner drank of it, but they presently disgorged their stomachs, and
fell asleep; I Sir, gathered up the miserable morsels of my friend, placed them
together, and restored him to be a perfect man again; and if he were here
still alive, he were able to witness it himself, and do you think I cannot
cure a ten-groates damage, or a cracked Crown.


1 Schol. Good Signior make no such delay, cure him, and have one wonder more
to fill up your Legend.


Medico. Here hold the Basin, you the Napkins, and you Mr Simplicius the Boxes,
how shall we do to lay his feet upon? By my troth Sir, he is wonderfully hurt,
his piam^ter I perceive is clean out of joint; of the 20. bones of the Cranium
there is but three only whole, the rest are miserably crushed and broken, and
two of his Sutures are clean perished, only the Sagitall remains free from
violence, the four Tunicates of his eyes are threadbare, the Meninx of his
^are is like a cut Drum, and the hammers lost: there is not a Ca^tilago in his
head worth three pence, the top of his nose is dropped away, there is not a
Muskle left in the Cauities of his Nostrils, his dentes molares are past
grinding, his Pa^^et is lost, and with it his gurgulio, yet if he can swallow,
I warrant his drinking safe: help open his mouth. So, so, his throat is sound:
he is well I warrant you; now give him a cup of Sack: so let me chafe his
Temples, put this powder into another glass of Sack, and my life for his, he
is as sound as the best of us all: let down his legs. How do you Sir?


Aristip. Why as young as the Morning, all life, and soul, not a dra^^ of
body; I am newly come back from hell, and have seen so many of my
acquaintance there, that I wonder whose Art has restored me to life again.


1 Schol. The Catholic Bishop of Barbers, the very Metropolitan of Surgeons,
Signior de Medico Campo.


2 Schol. One that has engrossed all Arts to himself, as if he had the
Monopoly.


1 Schol. The only Hospital of soars.


2 Schol. And Spittle-house of infirmities, Signior de Medico Campo.


1 Schol. One that is able to undo the Company of Barbersurgeons, and College
of Physicians, by making al diseases fly the Country.


2 Schol. Yea, he is able to give his skill to whom he please, by Act of deed,
or bequeath it by Legacy, but he is determined as yet to intaile it to his
heirs males for ever.


1 Schol. Sir, death it self dares not anger him, for fear he should beggar
the Sextons by suffering no grave to be made, he can choose whether any shall
dye or no.


2 Schol. And he do's't with such celerity, that a hundred pieces of Ordinance
in a pitched field, could not in a whole day make work enough to employ him an
hour; you owe him your life Sir, I Will assure you.


Aristip. Sir I do owe you my life, and all that is mine: think of any thing
that lies in the compass of my Philosophy, and it is your own.


Med. I have gold enough Sir, and Philosophy enough, for my house is paued with
Philosophers stones, mine only desire is, that you forgive the rage of this
wildeman, who is heartily sorry for his offense to you.


Wild. O reverend Philosopher, and Alchimy of understanding, thou very Sack of
Sciences, thou noble Spaniard, thou Catholic Monarch of Wines, Archduke of
Canary, Emperor of the sacred Sherry, pardon me, pardon my rudeness, and I
will forswear that Dutch heresy of English Beer, and the witchcraft of
Middletons water, I Will turn my self into a Gown, and be a professed disciple
of Aristippus.


Aristip. Give him a Gown then, ere we admit him to our Lecture hereafter. Now
noble Signior Medico de Campo, if you will walk in, let us be very iouiall and
merry, it is my second birthday, let us in, and drink a health to the company.

We car^ not ^or money, riches, or wealth,
Old Sack is our money, old Sack is our health,
Then let us flock hither
Like Birds of a feather,
To drink, to fling,
To laugh and sing,
Conferring our notes together,
Conferring our notes together.
Come let us laugh, let us drink, let us sing,
The winter with us is as good as the Spring,
We care not a feather
For wind, or for weather,
But night and day
We sport and play,
Conferring our notes together,
Conferring our notes together.

Simp. Hark, they are drinking your healths, within, and I must have it too, I
am only left here to offer my supplicat to you, that my grace may pass, and
then if I may but commence in your approbation, I will take a degree in
drinking, and because I am turned a iouiall mad rascal, I have a great desire
to be a Midsummer Batch'lor, I was only stayed to ask your leaves to go out.

Exit.
FINIS.
THE PEDDLER, AS IT WAS PRESENTED IN A STRANGE SHOVV.
Generous Gentlemen,

SVch is my affection to Phoebus, and the ninety nine Mu^es, that for the
benefit of this royal University, I have strodled over three of the
terrestrial globes with my Geometrical rambling, vid^licet, the Asia of the
Dolphin, the Afrique of the Rose, the America of the Mitre, besides the terra
incognita, of many an Alehouse. And all for your sakes, whom I know to be the
divine brats of Helicon, the lawful begotten bastards of the thrice three
sisters, the learned, filly-foales to Mounsier Pegasus, Archhackney to the
students of Parnassus: Therefore I charge you by the seven deadly Sciences,
which you more study than the three and four liberal sins, that your ha,
ha, he is may be recompense of my ridiculous endeauours.

I have been long in travel, but if your laughter give my Embryon jests but
safe deliverance, I dare maintain it in the throat of Europ, Iero^imo rising
from his naked bed, was not so good a Midwife.

But I see you have a great desire to know what profession I am of: first,
therefore hear what I am not. I am not a Lawyer, for I hope you see no Buckram
honesty about me, and I swear by these sweet lips, my breath stinks not of any
State actions: I am no soldier, although my heels be better than my hands: by
the whips of Mars and Bellona, I could never endure the smell of Saltpeter
since the last Gunpowder treason: the voice of a Mandrake to me, is sweeter
music than those Maxims of wars, those terrible Cannons; I am no Townsman,
unless there be rutting in Cambridge, for you see my head without horns; I am
no Alderman, for I speak true English; I am no Justice of peace, for I swear
by the honesty of a Mittimus, the venerable Bench never kissed my worshipful
Buttocks; I am no Alchymist, for though I am poor, I have not broke out my
brains against the Philosophers stone; I am no Lord, and yet me thinks I
should, for I have no Lands; I am no Knight, and yet I have as empty pockets as
the proudest of them all; I am no Landlord, but to Tenants at will; I am no
Inns of Court Gentleman, for I have not been stewed thoroughly at the Temple,
though I have been half codled at Cambridg^; Now do you expect that I should
say I am a Scholar, but I thank my stars, I have more wit than so; why, I
am not mad yet? I hope my better Genius will shield me from a threadbare black
Cloak, it looks like a piece of Beelzebubs Livery. A Scholar? What? I do not
mean my brains should drop through my nose: no; if I was what I wish I could
but hope to be; but I am a noble, generous, understanding, royal, magnificent,
religious, heroical, and thrice illustrious Peddler.

But what is a Peddler? why, what is that to you? yet for the satisfaction of him
whom I most respect, my right honorable self, I will define him.

A Peddler is an I^diu^duum vagum, or the Primum mobile of Tradesmen, a walking
Burse, or moveable Exchange, a Socraticall Citizen of the vast universe, or a
peripateticall Iournyman, that like another Atlas carries his heavenly shop
on's Shoulders.

I am a Peddler, and I s^ll my ware
This brave Saint Barthol* or Sturbridge fair,
I Will sell all for laughter, that is all my gains,
Such Chapm^n should be laughed at for their pains.
Come buy my wits which I have hither brought,
For wit is never good till it be bought;
Let me not bear all back, buy some the while,
If laughter be too dear, take it for a smile;
My trade is jesting now, or quible speaking,
Strange: trade you will say, for its set up with breaking;
My shop and I, am all at your command,
For lawful English laughter paid at hand,
Now will I trust no more, it were in vain
To break, and make a Craddock of my brain:
Half have not paid me yet, first there is one
Owes me a quart for his declamation,
Another morning draught, is not yet paid
For four Epistles at the election made,
Nor dare I cross him who does owe as yet
Three elli of jests to line Priorums wit.
But here is a Courtier has so long a bill*
'Twill fright him to behold it, yet I will
Relate the sums: Item, he owes me first,
For a^ Inprimis: but what grieves me worst,
A dain^y Epigram on his Spaniels tail
Cost me an hour, besides five pots of Ale,
Item an Anagram on his mistrisse name,
Item the speech wherewith he courts his Dame,
And an old blubberd scowling El^gy
Upon his Masters dogs sad exequy,
Nor can I yet the time directly gath^r,
When I was paid for an Epitaph on's father,
Besides he never yet gave me content
For the new coining of's last complement,
Should I speak all? be it spoken to his praise,
The total sums is, what he thinks, or says,
I will not let you run so much o'th score,
Poor Ducke-Lane brains, trust me, I Will trust no more,
Shall's jest for naught, have you all conscience lost?
Or do you think our Sack did nothing cost?
Well, then it must be done as^ I have said,
I needs must be with present laughter paid,
I am a freeman, for by this sweet ryme,
The fellows know I have secured the time,
Yet if you please to grace my poor adventures,
I Am bound to you in more than ten Indentures.
But a pox on Skeltons ^ury, I Will open my Shop in honester prose, and first,
Gentlemen, I Will show you half a dozen of incomparable points.

I would give you the definition of points, but that I think you have them at
your fingers ends, yet for your better understanding,

A point is no body, a common term, an extreme friend of a good man's
longitude, whose center and circumference join in one diametricall opposition
to your equilaterall Doublets, or equicrurall Breeches; but to speak to the
point, though not to the purpose.

1 The first point is a point of honesty, but is almost worn out, and has never
been in request since trunck-Hose and Codpeece^breeches went out of fashion,
it is made of simplicity Ribbon, and tagged with plain dealing; if there be any
knaves among you (^s I hope you are not all fools,) faith buy this point of
honesty, and the best use you can put it to, is to tie the band of affection:
but I fear, this point will find no Chapman, some of you had rather sell,
than with Demosth^nes buy honesty at so dear a rate: oh, I could wish that the
Breeches of Bowsers, Stewards; Taxors, Receivers, and Auditors were trussed
with these honesty points; but some will not be tied to it, but hist To^, it
is dangerous vntrussing the time.

2 The next is a point of Knavery, but I have enough of them already, yet because
I am loath to carry mine any longer about me, who gives me most, shall take it,
and the devil give him good on it: this point is cut out of villainous
Sheepeskin parchment in a Scriueners Shop, tagg'd with the gold of a Ring,
which the Pillory robbed him of, when it borrowed his ears; if he do but
fasten this to the new Doublet of a young Squire, it will make him grow so
corpulent in the middle, that there will be nothing but Waste, this point of
Knavery has bin a man in his days, and the best of the Parish, fourteen of
them go to our Bakers dozen.

The definition of him may be this: a point of Knavery, is an occult quality
tied on a riding knot, the better to play fast and loose, he was borne in
Buckram, h'as run through all offices in the Parish, and now stands to be
President of Bridewell, where I leave him, ^oping to see him trussed at Tiburne.

3 Amongst all my points, a point of ignorance is the very Alderman of the
dozen. This is the richest point in my pack, and is never out of fashion at
Innes of Court: if you buy this point, you are arrant fools, for I Will give you
this gift, that you shall have it in spite of your teeths.

4 The next is a point of good manners, that has been long lost amongst a
crowd of clownes, because it was only in fashion on this side Trent.

This point is almost found in our College, and I thank the heavens for'^, it
begins to be tagg'd with Latin, it has been much d^fil'd, but I hope to see
it clean washed away with the soap of good government.

This point, to give you a little inckling of it; begins from the due
observance of a Fresh man to Sophisters, and there it ends with a cede
m^ioribus.

5 Next point is a point of false doctrine, snatched from the codpeece of a
long-winded Puritan, the breath of Arm^nim will rot in him. Tag him with a
piece of Apocripha, and he breaks in sunder, trusse him to the Surplesse, and
his Breeches will presently fall down with the thought of the whore of Babylon.

He hates unity and Church Discipline so far; that you cannot tie a true
loves knot on him: cut off his tags, and he will make excellent strings for a
Geneua Bible; I would have these points anathema^ized from all the religious
breeches in the company: it is made of a dangerous stubborn Leather, tagg'd at
one end with self-conceit, at the other with wilful opinion, this point is
fit for no service, but Lucifers C^coti^ces: but why talk I so long of this
point, it is pitt^ it is not licensed.

6 If you like my points, why do you not buy? If you would have a more full
point, I can furnish you with a Period; I have a Parenthesis (but that may be
left out) I know not how you affect those points; but I love them so well, that
I grieve at the ignorance of my infancy, when my most audacious Toes durst play
at spurne-point.

Who will not pity points, when each man sees
To begging they are fallen upon their knees?
Though I beg pity, think I do not fear
Censuring Critic whelps, no point Mounsier:
If you ^ate points, and these like merry speeches,
You may want points for to trusse up your Breeches.
And from the close-stole may ^e never move,
That hating points, does clasps and keepers love;
But if my points have ^eere at all offended,
I Will tell you a way how all may be amended:
Speak to the point, and that shall answer friend,
All i^ not worth a point, and there is an end.
Then the Peddler brought forth a Looking Glass. The next is a Looking-glass,
but I Will put it up again; for I dare not be so bold as to show some of you your
own faces; yet I will, because it has strange operations, viz.

If a cracked Chambermaid dress her self by this Looking-glass, she shall
dream the next night of kissing her Lord, or making her mistress a she
Cuckold, and shall marry a Chaplin, the next living that falls.

If a stale Court Lady look on this Reflection, she may see her old ^ace,
through her new Complexion.

An Usurer cannot see his conscience in it, nor a Scriuener his ears.

If a Townesman peep into it, his Acteons furniture is no longer invisible:
Co^rupt takers of bribes may read the price of their consciences in it.

Some fellows cannot see the face of a Scholar in it. If one of our
Iewel-nos'd Carbunckl'd rubricke, bonifac't, can venture the danger of seeing
their own faces in it, the poor Basiliskes will kill themselves by reflection.

If a blind man see his face in this, he shall recover his eyesight.

But I see no pleasure in the contemplation of it; for when I look into it, I
find my self inclined to such a dangerous disease, that I fear, I cannot
live here above four years longer: Howsoever, I hope after my disease, we
shall drink the parting-blow.

If any this Looking-glass disgrace,
It is because he dares not see his face:
Then what I am, I will not see (faith) say,
'T was the whores Argument, when she threw't away.
Then the Peddler brought forth a box of Cerebrum. But now considering what a
Philosophical vacuum there is in most of our Cambridge Noddles, I have here to
sell a sovereign box of Cerebrum, which by Lullius his Alchymy* was extracted
from the quintessence of Aristotle's Pericranium, sodde in the sinciput of
Demosthenes. The fire being blown with the long-winded blast of a C^ceronian
sentence, the whole confection boiled from a pottle to a pint, in the Pipkin
of Seneca: we owe the first invention of it to Sir John Mandeuile, the
perfection of it to Tom of Odcombe, who fetched it from the gray headed Alps
in the Hobsons Wagon of experience; I swear as Persians use, by this my
Coxcombe, this Magazine of immortal roguery: but for this Box of brains, you
had not laughed to night; buy this box of brains, and the tenure of your wits
shall be soccage, when as now it is but ^ee simple.

These brains have very admirable virtues, and very strange operations: four
drops of it in the ear of a Lawyer, will make him write true Lattin: three
grains will fill the Capital of an University Gander; the terrestrial head
of a high-Constable, will be contented with half a dram; three scruples and a
half will fill the braine-panne of a Bambery brother.

Come buy my brains, you ignorant guls,
And furnish here your empty sculs:
Pay your Laughter as it is fit,
To the learned Peddler of wit.
Quickly come, and quickly buy,
Or I Will shut my shop, and f^oles you will dye.
If your Coxcombes you would quoddle,
Here buy brains to fill your noddle.
Who buys my brains, learnes quickly here,
To make a Problem in a year:
Shall understand the predicable,
And the predicamentall Rabble.
Who buys them not, shall die a fool,
An exotericke in the School.
Who has not these, shall ever pass
For a great Acromaticall Ass:
Buy then this box of brains, who buys not it,
Shall never surfeit on too much wit.
Then the Peddler brought forth a Whetstone. But leaving my brains, I come to a
more profitable Commodity: for considering how dull half the wits of the
University be, I thought it not the worst traffic to sell Whetstones.

This Whetstone will set such an edge upon your inventions, that it will make
your rusty iron brains, purer mettle, then your brazen faces. Whet but the
knife of your Capacities on this Whetstone, and you may presume to dine at the
Muses Ordinary, or suppe at the Oracle of Apollo. If this be not true, I swear
by the Doxies Petricoates, that I Will never hereafter presume of a better
vocation, then to live and dye the miserable factor of Conny-skins.

Then the Peddler brought out Gloves. I have also Gloves of several qualities:
the first is a pair of Gloves made for a Lawyer, made of an entire Loadstone,
that has the virtue to draw gold unto it; they were perfumed with the
conscience of an Usurer, and will keep scent till wrangling have left
Westminster Hall; they are seamed with Indenture, by the needleworke of
Mortgage, and fringed with a Nouerint Vniuersi. I would show you more, but it
is against the Statute, because a Latitat has been served lately upon them.
And few of you need any Gloves, for you wear Cordouant hands.

Night-Caps. My next Commodities, are several Night-caps, but they dare not
come abroad by Candlelight. The first is lined with Fox furre, which I hope to
sell to some of the Sophisters; it has an admirable faculty for curing the
Crapula, above the virtue of Iuie, or bitter Almonds; nay, the porredge pot's
not comparable unto it.

I have another, fit for an Alderman, which Acteon by his last Will and
Testament bequeathed to the City as a principal Charter, it was of Dianas's
own making; Albumazers Otacousticon was but a Chamberpot in comparison.

I could fit all heads with Night-caps, except your grane ouerwise Metaphysical
heads: Marry, they are so transcendent, that they will not be comprehended
within the predicant of a Nightcap.

Ruffes. I have also several Ruffes; first, a Ruff of pure Holland for a
Dutch drunkard, a Ruff of Cobweb-lawne for the University statutes: I have a
Ruff for the College too: but by this badge of our College (my reverend
Lambskins) our backbiters say, our College Ruffes are quite out of stock; ^
have no more Ruffes but one, and that is a Ruff of strong hemp, you may have
them who will, at the Royal Exchange of Tiburne.

As for plain Bands, if you find any in a Scriueners shop, there is good hope
honesty will come in fashion again.

But you will not bestow your money on such trifles: why? I have greater wares.

Will you buy any Parsonages, Vicarages, Deanaries, or Prebendaries?

The price of one is his Lordships cracked Chambermaid, the other is the
reserving of his Worships tithes; or you may buy the Knights horse three
hundred pound too dear, who to make you amends in the bargain, will draw you
on fairly to a Vicaridge.

There be many tricks, but the downright way is three years purchase. Come
bring in your Coin; Livings are Maioriinpretio now, then in the days of
Doomesday book, you must give presents for your presentations: there may be
several means for your institution, but this is the only way to induction
that ever I knew: but I see you are not minded to meddle with any my honest
Leuiticall Farmers.

Then the Peddler took out a Wench made of Alablaster. But now expect the
treasures of the World, the treasures of the earth dug from the mines of my
more then Indian paunch. Wipe your eyes, that no envious clouds of musty
humors may bar your sight of the happiness of so rare an object.

Come from thy Palace, beauteous Queen of Greece,
Sweet Hellen of the world, rise like the morn,
Clad in the smock of night, that all the stars
May lose their eyes, and then grow blind,
Run weeping to the man in the Moon,
To borrow his dog to lead the spheres a begging.
Rare Empress of our souls, whose Charcole flames
Burn the poor Colts foot of amazed hearts,
View this dumb Audience thy beauty spies,
And then amazed with grief, laughout their eyes.
Here Is now a rare beauty, oh, how all your fingers itch, who should be the
first Chapman? This will be a dainty friend in a corner. And were not better to
embrace this prerty shambles of beauty, this errant Poultry of perfection, than
to tumble your sopy Laundresses? Is this like your daggle-tail'd Bed-makers?
when a man shall lie with Seacole ashes, and commit adultery with the dust of
his chamber?

Me thinks this peerless Paragon of complexion should be better
countenanced. She would set a sharper edge on your appetites, than all the
three-penny Cutlers in Cambridge.

I am a man as you are, and this naughty flesh and blood will never leave
tempting: yet I protest by the sweet sole of this incomparable she, I never
had any acquaintance with the pretty Libraries of flesh, but only this: This
is the subject of my muse; This I adorn with costly Epigrams, and such curious
Encomiums, as may deserve immortality in the Chamberpots of Helicon: and thus
my Furor Poeticus does accost her.

Fair Madame, thee whose every thing
Deser^es the Close-stoole of a King:
Wose head is fair as any bone,
White and smooth as Pumex stone.
Whose natural baldness scorns to wear
The needless excrements of bayre.
Whose forehead streakes, our hearts commands,
Like Dover Clifts, or Goodwyn sands.
While from those dainty Glo-worme eyes,
Cupid shoots plum-pudding pyes,
While from the Arches of thy nose,
A Creame-pot of white Nectar flows:
Fair dainty lips, so smooth, so sleeke,
And truly Alablaster cheek.
Pure Saffron teeth, happy the meat
That such pretty milnestones eat.
O let me hear some silent song,
Tuned by the Iewes-trumpe of thy tongue.
Oh, how that Chin becomes thee well,
Where never hairy beard shall dwell:
Thy Coral neck does statelier bow,
Then Ios when she turned a Cow:
O let me, or I shall never rest,
Suck the black bottles of thy breast:
Or lay my head, and rest me still
On that dainty Hogmagog hill.
Oh curious, and vnfathom'd waste,
As slender as the stateliest Mast:
Thy fingers too breed my delight,
Each Wart a natural Margarite,
Oh pity then my dismal mo^ue,
Able to melt thy heart of stone.
Thou know how I lament and howl,
Weep, snort, condole, look sad and scowle.
Each night so great, my passions be,
I cannot wake for thought of thee.
Thy Gown can tell how much I loved,
Thy Petticoate to pity moved.
Then let thy Peddler mercy find,
To kiss theo once, though it be behind.
Sweet kiss, sweet lips, delicious sense,
How sweet a Zephyrus blows from thence?
Blessed Peiticoate, more blessed her Smock,
That daily busseth her Buttocke:
For now the Prouer be true I find,
That the best part is still behind.
Sweet dainty soul, daigne but to give
The poor Peddler, this hanging Slee^^.
And in thine honor, by this kiss,
I Will daily wear my Pack in this,
And quickly so bear thee m^re fame,
Then Quixot the Knight Errants dame:
So farewell sweet, daign^ but to touch,
And once again re-blesse my Pouch.
Is it not pity such ware should not be bought? Well, I perceive the fault is
in the emptiness of your learned pockets: well, I Will to the Court, and see
what I can sell there, and then carry the Relics to Rome.

The Peddler calls for his Coltstaffe. Some friend must now per^or^^,
Make haste, and bid my Boy
To saddle me my wooden Horse:
For I mean to conquer Troy.

FINIS.

