The book of Barthram Priest intreatinge of the body and blood of Christ
written to great Charles the Emperor / and set forth. vii. C. years a goo.
And Imprinted An. dn^i M.D.XLviii.

Cum Preuilegio, ad Imprimendum Solum.

The life of Barthram priest
by Johannes Thrithe^^us.
BArthram priest and monk, very well learned in seculer disciplyns and in
holy scryptures, subtyle of wit, eloque^t, and no less notable for ye
integretie of the life, the^ for his learning wrote many books, whereof I have
seen but a few. He wrote a commendable work touching predestinacyo^ to King
Charles brother of Lotherius, and a book concerning the body and blood of the
lord* He floryshed in the time of Lotherius Emperor an. dn^i Xlviii.

A man shall not perceive the mind of the au^tor except he read the book
through and confer the fyr^^ art with the latter.

The preface to Charles the Emperor.
YOU commanded me (most famous Prince) to signifye unto your magifycence,
what opinion I have tou^hynge the mysterye of the body and blood of Christ
Truly as it is a commandment, not unworthy of ^oure regal and pryncelye
^state so thexecucio^ thereof, to the peruite of my (...) strength shall be very
dyfficile and hard. For what is more worthy of your regal prouidenc, the^ to
be catholyke wise, touching the holy mysteryes of the body and blod of
christ, which has auanced you, to your regal seat And further not to permyt
your subjects, dyuersly to think of the body and blood of christ wherein
doutles, the some of chrystyan redemptyon does consyst Truly no small
contrauersye is sprung for as much as some say that the sacrament of the body
and blood newlye celebrate in the church is under no Fygur: obuelacion or
cover, And again, that other some does say these things to be contained
under a figure of a mysterye, and that it is one thing which appears to our
corporal senses: and another that is seen with the eye of our faith. And not
wythstandynge that thappostle writing to the fathfull word have al men to
favor one thing, say one, one thing and that no scysme should appear among
them. Yet they be wonderfully divided in deed, thinking dyuersly of the body
and blood of christ. Wherefore your regal hyghnes, provoked with the zeal of
faith, and not well pleased With these things (coueryug also according to the
apostles precepte, that al men should think and say one thing) searches
diligen^lye for the secret of the truth. Whereby it may (...) that have
wandered out of the way, into the same again. Where upon you disdain not, to
ask the truth of this matrer, even of very poor men, considering that the
mysterye of such a secret, can not be known, but by the reuela^ion of god.
Which shows the light of his truth: by whom soever it shall please him to
elect. Uerelye as it is pleasaunce for me poor man to obey your
commandment, so it is hard to dispute upon a matter, being far beyond the
senses of men, and that cannot be known. But by the erudition of the holy
ghost. Therefore I at this time being at your commandments: through his
grace of whom we will speak, shall declare according to my habilite, what I
do think, concerning this sacrament, not leanyng to mine o wne will, b^^
persuynge the footsteps of the old fathers.

The book of Barthram prfeste touthynge the body and blood of Thrist written
to great Charles the Emperor.
Your hyghnes desyrethe to know whether that the body and blood of christ
which is received in the church by the mouths of the faithful, be in
mystery or in verite. etc. That is to say, whether it conteyneth some secret
thing that is only euyde^t to the eyes of faith, or without the veale of any
mysterye that thing is looked upon of the externe sight of the body, which the
inward eye of the mind does behold. So that whatsoever is done, apereth
manifestely or no etc, And whether it be that body which was born of Mary, that
suffered dyed, was buried rose again, ascended into heaven, and sytteth on the
right hand of the father or no etc. Of these two questions, let us begin with
the first (...) lest we be let with doutfulnes, and ambyguyte.

Defyne we what a figure is, and what the verite is that we may certainly know
how, and which way, we ought to reason A figure is a certain obumbracion, or
shadoyng, declaryng the thing which he inte^deth by some veales or couers. As
for an example, we meaning the word, do name bread. As in the lords prayer,
we desire our daily bread to be given us. Or when Christ says in the
gospel. I am the lively bread, which have descended from heaven, Or when he
calls him self a vine, and his apostles branches, saying: I am the true
vine, you verily the branches. In all these one thing is spoken, and an other
thing understand. The veryte truly is a demo^stration of a manifest thing,
covered with no Image of shadows, but insinuate, with pure plain and natural
significatyons. As wha^ we say, that christ was borne of a virgyn that he
suffered, that he was crucified, dead, and buried. Here is nothing shadowed
with fygures, but the verity of the things, showed by natural significacions
of words. Neither must we understand, any other thing here, then that which
is expressed. But not so in those things that we spoke of before. For
substauncyally, neither is the bread christ, neither the wine is christ,
neither yet are the branches the apostles, wherefore in those is a figure, in
the other the verite is showed in narracyon. That is to say. A naked and plain
signification. Now let us return to those things for whose cause they be
spoken. That is the body and blood of christ. Truly if the mysterye be done
under no figure, then do we naught in calling it a mysterye, for that can not
have the name of a mystery, wherein no thing is hid, where nothing is
removed from our corporal senses, where nothing is, covered with any veale:
but that bread which by the mysterye of the (...) kind of the creature and
the shape of vysyble things, the bread and the wine have nothing changed in
them, and if they have nothing changed in them, they be none other then they
ware before.

Your hyghnes (noble prince) perceyueth to what pass the intellectio^ of these
things do come. Which be of a contrary judgment, they deny, which they are
thought to affirm And they are provide to distroye that they do believe. For
they faythfullye confess the body and blood of Christ, and in so doing
doutles they protest that the bread and wine be not the same they ware. and
herfore if they be not the same, they ware before, they have receyuyd mutation,
Seeing that this can not be denied, let them declare how they be changed.
Truly corporallye a man shall peceyue no^hynge to be changed, therefore they
must confess that the mutacion is made other wise then corporallye, and also
that not to be the thing which is seen in verite, but some other which is not
perceived to be though his power and peculyer benynge, or if they will not
confess this: needs they must deny the body and blood of christ, which is a
wicked thing to do, not in words only but also in thought: but forasmuch as
they do confess the body and blood of christ to be there and that it cannot
be there but by the reason of mutacion from a worse thing to a better it
must follow, that the mutacion be made not corporallye, but spirituallye, yet
and so that we may say that it is do spiritually. For under the veale of
corporal bread and wine, is the spiritual body and blood of christ yet is
there not the existencie of too diverse things, that is to say: of the body
and the spyrite, but one, and the same thing after one sort, is the kind of
bread and wine, and after one other sort the body and blood of christ for in
that both of them are touched: they be the kinds of corporal creatures, and
through the power by the which they at spiritually made they be the mysteries
of the body and blood of Christ.

Let us consider the well of holy baptysme, which is called not without a cause
the well of life, because that is confyrmeth those that discende into it with
the mount of a better life, and makes the^ live to justice which ware before
dead in sin, The element of the water has not his power, for if it should not
opteyne the virtue of sainctificacio^, it could not wasshe away the spotte of
sin. And if it should not co^teyne the vygore of life utterly, it should not
be able to give life to the dead. I mean not my flesh but ^n soul, yet in
the fountain if we have respect only to the thing which our corporal sense
comprehends, we shall find nothing but water subject to corruption, and
that which has none other virtue, but to wasshe our bod^es Yt after that the
virtue of the holy ghost has access by the concrea^^on of the baptyser, yt is
of the efficacy, not only to wasshe our bodies, but also by a spiritual power
to wasshe away the spiritual fylthe from our solles. Lo in one element we se
two things, the one resystinge: the other that is to say, a corruptyble thing
to give in corruption, and a thing without life to contrybute life. Therefore
know that in this well is one thing sencyble and therefore mutable and
curruptible. Also an other thing that only faith beholds, and therefore
incorruptible and immortal. And if a man require what that is which wassheth
the body it ^s nothing but an eleme^t, but if a man consider that which
inwardely purges, that is a lively virtue a virtue of sanctification a virtue
of immortalyte, therefore the lycore in his property is corruptible in the
mysterye, and wholesome virtue, eue^ so the body and the blood of christ
co^sydered outwardely is a creature doughtles subject to mutabilite and
corrupcio^, but if a man pondre the virtue of the mysterye, it is life geuynge
immortalite to those that be partakers of it. Therefore it is not al one thing
that is seen and that is believed. For those things that be seen do only feed
the corruptyble body, they being corruptible them selves. But those things
which are not seen, do feed the immortal solles, they being immortal them
selves. The apostel writing to the Corinthians, says: know you not that all
our fathers ware under a cloud, that all passed over the sea, that all they
were baptized in Moses in the cloud and in the sea, that all they have eaten
the same sprituall meat, and that all they have dronken the same spiritual
drink? They did drink of the spiritual stone following them, the stone also
was christ Thus we perceive that the sea had a kind of baptism, and the
cloud also that the fathers of the old Testament ware baptized in the cloud
and in the sea. Could the cloud or the sea of the^ selves have the virtue of
baptism, or could they sanctifye the people. Yet dare we not accuse the
Apostell of lyenge, for that he said our fathers ware baptyz^d in the cloud and
in the sea. And although ye baptysme was a type and a figure of the baptysme of
christ yt is now used in the church Yet no man that has his wytnes will say,
that it also was not baptysme it self, or that our fathers ware not baptized
therein, except he will varye from the Apostell as a mad man. Therefore the sea
and cloud, not in that they ware creatures and bodies dead, took the clerenes
of sanctifycatio^ of ye holy speryte. For in the^ was a visyble form which
appears plainly to the corporal sense, and within a spiritual power which
was only euydent to the eyes of the mind and faith. Likewise manna given to
the people from heaven and the water flowinge out of the rock ware corporal
and corporally they fed the people and gave the^ drink, Yt the Apostel
names that manna and that water spiritual meat, and spiritual drink. and why
verily because that there was in those corporal substa^ces a spiritual power of
the word, which fed the minds, rather then the bodies of the beleuynge
people and spiritually gave the^ drink, and not wythstanding their meat and
drink did prefygurate the body and blood of christ which the church does
^^^^^rate. Yet saint Paul affyrmeth that our fathers did eat the same
spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink.

A man will ask perauenture what he means by this word (the same) truly he
means that they did eat the same spiritual meat which the faithful
eats and drinks now a days in the church, we may not understand diverse
things, for christ is and was always on. And the same christ which fed the
people that ware the^ baptized in the deserte, in the cloud, and in the sea
with his flesh and his blood, fedeth now the people in the church of his
faithful with the bread of his body, and the water of his blood, this thing
the Apostel did plainly declare by that which follows, saying: they have
eaten the same spiritual meat and dronke^ the same spiritual drink They did
drink of the same spiritual stone followyng them and the stone was christ So
we understand that christ was in the spiritual stone in the deserte. And that
he gave the water of his blood to the people And afterward gave to us his
body which was borne of a virgyn and crucified for the health of the
faithful. And not only that we might be redemyd: but also that we might drink
thereof. It is a marvelous thing: that Christ all though he was
incu^prehensyble and inestimable And that he had not yt put upon him the nature
of man, had not yet tasted death for the health of the world, nor redemyd us
with his blood. For all that our fathers in the deserte by a spiritual meat and
an inuisyble drink, did eat his body and drink his blood. As the apostell
witnesses, saying: our fathers have eaten the same spiritual meat, and
dronken the same spiritual drink, here we cannot know by reason how this
thing was done. Yet to the doings faith must be adhibited for it is he truly
which by his omnipotente virtue turns the bread and the wine spiritually
into his flesh and his blood, and also which at the time made inuycyble the
manna that was given from heaven his body, and the water powered out of the
rock his blood The which David perceyuinge did protest in the holy ghost,
saying: man has eaten the bread of angels. It ware a fond thing to suppose
that this corporal manna given to our fathers, fedeth the heavenly host of
angels, or that they do eat any such meat which be rether fed with the
dayntyes of gods word The psalmyst declar^th plain or the holy ghost
rather speaks in the psalmyste, both what our fathers received in that
heavenly manna, and what the faithful ought to believe in the mystery of ye
body and blood of christ: in the both truly christ is signified, which is not
only the meat of angels, but also fedeth the souls of the faytfull. And
neither of these happen in corporal taste or feadyng, but in ye virtue of the
spiritual word, The eua^geliste teachet that Jesus christ before he suffered,
took bread gave thanks and distributed it to his apostles, saying: this is my
body which shall be given for you, do this in my remembrance. Likewise he took
the cup after he had supt, saying: this is the new testament in my blood,
which shall be shed for you. We se yt christ did work ye mystery of his body and
blood before he suffered. We dought not but every faythfyll man believes that
the bread was made the body of christ which he gave to his disciples,
saying: this is my body that is given for you. And also that the cup did
co^teyne the blood of christ, whereof he says, this cup is the new
testament in my blood that shall be shed for you. Therefore as he could turn
the substance of bread and the creature of wine into his proper body before he
dyed So could he in the deserte, turn the manna and the water of the rock
into his flesh and blood not wythstandinge that his flesh was hanged on the
cross for us. And his blood shed for us long after hear also we ought to
consider what is meant by these words, excepts you shall eat the flesh of the
son of man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in you. He said
not that his flesh which hanged on the cross should be eaten in pecys and
eaten of the Apostles, nor that his blood which he shed for the rede^ptio^ of
the world should be given his disciples to drink, for it ware a wicked thing,
if his flesh should be eaten or his blood dronke^ as the infydelles took it.
Therefore, he said to his disciples taking the words of christ not
unfaithfully, yt scarcely perceiving how the same was to be understand, these
doughtes offe^de Therefore if you shall se the son of man ascendynge thither
where as he was before As though he should say, you may not think my flesh
to be eaten of you corporally, or my blood to be drouken of you corporally,
neither that my flshe shall be divided into pecys for as much as after my
resurrection ye shall se me affende into heaven with the fulness of my holy body
and blood the^ ye shall well perceive that my flesh is not to be eaten of those
that believe as the infydels think, but that the bread and the wine changed by
a mysterye into the substance of my body and blood is to be received of the
faithful, he says also co^seque^tly. The sperite is he that quickens the
flesh profyteth nothing after any such sort as the unfaithful understand,
other wise it gives life as the faithful take it by a mysterye. And therefore
he says, ye sperite is he that quickens So in this mysterye of the body and
blood of Christ, here is a spiritual operacion geuyng life, with u^e the
which operacion the mysteryes be vnprofyatable for well may they feed the
body: but the soul they cannot Here springs a question, ^^e which proposed
some say that those things be done in verite, and not in mysterye wherein they
show them selves playn^lye to repungue against the wrytynges of the holy
fathers. Saint Austen the doctor of the church in the third of his book de
doctrina christ^ana writes thus Except you eat (says our savior) the
flesh of the son of man and drink his blood, you shall have no life in you,
He semyth to command a wicked thing, therefore it is a figure co^mandyng us to
be co^municators of his passion, surely also and profitable to peruerte in our
memories, that his flesh was ^o^dyd and crucified for our sakes Thus saint
Austen affyrm^th the mysterye of the body and blood of christ to be celebrate
of the faithful under a figure, for he says it is no point of religion but
rather of iniquite to take his flesh and his blood carnally, as they did
which understood not christ^s words spyry^uallye but carnallye and went back
therefore and departed from him. Among many things in his Epistle to bonyeface
he writes thus. Truly we use to say of times when Ester draw^th nere that
tomorowe or next day shall be the passion of the Lord: not wythstandyng he
suffered his passion many years before. Neither did he suffer but ons Also on
Easter day, we customably say this day the Lord has risen And it many
years has passyed in deed syns he rose. for saye^g this we should be reported
as shameful liars saving that we do name this after the sim^litude of the days
them selves, wherein the things were done So we may say this is the day,
though it be not the day it self in deed. But by the reuelacyon of time like
unto it. And so we say the thing is done this day for the celebracio^ of the
sacrament, which is not done this day in deed, but was done a great while
before was not christ once offered in him self? And yet in the sacrament, he is
offered to the faithful people, not only every Easter, but every day, nether is
he found a liar that answers to a man (askyng the question) that he is
offered For if the sacrament had not a certain sym^litude of those things
whereof they be sacraments they were no sacraments at all, for the lykenes
many times the sacraments take the names of the things the^ selves. Therefore
like as after a sort the sacrament of the body of christ, is the body of
christ, and the sacrament of ye blood of christ, is the blood of christ. So the
sacramet of faith is faith. Thus we perceive that saint Auste^ affyrmeth the
sacrament to be one thing, and the thing it self to be another thing, whereof
the sacrament is the body in the whyth christ suffered, and the blood which
flowed from his side are the things, but the mysteries of the^ (says he) be
the sacraments of the body and blood of christ, which are celebrated in
remembrance of christ's passion. Not only at every pascall sole^nite, but
every day in the year. And although there is but one body of the lord in the
which he suffered: and but one blood that was shed for the health of the
world, yet the sacraments of these things have taken there names, so that we
call the^ ye body and blood of christ for the similitudes of the things which
they signifye. So they be called after the same manner as the pascall feast and
the resurrection are which verelye be celebrated, and yet christ suffered but
once in him self, and rose again, nether can those days be revoked for they
are paste. The days in the which the memory of the lords passion and
resurrection be celebrated are named the self same days in which christ
suffered and rose, because they have a symilitude of the very same days in
deed. Wherefore we say, this day, tomorowe or next day is the resurrection of
the lord. Not withstandinge yt the day in the which be rose in deed, is many
years past. Do we say that the lord is offered, when the sacrament of his
body and blood be celebrated. Where as he was offered but ones in him self
for the health of the world. As the apostles says, christ suffered ones for
you, leaving an example that you might follow his fotesteppes. He does not say
that he suffers every day, which he did once. He has left us an example
which is daily presented to those which believe in the mystery of the body and
blood of christ. That whosoever shall come to it, may know that he ought to
be assocyate to his passions, whose Image he looks for in the holy mysteries
according to the saying of the wise man. Thou art come to the table of a
great man, attend deligently what things are set before the, knowing that
thou thy self must prepare like things. To come to ye table of a great man is
to be partaker of the lords souper The consyderation of the things set before
the is the intellygence of the body and blood of christ. Wherefore whosoever is
partaker, let him know that he ought to prepare like things. That is to say,
he must imitate christ in dyenge with him, the remembrance of whose death he
acknowledges, not only in beleuinge, but also in tastynge.

Furthermore saint Paul says to the Ebrews: yt was meet that we should have
such a bishop. That is to say, holy Innocent, without spotte segregate from
sinners, and higher then the heavens, which shall not need as the other
bishops, daily to offer for his own sins, and after for the sins of the
people. This our Lord Jesus christ has done in offering him self once,
and that which he did once, he does now daily frequent, once he offered him
self for the sins of the people, the same oblacio^ is daily celebrate among
the faithful: but it in a misterye, for that which christ has once fulfilled
in offering him self is daily done in the church in the remembrance of his
passion by the celebracio^ of mysteryes. Neither it is falsely said, that the
Lord is offered, or that he suffers in ye mysteries, for as much as they have
the symilitude of his death and passion whereof they be representatio^s.
Wherefore the mysteries be named the body and blood of christ, because they
take the appellation of things whereof they be sacraments.

Saint Ysodore in hye book wherein he entreteth of the true sygnificatio^ of
words, says yt a sacrifyce is an holy thing done, or the doing of an holy
thing, for by a mystical prayer it is consecrate in the remembrance of the
Lords passion. Therefore he commands us to call it the body and blood of
christ, And though it be made of the fruits of the earth, it is sanctified and
made a sacrament by the inuysible working of the holy ghost. The grecia^s do
call this sacrament, eucharistia, that is by interpretacio^. good grace, and
what is better then the body and blood of christ The bread and the wine
truly are comparyd to the body and blond of christ. Because that as the
vysyble substance of bread and wine does norysh and inebriate the externe man,
so the word of god (which is the lively bread) by his perticipatio^ does
recreate the minds of the faithful. And this catholic teaches that the same
mystery of the Lords passion must be done for us in the remembrance of the
same. Thus he declares that ye Lords passion was once done, and that the
memory of it is represented in the solemnicies of holy things. Wherefore the
bread which is made of the fruits of the ground is transposyd whiles he is
sanctified into the body of christ. And the wine that flows out of the
grape by the sanctificacio^ of the godly mysterye, is made the blood of
christ, not visybly: but after the mind of this present doctor through the
operation of the holy ghost, wherefore they are called the body and blood of
Christ and so taken, not because they do so appear externely: but for that they are so made by the work of the holy gooste, and for that they be an other thing
by the inuysyble power, the^ vysyble they seem to be. He makes a distinction
whiles he says. The bread and the wine be comparyd to the body and blood of
christ. Because that as the substance of the visyble bread wine does inebriate
and norysh the externe man, so the word of god which is the lively bread (by
the participacion of it) does refreshe and recreate the minds of the
faithful. Herein he confesses very plainly, that what externe thing soever we
receive, it is accommodate to the refection of the body: but the word of god
which is the invisible bread being in the sacrament inuisyble, by this
participacion in quyckening the minds of the faithful feadeth the^. Also the
same doctor says: a sacrament is in some celebracion, when the thing is so
done that it may he understand to sygnyfye some what which is to be taken
with holiness, by this he declares, yt any sacrament in holy things conteyneth
some secret and yt teaching which appears visible and yt which we ought to
perceive inuysyble be diverse. Afterward he declares what sacraments are to
be celebreate among the faithful, that is the sacrament of baptysme and of
the body and blood of Christ which are called sacraments for that a deuyne
virtue does secretly work the health received in them under the cover of
corporal things. Wherefore they be called sacraments, of secret or holy
virtue. He says also that a mystery by his sygnifycacio^ is that which has
an hyd, and secret disposycion. Here in we be taught that the body and blood
of christ be called mysteries, because they have an hid and and secret
disposicion. That is to say, a sacrament has one thing which he does
externely and plainly declare and on other thing which works inuysyble.
They be called sacraments, for that a godly virtue does secretly dispose the
health of them which faithfully take them under the cover of corporal things
Hither to have we declared that the body and blood of Christ which are
received in the church by the mouths of the faithful be fygures after the
vysyble form, but after the invisible substance that is to say through the
power of gods word they be the very body and blood of christ, Therefore by
the visible creatures they feade and noryshe the body, but by the virtue of
the more excellent substance they feade and sanctifye the mind of the
faithful.

FINIS.
The second question follows.
NOw let us consider the second question. Whether ye same body yt was borne of
marie, that sufferd dyed was buried and sytteth on ye right hand of ye father,
be ye body which ^s daily received in the church by ye mouths of the faithful
in the mystery of the sacrament or no. etc. Saint Ambros in the first book of
sacraments says Truly it is a marvelous thing that god did rain ma^na from
heaven for our fathers, and that they ware daily fed with heavenly
norysheme^tes, Wherefore it is said man has eaten the bread of angels. But if
al they which eat bread in the deserte are dead. This meat (...) which thou
receyueste. This lively bread which has discendyd from heaven does myn^ster
ye substance of everlasting life. And who so eats of this bread shall never
dye for it is the body of christ Se how this doctor calls the body of christ
meat which the faithful receive in the church. This bread says he which
has discendyd from heaven, does minister the substance of everlasting life,
not that which is seen corporally receyuyd, pressed with teeth swalowed with
throat, and sent down into the belie, does mynister the substance of
everlasting life. For by this (...) feadeth the flesh which shall dye. Neither
can it mynister any incorrupcion. In this respect truly we can not say who
soever shall eat this bread shall never dye, for that which the body receives
is corruptible, and cannot by any mean bring to pass that the body may live
ever, for whatsoever is subject to corrupcion can give no eternyte, Therefore
in that bread there is life which appears not to our corporal ey^, but that
is looked upon with the aspects of our faith, that is the lively bread indede
that descended from heaven and of the which it is truly spoken. Whosoever
eats this bread shall never dye, which is the body of christ. Also in the
consequences, where he speaks of the omnipote^r virtue of christ, he says
thus, the word of christ, which could make of nothing that which was not,
is able to change those things which be into that thing which they were not,
for it is harder to give new things, then to change natures. Saint ambrose
says in the mystery of the body and blood of christ there is a co^mutacio^
made marueloously, for it is made by an incomprehensyble manner, let the^ say
here which esteem not the secret virtue: but the whole which appears visyble,
how and in what point here happens co^mutacio^, for after ye substance of the
creatures, they be even the same things after the consecration, that they were
before. For before the consecration they were bread and wine, and after they
appear to remain in the same kind still. Therefore the mutacio^ is made
internely by the power of the holy ghost, which only faith looks upon, Which
feadeth the soul and mynistreth the substance of everlasting life. He says
also, why do thou seek for the order of nature here in the body of christ,
saying he was bor^e of a virgyn being both god and man beyond the course of
nature. Here also ryseth the hearer and affyrmeth the body of christ to be
that which is se^e, and the blood which is drunk Say^nge that he ought not
to inquire how it is made: but to believe that it is made: He appears to think
well, but if he consider delygently the nature of words, he shall pereceyue he
says not the thing which he believes. For if he might say I se the body
and blood of Christ he could not say I believe the body and blood of christ,
to be there, Now for as much as faith looks on the hole, whatsoever it be,
and the eye of the flesh apprehends no thing, he shall understand that the
body and blood or christ be not in the form but in virtue. Wherefore he
says that the order of nature is not to be looked for, but the power of Christ
to be worshypped which does create what soever he list, and changes that
thing which is create into some what that it was not before, at his pleasure,

The same auctor says, that was the true and very flesh which was
crucyfyed and buried. Truly therefore of the same flesh the sacrament ^s, the
Lord says this is my body. How dyligently and how wisely has he made a
distinction, where he says touching the flesh which was crucified and
buried. This is the true flesh of Christ, but touching that which is
received in the sacrament, he says, this is the sacrament of the true
flesh, so deuydinge the sacrament of the flesh, from the very flesh for
asmoche as he said in the very flesh which he took of the vyrgyne marye, he
was crucyfyed and buried.

But he affyrmeth the mysterye which is done in the church to be the
sacrament of the very flesh in the which Christ suffered, instructynge the
faithful, that the flesh in the which Christ suffered and was crucified and
buried, is not a mysterye, but the very natural flesh. But this flesh
which now conteyneth the symylytude of the very flesh in mystery, is not
flesh in kind, nor in for me, but in Sacrament.

For in kind it is bread and in Sacrament the true body of Christ* As the
LORD cries this is my body. Also he says further, that the holy ghooste
has other wise expressed this, saying, What shall we eat, or what shall we
drink. Mat. v. Also by his Prophet, saying, Taste and se for the LORD is
sweet, blessed is that man which trusts in him.

Do you think that this bread tasted corporallye? or this wine dronken
corporally? can you declare how sweet the bread is? whatsoever sauoureth is
corporal and declares the body sense. Shall we think to taste the LORD, is
to feade any corporal thing? Therefore the spiritual taste byddyth us to
prove the sauer, and in that bread and that drink to opynyonate nothing
corporally, but to feale the hole spiritually, for the LORD truly is a
sperite. He says further in the Sacrament is Christ. For the body of
Christ is there: but he does not say that the wine or the bread is Christ,
For if he should say so (as God forbydde he should) then he must pronounce
the body of Christ to be corporal. And subject to mortalite for what soever
is perceived and tasted in that meat corporally is subject to corruption, he
adds these words, (or it is the body of Christ.

Therefore peradventure a man will say, lo he does manyfestelye confess the
bread and the wine to be the body of Christ. But take heed how it is added,
for it is no corporal meat but a spyrytuall meat. Therefore you shall not
adhybit the sense of the flesh. For nothing is perceived here after that
sense.

There is the body of Christ how be it not corporal but spiritual. The
blood of Christ is there, how be it not corporal but spiritual. Therefore
nothing here is to be judged corporally. Here is the body of Christ, but not
corporally. Here is the blood of Christ but not corporally. He says further
wherefore the apostel speaking of the figure of this sacrament, says our
fathers have eaten the same spiritual meat, and dronken the same spiritual
drink, for the body of christ is a spiritual body the body of christ is
the body of the deuyne spirit. For christ is a sperite as we read
lamentationu^ l 4 ^0 Spiritus ante facia^ nostram xp^s dominus. He has taught
us most plainly how we ought to understand the mysterye of the body and
blood of christ what he said, that our fathers did eat the spiritual meat,
and drink the spiritual drink, notwythstandynge that the manna which they
eat, and the water which they drunk were corporal things, he a^dyth of the
mysteryes which is now celebrate in the church, defynynge how it is the body
of christ. The body of god says he, is a spiritual body. Also god is
christ, and the body which he took of the virgyn marye, in the which he
suffered, in the which he was buried, in the which he rose again was the very
and the true body, and the same remained visyble and palpable, but the body
which is called the mysterye of god is not corporal, but spiritual, it is not
visyble nor palpable. To this does saint ambrose adioyne saying, the body of
Christ is the body of the deuyne sperite, and a deuyne sperite is not
corporal corruptyble ne palpable, but this body which is celebrate in the
church through his vysyble vynde is corruptable and palpable. How then is it
calied the body of the deuyne spirit? Verily in the respect that it is
spiritual. That is to say inuisyble and inpalpable, and therefore
incorruptable, he says because Christ is a spirit, as we read Spiritus ante
facia^ nostra^ christus dominus. He shows manyfestlye by what mean the body
of Christ is had, that is to say by the reason that the sperite of Christ
is in it, that is the power of gods word, which does not only feade the
soul but also purges it. Wherefore the auctor consequentely says. This meat
co^formeth our hearts, and this drink makes glad the heart of man as the
prophet has mencyon^d, is it not corporal meat think you which confyrmeth
the heart of man or corporal drink which exhiliarate man's heart? but that he
might show: what meat or what drink he speaks of, (he has added this
meat, and this drink, what meat does he mean? or what drink? Verily the
blood of Christ, the body of the deuyne sperite. And to speak plainly, the
sperite of whom it is read. Spiritus ante faciam nostram xp^s, dominus In all
this things it is evident, that we must take nothing in this meat or this
drink corporally: but that the hole must be attendyd spiritually. For the
soul with in this place is sygnyfyed by the heart of man, is not fed with
corporal meat or corporal drink: but nurysshed it is and made strong with
the word of God. Which thing this same doctor affyrmeth more pl^ynlye in the
first book of the sacraments, saying: The bread which goes into our bodies,
is not the bread which mynystreth substance to our souls, but the bread of
everlasting life. And the lesson followyng declares most plainly, that
saint Ambrose did not mean here the rome^ bread but the bread of the body
of Christ. For he does speak of the daily bread which the faithful
desires to be given them. And therefore he addyth, if it be daily bread, why
doeste thou take it but ons in the year? as the grecyans were wount in the
ester. Take therefore that which may daily profytt the and live so that thou
may desire to take it daily. Therefore it is virtue: And it is clean
another thing which is sen^ externly from that which is believed in the mystery
Moreover the flesh of christ that was crucified, did not show one thing out
wardly, and was an other thing inwardely, for it was the very flesh of man,
and a body consystynge in the kind of a very body. We must also consydre, that
in the bread, not only the body of christ is fygured, but also the body of the
beleuyng people. For as the bread is made of many graynes of wheat, so the
body of the faithful people, is augemented with many of those that believe,
by the word of christ. Wherefore as in the mysterye the bread is taken for the
body of christ, so likewise the members of the beleuinge people in christ, be
intinuate in the same mysterye. And as the bread is the body of the faithful
men, not corporally but spiritually So we must necessarely understand, that
the same is the body of christ, not corporally, but spiritually Likewise in the
wine which ^s called the blood of christ, water is myxte, and the one is
permytted without the other. For as the people can not be without Christ, nor
christ without the people: so the head cannot be without the body nor the
body without the head. The water in this sacrament, bears the Image of the
people. Therefore if that the wine sanctified by the office of the mynister,
were corporally changed into the blood of Christ: then the water which is
myxte with it, should necessarely be changed corporally into the blood of he
faithful people. For where as is one sanctifica^yon, there is consequently one
operacion: and whereas is like reason, there is like mysterye. But we se that
nothing is changed in the water corporally: ^herfore it follows, that
nothing is changed corporally in the (...): what soever is signified in the
water of the people, is taken spiritually: therefore we must nedis take
spiritually, whatsoever is intinuate in the wine of the body of christ.
Moreover things which do dyffer, be not all one. The body of christ that
dyed, rose again, and was immortal, dies no more, death shall no more bear
rule over it, for it is eternal and shall suffer no more. But that which is
celebrate in the church is temporal, not eternal, corruptible, not
incorruptible, in the way, not in our country Therefore they dyffer and be not
all one, and if they be not all one how is it called the body of christ and the
very blood? For if it be the very body of christ, and be called the same:
Truly because it is the body of christ, it is the body of christ in verite,
that is to say. If it be the very body of christ, then it is ye body of christ
incorruptyble and inpassyble, and by that eternal. Therefore by this reason,
the body of christ which is celebrate in the church, must neades be
incorruptible, and eternal: but we can not deny that thing to be corruptible,
which is divided in pieces, broken with our tethe, and goes into the belie: but
that is one thing which is done externly, and that an other which is believed by
faith, whatsoever the senses attain unto, is corruptible, and that which faith
believes is incorruptible, Therefore that which appears outwardly, is not the
thing it self, but an Image of the thing, but that which is perceived and
understande in the mind, is the very thing. Therefore Saint Austen speaking
of the body and blood of christ in the exposicyon of the gospel of S. Ihon
sayet^ thus. Moses did eat manna, Aaron did eat (...) did eat, and many moo
did eat which pleased god, and they dyed not Why? Uerelye because they
vnd^^stode the visyble meat spirituallye, they filled them selves
spirituallye, We also do receive now the visible meat, yet the sacrament is
one thing and the virtue of the sacrament an other, he says also. This is the
bread which descended from heaven Manna did signifye this bread, the altar
of god did sign^fye this bread, these ware sacraments, and diverse in their
fygures, yet in the thing which is signified, they were like, Here the
apostle Paul. I would not have you ignoraunte, o brethren (says he) that our
fathers were under a cloud, and al they passed over the sea, and all were
baptized in moses in the cloud, and in the sea, and all they did eat the
same spiritual meat, and all they did drink the same spiritual drink,
therefore they did eat the same spiritual meat that we do, for there
corporal meat was an other thing, they did eat manna, we eat an other
thing, yet their spiritual meat was all one with ours, he addith, and all
they did drink on spiritual drink. In the visible kind our drink and
they^is were diverse: yet in the spiritual virtue, they did both signifye one
thing. How did they drink the same? They drunk (says he) of the spiritual
stone following them, and the stone truly was christ from whence they had the
bread, from whence they had the drink: the stone was christ in a figure, the
very christ is in flesh and blood. Further this is the bread discendynge from
heaven, that if any man eat of it he shall live for ever: but it is that which
pertains to the virtue of the sacrament, and not the visyble sacrament it
self. And he shall live which eats within and not he yt eats without,
which eatethe in his heart, and not yt braketh with his touthe. He says also
repetynge the words of out savior: this does offend you, because I say, I
give my flesh to be eaten of you, and my blood to be dro^ke^. Therefore if you
shall se: he son of man asce^dyng where he was first. What means this? Here he
dissolved yt which moved the^. Here he disclosed wherefore they were offended.
They thought that he would have spent his body among the^ But he said yt he
would ascend hole into heaven. Wha^ ye se the son of man, asce^dyng where he was
first: truly then ye shall se, yt he will not bestow his body so as ye
santifye yt he will. Verily ye shall understand yt his grace is not consumed
by morsels. Also he says him self. The spirit is he yt quyckeneth: ye flesh
profyteth nothing. The words yt I have spoken to you (says christ) be
spirit and life: that is to say, they are spiritually to be understand. Thou
have understand spiritually: they be spirit and life unto the. Thou have
understand carnally? they be spirit and life: but not to ye Thus we are
taught, by ye auctorite of this doctor, in treating of the words of ye lord,
touchi^g the sacrame^te of his body and blood: yt those words of christ are
to be understand spiritually, and not carnally. As he says, the words which
I spoke to you be spirit and life: he means ye words yt he spoke concerning
the eating of his flesh, and ye drink of his blod: where with the apostles were
offended. Therefore lest they should be offended still, ye ^euyne master calls
the^ again from the flesh to the spirit: from ye corporal visyon to ye
invisible intelligence. We se therefore, after what manner the meat of ye body
of ye lord: and the drink of his blod be his very body and his very blod.
Verily i^ the respect yt they be spirit and life: things that be al one be
comprehended in one definicion: It is said of the very body of christ, that he
is very god and very man: god yt was borne of the father before the beginning:
man that was borne in the later days of ye virgyn mary. Seeing that these
things cannot be said of the body of christ which is in the church by a
mysterye: it is known to be the body of christ, but after a certain manner:
this manner is in figure, and in Image, that the verite and the thing it, self
may be perceived in the prayers which are said after the mysterye, of the
body and blood of christ, to the which the people say amen. Thus it is
pronunced, with the voice of the priest: we taking the pledge of everlasting
life desire most humbly, that we may receive with manifest participacion, that
thing which we touch in the Image of the sacrament. Thus they be the pledge
and the Image of an other thing, that is to say, they respect an other thing
and not the^ selves A pledge is of that thing, for the which it is given. An
Image is an Image, of that thing whose symilitude it shows These do sygnifye
the things whereof they be, but they do not manifestly show them, saying: it is
so, it appears that this body and blood, are the pledge and the Image of the
thing to come: that ye thing it self, which is now showed by a symilitude
may here after be reveled manyfestly. And if they signifye that thing now which
here after shall be manyfeste: doutles it is one thing which is done now, and
an other that shall be manifest in time to come. Wherefore that which is
celebrated of the church, is the body and blood of christ: but it is a
pledge, and as an Image, the very body shall be seen: when no Image and pledge
shall appear, but the verite of the thing it self. This also is another
prayer which is used about the sacrament, Make perfyte in us good lord we
beseech the that that thing which the sacrament does conteyne, that we may
take those things in verite, which at this time we take in figure He says
that these things be done in figure and not in verite. That is by a
symilitude, and not by the manifestacyon of the thing it self. The figure and
the verite do dyffer between them selves. Wherefore the body and blood that be
now celebrate in the church, do dyffer from the body and thy blood which ar
now known to be glorified, by the resurrection, this body is the pledge, and
the figure the other is the very natural body. This we celebrate unto such
time as we may come to the other: and after that we shall come to it, the
sacrame^tall body shall be removed now we se, that these too bodies differ
as much the one, from the other: as the pledge does from the thing for which
it is left, and as the image differs from the thing, wherefore it is the
ymage^ and as the figure differs from the verite, thus it is plain, that the
mysterye of the body and blood of christ, which is received of the faithful:
in the church: differs from the said body, that was borne of marye the
virgyn, that suffered and was buried, that rose again, ascended into heaven,
and sytteth on the right hand of the father. For this which is celebrate in
the way must be spiritually understand, for faith believes that thing which
he sees not, and that fedeth the soul spiritually, makes glad the heart,
gives everlasting life, and incorruption. Whiles no head is taken to the
thing, that fedeth the body, that is pressed with the teeth, that is broken in
pecys: but that thing, which is taken in faith spiritually, but that body in
the which christ suffered, and rose again, is his proper body taken of the
virgyne marye, palpable, and visyble: ye: after his resurrection he says to
his disciples. Why be you troubled, and why do fantises occupy your hearts?
look upon my fete and my hand for I am he, grope and see, for a spryte has no
flesh, nor bones as ye se that I have. Let us also here what saint fulgencius
says in his book of faith, believe steadfastly and doubt not, but the only
beggotte^ son of god, the word was made flesh, and that he offered him
self for us, as a sacrifice to god, in the order of swetnes: unto who^ with
the father and the holy ghost, the patriarchs, ye prophets, the priests of the
old testament, did sacrifice beasts, and unto who^ with the father and the
holy ghost, with who^ he has like deuynite: the holy universal church through
out all the world^, seaseth not in faith, and charity, now to offer the
sacrafice of bread and wine. In those fleshely sacrifyces, was the
significacio^ of the flesh of christ, which he offered for our sins: and a
significacion of the blood that he shede, for the remission of our sins but
in sacrifice of bread and wine, is the action of thanks, and the
co^memoracio^ of the flesh of christ, that he offered for us and of the blood
that he shed for us Whereof of Saint Paul speaks in the acts of the
apostles saying: take heed to you and your universal flock, in the which
the holy gooste has made you byshopes, to govern the church of god, that he
has acquyred with his blood, therefore in the former sacr^fyces, it was
sygnifyed figuratyuely what should be given us, and in this it is euydently
showed, what is given us already, for as much as he says, that in ye former
sacrifyces, it was sygnifyed what should be given us, and in this sacrifice, we
remember what is given us already. He declares, that as the sacrifices of the
old law, was fygures of the thing that was it to com^: so this sacryfice is
a figure of the thing which is already past. By these words he has most
plainly showed, how much difference is between the body in which christ
suffered: and the body which is celebrate in the remembrance of his passion,
and death, for the body wherein he suffered, is the proper and the very body
having no mystery nor figure in him. But this is a mystycall body, shewying
one thing externely by a figure, and representyng an other thing internly
through the intellec^io^ of faith. Yt let us add an other testymoney of saint
Austen that shall both affirm our words, and fynyshe our oracion. In the
sermon that he made to the people, touching the sacrament of the alter, he
says thus. The thing which you se in the alter of god, was seen of you the
last night, but what it is, or what it means, or of how^ great a thine it
conteyneth the sacrament ye have not it heard The thing which you se is bread
and wine, and that your ^^^s do argue: but as your faith requires to be
instruct the bread is the body of christ, and the wine his blood it is
quyckely said, that faith perauenture is sufficient: but faith doughtles,
neadeth instruction. Esa. ^vi. says. Except ye believe, ye shall not
understand. Therefore you may say unto me, sir ye have commanded us to
believe: now expound to us, how we may understand, such a cogitacio^ may
rise in some man's mind. Ye know that our Lord Jesus took his flesh of the
virgyn marye, that he being an infant did socke, and was noryshed, and growed
to a man's age, and brought to persecution of the Jews, suffered, and upon a
cross was killed, and taken from the cross, was buried and rose again the
third day, and at his pleasure ascendyd unto heaven, and carried his body
thither from whence he shall come to judge the quycke, and dead, and there is
he now syttyng of the right hand of the father, how therefore is the bread
his body and the wine his blood? these good brethren be called sacraments,
because that one thing is seen in the^ and an other understand, that which is
seen, has a corporal form, and that which is not seen has a spiritual
fruit. In these words, thy worshypfull auctor instructyng us, what we ought to
think of the proper body of the Lord, that was borne of marye, and sytteth
now on the right hand of the father, in the which he shall come to judge the
quycke and the dead. Also what we ought to think of the body set on the
alter, whereof the people be partakers, the very body is hole, and not divided
with any sectio^, neither covered with any fygures: but this body set on the
table of the Lord is a figure, because it is a sacrament. And the externe
thing which is seen, has a corporal form that feadeth the body: but the
interne thing which is understand, has a spiritual fruit that quyckeneth
the soul, and he willing to speak more plainly and manyfestly of the
mystical body, says thus, if you will understand the body of the Lord,
hear the Apostell saying you be the body of christ And the members.
Therefore if ye be the body of christ, and the members of christ, your
mysterye is contained in the Lords souper, you take the mysterye of the lord,
and unto that thing which you your selves be, you answre ame^. And in answryng,
you subscrybe, therefore thou hear the body of christ and thou answrest
amen. Be thou a member of the body of christ that that the amen may be true.
and wherein, in bread we will speak nothing or our own heads, but hear
the Apostell. We being many (says he) are one bread, and one body, etc.
Therefore Saint Augustyne has taught us, that as the body of Christ is
sygnyfyed in the bread which is on the alter, so is the body of the people
that receives it, Also he has evidently showed, that the proper body of
christ, is that body in the which he was borne of the virgyn marye, in the
which he sucked in the which he suffered, in the which he dyed, and was buried
in the which he rose and ascended into heaven, in the which he sytteth of the
right hand of the father and in the which he shall come again to judgment.
But this which is set on the lords table, conteyneth the mysterye of the very
body: even as it does of the mysterye of the beleuyng people. For the appostle
says. We being maney, are one bread and one body.

YOUR wisdom (most excellent prince) may perceive, that I have prouyd by the
testimonies of holy scryptures, and of the holy fathers: that the bread which
is called the body of christ, and the cup called his blood, is a figure
because it is a mysterye. And that there is no small dyfference, between the
mystycall body, and ye body that suffered, was buried and rose again. For
this which suffered, is the proper body of our savior. Neither in it is any
figure, or signifycacion: but the manifestacyon of the thying it self is
known. And the visyon of it should be desired of the faithful. For after we
shall se it, your desire shall be accomplyshed, for he and the father be all
one, and not in the respect of our saviors body: but in the respect of the
fulness of deuinite, that dwellethe in the man christ, But in this mystycall
body is a figure, not only of the proper body of christ: but also of the
people beleuyng in christ. For doutles it bears the figure both of the body
of christ that suffered and rose again, and of the people borne again by
baptysme and made alive from the death of si^ne. Let us add also that the
bread and the wine, named the body and blood of christ: do represent the
memory of the lords passion and death For he says in the gospel. Do this
in my remembrance. the which paul expounds: saying So often as ye eat of
this bread and drink of this wine, you shall show the death of ye lord till
he come. Thus we be taught both of christ and of paul, that the bread and the
wine set on the altar, are set for a figure or a memory of the lords death,
that it may put us in remembrance in the time present, what has been done
in time past, that we made myndfull of his passion, may be made also partakers
of the godly reward, by the which we are delivered from death. Knowing that
after we shall once come to the visyon of christ, we shall have no nide of
such instruments, by the which we are put in remembrance what christ has
suffered for us. For we lokynge on him face to face. shall not be admonyshed by
an externe admonicion of temporal things: but by the contemplacyon of the
truth it self. Yet we may give thanks to the auctor of our health ^t you shall
not think for all this, that the body and blood of the lord is not received
of the faithful in the mysterye of the sacrament saying that faith receives
not the thing looked upon with our eyes, but that which is believed. For the
meat is spiritual, and the drink is spiritual, feadyng the soul
spiritually and gives the life of everlasting secret: as our savior says
The spirit is he that quyckeneth, the flesh profyteth nothing. W^^^les I
have indeuered to obey the commandment of your excellencye. I a man of small
importancye, have presumed to dispute of no small things: yt not following the
presumptyon of mine own estimacyon or Judgment But the authority of the old
fathers, if it happen yt you approve these things as catholyke, it must be
imputed to be merytes of our faith, which was not ashamed (the glory of your
regal magnifice^ce laid away for a time) to ask a responce of the truth, of
a poor man: but if they please you not: let it be imputed to my folyshnes it
could not with efficacye explicate that thing which you desired.

FINIS.
Imprynted at London in saint Andrews paryshe in the waredropt, by Thomas
Raynalde, and Anthony Kyngstone.


