A Copy of a challenge, taken out of the confutation of M. Iuells sermon made
by John Rastell.

Imprinted at Antwerp by Aegidius Die, xx. Ianuarij. Anno M.D. LXV. CVM
PRIVILEGIO.

A CONCLUSION TO THE READER, WITHDRAW a challenge annexed.
THVS much unto a singular Frind. but, to take my leave of the also (Reader),
and to shutt up all this matter, with some coclusion well worth the
remembering, I think it very good and profitable, to set forth also a solemn
challenge, thereby to geaue owr adversaries an occasion, to show forth their
Scriptures, Counsels, Doctors, etc, and to declare their deep knowledge in
answering for the^ selves, whose art we have experience of, in deuysing of
objections against other. Which enterprise and ventering of mine, as it will be
most subject unto their eye, and consequently unto their prying and examyning:
so have I taken unto me, the counsel of a perfect wise man, and well practiced,
which has tawght me, how to proceed against them, that I need not to mistrust
my boldness. For thus he says in his book of Proverbs, a book of good
authority and instruction, Do not answer a fool Prouer. 26
according to his folishnes, least thou be made like unto him.

And in the next sentence following: Answer (says he) a fool according unto
his folishnes, that he may not seem to himself to be wise. To follow now
therefore, this duble and good counsel, of not aunswering, and yet aunswering a
fool, I will set forth vuto the (Reader) two challenges, to play the fool
with a fool in the first of the^, that he may behold his artificial
wisdom: and in the second, not to agree with him in his folly, because I will
refuse his ways and order. But how may one answer a fool according unto his
folly, or what hope is there of any vantage, if that way be taken with him?
Marie, like as some madd men (I have heard say) have been meetlie well browght
to themselves, when an other has stared and gaped upon them, all
counterfaicting an owtragiouse behauyor: so vndowbtedlie against fond
questions, it is a profitable way of replying, to putt the like again unto
madd adversaries, and cawse them to behold the absurdity. For, as the fault
which an other makes, does more sensibly appear unto us, then the like of
owr own using, thowgh owrselues be nearest to owrselues: so, to declare the
absurdity of the challenge, which M. Iuell with much opinion of wisdom
pronounced against all Catholykes: let one of a like proportion to his, be
made forth unto him, that he may consider, the well fauorednes of his own
work, when the like example of it, shall greatly mislyke him. Now, if there
were not so good lykelyhode and reason, why this counterfaicted challenge (so
to call it) should be uttered profitablie: yet the wyseman so plainly either
counselling or licensing us, To answer a fool according to his foolishnes,
his authority is sufficient inowgh for me, to bear me out in this my doing,
and to say, that, if I play the fool, yowr example M. Iuell has moved me
unto it. I say therefore:

1 If any learned man of all our adversaries, or if all the learned men that be
alive, be able to bring any one sufficient sentence, out of any old Catholic
doctor or father, or out of any old general Council, or out of the holy
Scriptures of God, or any one example of the primitive church, whereby it may be
clearlie and plainly proved, that there was any dry communion in the whole
world at that time, for the space of six hundred years after Christ: 2 Or that
there should be no celebration of the Lord his supper: except there be a good
number to communicate with the priest, that is, four or three persons at the
least, though the whole parisshe have but twenty of discretion in it: 3 Or
that any Bishop then did swear by his honor, when, in his visitation abroad
in the country, he should warrant his promise to some poor prisoner priest
under him: 4 Or that any bagpipers, horsecorsers, gailers, or alebastars, were
admitted then in to the clergy without good and long trial of their
conversion: 5 Or that any Bishop then, refused to wear a white rochet, or to
be distincted from the laity, by some honest priestlie apparel: 6 Or that any
Bishopp then, not satisfied with the prisonyng of his adversaries, did cry out
and call upon the princes, not disposed that way, to put them yet to most
cruel death: 7 Or that the communion table (if any then were) was remoueable
up and down, hither and thither, and brought at any time in to the lower
parts of the church, there to exequute the Lord his supper: 8 Or that any
communion was said upon good fridaie: 9 Or that Gloria in excelsis should be
song after the communion: 10 Or that the Sacrament was ministered then, some
time in loeuebread, some time in wafers, and in those rather without the name
of Jesus, or the sign of the cross, then with it: 11 Or that Quicunque vult
and Creed of Athanasius was appointed to be song only upon high days and
principal feasts: 12 Or that at the communion time the minister should wear
a cope, and at all other service a surples only, or, as in some places it is
used, nothing at all, besides his common apparel: 13 Or that the words of
Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 11. should be ordinarily readen at the time of
consecration: 14 Or that they used a common and profane cup at the communion,
and not a consecrated and hallowed: 15 Or that a solemn curse should be used
upon Asshewensdaye: 16 Or that a procession about the fields was used in the
rogation week, to know therebie, rather the bounds and borders of every
lordeshipp, then to move God to mercy, and styr men's hearts to devotion: 17 Or
that any Bishopp then, gathered beneuole^ce of his clergy, to marye his
daughter to a gentle man or mercha^t, or to help him, in the setting up of his
howsehold: 18 Or that the man should put the wedding ring upon the fourth
finger of the left hand of the woman, and not of the right hand of her, as it
has been many hundred years continued: 19 Or that any man then did read it in
open schools, or preach it out of pulpites, or set it forth in print, that
Saint Peter was never at Rome: 20 Or that in the time of contagious plagues,
when, for fear of the infection, none will communicate with the sick person,
the minister might alonelie communicate with him, with out breach of Christ
his institution, and that the decree (of no communion to be made withowt three
at the least) should in such cases be forgoten: 21 Or that the people then,
were called together to morning prayer by ringing of a bell:
If any man alive be able to prove any of these articles, by any one clear, or
plain clause, or sentence, either of the Scriptures, or of the old Doctors,
or any old general Council, or by any example of the primitive church, I
promise, that I will geaue over, and subscribe unto him in that point. And of
this, I for my part, will not only not call in any point (being well assured
of the truth therein) but also will lay more matter to it. Wherefor beside
all that I have said already, I will say further, and yet nothing so much, as
might be said, If any one of our adversaries be able clearlie and plainly to
prove, by such authority of the scri ptures, the old Doctors, and Councels, as
I said before,

22 That the Bishopp of Rome was called Antichrist within the first.vjC. years
after Christ: 23 Or that the people was then tawght to believe that the force
and strength of their faith, made Christ his body present to them in the
Sacrament, and not any virtue of words and consecration: 24 Or that the
residue of the Sacrament vnreceaued, was taken of the priest or the parish
clark, to spread there young childerns butter therevppon, or to serve their own
to the with it, at their homely table: 25 Or that who so had said, in the
Sacrament is the true and real body of Christ and not a figurative body only
or mistical, should ben therefore judged a papist, and brought up before high
commissioners: 26 Or that it was lawful then to have but one communion, in one
church, in one day: 27 Or that images were then, cut, hewed, mangled, and
reviled, though it were answered that they are not holden for Gods or
Saints, but kept only for memorial sake of Christ him self or any of his
faithful: 28 Or that Bishopes then, threw down Christ and his saints
images, and set up their own, their wives, and their childernes pictures, in
their open chambers and parlors: 29 Or that our Savior in his last supper
delivered his body, to many more then his twelve Apostels: 30 Or that Judas
Machabeus in causing sacrifice to be offered for the dead, added in that point
unto the law, and offended God, and is no more to be followed in that doing,
then Loath and David are in their incest and adultery: 31 Or that a Bishopp
being a virgin at taking his office, did afterward yet commendablie, take a
wife (so to call an harlot) unto him: 32 Or that after the first wyfes death,
which he had before holy orders received, any priest took a second or third
unto him, with a toties quoties the later wife departing left him in hott fiery
passions, that he needed an other to cool him: 33 Or that any preacher of
those days, moved young men and women in open Lutherus in Postillis
sermons not to blushe or be ashamed of desyering the one the other, no more
then they would be ashamed of spetting or any such natural actio^: 34 Or that
it was at those days the right way to knowledge, every man to read by him self
the Scriptures, and neglect all kind of tradition: 35 Or that the lent, or
friday, was to be fasted, for civil policy, and not for any devotion: 36 Or
that Palmesonday was solemnised without bearing of bows conmonly called
palmebowes: Or that Christmassdaye, was without a mass, or asshewensday
without ashes, or Candelmasdaye without bearing of Candels: 37 Or that the
Nativity of S. Ihon Baptist was kept holy and the Eve fasted, and neither the
nativity neither the assumption of owr blessed lady kept holy, with a special
fast upon the Eues: 38 Or that they did pray unto God upon the feast of S.
Michael, saying (grawnt that owr liffe may be defended on earth by them, by
whom, thou art always waited upon in heaven) and nevertheless tawght the
people, that it was injurious to Christ and his mediation, to ask for help at
any others hands, then his: 39 Or that they should use the sign of the cross
in baptysme only and not at the co^secrating of Christ his body: 40 Or that
they were not heretykes which threw down altars erected unto Christ: 41 Or
that any Bisshopp then was married upon Asshewensday: 42 Or that any goodman
then, did write, that the government of women was monstrous: 43 Or that, est,
in these words, hoc est corpus meu^, is to be taken, for significat: 44 Or
that the lay people communicatyng did take the cup one at an others hands, and
not at the priests hands or the deacons: 45 Or that there was any controversy
then in religion, which being decided by the Bishop of Rome, the contrary part
was not taken for heresy, and the mainteiners of it accounted heretics: 46 Or
that any then was put in the Calender for a Martyr, which was hanged by just
judgment, not for any cause and matter of faith, but for evident and wicked
felony. 47 Or that any ecclesiastical persons were deprived then of their
benefices or excommunicated out of church and living, for that they refused to
swear against the authority of the Bishope of Rome. Or that any such oath
was used to be put unto any man, at that time: 48 Or that any friar of
threescore years, obteinyng afterward the Rome of a Bishop, married a young
woman of. xix. years: 49 Or that any Bishopp then preached to be all one, to
pray on a dunghyll and in a church: 50 Or that any but heretics refused to
subscribe to a general and lawful counsel, gathered and confirmed by the
Bishop of Rome his authority.
(These be the highest mysteries, and greatest keys of their religion, and
without these their doctrine can never be mainteyned and stand upright.) If any
one therefore of all owr adversaries, be able to avouch any one of all these
articles, by any such sufficient authority of Scriptures, doctors, or
Councels, as I have required: as I said before, so say I now again, I am
content to yield unto him, and to subscribe in that point (which I would never
do, nor might do unto an heretic, knowing that my faith must not hang upon the
event of disputation, yet seeing I have begone to play the fool with a fool,
therefore I use this term of subscribing, as I do learn it of master Iuell.)
But I am well assured, they shall never be able truly to allege one sentence.
And becaufe I know it, therefore I speak it, least any happily should be
deceived. And thus far forth to the imitation of master Iuell, Factus sum
insipiens, vos me coegistis.

But what now might any protestant think of this challenge? will he not mislike
with me, that among so many articles, as I rehearse with great solemnity, so
few are of weight and substance? will he not be moved at the very heart, that
for indifferent matters and reasonable ceremonies, I shall require yet, to have
their proof, out of the first six hundred years after Christ, and out of
general counsels, or ancient doctors, or else make an exclamation against
the keeping of them? will it not greiue him, that I stick upon terms, which,
can never be fownd in the cumpasse of the primitive church, which if their
principles were true, would follow yet well inowgh of them? And that leauyng
the principle, I press him with the particular word of some conclusion, will
it not anger him? Can he take it for indifferent dealing, that I rekon up some
ones private opinion, and make as thowgh it were the general determination of
all the protestants in the world? And when I have gathered up a number of
articles, of which the greater part contains indifferent or simple matters,
to conclude of the^ all, in one sum, without order or distinction, and boldly
to say: (These be the highest mysteries, and greatest keys of their religion,
and without these, their doctrine can never be maintained and stand upright)
can the protestant hearing or reading this, if he have any spirit of truth or
honesty, think that I were to be trusted in any point, with the teaching or
guyding of the ignorant? yet, I assure you, (mark it who will) M. Iuells most
gloriouse challenge, has no better reason or substance in it. for of so many
his ors and interrogatories, to make a show and color, of great copy and
store of matter, I see not three of them, which be not, either of scholepoyntes
and quiddities (without discussing and examinyng of which, the Catholic faith
continues plain inowgh) or else about orders and ceremonies (of which the
governors of the church, have the making or removing in their discretion. Now
therefore, if this manner of owr challenge be mislyked, I am gladd, that in
aunswering a fool according to his foolisshnes; I have geauen warnyng to the
Reader, not to make of every rare thing and much praised, a Iuell, and to be
ware ever of great faces set upon small and simple matters. As on the other
side, if for M. Iuells sake and honor, this my challenge, framed after the
example of his, shall stand for a reasonable one and tolerable: let me be
answered then in the particulars, and except I do reply again, and that
speedily, I with others, will yield unto him.

Yet now, because the wyseman has said, not only, answer a fool according
to his foolisshnes, but rather and before this warned us, with, do not answer
a fool according to his folisshnes, lest thou be made like unto him: I will
not therefore rest, and stay upon the forsaid challenge, but come forth with an
other, full of great and principal matters: neither will I be like the
protestant, and troble the reader with questions of small importau^ce, but of
substanciall and necessary articles, concerning the orders of this present
life, or the hope of the life everlasting.

I make for the Catholics honor this challenge, and provoke him that can, to
encouter me I except none, thowgh I like not all, (for who would be matched
with the bold and blind brothers, willingly?) but I trust, who so ever
replyeth, he shall be superintended so wiselye, that his answer shall not come
against me, but with good authority and priuileage. I say therefore: If any
single one of owr adversaries, or they all conmunicating together, can prove
by any suficient testimony, out of Scriptures, Doctors or Cou^cells. The
Catholic his Challenge made of great and weighty articles.


1. That for the space of six hundred years after Christ his ascension (by
which hundreds only, they would be tried, in examining of verities) It was
unlawful to make avowe to God, of chastity, obedience, or pouertye: or that
breakers of such vows, were esteemed above others, as singular witnesses of the
liberty of Christ his true Gospel. 2. Or that it was abominable then, to
make to him any special sacrifice, besides the sacrifice of owr thanks in
words and figures, for his benefits, with remembrance of Christ his passion
for us, and besides the offering of owr, sowles and bodies to the service of
his majesty, with mortifiyng of owr affections and cuill desires. 3. Or that
there was no priesthode the^, according to the order of Melchisedech, or that
priests have not a singular sacrifice, which they must offer for the sins of
the people.
1. OR that the Baptism, which Calvin in his institue tio^s, which are apoyne
ted to be readen of the priests of England
Christ instituted, is no better then the circumscision of the old law: 2. Or
that baptism is a sign only of owr profession, and that owr sins are not
truly and in deed, forgeauen us in it: 3. Or that the Sacrament of
Confirmation, is an invention only of man, and that no spiritual strength
cu^meth unto us, by signing of us with holy oil, and imposition of the
Bishops hands: 4, Or that Christ delivered in his last supper a figure only
of his body to be eaten of his Apostles: 5. Or that the power of forgeauing or
reteyning sinmes, which Christ gave to his Apostles, and by them to laufull
priests, is nothing else but a comforting, or a fearing of men's consciencies,
by the promyses or menacies of the scriptures. and that in deed priests can
not (as ministers under God) forgeaue sins and offenses, which by absolute
aucthoritye is proper unto God alone, and no others: 6. Or that to confess our
sins to a priest, with sorrow of heart and contritio^, and to labor by fasting,
prayeing, alms deeds, and hard discipline, to help forward toward the
making up of a full satisfaction and perfect, is iniuriouse unto Christ his
passion and merits, and a superstitiouse and thanklesse travail: 7. Or that
the knowledge and understanding of scriptures is sufficient license inowgh to
instruct and teach others: and that there is no such difference between the
clergy, and the laytie, but that the layetie has before God, as good and
great priesthood as the clergy: 8. Or that a temporal and Christian Prince,
were he man, woman, or child, had then, or may have now, the authority of a
supreme head in Christ his church and over the church: 9. Or that faith
only justifies, after one be baptized and sanctified: 10. Or that all the
Justice and holiness which good men of those days had, or now shall have, is
but an Imputative Justice, and such as pleases God to accept, but in deed is
not true and right Justice: 11. Or that the keeping of the forty days fast of
lent, was allowed then for temporal policy or bodylie healths sake only, and
had no commandment from Christ, or his Apostles: 12 Or that in most
extremity and at the very point of death, aneyling of Christians was abhorred
of Christians, and the keeping of the Sacrament forbidden, which is our true
viaticnm and viage provision:
1. OR that the calling upon Saints in heaven, was accounted then,
blasphemy: 2. Or the setting up of Christ his cross, or any holy Sancte his
image, was preached to be ldolatrie: 3. Or that the visiting of their tumbes,
and kyssing their relics, was thought to be a superstitiouse vanity: 4. Or
that the miracles worked at their chapels, or memories, were attributed then,
at the first tydinges of them unto the duyel his subteltie:
1. OR that to pray for the sowles departed, was thowght repugnant unto the
Scriptures: 2. Or that to offer sacrifice, and geaue alms for their sowles
health, was accounted impiety. 3. Or that the last wills and testamentes, of
fou^ders of alms howsen, Colleges, and Monasteries, were broken concerning
their temporal goods and legacies, and that no part thereof, did come to their
own blood and family.
These be such articles as are directed, first against the proper honor and glo
rye of God almighty: secondly, against the grace of Ihesus Christ, and
profit of all Christians in the world: thirdly against the dignity,
estimation, and honor of all Saints: fourthlie against the profit of the
sowles departed, by debarring their commodities. so that in all states,
worlds, and persons, Christ thorowgh these articles is proscribed. And again
in these articles, the fundation, estimation, and perfection of their Gospel
and preaching consists, so that without these, or worser then these, they
could not be so singular and unlike other Christians. If therefore, any of all
owr adversaries, be able with sufficient authority, to prove these articles,
or conclusions of theirs, out of the Scriptures, use of primityue church,
Doctors, or Councels: either he shall be proved, manifestly to misconster and
misuse Scriptures, doctors or councels: either else he shall be praised for his
labors, and followed with a free will and submission. Let this be the
challenge, and let us obtain an answer unto it. for, if the Catholykes pressed
with such questions, which for the most part deserved no answer, have not
refused to show their faith, and geaue reason of it unto their adversaries:
(allthowgh the lack of conference with their fellows, of free printing, and
open uttering of their books, might with reason have stayed them from their
purpose, and not have moved to chainge their contrie for the matter) how much
more cawse and reason is it, that they, which are so favored in their
procedinges, should not let to stand vnaunswered, such principal questions,
as are moved against them, nor go at that time backward, and flee from the
quarrel, when most of all, they should show them selves, and spread forth their
cunnyng and sincerity.

And yet if these forsaid articles are to many, for their leisure: or if they
seem to much particular, for their profit, which would not be espied: or if
the answering unto them should be said to be forbidden by wise heads: (for a
rumor may sone be made to feign, that it serves to a saction, to make such
challenges, and combattes) Let me be quietly suffered then, to speak a few
words and indifferent, such as to which every religion must agree, if with
any reason it will be credited.

The heretykes (says Tertullian) Libr. de praescr. aduersus haereticos.
make a show of Scriptures, and by this their boldness, straytwayes some they
move. Now in the very conference it self and meetyng together, they weerie
the steadfast and sure men, they catch and intrapp the weak, and the
indifferent they dymisse, and let go with grudges and scruples. But this way
must be stopped up against them at the first, and they are not to be suffered
to dispute and reason upon the Scriptures. And why so? Marye, for good cause
(says Tertullian.) For some one heresye does not admit certain Scriptures,
and those which it does allow and receive, it turns unto her purpose, by
putting unto them, or taking away somewhat from them. Some again are so
presumptuouse, and take so much upon them, that they will not acknowledge that
for Scripture, by which they may be convicted. Ergo, we must not appeal unto
the Scriptures, (says he) and the trial is not to be appointed in them, by
which the victory is either none, or uncertain, or not very sure. For
allthowgh the conference upon the scriptures should come to that pass, that it
would leave both sides alyke: yet the order of things required that to be
first and foremost proponed and putt forth, of which only it is to be disputed
at this time. that is to say. Quibus competat fides ipsa: cuius sint Scri
pturae: a quo, and per quos, and quando, and quibus sit tradita disciplina, qua
fiunt Christiani: who they are unto whom the faith it self belongs: whose
are the Scriptures: of whom: and by whom: and what time, and unto whom the
trade and instruction was geauen, by which men are made Christians. For, where
it shall apperet hat the truth of the Christian discipline and faith is: there
shall be the truth of the Scriptures, and of the expositions of them, and of
all the Chri stian traditions. Thus have I Englisshed more at large, out of
Tertullian, that it might the better be considered of the (Reader) whether he
speaks rea son or no: and whether in any disputation to be instituted, or any
challenge to be appointed, these articles, which Tertullian specifyeth, are not
principally to be debated, and examined: and whether this trade and manner of
arguing do serve to the mainteynyng of any stomak: which is so natural (as I
may say) and so reasonable, that you can not deuyse a more indifferent. To use
it therefore to mine own comfort and others, and yet not to depart from the
manner of a challenge, therebye to recompense owr aduer saries, I say:

1. If any of owr adversaries be able A most short and profitable
consideration, to go before eve: ry chaie^ge or to make of it, by it self
alone, a just challenge.
to show by any sufficient or lyklie argument and testimony, that they have
any true Christian faith at all among them: (for faith cleaves unto
authority, which they can never show for them selves, etc. 2. Or that the
Scriptures have been delivered unto them, or that they are the right keepers of
them: 2. Or if they can tell from whom they have received their Gospel, other
then papists: 4. Or by what successors, from the first, either maker, or
chief preacher of their Gospel, it has come unto them: 5. Or at what time,
they received it: 6. Or if they can show but the fundacions only, or
proportion of some church, house, communion table, communion book, or any
other thing never so small, by which it might be gathered, that a true an
Apostolyke religion was extant to be seen within the six hundred years after
Christ, as void of ornaments, ceremonies, reverence, distinction of places,
and dignityes, Sacraments, and solemnities parteyning to Sacraments, as
theirs is:
These are the most best and easiest questions, for the capacitye of a sensible
man, and most meetest to be asked of these great folowers of Antiquity (as
they say them selves.) If therefore any of owr adversaries, can name, either
the places, or the persons, where their religion stood of old time, or from
whom, by lineall descent, it has come to their churches, and ministers: I
promise for my self, and others also: either to prove their predecessors
heretics, or to yield with a good will to their succession, if they bring it
downewarde from any Apostle.

I have said: And in the mean while, until their answer be devised: I will
continue in that faith, which lawful Bisshoppes of England received of Saint
Augustyne a monk, and owr Apostle, which, by the almighty power of God,
converted owr realm from Idolatry to Christianity which received his faith
of Saint Gregory the great, and the first of that name: And Saint Gregory
learned it of his predecessor Pelagius the second: Pelagius again received it
of Benedictus the first: from Benedictus then we go upward to Ioannes. III. to
Pelagius. I. to Vigilius, to Siluerius, to Agapetus, to loannes the second, to
Bonifacius the second, to Foelix the first, to Ioannes. Ito Hormisda, to
Symmachus, to Anastasius the second, to Gelasius, to Faelix. III to Simplicius,
to Hilarious, to Leo. I. to Sixtus. III. to Caelestinus, to Bonifacius. I. to
Zozimus, to Innocentius, to Anastatius. I. to Siricius, to Damasus, to Faelix
the second, to Liberius, to Julius, to Marcus, to Siluester, to Melchiades, to
Eusebius, to Marcellus, to Marcellinus, to Caius, to Eutichianus, to Faelix. I.
to Dionisius, to Sixtus the second, to Stephanus. I. to Lucius, to Cornelius,
to Fabianus, to Antherus, to Pontianus, to Vrbanus, to Calistus, to Zepherinus,
to Victor, to Eutherius, to Soter, to Anicetus, to Pius, to Higinus, to
Telesphorus, to Sixtus, to Alexander, which was the first that appointed making
of holywater, which received the Catholic faith of Euaristus, which received
it of Anacletus, which received it of Clemens, which received it of Saint
Peter, which received it of Christ, which is God most true and blessed for
ever. Amen. Fare well. Romans 16.
Deus autem pacis conterat Sathanam sub pedibus vestris velocitet.

Quoniam viri S. Theologiae peritissimi Angli apud me fide dignissimi,
perlegerunt hunc librum Iohannis Rastelli, and per omnia catholicum esse
censent, dignumque qui typis excusus a popularibus eius Prouintiae nempe
Anglicanae legatur. puto ipsum tuto posse imprimi. Ita testor Cunerus Petri de
Brouwershauen Louanij Pastor S. Petri indignus. 11. Nouem. 1561


