A SERMON OF Meekness, PREACHED AT THE SPITTLE upon EASTER Tuesday,
M.D.C.XXIII.

By William Rawley, Doctor of Divinity.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND for Matthew Lownes, 1623.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE FRANCIS Lord VERVLAN, Viscount St. ALBAN, my truly
Noble LORD.
My Lord:
THere is more reason for the Dedication of this Sermon to your Lordship, then
for the Impression of it. Your Acceptance of me to be yours, before you had any
other of my Quality: The timely fruit of your favor, in my Advancement unto
that Fortune, by which J subsist: My Attendance upon your Employments, and
Services, at this present: And whatsoever is any way eminent either in my
Estate, or Name, J am ready to ascribe it to your Lordship, from whence J have
received it. For the printing of this Book, I can say little. It is not any
greedy Appetite of Life, wherein it can take comfort, but rather the contrary,
wherewith every thing is naturally touched, Fear of Death and Oblivion. And
yet if it be proper to any Discourses, those of this nature are fittest to
survive the first Birth, because they contain the incorruptible seed which
dies not. Besides, Printed Sermons have this privilege above Vocal Sermons
only, that they may be instant in season, and out of season. J pray God to
prosper your Lordships Person, and Affairs.

Your Lordships most humble and truly devoted Servant, W. RAVVLEY.

MATTHEW. 5.5. Blessed are the Meek, for they shall inherit the Earth.


THis Text carries us up to the Mount of Evangelical Holiness, and
Perfection; and is one of the eight steps, by which we may climb unto
heavenly Beatitude. Our Savior Christ, when he unfolded these Mysteries unto
the world, ascended up into the Mountain; A place chosen to resemble the
height of those things, he intended to deliver. The Company, that was present,
were only his Disciples, persons of more judgment, and penetration, then the
common Multitude. And though it be certain, that our Saviors wisdom, might
use these circumstances, for other causes, yet they are not unfit Arguments to
put a distinction, betwixt other his ordinary Sayings, and these mysterious
Sentences. And yet if we descend, to the opinion of the world, there is nothing
that depresseth us so low, as the practice of these eight Beatitudes; Poverty
in Spirit, Mourning, Meekness, and the rest; subjects of vulgar scorn, and
unsupportable misery: but such is the gratiousnesse of God, that he has
promised by his Prophets, to raise up the poor out of the dust; and to wipe
away all tears from the eyes of the mourners; and lastly, that he will
beautify the meek with salvation; and he also performs it. I have thought
fit, to present before this great Assembly, at this time, one of these eight
Beatitudes, in particular that of Meekness: First, because it was the
emploiment of the best Preacher, when he lived upon the earth: The spirit of
the Lord is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me, to preach good tidings
unto the Meek, Isai. 61. It was spoken in prophecy of our Savior Christ, and
is now the office of every Christian Minister. Secondly, because I know no
subject more useful, in the common calamities, and troubles of this world,
than Meekness is; in which we have such continual need, to apply that salve
of our heavenly Physician, In your patience possess ye your souls, Luc. 21.
And lastly, because it is not altogether impertinent unto this Time, in which
the Meekness of our Savior has exalted him to a joyful and glorious
Resurrection, according as it is acknowledged by Saint Paul, Phil. 2. He
humbled himself unto death -- Wherefore (that implies the cause) God also has
highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name. And
although, it may seem a subject, unfit for a mixed Assembly, in regard that our
Saviors wisdom, singled out his Disciples, when he first proclaimed this
Beatitude; Blessed are the meek: Yet I am sure, that exhortation of Christ was
general, and recommended to the whole multitude, Matthew. 11. Learn of me, for
I am meek, and lowly of heart. Now being to proceed in this Treatise of
Meekness, I cannot begin better, then to crave a taste of it, in your present
attentions, in those words, wherewith S. Cypr. begins his book de bono
patientiae. De patientia locuturus, vnde potius incipiam, quam quod nunc quoque
ad audientiam, vestram patientiam video essencessariam: Or to change it into
the style and authority of Saint James, Receive with meekness, the engrafted
word, which is able to save your souls.

The particulars, which I shall handle, in the unfolding of this Text, may be
all reduced to these three maine Heads. The first is, the Condition, or Estate
of men, whom our Savior Christ, amongst some others, repeated both before, and
after my Text, is pleased to glorify. The Meek. In which part, it will not be
unseasonable, to lay down a Model, of the Virtue of Meekness, and to
consider it, both in the Properties, and Kinds, the Opposites, the
Preservatives, and such like, with the circumstances belonging unto it. The
second is, the Dignity and Sublimity of such persons, as are eminent in this
Virtue of Meekness; Blessed: showing that it is not only a Virtue, either
Moral or Theological, but which is more, a Beatitude or Blessedness. The
third is the Reward, which is promised, to the practisers of this Virtue,
whether it be of temporal Blessings, or of eternal Blessings, or of both; For
they shall inherit the earth.

To begin with the first. The Condition, or Estate of men, who are here
pronounced Blessed, are the Meek. And first, that it may be plain, who the
Meek persons be, we shall find this Virtue to be described, by the Moral
Philosophers, and Schoole-Diuines both, that it is Moderatiua irarum; A
moderation about the passion of Anger. The Schoolmen have a distinction not
unprofitable, concerning the several offices of the Moral Virtues; namely,
that some Virtues are exercised about the Actions of men, others about the
Passions. Those that are exercised about the Actions, are the most easy,
having nothing else to do, but to observe an even, and golden Mediocrity
betwixt two Extremes. As Liberality is to observe a mean, in the Action of
giving, which may incline, neither unto Covetousness, nor Prodigality. Those
that are exercised about the Passions, are more difficult, having a double
emploiment; in that there is a golden Mediocrity to be observed, and an
inordinate Affection to be subdued. This Virtue of Meekness, is about a
Passion. Besides, amongst the Passions, some are more tractable, and gentle,
others altogether intolerable. That of Anger, is the most furious, and
irresistable Passion, of the whole number. In regard whereof, the temper of
Meekness, in persons capable of it, is the more rare, and excellent; first
that it is not a Mediocrity only, but a Moderation: Secondly a Moderation, not
of any ordinary, or relenting Passion, but of the suddenest, and most unruly
Passion of all, that is anger. The Extreme on the one side, that is in the
Excess, is called (...), Indignation, or Wrath: and the other Extreme, in the
Defect, unto which Meekness most approaches (though that also must be
eschewed as a Vice) is called (...), Lenitude, or an Incapabilitie of Anger.
The words, which do signify a Meek person, both in the Latin and Greek,
do set forth two Properties, which are found in him. First, because Anger is a
Commotion, and Unquietness in our own Breasts, such a moderate person, is in
Latin called Mitis: and that word is well expressed by Virgil,

Mitis vt in morem stagni, placidaque paludis: Resembling the Meek man, to a
standing water, where neither the Stream, nor the Tide do transport it, nor
the Wind much wrinckle the face of it. Again, because Anger is an outward
Harshnesse, or Way wardnesse toward others, the Greek name frees him from
that, (...), derived as it may seem from (...), that is easy, declaring a
Facility, and Gentleness, in the outward Comportment and Behavior.

Next heereunto are the kinds of Meekness, which we shall find to be
double; Toward God, and toward Man. Answerable to the two sorts of Anger. For
there is One, that casts a Stone upward, which is censured by Ecclesiasticus;
and there is Another, that shoots his Arrows forward, as Ioash did, though
he were warranted by Elisha. And He that casts a stone on high, aims it
against God, and it shall fall upon his own head, Eccles. 27. and He that
shoots his Arrows forward, leuelleth them against Man, intending the
Destruction of his Enemies. Now though the two kinds of Meekness above
named, may be both one Action, and he that is Meek toward God, will be Meek
also toward Man, and so on the contrary, from Man to God; yet because the
Object is so diverse, and requires a double Qualification in our Minds, I may
be licensed to divide it into these two streams, and to handle them severally,
in my Discourse following. The former is a frank, and constant submission of
our desires, in all things, unto the mighty pleasure of God. And the other, an
amiable, and useful Conversation toward all Men. The Opposite, unto the
former, is a Repining, and Murmuring against God; and unto the second, either a
Provocation of our Brother by Wrong, or a Thirst of Revenge, whether the Injury
be true, or pretended. We will begin with the former, A Submission, under the
mighty Hand of God. This Virtue is recorded, in the 37. Psalm, But those that
wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit the earth. From this Psalm, is the
Beatitude transferred into Saint Matthew, in express words: The Argument of
the Psalm, is wholly upon that string, Patient waiting upon the Lord: The
Reward is the same, They shall inherit the Earth: All these show it to be a
special branch, of this Virtue of Meekness.

There are two ordinary Motives, of our Indignation, and Murmuring against God.
The one is, the prosperous Estate of the ungodly: the other, the unprosperous
Estate (as we deem it) of the Godly. Concerning the former. We shall find
nothing, that did so much fill with wonder, even the best sort of Men, as these
ways of God, in prospering of the wicked. Asaph was a Prophet, and one of the
sweet Singers, and yet entering into this Contemplation, he confessed, that his
feet were almost gone, and his steps had well nigh slipped, Psalm. 73. Job was a
Pattern of Patience; and yet he thought he did wisely, in recounting the
felicities of the Wicked, to the silencing of his Friends, Job 21. Jeremy the
Prophet, reasoned with God, upon the same Argument; Wherefore does the way of
the wicked prosper, Ier. 12? But these Men, though they were at the first
stumbled, went forward into the Sanctuary of God, and with Meekness rested,
upon his righteous Judgments toward the ungodly. The Vice therefore, which
does most oppose Meekness, is Aemulatio propter impios, which is the Style of
the 37. Psalm, Fret not thy self, because of the ungodly. The Sentence,
denounced against the ungodly, in that Psalm, is always just, and certain.
For they shall soon be cut down, as the grass, and wither as the green
herb. The Flower of the Ungodly, here in this World, howsoever it may seem to
grow up specious, and goodly, yet is it always short, and momentany, the
Righteousness of God, and the Fullness of their Iniquity, pulling down in the
end, due Vengeance, and Wrath upon them. At vsque quo Domine, is our complaint,
Psalm. 94. Lord how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked Triumph?
The time is not long: Quoniam adhuc modicum, as in the first of Hosea, Yet a
little while, and I will avenge the blood of Iezreel. Nay the final
Condemnation of them is at hand, For Behold I come quickly, and my reward is
with me, Apoc. 22. It is the Saying of S. August. Infirmitas facit diu videre,
quod cito est. Our Desires, are like the Desires of sick Persons, unto whom
that seems long which is not so indeed, but because we measure the time, by
our distempered Appetites, and Infirmity. If we should measure our Desires, by
a temporal rule only, it is not manners for us, to press for Revenge, whilst
our Betters are unrevenged. The souls from under the altar (namely those of
the dear Martyrs of God) are not yet avenged, Apoc. 6. It is the case of God
himself, who if he were so jealous, and angry a God, he would not suffer an
Altar to smoke, nor an Idol to be adored, nor an hypocritical Prayer to be
offered, nor a blasphemous Oath to be uttered, without instantly consuming the
Offenders: At least, he would not divide so patiently, his temporal favors,
of the Sun, and Rain, amongst the Just, and Unjust, without distinction. To
proceed further, Nec dum vindicatus est, ipse qui vindicat, as S. Coprian
says; The Son of God himself, is not yet avenged, for all those foul
Reproaches, and Indignities done unto him. And though the Father has committed
all judgment to the son, John 5. and so he has the power in his own hands;
nay, and (which is more) he has invested himself into this Judicature:
Vengeance belongs unto me, I will recompense, says the Lord, Heb. 10.
notwithstanding he delayeth to execute deserved wrath upon his Enemies. And
herein appears, the wonderful Sufferance, and Meekness, of our Savior
Christ; Vt qui in coelis adoretur, nec dum vindicetur in terris, as the same
Saint Cyprian speaks, That he, whom the whole Host of Heaven adoreth,
should suffer an Host of Worms, and Miscreants, to blaspheme him upon the
earth. Lastly, it is no less Curiosity, to search into the Counsel of God
concerning the estate of the wicked, then Presumption to solicit their
subversion, before the appointed day. What, and if it be the will of God, that
both should grow up together (the Wicked and the Just) until the harvest,
Matthew. 13? What and if God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power
known, endures with much long suffering, the vessels of wrath, fitted to
destruction, Romans 9? And this is to appease the first Motive, of our Murmuring,
and Indignation against God, for the Prosperity of the wicked.

The other Motive, which armeth us, with Indignation, and Murmuring against
God, is the sense of some present Misery, whether it be, in our Soul, or our
Body, or our Goods, or any other way, wherein the hand of God lays heavy upon
us. This second Motive, touches us more nearly, then the former, and is like
unto that, wherewith the Devil thought, to have gotten an overthrow, against
Jobs Patience; But put forth thine Hand now, and touch his bone, and his flesh,
and he will curse thee to thy face. In this distress, the Saying of the same
holy Man Job, will be very proper to enter into our considerations; Shall we
receive good from God, and shall we not receive evil also? The Fountain of
all our good, is God, and if he be pleased, to turn our sweet, into a little
bitterness, why should we repine, against the Omnipotent wisdom of our
Maker? Again, if we be Gods Children, the Afflictions that come from him, are
not for our Destruction, but for our Trial, and to make us shine more
gloriously: wherefore it will turn to our advantage, when we shall come to
reap the fruit of our sufferings, and that Quanto in hoc seculo frangimur,
tanto in futaro solidamur; as Saint Bern* says: The more we are shaken in this
world, the more we are rooted, and grounded in glory. Neither is it of small
force, to exasperate, or mollify our Afflictions, the behavior we use in
taking of them; seeing it is true, as Saint Cypr. says, In sensu doloris est
omne quod punit: Grief is according to the apprehension of him that bears it.
And therefore the same Author S. Cypr. had very good reason, to put a
diffe^rence, betwixt the sufferings of the Righteous, and of others, that
repined with a Heathenish Impiety: In his Book ad Demetrianum: Putatis (...)
aduersa Vobiscum aequaliter perpeti, cum eadem aduersa videatis a Nobis, and
vobis, non aqualicer sustineri. There may be the same Latitude of pains,
inflicted upon two several Persons, and yet the sense, and Impression of them
much different, whilst the one bears them, with a patient, and calm mind,
the other with a querulous, and unquiet reluctation. But the best Argument is
that of Saint Paul, Romans 8. For I reckon, that the sufferings of this present
time, are not worthy to be compared with the glory, that shall be revealed in
us. And if there be so much difference, betwixt our present Enduring, and our
future Glory, there is as great inequality, betwixt the Offense of our
Murmuring against God, and the Cause of it, being for so small matters, as the
transitory Pelf of this world, which are no better, then the fading delight of
Jonas, censured by God himself, Do thou well to be angry for the gourd?
Looking unto Jesus, the Author, and finisher of our faith Heb. 12. The Scope,
and Comfort, of every Christians profession: And he that looks unto Jesus, as
he ought, cannot be much amated, at the evil Aspects of worldly Happiness.
Finally, who can tell, whether it be not, as Saint Bernard says, Praecordia
fatui, sicut rota currus, foenum portans, and murmurans? For there is Murmuring
in Fullness, as well as in Emptiness, like the Wheel of a Carre, that goes
on creaking, and yet carries away a full load. And we find, that the greatest
Murmurers were the Children of Israel, People that had the most saturity, and
were often replenisht with a Miracle. But they received the due reward of their
Murmuring, being stung to death by Serpents. The Murmurer has the Poison of
Serpents, under his tongue, wherewith he wounds God, and it is just for him, to
receive his Deaths wound by the Poison of a Serpent. To conclude this part; The
Root, from whence Christian Meekness springs, is Humility; the foremost in
the rank of these eight Beatitudes; that is Poverty in Spirit: And it was the
Confession of an humble Spirit, yet not of an abject (especially being uttered
in the Figure of Christ) For I am a worm and no man, Psalm. 22. Then what am
I, that I should turn again, upon my Maker? And this shall be sufficient, to
appease our Murmuring, and Indignation against God, caused from those two
Motives: The prosperous Estate of the Ungodly, and the unprosperous Estate of
the Godly. And thus much for the first Kind of our Meekness, toward God.

The other Kind of Meekness, is exercised in a gracious, and useful
Behavior, toward all Men. And this Virtue is recommended unto Timothy, by the
Apostle S. Paul: In whose speech, are inserted some things, peculiar to a
Bishop, other things general for all Men. And the servant of the Lord must not
strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach, patient: In meekness
instructing, etc. and so forward. There are three evil Properties, reigning in
the Breasts of the greater part, that do bear an evil Aspect, to this Kind
of Meekness, toward Man. The first is Auger, that Quality that is called in
Latin Iracundia; A Disposition ever ready to be on fire, and is as well
unsupportable to our selves, as to others. The second is Harmefulnesse, or a
malignant Desire of doing wrong, without any offense, or occasion given. The
third is a Thirst of Revenge, after an Injury conceived, whether the Wrong be
true, or pretended. These three must be calmed, and appeased, before we can
prepare a room, for the Virtue of Meekness.

To begin with the first, that is Anger. The Persons, that are prone to this
evil disease, are of the nature of a Burning Coal, or a Thorn full of
Prickles, on every side: I mean not for their desire to hurt, or to consume
others (for those are the Properties of the following Kinds) but because they
are always so Hot, or so Sharp, that you cannot touch them. And first this
Quality, (for I find no better testimony of it) is the Quality of a Fool.
Anger rests in the bosom of fools, says Ecclesiastes in the seventh
chapter; unto which agrees the Saying of Saint Bernard: Tanto qu^que
conuincitur minus sapiens, quanto est minus Patien^. A man is undoubtedly
convinced, to want so much of the Power of Wisdom, as he wants of the Virtue
of Patience Again, it is a Passion, that transport us immoderately, beyond the
Bounds of Reason; the Glory, and Privilege of Mankind. And I have read it in
one, that expresses this Excess not untruly; Cogitationes iracundi vipereae
sunt generationis, mentem comedunt matrem suam. The thoughts of an irefull Man,
are of the Vipers Brood, devouring Reason the Mother that bare them. And though
it be the Property of other Passions, to rebel against Reason, for the flesh
lusts against the spirit; yet in them, the spirit, again, lusts against
the flesh, and none of them does so mightily overthrow, and trample upon
Reason, as Anger does. Furthermore, it is a Passion, that is aptest to vex the
Holy Spirit of God, which is given us, for our sanctification. S. Paul writes
in the fourth to the Ephesians, And grieve not the holy spirit of God, whereby
ye are sealed unto the day of Redemption. To avoid this, he advises in the
Verse following; Let all bitterness, and wrath, and Anger -- be put away from
you. In these and many other, consists the Deformity of this Vice; It sets
upon a Man the Badge of folly, transporteth him beyond the Bounds of Reason,
grieueth the Holy Spirit of God which is given unto him.

The Second Property is Harmefulnesse, or the first Provocation by Wrong.
Seneca faith of Morosity, or Peevishness, that it is Delicatum iracundiae
genus, A dainty kind of Anger: wherein he hitteth it right, for it is so nice,
and queasie, that nothing can woo it to Patience. This Vice, upon which we now
insist, may be sometimes called Mortiferum iracundiae genus, A deadly kind of
Anger; for it denounces Mischief, and hurt to him, at whom it is aimed. And
these Natures are more ungentle then Nabal; for Nabal, though he parted not
with his goods, at the solicitation of David, yet he sought to do him no
harm; but there was a Nature, noted by Saint Paul, for a notorious evil
condition; Alexander the Coppersmith has done me much evil. That which was
spoken in Prophecy, of the Jews wicked hatred against our Savior Christ, was
in this rank of Anger, They hated me without a cause: for he sustained many
Injuries, and wrongs, which he never deserved. This Kind of Anger, can have no
better censure, then Homo homini Lupus, and I hope it is a Disposition more
frequent amongst wild Beasts, then Men. Lastly, Our Savior Christ has damned
it, with a perpetual blot; But woe to that man, by whom the offense comes.

The third Property opposite to Meekness, is a Thirst of Revenge, after an
Injury received. Seneca says likewise, in this point of Revenge, Inhumanum
verbum vltio; Vindication, or Revenge is an inhumane Word; the Action it self,
is far more inhumane. The Saying of the same Author Seneca, is a good Tenet
in Morality. Non vt in benefi^ijs, honestum est merita meritis repensare, ita
iniurias iniurijs; illic vinci turpe est, hic vincere. Injuries are not of the
nature of Benefits, to be requited with the like, as one Benefit with another;
And the Contention in the one is laudable, but in the other, it is soul, and
dishonorable. This made the Patient Cato, when he was stricken at unawares,
and the party came, to tender submission, for that Injury, to put it off with
so much lightness: Non memini percussum me; I remember not, that I was
stricken. And the same Spirit of Patience, and bearing Injuries, lived in many
of the Ancient Worthies, Alexander, the two first Caesar's, together with some
Philosophers, and others. And the Principle, that they held, for the bearing of
Injuries, was Magnanimity, according as Seneca, one of the latest of them has
expressed, and has well discussed this Argument; Magni animi est iniurias
despicere; that it was the mark of a poor Spirit, to be touched with
Injuries, and a great Mind, did trample, and contemn them.

Now the Virtue of Patience, which shined in those Heathen Worthies, is not
sufficient, to set of that Meekness, that is required at our hands, or to be
a pattern, for a Christians Imitation. For first, that is true, which is
Objected against them, by Saint Cyprian; Tamillis falsa Patientia est, quam and
falsa Sapientia. They had a false Patience, because they had a false Wisdom.
The ground of their Patience, was Tumor, and Pride, at the best Magnanimity:
but Christian Meekness must arise, not out of a Vice, or shadow of a Virtue,
but out of a true ground, or the Mother of all Virtues, that is Humility, as I
have already showed. Again, the Actions of those Heroical Spirits, toward
those that did the Injuries, are only manifest, and we are not assured of
their Affections, how their Hearts stood affected toward them: but our Heavenly
Master requires, as the Complement of our Meekness, that we forgive men
their trespasses, Matthew. 6. that is, A free Remission of all Injuries: And Love
your Enemies, Matthew. 5. that is, An entire Affection toward their Persons.
Lastly the Heroical Patience, went no further then this, Recompense to no man
evil for evil; and knew nothing of the other degree: But Christian Meekness
must exceed this; But overcome evil with good. Like the Meekness of Moses,
who offered himself, to be blotted out of the Book of Life, for that People,
which had murmured against God; and whereof some also, had repined, and mutined
against himself: Or like the Meekness of our Savior Christ, which so far
surpasses all comparison, that even, as we all confess, Viuificatur Christi
Sanguine, etiam qui fudit sanguinem Christi. They which crucified our Savior
Christ, are restored by the blood, which their malicious hands have spilled.
Now we have gone, through the three Vices, opposite to this second Kind of
Meekness. First, Readiness, or Pronenesse to Anger: Secondly, Harmefulnesse,
or an evil Desire of Doing wrong: And thirdly, Thirst of Revenge, after an
Injury received.

The Preservatives of Meekness (for It cannot be, but that offenses will
come, as our Savior says) may be diverse. The first is Silence; or
Taciturnity. And this first Precept, is recommended in the 34. Psalm, to him
that would lead a quiet life, and desires to see good days. Keep thy tongue
from evil. As Seneca says, in a case not much unlike, Cadit statim simultas,
ab altera part deserta, nisi par non pugnat. So where Wrath encountreth with
Silence, the Quarrel is lame on the one side, and the strife will soon be
appeased. But the contrary happens, where it is vpheld upon equal terms, as
the Comic Poet has said,

Bacchae baccanti si velis aduersarier
Ex insana insaniorem facies.
Besides, the strife which the Tongue raises, is not worthy the maintaining,
if we consider the Original of it. It is but a word which pierces not; Et
tantum delicatis grave (as the Morallist says) felt only by them, that are
delicate and tender; and in that impression, rather vexes, then hurts them.
And much less, if we consider the Parties, from whom it usually comes; Vt
quisque contemptissimus, Et vt mixime ludibrio est, ita solutissimae linguae.
Ever the more lewd, or the more ^oolish the party be, the more lavish of ^is
tongue he is, and the more liberty we give him: And ye suffer fools gladly,
says S. Paul to the Corinthians. Another Lenitiue, in the same rank (which is
Government of the Tongue) is a Soft and gentle Answer. A soft answer turns
away wrath; Proverbs 15. And these two, may work one Effect, though by diverse
ways: Silence takes away the Fuel, that the Fire may not burn; but a Soft
Answer, distilleth drops of Water, to put it out. Besides, a Soft Answer,
pertaketh sometimes, of Jacobs wrestling with the Angel, that it obtains a
Benediction in the end; which was the Effect of Abigails Speech to David, that
it wrought, not a relenting alone in David's heart, toward her Husband Nabal,
but found a more gracious acceptance at his hands; Blessed be thy advice, and
blessed be thou, which have kept me this day, from shedding of blood. Another
Lenitiue, in the same rank (though it might seem otherwise) is a sharp speech
in due season. And therefore Saint Paul inserts this, in his charge to Timothy,
Cum modestia corripientem: In meekness reprehending those that oppose
themselves. So that there is Meekness in Bitterness, as well as in
Sweetness. Such was the Speech of Abigail to her Husband Nabal, after she had
saved him, from the wrath of David. When Nabal was in his wine, it had been
bootlesse to have spoken, and would have provoked him to more folly, but after
his wine was disgested, she pierced his Soul, that his Heart smote within him.
Such effect has a sharp reprehension, tempered with Modesty, and Discretion.

The second Preservative of Meekness, is Cession, or giving place unto wrath.
So Saint Paul advises, Romans 12. Avenge not your selves, but rather give place
unto wrath. What Is that, Give place unto Wrath, that Wrath should ouerflow in
your breasts? not so; but Depart from thine Enemy, whilst he is in his Anger,
that so thy Absence, and removing the Occasion, might bury those unhappy
flames, which are kindled betwixt you. This was Jacobs Policy, to pacify his
Brother Esau, who being directed by the Counsel of Rebecca (and herein she was
the Emblem of Patience) departed from his Brother, into a far Country, and
returned not again, till after many years, when his Brothers wrath was wholly
appeased.

The third is, A Motion to Reconciliation: which is another Precept, in the
fore-recited Psalm, Seek peace, and ensue it. The Contention is not worthy,
who gave the first cause of offense, but it is a blessed thing, to move the
first Stone to Reconciliation. This also was after practiced, by the Patriarch
Jacob, who thought it not enough, to give place unto wrath, unless he further
endeavored a Reconciliation; and bought it too, with fair language, and large
gifts, whereby he so mollified his brother Esaus Heart, that in the end,
Praereptae benedictionis non meminisset, meminisset delatae satisfactionis, as
Saint Cyprian says. The Birthright and Blessing were quite forgotten; but the
Presents, and Satisfaction, were fresh and powerful. So now we have in the
general, three Preservatives of Meekness: Government or Brideling of the
tongue: Cession or Giving place unto wrath; and A Motion or Endeavoring of
Reconciliation.

There is now one Blot, wherewith this Virtue of Meekness is subject to be
stained, from which it will be pertinent, to free and deliver it. And that is,
that howsoever it may lurk under the name of a Virtue, notwithstanding it
proceeds from no other Original, but Defect of Courage, and is in it self,
the Badge of Pusillanimity, and an abject mind. And especially, if it be so,
as Aristotle says, that Ira, is Calcar Virtutis, Anger is the Spur of
Virtue; what then must that needs be, which both dulleth the edge of Virtue,
and brings in it self no warmth, to provoke forward, unto any virtuous, or
magnanimous Action? But this is not so. The Effect of Meekness, is to be
Vanquisher over our own Passions. And the Wise man has said, Prou. 16. He
that is slow to Anger, is better then the mighty, and he that rules his
Spirit, then he that takes a city. And the rather, because the Domesticke
Enemy, is more dangerous then the Foreign; and commonly those, which have made
other Men their thralls, are the greatest slaves, to their own Passions.
Besides, the Spur, which pricked forward those Heathen Worthies, unto such
renowned Patience, was not any base thought, or Abiectnesse, but Magnanimity,
and Height of Mind, as has been already showed. And who would impute, the
Meekness of David, unto any Baseness, and not rather unto Height of mind,
in suffering the foul Reuiler Shimei, at such a time, when as David was
guarded with a Band of Men, all well appointed, and ready at his command, to
execute Vengeance, upon a silly unarmed caitife? Lastly, the School Divines,
who refer every one of these Beatitudes, to some of the seven Gifts of the Holy
Ghost; as Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness, together with Mercy, to the
Gift of Piety; Poverty in Spirit, and Mourning, to the Gift of the Fear of the
Lord; do refer this Virtue of Meekness unto the Gift of Might, or Fortitude.

There are two Vices, which are shrouded under the name of Meekness, that
ought to be carefully avoided. The one is Senslesnesse, or a whole Auersion,
from the Passion of Anger; the other Remissness, or Looseness in our
Functions. And these two, ought to be thus divided amongst themselves, for the
former is a Defect in our Nature, the latter a Corruption in our Manners. We
will begin with the former. This Vice is called (where it has a name) (...),
and is the other Extreme, on the Defect of Anger. Seneca, who was the soarest
Enemy to Anger, would never endure, that his Wise man should be thought deuoid,
of the sense of Injury; For that were, to make him just of the constitution of
a Stock, or a Stone, that nothing can penetrate or affect. Besides this, that
it would rob him of the glory, due unto Patience; Nulla virtus est, quae non
sentias perpeti. It is no virtue, to suffer those things patiently, of which we
are not sensible. S. Ambrose accounts it a greater perfection, to temper the
unruliness of Anger, then to want the inward motions of it; cum plerunque hoc
lentius, illud fortius aestimetur; seeing the one is an argument of Ability,
and power, the other of Weakness. Lastly, the very Exercise of Meekness it
self, presupposes Anger; for it was described to be Moderatiua Irarum, A
Moderation about the Passion of Anger; And therefore it is to be found, and is
most excellent in those minds, which are naturally subject to Anger. And sure,
the Affection of Anger, is in some cases, not only tolerable, but a Virtue:
And therefore, it was truly called by the Academicks, and other Philosophers,
Co^ Fortitudinis, and Virtutis Socia: The Whetstone of Courage, and the
Associate of Virtue; then which two, what more glorious Titles can be given, by
Heathen Contemplatours? It was the Saying of Valens the Emperor, Alienus ab
ira, alienus a iusticia: He that is free from Anger, will be free from Doing
Justice. He spoke it, as an Emperor, unto whom was required a Mixture of
Anger, for the due Execution of his Imperial Laws: and might have spoken it,
if he had meant it of Universal Justice, which is the Root, of all the Moral
Virtues; He that is free from Anger, will be free from all manner of Virtue.
Aristotle makes it a laudable Quality, if it have due restraint, and
limitation; of which sort are, Quibus de rebus, quibusque hominibus, and
Quemadmodum, and Quo tempore, and Quamdiu. For there must be respect had to
the Causes, for which; and to the Persons, toward whom; and to the Manner,
how; and to the Season, at what time; and to the Continuance, or lasting of it.
David in the fourth Psalm, has set down an inviolable Rule for it. Wherein
is to be noted in passage, that he that could bear the reproaches, of the
Vilest Person, could give the excellentest Precept of Anger. Be angry, and
sin not. There are two things required, to make it a blamlesse Anger: First,
that the cause be warrantable, least it have the conception of a wicked Anger;
Secondly, that it be bridled by Reason, least it grow into Excess, and
degenerate into the Nature of a sin. So then Moses departed not from his
former Meekness, when he was so far transported for Gods cause, that he
brake the two Tables of Stone, newly written with the Finger of Gods Hand.
Phineas, had a good Cause, when he stood up to execute judgment, by which he
both turned away the Plague, and received the Praise of Righteousness, amongst
all Generations. Elias was a man subject to like Passions, as we are, being
once transported, with an holy Anger, that the Children of Israel, were
generally fallen to serve Baal, and himself only left, to serve the Lord.
Lastly, the Zeal was holy, which possessed our Savior, when he scourged the
Buyers, and Sellers, out of the Temple. Nay whosoever is not Angry, for God,
and a good Cause, wants Phineas his Zeal, and David's vnoffensiue Anger, and
Saint Paul's Rod, and again, the Zeal of Christ, The Zeal of thine house,
has eaten me up, John 2.

The second is a Remissness, and Looseness in our Functions. This Vice does
often creep, into the Meek man's Manners, and yet it is, a lesser Vice, then
extreme Rigor. For the Meek Man (as S. Gregory says) does only suffer a
Vice, to steal upon his good Nature, and Virtue; but the testy, and angry
Person, does hotly prosecute a Vice, under the name, and pretense of a Virtue.
S. Gregory, does gravely observe, the difference of the Apostles Admonitions,
unto two Persons, participating of one Affection of Charity, and yet divided in
their temper, and disposition. For Timothy, who was more violent and hot, he
meant to take often from his edge, -- Reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long
suffering, and doctrine. But unto Titus, who was of a colder temper, he
endeavors to add more Spirit: These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke,
with all Authority And in the Person of Titus, is the same Admonition
recommended, unto every Meek Man, in his Function. And this shall suffice, for
the two Vices, shrouded under the name of Meekness; the one an Error in our
Nature, the other a Deprauation of our Manners.

The Second general part, was the Dignity, or Sublimity of such Persons, as
are eminent in this Virtue of Meekness, Blessed. There are four several
Kinds, as the Schoolmen observe. Gifts, Virtues, Fruits, Beatitudes. Gifts,
are the seven Gifts of the Holy Ghost, and are almost all recited, in the 11.
of Isai^h, under the name of Spirits: The Spirit of wisdom, and
understanding, The Spirit of counsel, and might, the Spirit of knowledge, and
of the fear of the Lord. The Virtues are some Moral, and some Theological:
The Moral are, Prudence, Temperance, Justice, Fortitude, with other lesser
Virtues; and the Theological are Faith, H^pe, and Charity. The Fruits are in
part numbered unto us, by Saint Paul, in the fifth to the Galatians: But the
fruit of the Spirit, is love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith; Meekness, temperance. Lastly; the Beatitudes are these
eight, here in the fifth Chapter of S Matthew, Poverty in Spirit, Mourning,
Meekness, Hunger and Thirst after righteousness, Mercy* and so forward.
First, for Gifts, they are Habits in the Soul, which descend with the Holy
Ghost, the God of Love; and because they can never be disioyned from Love,
therefore they are peculiarly called by that name, The Gifts of the Holy Ghost.
The Virtues are likewise Habits, whereof some are conceived within the Mind of
Man, through the Light of Reason, as the Moral Virtues; and some are infused
into the Mind, as the free Gifts of God, namely the Theological. The Fruits
are like their name, the Issues and Fruits of the Spirit within us, and have a
double resemblance, unto corporal Fruits: first, that they be the last
Productions, of the strength, and vigor of the Spirit; Secondly, that they be
delectable, and pleasant to the Soul, as fruits are to the taste. Lastly, the
Beatitudes are outward Actions, and Practices; differing from Virtues, as in
some other respects, so also in this; that Virtues are Habits, and Powers of
the Mind; Beatitudes are Practices, and Operations of the Virtues. This Estate
of Meekness, falls into three of these Orders, and is both a Moral Virtue,
one of the Fruits of the Spirit, and a Beatitude. First, in respect of the
Moral Part of it, wherewith those noble Spirits, amongst the Heathen were
endued, it is the same with Patience, a Moral Virtue only, and rises no
higher. Secondly, as it brings delectation, and content to the Soul, it is one
of the Fruits of the Spirit, and reckoned amongst them, in that fifth Chapter
to the Galatians. And in the last place, as it is an eminent, and perfect
Practice of that Virtue, in the life of a Christian, it is one of the
Beatitudes, and the Persons excelling in it, are pronounced Blessed.

These Speculations of the Schoolmen, may seem too curious, and subtle,
especially for this Auditory, and therefore are to be touched only in Passage.
But I may set down this for Positive, that there are three things required in
Meekness, to make it a Beatitude, and to confirm the Professors of it, in
the State of Blessedness. The first is, that it be not an ordinary measure of
Meekness, but an Eminency, or Perfection in it. Secondly, that this
Meekness be accepted of God. Thirdly, that it be in the present, an
Inchoation, or Beginning of future Blessedness. For the first. Aristotle above
the common degree of Virtue, exalts one kind which is called Heroical,
which has that Eminency, that it dignifieth the Professors thereof, with the
Title of Diuini viri, deriuing unto them some participation of Deity, or
Divinity. This Meekness, whereof we speak, though it be not an Heroical
Virtue, (for that is too low a degree for a Christian) yet it must be some
supereminent degree, far above the positive, qualified not with one Action, or
Circumstance, but with many, and conueying the attribute of Beaci viri, or
Blessedness, to them that have it. There we many things concurring in David's
Meekness, to make it a Beatitude, or Blessedness. The Person of the King, was
sacred, not to he violated, by any lewd Reuiler: The Rayler was his Subject,
and had his life in the Kings hand: His passage at that time warlike, not to be
braued, by any bold affront: But the chief thing was, his humble Confession of
his sins, Let him curse, for the Lord has bidden him: And his patient
expecting a Recompense at Gods hands, It may be that the Lord will look on
mine afflictions, and will requite good for his cursing this day. And surely,
the Meekness of Saint Steven, was no less then a Beatitude; imitating the
Meekness of Christ, both in suffering Death patiently, and in offering up his
last Prayers, for his Persecutors. And the Effect of his Prayers was such, that
he obtained a great Enemy to the Church, and one of the hottest in his
persecution, to be afterward a Valiant Champion for Christ. This Meekness
must proceed from a double Root; Humility, which is the Exaltation of all
Virtues; and Charity, Charity bears all things, 1 Cor. 13.

The second Property, required to a Beatitude, is that it must be accepted of
God. The Heathen, though they were famous in this, and other Virtues, yet their
Meekness was not accepted of God. And as the reason is known, out of Saint
Paul, H^b. 11. Without faith it is impossible to please God: So to show, when
it comes in a form, pleasing unto him, Ecclesiastes has joined them both
together, He has pleasure in faith and Meekness. The singular Meekness of
Moses, was of this Kind; of whom we shall read from Gods own testimony; that
if a Prophet, had any ordinary Revelation from the Lord, the Lord did appear
unto him, in a Vision, or a Dream; But my servant Moses is not so, for he was
admitted, unto the familiar Conference and Bosom Counsels of the Lord: And
the cause of this high favor, and grace which he had with God, (as Dionysius
observes it) was the exceeding measure of his Meekness. David was declared
to be A man after Gods own heart, and it seems, that he was accepted for his
Meekness, when in making Intercession to God, he men^ions this Virtue only,
Memento Domine David, and omnis mansuetudinis eius: Lord remember David, and
all his Meekness. So I find it, in the Latin translation, though the
English reads it, And all his Afflictions. The third Property, required to a
Beatitude, is that it must be in the present, an Inchoation, or Beginning of
future Blessedness. Beatitude is properly, the last End of the life of man,
unto which all our Actions are directed, that we may obtain it: If it be an
apparent Beatitude only, it is that of the Philosophers; but the true
Beatitude, is only of Christians. These Virtues are called Beatitudes, not
because they are the eternal Rewards, which we shall enjoy after this life,
but because they are Estates of life, walking in the Laws, and favor of God,
and so far assured of future Happiness, as Hope can possess us of it. And
hope is so firm, that by it we partake of things future, as if they were now
real and present. By hope we are saved, says the Apostle, Romans 8 speaking in
a style, as if we did at the present enjoy it. Now for Meekness, it is an
Estate, as firmly possessing Heavenly Happiness, as any of the rest; The
meek man's prayers are pleasing unto God; Those that be meek will he teach
his ways; The Meek Man is apt, and vacant for Heavenly Contemplation; and
lastly, He will beautify the Meek with Salvation. These three things are
required, to a Beatitude. First, that it be a Virtue eminent in his kind.
Secondly, that it be accepted of God. Thirdly, that it be a beginning of
future Happiness.

The last general part of my Text, is the Reward, For they shall inherit the
earth. The Earth, which is employed in this Reward, may be double. First, this
transitory Earth, of which it is said, Heaven and Earth shall pass away: on
which the Meek, and the Mighty are mixed both together, and possess it
without distinction. Secondly, that immutable, and eternal Inheritance, of
which it is said* There shall be a new Heaven, and a new Earth; in which the
Meek shall have the sole possession of the Earth, without disturbance. Neither
do I see, but that the promise, made by our Savior Christ, unto the Meek,
may have this double respect. For it is a certain Rule, that is observed by
Saint Chrysostom; The promises of God, do not so assure us, of our future
Happiness, that they exclude us from a temporal Blessing: But seek ye first
the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be
added unto you: neither do they so reach unto us, a temporal Blessing, but
that the Latitude of his promise, does extend to a future. In which sense,
Saint Paul writes to Timothy; But Godliness is profitable unto all things,
having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come. To
say a little of each. First then it is without Question, that it may be meant,
of this present Earth. The Apostles, though they had profited in Christ, above
the common Multitude, notwithstanding they were at this time, and continued yet
Carnal. Diverse Instances convince them thereof afterward, in which they
understood many things, that were spoken of Christ, carnally: And our Savior
Christ, was well acquainted, how to draw, and allure Carnal Minds, partly and
at the first, by temporal Promises. As for that Psalm, from whence this text
is transferred, it is certain, by the whole phrase thereof, that it strikes
upon a temporal inheritance. Neither is this without Parallel, in most of the
Texts, of the old Testament, whenas in the Decalogue, or sum of the Moral
Law, there is but one promise, and that of a temporal Blessing, granted unto
those, that do bear due Honor to their Parents. Nor yet without Example,
seeing that of the great Multitude, which came forth out of Egypt, the
Murmurers were all cut off in the passage, and the Meek only suffered to
enter, into the Land of Canaan. As for that Interpretation of Saint Bernard,
that by the earth are employed our Earthly Bodies, whereof the Meek only have
quiet possession, in as much as in them, their Affections, and Passions are
subject unto Reason, it is no idle conceit, and it agrees also with a
Temporal Reward. For the second; It is also certain, that the Reward, which
is here promised by our Savior, does reach to a better Earth; of which David
speaks in the 27. Psalm, Unless I had believed to see the goodness of the
Lord, in the land of the living. The Earth here is the Land of the Dying;
either of those, which are dead in their sins, or poasting hastily to the
Coasts of Death: but the other Earth, whereof David speaks, is the Land of
the Living, and shall be the possession of those, who are the Inheriters of
Life, and Immortality. Besides this Text is originally a Verse of the 37.
Psalm, and in that place, (though the greatest part of the Psalm bends
another way) it is not altogether disioyned, from an eternal Inheritance; But
the meek shall inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves, in the
abundance of peace. Abundance of peace, is not the Portion of this World; in
which there is neither any solid Peace, nor any true measured Abundance; but is
reserved to be the Reward of that place; In which there is fullness of joy, and
pleasures for evermore. Again, Inheritance is not alone a Lawful Right, but a
Constant Possession, which is only the Tenure of the World to come. And
lastly, the Blessing of the Meek, is of the same Latitude, with that of the
Peacemakers; who are called in the ninth verse, the children of God. And Saint
Paul says in the eight to the Romans, And if Children, then heirs, heirs of
God, and joint heirs with Chist. And so much for the Reward, implying
Blessings of two kinds, which are both temporal, and eternal.

Let us now, as good Orators were wont to do, recollect the general Heads,
of that which has been spoken. I have gone through the three parts of my
Text. The first was, the Condition, and Estate of Men, whom our Savior, in
this Sentence, pronounces Blessed; The Meek. And in this part, I represented
unto you, a rude Model of Meekness: wherein I described first the Nature of
Meekness, that it is Moderatiua Irarum, A Moderation of Anger. Next the two
Kinds of Meekness, toward God, and toward Man; and withal the Opposite
Vices in each kind: In the first kind; Murmuring against God, for two Causes;
for the prosperous Estate of the Ungodly, and for the supposed unprosperous
Estate of the Godly. In the other Kind toward Man, three opposite Vices. 1.
Readiness, or Pronenesse to Anger. 2. Harmefulnesse, or an evil Desire of
Doing wrong. 3. Thirst of Revenge, after an Injury received. Of this Meekness
toward Man, I observed three Preservatives: Governing, or Brideling of the
Tongue; Cession, or Giving place unto Wrath; and a Motion, or Endeavor of
Reconciliation. Further lest this Virtue should have an evil Report, as the
Descendant of Baseness, or Pusillanimity, I have freed it, from that Ignominy,
and Scandal. And lastly, lest it should be obtruded under a false Vizour, I
have separated two Vices, or Extremes, from it; the one an Error in our
Nature, (Softness, or Dullness of Spirit:) the other in our Manners
(Remissness or Looseness in our Functions.) The second general Part, was
the Dignity, or Sublimity of the Meek: Blessed. In which part, I recited four
Kinds: Gifts, Virtues, Fruits, Beatitudes, with their differences: Beside,
three Properties required to the Constitution of a Beatitude. First, that it
be an eminent Virtue, in his own Kind. Secondly, that it be accepted of God:
Thirdly, that it be an Inchoation of future Blessedness. The last general
Part, was the Reward, promised unto the Meek, which included Blessings of two
Kinds, that is, both Temporal and Eternal, For they shall inherit the Earth.

This Sermon of Meekness, I conceive now, should affect most of us, with that
Passion, which ouertooke the young Man, in the Gospel, at our Saviors
Counsel of Perfection, that He went away sorrowful. If we be Christ's
Disciples of Meekness, we shall be sure, to have our share, of as much
Discontent, and Unhappiness, as this world can inflict upon us. And who are
proper, to be the Footstool, of every arrogant, and ignoble Spirit, but the
Meek? Which portion was long since allotted them, by one that had feelingly
contemplated of that Argument; They turn the needy, out of the way, the meek
of the earth, hide themselves together, Job 14. But the matter is not thus. For
first, the Encouragement is not small, which our Savior Christ annexeth to the
end of his Inuitation to Meekness; Learn of me, for I am meek, and lowly of
heart, and you shall find rest to your souls. That which all the world cannot
give, will Meekness assure us. And what is it, to be tossed, and bruised in
our Bodies, so we enjoy that Tranquillity of Mind, and Soul, above all the
Happiness of the world? And next, if we consider the Persons, that will
trample upon Meekness, they are none but those harsh, and ungodly Spirits,
who, if he were upon Earth again, would not spare to afflict, even the Lord
of Meekness himself, and to crucify him anew. And for those that are not
extremely ill, though Meekness has not a Weapon to resist, yet it has
Innocence, to protect it self against wrong; and as Seneca said of Cato, Quis
enim sciens Catoni iniuriam faceret? For who would willingly have offered any
Injury to Cato? But for the Gentle, and Pious Natures, there is nothing that
wins so much favor, and love from them, as Meekness does: And the
Counsel of Ecclesiasticus is always true; who was expert as well in Moral,
as in Divine Wisdom: My son perform thy doings with Meekness, so shall
thou be beloved of them that are approved. But if the case of the Meek man,
be so low, as to be forsaken on Earth, yet he has an Advocate, and a Judge
in Heaven, by whom amongst many other disconsolate Estates, the Afflictions of
these persons are not least regarded, For He will argue with Equity for the
Meek of the Earth; as the Prophet Isaiah speaks Laslly, because Examples are
pregnant to move us, especially when we have seen the latter end of them, I
will close up all in one Sentence of Saint James, of extraordinary force, and
persuasion, Ye have heard of the Patience of Job, and have seen the end of the
Lord.

The Text, of which I have spoken, is placed in an even distance, betwixt the
Poor and the Merciful. The observation is not impertinent, for though it be
no member of my Text, yet it is a part of my Errand, to commemorate the
thankful praises, of these poor Children, and other needy Persons, for your
merciful Affection toward them. I remembered but even now the Patience of Job.
The Advancement, which that Virtue brought him in the end, is manifest out of
the Scriptures. There was another thing intermixed with this Man's Virtues,
mentioned by himself, in his 29. chapter, Benedictio perituri; The blessing of
him that was ready to perish came upon me. And no doubt but it was a Motive,
unto which God had respect, in the Instauration of his Happiness. This
Blessing, I rejoice, that I have so good cause, to account it your Portion; for
whom the Prayers of so many Orphans, and Widows, and disconsolate creatures,
are daily sacrificed: and I desire of God, that it may not only be cast into
the Stock of this City, for your temporal increase, but that it might be
laid up for you, against that day, when God shall divide his Rewards, for such
holy works; In as much as ye have done it, to one of the least of these, ye
have done it unto me. It were a shame, if I should not confess, that this
Mother City, like another Dorcas, has been full of good works: and it is
observed, that there are erected, in some place or other about it, almost
yearly Monuments of your Bounty. These are laudable works, for the Beauty, and
Honor of the place: But yet in a true estimation, they can be held for no
better, then the Piles of Magnificence: It is that work only toward the
Poor, by which you shall build you Houses, upon a sure foundation; For the
poor shall receive you into everlasting habitations. Again, there is no man
can deny, but that the Government, and Justice of this City, are indeed famous,
and exemplary: This work of Justice alone, is like unto those Sublimed Gifts,
whereof Saint Paul speaks; Relief of the poor comes nearest to Charity;
neither would this prudent Exercise of your Justice, give any better, then a
tinckling sound, without your mixture of Charity. I speak not this to flatter
you with praises, for that would be like an unkind Breath of Wind, to blast
your toward fruits of Devotion; but with another intention, that, as the
Orator says, (...) might be (...), which is, that the Praises of what you
have done, might be Prouocations and Persuasions, unto fresh Examples of Piety.
Lastly, though I know the temper of Mercy to be such, that it loves nothing
less then a Trumpet; yet lest good works should be buried; or loose this
spring time of a new Emulation, both in your selves, and others, give me leave
to recite the number of distressed souls, which have been relieved by your
Bounty, since your last solemn Assembly upon this day. etc.

FJNJS.

