Noble Blastus:

THE HONOR OF A LORD CHAMBERLAIN: AND OF A GOOD BED-CHAMBER-MAN: OR The
COVRTIER justified in Conditions of Peace.

BEING A Sermon preached the 27. of March, 1631. before Sir LUCIUS CARRY, and the
Congregation at Burford Church in Oxfordshire;

WITH Special Relation to the Coronation-day, and the Plague and Dearth then
among the people.

BY JOHN RANDOL Bachelor in Divinity, of Brasen-nose College in Oxford.

LONDON, Printed for Tho: Lambert near the Hospitall-gate in Smithfield. 1633.

ACTS. 12.20. And Herod was highly displeased with them of Tire and Sidon: but
they came with one accord to him, and having made Blastus the Kings
Chamberlain their friend, desired peace, because their country was nourished
by the Kings country.


And Herod was war-minded or intending war to the Tyrians and Sidonians: but
they came with one accord to him; and persuading Blastus, who was one over the
Kings bedchamber, or, of the Kings-bed-chamber, they desired peace, because
their country was nourished by the Kings.
THis text contains a design of King Herod: a design of war: And usually
designs of war are in the spring; as now the season is with us: designs of
war, which private men ought not to handle; yet appertain to us all it does
to render thanks for having so gracious a King of peace, in whom there is no
design of war: virtues by their contraries do best appear; the Kings grace
by Herod's bloody mind; the happiness of our peace by the unhappiness of
Herod's war: therefore have I chosen this text to celebrate this day; a day of
peace; wherein our Sovereign Lord, a King of peace, began his reign, for
the good of other kingdoms as well as of our own; because he is not hostilely
intended against any realm: he is not, but God is: as we shall justly
commemorate unto you, how God by famine has designed a war against us all,
unless as the Tyrians sought peace with Herod, so we with God: Thus is the
text suitable to remember us both of this present precious day and of this
present dear year: The parts are these:

1. Herod's design against the Tyrians: 2. The Tyrians prevention of such
design. The design is for war; a passionate design; he was not only angry
with them of Tire and Sidon, (as the former translations did read it) but
highly displeased with them; and more, (as the last translation notes in the
margent,) that Herod did bear an hostile mind intending war against them: as
it is in the Greek, (...) from (...) and (...) says Erasmus, a war-minded man:
plusquam iratus, he was more then angry; for he did meditate a war against
them: bellum enim meditabatur, (says Lintrensis.) he had a fighting mind, and
meditated war against them: pugnacem gerens animum; meditans ac moliens
belium, says Lorinus: yes, yes; anim^ moliens bellum* he was bent for war,
says the Tigurine: This is the first part: Herod's design against the Tyrians
and Sidonians. Then the second part is their preventio^ of this design by
pacifying the King: wherein observe their expeditio^ of redress: they came
presently to the King: and their unanimity: they came with one accord: then
their prudent and respective dealing, by a mediator; having made Blastus their
friend: having persuaded Blastus; who is described by his office, to be one of
the Kings bedchamber, or one over the Kings bedchamber; by whose means they
prefer their submissive request to the King himself for peace, by way of
petition they desired peace; and lastly the cause of all; because their
country was nourisht by the Kings country: there is cause enough for their
desirance of peace; but his desire of war has no mentioned cause at all: we
are to examine the conjecturall doctrines of both sides: beginning with King
Herod, and his passionate design for war (...) he was wrathfully minded to
make war against them.

Of Herod and his passion.
When iniquity runs in a line, transgression down a whole blood; in some
generations you shall scarce find any good of all the name: Herod the son of
Antipater slew all the younger innocents when Christ was borne; and would have
murdered our Savior too; if providence had not prevented it by a saving
dream. Herod, his son, Tetrarch of Galilee, slew John the Baptist Mar. 6.
and most despitefully used our Savior at his death: Luke 23. and this third
Herod in the text slew James the Apostle, emprisoned Peter, drew his own
Traine-band to execution; and now is in a quartan ague of choler and melancholy
mixed with sordid blood, until he have laid the Tyrians dishonorably at his
feet. Among Ieroboams race, one young man was found, 1 Kings. 14.13. that had
pious intentions toward God: and it was but only one: But among the Herod's
none.

In marriage then be careful with what race ye interveine: Fortes creantur
fortibus, Gracious men of gracious parents come; and cruel impes from bloody
loins: if otherwise, it is by chance: Lois was good, Eunice good, Timotheus
good; S. Paul brings down the line: Grand-parents, parents, children, all
good: 2 Timothy 1.5. Aristotle can sit ye with a contrary tale; wherein the
grandfather was evil, the father evil, and the son evil: A plea being
entered against a man for beating of his own father, he thus answers to defend
himself; Most honorable Judges, in regard my father beat my Grandfather
before he dyed, and mine own son has likewise beaten me, let it not seem so
heinous a crime unto your sacred ears, if I have beaten my father also; est
enim hoc generi nostro proprium: For it is the property of all our generation
to beat their fathers, sometime or other, before they die. A goodly property.

Another drawing his father by the head unto the utmost door, his Father
entreated him there to rest; for so far he drew his Father, and left him there:
Arist. lib. 7. Eth. cap. 6. a chapter and examples suting with these Herod's
best of any next unto the word of God: for they were (...) angry men by nature;
and (...) quickly angry by inheritance; and (...) deeply, and bitterly angry
unto war, and blood and death it self: Men full of revenge, and of greater
mischief full: This was the property of all their generation: Heavens bless
women from such husbands, men from such a Prince, as Herod was: (...) a man
suddenly inflamed with anger; meditating nothing but war and death upon every
light suspicion of offense: (...).

Yet was not he the chief Commander of the State; but an underling deputy, or
Lieutenant only: Regunculus; a vassall-King: Claudius Caesar was the chief
Emperor of all Judaea, and the world besides: Herod a contemptible man in
comparison of him; of an obscure fortune in Caligulaes time, cast into prison
but a while ago; and now his bolts being newly knocked off, and the fury tossed
into such honor, as you see; he swells and domineeres over all; as if he were
the supreme Governor himself.

There is nothing more terrible then a Humblebee; if it could but get a sting.
Set servants on horseback once, they will quickly make their masters go on
foot. A sporting feast in was among the Thessalians and the Romans themselves
at their Saturnalian feasts, for the Masters once a year to serve their men;
and the Roman Matrons to wait upon their maids; obeying each command as they
did theirs the day before: Macrob. lib. 1. cap. 7.10.12. Seneca epist. 4.7.
Whether a wanton, or a wiser order; to acknowledge fortunes chance, the charity
of nature, or the change of times, I do not know: But sure I am, King Solomon
speaks it in a serious crime, amongst the many vanities of this World, that he
had seen this absurdity for one, Servants riding on horseback and Princes
walking beneath on foot: Eccles. 7.10. A vanity for slaves to be seen above
their betters; those on horseback, these on foot: but an absurdity of vanities
to see them higher in their own imaginations, then they were upon the saddle:
For he saw them not on Asses, or on mules as Princes of that Country rode; But
on horses; the proudest, fiercest, swiftest executioner of state: to signify
their superstately pride. And such this Herod was. For out of prison did he
come to reign: and therefore should have considered, says Solomon, Eccles.
4.14. that from his reign he might return to prison again: God can emprison
Kings, as easily as they can other men: and therefore Herod needed not have
been so too too outragiously forward for a war.

Meandness of beginning, or breach of greater Fortune, if once it come unto
the prison, or near the pit; it should teach more gentleness to men and more
obedience unto God: as it did Manasseh in 2 Chronicles. 33. v. 12: then God takes
off their fetters, forgives their sins, and will prolong their lives: But if
they despise the punishment of God, remain as obdurate as they were, sudden
destruction shall seize upon the^, says Job most prophetically in his 36.
chap. v, 8: 9. etc. as here on Herod most unexpectedly it did; because he was
(...) a man of a bloody and an hostile mind: upon every light occasion
meditating a war: a man so meanly descended, and yet so highly ascended
again in his own conceit. And such are usually more fierce then ancient
blood: Asperius nihil est humili, quum surgit in altum: their ignorance makes
them more savage then the rest: Or else their not partaking with the native
blood: cuncta ferit, dum cuncta timet; desaevit in omnes, ut se posse putent:
as Claudianus goes on: he strikes at all, where ever he fears; and rages
against all, that all may think him alone to be the mighty man: whereas, love
is the best preserver of a State; fear is but a doubtful band: ac multos
metuat oportet, quem metuunt multi: Plut: and he must needs fear many, whom so
many fear: meekness becomes the start of honor best, so shall he be the
sooner pitied and befriended if he fall: but unskilful tyrants think pride
and fierceness the only two, can make them seem to be egregious men: Besides
these privitive there are ma^^y positive causes, why such as these may incline
to vehement affections; especially arising from a mean estate; and yet made
forgetful from whence they did arise; For as coursest corn affords the
hardest crust; so coursest blood the most malignant choler: their unusual diet
makes them insolently mad; their company much more: enraged with fuming wines,
and swollen venemously big with the flatteries of many men, having prospered in
a cruelty or two. What dares not he now enterprise? (...) he was highly
displeased to the very point of death it self.

Foolish men succeeding well twice or thrice in the shedding of blood are
presently drunk with everlasting hope, that they shall ever prosper in it to
their dying day. James he beheaded, Peter emprisoned, executed his trayne-band;
and faring well in that (...) he was bloodily and hostilely intended for any
occasion that should next accrue: But wise men know Gods patience does invite
them to repentance or their greater fall: it was Herod's imperfection to gather
flesh, and take degrees in blood; yet never fear a fall; until it was too
late.

Some deputies are fiercer then supreme governors themselves, only to
demonstrate their officiousness of place: others to satisfy the vengeance of
their spleen: King David would have Abner saved 2 Samuel 3. But Ioab the
Captain of the Army would have him slain: Herod did destroy the innocent
young children which Caesar the chief Emperor would not have done: and
therefore thus reproacht him for it, when he heard the news: Herod thou art
kinder to thy swine, then to thy son: Thou killst not them, because thou art
a Jew; but children all; thou do not spare thine own; for fear of
usurpation, whilst thou art alive.

The Devil brought our Savior to the Temples top; yet would not throw him
down: his own Country men brought him to their steepest hill, and there they
would have thrust him headlong down: Luke 4. v. 29. No fire would our Savior
have from heaven to destroy the Samaritans; but his Disciples would. Luke 9. as
in the text: No war would Caesar have with them of Tire; but his Lieutenant
Herod has a mind unto it: Whether in folly of too much officiousness, or in
blood and covetisme, as more likely it was: what ever pretenses are, the cause
is always foul; when underofficers are more fierce and bloody, then the
supreme governors themselves.

But what ayleth this tempestuous wolf, that speaks not a syllable less then
death? thinks not a thought inferior to war? A war spends both the blood
and treasure of a State: and therefore the State should be consulted with,
before he enterprise a war: Ph. Com. lib. 10. especially the chief Moderator
of the State: Caesar, the imputation will be yours; whatever your
underofficers do offend: Herod, you may rule their treasure, but not their
hearts; if thus you estrange them by unnecessary wars: your chronicles Herod
can inform you well by King Amasiahs and Iosiahs reign, what maine damages
do still accompany such unnecessary wars.

Unluckie progress then! For what? Herod coming down to celebrate the Plays
of Caesar's health, some cunning brains at Caesarea have found means to accuse
the Tyrians to him: what will you say, if Blastus himself subornd the men that
did accuse, and now the same become a suitor for their peace? I say that
Blastus was too good a man to do so bad an act: but if he should; the crime was
Herod's still: For as he is worse that does infect his mind, then he that does
corrupt his blood: so it is his fault, that does not look to both: the greater
crime with greater care avoid: the height of danger lies in war: the height both
of sin and of disgrace in blood: the angry waspes and bees are full of stings;
the King of Bees, says Seneca, has none: solus ipse rex aculeo caret: No more
should Herod have.

Or, what will you say, if Herod never meant, yet did pretend a war: to
uncrest the Tyrians pride, and so enrich himself? But the text says not, that
he was (...) as a man intending war; but (...) a man really meditating a
war indeed: and I say, both safety and honor it is for Kings to be
contented with their own: to be Kings over themselves as well as other men;
that is truly to be a King indeed.

Or, if any man say, the war was intended because tribute was not paid; that
defense is false: for such their speedy petitioning of peace with cost; shows
either Tribute was not due from them, or if due, then it never was denied.

Or what? if the Tyrians did receive S. Peter and his doctrine with triumphant
joy, who so lately had displeased Herod, might he not therefore justly threaten
them a war? what if they did? so did the Caesareans receive S. Peter too: why
then should he meditate a war against those, more then these? these under his
Empire were, those not so: if therefore against the Caesareans he did not move
a war for interteining of S. Peter's faith; much less against the Tyrians ought
it to be done: as learnedly Zanchius and Lorinus against Baronius prove: What
Prince did ever move a war against those that were not under his command
merely and only for religion sake? for other things they may: but merely and
only for religion sake, Lorinus in his conscience thinks they may not. Lor. de
fide and Bello. So think our Church; who never do destroy an heretic merely
for religion sake; but for some other additament of cause. No: no: their own
fair Chronicler Josephus, who describes this very progress of Herod to his
death, reports no cause at all: and an unworthy war it needs must be, that is
not worthy of a cause. Nor do the Fathers give him any: but as S. Chrysostom
says, because he was (...) etc. In (...). facile irascens and vanae gloriae
cupidus: a vain glorious man; proud and ambitious; of a fierce and
overconfident mind; unsatiable both in wealth and honor: and where such
natures be; if no other cause be found, it is reason enough to move a war
upon you, merely because you are next neighbor to them: si ob nullam aliam
causam, tamen propter vicinitatem: o the miserable condition of evil
neighborhood: it is the common infelicity of every age; that neighbors
seldom do agree: and the potenter they be, the greater still the fewd:
because mighty men would ever dwell alone, says Esa. chapter 5.3. and being
willing to fall out; though cause be wanting yet prete^se is easy to be found:
it is il to neighbor next unto a covetous man; but worse to border next unto an
ambitious Prince: for as covetous me^ add house to house; so tyrants realm to
realm: no other kingdom is so great, but their appetite is as great, as it:
still thirstingly extending their line over others though they have not so much
as any just color of a war: that's the tyrants case: never contented
prudently to rule their own; though that be greater charge then well they can
perform: be their own dominions never so large, yet the next territory would
make a sweet addition to it: If Herod could but add Tire and Sidon to his
kingdom of Judaea! for which he is now (...) a man meditating of a war.

And is this thy meditation Herod? thou know the law; if a mean man remove
the mark of his Neighbors Land; he shall be accursed for it; much more a
Prince if he, Hosea 5.10. the World it self is transitory: why then do you not
enlarge your virtues rather then your lands? in coveting others goods, why will
ye lose your own? your own good conscience, which ten thousand times more
precious is, then all the gold of Tire: know then to be contented whenever
ye have enough: know then ye have enough whenever ye are contented with
it: though ye shed no blood, nor any combat wage; yet if you meditate or
pretend a strife to procure conditions of advantage to your selves by ruin of
other men, that neither did offend God nor you the Caelestiall spirit will
brand you for it, as he does this Herod in the text; that he was (...) a man
intending war or blood or any thing to procure unlawful conditions of
advantage to himself.

And is this thy meditation still O Herod? and do thou prosper in it, after
such abundance of sanctified blood as thou have shed? one would have thought,
some thunderbolt might have dashed out thy brains, the earth have opened, and
so the bloody wretch dropped down at once, as Satan did, from heaven to hell, or
that some potent enemy might have invaded well his land, and put him to the
inglorious halter, or to the revengefull sword. But lo prosperity in
conditions of gain and peace! The wicked in their seasons may have good
success, be free from troubles others do receive Psalm. 73. Ier. 12.
Conjecture not the worse of holiness, because unholy men do prosper in the
world: they have their heaven here: till suddenly the oracles of God take
place; and then in a moment they tumble to the ground, ingloriously, as Herod
did, consumed of worms: proud wormes-meat that we are, threatening a final
destruction unto others when we our selves are the very next to be destroyed:
Meteors, that blaze by night, and perish the next fair morning with the rising
sun; vain glorious fury, boil on, boil on, your blood is not yet hot
enough, is it? set your heart on fire then, the very wild fire of revenge. But
is this a royal passion fitting for a King? to be (...) upon every light
occasion the fomente of a war? the dismal issue shows how vile it is with
God: The worms within a month encounter him to death: Though just wars be
necessary to repress bold sins, yet unjust are odious both to God and men:
Dij talem terris avertite pestens: God in his good time take all such Herod's
away from troubling of quiet men.

So much of Herod and his passionate intention of a war: now come to the
people against whom: the Tyrians and Sidonians: of them and their actions: Then
Herod was hostilely intended against the Tyrians and Sidonians.

Tire and Sidon two ancient towns upon the Sirian sea, lay six Germane miles
apart, not far from Herod's jurisdiction, Tyras the son of Iaphet built the
one: and Sidon, Hams grandchi^d, did found the other, if Divines may be
believed: So that Tire in likelihood might be the antienter: both mentioned
Genesis 10. ver. 2. and ver. 15. But if heathens credit have, the Phaenicians
built Sidon, then Tire, and both before the Trojan war: Justin. lib. 18.
Curtius says, Agenor built them both: No matter which were the antienter (...)
both famous towns of merchandise they we^^; the Sidonians Homer celebrates for
many-a^ted, many-crafted, and cunning-crafted men: (...), and Virgill for the
verses or the kindreds sake, Sidonia Dido: though Justin say she was born at
Tire: Famous Queen Dido, discontented at her hushands death, fled into Africa;
there built Carthage, and so renowned her sex, as well as name, that once a
woman gat the third part of the world, Justin. lib. 18. and lib. 2. at Tire was
Cadmus borne, that did build Thebes: and, for ought we know, our selves might
come from Tire; at Tire the art of navigation, and of making glass; the
siderall science, and martial discipline, with many other learned arts, their
first invention had. The freedom and incomparable commodity of the sea gave
them variety of fame and fortune too: their youth they did diffuse throughout
all the world, and who but Tire and Sidon, in all the Colonies of Africa and
Europe did bear the name? as Justin, Curtius, Plinij, Mela, and others report
at large.

But what need heathen authors? the sacred text is full: and gives praecedency
perpetually to Tire: From Tire did David and Solomon fetch their Caedar for
sumptuous building of a Temple to the omnipotent God. 2 Chronicles. 2.3. Tire was
the Mart and fare for all the world: Fine wheat and spices; Unicornes horns
and Elephants teeth; lead iron and tynne, they were no traffic with them: But
silk and purple; silver gold and pearl; the sardius, topaze, and the diamond;
the Chrysolite and the onix; the jasper sapphire and the emeraude, with every
other pretions stone: their shops and garments were as rich below, as if they
would compare with the pavement of the new Jerusalem above the stars: Read
the 27. and 28 Chap. of Ezekiel, and wonder, whether ever there were a
statelyer City in the world; then was this purple Tire; this golden Tire, nay,
that is not enough, but this crowning Tire: Queen of the seas, nay goddess of
the seas, whose merchants were princes and their chapmen the Nobles of the
world. Thou great creator of new Princes, where, and when thou please! Thou,
whose very servants can sustain such loss of ponderous sums, without any
sensible decay: as would make a Noble man of other Countries shrink into his
prime original again! As the Prophet Esaias does describe thine honor in
terms as rich, as thou art proud, Esaias 23. Thou that fear Neptune more then
God, or Alexander the great; have thou not yet been often enough destroyed?
Once did Nebuchadnezar ruin all thy state: another time Alexander the great:
Those Monarchs honored thee in attempting such a prize: And had the Roman
Monarch Caesar been thy foe; thou had again been honored here. But now it is
Herod a vassal King. What is the cause between ye? or if not so; the
pretense, what is it?

Monarchs and free Cities seldom do agree, these to preserve and magnify
their own, invite the neighbor subjects to like freedom with themselves:
those to maintain their ambition and their lust, strive to enslave the others
like unto their own: Ambassadors, Agents and Merchants whosoever you be, that
traffic into other common wealths, whose form peradventure may differ from
your own; your license is from God to preserve each other, in exchanging
friendshipps, wealth, and wares: but no authority have you to destroy each
others form. The stately melancholy comes as well from God, as does the
sanguine mirth: Monarchs as lawful as free cities are, free cities as
legitimate as they: I speak for servants faith, that they be not (...) medlers
in other Princely governments, where they have nothing to do: Preserve your
own then; let others look to theirs, preserving is good, but over-magnifying
ruins all, as Tire and Sidon here were like to do: For which Herod was
hostilely intended against the Tyrians and Sidonians.

The greater riches are the greater prey: by arms that cannot, by submission
must defend themselves: Your riches, Tire, and want of arms are your
destruction now; unless you do submit: it is better to want wealth then
government of wealth: For which Herod was hostilely intended against the Tyrian
and Sidonian Towns.

There is a truer God of Tire then they themselves: their pride and
covetousness, their falsehood in their wares; the true God of Tire does justly
punish now, in suffering Herod to be (...) a denouncer of war against the
Tyrian and Sidonian pride.

Remember Tire, you long ago were given of God for your Idolatry to Asers
tribe, Josh. 19. v. 29. your Idolatry does still remain, for which God suffers
Herod now to threaten war upon you.

Remember Tire and Sidon, how that our Savior Christ vouchsafed to come to
you: Mat. 15. when never a Tyrian nor Sidonian would vouchsafe to come to him:
but only a Syro-phenician, dwelling near; whose daughter was so piteously
perplexed with a devil. Now therefore he has delivered you into Herod's
hands, Deus impios per impios punit, God punishes sinners by sinners greater
then themselves; the Idolatrous Israelites by more Idolatrous Nebuchadnezer:
the proud merciless Tyrians by Herod, that was more merciless then they.

They that are prime in Gods favor, shall be prime in punishment too, if they
prove unthankful unto God: the Tyrians have praeheminence in both, and
therefore in the method of Gods revenge, the war is principally against the
Tyrian town; against the Tyrians and Sidonians and principally against the
Tyrians Herod caries a most bloody mind.

Nay Tire, you shall have judgment to a scruple now, you boasted that your
chapmen were as rich as Noble men in other countries were: By what men sin,
they shall be punished by the same: by chapmen did you sin, by chapmen shall
you be punished; here is a chapman for you, but in a Nobler kind; if ye will
join all together to make a good reward, Blastus shall mediate your peace unto
the King. (...) So much of the Tyrians and Sidonians. Now of their action.

But they came all with one accord unto him. But who acquaints them with the
displeasure of the King? Likely some messenger did advertise them of the Kings
design, some summons or some pretensive claim there was. A Kings wrath is
like the roaring of a lion, says Solomon. Prove. 19.12. Now a lions roaring is
but a proem to the devouring of the next good prey he meets: and the wider he
roares, the greater is the preparation of his stomach to devour: So is the
fury of a King. Inferiors therefore must not look for much discussion of the
cause, but presently appease the displeasure that is begun: and therefore they
came all with one accord unto him: They came, and they came all; and they came
all with one accord unto him.

Unanimity is the Kingdoms wall and weal. Not like a heard of furious bulls
that turn their heads one against another; but like the music of the Lute,
where all the strings harmoniously agree: so come they now with one accord.

It seems it was a popular estate; and that the Citizens had all their voices
in matters of so great a consequence, as was the consultation of peace and
war, such was the custom of Aristotle's time, Lib. 4. politic. cap. 14. and
here, some hundreds of years after that. They came with one accord.

And yet the cities came not all abroad, but men selected for the embassy of
peace; The whole Kingdom may be said to do, whatsoever is done by eligible
men.

Ambassadors and agents are of ancient right: and must be able to persuade or
to discuss a cause, and they by their ambassadors came with one accord and
persuaded Blastus. They are come then, but not yet admitted into the presence
of the King.

Kings live in greater state then Free Cities do: there is no treating with
them, unless some great Internuncio be made your friend: therefore they
persuade Blastus. Arch-Prophet Nathan himself of old did not enter into David's
presence, until some great attendant had preinformed the King: 1 Kings 1.23.
Nor here the Ambassadors of Tire (to preserve the ancient honor of the Jews
Court:) dare once presume without the mediation of Blastus to enter the
presence of the King: But they came with one accord, and having persuaded
Blastus, the Kings Chamberlain, one of, or one over the Kings Bebchamber.

But who may this Blastus be?
(...) in greek, in Latin Germen, is a branch or young twigge in our English
tongue: it skills not greatly what the name, but what the nature and office of
the man imports: his office was (...) either one of the Kings bedchamber, or
one over the Kings bedchamber, either Provost over the whole chamber (as the
Imperial order is) or else one of the Chamber to his sacred person: it is
uncertain which, for (...) in office will bear both ingreek: But certain it
is, that he was very near and very dear unto the King himself: some prime
bedchamber man, at least, it may be of his secret Council too: such as
Aristotle calls (...) in the 2. of his Polit. and 5. chap. men surpassing
others in qualities laudable, and fit for Courts: Some streine it to the
Treasurer or Secretary of State, because they have always free access to the
presence of the King: but that cannot so properly be here, for they are neither
of them (...) neither directly over, nor directly of the Kings bedchamber; as
here Blastus was: says my learned council of interpreters upon the text:

Illustrious Princes have many noble servants, wise in the worlds esteem, and
gracious in their masters eyes: of this sort Blastus was. The matter they
propound was fair, and advantageous to the King, as well as to themselves: So
Blastus. he becomes the mediator of their peace.

The Courtier justified against all his adversaries; English, Greek and Latin.
But O noble Blastus I find thee much accused: a Jury of interpreters have
condemned thee for a corrupted man, I am ashamed to name them, there are so
many of them: well oyled with gifts thou undertak^^st the cause, they say, or
else thou would not speak a word. But which of the^ can prove it to be so?
Why might not Blastus, being great in office, noble in disposition of nature,
(as his very name imports) and prudently foreseeing, that the matter might be
well accorded both for the Kings purpose and the Tyrians future good, of his
mere goodness, rather the^ of covetousness undertake the cause? Or if he had a
large reward, yet should not their words be larger the^ his fee! if he had a
large reward; yet it is excusable, because the laborer is worthy of his hire;
especially in so good a cause as peace! If he had a large reward; yet the more
excusable it is because the Tyrians and Sidonians were very rich, and very well
able to bestow it upon him: rapacious Merchants, and proud inhabitants of Tire;
long had their unrighteous riches audaciously offended God: yet Blastus does
take none, but what they do most affectionately persuade him to accept: and
therefore still the more laudable it was; for they persuaded Blastus says the
text: (...) and they persuading Blastus of the Kings Bedchamber.

Persuading.
So that he was neither pragmaticall nor corrupt: not pragmaticall; to
undertake the cause till he was persuaded to it: nor yet corrupt; to undertake
it for any thing so much as for persuasion, when once he saw the goodness of
the cause! and therefore to argue more strongly still from the plain text it
self; which is the end of all controversy: if really and indeed Blastus had a
large reward; yet ought not any living man to say it was so: because the
Scripture uses a more mollifying phrase; and only says; he was persuaded to
it. The most sacred Spirit of the text thus teaching the rudeness of the world
not to defame a Court: (the derogation does redound to the Prince himself:)
but to ingratiate their manners with all candidnesse of speech; he says not,
that they corrupted, but they persuaded Blastus. What then the very language of
the holy Ghost names a mere persuasion, how dares the rudeness or the envy of
inferior men call that very same thing corruption? And they persuading Blastus.

You know that honor may invite, justice may require, yea want of safety may
necessitate a man to have a suite at Court: For woe to the oppressed if they
might not have recourse unto their King! yet more then woe if their mediators
be ignobleminded men: Miserable is he, that deals with a grype: twice
miserable that with a propitious fool: but thrice lamentable, that meets with
both in one: if ^^ch vices creep into a Court, the Court creeps out of honor
by it: But God be thanked here is no such cause of Blastus to complain: in
Artaxerxes evil Court Nehemiah he was good: in Ahashuerus evil Court Mordecay
he was good: and in Herod's evil court why might not Blastus here be good? Does
not our Savior say? Blessed are the peace makers. Mat. 5. thrice blessed then
thou Blastus art: thy feet more beautiful, then others faces are; because thou
bring tidings of glad peace: that by thee the Tyrians dare to move, what by
themselves they never durst to do, conditions of peace: And persuading
Blastus, who was of the Kings Chamber, they desired peace.

A friend at Court is worth a Kingdom at ones need; the Kingdom of Tire and
Sidon: and more then that; he is worth the saving of ten thousand souls:
rivers of blood and most abhorred death had likely been the end of all; if
Blastus had not interceded for them!

How much more good may Courtiers do then men of meaner place; if they would
employ their utmost power! The Tyrians, they had lost their lives; and Herod,
he had been the more condemned if Blastus had not been!

Blastus their friend; Patron both of their goods and lives! by his breath now
they live! (...) And having persuaded Blastus, they desired peace.

(...) postulabant pace^^: So much of their mediator; now to the substance of
their petition it self; which was peace: they desired peace.

Peace is the fair ornament both of Church and Commonwealth: peace is the
lawful profit of the whole World: peace the desirab^^ pleasure both of man and
beast: Therefore they desired peace.

The Tyrians in estate being very rich; and in freedom, richer then estate;
might have been richer in pride then in freedom; and so have arrogantly
replied, we are unused to serve; nor will we now begin. But weighing well
their suffrances of old; they now desired peace.

Happy they whose former wars can make them at the last desirous of a peace,
more happy they that can desire it without a war, (...) they desired it.

But by what means do they obtain it? Is the King so soon appeasable a man,
as to grant it upo^so small desire? How small? To pay submission is a dearer
rent, then are ten thousand millions by the year: heroic spirits count it so;
though base do not: which makes Solomon say, Prove. 25. v. 15. A soft answer
breaks the bones: so that as he, whose bones are broken cannot rise up to be
revenged upon you: no more can he, whose mind is appeased with a soft answer:
they both sit still; as if they were eqnally well appayed. Renowned Solomon
thou have blessed my weary bones with sweetest sleep by that sweet phrase of
thine; and taught us all great angers to appease by soft answers and submissive
deeds. For they persuading Blastus did humbly desire peace; and obtained it of
a furious King. Thus their submission did prevail something; their mediator
more; being in favor with the King* their time and place as much as both: for
wh^^ ^oyes in feasts and triumph are on foot, anger leaves boiling then: and so
they took the King at Caesarea; where plays were ordained to Caesar's honor,
there Herod clothed beyond himself, strove not to exceed the Nobles, but the
very sun in richnes of attire; as if owing more, more he would perform to
Caesar's honor, then Phoebus should himself: time and place do much facilitate
a suite: there they prefer their petition and obtain their ends. Peradventure
some other consideration was in the articles of peace: what? did they buy their
peace, so some Interpreters co^ceive: why not? undoubtedly Asa, Ioas and others
by their public treasure did redeem their Kingdoms peace, 1. K. 15.2 K. 12.
So might the Tyria^s here by sums of money, commodities of wares, or by other
gratificatio^s entreat the peace: better lose a part then all; of honor,
profit, or whatsoever else it be: their situation so commodious was, that
traffic would easily recover the charges of their peace: whereas expense of
war might chance to ruin all: therefore they prefer an unjust peace before
the justest war: that could but pinch a while; but this for ever might undo
them all: we Merchants are thought they; and therefore we desire not totry our
right by force of Arms: we live by free trading into every part: if war
begin, traffic will end with us; and so penury consume us all: for our
borders are but narrow; our fields a barren soil; great multitudes of people
to be maintained by it; more then our selves are able to relieve; our corn and
chief provision comes day by day from our neighbors Country, the Country of
^^e Jews; the jurisdiction under Caesar is in Herod's hand; if he in his
displeasure shall proclaim a war; nay if but forbid the exportation of corn
alone; the famine will consumeus all: and that is the maine reason we desire
peace; because our Country is nourisht (...) by the Kings Country. Whether
deservedly or no; we come not to dispute: Herod's displeasure is incurred; and
his offended countenance we cannot bear; for we live by alimony from him: that
is the reason we desire peace, because our Country is nourished by the Kings
Country. But will the King hearke^ to such terms, as those? for it is not out of
love, but of necessity, that ye seek a peace: and such a peace how long will it
last, do ye think?

Each Kingdom has something that another needs: The pearling pride of Tyrian
ware may please Herod no less then Herod's corn does them. Besides, the time
may come; that Herod may need their shipping, as much as they do now his
corn: moreover what one kingdom wants, that another by the law of nature is
bounden to supply; or else neighbor Kingdoms would for ever be at wars: and
Herod unless he be a devil unsatiable in malice; having passed his royal
word, will suffer the^ to enjoy their peace: however, they must take it de been
esse, if not de mero esse; because the greater part if not the whole country
receive their alimony from the Kings country. And they persuading Blastus
desired peace because their Country was nourished by the Kings Country!

Needs must they stoop, whose sinews shrink for want of meat: famine makes
stately men submit their proudest necks to Tyra^ts feet: No man so strong, but
famine will make weak: what the Grecian Captain said of old, the Tyrian; they
say here: against a man man may prevail, but against nature no man can: and so
they stoop.

It is justice, that without command they yield some retribution unto him, by
whom they receive nourishment; but if it be commanded once, it is justice with
necessity then; which is a stronger band: and that is the reason why they
stoop, Because they are nourisht by the Kings Country; and because they are
commanded to stoop, or else they shall feel the power of Herod's hand; and
know; that they are nourished by the Kings Country.

So I have done with the history of the Text; the conjecturall doctrines and
the general applications arising from it.

Now there are two special applications remaining concerning our own
Kingdom, our own time, and our own persons too: the one a laudative; the
other an instructive part.

The laudative is for thanksgiving unto GOD. Awake ye sleepie Saints; ye
mellow dust of Ancestors awake, you that on Neginoth and Gitteth do excel;
whose breasts have long been purified in hallowed earth; come all to David's
quire; and let us sing loud praises unto him; that gives us Kings; sweet Kings
of peace; by whom your childrens children do live and die in joyful peace.

And you all you, the flower of English blood; that do enjoy these fruits of
peace: quails and manna in every field, nectar and ambrosia under every vine;
the marrow of the land, and oil of seas, Neptune your fool, and Ceres your
servant is, the gods of the heathen are become your slaves; whilst the God of
gods is become your friend, and gives you Kings of peace, by whom you live and
die in peace.

To the scared temple then I say come all away, make up the Quire! higher and
higher sing praises unto God; until he find himself well pleased with gentle
thanks for such his more then gentle favor unto all, in giving Kings and times
of peace.

And you sweet sister Church of Tire and Sidon that do border near; whose
land is nourisht partly by the Kings, keep this day sacred with our selves,
make up the Quire: higher and higher sing praises unto God until he find
himself well pleased with more then humble thanks for such his more then gentle
favor to you all in giving you so gracious a neighbor King a King of peace.

No fuming Herod, no froward Rehoboam He, no (...), no war-braind man, but
(...) a man, whose wisdom studies nothing more, then how he may make peace.
As his Father was, so is he; (...) a peace maker with all kingdoms round
about, and why? But that every one may enjoy your own sweet pleasurable peace
at home. Were there a King of alchimy; the wars would eat him up, could all
your braziers turn their pewter into gold, yet the wars would eat them up:
nay were all your faces as hard as adamant it self, yet the wars would
bruise them to pieces like a potters vessel. Your rings and jewels, your
silks and amorous tokens, your chains of gold and books of rare delight; nay
your religion it self, and all would be made but a speedy prey unto the bloody
foe. Now silver flocks of sheep, and smoother herds of cattle, your generous
horses and your palaces of State, troops of revenues and curiosities of wares,
your religion and the very love of God himself, they are all your own,
because ye enjoy Kings and times and mediators of your peace. Great is the
blessing of peace amongst us, oh that our praises were as great as it! Wonder
many do, that of all nations we should enjoy such peace, wonder should I as
well as they, if there were not an haereditary benediction in it: for of
peaceable parents do peaceable children proceed: as his father was so is he: a
man of peace! nay a maker of peace! Do we attribute it then altogether to the
race? not so neither, but chiefly unto God, the giver both of the race and
peace! a race may fail, but never God! Cease we to wonder then, the God of
peace does love our land, and therefore blesses us with Kings and times of
peace, no (...) but (...) is our King. Let us in thankfulness live peaceably
at home, love we our neighbors, as Christ the King of peace loved us, have
peace with all men as much as in us lies: not for the belly sake, as the
Tyrians with King Herod had; but for our Saviors sake, who would we should
have peace with all. He is worse then Herod that will not entertain a peace,
when fair conditions offer to him; he is worse then a Tyrian, that will not
seek for peace, when as the Kings displeasure is proclaimed against all that
bring disturbance to the Church or State, and when as nor they nor we can long
be nourisht without the pleasure of the King. For he is a King of peace, and
thereby does most justly entitle himself unto a kingdom greater then our
own, For the most Christian King is he, who imitateth most our Savior Christ,
who is the prince of peace. For so suffered he the tares among the wheat, till
harvest come, the ripeness of season that shall root out all. Yet if any
offended have, there be many (...) near and dear unto the King, many gentle
mediators, that will procure their peace.

Or if you will not render thanks to God, because you enjoy the blessing of
such a King, or because your mediators are as good as Blastus was: yet render
thanks, because your land more happy is, then was the Tyrian and Sidonian
soil: You are not nourisht by other countries so much as they by you, they
send to calk your ships, you feed their bowels with the finest wheat. Their
silks and stuffes may please you well, but never nourish you so much as your
own warm native cloth can do; the enliving restaurative of decaying heat.
Their fruits and spices please your taste, but wholesome juycie meat engenders
purer blood to nourish any body, then all their spices do, and in such meat
does our Kingdom most copiouslie abound above them all; Therefore, render
praise to God. For there the emphasis is, at nourishing, not at pleasing, your
kingdom is pleased, but it is not nourisht by any other kingdom so much as by
your own. Therefore render thanks to God, and please your own King, you are
in better case then ever the Tyrians and Sidonians were. Some, if they durst,
would say, what need this pleasing of him? Yes die power most justly is in him:
Among the Romans two of the aediles might export their corn, as they thought
fit; but with us the command is altogether in one man's hands, and so he may
undo a forreiner, and pleasure his own without control, whenever he shall
please. Wherefore seeing his providence has given you good liberty to use,
worthily and wisely do you enjoy your peace, least falling into the power of
cruel men, with doubtful sighs and groans in vain ye often do desire the
liberty you lost. But if with prudence and thanksgiving you receive the present
peace, you do invite the Lord to give you greater joy. Nor Origens sepulcher
nor Caracalla's tomb, nor many a future monument beside had ever so famous
been at Tire; if thus they had not well preserved their peace. Wherefore give
thanks for the Churches and the Kingdoms peace; they shall prosper that love
them both.

So much of the Laudative. The Instructive shall conclude.

Though your Country be nourisht by no other earthly princes land, yet by the
King of heavens country it is, take heed then how ye displease that King, the
King of heaven and earth, the King of kings and God of gods, the super-supreme
commander of all things, for by his country we are nourisht every one: as
how? or why? Heaven and earth are all his country, the sea, and all to blast,
to blight, to burn, to drown, or how he please. But how should we displease
him then? or who knows that he is displeased? O the question! The plague
continues blew amongst us, the famine has begun to whet her hungry teeth, the
Cataracts of heaven are let loose: dry aries into watery pisces changed, the
ransom of a King into the subjects ruin, for military March is made a
standing poole: All these are more then signs that the King of kings is highly
displeased with us, and do you ask then who knows that he is displeased with
us? or what the cause is, that he is displeased, do you ask? When as our
sins so superabundant are, what marvel if he drown your corn with
immoderate showers in the field to punish those that drown their brains with
immoderate drinking in the house? What marvel if he suffer wheat to be
miscarried at sea, to punish those by land that misimploy their wheat? What
wonder if he destroy all nourishment of corn, rather then it should nourish a
company of vagrant impes, that nothing but travel from sign to sign, and
never scarce received the Sacrament in all their lives? What wonder if he raise
the price of corn to punish those that raise the price of rents and wares? In
sum, what marvel if our corn fail us, when we fail God in the good
employment of our corn? Among a thousand of those miscreants scarce one will
speak twelve syllables of grace in thanks to God for the greatest meal or
other plenty that ever he received; but swear, forswear, curse, steal, riot,
and domineere under every baser sign, as if they were the only men, by whom
the King and kingdom did subsist, whereas indeed they are a dishonor to the
King, confusion to the kingdom, the off-scowring both of men and beasts, and
the very scumme of all the land. I fear there are some thousands of those
Egyptian beggars that never were baptized. So that drunkenness, gluttony,
fraud, covetisme, the unworthy receiving, or not receiving of the Sacraments,
and a million more are all in cause, why God denies this fruitful alimonie,
which formerlie he gave. And do we then ask what is the cause? when as our
sins so superabundant are. Believe not me, but S. Basil, and the word of God
it self. Deuteronomy. 28.23. Basil, Hom. 7. to: 1. The heavens are turned to brass,
because our foreheads are; and the earth to iron, because our selves are
iron-hearted both toward God and man: There is no pureness in the heavens,
because there is no pureness in our lives, in the clouds we walk, and in the
clouds we speak, by darkness of carriage and by mistiness of words men do
obscure the very elements of Justice, as the clouds do them, by non-baptising
water is the seed of the unbaptised most justly deprived of harvest seed: The
nature of their sins has changed the very nature of the year: The burden
of sins has taken the burden of sheaves away: last year the windiness of
faith and lightness of religion has made a light harvest amongst us, and this
year as if the clouds were conjured all together to do a mischief to us,
what a deluge have they threatened us of late. And how shall we appease this
hungry anger of our God? says zealous Saint Basil in the forecited place. You
know what will offend him, well enough, and what will please him too, ye know:
Will any wise man then provoke a Princes wrath? decline it rather he should, as
mariners do a storm. Procul a love and fulminibus live far from offending
Jupiter, or else he will thunderbolt you unto death: how much farther then from
provoking the God of Jupiter? will any man dig for wild fire with a sword?
the word is too light, will any man dig for hellfire by such an high
provoking of his God? If not, then leave all well known, rude, notorious
sins. Did the Idolatrous dedicat a part to foreign Saints did the drunkard to
his folly, the wanton to his lust, the witches to the Devil himself give the
dedication of the last years corn? therefore this year they shall have none
to eat themselves, unless they leave these provocations, and dedicate all to
God, to grace, and virtuous actions of the State; God will consume both the
corn and them. Curse nothing either of your own or others, least God bring a
curse upon you and the whole land for it. Blot out the names of grievous
usurers out of your towns: the earth shall yield you the greater usurie of
corn. Drunkards, thieves, oppressors, be they never so great, let them be of
small estimation with you; poor widows, fatherless, or whatsoever else, let
them be of small or no reputation, unless they be godly poorer: especially
the Egyptian troops of unbaptized vagrants, that are borne, no man knows
where. Poor souls, how might they live in happiness again, if corn were
but as cheap as once it was! But they offer scorn and abuse both to God and
man, so soon as ever things are cheap, nay to this very hour they boast,
that they can make bread of beans, of acornes, nay of knots of strawes rather
then they will starve. O miserable! what if they can? will they therefore
provoke the Lord? can they make bread of iron or drink of brass? If not, be
still then and know, that the God of Scripture will be true, and if you still
proceed to challenge him by such epidemicall sins, as hitherto ye have, he
will turn your heavens to iron and your earth to brass: Deuteronomy. 28.23. And as
soon shall Dives make Lazarus bring him water to cool his tongue in hell, as
you shall make drink enough of brass to quench your dropsey thirst.

Ye Nobles and rich men of the land; if poor men will not reclaim
themselves; yet do ye arise and go to God for peace! You are all nourisht by
the King of heavens country, as well as they; nay more then they, by how much
more you do enjoy: But you think you have not so much need, as they! yes; I
will show you how! the curse will light on you, though they unworthy be: for
with greater freedom might you eat; if plenty were on all: but now not so, the
want of others redounds as sin to you: as Lazarus to Dives did: Besides
consider well, how honorable a blessing to your Kingdom it were, to live in
peace with God; and plenty among all: how dangerons if otherwise! Famine, of
all humane calamities the chief, does mischief that, which swords and
shipping could never spoil; and though your enemies seem to sleep a while,
as Herod did conceal his lurking spleen, till famine had circumvented them of
Tire; but when dearness of corn arose, then arose his wrath; and what by sea
he never durst, by famine now he dares to do in threatening them a war: so
will your enemies do to you, thereaten and conquer too; if the King of heaven
withdraw his nourishing hand: It Is not the poor, but rich men's goods they
seek! and rich and poor and all must yield, when famine comes: Public
necessity has no law, but to the Lawgivers mercy only must it sue for
conditions of peace because your Country is in all things nourisht by the King
of heavens country.

Rich and poor; unless we be foolisher then the Tyrians were, with feathered
and solicitous speed should we this day procure our peace from God, they theirs
from Herod but a mortal man, because their country was nourisht by Herod's
country: and is not ours much more by Gods? nor can we any way endure his
offended ire! blast us by war, blast us by famine, by spungie clouds and by
tempestuous hail, by scorching summers and snowie winters he may empoverish
us how and when he please, though war do not arise, yet if he do but
withold his nourishing hand, within a year or two we shall be utterlie
undone; because our Country in every thing is nourisht by the King of Heavens
Country: therefore by all the means of Christendom let us solicit our peace
with Him, the King of Kings and God of Gods: Sea, Land, Air, Waters, Winds,
Stars, Angels good and bad are all at his command: submit to him, as the
Tyrians to King Herod did: confess he has been more gracious to us, then
ever we to him, be heartily sorrowful for every transgression that is past,
fast and lament for offending him, that fasted forty days for you: and when
you fast, give a charitable part of that you spare unto the poor; least
otherwise it be thought you fast to save charges more then save your souls:
henceforward drink for strength and not for wantonness, for hunger eat, and
not for lust: correct the rudeness both of your own and others sins: in
every thing give thanks to God, perform himdaylie service for whatsoever you
enjoy: bless every thing ye do converse withal: live sweeter, newer,
fresher in graces, then the spring it self in flowers is: suppose God be
displeased more then Herod was, he will be easier pleased too: join we all
with one accord, as here the Tyrians did: go all to Blastus; make him the
mediator of our peace: If any man have sinned we have an advocate with the
Father says S. John: We have a Blastus, says Esaias; germen de radice Iesse: a
branch of the root of Jesse: (...) a Lordly Blastus indeed: Mediator both for
Church and Common wealth, there is one near and dear enough unto the King of
Heaven himself: who is gone before to make our peace, to prepare our several
mansions, and gently to usher us into the presence Chamber of the great King,
even Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for all our sins:
go all with one accord to him: the prayers of a Kingdom shall be sooner
heard, then of a single man: beseech him humbly to mediate all your peace: it is
all but one the forgiveness of sins: You therefore for me, and I for you,
and each and all for one another make supplication unto him; so to pacify his
fathers ire, so to enwise and envertue us all with future grace, that we never
may offend him or his Father any more; because our Kingdom is nourished in
every particular by the King of Heavens Country.

To the same God the Father, and his only Son Jesus Christ, and to the holy
Ghost be all honor and glory world without end. Amen.
FINIS.

