THE REBELLION: A TRAGEDY: As it was acted nine days together, and diverse
times since with good applause, by his Majesty's Company of Revells.

Written by THOMAS RAWLINS.

LONDON: Printed by I. Oaks, for Daniell Friar, and are to be sold at the Sign
of the Red Bull in Little Britain. 1640.

The Actors Names.
A Cupid. King of Spain. Antonio a Count. Machvile a Count. Three Spanish
Colonells.
Alerzo. Fulgentio. Pandolpho.
Petruchio. Governor of Filford. Raymond a Moore General of the French Army.
Three French Colonells.
Leonis. Gilberty. Firenzo.
Sebastiano, Petruchios Son, in the diguise of a Tailor called Giovanno. Old
Tailor. Virmine his man. Three Taylers more. Captain of the Bandetty. Two
Ruffians and a Brave.
Philippa the Moors wife. Auristella Machviles wife. Evadne Antonios Sister.
Aurelia Sebastianos Sister. Nurse Attendant on Evadne. Attendants.
The Scene SIVILL.

To the Worshipful, and his honorred Kinsman, Robert Ducie, of Aston, in the
County of Stafford Esquire: Son to Sir Robert Ducie, Knight and Baronet
Deceased.
Sir,
NOt to boast of any perfections, I have never yet bin Owner of Ingratitude,
and would be loath Envy should tax me now; having at this time opportunity
to pay part of that debt I owe your love. This Tragedy had at the presentment a
general Applause; yet I have not that want of modesty, as to conclude it
wholly worthy your Patronage; although I have bin bold to fix your name unto
it. Yet however, your Charity will be famous in protecting this Plant, from the
breath of Zoilus; and forgiving this my confidence: and your acceptance cherish
a study of a more deserving Piece, to quit the remainder of the engagement: In

Your Kinsman ready to serve you* Thomas Rawlins.

To the Reader.
REader, if Courteous, I have not so little faith as to fear thy censure;
since thou know youth has many faults, whereon I depend: although my
ignorance of the Stage is also a sufficient excuse; if I have committed any,
let thy Candor judge mildly of them; and think not those voluntary favors of
my friends (by whose compulsive persuasions I have published this) a
commendations of my seeking, or through a desire in me to increase the Volume*
but rather a care, that you (since that I have bin over entreated to present it
to you) might find therein something worth your time. Take no notice of my
name, for a second work of this nature shall hardly bear it. I have no desire
to be known by a threadbare Cloak, having a Calling that will maintain it
woolly. Farewell.

To his loving friend the Author, upon his Tragedy The Rebellion.
TO praise thee friend, and show the reason why,
Issues from honest love; not flattery.
My will is not to flatter, nor for spite
To praise, or dispraise; but to do thee right.
Proud daring Rebels, in their impious way
Of Machivillian darkness; this thy Play
Exactly shows; speaks thee Truths Satyrist,
Rebellions Foe, Times honest Artist.
Thy continued Scenes, Parts, Plots, and Language can
Distinguish (worthily) the virtuous Man
From the vicious villain, Earths fatal ill,
Intending mischeivous Traitor Machivill.
Him and his trech'rous Accomplices, that strove
(Like the Gigantick Rebels war against Jove)
To disenthrone Spains King, (the heavens anointed)
By stern death all were justly disappoynted,
Plots meet with Counter-plots, revenge, and blood,
Rebels ruin, makes thy Tragedy good,
Nath. Richards.

To his worthy Esteemed Mr. Thomas Rawlins on his Rebellion.
I May not wonder, for the world does know,
What Poets can, and often times reach unto.
They often work miracles: No marvel than
Thou make thy Tailer here a Nobleman:
Would all the Trade were honest too but he
Has learned the utmost of the Mystery,
Filching with cunning industery, the heart
Of such a beauty, which did prove the smart
Of many worthy Lovers, and does gain
That prize which others labored for in vain.
Thou make him valiant too, and such a spirit,
As every Noble mind approves his merit.
But what Renown thou have given his worth, it is fit
The world should render to thy hopeful wit,
And with a welcome Plaudit entertain
This lovely issue of thy teeming brain.
That their kind usage to this birth of thine,
May win so much upon thee for each line
Thou have bequeathed the World thou wilt give her ten
And raise more high the glory of thy Pen,
Accomplish these our wishes, and then see,
How all that love the Arts will honor thee.
C. G.

To my friend Mr. Rawlins, upon this Play, his Work.
FRiend, in the fair compleatnesse of your play.
You Have courted Truth; in these few lines to say
Something concerning it, that all may know
I pay no more of praise than what I owe.
It Is good, and merit much more fair appears
Apparelled in plain praise, then when it wears
A complementall gloss. Taylers may boast
They Have gained by your young Pen what they long lost
By the old Proverb, which says, Three to a man:
But to your vindicating Muse, that can
Make one a man, and a man Noble, they
Must wreaths of Bays as their due praises pay.
Robert Davenport.

To the Author on his Rebellion.
THy Play I never saw: what shall I say then?
I in my vote, must do as other men,
And praise those things to all, which common Fame
Does boast of, such a hopeful growing flame,
Which in dispight of flattery shall shine,
Till Envy at thy Glory do repine:
And on Pernassus cliffie top shall stand,
Directing wandering wits to wished for Land;
Like a Beacon of the Muses Hill remain,
That still does burn, not lesser light retain.
To show that other wits, compared with thee,
Is but Rebellion in the highest degree.
For from thy Labors (thus much I do scan)
A Tailor is ennobled to a man.
R. W.

To his dear friend, Mr. Thomas Rawlins.
TO see a Springet of thy tender age,
With such a lofty strain to word a Stage;
To see a Tragedy from thee in print,
With such a world of fine Meanders in it,
Pusles my wondering soul: for there appears
Such disproportion twixt thy Lines and Years.
That when I read thy Lines, methinkes I see
The sweet tongued Ovid fall upon his knee,
With (Parce precor) every line, and word,
Runs in sweet numbers of its own accord:
But I am wonder-strook, that all this while
Thy unfeather'd quill should write a Tragic style.
This above all my admiration draws,
That one so young should know Dramatticke Laws.
It Is rare, and therefore is not for the span,
Or greasy thumbes of every common man.
The Damask Rose that sprouts before the Spring
Is fit for none to smell at, but a King.
Go on sweet friend, I hope in time to see
Thy Temples rounded with the Daphnean Tree.
And if men ask who nursed thee, I Will say thus,
It was the Ambrosian Spring of Pegasus.
Rob. Chamberlain.

To his Friend Mr. Thomas Rawlins, on his Play called the Rebellion.
I Will not praise thee Friend, nor is it fit,
Least I be said to flatter what y' have writ.
For some will say, I writ to applaud thee,
That when I print thou may do so for me.
Faith they are deceived, thou justly claim'st thy Bays.
Virtue rewards her self; thy work's thy praise.
T. Iourdan.

To the Author, Master Thomas Rawlins.
KInd friend excuse me that do thus intrude,
Thronging thy Volume with my lines so rude.
Applause is needless here, yet this I owe
As due to the Muses: thine never su'd (I know)
For hands, nor voice, nor pen, nor other praise
What soever by mortals used, thereby to raise
An Authors name eternally to bliss;
Were rightly scanned (alas) what folly it is:
As if a Poets single work alone,
Wants power to lift him to the spangled Throne
Of highest Jove: or needs their lukewarm fires,
To cut his way or pierce the circled Spheres.
Foolish presumption! whosoever thou art,
Thus fondly deem'st of Poets princely Art.
Here needs no paultry petty Pioners skill
To fortify; nay thy melefluous quill
Strikes Momus with a maze, and silence deep,
And doomed poor Zoilus to the Leathean sleep.
Then ben't dismayed, I know thy Book will live,
And deathlesse Trophies to thy name shall give.
Who doubts, where Venus and Minerva meet
In every line, how pleasantly they greet?
Strewing thy paths with Roses, red and white,
To deck thy Silver-streames of fluent wit;
And entertain the graces of thy mind.
O may thy early head be sweet shelter find,
Under the umbraes of those verdant bays:
Ordained for sacred Posies sweet lays.
Such are thy lines, in such a curious dress,
Composed so quaintly; that if I may guess,
None save thine own should dare t'approach the Press.
I. Gough.

To the ingenious Author.
A Sour and austere kind of men there be,
That would outlaw the laws of Poesy;
And from a Commonwealths well governed Lists,
Some grave and too much severe Platonists,
Would exclude Poets: and have emnity
With the souls freedom, ingenuity.
These are so much for wisdom, they forget
That Heaven allow'th the use of modest wit.
These think the Author of a jest alone,
Is the man that deserves damnation:
Holding mirth vicious, and to laugh a sin:
Yet we must give these Cynicks leave to grin.
What will they think, when they shall see thee in
The plains of fair Elysium? sit among
A crowned troop of Poets? and a throng
Of ancient Bardes, which soule-delighting Quire;
Sings daily Anthemnes to Apolloes Lyre.
Amongst which thou shall sit; and crowned thus,
Shall laugh at Cato and Democritus.
Thus shall thy Bays be superscrib'd; my Pen
Did not alone make Plays, but also men.
E. B.

To his friend of the Author.
Bless me you sacred Sister. What a throng
Of choice Encomions's pressed? such as was sung
When the sweet singer Stesichorus lived;
Upon whose lips the Nightingale survived.
What makes my sickly fancy hither hye
(Unless it be for shelter?) when the eye
Of each peculiar Artist makes a quest
After my slender Judgment: then a Jest
Dissolves my thoughts to nothing, and my pains
Has its reward in adding to my stains.
But as the River of Athamas can fire
The sullen wood, and make its flames aspire,
So the infused comfort I receive
By the tie of friendship, prompts me to relieve
My fainting spirits; and with a full sail,
Rush amongst your Argoseys dispite of hail,
Or storms of Critticks, Friend, to thee I come,
I know the ast harbor, I defy much room:
Besides, I Will pay thee for it in grateful Verse,
Since that thou art Wits abstract, I Will rehearse:
Nothing shall wool your ears with a long Phraise,
Of a sententious folly; for to raise
Sad Pyramids of flattery, that may be
Condemned for the sincere prolixity.
Let Envy turn her Mantle, and expose
Her rotten intralls to infect the Rose,
Or pine like greenness of thy extant wit:
Yet shall the Homers Shield demolish it.
Upon thy Quill as on an Eagles wing,
Thou shall be led through the ayre's sweet whispering:
And with thy Pen thou shall ingrave thy name,
(Better then Pencill) in the List of fame.
I. Tatham.

On Master Rawlins and his Tailor in the Rebellion.
IN what a strange delemma stood my mind,
When first I saw the Tailor? and did find
It so well fraught with wit: but when I knew
The Noble Tailor to proceed from you;
I stood amazed, as one with thunder struck.
And knew not which to read; you, or your Book.
I wonder how you could, being of our race,
So Eagle-like look Phoebus in the face.
I wonder how you could, being so young
And teeming yet, encounter with so strong
And firm a Story, 'twould indeed have proved
A subject for the wisest, that had loved
To suck at Aganippe. But go on,
My best of friends, and as you have begun
With that is good, so let your after times
Transcendent be. Apollo he still shines
On the best wits; and if a Momus chance
On this thy Volume scornfully to glance,
Melpomene will defend, and you shall see,
That Virtue will at length make Envy flee.
I. Knight.

To his Ingenious Friend Mr. Rawlins, the Author of the Rebellion.
WHat need I strive to praise thy worthy frame,
Or raise a Trophy to thy lasting name?
Were my bad wit with Eloquence refined,
When I have said my most, the most's behind.
But that I might be known for one of them,
Which do admire thy wit, and love thy pen.
I could not better show forth my good will,
Then to salute you with my Virgin Quill.
And bring you something to adorn your head
Among a throng of friends, who often have read
Your learned Poems, and do honor thee:
And thy bright Genius. How like a curious tree
Is thy sweet fancy, bearing fruit so rare
The Learned still will covet. Momus no share
Shall have of it; but end his wretched days
In grief, 'cause now now he sees the art Crowned with Bays.
Jo. Meriell.

THE REBELLION: A TRAGEDY.
Enter severally, Alerzo, Fulgentio, and Pandolpho. Alerzo. COllonell


Full. Signior Alerzo.


Aler. Here.


PAn. Signiors well met:
The lazy morn has scarcely trimmed her self
To entertain the Sun; she still retains
The slimy tincture of the banished night:
I hardly could discern you.

Aler. But you appear fresh as a City Bridegroom,
That has signed his wife a warrant for the
Grafting horns; how fares Belinda,
After the weight of so much sin? you lay with her
To night; come, speak, did you take up on trust,
Or have you pawned a Collony of Oaths?
Or an imbroydered Belt? or have you taken
The Courtiers trick, to lay your sword at morgage?
Or perhaps a Feather? 'twill serve in traffic,
To return her Ladyship, a Fan, or so.

Pan. Y' are merry.


Full. Come be free,
Leave modesty for women to gild
Their pretty thriving Art of plentitude,
To enrich their Husbands brows with cornucopiaes:
A Soldier and thus bashful!
Pox be open.

Pan. Had I the Pox good Colonel, I should stride
Far opener then I do:
But pox of the fashion.

Aler. Count Antonio. To them enter Antonio.


Full. Tho he appear fresh as a bloome
That newly kissed the Sun, adorned with pearly
Drops, flung from the hand of the rose fingered morn,
Yet in his heart lives a whole Host of valor.

Pan. He appears
A second Mars.

Aler. More powerful since he holds Wisdom
And Valor captive. Whilst they salute Antonio enters Count Machvile.

Full. Let us salute him.


Match. Hallow close they strike,
As if they heard a winged thunderbolt, threatened his death
And each ambitious were to lose his life;
So it might purchase him a longer being:
Their breath ingenders like two peaceful winds,
That join a friendly league, and fill the air
With silken music.
I may pass by and scarce be spared a look,
Or any else but young Antonio.
Rise from thy scorching Den thou soul of mischief.
My blood boyles hotter then the poisoned flesh
Of Hercules clothed in the Centaurs shirts:
Swell me revenge, till I become a hill
High as Olimpus cloud dividing top;
That I might fall, and crush them into air.
He observe. Exit behind the hangings.

Ant. Commandy the all
This little World I Am Master of contains,
And be assured it is granted; I have a life,
I owe to death; and in my Countries causes I should --

Full. Good sir no more,
This ungrateful Land owes you too much already.

Aler. And you still bind it in stronger Bonds.


Pan. Your noble deeds, that like to thoughts outstrip
The fleeting clouds, dash all our hopes of payment:
We are poor but in unprofitable thanks;
Nay that cannot rehearse enough your merit.

Ant. I dare not hear this; pardon bashful ears
For suffering such a scarlet to o're-spread
Your burning Portalls.
Gentlemen your discourses taste of Court,
They have a relish of known flattery;
I must deny to understand their folly:
Your pardon, I must leave you,
Modesty commands.

Full. Your honors vassales.


Ant. O good Colonel be more a Soldier,
Leave complements for those that live at ease,
To stuff their Table Books; and over a board,
Made gaudy with some Pageant, beside custards,
Whose quaking strikes a fear into the eaters,
Dispute 'em in a fashionable method.
A Soldiers language should be as his calling,
(Ruff) to declare he is a man of fire.
Farewell without the straining of a sinew,
No superstitious cringe; adue Exit.

Aler. Is It not a hopeful Lord?
Nature to him has chained the peoples hearts;
Each to his Saint offers a form of prayer
For young Antonio.

Pan. And in that loved name pray for the Kingdoms good.


Full. Count Matchvill. Machvile from behind the hangings.


Aler. Let Us away.
Exeunt: manet Matchvill. Heart wilt not burst with rage, to see these slaves
Fawn like to whelps on young Antonio,
And fly from me as from infection? Death,
Confusion, and the list of all deseases, wait upon your lives
Till you be ripe for Hell; which when it gapes
May it devour you all: stay Machvile,
Leave this same idle chat, it becomes woman
That has no strength; but what her tongue
Makes a Monopoly, be more a man,
Think, think; in thy brains minte
Coin all thy thoughts to mischief:
That may act revenge at full.
Plot, plot, tumultious thoughts, incorporate;
Beget a lump how e're deformed, that may at length
Like to a Cub licked by the careful Dam,
Become like to my wishes perfect vengeance.
Antonio, I Antonio; nay all
Rather then loose my will, shall headlong fall
Into eternal ruin; my thoughts are high,
Death sit upon my brow; let every frown,
Banish a soul that stops me of a crown. Exit.

Enter Evadne and Nurse. Evad. The Tailor yet returned Nurse?


Nur. Madam not yet.


Evad. I wonder why he makes gowns so imperfect
They need so many says.

Nur. Truly, insooth, and in good deed law Madam
The stripling is in love deep, deep in love.

Evad. Ha,
Does his soul shoot with an equal Dart
From the commanding Bow of loves great God,
Keep passionate time with mine? or has aside.
She spied my error to reflect with eager beams
Of thirsty love upon a Tailor, being my self
Borne high? -- I must know more.
In love good Nurse; with whom?

Nur. Hey-hoe, truly madam it is a fortune,
Cupid good lad, praised be his godhead for it
Has thrown upon me, and I am proud on it;
O it is a youth joccond as sprightly May,
One that will do discreetly with a wife,
Board her without direction from the stars,
Or counsel from the Moon to do for Physic;
No, he is a back; -- O it is a back indeed.

Evad. Fie this becomes you not.


Nur. Besides, he is of all that conquering Calling,
A Tailor madam; O it is a taking Trade:
What Chambermaid, with reverence may
I speak, of those lost Maiden heads,
Could long hold out against a Tailor?

Evad. You Are uncivil.


Nur. What aged Female, for I must confess I am
Worn threed-bare,
would not be turned and live a marriage life
To purchase Heaven?

Erad. Heaven --


Nur. Yes my dear Madam Heaven, whither
My most sweet Lady but to Heaven? hell's a
Tailors warehouse; he has the Keys, and sits
In triumph cross legged over the mouth:
It is no place of horror.
There Is no flames made blew with Brimstone;
But the bravest silks, so fashionable:
O I do long to wear such properties.

Evad. Leave your talk,
One knocks, go see. Knockes within.

Nurs. O it is my love. I come. Exit.


Evad. A Tailor, fie, blush my too tardy soul,
And on my brow place a becoming scorn,
Whose fatal sight may kill his mounting hopes.
Were he but one that when 'twas said he is borne,
Had bin borne noble, high,
Equal in blood to that our House boasts great;
I Would fly into his arms with as much speed,
As an air cutting arrow to the stake.
But O he comes, my fortitude is fled.

Enter Nurse and Giovanno with a Gown. Gio. Yonder she is and walks, yet in
sense strong enough to maintain Argument, she is under my cloak; for the best
part of a Lady as this age goes is her Clothes; in what reckoning ought we
Taylers to be esteemed then, that are the master workmen to correct nature?
You shall have a Lady in a Dialogue with some gallant, touching his Suite, the
better part of man, so suck the breath that names the skillful Tailor as if it
nourisht her. Another Dona fly from the close imbracements of her Lord, to be
all over measured by her Tailor. One will be sick forsooth, and bid her maid
deny her to this Don, that Earl, the other Marquess, nay to a Duke; yet let
her Tailor lase and unlase her gown, so round the skirts to fit her to the
fashion: here is one has in my sight made many a noble Don to hang the head,
Dukes and Marquesses, three in a morning break their fasts on her denialls;
yet I, her Tailor, blessed be the kindness of my loving stare, am ushered; she
smiles and says I have staid too long, and then finds fault with some slight
stitch, that eye-let holes's too close, then must I use my Bodkin 'twill never
please else; all will not do, I must take it home, for no cause but to bring
it her again next morning. We Tailors are the men spite of the Proverb,
Ladies cannot live without. It is we
That please them best, in their commodity:
There Is magic in our habits, Tailors can
Prevail 'bove him, honor styles best of man.



Evad. Bid him draw near.


Nur. Come hither love, sweet chucke
My Lady calls.

Gio. What means this woman? sure she loves me too,
Tailors shall speed had they no tongues to woo:
Women would sue to them.

Evad. What have you done it now?


Gio. Maddam your gown by my industry
Is purged of errors.

Evad. Lord what a neat methodicall way you have
To vent your Phrases; pray when did you commence?

Gio. What mean you Madam?


Evad. Doctor I mean, you speak so physical.


Nur. Nay Madam it is a youth, I praise my stars
For their kind influence, a woman may be proud on,
And I am.
O it is a youth in print, a new Adonis,
And I could wish, although my glass tells me
I Am wondrous fair, I were a Venus for him.

Gio. O Lady, you are more fairer by far.


Nur. La you there Madam.


Gio. Where art thou man? art thou transformed?
Or art thou grown so base that
This rediculous witch should think I love her?

Evad. Leave us.


Nur. I go
Ducke, I Will be here anon,
I will Dove. Exit.

Gio. At your best leisure.
Protect me manhood, least my glutted sense
Feeding with such an eager appetite on
Your rare beauty, breaking the sluices,
Burst into a flood of passionate tears;
I must, I will enjoy her, though a
Destroying clap from Jove's Artillery were the reward:
And yet dull-daring fir by your favor no,
He must be more than savage can attempt aside.
To injure so much spotless innocence:
Pardon great Powers the thought of such offense.

Evad. When Sabastiano clad in conquering steel,
And in a phrase able to kill, or from a cowards heart
Banish the thought of fear; would me,
Won not so much upon my captive soul
As this youths silence does: aside.
Help me some power out of this tangling maze,
I shall be lost else.

Gio. Fear to the breast of women,
Build thy throne on their soft hearts;
Mine must not be thy slave.
Your pleasure Madam.

Evad. I have a question must be directly answered
No excuse, but from thy heart a truth.

Gio. Command me Madam, were it a secret
On whose hinges hung the casements of my life,
Yet your command shall be obeyed; to the least
Scruple.

Evad. I take your word,
My aged Nurse tells me you love her,
Answer; is it a truth?

Gio. She Is jealous, I Will try;
As Oracle.

Evad. (Ha)


Gio. it is so, i will further; I love her Madam,
With as rich a flame as Anchorits
Do Saints they offer prayers too:
I hug her memory as I would embrace
The breath of Jove, when it pronounced me
Happy; or Prophet, that should speak my
After life great, even with adoration deified.

Evad. My life, like to a bubble in the air,
Dissolved by some uncharitable wind,
Denies my body warmth: your breath
Has made me nothing. she faints.

Gio. Rather let me lose all external being.
Madam, good Madam.

Evad. You say you love her.


Gio. Madam, I do.
Can any love the beauty of a stone,
Set by some curious Artist in a Ring,
But he must attribute some to
The File that adds unto the luster?
You appear like to a Jemme, cut by the
Steady hand of careful Nature, into such
Beauteous Tablets, that dull Art,
Famous in skillful flattery, is become
A Novice in what Fame proclaimed him Doctor;
He cannot express one spark of your great luster.
Madam, 'those Beauties that, but studied on
By their admirers, are deifi'd, serve
But as spots, to make your red and white
Envied of Cloisterd Saints.

Evad. Have I ungrateful man, like to the Sun,
That from the Heavens sends down his
Cherishing beams on some religious plant,
That with a bow the worship of the
Thankful, pays the preserver of his life,
And groth: But thou, unthankful man,
In scorn of me, to love a Callender of many
Years.

Gio. Madam, upon my knees, a superstitious Rite,
The Heathens used to pay their gods, I offer up.
A life, that until now nere knew a price;
Made dear because you love it.

Evad. Arise; it is a Ceremony due unto none but heaven.


Gio. Here I Will take root, and grow into my grave,
Unless dear god less you forget to be
Cruel to him adores you with a zeal,
Equal to that of Hermits.

Evad. I believe you, and thus exchange a devout vow,
Humbly upon my knees, that though the
Thunder of my brothers rage should force divorce,
Yet in my soul to love you; witness all
The winged inhabitants of the highest heaven.

Gio. If sudden lightning, such as vengefull Jove
Cleares the infectious air with, threatened to
Scorch my daring soul to Cynders, if I
Did love you, Lady, I would love you, spite
Of the dogged Fates, or any power
Those cursed Hagges set to oppose me.

To them enter Nurse. Evad. Be thy self again.


Nurs. Madam, your Brother.


Evad. Fie, you have done it ill, our brother, say you?
Pray you take it home and mend it.

Gio. Madam, it shall be done; I take my leave.
Love I am made thy envy; I am he
This Votresse prays unto, as unto thee:
Taylers are more than men; and here is the odds,
They make fine Ladies; Ladies make them gods:
And so they are not men, but far above them:
This makes the Tailers proud; then Ladies love them. Exit.

Antonie meets him. Ant. What Is he that past?


Evad. My Tailer.


Ant. There Is something in his face I sure should know.
But sister to your Beads; pray for distressed Scivel;
Whilst I mount some watch tower,
To o're-looke our enemies, religious laws
Commands me fight for my loved Countries cause. Exit.

Evad. Love bids me pray, and on his Altars make
A Sacrifice, for my loved Taylers sake. Exit.

Alarm. Enter Raymond, Philippa, Leonis, Gilberty, and Fyrenzo. Ray. Stand.


Leo. Stand.


Gil. Stand.


Fir. Give the word through the Army, stand there.


Within. Stand, stand, stand, stand hoe.


Ray. Bid the Drum cease, whilst we embrace our love:
Come my Philippa, like the twins of war,
Laced in our freely Cornets, we are become
The envy of those brain begotten gods,
Moldy Antiquity lifted to Heaven:
Thus we exchange our breath; kisses.

Phil. My honored Lord,
Duty commands, I pay it back again,
'Twill waste me into smoke else,
Can my body retain that breath, that would
Consume an Army, dressed in a rougher habit.
Play deliver (come I Am a gentle thief)
The breath you stole.

Ray. Restore back mine -- So, go pitch our tent, we will
Have a Combat in the field of love, with thee
Philippa, ere we meet the foe: thou art
A friendly enemy. How say my Lords,
Does not my Love appear,
Like to the issue of the brain of Jove,
Governesse of Arms and Arts, Minerva?
Or a selected beauty from a troop of Amazons.

Lords. She is a Mine of valor.


Phil. Lords spare your praises till like Bradament,
The mirror of our Sex, I make the foe.
Of France and us, crouch like a whelpe,
Awed by the heaving of his Masters hand;
My heart runs through my arm, and when I deal
A blow, it sinkes a soul:
My sword flies nimbler than the bolts of Jove,
And wounds as deep: Spain; thy proud host shall feel
Death has bequeathed his office to my steel.

Ray. Come on brave Lords, upon your Generals word,
Philippa loves no parley, like the sword. Exeunt.

Enter Giovannno, old Tailor, Virmine, and two more. Gio. Come bullies, come;
we must forsake the use of nimble sheeres, and now betake us to our Spanish
needles, Stelletto blades, and prove the Proverb lies, lies in his throat: one
Tailor can erect sixteen, nay more, of upstart Gentlemen, known by their
Clothes, and leave enough materials in hell to damn a broker.


Old. We must to the wars my boys.


Virm. How Master, to the wars?


Old. I to the wars Virmine, what say thou to that?


Virm. Nothing, but that I had rather stay home: O the good penny bread at
breakfasts that I shall lose! Master, good Master let me alone, to live with
honest John, noble John Black.


2 Tay. Will thou disgrace thy worthy calling, Virmine?


Virm. No, but I am afraid my calling will disgrace me: I shall be gaping for
my mornings loaf, and dram of Ale; I shall; and now and then look for a
Cabbich leaf, or an odd remnant to cloth my bashful buttocks.


Old. You shall.


Virm. Yes marry; why I hope poor Vermin must be fed, and will be fed, or
I Will torment you.


Gio. Master I take privilege from your love to hearten on my fellows.


Old, I, I; do, do good boy. Exit.


Gio. Come my bold fellows, let us eternize,
For our Countries good, some noble act
That may by time be Regestred at full;
And as the year renewes, so shall our fame
Be fresh to after times: the Taylers name,
So much trod under, and the scorn of all
Shall by this act be high whilst others fall.

3 Tay. Come Vermin, come.


Virm. Nay if virmine slip from the back of a Tailor, spit him with a Spanish
Needle; or torment him in the louses Engine: your two thumb nails. Exit all
but Giovanno*


Gio. The City seig'd, and thou thus chained
In ayrie fetters of a Ladies love;
It must not be, stay, it is Evadne's love;
Her life is with the City ruined, if the
French become victorious:
Evadne must not dye, her Chaster name
That once made cold, now does my blood inflame. Exit.

Act Second.
Scene I. A Table and Chaires.
Enter (after a shoute crying Antonio,) the Governor and Count Machvile. Gov.
HEll take their spacious throats, we shall e're long
Be pointed as a prodige;
Antonio is the man they load with praise,
And west and as a Cipher to advance
Him by a number higher*

Match. Now Machvile plot his ruin, aside.
It is not to be borne; are not you our
Masters subsitude? then why should he
Usurp a privilege without your loave,
To preach unto the people a Doctrine
They ought not hear:
He incites 'em not to obey your charge,
Unless it be to knit a friendly league
With the opposing French; laying before 'em
A troop of fained dangers will ensue,
If we do bid 'em battle.

Gov. Dares he do this?


Match. It Is done already;
Smother your anger and you shall see, here
At the Counsel boarde he will break into a
Passion; -- which i will provoke him to. -- aside

To them Antonio, Alerzo, Fulgentio, and Pandolpho: they sit in Counsel. Gov.
Never more need, my worthy partners, in
The dangerous brunts of Iron war, had we
Of Counsel: the hot rained French, led by that
Haughty Moore, (upon whose sword sits
Victory enthroned) daily increase;
And like the Army of another Xerxes,
Make the over burdened earth groan at their weight.
We cannot long hold out; nor have we hope
Our Royal Master can raise up their Seige
E're we beforc't to yield:
My Lord your counsel it is a desperate grief.

Match. And must my Lord find undelaid release?
Noble Commanders since that wars grim god,
After our sacrifice of many lives,
Neglects our offerings, and repayes our service
With loss; it is good to deal with policy.
He Is no true Soldier that deals needless blows
With the indangering of his life; and may
Walk in a shade of safety, yet overthrow
His towering enemy.
Great Alexander made the then known world
Slave to his powerful will, more by the help
Of polliticke wit,
Than by the ruff compultion of the sword.
Troy that endured the Grecians ten years Siege,
By policy was fired, and became
Like to a lofty Beacon all on flame.

Gov. Hum, hum.


Match. Suppose the French be marked for conquerers:
Stars have bin crossed, when at a natural birth
They dart prodigious beams; their influence
Like to the flame of a new lighted Tapor,
Has with the breath of policy bin blown
Out, even to nothing.

Full. Hum, hum.


Aler. This has bin studied.


Pan. He Is almost out.


Gov. Good,
But to the matter;
Your counsel.

Match. It Is this my Lord;
That straight before the French have pitched their Tents,
Or raised a work before our City walls;
As yet their ships have not over spread the sea,
We send a Regiment that they with speed
Land on the Marshes, and begirt their backs,
Whilst we open our Gates, and with astrong assault
Force 'em retreat into the arches of death
So the revengefull earth shall be their tomb,
That did ere while trample her teeming womb.

Gov. Machvile speaks Oracle;
What says Antonio?

Ant. Nothing.


Gov. How?


Ant. Nothing.


Match. It takes: revenge,
I hug thee; young Lord thou' art loft. aside.

Gov. Speak, Antonio your counsel.


Ant. Nothing.


Gov. How?


Ant. So;
And could my wish obtain a sudden grant
From you Tribunal, I would crave, my senses
Might be all steept in Lethe, to forget
What Machvile has spoken.

Match. Ha, it takes unto my wish. aside.
Why Antonio?

Ant. Because you speak
Not like a man, that were possessed with a
Mere Soldiers heart; much less a soul guarded
With subtle sinews: O madness, can there be
In nature such a prodegie so senseless,
So much to be wondered at,
As can applaud or lend a willing ear
To that my blushes do betray I Have bin
Tardy to hear? your childish policy.

Gov. Antonio you're too bold; this usurpt liberty
To abuse a man of so much merit, is not
Seemly in you: nay I Will term it sauciness.

Ant. Nay then my Lord, I claim the privilege
Of a Counselor, and will object.
This my Propheticke fears, whispered my heart:
When from a watch Tower I beheld the French
Erect their spears; which like a migthy Grove
Denied my eyes any other object:
The tops showd by a stolen reflection from
The Sun like Diamonds, or as the glorious
Guilder of the day, should daine a lower visit,
Then my warm blood; that used to play like
Summer, felt a change; Gray-bearded winter
Froze my very soul, till I became
Like the Pyrenian Hills, rapt in a roabe of Ice:
My Atticke fears froze me into a statue.

Aler. Cowardly Antonio.


Full. I have lost my faith,
And can behold him now without a wonder.

Gov. Antonio, you are too long and wrack our patience;
Your counsel?

Ant. I feared, but what? not our proud enemies,
No, did they burden all our Spanish world:
And I, poor I; only survived to threat defiance
In the Mounsiers teeth, and stand Defendant
For my Countries cause; naked, unarmed.
I Would through their bragging Host, and pay my life
A Sacrifice to death, for my loved Countries safety.

Aler. Fulgentio thou have not lost
Thy faith?

Full. Noe, i am reformed he is valiant.


Go. Antonio your counsel.


Ma. I your counsel.


An. Our foes increase to an unreckon'd number:
We less then nothing, since we have no hope
To arrive a number, that may cope with
Half their Army.
It Is my counsel we strike a league:
It Is wisdom to sue peace, where powerful Fate
Threatens a ruin: leaft repent too late.

Full. It Is god-like Counsel.


Aler. And becomes the tongue of young Antonio.


Gov. Antonio let me tell you, you have lost
Your valiant heart; I can with safety now
Term you a Coward.

Ant. Ha.


Gov. Nay more,
Since by your Oratory, you strive
To rob your Country of a glorious conquest;
That may to after times beget a fear,
Even with the thought should awe the trembling
World: you are a Traitor.

An. Ha my Lord, Coward and Traitor, it is a damned lie,
And in the heart of him dares say it again
I Will write his error.

M. It Is as I would hav't.


Fu. Noble Antonio.


Aler. Brave spirited Lord.


Fu. The mirror of a Soldier.


Go. O are you moved sir, has the deserved name
Of Traitor pricked you?

An. Deserved?


Go. Yes.


M. Yes.


An. Machvile thou lie; had thou a heart
Of hardened steel, my powerful Arm
Should pierce it.

They fight all in a confused manner: Antonio kills the Governor. Machvile
falls. Aler. The Governor
Slain by Antonio's hand?

Fu. No, by the hand of Justice; fly, fly my Lord.


Aler. Send for a Surgeon to dress Count Machvile,
He must be now our Governor; the King
Signed it in the dead Governors Commission. Exeunt sol.

An. Now I repent too late my cash contempt,
The horror of a Murderer will still
Follow my guilty thoughts, fly where I will. Exit Antonio.

Match. I Am wounded, else Coward Antonio
Thou should not fly from my revengefull Arm:
But may my curses fall upon thy head
Heavy as thunder; may thou dye
Burdened with ulcerous sins, whose very
Weight may sink thee down to Hell:
Beneath the reach of smooth-faced mercies arm.
A shoute within crying Antonio. Confusion choke your rash officious throats,
And may that breath that speaks his loathed name
Beget a Plague, whose hot infectious air
May scald you up to blisters, which foretell
A purge of life: up Machvile,
Tho'st thy will, how ere cross Fate
Divert the peoples hearts; they must perforce
Sue to that Shrine our liking shall erect.
The Governor is dead, Antonio's lost
To any thing but death; it is out glad fate,
To gripe the staff of what we looked for state.
My bloods ambitious, and runs through my veins
Like nimble water through a Leaden Pipe
Up to some barren Mountain: I must have more,
All wealth in my thoughs to a Crown is poor.

Enter Giovanno, Evadne and Nurse. Gio. It Is a near Gown and fashionable
Madam; is it not love?

Nur. Upon my Virginity wonderful handsome:
Dear, when we are married I Will have such a one;
Shall I not chicken? ha.

Gi. What else, kind Nurse.


Nur. Truly you Taylers are the most sanctified members
Of a Kingdom:
How many crooked and untoward bodies have
You set upright, that they go now so straight in their
Lives and conversation, as the proudest on them all?

Gi. That Is certain, none prouder.


Evad. How mean you sir?


Gi. Faith Madam your crooked movables in artificial bodies, that rectify
the deformity of natures overplus, as bunching backs, or scarcity, as seanty
shoulders, are the proudest creatures; you shall have them jet with it an
undaunted boldness; for the truth is, what they want in substance they have in
air: They will scould the Tailor out of his Art,
And impute the defect of nature to his want
Of skill, though his labor make her appearance
Pride worthy.



Nur. Well said my birds eye, stand for the credit of
Taylers whilst thou live; will thou not Chucke?
Ha, say thou my dear?

Gi. I were ungrateful else.


Evad. Nurse pray leave us, your presence makes your
Sweet heart negligent of what he comes about;
Pray be won to leave us here.

Nur. Madam your will's obeyed:
Yet I can hardly pass from thee my love.
At such a sudden warning.

Gi. Your eager love may be termed dotage,
For shame confess your self to less expressions:
Leave my Lady.

Nur. A kiss and then I go, so; farewell my Duck. Exit.


Gi. Death she has left a scent to poison me;
Love her said she, is any man so mad, to hug a disease,
Or embrace a colder Image the Pigmalions
Or play with the bird of
Frosty antiquity, not I:
Her gumms stink worse then a Pesthouse,
And more danger of infecting.
As I Am a mortal Tailor; and your servant Madam,
Her breath has tainted me I dare not salute
Your Ladyship.

Evad. Come you are loath to part with it it is so sweet.


Gi. Sweet say you Madam, a muster of diseases
Cannot smell worse, than her rotten teeth.
Excuse my boldness, to defer your longing;
Thus I am new created with your breath. Kisses.
My gaping pores will never be satisfied.
Again -- they still are hungry.

Evad. My dear friend, let not thy lovely person
March with the scoulding peace affrighting Drum:
War is too cruel: come i will chain
You here, here in my arms; and stiffle you
With kisses; you sha' not go -- by this you sha' not go,

Gi. By this I must.


Evad. I Will smother that harsh breath. They kiss.


Gi. Again I counter-checke it.


Enter Antoino as pursued, sees them and stands amazed. Ant. O sister, ha!
What killing sight is this! cannot be she.
Sister.

Evad. O my dear friend, my brother, we are undon.


Ant. Degenerate girl, lighter than wind or air;
Can thou forget thy birth? or 'cause you are fair
Art priviledg'd, do think with such a zeal
To graspe an under shrub? dare you exchange
Breath with your Taylers, without fear of vengeance
From the desturbed ghosts of our dead Parents,
For their bloods injury? or are your favors
Grown prostitue to all? my unkind Fate
Grieves me not half so much, as thee forgetful.

Gi, Sir if on me this language, I must tell you,
You are too rash to censure. My unworthiness that makes
Her seem so ugly in your eyes, perhaps
Hangs in these clothes, and's shifted off with them.
I am as noble, but that I hate to make
Comparisons, as any you can think worthy
To be called her husband.

An. Shred of a slave thou' lie.


Gi. Sir I am hasty too; yet in the presence of my
Mistress can use a temper.

An. Brave; your mistress.


Enter Machvile with Officers. Ma. Lay hold on him,
Ere we presume to meet the enemy
We Will purge the City; lest the wrath of heaven
Fall heavy on us: Antonio I arrest thee
Of Capital treason, against the King and Realm.
To prison with him.

Evad. O my lost brother!


Gi. It Is but an error, treason do you call it; to kill
The Governor in heat of blood, and not intended?
For my Evadne's sake, something I Will do
Shall save his life. Exit.

Ma. To prison with him.


An. Farewell Evadne, as thou love the peace
Of our dead Ancestors, cease to love
So loathed a thing; a Tailor,
Why? it is the scorn of all; therefore be ruled
By thy departing Brother, do not mix
With so much baseness:
Come Officers, bear me e'ne where you please,
My oppressed conscience no where can have ease. Exit with Officers.

Ma. Lady we here enjoyne you to
Your Chamber as a prisoner, to
Wait a further censure; your brothers
Fault has pulled a punishment upon your head,
Which you must suffer.

Evad. 'Ene what you please, your tyranny cannot bear
A shape so bad to make Evadne fear:
Strong innocence shall guard my afflicted soul,
Whose constancy shall tyranny control. Exeunt.

A noise within crying Rescue, Rescue. Enter Antonio and Guard, to them
Giavanno and Taylers and Rescues him; and beat them off. Enter a Officer
meeting Machvile. Of. A troop of Taylers by force have taken
Antonio from us, and have borne him (spite
Of the best resistance we could make) unto some
Secret place, we can not find him.

Ma. Screech owl do know what thou have said?
Death, find him or you dye: O my cross stars,
He must not live to torture our next sense,
But dye; though he had no fault but innocence. Exit.

Enter Giovanno, Antonio, and the old Tailor. Gi. Can this kindness merit your
love?
Do I deserve your sister?

An. My sister! worthy Tailor; it is a gift lies not in me to give: ask
something else, it is thine, although it be gained with the quite extinguishing
of this; this breath you gave me.


Gi. Have not I --


An. Speak no further, I confess you have bin all unto me, life, and being; I
breath but with your license: will no price buy out your interest in me, but
her love? I tell thee Tailor, I have blood runs in me, Spain cannot match for
greatness, next her Kings. Yet to requite thy love I Will call thee friend, be
thou Antonio's friend; a favor nobles have thirsted for: will this requite
thee?


Gi. Sir this may, but --


An. My sister thou would say most worthy Tailor, she is not mine to give;
honor spoke in my dying Father, it is a sentence that is Registered here, in
Antonio's heart, I must not wed her, but to one in blood calls honor Father:
Prithee be my friend, forget I have a sister; in love I Will be more than a
brother; though not to mingle blood.


Gi. May I not call her mistress?


An. As a servant, far from the thoughts of Wedlock.


Gi. I Am yours, friend I am proud on it; you shall find,
That though a Tailor, I'ave an honest mind.
Pray Master help my Lord unto a Suite, his life
Lies at your mercy.

1 Tay. I Will warrant you.


An. But for thy men.


1 Tay. O they are proud in that they rescued you,
And my blood of honor; since you are pleased
To grace the now declining Trade of Taylers,
By being shrouded in their homely clothes,
And deck a Shop-board with your noble person;
The taunting scorns, the foul mouthed
World, can throw upon our needful Calling
Shall be answered:
They injure honor, since your honor is a
Noble practitioner in our Mystery.

Gi. Cheer up Antonio, take him in,
The rest will make him merry; I Will go try
The temper of a sword upon some Shield
That guards a foe.
Pray for my good success. Exit.

1 Tay. Come, come my Lord leave melancholy
To hired slaves, that murder at a price:
Yours was --

An. No more, flatter not my sin.


1 Tay. You are too strikt a convertite, let us in. Exit.


After a confused noise within, Enter Raymond, Leonis, Gilberty hastily. Ra.
What means this capering Echo?
Or from whence did this so lively Counterfeit
Of Thunder, break out to liberty?

Gil. It Is from the City.


Ra. It cannot be, their voice, should out-roare Jove;
Our Army like a Bassiliske, has struck
Death through their eyes; our number like a wind,
Broke from the Icy prison of the North,
Has froze the Portalls to their shivering hearts;
They scarce have breath enough to speake't: A shoute within.
They live.

Gil. 'Ts certainly from thence.


Leo. You Are deceived, poor Spaniards fear
Has changed their elevated Gate to a dejection
Their Planet struck.

Ra. It Is from our jocond Fleet, my Genius prompts me;
They have already plough'd the unruly seas,
And with their breats, proof against the battering
Waves dashed the big billows into angry froth,
And spite of the contentious full mouthed gods
Of Sea and wind, have reached the City frontiers,
And begirt her Navigable Skirts.
Again: it is so. again within.

Gil. My Creeds another way;
I have no faith but to the City.

Alarm. Enter a Soldier bloody. Leo. Here Is one,
Now we shall know: ha! he appears
Like one composed of horror.

Ra. What speaks thy troubled front?


Leo. Speak crimson Metor.


Ra. Speak Prodigy, or on my sword thou fallst.


Sol. The bold Spaniards, setting aside al cold acknowledgment
Of any odds, or notice of the number our Army
Is made proud with, sends from their Walls
More lightning, than great Jove afrights
The trembling world with, when the air
Is turned to muteny.

Ra. Villain thou lie;
'Twere madness to believe thee.
Foolish Spain, may like those Giants, that
Heapt hill on hill, mountain on mountain,
To pluck Jove from heaven, who with
A hand of vengeance flung 'em down beneath
The centure, and those Cloud contemning Mounts,
Heaved by the strength of their ambitious Arms,
Became their Monuments: so Spaines rash
Folly, from this arm of mine, shall find their
Graves amongst the rubbish of their
Ruined Cities. Enter a second soldier.
What another! thy hasty news?

2 Mess. The daring enemies have through their gates
Made a victorious falley; all our troops
Have jointly like the dust before the wind,
Made a dishonored flight: Hark Alarm within.
The Conquering foe makes hitherward.

Ra. Run to my Tent, fetch my Philippa:
Slave why mov'st thou not?

2 Mess. The enemy's upon us.


Ra. Shall I send thy coward soul down the strikes him.
Vaults of Horror: fly Villain, or thou dyest.

Alarm. Enter Machvill, Alerzo, Fulgentio, Pandolpho, with Philippa prisoner,
Giovanno with Taylers. Match. Let one post to my Castle, and conduct my Lady,
Tell her I have a prisoner would become proud
In her forced captivity to wait upon her beauty:
Fly, let not the tardy clouds out-saile thee.

Phil. Can thou proud man think that Philipa's
Heart, is humbled with her fortunes, (no did thou
Bring all the rough tortures
From the worlds Childhood) to this hour invented,
And on my resolute body, proof against pain,
Practiced Scicilian tyranny.
My Giant thoughts should like a cloud of wind,
Contemning smoke, mingle with heaven:
And not a look so base, as to be pitied, shall
Give you cause of triumph.

Al. Before heaven a fiery girl.


Full. A Masculine spirit.


Pan. An Amazon.


Ra. See my Phillipa, her rich colour's fled and like that foul
The furrow fronted Fates have made an Anvill
To forge diseases on, she is lost her self
With her fled beauty; yet pale as she stands,
She adds more glory to our churlish foe,
Than bashful Tycan to the Eastern world.
Spaniards, she is a Conquest; Rome,
When her two neckt Eagles, awed the world
Would have swum through their own blood to purchase:
Nor must you enjoy that jemme, the superstitious gods
Would quarrel for, but through my heart.
Courage brave friends, they are valiant that can fly
In The mouth of danger; it is they win, though dye.

Gia. This Moore speaks truth,
Wrapped in a voice of thunder.

Ra. Speak, my Philippa, what untutored slave
Durst lay a rugged have upon thy softness?

Phi. 'Twas the epitome of Hercules:
No big Colossus, yet for strength far bigger:
A little person great with matchless Valor.

Ra. What pains thou take to praise
Thine enemy.

Phi. 'Twere sin to rob him, that has wasted so
His blood for praise: this noble Soldier, he
'Twas made me captive; nor can he boast
'Twas in an easy combat; for my good
Sword, now ravished from mine arm, forced crimson
Drops, that like a goary sweat, buried
His manly body in oblivion: those that were
Skild in his Effigies, as drunk with Lethe, had
Forgot 'twas he; till by the drawing of the
Ruefull curtain they saw in him their error.

Ra. A common Soldier owner of a strength worthy
Such praise? Dares he cope with the
French General single?

Phi. My Lord, you must strike quick and sure


Ra. Why pause you? my Philippa must not stay,
Ceptivity's infection.

Ma. We have the day.


Ra. Not till you conquer me: which if my arm
Be not by Witchcraft robbed of his late strength,
Shall spinne your labor to an ample length.

Ma. Upon him then.


Gia. Ods is dishonorable combat: my lads
Lets one to one; I am for the Moore.

Ale. Thee.


Full. Tailor, you are too saucy.


Gia. Saucy?


Aler. Vntutor'd groom, Mechanicke slave.


Gia. You have protection, by the Governors presence,
Else my plumed Estrages, it is not your feathers,
More weighty than your heads, should stop
My vengeance, but I Would text my wrong
In bloody Characters upon your pamperd flesh.

Full. You would?


Gia. By Heaven I would.


Full. You Would be advised, and render up your life a Sacrifice to patience.


Gia. Musk-Cat, I'do make your Civet worship stink first in your perfumed
Buffe.


Ale. Phlegmatic slave.


Gia. Blood less Commanders.


Fu. Pa. Ale. How.


Gia. So.


Fu. Pa. Ale. Let Us reward his boldness. They fall upon Giavanno.


Ma. Whence this rashness?


Ra. Blessed occation: lets on 'em. The French whisper.


The French fly upon 'em: They turn to their guard, and beat 'em off. Act
Third.
Scene I.
Enter Match. Full. Pan. Aler, Giavanno with Raimond Prisoner, and the rest of
the Tailors. All the Tail. A Tailor, a Tailor, a Tailor.

Gia. Raimond you are now my prisoner:
Blind Chance has favored where your thoughts,
And hope she meant to ruin
From our discord, which heaven has made victorious,
You meant to strike a harmony should glad you.

Ale. It Is not to be borne: a Tailor! Whisper.


Full. 'Twas an affront gales me to think on it:
Besides his saucy valor might have ruined all
Our forward fortunes, had the French been
Stronger: let him be banished.

Mac. It shall be so;
My fears are built on grounds
Stronger than Atlas shoulders: this same Tailor
Retains a spirit like the lost Antonio;
Whose sister we will banish in pretense of
Love to Justice; it is a good snare, to trap the
Vulgar hearts: his, and her goods, to guild my
Lawless doings, I Will give the poor, whose tongues
Are i'their bellies: which being full,
Is tipped with heartlesse prayers; but empty,
A falling Planet is less dangerous; they will down to
Hell for curses. You Tailor.

Gia. My Lord.


Ma. Deliver up your prisoner.


Gia. You Are obeyed.


Ma. So: now we command on forfeit of thy
Life, you be not seen in any ground our
Masters Title circles, within three days,
Such a factious spirit we must not nourish:
Least like the Fables Serpent, grown warm
In your conceited worth, you sting
Your Countries Breasts, that nursed your valor.

Gi. This my reward?


Aler. More then thy worth deserves.


Gi. Pomander box thou lie.


Full. Go purge your self; your Country vomits you.


Gi. Slaves you are not worth my anger.


Full. Go vent your spleen amongst Satyrs, pen a
Pamphlet, and called the Scourge of greatness.

Aler. Or Spaines ingratitude.


Gi. Ye are not worth my breath,
Else I should curse you; but I must weep,
Not that I part from thee unthankful Spain,
But my Evadne, well, it must be so:
Heart keep thy still tough temper spite of woe. Exit.

Ma. My house shall be your prison,
Attend 'em Colonel. Exit, Raimond, Philippa, Alerzo, Full, Pana. mariet
Taylers.

Full. Please you walk?


1 Tay. My servant banished.


3 Tay. Famist master? nay says and a Tailor
Come to be famisht, it is a hard World:
No bread in this world here hoe, to save
The renowned Corpse of a Tailor from famishing?
It Is no matter for drink, give me bread.

2 Tay. Thou have a gut would swallow a pecke Loaf.


3 Tay. I marry would it with vantage; I tell truth,
And as the Proverb says: shame the Devil;
If our Hell afford a Devil, but I see none
Unless he appear in a delicious remnant of
Nim'd Satin, and by my faith that is a courteous
Divill, that suffers the Brokers to hang him
In their ragged Ward robe; and used to sell his
Divelship for money: I tell truth, a Tailor
And lie, faith I scorn that.

1 Tay. Leave your discovery.


3 Tay. Master, a Traveller you know is famous for lying,
And having traveled as far as hell;
May not I make description of the unknown Land?

1 Tay. My brain is busy,
Sebastiano must not tread an unknown Land
To find out a Grave; unfortunate Sebastiano,
First to lose thy self in a disguise, unfitting for thy
Birth, and then thy Country for thy too much valor:
There Is danger in being virtuous, in this Age
Led by those sinful Actors, the plunged stage,
Of this vice-bearing World, would headlong fall
But charitable virtue bears up all.
I must invent, I have it, so:
As he is a Tailor; he is banished Spain,
As Sebastiano it is revokt again. Exit cum suis.

Enter Machvile solus. Ma. How subtle are my springes, they take all?
With what swift speed unto my Chaffie bait
Do all Fowls fly, unto their hasty ruin?
Clap, clap your wings, and flutter greedy fools,
Whilst I laugh at your folly; I have a Wier
Set for the Moore, and his ambitious Consort;
Which if my wife would second, they are sure. Enter Auristella.

Au. What must she second?


Match. Art thou there my love? we are in a path
That leads us to a height, we may confront
The Sun, and with a breath extinguish common
Stars; be but thou ruled, the light
That does create day to this City
Must be derived from us.

Au. You are my soul, and to my airy
Wings, add quicker Feathers: what task
Would not I run, to be called Queen?
Did the life blood of all our Family
Father and Mother, stand as a quick wall
To stop my passage to a Throne,
I Would with a Puniard open their Azure veins,
And squeese their active blood up into Clods,
Till they become as cold as winters snow;
And as a bridge upon their trunkes i would go.

Ma. Our souls are twins, and thirst with equal heat
For Deity: Kings are in all things Gods
Saving mortality.

Au. To be a Queen, what danger would I run?
I Would spend my life like to a Barefoot Nun;
So I might sit above the lesser stars
Of small Nobility, but for a day.

Match. It Is to be done sweet love an nearer way;
I have already with the suger'd baits
Of Justice, liberallity, and all
The Fox like ginns, that subtle Statse-men
Set to catch the hearts o'th giddy multitude:
Which if it fail, as cautious policy
Forbids, I build too strongly on their drunk
Uncertain Votes, I Would have thee break with
My great Prisoners Wife, as I will
Do with him; promise the states equal
Divided half himself shall rule:
So that if need compel us to take Arms,
We may have forces from the Realm of France,
To seat us in the Chair of Government.

Au. I never shall endure to walk as equal
With proud Philippa, no; ambitious soul
Boyles in a thirsty flame of total glory:
I must be all, without a second flame
To dim our luster.

Match. Still my very soul, think thou I can endure
Compeditor, or let an Ethiope sit by Machvils side,
As partner in his honor? no, as I have seen
IN the Commonwealth of Players, one that did act
The Thebane Creon's part; with such a life
I became ravished, and on Raimond mean,
To plot what he did one the caveling boys of Oedipus.
Whilst we graspe the whole dignity.

Au. As how sweet Machvile?


Match. It is not ripe my love,
The King I hear applauds my justice:
Wherefore I have sent order that Count Antonio
Once being taken, be sent to Fill-ford Mill;
There ground to death.

Au. What for his wife?


Match. Thy envy: she I have banished,
And her goods to guard a shower of curses
From my head, I'ave given the poor.

Au. Good policy, let us home to our designs:
I hate to be officious, 'yet my frown
Shall be dissolved to flattery for a Crown. Exit.

Match. Attend your Lady -- so her forward spleen, Tickled with thought of
greatness makes the Scene attempts run smooth: the haughty Moore shall be the
Lader, on whose servile back I Will mount to greatness, If calm peace deny me
easy way.

Rough War shall force it, which done, Raimond
And his Philippa must go seek an Empire in
Elysium; for to rule, predominance belongs
Alone to me: slaves are unworthy rule,
What state would set a Crown upon a a Mule? Exit
Antonio disguised sitting in a Closet. My soul is heavy, and my eyelids feel
The weighty power of lazy Morpheus:
Each element that breathes a life within me
Runs a contrary course, and conspire
To counterfeit a Chaos: whilst the frame
And weak supporters of my inward man
(Crack) as beneath the weight of Atlas burden:
A sudden change, how my blear'd eyelids strive
To force a sleep against nature. O you Powers
That rule the better thoughts, if you have ought
To act on my frail body, let it be with eagles
Speed; or if your wills so please,
Let my fore past and undejested wrongs
Over wh^lme my thoughts, and sink me to the ground
With their no less then deaths remembrances.
Cease bastard slave, to clog my senses
With the leaden weights of an unwilling sleep; unless
Thy raw-bon'd brother join his force, and make
A separation twixt my aerie soul,
And my all earthly body:
I am over come, heaven work your wills, my breath,
Submits to this us 'twould submit to death. Sleeps.
Soft Music, Love descends half way then speaks. Sleep intranced man, but
be
Wakefull in thy fancy; see
Love has left his Palace fair,
And beats his wings against the air,
To ease thy panting breasts of ill:
Loves a Physician, our Will
Must be obeyed; therefore with have
To Flanders fly, the ecchoing blast
Of Fame shall usher thee along,
And leave thee pestered in a throng
Of searching troubles, which shall be
But Bug-beares to thy constancy.
Enter fom one side death, and from the other side Aurelia, Death strikes three
times at Antonio, and Aurelia diverts it. Exit severally. What this same shadow
seems to be,
In Flanders thou shall real see;
The Maid that seemed to conquer Death,
And give thee longer leaf of breath,
Dotes on thy air; report has bin
Lavish in praising thee unseene.
Make have to Flanders, time will be
Accused of slothfulness, if she
Be longer tortured: do not stay,
My power shall guide thee on the way. assended.

Enter Giovanno and the old Tailor. Gio. He is asleep.


Old Tay. See how he strugles, as if some visions
Had assumed a shape fuller of horror
Then his troubled thoughts.

Gio. His conscience gripes him to purpose: see he wakes;
Let us observe.

Ant. Stay gentle power, leave Hostage that thy promise
Thou Wilt perform,
And I will offer to thy Diety
More then my lazy heart has offered yet.
But stay Antonio, can thy easy faith
Give credit to a dream? an aerie vision,
Framed by strangling fancy, to delude weak
Sense with a gay nothing? recollect thy self,
Advise thee by thy fears, it may force hence
This midnights shade of grief;
And guild it with a morn as fall of joy.
As does bright Phoebus to our Eastern World,
When blushing he arises from the lap
Of Sea-greene Thetis to give a new day birth.

Gio. Why how now friend, what talking to thy self?


Ant. O Giovanno it is my unpartiall thoughts,
That rise in war against my guilty conscience;
O it stings me!

Old Tay. Be more a man, shrink not beneath a weight
So light, a child may bear it; for believe me,
If my Propheticke fear deceive me not,
You had done an act, Spain should for ever praise
Had you killed Machvile to.

Ant. As how good Master? I must call you so;
This is your Livery.

Old. O you are noble Tailor. But to Machvile
It was my chance, being sent for, by his wife
To take the measure of their noble prisoner;
Who when I came was busy, being placed
Into a room, where I might easily hear
Them talk of Crowns, and Kingdoms;
And of two that should be partners in this
End of Spain.

Gio. Who were they?


Old. Machvile and Raimond, at last Machvile laughed
Saying, for this I made the Governor
To cross Antonio at the Counsel board:
Knowing that one must, if not both should dye.

Ant. Did he say this?


Old. He did, and added more under a feigned show
Of love to Justice, banished your sister.

Gio. Is Evadne banished?


Old. She is, and as I guess to Flanders, her woman too has left her.


Ant. Nay droope not friend; Host, pray tell proud
Machvile, I have a sword left to chastise
A Traitor: come, let us go seek Evadne.

Gio. O Antonio, the sudden grief almost, distracts
Thy friend; but come, let us go each several1,
And meet at Fill-ford: if thou find Evadne,
Bear her unto the Castle. Exit.

Ant. Farewell good master. Exit.


Old. O you honor me.
Bootelesse were all persuasions, they will not stay.
I Will to the King; this treason may become
Like a disease, out of the reach of Physic:
And may infect past care if let alone. Exit.

Enter Raymond and Philippa: Phi. Erect thy head my Raymond, be more tall
Then daring Atlas, but more safely wise:
Sustain no burden but the politic care:
Of being great; till thou atcheive the Cities
Axeltree, and wave it as thou list.

Ray. Have thou no skill in Magic, that thou hits
So just upon my thoughts, thy tongue is tipped
Like Natures miracle; that draws the steel
With unresisted violence: I can not keep
A secret to my self, but thy prevailing
Rhetoric ravishes and leaves my breast
Like to an empty Casket, that once was blessed
With keeping of a Jewel I durst, not trust the
Air with, 'twas so precious: pray be careful.

Phi. You do not doubt me?


Ray. No, were you a woman made of such course ingrediances as the common,
which in our triveall phrase we call mere women; I would not trust thee with a
Cause so weighty, that the discovery did endanger this, this hair; that when
it is gone a Linxe cannot miss it: but you are -- I want expressions, it is not
common words can speak you truly, you are more than woman.


Phi. My Lord you know my temper, and how to
Win upon my heart.

Ray. I must be gone, and post a messenger,
France must supply what wants to make thee great;
An Army my Philippa, which these people
Snoring in pride of their last victory,
Do not so much as dream on?
Nor shall, till they be forced to yield their voices
At our election; which will be ere long.

Phi. O it is an age, I Would rather have it sed,
Philippa then a prisoner were dead. Exit.

Enter a Crimenall Judge and Officers, with Antonio, Petrucio and Aurelio meet
him with servants. Iud. Captain Petruchio, take this condemned man
Into your charge, it is Antonio once a
Spanish Count, till his rash folly, with his
Life made forfeit of his honor; he
Was found traveling to your Castle,
'Twas Heavens will that his own feet
Should with a willing pace conduct him to his ruin:
For the murder he must be ground to death
In Filford Mill, of which you are the Governor:
Here my Commision in its end give strength to yours,
He Is your charge: farewell,
His death must be with speed. Exit with his.

Ant. Deceive me not good glasses, your lights
In my esteem never till now was precious,
It Is the same, I it is the very same
I sleeping saw.

Au. Is this the man Fame speaks so nobly of?
O love, Aurelio never until now
Could say he knew thee; I must desemble it.

Pet. Come sir to my Castle.


Au. Fie on you sir, to kill a Governor it is a fact
Death cannot appear too horrible to punish.

Ant. Can this be truth? O shallow, shallow man
To credit air, believe there can be substance
In a cloud of thickened smoke, as truth hid in a dream;
Yes there is truth, that like a serowle fetched from
An Oracle, betrays the double dealing of the gods;
Dreams that speak all of joy do turn to grief,
And such bad (...)deludes my light belief.

Pet. Away with him Exeunt.
Aurelius solus. Often have I heard my brother with a tongue
Proud of the Office, praised this lovely Lord;
And my trapt soul old with a eager have
Draw in the breath, and now: O Aurelia,
Buried with him must all thy joy thou have
For ever sleep; and with a pale consumption,
Pitying him wit thou thy self be ruined?
He must not dye, if there be any way
Revealed to the distressed, I will find it:
Assist a poor lost Virgin some good power,
And lead her to a path, whose secret tract
May guide both him and me unto our safety.
Be kind good wits, I never until now
Put you to any trouble; it is your Office,
To help at need this little world you live by:
Not yet! O dullness! do not make me mad --
I hav't blessed brain; now shall a woman's wit
Wrestle with Fate, and if my plot but hit:
Come off with wreaths, my duty nay may all,
I must forsake lest my Antonio fall. Exit.

Act Fourth.
Scene 1.
Enter Giovanno mad, solus. NOt find Evadne I sure some wanton wind
Has snacht her from the earth into the air;
Smooth Zephers faines the tresses of her hair,
Whilst slicke F^venio^s plays the fawning slave;
And hourly dies, making her breasts his grave:
O false Evadne, is Giovanno's love
That has outdone all merit for thy sake
So light, that wind out-weighs it?
No, no; no; Evadne is all virtue,
Sweet as the breath of Roses; and as chaste,
As Virgin Lillies in their infancy:
Down you deluding Ministers of Air:
Evadne is not light, though she be fair:
Dissolve the counterfeit: ha, ha, ha, ha.
See how they shrink: why so, now I will love you:
Go search into the hollowes of the earth,
And find my love, or I will chain you up
To eternity: see, see; who is this? O I know him now.
So, ho, ho: so, ho, ho, not hear?
It Is Phoeton: no, it is an heir got
Since his fathers death, into a Cloak of gold
Out-shines the Sun; the headstrong horses
Of Licentious youth have broke their Reins
And drawn him through the Signs of all libidinousnes,
See, from the whorish front of Capra,
He Is tumbling down as low as beggary.
O, are you come grimme Tartors Radamonte
Go ask of Pluto if he have not taken
Evadne to his smoky Commonwealth,
And ravished her? begone, why stir you not?
Ha, ha, ha, the devil is afraid.
Evad. Help, a Rape. Within.


Ban. Stop her mouth.


Gia. Who calls for help? it is my Evadne; I
It was her voice that gave the Echo life;
That cried a Rape: Devil do love a wench?
Who was thy Pander, ha? What saucy friend
Durst lay his unpard Fangs on my Evadne?
Come I Will swim unarmed over Acheron,
And sink grimme Charon in his fiery Boat.

Evad. Murder: a Rape. Within.


Gia. I come, I come. Exit.


Enter the Bandetos dragging Evadne by the hair; she drops a Soarfe. Exeunt.
Enter Giovanno again. Gio. I cannot find her yet,
The King of Flames protests she
Is not there: but hang him Rogue,
They say he will lie; O how my glutted spleen
Tickles to think how I have paid the slave?
I made him lead me into every hole:
Ha, ha, ha, what crying was there there?
Here on a Wheel, turned by a Furies hand,
Hangs a distracted Statesman, that had spent
The little wit Heaven to strange purpose lent him,
To suppress right, make beggars, and get means
To be a Traitor. Ha, ha, ha, and here
A Usurer fat with the curses of so many heirs
His Extortion had undone, sat to the Chin
In a warm bath, made of new melted gold;
And now and then a draught past through his throat:
He fed upon his god; but he being angry
Scalded his Chops. Right against him
Stood a fooled Gallant, chained unto a post,
And lasht by Folly for his want of wit.
The reeling drunkard and plumpe glutton stood
Making of faces, close by Tantalus:
But drank and fed on Air.
The whore-master tied to a painted Punke,
Was by a Fury termed insatiate Lust,
Whipped with a blade of fire. And here --
What Is here! it is my Evadnes vale; it is hers I know it:
Some slave has ravished my Evadne: Well,
There breaths not such an impious slave in hell:
Nay, it is hers, I know it too too plain:
Your breath is lost, it is hers, you speak in vain. Exit.

Thunder and Lightning. Enter the Bandetoes with Evadne by the Hair. Capt.
Come, bring her forward, tie her to that tree,
Each man shall have this turn: Come Minion,
You must squench the raging flames of my
Concupisence: what do you weep, you
Puritanicall Punke: I shall tickle mirth
Into you by and by: Trotter, good Trotter post
Unto my Cell, make compound of Muskadine
And eggs; for the truth is, I am a Giant in my
Promises but in the act a Pigmy: I am old, and
Cannot do as I have done; good Trotter
Make all convenient speed.

Trot. Faith Master if you cannot, here is them that can ferrit in a Cunny
burrow without a provocative, I Will warrant you: good Master let me begin the
health.


Cap. No more I say: it is a percell of excellent Mutton:
I Will cut it up my self: come Minion. Exit Trot.

The Captain takes his dagger and minds it about her hair, and sticks it in
the ground: Thunder and Lightning. Evad. Kill me; Oh kill me: Rather let me dye,
Than live to see the jewel that adornes
The souls of virtuous Virgins ravished from me.
Do not add sin to sin, and at a price
That ruiues me, and not enriches you,
Purchase damnation: do not, do not do it:
Sheath here your sword, and my departing soul,
Like your good Angel, shall folicit heaven
To dash out your offenses: let my flight
Be pure and spotless: do not injure that,
Manhood would blush to think on. it is all
A maids Divinity: wanting her life
She Is fair Coarse: wanting her chastity,
A spotted soul of living infamy.

Cap. Hang Chastity.


3 Ban. A very voice. Enter Trotter.


Trot. O Captain, Captain, yonder is the mad Orlando the furious, and I think
he takes me for -- What do you call him?


Cap. What Meder?


Trot. 1, 1, Meder: the Devil Meder him, he has so nudled me -- O here he
comes; I Will be gone. Exit.


Enter Giovanno. Gio. Stay Satyr; stay; you are too light of foot,
I cannot reach your paces, prithee stay.
What Goddess have you there? sure it is Evadne:
Are you the Dragons that never sleep but watch
The golden fruit of the Hisperides:
Ha, then I am Hercules; fly ye?
Sure that face dwelt on Evadnes shoulders.

He beats them off, and unbindes Evadne, Evad. O thou preserver of near lost
Evadne,
What must my weakness pay?

Gio. It Is, it is she; she must not know I Am mad.


Evad. Assist me some good power, (it is my friend)
Make me but wise enough to resolve my self.

Gio. It may be it is not she; I Will ask her name.
What are you called sweet goddess?

Evad. They that know me mortal, term me Evadne.


Gio. It Is she: I, I, it is she.


Evad. Pray you sir, unto the bond of what I owe you,
Which is a poor distressed Virgins life, add
This one debt: what are you?

Gio. Not worth your knowledge: I am a poor,
A very, very poor despised thing: but say
I pray, are you sure your name's Evadne?

Evad. It Is questionless my Tailor. I am she,
(Receive me to your arms) not altered
In my heart, though in my clothes.

Gio. I do belelieve you, indeed I do; but stay I don't
Are you a Maid, a Virgin, pray tell me?
For my Evadne could not tell me a lie; speak,
I shall love you, though that Jewell's gone.

Evad I am as spotless, thank your happy self
That saved me from those Robbers, as
The child which yet is but a jelly, it is so young.

Gio. No more, no more, trust me I do believe you.
So many slaves, whose flaming appetites,
Would in one night ravish a throng of Virgins,
And never feel degression in their heat.
I Will after and murder all.

Evad. How do you?


Gio. Well, very well: be like you think I Am mad.


Evad. You look distractedly.


Gio. It Is but your thoughts, indeed I me wondrous well.
How fair she looks after so foul a deed?
It cannot be she should be false to me:
No, you are mad to think so. Fool, O fool,
Think thou those slaves, having to fair a mark
Would not be Shooting? yes, they would, they have,
Evadne is flye-blowne, I cannot love her.

Evad. What say you sweet?


Gio. The innocence that sits upon the face
Says she is chaste, the guilty cannot speak
So evenly as she does: guilty, said, I!
Alas it were not her fault, were she ravished.
O madness, madness, whither will thou bear me?

Evad. His fences are unsettled; I Will go seek
Some holy man to rectify his wits.
Sweet will you go unto some Hermits Cell?
You look as you lackt rest.

Gio. She speaks like to an Angel, she is the same
As when I saw her first, as pure, as chaste.
Did she retain the substance of a sinner,
For she is none, her breath would then be sower,
And betray the rankenesse of the (...) but
Her chaste sighs beget as sweet a (...)
As that of May.
Why weeps Evadne, truly I Am not mad?
See, I am tame, pray lead me where you plese. Exeunt.

A Banquet is set forth, Enter Petruchio, Aurelia, with two servants bringing
Antonio, a sleep in a Chair, and set him to the Table. Pet The drink has
done its part effectually,
'Twas a strong powder that could hold his senses
So fast that this removing so full of noise,
Had not the power to wake him.

Aur. Good Father let Aurelia, your daughter,
Do this same act of Justice, let me tread the pin:
The fact of his being so foul, so hateful,
Has lent me through a maid such fortitude.

Pet. Thou have thy wish, do it boldly, it is a deed
That in the ignorance of elder ages,
Would be thought full of merit:
Be not daunted.

Aur. I have a thought tel's me it is religious,
To sacrifice a murderer to death;
Especially one that did act a deed,
So generally accounted odious.

Pet. By holy ( Jacques) I Am a governor.
And should my life; (though, by the hand of him
My duty does call King) be stroke in the air;
My injured corpse should not forsake the earth
Till I did see it revenged: be resolute; thy foot
Is guided by a power, that though unseene,
Is still a furtherer of good attempt.

Aur. Pray sir lend me the Key of the back ward,
For though my conscience tells me it is an act
I may hereafter boast off; yet i will pass unto our
Ladies Chapel whe^^ it is done, to be confessed
Ere I am seen of any*

Pet. I am proud to see thee so well given.
Take 'em girl, and with 'em take my prayers.

Aur. He wakes, pray leave me sir. Exit Pet.
So I Will make fast the door,
Goodness bear witness it is a potent power
Out-weighs my duty.

Ant. Amazement! oh what tentors do you stretch?
O how this alteration wracks my reason, i am
To find the Axeltree on which it hangs?
Am I asleep*

Aur. Shake thy wonder off, and leave that seat,
'Twas set to sink thy body for ever
From the eyes of humane sight;
To tell thee how would be a fatal means
To both our ruins -- briefly my love
Has broke the Bands of nature with my father,
To give your being.

Ant. Happy, happy vision, the blessed preparative
To this same hour, my joy would burst me else.

Aur. Receive me to thy arms.


Ant. I would not wish to live but for thee, life were
A trouble; welcome to my soul.

Au. Stand, I have a Ceremony, to offer to our
Safetryere we go.
She takes Dugge and tie sit to the Chair, she stampes: The Chair and Dog
descends, a Pistol shot within: a noise of a Mi^^. Had not my love like a kind
branch
Of some over looking tree, caught thee,
Thou Would fallen, never to look upon the world again.

Ant. What shall I offer to my life, preserver?


Aur. Only thy heart, Crowned with a wreath of love,
Which I will ever keep; and in exchange
Deliver mine.

Ant. Thus I deliver, in this kiss receive't.


Aur. In the same form Aurelia yields up hers.


Ant, What noise is that? A noise.


Aur. I fear my Father.


Ant. What Is to be done?


Aur. Through the back ward, of which I have
The Key; we will suddeinly make escape,
Then in two Gowns of which I am provided,
We Will cloth our selves till we be past all fear.

Ant. Be It as you please, it is my good genious will
Thee I obey: command, i will follow still. Exeunt.

Enter Petruchio with servants. Pet. She Is gone unto her prayers, may every bead
Draw down a blessing on her; that like seed
May grow into a Harvest: it is a girl
My age is proud of, she is indeed the Model
Of her dead Mothers virtues, as of shape.
Bear hence this Banquet. Exit with the Banquet.

Giovanno is discovered sleeping in the lap of Evadne. Evad. Thou silent god,
that with the leaden Mace
Arresteth all (save those prodigious birds)
That are Fates Heriulds to proclaim all ill;
Deaf Giovanno, let no fancied no^se
Of ominous Screech owls, or night Ravens voice
Affright his quiet senses: let his sleep
Be free from horror, or unruly dreams;
That may beget a tempest in the streams
Of his calm reason: let 'em run as smooth,
And with as great a silence, as those do
That never took an injury; where no wind
Had yet acquaintance: but like a smooth Cristall,
Dissolved into a water that never frowned,
Or knew a voice but music.
Enter Antonio and Aurelia in Hermits gowns. Holy Hermits, for such your
habits speak you,
Join your prayers with a distressed Virgins;
That the wits of this distracted young man
May be settled.

Ant. Sure it is my sister, and that sleeping man


Giovanno. She loves him still. He wakes.


Gio. O what a blessedness am I bereft of!
What pleasure has the least part of a minute
Stolen from my eyes: me thought I did embrace
A Brother and a friend; and both Antonio.

Evad. Blessed be those gentle powers that --


Gio. What Evadne -- have deceived my eyes,
Take heed Evadne, worship not a dream,
It Is of a smoaky substance, and will shrink
Into the compass of report; that 'twas:
And not reward the labor of a word
Were it substantial: Could I know but see
That man, of men; i would by my practice
Of Religious prayers, add to the Calendar
One Holy Day, and keep it once a year.

Ant. Behold Antonio.


Evad. Brother. To Antonio.


Aur. Brother. To Giovanno.


Ant. What earthquake shakes my heart,
With what a speed she flew into his arms!

Evad. Some power that hearkens to the prayer of virgins,
Has bin distilled to pity at my Fortunes;
And made Evadne happy.

Aur. Now my longing that was grown big,
Is with your sight delivered of a joy,
That will become a Giant; and overcome me.
Welcome, thrice welcome brother.

Ant. Ha, her brother! Fortune has bound me
So much in their debts, I must despair to pay 'em:
Twice has my life bin by these twins of goodness
Plucked from the hand of death; that fatal emnity
Between our houses here shall end,
Though my Father at his death commanded me
To eternity of hatred:
What tie binds stronger then Reprieve from death?
Come hither friend; now brother, take her,
Thou have bin a noble Tailor.

Gio. Be moderate my joys, do not over whelme me
Here take Aurelia, may you live happy:
O Antonio this, this was the cause of my disguise;
Sebastine could not win Evadne's love,
But Giovan^o did; come now to our fathers Castle.

Ant. Pardon me; there is a bar that does
Concern my life forbids you as a friend,
To think on going to any place
But to, the Taylers house, which is not far:
Come, as we go I will relate the cause.

Aur. Do good brother.


Evad. Go good Sebastiano.


Gio. Sebastine is your Page, and bound to follow,
Lead on.

Ant. O noble temper I admire thee! may
The world bring forth such Taylers every day. Exeunt.

Enter three Taylers on a Shop board. 1 Tay. Come, come let us work;
For if my guesses point the right, we shall not
Work long.

3 Tay. I care not how soon, for I have a notable
Stomach to bread.

2 Tay Do hear, I suspect that Courtier my master
Brought in last night, to be the King;
Which if it be bullies, all the bread in the
Town shall not satisfy us, for we will eat
Cum Privelegio.

1 Tay. Come let us have a device, a thing, a song Boy


3 Tay. Come an air --


The Song. 1 Tay, It Is a merry life we live,
All our work is brought unto us;
Still are getting, never give;
For their Clothes all men do woe us:
Yet unkind they blast our Names,
With aspertions of dishonor:
For which we make bold^ with their Dames,
When we take our measure on her.

All Tay. For which we, etc.


Enter Antonio, Giovanno, and the old Tailor, Old Tay. You see the life we
live, cease.


Ant. O it is a merry one.


Gio. It is no news to me, I have bin used to it.


Old Tay. Now for discovery, the King as yet
Is ignorant of your names, and shall be
Till your merits beg your pardon.
My Lord you are for Machvile; take this gown.

Ant. Pray for ^^ecesse: Exit Ant.


Old Tay. You in this French disguise for proud Philippa;
This is her garment. I hear the King, be gone:
The French man's folly sit upon your tongue. Exeunt.

Enter the King, Evadne and Aurelia. King. Believe me Tailor you have
out-stript the Court,
For such perfections lives not every where,
Nature was vexed as she is a very shrew,
She made all others in an angry mood;
These only she can boast for Master-peeces:
The rest want something or in mind or form,
These are precisely made: a Critticke Jury,
Of cavelling Arts cannot condemn a scruple.

Aur. But that your entrance in this formal speech
Betrayed you are a Courtier; I had bin angry
At your Rank flattery.

King. Can you say so?


Evad. Sir, she has spoke my meaning.


King. Friend, what are those beauties called? aside.


Old Tay. Your graces pardon.


King. Are they Oracle, or is the knowledge fatal?
But that I know thy faith, this denial
Would conjure a suspicion in my breast;
Use thy prerogative, it is thy own house
In which you are a King; and I your guest.
Come ladies. Exeunt.
Enter Antonio disguised like a Physician. This habit will do well, and less
suspected;
Rapt i'this cover lives a Kingdoms plague,
They kill with license; Machviles proud dame
It Is famed is sick, upon my soul, how ere
Her health may be the Aguesh commons cry;
She Is a disease they groan for: this disguise
Shall sift her Ebon soul, and if she be
Infectious, like a Meagrome, or rot limb*
The sword of Justice must devide the joint
That holds her to the States endangered body.
She comes.

Enter Machvile with Auristella leaning on his arm, with two Servants. Match.
Look up my Auristella;
Better the Sun forsake hi^ course to bless,
With his continuing beams the Antipodes,
And we grovell for ever in eternal night,
Then death eclipse thy rich and stronger light.
Seek some physician, horror to my soul, she faints;
I Would rather lose the issue of my hopes, than Auristella.

Ant. Issue of his hopes, strange; aside.


Match. The Crowns injoynement can yield no content,
Without the presence of my Auristilla.

Ant. Crowns enjoyment, O villain,


Match. Why stir you not? fetch me some skillful man,
My Kingdom shall reward him; if his Art
Chain her depart^^g soul unto her flesh,
But for a day, till she be crowned a Queen:
Fly, bring him unto this walk.

Ant. Stay,
Most honored Count, (now for a forged link aside.
Of flattery to chain me to his love;)
Having with studious care gone over the Art
Folly terms Magic, which more sublime souls
Skilled in the Stars, know is above that mischief;
I find you're borne to be 'bove vulger greatness,
Even to a Throne: but stay, let us fetch this Lady.

Match. All greatness without her is slavery.


Ant. Use modest violence.


Au. Oh.


Ant. Stand wider, give her air.


Match. God-like Physician, I and all that is mine,
Will at thy feet offer a sacrifice.

Ant. Fore send it goodness; I, nay all;
E're many hours makes the now young day
A type of sparkeling youth; shall on their knees
Pray for your highness.

Match. Look up my Auristella, and be great;
Rise with the Sun, but never to decline,

Aur. What have you done?


Match. Waked thee to be a Queen.


Aur. A Queen* O don't dissemble; you have robbed me
Of greater pleasure, than the fancied bliss
Elysium ownes: O for a pleasure real, that
Would appear in all unto my dream: that I may
Frown, and then kill; smile, and create again.
Were there a Hell, as doting age would have,
To fright from lawless courses heed less youth:
For such a short lived happiness as that,
I would be lost unto eternity.

Match. The day grows old in hours:
Come Auristella to the Capital;
The Gray-beard Senate shall on humble knees,
Pay a Religious Sacrifice of praise
Unto thy demi Deity: the Stars
Have in a general Senate made thee Queen
Of this our world: Great master of thy Art,
Confirm my love.

Ant. Madam --


Match Nay hear him love, believe me he is a man
That may be Secretary to the gods;
He is alone in Art, 'twere sin to name
A second; all are dunces to him.

Ant. How easy is the faith of the ambitious.


Match. Follow me to the Counsel. Exit.


Au. Are you the man my husband speaks so high of?
Are you skilled in the Stars?

Ant. Yes Madam.


Au. Your habit says, or you abuse the custom,
You're a Physician?

Ant. Madam i am both.


Au. And dee' find no let that stops my rising.


Ant. Not any.


Au. Away, your skill is dull, dull to dirision.
There is a Star fixed in the heaven of greatness,
That sparkles with a rich and fresher light,
Than our sick and defective Taper.

Ant. It may be so, the horiscope is troubled;


Au. Confusion take your horiscope and you.
Can you with all your Art advise my fears,
How to confound this constellation.

Ant. Death how she conjures;
Madam I must search into the Planets.

Au. Planet me no planets; be a Physician,
And from your study of industrious poisons,
Fetch me your best experienced speedy one,
And bring it to me straight: what it is to do,
Like unresolved riddles hid from you. Exit.

Ant. Planet said I; upon my life no planet
Is so swift as her nere resting evil,
That Is her tongue: well i will not question
What the poisons for, if for her self,
The common Hangman's eased the labor of a blow,
For if she live her head must certain off;
The poison i will go get, and give it her,
Then to the King:
If Sebastiano's Frenchified disguise
Purchase the like discovery, our eyes
Will be too scanty; we had need to be
All eye, to watch such haughty villainy. Exit.

Enter Giovanno and Philippa. Gio. Begare Madam me make de gown so brave; O,
de hole vorle vorke be me patron, me ha vorke for le grand Duches le Shevere,
le Royne de Francia, Spanea de Angleter an all d'fine Madamosels.


Phi. Nay Monsier to deprive desert of praise, is unknown Language, troth I use
it not* nay it is verry well.


Gio. Be me trot a Madam ^ever do ill, de English man do ill, de Spanere do,
de Duch, de all do ill, but your Franch man, and begare he do incomparable
brave.


Phi. You Are too proud on it


Gio. Begare me noe proud i would vorle, me speak be me trot de trut, ang me noe
lie; metra Madam begare you have de find bode a de vorle, O de fine brave big
ting me have ever measure, me waire fit it so pat.


Enter Raimond. Phi. Welcome my Lord,
Shall I still long, yet lose my longing still?
Is there no Art to mount the lofty seat?
No Engine that may make us ever great?
Must we be still styled Subjects, and for fear
Our closest whispers reach the owing care,
Not trust the wind? Ray. Be calm my love,
Ha, who have we here an eues dropper.

Gio. Me Signior, Be povera i^nile homa a Franch
A votre commandment.

Phi. My Tailor,


Gio. We Monsier de Madam Tailor.


Ray. Some happy genius does attend my wishes,
Or spirit like a Page conducts unto me
The Ministers, whose sweet must sent me easy.
Come hither French man, can thou rule thy tongue?
Art not too much a woman?

Gio. No begar me show someting for de man.


Ray. Or can thou be like a perverse on, profess dogednes?
Be as a dead man dumb, briefly be this:
A friend to France, and with a silent speed,
Post to our now approaching armed friends:
Tell them that Raimond e're the hasty Sand
Of a short hour be spent, shall be impaled,
And on his brow a Deputy for France,
Support a golden wreath of Kingly cares:
Bid 'em make have to pluck my partner down
Into his Grave; be gone, as thou nursest
In thy breast thoughts that do thirst
For nobleness: be secret and you are made;
If not, you are nothing. Mark, it is Raimond says it:
And as I live, I breath not, if my deeds
Appear not in a horror 'bove my words.

Gio. Begar me no ne^de threaten; me be as close to your secret, or my Ladies
secrets as de skin to de flesh; de flesh to de bone: if me tell me de -- vat,
de ye call de modero de Dog, de Bich; call me de son o de Bich.


Enter Fulgentio. Full. Count Machvile waits your honor in the Hall.


Ray. Do It, and be more then common in our favor;
Here take this Ring for thy more credit:
Farewell, be quick and secret. Exeunt.

Gio. Folly go from my tongue, the French so nigh,
And thou half ruined Spain, so wretchedly provided;
Strange, yet not, all Countries have bread monsters:
It Is a Proverb as plain as true, and aged as it is both:
One tainted Sheep mares a whole flock.
Machvile that tainted beast, whose spreading ills
Infecteth all; and by infecting kills.
I Will to the Franch, what he intends to be
Our ruin; shall confound their villainy. Exit.

Act Fifth.
Scene 1.
Enter the King, Antonio, old Tailor, Evadne, Aurelia, the King and Antonio
whisper. King. FOr this discovery be still Antonio,
The frowning Law, may with a furrowed face
Hereafter look upon; but nere shall touch
They condemned body. Here from a Kings hand,
Take thy Aurelia; our command shall smooth
The rising billows of her Fathers rage,
And charm it to a calm: let one be sent
To certify our pleasure, we would see him.

Old Tay. Your graces Will shall be in all obeyed.


King. Thy loyal love, makes thy King poor.


Old Tay. Let not your judgment, Royal sir, be questioned,
To term that love, was but a subjects duty. Exit.

King. You sent the poison, did you?


Ant. Yes, and it like your grace, the Apothecary
Called it a strong provocative to madness.

King. Did not he question what you used it for?


Ant. O my disguise saved him that labor, sir,
My habit, that was more Physician than my self,
Told him 'twas to dispatch some property
That had been torter'd with five thousand drugges
To try experiment: another man
Shall Not buy the quantity of so much Rats-bane
Shall kill a Flea, but shall be had forsooth
Before a Justice, be questioned; nay, perhaps
Confined to peep throw an Iron grate:
When your Physician may poison, who
Not, cum privilegio: it is his trade.

Enter Giovanno. Evad. O my Sebastine.


Gio. Peace my Avadne, the King must not yet know me.


Evad. My brother has already made you known.


Gio. Will It please your Highness?


King. What Sabastiano, to be still a King
Of Universal Spain, without a Rival?
Yes, it does please me, and you ministers
Of my still growing greatness, shall e're long
Find I am pleased with you, the boldly durst
Pluck from the fixed arm of sleeping Justice
Her long sheathed sword; and whet the rusty blade
Upon the bones of Machville, and his
Confederate Rebels.

Gio. That my Lord is yet to do, let him mount higher.
That his fall may be too deep for a resurrection;
They Are gone to the great Hall, whither wilt please your
Grace disguised to go, your person by our care shall be
Secure. Their French troops I have sent as useless into
France, by virtue of Raimonds Ring, which he gave
Me to bid the General by that token
To march to this City.

King. What say the Colonells will they assist me?


Ant. Doubt not my Lord.


King. Come then, lets go guarded, with such as you
'Twere sin to fear, were all the world untrue. Exeunt.

Enter Taylers. Old. Now for the credit of Taylers.


3 Tay. Nay, Master and we do not act as they say,
With any Players in the Globe of the world,
Let us be baited like a Bull for a company of
Strutting Coxecombes: nay we can act I can tell you.

Old. Well I must to the King; see you be perfect,
I Will move it to his Highness. Exit.

1 Tay. Now my Masters are we to do; do you mark me, do --


3 Tay. Do; what do? Act, act, you fool you, do said you, what do? you a
Player, you a Plasterer, a mere dirt dawber; and not worthy to be mentioned
with Virmine, that exact Actor: do, I am ashamed on it, fie.


2 Tay. Well said Virmine, thou tieklest him in faith.


4 Tay. Do, pha.


1 Tay. Well play; we are to play a play.


3 Tay. Play a play a play, ha, ha, ha; O egredious nonsensensicall wigeon,
thou shame to our crosse-legg'd corporation; thou fellow of a sound, play a
play; why forty pound golding of the beggars Theater speaks better, yet has a
mark for the sage audience to exercise their dexterity, in throwing of rotten
apples whilst my stout Actor pockets, and then eats up the injury: play a
play, it makes my worship laugh in faith.


2 Tay. To him Virmine, thou bitst him in faith.


1 Tay. Well, act a Play before the King.


2 Tay. What play shall we act?


3 Tay. To fret the French the more, we will act strange but true, or the
stradling Mounsieur, with the Neopolitan Gentleman between his legs.


2 Tay. That wo'not act well.


3 Tay. O giant of incomperable ignorance: that wo'not act well, ha, ha, that
wo'not do well, you Ass you.


2 Tay. You bit him for saying do: Virmine leave biting you would best.


1 Tay. What say you to our Spanish Bilbo?


3 Tay. Who Ieronimo?


1 Tay. I.


3 Tay. That he was a mad rascal to stab himself.


1 Tay. But shall we act him?


2 Tay. I let us do him.


3 Tay. Do again, ha.


2 Tay. No, no, let us act him.


3 Tay. I am content.


1 Tay. Who shall act the Ghost.

3 Why marry that will I, I Virmine.

1 Thou do not look like a Ghost.

3. A little Players deceit: flower will do it; Mark me,
I can rehearse, mark me rehearse some:
When this eternal substance of the soul
Did live imprisoned in my wanton flesh,
I was a Tailor in the Court of Spain.

2 Tay. Courtier Virmine in the Court of Spain.


3 Tay. I, there is a great many Courtiers Virmine indeed:
Those are they beg poor men's livings;
But I say, Tailer Vermin is a Court Tailer.

2 Tay. Who shall act Ieronimo?


3 Tay. That will I:
Mark if I do not gape wider than the widest
Mouthed Fowler of them all, hang me:
"Who calls Ieronimo from his naked bed: haugh!
Now for the passionate part --
"Alas it is my son Horatio.

1 Tay. Very fine: but who shall act Horatio?


2 Tay. I, who shall do your son?


3 Tay. What do, do again: Well I will act Horatio.


2 Tay. Why you are his father.


3 Tay. Pray who is fitter to act the son, than the father
That begot him.

1 Tay. Who shall act Prince Belthazer and the King?


3 Tay. I will do Prince Belthazer too: and for the King
Who but I? which of you all has such a face for a King,
Or such a leg to trip up the heels of a Traitor?

2 Tay. You will do all I think.


3 Tay. Yes marry will I; who but Virmine? yet I will
Leave all to play the King:
Pass by Ieronimo.

2 Tay. Then you are for the King?


3 Tay. I bully I.


1 Tay. Lets go seek our fellows, and to this geere.


3 Tay. Come on then. Exeunt.

A table and stools set. Enter Brave, Men of our needful profession, that
deal in such commodities as men's lives, had need to look about 'em 're they
traffic: I am to kill Raimond, the Devils cozen german, for he wears the
same complexion: but there is a right Devil that has hired me, that is Count
Machvile. Good Table conceal me, here will I wait my watchword: but stay,
have I not forgot it (Then) I then is my arm to enter. I hear them coming.


Goes under the table. Enter the King, Antonio, old Tailor, Evadne, Aurelia,
above. Machvile, Raimond, Philippa, Auristella, Giovanno, the Colonells, with a
guard below. Match. Pray take your seats.


Ray. Not well, prithee retire.


Phi. Sick, sick at heart.


Au. Well wrought poison, O how joy swells me.


Ant. You see my Lord the poison is boxt up. above.


Phi. Health waste upon this Royal company.


King. Knows she we are here?


Ant. O no my Lord, it is to the twins of treason:
Machvile, and Raymond.

Full. Royal there is something in it.


Aler. It smells rank o'th Traitor.


Pan. Are you in the wind on it?


Au. Will you leave us?


Phi. I cannot stay; O I am sick to death. Exit.


Au. Or I Will nere trust poison more.


Match. Pray seat your selves
Gentlemen, though your deserts have merit They sit above the Table.
And your worth's have deserved nobly;
But ingratitude, that should be banished
From a Princes breast, is Philips favorite.

King. Philip Traitor, why not King? I am so.


Ant. Patience good my Lord; i will down. Exit.


Match. It lives too near him:
You that have venter'd with expense of blood,
And danger of your lives, to rivet him
Unto his Seat with peace: you that in War
He termed his Atlasses, and pressed with praises
Your brawny shoulders; called you his Colossuses,
And said your looks frighted tall war
Out of his territories: now in peace,
The issue of your labor: this bad man,
Philip I mean, made of ingratitude,
Wo'not afford a name, that may distinguish
Your worthy selves from Cowards:
Civet Cats spotted with Rats dung,
Or a face like white Broth, strewn over with Currance
For a stirring Caper, or itching Dance; to
Please my Lady Vanity, shall be made
A smock Knight.

King. Villain, must our disgrace mount thee?


Full. To what tends this?


Aler. What means Count Machvile? Enter Antonio below.


Au. To be your King; fie on this circumstance,
My longing will not brook it: say,
Will you obey us as your Kings and Queens. aside.

Full. My Lord Antonio.


Ant. Confine your selves, the King is within hearing; therefore make show of
liking Machviles plot: let him Mount high, his fall will be the deeper: my
life you shall be safe.


Au. Say, are you agreed?


Ray. If not we will force you to it:
Speak French man, are our forces in the City?

Gio. We Mounsier.


Aler. Full. Pan. We acknowledge you our King.
King More Traitors.

Match. Why then. The brave stabs Raymond.


Ray. Ha, from whence this sudden Mischief?
Did you not see a hand armed with the fatal
Ruin of my life.

Gio. None paw Signior.


Match. Ha, ha, ha; lay hold on those French Soldiers,
Away with them. Exeunt guard with the French Colonels.

Ray. Wast thy plot Machvile? go laughing to thy grave.


Au. Alas my Lord is wounded. Stabs him.


Ray. Come hither French man, make a dying man
Bound to thy love; go to Philippa,
Sickly as she is bring her unto me;
Or my flying soul will not depart in peace else:
Prithee make have: yet stay, I have not breath
To pay thy labor.
Shrink ye, you tweene-borne Atlasses, that bear
This my near ruined world; have you not strength
To bear a curse, whose breath may taint the air,
That this Globe may feel a universal plague.
No, yet bear up, till with a vengefull eye
I out-stare day, and from the dogged sky
Pluck my impartial Star: O, my blood
Is frozen in my veins -- farewell revenge -- me -- dies.

Aler. They need no Law.


Full. Nor Hangman.


Pan. They Condemn, and execute without a Jury.


Enter Philippa mad. Phi. I come, I come; nay fly not, for by Hell
I Will pluck thee by the Beard, and drag thee thus
Out of thy fiery Cave. Ha, on yonder hill
Stand troops of divills waiting for my soul:
But I Will deceive 'em, and instead of mine,
Send this same spotted Tigers. Stabs Auristellae.

Au. Oh.


Phi. So, whilst they to hell
Are posting with their prize, I Will steal to Heaven:
Wolf do thou grin? ha, is my Raymond dead?
So ho, so ho: come back
You sutty Fiends that have my Raymonds soul,
And lay it down, or I will force you do it:
No, will not you stir? by Stix I Will bait you for it:
Where is my Crown? Philippa was a Queen,
Was she not ha? Why so, where is my Crown:
O you have hid it -- ha, wa'st thou Over throws the Table.
That robbed Philippa of her Raymonds life?
Nay I will nip your wings, you shall not fly;
I Will pluck you by the guarded front: and thus
Sink you to hell before me. Stabs the Brave.

Bra. Oh, oh.


Phi. What down, ho, ho, ho:
Laugh, laugh, you souls that fry in endless flames;
Ha, whence this chillness -- must I dye -- nay then,
I come, I come, nay weep not for I come:
Sleep injured shadow, O death strikes dumb. dies.

Au. Machvile thy hand, I cannot repent, farewell:
My burdened conscience sinkes me down to hell. Dies.

Match. I cannot tarry long, farewell; we will meet
Where we shall never part: if here be any
My life has injured, let your charity
Forgive declining Machvile: I am sorry.

Ant. His penitence works strongly on my temper.
Of disguise, see falling Count: Antonio forgives thee.

Match. Antonio, O my shame,
Can you whom I have injured most pardon my guilt?
Give me thy hand yet nearer, this embrace
Betray's thee to thy death: ha, ha, ha. Stabs him.
So weeps the Egyptian monster when it kills,
Washed in a flood of tears; could ever think
Machviles repentance could come from his heart;
No, down Colossus Author of my sin,
And bear the burden mingled with thine own, Enter the King. Aur. Evad. old
Tay.
To finish thy damnation.

King. Accursed villain, thou have murdered him
That holds not one small drop of loyal blood:
But what is worth thy life.

Evad. O my brother.


Gio. Give him some air, the wound cannot be mortal.


Au. Alas he faints, O my Antonio:
Cursed Machvile, may thy soul --

Ant. Peace, peace Aurelia; be more merciful:
Men are apt to censure, and will condemn
Thy passion, call it madness, and say thou
Wantst Religion: nay weep not sweet,
For every one must dye: it was thy love,
For to deceive the Law, and give me life:
But death you see has reached me, O, I dye;
Blood must have blood, so speaks the Law of Heaven:
I slew the Governor, for which rash deed;
Heaven, fate, and man, thus make Antonio bleed. Dies.

Match. Sleep, sleep great heart, thy virtue made me ill
Authors of vice, it is fit the vicious kill:
But yet forgive me, Oh, my great heart
Dissolves like snow, and lessons to a Rhume,
Cold as the envious blasts of Notherne wind:
World how I loved thee, 'twere a sin to boast;
Farewell, I now must leave thee; my life
Grows empty with my veins: I cannot stand, my breath
Is as my strength, weak; and both seaz'd by death:
Farewell ambition catching at a Crown,
Death tript me up, and headlong threw me down. Dies.

King. So falls an exhalation from the sky,
And's never mist because unnatural;
A birth begotten by incorporate ill:
Whose usher to the gazing World is wonder.
Enter Petruchio. Alas good man, you are come unto a sight
Will try thy temper, whether joy or grief
Shall Conquer most within thee; joy lies here
Scater'd in many heaps: these when they lived,
Threatened to tear this balsome from our brow,
And rob our Majesty of this Elyxar: points to his Crown.
Is It not my right? was not I heir to Spain?

Pet. You are our Prince, and may you live
Long to enjoy your right.

King. But now look here, it is plain grief has a hand
Harder than joy; it presses out such tears.
Nay rise.

Pet. I do beseech your Grace not to think me
Contriver of Antonio's escape from death,
'Twas my disloyal daughters breach of duty.

King. That Is long since pardoned.


Pet. You're still merciful.


King. Antonio was thy son, I sent for thee
For to confirm it, but he is dead:
Be merciful, and do not curse the hand
That gave it him, though it deserve it.

Au. O my griefs, are you not strong enough
To break my heart? pray tell me, tell me true;
Can it be thought a sin? or is it so,
By my own hand to ease my breast of woe?

King. Alas poor Lady; rise, thy Father's here.


Pet. Look up Aurelia, ha, why do you kneel?


Gio. For a blessing.


Pet. Why she is not Aurelia, do not mock me.


King. But he is Sebastiano and your son;
Late by our hand made happy by enjoying
The fair Evadne dead Antonio's sister:
For whose sake he became a Tailor,
And so long lived in that mean disguise.

Pet. My joy had bin too great if he had lived,
The thrifty heaven's mingle our sweets with gall;
Least being glutted with excess of good,
We should forget the giver. Rise Sebastiano
With thy happy choice, may thou live crowned
With the enjoyment of those benifits,
My prayers shall beg for: rise Aurelio,
And in some place blessed with religious prayers,
Spend thy left Remnant.

Au. You advise well: indeed it was a fault
To break the bonds of duty, and of law;
But love, O Love; thou whose all conquering power,
Builds Castles on the hearts of easy maids,
And makes 'em strong unto attempt those dangers:
That but rehearst before, would fright their souls
Into a Jelly. Brother, I must leave you;
And Father, when I send to you a note, that shall
Desire a yearly stipend to that holy place
My tired feet has found to rest them in;
Pray confirm it.
And now great King Aurelia begs of you,
To grace Antonio in the mournful March
Unto his grave, which be where you think fit:
We need not be interred both in one Vault.

King. Blessed Virgin, thy desires I will perform.


Au. Then I leave you, my prayers shall still attend you
As I hope yours shall accompany me.
Father your blessing, and ere long expect
To hear where I am entertained a Nun
Brother, and Sister, to you both adue;
Antonio dead, Aurelia marries new. Exit.

Pet. Farewell girl, when I remember thee,
The Beads I drop shall be my tears. Enter Vermin in a Cloak for the
Prologue.

King. She Is to all virgins a true mirror;
They that would behold true love, reflect on her:
There it is engrossed.

3 Tay. Great King, our Grace --


Old Tay. The King is sad, you must not act.


3 Tay. How? not act?
Shall not Vermin act?

Old Tay. Yes you shall act, but not now;
The King is indisposed.

3 Tay. Well then, some other time; I Virmine
The King will act before the King.

Old. Very good, pray make your Exit.


3 Tay. I Will muster up all the Taylers in the The King and Gio. whisper.
Town, and so tickle their sides.

Old. Nay you are a right Virmine, go be not
Troublesome. Exit Virmine.

Gio. Upon my truth and loyalty great King,
What they did was but feigned, merely words
Without a heart: 'twas by Antonio's Counsel.

King. Thou art all truth: rise. The Colonells kneel.


Omnes. Long live King Philip in the calm of peace,
To exercise his Regal Clemency.

King. Take up Antonio's body, and let the rest
Find Christian burial: mercy befits a King,
Come trusty Tailor,
And to all Countries let swift Fame report,
King Philip made a Taylers house his Court.

Old. Your grace much honors me.


King. We cannot enough pay thy alone deserts,
Kings may be poor, when Subjects are like thee,
So fruitful in all loyal virtuous deeds:
March with the Body we will perform all Rights,
Of sable Ceremony: that done,
We Will to our Court, since all our own is won.

Exeunt. FINIS.

