THE Life and death of Gamaliell Ratsey, a famous thief of England, executed
at Bedford the 26. of March last past, 1605.
IN a Town in Lincolneshire called Market-Deeping, lately dwelt a man
enriched, as well in the virtues of his wife, as in the qualities of his own
condition. For he was generous both by birth and other perfections of the
mind, which made him more fortunate in the love of his neighbors, then in the
comfort of his children. Careful he was for their education, and very
industrious to give them that bringing up, that might either answer his hope,
or be likely to yield them honest means of maintenance and preferment. His
name was Richard Ratsey, a Gentleman, and belonging to some honorable personage
of this land, whom he followed a long time in great favor and estimation.
Amongst his other children he had one son named Gamaliel R^ts^y, of whom in his
yong^r years, he conceived a very hopeful expectation, for his care was great
to bring him up in learning and the knowledge of good letters. Wherein at the
first he profited not a little, while he lived in the ^eare and reprehension of
his parents, and the awful correction of his teacher. But as, Imberbis iuuenis
tandem Custode remoto
Gauaet equi^, ^am^ns, and aperei gramine Campi, etc.
So this Gamaliell Ratsey growing more mature and ripe in years and having
that hand of restraint carried more loose and ^asie then was accustomed, by
which he was formerly curbd of some liberty, grew less duteous and more
d^sirous to range abroad, and see strange Countries, holding his hopes
frustrated and himself disparaged by living at home: and therefore resolved to
surrender the life and exercises of a Scholar, and betake himself to the
fortunes and profession of a Soldier. As you shall here understand by the
course of his life, the which he related to some friends of his after the time
of his imprisonment, with desire it might be published, as well to testify
unto the world his repentance, as to give cawsion to his countrymen, to eschew
his folly, and prevent his fall. The which is further manifested in the end
hereof, by his repentance written in his time of durance with his own hand.

How Gamaliell Ratsey first left to be a Scholar and became a Soldier.
THerefore I first thought good to make known, that at the time that the right
honorable the Earl of Essex went into Ireland, this Gamaliell Ratsey ventured
his fortunes over with him, being at that time very young, and unskillful in
managing of any Martial affairs: yet he spent much time in those wars, and
was very venturous and hote-spirited, and profited not a little, as well in
knowledge, as in the commendations of his Commanders: For in any public
designs or skirmishes, he was not slack to show forwardness, and in any
private quarrel, very resolute to repel injuries. Insomuch, as in those parts
he was then thought worthy from a private Gentleman of a Company to be made
Sergeant. Which place he remained in under the Company of Captain Langford,
till the time that my Lord of Devonshire came out of Ireland, and brought over
Tyrone, after the death of our late Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth.

How Ratsey first fell into theft, by what means, and in what place, and how
he was imprisoned in Spalding, with his dangerous escape out of prison in his
shirt.
AT the Earl of Deuonshires return into England, the said Ratsey came
likewise back again, and shaped his course through the Country, homewards to
the place where he was borne, where it is bootelesse to tell what pranckes he
performed in his journey. But this at his arrival at home, though it was
first, yet was it not the least of his exploites, for he gulld the servant,
deceived the master, and escaped for that time out of prison. But as Every
evil act has his evil end: so his success was so hard, that he was crossed
almost to the cross, and that is the next neighbor to the gallows; and
miserere mei, had been the best mattens, had not one pair of legs been
better then two pair of hands.

For thus it fortuned, that not long after his coming home out of Ireland, he
went to a Market town called Spalding, not far from the place where he was
borne, where coming into an Inn in the same town, he insinuated himself
into the love and league of a servant, Maid in the same house, with whom he
prevailed so far, what with his pleasing speech (and with what else he
pleased her I know not) that he was the only man in the maids estimation.
Insomuch that in his absence (for he was coming and going thither often) the
Maid prevailed so with her Mistress, that he before any other guest should
be admitted the privilege of the Parlour. But as had-I-wist comes too late,
and kindness oftentimes receives not her deserved effects. So fell it out in
this his so sudden intertainment: for he only made that his mean to awaite
some opportunity, when he might spy out a purchase and effect his purpose, as
it shortly after fell out he did.

For a Farmer, or husbandman, coming to the same Inn (as it was his custom
upon Market days) to pay a matter of forty pounds to a Gentleman dwelling
there, which was due upon a bond, called the Hostess aside, and desired her,
that she would lay up the same safe for him (being sealed up in a bag) till
the Market was done, which she received, and promised to do accordingly. And
coming into the Parlor where Ratsey remained, she showed herself nothing
squeamish to show what trust was reposed in her: but locking the same in a
Press, he thought (that her back once turned) he would discharge her of that
charge. For as he had an Eagles eye to epsy advantage, so had he a Lions
heart to effect his purpose: for he was not long hammering it in his head, but
with a quick dispatch, unlocked the Press, and pocketted the bag. Which
when he had got, it was bootelesse to bid him haste away: for he presently bade
them farewell in the Inn for a while, and told them he would but walk into
the market, and come again by and by, although he meant nothing less, and
they mistrusted nothing at all. But he hied home to Deeping, where in his
Mothers Orchard, he dug a pit, and buried the bag of money, doubting
there would be search made after him for it, and not^^^g found about him, or
in his mothers house, it would be out their yea, and his nay, and so the matter
might he the more easily answered.

Now you must imagine, that the market being done, and the Farmer calling for
his bag of money, and the Hostess finding that the same was taken out of the
Cupboord, and her Press opened, was not a little perplexed in mind, but it
stroke such a quandarie to her stomach, as if she had drunk a draught of
small beer next her heart in a feostie morning. She came back to the Farmer,
with her hands empty, and her heart full of cares, exclayming against Ratsey,
whom she remembered she left in the Parlour, but that auayled nothing.
Thereupon they both went to a Justice of Peace dwelling near Spalding, and
opening their said griefs and losses, desired his warrant to bring Ratsey
before him, which he granted, and they procured to be served by a Constable
of Deeping. So Ratsey being apprehended, and brought before the Justice,
stood stiffely in the denial thereof, and was committed to the safe keeping
of the Gayler, upon suspicion of felony.

Where he had not long remained, but money was wanting unto him, and he had no
means to relieve his necessities in prison, but to reveal the hiding of the
money in the said Orchard, and therefore bethought him whom in such a case
he might make the same known unto, with his best security. Whereupon he
resolved to make none acquainted therewithal, but his own mother, to whom he
addressed secret knowledge thereof. Which when she heard, she was in a great
perplexity what to do, whether she should prove unnatural in revealing the
same, or by concealing it, hazard her reputation in the Country. In the which
she was always very well esteemed with the most and best, both for wisdom
and virtue.

His mother to be further advised, revealed it to her daughter dwelling in the
same Town, her daughter to her husband, and so from one to another, (as two
may keep counsel, if the third be away:) it came to the Justices hearing,
where, and in what place, and under what tree in the Orchard it was hidden.

Ratsey having secret information of notice given to the Justice, and that he
should be further examined concerning the same, knew that denial would not
then serve his turn, but resolved to set all his wits abroach, to free
himself from their hands, which could by no means be done, but by escape,
which he effected in a morning betimes, out of a very narrow passage in his
shirt.

But the time was not long after his escape before he was missed, and have made
after him on every side, both by horse and foot. He was egerly pursued, yet
knew the Country well; and was a long space followed so hardly, that he was at
last forced to a very dangerous great water, which he took and swamme over;
and being over, he staid and turned himself toward them, and after some
brauadoes given them, (for he knew none of them durst follow him) he went his
way and out-stript them all.

A kind conceit of Ratsey, performed by him in his way upon a Seruing-man
that ouer-tooke him by chance, riding to London with his Masters horse to
fetch him from the Term.
AFter he had made this escape, he took his way to a friend of his not far
off, with whom he might be bold for suit of apparel, and to furnish him
with such necessaries as his case required. The which his friend furnished him
withal, and put some small matter of money into his purse to bear his
charges, for he knew as soon as Ratsey had struck a hand, he should be no
loser by it.

Ratsey, as a man then half armed to enterprise any exploit, and well flesht
by his late escape, took his journey on toward London, thinking there to
find men of all faculties, and copes-mates to fit his humor in every
condition. For although by the great discretion of the Judges and Justices,
many are daily trussed up, yet still there springs up young that grow, in
time, to bear fruit fit for the gallows.

As he had thus travailed two or three days toward London, booted and
spurrd, and afoote, he turning back to breathe himself, being weary, espied
a Seruing-man riding after him with a spare nagge, for he led his own horse
in his hand, and road upon his Masters Gelding; which good opportunity was
soon apprehended by Ratsey, for he presently began to call his wits
about him, and to bethink him how he might ouer-reach the plain serving
creature that followed him. Who no sooner ouer-tooke him, but he straitway
vailde his bonnet at the sight of Master Ratsey; who seeing the young Nouice
so full of curtesse, resolved to repay him with craft ere they parted. For
Ratsey fell presently a questioning with him, if he did not ouer-goe a
Seruing-man leading a Gelding (as he did) in his hand? who made him answer,
that he met not any such. Then Ratsey began to feign himself in a fustian
sum, and swore his man should neither carry it to hell nor heaven for abusing
him so, for I bade him follow me (says he) and he sure mistook me,
thinking I would ride to such a Gentleman's to night, and has so left me as
thou see. But if thou be an honest fellow (quoth he) let me ride upon thy
leere horse and I will give thee a couple of shillings to drink. The seely
fellow greedy of two shillings, (for it was a great deal of money in his
purse) and seeming to be sorry that such an honest Gentleman (as he thought)
should go a foot and he a space horse in his hand, gave his good will, which
Ratsey took hold of, and presently mounted himself. So they road a great
part of the day together, passing the way with much idle prattle. But yet
Ratsey was not satisfied in his mind, that the Seruingman should ride upon
the best Gelding, and not he, and resolved to have a fling at him for that too.

So the afternoon being well spent, and night drawing on, Ratsey began to
betake himself to his first discontent, and road a pretty way without any
chat or prattle, as he had before. Which the simple Seruing-man perceiving,
thought he would cheer him up alitle, and began to ask him how he did,
and what ayled him: Ratsey told him his man's negligence stuck still in his
stomach, and he could not forget it. For says he, I am now near the place
where I intend to lie all night, and I have many worshipful friends and
kinsfolks there, and it grieves me to the heart, that I should be seen come
riding into the Town in such a fashion and so meanly horsed, for I tell thee
(friend says he) I never came thither without my man or two with me, and a
very good Gelding under me.

The Seruingman hearing this, told him, if that were al if his Masters gelding
would pleasure him, he should ride on that, and he would change horses with
him. Yes mary quoth Ratsey, (for he aimed at that) for I hold thy Masters
Gelding to be worth some twenty ponnd: he cost not a penny less, quoth the
Seruingman. So they interchange horses, and riding on, Ratsey persuaded him,
seeing he had been thus kind, to do him one other pleasure, and he would pay
for his horse meat and man's meat that night, and set him forth free in the
morning, with somewhat in his purse to drink. The Seruingman asked of him what
it was; nothing (says he) but to lie at my Inn too night, and be to me as my
man, and I will reward thy pains, for thou shall both save thine own charges,
and continue my credit. That I will (says he) with all my heart, and do you
the best service I can.

So the seely fellow for that night became Ratseys man, and coming to the
Inn, the horses were set up, and he commanded his man to direct that supper
should be provided. Which being done, and supper ended, Ratsey goes into the
stable, and gives order that his horses be well dressed and looked too. For
(^aies he) my man is but new come to me, and I dare not as yet trust him with
dressing my Gelding, which the Ostlers promised to do accordingly. And
perceiving the gentleman to be a kind man, they thought they would do some
kindness to his servant in the bottom of the Seller. For while Ratsey was
playing at dice above, with some others that were there, his new man was
carowsing below. And wanting that vim etentiuam, and ability that the rest had
to carry their liquor, he began to fell Dakes in the Taphouse, and his best
brains were wrapped in a leaden cap: for he was so heavy in the head, that he
could not stand on his feet. So he was had to bed presently.

It fitted Ratseys purpose well, that while he lost his money at Dice, his man
did gain his loading with drink, for he had an intention to send him away
on foot, and so he did. For by that they had done playing, the morning began
to wax gray, and he fell a bargayning for his best Gelding with the Host of
the house, and received nineteen pounds for him. Who was no less glad of the
one, then Ratsey was of the other. So he discharged the house, and commanded
his man's Nag to be sadled for him, (while he was all this while asleep.)

Which being done, he left some small matter of money behind him for his man,
and gave order that he should follow him to such a Gentleman's house, where he
never meant to meet him, and so rode his way.

Now what a sorrowful and troubled heart this young Nouice had, when he rose
and found his new master gone with his old masters Geldings, I refer to to
them that have grieved at the like loss.

How Ratsey met George Snell, and Henry Shorthose, and of their riding
together in Northhamtonshire, and his robbing of nine men alone.
RAtsey resolved after his late purchase, neither to buy house or land with his
xix. li. but seeking for copsmates of his own condition, that were as ready
to live upon spoil as himself: at last her met with Shorthose an old friend
and Countryman of his (for Shorthose was likewise borne in Market-deeping.)
And although Shorthose (till he persuaded him) never gave consent to enter
into any malefaction, but was driven for matter of debt to forsake his native
country. Yet being very poor he was glad of Ratseys company, and help him
to spend a great part of his money so lately, and so lewdly got, which in a
little space drew near an end, (for two hands in one pocket soon makes a
light purse.)

Then came they both in company by chance with Snell, whom Ratsey perceived,
as well by conference, as by countenance, (as Quam difficile est animam non
prodere vultu) as apt to incline to desperate courses, as themselves, (as
indeed he had been before,) for he was twice burnt in the hand in Newgate
for his bad conditions.

Well: they all laid their heads together, and forth they went, although
none horsed but Ratsey, and laid their plottes for Northamtonshire, and those
parts, for there he was most skillful of the Country: and coming to a place
called Helpson-heath, they espied nine men riding toward them together, that
were bound for London. Ratsey resolved to show his resolution upon them, and
bade his other companions to go on the infide of the Hedge into a coppice,
while he lay on the outside cracking of Nuts: and bade the other not come forth
unless they saw great necessity of their help.

The men drew somewhat near the place where Ratsey lay, and being within sight
of him, one of them knew him, (for they were all Lincolneshire men) and bade
the rest be resolved to loose their purses now, for (says he) yonder lies
Ratsey, whom I know to be a dangerous and desperate fellow, and he awaytes
nothing but a prey.

Ratsey makes roughly toward them, and told them that he came for money, and
money he must have, and would have: therefore dispatch (quoth her) for one of
your company here knows me, and knows I will not be trifled with.

On our faythes (said they) master Ratsey, we are no better provided then
will be are our charges to London, and that at the most is not twenty
shillings a man, if you will have that, you shall have it with all our hearts.
Nay (says Ratsey) that will do me no good: for it is well known I rob not
for trifles. But what have you sir, says he to one that stood aloof from
the rest, in your Portmantgle? Faith, says he, I have a little money that I
am to pay upon bond by a day, and we are two or three of us here bound to
pay it, if you take it from us we are undone. How much is it, says Ratsey?
Two hundred pounds (says the other) I Marry, quoth Ratsey, such a lump I
look for. And seeing there are so many to pay it, it will not hurt you much if
all of you loose it. Therefore be brief, deliver it, for if you stand upon
terms, or delays with me, I have Whelps within the inside of the Hedge,
that upon a Watch-worde will presently come forth, and they never bark till
they bite: if they stir, it is all things to nothing, but some of you loose
your lives, and your limbs. This being heard, the money was presently
delivered, for of two evils, they thought it best to choose the least. And
Ratsey, he thought it the best cracking of Nuttes that ever he made, that
yielded such shelles; And so they parted.

How Ratsey robbed a Coniurer.
RAtsey had secret notice given him of a Coniurer that was a master of Arts,
and a Scholar of Cambridge (for he had his intellegencers abroad, although
against the state of the Commonwealth) and was directed which way he road,
with his books of coniuration in a Cloake-bag behind him. But Ratsey thought
all his books should not save him: for he meant to conjure him without book,
not so much for the money sake (for he had knowledge that the Scholar had not
above five or six pounds about him.) But for that it should be said that he
once in his life, his courage and spirit out-stript and daunted the cunning and
art of a Coniurer.

For following him till he came in Bawtrie Lane, where he intended this
exployte, and which indeed is a very dangerous place for theeuing, Ratsey
made toward him, and the Coniurer thought a good pair of Spurs better than
Spelles or Coniuration at that time, and began to prick forwards his Horse,
which indeed was so far better then Ratseys, that had not Shorthose stepped
in, who lay to prevent his escape, the Coniurer had out-rid Ratsey, and saved
both his books and money.

But now the Coniurer is in hucksters handling, there is no wap with him but
one, for Ratsey seises both upon his money and books, for the which the
Coniurer pleads hard, but prou^^es not. And thinking his pain had been past,
be begins to take his leave of master Ratsey, and to ride away: nay says
Ratsey (and takes his horse by the head) I have not done with you yet; I have a
quarrel to this gallant too, he must go with me, for presuming to ouerrunne
me: it may be you have infusde some Art into your horse, that may stand me in
steed hereafter, for I like him well at hand, howsoever he is at length. So the
Coniurers horse went with Ratsey, which was an excellent good Gelding, for
Ratsey was oftentimes offered xx. pound for him, which he refused, for he
proved so fit for his purpose, that all the prankes that Ratsey played
afterward, was upon the Coniurers horse.

The Coniurer he walks now a foot, and had he not had two or three pieces of
gold left in a secret place, which Ratsey found not, I think he would with
Batillus have hanged himself.

How Ratsey robbed a Scholar of Cambridge, and causde him make an Oration to him
in a Wood.
RAtsey another time riding by the way, and Snell and Shorthose with him, (for
they still served for his men, unless upon the performance of any exploit) met
with a Scholar, that had been to receive a part of his wives dowry which was
four score pound and upwards: And Ratsey pretending his course the same way
that the Scholar did, they rode together a great while, they past away the
time with much talk of many matters. And the Scholar (thinking at least he
had been in the company of a Knights soune and heir, for that Ratsey rode
with his two men, one before, and another behind) began to discourse of many
former accidents, and after fell into complaint of the iniquity of the time,
the corruptions of men's conditions, and the obduracie and hardness of their
hearts, for (says the Scholar) it is a world to see how little regard is now
a days had of Scholars and Soldiers, how they range in every corner without
respect, or relief. Their distress is in every man's eye, but out of every
man's heart, so that our present times make good that old saying: Charitas
laudatur at alget. With much other prattle to this effect: which Ratsey
hearing, soothed up a pretty while, till he came to a convenient place, near a
wood side, and then whistled, and both his men came about the Scholar, for the
whistle was a watchword between them, which when he saw, he was in a pitiful
plight, and Ratsey spoke to him thus, or to this effect. Now honest Scholar,
for so thy talk and thy habit shows thee to be; know we are not as we seem,
for we are Gentlemen and Soldiers, such as thou did talk of before: we are
in want, and we scorn to cry out our wants in the streets, for we shall not
be heard; we will have money if it walk upon the earth. And therefore to be
short, you must needs minister your purse to me presently. Come dispatch, make
no delay, for we cannot tarry. This stroke cold to the scholars heart, for he
little thought that the speech he made would produce such effect. But seeing he
perceived there was no remedy, but he must needs untruss (for he saw they
were all resolute) he quietly delivered his money unto them, and would have
been gone.

Nay says Ratsey you must needs stay with me a little, for I must talk a word
or two with you in yonder Wood: The Scholar fearing if he had him there, he
would bind him, and do him some bodily harm, fell on his knees, and desired
him to be good unto him; Rise up man, says Ratsey, come I mean not to hurt
thee, I would but have thy counsel in a matter. Well, when they were in the
wood together, Ratsey told him, that he lik^d his discourse so well at first,
and sped so well after it, that he was destrous he should preach unto him some
short Sermon of Repentance, for says he, I have been a long malefactor, and
it may so prevail with me, that it may work me to some good deeds, after my
many evils. The Scholar knew he must needs do as he would have him, now being
in his hands, and therefore stepped to a Tree, chose his text to that effect, and
made a speech of half an hour long: which being ended, Ratsey gave him a
brace of Angels back of his money, and told him if ever he came to be a Lord,
he would make him his Chaplain for his labor.

How he robbed two men, and Knighted them.
THis Gamaliell Ratsey, and his two other companions, Snell and Shorthose,
having lain two or three days in an Inn in Stamford, expecting some booty
worthy the taking; At last there came into the same Inn where they lay, two
men that had forty pounds a piece about them, and were riding into Lincolnshire
to buy wool, which when they heard, they were not a little glad of, for they
made account it was their own straight, and dealt with the Chamberlain of the
house to learn which way they rode in the morning, which the chamberlain
performed accordingly and that with great care and diligence, for he knew he
should partake of their fortunes, and share with them, if they sped. So they
were directed by him, which way the two men did intend their travel in the
morning.

The morning being come, the Chamberlain gave them such an huntes-vp, as made
them rise presently, for; Quid non mortalia pectora cogit
Auri sacra fames?


They slept not soundly that night, till the thirsty desire of their purchase
was effected. Up they got with all speed, and gave order that their horses
should be made ready, which being in readiness, they rode easily before the
same way that the Chamberlein directed them, for they imagined the two men
would not follow them in an hour, or two after. But they made too much have
for their little profit for they had not stayed one whole hour, when they
might epsy the two Clothiers five miles beiond Stamford ryding toward
Lyncolne.

And at Five mile Cross, Ratsey gave them such a good morrow, as with four
words speaking, ( Stand, deliver your purse) he fetched fourscore pounds from
them at one clappe. This being done, he had them kneel down and drawing forth
his weapon, he asked them what their several names were, and of what
profession. They told him, and answered they were Woolmen by trade, Ratsey
then laying his weapon on the shoulder of one of them had him rise up Sir
Walter Woolsack, and of ye other rise up Sir Samuel Sheepskinne. You are now
(says he) both my knights, as I have many others besides you; that have paid
me their several fees, according to their abilities, as you have done, for
their election into the order of Knighthood: If any ask you who bestowed that
dignity upon you, say you met with K. Ratsey, and so farewell.

Thus they rid away, and left the two Woolmen heavy in heart and empty in
purse, and how little they ioyed in their poor Knighthood so richly paid for.
Let every indifferent opinion judge by himself, as if he had been in their
taking.

How Ratsey dealt with a poor man going to a Market, whom he intended to have
robbed.
ANother time Ratsey ryding between Huntington and Cambridge (for he kept for
the most part in those parts) he met with an old Man going to S. ^lves to a
fair, And thinking he had had more store of money about him, he began to be
brief with the old Man, and his wife (for she was likewise in his company) and
to tell them that he lackt money, it was a hard time for men of his profession,
there were no wars, and Soldiers had no employments. Therefore (father says
he) I must have your money, I come for it, be short and deliver it. The old man
he sto^d shaking as if a man had been giving up the ghost. And told him that
in all world he had but five nobles and that he was feign to make hard shift
for, and sell some of his household stuff to make it up, and if he should die
he left not one penny at home to help him, and my wife (says he) has but
one Edward shi^ling and a Mill sixpence, which has seen no sun these seven
years, and that she has taken in her purse if we should want money, and all
this we have pacht up together (master) to buy us one cow to keep me and
my wife now we are old. If you take if from us we are utterly undone. You are
an old dissembler (Sir says Ratsey to him, I have met with such as you that
have said as much as you do, and yet I have found more silver and gold in a
russet hose then in velvet breeches.

It may be so quoth the old Man, but on my faith and hollidome I deal truly
with you sir. And with that he drew forth his leather purse, and powered forth
his store, and his wife hers, and badde him even deal with them, as he would.

Ratsey seeing this was true, took the moneys of both of them, but returned it
back, and told them he had too high a mind to look upon so low a matter, and
therewithal gave the old Man Forty shillings out of his own purse, and bad him
by a couple of kine: for I hold it worse then Sacrilege (says Ratsey) to rob
the spittle, and while I live the Sermon in the wood must teach me to favor
and pity them that are poor, and help them, for the rich can help
themselves.

Thus did Ratsey leave the old Man both lighter at heart, and heavier in purse
then he found him, but how honest a thief the old Man thought him to be when
he was gone, let every poor Man judge, that lackes a Cow and has forty
shillings given him to buy one.

How Ratsey got 300. pounds in one night by his venture of 50. pounds with a
farmer, that he never saw til they met together in an Inn.
IT fortuned that Ratsey, and his company lying at an Inn in New Market, there
came into the same house a farmer, or husbandman by occasion of business that
way, who intending to lie there all night, and being alone, demanded of the
Host, if there were no company with whom he might suppe, he made him answer
that he had no guests that night, but one Gentleman and his Men, and he knew
not whether he would permit any stranger to suppe with him, but (says the
Host) I will ask of him. So Ratseys pleasure being damaunded in that case, he
was very well content: for it was an accident that fitted his expectation, that
lay there to no other end, but to awaite opportunities: and it was a good wind
he thought that would blow him some profit.

Then Ratseys supper being ready, the stranger was calin to his chamber, where
the cloth was laid* and Ratsey gave him a kind welcome, though with a Jewish
heart, (for he meant to rob him, though indeed it sell out otherwise) So they
fat down, and Ratseys two supposed seruingmen, waited as dutifully, as if they
had had a Master of a better condition. But all supper time the farmer used
very few words, was discontent, and very heavy at heart, which he could not
but discover, which Ratsey perceiving, demanded of him the cause of his so
great grief and melancholy, which with much ado he told him.

The truth is, says the farmer, I have much cause of grief, and for my life I
cannot dissemble it, it tour heth me so near; For to morrow I am to pay two
hundred pounds to a Gentleman not far from hence which I am bound to
discharge, and more then my bond, my house, and land is morgaged unto him, and
I remain at his mircie, for I have had such losses and hindrances, that all I
can make amounts but to one hundred and fifty pounds, and I and mine are
utterly undone, unless I can take new order for payment of the other fifty
pounds by a day, which I am very doubtful of; he is reported to be so cruel,
and unconscionable.

If this be all (says Ratsey) be of good cheer, for although my self am
unknown unto him, yet I am sure he has heard of my friends, for they are not
dwelling far from him: And I will do so much for you as to ride with you in
the morning to him, and doubt not I will prevail, that he shall forbear you
till a further time, without forfeiture or advantage taken: for I presume one
gentleman will not deny another such a request being so near neigh bors.

The Farmer gave him great thanks, and was well comforted by that promise, for
it seemed a very likly thing, ye a gentleman of that show that Ratsey was of,
might both persuade and prevailed with his creditor. So supper ended, they
parted to their several todgings and the poor man was much merrier by this
hope conceived.

Well, morning being come, they rode altogether according to promise, and as
they rode, still Ratsey would feign have been doing with this hundred and
fifty pound, but (as God would have it) his purpose was still croft by the
continual coming too and fro of passengers, who made Ratsey at that time
volens nolens, to play the true man against his will. But he thought he would
go through stitch now, as he had beg^nne, and indeed (although at first he
never meant it, when he said it) rode with the Farmer to the Gentleman his
house, where Ratsey as well as he could played the Rhetoritian, to persuade the
G^ntleman to bear with his debtor for a time for the odd fifty pounds and
told him, if either he or any friend of his had cause to use him, or his
means, where he dwelt, (for he took upon him the name of a Gentleman's son
some xx. miles from thence of great reckoning) he should command him to
requite his courtesy. Sir, said the Gentleman* I have no acquaintance with
your father but this I have heard, that he is a man of great worth and worship
in the country, and could I without my great prejudice, pleasure this man at
your request, it is as like you might obtain it at my hands, as any man living
to whom I am not further engaged. But believe me sir, as I am a Gentleman, I am
to ride to morrow to pay 300. pound for a purchase, and my credit is bound for
it, and I have so depended upon the payment of this money, as I have neglected
to provide for my self otherwise, upon the assurance of it. Therefore you must
needs ercuse me, and so turned his back, and was going away Nay stay sir says
Ratsey, I will once in my life play the Merchant venturer, and hazard fifty
pounds upon a man I never saw before: Oh sir, says the man (and sell upon his
knees) if you will do this pleasure to a stranger, you shall bind me, my wife,
and children to pray for you, and I will be as careful to make you
restitution, as I am now desirous to be helped in this extremity: and I hope you
shall not stay long for your money. Ratsey made that reckoning so, for he
intended to be paid at some of their hands before they parted. To be short,
Ratsey tendered down fifty pounds in gold presently in the man's behalf, which
the Gentleman received, and was so well co^ceited of Ratsey, that he made them
al his guests ye night.

The night being past over, and the morning come, the Gentleman of the house
gat up, and bagd the three hundredth pounds, and made himself ready for his
business, and to ride: Ratsey was not long after, before he was as ready as
he, for he meant to accompany him which way soever he rode, So breakfast being
past, Ratsey told the Gentleman he would ride some part of his way with him,
as he pretended occasion of business, which the Gentleman was very glad of,
for he was so far from any mistrust of him, (for that he named himself such
a Gentleman's son) as he held himself much graced by his company. The Farmer
took his leave of them both, and was not a little glad that he had escapt his
late danger.

Ratsey and the Gentleman had not rode many miles together, when the Gentleman's
man's horse (for he carried the three hundred pounds in a Port-mantle behind
him) began to faint, being a grass Nagge, and they were much troubled with
him; which Ratsey perceiving, had the Gentleman (if he pleased) to let his man
take it behind him (being better horst) as long as they rode together. The
Gentleman thanked him very heartily. So the money was removed, and set behind
Shorthose. This was that which Ratsey aimd at, for now he knew his venture of
fifty pofids would come home with profit. Shorthose having the Portmantle
behind him, needed no directions what to do, for their minds were well
enough known the one to the other. But as the Gentleman and Ratsey past the
time away with talk of many matters, little minding the way before them, so
Shorthose by little and little mended his pace, and in very short time got
much ground of them, which the Gentleman perceiving, told M. Ratsey that his
man rode too fast. Then Ratsey began to call and whistle to his man, but he
would take no notice of it, but the more he calde or whistled, the more he
stole away by degrees. At the which Ratsey seemed much moved, and did swear
and tear exceedingly, and told the Geatleman that he would ride and overtake
him and stay him with a vengeance, who all this while mistrusted nothing, for
Ratseys assumption of such a Gentlema^s name, drowned the conceit of any doubts
or suspision.

But being ridden after his man, Snell likewise begins to pace after his
master (as it was his duty) and the faster they followed Shorrhose, the faster
he rode from them so that in a little time as they grew near together, and at
a convenient place of changing the way, they raind their horses back toward
the old gentleman (who followed likewise as fast as he could) and wau'd their
hearts over their heads as a farewell for his 300. pound, and so rid clear
away. The Gentleman he made hue and cry after them, but to no purpose for they
were so well horst and so well experienced in every by way, that at their
pleasure they would outstrip a country.

The Gentleman went about to trouble the Farmer, because he brought him to his
house but it auaild him naught, for he produced such sufficient proof how they
met by chance in the Inn together, and was so well known to be of honest life
and conversation, that any matter suggested against him, could not prevail to
his hurt.

So the old Gentleman with his man returned home by Weeping Cross, and all he
had for his three hundredth pounds, was but a Caveat hereafter to beware how he
gave such sudden entertainment to strangers.

A true and merry conceit Ratsey performed upon a Picklock that traveled the
Countries as a foot-post.
IT chanced that as Ratsey rode abroad, he heard still of a fellow that
traveled up and down the country, in the name and nature of a foot-post,
with a long pikt staff on his neck, and a Leatherne bag overthwart his
shoulder and under his arm, that protended to carry letters too and fro, but
in steed of packets, his bag was filled with picklocks, and in every Inn and
Asehouse where he lodged all night, he paid the hostisse with her own money,
and carried somewhat away besides too, for there was not a Cupbord or Chest
that he could come near, but he would pick open, and if th^re were no money in
it, then money worth should walk with him; and he would not stick to rob
poor Milke-maids, and servants toward an evening, if be met them handsomely,
if they had not above six pence in their purses.

Ratsey came in no place, but complaints were still made of such a fellow, and
he did envy the practices of such deiect and base conditions, and resolved in
his mind if ever he met with him, both to redress and revenge his villainies,
and to effect some matter of conceit upon him, that should be worth talking,
and deceive the foot-post in his art of lock-picking.

It chanced that not long after the foot-post came into an Inn in Stilton to
drink, where Ratsey was at dinner, who espying him out of ye casement of a
window that stood open, (for he had certain notice what kind a fellow he was,
and in what attire and fashion he traveled) he causd him to be called in, and
after some questions, Ratsey made him to drink, and to sit down to dinner
with Shorthose and Snell. They filled his veins with good victualles, and wine,
and that made the footpost very merry.

I pray thee footpost (says Ratsey) which way do thou travel? faith Sir
(says he) I go every way, even as the directions of my letters give me
occasion, But now I am going to Cambridge: I pray thee then quoth Ratsey, let
me entreat thee to carry me a letter to the Iailor. For my father sent in a
fellon thither the other day, and I should send word to the Iaylour that he
should not be bailed. Marry that I will in most dutiful manner (quoth this
supposed footpost) and much more for your worship then that: Then Ratsey
demanded his name which he told him, Give him a cup of wine (says Ratsey:
and while he is drinking and at dinner I will write my letter, and make it
ready. But in stead of a letter Ratsey counterfeited a Justice of peace his
hand in Cambridge shire and wrote his Mittimus, and set it in with this
Prouiso, that he should be kept fast boulted or else he would break away.

As soon as the Mittimus was made, sealed, and subscribed in form of a
letter, Ratsey delivered it to the footpost, and said give this to the chief
Iaylor of cambridge, and here is half a crown for thee to drink for thy
labor. So the footpost took the letter and the money, and with many a cappe
and knee thanked Ratsey and departed. And made have till he came at Cambridge,
and staide not in the town so much as to taste a cup of nappie Ale, before he
came to the Iaylor, and to him very briefly he delivered the letter, The
Iaylour took it, and read it, and smilde a good, and said, Footepost thou are
welcome, for such a Gentleman's sake, He bids me give thee the best
intertainment I may, I, Sir, quoth the Footpost, the Gentleman loves me well,
and I thank him for it, I dined well with his Men to day.

But I pray you (says the footpost) has the courteous Gentleman remembered such
a poor man as I am in his letter? I mary does he (fellow) quoth he, and
therefore Sir (says the Iaylor, and calls to one of his men) take the
footpost into the lowest ward, clappe a strong pair of bolts upon his heels,
and search what other letters he carries in his leatherne Casket, which his man
performing, found nothing in the same, but 3. or 4. bundels of picklocks, Then
the Iaylor commanded he should have a pair of shackles clapped on more, and bad
him to see if his picklockes would serve his turn to bail him thence. But the
footpost (or rather picklocke) hearing his Mittimus, was blanke and cold at
heart, and had not a word to say his Conscience did so accuse him. But there
he lay while the next Sessions and was hanged, for many matters did come
against him.

Now let true men judge, what knauerie is amongst Thieves when one crossbites
another to the Gallows.

How Ratsey robbed a Preacher, by persuasion.
ANother time Ratsey ryding by the way, upon New Market heath, ouertooke a
Preacher, upon whom he intended to pass some pranke, and resolved there could
be no better jest practiced upon a Parson then to pick his purse by
persuasion, without drawing of any weapon, And at the first gave him this
encounter. You are well overtaken sir. You are welcome says the Preacher. Pray
you how far ride you this way quoth Ratsey, I ride says the Preacher to such
a place: if you ride that way, I would be glad of your co^pnay: yes indeed
(answers Ratsey) that same waie^lies my business, and I will accompany you
with all my heart. Thus their several salutatons ended upon their first
meeting: they entered into further communication of diverse matters and so
beguiled much time and way with such talk, but that was not the matter which
Ratsey aimed at, for he meant to give the Churchman another text to preach
upon. Therefore fell roundly to his purpose in this fashion. I perceive Sir by
your habit you are a Preacher, and Scholars both by art and nature are kind
and courteous, I do little therefore misdoubte your friendly respect of what I
shall speak unto you Know then that I am a Gentleman, and have been a man of
better means then my present fortunes makes show of; But by the fortunes of
war, and my own disorder I am fallen into the hands of Extremity, and am
forced to lay my wants open to the help of others, and I think I cannot fitter
communicate my griefs to any then a man of your condition, for you preach to
others the Doctrine of good deeds and Charity, therefore I doubt not but your
self will be respective of such as are needye. I confess I have been a great
malefactor, bu^ am sorry for what is past and would willingly prevent any
misfortunes to come: Yet I was never nearer the mouth of mishappe, then I am
now at this instant, For my wants are such, and so desperate as if I have it
not of you, I must and will have money of him I meet next, although I hazard my
dearest blood. Therefore as you are a Gentleman, and a Scholar, tender my
distress: and consider the force and power of Necessity, which constraines
them that are needy to rod, and take away the goods of their neighbors, and
oftentimes to endanger their lives and limbs, and so at last bring themselves
by such lewd courses to untimely end. If I do pass from you unpitied and
vnreleeued, notwithstanding I thus make my mind and extremities known unto
you, and afterward be constrained to fall into Theft, or murder, assure your
self you are partaker of my evil, in that you have not reduced me going awry,
nor supported me being ready to fall.

The Preacher was feelingly touched with this passion, and told him that he was
inwardly grieved that a gentleman of his rank and fashion should be driven to
so low an ebb: and that his means could not answer his willing mind: And
so drew his purse out of his pocket, and says to Ratsey here is money, hold, take
it, I think it be three pounds or thereabouts. I would I were better provided
to pleasure you. Ratsey received it, and gave him great thanks, but resolved
to sound him deeper whether he had any more store or no. Therefore seconded
his speech in this manner. Sir quoth Ratsey, this is money indeed, and will
serve a man's present occasions for meat and drink, but not to furnish me to
such preferment as I am hopeful of: and my mind gives me (I cannot tell what
the reason is) that you have more money about you, If you have, it ill befits a
man of your profession to dissemble, for that is a fault you much reprehend in
others: Therefore as you will answer before God, I charge you tell me the
truth howsoever it be: Why then (quoth the preacher) to deal plainly with
you: I have ten pounds more which I received this Morning. Let me see it
(says Ratsey) So he drew it out of his other pocket, and delivered it to
Ratsey: Who returning the purse and three pounds back to the Preacher, kept
the ten pounds and told him, that (he thought) would serve his turn, and
save him from imminent danger that before he was ready to fall into. And
(says Ratsey) if ever my estate be raised to that ability that I be able, I
pray you tell me your name and dwelling, and I will make you undoubted
restitution for it, in the mean time I will but borrow this of you till my
better fortunes. And so would have taken his leave and departed. Nay (says the
Preacher) I pray you leave me not to night, but lie at mine Inn with me, and I
promise you (for all this) I will bear your charges, and be merry with you.
Pardon me for that, says Ratsey; so you may do me wrong, and charge the
Constable with me, and say I have robbed you of ten pound, when I have but
borrowed it: I dare not hazard my life and liberty so slenderly. As I am an
honest man, says the Preacher, and look for mercy at Gods hands at the last
day, believe me I will not speak one word of it to any man, neither shall you
be troubled or injured any way by my means or procurement, for I am so well
persuaded of you, that if you live, you will one day give it me again.

Upon this religious protestation, Ratsey rode along with him, and set up their
horses together, supt together, and lay together. For Ratsey handled his talk,
and behavior so orderly in the presence of the Preacher, that he conceived an
extraordinary good opinion of him, and imputed the former accident to
necessity, rather then the corruption of Ratseys condition.

The morning being come, they brake their fast together, and the Parson paid
all according to promise, and Ratsey brought him ten miles of his way, where
they took their several leaves. Ratsey with redoubled thanks, and promise to
pay the money again, and the Preacher with a world of good counsel, for
(says he) if that may serve to save you from such perrill as you pretended, I
shall think it the most charitable deed that ever I did in my life. And so
they parted.

A true relation of the Robbery committed by Ratsey and his company, within a
little off Bedford, for which they were Executed at Bedford the 27. of March
last. 1605.
A Gentleman, and his Brother dwelling within six or seven miles of Bedford,
having bin in a place where they had received the sum of eight score and
fourteen pounds, or there abouts, Ratsey had secret knowledge and
intelligence thereof, and of the way which they traveled homewards: So both
he, and Snell, and Shorthose dogged both the Gentlemen, whereof the one carried
the money before him in a Wallet, and could spy no convenient place to give
onset to their purpose, til they came within half a mile of the Gentleman's
own house: Then Ratsey (by his intelligence) thought it was either high time
to strike or to desist from their former resolution, for by the notice that was
given him, he knew be was not far from the Gentleman's grounds, and place of
dwelling. And therefore being well horst (for he was upon the Coniurers
Gelding he touched him with his spurs and soon ouertooke the Gentleman. To
whom he briefly began to tell the cause of his coming, which was (he said
for money, and money he must have. The Gentleman told him that he would not
part with his money so easily and alighted and Ratsey and he betook themselves
to their weapons, and while they were at it, very lustilye, the Gentleman's
brother began to ride away with the money, but Sne I followed him and soon
brought him again, who kept him safe while the other were fighting who should
carry away the money. The Gentleman is known in his Country to be very
stout and valiant, and had not his sword broken, it is thought that Ratsey and
Snell both could not have robbed him, (for Shorthose never came in.) The
Gentleman hurt Ratsey very dangerously, and he himself had a maime in his
leg, which is said to be done by Snell coming in to aid Ratsey, and being
both upon him, when the Gentleman's sword failed, the money was delivered, and
with much danger Ratsey and his companions escaped, for hue and cry went
forth in every place, but they spared no Horseflesh till they Coasted the
Country and came to Saffron-walden, there one of them had some friends or
Kinsfolks, with whom they all reposed themselves a day or two, and Snell and
Shorthose did there change away their horses.

From thence they took their several courses to London, where they met
altogether in an Inn in Southwarke, where it is reported they shared their
money, and that Ratsey had two shares allowed him in respect of his hurts
received.

But as goods evil got, are for the most part evil spent: so they made as
little conscience in consuming their money as they did in getting the same. And
as deceit has still his due, and God is just in punnishing offenders, so fell
it out in their several apprehensions, for Snel being taken in Duck-lane in
London for a Horse that he had stolen from about Graues-end, not for ye
robbery committed in Bedford-shire, and being examined before a Justice, and
ready to be committed to prison, he appealed to ye Justice for favor, lolde
him he would help him to one Ratsey of whom such fame went for many
robberies, if he weld be good unto him for his life. The Justice promised him
his lawful favor, and thereupon Snell gave him notice where Ratseys Horse stood,
and where he should have him. So by his directions Ratsey was taken, and
apprehended near the Doctors Commons and committed to Newgate, where he
remained a long time, and Snell likewise. In which space, two or thee Sessions
past, and they never called to any trial.

All this while Shorthose was at liberty, and having been up and down in the
Country, five or six weeks, and coming to London to listen how Ratsey and
Snell had sped the Sessions before, he went and unfolded his mind to one
Water Skellington a Countrieman of his, who revealed him to the keepers of
Newgate, and so he was likewise apprehended in Long-lane, in the liberties of
great S. Bartholmewes.

So being thus severally taken, Newgate held and contained them till Snell
desired the Justice to remove him to ye Kings Bench, for fear least one of ye
other should do him some sudden mischief for revealing of Ratsey.

A little before the Assize time in Lent last, they were all removed down to
Bedford, where they had not remained long, but Ratsey had eaten off his Irons
with a water which he had gotten, and so had escaped, but that he was espied
in time, and prevented by the Keeper.

To be short, the Assizes being come, they were all brought down to the place
of Judgment, where they showed themselves so valiant that they thrust twelve
men into a corner, who sound them all guilty for the Robbery committed in
Bedfordshire upon the Gentleman and his Brother. And they were sent away from
the Bar with the doleful sentence of Lord have mercy upon you. And the
seven and twenty day of March last, they were all Executed in Bedford
aforesaid.

Ratseys repentance which he wrote with his own hand when he was in Newgate.
THe silent night had shadowed every Tree,
And Phoebus in the west was shrouded low:
Each Hiue had home her busy laboring Be,
And Birds their nightly harbor began to know.
And all things did from weary labor linne,
When I began to way my state and sin.
Men worn with work betook them to their rest,
The sun had left to show his glorious beams:
Titan had fully hid him in the West,
To cool the set locks of his weary teames;
When sunk with sorrow being captiuate,
I shed forth tears, lamenting much my state.
My head on hand, my elboe on my knee,
And tears did trickle down my count^nance than,
My countenance as sad as man's might be,
My dumps befitting well a captive man.
Fettered in Prison, passionate alone.
My sighs wrought tears, and thus I began to moan.
I that of late did live a Soldiers life,
And spent my service in my countries good,
Now captive lie, where naught but cares are rife,
Where is no hope but loss of dearest blood,
This is befallen me, cause I did mispend,
That time which God to better use did lend.
Sigh! for my music is a Sirens song,
A fair deceit, to shadow men in grief:
Did I say fair? Alas I called it wrong,
Ulysses knew the Sirens dangers chief,
Was when she sung to lull a man a sleep,
Then fashioned she to sing, to make men weep.
Deceauing Sirens, Sirens all to me,
A shining shadow, but a dream of glo^de:
A bayte, a trappe: I blind and could not see,
A dangerous pray, and I both fond and bold.
Would venture all, all for a worthles toye,
And so I left, and lost my chiefest joy.
Had I but stopped mine ears when Sirens sung
And bound my self unto Ulysses mast:
Or had I thought, alas I am but young,
Too much is all to venture on a cast.
I might have lived, and from all dangers free,
Where now I dye, for life is not for me.
But I did follow what I knew was vain,
Instead of virtue, I did vice embrace:
My former pleasures now procure my pain,
And cause I lackt one spark of timely grace.
The poisoned Aconite of death and woe,
Resolves to send a fatal overthrow.
This makes mines eyes to gush out floods of tears,
My flesh to melt, my veins and artirs rend:
My soul to seek redress, to cure her fears,
For now my cause cannot afford one friend.
I that of late did number many friends,
Now find them fled, and no man comfort lends.
The leaueles tree with wrath of Winters wind
Best represents my wretched wasting state:
Fortune the wind, the leaves my friends I find,
My self the Tree that thus am crossed by fate.
And yet in this we greatly differ may,
That it reuiues and I still pine away.
I cannot speak but kill my self with words,
I cannot think, but I my conscience wound:
Law stabbes me still, in every part with swords,
Justice commands in fetters I be bound,
And for I have been graceles, griefs do spring,
My days misled, my present cares do bring.
Confounding sadness like a load of lead,
Chilles all my blood, and makes my sinews shrink,
Revenge (quoth wrong) let rigor stand in stead,
Death filles the Cup, and says that I must drink.
This makes me plead, this makes me call and cry
To heavens great King for mercy ere I die.
I all confused and in confusion wrapped,
Implore Gods mercy, prostrate on my face:
Youngling I was, and nouice-like intrapt,
Repentance true, away shall follies chase.
Forgive, Oh heavens th'iniquities of youth,
Do not object the faults of my untruth.
Villains avaunt, you bastards are by kind,
That do perturbe the Countries quiet state,
Shame to offend, shun a corrupted mind,
And learn by me your former life to hate.
Live of your own, and brave it not with brags.
Least Law condemn you in your proudest rags.
Awake for shame, and lift your eyelids up,
Sleep not secure, nor dream of doing wrong,
If Justice strike, you cannot change her cup,
Death being done, you fall, for he is strong.
And then your course, because you did not cease
To vex your King, with noubling countries peace.
Drink not the Nectar of your Neighbors sweat,
Steal not at all, thy God does so command:
Whose law to keep thy Sou^raigne does entreat,
Thy health it is, Gods law to understand;
Obeying God, God shall all harms prevent,
Keeping Kings Peace, thy King is well content.
Like to the Woolfe in every place you range,
Praying on Lambs that never went astray:
And like Camelions must your suites be strange,
Who does by kind change colors every day;
Without respect, forgetting what you be,
Masking in sin, as if God could not see.
Abate presumption, sin is not a jest,
Though God forbear, yet will he strike at length,
God made thee man, make not thy self a beast,
But seek to love thy God with soul and strength.
Ill got ill spent, your hopes (in Theft) pretended,
Are grief and shame, and life in sorrows ended.
Your chief desires to fill your pursse with gold,
By hook and crook all careless of regard;
You count him best that Bayardlike is bold,
For such desires, sharp reckonining is prep^rde.
Leave then to sin, so may you escape that fall:
Which following vice, you cannot shun at all.
Mad is the mind, that still in dangers stray,
Iron his heart, whose gain is others woe:
Sold is his soul, whom Satan leads away,
His path destruction, where so ere he go,
Sold, sold, for dross: Oh be not so deceau'd!
Hell gapes, soul sincks, of heavenly joys bereaved.
It Is I inuect, knows what infection is,
And loves effect, that makes me thus to warn:
Take what I give for good confection it is,
By my downe-fall far better may you learn,
Least all to late, you weep as well as I,
In deaths deep grief, expecting still to die.
My sorrowing sobbes with tears redeem what is past.
Or slouds of tears suffice for fore-done ills:
Behold my looks with discontent ore cast,
Whose heart does rend, whose eyes fresh fountains s^^ls,
And yet all this, and all that I can do,
Is small to that, which I have need to do.
My soul shall mourn for all my ill-done deeds,
And I will weep, sole Author of souls woe:
Repentance shall be my black mourning weeds,
I Will bathe my self in tears from top to toe.
And while life is, which cannot now belong,
Grant mercy Lord, this shall be all my song.
My heart through flesh shall issue sweating grief,
And scald my bones, with salt and brinish tears:
Through flesh and bone my heart shall beg relief,
On bended knees, till bone my flesh outweares.
All that I am, I Will spend in mourn for sin,
And where I end, a fresh I will begin.
Divine celestial maker of earths Globe,
Crowned King of Kings, most happy power of powers:
Just in thy Judgment, clear in Scarlet Robe,
Sweet of all sweets, in judgment gall to sowres.
Release my sorrows, if thou think it meet,
And Salve my sinful sores with Balm so sweet.
Great God, remit the follies of my youth,
Thy power divine, I will no more offend,
But I will strive to serve thee still in truth,
While to this body thou a life do lend,
And at my end, I Will give the praise to thee,
If thou but grant one dram of thy mercy.
If Maudlins tears did ever Christ's feet wet,
And sweet her soul with true repentant tears:
If Peter's mourning streams did mercy get,
For all his sins, though he his Christ forsweares.
My sad laments abounding from mine eyes,
Sweet God accept, and hear my mournful cries.
A wounded Soul, a broken contrite heart,
Creepes in great'st throng thy mercies Throne to touch,
The oil of life, King of my life impart,
Though sin be great, thy mercies thrice as much.
Oh thou that art in power, and mercy great!
Send down thy mercy, from thy mercies feate.
The Publican suppressed with weight of sin,
Durst not presume to cast his eyes on hie,
Gazing on earth his heart did never linne,
But Miserere lowely he did cry.
Peccaui Lord, this sinners soul confessed.
Whose note I sing that have no less transgressed.
The wandering Son, whose portion was misspent,
With ryots, surfets quaffing bowls of wine,
Dainties all dear: In hunger now content,
To feed with Hogs this prodigalls not nice.
All tattered torn shook out of colors fine,
Need him compels to keep a strangers swine.
The ground contents him now to rest upon,
Whom beds of down did whilome discontent,
His head up boulstred with some hill or stone,
The clouds a covering to his field-bed lent,
Where sorry man ore' plundged woeful lies,
His Curtains cold, his Canapy the skies.
Renumerating with himself the cause.
Of want, of woe, of hunger and of cold:
Offense to God, the breaking of his laws,
Then break out tears, he could no longer hold,
But weeping ran, till he his Father sees,
In true repentance, bending on his knees.
And with loud Organ of a faynting soul,
Father, (he said) I have against heaven offended,
Against earth and thee, whose power does sin control*
No worthy Son: so he his faint speech ended.
Yet still in silence, pearls of tears dril'd forth,
Till Fathers welcome counted him of worth.
His Fathers heart in pity then relents,
About his neck he closde his aged arms:
Glad in his heart, his Son in heart repents,
Receaues him home, and with a kiss he warnes,
That all his friends should feast at his free cost,
And welcome home his Son, so long was lost.
Thrice happy Son, whose tears renew this grace,
And sweet repentance was it home thee brought:
Threefolde, thrice double, happy Fathers face,
A Son to find whom thou so long have sought.
And Son most happy in a Father kind,
Who being lost, did such a Father find.
The self same Balm, is cure for my great woe,
The same repentance makes me Abba cry:
My speech does faint, and I can say no more,
Mercy redress, else languishing I die.
Sweet, sweet of sweetes, blessed balm, chief ease of pain,
Grant memy home, I will not stray again.
No more shall folly hold my wits in thrall,
Wisdom shall ransom Will from Follies bands,
Experience shall forewarne me Sirens all,
Nor shall despair, touch Conscience with foul hands;
But till life's end, my prayers to heaven shall hye,
And with repentance will I live, and die.
With sin my soul shall be no more oppressed,
My God to serve shall now be all my care:
No longer shall my thoughts be at unrest,
But daily shun the place where wicked are.
And while the remnant of my life does last,
I Will sigh, and sorrow for my sins forepast.
My colored suites I now exchange for black,
Till scarlet sins be all as white as snow:
On me sweet time shall never turn his back,
Nor shall his task be more my tares to mow,
But with repentance, furrow hopes forlorn,
Till God give grace, I sheaff up better corn.
This little remnant of my life so poor.
He teach to shun all sin and vices all,
Giver of grace, grant grace I sin no more,
Establish me that I may never fall,
To thee my heart, my life and soul I give,
Who after death eternally makes live.
Dyrect my paths even for thy mercies sake,
Guide thou my steps, to keep repentant ways:
Keep me from sleept, in thee still let me wake,
To laud thy name, during these arthly days.
And when from earth I shall dissolve to just,
Grant that my soul may live among the just.
Gamaliel Ratsey.
FINIS.

