THE ROMISH IVDAS.

A SERMON PREACHED AT SAINT MARY'S IN OXFORD THE FIFTH OF NOVEMBER, 1610.

By JOHN RAVVLINSON Doctor of Divinity.

Bern. super Cantic. Ser. 52. Non quod mihi est vtile, sed quod multis, id mihi
vtile iudicabo.

LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM HALL for JOHN HODGETS, 1611.

TO THE HONORABLE GOOD KNIGHT Sir John Egerton, multiplication of Grace in
this life, and consummation of Glory in that other.
HONORABLE SIR,
THough Nihili ad omne nullaest proportio, there is no proportion between such
a Nothing as this, and the All of your all-deseruing favors toward me; yet
because the Moralist tells me, that where only the quality of the affection,
and not the quantity of the present is to be attended, Modicum non differt a
magno: it skilles not, be the present great or small. And, Testes inhabiles
tunc admittuntur, cum alioqui veritas haberi nequit, say the Lawyers: Witnesses
less sufficient are admitted, when the truth cannot without them be
sufficiently tried; J will not once question your kind and favorable
construction of this either little Modicum of my love, or insufficient witness
of the truth of my affection toward you, to whom (unless I would be
impudently bashful) I cannot but ingenuously confess, that whatsoever is
within the sphere of my actiuitie, has long since been deservedly due.

Having therefore p^^ssed this Sermon for a Soldier to fight against the
Romish Judas, the Priests and Jesuits, who are ever like Ier. 2.24.
Jeremies wild Ass, great with foale, and so the fitter to be pursued, I
know not under whose colors it should rather serve than yours; both because
the many sweet influences of your favors have taken such hold and handfast of
me, that though by the Civil Law, Ecclesiae res vltra triennium locari non
possunt, Church-liuings cannot be let forth for more than three years, yet by
the Law of Civility, my self a Churchman, am bound to let and set my self
to your service for ever; as also because you have vowed your Knights service
to the defense of our Head-Captaine Christ, against his and our Head-enemie the
Pope, the Muster-master of the Priests and Jesuits: a sort of Romanists, of
whom I would we might not truly say what Cor. Tacit.
Tacitus sometimes said of the Roman Augurs, Hoc genus hominum semper
vetabitur, semper tamen in Ciuitate retinebitur. They will ever be forbidden,
yet will this Land of ours never be rid of them. To put by many other their
matchless, more than Machiauellian Practices both at home and abroad, he that
shall but look into their practice of the Powder Plot, which I have made the
Subiectum adaequatum of this Sermon, it cannot but resolve his heart (if truly
honest) into that poetical fury, Odero, si potero: si non, inuitus amabo. J
know their cunning to be such, that they will disclaim what they cannot
excuse, and rather than stand burdened with so foul a crime, disburden
themselves of it what they may, by terming it the rash c Ovid.
attempt of certain unfortunate Gentlemen, whom yet they account in nothing so
much unfortunate, as that it was not their fortune to speed in that dismal
enterprise. Howbeit, J verily believe, that had they sped, it would have
extorted tears from the Priests and Jesuits their taske-masters; tears, not
of sorrow, but of joy, such as Caesar shed when Pompeys head was brought
before him.

I trust, my loyalty to my most gracious Sovereign, will excuse my
presumption, that I suffer my pen to travel in the same path after The Bishop
of Lincoln. The Deane of Christ. church.
two of the most bright and orient Lights of our Church, after whose harvest I
am far unworthy to gleane: and my love to your honorable self obtain my
pardon for entitling you to these my poor travels: for whom, as for my most
honorable Lord and Master your Father, the most noble Foster-father of the
whole Clergy, with each branch and sprig of so noble a Root, my prayer is and
ever shall be to God:

Michael Serinius in antiquitat.
Stet Domus haec donec fluctus Formica marinos,
Ebibat, and totum Testudo perambulet orbem.
Until a little-little Ant
Shall drink the brackish Sea-waues dry;
And a Snaile compass all the world,
Stand may that noble ^^milie.
Yours to the utmost streine of his best service, John Rawlinson.

A SERMON PREACHED AT St. MARY'S IN OXFORD the fifth of NOVEMBER, 1610.
The Preface.
FOr every purpose under Heaven there is both (...) and (...), (so the
Septuagint read it Eccles. 3.
Ecclesiastes 3.) Tempus and Tempestiuitas, a Time and a Season: and the Season
is (as I may call it) Salactionum, the salt that so seasoneth al our actions,
that whatsoever is unseasonable is ever unpleasing.

Musica in luctu importuna narratio, Ecclus. 22.6.
says the Son of Sirac. c. 22. A tale out of time is as music in mourning:
or (in Suidas.
Suidas his Proverb) (...), as the wearing of a hot and heavy winter-cloake at
Midsommer-Yea, that Panis Angelorum, Angelical Manna that came down from
Heaven, though when it was gathered in due time, it had in it Omne
delectamentum, the delight and delicacie of all sweets, Sap. 16.20.
Sap. 16. yet being gathered out of season, tempore non suo, as upon the
Sabbath day, it putrified and was full of worms, Exo. 16.20
Exodus 16.

As in other works, so especially in this great and notable work of the Lord
(the Work of Works) the dispensation of his holy word, there is a
tempestiuitie or season to be observed. Text and Time must have congruitie
each with other.

As at other times, so especially at such a time as this, which for the noble
and excellent work of our delivery wrought therein by the high and mighty hand
of God, from the damnable designs of that cursed crew, those Catuli
Catilmarij, whelps of Catilines breed, and Iudae plusquam Iudaici, more than
Jewish Iudasses, who as this day five years had banded themselves together for
the extirpation both of Prince and people, may be called a Time of Times,
(for, but for it, to us time had been no more) and does therefore rightfully
challenge at our hands a Song of Songs, even a song of thanksgiving, which is
the best and sweetest melody in the ears of God.

While I speak of suting this time with a Text, I presume your conceits do
already anticipate, and run before me in my choice; which indeed shall be
a choice without choice, none other than that of Judas his treason, the hideous
cry and dinne whereof so lately sounded, and shall now again be revived in
your ears.

THE TEXT.
Luc. 22.48. Judas, betraiest thou the Son of man with a kiss?


MY Text then (as ye see) for the vicinitie and readiness of it, is like
Jacobs Venison, Ge. 27.20.
Genesis 27. a piece of tame and homebred Kidde, in stead of wild Dear, far
fetched, and hunted afar off: rather found than sought, because the Lord my
God has brought it unto my hand. Yet is it not more ready and near at hand,
than apt and apposit to the present business. Before (I am sure) it was no
abortiue borne out of due time; for it does but too-too-fitly sort with Tempus,
the generality of the times wherein we live, being the same whereof the
Apostle propheticallie spoke, 2. Tim. 3 4
2. Tim. 3. that in the last days should come perilous times, for men should
be ungrateful, unnatural, Truce Breakers, Traitors. But now to the
Tempestiuitas, or present opportunity of time, it is as pertinent and proper,
as if the Holy Ghost had dictated and destinated it heereunto. Only it is my
burden, and my disadvantage, that for want either of time, or skill, or both, I
shall not be so well able to fit it, as it the time; but am feign to come (as
Plutare de educ. lib.
Pericles excused himself) (...), not so thorowlie prepared as happily upon
more mature warning I would have been.

Judas, betraiest thou, etc. In which our Saviors expostulation, I have
heretofore noted two things:

1 The one is (...), the matter or substance of it; and therein An Action,
Treason. The Agent, Judas, The Patient, Christ. The Instrument, a Kiss.
2 The other is (...), the Style or Character of our Saviors speech, which is
twofold: 1 Compellatiue, in this word Judas. 2 Interrogatiue, in the words
following, Betrayest thou, etc.

The one, an Intimation of our Saviors Lenity and mildness.

The other, an Insinuation of his Inspection and insight into the covert plot
and practice of Judas.

These be the limbs and lineaments of this Text. Of the first limme, which is
the Action, was framed the whole body of my last Sermon, as the woman was made
of one ribbe taken out of the man.

I should now proceed to the anatomizing and cutting up of the Agent, (Thou)
who, (as I doubt not, ye well remember) by the just and fearful judgment of
God, was hanged, (for he hanged himself) at our last Session. But for this
time I will wholly apply my self to the cursed (shall I say, or blessed?)
occasion of this meeting: for it was both; cursed of God and men in regard of
the attempt, but in regard of the event, blessed of God, blessed and ever to be
blessed of men, till the world it self shall be consumed with a Flood of
Fire, as once before it was with a Flood of Water.

And because I shall endeavor to fit the treason of Judas to the Embryo or
inchoate treason of this day, next to it the greatest that ever was, post
homines natos, since men began, nay, post diabolos incarnatos, since Englishmen
Italionate began to be devils incarnate; I must beg this leave, that I may
make a little excursion extra oleas, beyond the bounds of my text, and take in
such other circumstances as I shall meet with in the Story of Judas his
treason: the rather, because indeed there is none of them but reductiuely falls
into my text, as do all other Seas and Rivers into the maine Ocean;

-- Homer.
(...). I must confess, that in one, and that a maine material point, which
is the Patient, there is an infinite disparison and disproportion between
them; for because this of Judas was High Treason against Christ the son of
the most high, all other treasons are so infinitely short of it, that (compared
with it) they are all but as it were petite treasons. And yet to make amends
for that one circumstance, wherein the Powder Treason falls short, examine it,
and ye shall find other three wherein it exceeds it.

1 The extent of the Patient: for the treason of Judas was not against all the
Apostles, or Disciples, or Frinds, or Followers of Christ, but against Christ
alone: But this was not only against his Majesty's royal person, who is-
multis e millibus vnus, such a one as is not among many thousands, or rather,
as it was said of David, 2. Sa. 18.3.
2. Sam. 18. vnus solus pro december millibus, such a one as is worth ten thousand
of us: in whom Maiestas and amor-, Majesty and Serenity are met together, Mercy
and Truth have kissed each other; so as never any King whose person might more
aggrauate a treason intended against him: but it was also against the Queen,
the Prince, the rest of that Royal Stem. -- Homer.
(...) against 2 Re. 2.12.
the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel: the thousands and ten thousands of Israel.

Flos delibatus populi, Suadaeque medulla: the choicest of the Nobility, the
Clergy, and the Gentry of this Land. And to sum up Jliada malorum, the
Iliads of all our miseries at once, Ovid.
(I may well call it the Iliads, for n Haec facies Troiae, cum caperetur, erat:
such a fiery face had Troy when it was taken, as our Troynouant should have
had) it was against

Rem, Regem, Regimen, Regionem, Religionem. 2 The second is the Extent of the
Agent. In the treason of Judas there was but one to one; one Judas against one
Jesus: but here it is twelve Iudasses, twelve Scholars of the Priests and
Jesuits, against a number of the Friends and Followers of Jesus. And multitudo
peccantium multiplicat peccatum; the multitude of offenders multiplies the
offense.

3 The third is the extent of the Action, together with the speediness of the
execution. Judas betrayed Christ to one corporal death, which because he
suffered sensim, peece-meale as it were, by little and little, Quot mortes in
vna morte! Lord, how many deaths in that one death of his! But these would have
betrayed the King and his to two deaths at once, a corporal and a spiritual
death; but the spiritual death, which is the second death, worse than ten
thousand millions of corporal deaths: and to both these deaths, not sensim, by
little and little, but sine sensu, at unawares. Their coming was like the
coming of a these in the night, stealing upon us to kill us:

Horat.
Vt tugulent homines, surgunt de nocte Latrones; Or like the coming of the
Son of man at the last day, to judge the world with fire; in a moment, in
ictu oculi, in the twinkling of an eye, 1. Cor. 15.
1. Cor. 15. And again, in ictu, at one blow: I say not, at the blowing or
sounding of the last trumpe, but at the sounding of the hollow vaur, and at the
blowing of the first spark; and their blow had been like the blowing of two
contrary winds at once; for our bodies had been blown up toward heaven, but
our unprepared souls (without the singular mercy of God, whereof in so good a
cause we had the less cause to despair) had been blown down to hell.

So then three points there are of disquiparancie and dissimilitude, wherein
this days treason surpasses this of Judas: only one (for ought I can see)
wherein this of Judas out-goes it. But (I think) for every other circumstance
of note, that Antichristian plot of theirs was so near of blood, and of such
consanguinitie with this most Antichristian plot of Judas against Christ, that
of all other treasons it had best right to inherit Judas his halter. Non ouum
ouo similius, One cockatrices egg is not more like another, which in the end
will exire in Regulum, break forth into a Basiliske, a flying and a
fire-breathing Serpent, whose deadly eye will spare neither Prince nor people.
Howbeit, I will not strive to make another Maiores Concordantias between them;
but as the Israelites passed through the red Sea, and yet never wet their feet,
so will I through this Mare rubrum, this bloud-red Sea of matter which is before
me, only sicco pede, drie-footed, that is, as lightly and briefly as I may.

1 The action.
1 First then compare we them in their Action (Betraiest) and therein note we
Ingressum, Progressum, Egressum; the Antecedents, the Concomitiants, and the
Subsequents.

The antecedents were seven.

1 The consultation to kill Christ was Mat. 26.3.
In aula Pontificis Maximi, in the hall of Caiaphas the high Priest: so this
consultation to kill the King and his, was in aula Pontificis Maximi, in the
Hal, or Court of that High Priest Caiaphas of Rome, who because he is far
worse than the other Caiaphas, said not as he did, Ioh. 11.5.
Ioh. 11. It is expedient for us, that one man die for the people, and that the
whole Nation perish not; but, It is expedient for us, that not one man alone,
but the whole Nation, or at least wise the Synopsis, or representation of the
whole Nation perish: as if he were of Maximinus his mind in Tertull. in Apolog.
Tertullian; Christianorum sanguinem Dijs victimam esse omnium gratissimam that
the blood of Christians is the best-pleasing sacrifice to God: or as if he
made it his pride and his glory, with Funce Chr. lib. 7.
Attila King of the Hunni, to be called Flagellum Dei, the scourge of Gods
wrath: or with Andre Hondorff. Theatr. hist.
one of the Frideriks, Malleus Orbis, the hammer of the whole world: or lastly,
with Melanct. Chron. l. 4.
Otto, Pallida mors, the pale death, not Saracenorum, of the Saracens, as he
was, but Christianorum, of Christians. And (that ye may know him to be Pallida
mors indeed)

Horat.
aequo pede pulsat pauperum Tabernas, Regumque Turres; -- He knockes as well
at the Kings Palace, as at the poor man's shop: so that now it is raraauis, a
thing almost as rare as a Phoenix, to hear of a King that dies in his bed.

Inuenal.
Ad generum Cereris sine caede and sanguine pauci
Descendunt Reges, and siccamorte --
2 The Mat. 26.4.
chief Priests and Scribes consulted how they might take Jesus by subtlety,
and kill him: so did the Priests and Jesuits take counsel how they might by
subtilty root out Esa. 9 14
caput and caudam, head and tail, branch and rush, Prince and people both in
one day. And it was a subtlety with a witness; (...), a dark subtlety,
darker than any Scotus among all his Subtilties ever could invent. I think the
black Prince of darkness, with all the devils in hell, sat together in
counsel with them, when they devised it.

3 Judas went to the chief Priests, and said, Mat. 26.15
Quid dabitis? What will ye give me, and I will deliver him unto you? and they
appointed unto him thirty pieces of silver: So did these Traitors go to the
chief Priests and Jesuits, and for a Quid dabitis? a thing of nothing,
(suppose the canonizing and kalendarizing of them for as good Saints, I dare
say, as any are in hell) adventured upon that infernal and hellish exploit.

4 Judas did Mat. 26.16
(...), wait an opportunity to betray Christ: and his opportunity was this;
he came by night, because Ioh. 18.3.
he that evil does, hates the light: Mat. 26.43
dormientibus discipulis, while the Disciples were asleep: so did these (...),
Lucifugae, children of the night of eternal darkness, attend the like
opportunity, being the very same which that old Seminary the devil watched,
wherein he might superseminare zizama, sow his tares amongst the good corn.
They came by night, dormientibus hominibus, while men slept, and never dreamt
of any such matter fortifying their cruelty with our incogitancie; as indeed
what time so likely for that Dolus Apocryphus, that Apocryphal and hidden
mystery of iniquity, as their Horae Canonicae, canonical night-houres,
wherewith the Church of Rome had acquainted them.

5 Judas was devising and hammering his treason in Coenaculo, in the Parler
where Christ was eating the Passover with his Disciples: so were these
Traitors framing and machinating their treason in Senatu, or at leastwise sub
Senatu, under the Parliament house, where the King was to have consulted with
his Nobles.

6 Judas Matthew. 26.6.
received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper but newly before his treason: so
did these Traitors immediately before their treason; yea they bound themselves
to it with a double Sacrament; Sacramento Iurisiurandi, with the Sacrament of
Oath, and Sacramento corporis and sanguinis Christi, with the Sacrament of the
body and blood of Christ.

7 And lastly Ioh. 13.27
after the eating of the soppe which Christ reached unto Judas, Satan entered
into him, in interiora cordis eius, (says Theophyla. ibid.
Theophylact) into the very inwards of his heart, and he was made as it were
one spirit with him: so these Traitors, after the eating of the soppe (if I may
so speak) of the body and blood of Christ, Satan entered in interiora cordis,
into the hell of their consciences, and was made as it were one spirit with
them.

2 The second thing which I noted in the Action, was the Concomitants, which
were two:

1 The one, the Manner of it, wherein they showed themselves to be far
deeper Politicians than ever Judas was: for Judas his policy wrought but above
ground, but theirs wrought under ground: and the tools of their treason were
not Matthew. 26.47.
swords and staves to apprehend, but spades and pickaxes to undermine.
Ingeniosa crudelitas ad poenas, they were men of cruel wits, cruel as the
grave: Sepulchrum patensguttur eorum; their throat was an open sepulcher to
have swalowed us up quick, exardescente in nos tra eorum, (as Ps. 124.2.
Tremellius reads it Psalm. 124.) while their jealousy burnt against us like
fire.

-- Ovid.
Itum est in viscera terrae,
At que oculis capti fodere cubilia talpae:
These blinded moales and pyoners, out of a blind, yet fiery zeal, went down
into the bowels of the earth; not as did Curtius that noble Roman, when he cast
himself in hiatum terrae, into a vast vaute, for the incolumitie and
preservation of his Country; but Genimina viperarum, viperous brood as they
were, they first gnawed out the bowels of their Grandmother Earth, that so they
might afterward gnaw out the bowels of their Mother Country, by turning the
Parliament House into a slaughterhouse; as if they had gone before, to
bespeake a place in hell for us, and in that Hypocaustum, or firevaute of
theirs to have offered up both Prince and people unto devils, tanquam
Holocaustum, as a whole burnt offering; like those Idolaters that in the valley
of Hinnon offered up their sons and daughters unto devils: and Coniuratores,
Traitors (shall I say, or Coniurers? as they would have been) because our
Religion, which is (...), from above, did not please them, they would (...),
from beneath, by Sorcery and Geomancie have coniured up another of their own,
and that (if ye will believe them) a truer, a better than ours. But believe
them not; theirs smells too-too-ranklie of the neither-most lake.

2 The second Concomitant, is the Matter of their treason. When Judas betrayed
Christ, for Christ's death no torments were thought exquisite enough. There were
plura parata supplicia, quam membra, more punishments provided for him, than he
had members: So in this treason there was prepared for the King and his
company, though not a Cross, with the Appendices thereof to crucify them,
yet a Pile of fire and fagots, iron bars, timberpeeces, and huge stones, with
thirty-six barrels of gunpowder, all to have been broacht at once, and to have
made but one volley of shot to have blown them up, and so not only with
their powder to have burnt them, but lest (Salamander-like) they should have
lived in that fire, with their wood, stones, and iron to have grinded them to
powder: for they have a Law, and by that Law we must have died; Turn, or
burn; Turn, or be ouer-turned.

3 The third thing which I noted in the Action, was the Subsequents, which were
two:

1 The Pension, as of Judas his treason, so of theirs, was Suspension: for
Judas hanged him self; they were hanged by others. Both had not the hap to
execute their treason alike; but it was both their haps to be alike executed
for their treason. Judas executed his treason, and his treason likewise
executed him: but these Traitors could not execute their treason, and yet their
treason executed them. 2 With the reward of Judas his treason was purchased the
Act. 1.19.
Potters Field to bury strangers in; and that Field is called Aceldama, the
Field of blood: so the reward of their treason is this, that to Rome, which is
Campus Figuli, I will not say, Peter's Field, as they would have it, but the
Potters Field, (the Field of the Pope, who together with his servants and
apprentises the Priests and Jesuits, is Figulus Proditionum, the Potter and
Plotter of so many treasons) I say, to Rome it has purchased this name,
Aceldama, the Field of blood; a Field to bury those in, that will be
strangers to their Religion.
That Is for the first point, which is the Action.

The second is the Agent (Thou.)

2 The Agent.
A man would think, that there had been a transmigration of Judas his malus
genius into these Traitors; so aptly do they accord both in Name and in Person.

1 For their Name; Judas Polycarp. Lyser. li de ^ass. Dom.
had his name of Judah a Patriarch of that Tribe, of which our Savior himself
descended; who is therefore called Leo de Tribu Judah, the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, Apoc. 5.
Apoc. 5. And yet in nature he is Judas de Leone, Judas of the Tribe of those
Lions, of whom our Savior says, Psalm. 57.4.
Psalm. 57. Eripuit Deus animam meam de medio catulorum Leonum; God has
delivered my soul from the midst of Lions whelps. So the Jesuits, the
Authors of this treason, have their names of Jesus, the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah; but yet in nature they are of the Tribe of Lions:

Virgil.
-- Hyrcanaeque admorunt vbera Tigres. Again, the name of Judas Ambros in
Apoc. 7.
signifies Confession, which is a notable means of salvation; for Ore fit
confessio ad salutem, To. 10.10.
Romans 10. but yet his practice was Confusion, even the killing both of Christ
and himself. So the Jesuits, the Authors of this treason, take their name of
Jesus, the only name under heaven by which we must be saved; and yet their
only practice is the confusion and ruinating both of Kings and Countries; as if
their society and brotherhood were founded upon that fraternity and
brotherhood which Basil l. de inuidia.
S. Basil speaks of, (...), envy and slaughter, which (as he notes) were
founded upon the first Fraternity that ever was, which was that of Cain and
Abel: for Cain first envied his brother, and then he slew him.

Again, Judas had also another name, and that was Iscariot; which is (as
^^iuret.
some interpret it) Vir occisionis, or Vir exterminationis, a murderer or a
destroier. So the Agens aggregatum, the whole aggregate Agent of this treason,
being (as Ps. 67.33.
David speaks, Psalm. 67. Congregatio Taurorum in vaccis populorum) the Priests
and Jesuits the Authors, and the twelve which were the Actors, they were all
of them Iscariots, or viri exterminantes, murderers and destroiers, not only
Sons, but Fathers also of perdition: Viri sanguinum and dolosi,
bloud-thirstie and deceitful men; Boanerges, sons of Thunder from beneath,
and of sudden Lightning before death: in a word, the Devils Hell Hounds, who is
Parson of two great Parishes, Hell and Purgatory; or rather the Popes
Bloud-hounds, who is his Curate, to see both places diligently served.

2 For their Persons and Callings; Judas was a Priest, and yet a Father of
Runnagates, for that is one of his curses, Psalm. 109.
Psalm. 109. Let his children be vagabunds. So the Priests and Jesuits, they
are (many of them) Fugitives themselves from this their native Country, but
all of them the Fathers and begetters of Fugitives.

Again, Judas was a Disciple, and an Apostle of Christ: so the Actors of this
treason were Disciples, and Apostles; but Disciples of the Priests and
Jesuits; Apostles, and as it were Legati a Latere from the Pope.

Again, Judas was a Friend, and Servant, and native Country man of Christ's,
graced with many favors and kindnesses at his hands: so these Traitors,
seeming Friends, and Subjects, and natural unnatural Countrymen of the
Kings; upon whom he had cast, or rather, cast away many kindnesses; for
besides that he had pardoned both them, and others that were eiusdem monetae,
of the same mine and mint that they were, many pecuniary mulcts for Recusancie,
and had spared them both life and liberty, when yet they deserved neither, some
of them he had adorned with titles of dignity and honor, others with more than
titular favors. But

Perit quodfacis ingrato: And
Improbus a nullo flectitur obsequio.
These poor and frozen snakes, whom the King had cherished in his own bosom,
(...), (as Greg. Nazianz. in od.
Gregory Nazianzen speaks) when once they had received warmth and liuelihood
from him, they were turned into fiery Serpents, to have stung him to death.
More than Cyclopicall Monsters of men! for that Captaine-Cyclops Polyphemus (in
the Poet) promised, not to devour Ulysses King of Ithaca, so long as he had
but any one of his companions to feed on; and his reason was, because he had
begun to him in noble and generous wine. But these most ignoble and degenerous
monsters of men, notwithstanding those many favors wherewith his Majesty had
vouchsafed in a manner to inebriate and ouercharge them, would have devoured
both him and all his companions at once; but his Majesty rather than any, or
all his companions besides.

That's for the second point, which was the Agent.

3 The Patient.
The third is the Patient, (the Son of man) who because he is every way of a
super-superlatiue excellency by himself, can admit no exact comparison with
any the sons of men. And yet, forasmuch as the Holy Ghost himself has
thought it no robbery, to make David and Solomon types of Christ; let it not
be thought presumption in me, if I take upon me to show you some few of many
Analogies between the Patients in both treasons: Christ in the one, and the
King (as the mark chiefly shot at) in the other.

The Analogies hold chiefly in four things: their Persons, their Names, their
Offices, and their Adjuncts.

1 In their Persons. Christ was (...), God and Man: so the King, in sensu
modificato, in a qualified sense, is also God and man. I would not be mistaken:
I say not an heavenly, but an earthly God: a God, not by nature, but by
regiment. And therefore the Psalmist, after Dixt Dijestis, I have said, ye are
Gods, Psalm. 82.6.
Psalm. 82. presently subioines an Item of mortality, Sed sicut homines
moriemini; Gods though ye be, yet ye shall die like men.

2 In their Names. Christ was called (...), or Vnctus Dei, the anointed of God:
so is the King (...), Vnctus Dei, the anointed of God. And concerning Kings
has God given this express charge; Nolite tangere Christos meos, Touch not
mine anointed.

Again, Christ was called Jesus, which Luc. 2.
signifies a Savior, because he saved his people from their sins: So may
the King, like another Joshua, be called Jesus, because by means of that
divine Revelation, whereby he vnriddled the meaning of those Vriahs-like
Letters of theirs, he was a temporal Savior of us his people, as Joshua was
of his.

3 In their Offices. Christ was both a King, and the Son of a King, even the
King of heaven and earth: So the King is both a King, and the Son of a King,
who was once a King on earth, but now a King in heaven.

Again, Christ was Sacerdos, a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech, King of Shalem, Ge. 14.18.
who brought forth bread and wine to Abraham, after Abraham's victory over the
King of Sodom: So is the King Sacerdos, a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedech, King of Shalem, King of peace, bringing forth (as appears this
day) bread and wine, as a Sacrifice of thanksgiving, to offer unto the God of
Abraham, after his victory over the King of Sodom the Pope, whose hope was,
that, as this day, we also should have been Romans 9.
facti tanquam Sodoma, and have died of Sodomes consumption with fire and
brimstone, not from heaven, but from hell. Yea, and before this conquest also,
his Majesty in a thankful commemoration and recognition of another no less
mighty than merueilous deliverance, had appointed, and does still religiously
observe (and observe, O Lord, let him, if it be thy will, many and many
years) a continual morning-sacrifice of thanksgiving unto God, every Tuesday
through out the year.

Again, Christ was Propheta, a Prophet, nay plusquam plusquam Propheta, more
than John the Baptist, who was more than a Prophet. So is the King Propheta, a
Prophet, yea and more than a Prophet, even Regius Propheta, as was David, a
Kingly Prophet; a Prophet skilled, as was Moses that man of God, in all the
learning of the Egyptians, in all good secular arts and sciences, (these very
walls have been earewitnesses of it) and not only so, but in expounding of
holy writ ( Opera testantur de eo, his works testify of him) and (which more
is) in encountering, nay quelling (as Hercules did the many-headed Hydra) that
most Tortuous and subtle Serpent of Rome: but then most a Prophet, when by
inspiration and revelation from above, be discyphered the hidden meaning of
those most obscure and mystical Letters. And as Christ himself, both a
Prophet and the God of the Prophets, was the first that detected Judas his
treason; so the King, as a Prophet inspired by that God, was the first that
discovered and defeated this treason.

4 In their Adjuncts or Attributes. Christ was not only verax, true, one that
taught the way of God truly; but he was Ipsa Veritas, Truth it self. Ioh. 14.
Ioh. 14. So the King is not only verax, true in his Tenet of Religion, but he
is also (...), a Propugner and Defender of the truth of Christ.

Again, Christ was Mitis and Mansuetus, meek and gentle: his Meekness such,
that he reviled not his adversaries when they wrote this inscription over his
head, as in a scorn; This is the King of the Jews: but rather made it his
Crown, and his reioicing: and his Gentleness such, that he was more ready to
revive the dead, than to kill the living. So the King is Mitis and Mansuetus,
meek and gentle; his Meekness such, that though his adversary write a book
against him, yet will he take it upon his shoulder, and bind it as a Crown
unto him, (as the holy man Job 31.35
Job speaks, chap. 31.) and his Gentleness such, that more ready he would be
(if it were in his power) to revive the dead, than to kill the living.

Again, Christ was Innocens, innoxious and harmless, and therefore it is his
plaint in the Psalm; Principes persequuti sunt me gratis; the Princes
persecuted me without a cause, and without any desert of me, O God. So the
King, most innocent. God thou know his righteousness, and his innocence is
not hid from thee. And herein was the Traitors cruelty like that of Herod, who
would have killed the poor Innocents that were bimuli, of two years old and
under: for so would they have killed the King when he had reigned little more
than two years among us, though innocent as ever was Bimulus, any child of
two years old. And as Herod, rather than not kill Christ, caused his own
son to be killed among those Innocents; so they, rather than not kill the
King, would have blown up some Catholics of their own with him, to have
been burnt as Martyrs with him for company.

That Is for the third point, which was the Patient.

4 The Instrument.
The fourth and last, is the Instrument (with a Kiss.) From whence there
arises a twofold contemplation: one, of the color; another of the cause of
Judas his treason; the false color, and the true cause.

1 For the Color. Judas his treason had (...), which I may call either a
goodly gloss, or a fair tongue, (for the words signify both) and it had also
a fair pair of lips, like the harlot (in the Pro. 30.20
Proverbs) when she wipeth her mouth, as if she had no ill thought with her.
For he comes unto Christ with Aue Rabbi, All-haile Master, and withal he
kisseth him. Both were colorable pretexts; I say not, to commend and honest,
but to cloak and cover his cruelty. So had this treason also a fair tongue;
for who more ready than these Traitors, to say Aue Rex, God save King James? It
was as familiar to them almost as their Aue Maria. And it had also a fair
pair of false harlots lips, offering osculum pacis, a holy kiss of peace,
(many treaties and supplications for toleration of their intolerable Religion
among us) as if they, forsooth, had sought nothing but the pretended good of
their own souls, when indeed they minded nothing so much as the internecion
of Protestants, body and soul.

2 The true Cause, and (as I may say) Fodina, the quarry and the rock whence
this treason was hewn, was twofold.

1 The one was Ambition. For when Ioh. 19.15
Pilate asked the high Priests, Shall I crucify your King? meaning Christ;
they answered, We have no King but Caesar. And afterward Verse 21.
when Pilate had written Christ's Title, and set it over his head on the Cross,
they said unto him, Mat. 27.37
Write not, The king of the Jews, but that he said, I am king of the Jews:
and that must be set over his head as the cause of his sufferings. So the
quarrel of the Priests and Jesuits against our King was, that he would be an
absolute King, and head of the Church within his own dominions, and not submit
both his head and head-ship to the Pope. They will hear of no King, but
Caesar; no head, no not of any particular Church, but the Pope. It were
therefore to be wished, that the Pope carried a mind but as gentle, as it is
gentleman-like: for as Gentlemen (many of them) think they have never
elbow-roome enough, till they have shoued and shoulderd out al their poor
neighbors out of their housen, and taken their housen into their own hands:
so the Pope thinks he has never Rome enough, till he have thrust all
Christian Kings, that will not stoop to his lure, out of their thrones,
kingdoms, lives and all. His pretense is, (...) that he does it for the Lords
sake; but the truth is, that he does it (...), for Lordships sake, that he may
(...), carry an imperious hand over the Kings of the nations.

2 The other cause was Covetousness. Ioh. 12.5.
Judas was angry that the ointment was poured upon Jesus his head, and that
money was not made of it to his bag. So the Priests and Jesuits, who are the
Popes Bursars and Treasurers, if not to bear, yet to fill his bags, were
angry that the ointment which was poured upon King James the anointed of the
Lord, had not been turned into money: that is as much to say, that the King was
not content to become tributarie to the Pope.

Again, Judas because he had lost 300. pence in the ointment, to regaine what
he had lost, betrayed Christ for 30. pence, every one of which (as some write)
was equivalent to ten usual pence, and so by that means he made himself a
sauer. So the Priests and Jesuits, because the Pope lost somewhat that he
might have gained by the ointment, that is to say, if our Anointed had been
Catholic, to repair that loss (as they hoped) by a successor of their own
making, that might be for their turn, would have thrown our gracious
Sovereign out of throne and life at once.

Thus ye see (beloved) how the most execrable Treason of this day does every
way match, if not master, the treason of Judas (excepting only that ever to
be excepted circumstance of the altogether unmatchable person of the Patient,
Christ) and that both of them so neerelie iumpe together, as if that had been
the (...), or prime-copie of this Treason, this but an extract or transcript of
it, with some few additions of an higher streine, wherein it goes beyond it.

The consideration whereof should engender in us

1 A Detestation of that shameless, enticing, sanguin-coloured, Catholic,
common whore of Babylon, who is ever in travel with a Babel, or Chaos of our
confusion; whose Religion is like Draco's Laws, written with blood; whose
head, Officina scelerum, the shop where all Treasons and Villainies are forged;
whose heart and hands, Carnificina Sanctorum, the shambles of the Saints of
God: and among other her whorish tricks, she has this for one; she is
Diuaricatis tibijs, (as the Ezech. 16.
Prophet speaks) ready to admit all comers; burning with lust, and lusting to
burn; to burn all. Those that approach unto her, she burns in that
brimstonie lake of hell; and those that will not come at her, she burns in a
lake of gunpowder, a borderer and next neighbor to the lake of hell.

2 A Caution and Circumspection, to walk wisely and warily amidst such a
crooked and perverse generation, a generation that set not their heart aright
toward us: and to trust neither flat Recusants, that openly refuse our holy
Assemblies, no nor yet our monthly Popish Protestants, and Protesting Papists,
the Moonecalues of that Lunaticke Religion, having Fidem menstruam, a faith
that wexeth and weineth with the Moon, coming to Church once a month, (more
for fear of the Law, than for love of the Gospel) and then presently having a
months mind to be out of the Church again: And to know, that Hora est iam
nos de somno surgere; since the Papists are so watchful while we sleep; and
all, that they may with least suspicion, and best advantage, be Fundi nostri
calamitas, the baine and bale of this Land of ours; it is time, high time, that
we now awake out of our sleep; yea, that the keen sword of Justice should now
awake, and sleep no longer in the scabbard of cruel pity; and to persuade
our selves (as too-too-iustly we may) that Virgil.
Vna salus nobis nullam sperare salutem.

Our only safe course shall be, never to think our selves safe, so long as
this Trojan Horse is among us;

Idem.
Equo ne credit Teucri: And, that though one vaute of theirs be dammed up, yet
so long as there is another, and that a deeper vaute of Treason in their hollow
hearts, abyssus abyssum, one vaute will call up another, and ignis ignem, one
fire-worke will kindle Romans 13.
another, and simile simile, one like will produce another like to it self.
Dolent, sibi bolum e faucibus ereptum; it grieves them, that we were not given
over as a prey unto Faux his teeth: and therefore their rage is still as hot as
hellfire against us, even (...), a fire that never will be quenched; and the
burning thereof (if we look not to it) will be fire and much wood; and the
breath of the Pope, like a river of brimstone, to kindle it for evermore.

3 A Consolation, to confirm and solace our hearts in this assurance, that as
at our first redemption de inferiori abysso, from the nethermost hell, Christ
cancelled Chirographum, the handwriting that was against us, and nailed it to
his Cross, and now again at this our second redemption (as I may call it) de
superiori abysso, from the uppermost hell, he also cancelled Chirographum, the
handwriting that was against us, and nailed it to the Traitors Cross: so if
we shall serve and fear him as we ought, he will ever frustrate and annihilate
whatsoever purposes and proiects all the devils either on earth, or in hell can
devise against us. And, that as Christ was Emmanuel, God with us, Ad
consummationem salutis, for the consummation of our salvation, when, as the
Son of man, he suffered himself to be betrayed to the death of the Cross,
as in my text: and again, Emmanuel, God with us, as on this day, ad
consummationem salutis, for the consummation of this our second salvation,
when, as the Son of God, he revealed, and, as it were, betrayed these Traitors
to the death of the Cross: so he will also be Emmanuel, God with us, Matt. 28.
ad consummationem saeculi, to the end of the world, if we stand fast and
immovable in the faith of Christ, whereby we shall be able to quench all the
fiery darts of the devil. For true and faithful is he that has promised,
that if we will be his people, he will surely be our God. Wherefore, march
valiantly, o my soul; and o ye the faithful soldiers of Christ, be strong,
and comfort your hearts. Christo Duce, so long as your Captain General is
Christ, fear not what devil or man can do unto you.

4 And lastly, a Gratulation or Thanksgiving unto God, for this his
unspeakable mercy toward us. For Ecce nunc dies salutis, Behold now the day
of salvation. A day in the Church of Rome, (...) -Carbone notabilis atro; for
ever to be marked and signed with a black coal, because the fire came not at
their coal to make it red: but to the Churches of Great Britannie for ever to
stand in their Kalendars like that Vialactea, or milkie way in heaven, Ovid.
Candore notabilis ipso: and to be noted for a milke-white day, because in it
the favor of God was as milk to repress and quench the wildfire and the
gunpowder, that had otherwise been unquenchable, till we had staunched and
quenched the fury of it with a common ruin. (...), but not (...), dies, but
not in diem, a day, but the memory thereof not to last only for a day. Diem pro
anno, diem (inquam) pro anno tibi dedi, says God to his Prophet Ezec. 4.6.
Ezechiel, c. 4. I have appointed thee a day for a year, even a day for a
year. But this is dies pro omnibus annis, a day that must never be
ouer-year'd, a day for all the years of our life to thank God for: a day (I
say) wherein Psa. 111.4.
the merciful and gracious Lord has so done his merueilous work, that it
ought to be had in remembrance. For it was come to a Tantumnon, and to a
paulominus in inferno habitasset anima nostra. We were even at the pits brinke,
Jn articulo mortis, not onley as men appointed to die, but at the point to die.
But God who is (...), (as Simplicius in Arist. Physic. l. 1.
the Philosopher calls him) and (as Psalm. 9.9.
David) Deus in opportunitatibus, a God in the needful time of trouble, when
we were thus albicantes ad messem, white for the harvest, and ready to be cut
down, and there wanted nothing but only the thrusting in of Falx, the sickle
to cut us down; or Fax, the fire to burn us up; or Faux, even Guy Faux, or (if
ye will) Faux Orci, that hellish Faux to have devoured us; then, then did he
send from heaven, and save us.

Nocte pluit tota, redeunt spectacula mane. All the night long were the ungodly
digging a pit for us, but before the morning watch, I say, before the morning
watch, they fell into it themselves. God the watchman of Israel, who neither
slumbers nor sleeps, who unless he had kept the City, the watchmen had watched
but in vain, he watched them a turn, and turned their counsel to their own
confusion. The blow which they had intended unto us, was such a blow to
themselves, that in every honest heart the credit of their Lex ignea is quite
blown up.

O let not us also play the Iudasses with God, and set light by this and other
his mercies toward us. Ps. 125.4.
If God do * benefacere, do well unto us, let it not grieve us, benedicere, to
speak good of his name. Ge. 22.13.
But as x a Ram was offered up to God for Isaaks delivery, when wood, fire,
and knife were prepared to have killed and offered up him in sacrifice; Psalm.
28.1.
so y Afferte domino, filij Dei, afferte domino filios arietum. For this
delivery of our gracious Jacob and his people, bring unto the Lord, o ye sons
of God, bring young rams, (bring also the calves of your lips) unto the Lord;
that is, (as it follows in the Psalm) Ascribe unto the Lord worship and
strength, Give the Lord the honor due unto his name. And since our blessed
Jacob, as this day, got away the blessing from that Romish Esau, and supplanted
those supplanters, and having as it were wrestled al night with the destroying
Angel, in the morning became Israel, and prevailed with God; Oh let Jacob and
all Israel power out their hearts in songs of thanksgiving unto God, the God of
Jacob and Israel. And since our selves were not made (as we had almost been)
Oblatio matutina, a morning burnt incense to the devil, igni deuorationis,
with their devouring fire; let us make our selves Oblationem matutinam, a
morning burnt sacrifice unto God, igni deuotionis, with the fire of devotion.
And since Calix mortis, that bitter cup of death and destruction, which they
had mixed for us, passed from us untouched and untasted, let us testify our
thankfulness unto God for it, by taking and tasting of this other cup, which
the Lord himself has mingled for us, even the cup of his own blood; a blood
that speaks better things than did the blood of their cup. For this is Calix
salutaris, the cup of salvation, and Calix benedictionis, the cup of blessing,
and Calix Eucharistiae, the cup of thanksgiving unto God, as for the benefit of
Christ's suffering, so likewise for the benefit of our not suffering.

And now, beseech we God (Quid enim nisi vota supersunt?) even that God who
has hitherto so graciously preserved us, that if every hair of our head were
a life, it were not too much to spend them al in defense of his truth, that as
he turned the treason of Judas to the salvation of mankind, so he would also
turn this treason of the Papists to the good of this Land, that it may make us
al wise unto salvation, that once knowing them, we may for ever learn to avoid
them; that the Regal Diadem may for ever be so nailed and fixed to the head
of King James, that the strong and gunpowder breath of the Pope, or any other
Prince or Potentate whatsoever, may never be able to blow it off: That his
Queen may be an ancient Nursing-mother both to him, and our whole Land: That
his Children may grow up as the young plants, and be as Oliue-branches (pledges
of our continual peace) round about his Table: That God would also make his
enemies, and the enemies of his truth, like unto a wheel, and strike them with
the spirit of giddiness: That he would turn their fire-matches into halters
for their own necks, and their swords into their own bowels: and that he
would ever bow down their backs, whose necks are so stiff, that they will
not bow to the yoke of obedience to their liege and lawful Sovereign; that
so, we his people may take up that (...), or Song of triumph; Ps. 110.1.
Dixit Dominus Domino meo, The Lord said unto our Lord the King, Sit thou on
thy Throne, until I make thy foes thy footstool. And let all the people say,
Fiat, Fiat: Viuat, Viuat: Valeat, Valeat: God save King James. Amen, Amen.
Amen; Even so Lord Jesus.

FINIS.

