A confutation of a sermon, pronounced by M. Iuell, at Paul's cross, the
second Sondaie before Easter (which Catholics do call Passion Sondaie) Anno
Dn^i.M.D.I.X. By John Rastell M. of Art, and studient in divinity.

Miror quod tam cito transserimini, Galat. 1.
ab eo qui vos vocauit in gratiam CHRISTI, in aliud Euangelium. etc.

I marvel that you be so sone carried away from him which called you unto the
grace of Christ, in to an other Ghospel.

(...).

Mores antiqui obtineant.

Let old customs prevail.

Imprinted at Antwerp by Aegidius Die 21. Nouemb. Anno. 1564. CVM PRIVILEGIO.

REgi^ Maiestatis priuilegio permissum est Iohanni Rastello artium Magistro,
and sacrae Theologiae candidato, vtiper aliquem ^ypographorii admissorum impune
ei liceat imprimi curare, and per omnes suae ditionis regiones distrahere,
librum inscriptum: A confutation of M. Iuelles sermon. etc. Et omnibus aliis
inhibitum, ne eundem absque eiusdem Iohannis consensu imprimant, vel alibi
impressum distrah^t, sub poena in priuilegio contenta. Datum Bruxellae.xvij.
Nouemb. Anno. 1564.

Subsig. Facuwez.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
TO testify my duty and service, which I owe to the Church, and my
country; and to satisfy my fre^des in these quarters, whose judgments I have
not to discredit; to confute M. Iuell in sundry points, whose challenge is so
gloriouse and general; and to give fair warning to the negligent, that false
Prophets do not deceive them; to co^tynue the memory of the challenge; which
never can be honestly mainteyned; and to move a further expectation; which
part first shall show her weakness; to take the present time of speaking,
even as there has been time of silence, or recompense the formar slacknesse, by
reasonable and faithful diligence: to prove that M. Iuell may be answered, by
a mean scholar in divinity, that he need not to provoke the best of the
Catholykes, which at this day are anywhere lyuinge: to show that all thowgh,
we be kept down and oppressed, yet we perish not for all that, nor be utterly
confounded: I send that forth now, after four years, which so long before was
made by me, and I make that now common to frindes and to foes, which at the
first I prepared for one frind alone, to avoid fear of foes. He that lyketh
this, let him thank God, and help me with his prayers. He that finds fault,
let him shame the dyuele, and tell me of it hardly. If any just one shall be
found, (unseen of me and others) I trow, it will be omission in leaving of
some things unanswered. Yet do I answer every matter, concerning the whole
some of it, marie I was not so diligent, as to examine every witness. And
whether I am bound so to do, I am not yet full persuaded, but ever I thowght,
that it was free, to write and fight, after my fasshion. Especially where the
number is great, and every one ready with his weapon, so that the enemy be
beaten down, the captain aloweth their labors. Yet all they did not strike
one way, but as they should see their advantage, so would they use or down
right blows, or foynes, or some other inue^tions. Some writers of these our
days, men of great contynuance and study, do late full lode out of
scriptures and counsels, just upon the pates, and backs of owr common
adversaries, Other some be more sparer, in alleaginge of old authorities, and
rather follow a sensible fasshion, of reasoning, withowt book, against them.
Again, some will persequute, the enemy so narowlie: that sentence by
sentence, they examyn his truth and fidelity. but some again, do so think
upon the chief point of the question: that, for have sake, they let much
escape, which perchaunse, was well worth the noting. Let one example stand for
all. M. Iuell here in his sermon, to prove that the people did communicate and
receive together with the priest, all the first six hundred years after
Christ: begins with owr Saluyor, and cummeth to the blessed Apostle, goinge
down by S. Clement, Denyse, Iustine, and other fathers, until he stays at
S. Gregory, whom yet he rekoneth for a witness. But to what purpose and
conclusion? to prove forsooth, that sole receiuinge, is not to be suffered,
among Christians, bycawse he finds, by so many testimonies, that, of old
time, there were made communions. Well then, go ye to, if this be all the
matter, it is not hard or cu^berouse, to give M. Iuell an answer. Yet truly,
he shall not be answered, after one manner by all men, but like as leisure,
zeal, and lerninge, abundeth or lacks in any one, for the purpose: so, more
or less, will be browght against him, and he that says lest of all, will yet
be good enough for him. For the lest is this, The first manner of answeringe.
to grawnt his authorities, and only to deny his argument bicawse, sole
receiuinge, might be used in a thousand chappells, notwithstanding the daily
communion, which was then, or may be now; ordinarily had in parissh Churches.
On sondaies also or solemn feasts, all might be charged to communicate* and
when the people on other days are other wise occupied, the priest, might right
well do his office, if none but the parish clerk, were present to serve him.
A second manner.
But some other Catholic, is not fully satisfied, by ending this matter, so
quickly, and therefore he goes further, in tryinge M. Iuells places, which
serve yet unto no purpose, although they were truly alleged. And he
obiecteth against Iuell (forgetting to call him Master) that the Apostle unto
the Corinthians, means not literallie, so, as Iuell takes him. For, 1. Cor.
11.
( Tari^ ye, one for an other) which are the true words of the Apostle, are
not properly, (he will say) to be referred to the Sacrament, but those other
suppers, of common meats, which then emonge the Corinthians, were not
charitablie or discreetlie ordered. He will tell him also, that he mistaketh
Calixtus, and would say (perchance) Anacletus, and that he speaks, only of
the clergy, to communicate, and not (as M. Iuell reports) generally of all
the people, and so forth in other testimonies. A third ma^n^r.
Now some third one, will pass these two, and show by many examples, that
sole receiuinge was not unknown, in the best times and most awncient. For
which purpose he will bring out, Tertullia^, Tertull. ad^xorem Cyp. ser. 5 de
la^. hist. trip. li. 6. c. 44
S. Ciprian, Serapion, and Satirus, with many other, which in this place I
need not tell of. What then shall we say? Truly, Ambros. de obitu fratris.
as S Paul was gladd, to see Christ much set forth and preached, Sieve per
occasionem, and for an other purpose, Philip. 1.
Sieve per veritate^, that is, vprightlie and sincerely: so should an honest
mind be well contented, when a false preachers vain tale is confuted, be it
done either lernedlie, abundantly, and deeply, or meanly, sufficiently,
and by light passing over him. Therefore to conclude* as I wrote this for my
frind, intelligiblie and familiarlie, so I leave it unto the Reader. nothing
alteringe of that manner. If I l^^ke sinews and substance, such as is in old
souldiars: by use and practice. strengh will grow. If indifferency: favor
these beginnings. And (as I have said) I think it no fault with a breath
only (if I could) to drive back an enemy. And if with a penknyfe I diminishe
his lusty b^oude. let other use the great swords, and piekes, which shall
kill his heresy. Let this be my excuse, unto the Catholykes. let this be my
defense against the Protestants.

Fare well. At Louanie. Nouemb. 20.
A CONFVTATION of Master Iuelles sermon.
THe time and world now being such, that there is made no sermon or treatise
so vain and idle, but it finds one or other to print it, and that, not
without Grace and Privilege obtained: I do not mistrust ready pardon of you
(my dear frinde M.N.) if I dare write my mind unto you, in any kind of
disputable question. For, if my sayings be alowable: they may be profitable to
more then one, and be known of ^undrie persons for all the lack of print. and
if they be not in some part altogether so exact and perfect: my forgetfulness
or unskillfulness, may receive better aduisement and instruction, when they shall
not be past the amendinge, because they are not auctorised Cum Gratia and
priuilegio ad Septennium. It moves me also to write, that whereas, according
to the blessed will and gift of God, I may perchance come, before I end this
life, unto open defense and showing of my faith, it shall be therefore profitable
and necessary, to practice with my pen in the chamber, that, which may be and
should be openly confessed with mouth, either in church or consistory. And
further, my heart being so justly grieved, with the loud exprobration, that the
called Bishop of Salisburie made, unto all the hosts of the ^od of Israel,
although I be but a common soldier among the orders of divines, and must
therefore keep my place, which is, to stand behind so many Bishops, Doctors,
Bachelors, and Scholars in divinity, which in the fore front ar set to
fight, and although my course be not yet com, to meet with the party hand to
hand, and face to face, yet, the heart being grieved, and desire of def^ce
arising with in me, the hand is moved, and with such weapons as it has, pen,
incke, and paper, it does what it can, to the overthrow of him, which stands
upon his own words, so steadfastly. And verily I do think, if M. Iuell him
self should presently understand, what I entend: and should herafter see what
I write, he would be nothing at all displeased with my replying, except
perchance because I am not cunning and learned inowgh to set upon him, which
is so well prepared, that he provoke the best of all the army of the
Catholics, and so provoke them, that if they can bring against him, but one
sentence for example, out of all their armorie of cou^cells, doctors, usage of
the primitive Church, or scripture, (that is to say) if they can fasten but one
blow upon him, then he will yield utterly and give over in plain field, unto
them.

Which opinion, of thinking one Catholic to be to weak for him, if it can
enter in to so noble a heart (as it is very hard to keep it out thereof) then,
must he use some indifferency, and take no skorne, if a M. of Art and studient
of Divinity go about the practice, of breaking his blows and assertions,
whereas the church of God, so well ordered with excellent men of learning and
godliness, is constrained to suffer, cobblers, weauers, tinkers, tanners,
kardemakers, tapsters, gailers, fiddlers, and other of like profession, not
only to enter into disputing with her, but also to clime up into pulpetes
within her jurisdiction, and to keep the place of Priests and ministers of the
mysteries of God, before her face. Which thing being tolerated (if not allowed)
in these our blessed days, if M. Iuell were Metropolitan of the realm, he
should not disdain (as I think) to be set upon by a very mean scholar.

But his wisdom is such, that he will not mark so much, what person it is
which speaks, as what matter it is, which shall be spoken: and so desirous he
is (as it appears) of one to encounter with him, that, rather then he will
lack occasion to utter his learning, he will suppose in his mind one to stand
against him with diverse objections, which he is trymlie prepared already to
answer, provided always that he will object him self no more, then he is able
to answer. And when, somewhat is for a fassion sake rehearsed, then for the rest,
that he will triumph solemnly, as though all were ouercom. Wherefore being
sufficiently moved to write, because first, so great licenses ar Esa. 54. Psalm.
^1. Malach. 1. Matthew. 16.
should prevail against his Catholic Church. In the sight of this our God,
and under the witness of so blessed, glorious, and divine company, I will
declare your great flourishing, to be far from all kind of good fighting, and
that all your talk, M. Iuell, has more of the word then of the sword, with
much moving, and little proving.

In the copy of a Sermon pronounced by the Bishopp of Salisbury at Paul's
cross, the second Sunday before Easter (which is by interpretation Passion
sunday) in the year of our Lord. 1560. these words ar prefixed: (...).
Mores antiqui obtineant. Iuell.

Let old customs prevail.


Would not a man think, that the person, which uses such a posy in the first
side of his sermon, were one which did much embrace old customs? How can they
be but very heretics, which appeal only to the written word, and refuse all
other proof, which is not expressly in the lively scriptures of the Lord?
Behold here is a testimony of the Council of Nice, alleged and allowed, by the
Bishopp that is called of Salisbury, set as a golden claspe, unto his precious
Sermon, which he pronounced at Paul's cross, the second Sunday before Easter,
and it is this, Let old customs prevail. But where is this saing, in all
Scripture? begin at Genesis and read to the end of the reuelatio^s of S. Ihon,
and show the chap^er where this commandment or counsel is? we know (except
your own Prophets do lie) that all things necessary for salvation are
written in the book of life the old and new Testament, we read him to be
accu^sed which adds or diminishes to or from the word of the living Lord,
we are abundantly content with the Bible in English, Apo. vlt.
we go no further, then to God his own word. Will you bring us again to
harken to old customs? and the sentence of the Council of Nice, which was but
of men, shall that be our touch stone? O Sir, when you have caused all
Sacraments, in a manner, and all Sacramental things to be taken away: when,
of so many external signs and tokens, which represented the mysteries of our
salvation, so few are left: when you have taken away the very orders of them,
which lived after the perfectest way of Christ his religion, do you now speak
of old customs? This does so well become you to speak, as a Saduce to prove
the resurrection. as an Arrian to be ruled by tradition. as a woman to wear a
mitre. You would laugh or wondre at a catholic, or (as you term him) a
papist, if he should set forth his work with this title, that nothing is to be
believed, which is not expressly in Scripture: and shall Protestants escape
the like judgment, when they speak sentences, for old customs and vsages?
But what mean you by this sentence: Let old customs preuail? what is that,
which is against them, that the victory neadeth to be given to them, by the
arbitrament of the noble Council of Nice? except there be some battle, there
can be no victory. there is no prevailing, where there is no resisting. and
there must, at the lest, be two parts, when one singularly is preferred. I
remember well, M. Iuel mistaketh the words of the counsel of Nice.
that these words: Let old customs prevail, are in the beginning of the sixth
Canon of the Counsel of Nice, where it is written, as concerning the
jurisdiction of the Bishopp of Alexandria and Antioch, that the old custom,
which ever before was used, should continu. But in that sense, it can not serve
for a sentence, to be placed before M. Iuell his Sermon, that, because the old
custom shall stand, which has been observed about the Bishopprickes of
Alexandria and Antioch, therefore absolutely old customs should preuail.
Wherefore understanding by these words, Let old customs preuail, such a
general sense, as M. Iuell would pretend, that the Council of Nice might use
those words generally: I ask then now, what is this, which the Council
speaks of, Let old customs prevail? what might the occasion be, of that
sentence? did it mean, that old customs must be preferred before new? this is
not always true. Whereas the circumstances of time, person, age, and such like,
may cause the old custom not to be refused absolutely as nawght, but to yield
for just causes unto the new. Example whereof we have, in washing of feet, Io.
13. Act. 15.
and abstaining from the eating of blood, which was a custom of old, but in
these days, the newer, and diverse from that, is preferred and followed. Well
the^, M. Iuell hinderith his own side, by the alleging, of the Council of Nice
yea rather because it is true, that they must prevail in deed, by your own
allegatio^ of this place, you have put that sentence for a defense unto your
sermon, which being rightly understood, does at once overthrow your religion.
Consider now therefore the state of the Church at those days, and the cause of
that Counsel, if perchance we may find out the sense of these words, after
your allegation:

(...). Let old customs prevail, and ^ere away the victory.

Arrius was a proud new fangled man, a disobedient person unto his Bishopp,
which made much of him at the beginning, before he took heart of singularite
upon him, and promoted him to the honorable rome of a priest in Alexandria. Well
may I use the word, honorable, for at those days, priesthood was so taken
among all Christians. Alexander then which was Bishopp of Alexandria a very
meek and reverend Father, understanding his priest Arrius to busy him self
with new inventions, first gently and fatherly, he warned him: and when Arrius
proud heart and gloriouse, would be nothing the better for sweet words and
admonitions: the wise and blessed Bishopp gathering a Synod of his clergy
justly did excommunicate, that singular and blasphemous heretik. But for all
the excommunicating of the heretik, both he and his heresy had a great sort of
evil partakers with them: so far forth, that it was necessary, to call a
general Council, to the determining of the Catholic faith, and condemning of
new found learning. In which Council the holy fathers against the new terms
of Arrius, did principally allege, the traditions of the Apostles, and
customs, ma^ners, and laws of the holy writers before their days.

And although they had Scriptures for the^ against Arrius, yet the chefest stay
of their cause, was grounded upon the catholic received faith. For herein
co^sisted the unruliness of Arrius, that expounding the Scriptures untruly,
according to his own fancy, he would not be reformed, by the interpretation of
old fathers, and submit his faith unto their judgments. Which if he would
have done, the church of God had never ben so much trobled, with that
abominable heresy. ^rid and (...) for (...).
And that, not only Arrius, but al his fellows besides, were so affected
toward them selfs and their own devises, and against the expositio^s of
fathers: it appears plainly by an Epistle of Alexander Bishopp of Alexandria,
(...) 14.
written unto Alexander Bishopp of Constantinople, in the which, toward the
later end with in two leaves, these faults of the Arrians be declared.

It is no wonder, that which I shall write (most derely beloved) if I show unto
you the false derogations and defacinges, made against me and our devout people
For they which pitch their tents, against the Deity of the Son of God:
nothing fear they, to use spiteful ^launders against us, for because they
think it not meet, to compare any of the ancient fathers with them selves.
neither do they suffer them selves to be matched, with those masters and
teachers, of whom we have been instructed from our youth. neither do they make
any account of any, which are our fellow priests where so ever they be, as
concerning the measure of wisdom: as though they only were wise, and had
nothing to be said against them, and were the inuentors of new decrees, and as
to which only those things are revealed and opened, which are known to be
understood of no other besides, under the soun. O mischeuous pride, great
madness, furor of vain glory, wisdom of the devil, which mightily has
invaded their most wicked minds. The exposition of Scriptures, which the
well-beloved of God has made, did nothing fear them from their purpose, the
agreeable reverence, which their fellow ministers used toward Christ, did
nothing tame their wildnes.

Thus the^ lo the Arrians, being so much self minded, what better remedy
might the reverend fathers of Nice have against them, then to bring forth the
former received why the heretics admit only scripture, and the fathers old
customs also.
Only therefore tradition, custom, and manner, is that thing, which kills the
heretics hearts (and therefore they will not be judged but by express
Scripture only) and it is the thing, which defends the Catholic Christians,
and therefore gladly do they follow the ways of the ancient fathers. Which
thing is plainly proved by this honorable Counsel of Nice, about which our
talk is. For, as it appears by the acts of the same Council, after long
disputation and learned, between certain philosophers, (hired of purpose by
Arrius, in defense of his cause) and most excellent fathers inspired with the
holy ghost, for the uttering of the truth: It pleased (says the history) all
the fathers unto one, In (...) Conc. Niceni
that like as it was delivered from the holy fathers and successors of the
Apostells: so they should decree (...), (which is to say the equality of
substance in God the Son with the Father) and provide it to be put, in the
Creed of the Church. Against which word (...) and decree of the fathers, what
did Arrius or any of his sect afterward allege, to the reproving thereof?
(And you in the mean time (my well-beloved frind. N.) think it not long which
is not unprofitable, and chose out the time to read that quietly, which the
cause requires that I should write plainly.) What did the Arria^s then (said
I) argue against (...)? what was their chefest and best reason? for soth this
only, that it was not in Scripture. O M. Iuell, that your eloquence had not
ben born at those days: you would have stood greatly against them with your,
(...). Let old customs and manners win and preuail. But yet you may do good
service in these days, to persuade with the multitude of them, which take them
selves wiser then all other, which have been these nine hundred years, and which
will believe nothing but the written word and bare letter: that old customs
must be regarded and preferred also.

I mislike not the saying, but it agrees not with your person, as I believe.
Catholics may, all the company of them, allege truly both scripture and
custom. heretics, do pretend Scripture only, and that yet not truly, but
custom they can never allege at all. This we have received from the Apostells
and their successors, says the Council of Nice (...), is not in all the
scripture, says the heretic. And as every cuntry, is distincted one from a
another, by proper and peculiar language: so does the Catholic ever speak
after the voice of the Church, and the heretic bableth only after the letter
of the book. Read you the fifth Chapter of the Tripartite history the fourth
book. There it is plain, that Constantin the great, did put a chaplain of his
in trust, for the delivery of his testament, Hist. trip. li. 4. ca. 5.
to Constantius his son. which chaplain, being in deed an Arrian, and
having access to the Emperor and acquaintance with him, by occasion of the
testament, perceauing also the young Emperor his mind to be unstable and
wavering, To refuse unwritten verities, the old w^nt of heretics.
what persuasion did he use first of all as you think?

He said (as Theodoretus testifies) they were to blame, which had put the
word, Consubstanciall, among the articles of the faith.

And why so? which word (says he) is not written in all the Scripture. Lo
here is his greatest reason, and such in deed as becomes heretics most of
all. Let us go yet forward, and seek whether any mo heretics will use that
reason. And where shall you more plainly find this matter, then where the very
pack of them is gathered together. In a confession of a faith, which was made
at Sirmium, Consta^tius him self being present, with to many Arrian Bishops,
after other things, this decree follows.

As for the word (substance:) because, Trip. hist. lib. 5. c. 20
being simply put forth by the fathers, it is not known of the common people,
and it makes a scandalum and offense: and because, neither the Scriptures have
this word in them: it pleases us, it should be abrogated, and hereafter no
mention at all to be made of substance in God, because the Scriptures divine,
do in no place make mention of the substance of the father and the son. You
may see what great price they made of this argument (it is no Scripture, ergo
no matter of faith.) because that in so few lines, they do twice repete the
self same reason. Which undoubtedly was then, and is now, the very principal
(but not most surest) stay, of all unconstant minds. As in the same book
again, see what a another company of scismatikes do speak for them selves,
against the Counsel of Nice? We (say they) which are gathered together in
Seleucia, Trip. hist. lib. 5. c. 34
which is in Isauria. we have yesterday, which was the fifth before the Kal. of
Octobre, given all diligence, according to the Emperor his will, to keep
straightly the ecclesiastical peace, and to think earnestly upon the faith, as
our well-beloved Emperor Consta^tius has commanded, according to the sainges of
the prophets and Ghospells, and to bring forth nothing, besides the Scriptures
in the matter of the faith Ecclesiastical. This again does prove my purpose,
that it is propre to the heretics to appeal to the scriptures only, because
they are quickly condemned by tradition, custom, and manner.

To conclude therefore this place, Arrius being so proud, as we have said, having
many textes of Scripture for him: as he understood them which took him self to
be best learned, the Council of Nice defining the co^substantiality of God the
Son with the Father: because they had so received it from the Apostells by
their successors, the same Council being allwaies reproved of heretics, for
that it defined that matter as an article of faith, which was not in Scripture:
I ask now, what it is like that the Council did mean, when it should say,
Let old customs and manners prevail? Can it well be understood otherwise, (if
the words be taken generally, as you M. Iuell do allege them) then after
this sort? that for as much as heretics can allege for them selves Scripture,
and will not be brought down from their private sense to understand those
Scriptures, as old blessed fathers have interpreted them, that herefor to make
an end, and to stopp the mo^thes of all arrogant persons, we will and define,
that old fassions, old customs, ancient interpretatio^s, and so forth, shall
preuail? For the question here in this and custom, tradition and tradition,
which should prevail: for the Arria^ did meddle with no tradition, under the
letter of the scripture, he uttered his blasphemous sprit, and went against the
plain traditions, and lessons of the Apostells and fathers of Christ his
Church. therefore (says the Council) Let old customs and ma^ners prevail,
what the Council means sayng, let old customs prevail.
which is to say, we allow scripture, and we allege scripture, but after that
sort, that we must not, ne will admit any thing contrary unto the Apostolic
faith received, for as concerning your text, (Sir Arrius) where you say, Ioha^.
14. Pronerb. ^
The father is greater then I am. And again, God made me in the beginning of
his ways, with such like, they must be understood as our ^decessors, masters
and fathers have delivered unto us. neither must you (bring you in never so
many places of the old or new testament) think therefore, that you may conclud a
sense and meaning contrary to the old faith. Away with this pride of yours,
submit your understanding to the faith of the Church, leave of your new terms
of exta^tibus and non extantibus, receive the (...) and co^substancialitie
(which word although it be not expressed in Scripture, yet it is in tradition,)
Consent and agree with the Council of the whole world. These words lo and
such like, do express truly, what the fathers should mean in saing, Let the
old customs prevail. And this being proved, to be the very meaning of that
worthy sentence, what has M. Iuell done, in setting it before his sermon in
the first show thereof? is it put there, to be laughed at, or to be followed and
regarded? If to be laughed at: the Counsel of Nice is not so simple a thing.
If to be followed: why are the Catholics reproved then, for defending ancient
traditions? and why are the heretics honored which will have nothing but ^he
bare text only, together with their private comment upon it? If customs,
manners, fashions, vsages (call it as you will) if they must prevail: wherefore
do we all this while, contend with the Protestants, upon verities written and
unwritten, upon traditions and uses of the Catholic Church? Every book almost
which is of common places, has the question of Scripture and tradition moved
therein, which needs no more to be any question, you being so well acquainted
(M. Iuell) with the Protestants, and having so great credit among them, as
they lightly can give to such a person. For at one word you shall end the
whole matter, persuading them, that old customs and fashions must prevail,
which in my mind I think to be impossible, (but nothing is hard perchance,
to you,) for this is clear even in sight, the last and third communion is
preferred before the second, the second better esteemed then the first, and if a
new one come forth, you shall (I warrant you) see it plainly proved, that,
quite against your will, and against the Council of Nice, the old fashions
shall not be preferred. And this much hitherto I have said, as concerning old
customs, supposing and granting, that the Counsel of Nice might use that
sentence, as M. Iuell alleges it, for a general conclusion and
determination, whereas in very deed those words (...) ar only mentioned in
the beginning of the sixth Canon as concerning one especial matter, about the
prerogative of the sees of the Bishopp of Antioch and Alexandria, and should
not therefore be drawn unto a general sentence. But we shall meet again with
M. Iuell, upon this point, before the end, I think, and therefore now, will I
turn over the lease, and consider his sainges, and apply some answers, and
infer, so well as I can, some objections against him. When so ever any order,
given by God, is broken or abused, Iuell.
the best redress thereof is, to restore it again into the state that it first
was in at the begnining. If you take the pains leisurly to consider the
illation of this conclusion, you shall perceive the words of the blessed
Apostle unto S. Timothe, the first epistle and chapter, to have in these our
days the persons unto whom they may and must be applied. 1. ad Tim. cap. 1.
The end of the commandment is charity, which comes out from a pure heart,
and good conscience, and unfeigned faith^ from which certain men wandering a
side, are turned unto vain talk, coveting to be teachers of the law, not
vnders^anding, (yet) neither the things which they speak, neither upon what
things they make affirmatio^s M. Iuel here in the words which I have recited,
makes mention of an order given by God, and of order broken, and of redress
of the same by retorn to the first institution. In which sainge can he tell
what he speaks? or what, and wherefore he affirms? what order given by God,
did he talk of before, to bring in the words thus, when any order given by
God is broken? etc. In the third leaf he says, that S. Paul had appointed
the Corinthias as touching the Sacrament, that they should all eat and drink
together. Does he call this, the order given by God? I believe verily, that what
soever S. Paul appointed, the same did come from God, as the principal
governor of his church. But for all that, there is great difference, betwixt
the co^maundmentes expressly given by God, A difference between the
co^mandementes of god and the ordinances of men.
and ordres set by men as ministers of God. For with the one kind, non can
dispense, withowte especial license from God. and in the other kind, the
heads of the church have the power in there own hands, without further
question, to set and remove, plant and pull up, as they shall see it profitable
for the present state of the church. Wherefore although the blessed Apostle did
never make such ordres upon his own head, as did not agree with the will of
almighty God: yet (properly to speak) an order given by God, is so to be taken,
that, without all exception, it must be kept and followed, without special
revelation for the discontinewing of the same order. And ordres which men
appoint, may be changed again by men. What then means M. Iuell by these
words, When any order given by God is broken? and let him plainly also show,
wherein the order consisted, and who did break it? The order was this, (as it
appears by the learned commentaries of the blessed fathers upon that.xj.
chapter of the first to the Corinthians. Theoph. cap. 11. 1. ad Cor.
) On their holy days and appointed feasts, (according to an old custom of
the Church) the Corinthians did use, rich and poor, altogether in common, to
eat and drink. and that, of common meats and drinks.

Which meetinges and suppers were called in the Grek tongue (...) (as other do
write) because of their charitable sitting and eating together. Now (as S.
Austen writes) after the supper ended, they did receive the Sacrament. But as
S. Chrisostom thinks, they did first receive the Sacrament, and then set
them selves to supper. But were the Sacrament received after or before, and to
come to Theophilactus again, afterward, (says he) Dissentions arising among
them, that marvelous or excellent manner (which had much charity, and not a
little Christian philosophy in it) was taken away, and kept no longer of the
Corinthians. How was it taken away?

Because they did now sit a sondre, as, ^che by them selves, or kindredes with
kindredes, or by families, or other ways divided, whereby the poor folks,
which before did put their hands freely in the rich men's disshes, whiles they
sat Christianlike at one table together, they now poor sowles in deed and
hungry, were caused to ^itt by them selves, and had no benefit of their even
Christians plenty. With which singularity of the rich men S. Paul was
justly offended, and said, When you com together in one, 1. Cor. 11.
this is not it, to eat our Lord his supper. For every one of you does take
his own supper before, and eat. In which words, our Lord his supper, is
understood (as Theophilactus writes) that meeting and eating together of
theirs, which was instituted and received, as in following of that reverend and
worshipful supper of our Lord in deed. Here upon now, S. Paul studying for
the redress of this order, among other arguments (by which he would persuade
them quietly, and without disdain or murmur to sit together as they were wont
to do) he brings in for one principal argument, the doings of our Savior
in his last supper, saying, I have received of our Lord, that which I have
delivered unto you, 1. Cor. 11.
and so forth.

As if he should have said more plainly: my frindes, you do use in your
meetinges together, to keep separate tables and to put away the poor from you,
throwgh a certain contempt, perchance, or disdain of them. Which you are
much to blame to do. For seeing our Savior in his last supper giving his own
body to be eaten, did not make parts thereof, and unequal division, that some
should have al, and other should go without: and whereas you also do receive;
at these present suppers of your own that very body of his: it is to absurd
that toward your neighbors, and brothers, you should use this straingenes,
as though they were not worthy to eat of your bocherly fleshly meat with you,
or com nigh unto your tables: which a^ made partakers with you of the body of
our Savior, and of the heavenly table.

Thus then you may see, how the words of S. Paul depend orderly one upon an
other, and what the order was with the breakinge of which he was offended. And
where upon then do these words of M. Iuell follow I have received of the Lord?
etc. 1. Cor. 11
But let us now yet debate this matter more plentifully. The order once
received was, that they should make there common supper all togeth^r, of such
meats as they would bring, and either before (as S. Chrisostom his opinion is)
or after Epist. 118. ^d lanuar.
(as S. Austen understands it) they should receive the Sacrament. Well this
order is broken. But why did you break it, o ye Corinthians? why did ye let
either envy, disdain, pride, glotome, or any other unclean thought, so to
enter into your hearts, and so to take place there, that whereas before, to the
maintenance of charity, your tables in the church were common: now, to the
discomforting of the simple and poor, ye make to your selves private and
singular banketes? If you seek only for good chere: you have howses of your
own meeter for that purpose, then the church. But if needs you will supp in the
church, after the old fasshion: let your meats be common unto the rest, which
shall be there gathered as the old fasshion was. We see a manifest disordre, and
most lamentable. some be dronken, because of to much. other be fainte, because
of to little. Do ye contemn the church of god? Do ye confound and make to
blushe others which have nothing? But what remedy? Mary, says M. Iuell, let
us bring the matter to the first order given, and correct the abuse, by
reducinge of the case unto the first use thereof. Do so then as you say. amend
this disordre of the Corinthians. tell them what they have to follow. show forth
the true fasshion, and order, 1. Cor. 11.
which must be used. I have received of the Lord (says M. Iuell) that thing
which I also have delivered unto you. that is, that the Lord Ihesus in the
night that he was betrayed, took bread, etc. But to what purpose is this? we
have showed before, that the disordre among the Corinthians consisted chiefly
in this, that they did one contemn another, and would not sit together (as
the old fashion was) but make strange one of another. for a redress hereof
(says M. Iuell in the third leaf) S. Paul calls them back to the first
original, Iuell.
and to the institution of Christ from whence they were fallen. If this be so,
tell me I pray you, what one word is there sownd* in the institution of Christ,
which makes for sitting together or sitting a sondre, for eating at church or
eating at home, for particular banquet or common supper? Christ his institution
does here in consist, that, 1. Cor. 11.
He took bread, he brake bread, he gave it unto his disciples, and said,
take ye, eat ye, this is my body, which shall be delivered for you, do ye this
in remembrance of me. But our talk, is about the reforming of a custom which
is broken, and I ask you, how you will amend this separate manner of eating
and drinking, which the Corinthians do use in the church? I know that Christ
did take bread, did break it, did give it. But answer me, how the good
Christians were wont to meet together, and how they did use to sit and eat,
whereas the Apostle does ^ind fault with the Corinthians for their disordre of
eating in the church: not eating only of our Lord his body, (which if they
did mistake, then the words which you allege of the institution of Christ,
would serve well for that purpose) but eating of their own supper, which they
brought to church with them. When you speak of reducing things to their
original, and when it is clear, that the Corinthians in their meetinges
together, did not keep the old custom and manner, I looked to hear of you,
not the institution of Christ, what that was, but the old fasshions which the
Corinthians should keep, as for those words of the institution of Christ,
which S. Paul reherseth, they are written of him, not, as the original pattern
of the reforming the Corinthians disordre: but in way of argument, (as
Theophilactus says) to prove his principal purpose, that because Christ, did
not spare to give his own body unto his disciples and folowers: therefore the
rich Corinthia^s should not disdain to admit the poorer sort of Christians
their brethern unto their table. for therein was the blessed Apostle occuped, to
correct the stoutnes and singularity which the Corinthia^s used then,
otherwise then it was received among Christians. And therefore S. Paul being
mindful of his intent and principal matter, he concludes the chapter with
these words: therefore my brothers (says he) when ye com together to eat: tarry
and look one for another. If any one be hungry: let him eat at home. Shortly
therefore to conclude this matter, truth it is, that when any disordre is com
into the church: the first order, from which the fall was made, should be
reduced. The disordre among the Corinthians, was, that they did not charitably
communicate together in their suppers. let this be amended. the Apostle does it
properly, saing. Therefore, when ye com together to eat, tarry one for another.
M. Iuel understands not the^ place which he bri^geth out of the first unto
the Corinthias ca. 1^.
For so was it at the beginning, that the Christians did mere and sit
altogether, and eat one of an others meat in their Churches, and either after
such their meals, receive the Sacrament, or before them. All this agrees
well. But let M. Iuel amend the disordre, and set every man in his place. Let
them be called back again Iuell.
(says he) to the first original, and to the institution of Christ.

Which answers, as rightly to the question proponed as if in a deliberatio^,
how the beggars and needy persons of England might be provided for, some great
clerk would stand up and solemly declare unto us, unto what value of our
current money the three hundred pence would com unto, for which the ointment
that was poured upon our Savior his head, might have been sold for, according
unto Judas his estimation. Or (as it is more familiar with English ears)
which is the way to London? A pot full of plu^mes. Yet do they glory still
upon the institution of Christ, as though those words, Take, eat, this is my
body, do this in remembrance of me, did appoint both time, and place, and
vesture, and nombre of co^municantes, and all things which they use in
ministering of their what shall I call it? (treuly I can not tell,) and which the
true catholic church has or may use, in the ministering, adorning, or
defensing of the Sacrament. But let it be granted (which is to far absurd)
that S. Paul did reduce the Corinthia^s from their disordre unto the first
original and institution of Christ, and that he upon the original of Christ
his institution did conclude, that one should tarry for another when they came to
eat. How does it now then so fall out, that according to the redress which the
Apostle made after the original of Christ his institution, Christian men bring
not their meats to the church, and the rich tarieth not for the poor, and he
which abounds, gives not gladly unto him which lacks? And when they are
well refresshed with common meats, then receive the Sacrament? Yea rather, you,
which appeal so lowdly and rudely to the institution of Christ, The
incons^anci^ of heretics.
why do ye not wash one another feet, which have so express and evident a
text for it? Where is now your original, and where is the institution of
Christ? if both kinds be not received of the lay people: O then institution
of Christ, how far ar we departed from the? say they. And the same Christ
saing, Joan. 13.
I have given you an example, that like as I have done so should you do, and
wash one another feet, they are content herein to let institution and
original both go. And so, like as bells do sound in diverse men's ears
diversely, and diversely in one self same ear, as the mind is affected: so
Scripture and custom are made to sound in these men's fancy, even as their
(...) is to have this or that opinion to go forward. When it pleases them:
(...) the bells shall go, With customs of p^^matiue church, examples of
good men, testimonies of blessed Doctors. And when so great a sound does troble
their study, then lo it pleases them to have one bell only to ring, With
nothing is to be believed without express word of Scripture. But now let us
go further. It was to be hoped, for so much as the glorious light of the
Ghospel of Christ, Iuell.
is now so mightily and so far spread abroad, that no man would lightly miss
his way, as a^ore in the time of darkness, and perisshe wilfully. I could not
but note this sentence, because it contains so great a bost and so small
treuth in it. For where is the glorious light of the Gospel now so mightily
and so far sprede abroad? and what calls he the darkness of the time before?
many new found lands, and the wild Indians are come to the faith of Christ in
our days: but had protestants and heretics the ministry thereof? or else
religious men, monks and friars, with other such of the catholic church? Note
a most evident lie of M. Iuels.
how many parts of Italy, of Spain, of France, of Germany, of ^laundres, of
other contries of Europe, do acknowledge this glorious light which he talks
of? Yea, what one city can he name, in the which it is mightily blased abroad?
Frankford, does it wholly agree within it self in one faith? Geneua, is it
wholly ouershadowed with this counterfaict light? In England, or London, or in
Sarum under his own preachinges, is the Gospel gloriously and mightily spread
abroad? The kingdom of the Gospel of Christ, is in men's hearts. and then, of
how many hearts is M. Iuell assured? of those very contries, which are taken to
incline to the new lerninges, three parts, or more, shall be ^ownd, in heart and
will, Catholics.

And yet grant him, that any one city is al^ogether turned from Christ and
his church, so that no one Papist in heart, shall there remain: by and by is
the Gospel mightily and far spread abroad? There is no more but one Gospel,
but of Ghospellers more then six kinds in every contrie, There is one
Gospel, but diverse Ghospellers.
which the glorious light of the Gospel has now oueruewed. M. Iuell him self
does he know any one, to be of the same faith of which he him self is? if he
agree in all points with any other, how comes that to pass? either they have
one master, which keeps them both under correction, that they shall not play
the wantons, but hold that, which he teaches: or else voluntarily, and at
pleasure they agree. If voluntarily and at will: then is not he sure of an
others mind, which may be so often times chainged in every day and hour. If
they say one thing because of one master and auctoritye: let him then plainly
tell us, the name of that person his master. We have hard of Luther, Zuinglius,
Oecolampadius, Seruetus, Suenk feldius, of the which every one did crake of the
glorious light of the Ghospel of Christ, which they did bear abroad in their
lanthornes. But there light is not the light of the son, but such as we see in
great tempests, when contrary flashinges of lightening, com one against an
other. They did not confort and quicke^ by their doct^in* but destroy and burn
up quite the grene fruits of devotion, and pretty. And which then of all these,
is your master and ruler? The word of God, ^f in these days it be com abroad
out of darcknes, it comes not without hands and tongues. who then be your
apostles? If there be none: Aedant Origines Ecclesiaru^suar^. Let them show
the b^ginninges and first rising of their churches. Tertull. in ^script.
aduersus haereticos.
a great marvel certainly, to receive so great a gift and not to know, from
whence it came, or who brought it. If there be any: then must you follow your
Apostles. But they are all so well and highly learned, that they disdain to be
any man's scholars, as a certain Doctor and called a bishop, persuading with one,
that he should read the Doctors with judgment (meaning that in deed the
doctors be plainly against them, except one take the place of a judge upon him,
and defyne their verdictes, as it shall please the world, the fle^sh, and the
devil) used this kind of reason to obtain his purpose. for I my self (quod he)
do read Luther with judgment. O miserable and beggarly religion. even Luther
him selue, which like a morning, is said to have risen before the light of the
gospel, for whom they bless the Lord, that in him he reveled his s^ne Ih^sus
Christ (os impudens) yet is he to be readen with judgment. But whose judgment?
The judgment of the church ^row you? or judgment of Melanchthon, Bucer, Calvin,
or any other? no no* for all these are to be reade^ also, with judgment. And
whose judgment? forsooth mine own. Behold then I pray you, is not the Gospel
mightily spread abroad, when all this while no one person living, is found on
the Protesta^te^ side, which is and must be taken for an undoubted true preacher
of the Ghospel? the Protesta^te; has no one ^^doubted true judge, teacher or
faith.
Again, suppose that I have yet no Christendom, and that gladly I would com to
the true faith, which is the true light of my soul: as far and as mightily as
it is spread abroad, where yet shall I find it? Let me begin at Sarum church,
and does that agree in all points with the Queen's chapel? Let me go unto
Geneua: and that church, does it agree in all articles, with England? from
thens bring me abroad in to Germany: and shall I see the same preachinges used,
as are in other countries and cities of them which are no papists? how shall
I, which am not yet christened and learned, distinct the Lutheran, Zuinglian,
Anabaptist, Arrian, and more such sects one from an other? For the blase of
the glorious light, which you talk of: is marred by the concurring, of all
these flames, together. Wherefore I wonder much, at the vain hope of him, which
in these most troblesom and controuersious times, would look that every man
should com to the licht of the Ghospel, which he says is mightily spread
abroad. whereas in deed, he him self which hoped for many incummynges, does not
yet redely know, whether he be in the right way him self or no. and can not
prove to me, whether this which he holds, be the Gospel of Christ or no, or
counterfaicted by some Pope or other, or by some one general Council or other,
from whose hands we have received it. For if it follow well, and if we may
build here upon our souls health, that they have not, ^aythfullie expounded
unto us the Gospel: as easily it may follow, that they have delivered unto us
a false Gospel. And if they may be trusted with the keeping of the Gospel,
and that we nothing doubt, but they have delivered it as they received it,
Consider, whether ^ new Ghospel and ^aith may with any reason be trusted.
without interlining, rasing, blotting, and corrupting of it: why should we
mistrust them, in the expounding of the same Gospel? If they had so good
conscience, that having the testament in their keeping, they are believed to have
suppressed or burned, or altered, no part thereof: shall we make them on the
other side, so wicked and desperate that they would expound the same otherwise,
then they had received? And if we do stand by it plainly and openly, that they
were so corrupted and blinded, that they have sensed and interpreted the
scriptures most untruly, and most against the glory of God: can we with out
fear, receive the testament of God and writings of all our health from them,
and nothing mistrust, lest they have put in, and put out, for their own
purpose and advantage, many things which God never uttered, or which he
expreslie commanded? Certainly, as mightily, as the talk of the word of God,
and glorious light of the gospel is spread abroad, because of so diverse
sects, which declame against the catholic and Apostolic church: yet, if we
considre the case rightly, the very crakers of that light, know not for all
that, in what suerty of their faith, they be them selves. For they have
forsaken the high way, and what by breaking of ceremonies, what by ouerturning
of monasteries, what by false liberty of conscience, that they may do what
they will, under the name of the cross of Christ and his passion: they have so
crossed the ways, and broken down so many hedgis, and trodden down so much
good corn, and so many fair pastures of all piety and devotion: that, except
they com back to the beginning again, they can never com to good end. Whither
be you posting Sir, and please you? unto heaven? you must ride then a pase for
company because by your own confession, these nine hundred years and more,
none did ever take this way which you do follow. But, where will you bayt by
the way? At the sign of the book with seven claspes, which is the Gospel.
Sir, then I beseech you, what call you the city where that sign is? Mary,
Geneua where Calvin reads. What, if Geneua be destroyed, and Calvin burned,
or otherwise dead, before you com thither? Whither will you go then? to the
sign of the Ghospel. And why not to Caluins successors, which may sa^ly
deliver you the Ghospel? And then, Geneua being destroyed, and Calvin both,
what shall the next bayting place be, at which they may turn in, which look to
be saved? or what shall his name be, which is goodma^ of the house? Certanly,
at this point and turning, they are no more sure of their faith, the^ I should
be of my way to the mount Tabor, if I were in the furthest and wildest places
of all Egypt. Because they will trust none but the^ selves, and their own
wittines, and as them selves shall cast the way, so will they hear by leisure,
what old good fathers do say, protesta^tes will stand to their own
judgments only.
but yet will they follow their own inclination, this being inowgh with them
all, for the most part, that my mind and sprit gives me, this should be the
way: ergo this is likely to be the way. And again, the sprite of God, is not in
the great scholars and high Bishops or rulers of the world, ergo happy are we
the poor and ignorant, which have neither lerning neither authority. M. Iuell
complains that some there are this day, M. Iuell.
which refuse the communion and run headlong to the mass. whereas the I could
make short, and say, all is lies. And truly to make short in many places, I
shall be constrained, the matter does so increase, together with a just
indignation. Which if I should follow to the uttermost, I might write a great
volume, and yet not com to the end. But as for saying al is lies, without
proving of it, althowgh my negatio^ be as free for me in familiar writing, as
his affirmation is for him in open pulpetes and preaching: yet because I need
not to use such extremity, I will prove, that all together it is falsely
a^owched, which he writes in this forsaid sentence. For how first does this
communion agree, with the order that was delivered by Christ? yea rather what
order of celebrating, did Christ deliver, which you can tell of? Joan. 13.
Christ did sit down with his twelve, and after the paschall lamb eaten, he
arose again, he put of his roobes, he girded him self with a linen cloth, he
poured water into a basin, he washed his Apostles feet, he satt down again,
he preached, he took bread, he blessed it, he brake it, he gave it, saing, this
is my body, which shall be delivered for you. Mat. 26.
And likewise he took the chalice and blessed it. (as the Gospel testifies)
and at the last, many godly and comfortable lessons being given, and grace
ended, he said to his disciples, Joan. 14.
arise, let us go hence. I. there any more about the last supper of Christ,
that you can tell of? But how many things more, and how many things less
has your order in the communion book? Note the Protestants use many things
i^ their communion which, are not fownd in script: to be by Christ his
institution.
What Scripture have you for the linen fair cloth upon the communion table?
Where has Christ delivered unto you, that the priest shall stand at the north
side of the table? Where found you the prayers, collectes, exhortations,
co^fessions, knelinges down, standinges up, and such other fashions, as the
communion book has prescribed? I speak another of nor on as concerning the
goodness and allowance of these things, but only I ask where you had these
ordres of Christ? For these be your words. that The communion now is restored
to the same order, that was delivered, and appointed by Christ. Now, as you have
many things more in your communion, Also they have many points less, then
war done by Christ at his last supper. as.1.
then ever you can prove by express Scripture, that owre Savior used in his
last supper: so have you on the other side, many points less, then you owght
to have by any dispensation, if Christ were your perfect example. For Christ
our Savior, as he was at supper with his disciples, first and foremost took
bread. And how dare you to make your boste, of the exact following of the Lord,
Matt. 26. Christ took bread in to his hands.
where as you be ashamed to take your communion bread in to your hands? I will
not press you with the question, whi you do not communicate at supper time
(which one might think that you would cheifelie do, being such obseruars and
kepers of the actions and procedinges of Christ) but this so reasonable and
co^sequent point, that (I mean) he which intends to work about any matter
should take it up in to his hand, and this thing, which Christ him self has
willed us by his example to do (in taking of the bread, which he minded to
consecrate, in to his holy and reverend hands, why do not you remember to
follow, and why give you not forth a general iniunction, that every minister
shall keep that ceremony and manner? For although you M. Iuell (as I have heard
say) do take the bread in to your hands, when you celebrate solemply, yet
thousands there are of your inferior ministers whose death it is, to be bound
unto any such external fasshion, and your order of celebrating the communion
is so unadvisedly conceived, that every man is left unto his pryuate rule or
canon, whether he will take the bread into his hands: or let it stand at the
end of the table. Let it therefore be well marked that first of all you either
forgett, or neglect, or be ashamed to follow Christ, in taking of bread in to
your hands.

Christ blessed the bread.
but what did he bless? vndowbtedlie that which he took in to his hands. And
why then do not you follow Christ, in this action about the sacrament? or leave
craking, that you have brought your communion unto that perfect form and
absolute, at which Christ left it unto us? if you will appeal in this place
unto the Jews, in whose tongue, blessing, is commonly taken for thanks
giving, you must then expound unto us what thanks Christ did give unto the
bread. For the accusative case, which is governed of the verb (Benedixit, he
blessed) is not, Deum or Apostolos, that is, God or his Apostles, but panem,
that is bread. Therefore he blessed the bread, and did not thank the bread. no
he did not praise the bread. in which sense (benedicere, to bless) is often
times taken. For how could that holy mind of his, which always was occupied
upon high matters, and which then was most especially fully and excellently
directed unto the making of unspeakable mysteries, intend the right seasonyng,
or well bakyng, or fair lockyng, or any other thing worth the praising, in
that bread which he took in to his hands? if you would or could for your cursed
stomak and greatness of heart, follow with quietness and charity, the example and
manner of the wholly catholic church, you should make the sign of the cross
over the bread, and think that Christ his blessinge of that creature: is well,
so to be understood. But as though a thing were the worser, for the sign of
the cross made upon it, or as thowgh Christ in blessing of the bread, blessed
it not in deed, but rather blessed and thanked his father: so you ^lee, by all
means possible, from all such action and gesture, which might seem to commend
this bread unto us, and you have rather chosen to leave out all manner of
blessing: then you would be bound to ceremonies, and come within order and
canons. But whether this agrees with your crakes and bostinges, that you have
brought the supper of the Lord unto his first order and perfection (which you,
for all that do not bless the bread, as you should have learned by Christ his
example and pattern) let any man judge, which has but mean reason, and
understanding.

Further more, it is in S. Luke, that, likewise also the chalice, Luce. 22.
(understand) Christ gave. Which word (likewise) I note, because it imports,
that there was a certain especial manner, which our Savior used in taking and
giving of bread, the which he observed in taking and delyuering of the chalice.
And reason, undoubtedly, gives it, that he, which at other times used, Matt^.
14.
most solemn and reverend gestures, (as in the feeding of five thousand with
five barley losses and two fisshes, Joan. 11.
and in the raising of Lazarus he used blessing, lifting up of eyes, and loud
speaking) would not in such a time, and toward such a purpose, either use a
common attentio^, either a common expressing of his intention. especially
where as the disciples, with whom he turned in at Emaus, knew him in the
breaking of bread, what reverent gestures Christ used at his last supper
because he did it, after such a divine and solemn ceremonye, as was not used
of any other, such was his grace therein and his ordenance. O Lord, how
affectuouslie did he take that bread, from the rest which was upon the table,
of the which bread he appointed to make his own pretiouse body? How
reverently did he look up to heaven? How hartelie did he thank his father?
How abundantly did he bless and halow the bread? either by vsinge the plain
sign of a cross, or by some other expressing of his goodness which he would
to come upon that creature? How attentively did he break it? How hartelie did
he bid them to take it? How louingelie did he give them to eat it? how
mightelie and vnspeakablie did he turn and convert it? Like wise also he took
and gave the calice. Surely if there had been no matter in the taking and
handeling of it, neither the bread (I believe) neither the wine was so far from
him, but that he might have poynted unto them, with his finger, or looked at
the least way upon them, saying, Take ye, and eat ye, this is my body, this
is my bloudd. Yet to declare the singular working of his, which is done in
the bread and wine, and to make us the more attent and close in mind, whi
Christ used such reverent gestures at this institution of the Sacrament of his
body and blood.
by the folowinge of his owtward gestures, he took it: separating it (as it
were) from the rest of the like grain, he blessed it: by some special sign
or sanctification, such as is not for our common meats, he brake it: to
represent misticallie, the visible tearing of his body, which the next day
after followed. He gave it: to make the^ one together with him, not by faith
only and charity: but in very flessh also and body. He said, This is my
body, this is my blood: to teach them a true faith in those mysteries, and to
confirm and establish us against the objections, which either heretics or our
senses, 1. Cor. 11
do make to the discrediting of the Sacrament. and to co^clud. he said, Do
this in remembrance of me: by which he gave full authority of consecrating
unto Priests, and willed them to follow his example. But can you now (M. Iuel)
prove, that you keep all these things in your communion? Remember, I pray
you, the order of it, and consider, that the bread and wine are laid down
upon your table, where it pleases the sexten or the parish clark to set
them. The new ministers abuse and lack in celebrating Christ his last supper.
And when the time of consecration (if all things did proceed rightly)
cummeth, your book apointeth, no taking, no blessing, no directing of the mind
to the bread. But like as a man should tell a tale: so the minister recites
only the words of the Apostle, and when all is quickly done, he takes the
vnco^secrated bread himself and gives it to other, willing them to be
thankful, and to feed upon Christ in their heart. In so much, that if a
stranger should come in the mean time whiles you be at your communion, he
might wonder, why at the end, you make so much of that bread and cupp of wine,
with which all the service long before you seemed to have had so little to do,
or nothing. For neither by taking, neither blessing, neither direct and
intentyue lookyng, it appears that you work any thing in the bread. And all
this not withstandyng, have you browghte back the communion, unto that state
and perfection, in which Christ delivered it unto his Apostles. May you not be
ashamed of your vanity, which crake of the following of Christ, and condemn
his holy Catholic church, your selves neither taking, neither blessing,
neither co^secrating the bread and wine, as Christ himself did in his last
supper show unto us? Well (M. Iuell) this is one foul lie of yowres.

There follows an other, namely, that you have the same order, An other lie of
M. Iuells.
which was practiced by the Apostles. But it appears not either in the Acts
of the Apostles, or any of their epistles, what order of communion they had, In
the Acts of the Apostles it is written, Act. 2.
that they did break bread in their houses. Act. 13.
and again, that after the Apostles had fasted and sacrificed, they sent forth
S. Paul and Barnabas to fulfill the holy ghostes commandment, and to preach
abroad the Gospel. But of the order, which they used in breaking their bread,
1. Cor. 11.
or in their sacrifices, nothing is declared precisely. Again, unto the
Corinthians, the blessed Apostle writes, what he received of our Lord, and
testifies therein the verity of the sacrament, but of the order, which is to be
observed, he speaks so little, that he ends that matter with these words.
As for the rest, when I come my self, I will set in order. here be, lo, two
foul ones past. there follows the third, which has many other underneath it.
And that lie is, that, the holy communion is restored to the same order, which
has been co^tinewed, by the holy doctors and fathers (one) for the space of.v.
or.vjC. years Many lye^ of M. Iuel^ in one (...) ^e togeth^r
(two) through out all the whole Catholic church of Christ (three) without
exception or sufficient example to be showed to the contrary (four) yet are
there some this day (q, he) that refuse it, which is also the fifthe lie, if
he take this word (some) for a small some. Because in deed, there be very many
persons, which do refuse it, and would gladly run to mass, wherein the
Protesta^tes Communion agrees not with the primitive church and old fathers.
if there were any.

But now to shame all these lies, I will bring furthe a few exceptions, by
which I shall evidently prove, many things yet to lack in the Communion, of
the order, which in the primitive church, was used. Prayer toward the East.
Iustinue 118. quaest.
As it does appear by S. Justin the martyr.118. quest. Because (says he) we
should reserve the most honorable things for God, and by all men's judgment,
where the son rises, that is the worthiest part of the wordle. The same also
is proved by S. Athanasius quest.37. Athan. quest. 37
Which alleges for that purpose the testimonies of the Psalms and Prophets
in answering to a Jew and for the answering to a Gentil, he says that because
God is true light, therefore we look toward the sight created, and do not
worship the light it self but the maker thereof. Thirdly to a Christian this he
answers, saing, For this cause the most blessed Apostles did make the
church, of the Christians to look toward the East, that we looking unto
Paradise, from whence we have fallen, (I mean our old co^try and land) should
and might desire our God and Lord to bring us back thither, from whence being
cast out, we are in this banishement. And of this judgment also S. Basil the
great, is. And says It is a tradition of the Apostles. Basil. de ^. 5. cap.
27.
And with these agrees S. Austen sayng, when we stand to pray, we torn unto
the East. Lib. de ser. in monte.
And why therefore is not this order kept in the communion book but expressly
rather it appoints the Priest to stand at the north side of the table? Is
this your continewing in old fathers and doctors orders, that you be assured,
no example can be showed to the contrary of that, which you do? if you say the
standing makes no matter: suppose it to be so, and wherefore then did you not
let things stand when they were well? or why do ye crake before ignorant
people, that you hau^ the same order withowt example to the contrary, which was
in the primitive church and five or six hundred years after used?

Thus, first then you stand not rightly, no more do ye in the rest
accordingly. For where is the water, which you should mingle together with the
wine in consecrating the chalice? why keape you not this ancient approved and
received order? S. Alexander Bishope of Rome the the chalice owght to be
mengled with water
Neither wine alone, neither water alone, but both mengled together, ought to
be offered up in the chalice of our Lord. as we have received of our
forefathers, and reason it self does teach, because both they are readen to
have gusshed out of his side, when he suffered his passion.

Item, C^^. Car. 3 ca. 24.
the third Council holden at Carthage, forbideth that any thing else be
offered, then our Lord him self has delivered and appointed, that is to say,
bread and wine mengled with water. Again, S. Cyprian, Cyp. ^p. 3. lib. 2
in one whole epistle, greatly rebukes them, which offer up water alone, or
wine alone. Because (he says) that our Lord appointed it so, that water and
wine should be mengled both together, to signify the joining of Christ, and
his Church in one. Apoc. 17
For many waters do signify in the Apocalipse, many people: so that water
mengled with wine, does well represent the people tempered together, and united
with Christ. How say you? be not these witnesses sufficient enough? they are
within the five hundred years which M. Iuell gives us leave to considre, if
perchance we may find any exception to the contrary, that the order in the
English communion, is not according to the perfect example of that which it
should be.

I ask yet once again why, The sign of the cross owght to be used in the
communion.
the minister of

And Tertullian says, Libro de corona milit^^.
that in his time it was a general custom, to make the sign of the cross in
the forhead at every coming in to the house, at every going forth in puttyng
on their apparel, in sittyng down at the table, at candelltyde, at beddtyde.
How much sooner then, did they use that sign in holy mysteries. S. Chrysostom
also an awncient father, In demo^st. aduerssusgent. to. 3.
the head (says he) is not so much decked and set ^urth with a royal crown,
as with the cross. All men sign them selves with it, ^mprinting it, in the
most noble part that we have. For in the forehead as it were upon a pillar the
figure thereof is daily made, so likewise in the holy table, so in the
making of preistes, so again with the body of Christ in the mystical
suppers, that sign does florishe. Augustine. tract. 118. in Ioanne^.
Unto these.11. fornamed witnesses let us take a therde verdict of the blessed
S. Austyne, which judges of the cross in this wise, that, except it be putt
unto either the forheades of the faithful, either the water with which they are
regenerated and borne again, wither the oil with which they are anointed,
either the sacrifice with which they are norished, none of them all is well
done. What then shall we say? if M. Iuell has not thorowghlie readen these
awncient doctors, how hardy and hasty was he in reporting, that his communion
and his fellows is restored to the form of the primitive church, delivered by
Christ, practiced by the Apostles, continued by the holy fathers? and if that
he has readen the holy fathers, and yet co^tempneth their sayings: what
credit is to be given unto his preaching, which plaieth the hipocrite so
notoriously? But let us make other exceptions.

In the primitive church, altars were allowed among Christians, altars used and
hallowed in the primityue church.
upon which they we have an altar, of which they may not eat, which
communicate with Idols. The council also called Agathense, has decreed it,
that Altars should be hallowed, not only with the anointing of holy oil, but
also the blessing of the priest. Council. Agathen. se. cap. 14.
Yet yowr company (M. Iuell) to declare what folowers they are of antiquytie,
do account it among one of the kinds of Idolatry, if one keep an altar
standing. And in deed, you follow a certain antiquity, not yet of the
Catholykes, but of desperate here tikes. Optatus contra (...).
As Optatus writes against the Donatistes, saying: what is so wicked and
theewish as to break, to raze, to remove, the altars of God, upon which once
you did offer? Now if you be of no affinity with the Donatistes, answer, for
the pulling down of altars, what sprite it was which moved you there unto?

Again, in the primityue church, incensing at mass, was, of most holy men
allowed witnesses hereof, are S. James in his mass, saying: O Lord ^hesu
Christ, etc. purge us from all spot, and make us to stand pure at thy holy
altar, that we may offer Perfumes ^incense used in the pri^itiue church.
and receive of us thy unprofitable servants this present perfume for a sweet
savor, etc. S. Denise also is a witness, which among other things write,
concerning the order of church service in his days, Ecel. Hierarch. ca. 3
tells, How the Bishop after he has ended his folly prayer, upon the divine
altar, begins at it to burn incense and so goes round about the whole
church. An other witness (to let go the liturgies or masses of S. Basile and
S. Chrysostom) shall be S. Ambrose, Amb. li. I. in csp. 1. Luca.
which in his co^templation of the coming of the Angel unto the high priest
Zachary, says, And I would to god, that whiles we ince^se the altars, and
bring sacrifice thither, the Angel should stand by us, and give himself to be
seen of us. Now these testimonies M. Iuell, being gathered out of the five
hundred years after Christ, you were not so wise undoubtedly as you were bold,
in saying your communion to be of that form and fashion, which the Apostles
delivered and their next folowers received.

Furthermore in the primityue church Lyghtes maintained in the primitive
church.
how read you in the old doctors? were they not? If they were, how be you not a
shamed of the darkness, which is generally in you, and your communion? If you
can find no mention of lights in any good ancient doctor: read then S.
Augustyne in his sermons unto the people, August. Ser. 7. de tempor^
declaring what is the best kind of vow. and uttering by that occasion the
manner of good folk in his time, of who^, some did vow oil, some wax, to
keep light in the night, some, a pall or robe, etc. Which although he aloweth,
yet these are not the best vows says he. Paulin. in not. 3. ^. Foelicis.
Read also Paulinus, which upon S. Felix holidaye, says, Clara coronantur
densis altaria lychnis. The altars bright: Are rownde I dight, With lamps
thick set, and light.

Read (to be short) S. Hierome, and not only read: but regard him. Read what
he judges of Vigilantius, and read what the heretic Vigila^tius judged of
churchlightes and tapers. Did not he, like a singular and blind Protestant (all
be it such then, were not called Protestants, but known well inowghe by the
bare name of heretics) but did not he jest and tawnt at the manner of
Catholics, askyng them whi they lighted tapers at myd noon, the son fair
shinyng? and askyng further, whether the martyrs which dwell in heaven, need
any of our tapers, which tarry on earth? Whose madd brain for these, and other
like sayings, H^ero. aduersus Vigilantium. ^oan. 12.
S. Hierome noted, to require some cure and remedy, and among other things he
answers Vigilantius with these words. Neither Christ needed the ointment
(which Marye Magdalene powered upon him) Nor martyrs the light of tapers: and
yet that woman did that thing in the honor of Christ, and the devotion of her
mind is taken, and who so ever do light tapers, they have their reward
according to their faith. Again. Thorowgh all the churches of the East, when
the Gospel is a reading, the tapers are lighted, even when the son now
shyneth. Not truly to putt darkness away, but to show forth and declare a
token of joy and gladness.

For this matter therefore M. Iuell, I will leave you unto holy S. Hierome, to
see whether you and he in this ^^ynt can agree any thing together. and whether
he can patiently suffer you, after so evident customs to the contrary, to
crake that you have browght the communion unto that form which it had at the
beginning.

Shall I make any more exceptions against you, or have I said to much allreadie
for your profit and credit among the ignorant? Many surely will think and
say unto them selves, that if my Lord Iuell preached these things in open
pulpite, he was well aduysed before, what he would say, and undoubtedly he
has how to answer, how so ever these papists allege the Doctors. Which
fellows verily have to great an opinion of the man, and they may seem to
offend of purpose, which will not see most manifest things, and such which are
comprehended by the owtward and carnal senses. Many heresies of old were very
subtle, and of much show of virtue, in so much, that right learned and good men
might have been deceived in them: but the heresies of this time are for the most
part all, so gross, so unreasonable, so unnatural, so folish, so much crakyng,
so little performyng, that it is a wou^der, how any man of common sense, does
prefer the new before the old religion. For, to note.ij. points more, which,
the church observes as delivered by the Apostles, and which the communion book
has not in it, for all the bost that is made of it, what honest heart can abide
to here those bold words, that the communion is restored to the use and form
of the primityue church, when he shall perceive that praying to the Saints,
and praying for the dead, Of praying to Saints.
which the new Ghospellers do utterly neglect, was generally of old observed.
Is it not said many times and often, in S. Basils mass, let us commend our
selves one an other and all owr life, Basil. in sua Liturgia.
unto Christ owr God, having in memory, owr most holy and undefiled lady the
mother of God, and allwaies virgin Marie, with all the Saints? Does he not
make an express mention of owr lady, of S. Ihon the Baptist, and of the
saint, whose memory is kept that day in the church, saying, Quoru^
postulationibus visita nos. at whose prayers and requests visit us? Chrisost.
in Liturg.
Does not Chrysostom in this article agree with Basile and the catholic
faith? O Michael (says he) which art the chief captain of the heavenly
army, unworthy we beseech the to defend us by thy intercessions, under the
shadow of thy wings. Again, O ye Apostles, do your message unto owr merciful
God, that he may give unto owr sowles remission of sins. The like prayer he
makes in effect unto S. Nycolas and to all the saints. And whereas holy
Saints and Martirs are mentioned in the rest of the mass, Chrisost. ^om. 21.
in acta Apo.
especially yet they are at the time of oblation: for it is great honor to
them, to be named when their Lord is present, when that death is celebrated,
and that dreadful sacrifice, and unspeakable sacraments. Which was so
ordinary and common a matter, Aug. li. de S. virgin. cap. 45.
that S. Augustine in few words says, It is well known unto the faithful,
at what^ place the martyrs and religiouse women or Nuns departed, are
rehearsed at the Sacraments of the altar.

And again, Idem li. 22 de ciu. Dei cap. 10.
that we use not to offer sacrifice to Martirs, but that in that sacrifice
which we offer up unto God, the martirs in their place and order are named. If
you ask, to what purpose the catholic and true communion should use the
invocation or namyng of martyrs: (althowgh it be argument sufficient against
your communion, that it follows not the like manner, which we find to have been
received in the awncient church, yet to yield much herein unto you) I say
either with Chrysostom in the place forenamed in the that it is the Martirs
honor, to be remembered in the presens of their lord his pretiouse body. Lib.
20. ca. 21. contra Faustu^
Or I say with S. Augustine, applying that to our purpose specially, which he
spoke generally of all Martirs, that, the Christen people do keep the
memories and commemoration of Martirs, with a religiouse and devout
solemnity, both to stir up in them selves a following of them, and also to be
made partakers of their merits, and to be helped by their prayers. But the
practice of the primityue Church being euydent, althowgh the cause of it were
not known, whi use you not in yowr communion, an ordinary invocation of holy
saints?

Now if in all other things, no odds between you and the true church might
be espied, Praying at mass time for the dead.
yet the praying for the dead, was in the primityue church so laudable, and in
yowr religion it is so hated, that except, before judgment be geauen, you
alter in that point yowr communion, no reason can bear it to be Apostolic.

Consider by your selves S. Basiles and S. Chrisostomes masses, whether
peculiar and proper mention of the dead, be not made in them, to obtain God
his mercy for them? Conf. lib. 9.
Remember, that S. Augustine desires his brothers and fathers tho priests,
which should read of the death of his mother, to pray for her at the altar.
And if you will be loath to turn to these places, and to consider them
accordingly, I will pardon you of that labor, trusting that one testymonie
will be sufficient unto you, which seek nothing, but truth, and are ready to
follow better council. The testymonie is Saint Chrisostomes. Chris. homil. 3.
ad Philip.
It has not ben decreed for naught, by the Apostles, (says he) that in the
celebration of the venerable mysteries, a memory should be made of them, which
have departed hense. For they knew, that much vantage and profit did come
herebie unto them, etc.

So many points therefore considered, which we find used in the primityue
church, and which we lament to see contemned in your vpstart church: can you,
for shame of the world, either not follow that, if you know the state of it, or
if you do know little of it, so boldly compare your selves with it? You say,
that whithout exception and authority to the contrary, you have the same
order and fasshion which was practiced in the ancient church, thorough
Christendom, and I do show you now half a skore of just exceptions, of noe
small matters, or hard to find, but great and easy to be perceived. Who
therefore might in this place and vantage against you, give for God his sake
which is truth, a just and free sentence between us and you? Who might grant
forth inquisitors and Judges to sit upon it, which of us two does follow the
church, and which of us two does belie her? how long is it that men halt on
both sides?

If our Lord be the God, follow him: if Baal be, follow him. Reg. 3. cap. 18.
If Iuell say truth, let the Catholics continue in their infamy: if the
Catholics prove him a lier, go upright, and halt not with a false leg. This
communion of yowrs M. Iuell, is no more like the mass, office, or service,
which the Catholics used in the first five hundred years after Christ: then a
four crabb is like a sweet orange. But as some man might folishlie say of an
other, he is like King Arture the famous, because he sits at a rownd table,
or has perchaunse some part of a gesture, which (as he has readen in
Chronicles) becummed King Arture very well, whereas in all kind of manlines,
he is more nearer a ducke then a duke, so (that I may be quietly suffered, to
compare things simple and temporal, with those great matters and everlasting)
these obscure Protestants, because they presume all of them to receive under
both kinds, as Christ did unto his Apostles only, deliver them both, (as
teaching them how to celebrate that daily sacrifice) and because they will not
receive, except they be a company of them together: lo, say they, we be the
folowers of Christ, and his Apostles, and of the primitive church as far as
five hundred years go, (for there we leave them) and we have the light of the
Gospel, after so long a night of nine hundred years and more, and our order
of the holy communion, is the same which Christ delivered, (o good brothers)
and the Apostles received, and the Doctors and Fathers continewed, without any
exception, which can be made to the contrary. Whereas in deed, you may see, in
how many, and how principal things, they forsake quite the true order of the
primitive church. But shall they be so suffered for ever? True it is, the
Sacrament is an holy thing, M. Iuell fol. 8.
the ordinance of Christ, the mystery of our salvation. Yet, is there nothing
so good, no ordinance so holy, no mystery so heavenly, but through the folly
andx frowardnes of man, it may be abused. From this place forward, many leafes
together, he proves that things may be abused: and reckons up certain
abuses, which have chanced about the Sacraments. and if I take him ^ardie but
in one, he must be gilty in all, because he alleges all with like faith and
integrity, and wills him self to be taken as he is, if he be found ouercom,
but in one thing only. First then, as concerning those, which did baptize the
dead, they are well reproved in the third Counsel of Carthage, the sixth canon.
But here by the way, I note one great unreasonableness in those men, which at
their pleasure, to serve their turn, do allege Counsels, and will not yet
obey the canons of the same Counsels. The 17. canon of this very Council of
Carthage, forbeddeth that no strange women, (that is to say) none, but either
mother, grandmother. Aunt by the father or mothers side, sisters, and brothers
or sisters daughters, either such as were of household, before they took ordres,
but besides these, none should dwell together with the clergy. And now,
priests do take not only strangers to their household servants, but also to
their chamber and bed fellows. The.27. Cano^, commands water and wine both
to be used in the sacrifice. The.36. forbeddeth utterly, that any priest should
co^secrat holy oil, for that was reserved to the Bishop only, with whose leave
the priest might co^secrat virgins. But in these quarters of the world, another
water in sacrifice, another oil, another virginity with consecration thereof, is
allowed of the Protesta^tes. Reason truly it is, to take a man's whole tale, and
not to mangle an ancient Counsel. Which Council, if they do not creditt, why
then do they bring the testimony of that Council for proof of their purpose,
against which, they bear false witness that it is not to be followed?

But to let this matter to pass: A great abuse is attributed unto Tertullian,
and Saint Cypria^ his time, a thousand four hundred years ago, that the
Christians took the Sacrament home with them.

This was (^aieth M. Iuell) an abuse, and therefore it was broken. But who did
break it tell us? It was broken says he. and how do ye prove this to be an
abuse? it was an abuse says he. And I say, it was not. and why not my nay, as
good in reasoning, as your yea. For although the co^me^dation of some person
has made you a Bishopp, And, by order of the church, I am a simple priest: yet
as good the legs of a lark, as the body of a kyte. If we go to craking (in
deed it is not good, but this yet they would constrain many to do) I will yield
no more unto his authority, then reason will require. Yet I may justly crake,
not in my self, but under the churches authority, and in the name of S.
Cyprian and Tertullian. Was that, say you an abuse, to carye the Sacrament home
at those days, and receive it before other meats? I understand what greueth
you in this example, of the primitive church. For it proves plainly against
you, that even in so nigh days unto Christ, there was no necessity to receive
the Sacrament under both kinds. And whereas the persequutio^ and hatred of
Christians, was then so great, that they could not freely meet together in any
common and open place, and so quietly serve God, and receive his benefices, as
they desired: can ye blame them, if the clergy were content, to let the
Christians carry home with them, that present comfort of their soul, (which is
the body of Ihesus Christ) to have it always in readiness, and to strengthen
their weakness therwithall, if suddenly they were called unto martyrdom? Be you
wiser then S. Cyprian? and he writing not his private fashion and manner (which
might be well enough corrected by great counsel) but writing of a certain
fact of a woman, which reserved the Sacrament in her chest, whereby the custom
of that time and most undoubtedly, the faith of that time may be gathered, do
you reprove the odre of the primityue church, and have you forgotten so sone,
It was no abuse in the primitive church to carry home the Sacrament, and
receive it alone.
that old customs must prevail? where have you readen, in any old father, or
doctor, or in any general council, or how can you show it, by any treu
example of the primitive church, that the carrying home and reserving of the
Sacrament, was an abuse? but let us hear what S. Cyprian writes, in his
sermon de Lapsis. Cyp. ser. 5. De Lapsis.
He proves (...) (...) Wherein I confess he did vilye and damnablye misuse the
people and contrary the church. But it is to be noted, that this Marcus went
about to win unto him self an estimation above all other priests, which
could not but follow, when that at his co^secrating, the people should see the
wine turned as it were in to blood, and that the like did not appear, when
other Priests did consecrat. And note, that except the faith of the church in
those days, had been, that the very blood of Christ, was in the mysteries of
the Christians, he could never have made any to reverence him the more, for
that practice, but rather to have brought him, before the officers of the
church, and examined him, saying: We do believe, that we receive Christ only
by faith, which faith goes up to heaven, and eats him as he sits at the
right hand of his father: but this man shows us, very plain blood in the
chalice, which is against our belefe. And whereas this Necromanser, did turn
his craft to the pleasing of the people, and so made blood to appear in the
chalice: it follows, that the whole people of the church, did rejoice in the
blood of Christ, which they believed to be in the mysteries, and so he craftily
served their faith an devotion, that he might win their praise and favor, and
that he might be pointed unto, with, lo, there goes a good priest, and a
blessed man. But will you hear more abuses? Some take the Sacrament for a
purgation, Iuell.
against slander: some hang it before their breasts for a protection. S. Benet
(says he) ministered the communion unto a woman that was dead. Ergo what does
follow? Ergo the sacrament may be abused. I grant it may be, as when wicked and
false coniures do make it a mean to bind the devil, or when heretics or
infidells tread it under foot, or cast it in the fire, or prick it with
knives to prove, whether God his word be true, that this is his body, which
was delivered for us. But none of your premises almost does infer rightly
that conclusion.

For whereby show you, that S. Benet did abuse the Sacrament in ministering it
unto a woman that was dead? All your argument is this, Christ did not appoint,
that the Sacrament should be hanged about ones neck, or put in chest, or geauen
to dead women: ergo these be great abuses. Is this in deed good reason? that
what soever Christ has not expressly willed, A n^wghtye argument of
authority negatiuelie.
that may not be used? Sir, Christ did not bid us, that if there were not
present three at the least, which would receive, there should be therefore no
communion that day. Christ did not bid us knele down, and say, Lord we do
not presume to com to this thy table trusting in our own merits, Christ did
not bid us, when one chalice is supped up, to fill it again out of the whole
potle or quart pot. Christ did not bid us, carry home with us the pieces of
bread, or cantells thereof, and do what we would with it. Ergo these be great
abuses in the communion book. no Sir no, the truth must be tried by other
arguments, then these rhetorical repetitions and negatiues of Christ did not
appoint this, ergo it is an abuse. especially, whereas to many do think, that
Christ will be content with no other things, but such only as are written: as
though the holy ghost, the spirit of truth, were idle in the church all this
while. how dare you to judge of S. Benet his fact, the like unto which, S.
Gregory does allege for a miracle, and for a notable matter. S. Austen so wise
and blessed a man, whereas he disputes in his book De Ciuitate Dei, of deaths
which some have used toward them selves, and whereas he well remembered, that
the precept of God was, Exodus xx.
Thou shall not kill, and also remembered that the church does honor for martyrs
certain, which did run into the waters, and to keep their virginity lost
their lives, in this so doubtful a case, wherein the church seamed to stand
against God, and the precept of God, to be contraried by the holy day of the
church, he dared not rashely to conclud, but stood herein, that the precept of
God must have his force, and with what conscience and praise, those virgins
drowned them selves, that must be left unto the working of God the holy ghost,
and not curiously serched of men. for what if they did so (says he) not
deceived as women may be, Lib. 2. de^c^uit. Dei cap. 26.
but commanded by God, neither ^rring therein, but obeying? As of Sampson, it
is not lawful for us, to think any other thing. And we therefore (says he
afterward) come to the conscience by hearing, but of secret things, we take
not upon us the Judgment. The doings of the church and of good me^ are not
lightly to be judged.
Thus, Sir, it did become you to do, for as much as you confess Saint Benet
for a Saint, and whereas by many miracles, that has been well known unto the
church, not hastily to judge of the spirit of God, with whom you are not so
well acquainted, as Saint Benet was, but humbly and reverently, to hear the
miracles of God in his saints, and to confess that M. Iuell does not know
all things. Where you have it, that Saint Benet did give the communion, unto a
dead woman, I know not verily, but Saint Gregorye reports a like thing of
him. 2. lib. Dial. cap. 24.
that a ladd of Saint Benet his monasterye, departing unto his parents
without the blessing of Saint Benet, and before his return departing also the
world, after he was committed to the earth, the next day he was cast up again.
Where upon Saint Benet, (after moan made unto him) sent the communion, and
willed it to be putt upon the breast of the lad. After which do^e, there was no
more troble. which thing being so sadly written by Saint Gregory, we may not
well lawgh at it, and the same finding no fault with the matter, let not us
murmur against the works and inspirations of God. In deed, it is not for every
man so to do, but when so singular virtuous men, are moved thereunto, and when
a great effect does follow, we must judge, that God was the author thereof, and
that the party did it not upon his own opinion and boldness. The which answer
serves also, In oratione funebri de obitu fratris sui Satyri.
that we be not to bold in condemning any one his devotion and faith, which
uses the sacrament for his defense in any kind of cause. For S. Ambrose
praises his brother Satyrus, which minding to go over the seas, did take of
the Christians, which were in the ship with him, the Sacrament, and hanged it
about his neck.

whereupon afterward, when a tempest did rise, and break the ship, he
committed him self, to the defense of Christ in his Sacrament, and so
miraculouslye escaped drowning. And like as Saint Peter, taking comfort and
strength of the presence of Christ, Matthew. 14.
said, Lord if thou be he, bid me com unto the, upon the waters, and did walk
upon them, as upon firm land: so the Catholics, which certainly believe, that
this is he him self, whom they see covered under form of bread, (although he
be always present) yet they are more out of fear, when they have him within
their hands, and reach. And throwgh the grace which comes from him, they
walk securely and peaceably. As contrary wise unto other, which doubt of
Christ his words, and make such a sense of them, as they be able without
difficulty to attain unto, saying that he is present by a certain conceived
thowght of ours, and remembrance only: I wondre not, if it seem folly unto
such, to make any store of the Sacrament, or to reserve it for a stay of their
wavering faith in ieoperdies. For what is bread but bread, and what can it do
more then comfort the body? But now again, because in S. Benet his time, more
besides him (as M. Iuell collecteth) did give the Sacrament even unto dead
persons: ergo they certainly did confess a more lively, real, mighty, and
blessed thing therein to be, then our protestants will admit. So that putting
a side the question, whether they did well therein or no? yet this appears,
that they took the Sacrament to be as Christ has said, his very own body,
and that faith was in the church within the five or six hundred years after
Christ, which M. Iuell receaueth for incorrupt. But alas, what if they, Iuell.
which most of all defend the mass, them selves, find fault with the mass? as
Albertus Pigghius by name, the greatest pillar of that part. First I answer,
that the church does not take him for the greatest pillar (in so much that in
three or four points she notes him to have had his errors) and a Catholic
faith is not bownd unto any private man's opinion. But you be accustomed to this
kind. Then I say further, that it appears hereby, of what good conscience
Pigghius was, who did not write for favor of his side, or hatred of the
contrary, which if he had minded, he would never have yielded one inche unto an
heretic, which have that manner of stoutnesse, that if one of them deny never
so manifest a thing (as for example, that S. Peter was ever at Rome: upon which
thing all writers agree upon, althowghe they differ somewhat in the time) but,
as I said, be the thing never so manifest to the contrary of that, which any
of them does affirm or impugn, yet will the rest defend him in their wise,
not perchance in alowing the opinion, A difference between the Catholics and
Protestants assertions.
but in saing that it is a disputable question: and so, that being granted,
ergo say they, it is no matter of faith, whether the one part or other be taken.
But the catholics, because they be plain, they do utter their own opinion,
and noting dissemble with the^r fellows, if it be not true. Wherein, they are
suffered, so to reason one against an other, that they be both of them obedient
unto the church, whose voice we do harke^ unto, and not what Albertus Pigghius
says. Thirdly the^ I answer, that more beside Pigghius confess, abuses to
have crept into the service of the church, as it appears by the catholics,
Cap de horis Canonicis.
which co^sulted upon reformation of disorders, in a certain meeting at
Ausburg. Also ^^ofmesterus in the expounding of the mass, what abuses are
crept in to the church mass, and divine service.
demeth not, but some trifles have been put in. but what abuses and trifles does
he mean? forsooth, such as be in some proses, antiphonies, repetitio^s, and
rehersalls of things not aute^tike. which be in deed in the compass of the
mass, but are the outward garment, as it were of the body. Now, whereas you
say, that Pigghius has found out errors and abuses in the mass, it makes a
Catholic man to fear by and by, lest that, either by Pigghius opinion, Christ
his body were not really present, or were not to be adored, and the sign of
the cross were not to be used in the mass, or water and wine not to be
mengled, or the bread not to be taken in the hand of the priest, when he should
co^secrat, or least some other thing worth the talking of, were omitted or
abused. As for a versicle, or lesson, or some one ceremony, there may be cause
perchance to alter it, and yet the mass continue never the worser. And
therefore truly, M. Iuell seems unto me, not to play a bold part and upright.
for whereas properly (as he can not but know, except he be to much unlearned)
whereas I say, the mass is properly the sacrifice of the new law, what a mass
is.
in the which Christ his very own body is offered, by him self throwgh the
ministry of priests, unto God his father, for the purging, preserving, and
beutifying of his church: M. Iuell yet, setting him self to talk against the
mass. I will not speak (says he) of transubstantiation, A timorous bragging
and vain gloriouse weakness of M. Iuell.
of real presence, of sacrifice, I am content to disauantage my self at this
time in those things, but I will talk of the communion in both kinds, of the
Canon of the mass, and of private mass. As who should say, it is not good to
com before the face, but I shall anger them well inowgh, in tredding on their
heels. It is the fashion of merry men, when they are disposed to spend good
time idly, to find fault with the fashion of the apparel and gesture of them,
whose manners they can not reprove. And so in this place, if they have any
thing, to lay against the mass, let them reprove, either sacrifice or
presence, or one of the substantial things. But if they will make great bost,
of defacing the mass, and in effect meddle with nothing, but the circunstances
thereof, truly if this be allowed, then (say I) he is no honest man's and if I be
required to prove it, I will bid the judge to consider his crooked nose, or
halting leg. Which, as they are no good reasons, to disprove a man's honesty:
so does most of M. Iuell his talk, nothing perteine to the purpose. But M.
Iuell craftelie perceiving, that of congruence in speaking against the mass,
it should follow, that he did speak against the sacrifice and real presence,
No (says he) I will not talk of them, I will disauantage my self which is a
marvelous kind of simplicity, to seek a praise of courage and strength in very
fear and cowardnes. This is once certain, The sacrifice and presence
disproued, all the rest would quicklye fall. but communion under both kinds,
vulgar tongue, and taking away of private mass (as they call it) for a while
permitted: the mass in deed is never the worse, the communion in effect is
never the better. Yet, go to, let us consider, what he says against the
mass, even in those points, which he has his most advantage in, which all
(except adoration only) if he could disprove, he is nothing the nearer of his
purpose, which is to withdraw good Christians minds from the mass, and make
them hang upon the Communion. First as touching the strainge and unknown
tongue, M. Iuell.
which has been used in the mass. S. Paul his counsel in general is, that
what soever is done or said in the congregation, should so be done and said,
that the hearers may have comfort thereby, and yield thanks unto God, and say
Amen. It appears that the store is spent, when such arguments are browght
forth, or rather, that there was no store at all. For this objection of the
unknown tongue, might have been uttered over night at Euensong tide, or early
at matins in the morning, which both services are in the latin tongue, which he
terms an unknown tongue. But to keep it unto the mass, it is out of place
and fashion. And behold, he pretends to talk properlye against the mass,
and that he might so do the more properly, Note how properlye M. Iuel argues
against the Mass.
and the more to the purpose, he dispatched his hands of many other questions,
and disaua^taged him self, of speaking against the real presence and sacrifice,
as who should say, I will only meddle with the mass, and yet his first
objection against it, does serve first, against Euensong or matins, if we
should follow the order of time. And by this reason also M. Iuell, you might
have taken upon you to speak against the Pater noster. Again, this argument
is good in the country, not in the town, among the lay vnleardned people, and
not in the university among scholars, unto whom the mass is not in an
unknown tongue.

Also this reason may be allowed, on this side of the seas, and not beyond sea,
where the latin tongue in many places is commonly known. You have proved then,
that a simple English man, should not allow the mass, but all Latinistes and
scholars may use the mass still. And so the great labor, which you have taken
in reciting of S. Paul, S. Austen, and Justinian, is not against the mass,
but against her cote only. how think you (master mine) if I should preach among
the welshmen, and cry out to them, that the communion is nawght, and should
say, alas good people, you lack the fruit of our Lord his supper, and the
solacing of your selves in the remembrance of Christ his death, and so forth.
And if I did bring this principal reason for me, because it is in a tongue
unknown unto them, would you not account me frantik, to make such a do
against the communion, for the tongue only, in which it is written? would you
not answer, that the communion in it self is good, but this little missehap, is
leysurely to be amended? Even so then give sentence upon your own argument,
and say, objections against M. Iuell co^cernig his will. that al things done in
the church must be understood of the people.
that the mass may be good for all this, but only the tongue in which it is
used, is to be amended.

Before I go to another objection of his, I will make some against him my self,
upon the place of S. Paul, which he triumphs in. For if every thing is to be
done and said so, in the congregation, that all may understand what is said:
wherefore is case of the people, which knele in the body of the church? yea let
them harken at the chauncel door it self, yet they shall not the poorer, an
other. There would be no end of confusion, if we should provide, according to
this devise, that nothing be readen in the congregation, but that which shall be
heard and understood of all, which are present. But the Apostle his purpose was
of an other wisdom and discretion. For he, in the first unto the Corinthians,
speaking of the gifts of the holy ghost, and comparing them together:
corrects thereby a certain vain glory of the Corinthians, among whom, some
were proud, for the gift of tongues, and thowght it a ioyly matter, to speak
in a strainge language. But, says the holy Apostle, 1. Cor. 14
Follow ye spiritual things, and rather covet ye, for the gift of prophesying,
which was to expownd and open the Scriptures. And then afterward, he does not
dispraise the speaking with tongues, but he prefers the gift of
interpretation, and of preaching the Scriptures. which is most true in deed, as
S. Paul does prove it most manifestly by the similitude of instruments and
trumpettes.

For if one were never so cunnyng in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, and would show a
copy of those tongues, in open sermon and exhortation: an other were more
worthy praise, and should bring more profit unto the hearers, which knew but
his native tongue only, and would preach therein unto his co^trie men, then he
the thrice better learned man, whom none of the cumpanie could understand.
wherefore properly, against such vain glorious men, is the meaning of Saint
Paul. which seek rather to show their cunnyng in using of diverse tongues, then
to profitt the church of God, in expounding the scriptures in that tongue which
is known unto the audience. But if a parish priest say his service in the
Latin tongue, which none of the parish besides do understand: is this priest
in danger of S. Paul's words, which he speaks concerning the use of a
strainge language? no truly. For it is written in the same chapter of S. Paul,
that he which speaks with tongues, speaks not unto men, but unto God. 1.
Cor. 14
And again, He which speaks with tongues aedifieth him self. and again, if
one do bless and praise God with his tongue and voice, yea although his fellow
be not edified thereby, yet he him self does well in giving of thanks. Which
thing being so, they be to folish and scrupulous, which do admit no other
prayer books, but such as are only in the vulgar tongue. And where now is this
great fault? what so ever is done in the congregation (says M. Iuell) must be
so done, as the hearers may take comfort thereof. And yet, say I, one may be in
the congregation, and speak unto God, and praise God in a tongue unknown unto
other, and be out of blame therefore. As S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 14.
that he which speaks in tongues, aedifieth him self, and does well to give
thanks, altowgh another be not aedified. And in the end of the forsayed
chapter, if there be not an interpretor, let him which has knowledge in tongues,
hold his peace in the church, and speak unto him self, and unto God. But where
then is the fault? only in this truly, if in such matters, as appertein unto
the instruction of the people, an unknown strange tongue be used. as in
Sermons which are to be made unto them, why it is not necessary the people
understand all divine service.
and exhortations. As for mattins and mass, what so heinous crime is
committed, if the people understand not all things which are spoken? If the
commons of any shere, would obtain of the Counsel of the realm, a certain
benefit: and because it were to much, for all the whole shere to ride up to
London, if they did appoint out, half a skore of honest men, to travel in the
common case, would not the matter be browght unto a good end, except every
plowghman should hear, what those half skore did say unto the Counsel? Or if
among those half skore, two were chosen by consent of the rest, and those two
should declare their whole minds: were all the matter dasshed and marred, if
those two m^ns tales were not heard of the other eight? And yet, this is but a
temporal matter, and it is done by them which may err^ and browght before
them, which do not see the heart, but judge of the external words and deeds.
And yet no uproar is made, althowgh two men declare the message, and take to
their charge, the cause of the whole shere. How much more then, is all safe,
when the people send their priest to almightye God, and maintain him with
their costs, that he should apply their suit, and speak for them diligently?
Shall a Carter or a Gentleman, because he is best in the parish, shall he com
to the priest, and say, now Sir Ihon, let us hear, what ye pray. We will
understand whether you say well or no, we will prompt you if you say amiss,
and you shall not deceive us with an unknown tongue? Whereas if the priest were
never so unlearned, never so vnreuerent, never so (...), or distracted with
cares: the devotion of the people, and their good will, is considered of God.
and he for his infinite mercy, and wisdom, does take the priest his prayers in
as great and hearty a sense, as any of the parish does wish. These things being
true, is there any hastiness to have all the service in English? Does not god
consider the har^is, not the priest the embassadeur betwixt the people and God,
Chrisost. lib. 3. de Sacerd.
and the Angel or messenger of God unto the people? shall any more then Moses
go up to the hill to talk with God? Exodus 19.
should not the rest stand at the foot of the hill trembling and quaking, lest
perchance, they be to malepert and draw to nigh? O what a world have we? here
is a fault found, that the Canon of the mass is not in English, which (if it
were possible) for the reverence of our mysteries, should be in such a kind of
tongue, that none but priests might understand it, not because disdain is
taken, that lay men should understand as much as priests do, but because the
breaking of many arrogant fools heart, were to be provided for, in barring of
their curiosity. Yet, Let all things be done in the congregation, says M.
Iuell, that they may be understood of the people. if all were reasonable
men, yet for reverence sake, many things were to be reserved from them, or
rather for them. But now, some be unclean, before whom precious stones were not
to be cast, some be sucklinges, which can not yet receive hearty strong meat,
other be deintye, which can not away with common service, many more diuersites
there are to be found, and yet, as though all were one, without distinction of
age, time, or person, it is not well, except all things be done in a common
tongue.

But how is that proved? Mary because S. Paul says, that he had rather
speak five words, that other may be instructed thereby: then ten thousand in a
strange an unknown tongue. Truth it is, and yet S. Paul speaks not of all
service of the church, but of that part only, which apperteineth unto the
instruction of other, in which the strainge tongue is not allowed. For if the
speaking in tongues (according to S. Paul) is to be understood of daily
service and prayer, 1. Cor. 14.
why does he appoint two or three at the most to speak in tongues and one to
interpret and expound them, whereas daily service is and may be well done of
more then two or three skore? Again by their interpretation of speaking in
tongues, all service must be in the mother tongue, and women thereat may sing.
But S. Paul does so take speaking with tongues, that he says, let women hold
their tongues in the church. One thing they might say with good reason, that
the Epistle and Gospel, which are appointed for the instruction of the
people, might be readen in the mother tongue, if they were first well
translated. And yet also, even by Saint Paul, if the priest were able to
expound it afterward, he might read it in the mass time, in an unknown
tongue, to the common people. For S. Paul does not forbid to speak with
tongues, so that one be present which can expound them. Ergo say they, when
none does expound it, there is a great fault committed. Go to, let me grant,
that all is not so exact, but that heretics may peeke a quarrel. Who shall
amend that, which is not well? or who has made you controllers in the house of
God? why do ye not first, make a privy exposition of your conceit unto the
officers? why do ye not then, cast your heads together, and make a most
humble supplication? why go not you to Rome, and confer with Peter's successor,
as Paul a^^ended to Jerusalem to Peter, and the rest? Why do ye not pray to
God, that he will help, when no peaceable request can obtain? And if God, for
some cause known to him self, should differ his help, must you take the sword
into your hands, or vsurp the auctoritye of Christ his church, and make your
selves leutenants under God? And yet, it is no greater fault, to read the
Gospel in Latin unto English men, then to read the same in English unto
Welshmen. But you will provide hereafter, that Welshmen may have i^ in the
mother tongue, or cause them to learn English. How say you then to Irishe men,
Northen men, and Cornishmen? There is no remedy, but every spech, must have a
book of service, in there proper mother tongue.

But yet, in the mean time, do those quarters, which obey the Kings of
England, and understand not the English tongue, lack the fruit of their
devotion, whiles they be at service? And shall we make folish co^plaintes, and
exclamations, that the poor welshmen do lack the lively word of God, that
S. Paul's will is broken, that the order of the primitive church is neglected,
and so forth, as far as our rhetorike will serve us, because they understand
not what the priest says? Let it be an abuse, that the people three years
sense, did not understand the Gospel, but only stood up at it, and bowed
their knee at the name of Ihesus, and did conceive wonderful high things to
be underneath the Latin spech, and honored God in their hearts. How much better
is it now, Inconveniences by having divine service in English.
I pray you, when the simple folk, and those which are of the old making,
understand the sentences but by halfes, and either for lack of attention, or
dulnes of hearing, or smalnes of voice in the reader, do bear very little
away: and when those of the new making, do harken to maintain talk there
upon, or to appose the priest, or to judge the priest, or condemn the church
of God, or to glory in their knowledge, deceauing them selves and wening, that
they be able to expound the Scriptures, which are not able for lack of
humilitye, to hear them only, as yet. Charity without science, is more to be
allowed, then science, by which charity is greatly confounded.

Yet for all this, the Canon of the mass owght to be secret
let the epistle and the Gospel, be in the mother tongue, what has M. Iuell
to do with the Canon, In which, the priest does, (as Saint Chrisostom says)
stand before God, Chrisost. lib. 6. de Sac^rd.
as a suter for all the whole world. For whom, the people should pray, that
his service for them, might be acceptable, and that he may have good success?
What, if they understand not his spech all that while? The quire, according to
the Latin and Greek church, is occupied in singing the angelical hymn of
Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus. Whiles the priest, prays softly and closely at the
altar, the laitye were to be taught, what is the peoples office at the mass
time
to look for the consecrating of that body, which was borne, circumcided,
presented, with fast debated, scorged, torn, cruci^ied, raised up, and which
at lenghth ascended into heaven for their sakes. And that presence of Christ
once believed, they should need no English tongue, or sermon, for that time, to
bring him unto their remembrance, whom presentlye they know by the infallyble
faith of the church, to be upon the altar. What needs then any English at this
point? if one might speak with tongues of men and Angels: yet at the presence
of those mysteries, al tongues are to like.

And therefore good men forsake their tongues, and go to their heart, and there
speak they after a more excellent sort, then Latinistes, Grecians, or
Hebricians can do. Which spech of heart, (which sounds in the ears of God
almighty) good people had most of all, when they were lest busied, with the
spech of bodily tongues: with which, they uttered mysteries, and thanks, and
vows, and loves, and complaints, and requests, and all heavenly desi^es, and
devotions.

Out of the pulpet, they learned their fayth^ out of the church, they talked of
God: in the chauncell, they appointed priests and clerks to praise God, and
to pray for them. at the altar, there stood the priest alone, and there was
their Savior and ours, ready for them, And after this sort, service being
appointed, there remained for them, consideration of the things, which were by
external signs declared. The true religion consists not in tongues, which
tongues are necessary for learning of the faith, but faith ones received and
taken in the heart: the most perfect way afterward, of serving God, is, to
consider in our minds, the greatness of his benefits, which we comprehend by
faith. And by this reason one plain picture of the passion of Christ, shall
gene more devotion, unto him which already is faithful, Pictures are necessary
for the faithful people
then a most eloquent learned sermon of M. Iuell him self. Because, the end of
the sermon, is, to leave in my heart, and mind, a picture of Christ, and the
beginning of a picture, is, the Image of that, which I have printed in my
conceuing. so that I may say, where a preacher ends, there begins a
painter, and hearing of sermons, is for those which are to be instructed, and
beholdinges of external signs and pictures, is for them, which love in
silence and closenes, to practice their belief. Wherefore, there is no cause to
have the Canon of the mass in English: but cause there is, why the lay people
should be instructed, what to think, in time of the Canon. And, again I say, it
is no great matter, to hear what is therein said, but the only matter is, to
believe, that which therein is done. And, as at the beginning it was necessary,
to open my ears, that the word of God might enter by that way into my heart:
so the word ones by faith conceived, and the heart being now (throwgh the
goodness of the holy ghost) made as it were great with child there with all, I
shall more evidently, behold the verity of God, in those mysteries (of which
it is said, This is my body) if ears, and eyes, and all sense, were stopped:
then, if I should entend the proper actions of those senses. But S. Austen
says, in the prayers, M. Iuell.
which we make unto God, we must not chirpe like birds, but sing like men.
ergo we must not use an unknown tongue. Yea, with a further ergo, we must
learn to understand the English, which we read in the congregation, which
because thousands do not receive, therefore they be chirpers and not speakers.
Yet the English service does remain, although every one does not understand
it.

Justinian also a Christian Emperor, M. Iuell.
made a strait constitution, that the words of the ministration, should be
pronounced with open voice, that the people might say Amen. ergo the service
must be in English. yet for all that we say Amen, upon those words, which we
understand not, when there is no mistrust in the faith and honesty of the person
which pronounces them. And also, if the people said Amen, to the words of
the ministration, which I think (to speak more plainly) are the words of
consecration, then does it appear, that they confessed the words, which the
priest did speak, to be most true in them selves. so that, when the priest
pronounced these words, This is my body, the answering of Amen by the people,
did confirm it to be so in deed, and excludes quite all siguration and
signification of his body. Touching the second abuse of the communion, he
finds fault, that the Sacrament is not received in both kinds: of which
afterward we shall speak seperatly. And in the mean time this I say, that this
objection makes no more against the mass, then if I should disprove a good
dish of meat, not for any vnsa^orines therein, but because the good wife of the
house, for diverse causes does keep it away from the servants.

For what is this against the mass, that both kinds be not ministered, in the
which mass both kinds are consecrated, and both kinds may be received, if
the masters of the house, do think it good? Were the law of M^^^^s, or the.
Gospel of Christ, worthily to be reproved, because a few only were suffered,
to read the law and Gospel? does the Son lose any of his light, because the
clouds com betwixt our sight and him, and keep his beams away from us?
Suppose then, that it were most true (which is most false) that the Bishopes
and heads of the church, did rob the people of one part of the sacrament,
shall this robbery be objected against the mass it self, in which both kinds
are consecrated? I grant unto you, M. Iuell, that the sacrament has been
received, and may be received hereafter in both kinds, what do you conclude
thereupon? ergo there is an abuse in the mass. Why Sir, does the order of the
mass forbed the receiving o^der both kinds? are not both kinds consecrated
in the mass? do not the priests receive both? Yea, but the Bishopes and
priests deliver unto the lay people one kind only. They do it in deed, and
for just cawses. But a Bishopp, or priest, is not a mass, and the fault of men
is not the fault of the service. The fault of men is not the fault of the
service of God.
Reprove then the Bishopes, and speak not against the mass. and confess,
that the mass is autentike, and godly. but that the ministers do not follow
their book, which I say not, as thowgh the Bishops and priests were in deed
guilty, their doings being grownded upon most just causes: but to show, that
if there were any fault, it is yet more rhetorike then reason, to object that
against the mass, which apperteyneth only unto the men. The third point, that
I promised to speak of, M. Iuell.
is the Canon, a thing for many causes very vain in it self, and so uncertain,
that no man can redely tell, on whom to father it. Lo, what a fault here is,
no man can tell who made the Canon of the mass, ergo it is not to be credited.
As who might doubt, whethere the third and fowerth books of the kings were to
be credited, the proper author of them being unknown, or as thowgh they were
fautles which have denied S. Ihons revelations, and S. Paul to the Hebrews,
because it has been a question, whether they were the true authors of those
things. After like manner of folly it is said, no man can redely tell, what
year of Nero his reign, S. Peter did come to Rome, ergo he was never at Rome.
which liberty of babbling ones granted, there may be found which shall make
this quareling argument: and say, the histories do not agree, what year of
his age Christ suffered, ergo his passion is not to be believed. well yet, among
all them which are named authors of the Canon, take him which was farthest of
from Christ, and see, what a foul blank M. Iuells cause must have. Innocentius
tertius says, that it came from the Apostles, The Cano^ of the mass came from
the Apostles.
that is to high, thinks M. Iuell. Go to then, take him which comes lower.
that is S. Gregory the first. who living within six hundred years after
Christ, it follows well, that the Canon of the mass, is of great antiquity.
And now because you glory, that for six hundred years after Christ, there can
be found nothing, against your communion and religion, it is easy to nombre,
that the very Canon of the Mass, M. Iuell confuted by his own report.
which you speak most against, was in those days used in the church of
Christ. Wherefore if the Apostles made not the Canon them selves, yet are you
confounded, because they made it, which lived within six hundred year after
Christ, by which years, you are contented to be judged. But you will say, that
some write, how Gregorius the third, made the Canon, and that you believe, that
to be most true. In deed it is the property of your side to take all things at
the worst* for otherwise, why should you not believe rather, that one
Scholasticus made it before S. Grego^^e his time, as you understand him, and
other also before you, no evil men or protestants. Althowgh in deed it is
worth the considering, whether he meaned, some one certain learned man, whose
name should be Scholasticus, or else some of the Apostles and scholars of
Christ. Gregor. li. 7. epi. 63
for his words be these in his epistle and answer, made in the defense of the
order of the mass of his church, where concerning owr Lords prayer, why it is
readen after the Canon, It seems unto me an unseemly thing, (says he) that
we should say over the oblation, the prayer which Scholasticus, (or ^ls as I
would translate it) which the scholar made, and should not say over the body
and blood of owr Savior the very tradition (meaning the Pater noster) which
he him self did make. But how so eue^ it be, he which reports that Gregorius
tertius made the Canon, might well inowgh write so, according to his knowledge,
and when it is written by S. Gregory, that one Scholasticus, or a disciple of
Christ's, was the auctor thereof, this is nothing falsified by him, which wrote
afterward. And likewise it may stand, that it came from the Apostles, as
Innoce^tius tertius writes, for all that an other says, that it came from
Gregorius. except perchance you will say, that one may not read more then an
other, an one see further then an other, both speaking according to their
knowledge and euide^ces. But whosoever were the first deviser of it, it forces
not. says M. Iuell. Yes mary Sir, for this being proved by more auctorites of
writers, that the Canon did come from the Apostles, or that it was exta^t
within. vjC. years after Christ, the^ it can be disproued to be of so great
antiquity, great sham it is for us, not to maintain so ancient an order of
the mass, and great forgetfulness in you, M. Iuell, to jest at that, which is
found to have been received, within the compass of six hundred years after
Christ, Note the uncertainty of M. Iuels mind where to find it.
of which years you make your self so sure, that for so long space you say,
all went with you without exception. But now, if it forces not who made the
Canon (whereas before you made the matter so great, that it was against the
scriptures, because of S. Paul, which says, Sciocui credidi, I know who^ I
have believed, as though Catolikes had not a church to beloue, but should hang
upon the report of historiographers) well seeing then now, it forces not who
made the Canon, what fault have you found in the substance and meaning of the
Canon?

First the priest in the Canon desires God to bless Christ's body, M. Iuell.
as though it were not sufficient lie blessed all ready. First you make a
shameful he, that the priest desires God to bless Christ his body. Bear it
well away, I pray you, and remember it that I charge you, with making of an
open lie, even at your first beginning which you make against the Canon. It is
not I say, in owr Latin and common Canon, that the priest desires God the
Father, to bless Christ his body. And I dare swear for it, althowgh you may
do much in Sarum, that no missall after the use of Sarum, has the like as you
do speak in the beginning of the Canon. Also if it should be said, so, as
you report, in any part of the whole Canon, can you prove that the Catholics
have prayed so, for this cause, as thowgh Christ his body were not
sufficiently blessed alreadi^? What a Ioannes diuisar be you, to make so
wicked and vile dis^urses, upon that which either is not said at all, or has been spoken with much reverence, and great humility of the parties. In deed,
such like words, have been used of the Grecians, Vide Bessanionem Card. de
sacr. ^uch.
even after the consecration perfected, as appears by their wrytinges. But
what cause allege they for it? Marie, thos^, (say they) which are in great
desire of any thing, use to speak of that which is most sure, as thowgh they
were not sure of it, nothing thereby mistrusting the effect, but declaring the
vehemency, of their desire. As the Prophet Dauyd, when he had said: Psalm. 4.
God my ryghtuousnes heard me when I called unto him, yet in the same very
Psalm and verse following, he adds, Have mercy upon me O Lord, and hear my
prayer. Theodoritus in hunc Psalm. 4.
Lo says Theodoritus, The just man is not satisfied in prayer, but making
his petitions, and obteyning them, yet continues ^e still in prayer. by which
you see, how far a Christian and good commentator would be, from such deuyses,
as you M. Iuell do make upon holy sayings. But the Latin Canon, has no such
words at all. neither before nor it after consecration, that (I mean) God
should bless Christ his body. In the beginning of the Canon the priest
desires God, to accept and bless those gifts, and presents, and sacrifices,
or oblations of bread and wine, which may receive increase of sanctification,
and are in deed made most holy^, when they are turned in to the body and
blood of Christ. Also, after consecration, the priest desires God, to look
me^cifullie down, upon those pretiouse things, which are there present. But
how? not as they are in them selves mos^ acceptable, but as they are offered.
for who can say, that his heart is chaste and pure? and who knows, whether God
will not punish us, when we are not prepared rightly, to do that office.
Considering therefore, the holiness of God, and vileness of man, the church
desires God, to accept owr offering of Christ^ body, owr Lord* or (in other
words to say it) to accept that body and those gifts offered. But of that
place M. Iuell speaks afterward. I conclud therefore upon his present words,
that he makes an open lie and mani^est. And if himself was not the maker of
it, let him tell, of what author he borrowed it. Further the priest says, M.
Iuell.
that he offers and presents up Christ unto his father. True it is, and
that you may wonder the more, not the priest only, but all the whole church
does offer Christ daily to his father. For as concerning the priest, either
t^ere is no priest among us at all, or we be no sinners, or we must have a
daily sacrifice, to make our God favorable unto us. A sac^ifice, not of thanks
giving only, which the law of nature teaches us to offer to our chief Lord
and Creator, neither of calfes and sheep, as the old law did appoint it, but a
sacrifice proportionable to a new law, and a sacrifice worthy and meet for a
new testament, of Ihesus Christ. What say you then, good Sir, if the priest of
the new law and testament offers Christ unto his father? it is, say you, open
blasphemy. So say they, which worship false Gods, which they have made to them
selves, by licentious understanding of the Scriptures, and by cutting, hewing
and pecing together of the verity. For wherein consists this blasphemye? do
you, which are of the church by outward show of your degree, and manner of
behavior, think priesthod to be a pelting base office, as the worldly people
do? But Chrisostom says, Libr. 3. de Sacerd^ti^
That priesthod so far passes kingdom, as the soul passes the body: and we
ought to reverence priests, not only more then kings, and princes, but to set
them forth with more honor then our own fathers. Or think you, that Christ in
his last supper, did not of^er up him self to his father? But the Prophet
says, yea rather God, not only says it, but binds it with an oath, and
it shall not repent him thereof, Psalm. ^09.
that Christ is a priest for ever, according to the order of Melchisedech. Can
you say for all this, Priests do^ ^^^er Christ.
that priests have no authority to offer him? But Chrisostom replieth saying,
The holy oblation whether Peter or Paul do offer it or any other priest, In
moral. Ho^^l. 2. in. 1. cap. 2. epist. ad Timot.
of what so ever goodness he be, is the same, which Christ did give, unto his
disciples, and which priests even now to these days, do consecrate. Cap. 10.
ad Hebr.
And S. Ambrose, He is (says he) our Bishop, which offered the sacrifice,
which purged us, the same we also now offer up, which then being offered, can
not be consumed. Wherefore, seeing that priests, how so ever they be in their
lives, are honorable for the sacrifice which they offer: And whereas Christ did
offer up him self, according to the order of Melchisedech in his last supper:
and thirdly whereas priests do the same very thing which our master did before,
it is ignorance not to know these things, or dissimulatio^ to pass by them,
it is impiety to speak against the church, and it is blasphemy in deed to
revile or taunt at Christ his bodi. But yet M. Iuel M. Iuell.
will prove his saing. For contrariwise, Christ presents us, and makes us a
sweet oblation, in the sight of God his father. Ergo (says he) the priest
offers not Christ. which is open blasphemye, or else he should say, that he
understands not the matter. For what contrariety is between Christ, See what a
reason M. Iuell brings.
and his church, or between the head and the body? All this which I shall say, is
true. Christ offers up us, Christ is the oblation it self, the church
offers Christ, and Christ does offer his church, and in all this, there is no
contrariety, witness hereof is S. Austen saing, Cap. 20. lib. 10. de ciuit. Dei
Because of the form of a servant which he ^oke, Christ is also a priest, him
self being the offerer, and him self the oblation. Of which thing, he would the
daily sacrifice of the church to be a Sacrament. whereas he is the head of her
the body, and she the body of him the head, she as well being accustomed to be
offered by him, as he accustomed to be offered by her. So that every man may
see, whith what lerning, and truth the Canon hitherto has been reproved. But
let us consider the rest. More over, M. Iuell.
the priest desires God to accept the body of his son Ihesus Christ* as he
once accepted the sacrifice of Abell, or the oblatio^ of Melchisedech. And
think we, that Christ the soune of God stands so far in his fathers
displeasure, that he needs a mortal and miserable man, to be his spokes man,
to procure him favor? Have you seen a man sometimes, for wantones, or dronkenes,
or plain (...), to fight against his own shadow. (...) M. Iuel here, streketh
that kind of men which I have not read of. and none, I think, which believes in
Christ, did ever dream, that his father was angry with him, and that he
needs to have, not only a mortal miserable man, but any most glorious
creature to speak for him. Yet this preacher so sowndeth, as though all the
whole number of Catholics, which these nine hundred years (by his own
confession) used the Canon, have prayed to God, for Christ his soul. Now, God
have mercy on his soul, which so loudly belieth, so many blessed and learned
men. This objection has in part been answered before, yet I say now again,
that the church desires God to look down upon his sons body, and to accept
it, either for vehemence of love and devotion, Psalm. 49.
VVy do thou declare my righteousness, and take my testament in thy mouth?
Which men, well might pray, after this sort, which M. Iuel so greatly wondreth
at, and say, Lord behold with a merciful countenance the words of thy own
Gospel, and turn not away they face from thy own testament. And so likewise
that which follows in the Canon, that God would accept the sacrifice of his
sons body, as he accepted Abell, Abraham, or Melchisedechs oblations, it is
not spoken, as M. Iuel faineth, as thowgh the body of Christ were to be
received, no otherwise, then sheep or lamb, and bread or wine, but the church,
declares therein her wish, that, as concerning her service, not as concerning
the price of the things, offered in the old time and these days of grace, it
would please God, to receive at her hands, the sacrifice of Christ his body, so
thankfully, as he received the oblations of those good fathers, And that her
service in this part, may be no worse unto her, Iuell plays the Ethny^^es part
then those of old time were to Abell, Abraham, and Melchisedech. But let us
now consider by this objection, what one may do, which is disposed, and what
evil example is given unto Ethnikes by the lokes of Christians, to speak
against the Christian faith. Arise o Lord, Psalm. 43.
(says the Prophet) why do then sleep. Remember David, o Lord, Psalm. 131.
(says the same Prophet) and all his gentleness. and that David is Christ.

And in an other place of the Psalms, it is written, Psalm. 77.
that God did arise like one which had been a sleep, and like a valiant which
had well dronk of wine. Yea it is expresslie said for Christ, Psalm. 19.
I pray God to hear the, in the time of thy tribulation. and so forth thorowgh
the whole Psalm. Shall Christians in these places, play the Ethnikes parts,
and ask, whether God be a sleep or forgetful, or well tipled? what do they
mean, which pray to obtain any thing, for Christ his sake? do they not say in
effect all this, behold, o Lord, how thy blessed soun take flesh upon him for
our sakes, remember his obedience, remember the scourges, the pricks of
thorn, the nails, the cross, the death which he suffered, remember and do
not forget? how deep is S. Bernard, and S. Bonauentura, and thousands of
blessed men, in the co^sideratio^s of our Savior his passion? what
lamentations? what questions? what wisshes? what thoughts have they? in
co^secratione cer^i Paschalis.
O blessed fault, says S. Gregory, which deserved such a redemer. what say
we, to the ancient hymns of the church, which are song in the lent? the sense
I remembr^ although I keep not all the words, Bow down thy bows o tall
high tree,
and slake thy hard stiff grain,
That with soft stretching his body,
thou ease the high kings pain.
what place is left for the fong of the three children, All the works of our
Lord bless our Lord? Psalm. 148.
And the Psalm. Praise ye our Lord, which is in the heavens. in which Psalms,
son and moon, thunder, lightning, hail, snow, hills, fildes, rivers, seas,
all beasts of the earth, all fowls of the air, and (to be short) all
creatures are called upon, to praise God? may you, wisely now, object and say,
the moon can not hear me, the wild beasts be never the sooner obedient for
me, the birds will sing no louder for all me, with princes of the earth what
is there to do for me? young m^n, and virgins, old men with younglinges let them
praise the name of our Lord, and who made me an officer to command so many? I
will go no further, but briefly, will I conclude, there was never kind of
argument more pernicious, How pernicious it is, godly men's devotions to be
examined and judged by worldlinges.
then this one: to examine the devotions and prayers of good men, by the rules
of worldly ciuilitye, and to jest at the homlines and hartines of Catholics,
when they speak to God, as one frind would unto an other familiarly, or when
they speak, according to the world, childishely, or according to the nature of
things, absurdly, Off all which points you may find examples in the book of
Cantica Canticorum, if ever you have either read them, or can with all your wit
understand them, and then to bring those sayings before the people, to be
judges thereof, which have no taste almost of heavenly things, it is most vain
and unreasonable.

Besides this he dosireth God, M. Iuell.
that an Angel may come and carry Christ his body away, into heaven. What a
fable is this, that Christ should be born upon an Angel, and so carried up away
into heaven? It is besides the person of him, which has been brought up among
learned men, and for opinion of learning and gravity, is called a Bishop, so to
dissemble, and so to counterfaict the vice, in making of sport, with a fable
of his own. And first the Canon, is not truly Englished in this part which
he iesteth at. For the words of the Latin Cano^ be these, M. Iuells false
reporting.
Iube haec perferri, per manus Sancti Angeli tui, in sublime altar tuum. which
is to say, command o Lord these things to be brought, by the hands of thy
holy Angel, in to thy high altar. Yet M. Iuell to make more sport, englisheth
perferri, to be carried away, not to be brought or carried up, as the truth is.
And because the Canon makes mention of the Angels hands, he fableth, as
though Christ should be carried upon an Angels back, or shoulders, or as though
the Catholic did mean, that Christ should be borne upon an Angels back, and
carried up away into heaven. But what a fable is this, says he? for soth a very
folish gross fable in deed, invented by the devil, and uttered by Melhoserus,
and translated in to english by M. Iuell. A folish gross fable I say, because
the church of God has no such carnal base, understanding of the place. But
desires God, that by the ministry of Angels, which wait upon us and his
mysteries, he would command the body of his soune our Lord, to be carried up,
not according to the changeing of place, but according to his gracious
acceptance of our service, in to his high altar, which is heaven.

For, thinks M. Iuell, that when the Angels do carry up, good men's alms
deades, or their prayers, or fastinges, or tears, or any such like, in to the
sight of God, that they make those things up in fardels, and cast them upon
their backs, and make have to heaven ward, and there undo their packes? Of
spiritual things man must speak and think spiritually
for the word of carrying up, sounds in the ears of a carnal man, as though
there were changeing of place there about, or heuines of a burden, or use of
arms, sholders, or back, or some stay upon which the carriage might rest. which
members are not in Angels, and yet the scripture speaks, after the fashion of
men, testifying our alms deeds, fastinges and prayers, to be carried up, before
the face of God in heaven, and presented before his majesty, by the ministry
of Angels. now if one did not understand the sense of those words rightly, it
were wisdom for him, to hold his peace, rather then to utter his grossenes, in
understanding them so basely and folishelye. Especially, whereas Saint
Ambrose, so blessed and learned a doctor, has like words unto these, which M.
Iuell contemns, saing in his book, which he made of the sacraments: Lib. 4.
de Sac. cap. 6.
We beseech the, and pray the, that thou will receive this oblation, up to they
high altar, by the hands of thy Angels, as thou have vouchsafed to receive
the gifts of thy just servant Abell, and the sacrifice of our patriarch
Abraham, and that which the high priest Melchisedech offered up unto the. Lo
Sir, if it please you, to show the finenes of your wit, you may find fault
with Saint Ambrose, and ask of your audience, more folish then your self.
what a tale is this, that the oblation of the church, should be borne upon an
Angel (on pick pack perchance) and so carried up away, into heaven? but see
the good nature of the man? he confesses his folies, and says, he would not
stand so long upon them, if force drove him not there unto.

But what force trow ye? The Protestants preach to please there audience.
I think (because a wanton audience is most delited with jesting against other,
and because a gross audience, conceiueth things spoken after a carnal sort,
and thinks that preacher which so does, to be a very (...)) that, to serve
his audience, he could not leave of, so plausible a matter. Therefore says he
(after he had done his worst) I leave to speak farther of the Canon, M. Iuell.
giving you occasion by these few things, the better to judge of the rest.
Which words I note, because in deed as the whole Cano^ might have been
mistrusted, if any certain faults had been noted in it: so when with all his
power and cunning, he has spoken the worst, and yet has reproved nothing, but
his own misunderstanding, an imagination, which he fained to be in the Canon,
therefore we may judge all well of the rest, when no evil is found in those
points, which he took to be farthest from the best. The ^owerth matter that
remains to be tow^hed, M. Iuell.
is, the adoration. It is agreeable with the rest of their doctrine, and it
follows co^sequentlye, that no body of Christ being in the Sacrament, there
should be no adoration used at all. So that the very sure way to disprove
adoration, were, to disprove the real presence. Which because they can not
do, against so manifest words of our Savior, therefore how so ever the matter
of the presence does stand, yet will they assaye to take away the worshipping
or adoring of Christ in the Sacrament. But that is done with so light and
vnfytt arguments, that they may serve, by changeing of a few words, against
all kind of orders in the church, and consequentlye of owr faith. For what is
it that you say, good master mine against adoration? Christ (says he) which
knew best what owght to be done, M. Iuell.
when he ordained and delivered the Sacrament of his body and blood, gave no
commandment that any man should fall down to it, and worshipp it. Ergo, yowr
argument is this, The Protestants condemn all voluntar^e service of God.
that what so ever is not commanded to be done, is to be left undone. And
where then are all customs which you have set so much by, as it appears by
the first side before yowr Sermon? Also where is it in all Scripture, that
Christ commanded his Apostles to fawle down and worship him, him self? The
Magians, S. Peter as he was in the boat together with Christ, Matthew. 2. Matthew.
14. Matthew. 20. Matthew. 15. 10. 9.
the mother of S. John and S. James, the straynge woman the Syrophaenissa, the
blind man, who^ Christ healed by tempering of his spettle and earth together,
Luc. 24.
the Apostles after the resurrection: all these fell down and worshipped
Christ. but where read we, that he commanded them so to do? Is there no
voluntarye service of God, but that al must be obtained by way of
commandment? It was inowgh (I trow) that he said to his disciples, An
argument of authority negatiuely is na^ght and protestantlyke.
take, eat, this is my body, which shall be delivered for you. For to doubt
thereof, whether Christ his body were to be honored, it was for them which
doubted, whether he were Christ or no. Christ did bid his Apostles to take and
eat, but he did not expressly command them, to open their mouths, to soften
the meat in the mouth, to let it down in to the stomach. for what need was
there so to do, whereas he, which lycenseth me to eat, lycenseth me also to use
all those means, by which eating is performed. So in like manner, owr Sauyor
said, This is my body, and this being received and believed of Christians, to
what purpose was it to say, Arise Sirs, and fall down before yowr God. or to
say, Adore me in yowr heart. When the king does show him self in his robes and
croune, or when he would in the dark, utter him self by speaking unto the
lords of the court, is it to be required, that he must say precisely, putt of
yowr cappes unto me, and bow down yowr knees, or else does not every
obedyent heart straytewayes geaue all reverence dew unto his prince, withowt
further warning. By like reason then, the king almighty has spoken the word,
This is my body, by which word, they which are accustomed unto his voice, are
as sure of his presence, as if they should see him visiblie, and shall we, if
we are of the king his court, require yet to here and see more in this case,
and may we wonder at others folyes, which make low courtesy, where as they
had no commandment? And yet, M. Iuell, is so delited, in this kind of
argument, which proceeds by negatiues, that he goes fu^ther therein, and
says, S. M. Iuell
Paul took the Sacrament at Christ his hands, and as he had taken it, he
delivered it to the Corinthians, and never willed adoration, or Godly honor to
be done unto it. To which I answer, with askyng this question, whether S. Paul
commanded us to stand or kneel, to lie a long at the communion, or sytt
down? Truly of these things there is no word or commandment, what then?
may any man tumble at the communion, or lean upon his breast or upon one of
his elbowes, or do what please him, because nothing is appointed by S. Paul,
as concerning adoration?

The English co^municantes them selves, do use to kneel (except perchaunse in
some very stiff hearted men, there be no kneeling at all, because they stand in
their own conce^tes) But Christ and S. Paul commanded not kneeling, and yet
Christ knew best what he had to do, and S. Paul delivered that which he
received of Christ. what strength then has this kind of argument, to say,
Christ or S. Paul commanded not these things, The Protestants argument.
ergo they are not to be kept or believed at all?

Truly it has so little against the Catholykes, that the argument is flatlye
denied. So great for all that, against the protestants: that it shameth all
the order of their communion, as concerning apparel, place, standing,
kneeling, confessyng, thanks giving, and such like. Which all, I do not say
or think, to be repugnant with Scripture, but I say, that as concerning the
order which there is used, there is no commandment in Scripture, and no
comm^undement being in Scripture of it, there is no just cause or reason,
wherefore it should be regarded. Such is the protestants logyk. Well, if this
argument which runs by negatyues, had been good, the authorytie and name of
Christ or Saint Paul in that behalf had been sufficient: but now it is most
weak and simple, and not worth the bringing, and yet M. Iuell will be copious
in it, saying: The old Doctors, and holy fathers of the Church, M. Iuell.
Saint Cyprian, Saint Chrysostom, Saint Ambrose, Saint Hierome, Saint
Augustyn, and others that received the Sacrament at the Apostles hands, and,
as it may be thowght, continued the same in such sort as they had received it:
never make mention in any of all their books, of adoring or worshipping the
Sacrament. ergo etc.

This is a nowghtye lying argument. Nawghtye, by cause, if in all their works,
they never do speak of adoring the Sacrament, that does not disprove the
adoration, which Christians have ever used. And lying, because in deed, they
make mention in their works, of adoration. Never, is a long day (the proverb
is) and also. Never, is a long way. And that those holy fathers in all their
works (which be so many) did never make mention of adoring the Sacrament, it
is largelye and lowdelye spoken. It would have eased me very much, if M. Iuell
in speaking this great word (Never) and (in all their books) would have named
the books, which he takes to be the proper works of those holy fathers. For
perchaunse he takes no more for Saint Cyprian, Saint Ambrose, Saint
Chrysostom, Saint Hierome, and Saint Augustynes works: then him self has
readen and allowed. And by that way, he may quickly make good his word, if he
shall according unto his pleasure, deny that book to be Saint Ambrose, or
Saint Augustynes, in which any mention is made of adoring the Sacrament. But
if he will be tried by the consent of Christendom, or by that severe and hardye
notar of the holy fathers, Erasmus: quickly shall I prove, that either M.
Iuell has not readen all the doctors (which is in him lykelye,) or that he
has not well remembered them in all places (which every man does, as I suppose,
generally,) or that wittingly he belyeth them, (which sometimes is done
lowdely in their pulpites) or that adoration of the Sacrament, may be observed
and found in holy Fathers wrytinges, (which is quyte and clean contrary unto,
Never to be mentioned in them.)

There be extant whole treatiseis, of excellent learned men, Adoration dew to
the Sacrament
as concerning the proof and testymony of worshipping the hol^e Sacrament, but
one place or two shall be as good for my purpose as a hundred, where crakes be
made, that no mention of adoration, can ever be fownd in any one place of old
doctors. S. Chrysostom therefore in the Chrysostom. ^o. 83. in Mat.
.83. homylie upon S. Matthew says: We are fed with that thing, which the
Angels seeing do tremble at, and can not look upon it without ^ear, because of
the brightness which reboundeth from it. Again the same blessed Doctor in
the.24. Chrysostom. ho. 24. in.10. cap. Matt.
homylie upon the.10. chap^ter of the first to the Corinthians shows at
large, that, at the least we should do toward the Sacrament of the altar,
that which the Magians did, toward ow^ Sauyor lying in the maynger, which did
come unto him, with great reverence and horror. Which example he repetyng in an
oration of his upon S. Philogo^ius, says, Chrysostom in Ora. in Philogonti^n.
As thou do receive and intertayn God here (menyng in earth) with much
honor, so will ^e receive the there (vndowbtedly in heaven) with much glory.
Li 3. ca. 12. de ^p. Scto^.
Likewise S. Ambrose most plainly, reasonyng with him self, how the Prophet
Danyd in the Psalms wills us to worshipp the footestole of God, which by the
interpretation of an other Prophet, Esa. ca. 66
is called the earth: at the length he concludes: Therefore by the footstool
let the earth be understood, and by the earth the flesh of Christ, which also
at this day we worship in owr misteryes, and which the Apostles did worship in
owr Lord Ihesus. Mark the word, which Saint Ambrose has, That to this day,
we worsh^pp Christ in owr mysteries. Because M. Iuel will have us to ascend up
(I can not tell how) in to heaven, to worshipp Christ there, as thowgh there
were no ^ote stool of his, that is to say, no flesh of his in earth. For where
as S. Augustyne has these words manifestlye, ( Christ took earth of earth:
for flesh is of the earth, and he took flesh of the flesh of Marie: and because
he walked here in that very flesh, and gave that very flessh unto us to be
eaten for owr health, and no man eats that flessh, except first he adore and
worship it: it is found out, how such a fotestoole of owr Lord may be adored,
and that we not only do not o^^end in worshipping it, but in not worshipping
of it we do offend) M. Iuell does expound him after this sort, that the eating
of him, M. Iuell.
and worshipping of him, must join together, but we eat him in heaven (says
he) ergo we must worshipp him there. But how much better does it follow, we eat
him on earth, ergo we must worship him on earth, where we eat him: or else to
join both sayings together, we eat him in heaven and in earth, ergo we
must worship him in heaven and in earth. For as concerning those testymonyes,
which are alleged by M. Iuell, M. Iuell.
that we must lift up owr hearts. And, If we be risen again with Christ, Coll.
3. Philip. 3.
let us seek those things which are above. And again, Owr conversation is in
heaven. By which testimonies he would conclud, that Christ his body is to be
sowght for, only in heaven: verily, as the words do sownd diuinelie and
truly, so is the conclusion inferred very madly and miserably. Because those
textes do no more disprove, Christ his body to be on earth reallye, then they
prove owr bodies to be now reallie in heaven. As in this short example. Owr
conversation is in heaven. says S. Paul, and yet, when he spoke those
words, was he not on the earth, in presence of body? Does M. Iuels heart go
out of his body, when he does lift it up to God? Or when I am commanded to
seek those things which are above, must I make a ladder for my body, to
clyme up to heaven?

All blessed men do counsel, the receauers of the Sacrament, to ascend in
their heart, to look up to heaven, to worshipp Christ sittyng at the right hand
of the Father. Which, they do not therefore counsel, that we should not believe
owr Savior to be present in his mysteries: but because they covet to withdraw
our imaginations from all earthlines, and to give us warnyng, that we do not
make rekonyng to see with our e^e, or perceive by taste or smell, or grosslye to
conceive by any bodilye sense, the manner, of Christ his being in the
Sacrament. For even then also, when owr Savior hanged visiblie upon the cross,
it might have been well said to the faithful, lift up yowr hearts, and ascend
with your minds, in to heaven, not fastenyng your eyes so much upon this
present form, most pytiefull, but rising with yowr faith, to apprehend that
infinite majesty, and divinity, and wysedom, and power of Christ, which is
the glory of his Father in heaven, and comfort of all the holy Angels, and
thus presently yet now, is tormented and defaced upon the earth. As S.
Augustyne says very wys^lye in the Psalm which I have fornamed, entreatyng
upon the adoration of Christ his flessh: It is the spirit, which quickens,
the flessh profyteth nothing. Aug. in Psalm. 98.
And therefore when thou do bow down thy self, and ^al prostrate before
any such earth, (meaning the flessh of Christ) look not upon it, as it were
earth, but look upon that ^oly one, whose fotestoole it is, which thou do
worshipp. So that the body of Christ, being present upon the altar, because we
are all very prone to gross cogitations, and sensible loves, therefore may it
be said most justly unto us, lift up yowr hearts, go up toward heaven with
them, there let yowr thowghtes be occupied. As who should say: because (good
people) you here, that this is his body, and you see it yet in a simple form,
as lying upon an altar, and carried in men's hands, The tru^ meaning of lift
up yowr hearts.
broken also and divided, you may perchau^se, have to base and low cogitations.

But, I tell you, ascend in yowr minds, dilate yowre hearts, and enlarge yowre
thowghtes. This is his body, in deed, as he has spoken himself the word,
which can not be false, and this is his blood.

But whose body and blood? lift up yowr hearts now, The body of the second
person in trinite, the only begotten of the Father, the maker of the world,
the wisdom of God, the ouerlooker of all creatures, good and badd, angels
and devils, men, and beasts, the sercher of owr^ hearts, the disposer of
times, the judge of the world, the felicytie and joy of the good, the terror
and fear of the condemned. Lift up yowr hearts I say. Think you that here
is present, a body or flessh only? And that, as in diseases some whott meats
do cumfort the body, so that you have but a lively piece of his ^lessh only?
Or else, do you conceive the matter after this sort, that as one f^nde sends
to an other a morsel of good meat, which the other had not: that so Christ in
this banquet gives unto every man a taste, or else a portion only of his
precious body, as it were a most excellent gift, but yet baser, then his soul
and divinity? O, lift up your hearts. You must not seek Christ so grosselye,
look not to have him so upon the earth. Christ is one perfect person, God and
man, maker of all times, and borne according to flesh in time, everlasting
life, and yet putt to most shameful death, reignyng at the right hand of God
his father, and present among men upon the altar. Stick not therefore I say unto
the body, let not your thoughts and desires rest in the flessh only: but go
hyer by your faith, and consider that blessed soul of his, so chaste, patient,
wise, charitable, bright, glorious, and yet hyer and hyer, in to the very
heavens, and above all heavens, beholding and wondering, how the maker of them
all, whom thousand thowsandes, and ten hundred thousand thousands do wait
upon: is present here for us, to be received of us, and to incorporate us in to
him selue.

This lo^ have I spoken more largely, because M. Iuell has no other way, to
answer S. Augustine, but to declare (as we deny it not unto them, but which
they have learned of us) that we must ascend with our hearts, in to heaven, and
there honor Christ. Which being most true, and grawnted unto him, he does
untruly and ignorantlye to say, that Christ is not to be honored also in earth,
in the sacrament of his very body and blood, because he is to be honored in
heaven. For we do not divide Christ, and make one Christ to be in heaven, an
other to be on earth, one body in heaven, an other in earth: but men worshipp
him in heaven one God, and the Angels worshipp him in the Sacrament here on
earth, (as S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. lib. 3. de Sacer.
proves,) And men worship him, as he lies upon the altar: and Angels worship
him, as he sits at the right hand of God his father. And so both Angels and
men, Angels and catholic m^n worship Christ both in earth and in heaven.
do worshipp Christ, both in earth and in heaven, and that, not with two
kinds of honors, one for holy days, an other for working, but with one salfe
same honor and worship. The protestants would be seen to say much, when they
appeal so often to heaven, and receive Christ, sitting at the right hand of
God, as who should say, the papists minds, go no hyer then the priests
hands, when he shows the Sacrament unto them. And when they have supposed,
that this is true, then lo they triumph, in recityng S. Chrysostom, S.
Augustyne, S. Hierome, and then are they sorye, that old holy fathers be not
regarded. But the answer unto them, is ready, that they have sa^ed therein
very well, but nothing to the purpose. for Catholykes do believe, that they
must lift up their hearts, and seek for Christ in heaven, and worship him at
the right hand of his Father^ but protestants deny, that Christ is reallie
present in the Sacrament, or that he is to be worshipped therein: which I shall
disprove, a little more.

S. Augustyne, August. in Psalm. 21.
upon the.21. Psalm: The rich of the earth, (says he) have eaten also the
body of their Lord, but they have not been fulfilled, as the poor men were,
in following of Christ, That Christ is to be adored in the Sacrament
but yet they did worship him. Now, M. Iuell confesses, that where we eat
Christ, there we worship Christ. ergo these rich men, of whom the Prophet and
S. Augustyne speak, which did eat Christ on the earth, did worshipp him also
on the earth, for in heaven they did not eat him, because they followed him
not, as the poor did, which worthelie did receive him. Again, how could the
gentyles have misreported the Christians in the primitive church for honoring
of Ceres and Bacchus (the false gods over bread and wine) except they had
given some argument thereof in deed, Aug. li. 20 co^tr. ^austum, ca. 13
by reason of honoring Christ in the Sacrament? For if an Ethnyk should behold a
Christian, after grace said, to eat his meat sauorlie and soberlye, he could
not think, that he worshipped Ceres and Bacchus therein. But when the panymes
hard say, that the Christians did eat the flesh of their God, and when they
could see nothing but bread and wine, which were received with all reverence
and devotion: they might not say, that is was only bread, because of the
honor, which at the presence thereof, the Christians exhibited unto it: and
they could not say, it was the body of Christ, because, that being yet
infydells, they were not instructed in owr mysteries: it remained then, to
think and to report, that undoubtedly, Christians did worshipp Ceres and
Bacchus. Which proves, that the Sacrament was then adored and worshipped.
Besides this, it is gathered out of the same blessed Doctor, that, In lib.
sint. prosperi.
we do honor things invisible, I mean flessh and blood, under the form of
bread and wine, which we see. And we do not take these two kinds, after like
sort, as we did before the consecration: whereas we confess faythfullie, that
before the consecration, it is bread and wine, which nature formed, but after
the consecration; it is the flessh and blood of Christ, which blessing has
hallowed. But yet for all those testimonye, what says M. Iuell? It is a very
now deuyse, M. Iuell.
(quod he) and which as it is well known, came but lately in to the church,
about.iij. hundred years past, Hono^us being Bishop of Rome, and commanding
the Sacrament to be li^^ed up, and the people reverently to bow down to
(...). After him Vrbanus the fowerth appointed (...) holydaie of Corpus Christ,
etc. Thre^ hundred years are, (...) but, a very little (...) with ^ow; when we
^alke of the adoration of the sacrament but if we come to the glorious setters
furch of the new fownd Gospel, thirty years lacking (...) ( (...)
computationem Eccelesi^ Anglica^^) do ^^^ke a grea^^ antiquity. And then,
(...), or after him Zuinglius, must be named fathers and Apostells, when very
blessed Bisshoppes, Honorius, and Vrbanus, whom all Christendom assented unto,
are named contemptuously as who should say, I knew them, whem they did stand
withowt the church doors, and could not read any letter in the b^ke. But go
to, when Honorius did command the adoration of the sacrament, did any country
of all Christendom, or City or godly man, speak against it? Or when S.
Vrbane appointed an holidaye for it, is it written or extant by any argument,
that it was refused whi the truth should not be suppressed, is it possible,
that withowt open co^tradiction, (...)
a false honor of God, should be received among Christians, therough the whole
world? if the adoration of the Sacrament were in deed blasphemous being so
received, as it was in all Christendom, so many people runnyng headlong (as
you ween) in to their damnation, did the holy ghost stir up no one good man to
call them back? That holy ghost, which was promised before, and is now
performed unto the church of Christ, which is an invincible, immortal* and
coaeternall God, with the father and the soune? which gives seuenfold graces,
and among those seven, one especially of fortitude: would he suffer all his
church, to be beaten down, and would give strength not so much as to one,
against whom all his adversaries, should not be able to prevail? In the time
of the synagoge, and in that night, when a general Idolatric was committed:
our merciful God, ever did use to raise up some one Prophet, or other, whom
he would not only to speak, but whom he would also maintein, both to speak
and to be hard: if not to the peoples profiting (because of their infidelity)
yet to their condemnation (because of his justice and equity) and that
posterity of them might know, how to fear God, and him alone to honor. And
although Esaie, Jeremy, and other Prophets have been slain, yet have their
words still continued in memory and writing* for who can resist God
almighty, and let, that his will go not forward? And now in the time of
grace, when Christ lives never any more to die, when the son of Justice
shines, and men walk honestly, as it were in the day: is it not besides, not
only all faith, but all reason also, that an universal Idolatry, should be
committed and authorized in the church, and that by no prophet or preacher, it
should be presently controlled? Behold, when Nicolaus, one of the seven first
Deacons, when Arrius, Eunomius, Martion, Donatus, or any other heretic, did
begin to spring, straitwaies the church has noted him, althowgh because of the
violence of princes, she has not been able, straytewayes to oppress it. And
were the pain never so great, and the power and number for maintenance of
the heresy never so outrageous, yet God never left him self withowt
testimony: and valiant Catholykes were found, which would not shrink in the
cause of truth, not for the Emperor, and all his souldyars. Athanasius the
great, is alone, ^xample strong inowgh for all. Yea there is so great strength
in a spirit, that when a very true cause, is set upon and invaded by
falsehode, the person whom the dyuel does possess for that purpose, will utter
him self and be known, if all the world fay nay, and come against him.
Example in Luther, whom neither Pope, neither Emperor could make to hold his
peace. And when he is dead, yet will his scholars, althowgh they can not
maynteyne his doctrine, preserve yet his name, that it may be said: Doctor
Martin Luther began to set^ up the Gospel in the year of owr Lord M. D.
XVII. a worthy man, and greiuouse against the pope: All be it in the greatest
matter, his scholar was better learned then he, and fowght against the master.
How then stands owr case? Vrbanus a blessed pope appointed an holyday in the
honor of the body of Christ and it was joyfully received thorowgh the whole
church, without any open contradiction, and could it be Idolatry? No, if it
had been against the glory of God, not only it should not have been
universally received, but not so much as particularlye suffered without some
evident resistance. And there would have been fownd in a thousand religious
howses, and in universities, and in well ordered cities, and (I believe) in very
mean howseholdes, some, which rather would have dyed, then have committed
idolatry.

Especially, whereas it has been promised unto Jacob his seed, which is
performed in the church, Non est idolum in Jacob, Nu. 23. there is no Idol in
Jacob: and whereas God so expresselie says to us by Ezechiel, ca. 36. I will
cleanse you from all yowr Idols. Then lo, what a shameful pride is this, a
weak head, not agreeing with other, not knowing him self, behind so many in
years, above so few in lerning, to make so light of the concord of Christ his
church, and of her majesty, that with a light word, he dares to condemn,
two blessed governors of her, Honorius, and Vrbanus, with all Bishops,
Doctors, divines, religious orders, secular priests, such which lived in good
order all the time sense, and to condemn Emperor, Kings, Princes, counselars,
with all the devout laytie of those times and after? But what does he say?
Honorius (quod he) was about three hundred years past. why Sir, is not three
hundred years a fair age? This argument A weak argument of M. (...)
sounds as consequently, as if one stryuing with an other, upon a question
of lerning, would answer him, with tussh man, I know this better then thou, for
I am thirty years you^ger then thou. Well Honorius was three hundred years
past or there about: and he was deceived, (say you) or he is not at the least
much to be regarded, as I can tell you for soth by that I have lived these
forty years or there about, and am now Bishop not of Rome but of Sarum, in
much wisdom and authority. But may we so safely ^lude the answer of God,
and reject his blessed will uttered by the mowth of holy men, that the cause
it self shall be accounted childeysh, because they, which promoted it, were
not fifteen hundred years old, but men of three hundred years only, as it
were childerie of three years, in respect and comparison of the reverend John
of Salisburie? It is not the age, which makes verities, but the word of God,
and the consent of the church, whose voice especially, is much to be
considered. Vrhanus (say you) was after Honorius. M. Iuell.
What of that? be these later years so accursed, that there can be fownd no
good men in them? I find no fault with Luther, because he is of no antiquity,
but because, he adds thereunto, the breach of good order and unity. And in
Saint Vrbanus, I do not so much observe, that he made a new holy day, but
this is much to be marked, that all Christendom did keep it with^owt any
murmur, and rebellion. And again, his decree did not make that, which was
before profane, to be holy, but the holiness of the Sacrament, and the enemy
Berengarius, whom the dyuel stirred against it, did cause him, to apoynt the
time, wherein it might b^ celebrated and honored, with especial memory.
Christ his birth, was to be worshipped, before the holidaye was thereunto
appointed, and the consubstantialitie of the father and the soun, was before
the concell of Nice, and when orders begin to decay, new statutes are made for
the rapayring of them, not, as who should say, they were never used before,
but that it should not come to pass, that they might be quite forgatten
hereafter. And therefore it is false, that the adoration of the Sacrament, was
never before Honorius decree and S. Vrbanus holidaye, of whom, by the
protestants judgments, it is to late to say, God have mercy on their sowles,
because they are allreadie condemned for their idolatry, as the heretykes can
term it.

O S. Thomas Aquinas, whose labors in the making of the service for Corpus
Christi day, I can not but remembr^, the octaues of that feast now being
present, are they all lost, and art thou thy self together with them
condemned? It was not for a man alone, to compile out of both testamentes so
many testimonies, for the sacrament, and so compile them, that like two
Cherubins, the old should look upon the new, and the new answer the old: It
was not of flesh so to do, but of the spirit of God. Read over the antempnes,
the respondes, the versicles, of that blessed day, and by the very sound and
sense of them, they declare plainly from whence they proceeded. The first
respond out of the old law is this: The number of the children of Israel,
Exodus 12.
shall offer up a kydd, at the evening tide of their passover, and they shall
eat flesh and unleavened bread. The versicle answering the same, out of Saint
Paul's epistle, is this: Christ our passover is offered up, 1. Cor. 5.
therefore let us eat in the unleavened bread of sincerity and verity.
Again, an other respond is: Helias looking back, 3. Re. 19.
did see at his head a cake, and rising, did eat and drinck: and with the
strength of that meat, he walked unto the hill of God. This is the respond,
but what is there in the new testament to answer this? It follows out of
Saint John his Gospel. Io. 6.
If any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever. It is written in Job:
The men of my tabernacle have said, Job. 31.
who might give us of his flesh, that we might be satisfied? and the respond
is, that whiles they were at supper Christ took bread, and brake it, Matt. 26.
Mar. 14.
and gave it, and said, take ye, and eat ye, this is my body. What could
have been devised more agreeable and comfortable? Then, in other parts of the
service, how playnelie is the faith of the church, in how few words, declared?
and how effectually be the effects of the sacrament proponed? O holy feast
(says the antempne of the later euensong) in which Christ is received, the
memory of his passion is repeted, the mind is filled with grace, and a pledge
of the glory to come, is given unto us. The heretykes say, that we must
remember Christ his passion, and that, that is the very some of the
institution of the Sacrament. But they forget three parts of the whole:
because, we not only remember his passion, but we receive him also in deed,
and grace presently is given unto us, and a pledge of the glory to come
hereafter. The church tawght them, eue^ that verity which they hold (as it
appears in the prayer of corpus Christi day) Of Corpus Christi day and of
the service of that holy day.
O God which have left unto us the memory of thy passion. under a wonderful
sacrament (but then she says further) Grawnt us, we beseech the, so to honor
the holy mysteries of thy body and blood, that we may daily feel in owr
selves, the fruct of thy redemption. So then, she grawnteth the memory of his
passion, but she holds the verity of his body: she pelteth not with God,
denying this to be his body, because she is commanded to do this in
remembrance of him: but she does best remember him, when she has the body
which suffered, before her. She calls the sacrament, the mysteries of his
body and blood, and yet she does plainly adore and worship his presence,
which is covered. I may seem to be to long in my service, but certe^lie, if we
should consider the marueilouse wisdom of almighty God, and the multitude of
mysteries, which by the mowth of S, Thomas, were uttered in that matter, it
were argument enough that it come from God. And is all this gear lost now? And
where as most manifest miracles, have testified unto the world, that our Sauyor
accepts him, and has taken him in to heaven, shall the sprite of pride and
lyeing, with one word, co^dempne him, everlastingly? Thanked be God, that
ever the holiday was made, in the worship of Christ his body in the sacrament.
for this and an other and the third heretykes, will putt it out of strength by
spiritual and mystical understanding (which words they understand not them
selves, but like smoke vanysh away, in their cogitatio^s) yet the apointing of
an holydaye in honor of the sacrament, is so manifest an argument against them,
that they have no other remedy, but to say, Vrbanus was not ancient inowgh
for them. Which holy pope, if he had written a whole book, in the praise and
honor of the sacrament, Isichius li. 6. ca. 22. in leui. Ambr. li. 6 de Sacra.
Damas. lib. 4. cap. 14.
calling it (as the holy doctors have done) the bread of liffe, the bread of
divine substance, the bread united to the diuinitye, the pledge of everlasting
ly^^e, the body most holy, pretiouse, save, inestimable, with an hundred
other such tytles, they would have escaped by leing or denying.

But now, what can they say? not only S. Vrbanus, of the adoration of Christ
his body p^sent in the Sacrament.
but all Christendom, not only do speak, but command, and prove by
sensible and visible argument, that the very body of owr Savior, is in the
Sacrament, and that they adore it, with a proper holidaye. But Christ (says
M. Iuell) and his Apostles, M. Iuell.
the holy fathers in the primitive church, the doctors, that followed them, and
other learned men, whatsoever for the space of a thousand and two hundred years
after Christ, never heard of it. Never? will you abide by it? M. Iuell.
Yea (says he) once again I say, for the space of a thousand and two
hundred years, after Christ his ascension in to heaven, this worshipping of
the Sacrament, was never known or practiced, in any place, within the whole
Catholyke church of Christ, within the whole world. Here I am at a stay, I
tell you troth: because I can not tell, by which way I might begin to answer,
so vehement an asseueration. For were it best (think I) to tell him, he lies,
and to prove it? or to wish him shame only, and to permit the matter to the
hands of God? or to reason with him, as if he were present? or what way might
I take? I have alleged S. Ambrose, and S. Augustyn before, and if those two be
not sufficient, Theodoretus says, that the mystical signs remayn in their
formar substance, and figure and form, Theod. dial. 2.
and they may be seen and felt as they were before, but they are understood to
be those things which they are made, and they are believed and adored, as being
those things, which they are believed to be. Euthimius also says, in the 64.
chap. upon S. Matthew: Let us so do^, in the worshipping of the mysteries, not
only looking on those things, Euthi. cap. 64. i Mat.
which are set before us, but believing, his words. And whereas be says,
this is my body, this is my blood, let us obey him, and believe him. Further
more Eusebius Emissenus in his fifth sermon of Easter, he says, Behold, with
thy faith, honor and wonder at the holy body and blood of thy Lord.
Eusebius. Emis. ho. 5 (...) pascho.
But none of these are plain enough for M. Iuell. I do ask him therefore,
what S. James meant, in his liturgy or mass, when that, lifting up the gift
(which is the consecrated host) he cries out holy things, for the holy.

If he said (holy) in that respect only that Christ sits in heaven:
Jacob. in Litur. sua.
why does he then lift up the Sacrament? Again, in S. Basile his mass, Of
lifting up of the sacrament.
at the time of receiving, the Bishop lifting up the bread, says, Look down
o Lord (...) Christ owr God, out from thy holy tabernacle, and come to
sanctify us, thou which sit above together with thy father, and art
together with us here invisibly. Vouchsafe, with thy mighty hand, to give
unto us, In Missa S. Basil.
thy holy and undefiled body, and pretiouse blood, and by us sinners, unto
the whole people. And what means S. Basile, by lifting up the bread, and by
so devout a prayer, and by that which follows, when, with a great voice he
cries, holy things, for the holy?

Also, how is it said in S. Chrysostom his mass, that the priest, after the
like prayer made as S. Basile has, takes a portion of the host, which is on
the holy paten, and lifting it up a little, says, holy things, for the
holy, the clerks and the people answering, one holy, one Lord, in the glory
of God his father? But to let these questions go, I will come more nerer, and
be certified of M. Iuell, whether Christ were the very soun of allmighty God or
no? whether his body is to be worshipped or no? whether he be reallye and
truly, in the Sacrament of the faithful? M. Iuell denies, that in any place
in the whole world, twelve hundred years after Christ, the worshipping of the
Sacrament was used. But I ask, whether any doctor or good man, in the space of
twelve hundred years after Christ, did believe, that Christ was reallie in the
Sacrament? It can not be denied, but that holy men did believe so. As S.
Damascene witnesses, Damase. li. 4. orth. fid.
sa^eing: Bread and w^ne are not the figure of the body and ^loud of
Christ,(God ^^^bead) but the very body, endued with the Godhead: whereas our
Lord him self says, this is my body and not a figure of my body. And
likewise Algerus in his book de Sacramento altaris, is very manifest. And
again, B^^^engarius, which denied the verity of Christ his body in the
Sacrament, and would have nothing but a figurative body there, he was
condemned by a general council, in which Lanfrancus Bishop of Canterburye was
a chief doer against that heresy, and wrote a book, by name against
Berengarius. Therefore it can not be denied, but that these men, which (again I
say) lived within the compass of twelve hundred years, after Christ his
ascension: did verelie believe, as the Catholykes and papists do at these
days. If then, Lanfrancus Archbishop of Canterbury, believed, that Christ was
verelie and reallie (not as Berengarius the heretyke said, who can save M.
luell in this place from a pla^^e lie.
figuratiuelie only) in the Sacrament: ergo he did worship our Savior there
present, ergo a learned blessed man has worshipped the Sacrament, within a
thousand two hundred years after Christ his ascension, ergo some man has made
a foul lie. Certenlie, you can not escape here, master mine. For if Lansra^cus
were This is my body, are no otherwise to be taken, then those other of his, I
am the vine, and if no Christians heart can choose, but honor there was no lack
of memory, and the proposition did not escape M. Iuelles mouth unware, for he
stowtlie repeteth it, with. once again I say, that a thousand two hundred
years after Christ his ascension, the worshipping of the sacrament, was never
known. Well Sir, the presence was known, if you answer, it was not: whithe^
was Berengarius condemned, which denied the presence? If it were confessed:
how could it, but be worshipped? I had rather one should answer, that
Lanfrancus and the council called Vercelle^se, did not believe the presence of
Christ in the sacrament (which were very ignorantly and untruly spoken, they
condempnyng Berengarius, for an heretyke) then to say, that for all his
presence, they did not worship him. For that is not only ignorantly, but
also wickedlie and blasphemo^slie spoken. Lanfrancus then was within twelve
hundred years next after Christ, He lived An. Do. 1052.
and he believed, with all the Catholykes of that time, Christ to be reallie
present in the Sacrament: ergo the worshipping of the Sacrament, was known
within the cumpasse of the years, which M. Iuell rekoneth upon: so that all is
not the Gospel which he spenketh.

But will you here now a pretty conjecture of his? for conclusion I can not
call it, which makes to no purpose. After the people began (says he) to
worship the sacrament with godly honor, M. Iuell.
the learned men, and schole doctors, that then were: saw, it could not stand,
without great danger, and confessed, that the ignorant sort might be leaden in
to Idolatry. And what of this? if there be danger in worshipping an host not
consecrated, how then? Shall the honor due to Christ his body, be taken away?
In the beginning of your sermon, nothing to the purpose, it was proved, that
abuses; have crept in to the sacrament* would you therefore, the sacrament also
to be abolished. if a lewd priest (with whom you were well acquaynted, or else
you b^ light of belefe) has been known, for many years space, not to have
consecrated the host, shall honest priests therefore, which do consecrate, be
suspected, and the true sacrament dishonored? The learned men, of whom you
speak, did never doubt, but the sacrament was to be honored, but some of them
did cast the worst, saying, what if, by malice of the priest, or other wise,
there should be no consecration at all? how then shall we think (said they) is
there any idola^e committed of the ignorant people? But you suppose, they made
this argument, It may chance, that an host not consecrated be lifted up, and
honored of the people, which thing is daungerouse: ergo it had been better,
never to have made corpus Christi day, or it were well done to take away the
sacrament. For this must be your conclusion, to prove, that even by the very
scholemen, adoration is taken away, or not allowed. For if this be not proved,
you are fallen from your matter, and you talk of scholemen, besides all
lernyng. Yet grant that there is danger (because the dyuel has his
chapelaines) it is easelie remedied, even according unto them, which thowght
good, that the sacrament be worshipped under this condition, if consecration
were performed. But according to the truth, there is no danger at all. As I
will prove, which yet neadeth not (because danger or danger not, adoration is
due unto the host truly consecrated) yet, for the more plains, I will show,
the people to be safe, without all question. for the vulgar and true
Catholykes, allthowgh unskillful in knowledge, yet steadfast in faith, when they
believe once, that our Sauyor left his body unto his well-beloved church, in
form of bread, and gave the power unto priests, of consecrating the same his
body: or if the people be not able to make such distinction, yet if they
believe, what so ever the church teaches, and if they agree to the ordinances
of her: then lo they, in hearing of mass, and adoring the Sacrament, the
intention of the priest is not to be serched of the people.
are not bound to make search of the intention of the priest, but under this
faith, that all is well done in the Catholyke church, and that Christ is to be
worshipped under form of bread, their devotion is harmeles unto them, and
acceptable unto God. Matthew. 5.
If thy eye be simple, says owr Savior) all thy whole body is lightsome, and
therefore, the intention of the people, being good, and directed unto that first
verity, that Christ our Savior has left his body unto us, in form of bread:
what so ever knauerie or dyuelishnes, be wrought of man, in some particular
host, it hurts not the piety, of the good and denote people. And god, which
is the sercher of the hearts, does receive unto him self, that honor which
they have appointed for him, in the Sacrament. For they see, the priest to
reuest him self, to go to the altar, to make crosses and signs, to kneel
down, to show unto them the Sacrament, they see the form of bread, and what
should they do then, but worship the Sacrament? Except perchance, any man will
require more then a man his knowledge in a man. For I would ask the question,
of that scrupulouse conscience, which fears where no cause of fear is, and
say to him: Good fellow, why do thou not kneel down, at sacring, and
worship the body of Christ? It appears, by thy plain countenance and apparel,
that thou fear not hurting of thy knee, or breaking of thy hose, as some
strayt pointed gentilmen do lean unto a pillar of the church, for such like
causes: but some ernest matter there is, which moves the* Yea for sothe Sir,
for (and if it please you, a little to come a side,) I heard a preacher once
say: that some priests, do mock the people, and do not consecrate the bread.
And the^, if there be no consecration, I heard the same preacher say, there is
no adoration due unto it, which thing he also proved, out of I can not tell,
what old doctors and learned men's books. If I were therefore sure, that the priest
does consecrate, I would then truly, worship my maker. How then wilt thou be
sure? has he not vestme^tes upon him? is he not at the altar? does he not al
things as good priests should do? Yes, but I would know his intent and meaning,
by his own word. Why, would his word quiet the? or might not he think one
think and speak an other? Mary therefore (as the preacher noted) it were good,
never to worship Christ in the Sacrament, for fear, least thorough the priest
his dissimulatio^, I should have nothing else there but bread, and so commit
idolatry. Nay, good fellow, that was not the wysest preacher, that ever thou
have heard: because, sure I am, thou honor they father and mother, with all
obedience and service, (if they be a live) and with thy dailye prayer (if they
be departed:) but art thou sure, that they are thy father and mother, which are
said to be? what discretion hadest thou, before thou were begotten? how say
thou then? if that preacher shall rule the: not only, not thou thy self, but
no man at all, shall worshipp any man or woman for father or mother. Because we
are not otherwise sure of them, but that we believe the whole parish, which
does testify it. And then, if authority shall prevail, the whole world
testifyeth, that in the mass time Christ is present, in form of bread: so
that thou need not, to make any more question hereof, then whether thy
father, be thy father or no. And this I speak, to declare, that as long, as we
be in the world, we should seek for no further proof of things, than may be
gathered of heering, seeing, and other senses. And therefore, perceauing by all
external signs, that any priest at mass, does as the church has appointed,
I should not desire, to creep in to his bosom, and to withstand or withhold
the worshipping of the Sacrament, which the church teaches me, until I know
the priest his thowght and intention. Well Sir yet* (would the fellow say)
albeit I must believe, that in the Sacrament, Christ his body is present, and
sold require no further proof thereof, then the authority of Christ and his
church: yet, (me thinks) the case with us poor people is hard, when we
worship Christ in the Sacrament, if he be not in the Sacrament because of the
leuden^^ of the priest, Quis vel insanus ^u^culpandum putet, quieis o^ficia
debita impenderit, quos parents esse ere diderit, etia^ si no^ essent? Quis
contra, non extermina^ du^ iudicauerit, qui veros fortasse parents minime
dilexerit, dum, ne fall sos diligat, metuit. August. de vtilit. credendi ad
Honoratu^.
which made no consecration* No, no, good fellow, (...) harm is done at all
unto the. For suppose this, (which is possible inowght, that there were one so
like thy own father, that (...) could not be discerned, which of the two, were
thy true father in d^^d, If thou should honor the counterfayte, thinkyng
him, to be thy true father, might thy natural father (trowest thou) iustlye be
offended there withal? or because thou could not have any certain mark, in
this doubtefull case, would thou honor no father at all? They, which stand
behind a pillar in the church, or behind their neighbors backs, or which at
the time of eleuatio^ look down upon the grownd, do not they worshipp (if
their mind be good) Christ in the Sacrament? And yet they behold not that host,
which is present, ne bind themselves unto those singular forms, which they
might behold, for the looking up: but simply and plainly, they worship the
true body of Christ, which is under the form of visible bread, when it is
rightly consecrated, as they take the host upon their parish church to be. And
if it be otherwise, it is a pryuate and deadlye synn of the priest, and a
particular error of theires, nothing hurting or letting the proper object and
stay of their faith, unto which their devotion is carried. And, to let him go
now, with whom I seemed to talk all this while, and to return unto M. Iuell,
the learned men did, in deed, make objection, as thowgh there might be dawnger
in worshypping of an host unconsecrated: And therefore (says Master Iuell)
they gave warning of it. M. Iuell.
which words, import so much, as if the scholemen should say, take heed
good people, what you do: you may be poisoned, the host may chaunse not to be
consecrated, and then, M. Iuell understands not the schole men whom he
alleged
there is dawnger of idolatry. And so, the people should be dimissed with
scruple of conscience, as M. Iuell understands the scholemen, which is
nothing so* for the conclusion of schools, and answer unto that objection,
which Master Iuell alleges, is, that the people are withowt all danger, in
so much, that the opinion of worshypping the Sacrament under a condition, is
refused of the best learned.

Now, as concerning Duns and Durand Master Iuell, reports of them by these
words. That they thowght it best, to remove away the bread, M. Iuell,
and to bring in transubstantiation (for it were remained the substance of
(...) and how (...) unto (...)? What is he, which ^^^ring (...) words, and
knowing, neither the places where Dun^ and Durand say (...) or any good lernyng
besides, wol^ not (...) Duns and Durand, did so cast their heads to geather,
as thowgh they were able to bring th^^^ opinions, in to the articles of owr
Creed, and as thowgh transubstantiation were invented and authorized by them,
and not rather confirmed by the whole church of Christ. It is a shameful kind
of lyeing, when, the true orderers of Christ his church, shall be suppressed
with silens, and when the ve^^tyes of the Catholyke faith, shall be attributed
unto the disputation of ^^holemen. Saint Thomas indeed, has this argument, D.
Thom. 3. part. qu. 75. art. 2.
that it is against the worshipping of the Sacrament, if any crea^ed substance,
which may not be worshipped with godly honor, should be there: ergo (says
he) no substance of bread remains. Against which reason of his, Duns and
Durand both, do argue very busily. and they do think, that the substance of
bread, might be granted to remain, and yet the body of Christ might be
worshipped in the Sacrament, withowt all danger of Idolatry. Note.
Therefore, M. Iuell, as cunnyng as he makes him self in Duns and Dura^d, does
so far and fowl^e, go ^^de of their meaning and opinion, that they argued the
plain contrary unto that which he reports of them. For, whereas he
interprets then sayings after thi^ manner, Iuell.
that, for au^yding of idolatry in the Sacrament, the substance of bread must
be removed: they reason a plain contrary way* and argue (their obedience unto
the church always reserved) that for all the remaining of ^read, Duns and
Durand.
yet the body of Christ might be in the Sacrament, and withowt danger
honored. But they speak therein like scholemen, and also like adversaries of
Saint Thomas, whose arguments* whiles they discussed to the uttermost* they
have fallen some times in to the suspicion, either of envy, or curiosity. And
see again, how little it hangs together, that, which M. Iuell would father
upon them? If there be any substance of bread in the Sacrament, M. Iuell.
(says master Iuell in his co^mentarie upon Duns and Durand) there must be
danger of idolatry: ergo by transubstantiation let us take the substance of
bread away, and then will all things be safe and su^e, and the people shall
be clean void of ieopardie. But how can this sense and conclusion seem
agreeable to a schole man? For if (as M. Iuell has told us out of their
writings) there be danger of Idolatry, when consecration is omitted, how
much has Duns helped the people, by bringing in of transubstantiation, where
as the substance of bread never so much taken away, yet there may lack
consecration: and that failing, (as master Iuell weeneth) idolatry may be
committed, and Duns and Durand should miss of their purpose, for which they
devised transsubstantiation.

Wherefore I wonder at the liberty, which master Iuell takes upon him, in
making, as pleases him, free reports upon the learned, as thowgh they were
easy to be understood, or he had ever great mind to read them, or as thowgh
his report were of such authority, that as he says, so it must be in them.

Now, as concerning Saint Thomas, which proves that no bread does remain in
the Sacrament, because godly honor is given unto it, the authority and
present practice of the church did move him thereunto. As though he should say
on this wise: The church does give godly honor unto that, Of
transsubstantiation.
which is under the forms of bread and wine, but no godly honor is due unto
any pure creature, ergo except the church should committ Idolatry (which is
impossible) no other substance besides the body of Christ, can be contained in
the Sacrament. In which his conclusion, the honor, which the church gave to the
Sacrament, was sufficient unto him, to infer, that no bread remained, and not
his desire, to have the Sacrament worshipped, was the motyue and occation, to
invent that no bread remained. For, to speak the truth, the scholemen, as
they were, for the greater part, men of excellent wit and holiness: so,
thorowghe the ghift of understanding and cumpassing weighty matters, they went
very far in serching out the treasures of all divinity, and yet, thorowgh
the grace of holiness, which qualified their deep inventions, they always
submitted their conclusions unto the authority of the Catholyke church. In so
much, that if a thousand Dunces and Durandes, should so decide this question and
matter, as master Iuell reports of them: yet needs not the Catholyke, for
that cause, to be trobled, or the heretyke crake of any victory, against the
practyse and faith of the church. But let us behold, how master Iuell plaieth
the schole man, and utters such an insight in the Sacrament, as the greatest
doctors for subtilitye, have never marked throwgh their dulnes. For upon this,
which he supposes Duns and Durand to say (the Sacrament is to be worshipped,
ergo no bread must be remaining) he infers a contrary conclusion, M. Iuell.
as, that (there is bread remaining, ergo it must not be worshipped.) Wherein
both the argument concludes not, if he will follow Duns and Durand: and the
formar proposition is heretical, if he would submitt his understanding unto
the Catholyke church. The argument (I say) and the consequence is nawght,
because for soth, by his doctors Duns and Durand the schole men, for all the
substance of bread remainyng yet might the Sacrament be adored and worshipped.
But that is one doctors opinion. Then also, his antedent is false, because the
church has so received and tawght us, that the substance of bread is clean
converted. And as concerning master Iuell his profes, of his antecedent, where
as he alleges Saint Augustyne in a sermon of his ad insantes, saying, that
which you see upon the table, is bread, it does conclud that the other thing
which we believe to be under those forms of bread is not Christ his natural
body. And, I trow, Saint Augustyne did not mean such bread to be there, as
childerne spread their butter upon. For it is written by the same blessed
doctor: In lib. sent. Prosperi.
We honor things which we see not, that is to say, flessh and blood, in the
form of bread and wine which we see. The church also herself fears not, to
call the Sacrament bread, why the Sacrament (...).
which yet condemns all Lutherans and Zuin gl^ans. And she calls the
Sacrament bread, because the Sacrament has the form of bread, and because
bread in the Scripture signifies any food, and because Christ his body is,
in deed, true bread, and bread of life, and heavenly bread. Therefore,
because it is called bread, upon that only to conclud, that it contynueth
bakers bread: it is the argument of thinkers, tailers, and cobblers, and not of
learned scholars.

Then, as concerning Gelasius, which says, that the substance of bread, or
nature of wine do not cease to be, (in the Sacrament,) he expowndeth him
felfe, by that which follows strayt after in the same sentence, adding these
plain words, But they remain in the proprieties of their nature. Which
proprieties are these following whitnes, thicknes, breadeth, weight, taste, and
power to norissh and feed the body, with such like, which he calls the
substance of bread and wine, and more playnelie the properties of their nature.
The like is to be answered unto Theodoretus, which says, that Christ honored
the bread and wine which we see, Theodor. Dial. 2. co^trahaereses
with the names of his body and blood, not chainging the nature of them. (that
is to say, the natural proprieties, because in all points it appears unto
owr eye, to be even as it was before consecration) but joining grace unto that
nature. Over and above all this, a most true and ready answer is, that the
faithful do consider always, not, what one or two do say, but what the
whole cumpanye of learned men, or the greater part do testifye. Again, before
the church had expressed it, and opened by her sentence, the manner of Christ
his being in the Sacrament, it was no heresy (if proud obstinacy did not
make it) to say that bread remained, or that it vanished in to nothing.
Because both opinions did hold with real presence, and the authors of them
were contented to yield unto their betters judgment. And so, if we should
grant unto the heret^kes, that which they do require about Gelasius or
Theodoretus, they both defending the real presence, it is no small matter
against the heretykes other opinions, and it is nothing at all against the
Catholykes. But in these dares now, when it has been decreed according unto
scriptures, Concilium Lateranese
and ancient fathers, in a general council, that the substance of bread is
converted in to the body of Christ: now, to deny transsubstantiatio^, and to
reuyle the decree of the Catholic church, this is greatly against the faith.
and this is it, which makes heretics. S. Cyprian, which defended the
rebaptizing of them, whom heretykes had baptized before, was no heretyke in so
doing, because the question was not then determined by the church, unto whose
judgment, he submitted his lerning and authority. But now, if it should come
in to an idle head, to bring that blessed martyrs reasons, and to withstand the
Catholic church, he should do nothing else, in wise men's judgments, but
declare his own vain gloriouse folly. And yet, I do not, ne will not use this
defense, but plainly answer, that Gelasius and Theodoretus, do mean well,
and speak as papists may do, that the substance or natural property of
bread remains, that is to say, the same quantity, virtue and quality,
which it had before the consecration. Wherefor to conclud the clean contrary,
unto Master Iuells assertion, I say, that neither the ancient doctors do
affirm, that the substance of bread remains (understanding by substance the
essential and internal form or nature of bread) neither Duns and Durand do
say, that if bread remain, there is danger of Idolatry.

Farther yet the scholemen say (quod M. M. Iuell.
Iuell) that if a man happen to worship the accidents of bread? Idolatry may
be done to the sacrament: No good Sir; not to the sacrament, but to the
accid^ntes; wherein if fault should be committed, it is not the fault of the
institution of Christ, but of the silence of priests, or simplicity of the
people. Neither is adoration therefore to be forbidden, but the manner of
adoration is discreetly to be opened. whiles owr Savior him self, walked
visiblie upon the earth, if one should have worshipped his very face or
garment, not able to distinct between the two natures of God and man, neither
in what diversity and degree, the face and the garment appertein unto one
self same person, (whereas in truth, it were idolatry to worship that face
with godly honor, in that respect and consideration as it is only an holy
and graciouse visaige of a right excellent and perfect man) because, herein may
be danger, should we not worship Ihesus Christ at all, or not worshipp him
before we understand the distinction between Latria and Dulia, that is, honor
due and proper unto God: and honor, which may be geauen unto any holy^
creature? O miserable people (says master Iuell) that thus are lead to
worshipp they know not what. For alas, how many of them, M. Iuells needles and
folish piety.
understand these distinctions, or care for them? How many of them understand,
after what sort accidentia be sine subiecto? etc. But o miserable world, say I
also then, and alas alas, that any wise man should be so taken, to think that
what so ever is concluded in schools, should be opened in the pulpites.

Alas, alas, the church does teach openly, that the Father is unbegotten,
the Soune only begotten, the Holy ghost proceeding, and this who so ever does
not believe, shall not be saved. O miseserable people, that this are lead to
believe they know not what. For what know they, or what care have they, of
proceeding or begetting? or how can they understand those mysteries of the
schole men? as for example, Christ took the nature of man, he took not the
person of man, as concerning Christ his person, God died for man, as concerning
the divine nature, God can not die, and he which believes not those things
shall never be saved. O miserable people, that this are l^^d to believe, they
know not what. for which of them understands the distinction, between
substance and person? But what shall we say? must the learned men of the church
(O master Iuell) believe no more, then the people are able to conceive? or
because the people understand not, what is accide^ce, or what is substance, or
what is quantity, or quality, relation, or action: is it therefore no matter,
whether it be fysh or flesh, square or round, white or black, worldly or
everlasting? for the (...), this is sufficient to believe, that Christ is in the
sacrament, under form of bread and wine, the bread b^^ng chainged by his
almightines, in to his bo^^e, and the wine, in to his blood: or if some can not
bear away all this, let him clean to the Catholyke faith, and hold up his
hands at sacring as others do, and believe more excellent things to be
present, then him selue can see or feel, and be content to be reformed, if
perchaunse he should be in any error: and God will (...) ask him (f^are you
non) what is (...)* or what is s^l^ctum, oh how is my body founded in the
Sacrament. Now yet, if the plains of faith does best serve the simple man,
shall the learned be forbidden, to search out the uttermost of the mysteries, and
to meditate upon the works of God, praying and studying always, for more
knowledge and understanding? By this kind of reason, the study of logyke and
philosophy is neglected, the pride of the ignorant is mainteyned, the commentes
of ancient fathers are not followed. And whiles master Iuell shows unto the
people, which can not judge of divinity, the true but subtle conclusions of
the divines and scholemen, and whiles he pytieth their case, because the schole
doctors do talk of accidentia sine subiecto, and of substantia and accidens,
which the common lay people can not understand, and where as he would make them
believe* that according to the conclusions of the same scholemen, they shall
never be saved, except they credit and believe those matters, they are made to
abhor the schools as cruel, or to contemn them as sup^^ssuouse. Whe^as the
truth is, that if they believe in one some, all that which the church teaceth,
allthowgh they never ask for every part of it, and be not curiouse in things
which pass their capacity, they yet be out of all danger. O pitiefull heart,
Alas says he, how many of the people understand these distinctions? whi Sir,
no harm is done, where it is not required, that they should go to schole to
learn them, for give me a faithful man, which believed verelie, Christ to be
reallie in the sacrament, as the words of This is my body, do sound: and
there shall need no teaching, that he kneel down, or knock his breast, or
call for grace, or behave him self as it becummeth a creature, in the presence
of his maker. And such a one needs not, to be talked with all, about accidens
and subiectum or other such verityes and yet mysteries. But when the priest
says unto some one in the world, you must believe that Christ is God, and
that his words be true, and that he said of bread, This is my body which
shall be given for you, which body, the Catholykes have in the Sacrament if a
pedlar now, or pelting craftesman, would ask, how it is his body, and make
forth straitewayes arguments, which first were devised in ale howses, or
shoppes, and afterward received in some schools, (as in example, Christ is
ascended, ergo he is not in the Sacrament, or, can a priest make God? or,
Arguments of the ignorant people.
can one body be in more places then one, at one time? or, if a mowse eat the
host does he eat Christ his body?) in this case silence (I think) were best,
and ecclesiastical correction for such a person were necessary, so that to
talk to him of accidence and substance, it were clean out of the purpose. But
now if a learned man, and expert in liberal sciencies, were conuented
perchance, and examined upon the Sacrament of the altar, and if he would use
the cobblers argument, and say, Christ his ^rue body is in one place, but the
Sacrament is at one time in a thousand churches together, ergo Christ is not
in the Sacrament, here lo^ were good occasion, to persuade and prove to him the
contrary, because of the nature of a substance, which occupies no place, and
so afterward to declare, that Christ is in the Sacrament, not as in a place
^^callie, but as under form of bread substantiallie, and that, by the turnyng
of bread into his body. Or, if an ethuyke being learned, were to be converted
unto the faith, it is for the honor of God and his church, to prove unto the
ethnyke, that althowgh the mystery of owr faith do pass all reason, yet the
principles of God his omnipotencye, and the incarnation of Christ once believed:
they are so agreeable unto the high wisdom of God, that no absurditi^ or
shamefulnes shall ever be concluded of them. In these cases then, the
distinctions do serve, and in these occasions the church must not be to seek,
of the fynest points of all lernyng and mysteries. In the serching of which,
she has labored from Christ his asconsio^ hitherto, and daily does study,
the Holighost; the scholmaster, eue^ teaching her more and more, and ever
leaving her many points to be learned, until she come at length unto, heaven,
where all truth and verity shall be most manifest and open. Wherefore the
scholemen (as the word it self does import) are especially for schools, and
they are for learned men, not for common pulpites or merchantes ears, which as
they be most rich of other, so they take them selves most wysest, and by a
short way, look what they can not understand, that are they ready to
contempne. Now also, if the scholemen have many things not necessary at all,
it is no true part to make the cause of the church and them one. As M. Iuell
here does, which recy^yng Duns and Durand, and S. Thomas, and Alexander, and
Holcott, would make men believe, that the church can not tell what to do,
because in certain points and articles, these men varye the one from the
other. Thinkyng perchaunse that as Luthera^s must follow Luther, and the
Zuinglians clea^e fast to Zuinglius: so that some sect of us must follow Duns,
some Alexander, and some S. Thomas.

Unto which men yet, the Catholykes are not bownd, but as the church does
direct them. And where the church has not de^iaed some matter, there may I
hold one day with one sense, an other day with a contrary, leesing nothing
of the integritye of my faith. I perceive, that is any just matter, might be
fownd out against the church, it should be exaggerated, seeing that the pryuate
opinions of certain, be turned to the defacing of the whole catholyke faith.

Holcot says, that it may so chaunse, that one should merit by the
worshypping of the dyuel, master, Iuell thinks it impossible: Let us then
suppose it, that master Holcot lies, the church (I true) is not to be abhorred
therefore, as thowgh she exhorted her childerne, some times to set up a candell
before the dyuel. And you also M. Iuell, if you would remember, what difference
there is betwyxte a thing done materiallye and formallye (which terms the
schools know well inowgh) you would never have fownd such fault with Holcot,
withowt showing of the particular case, in which the worshypping of a wicked
spyrite, might be unto some one meritoriouse, for in deed, if one did know for
certain, that Luther or any of his folowers, were a very dyuel, in form of a
Doctor of the new Ghospel, you should not (loved you the setting forth of yowr
procedinges never so well) geaue any reverence unto him: But if he seems
unto you to be a third Helias, and a man of excellent prerogative in knowledge
of all truth and holiness, were he a dyuel a thousand times, your brotherne
would never condemn you, for giving of reverence unto him. For when the
owtward person is mistaken, and good will showed unto it: the error happening,
is quickelye forgeuen, and the inward affection is iustlye considered. But let
us go further.

Loath I am here to ^^pp up and to open unto you the high mysteries and secrets
of their lerning, M. Iuell.
and the force and strength of their reasons. Yet at this time, the
importunitye of them, forces me, so to do, etc. These be his words. But I
will tell you Master Iuell, if you will be ruled by counsel, and do as wise
and learned men have done here before, never go front your purpose, and make an
end of that, which you have taken in hand. And if any be importunate: answer
them that you will be at leisure an other time, and then talk at large of their
obiectio^s. But now it is out of your purpose, to entreat of any thing which
does not appertein unto the mass. But contention has no ears, and when al is
set, in and upon the tongue, out it must, that which burns in the stomach,
althowgh it agrees no better then Germans lips, whose tongues we see, by
experience in this world, how far they sound one countrarye to the other.
Loathe I am (says he,) which is very seldom in men of his religion, which
take it for a great perfection and zeal, not only to dally with men's
arguments, but also to deface their lives, and to speak the worst they can of
the highest priest in Christendom. But thanks be unto God, that there is one
shamefast man in their side. And then good master Iuell, if in deed you be
loathe (as you seem to speak) let all extraordinary matters pass by, and
follow only your purpose. For why will you encumber your self with the high
mysteries, mysteries, and secrets of their lernyng, the mass alone having
sufficient argument, to make.20. Sermons upon it?

Well, there is no remedy: allthowgh he be loathe to open the secrets of owr
lernyng, yet the importunitye of them (says he) forces me so to do. Wherein,
althowghe I nothing doubt, but that he preached withowt troble, and that he
might have done, what he would, and have preached (in the lent especially) of
the passion, or some matter parterning to pretty, withowt bringing of question,
or controversy: yet let us suppose, that some one was importunate, and let
us harken how properlye master Iuell does answer his appetite. But remember
Sir, that you keep promys, least you be thought to have gone out of your ware
for nothing, and remember that you ryp up and open the high mysteries and
secrets of their lernyng, not skoffyng like a benchewhistler, but reasonyng
like a preacher.

First then, M. Iuell.
to begin with the head, mark you well (says he) and waighe this argument.
God made two lights in heaven, the greater to rule the day, the less to rule
the night, ergo there be two powers to rule the world, the Pope, that
resembles the son, and the Emperor, that is less then he, and likened unto
the moon. This is an argument of theires used by Innocentius tertius.

Sir, I pray you, before Innocentius, who used this argument or conclusion?
Then I ask, whether this text of Genesis, was the cause that the Pope should
be greater then an Emperor? if you can not tell what to answer to the first,
you are not skillfull inowgh in owr mysteries, how great also is your knowledge
and reading, that before Innocentius tertius, you dare well say, that no man
ever used the same very argument or similitude? And if to the second you say,
that the Son and Moon were the cause, for which Christians did make the
distinction between Pope and Emperor: you may go to school again, and
learn yowr Catechism, for any knowledge or understanding, which you have in
secret mysteries, whereas before Innocentius days, the Pope was higher then
the Emperor, the argument of the Son and Moon, being not alleged for that
purpose. If you were Cicero, and for love of your client, would make a pretty
lie and me^ie, to delight my Lord the Judge, and deceive therewith his
circunspection and gravity: the Ethnykes, for your so doing, might dispense at
their pleasure, with you, and give that praise and name unto you, that you be a
trym fellow, of a goodly fine wit and a pleasant, and such a one, good
Jupiter, send me (might they say) at my need: but, among Christians, in so
great a question as the soul cummeth unto, in open pulpitt, a famous scholar,
a Bishopp by calling, to move ernest expectation, as though he would rypp up
the high mysteries of the Catholic faith, and to recyte but an argument of
Innocentius only, (which he rather for garnisshing of his letters, to the
Emperor, then strength of the similitude in it self and by it self, did
roundelye allege forth unto him,) and to make, as though that were the best
argument, and most secret mystery, of the papiste^ it is not for a sage
person, matter, place, or audience. Unto you M. Iuell, if one should talk of
this question, how much the dignity of a pope were better, then the rome of an
Emperor, he should never allege Innocentius tertius, or the gloss. Not
because, they are to be contempned in them selves, but rather because you do
set so little by them. And yet, it may be proved unto you, all that which
Innocentius would conclude, by the alluding unto the son and moon, which God
made at the beginning. Therefore I do grant unto you, that Innocentius
argument is not of great good force against an ethnyke and heretic, and yet I
save, the conclusion of the church stands, for all that this argument may
fall. But if it were an high mystery, it could not be so easelie let to
fail, ergo then you have declared or confuted yet, no mysteries of owre
religion.

Now, of the two rulers of Christ his church on earth.
that there be two states of ruling in the church of Christ, it is plain by
this, that the one which is temporal, every man does see: of the other, which
is spiritual, the psalmist does prophe^ie, saying, Psalm. 44.
in steed of my fathers, their ^ounes are borne unto the (meanying the
Apostles, and Bishops their successors) them shall thou apoynte princes and
rulers, over the whole earth. And this is proved also by the Apostle,
commanding the Bishops of Ephesus, to take heed unto them selves, and also
the whole flock, in which the holyghost has set and made you Bishops, Act.
20.
that you should govern the church of God, which he has purchased by his
blond. Then how much not only pope or prelate, The dignity of preisthode.
but every simple priest is higher and honorabler, then the greatest Emperor
of the world, not only the words and writings of holy men, but their factes
rather and behauyors, do give an euidon^ testimonye. As S. Martin being
invited with much a do unto Maximus the Emperor his table, and having the cup
first geauen unto him, that he should begin unto the Emperor, not withstandyng
the exceading great feast and honor, Sulpit. lib* 1. (...)
which was he stowed upon him, by one of the chiefest then in the world: yet
he, (to teach the Emperor a true lesson, and to prove that his majesty is not
the highest) began above all other, unto his chapelaine, declaryng that he knew
none there, to be better. Of like courage and fortitude was Eulogius an holy
and constant priest, which being required of the Emperor Valens chief officer,
Trip. hist. li. 7. ca. 33.
to communicate with him, which held the empire and kingdom (which, in owr
English tongue at these day^s, is to say, Follow the Kings procedinges)
answered peaceably and gentlelie, saying, And I also have my part of a
kingdom and priesthode.

Such men were, Hist. tri. li. 7. ca. 3^ and li. 9. ca. 30.
holy Basile, Ambrose, Chrysostom, noble and reverend Bisshoppes in deed,
which little regarding the glory of the court and the world, spared not, to
tell the Emperors, their own, and also to show them that a Bisshopp his
office, is not given, with goldon crown or purple. And not only in their
doings, the superiority of the (...) the Emperor.
but in writings also, they declared this verity, that the Emperor, rul^th in
the court; the Bisshopp, in the church: the Emperor, over men's goods and
bodies, Ambros. de Sacerdotio. Chrisost. libr. 3. de Sacerd.
the Bisshopp, over sowles and consciencies; the Emperor, in things
transitory: the Bisshopp in things everlasting.

These conclusions being therefore true, if Innocentius would sweetlye and
misticallye allude unto the beginning of Genesis, and say, that the two great
lights, which God made to rule the day and night, do signify the two
powers, of the spiritualtye and of the temporaltye, of which the one is so
brighter then the other, that the least of them both yet, does direct and guide
men in the whole world: is this so improperly spoken or childi^^^lie, that
any father of this generation, may honestly contempne it? As, on the other
side, if there be no strength and force in this argument, is the highest
mystery and secret lerning of the catholics, thereby uttered and confuted?
When frindes confer together familiarly, many things come and go, to and fro
betwixt them, which if they were examined, by the severe judgment of some
co^trollar, would seem to be spoken triflinglie. yet consider the time, place,
and persons, they may stand well enough with charity, my meaning is this, when
Christians write unto Christians, in great peace of conscience, and silence of
heresy, they are more bold with the Scriptures, alleagi^g the textes of them*
toward their purpose, although it be not according to the first sense, and
meaning of the place. Alluding (as sweet S. Bernard does man thousand places)
unto some history, verse, sentence, or other like thing in them, playeing, (as
I might say) and refreshing them selves with the Scriptures, as ^saac did play
with the fair Rebecca his wiffe in the garden of Abimelech the king,
secretlye, Genesis 26.
as he thowght him self, and honestly, is a good and virtuous man, lovingly
yet and familia^lye, as with a most true and bewtifull wi^e. All which things,
(...) colerated among friends, and they agree well inowgh with cha^^^ as long as
they disagree not with honesty and veri^ie. But, when peekers of quarell^
(...) do appear, and heretics begin to loure, then in deed, other kind of
writing and arguyng is to be used, not to the utter disalowing of the familiar
manner and fashion (which has his time and place,) but to provide against the
cummyng in of strangers and enimyes, which seek only how to find faults with
the Catholics. S. Paul writing to the Corinthia^s, among other things, he
willed, that women should be covered in the church, and among other reasons,
this was one, which he wrote very sadly: Does not nature (says he) teach
you this? 1. Cor. 11.
for you see, that long hear is geauen unto a woman, to cover herself
withal. This now, in a Christian man his ears, does sownd right well and
probably. But let a quareller stand against him, and say, my masters, Paul
here has written unto you, that your women should not be bare headed in the
church. And why so? Loath I am, to ripp up the secrets of his lernyng, and the
force of his reasons. But his importunitye dryueth me thereunto, mark ye
therefore well, and waighe this argument. A woman, by nature has long hear,
ergo they must were byggins in the church. Should not such a skorner then,
speak as right as master Iuell does? alleging that for a principal or
singular argument, which in deed, is not so? and afterward, by disgracing of
that argument, to bring the whole matter in to question, or else contempt? for
the blessed Apostle used that reason, as in way of persuasion, and as a
probable and convenient argument, which if one would deny, saying, it did not
prove his purpose, his conclusion is sure for all that, where he says, in the
end of that question. If any man seem to be contentiouse, 1. Cor. 11.
we have no such custom, nor the church of God. After which sort, it may be
well answered, that if Innocentius did not therebye well prove, the
superiority of the pope above the Emperor, because the Son is bigger then the
moon, and if there were no other reasons of force and strength, among the
Catholykes, for that purpose, (as contrary wise there be whole books of
ancient doctors, which prefer priests before all other, what so ever,
creatures, for their order sake and authority) yet, Ambr. and Chrisost. de
Sacerd.
it might be well answered to heretykes, that, if you be good and cunning at
jesting and lyinge, understand ye, that we have no such custom, neither the
church of God. And so I answer not only for Innocentius, A general answer for all the reasons of Gloses or doctors which M. luell iesteth at.
but for Isidorus also, and Gerson, Bonifacius, the Gloss, and for all others,
which master Iuell rekoneth up. That if they, like good men, abundyng in their
sense, have alleged scripture, for proving of those things, which were used
before they were borne, and if unto contentiouse persons, those good men's
reasons are not sufficient, yet none should be so hardy, as to take away
orders or articles, generally of the whole church received. Because, it is
inowgh for a Christian man to allege, that we have no such custom, neither
the church of God.

Wherefor as concerning shaven crounes, and purple sandales, holy water, or
praying in one tongue, they were never taken for secret mysteries in the church,
and if the sentences of scripture, which holy men have applied unto them do
not abundantly prove them good, there is no great harm taken. Of holy water.
As for holy water, althowgh that the words of the Prophet Ezechiel, may
very well be applied unto it, where he says: I will sprinkle upon you clean
water (which words being a prophecy of the baptism of Christians, Eze. ca. 36
I can not deuyse, in what part of the seven deadly sins it may be
numbered, to speak them also by holy water, which in one signification, does
bring us in remembrance of owr baptism) yet, granting, that they make no more
to the purpose, then master Iuells talk here of the supremacy, and
purgatory, and priests crowns, and purple sandales, do make against the
Canon of the mass: holy water for all that, is not to be cast out of the
church, which was instituted by S. Alexander Bishop of Rome, and Martyr of
Christ, fowrtene hundred years ago.

Then also, in the matters of weight, if that, Luc. 22.
Ecce duo glagij hic^* behold here are two swords. Does not prove the Bishopp
of Rome his both spiritual and temporal power: The Pope has both spiritual
and tempes rall power ever all Christians, althowgh ^e use not both, at all
times.
yet must you not make him an Antichrist, or the temporal princes page, and
servant. And if owr Savior would not use in his humilitye the temporal sword
and jurisdiction, you will not therefore, I trust, deny, that he was Lord of
Lords and king of kings. And so likewise, he making his Apostle S. Peter his
leuetenant, and ruler of all Christians, both sheep and lambs: althowgh he
put up his sword in to his sheath, yet does it not follow, that he has no such
sword at all. For as concerning the spiritual sword, no wise heretic denies
that unto the Bishop, the Scripture saying most plainly, whose sins you
forgive, Matthew. 18.
they are forgeuen, whose sins you retain, they be retained: But the
temporal, if he will not use it always, you may not therefore in all cases
take it from him. Whereas, for the commodity of the whole church (if cause so
require) he may as swell forbead, (concerning the Emperors own person,) that
no man salute him, or regard him, as he may excommunicate the basest man in a
whole city, for a fault which deserves it. which is true, in a Christian
Emperor, that has submitted him self by promise unto God, and the church: For
of them which are withowt, 1. Cor. 5.
what does it apparteine unto me, to judge? do not you judge of these which
are within? Therefore, the temporal power, is so included in the spiritual,
as a less figure Mathematical, of never so many corners, is compassed within
a circle. It is fynche said of Saint Bernard, Bern lib. 4. de consideratione
Lib. 4. de consideratione, where he speaks of the temporal sword, which the
Pope has in his sheath: Is this sword, (says he) did perteine unto the by no
right, when the Apostles said, behold, here are two swords: owr Lord would
not have answered, it is inowgh, but it is to much. And therefore, both are the
churches, I mean, the spiritual sword and the material. But the one, is to
be exercised for the church, the other, of the church: the one, with the
priests hands, the other with the souldiars. But yet truly, at the beck of
the priest, and bydding of the Emperor.

A, see now master Iuel, Low much Saint Bernard made of that argument, which
you think worth the lawghing at. And this is that Bernard his testimony, whom
you in pulpites, do much bring forth against the pomp and vice of Rome, which
as he was in deed, no flatterer at all, of the Bishop of Rome, so much the
more, you should allow his testimonye, which he has browght forth, for the
supremicie. But, why should (Behold here are two swords) more offend Christian
ears, when one goes about by all means, for to prove and declare a verity:
then the argument of Saint Paul does, Gal. 4.
where he unto the Galathians (in disputing of the old law and proving it to be
void) tells us, that Abraham had two sounes, the one by his maid servant,
the other by his wife, which (says he) are the two testamentes. Against which
argument, if master Iuell should use one of his deep and witty confutations,
and bydd the people mark, with, see I pray you, what a worshipful argument
this is, Abraham had two sounes, and the elder, played the boy with the
younger, and the good wife Sara, away (quod she) with this old lubber, he
shall not be heir with my child: ergo, the old law, must be thrust out of
doors: no doubt, but this would sound so vntuneablie, in the rude worldly, or
fine courtly ears of many, that sone they might be brought unto irreligion,
and contempt of the Apostles writings.

But let us come nearer (says M. Iuel) and see the arguments, M. Iuell.
upon which the mass is luylded. You say well, of cummyng nearer, for hitherto
you have gone very far of, and very far wide. Yet, what bring you against
the fundation of the mass? I wonder at the liberty of the man. he makes as
thowgh he would ouerturne the mass, and he talks of nothing, but of the
Latin tongue, the corporal of lynen, the altar of stone, the rou^dnes of the
bread, the mettle of the chalice, and such like things, which apperteine only
to the comlynes, and worship, and signification, of some good thing, about the
ministering and consecrating of the sacrament. Are these the things which you
number, among owr high mysteries and secret lernyng? And which you were loathe
to speak of, as thowgh there had been some shameful dishonestie in the matter?
Or do you call these things, the fundacions of the mass, upon which it was
builded? Are these the points, by uttering of which, you have gone abowte to
procure us shame? Grawnt unto the Catholics or papists, that which they do
bring in, by their high mysteries, secret lernyng, and strength of their
reasons. grawnt it, I beseech you good master Iuell, for a while, to see what
will follow? Truly, no dishonor unto God, no diminisshing of Christ his
passion, no occation of lewdnes, no breach of commandment, no thing which a
quiet man should mislike. But these things will follow, which you were loathe to
ripp up and open, that, in the celebration, the chalice be of silver or gold,
that priests wassh their hands in the mass. that the clothes be of fine
lynen, that the priest lift up the paten, and look in to the chalice, as the
angel did in to the grave, that the priest fetch a sigth, in a certain place
of the Canon of the mass, and knock his breast, with remembrance of the theife
which repented him self of his wicked life, with such like more, which may and
do bring many meanly disposed, in to the remembrance of sundry points of
Christ his passion. O heaven and earth: what faults be these? How much is
master Iuell to be esteemed, for rippyng and opening of such privy mysteries,
which once being known, no man would ever love the mass any more I trow? It
is wonder that Saint Pawles church and steple were not stricken with lightning
from heaven, when the fierst mass was said within it, in which mass, such
absurdities as the preacher tells us of, were permitted. O excellent Iuell,
thou have not thy name for nawght. This day, thou have confounded all
papists, this day, thou have so ripped their copes, and opened their
bosoms, and Englisshed unto us their observations and rubrikes, that they must
needs be ashamed for ever. O the living Lord (will the folissh say) how have
we ben seduced of the papists? how much were they them selves heavy laden
with men's traditions? and how little virtue was in all their doings, if a man
should take away, the number of popis^h ceremonies?

But alas for pity, and phy for shame. A learned man and browght up among
honest studies, so for to abuse the ignorance of the unlearned and unsteadfast
people, that they should think, nothing else, to be in the sacrifice and
oblation of the Catholics, but an observation of a strange tongue, lynen cloth,
altar of stone, chalice of gold, or other such matters? Although I would not
suffer a suspect person, to cut my hear, and would not trust him with paring
of my nails, and no man (that wise is) permits his enemy to do with the
making of his apparel, or the prescribyng of a diete and order unto him: yet
the life it self, is an other thing, then hear, nail, apparel, or diete,
and the heretic has not to meddle, with the behauyors and ceremonies of
Catholics, althowgh the life of owr soul consists not in them: but in the
holy and relieuing Sacraments. What should we do, by M. Iuells pryuie and
wise counsel? if we did putt away, for his pleasur, the ceremonies, which
offend his ghostly spirit: should we have nothing to putt the bread and wine
upon, that he finds so great fault with an altar? surely, what so ever
matter, the altar had been made of, good men would have sone applied, some one
text, or other to that purpose. He has a spite against the golden chalice:
should we drink then without a cupp? what so ever metal, the chalice had been
made of, great scholars would have showed, some place or other, serving for it.
And no doubt, the things them selves were first used, for some good cause and
reason, not expressed in writing perchaunse, but left in tradition, which being
not always known and manifest unto all learned men: they, upon the confidence
of the truth, and holiness which is in the church, and also upon this
principle, that nothing is to be condemned which serves unto charity: The
traditions and ceremonies of the church, are to be received and continued
withowt reason alleged.
added a probable and likely reason, which should make for the ceremony
received. And whereas, without any reason alleged, every tradition is to be
continued: why should it be so much the worser, because a reason is invented
for it?

There is no principal part of a man, of whose fasshion, situation, or manner,
the philosophers did not, either give the reason, or seek after it, at the
lest. As, why the eyes, be placed on high? why there be two of them, one tongue
seruyng us? why the fingers be so many? why the thumb so thick and short? why
the brain so cold, set in the head? why the heart so hott, placed in the
middle? and so fu^the in the rest. Yet, I am sure, they stood not by God, when
he made the world, that because of the Ergo, which they had concluded, God
should make that part of his creature, which should agree with their reason. As
(in example) the heart (...) hott, and some cold thing must be invented, to
assuage the feruentnes of it, ergo set the cold brain directly over it: I
think not, that any man did at the beginning make this reason, and that
therefore God did answer him, with, you say well gentle philosopher, it shall
be so, as yowr ergo concludes. But God, most wyselie and agreablie, has set
every part of us in his order. of which has doing, there be causes, and
reasons, more then any man can t^ll. upon the inventing and serching of which
he has set those occupied, which will study natural philosophy, and
consider the works of wisdom. Not so yett, that when any man, has geauen a
proper and probable cause, of the making or disponing of any creature: that
cause which the man inventeth, should be termed the occasion and cause of that
creature. But this does follow, that God is a wonderful wisdom, which
(allthowgh no man should find fault with his doings, but take them as he has
appointed) has provided yet, that such good reason, should be seen in all his
workinges: that he must be, not only stubburne, but also folish, which would
strive and murmur against them.

And so I think, for the ceremonies of all kinds which are used in the church,
of which a great number have come from the very Apostles, and the rest have been appointed, by them which had Apostolic authority. These ceremonies then,
once received of the Catholykes were kept of them for obedience sake, which
knew not the reason and occasion of them. Then lo, the learned men, Of the
antiquity authority and causes of the ceremonies of the catholic church.
having good judgment and leisure, and knowing that nothing has been
rasshelye allowed in the universal Church of the Catholics: either received or
invented (as God should putt in their minds) a probable cause of the churches
ceremonies and traditions, and the posteritye also would perchaunse, increase
their forefathers godly inventions, so that at this day, of one ceremony of
the church, you may have three or four devout causes, wherein we must not
make folysh arguments, of this says Durand, ergo this was the very
fundation, of the ceremony.

And now, let every man so work about the reason of it, as he may gather
most vantage and profitt, to the sturring up, The cause and institution of the
white lynen corporal.
of his devotion. Christ was buried in a shroude of lynen cloth, ergo the
corporal must be made of fine lynen. This argument may be found in Siluester,
quod master Iuell. Ergo before this argument, and before the time of Siluester,
was not the corporal of lynen? Beds. in cap. 25. Mar^^.
yeas, S. Bid an ancient father, testifies, that holy Sixtus long before
his time, did make that order, that the sacrifice of the altar should not be
exequated, neither on silk, neither on colored cloth, but clean white lynen
only. Again, Hi^re. 51.
Babylon is a cupp of Gold in my hand, says the Lord, ergo the chalice must
be of silver or gold. This reason master Iuell testeth at, Of the antiquity of
(...) in the church
as the argument of master William Durand. But, were chalices of gold never
used, before Durant made that reason, or application? yeas, Prude^tius
above.xij. hundred years past, Prudent, de (...).
speaks expreshe of golden chalices, which the Emperor would have taken from
the Christians. When Virgill says, Cum faciam vitula, he used facere for
sacrificare, ergo hoc facite in me^ memoria^, Iuell.
is meant, sacrifice this in remembrance of me. May we thank Virgil then, for
owr sacrifice? And except that verse had been espied, would there have been no
priesthode at all, or proper sacrifices of the Christians? And yet, in the
very scriptures themselves, facere is used for sacrificare. 13. Iud.
as in the.xiij. Chapter of Judges, I beseech the (says Manue to the Angel)
that thou willt yield to my requests, and faciamus tibi hoedum de capris, and
that we may offer up unto the a kydd of the gotes. But what need I, to speak
further in this matter? The truth is very plain, that the things themselves
were used, before the reasons of Siluester and Durand were alleged.

And therefore, it is a plain lie to imagine that their reasons were the
fundations of our ceremonies and orders, as who should say, before Durand and
Siluesters days, they were never invented. And therefore once to make an end
of this place, these nice fellows, which having no religion yet of their own,
have idleness and lice^tiousnes inowgh, to find fault with others piety: they
may be well compared to the wanton dame Michol, which lookyng out at a window,
upon the king David her husband, and mislyking much his daunsing before the
ark of God almighty, 2. Reg. 6.
O (quod she tauntinglie) how worshippfull was my Lord this day, discovering
him self before his handmaydens? 1. Paralip. 15.
And (says the scripture) she despised him in her heart, by likelihode because
he had a white lynen cloth, as rochett or surplesse upon his back, like a
priest. And so these now, from the window of their high contemplation, or
despection rather of other, when they behold good and blessed men, to dance
before the ark of God, and to make in their turninges and returnynges, the
scriptures pleasantly to allude unto the ornaments of the sacrifice, and the
true manna, which is the body of Christ, Are not heretics, wanto^ and baren
Michols, or dawghters of Saul.
and perchaunse thorough liberty of spirit, and excess of joy, show a little
their bare, O, say these daughters of Saul, what goodly doctors are these,
and how clean is their religion? See, what golden cups, and altars of stone,
and fine lynen clothes, and rowndnes of hosts, and wasshinges of hands, and
sighthinges of heart, and what reasons they have? Behold, the Son and the Moon
do rule day and night: and again, two swords be here, ergo the Pope is
better then an Emperor, and may sit judge over spiritual and temporal
matters.

How gloriouse lo (say they) be these young fathers and lords of the church?
But what says the truth for Catholics? Marye, bycawse God has chosen us,
to be rulers of his church, and has preferred us before the stowtnes of the
Protestants, and because in owr arc and church the law and the Gospel is
contained, with the authority to correct miscreantes, which is the rodd of
Aaron, and the pott of heavenly Manna, which is the body of owr Sauyor:
therefore, if owr discovering of owr selves does green you: we will not only,
not be ashamed of the applications of scriptures, which we have used, but we
will hereafter be more studiouse, in reading, in using, in expownding of the
scriptures, that no history, prophecy, battle, name of person, place, or
country, no hill, flood field, nothing at all, shall escape us, but we will
bring it unto some good sense, allegorical, moral, or analogicall: we all
know, that Theologia mysti^a non est argumentis apta, and that the sense
mystical, is not of sure strength in reasonyng. but owr arc being sure, and
the growndes of owr religion being well setteled, and out of dawnger: for the
rest, we may sing and play, and be joyful, and harp upon the scripture. In
using of which if a curiouse (...), shall see us discovered, or in part, naked:
it is not owr thowght, whether all things sit about us so well and fynelie,
that heretics and quarellers do not or can not carp at us, but that the ark of God, be safely conducted in to Syon, and placed within Jerusalem. And if
this text of the old law, ( Thou shallt not bynd up the mowth of thy ox which
treads owr thy corn. 1. Cor. 9.
) does not prove, that they, which labor in seruyng the altar, must live by the
altar: yet as long as church, altar, priesthode, sacrifice, and such other
things of weight remain, we will not strive upon the mystical sense of
every chapter in the law whether it proves owr conclusion, that which we
think worth the alowing. These words (as I trust) are reasonable, and this is
the plain truth of the matter. Not to make more ieopardie, then the church
requires, neither to feign upon the Catholics, as that, if a Cardinal tredd
a wrie upon his purple sandales, or the priest at the altar remember not the
theife which hanged on the cross by Christ, and sigth at the remembrance
thereof; that all owr religion is quyte ouerturned. And this much hitherto, for
the answering of that common place of M. Iuells, where he thowght by gathering
of certain absurd arguments (if the people be judge) and by loud and bold
crying out, that these were the secret mysteries of owr religion, and that
loath he was to rip them up, he thought to bring owr whole religion, in to
contempt and obloquie. And now let us consider his last matter, which he
promised to touch.

It can not be denied, M. Iuell.
(says he) but Christ in his last supper, ordained a communion, and showed no
manner taken of private mass. But, what calls M. Iuell a private mass? He
craketh much of the primitive church, as who should say, all antiquity were
with them. And oftentimes, he asks the question, where we can find a private
mass? and will not hear us answer, that we uphold no private mass, and that
this term of (private,) has been invented, but of the heretics them selves.
For the mass in deed, is a common function and office, to be done of a
priest, which is the legate of the people unto God: and God his messenger unto
them, In which offices, he speaks for their necessities, bringyng unto God,
the most noble and rich present of Christ his own body, the sooner to obtain
mercy and grace at the which, not only the visible parties present, but all
Angels and blessed sowles, either in heaven, or in the way thytherward, be
assistants, and do accompany the priest. If.20. men be standing by, is it
common: and if thousands of heavenly hosts, replenysh the place.19. of the
men lackyng, is it private? if it be said in the open church, is it common, and
if it be browght unto a little chapel, is it private? what means he by this
word private, I would feign understand? And they answer, that, when one alone
receives, what the Protestants mean by private mass.
then it is private. But is that all their reason? why then, if the matter
hangs upon the number of the communicantes, we shall have as many divisions
of common mass, as they have pretty definitions of a private mass. Three
(says the order of the communion book) myndyng to receive, do make a
communion, as three make a college, (as I have heard) with the lawiers, but
one alone maynteyneth it a college, by the selfsame lawiers, ergo that mass
is not private, but common. and yet common of the least, because,) if one
lacked, there could be no communion. well then, if three skore will
communicate, the nombre encreasyng, the state of the mass, is altered, and
therefore let this be called a mass of the common of the more. Now, if you make
up three hundred, that must needs be, a common of the greater. if three
thousand, a common of the more greater: so that we shall have no end, of common
of the more, and common of the less. How much more better is it proved, every
mass to be equally common, because the priest is a common officer, the prayers
be common, the answerer in the peoples behalf common, the church has no
private Mass but every one is common.
the thing offered common, the table common, the thanks geuyng is common, and
as it was in the Apostelles times, all, in that mystery, is common. And these
so many common things, shall one peltyng reason take away, bycawse the priest
alone receives? And shall the lothsomnes to heavenly things, in the people,
cawse that, to be private, which of his own nature, is and (...) no otherwise,
then common? Let some certain Bisshopp of good will and charity, cause bei^^es
and muttons to be killed, and all things prepared, for open howsehold, his
intent being known, and the tables spread, the vssher with loud voice
provoking men to sytt down, if none will use the liberalitye of the good
prelate, may we frelye tawnt at him, and say, he keeps no house at all, or
else but a private table? If a fair common, lie ioyening unto a city, and by
common agreement, the cattle be let to enter in, but three distinct months
in the year: in all the rest of the nine months, were it wisely reported, to
say, this is private? So may one call the seas private, where no man does
travel, and the wilderness private, where no man inhabiteth, and the son
private, if none could come into him, and Christ's very death private, if all
would be infidells. I or did ever any p^^est, forhead the lay people, that they
should not come to communicate? are not the church doors open? may not the
priest, be spoken with all? is not the necessary matter for the Sacrament, of
light charge? has not the church commanded upon the pain of synn, once at
the least to receive every year, because someels would never com to that table?
whereby she declares her sorrow, that many are so rechelesse in matter of their
salvation, and how glad she would be, to have no occasyon of continuing her
decree? And the Sacrament lying so open, for every man and woman, and the
priest so ready, and the service of the mass so daily, must it, (on Luthers
name,) be called pryuate, because none will communicate? Or, is the meat on
the table, and the gestes at the table, all one? and if the gestes depart, will
the disshes arise with them? and is the people be singular, must the mass be
pryuate? well, yet lightely then, upon Easter day in parish churches, there are
no private masses, and so those masses be owte of yowr reach Master Iuell.
Then put this case, that at one priests mass, there were some receauers, at
a^nothers none at all, both priests using one book and service, if he which
says the private mass, (as you term it) do naught, how do you excuse him,
withwhom some communicate? or if his mass be good, which has certain to
receive with him, why shall the others be reproved, which althowght he receive
alone, yet he says no more nor less, then his fellow does? In my mind, it is
out of reason and purpose, to find fault with the mass, because of them which
here the mass and for the slowth of the people, to disprove the diligence of
the priest, and because of unwillingness in men, to distroye the mysteries and
pleasure of God. But now, M. Iuel, lest he should seem to speak withowt
authority, he reckons up, the institution of Christ, the order which S. Paul
receiuyd, the practyse of the primitive church for the space of six hundred
years. And what will you prove by all this? Mary (says he) that at those
days, there was a communion. Well we do grant that in the beginning, the
people received with the priests. But what do you infer of that? ergo there
was no private mass, and the priest did never receive alone. I deny your
argument For these two things: the people to receive with the priest, and a
priest yet to receive alone, be not contrary, but that at these days, they may
be both verifyed in one church at an Easter time. But I will not be so hasty
with you: and I grant that at the beginning the people did communicate daily
ergo the private mass is naught. Well Sir, if this be the fault, ^t shall be
amended with me, and I will never say mass hereafter, but some shall
communicate with me does this please you? and is the mass, which I say, in
this case allowable or no? I know what you must say (if you follow your
masters), that it is not allowable. Truly then I may well come within you. For
if the having of co^municantes at my mass, do not make the thing perfect:
neither the lack of them shall make it imperfect* what is the mass the
better, if three receive with me? No jot says the heretik* what is it the
wo^ser, if none will communicate? In no point, he should answer. so that to
have or lack communicantes, is but an accide^t unto it, and may be absent
either present, beside the corruption of the subject. Therefore, if you could
prove, that S. Clement, S. Denis, S. Iustyne, and the rest, did use a contrary
mass unto owres, you should say sumwhat, but now, you troble your self, with
proving, that many did receive with the priest, in the primitive church (which
no man denies) and you infer thereupon slenderly, that private mass was not
then used* which nothing avails. for more or less, all or none, to receive
at a mass, it makes so little difference, that as owr mass is nothing the
better (as you will say) if all present by, should receive: in so by the like
conclusion, it is nothing the worse, if none do communicate. And as the
goodness or naughtines of the priest, does nothing profit or hinder the
mysteries in themselves: so much less, the coming or the going of the people,
can withstand the effect of God his word and will. Now yet, althowgh I have not
to deny the testimonies of the fathers, which in this part are alleged, which
are not unknown unto Catholics, and are regarded of them: that not
withstanding, I will look upon them, and consider their faces, most grave in the
sight of Catholics, but not so with the Protestants, which some times give
reverent and humble lokes up toward them, and at other times with scoffs and
disdaynes inowgh, they pass lightly by them.

Behold now, The inconstantie and uncertentie of heretics.
how much is made of S. Clement? whom ower Iuell puts in the first place,
but at another time, how much he will regard him? it appears manifestly by
the praise which he gives to him, saying (who, as they say, was S. Peter's
scholar) I am content now. As who should say, that Clement stand for S. Peter's
scholar, but this I speak, not upon mine own thinkyng so, but (as they say.)
For if I be urged with any testimonye of that epistle of his, unto S. James (as
it has many popissh things in it) I will answer, that I know not what fellow
this Clement was, but as they say, he was S. Peter's scholar. And what then say
you of him, M. Iuell.
if a man should ask you? Then follows S. Dionisius, an ancient writer, and,
as some have thowght, Disciple unto S. Paul, although the contrary may
appear, by his own words. well yet, let it be marked that Master Iuell
confesses him to be an ancient writer, for a certain purpose, when we shall
prove many things to lack in the late setting up of this new religion, which
were used in the primitive church, as frankin^ense, oil, salt, syngyng,
crossyng, hands wasshyng, and such like, which Saint Denis reckons up.

In the third place S. Iustine is alleged, but to the shame of the communion
in English* because S. Iustine makes mention of wine and water both, the
English order having wine only without water. And again, if any were absent,
in S. Iustines days, the sacrament was carried home to them, which, according
to the express form of the Gospel, and S. Paul, should (as these men
report) be received, not alone at home, but in the congregation, togeathers
with other.

After him, S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, S. Leo, are browght in, to
prove that, which catholics ever confessed of, that in the primitive church
the people did communicate with the priest, with which thing it might stand
well inowgh, that the priest did his office, although the people would somtymes
not communicate: for of the daily sacrifice, and receiving of the priest, used
in the old church, S. Chrysostom says in the.24 homel^, upon the first unto
the Corinthians: Do we not offer daily? yes we do offer, Chris. homil. 24. ad
1. Cor.
but thereby we make a remembrance of his death.

But of the slacknes of the people, S. Ambrose says: It is a daily bread, why
do thou receive it, Ambr. lib. 6. de Sac. cap. 4.
after a year, as the Grecian^ are accustomed to do? So that, if the priest
should tarry for the people, and they would not receive, and if he could not
consecrate, and do his office, except some would communicate, then had they in
Greece, in some parts thereof, but one communion through the whole year, which
is to absurd and unreasonable, and also against S. Chrysostom, Chrisost. ad
Ephesians. hom^l. 3.
ad Ephesians. ho. 3. where he makes express mention of frequent and often rece^uyng.
But now see what a reason he brings against us? even by the very mass, which
is at this day used, he proves, that private mass was never practiced.
Because the prayers and blessings, and actions of owr mass, do apparteyne to
the plural number, and therefore unto a communion, and not to the private
mass. Which thing, being grawnted, it will follow then, that the form of the
mass is very ancient, and made within.v^C. years of Christ, after which
time, private mass came in place, as they seem to say. For reason does give,
that unto a private mass the rulers of the church, would not have given a
common form, ergo this mass, which at these days is used, which sounds of
a communion, was before the private mass, ergo it is very ancient, ergo it
should not be so much taunted at, as M. Iuell has done, in the beginning of
his Sermon. And further it does appear, that the mass has no lack in it
self, as the which agrees in sense and words, for more then one to receive at
it: but only the fault is, in the people, which will not conform them selfs,
unto the order of the mass. Chrisost. ho. 3. ad Ephesiot. Astat me^sa regia,
adsu^t Ang^^li mensae huius ministri.
And yet I say further, that the words of Oremus let us pray, and orate pro
me, pray for me, be truly said, when the priest alone receives, because more
are present at ouery mass^, then any bodelie ey^ can see. And also, because the
priest is not a private person when he is at the alter, but a common officer of
the whole church, whose presence is always understood, to be at the office
of the mass, even as she is present at the baptising of children, if neither
god father nor god mother, neither mydwife, neither parish clark, were within
he^^ng, but only the young infant which has no discretion, and the priest (or
some other in time of necessitye) to baptize the child, in the name of the
father the soune and the holyghost.

Now after all this, he allegeageth the Canons of the Apostles, a decree of
Cal^xtus, the Dialog of S. Gregory. O Lord God, what faces have these men?
They know in their own ha^^es, that the Canons of the Apostles, and the
Dialoges of S. Gregory, make so much against them, that they are constrained to
repel them both, and privily (by your leave) to laugh at S. Gregory. And yet
now, see what a good countinance they bear toward them? But all that, which
any of these ^ore named witnesses do conclud, is, that in the primitive church
the people did communicate, or, when they were slack and tardye, the good
Bishops did make them, to hasten them selves, with these words and like,
Gregor. in dial. Chrisost. ho. 3. ad Ephesos
except you communicate, depart you hence, if you be not ready, and worthy to
receive, you be not worthy to be present etc. But when charity, for all the
good men's exhortatio^s, daily decreased, and for all their sainges, that
Christia people should often receive.
when very few did receive, should the daily sacrifice fail? should the order
of Melchisedech have his end? should there be no priesthode any more, because
the people did not co^muc^te? The rulers of Christ his church, did exhort and
wish, that men would receive daily, which when they could not obtain, they
commanded, that yet at the least, every sunday they should communicate, which
after a space being grievous unto many, they brougth it unto.3. principal
feasts of the year, Christmas, Easter, and Whitsontyde. And those.3. at length
seming to many in England (for in other countries they keep them, Fabian^ Papa.
and more to, unto this day) it was last of al enacted by the church that he
which would not receive at Easter, Inno^^tius 3 Extra. de p^e. and remiss. ^a.
Omnis.
having no necessary impediment, should not be accounted for a Christian. And
should we in this wicked world, have no oblation or service, betwixt Easter,
and Easter, if in all that space, none but priests by them selves would
receive? Also does any wise man judge it necessary, that in these days all
orders be appointed, upon the pain of deadly sin, which were in the
primitive church used? At those days, by the.10 Canon of the Aposteles, he
which had not tarried at the prayers, until the end of mass, and received the
holy communion, was suspended therefore. But now, the best of every parish does
come and go at his pleasure, and receives but thrice in the whole year, to
fulfill the act of parliament, and is quyte out of dawnger of so great a
punishment as suspension is to be compted. By S. Gregory his dialoges, he
should depart, which did not communicate, and now they which receive not, do
tary^ in yowr church withowt fault, until their turn of receiving comes. At
those days Catecumenes in the faith, Chrisost. and Basiliu^ in suis Liturg^^s.
and the penitentes were commanded to go forth, and now even those which are
of a contrary religion, are compelled to come in. Therefore the heads of the
church, have ever wrought wisely, easyng the rigor of their statutes, as it
should be best, for the ^^difying, and not destroying of the people. Glad to
receive them every day^, if that every day they would come. Glad to receive
them on sondayes, and if not th^n, yet thrice a year, once at the least: or if
the people would never come, shall their incredulity make void the truth of
God?

And may not a priest enter in to the most holy places of Sancta Sanctorum,
exc^pt the whole parish go in together with him? Therefore, grawnting that in
the primity^e church, (when all Christians lived so honestly in their common
behauior, as a few do live in these days in the monasteries) they received
dayli^, throwgh the seruentnes of there charity: it stands yet, with good
reason, that if none receive now with the priest, the service and sacrified
which was in the primitive church, should never the less continue. because the
not receiuyng, is imputable unto the fault of the people, but the order of
service and sacrifice, has been received of Christ, the Apostles, and their
successors. And so M. Iuell you need not, to cry out, with O Gregory, O
Augustine, Iuell.
O Jerome, O Chrysostom, O Leo, O Dionisie, O Anacletus, O Sixtus, O Paul, O
Christ. as though they have deceived you, and tawght you schisms and d^^sions,
for you say, if the people receive not, there can be no mass at all: and the
fornamed say, according to the state of their time, that if the people will not
receive, they depart and give place. To deny obstinathe, that if a priest say
mass, and receive alone, it may be auayleable, that is an heresy. to exhort
and persuade, that the people prepare them selves, to receive daily, that is
the doctors saying, and here unto agree the Catholics.

And now, we are come to the place, where the preacher does most dilate him
self, with crakyng and lying, with provoking of others, and enforcyng him
self, so abundanthe, that one would look, that he should bring sumwhat. Yet, he
talks so co^fusely, that I can not tell, wherewith to begin, some things, which
he asks, deserving no answer, other things, which he denies, requiring
whole treatises.

They have ( says he) herm (which is the matter of the private mass) not one
father, not one doctor, Iuell.
not one allowed example of the pri^^^ue church, to make for them. I speak not
this ( quod he) in vehemency of sprite, or heat of talk, but even as before
God, in the way of simplicity, and truth and therefore, once again I say, that
of all the words of the holy Scripture, they have not one. Lo, one would
think, that the Catholics did maynteyn, a certain thing called a private mass,
in despyte and contempt of the layetie. And that this private mass, were such
a thing, as makes or marreth owr religion for ever, for which yet, we can
allege, no Scripture, no example, no council, no doctor, no ancient father.
But shall I answer briefly? the church of Christ, has and knows no private
mass, and therefore to what purpose is it to require that she should prove it?

And although, some masses are said in the morning, the church acknowledges
no private mass.
some before the King and his Cownsell, other before the commons, some where
none will receive, other where a few are prepared thereunto: yet the mass is
not divided, among them which have lernyng, into morning mass and high mass,
or royal mass and low mass, or common mass, and private mass, as it were,
the proper distinct kinds of mass: or as herit^kes may be essentiallye
divided, into Lutherans, Zuinglians, Anabaptists, and such like. But, as there
is but one natural Soon of God, Ihesus Christ, which took flessh for mankind,
and one oblation was offered by him once for all: so there is but that one
oblation, which still contineweth, and but one mass. Further* now, Iuell.
if any learned man, of all owr adversaries, or if all the learned men that be
alive, be able to bring any one sufficient sentence out of any old Catholic
doctor, or father, or general Counsel, or holy Scriptures, or any one example
of the primitive church. The sentence is very long: the conclusion is, that if
we can bring any proof against them, in a nombre of articles, which he
recyteth, then will he yield and subscribe unto us. A Gods name then, what
shall we prove? Eyrst, (quod he) that there was any private mass, in the whole
world, at that time. No, there was none then, neither is there any now, among
the Catholics. Or that there was any communion ministered unto the people under
one kind. Unto this, what if I should answer no: and say, that.vjC. years
after Christ, the people received under both ki^des: owr Catholic faith, is in
no dawnger thereby, and we are not rebels, or traitors, to the ordenance of owr
Savior, and the primitive church. For in a matter indifferent, the church may
follow what part shall please her, and this receiving in one or both kinds, is
indifferent, as concerning the layetie: and this is so plain, that owr
aduersa^^es do confess it. The right third Elias, R^ceiuing under both ky^des
is a thing indiffer^ent concerning the laity.
and restorer of the Gospel, M.D. Luther in a book of his unto the Bohemians,
Because in deed (says he) it were goodlye, to use both kinds, and Christ has
commanded in this point, nothing as necessary, it were better, to follow peace
and unity, then to strive upon the forms and kinds of receiuyng the
sacrament. Thus first the^, could I answer safely inowgh, Receiving under one
kind, ^^wed in the primitive church.
but I will take an other way, and prove by good authority of fathers, and
examples of antiquity, that within.vjC. years after Christ, the sacrament was
received under one kind. Christ owr Savior, Luc. 24.
took bread, brake it, and gave it unto the two disciples, with whom he turned
in at Emaus: and before he did the like with any wine even in the very brekyng
of the bread, he vanysshed out of their sight: but that bread was his body, as
S. Augustine and Theophilact do testifye, Aug. lib. 3. de consen. eua^. ca.
25. Theo. (...) Lucam cap. 24.
therefore was there receiuyng of Christ his body under one kind in the
primitive church. I trust this testymonie be ancient inowgh. Likewise in
the.xx. of the acts of the Aposteles, S. Paul and the Christians came
together, upon a sunday, to break bread: but there is no mention of wine, ergo
they did receive under one kind. If you deny the brekyng of bread, to be taken
in that place, for the sacrament: besides that learned fathers do so expownd it,
Act. 20.
the time it self, (because it was the next day after the Saboth, which is ow^
sunday) does make it lykely, and the latenesse of receiving of it, is a good
argument thereof also. Bycawse if they had com to supper, they would have tasted
thereof before midnyght, but at midnyght the young man Eutichus fell down from
the upper loft, where S. Paul preached, or talked to them, and after that the
Apostle had putt them in good comfort, that he was not dead: then lo, he
ascended again and brake bread, and tasted it, and so co^tynued his talk
until the morning. So that the circumstance of the day, which the Christians
kept holy, and the vnseasonablenes of the time, to go to supper after
mydnyght, sytting down to it before son set at the least: does prove better,
that it was the sacrament, then that it was common bread. But if you deny the
argument, that, because only bread is named, ergo there was no wine: remember,
I pray you the^, your own fashion of reasonyng, when you say, there is no
mention of this or that place, of S. Augustine, Ireney, Denis, and others, of a
private mass: ergo they had no such mass as we use.

Item there is no mention of lyfling up the sacrament, or setting it under a
canopye, or of the solutions to schole me^nes questions: ergo there must be no
such things at all. further then, you do not deny, Libr. 2. ad vxor. Lib.
de. corou^ militis.
but in Tertullian his time, the sacrament of the one kind, I mean of bread,
was carried by the Christians home to their howses. and received, at their
necessities (if persequution or sickness did com upon them) or r^ceiued at their
most leisure and devotion (if there were no danger toward them) And plain
it is, Cyp. Ser. 5 de lapsis.
by S. Cypryane, that in his time some carried the sacrament of one kind, home
also with them. But you answered, this to be an abuse: well yet then, the
communion under one kind, owght not to be so strange unto you: As also if it
were an abuse, it was in carrying it home, not in taking it under one kind.
Cyp. sermon. de lapsis
And S. Cipryan, if he had understood the sayings of Christ, so grosselye as
you do, he would never have suffered the people, to have been robbed of half
the sacrament, he would never have thowght any profit or presence to be in the
one kind, except with the concurring of the other, and then, he could not have
written it, for a great miracle, that when a nawghty woman, did begin to open
her chest, in the which that holy thing of owr lord was, she was made a
frayed, Ireneus in epist. ad beat. Vict.
with fire rising from thence, that she should not touch the sacrament with her
unworthy hands. This would S. Ciprian never have declared, for (according unto
your minds) he should never have believed it. Now, to let pass an ancient
custom of the church of Rome, which was, that the sacrament should be sent
reverently, unto strangers, priests and Bishops, which came to Rome: (which
proved that the sacrament was kept, and consequently therefore in one kind,
because wine does quyckely wax sowar) And that in S. Jerome his time (which M.
Iuell mentions in the beginning of this sermon of his) the sacrament was
reserved, and carried home of some Christians: And to let pass, a provision of
Melciades Bishopp and martyr, that because of heretics, (which did not all
things rightly) the sacrament should be sent from church to church (which by
good reason, should be in form of bread) to let all these pass, Basil. ad
Caesar. patritia^
I will rehearse only S. Basils testimonye, for this matter, which says: Ye
were superfluous, to declare, that in the time of persequution no priest or
deacon being present, a man to be constrained by necessity, to receive with
his own hands the communion, is not evil or hurtful. because that by long
custom, even by the very use and practyse of things, this has been confirmed,
for they, which lead a solitary life, in wilderness, where no priest is,
kepying the Sacrament with them, they communicate by them selves. And in
Alexandria and Aegipt, every one of the lay people, for the most part, has the
communion in his own house. Of which testimonye, it is gathered, that the
priest may as well receive alone in the church, as the people may at home: And
also, that the sacrament was kept for the fear of death, which seemed to be
always present, in the pers^quutio^ which raged: And therefore of goo^
lykelihode, it was kept in one kind, where as wine will sone be altered: Now,
if these reasons and authorities did nothing prove against him, we may, by M.
Iuells leave, use examples and histories: among which it is a notable one, that
Dionis^s Alexandrinus scholar unto Origines, reports of Serapio^ a man of
Alexandria, which lying three days spechelesse, on the soweith, Eccl. hist.
li. 6. ca. 44
called his dawghter unto him, and willed some to be sent unto the priest for
the sacrament. But the priest being syck, he delivered the messenger a part
thereof, commanding him to dipp it first in somewhat and to soften it, (for dry
bread goes down very hardly with sick persons) and so to deliver it to the
old man his master. And the old man after he had received it, departed this
world gladlye. Out of which example it is necessa^^lie gathered, that first the
priest had in his house and last of al it may be gathered, that it was under
one kind, either as most meetest to be kept, either most safe to be carried,
or, as likewise profitable to the sick person, as if both kinds should have
been delivered. A another example as notable, Ambr. in orat. sunebri de obi^u
frat. sui
is, of S. Satyrus. S. Ambrose his brother, which, before he was fully and
perfectly traded in owr religion, being in dawnger of shipwreck, required of
the perfect Christians, which were in the same ship and dawnger with him, to
have that divine sacrament of the Christians, Not to set a curiouse eye, upon
those mysteries, but to have help for his faith. Which being given unto him,
he made it to be bound up in a stole, and the stole he wrapped about his neck,
and passing upon no boerde or rybb of the broken shipp, to help him self
withal, he was safelye and meruelouslye browght to land, and straytwaies
askyng, where the church was, thither he went, and received that blessed
Savior, which had delivered him from drowning. Lo, what can we have more, for
owr purpose, and more against the Christians had the Sacrament, and that it was
in one kind (except they can deuyse, how to keep wine, by wrapping it up in a
stole.) Also that it was no fantastical Or that the people had their common
prayers in a strange tongue, Iuell.
that they under stood not. I think verily, that as every country was
conquered, by the preaching of the Apostles successors. so the conquerors
thereof, planted such order of service, as the mother church used, from which
they were sent. Even as S. Augustine, when he came from Rome, in to this
country of owrs, he made not a new Englisshe service, or Kentish rather, after
the nature of those quarters, Laten ser^^^ was brought in to England by S.
Augu^^ne, and used there generally.
at which he arrived: but rathe^ used the Roman fasshion and language. neither
has it ever ben written or testified, that according to the diuersit^^s of
speeches here in England, proper service for every quarter thereof, was
provided. But the contrary rather does appear, that one tongue was generally
used in their mass and mattins. ^uen as at these days, there is no fault
fownde, or else it is no dawngerous fault, for the Welsche men, Cornyschemen,
Northern, and Irysh, to use one order of the English church, and the longer it
is suffered, the farther of it is still from amendyng: So, what cause is there,
why that laten service being browght into this realm, by the Pope his goodness,
and owr Apostle S. Augustine, the same might not co^tinew throwgh the realm,
as it was by little and little, subdewed unto the gospel of Christ. Especially
where as in these days fault is fownd, with the unknown tongue, which people
can not understand, and yet the welshemen have no welshe communyon, and at
those blessed and quiet times, there was no lack fownd at all, when the priest
and the clergy, should sing and pray by them selves, and the people by them
selves entend their private devotion. S. Paul writing to the Romans, not a
form of service but a very sermon (as it were,) wherein he entreats of most
high, and again most familiar matters, yet he write in Greik and not Latin.

Which thing, did he, (trow you) for the lack of the Latin tongue? no, that is
not true, in him, which had the gift of all tongues. Did he think, that all the
Romans, had the knowledge of Griek, as well as of Latin? Truly, that was for
any simple man more meeter to think, then for the wisdom of S. Paul. Had he
forgotten him self, being always of that mind, that in the congregation, he
would rather speak five words, that other might be the better for them, then
five thowsande in a s^rawnge tongue? No, he thowght to earnestly of the cause of
Christ, to forgettsuch a principal matter, as this is, according to the
heretykes declamations. And then, in an epistle, by twenty parts, there is
more cause, to write in the vulgar tongue, then in a common prayer, because in
the service, the quyer occupyeth the place of the people, and answers in
their steed: but in his epistle, none were excepted, but, Romans 1.
unto all you which be at Rome, well-beloved of God, and faithful, grace be to
you (says he* and peace. In to the quyer all did not come in a clompe
together, to here what the priest did read, but abowte the pulpet, or other
where, all might stand well inowgh to here the epistle readen. And so after
this sort, I might find twenty differencyes, betwixt an order of service, and
an epistle. Wherefore I wonder much, that they make such a brablyng, abowte the
strange tongue. and require, what authority, example or reason we have for it,
out of Doctor, Council, or, Antiquitye. It is reason, auctoritye, and proof
abundant, for a Christian man: that, this or that thing has been done or used
universally in the church of Christ, 1. Tim. 3.
were it used but for one year only, because the church is the pyllar of
truth, and has the holy ghost her teacher and governor for ever, and never
has been suffered utterly to have erred, in all her members at one time. And
then, whereas the latin service in the Latin church has been so long used in
these contreys, which understood not the latin tongue, and also they confess a
very long use of it, yt is well inowgh proved, that there is no dampnable error
in the matter. for what tongue fownd you, M. Iuell, in the English church, when
you were borne? or how long before, had the english service, been left vnsayed,
and the latin entertained, a strawnger before a cuntreye man of owr own? if
you can bring forth the books, where the english common prayers, were ever in
the common vulgar tongue, and tell us the name but of one Bishop, which used it
in his diocese, you shall make all men wonder at your invention, and if, never,
any other but latin, has been used, yt is authorytie and reason sufficient for
all English men, that the first co^uertors of this land, unto the says, did
leave the latin service in it, nothing fearing or caring, what a few fine
fellows would persuade to the contrary, after.viij. or.ix. hundred years
continuance. Then also, must all prayers of necessity, be in the common tongue,
or may a few be excepted? if you except any one: why should not the people here
all, and answer Amen unto all? and especially in the most secret matters,
which have most weight in them, and in which the cause of the people, is most
expressed? if all of necessity, must be audiblye expressed: how then does your
doctrine agree with S. Basil, and S. Chrysostomes masses, in the which the
chief priest prays secretelye at the altar, at certain places, whiles the
quyer in the mean time syngeth? Or how could S. Ambros^ (O worthy Bishop) how
could he standing at the alter command the Emperor by his archedeacon to stand
without the Chauncell doors? Rather he should have said to the Emperor, in his
own person, in owr most humble request, may it please your most excellent
wisdom and majesty, to com more nere to the altar, to here the word of God,
which does save our sowles, or else to command the altar to be pulled down,
and that a table may com down to your highness the more commodiouslye to
answer Amen, unto my blessing, even, as it shall please your majesty, so shall
it be. But not so S. Ambrose, not so, he, which moved not one ^oote from the
altar, but sent his archeadeacon, not with supplication, but with reprehension,
not as to an Emperor of the world, but as to a common Christian, saying: O
Emperor, the inward places are appointed for priests only, Hist. Eccl. li.
9. ca. 30.
which others are not permitted, neither to enter into, neither to touch. Go
forth therefore, and ^arye, for the receiuyng of the mysteries, as others do:
for purple makes Emperors, and not priests. Unto which, the Emperor answered
so mekely and Christianlike, that he is more to be wondered at, for the
ouercummyng of his passions, then conquerying of barbarous nations. But, to my
purpose, it appears by this distinction of places in the church, that the
people were not suffered to here al things. And therefore I conclud, that whereas
it is no necessite that all things be understood, which the priest in the
church says, yea rather, if this be against all good order and discipline,
there is no necessity, that the tongue should be common all to geather, where
the hering of the same tongue, must be kept secret.

Or that the Bisshopp of Rome, Iuell.
was then called an universal Bisshopp, or the head of the universal church.
I would to God, that this question of the head of the church of Christ, were
thoroughly known, it would stop a great sort, of hastye preachers and
ignorant, which think them selves able to do much, by cause they can speak in a
matter indifferent probablye: as communion under both kinds, service in the
vulgar tongue, and such like. But, to this question of M. Iuells, I answer,
askyng him first, whether any prince of that time, of which he speaks, did
bear the title of defendor of the faith? and if neither Constantinus, neither
Theodosius, neither any Christian good Emperor, were precisely then so called,
shall it follow, that one may take that title, from the kings of England? Many
things may truly be verifyed of certain persons, which yet they do refuse,
not as vnagreyng with their dignity, but as unapt for keepyng their humility.
As S. Peter, S. Paul, S. James, and John, with all the rest of the blessed
Apostles, Matthew. ^. Psalm. 44. 2. Cor. 10.
were the lights of the world, and rulers of the earth, and co^querors of all
power, which would set it self against Christ, and they did not observe that
style in their writings, neither any of their disciples after them, which also
were lights and governors of the world. Further it is to be considered how
this word (universal Bisshopp) is to be taken. For if you mean universal
Bisshopp, that besides him there is no other in all the world, but that he is
one for all, as the word imports: then also at these da^es, there is no
universal Bishop. But if he be called universal which among all Bishops is
the chiefest and one over all, so is there, In what sense in universal bishop
is to be granted
and must be, one universal Bisshopp in the church of Christ. First then, I
answer, that if none were called universal Bishop.vjC. years after Christ yet
the lack or not geauyng of that title, does not prove, that there was no such
thing, or no supreme head over the church. And further I say, that also in
these days, there is no universal Bishop, if we take the word, after some one
fasshyon. For in S. Gregorye his time (of which place M. Iuel in his sermons
does often triumph) the Bishop of Constantinople forgetting the humility of
Christ owr Sauyor, did much covet to be called universal Bishop: presuming,
that since he was Bishopp of the same city, where the Emperor then dwelt,
which was only Emperor of all: that his name, for that place, might likewise,
with this gloriouse title (of universal Bishop) be right well adorned. against
whom S. Gregory did write, and speak ernestlye, co^dempning the desire of
that gloriouse title, grownding his argument upon the signification of this
word, (universal.) Because (says he) in the epistle unto Ihon, Bishopp of
Constantinople) one should seem, to take away the glory of Bisshoprick^s, from
all the rest of his brothers, which would challenge unto him self, to be
called the universal Bishop. True it is therefore, that there is no Bishop
universal in that forte, as who should say he were only a Bishopp, but like
as (...) the time of the old law, Number. 11.
not only Moses had the grace of governing and prophecyeing, but seventy
elders of the people of Israel, had imparted unto them of his spirit and
dignity, and like as Moses lost nothing of his perfection, for all the
dispensing of some of his graces, emong^^ certain of the elder and worthier: so
the Pope is not so singular, but that he has fellow Bishops to take part of
his function, and for all the multitude of his fellows in office, he continues
in his supremacy, as a Moys^s above the septuagintes. And so, only he has
not all the spirit of God, which for the profit of the body, is distributed in
to sundry members, and none yet is equal unto him in superiority of
government, because in every seemly body, one part is higher then all the
rest. Again, S. Gregory, which was a most blessed Bishopp, might and did
justly, find fault with John of Constantinople, because of his proud
enterprise, although it were granted, that the title (universal) might have
been verified in any one Bishop. So in one sense, which I have spoken of, I
grawnte that there was never, and that now there is none, which is an
universal Bishopp. But yet if we understand an universal Bishop so, that among
Bisshoppes there must be one senior unto all the rest, and eldest brother of
all, under whose correction, they shall each one, enjoy their privileges,
which the ^heife father and ruler has appointed, in this sense, I will prove,
that there was an universal Bishopp, ever in the church of Christ. S.
Anacletus in his second epistle, Anacletus ^pist. 2.
This holy and Apostolic church of Rome (says he) has the primacie and
preemiine^ci^, over all other churches, and over the whole stock of Christ, not
by the Aposte^s, but from owr Lord owr Savior, him self, as he said him
self unto S. Peter, thou art Peter, Matthew. 16.
and upon this rock (this Peter) I will buyld my church. Also S. Cipryan
declaring the return, Cip. Cor. li. 3. ep. 11.
of certain schismatikes unto the faith, prayseth much those words of theirs,
where they said. We know, that Cornelius is set up, by almyghtye God, and
Christ owr Lord, There is one supreme head in the church
Bishop of the most holy Catholic church. And after a little space: We are
not ignor^nt, (say they) that there must be one God, one Christ owr Lord,
whom we have confessed, and one Bishop, in the catholic church. The same
blessed doctor also, Lib. 1. ep. 3.
in an epistle unto S. Cornelius, says, that heresies have risen of no other
cause, but that the priest of God, is not obeyed, and one priest in the church,
vice Christi iudex.
to judge as vicar of Christ, is not r^garded, or thowght upon. Then Saint
Ambrose, whereas the whole world is gods, 1. Tim. 3.
(says he) yet, the church is called his house, of the which, Damasus is at
this day, rector and governor. Further yet S. Augustine, in diverse places,
epist. 106. epist. 93. lib. de vtilitate credendi: calls Rome Sedem
Apostolicam, and what is a seat Apostolic, but that place, which may plant and
pull up and set and let, and has his power over the whole world. S. Ci^^ll
also, In lib. ^hesau.
As Christ (says he) has received of his father, the scepter and rule of the
church of gentiles, which came out of Israel a captain and duke over all
principates and powers, over all that, which so ever is, so that all things
do bow down unto him: so, Christ has committed most fullye unto Peter, and
to no other then Peter, that which fullye is his, and to him alone, he has
given it. And to make an end S. Gregory him self, even in that epistle, where
he speaks against the pride of him, which would be called after a new fashion
(universal Bishopp.) It is clear (says he) unto all them, Lib. 4. Ep. ^p. 32.
which know the Gospel, that the charge of the whole church, was committed,
by the voice of owr Lord, unto holy, S. Peter and chief Apostle among all the
Aposteles, and yet (says he afterward) he was not called universal
Bishopp. Wherefore unto M. Iuells question, if the name of universal Bishopp,
was not in the primitive church: yet the thing it self was, as (...) showed, so
that the name it self (...) have been used, in that sense, as it (...) Bishopp
which has charge (...) and of all the Catholic (...). But as it signifies
him, which (...) other Bishop but him self (...) there neither was, (...)
Bishopp universal. (...) people were then tawghte, to (...) Christ's (...) is
reallye, (...) carnail^e, or (...). The (...) ^ome of God, is not in words,
but in power and strength, and allbeyt, out of hand, it could not be fownd, to
bring a writer so ancient, as you require, for every one of those terms, yet
is the cause nothing the worse: so that it may appear, it is not well to strive
upon the (...), when the thing it self is evident.
by any means, that in the Sacrament is his very body. For I think it would
be very hard, to find, in any writing, of old and holy doctor with in.vjC.
years of Christ, all these words, that he take r^all, substantial,
corporal, carnal, and natural fl^sh^ of the virgin Marie, and yet they were
instructed perfectly, to believe that Christ took owr very flesh, and not a
figure only thereof, as the Maniches did evil report. And so, if I could no^
bring example of all the terms, which you would have proved, yet if I can
conclude that the very body, and not a fantastical supposed body, is in the
sacrament, for the words of carnal, real, corporal, substanciall, and
natural, I need not be woeful. In the sacrament (says S. Jerome unto
Hebidia) the very body^ of Christ, is, of which body (says Isichius in Leu.
lib 6. Cap, 22.) S. Gabriel did say unto the virgin, the holy ghost shall com
upon the. It is called of S. Cyrill, lib. 3. in. 10. Cap. 37. and lib. 10. Cap.
13. the body of life it self, or, of natural life. Of Origene the body of
the word: Of S. Chrysostom, the body which is partaker of the divine nature.
1. Cor. Cap. 10. Of S. Augustine, Psalm. 33. the very crucified body, in the
which he suffered so great things. Of Chris^stome again. 1. Cor. Cap. 10.
the body which was nailed upon the cross, beaten, wounded with spear, which
was not ouerco^med with death. What will a Christian man ask more? and what
need to bring out the words, of carnal, real, corporal, natural, whereas,
the body of Christ being present, and that body, which was borne of the virgin
Marye: it follows, that it is real and natural, or else, we are fallen from
owr faith, in which we believe, that he took real flesh of the blessed virgin.
And here also, where find you, not only within.vjC. years of Christ, but
within.vj. and.vj. hundred, and take three more unto them, that the people were
taught, to believe, that the body of Christ is, only figuratiuelye,
sacrame^tallie, significatiuelye, tropicallie, imaginatiuelie, in the
Sacrament, to the denial of all presence and realitie? S. Damascene, Lib. 4.
de orthodox^ fide ca. 14.
a notable father, writing purposelye of the sacrament of the altar, says,
that it is not simple bread or fode, but united unto the divinity, Also hread
and wine (says he) is not a figure of the body and blood of Christ, (God
forbed,) but it is the very deisyed body of owr Lord, where as he has said
him self, this is my body, not a figure of my body, and not a figure of my
blood, but my blood. But M. Iuell appealeth unto the.vjC. years, next after
Christ, Unto those.vjC. does he appeal? Unto those.vjC. he that be browght,
And I require him to show forth, where it was ever tawght, with in vj.C. years
after Christ, that Christ's body was in the sacrament figuratiuelye only?
Let one sentence, example, aucthoritye, word, or syllable, be browght forth,
of a body, only figurative and significatiue: and he shall have the victory.
Iuell.
Yea but (says he) the real, corporal, carnal, natural presence, was not
preached or tawght, at those days, ergo a figurative body only was believed.
And thus whiles we strive upon terms only, we spend the time in a question
not necessary, and he will not consider the truth, in it self, as it is. Luc.
20.
Christ said, this is my body, which shall be delivered for you. Say the truth,
Is not this, plain inowgh? what if he had said, this is my natural body,
should all mysbeleife on yowr part, have ceased? I think not. for these words
(which shall be delivered for you,) do, as plainly express, what body he
means, as if he had used, the word natural, or corporal. what difference
is in these points, M. Iuell, and the named Bishopp of Sarum, and he, which in
the year of owr Lord. 1561. preached at Paul's cross the second sunday
before Easter? and, after this sort, if I would proced further, what difference
were there, or how many persons, might I be thowght to have named, in the
judgment of them, which know the state of this world? what odds is there,
between four pens, and a grote? what difference, betwixt the very body of
Christ, and the real body? the body borne of the blessed virgin, and the
natural body? the corporal body, and his very flesh? the carnal body, and
the body which was delivered unto death, and hanged on the cross, for us?
This is not childisshnes only, but very wantonness, to ask for the term, of a
corporal and real body, and not to be content with such a body, which dyed
for us: to believe owr eyes, if we should see him, and to discredit his voice,
when we do here him: not to be able to deny but this is the body, which was
delivered for us, and yet to require, whether it be his natural body or no?
And yet, because the church owr mother, which in her self is strong, does
condescend unto the infirmity of those, which once the browght forth, I will
show in one testimony, that even in plain word corporally, Christ his body
is given unto the faithful. And if copye of words delight M. Iuell, I will
prove also, that he is naturally in his faithful. S. Cyrill, Lib. 10. ca. 13.
in loan.
a blessed and ancient father, in reprouyng and confutyng a certain Arrian,
which upon those words of Christ, I am the vine, and my father is the
husbandman, Joan.15.
would infer, that Christ and God the father, were not of one substance, no
more then a vine and a husbandman, are: which Arrian also said, that those
words, I am a vine, etc.) apperteyned unto the divinity, and not the
humanity of Christ. S. Cyrill, (I say) in confuting this reason, has these
words: We do not deny, but we are joined spirituallie unto Christ by right
faith, and sincere charity: but yet, that there is no way of the joining of
us together, with him, according to the flesh, that truly we do veterly
deny. And we say, that, to be altogether, besides the Scriptures. For who
has do^ted, Christ, even after this fashion (understand according to the
flesh) to be the vine, 1. Cor. 10.
and us to be the branches, which receive and get life from thence. Here S.
Paul, saying, that all are one body in Christ. For althowgh we be many, yet
in him we be one, for all take part of one bread. Does he think perchance
(meaning the Arrian) that we do not know the strength, and power of the
mis^icall benediction? which, Note Corpora^^^.
when it is done in us, (...) not make Christ also corporally to dwell in us,
throwgh the communicating of the flesh of Christ? For why are members of the
faithefull, 1. Cor. 10.
the members of Christ? know you not (says S. Paul) that your members are the
members of Christ? And shall I then make the members of Christ the members of an
harlo^^? God for send. Also, owr Savior says: he that ^ateth my flesh and
drinks my blood, remains (...) me, and ^in him. whereupon, it is to be
considered, that Christ is in us, nos only by habitude and fashion, that which
is understood to be throwgh charity, Natural participation of Christ.
but also even by natural participation. For, like as if a man, melting waxly
the fire, would so mengle it with an other wax likewise melted, that of them
both, one certain thing may seem to be made: so by the communicatyng of the
body and blood of Christ he is in us and we are in him. For otherwise, this
corruptible nature of owr body, could not be browght unto incorruption and
life, except the body of natural life, were joined together with it. Do
thou not believe me, speaking these things? give credi^e then, I beseech the,
unto Christ. loan. 6.
Verily verily I say unto you, except you eat (says he) the flessh of the
soun of man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in you, etc. In this
testimonye of S. Cyril, althowgh it be plain to understand, yet shall I put you
in remembrance, of noting two points, the one, that he says, Christ to be in
us, by charity, but not only throwgh charity, which is, when we believe in
him, and long for him, and thank him for his benefits: the other, that even by
natural participation and corporally, and by the natural body of life, he is
in us. Ergo, it is false* to say that the receiving of Christ is only by
faith, and that the body which we receive, is only a figurative spiritual
body, which, heretics have invented. And on the other side, it is true that
besides the spiritual receiuyng of Christ, through^h (...), there is an other
kind, by which his natural body, is corporally joined to owr corporal
body, in which, the Catholics do believe. So that (to use the words of ^.
Cy^^l, which follow in the place forenamed) both spirituallie and corporally,
we are b^^nches, and Christ is the vine. And if you ask the way, how this
has been, and is browghte to pass? the same Doctor in an other place*
declares it most plainelye. Corporally (says he) the soun of God, Lib. 11.
in lo. ca. 27.
throwgh the mystical blessing is united to us, as man: but spirituallie, as
God: he is united unto us, by renewyng owr spirit, by the grace of his
spirit, unto a newlyfe, and unto the partakyng of the divine nature. Christ
therefore is the knytting up, of owr union with God, which is naturally united
unto us, as man: unto God the father, as God. More authorities of this blessed
father, and of others, mygh^ be recited, to the proof hereof, that women, are
joined naturallye and corporallye, unto Christ: not only by that he took owr
nature on him, in the vitgin^ womb: but also rather, because we eat his
flessh, and drink his blood, throwgh the strength of the mystical benediction.
But one insta^ce is sufficient against him, which universally belyeth the
Catholics, that they have no proof at all, to d^clare that the natural,
real, corporal body of Christ should be in the Sacrament, which is so
untruly reported, that the doctors conclude, (S. Cyrill, in the place alleged,
S. Hilarye in the.viij. book De trivitate, S. Gregory Nissenus in oratione
catechetica, and others in diverse places) that except this body of owrs, had a
lyuche body, by participatio^ of which, it should be repaired: it were
impossible, that it should rise again, when it were once by death cast down.
not because, God of his absolute power, were not able to have done it, The
heretics do wea^^ owr hope of the resurrection of owr flesh.
which withowt the incarnation of his blessed soun might have saved the world,
but the order most wise and agreeable once being let out, by almightye God,
that owr soul by his spirit, owr body by his flesh, should be properlye
preserved: now, in this order and wisdom, he, which takes away from
Christians a bodily real presence, he takes away the proper and chiefest
hope of the resurrection of bodies.

Or that hu body is, M. Iuell.
or may be in a thousand places, or mo^, at one time. This question neadeth
not, as many others, which follow in the s^rmon. First because fathers works,
or else that we make doub^e of the principle, which afterward I will make
more plain and probable. Heb. 9. and 10. ho. 17.
that Christ does not offer up him self, oftentimes, as the priest in the old
law, did enter in to the most holy places every year with the blood of
beasts: How then do we? says Chrysostom, do we not offer up every it was
offered in to the most holy places, and this sacrifice is an example, taken
out of that. We offer up, the self same always, and not truly, this time
one lamb, to morrow an other, but always the self same. Therefore this
sacrifice is one, other else, by this reason, because it is offered in many
places, there be many Christ's. No not so, but Christ is one every where, both
here full and whole, and there full and whole, one body. For as he, which is
every where, offered up, is one body and not many bodies, so also the
sacrifice is one. Now, he is one Bishop, which offered up the sacrifice, which
did make us clean, the same we also now do offer, which at that time being
offered, could not be consumed. Yet this which we do, is done in remembrance,
of that which was done. For (says Christ) do this in remembrance of me, we
make not an other sacrifice, as the Bishopp did, but always the same, or
rather, we make the remembrance of that sacrifice. Therefore I conclude, that not
only, it is readen, among ancient fathers, that Christ his body, may be, and
is, in diverse places offered, but that the cause thereof, is, for that Christ is
but one, in all days and places. Note the diversity of making co^clusions,
for the heretics part, or catholics faith.
And note here the diversity of reasonyng betwixt heretics and catholics.
They say, there be many churches: ergo by all reason there must be many bodies,
if Christ's very body be on the altar in every church. The catholics say
with Chrysostom, there is but one Christ: ergo no absurdity there is, if he
be offered up this day, and to morrow, and every day, in every place, in the
whole world. They, by the gross numbering up of diverse places, would conclude
against us, that there must be many bodies. The Catholics, by the believing and
confessing of one body, do grawnt that he is in many places, withowt
division, because the body is but one. They, begin at their senses, and
according to the reason of them, they conclude matters of faith. The Catholics
begin with faith, and afterward command silence and quyetnes, to their
senses. 1 Or that the priest did then hold up the Sacrament over his head. M.
Iuell.
2 Or that the people did then, fall down and worshipp is, with godly honor.
3 Or that the Sacrament was then, or now owght to be hanged up, under a
canopie. 4 Or that in the Sacrament, after the words of consecration, there
remains only the accidents, and shows, withowt the substance of bread and
wine. 5 Or that the priest then divided the Sacrament in three parts, and
afterward received him self alone. 6 Or that who so ever had said, the
Sacrament is a figure, a pledge, a token, or a remembrance of Christ his body,
had therefore been judged for an heretic. 7 Or that it was lawful then, to have.
30. 20. 15. 10. or 5. masses said in one church, in one day. 8 Or that images
were set up in the churches to thentent that the people might worship them. 9
Or that the lay people were then forbedden to read the word of God, in their
own tongue.
Here be.9. questions, as it were.9. worthyes, not all worth one good point.
For it is vnskilfullie required, that of particular things any account should
be given, which are deducted, and may be more deducted herafter, out of the
principal conclusion. As, to show in other examples how unlearned and peltyng
a kind of reasoning this is which he uses: A very sond kind of
interrogatories and questions moved by M. Iuell.
I ask him, where he did ever read in scripture, that Christ did cry for his
mothers breast, or that ever he lawghed, or ever did were peticote, hosen, or
shows, or ever did go in his mothers errant, or, by his handy labor, help
forward toward her finding? Which all, are credible inowgh, (because he took
upon him owr very nature) and all yet, are not necessary to be written. Then to
come to the Apostles: where did he ever read, that in their external behauior,
they did wear frockes or gowns, or four corned cappes, or rochetes, or, that
they did ever cate sodd, roste, or bake meats, or that a company of lay men
servants, did follow them, all in one lyuerye, or that at their prayers they
satt in sides, or lay in the grownd, or fall prostrate, or sang Te Deum, or
looked toward the sowth, or did wear copes of tissue or veluett, with a
thousand more such questions? which be very many, and not necessary, because
they lived and fared undoubtedly, as occasion and cause served, and they did
honor God with the best that they had. And if they were not so rich, to bye
tissue, I think not therefore, that they were naked in their service, and if the
church now, has golden copes, they must not be taken away from her, because of
the Apostles poverty. In whose days, as I need not to tell, what deckyng of
the place they used, where God should be honored, so reason gives, that they
tho^ght nothing to good for him. Let all things be done among you (says S.
Paul) honestly and according unto order. 1. Cor. 14
This is a general principle, with which principle in the Apostles time, it
did agree, that all should come, in to one place of prayer, as in to some upper
chamber, lofte, or parlar: and the same conclusion agreed with Saint
Syluester, Saint Ambrose, S. Chrisostomes, and other times following, when the
quyer was appointed for the clergy, and the body of the church for the
layetie. In the primitive church, when persequutio^s of Christians, did so much
increase, all black apparel did become the clergy well inowgh: but
afterward, when all nations of the world were converted unto Christ, and
Emperors browght their glory into the church, what deadly fault is there, if a
Cardinal wear a skarlet robe, and a Bisshopp a white rochett?

Not, if perchaunse S Paul did travel in his journeys, for the most part, on
foot: therefore, you must set all bisshoppes besides their saddelles. And if he
did pray by the waters side, and in private chambers: you must not therefore
overthrow all churches. For the principle is always one, that we must do
things according unto order. And so, the verytye is, that Christ has left
unto us his very body in the Sacrament, and this is plain by scriptures,
counsels, and fathers. Which veritye standing: what harm is done, in the
showing, of that high mysterye unto the people? what difference and matter is
it, whether it be holden in one hand, or two? lyfted up over the head, or by
the turnyng of the priests face from the altar, showed unto the people (which
the Grecians do use?) Again, the veritye of his body being present, what
beast is he, which beleiueth it, and does not worship (...)? And why might it
not be reserved for sick persons? and why not then closed in a golden or silver
box? and either, be set under a canopye, or placed otherwise withal
reverence? Or how can he be, but an heretic, which says not, that it is a
figure or pledge, but only a figure, or only a pledge of his body? Then,
put the case, that for lack of lerning, or for lack of proof, one could not
show you examples, for those particular questions, in which you require to be
answered, the conclusion and verity, most plainly being proved, those other
things may well follow afterward. As otherwise, if the matter of a canopye,
or lifting it over the head, or namyng of the heretic which said it was a
figure only, if these things and such like, either were not then, or should
not be allowed now: yet it remains still, that in the sacrament, is Christ his
body, and to make plain what body is meaned, it follows, which shall be
delivered for you. Again, it is a ver^tie most certain, that Christ has not
left his church without guides and governors, in which be, first Apostles,
then Prophe^s, Ephesians. 4.
then Eua^gelistes, after these, Pastors and Doctors, to the perfiting of her.
Which if you grant, to what purpose is any talk or brable moved, if more
masses be said, in one church, at one time: if lay men be restrained from
commenting upon the Scriptures: or if the host be divided in to three parts:
or if the lay man receive in one kind alone? where as all these things be
such, that being once appointed, they must needs be observed. And if they never
had been appointed, the verity of the Sacrament were nothing thereby
diminished. To what purpose then, do I speak all this? Truly to come at length
to some end with out adversaries, and to give wa^^ing unto our friends, that in
all things, they require that, which is material and nec^ssary, and learn to
distinct that, from things indifferent in them selves* also to appeal unto
the principal conclusion, and not to meddle with lower matters before the
principal be decided. Can you prove, says M. Iuell, that it was lawful by
the old Doctors and Councels, for the priest to pronounce the words of
consecration closely? What then Sir? I can prove, that there was and must be, a
principal head in the church, by whom we must be ruled, whether he appoint the
words closely or openly to be pronounced. how now then? should any wise man,
and desirous of the truth, have talk with an heretic about the open and close
speaking of the priest, which depends of that other question, whether the
Bisshoppes and heads of the church, may not rule the church of Christ, as
they shall see expedient? what a do is made, about the communion under one
kind: of prayers in the vulgar tongue: and of order in the service? in which
questions, the heretic has this advantage, that whiles these things are
indifferent, he may bring for him self, a probable argument, and the
Catholic, whatso ever he shall bring (except he go to a higher question) he
shall speak but probablye, and so the hearer of both parts can not dissalow
greatly, any one. But if we would come to that, which is the chief in all such
indifferent matters, and reason, whether we should not obey the lawful
Bishops and heads: this question concluded, would sone put to silence all
heresy, and settle well the consciences of true Catholics. I would feign be at
an end, and I can not. For behold, more then a dosen interrogations do follow,
which if I do not answer: I think that will be the best answer, rather then to
trouble both you and my self, in opening all the matters, which go before and
follow after, upon the foresaied interrogations. But what needs, that I go
thorough all his interrogations and articles, whereas if we be able, to auouche
against him any one of them all, he is content to yield and subscribe.

I will show therefore (which he demeth) that the priest has authority to
offer up Christ unto his father. Hebr. 5.
Every Bishop (says the blessed Apostle unto the Hebrews) selected and
chosen out^ of men, is appointed for men, in those things which appertain
unto God, that he offer up gifts and sacrifices for sins. which being a
general proposition, ergo either there be no priests and Bishopes in the new
law, or else they must have a sacrifice, which they may offer. Which sacrifice
must be of that value, that none may offer it but he which is called thereunto,
as Aaron was called* and which sacrifice, must be according to the order of
Melchisedech, as it is written, Psalm. 109.
Thou art a priest for ever, according to the order of Melchisedech. Of which
order, Christ our Lord was in his last supper, as being the priest of the
gentiles, and not anointed with visible oil, as the old Bishops of the law
were, and thirdly, because he offered up sacrifice there, his own body and
blood, not in form of blood and flesh, but in form of bread and wine, as
Melchisedeth did before. Of which order, Christ is truly said to be a priest
for ever (as Oecu^enius says) in respect of the priests which be now a days,
by means of whom, Christ does offer and also is offered. Therefore, if
allmighty God has taken an oath, and if it does not repent him thereof, that
Christ is priest for ever, according to That priests have authority to offer
up Christ.
that the priests have no authority to offer his body, which, except it were
offered, God should seem to repent him of his oath, and to Do this in remembrance
of me, Luc. 22.
which commandment except it had been given, what man in all the world would
have entreprised to have consecrated the body of our Lord? For, as S. Deny^
testifies of the priests of his time, Lib. de E^cles. ^ierarchi^.
They did excuse them selves, reverently and Bishoplike, that they offered up,
the ^olsome sacrifice which is far above them, trying first unto God decently,
and saying, Thou have said, Do this in my remembrance, and then beseching him,
that they may be made worthy, of so great a ministry and service, that they
may holylye consecrat the Sacrament. By which words it appears, that the
priests of the primitive church, much abashed at the excellency of their
function, did yet take har^e of grace, to consecrat the holsom sacrifice,
because they were commanded so to do, by God him self. In which sense also,
Saint Basil prays in his lyturgye and mass: Make me, (says he) meet,
through the power of the holy Ghost, that I being endued with the grace of
priesthood, may stand at this holy table, and may consecrat thy holy and
undefiled body, and precious blood. And like wise again. For thy unspeakable
and exceeding kindness sake, without all mutation and conversion, thou have ben
made man, and have ben named our Bishop, and have delivered unto us, the
consecration of this serviceable, and unbloody sacrifice. And after this very
sort, all blessed men, have ever done, in the church of Christ, not denying,
but that all priests do in very deed co^secrat and offer up the body of
Christ: but le^t such an high ministry, might turn to reproach of their
rashness, in that behalf, they allege for their excuse the words of Christ,
In com. in 1. Cor. 10. In com. in Heb. 10.
saying, Do this in remembrance of me. Do not we offer up Christ every day,
says S. Chrisostom? And again, It is our Bishop (Says S. Ambrose) which
offered up the sacrifice, which cleansed us, In Psalm. 38
the same offer we now also, which then being offered, can not be consumed. Let
us priests therefore (says the same blessed man in an other place) follow as
we can, our high priest, that we may offer up sacrifice, for the people,
although weak in deserts, and good deeds, yet honorable for our sacrifice.
for although Christ now does not seem to offer, yet he is offered in earth,
when that the body of Christ is offered. Wherefor I conclude, that it is a very
lie, to say that it can not be found in any ancient Doctor, that priests
have authorite to offer up Christ to his father.

Thus having then proved right sufficiently, that he has b^lyed the church,
and the truth, for the rest of the questions, whether we can find in the old
fathers, the terms ex opere operato, or indiuiduum vagum, or the questions of
the applying of the sacrifice, or of the accidents remaining, or the case which
he moves of a mowse: unto all these which so roundely and gloriously, as if
the field had been wo^ne, he brings forth all in a ray, I resist with one
awnswer: that if I could find them in old Doctors, yet at this time I would
not seek them, and if they can not be found (as I may grant without
hinderaunce of the Catholic faith) expressly and plainly set forth: yet
has he won nothing, unto his purpose. And because this confession of mine
(for what others will fa^e I can not tell) but if this confession of mine may
seem to give somewhat unto M. Iuells articles, I will therefore again shortly
make my answer more plainer. I grant, that I find not within.vj.C. years
after Christ, that ex opere operato, and for the works sake, sins were
forgiven at the mass time. Ergo, says he, Iuell.
the highest mysteries and greatest of your religion be broken. No Sir, not so.
for you ask whether within.vj.C. years after Christ, these or these terms,
were expressed? and I answer no. as far as I know. But if you ask me,
whether these and these things be true, and whether they were believed? I will
plainly say, yea and prove it plainly. But I will prove it, by the consent
of learned men, and the voice of the church, which has been sense the.vj.C.
years, of which you speak. But you will have the proof, to be taken out of
the.vjC. years, next after Christ: or else you will not admit it. As though
this were your argument. what so ever was not preached, and so left in writing
vjC. years after Christ, that is not true* but indiuiduum vagum was not
mentioned with in these.vjC. years: ergo what so ever is proved by all
lernyng, as concerning indiuiduum vagu^, that is not true, because it was not
spoken within those vjC. years. And as I have made your argument in indiuiduu^
vagu^, so is it in all the other of your articles almost, in which all, the
fault which you find, is that.viC. years after Christ were passed, before they
were by the Catholics published. Now, if this be a good reason, then do I
confess, that I am quyte ouercomed. But if that otherwise, it be nothing
worth: then have I lost nothing, in granting, that with in.vjC. years after
Christ, certain, yea most of those articles which he recites, were not
plainly opened. how think you? if that in the end of August, when fruits are
ripe and are tasted to be good, yet some one sadd witted fellow, would condemn
all the fruits in the orchard for wild and naught, and that only for this
cause, that in the beginning of April, no such things were upon the trees,
and would in his own co^ceyt, praise the fair month of April, for the
shining of the Son, the opening of the earth, the gentle raines from the
clouds, and grene ornaments of the ground, which no man would deny: but for
all the rest of the spring and summer, if he would speak few good words of
the^, and for anger, would cast away all the fruits of the harvest, should he
not declare, Cant. 4.
a madd testy kind of wisdom therein?

And why then, I pray you, in the church of God, which is called in Scripture,
and is in deed, his paradise and garden: will you admit nothing, but that
which budded forth in the.vjC. years after Christ, as it were in the spring
tide or beginning of summer? The co^clusions of the value of the Sacrament, of
the applying thereof, of the accidents, of all other such things, they com out
of the rote and body of the tree, of that verity, I mean, which says, This
is my body: which if you will contemn, because they were not sprongen out vjC.
years after Christ, you shall be one of the hastings, to speak the lest of
you. Where is it readen with in.vjC. years of Christ, that our blessed lady,
was preached or named, the mother of mercy, the hand maiden of the Trinity,
the spouse of the holy ghost, the Queen of heaven, the Empress of hell? yet if
you believe in deed, and in heart, and not say it only from the teeth forward,
that she is the mother of God, necessarely all the other titles follow. Shall I
then say, she was not called the Queen of heaven, or spouse of the holy ghost,
in the.vjC. years after Christ, ergo she may not be so called now, and the
greatest keye of owr religion is broken? yet, common sense approves, that a
kings mother is a Queen, and not of no place, I trow. And thus I trust, M.
Iuel, has no cause to triumph hitherto.

Now for the rest of things which do follow unto the end of his sermon, I have
little mind to declare the falsehood of them, because, I am weary, of repeting
so many untruths of his: one he alone betrated, being sufficient to confound
his loyl^ty in misreporting and misco^struing with liberty. For what reason is
this, to say, that therefore the papists do not well answer, no mass is
private, Iuell.
seeing that in every ^asse every priest does communicate with an other, where so
ever he be: because, (says M* Iuell) by this reason, there should be (...)
excommunication at all, whereas the party excommunicated in England, might
say, he would co^municat with the priest which says mass in Calicute. For
this reason does prove our sentence, that whereas the man in England, being
excommunicated, can not communicate with the priest in Calicute: ergo the priest
of Calicute and England be of one communion and body, so that he which is cut
of from the one, can not remain in the other, and he which agrees with the
one, agrees with the other. Therefore, it is not with us M. Iuell, as it is
with you: that, if I will not be of the congregation of Geneua, I may go to
Wittenberge, and if I like not one city and fraternity, I may go to an
other. But even as he, which is in the church of England and a faithful
Catholic, is made partaker of the Sacraments and prayers, which be said in
Calicute: so he which is cut of, and separated, from any one part and membre
of the church, he shall not leap to Calicute, for his communion, but shall
remain quyte divided from the body. So that as it seems absurd unto you
(master mine) that an excommunicate in England should communicate with the
priest of Calicute, whether the priest of Calicute will or nill: so make the
like argument against your self, that it must seem as absurd, that he, which
communicates in England, should not eke communicate with him which is in
Calicute, and then shall it remain that if none receive with the priest at the
altar in England, yet he co^municateth with the priest of Calicut.

Of the like vain of knowleadge comes this other argument also: Iuell.
That the name of mass was not until four hundred years after Christ: nor
yet were the pieces and parts of the mass as we in our time have seen the^
set together. Ergo wat mass could that be, that as yet, had neither her own
name, nor her parts? As who should say, the mass, which was used of the
Apostles and their next successors, was made the worse by Kyrie eleeson,
Gloria in excelsis, Alleluia, Credo in Deum, and Agnus Dei, with certain most
godly collects and prayers, which have been added unto the substance of the
sacrifice, which was in the Apostles time, not as necessary, but as convenient
and comely. Do you not know that it is an old and true distinction of the mass,
one which was called Catechumenorum, which ended after the Gospel, and an
other mass called Christianorum, which began with the preface? what mass
could that be, Iuell.
say you, which as yet had another her name nor her parts? I answer to this,
that she had the essential and necessary parts from the beginning but the
garnishing and decking of the mysteries, did follow afterward. Neither does it
hurt and hinder the nature of man, if he have a new or diverse cote, according
to the disposition of the year. But what do I, which said I was weary, as I am
in deed, and yet do run forward, with opening his faint and untrue reasoning?
well: now I will remember my self better, and conclude with one point, which
ended, I shall take my leave of him and you both.

In co^paring S. James mass and ours together, it is a world to see, how
freely he follows his rhetorike, and fo^saketh the verite. A figure of which
rhetorike, whiles he did maintain, with sundry reports (of S. James mass
has this, and their mass has this) with this and this, until I think, he
was weary of speaking, to conclude, Iuell.
he says: Saint James mass ^ad Christ's institution, they in their mass,
have, well nere, nothing else but man's invention. Do you speak as you think? is
not your communion almost wholly peced together, of the parts of the Popish
mass by you dismembered? The epistle, the Ghospel, the collects of the sunday,
the hymn of the Angels, the confession of our faith, the himne of Sanctus
Sanctus Sanctus, the saying of Agnus, be not these so many things, in the
mass, and transferred in to the communion? how then has the mass, well nere,
nothing but man's invention, if your communion have Christ's only institution? I
take it, that M. Iuell did speak so much, only to save his honesty, lest he
should have seemed not to prove that our mass was clean contrary unto S.
James, except he would have borrowed this little lie, of the ignorance and
rudenes of the most part of his audience. But letting the cause of our mass
to cease, has S. James mass, Christ his institution, and has it no man's
invention, or very little at all? I think, you do not mean, that he has
nothing else but Christ's institution, but as our mass has, well nere,
nothing else but man's invention: so by the contrary you must mean, S. James
mass has, well nere, nothing else but Christ's institution. which I speak
for your advantage, because it serves better for the Catholics, that S.
James mass should have nothing else but Christ's institution. But now Sir, if S.
James mass be so perfect a thing in your judgment, why did not you translate
it in to English? It had been a great glory for you, to say that you did bring
again, the very order of the Apostles, and so to prove your saying true, by
the mass which S. James him self used. which thing the Catholics granting
unto you (that it is Saint James mass in deed,) with more glory and surety,
you might have turned the Popish mass, out of the church, and have brought in
the mass Apostolic. But you do not, I think, allow that mass of Saint
James. Certainly then you be a great dissembler, to speak so many fair words
openly of it, and in your heart to disdain it privily. No mary, will you say,
Saint James in his mass had Christ his institution. Let us then be tried by
S. James mass, whether you justly reprove the Catholics mass, and extol
your communion? In the first beginning of Saint James mass, franckincense is
burned, with a prayer thereunto appertaining. how does this savor in yowr
noses, tell the truth? Further, in that mass the priest goes up solemnly
with devout praying, the Deacon in the mean time singing. Again in an other
place, the Deacon bids, that none of them, come in presence of the
mysteries, which be yet to learn the faith, or which can not pray with the
faithful (such he means as have not fullfilled their penance) and he
commands the doors to be kept. But how agrees this with that law of yours,
which receives in, all sorts without examination, and constrayneth other,
which would not, to come in and be present? Then yet again, in that mass the
priest says, O Lord allmighty king of glory etc, receive of our hands which
be sinners, this per^ume, as thou have received those things which Abel, Noe,
Aaron, and Samuel, and all thy holy ones have offered unto the. Further yet in
that mass, the priest makes the signs of the cross, over the gifts, saying
unto him self (Glory be to God on high and in earth peace, unto men good
will) three times, and after two other sentences, with bowing him self on this
side and that side, he says, Magnify you our Lord with me, and let us
exalt his name together. Also there is in Saint James mass, a secret prayer
for the priest, when he enters with in the curteynes. further after the
consecration and secret prayers, he says Hayle Marie full of grace, our Lord
is with the. etc. At the last he breaks the consecrated host, holding the
half in one, the half in his other hand. And that which is in the right hand,
he puts in to the chalice, saying, The union of the most holy body and
precious blood, of our Lord and God and Savior Thesus Christ. Then the other
part, which was in the left hand, he blesses, and divides, and puts it in
to chalices, saying, it is united and sanctified, and co^summated in the name
of the Father and Soun and the Holy Ghost now and ever. I leave out many
things, as praying unto Saints, and also praying for the dead, often
inclinations and bowinges, often lifting up the voice, often speaking to him self
alone, with incense again offered in the later end of the mass. Which mass
truly, if it were in english, and said accordingly, it would seem more
superstitious and more full of ceremonies and gestures, then the mass which
they say to have nothing, well nere, but men's invention. What memories have
these fellows, which so freely report of S. James mass, that, which they have
forgotten how it stands? or if memory fail them not, what hearts have they,
to lie so lowdly, and (to the shame of their communion) to cry out, that Saint
James mass, has Christ his institution, that the people which have never
read it, heard it, or seen it, might think it were as pretty a thing as the
communion is, whereas in deed all things being known, it utterly confounds
all their craking and glory: except they have forgotten that incensing,
blessing, crossing, and soft speaking, and saluting of our blessed lady (all
which things are used in Saint James mass) do utterly disagree from their
positions. whereof it follows, that he speaks much against him self, which
praises so highely that mass, whose rites and ceremonies do turn their
religion to utter shame and unworthiness. I pray God to send them all better
minds, and not to seek their own glory, by defending of that, which once they
take in hand to maintain: but the honor of God and his truth, which has and
shall continue for ever. Amen.

Thus then now Sir, you have a piece of an answer, The aucthor to his fri^d.
unto the stout challenge, and a token of my good will toward your benevolence,
and some example of the exercise, in the which I bestow my solitary and
sorrowful time. Of which three points, although every one separatly, were
sufficient, to have given an occasion to this my labor, and should be
available to obtain easy pardon, for such things which may be amended by the
learned Catholics: yet chefely I intended to destroy the assertions of Master
Iuell. Which if I have not fully done, yet all is not lost, because I have
other provided a toke^ to send to my very friend, or chosen such an exercise,
where in I was not vnfrutfully occupied. But on the other side, if I have
attained unto the co^futation of those matters, which I know deserve just
confusion: then have I that, which I principally sought for* and then, as I
would be content, that our friends should have a sight of it: so would I not be
as^amed, if the enemies should chance to find it. But who is there that is
able to say, that this is so diligently wrought, that it should be welcome to
those which do love us? or should be accepted for probable of such as fi^d
fault with us? Well yet, how so ever it be, I put it in to your hands, to
have and to hold, for better for worse, until you see occasion, from it to
depart. Fare you well. You know my ordinary commendations, which I use in all
letters. Do them at this time extraordinarely, with an overplus, because it is
long, sense I wrote last unto you.

Your own I. R.

A CONCLUSION TO THE READER, WITH a challenge annexed.
THVS much unto a singular Frind. but, to take my leave of the also (Reader),
and to shutt up all this matter, with some conclusion well worth the
remembering, I think it very good and profitable, to set forth also a solemn
challenge, thereby to geaue owr adversaries an occasion, to show forth their
Scriptures, Counsels, Doctors, etc. and to declare their deep knowledge in
answering for themselves, whose art we have experience of, in deuysing of
objections against other. Which enterprise and ventering of mine, as it will be
most subject unto their eye, and cons^quentlie unto their prying and ex^myning:
so have I taken unto me, the (...) of a perfect wise man, and (...), which has
tawght me, how to proceed against them, that I need not to mistrust my
boldness. For thus he says in his book of Proverbs, a book of good authority
and instruction, Romans 26.
Do not answer a fool according to his folisshnes, least thou be made like
unto him.

And in the next sentence following: Answer (says he) a fool according unto
his folisshnes, that he may not seem to himself to be wise. To follow now
therefore, this duble and good counsel, of not aunswering, and yet aunswering
a fool, I will set forth unto the (Reader) two challenges, to play the fool
with a fool in the first of the^, that he may behold his artificial
wisdom, and in the second, not to agree with him in his folly, because I will
refuse his ways and order. But how may one answer a fool according unto his
folly, or what hope is there of any vantage* if that way be taken with him?
Marie, like as some madd men (I have heard say) have been meetlie well browght
to themselves, when an other has stared and gaped upon them, all
counterfaicting an owtragiouse behauyor: so vndowbtedlie against fond
questions, it is a profitable way of replying, to putt the like again unto
madd adversaries, and cawse them to behold the absurdity. For, as the fault
which an other makes, does more sensibly appear unto us, then the like of
owr own using, thowgh owrselues be nearest to owrselues: so, to declare the
absurdity of the challenge, which M. luell with much opinion of wisdom
pronounced against all Catholykes, let one of a like proportion to his, be
made forth unto him, that he may consider, the well fauorednes of his own
work, when the like example of it, shall greatly mislyke him. Now, if there
were not so good lykelyhode and reason, why this counterfaited challenge (so to
call it) should be uttered profitablie: yet the wyseman so plainly either
counselling or licensing us, To answer a fool according to his foolisshnes,
his authority is sufficient inowgh for me, to bear me out in this my doing,
and to say, that, if I play the fool, yowr example M. Iuell has moved me
unto it. I say therefore:

A challenge made after the pattern of M. Iuells own against the Catho^ikes
be able to bring any one sufficient sentence, out of any old Catholic doctor
or father, or out of any old general Council, or out of the holy Scriptures
of God, or any one example of the primitive church, whereby it may be clearlie
and plainly proved, that there was any dry communion in the whole world at
that time, for the space of six hundred years after Christ:











any then were) was remoueable up and down, hither and thither, and brought
at any time in to the lower parts of the church, there to exequute the Lord
his supper:



Gloria in excelsis should be song after the communion:



Quicun^ vult and Creed of Athanasius was appointed to be song only upon high
days and principal feasts:





















If any man alive be able to prove any of these articles, by any one clear, or
plain clause, or sentence, either of the Scriptures, or of the old Doctors,
or any old general Council, or by any example of the primitive church, I
promise, that I will geaue over, and subscribe unto him in that point. And of
this, I for my part, will not only not call in any point (being well assured
of the truth therein) but also will lay more matter to it. Wherefor beside
all that I have said already, I will say further, and yet nothing so much, as
might be said, If any one of our adversaries be able clearlie and plainly to
prove, by such authority of the scriptures, the old Doctors, and Councels, as
I said before,







or mistical, should ben therefore judged a papist, and brought up before high
commissioners:















Lutherus in Postiilis
moved young men and women in open sermons not to blushe or be ashamed of
desyering the one the other, no more then they would be ashamed of spetting or
any such natural actio^:





called palmebowes: Or that Christmassdaye, was without a mass, or
asshewensday without ashes, or^ Candelma^daye without bearing of Candels:



(gra^nt that owr lisse may be de^ended on earth by them, by whom, thou art
always waited upon in heaven) and nevertheless tawght the people, that it
was injurious to Christ and his mediation, to ask for help at any others
hands, then his:





upon Asshewensday:



hoc est corpus me^^, y^ to be taken, for significat:







Bishope of Rome. Or that any such oath was used to be put unto any, man, at
that time:







(These be the highest mysteries, and greatest keys of their religion, and
without these their doctrine can never be mainteyned and stand upright.) If any
one therefore of all owr adversaries, be able to avouch any one of all these
articles, by any such sufficient authority of Scriptures, doctors, or
Councels, as I have required: as I said before, so say I now again, I am
content to yield unto him, and to subscribe in that point (which I would never
do, nor might do unto an heretic, knowing that my faith must not hang upon the
event of disputation, yet seeing I have begone to play the fool with a ^oole,
therefore I use this term of subscribing, as I do learn it of master Iuell.)
But I am well assured, they shall never be able truly to allege one sentence.
And because I know u, therefore I speak it, least any happily should be
deceived. And thus far forth to the imitation of master Iuell, Factus sum
insipiens, vos me coegistis.

But what now might any protestant think of this challenge? will he not mislike
with me, that among so many articles, as I rehearse with great solemnity, so
few are of weight and substance? will he not be moved at the very heart, that
for indifferent matters and reasonable ceremonies, I shall require yet, to have
their proof, out of the first six hundred years after, Christ, and out of
general counsels, or ancient doctors, or else make an exclamation against
the keeping of them? will it not greiue him, that I stick upon terms, which
can never be fownd in the cumpasse of the primitive church, which if their
principles were true, would follow yet well inowgh of them? And that leauyng
the principle, I press him with the particular word of some conclusion, will
it not anger him? Can he take it for indifferent dealing, that I rekon up some
ones private opinion, and make as thowgh it were the general determination of
all the protestants in the world? And when I have gathered up a number of
articles, of which the greater part contains indifferent or simple matters,
to conclude of the^ all, in one sum, without order or distinction, and boldly
to say: (These be the highest mysteries, and greatest keys of their religion,
and without these, their doctrine can never be maintained and stand upright)
can the protestant hearing or reading this, if he have any spirit of truth or
honesty, think that I were to be trusted in any point, with the teaching or
guyding of the ignorant? yet, I assure you, (mark it who will) M. Iuells most
gloriouse challenge, has no better reason or substance in it. for of so many
his ors and interrogatories, to make a show and color, of great copy and
store of matter, I (...) of them, which be not, either of (...) points and
quiddities^ without ^^^cussing and examinyng of which, the Catholic faith
continues (...) ^nowgh) or else about orders and (...) (of which the governors
of (...) church, have the making or removing in their discretion. Now therefore,
if this manner of owr challenge be mislyked, I am gladd, that in aunswering a
fool according to his foolishnes, I have geauen warnyng to the Reader, not to
make of every rare thing and much praised, a Iuell, and to be ware ever of
great faces set upon small and simple matters. As on the other side, if for M.
Iuells sake and honor, this my challenge, framed after the example of his,
shall stand for a reasonable one and tolerable: let me be answered then in the
particulars, and except I do reply again, and that speedily, I with others,
will yield unto him.

Yet now, because the wyseman has said, not only, answer a fool according
to his foolishnes, but rather and before this warned us, with, do not answer a
fool according to his folisshnes, lest thou be made like unto him: I will not
therefore rest, and stay upon the forsaid challenge, but come forth with an
other, full of great and principal matters: neither will I be like the
protestant, and troble the reader with questions of small importau^ce, but of
substanciall and necessary articles, concerning the orders of this present
life, or the hope of the life everlasting. I make for the Catholics honor this
challenge, and provoke him that can, to encounter me I except none, thowgh I
like not all, (for who would be matched with the bold and blind brothers,
willingly?) but I trust, who so ever replyeth, he shall be superintended so
wiselye, that his answer shall not come against me, but with good authority
and priuileage. I say therefore: If any single one of owr adversaries, or they
all conmunicating together, can prove by any suficient testimony, out of
Scriptures, The Catholic his Cha^^enge made of great and waighti^ artic^es.
Doctors or Cou^cells.







Calvin in his institutio^s, which are appointed to be readen of the priests of
^ngland
which Christ instituted, is no better then the circums^^sion of the old law:







God alone, and no others:









which good men of those days had, or now shall have, is but an Imputative
Justice, and such as pleases God to accept, but in deed is not true and right
Justice:









and kyssing their relics, was thought to be a superstitiouse vanity:

chapels, or memories, were attributed then, at the first tydinges of them
unto the dyuel his subteltie:







These be such articles as are directed, first against the proper honor and
glory of God almighty: secondly, against the grace of ^hesus Christ, and
profit of all Christians in the world: thirdly against the dignity,
estimation, and honor of all Saints: fourthlie against the profit of the
sowles departed, by debarring their commodities, so that in all states,
worlds, and persons, Christ thorowgh these articl^s is proscribed. And again
in these articles, the fundation, estimation, and perfection of their Gospel
and preaching consists, so that without these, or worser then these, they
could not be so singular and unlike other Christians. Y^ therefore, any of all
owr adversaries, be able with sufficient authority, to prove these articles,
or conclusio^s of theirs, out of the Scriptures, use of primityue church,
Doctors, or Councels: either he shall ^e proved, manifestly to misconster and
misuse Scriptures, doctors or councels* either else he shall be praised for his
labors, and followed with a free ^yll and submission. Let this be the
challenge, and let us (...) an answer unto it. for, if the Catholykes pressed
with such questions, which for the most part deserved no answer, have not
refused to show their faith, and geaue reason of it unto their adversaries:
(allthowgh the lack of conference with their fellows, of free printing, and
open uttering of their books, might with reason have stayed them from their
purpose, and not have moved to chainge their contrie for the matter) how much
more cawse and reason is it, that they, which are so favored in their
procedinges, should not let to stand vnaunswered, such principal questions,
as are moved against them, nor go at that time backward, and (...) from the
quarrel, when most of all, they should show them selves, and spread forth then
eunnying and sincerity.

And yet if these forsaid articles are to many, for their leisure* (...) they
seem to much particular* for their profit, which would (...) or if the
answering unto (...) he said to be forbidden by wise heads: (for a rumor may
sone be made, to feign that it serves to a faction, to make such challenges,
and ^ombattes) Let me be quietly suffered then, to speak a few words and
indifferent, such as to which every religion must agree, if with any reason it
will be credited.

The heretykes (says Tertullian) make a show of Scriptures, Libr. (...)
praes^r. aduersus haereticos.
and by this their boldness, straytwayes some they move. Now in the very
conference it self and meetyng together, they weerie the steadfast and sure
men, they catch and intrapp the weak, and the indifferent they dimisse, and
(...) go with grudges and scruple^. But this way must be stopped up against
them at the first, ^^d they are not to be suffered to dispute and reason upon
the Scriptures. And why so? Marye, for good cause (says Tertullian.)* For
some one here^ye does not admit certain Scriptures, and those which it does
allow and receive, it turns unto her purpose* by putting unto them, or taking
away somewhat from them. Some again are so presumptuouse, and t^ke so much
upon them, that they will not acknowledge that for Scripture, by which they may
be (...) Ergo we must not appeal unto the Scriptures, (says he) and the
trial is not to be appointed in them, by which the victory is either none, or
uncertain, or not very sure. For allthowgh the conference upon the scriptures
^hold come to that pass, that it would leave both syde^ alyke^ (...) the order
of things re^quired that to be first and foremost proponed and putt forth,
(...) which only it is to be disputed at this time. that is to say. Quibus
compet^t fides ipsa: cui^^ sint Scripturae* ^ quo, and per quos, and quando,
and quibus sit tradita disciplina, qua fiunt Christiani: who they are unto whom
the faith it self belongs: whose are the Scriptures: of whom: and by whom:
and what time, and unto whom the trade and instruction was geauen, by which men
are made Christians: For, where it shall appear that the much of the Christian
discipline and faith is: there shallbe the truth of the Scriptures, and of the
expositions of them, and of all the Christian traditions. This have I
Englisshed more at large, out of Tertullian, that it might the better be
considered of ^he (Reader) whether he speaks reason or no: and whether in any
disputation to be instituted, or any challenge to be appointed, these articles,
which Tertullian specifyeth, are not principally to be debated, and examined:
and whether this trade and manner of arguing do serve to the mainteynyng of
any stomak: which is so natural (as I may say) and so reasonable, that you
can not deuyse a more indifferent. To use it therefore to mine own comfort and
others* and yet not to depart from the manner of a challenge, therebye to
recompense owr adversaries, I say:

A most short and profitable consideration, to go before every challenge or to
make of it, by it self alone, a just challenge.
that they have any true Christian faith at all among them: (for faith cleaves
unto authority, which they can never show for them selves, etc.



have received their Gospel, other then papists:







These are the most best and (...) questions, for the capacitye of a sensible
man, and most meetest to be asked of these great folowers of Antiquity (as
they say them selves.)

If therefore any of owr adversaries, can name, either the places, or the
persons, where their religion stood of old time, or from whom, by (...)
descent, it has come to their churches, and ministers: I promise f^^ my self,
and others also: either to prove their predecessors heretics, or to yield with
a good will to their succession, if they bring it downewarde from any Apostle.

I have said: And in the mea^ while, until their answer be devised: I will
continue in that faith, which lawful Bisshoppes of England received of Saint
Augustyne a monk, and owr Apostle, which, by the almighty power of God,
conuert^^ owr realm from Idolatry to Christianity: which received his faith
of Saint Gregory the great, and the first of that name: And Saint Gregory
learned it of his predecessor Pelagius the second: Pelagius again received it
of Benedictus the first: from Benedictus then we go upward to loannes.III. to
Pelagius.I. to Vigilius, to Siluerius, to Agapetus, to Ioannes the second, to
Bonifacius the second, to Fo^lix the first, to Ioannes.I. to Hormisda, to
Symmachus, to Anastasius the second, to Gelasius, to Faelix III to Simplicius,
to Hilarious, to Leo.I. to Sixtus.III. to Caelestinus, to Bonifacius.I. to
Zozimus, to Innocentius, to Anastatius.I. to Siricius, to Damasus, to Faelix
the second, to Liberius, to (...), to Marcus, to Siluester, to Melchiades, to
Eusebius, to Marcellus, to Marcellinus, to Cai^s, to Eut^^hiamus, to Faelix.I.
to Dionisius, to ^ixtus the second, to Stephanus I. to Lucius, to Cornelius, to
Fabianus, to Antherus, to Pontianus, to Vrbanus, to Calistus, to Zepherinus, to
Victor, to Eutherius, to Soter, to Anicetus, to Pius, to Higinus, to
Telesphorus, to Sixtus, to Alexander, which was the first that appointed making
of holywater, which received the Catholic faith of Euaristus, which received
it of Anacletus, which received it of Clemens, which received it of Saint
Peter, which received it of Christ, which is God most true and blessed for
ever. Amen. Fare well.

Romans 16. Deus autem pacis conterat Sathanam sub pedibus vestris velociter.

Quoniam viri S. Theologiae peritissimi Angli apud me side dignissimi,
perlegerunt hunc librum Iohannis Rastelli, and per omnia catholicum esse
censent, dignumque qui typis excusus a popularibus eius Prouintiae nempe
Anglicanae legatus. pu^o ipsum tuto posse imprimi. Ita testor Cunerus Petri de
Brouwershauen Louanij Pastor S. Petri indignus.11. Nouem. 1561

A Table of the cheifest matters.
THE occasion of the Council of Nice. Folio. 6. The pride of heretics, and
old wont of refusing unwritten verities. fo. 9. That the new ghospellers must
needer disagree among them selves. 20. The English order of communion and
service, does not follow just the example of Christ and his Apostles, but has
in some parts more, in some less, as In taking of bread in to their hands,
when they should consecrate. 25 In blessing of bread. In taking the chalice
likewise. 26 The order of the Englisshe service agrees not with the primityue
church, as I^ praying toward the East. 29 ^n mengling of wine and water
together in the chalice. 30 In using the sign of the cross in the mysteries.
31 In erecting of Aultars. 32 In burning of incense. ibidem. In lichtes and
tapers. 33 In praying to Saints. 35 In praying for the souls departed. 36 Of
service in the mother tongue. 50. and. 132 Of the sacrifice of Christians. 63 Of
adoration. 73 A general answer to the skoffing of heretykes, against the
similitudes and allusions, which Catholykes have used. 108 Of private Mass.
119 Of receiving in both kinds. 228 Of the title of universal Bisshope. 136
Of the real and corporal presence of Christ in the Sacrament. 139 That
priests have authority to offer Christ. 150 A general answer to the
particular questions which M. Iuell moves. 153 Folish collections and
arguments of M. Iuells, Fol. 59. 64. 65. 70. 76. 82. 94. 99. 116. 121. 146.
152. 154. 155. Notable lies of M. Iuells. Fol. 23. 61. 68. 72. 86. 94. 151.
156. 158.
In the Challenge.
Tertullians rules to be observed in every disputation, and challenge
appointed: Fol. 173. and. 174.
Faults escaped in the printing.
Fol Fa. Linea. 7. 2. 7. to establisshe and to establis^^^ 8. 1. 20. said
say. 16. 2. 5. gave it gave, (without, (...) 26. 1. 13. lockyng lockyng.^ 35.
2. 26 in the (put it out) 40 1. 11. great greater. lb. 1. 17. odre order. 43.
1. 19. coniures coniurers. 53. 1. 26. hartis, not heart, is not. 56* 2. 11. like
little. 66. 2. 1. lokes. books. lb. 2. 20. take. took. 80. 2. 6. posterity the
posterity. 82. 2. 10. childeri^. childerne. 92. 1. 12. sold should. 96. 1.
16. antedent antecedent. lbi. 1. 23. does co^clud does not concl^d lbi. 2. 19.
thinkers tinkers. 99. 2. 26. founded found. 122. 1. 9. i^ so even so. 133. 1.
11. write wrote. 144. 2. 10. circu^scriptiue circu^scriptiuelie* Ibid. 1. 12.
host? host: 155. 1. 13. one our. 156. 2. 11. your our.

In the Challenge.
^60. in the mergent, Romans 26. Prouer. 26


