A BRIEF DISCOVRSE Of the true (but neglected) use of Charact'ring the
Degrees, by their Perfection, Imperfection, and Diminution in Measurable
Music, against the Common Practice and Custom of these Times.

Examples whereof are expressed in the Harmony of 4. Voices, Concerning the
Pleasure of 5. usual Recreations.

1 Hunting, 2 Hawking, 3 Dancing, 4 Drinking, 5 Enamouring.
By Thomas Rauenscroft, Bachelor of Music.

LONDON Printed by Edw: Allde for Tho. Adams 1614.

Cum priuilegio Regali.

To the Right Worshipful, most worthy Grave Senators, Guardians, of Gresham
College in London.
Sr. Stephen Soames. Aldermen Sr. John Garret. Aldermen Sr. Thomas Low.
Aldermen Sr. William Crauen. Aldermen Mr. Cornelius Fish. Chamberlain* Sr.
Tho: Bennet Aldermen Of the Mercers Company. Mr. Tho: Bennet Sheriff. Aldermen
Of the Mercers Company. Sr. Baptist Hocks Of the Mercers Company. Mr. William
Quarles Of the Mercers Company. Mr. Edward Ber^es Of the Mercers Company. Mr.
John Gardener Of the Mercers Company. Mr. William Ferrers Of the Mercers
Company. And the 2. Wardens Of the Mercers Company.
And to the Right Worshipful Sir John Swi^erton and Sir Thomas Hayes Knights
and Aldermen, most True and honorable affectors of Music.
AS I do account it a great portion of happiness to have received first
Instructions, Exercise, and Encouragement of my Studies in this Ancient and
most Famous City: So am I thereby bound, and do (willingly) endeavor my best
part and power, both to testify and augment the Life and Honor of this
Liberal Science which I pro^esse, to the benefit of all Students therein, and
the contentment of all Affectors thereof in this my native Country, and
especially in this the Metropolis thereof, which gave first life and breaching
to my poor Endeauours. And herein I must, and do acknowledge it as a singular
help and benefit, that I have received diverse Instructions, Resolutions, and
Confirmations of sundry Points, and Praecepts in our Art, from the Music
Readers of that most famous College, founded and erected by the ever
praiseworthie, and justly renowned Senator Sr. Thomas Gresham; who bearing his
never dying Name, as a Praesident and Pattern to his Co-Citizens, to show them
the right way to aeternize their names to future posterity, by being kind
Nursing Fathers to good Literature, Reu^ed the liberal Arts and Sciences,
especially the Mathematickes, which were somewhat neglected even in the
Universities; and endowed them with such Maintenance and exhibition, that
(their worldly wants being more then meanly supplied) they have and do
continually strive with highest Art and Industry, so to explain them to the
world by way of Lecture, and otherwise, that much good from thence redoundeth
to many desirous of those Knowledges, and more and more will, as time and
occasion shall serve. What fruits my self in particular have received by that
one particular Lecture of Music (whereof I was an unworthy Auditor) I
dutifully acknowledge to have proceeded from that College; and do here
Commend and Dedicate them to your Worshipps, Who are Visitors and Guardians of
that most famous Foundation, from whence I have received such benefit in these
my studies. For as I have been encouraged by your Noblenes to travail in
these Studies, so by Duty they belong to You, from whom they had their
Animation. May it therefore please your Worships to accept this my Discourse of
Music with some Harmonicall Examples thereof, as a Simple Sacrifice, in part
of that devotion and service which I owe, upon promise and full intendment by
your wonted goodness and asistance, to search for Richer and riper Discoueries
in this Musical Continent. So wishing the long Continuance of your careful
Love, and loving Care to al good Learning, especially to Music, the earthly
Solace of Man's Soul, I ever Remain

The Honourer, and sincere Affector of your Approved good Minds Thomas
Rauenscroft.

Apology.
PLutarch in his Book of Music says, that Pherecrates the Comicall Poet
presented Music in form and habit of a Woman, her body pitteously scourged
and mangled; Justice demanding the reason, she in her complaint made answer,
that Melanipides, Cynesias, Phrynis, and Timotheus had through certain
uncertain Opinions and Changes, wrought her so much woe.

If Pherecrates had now lived, well and truly might he have have presented her
Terent.
Pannis annisque obsitam, with scarce Ligatures left to preserve the compacture
of her Body, so much is she wronged, dilac^rated, dismembered, and disioynted in
these our days; she scarcely has Form or Habit left, but e'ne as a
Sceleton, retains only a shape, or shadow, of what she was in her former
purity.

Now may she sit complaining, O woe is me, that was ordained for the welfare of
all virtue in Man; O woe is me, that to whom I brought so much goodness, by
him I should be vilified, and so ill entreated; O woe is me, that for whom,
and for whose best good I ordained Laws and Praecepts, by him, and only him,
I should be thus abused, my Laws violated, my Precepts rejected, and my self
made a laughing stock; O woe is me, that e're I was, or did so much good for
him that sets so light by me.

And (if ever) this braine-sicke Age wherein we live, may best testify her
misery; for neither Her self, nor her Laws are regarded even of her Children,
but most led by their straggling passions run after their own rebellious
Imaginations; which does breed a misery of miseries unto Her, great grief and
sorrow to her true borne Children, and to all, a base wretched Estimation,
as well amongst those who know her Eminency, as those who never knew Her, nor
any other virtue.

And if we shall find (as certainly find we shall) in one member of Her, in
one little part of her Praecepts, so many erroneous and repugnant Absurdities
committed, what should we meet with, if we did search into her whole Body?
surely such a contumelious Insurrection, that either for Ignorance or shame in
so much wronging Her, we must stand obstinate, and set Her at defiance, or with
peaceable understanding submit ourselves to Her Censure, checking our Emperor
they esteem Learning and all Virtue to be the Bane and plague of a Common
wealth: And yet (forsooth) these Archidamuses will seem to countenance and
entertain Musi^ks Professors; But alas it is upon Color and Praetext, to make
show unto the world that there is in them a Musical Genius, and a religious
disposition; they make this their virtue, to shadow such inhumane desires, for
the better accomplishing of their private ends. And when their humors are to
be besotted with the Soule-rauishing pleasure and content of melodious Harmony,
they seek either by dissembling Commendations, or gross Flattery, or the
like, (by any ordinary capacity quickly conceived) to grieve and discontent
those outwardly, who afford them delight, and contentment inwardly.

What policies are used in the Entertaining of these Professors, in the
Retaining of them, and in their small Salaries and Pittances (which they term
Competencies) I forbear at this time to disclose; But let such Golden Sheep,
who are better Clad then Taught, and wanting an ingenuous and generous
disposition, are willing to prostitute themselves to Da^nee after every man's
Pipe, or to Fiddle at every man's Whistl* be as they deserve; I could wish and
advice al Students of our Art, or any other noble Science and Speculatiue
Faculty whatsoever, to account of Such as they account of Them, and to stand
firm for the honor and estimation of Learning.

But to our former discourse* Most men respect Parasites most, who soothingly
seed, and flatter them in their natural affections, but reject and despise
those (...) who dis^ouer the ^^ (...). Let Common Practice and her Accomplices
censure ^e as they please, building upon a good foundation I am prepared; For
it is neither Vainglory, nor Ambition that I aim a^, but only the Honor of
our Art, to vindicate Her from these Solaecismes, and Barbarismes, wherewith
she is now pestred. I love and reverence the understanding Artist and natural
Affector, as life; but d^rest the self-conceited pertinacious A^rist, and
pol^tic^ Favorite ^s death; and both shall be known by their affecting, or
censuring of me.

It is an easy matter (says one) to find fault; and an ordinary matter (say
I) it is to commit a fault, and there is no reason but faults (especially great
ones as these are) should be corrected.

Gla: D^d: lib. 3. cap. 8.
Franchinus observed these errors in the Common Practice, and rejected them.

Glar: Dod: lib. 3. cap. 11.
Glare^^us likewise sought to re^onne them.

Morley An^ota: ^^ Tripla-proportion.
Morley acknowledged them for errors; but was loath to break the Common
Practice, or received Custom; yet if any would change, he would be the first
that should follow.

The Ice is broken, and the Foot-path found; and I hope to find many Morleyes
alive, though He (who did shine as the (...) in the Fir^ament of our Art, and
did first give light to our understanding with his Praecepts) be long since
come to the Close and Period of his Time; But his posterity, as Stars,
receiving light and benefit from his Labors, will (I hope) according to his
desire and wishes, entertain and embrace such (...), as he himself
acknowledged to be true.

In this little Treatise I have not observed only the Writings of Authors
(because I found them various and differing among themselves; Some observed the
custom of the Common Practice: Others not only the Practice, but the Reason
of each particular Pracept: A third, well understanding neither The^ry nor
Practice, drew ou^ certain Rules from both the former, and according to their
own Imagenations delivered absurd Opinions) but I have searched the very
Original of our Art, and Etimologis of each proper (...), how, and whereto
(...) thing is appropriated; I have compared the Practice with the The^ry,
Nature with our Art, and it with other Arts, and I find it a Subordinate
Mathematicke, extracted from the Quintessence of Arithmetic in the Rules and
Praecepts.

So that then (Courteous Reader) if thou find'st Reason and Authority for my
Assertions, neither misconstrue me, nor condemn me without better Reason,
Proof, and Authority, then here I allege* And although diverse may produce
Authors (and happily the self same which I allege) yet shall they find that
those Authors themselves acknowledge to have received them from the Common
Practice, and not from the Fundamental Reasons of the Gr^unds and Rules of our
Art; But till then, if thou accept and entertain them, my desires and labors
have their accomplished and wished for, rewards.

If any object, that those former Harmonie^ by me published in my Infancy are
contrary (...) obiecti^ns* I answer, I did then as a Child; I did fo(...)
Reasons; and those Works for the mo(...) were not (...) by My self, but by
diverse and sundry (...), which (...) the less compiled together, in regard of
the general delight men took in them; And although very many of them were
Defectius in their Compsition when they came to my hands: yet according to my
knowledge then, I corrected them and commended them to the world, and had the
Printer and Presse-Corrector discharged their office with care, they had
appeared without any defect in their Cliff^^, Notes, and Duties, though most
part of their Measures in the Pr^lat^^^ and Diminutions (following the Common
Practice*) a^e falsely Charactered; the which, by this fourth and last work of
Ioni^^ Harmonies, may be corrected.

The Foreign Artist says, that an Englishman is an excellent (...)tator, but
a very bad Inuentor; and indeed it should so appear* ^or we observing such
Inventions which they ensample to us, as M^^rigalls, Pastorals, Neopol^^anes,
Ballads, and diverse other*light* Harmonies, do bend our courses only to
surpass the tuning of such Strings; Among whom if diverse excellent Composers
have exceeded their Ensamples, why should not we* (seeing our Ar^ is as
copious, and ample* our Clymate not exceeding moist, and our A^tis^^ (as they
confess) far surpass them in the accuratenes thereof, which is upon the
P^^ine song, and multiplicity of Parts, wherein they do admire us*) find some
Invention to set them on work* Su^^l^ the fault is in our slothful Natures,
either not aiming at the (...) Perfection* or not making Use of those
knowledges for (...)* which they would direct us unto.

Wherefore let us for the honor of our Art, of our S^l^es and Country*
(especially those whom she maintains) endeavor* to bring Her unto that Life,
Reputation, Estimation and honor, which ^he formerly did sustain; so shall
we acknowledge our selves her True-borne Children, and know Her self to be a
virtuous Mother and Nurse, and the World will esteem Her according to her
Desire, and reward us according to our Deserts, and all receive Comfort and
Contentment, according to that power, which she affoordeth.

In Approbation of this Work.
IN former Age, among (...) rare,
Regard was had of Measures then in vs^
And Characters; ordained by special care,
Least after Co^mers should the same abuse,
But forasmuch as those Compose^*Sage
Occasion had not to apply each thing
Unto the ^^^ers Humors which this Age
Has stud^ed*out* and to the world doth*bring:
I well approve this Authors Diligence,
Who by his Labor Characters has found*
To show what h^retofore by negligence
Has been omitted, and for certain ground
To make that plain, that wanting was before
In Measures, Times, Prolations well observed.
Wherein his Commendat^^^^ is the more,
His Songs, and Skill high Praise has well deserr'd.
NATHANIELL G^LES Bachelar of Mu^^^^e* Master of the Children of his (...)
Chapels, of Household, and Windsor.

O^ this Ensuing Discourse.
Marks (...) L^nd^^^* (...) t^^es
None durst (...)* so much the common good
Prevailed with all men; *it was the w^rst of crimes.
The like in Music may be understood*
For That the treasure of the Soul is next
To the rich Storehouse of Divinity:
Both comfort Souls that are with ^^r^ p^^plex*
and set the Spirit Both from passions free.
The Marks that limit Music here are taught,
So fixed of old, which none by right can change,
Though Use much alteration has wrought,
To Mosickes Fathers that would now seem strange.
The best embrace, which herein you may find,
An^^^ Author praise for his good Work, and Mind.
THO: CAMPION.

JOHN DOWLAND Bachelar of Music, and Lutenist to the Kings Sacred Majesty,
in commendation of this Work.
FIgurate Music does in each Degres*
Require it Notes, of several Quantity*
By Perfect, or Imperfect Measure changed:
And that of More, or Less, whose Marke^ were ranged
By Number, Circle, and (...) but v^^ious use
Of vnskild Composers did induce
Confusion, which made ^^dd^ and obscure,
What first Invention framed most clear, and pure.
Those, (worthy RAVENSCROFT) arerestrain'd by Thee
(...) ^^^t Form: and that approved by Me.
In the most just praise of Music, this praiseworthy Work, and my dear,
virtuous, and right ^^pert friend, the most judicious Author.
THe ten-fold Orbs of Heaven are said to move
By Music; for they make Harmonious din:
And all the Powers subordinate above
Spend Time, nay, spend Aeternity therein.
If Music then, move all that All does move;
That Is not comprised in ALL that spights her State:
If not in ALL, it is naught; which who does love
is worse then naught, to love what Heaven does hate:
For, NOVGHT is nothing; since it was not made
By that great WORD, without which made was naught:
Then, if that naught but NOVGHT do her invade,
Like God, her goodness is surmounting THOUGHT!
But no man is so ill that has no good;
So, no man in the Abstract can be naught:
Then it is no man that hates sweet Musickes mood,
But Something worse then all that can be thought.
A Beast? O no: A Monster? neither. Then
Is it a Devil? Nothing less: for, these
Have Beings with an Angel, or a Man;
But that exists not, that sweet Notes displease.
FORMS, Essence give to Man, Beast, Fish, and Foul;
Then Men WERE not, had they no Soul (their Form)
But Musickes haters have no Form, nor Soul;
So, they (like Sin) exist but to enorme,
For, had they Souls produced in Harmony,
Or rather Are it self (some Wise avouch)
They would be rauishe with her Suauity,
And turned Celestial with her Heavenly Touch!
But, let them go as more than mortal Sin
Against Wisdoms Spirit, not to be forgiven:
While thou do woo the Souls, which thou do win
With thy sweet Notes (dear Friend) to mind but Heaven.
Thy Nature, Manners, and thy Notes do make
A Three-fold-Cord, to draw all hearts it gains:
Thy Musickes Cords hold Ears and Eyes awake
(Yet lullaby in pleasure) with their Strains.
So, then this latter Music (though alone)
'Twixt Fame and Thee does make an Unison,
Through which consent, though Deaths clouds thee o'rerun
Thy glory still shall shine, and cloud the Sun.
Io: Dauies. Heref:

In Approbation of this ensuing Discourse, and the Author thereof my dear
friend, Master THOMAS RAVENSCROFT.
ARts are much alt'red from their Pristine State,
Humors and Fancies so praedominate.
Old Ar^^sts though they were Plain, ye^ were Sure,
Their Praecepts and their Principles were Pure:
But now a days We scarce retain the Grounds,
We Are so Extrauagant beyond our Bounds.
Among the Rest, Music (that noble Art)
In this s^d Elegy must bear a Part;
Whose Purity was such in times of yore,
(When The^ry the Practice went before)
That then She was had in as great Esteem
As now of Her the Vulgar basely Deem.
Errors in Figures, Characters, and Note
Do Now cause many Teach, and Learn by ro^^.
This my dear Friend does se^ke beer to a^^^d;
Wherein he trauail'd far, great pains did spend
To right his Mother; he seeks to reduce
Her to her ancient Grounds, and former Use*
To beat down Common Practice, that does rang^
Among the Commons, and her Praecepts change.
Here shall you find of Measures diverse sorts,
For Church, for Madrigalls, for sundry Sports;
Here shall you find true Judgment, store of reading*
All for the Old true Rules of Music pleading.
Numbers of 3. among the Mean respected
Are hence exiled, and (worthily) rejected,
As being crept in by Custom, and Use
Among the Vulgars, which the Wise refuse.
Much might be said more of this little Book:
But let the Reader judge that on it shall look.
This of the Author only I will say,
That in One point to no man he gives way*
Composing of a Song unto some Ditty
He is so Judicious and so Witty,
That wa^ghing first the Nature of each Word
He finds fit Notes, that thereunto accord,
Making both Sound and Sense well to agree;
Witness his sundry Songs of Harmony.
What shall I say more? this Work I approve,
And for his Skill, and Pains the Author love.
MARTIN P^ER ^ON Bachel^r of Musicks.

To him that reads.
COncord and Discord still have been at od^
Since the first hour the Heathens made them Gods.
In every Profession, Trade, or Art
They draw their swords, and each Wit takes a part.
There Is neither Star that ma^es, nor Herb that grow^s,
But they Dispute upon it with Words, or Blows.
*Among which Musicians, hanging up their Harpes
Do grow to fall Flat out, for Flats and Sharpes,
And by their Discord make that Art uneven,
Whose Concord should express that Peace in Heaven:
But here is One, whose Doue-like Pen of Peace
Strives to out-flie such Strife, and make it cease;
And Discord brings with Concord to agree,
That from their Strife he raises Harmony.
He that for Love does This, and not for Gain,
Must needs have Praise, the proper due for Pain.
WILLIAM* AUSTIN.

To my dear Friend Master THOMAS RAVENSCROFT, upon this Work.
I Prophecy ( dear Friend) that thou which give
The Dead deserved Bays, shall while thou live
Never want Garlands of that Sacred Tree
To Crown thee in Aeternall memory:
Thou that have made the dying Coals to Glowe
Of old Ed. Piers his name; which now shall grow
('Against all that envious or malicious be)
In high Opinion amongst Posterity;
Nor shall they touch Worth without Reverence,
In whom once dwelt such perfect Excellence
In Heaun'ly Music; I may call it so,
If old Pythagoras said truly, who
Affirmed that the Sphaeres Caelestiall
Are in their Motion truly Musical:
And Man, in whom is found a humane Mind,
(Then Whom, (Angels except) who e're could find
A Nobler Creature) some affirm consists
Only of Harmony, wherein existeth
The Soul of Music; and yet (but for Thee)
This Man had died to all men's memory;
Whose Name (now cleans'd from rust) this Work of thine
(While there are Times or Men) I do divine
Shall keep Alive; nor shall thy own Name die,
But by this Work live to Aeternitie:
And from it men hereafter shall pull out
Scourges, to lash the base Mechanicke Rout
Of Mercenary Minstrels, who have made
(To their own scorn) this Noble Art, a Trade.
THO: PIERS.

(...).
NIbona (prisca licet) non consuetudo ferenda;
Dirue, quod rectum ius negat esse suum.
Sit speciosa licet tua, si sit adultera forma,
Vera magis grata est, altera fucus erit.
Iste Notas pariterque Nothas dat (perlege Lecter)
Queis misere est rudibus Musicae laesa Liber,
Est dignus quem saepe legas facilisque paratu est:
Multus in Authorem sit tuus ergo favor.
T. H.

De ingenuo Iuvene T. R. (annos 22. nato) Musicae Studiosissimo, huius
Libelluli Authore.
RAra auis Art Senex Iuvenis; Sed rarior est, si
Aetate est juvenis, Moribus ille Senex.
Rara auis est Author; (poene est pars Rauenscroft.
Nominis vna)
Namque annis juvenis, Moribus, Art Senex.
Ad anno^ 14. Creatus est Bacc^^aureus facultati^ Musicae in Academ* Cantabrig.
Non vidit tria Lustra Puer, quin Art probatus,
Vita laudatus, Sumpsit in Art Gradum.
Quale fuit studium, Liber hic testabitur; in quo
Vim, Vitam Numeris reddidit ille Nouam.
Quam been castigat, male quos induxerat Vsus
Errores, Priscas hic renouando Notas?
Art Senex, Virtute Senex, aetate Adolescens
I bone, Rar^ auis es; Scribe bonis anibus.
R. LL. Theo-muso-philus.

FINIS.
THE PREFACE.
Music in ancient times, was held in as great Estimation, Reverence, and
Honor, by the Best understandings and Noblest Bloods, as any Science Liberal
whatsoever. The Grave Philosophers reputed it an Invention of the Gods, which
they had bestowed on Men, to make them better conditioned, then bare Nature
affoorded: And the Wise Grecians therefore educated their children in it, that
by means of it, they might temper their minds, and fully settle therein, the
Virtues of Modesty and Honesty: and, (in a word) all of worth ever held it, a
very Direct and Necessary course, for the best Institution of Life, and
Correction of ill manners.

The Causes then of that Disrepute, and over low Estimation, which Music in
these days, (for the most part) sustaines, and whether they proceed from
Corruptions of Nature, or Art, or both, as long since I began to marvel at,
so had I now uttered some observations thereabout, had not counsel, and
discretion persuaded me a while for a further exact suruay.

I had then (amidst other things) unfolded on the one side, both the Natural,
and also the Politic Affector and Entert^yner of our Art, and on the other
side, the strange imbecility of our Professors, a great part of them Professed
General M^^sters, able (they will undertake) fully to teach both precepts and
Practice of our Art, in one poor year, (or less if you will:) and yet
(spoken it shall be without offense) the most of them, not well understanding
the very Nature of a Sound, or the Difference of P. operties, the Distinction
of Tones, the Division of Numbers and Measures, the inaequalitie of
Proportions, nay, scarce Defining the nature of that Instrument, Masters
whereof they profess themselves to be.

I had likewise poynted at some other abuses, committed and suffered by Musicks
Professors, as well in Ecclesiasticke as Common Service, whereby the one,
finds his Due Right empay^ed; and the other, his Estimation; and both, their
Abilities.

As for those common kind Practitioners, (truly ycleped Minstrells, though our
City makes Musicians of them) who making account forsooth to do the Art
Honor, now in these days of the ill opinion, and small credit it bears, have
(fairly) brought it down from a chief Liberal Science, to the basest almost
of Mechanic Functions: I make no question, but in good time it may return
upon their own necks, and their Desert be rewarded, as Statute in that case
has already (most worthily) provided.

Besides, I suppose I should hardly have omitted the Belief (whereof I find
some Aerie or Isntrumental Composers and Practitioners to be) concerning
certain Vices, which their Ignorance is persuaded, our Art receives help by,
how disagreeing soever, both to Nature and ^eason, which is the soul of all
Arts.

And then for amends of all, I should at last, have affoorded somewhat in the
general precepts, both of Plain, and Measurable Music, in the many
Diversities, which the Nature of Compositions give us, from the very original
of them, to that excellency, wherein the Art is now to be found, and in diverse
other particulars tending to the same effect.

But now in the mean time, let the Affector show his Disposition, and the
Professor his Art, to both whom I promise, that when e're I proceed in it, I
will be free and impartial, as Rule and Reason only gives me, laying my
Observations, and so desiring (if it may be) the restitution of our Science, to
Due, and ancient Honor.

And till then (if at all they love the Art) they shall well accept of my good
will, and (with me) take in good worth, these various Sprightfull, Delightful
Harmonies, which now I bring them. Their Composure I dare warrant, it is not
only of Air, made for some small tickling of the outward Sense alone, but a
great deal more solid, and sweetly united to Number, Measures, and Nature of
the Ditty. The earnest affections which a man has, in the use of such
Recreations as they are made for, are so fully expressed in them, for Tact,
Prolation, and Diminution, that not only the Ignorant Ear must needs be
pleased with them, for their Variety of sweet Stray^es, and the Humorous
Fantastic ear satisfied, in the Iocundity of their many Changes, but also the
Judicious hearer will find that in them, which passes the Outward sense, and
strikes a rare delight of Passion upon the Mind it self, that attends them.

I will take so much Judgment upon me, as to affirm, I find a great part of
them so, though (without any trial) the very Naming of those two Worthies in
their Art, and Times, (and especially in these kinds) who first Composed that
part I now speak of, is warrant enough for such a Belief of them Master
Edward Pearce the first, sometimes Master of the Children of Saint Paul's in
London, and there my Master, a man of singular eminency in his Profession,
both in the Educating of Children for the ordering of the Voice so, as the
Quality might afterward credit him and prefer them: And also in those his
Compositions to the Lute, whereof, the world enioyes many, (as from the Master
of that Instrument) together with his skillful Instructions for other
Instruments too, as his fruits can bear him witness.

The second I name, as partner in this work, is Master John Bennet, a
Gentleman admirable for all kinds of Composures, either in Art, or Air,
Simple or Mixed, of what Nature soever. I can easily believe he had some what
more then Art, even some Natural instinct or Better Inspiration, by which, in
all his works, the very life of that Passion, which the Ditty sounded, is so
truly expressed, as if he had measured it alone by his own Soul, and invented
no other Harmony, then his own sensible feeling in that Affection did afford
him.

As for this little work, and the Diversities therein, they appertain all, to
the common Recreations that men take, and therein utter that Passion which men
discover in the use of th^se Recreations: As are

1 Hunting 2 Hawking 3 Dancing 4 Drinking 5 Enamoring:
All which are here as lively Uncharacterized, as ever were any of the kind yet
among us, withal Measure, and Rule to Art appertayning.

1. 2.
HHunting and Hawking have the first place, as the most gener^us and worthy
kinds of Recreations. In the performance of both which, such are the Times,
Numbers, and Measures, obseruable, not in Man alone that uses the Pastime, but
even in the Creatures also, that either make the Game, or pursue it, as being
duly Composed, beget an excellent Harmony, and require the Singers skill to
utter them, as if he were then abroad at the performing of them.

3.
THe next we present is Dancing, but that with some difference from the common
Exercise now a days of it, in our Maskes and Reuells: As not grounded on the
Dancing of Measures, and accordingly bound to some particular Rules and
Numbers, proper to the Nature of that Dance only, which then is afoot: But
fashioned like those Antique Daunces, which the Poets would have us believe,
the Fayries, and the Satyrs, and those other R^rall Natures frequented, and
having in them, much more variety and change then any other Composition, and
withal so expressing our imperfect Moods and Measures, for their Tact,
Prolation, and Diminution, that in singing, cunningly and Sprightfully to
resemble them, must needs give the performance high commendation, and the
Hearer the most pleasing delight that may be.

4.
DRinking is our fourth Recreation. For so it is become (at least, if not the
first) by the use and Delight that men now take in it, and so, for their sakes,
I am content now to term it. And among all the rest, for theirs Especially,
that in the Aerie part of our Faculty, for want of Skill and Reason in that
which they perform, set their Strength and Spirits to search it out of the
other Elements, chiefly out of those two, that the Air is environed with,
Fire and Water, well composed and Brewed together, wherein they are resolved to
grow exceeding skillful, or else it shall cost their Brains a fiering, and
their Bowels a drowning. The Earth indeed they look least after, it is base
that they account, and for Mechanic Spirits to run so low, The Note they
sing (...)

The Definitions and Divisions of Mood, Time, and Prolation in Measurable
Music.
MEnsurabilis Musice is defined to be a Harmony of diverse sorts of Sounds,
expressed by certain Characters or Figures called Notes, discribd on Lines and
Spaces, different in Name, Essence, Form, Quantity, and Quality, which are
sung by a Measure of Time; or as ^o: Dunstable Mensurabilis, Musicae cap. 1.
Io: Dunstable, Io: Nucius musica Poetica cap. 1.
the man whom Joan. Nucius in his Poetical Music (and diverse others)
affirm to be the first that invented Composition) says, it has his beginning
at an Unite, and increases upward by two and by three infinitely, and from the
highest decreaseth in like manner down again to an Unite.

Measure in this Science is a Quantity of the length and shortness of Time,
either by Natural sounds pronounced by Voice, or by Artificial, upon
Instruments.

Of this Music, Franchinus de Colonia was the first Inuentor; and to guide our
knowledge the better, observing the same course that Guid^ Ar^tinus did, (who
instituted the form of Plain, or Simple Music) He made Scales or Tables, in
the which all things pertaining to the division of Perfect and Imperfect
Measures are contained, and by the which we may by degree attain to the
perfection of this Knowledge.

The Scales or Tables (by him instituted) of diverse are vulgarly termed Moodes,
by some of better understanding, Measures; and consist of Notes, Pauses,
Degrees, Signs, Perfection, and Imperfection.

Of Notes.
A Note is a Sign, or Character repraesenting either a Natural, or
Artificial Sound: and it is two fold;

1. Simple 2. Compound.
Simple Notes (Like Nowne Substantives) require none other to be joined with
them, to show their signs, or significations; of which there are 8. Glareanus
Dodecachod. lib. 3. cap. 4.
the first five are called Essential the last 3. Colaterall. 1. Large, 2. Long.
3. Breue 4. Semibreue. 5. Minime. 6. Crotchet. 7. Quauer. 8. Semiquauer.

Compound Notes (Like Nowne Adjectives) cannot stand by themselves, but require
another to be joined with them to show their signs and significations; and
arise from the 4. first simple Notes. Larg, Long, Breue, and Semibreue; which
being fitly conioyn'd one with another, we term Ligatures; of which, those
that are with 10: Dunst. Mus. cap. 12.
plikes or strokes in Quadrate forms are called Rectes, ^ those that are by
crooked ones 10: Dunst. Mus. cap. 12.
Obliques, ^ either ascending or descending; in the Charactering of which, that
at the beginning, that in the Middle, and that at the latter end must specially
be observed.

For ensamples, I refer all to those foreign Authors, that have at large
discourst of the particular praeceps of this part of Music: but domestically
to The: Mor: lib. 1. fol. 9. 10. 11.
Master Tho: Morley who will satissye any curious obseruer.

These Ligatures were invented for two respects: 1. for the Ditties sake 2.
(without Ditty) for breuity of Pricking. But in regard the Notes now in use are
not of so long a quantity, as when the Perfect Moodes were used, the most part
of the Notes Ligatur'd, and Ligatures themselves are laid aside, except the
Breue and Semibreue, which yet are retained for the causes before mentioned.

The 4 last simple notes, Minime, Crotchet, Quauer and Semiquauer are therefore
not Ligable, because they are not Measured; for the 10: Dunst. Men's. Mus. cap.
16.
Minime is the first Note that Measures (being in it self indivisible) and
the Semibreue the first note Measured; and therefore the first Note ligable;
And for the other 3. Crotchet, Quauer, and Semiquauer, they are neither
augmented nor diminished, but keep one continual quantity,

The first 4. simple Notes Ibidem. cap 3.
Franchinus Invented; and although part of their forms were not in the
original as now they are charactered, yet their Measures were all one: he was
also the first that divided the Largs into 3. Longs, and the Long into 3.
Breues, and the Breue into 3. Semibreues. (further then which in those days
the Measure tended not) so all of them into 2. likewise; and thereby he was the
first that Invented Perfection, and Imperfection.

The Minime Ibidem. cap 6.
Ph. Vitriaco (the Flower of Musicians of all the world in his time) invented,
observing the same form that Franchinus did, dividing the Semibreue into 3.
Minimes, and into 2. at the least, and termed it Prolation; but as for the
Minime, not counting otherwise of it, then as of an Unite, or a Point in
Geometry, he reckoned it no Time, but the beginning of Time, and the very
beginning of Measurable Music; and so in these days further then the Minime
the Measure tends not, it being the first and shortest Note that any Measure
can begin on; as contrariwise the Large is the last and longest Note, that the
voyee of man with one Breath can deliver.

And as for our Crotchets, Quauers, and Semiquauers, I yet find not the
Invention of them; and therefore I suppose no great heed was taken of the
Inuentor, yet they were accepted upon sufferance; yet so, as that we now differ
from the ancient in the naming of them, Ibidem. cap. 6.
for that which we term our Quauer they termed a Crotchet, and that which we
term a Crotchet, they termed a Semi-Minime, the half of our Minime, as the
Semibreue is the half of the Breue. And these Simple and Compound Notes are
they, which we commonly call the Inward signs of Measurable Music.

Of Pauses, or Rests.
PAuses, or Rests are silent Characters, or an Artificial omission of the
voice, repraesenting the quantity of the Inward notes, or Signs, as they are
Measured by the outward Signs, which were Invented for 3. causes. 1. For
Closes, 2. for Fuges, 3. for avoiding of Discords, and disallowances.

Examples of Inward signs and rests. ^

Large, Long, Breue, Semi-breue, Minime, Crotchet, ^ Quauer, Semi-quauer.

Of Degrees.
DEgrees were invented to express the value of the aforesaid principal Notes,
by a Perfect and Imperfect Measure. Perfect Measure is when all go by 3.

Imperfect Measure when all go by 2. and Degrees are threefold:

1. Mood 2. Time 3. Prolation.
Glareanus Dodecach^^d. lib. 3. cap. 5.
As all other things have a Mood (says Glarean) so has Music; and Modus
signifies a manner of something to be repraesented; and here are all Notes of
a Square Quadrat form, and thereby are appropriated Largs and Longs, measured
by the least of this form, the Breues.

Tempus signifies a Time, Plutarch.
which is ordained by order, having a just Measure, set Limits and Bonds; and
here is afigure or Note of a Glarean lib. 3. cap. 1. Sebald: Heyd: lib. 2. cap.
1.
Rhombus or Circular form, which we term the Semi-breue; but the reason why
the Time is appropriated to the Breue is in regard of the Perfect Measure of
the Breue by this Circular Note, though in the form it is applied to the
Semi-breue.

Prolation signifies an extending or putting forth; and it is of the Degrees
from the first measuring Note to the last measured, through the Perfect and
Imperfect figures; unto which term Prolation is applied, a Note of a Circular
body, but with a Stroke, as a head joined to that Body, which is termed the
Minime; (which Sebald. Heyd: lib. 2. cap. 2. Gla. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Minime measuring the Semi-breue) thereby comes it, that the Term Prolation
is appropriated to the Semi-breue, as being the first Note measured by the
Prolationate, or extending Note.

And all three of these Degrees, are 2. fold, Io: Dunstable Mensurabilis
Musicae. cap. 16.
Mayor and Minor:

The Greater Mood perfect is, when a Large contains 3. Longs. The Less Mood
perfect is, when a Long contains 3. Breues. The Greater Mood Imperfect is,
when a Larg contains 2. Longs. The Less Mood Imperfect is, when a Long
contains 2. Breues. Time perfect is, when a Breue contains 3. Semi-breues.
Time Imperfect is, when a Breue contains 2. Semi-breues. Prolation perfect is,
when a Semi-breue contains 3. Minimes. Prolation Imperfect is, when a
Semi-breue contains 2. Minimes
Of Outward Signs.
TO these Degrees there were added certain Outward Signs, the better to
distinguish the Perfection and Imperfection of Mood, Time, and Prolation.

To the Glarean D^d^^ach^rd. lib. 3. cap. 6.
Mood expressing the perfection of it is attributed a Ternary number: thus 3.

To the Sebaldus Heydon. lib. 2. cap. 1. O^nith^parchus lib. 2. cap. 4. 5.
Imperfection the Binary expressed thus 2 M^rley. lib. 1. folio. 4.
or the Ternary omitted.

But in the first Age of the Invention of this Art, it was expressed by Rests or
Pauses of their Notes, and in regard of the little use of the Moodes, and the
Practical occasion of such Rests for Closes, and coming in of Fuges, they
were laid aside, and these numbers aforesaid accepted.

The perfection of Time Glare. Dode. lib. 3. cap. 6.
(as growing out of Circular motion) is expressed by a Round Circle, thus
{timeperf-prolatimperf}.

The Imperfection of it by a Semicircle thus * Ibidem. lib. 3. cap. 8.
As for those that would have the Number signify the Time, and the Circle the
Mood, Franchinus, Glareanus, and diverse ancient Theoriks Justly reprehend
them.

To Prolation, for the expressing of the perfection thereof is atributed a Point
or prick, signifying the indiuisibility of the Measure which is placed in the
midst of the Cicrcle thus {timeperf-prolatperf} or the Semicircle thus * as by
it presence it causes Perfection; so by the absence thereof it causes
Imperfection; But those slender Artists, which would have the Ternary number
signify the Perfect Prolation, and the Binary the Imperfect, (and so only
appropriated) the aforesaid Authors condemn, as most ignorant of these
Measures.

Furthermore these aforesaid Degrees are divided into 4. Tables, by some termed
Moodes, by others 4. Prolations, (but wrong by both for of Moodes and
Prolations, there are but 2. the Great and the Less) but by the best
understandings,

4. manner of Figures, are approved to distingush the Perfection and
Imperfection of these Degrees, by which all Song in this kind is measured.

Examples of the 4. Figures.
1 Perfect of the more Prolation. 2 Perfect of the Less Prolation. 3 Imperfect
of the more Prolation. 4 Imperfect of the Less. Prolation.
1 PErfect of the more Prolation in his proper form, is, when there is Perfect
Mood, Perfect Time, and Perfect Prolation, and is thus Charactered.

Example.
* Large ** * ** * ** * ** * * * * * ** Longs 3 Breues. 3 Semb 3 Min 3 crot 2
qua. 2 semiq 2 Breues 9 Sembr. 9 Min. 9 Crot. 6 qua 4 semq Semibreues 27 Min.
27 Crot. 18 qua. 12 se^iq 8 Minimes 81 Crotch 54 Qua. 36 Se^iq 24 Crotchets 162
Qua. 108 Semi. 72 Quauers 324 Semi. 216 Semiquauers 648

This Table, and the rest following express all perfection, and imperfection,
and the quantity of the Diuisible and Indivisible Notes, how many goes to a
Large, Before the former example this Character of the Perfect of the Mere
Prolation should be placed thus. {timeperf-prolatperf}3.

PErfect of the less Prolation or the less extenuation in the less Perfect
Mood in his proper form (according to those, whose ensamples ought to be the
same with their reasons) in my opinion should be thus Charactered
{timeperf-prolatimperf}2.3 but with diverse it is thus {timeperf-prolatimperf},
thus {timeperf-prolatimperf}2, and thus {timeperf-prolatimperf}3; according to
which differences, we find great Masters in their works (especially in
their ensamples) much ranging, although the most of them confess this Sebal:
Hey: lib. 2. cap. 1. Glarea Dode. lib. 3. cap. 5. John Dunst. cap. 10. Ornith^:
lib. 2 cap. 4. Morley lib. 1. fol. 13.
Perfect of the less Prolation to be the less Mood Perfect: Time perfect,
and the great Mood, (which is 3. Longs to the Large) and perfect Prolation
(which is 3. Mimmes to the Semi-breue) to be Imperfect, and that Perfection is
by 3. and Imperfection by 2. Why? either the omitting of the Numbers, and the
Binary Number signifying Imperfection, or the single Ternary, although in the
Perfect of the more Prolation, the single Ternary notes the Perfection of both
moodes, Ornith^. lib. 2. cap. 5.
and wheresoever the Greater is there is the Less, but not contrarily; by
which reason it makes good the aforesaid Charactering, and allows us for the
signifying of the greater Mood Imperfect the Binary Number, for the Less
Mood perfect the Ternary, for the Time perfect the Round Circle, and for
Prolation Imperfect, the absence of the Point or prick, Example.
{timeperf-prolatimperf}2.3.

Example of the Perfect of the Less Prolation in the Measure and division of
the Notes. {timeperf-prolatimperf}2.3
* Large. * * ** * ** * * * * * * * ** Long 2 Bruees 3 semib 3 Min. 2 Crot. 2
qua 2 Sem 2 Breues 6 Semib. 9 Min. 4 Crot. 4 quau. 4 Se. 4 Semibreues 18 Min.
18 Crot. 12 quau. 4 semiq 4 Minimes 36 Crotch 36 quau. 24 semiq 16 Crotchets 72
quauer 46 Semi. 48 Quauers 144 Semiq. 144 Semiquauers 288

THese 2. Perfect Moodes in these days are of little of no use, and therefore
I have little to say to them concerning their Diminutions; only I find that
the Ancients expressed them by Stroks drawn through their Circles: In the
Perfect of the More for the great Diminution thus, Glarean Dode. lib. 3. cap.
11.
{timeperf-prolatperf-str} for the Less thus Sebal: Heydon lib. 2. cap. 6.
L^ssi^ Senior. lib. 2. cap. 6. Morley lib. 1. fol 25.
{timeperf-prolatimperf-x} In the Perfect of the Less for the great thus
Ibidem.
{timeperf-prolatimperf-str} for the Less Ibidem.
{timeperf-prolatimperf-x} but these for the most part are out of use, only we
find in diverse Church and Madrigall Compositions, the Perfect of the Less in
his great Diminution expressing Sesqui-altera Proportion thus Charactered
Glare: Dode, lib. 3. cap. 11.
{timeperf-prolatimperf-str}3/2 and by diverse examples for Triple proportion
thus Sebald. Heyd. lib. 2. cap. 6.
{timeperf-prolatimperf}3/1. but because these 2. Imperfect Moodes following
are now only in use, I will somewhat speak of the absurdities committed in the
Charactering of their Measures, especially for the Prolations and Diminutions;
whereby we may discover what things are necessary and Art-Like, and reject
those Vn-Art-Like Forms which by Ignoranee are creptin.

IMperfect of the More Prolation (which is the extenuation of the perfect
prolation through the Imperfect Moodes and Time) in the proper form of it is,
when we have Imperfect Moodes, Imperfect Time, and Perfect prolation, all
Notes Measured by 2. (save the Semi-breue which is by 3. and by all approved
Theorickes thus Charactered. *

Exampleof the Imperfect of the More Prolation. *
* Larg * * * * * * ** * * * * * ** Longs 2 Breues 2 Sem^ 2 Min 3 crot 2 qua. 2
semiq 2 Breues 4 Semibr 4 M^n. 6 Crot. 6 qua 4 semq 4 Semibreues 8 Min. 12
Crot. 12 qua. 12 se^iq 8 Minimes 24 Crotch 24 Qua. 24 Se^iq 24 Crotchets 48
Qua. 48 Semi. 48 Quauers 96 Semi. 96 Semiquauers 192

But now Practice has so infected this Measure, especially in the Prolation
and Dimin^tion of it, that when a Perfect Artist comes to sing a song of such
Practical Charactering, (supposing it to be Charactered according to the just
Perfection and Imperfection of the Degrees) he shall be (almost) as far to
seek for the Measure intended, as were they that Composed it to seek for the
true Charactering of that Measure, they would have expressed. For that I may give
instance herein, I find it by them thus exampl'd *3 or thus *3, the which
indeed I must confess is the Imperfect Time, and the More Prolation; But then
I demannd to what end t^nds that Ternary Number? Hereto they will answer
(especially those who in conceyt are Masters) that it is to signify a Triple
Proportion, by which the Song before which it is set, must be sung; and that is
(say they)3. to one. True; but then ask them what three to one? and they will
tell you, 3. Minimes to one Semi-breue; O most Vnproportionate Customable
Compositors, whose Art serves them not so much as to distinguish Prolation from
Proportion! For Prolation is, when 3. Minimes go to one Semi-breue, and Triple
Proportion is, when 3. Semi-breues to one Semi-breue, as being a Proportion of
the Greater Inaquality, and (as we term it) Multiplicis generis, that is when
a Greater Number is compared with a Lesser, and contains the Lesser many
Times as 3/1 6/2 9/3 etc. It is evident then, that this single Ternary Number
cannot stand for a Triple Proportion, seeing it wants a Lesser Number to be
compared with all; and beside that, were there a Number adioyn'd, yet the sign
of the Imperfect Time, the Perfect Prolation, Ornitho. lib. 2. cap. 8.
(and Number cannot work upon Prolation so long as the Circle retains the
Point,) the Charactering of the Note in white, the breaking of the Measured
Notes, and the Measure of a Lesser Quantity and Quality to the Tact, would all
resolve us, it is no Triple Proportion.

Others then being beaten from that opinion, and yet not doubting but to hit
the mark, make answer; Some, that the Number is there set to signify, that 3.
Minimes went to a Semi-Breue, in their idle conceits never remembering that the
Point in the Semicircle signifies that sufficiently: Some, that it is to
signify the Mood, not regarding that the Measure it self confutes them, in
as much as this Ternary Number signifies Perfection, and the Moodes in this
Measure are Imperfect. And lastly, Some (rather then fail) will have it
signify Time, quite forgetting (as good Authors observe) that it is the Circle
which signifies it, which being broken in this Measure, makes it therefore
Imperfect.

May I not then well conclude, that seeing this Number signifies neither
Proportion, nor Prolation, nor Imperfect moods, nor Time, it is but an Intruder,
and by right must be wholly left out in the Measure of the Perfect Prolation?
which being granted, I will say no more of it, as making account that it is a
thing generally known.

The use of this Perfect Prolation is, in Service Divine for I^bilees and
Thankesgiuings, and otherwise for Galliards in R^^ellings.

But in this Measure, I observe another great error committed by them, which
express the Sesqui-altera-Proportion with 3. White Semi-breues, belike not
understanding, that herein a White Semi-breue contaynes ^. Minimes, if it be
not Imperfected by a Less Note going before, or following; Yet will they
(forsooth) have 3. of these White Semi-breues go to the Time of 2. Tacts or
Strokes; whereas, in all nature of Proportions, it (contrariwise) ought to be
expressed with 3. Semi-breues Denigrated, and so signifying Diminution; which
then contain the quantity that they aim at, of two Strokes in this Perfect
Prolation,

Example.
Error ^ Truth ^
Unto this perfect Prolation, there pertaines a 2. fold Diminution* the
Greater and the Lesser; signified by Internal, and External Signs.

^^* Magir^^ de Art* Musica.
Internal by the Denigrating or blacking of the Inward or simple White Notes
without the External Sign, Diminishe the Tact, as much as the External Sign
it self of the Great Diminution: Examples of which we find Diverse, in Church
Songs, Madrigalls, and such like as thus:

And diverse others there are bothin the Perfect and Imperfect Measures, all
pertaining to the Great Diminution.

The External Signs are those which are set, at the beginning of Songs, and
are the Characters of the Degrees, for the Diminishing of the White and Black
Notes, by Dash and Retort, in the Great and Less Motion of the Tact.

The Great Diminution and the External Sign to signify it in White, is by a
retort of the Semicircle with the Character of Prolation thus

Example.
^ Perfect Prolation ^ Great Diminution.
Otherwise joining the External and the Internal Signs together, it is thus
signified,

Whereas the common practice (in Composition for Church S^ngs, Mad^igalls,
Pastoralls, Ballads, etc.) charactereth this Diminution with denigrated Notes,
and the Outward sign by the Ternary Number thus:

THey seem to draw their Reasons (as some Masters have affirmed) from the 3.
swift feet in Poetry, Trochaeus, Iambus and Tribrachius, in regard of the
Notes that are Diminished.

But then why it should be applied more to this Diminution then to the Perfect
Prolation I see no Reason at all; by cause however the Tact of this Diminution
be of a swifter Motion, yet the Measures are all one in the dividing of the
Semi-breue, according to those feet. As 1. Trochaeus, which is one long and
the other short, a Semi-breue and a Minime. 2. for Iambus, which by way of
Retort to the former is one short and the other long, a Minime and a
Semi-breue. 3. for Tribrachius, which is three short, the Semi-breue divided
into 3. Minimes; which division (say they) pertaines only to the Diminution and
not to the Perfect Prolation; How beit many mean Practitioners are able to
contrary that, and they who aright understand Poetry, and Music* shall be
Judges, who know the Measure to be all one, and the differences of the Motion
to be according to each Rule, or according to the discretion of them that
Sing, or Read them.

But the matter here we chiefly stand upon is, that the Ternary Number ought
utterly to be rejected, as having no manner of interest either in the Perfect
Prolation, or the Diminutions thereof: The Perfect Prolation we spoke of before;
and now for the Diminution thus I say, that if by their Trochaick reason they
will bring this Ternary Number in, to signify this Diminution, they may as
well, yea they must necessarily, to every division of the Semi-breue, (which
may be as diverse, as is the Composers Invention) set a several Character to
signify it, and their applications of it to the feet, by which it is
Measured: But what a confusion would that be to the Performer, (besides the
evidence of their ridiculous ignorance) to charge each Division with a
particular Character, when only the External and Internal Signs set at the
beginning of Harmonyes are thereto sufficient? And if it be unnecessary to
Charactere all, I see as little reason that they should Charactere any one: Or
if yet they needs* will, that one be Charactered, then let them show me, why
the Measure of these other feet, which belong to the Division of the Imperfect
Prolation and the Diminutions thereof, (as Spondaeus, Pyrrychius, Anapaestus,
Bacchius, Antib^^chius, etc.) should not as well be Charactered by them, as
these that belong to the division of the Perfect Prolation, and the Diminutions
of it. For if they hold that a thing needless and superfluous to be done in a
case so common and obuious: the consequence will be altogether as good against
this their Poetical, fantastical Charactring with the Ternary Number.

But see how one errorbegets another; It is that which I have observed as a
most gross Absurdity in the pricking of the Internal Signs of this
Diminution, and yet is to be found among those, whom our Vulgar Practitioners
account approved Masters, and in that opinion have followed their Vn-art-like
Example; which is, the setting of it with a White Minime and a Crotchet, and
the Tact charactered with the aforesaid Ternary Number; as thus

Their Apology (upon exception taken) proved like their ensample, both fond,
and senseless; to wit, that they might Character the Sounds in what form it
pleased them, and needed not to be bound to follow the Laws and Rules of Art,
which they found were herein wholly against them.

THe Lesser Diminution, (which is vulgarly called Morley lib. 1. fol. 15.
Diminution of Diminution, or the Double Diminution of the Perfect Prolation)
is the swiftest Motion that any Tune it Composed of under this Measure, as
Country Daunces, Bran's^s, Volt^s, Courant^s, and such like: And it like wise
we find charactered, to signify the Tact of it, with the Ternary Number, which
is yet of all the rest the greatest Absurdity: For herein there are six Notes
Measured to one Tact, (whereas before but 3.) and Their Ternary Number is made
to signify no less then Perfect Prolation, Great Diminution, and Less
Diminution, and all upon the bare and groundless warrant of Common Practice,
which say they, has so received it, and therefore they use it.

But what a confusion will this be when they have a Song or Tune composed of
all these Tacts, (as diverse there are in use for Maskes and Reuells) and shall
find but only one Character to express all Motions? how can that work be
performed in his proper nature, except the Composer shall either Demonstrate by
a Canon what his meaning is, or himself personally be there to explain his
Form intended? Therefore the Authors of our Art, foreseeing the Diversities
(and there by the Absurdityes) which herein would be invented concerning the
Diminutions of the Tact, agreed upon certain Rules and Characters together, to
Demonstrate every particular Motion by, of what kind of Division soever the*
Tact was. But now in regard that those Canons and Proportionate Rules are out
of use, I see no reason why we should use their Characters, but rather be led
by that Rule, where of now in these days our practice consists, which is the
Circular Rule, and by which this lesser Diminution of the Perfect Prolation
(the Internal Notes being Denigrated) is thus Charactered.

As for any motion of Tact swister then this Lesser Diminution if there should
be need thereof, it should be either thus Charactered * or by the former
Retorted thus * Wherein the Stroke drawn through the Semicircle and the Prick
in it, do signify a Conjunction of both Prolations by a double Diminution of
the Perfect and Imperfect Measures of the Tact. And thus much shall suffice for
the banishing of the Ternery Number, and the placing in steed thereof the true
Character of the perfect P^olation, with the Diminutio^ of it by the Circular
Rule.

THe Imperfect of the Less Prolation; in the proper form of it is, when there
is Imperfection of all Notes Measurable, from the Larg to the Minime; and is
thus Truly Charactered * and under it are composed, as Divine Ser^i^es for the
Church, so also ^^^^ets, ^^^^igals, Pa^i^s, and such like for other uses.

Example of the Imperfect of the Less Prolation. *
*Large. * * * * * * * * * * * * ** Longs 2 Breues 2 Se^b 2 Min 2 crot 2 qua. 2
semiq 2 Breues 4 Semibr 4 Min. 4 Crot. 4 qua 4 semq* 4 Semib^^ues 8 Min. 8
Crot. 8 qua. 8 se^iq 8 Mini^^^ 16 Crot^^ 16 Qua. 16 Se^iq 16 Cr^^che^s 32 Qua.
32 Semi. 32 Quauers 64 Semi. 64 Semiquaner^ 1^8

NOw as before I did in the former, so in this Measure also have I observed
diverse absurdityes committed, by not distinguishing the Less Prolation from
his Diminutions.

For unto this Time and Prolation there pertaines a 2. fold Diminution (by
Glarean* Dode lib. 3. cap 10. Preder^chus Berhusu^s cap 12. Ornitho: lib. 2 cap
8.
some termed Sem^-dity) the Greater, and the Lesser.

The Greater Diminution is rightly thus Charactered Sebald: Heyd: lib. 2. cap.
6. Preder: Berhusius cap. 12.
* or (by Retort of the aforesaid Imperfect Circle) thus * though diverse there
be, that from the Proportionate Rule (forsooth) will have it thus *2. but for
as much as in this Measure there is used no Denig ation, and all Proportions
are out of use save Sesqui-altera, I have said sufficiently for confutation
thereof, before.

Under this Dimination are composed Almayns, Free Men's Songs, Airs and such
like, and (accordingly) among our Minstrells, it is known by the name of
Almayne Tune, and is as a Duple to the Less Prolation; that is, a Motion as
swift again as the Less Prolation is of in his own Natural Tact.

The Less Diminution we find to be thus Charactered Morley lib. 1. fol. 15.
^, or with Retort of the Great Diminution thus Sebald. Heyd: lib 2. cap. 6.
Nic^o^a^ ^eflerij lib. 2. cap. 4.
^; and this is the swiftest Motion that under this Measure is Composed; and
such are all those Compositions which are under it, as Iiggs, and the like.

But neerein now the Ignorance of our times is such, not knowing the
differences of this Imperfect Prolation (...) the Diminutions thereof, that they
commonly Charactere the Church Songs, and Mottets, with the Greater Diminution
thus * according whereunto if those Songs should be sung, it would not only
alter the nature of those Harmonies, but also make them seem rather some
Danncing or Reuelling Measure, then a religious Note to be used in Gods Service*

It Is then the Less Prolation (thus *) wherewith all such Divine Compositions
(especially those which are with Fuges) ought to be Charactered, and that is
the slowest and grauest Measure now in use.

And so again for those Madrigalls, Pastor all^, Ravens, and such like, which
are Charactered with this Great (...), should they be sung according to the
Tac^ thereof, they would make such a confusion, that the Performers would
surely be taken for madmen, and the Songs themselves would seem no better
then common has to the hearers.

Wherefore it concerns the Composer to understand the differences of these
Tacts, and according to the nature of the Composition discreetly to Charactere
them, that both Him self, and his Wo^kes may have their due commendation.

And thus much briefly for the true Charactering of the 4. Figures or Measures,
concerning the Perfection, Imperfection, and Diminutions of Mood Time, and
Prolation. Only thus much more of Diminution it self. I ^ust crave leave to
add, namely, the Description and ^^^ of it, that it is a certain Glerean.
Dod: lib. 3. cap. 8.
Decreasing of the Quality and not of the Quantity) of the Notes and Rests, by
Internal and External Signs: or Io: Magirut cap. 12.
when the Element is abated in the Greater, or Lesser of the Nature of it; and
it was invented to hasten the Tact, for a reviving of the Ear, when it is
dul'd and wearied with a slow Motion; Ornitb^: lib. 2. cap. 8.
Not that the Number or value of the Notes is thereby Diminished, but only that
the Tact for the Motion of it is hastened, both in the Perfect and (...) difers.

And this by the Ancients was observed 3. ways.

1 By a Canon. 2 By Proportionate Numbers. 3 By Retort of the Semicircle and a
Dash.
1 Now the Canon being clean out of use, we have nothing at this time to
speak thereof: and the like also for

Proportionate Numbers; in regard common practice has disused all proportions
save Sesqui-altera we have little to say of them.

As for the Ternary and Binary Number^ which should be brought in by way of
this Proportionate Deminution, expressed by Glar^^nus withthese examples (as
from the common practice in thosedayes) *3 *3 *3 *3 and thus with a Ternary
Number alone 3; He and diverse other ancient Theorists affirm (inregard of the
Diminutions of the Degrees) that they are nothing but fancies of the ignorant
Vulgar Practitioners; for says he (speaking of the Diminution of the Degrees,
and thereby Glar^a^, Dod: lib. 3, cap. 11.
of the Circular Rule) what needs there to express the Diminutions of the
Degrees, any more, then only the Re^^^t and the Dash, and so reject all the
rest, that the common Canters should not be confounded in these rules, himself
and diverse others giving these examples {timeperf-prolatperf}.
{timeperf-prolatimperf-x}. {timeperf-prolatperf-str}.
{timeperf-prolatimperf-x}. *. * * * or thus *. *. * or thus *. * or thus *: to
which as very reasonable and only necessary, for the practice of these Times
(all others being contrary) I subscribe.

Of Tact.
Tact, Touch or Time, is, a certain S^bald: Heyd. lib. 2. cap. 5*
M^t^^^^ of the hand (whereby the q^^^tity of Notes and Rests are directed) by
an equal Measure, according to the properties Morley ^^ ^ fol. 9. Nichola
Li^^^^q. cap. 10.
of the Signs of the Degrees. The Ancients observed three

1 The Greater. 2 The Less, 3 The Proportionate.
But these our days observe but two, and those derived from the former
observations.

The first is the Perfect Division of the Semi-bre^e which is by 3. the which
we call Minime Time, and as some say, from the Proportionate Rule.

The second is the Imperfect Di^ision of the Semi-breue which is by 2. the
which we term the Semi-breue Time, and as some say, from the Diminished Breue.

All which Tact or Time according to the discretion of the Singer (and
according to the Measure) may be sung swifter, or slower.

BEsides all these, unto these four foresaid Figures or Measures, there
appertain diverse other ^^les; As Augmentation, Sin^opation, Imperfection, the
Bricks of Perfection, Addition, Division, Alteration, and such like; ^^^ which
serve to distinguish the Division, Alteration, and A^g(...)tion of Perfect and
Imperfect Notes; but because we h^^^ little or no use of the most of them, save
the Prick of Addition, Morley Anota, fol. 5.
((2) which some term that of Perfection, others of Augmentation, making
little difference between them) at this time I Will speak of it ^nely, and not
of the re^^.

A Prick is a Sign of an (...) Q^^^tity placed either before, after, on the
upper, ^^ther ends, or sides of a Note, and there serving for the aforesaid
distinctions.

This Prick of Addition placed on the right side of a Note, (thus *.*.*.*) in
Perfect Time, and Perfect Prolation if a Minime or a Less Note follow, causes
the sameto be Perfect; and in Imperfect Time it makes the said Note, if a
Breue or Semi-breue, to be Perfect, but as for Less Notes, being Indivisible,
it does Augment the same to be half so long again, as the Quantity of it
affoorded.

ANd last of all, as necessary to all Harmonies, portaine certain Signs for
diverse uses, as Repetitions, thus Charact^red. * ij:)(:

C^^^ed^nces thus *{vocal join} *{vocal join}

Concordances, do (...) thus * * as Pauses * *fermatab;

(...), (...) h^^ two Notes are joined together both for the better ordering of
Discords; and the applying of the (...)^; all which th^s work (...) Index or
Director thus *

And these Signs, let me entreat all those which would perform these
Harmonies in their proper Nature, strictly to observe; which if they will do,
with the Distinctions of the (...) and (...) they (...) do the Autho^ (...)
righ^, and no doubt gi^e themse^ies and the hearers good contentment. (...)
^able as they are True and Necessary, it will give me muchincouragement to
proceed further in a (...) ^erall (...) by (...) shall (...) me (...) ^o bestow
my ^^Spa^^^ ^^ such a ^(...)

FINIS.
Errata in the Harmonies.
3. for Peiree read Peirs.

4. Treble. at ware baunt for ^ thus ^

5. Tenor. at heylo. the Cliffe for this ^ thus ^

7. Basis. at humble Siluans for ^ thus ^

9. Tenor. at the second line the Cliffe for ^ thus ^

13. Basis. for the Cliffe thus ^ thus ^

Errata in the Discourse.
In diverse of the books, in the Rule of the Perfect of the Less his Character
is thus, folio 8. {timeperf-prolatperf}23 {timeperf-prolatperf}
{timeperf-prolatperf}2 {timeperf-prolatperf}3, but should be thus
{timeperf-prolatimperf}32 {timeperf-prolatimperf} {timeperf-prolatimperf}2
{timeperf-prolatimperf}3 folio 13. in the fourth Example of Internal Signs.
for ^ thus ^ folio 17. for Direction It Is, read Now. folio. 20. line 7. for the
Characters of the Imperfect of the Less *3*3. thus *3*2.

Hunting, and Hawking,
A Hunts up.
JOHN BENNET.
4. Voc.
Tenor.
Cho. ^ ^

THe hunt is up, * sing merrily we, ^ the hunt is up, sing merrily we, the
hunt ^ is up, The Birds they sing, the Dear. ^ they fling, hey nony nony nony
no, the Hounds they cry, the Hunters they slye, Cho.^. ^ hey tro lilo, tro lo
lilo, hey tro lo lilo lili lo. The hunt is up, vt supra.

The Woods resounds
To here the Hounds,
hey, nony nony-no^
2
The (...) report
This (...)
(...)
Then hye apace
Unto the chase
hey nony, nony nony-no
3
(...)
(...)
(...)
MEDIVS.
Cho: ^

THe hunt is up, the ^unt is up, sing merrily we the hunt is up, sing ^
merrily we the hunt is up. Hey down Cho* ^ The Hunt is up, ^t supra.

TREBLE.
Cho: ^

THe Hunt is up, the Hunt is up, sing mer^^^ ^ee, the Hunt is up, ^ sing
merrily we, the Hunt is up: hey down ^ Cho ^ the Hunt, etc.

BASIS.
Cho: ^

THe Hunt is up, the Hunt is up, sing merrily we, the Hunt is up, ^ verse
(...) ^

For Hunting.
The Hunting of the Hare.
EDWARD PIERS.
4. VOC.
TREBLE.
^ HEy trola, trola, hey trola, trola, there, there boys there * hoicka,
hoick, * whoope * Cry there they go, cry, there they go, they go, they are
at a fault: Boy wind the Hor ne, Ho rne, Boy, wind the Ho rne,

TENOR.
^ HEy trola, trola, hey trola, trola, there, there boys there, * boys there:
hoicka hoick, whoop: * cry there they go, cry there they go, they go, they
go, they are at a fault:

MEDIVS.
^ HEy trola, trola, hey trola trola, there, there boys there, * hoicka hoick,
* whoop * cry there they go, cry there they go, they are at a fault: Boy,
wind the ho rne, ho rne, Boy wind the ho rne,

BASIS.
^ HEy trola, trola, hey trola, trola, there, there boys there, there boys
there, hoicka hoick, whoop, * cry there they go, cry there they go, * they
are at a fault: Boy

TREBLE.
^

Ho rne* Ho rne: Sing tiue, tiue, tiue, * Now in full cry,

^

with yeeble yable, gibble gabble, hey, with * with gibble gabble

^

hey, with * hey with hey, the Hounds do knock it lusti ly,

^

with open mouth and Iustie cry.

TENOR.
^ ^

Ho rne, Ho rne, sing tiue, tiue, tiue, sing * now in full cry,

^

with yeeble yabble, geeble gabble, hey: with yeeble yabble, yeeble yabble,

^

gibb^e gabble hey: with * yeeble yabble* gibble gabble, hey: The

^

^

MEDIVS.
^

ho rne, ho rne, sing tiue, tiue, tiue * now in full cry,

^

with yeeble yabble, gibble gabble, hey: * with hey: with yeeble

^

yabble, gibble gabble, yeeble yabble, gibble gabble, hey: the Hounds do knock

^

it lusti ly with open mouth and lusty cry.

BASIS.
^

Ho rne, Ho rne, sing tiue, tiue, tiue: sing now in full cry,

^

with yeeble yable, gibble gabble hey* with: * with yeeble yable,

^

gibble gabble, yeeble yabble, gibble gabble, hey: The Hounds do knock

^

^

A Hawkes-vp, for a Hunts up.
THOMAS RAVENSCROFT. Bachelar of Music.
4. VOC.
MEDIVS.
verse ^

AWake, awake, the day does break, our Spanyels couple ^ them: our Hawks shall
fly low, mean, or high, ^Cho. and trusse it, * and trusse it * if they can,
hey troly lolly ly lo ly ly lo, ^ hey troly ly * * hey * and trusse it, ^ and
trusse it, and trusse it if they can, you can, and trusse it if they can.

Then rise, arise,
for Phoebus dies
(in gold) the dawne of day,
And Coveyes lie,
in Feilds hard by,
then Sing we care away.
Chor: Hey trolly, lolly, then sing we care away.

TENOR.
verse ^

AWake, awake, ^Cho* ^lolly lo hey, * * * hey troly loly lo, and trusse it, ^
and trusse it, and trusse it if you can you can, and trusse it if you can.

TREBLE.
^

AWake Cho ^ hey troly lo ^ ly ly lo ly ly lo hey * hey hey * ^ and trusse it,
* and trusse it if you can you can, and trusse it if you can.

BASIS
^

Awake, Cho ^ hey troly lo ly lo ly lo, hey troly lo ly lo * hey tro lo ly ^^



Hawking for the Partridge.
THOMAS RAVENSCROFT. Bach: of Music.
4. VOC
MEDIVS.
^

Since Sickles and the sheering Sithe, has shorn the Feilds ^ of late, now
shall our Hawks and we be blythe, Dame Partridge ^ ware your pate: our
murdring Kites, in all their flights, will sild or never never never* ^ ^eld or
never miss, To trusse you ever ever ever ever, and make your bale our bliss*
^ whur ret Duty, whur ret Beauty ret, whur ret Love, whur ret, hey dogs hey *

TENOR.
^

Since Sickles ^ ^ (...)

TREBLE.
^

Since Sickles, ^ ^ whur ret, ^ whur ret, Quando ret, whur ret, Nimble ret, hey
dogs hey * dogs hey,

BASIS.
^

S^th Sickles ^ ^ whur ret, whur ret, Travel ret, whur ret, Trouer ret, hey
dogs hey * ^ ^

Of the Hearse and Ducke.
4. VOC.
TREBLE.
^ Dye fearful Duckes, and climb no more so high, * * The Nyas Hawk will
kiss the Azure Sky. But when our Soar Hawks fly, and stiff winds blow:
then long to late we Faulkners cry hey lo, hey lo, hey lo. * hey lo, hey lo.
But when etc.

TENOR.
^ Dye fearful Duckes * and climb no more so high, and * The Nyas Hawk will
kiss the Azure Sky, But when out Soar Hawks fly and swift winds blow,
then long to late we Falk^^^s cry hey ^o hey^^* * heylo * hey *

MEDIVS.
^ Dye fearful Duckes and climb no more so high, no * and * The Nyase Hawk
will kiss the Azure Sky, But when our Soar Hawks fly and stiff winds
blow, then long to late we Faulkners cry, hey lo hey lo * hey lo * hey lo *
hey lo * lo But when our Soar etc.

BASIS.
^ Dye fearful Duckes, and climb no more so high * no more so high so high.
The Nyase Hawk will kiss the Azure Sky, But when our Soar Hawks fly, and
stiff winds blow, ^

Dancing.
The Fayries Dance.
THOMAS RAVENSCROFT. Bach. of Music.
4. VOC.
TREBLE.
^ DAre you haunt our hallowed green, none but Fayries here are seen, down
and sleep, wake and weep: pinch him * black; and pineh him blew, that seeks
to steal a lover true. When you come to hear us sing, or to tread our Fayris
ring, pinch him black and pinch him blew, *O

TENOR.
^ DAre you haunt our hallowed green, none but Fayries here are seen: Down
and sleep, wake and weep, pinch him black, and pinch him blew, that seeks
to steal a Lover true^ when you come to near us sing,

MEDIVS.
^ DAre you haunt our hallowed green, none but Fayries here are seen: Down
and sleep, wake and weep, pinch him black and pinch him blew, that seeks to
steal a Lover true. When you come to hear us sing, or to tread our Faytie
ring, pinch him black and pinch him blew. O

BASIS.
^ DAre you haunt our hallowed green, none but Fayries here are* seen, Down
and sleep, wake and weep, pinch him black and pinch him blew, that seeks to
steal a Lover true. When ye come to hear us sing,

TREBLE.
^thus our nails shall handle you, thus our nails shall hanndle you.

TENOR.
^thus our nails shall handle you, thus our nails shall handle you.

7 The Satyrs Dance.
THOMAS RAVENSCROFT. Bach: of Musick^.
4. VOC
TREBLE.
^ ROund a round a round a * keep your ring to the glorious Sun, we sing Hoe!
hoe! he that wears the flaming rays, and the Imperial Crown of Bays, him
with him, with him, with shoutes and songs we pra^^e, we praise,

TENOR.
^ ROund a round a round a * keep your ring to the glorious Sun we sing Hoe!
hoe! he that wears the flaming rays, and the Imperial Crown of Bays, him
with him, with him, with shoutes and songs, we praise, we praise,

MEDIVS.
^thus our nails shall handle you, thus our nails shall handle you.

BASIS.
^thus our nails shall handle you, thus our nails shall handle you.

MEDI^
^ ROund a round a round a * keep your ring, to the glorious Sun we sing.
Hoe!, hoe! he that wears the flaming rays, and the Imperial Crown of Bays,
him with him, with him, with shoutes and songs, we praise, we (...)

BASIS.
^ ROund a round a round a, * keep your ^ing to the glorious Sun we sing.
Hoe! hoe! he that wears the flaming ^ay^^, and the Impe^^all Crown * of
Bays, him with him, with him, with shoutes and songs, we praise, we praise,

The Urchins Dance.
4. VOC
TREBLE.
^

lightly * as the little, little be, two by two, * and

^

three by three, * * and about go we, * and about, about

^

about, about, and about, about go we, and about, about go we. {vocal join}

TENOR.
^

lightly* * * as the little, little Be, two by two, and three by

^

three, * * and about go we, * and about, about,

^

about, about, and about, about go we, and about, about go we. {vocal join}

MEDIVS.
^

lightly, * as the little little Be, two by two and three by three,

^

* and about go we, * and about about about about and about

^

about go we, and about about go we.

BASIS.
^

lightly* * as the little little Be, two by two * and three by three,

^

* * * And about go we, * and about about about about

^

and about about go we, and about about go we. {vocal join}

The Elues Dance.
JOHN BENNET.
4. VOC.
TREBLE.
^ ROund about * in a fair ring a, thus we dance * and thus we sing a, trip
and trip and go, too and fro and fro, too and fro, too and fro, over this
green a* all about, in and out, * all about, in and out over this green a.
all about, etc.

TENOR.
^ ROund about * in a fair ring a, Thus we dance, * and thus we sing a, trip
and trip and go, too and fro and fro, over this green a, All about, in and
out, * all about, in and out, over this green a. all about, etc.

MEDIVS.
^ ROund about: * in a fair ring a, Thus we dance, * and thus we sing a, trip
and trip and go, too and fro and fro, too and fro and fro, over this green a,
All about, in and out, * all about in and out, over this green a. all about,
etc.

BASIS.
^ ROund about * in a fair ring a, Thus we dance, * and thus we sing a, Trip
and trip and go, too and fro and fro, too and fro and fro, ^ fro over this
green a, All about, in and out * all about in and out, over this green a. all
about, etc.

Drinking.
Of Drinking
THOMAS RAVENSCROET. Bach: of Music.
4. VOC.
TREBLE.
^ TRudge away quickly and fill the black Bole, devoutly as long as we bide,
now welcome good fellows, both strangers and all, let madness and mirth set
sadness verse aside. Of all reckonings I love good cheer, with honest folks in
company: and when drink comes my part for to bear, for still me thinks one
tooth is dry.

Love is a pastime for a King,
if one be seen in Phisnomie:
2
But I love well this pot to wring,
for still me thinks one tooth is dry.
Masters this is all my desire,
3
I would no drink should pass us by:
Let us now sing and mend the fire,
for still me thinks one tooth is dry.
TENOR.
^ TRudge away quickly and fill the black Bole, devoutly as long as we bide,
now welcome good fellows both strangers and all, let madness and mirth set
sadness verse. aside. for still me thinks one tooth is dry.

MEDIVS.
^ TRudge away quickly and ^ill the black Bole, deuo^^ly as long as we bide,
now welcome good fellows both strangers and all, let madness and mirth set
sadness aside. for still me thinks one looth is dry.

4
Mr. Butler give us a taste,
of your best drink so gently:
A Judge or twain, and make no waste,
for still me thinks one tooth is dry.
5
Mr. Butler of this take part,
ye love good drink as well as I:
And drink to me with all your heart,
for still me thinks one tooth is dry.
(...) Cho^ T^^dge away quickly, etc. now welcome good fellows, etc.

BASIS
^ TRudge away quickly and fill the black Bole, devoutly as long ^^ we bide,
now welcome good fellows both strangers and all, let madness and mirth set
sadness aside. for still me thinks one tooth is dry.

THOMAS RAVENSCROFT. Bach. of Music.
4. VOC
TREBLE.
^ Toss the pot toss the pot, let us be merry, and drink till our cheeks be
as red as a Cherry. We take no thought we have no care, for still we spend, and
never spare, till of all money our pursse is bare, we ever toss the pot.

Chorus.

Toss the pot, toss the pot, let us be merry,
And drink till our cheeks be as red as a Chery
2
We drink Carouse with heart most free*
A hearty draught I drink to thee:
Then fill the pot again to me,
and ever toss the pot,
Cho: Toss the pot etc.

3
And when our money is all spent,
Then sell our goods, and spend our rent,
Or drink it up with one consent,
and ever toss the pot.
Cho: Toss the pot etc.

TENOR.
^ Toss the pot toss the pot let us be merry, and drink till our cheeks be
as red as a Cherry.

MEDIVS.
^ Toss the pot toss the pot let us be merry, and drink till our cheeks be
as red as a Cherry.

Cho: Toss the pot, etc.

4
When all is gone we have no more,
Then let us set it on the score,
Or chalk it up behind the door,
and ever toss the pot.
Cho: Toss the pot, etc.

5
And when our credit is all lost*
Then may we go and kiss the post,
And eat Brown bread in steed of roast,
and ever toss the pot.
Cho. Toss the pot, etc.

6
Let us conclude as we began,
And toss the pot from man to man,
And drink as much now as we can,
and ever toss the pot.
Cho:

Toss the pot toss the pot let us be merry,
And drink till our cheeks be as red as a Cherry.
BASIS.
Cho.

^ Toss the pot toss the pot, let us be merry, and drink till our cheeks be
as red as a Cherry.

Ale and Tobacco.
THO: RAVENSCROFT. Bach. of Music.
4. VOC
TREBLE.
^ TObacco fumes away all nastie rheumes, but health awayi^neuer lightly frets,
And nappy nappy Ale makes mirth, makes mirth (as April rain does Earth)
Spring like the pleasant spring, where ere it soaking wets.

Chorus. But in that spring, etc.

One cleares the brain, the other glads the har^,
which they retain, by nature and by ^rt:
The first by nature cleares, by Art makes giddy will,
the last by nature cheares, by Art makes heady (...).
Chorus. So we whose brains, etc.

TENOR.
^ TObacco fumes etc.

MEDIVS.
^ TObacca fumes etc. Chorus. So we whose Brains else low, swells high with
Crotchet rules, feed on these two as far, as heddy giddy fools*

BASIS.
^ TObacco fumes, etc.

TREBLE.
^ But in that spring of mirth of mirth, such madness * hye does grow, as fills
a fool by birth, a fool a fool by birth, with crotchets, * with Ale and
Tobacco, Tobacco * with * Tobacco * Ale with Ale and Tobacco.

Chorus

So we, whose Brains else low swell hye with crotchet rules,
Feed on these two, as fat as headdy giddy fools.
TENOR.
Chorus ^ But in that spring of mirth of mirth, such madness madness, * hye does
^ grow as filles a fool by birth, a fool a fool by birth, with crotchets,
with * ^ * with Ale and Tobacco, Tobacco * with Ale and Tobacco, Tobacco ^ *
with Ale with Ale, and Tobacco.

MEDIVS.
^ But in that spring of mirth of mirth, such madness madness * hye does grow,
as filles a fool by birth a fool a fool by birth, with crotchets * with Ale
and Tobacco, Tobacco, Tobacco, with Ale and Tobacco, Tobacco, Tobacco, with Ale
with Ale and Tobacco.

BASIS.
^ But in that spring of mirth of mirth such madness madness * hye does grow, as
filles a fool by birth by birth with crotchets crotchets, * Ale and Tobacco,
Tobacco, * with Ale and Tobacco, Tobacco, Tobacco, with Ale and Tobacco.

Enamoring.
JOHN BENNET.
4. VOC
TREBLE.
^ WHat seeks thou fool, what seeks thou fool in this place? thou fool,
thou fool, gay clothes and a purse of gould, fool fool, fool fool, whom ^
^^ ^h^n s^ts to scho^le* fool fool, (...) ^^om a woman ^^^s to scho^le* whom
etc*

TENOR.
^ WHat seeks, thou fool, thou fool the babble of a fool, what seeks thou
fool, what seeks thou fool in this place. fool fool * whom a woman sets to
school, fool fool, fool fool, whom a woman sets to school, whom a woman
sets to school.

MEDIVS.
^ WHat seeks, etc. thou fool a woman's stouborne will, what seeks thou
fool, what seeks thou fool in this place, thou foole^ fool fool, fool
fool whom a woman sets to school, fool fool, fool fool, whom (...) wh^^ ^
woman sets to school.

BASIS.
^ WHat seeks, etc. fool fool, whom a woman sets to school, fool fool,
whom a woman sets to school, whom a woman sets to school.



The Servant of his Mistress.
JOHN BENNET.
4 VOC
MEDIVS.
^ MY Mistres is as fair as fine, milk-white fingers, Cherry nose, like
twinkling day-starres looks her eyne, lightning all things where she goes,
Fair as Phoebe though not so fickle: smooth ^^ glass though not so brickle.

My heart is like a Ball of Snow,
melting at her lukewarm fight:
Her fiery Lips like Night-worms glowe
shining clear as Candlelight.
Neat she is, no Fe^ther lighter:
Bright she is, no Dazie whiter.
TREBLE.
^ MY Mistress is etc.

TENOR.
^ MY Mistress is as fair as fine, etc.

BASIS.
^ MY Mistress is etc.

The Mistress of her Servant
EDW: PEIRS.
4. VOC
TREBLE.
^ Love for such a cherry lip, would be glad to pawn his* Arrows, Venus here
to take a sip, would sell her Doves and teeme of Sparrowes, out ^hee shall not
so, hey no no ny no ny no, none out I thi^^^ ^ust (...), bey nony nony nony,
^^y, hey * nony no.

Did Jove see this wanton eye,
Ganimed should wait no longer:
Phebe he^^^ o^^ hight to ^^e,
would ^^ange her ^^ce, and lo^k^ much y^ng^^.
but she shall not see,
hey no ny, no ny no.
none but I this ^^p must owe,
hey no ny, no ny no.
TENOR.
^ Love for such a cherry lip, etc.

MEDIVS.
^ Love for such a chery lip, etc.

BASIS.
^ Love for such a chery lip, etc.

Their Marriage Zolemnized.
THOMAS RAVENSCROFT. Bach: of Music.
4. VOC.
TREBLE.
^ Leave of Hymen, and let us borrow to bid the Sun good morrow, good morrow
* good morrow. See the Sun cannot refrain, but does rise and give again,
that which you of Hymen borrow, and with smiling bidst good morrow, good morrow
to the Sun, and to our Brides goodnight to your sweet Beauties, sweet
Beauties touch your side.

MEDIVS.
^ Leave of Hymen and let us Borrow to bid the Sun good morrow to * morrow
good morrow * good morrow.

TENOR.
^ Leave off Hymen and let us borrow, to bid the Sun good morrow * good
morrow * good morrow.

BASIS*
^ Leave off Hymen and let us borrow, to bid the Sun good Morrow, good
Morrow, good Morrow, good Morrow.

Hodge Trillindle to his Zweet hort Malkyn.
Vurst bart.
4. VOC.
DENOR.
^ COame Malkyn, hurl thine oyz at Hodge Trillindle, And zet a zide thy
Distaue thy Distaue and thy Zpindle, a little little tyny let a ma brast my
mind, to thee which I have vnw^d as ghurst as ghinde, yet loaue ma (Zweet,
Zweet, Zweet,) a little tyny vit, and woe a little little We delocke wool
gommit, a little little tyny We delocke wool gommit, y vaith wool we, wool
we, that we wool y vaith lo. Zegund bart vollow^.

DREBLE.
^ COame Malkyn, etc.

DREBLE.
^ Zegund bart vollowes.

MEDVZ.
^ COame Malkyn, etc. Zegund bart vollowes.

BAZIS.
^ COame Malkyn, etc. Zegund bart vollowes.

Malkinz anzwer to Hodge Trillindle.
Zecund bart.
THOMAS RAVENSCROFT Bach. of Music.
4. VOC.
DRELE.
^ YO tell yo tell ma zo: but Roger I cha vound your words but wind: thon not
for vorty bound, wool I beeleaue you vurther thon Ich zee your words and deeds
loyke Betans and Bacoan gree: But if yol loaue me long a little little vit,
Thon wedlock Ich a little * wool gomit, A little little tyny wedlock wool
gommit y vayth wool I, thot ich wool * thot Ich wool ^ vayth lo.

MEDVZ.
^ YO tell yo tell ma zo; etc.

MEDIVS.
^ ^ Dthurd bart vollowes

DENOR.
^ YO tell yo tell ma zo, etc. Dthurd bart vollowes.

BAZIS.
^ YO tell yo tell ma zo, etc. Dthurd bart vollowes.

Their Goncluzion.
4. VOC.
Mal^^^* DREBLE.
^ TCh con but zweare, etc. Thon Roger zweare yo wool be virmer thon yo wear:
zo Roger zweare an oape hold Hodge O hold, oie to wyd yo gape, O hold, O hold,
^howlt byte I zweare my wozen. (...) good (...) no more, Ich Cho wool be
thoyne and God a be vore, Ich * be thoyne, and God a beevore.

MEDVZ.
^ TCh con but zweare, etc. Cho

DENOR.
^ TCh con but zweare (and thot I chill) vnbonably to loaue atha ztill, thot
wool I lo. By thease ten Boans by Ia- by Ia- whay thou beleaue ma whon Ich
zweare, Cho zo do thou*

BAZIS.
^ TCh con etc. Cho:

DREBLE.
^ Thon geat we Growdes and Boagbipes and * and Boagbipes, Harbes and Dabors *
to leead us on to eand ower loaves to eand ower loaves great labors, to eand
ower loaves great labors

MEDVZ.
^ Thon geat we Growds and Boagbipes, Boagbipes and * and Boagbipes, Harbs and
Dabors * to l^ead us on to eand ower loaves, to eand ower loaves great labors
to *

DENOR. 4 VOC
^ Thon geat we^ Growds and Boagbipes and Boagbipes * and Boagbipes Harbs and
Dabors * to leead us on to eand ower loaves, to eand ower loaves great labors.

BAZIS. 4. VOC.
^ Thon geat we growds, and ^oagbips and Boagbipes * Harbs and Dabors, Harbs
and Dabors, to leead us one to eand ower lo^nes to eand our loaves, great
labors to eand ower loaves great labors.

Their Wedlock.
JOHN BENNET.
4. VOC.
DREBLE.
^ A Borgens a borgens, che hard long a go be merry merry * and a vig vor
woe* O it is faliant ^port* then let this Burden zweet ly zung be ztill, A*
Borgen^ a Borgen be it good be it ill, A

DENOR.
^ A* Borgens a borgen, ^ha hord long a go, be merry merry * and a vig ^or
woe*

MEDVZ.
^ A Borgens a Borgen cha hord long ago be merry merry * and a vig vor woe
Zing gleare zing zweet and zure, ower Zong zhall be but zhort* Muzicke foice,
and d^^^zing

BAZIS.
^ A Borgens a Borgen, cha hord long ago, be merry merry * and a vig vor woe,

DREBLE.
^ A Borgens a Borgen, vor weal or vor woe. So ever led dis bleasing Borden
go, So * bleasing Burden go.

DENOR.
^ Borgens a borgen vor weal or vor woe, zo ever led dis bleasing borden go,
soever let so * so ever led dis bleasing burdon go.

FINJS.
MEDVZ.
^ Borgens a Borgen vor wealeor vor woe, zo ever led dis blea sing burden go,
so ever led * dis blea fing burdon go.

BAZIS
^ Borgens a Borgen vor weal or vor woe, so ever led dis bleasing burdon go,
so ever led, so ever led dis*bleasing bordon go.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF ALL THE Harmonies Contained in this Book.
4. VOC. HVNTING. 1 A Hunts up. John Bennet. 2 A Hunting Song. Edward Peirs.
HAVVKING. 3 A Hawks up for a Hunts up Th. Ra. B. Mu. 4 For the P^r^ridge. Th.
Ra. B. Mu. 5 For the Hearne and Duck. Io Bennet. DAVNCING. 6 Fayries Dance.
Tho: Ravenscroft. Bach. of Music. 7 Satyrs Dance. Tho: Ravenscroft. Bach.
of Music. 8 V^chins Dance. 9 El^^s Dance. John Bennet. DRINKING. 10 Of
Beer. Tho: Ravenscroft. Bach. of Music. 11 Of Ale. Tho: Ravenscroft. Bach.
of Music. 12 Of Ale and Tobacco. Tho: Ravenscroft. Bach. of Music.

ENAMORING.
13 Three Fools. John Bennet. 14 The Servant of his Mistress. John Bennet. 15
The Mistress of her Servant. Edward Peirs. 16 Their Marriage solemnized. -- --
Thomas Ravenscroft Bach. of Music. 17 Hodge Trilli^dle to his sweet h^rt
Molkyn. Thomas Ravenscroft Bach. of Music. 18 Molkyns answer to Hodge
Trillindle. Thomas Ravenscroft Bach. of Music. 19 Their Gonglusion. -- -- --
Thomas Ravenscroft Bach. of Music. 20 Their Wedlock. -- -- -- Thomas
Ravenscroft Bach. of Music.
FINIS.
Pammelia. MVSICKS Miscellanie. OR, MIXED VARIETY OF Pleasant Roundelayes, and
delightful Catches, of 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. Parts in one.

None so ordinary as musical, none so musical, as not to all* very pleasing
and acceptable.

LONDON Printed by William Barley, for R. B. and H. W. and are to be sold at
the Spread Eagle at the great North door of Paul's. 16^^* Cum Priualegio.

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

TO THE WELL DISPOSED TO READ, AND to the merry disposed to Sing.
AMongst other liberal Arts, Music for her part, has always been as
liberal, in bestowing her melodious gifts, as any one whatsoever, and that in
such rare manner, for diversity: and ample measure, for multiplicity, as more
cannot be expected, except it were more then it is respected: yet in this kind
only, it may seem somewhat niggardly and unkind, in never (as yet) publicly
communicating, but always privately retaining, and as it were, envying to all,
this more familiar mirth and iocund melody. But it may be Music has
hitherto been defective in this vain, because this vain indeed, has
hitherto been defective in Music: and therefore, that fault being now mended,
this kind of Music also is now commended to all men's kind acceptance. This
did I willingly undertake, and have easily effected, that all might equally
partake of that which is so generally affected. Catches so generally affected
(I take it) quia non superant captum, because they are so consonant to all
ordinary musical capacity* ^ being such indeed, as all such whose love of
Music exceedes their skill, cannot but commend, such also, as all such, whose
skill in Music, exceedes their love of such slight and light fancies, cannot
either contemn or condemn. Good Art in all, for the more musical* good mirth
and melody for the more Iouiall, sweet harmony, mixed with much variety, and
both with great facility. Harmony to please, variety to delight, facility to
inuit thee. Some toys yet musical, without absurdity, Some very musical,
yet pleasing without difficulty, light, but not without musickes delight,
Musickes pleasantnes, but not without easines, what seems old, is at least
renewed, Art having reformed what pleasing tunes injurious time and ignorance
had deformed. The only intent is to give general content, composed by Art to
make thee disposed to mirth. Accept therefore kindly, what is done willingly,
and published only, to please good Company

^ ^ ^ ^

Rounds or Catches of three Uoices.
Cannons in the unison.
3 Uoc.
1
^ HEy hoe, to the green wood now let us go, sing heave and hoe, and there
shall we find both bucke and Do, sing heave and hoe, the Heart the Hind, and
the little pretty Roae sing heave and hoe, Hey hoe, vt supra.

2
^ O My fearful dreams never forget shall^, never forget -- ^ shall I, me
thought I heard a maiden child condemnd to die, whose name was Jesus, whose.ii.
O my fearful. vt supra.

3
^ Jolly shepherd and upon a hill as he sat, so loud he blew his little
horn, and kept right well his gate: Early in a morning, late in an Evening,
and ever biew this little boy, so merrily piping: Tere liter lo.ii. terli terlo,
terli ter liter lo.ii. rer liter lo terli. Ioly sheperheard, vt supra.

4
^ ALL in to service let us ring, merrily together, ding dong ding dong Bell.
Allinto vt supra.

^ ^

5
^ NEw Oysters, new Oysters, new Oysters new, have you any wood to cleave.ii.
have you any wood to cleave, what kitchen stuff have you maids.ii. what
kitching sluffe have you maids? New Oysters, vt supra.

6
^ OKen leaves in the merry wood so wild, when will you grow green a, fairest
maid and thou be with child, lullaby may thou sing a, lulla lullaby lulla
lulla lullaby lullaby may thou sing a Oken leaves vt supra.

^

7
^ NO^ God be with old Simeon, for the made Cannes for many a one, and a good
old man was he, And Iinkin was his Iorneyman, and he could tipple of every
can, and thus he said to me, to whom drink you sir knave, to you, then hey ho
Jolly linkin, I spy a knave in drinking, come trole the bole to me. Now God
vtsupra.

8
^ WEll fare the Nightingale, fair fall the Thrush cock too, but foul fair
the filthy bird that sings Cuckoo. Well vtsupra.

^

9
^ FOllow me quickly, Jack is a pretty boy, round about, standing stout,
singing ale in abole, fala sol, la my dirry come dandy. Follow vtspura

10
^ NOw kiss the cup cosen with courtesy, and drink your part with a heart
willingly, then so shall we all agree merrily. Now vtsupra.

11
^ NEw oysters, ii, new walefleet oysters, at a groat a pecke.ii. each oyster
worth two pence, fetch us bread and wine that we may eat, let us loose no time
with such good meat, a banquet for a prince. New

^

12
^ ALL in to service, the belles toles, Al into service now ^ing they all in to
service, Ding dong dong bell, ding dong bell. Al in to vt supra.

Cannon three parts in one, in the fifth and ninth.
3 Voc.
13
^ HEy down a down, behold and see, what song is this or how may this be,
three parts in one: Sing all after me with hey down down a down downea
trole the berry drink and be merry. Hey down. vt supra.

^

14.
^ MIserere nostri Domine, secundum Misericordiam tuam. Miserere vt supra.

15
^ PIetas omnium virtutem parens and fundamentum parens and fundamentum.
Pietas. vt supra.

16
^ Intend voci Oration* nis mea rexmeus and De -- us meus quoniam.ii. ad te
orabe. Intend vt supra.

^ ^

17
^ HAec est vita aterna vt cognoscant te solum Deum verum, and quem misisti
Iesum Christum and quem misisti Iesum Christum Amen. Haec est vt supra.

18
^ MIserere nostri Domine viuennum and mortuo. rum. Miserere vt supra.

19
^ O Praise the Lord ye that fear him, magnify him all ye seed of Jacob. and
praise him all ye seed of Israel. O praise vt supra.

^ ^

20
^ THe Nightingale, the merry Nightingale, she sweetly sits and sings, and
sings: The pretty nimble* Do does trip it to and fro, the st^nd horse kickes
and flinges and ^lings, the Cuckoo he does fly from tree to tree: And merrily
through the woods cuckoo, cuckoo rings. The vt supra.

21
^ THe old dog, the jolly old dog as he lay in his dennea Huffa, trolilo
as he lay in his dennea. the third, trolilo, as he lay in his dennea. The vt
supra.

^

22
^ Joan come kiss me now, once again for my love, gentle love come kiss me
now. one come tsupra.

23
^ MY Dame has in her hutch at home, a little dog, hey dog hey. third* with a
clog. My

24
^ GO no more to Brainford, unless you love a Punke, for that wicked
sinful town has made me drunk^, come follow me. Go vt supra

^ ^

25
^ DAme lend me a loaf.ii. from saturday to saturday And longer if you longer
may, Dame lend me a loaf. Dame vt supra.

26
^ I Am a thirst, what should I say, alas I have no money to pay, fill the
pot Butler, fill, fill, for I will drink with a good will. I vt supra

27
^ THere lies a pudding in the fire, and my part lies therein a: whom should
I call in, O thy good fellows and minea. Third Call in, call in, O thy good
fellows and minea. There ut supra

^

28
^ HEy down a down down a be hold and see, good hostess this is the fill
the pot for me, and yet it is the first of three* Take and fill this best ale
believe me, if ye will drink more, then call me, pot yet once again, we will
for this time thus remain, when this is spent fill pot again. Hey down vt
supra.

29
^ WHat hap had I to marry a shrow for she has given me many: a blow, and how
to please her alack I do not know. What vt supra.

2
From morn to even her tongue near lies,
Sometime she braules, sometime she cries,
Yet I can scarce keep her tallants from my eyes.
3
If I go abroad, and late come in,
Sir knave (says she) where have you been,
And do I well or ill, she claps me on the skin,
Rounds or Catches of four Uoices.
Cannons in the unison.
4 Uoc.
30
^ HEy down down.il, hey d. d. d. a d. d. d. down.^. heave and ho, Rumbelo,
follow me my sweet heart follow me where I go Shall I go walk the woods so
wild, wandering here and there as I was once full sore be guild, what remedy
though alas for love I die with woe, Often have I ridden upon my gray nag, and
with his cut tail he played the wag, and down he fell upon his cragge, ^a la re
la, la ri dan dino. Hey vt supra.

31
^ VT, re, me, fa, sol, la, la, sol, fa, me, re, vt. Hey down down.ii. hey
down.ii. down a. My heart of gold as true as steel as I me leant unto the
bowres, but if my Lady love me well, Lord so Robin lowres, heave and hoe
Rumbelo, hey trolo troly lo, hey troly trolly hey.ii..ii. My Ladies gone to
Canterbury, S. Thomas be her boot. She met with Kate of Malmsbury, why weepst
thou maple root: O sleepst thou or wakst thou Ieffery, Cook, the roast it
burns, turn round about about,.ii. ^.ii. O Friar how fares thy bandelow
bandelow Friar, ^ how fares thy Sandelow, Sandelow. Vt vt supra

32
Canon in vnisono.
^ MIserere-mes Deus secun -- dum magnum misericordi -- ans tuam, Mise..ii.
Mise- vt supra,

33
^ COnditor Kirie omnium qui vi^^nt, Kirie Leison. Con. vt supra

^ ^

34
^ IN te Domine speraui non confunder in aeternum In te Domine speraui, non
confunder in aternum. In te vt supra.

35
^ EXaudi Domine gra -- ti -- o -- nem meam. Exaudi vt supra.

36
^ ORa and labara.ii. Ora vt supra.

37
^ QUicquid peticritis patrem in nomine meo, dal it vobi^ Quic- vt supra.

38.
^ CAnta -- te do mine Canticum no -- uum Canti -- cum nouum no nouum. Can- vt
supra.

39
^ MAne nobiscum.ii..ii. Christi quontam ad vesperascit and di -- es inclinatus
est. Mane vt supra.

^ ^

46
^ ATtend my people and give ear, of ferly things I shall thee te^^l See that
my words in mind thou bear, and to my precepts listen well. At vt supra

I am thy sovereign Lord and God,
which have thee brought from careful thrall:
And eke reclaimde from Pharaohs rod,
make thee no Gods on them to call.
Nor fashioned form of any thing,
in heaven or earth to worship it:
For I thy God by revenging,
with grievous plagues this sin will smite.
47
^ O Lord in thee is all my trust, give ear unto my woeful cry, refuse me not
that am unjust, but bowing down thy heavenly eye. O Lord vt supra.

2
Behold how I do still lament
my sins wherein I do offend,
O Lord for them shall I be shent,
since thee to please I do entend.
3
No, no not so, thy will is bent,
to deal with sinners in thine ire:
But when in heart they shall repent,
thou grantst with speed their just desire:
48
^ O Lord turn not away thy face from him that lies prostrate, lamenting sore
his sinful life before thy mercies gate, which gate thou openest wide to
those that do lament their sin, Shut not that gate against me Lord, but let
me enter in. O Lord vt supra.

2
And call me not to mine accounts
how I have lived here:
For then I know right well O Lord,
how vile I shall appear.
I need not to confess my life
I am sure thou can tell,
What I have been, and what I am,
I know thou know it well.
49
^ ADieu seul soit honneur honneur et gloire honneur et gloire adieu seul s^it,
honneur et glory adieu seul soit honneur et gloire. Adieu vt supr

50
^ CElebrous sans cesse de diu ces boutes celebrous sans cesse de dieu ces
boutes. Cele- vt supra.

51
^ SAuct escriture to propa se, si tu veni a complerla loy, damer to^ dieusour
toute chose et ton Prochain antant que toy. Sanct. vt supra,

52
^ DOnec aboire all bon companion alleluia alleluia. Donec vt supra.

53
^ AS I me walked in a May Morning, I heard a bird sing Cuckoo. As vt supra.

2
She nodded up and down,
and swore all by her crown,
She had friends in the town,
Cuckoo.
3
All you that married be,
learn this song of me,
So shall we not agree,
Cuckoo.
4
All young men in this throng,
to marry that think it long,
Come learn of me this song,
Cuckoo.
54
^ THe white Hen she cackles and lays in the puddles, Sing hey cock
without a comb, cock a (...). The vt supra.

^

55
THe wind blows out of the west, thou gentle Mariner a, look ^ to the looffe
well, beware the lee still, for deadly rocks do now apeare ^ a, look to thy
tacke; let bowling go slack, so shall we escape them ^ and go clear, Tarra
tan tarra stir well thy course sir, the wind waxes ^ large, the sheets do
thou year, go fill the can, give us some bear. ^ I Will drink thee I Will brinks
thee my mates, what cheer? The vt supra.

^ ^

56
Jack boy, ho boy news, the cat is in the well, let us ring ^ now for her
knell, ding dong ding dong bell, Jack vt supra.

57
BLow thy horn thou jolly hunter, thy horns for to revive a, * ^ show thy
self a good huntsman whilst that thou art alive a, that men may ^ say and sing
with thee, thou have a merry life a, in pleasure all the day, ^ and Venus mate
to wife a. Blow vt supr^a.

^

58
^ BAnbery Ale where where where, at the Black Smithes house, I would I were
there. Banbery vt supra.

59
^ A Miller, a miller, a miller would I be, to learn his craft as well as he,
by art to steal, by cunning to lie, to get a poling pe^^y thereby. A vt supra.

60
^ Irch and green holly, birch and green holly, if thou be beaten boy,
thank thine own folly. Birch vt supra*

^

61
^ THe Lark Linit and Nightingale to sing some say are best, yet merrily sings
little Robin, pretty Robin with the red breast. The vt supra

62
^ T. ^. trole. ii. trole the bole to me, and I will trole the same again to
thee, begin now hold in now, for we must merry be as you see, be lusty so
must we, Oh it is a brave thing for to pass away the spring with mirth and joy
to sing, Tan tan tan tara tant tant, all a flant brave boys, what joy is this
to see, when friends so well agree. Trole vt supra.

^

36
^ NOw Robin lend to me thy bow, Sweet Robin lend to me thy bow, for I must now
a hunting with my Lady go, with my sweet Lady go. Now vt supra.

2 And whether will thy Lady go,
Sweet Wilkin tell it unto me:
And thou shall have my hawke, my hound, and eke my bow
to wait on thy Lady.
3 My Lady will to Vppingham,
to Vppingham forsooth will ^hee,
And I my self appointed for to be the man,
to wait on my Lady.
4 Adieu good Wilkin all be shrewde,
thy hunting nothing pleases me,
But yet beware thy babbling hounds stray not abroad,
for angring of thy Lady.
5 My hounds shall be led in the line,
so well I can assure it thee:
Unless by view of strain some pursue I may find,
to please my sweet Lady.
6 With that the Lady she came in,
and wild them all for to agree:
For honest hunting never was accounted sin,
nor never shall for me.
64
^ FArewell mine own sweet heart farewell whom I love best since I must from
my love depart, adieu my joy and rest. fare. vt supra.

65
^ FAy mi, fare la mi, begin my son and follow me fing flat fa, me, so
shall weewell agree, hey tro lo ly lo ly lo, hold fast good son with hey tro
lily lo trod ly, O sing this once again Iustily. Fa vt supra.

66
^ MVsing.ii. musing mine own self all alone, I heard a maid.^^* I heard a
maid making great moan with sobs and sighs, and many a grievous moan, for
that for that for that her maidenhead was gone. Mu* vt supra.

67
^ TO Por^smouth.ii. it is a gallant town, and there we will have a quart of
wine with a nutmeg brown, diddle down. The gallant ship, the Mermaid, the
Lion hanging stout, did make us to spend there our sixeteen pence all out. The
vt supra

68
^ COme drink to me, and I will drink to thee to thee, and then shall we
full well agree. I have loved the jolly tankerd full seven winters and more, I
loud it so long till that I went upon the score, he that loves not the tankerd
is no honest man.ii. and he is no right soldier that loves not the can: tappe
the canikin, to^^e the Canikin, trole the ^anikin turn the canikin, hold good
son and fill us a fresh can, that we may quaffe it round about from man to
man. Come vt supra.

69
^ LEts have a peale for John Cooks soul, for he was an honest man with
belles all in an order, the cruse with the black bole, the tankard likewise
with the can, and I my own self will ring the treble bell, and drink to you
every one* (...) now my mates, ring merrily and well till all this good ale is
gone. Lets vt supra.

70
^ SIng we this roundelay merrily my mate, ill may he thrive that does us hate,
Sing we this roundelay merrily each one, take care who will for i will take none.
Sing vt supra.

^ VT re mi fa mi re vt, hey derry derry sing and be merry, quand^ veni quando
coeli, whip little David's bome. bome. Vt vt supra. The fourth must sing the
Fahurthen. Bome bome..ii. Bome. Bome vt supra.

72
^ L^dy come down and see the Cat sits in the Plumtree. Lady vt supra

73
^ Love, love sweet love for evermore farewell to thee, for fortune has
deceived me.iii. Fortune my foe, most contrary has wrought me this misery, but
yet my love, my sweet love farewell to thee, farewell to thee. Love vt supra.

A Round of three Country dances in one.
Basse or Ground.
74*
^ SIng after fellows, as you hear me, a toy that seldom is seen a: three
country dances in one to be a pretty conceit as I ween a.

Tenor.
^ RObin Hood Robin Hood said little John, come dance before the Queen a. In a red Petticote and a green iacket, a white hose and a green a. vt supra.

Cantus.
^ NNow foot it as I do, Tom boy Tom, now foot it as I do Swithen a, And
Hicke thou must trick it all alone, till Robin come leaping in between a. vt
supra.

Medius.
^ THe crampe is in my purse full sore, no money will bide there in a, and if I
had some salve therefore, O lightly then would I sing a, hey hoe the Crampe a,
hey hoe the Crampe a, hey hoe the crampe a the crampe a. The vt supra.

Rounds or Catches of five Uoices.
Canon in the unison*
5. Uoc.
75
^ COme follow memerily my mates, lets all agree.^. and make no faults. Take
heed of time, tune and ear, time, tune and ear, And then without all doubt,
we need not fear to sing this catch throughout: Malkin was a country maid, a
country maid trick and trim, trick and trim as she might be, she would needs
to the Court she said to sell milk and firmenty, hey hoe, have with you now ^
to Westminster, but before you come there, because the way is farresome ^ pretty
talk lets hear. Adieu you dainty da^^es, go whether you will for ^ me* you
are the very same I took you for to be Come vt supra.

76
^ WHite wine and sugar is good drink for me, for so said Parson Brat, but
Gough said nay to that, for he loved Malmesie. white wine vt supra.

77
^ LIbera me Domine a per sequentibus me quia comfortati snnt ^u* (...) per
(...) me Libera vt supra.

78
^ VNiuersa transeunt.ii..ii..ii. transeunt, Vniuersa vt supra.

79
^ Vias tuas Domine. demonstra mihi, and semitas tuas edoce me, edoce me Uias
vt supra.

80
^ FIdes est a -- ni -- ma vi -- ta si -- cut anima est vita corporis. Fides vt
supra.

81
^ SI non pa -- uisti oec^ -- disti Si vt supra.

82
^ VEr -- hum Domini manet in aeternum in aeter -- number verbum vt supra.

83
^ SIng you new after me, and as I sing sing ye, so shall we well agree, five
parts in unity, ding dong, ding dong, ding dong, ding dong bell. Sing vt supra.

84
^ IInkin the iester was wont to make glee with Iaruis the Iugler till angry
was he, then Wilkin the Wiseman did wisely foresee, that Iugler and Iester
should gently agree, hey down, d. d. down derie d. d. d. d. down, d. Iinkin vt
supra.

85
^ HEy ho no body at home, meat nor drink nor money have I none, fill the pot
Eadie. Hey vt supra.

86
^ VT, re, mi, fa, sol, la, la, fa, fa, mi, re vt. Hey down ad. a dising you
three after me and follow me my lads ii. my lads and we will merry be fa, la,
la, la, la,.ii. fa, la,.ii. fa, la,.ii, la. la well song before hold
fast.ii..ii. hold fast betime, take heed.ii. you miss not nor break the time,
nor.ii. for if thou miss the Basse a note there is nere a man.ii. can sing a
jot. Vt vt supra.

87
^ LEt Lobcocke leave his wife at home with lusty. ii. Iinkin that clownish
Groom, with tighee, with two alone, with ta ha farewell my kind moame, yet
must we look kindly when Lobcocke comes home. Let vt supra.

88
^ VT, re, mi, fa, sol, la, la, sol, fa. mi, re, vt. Hey down, down, down,
down, sing you now after me, la, mi, sol, re, fa, so shall ^ ^ we well agree,
take heed to yourtime, and rest as you find, the round ^ and the square must
be tend in their kind: O well sung my Lads I say, ^ we are as good by night as
by day. la, mi, sol, re, fa, let us be merry, hear ^ so long time as you may,
for time truly passes away, hey ho, hey ho, ^ hey ho, hey ho, hey ho. Vt vt
supra.

^ ^

89
^ Keep well your ray my lads, and show your selves like men, this day our
foes shall feel our forces once again, now let the trumpet sound.ii. their
deadly blast, tantarra, tantarra, tantarra tan, stand to it first and last,
with tautara ra.ii. see hey, they fly full fast. Keep vt supra.

90
^ HOw should I sing well and not be weary, and ii. Since we lack money to make
us merry, to make us merry, since we lack money to make us merry, since we
lack money to make us merry. how vt supra.

^

Rounds or Catches of six Uoices.
Canon in the unison.
6 Voc.
91
^ Joy in the gates of Jerusalem, peace be in Sion. Joy vt supra.

92
^ LAndate nomen Domini, landate serui Dominum qui statis in d^^^ domini.
Landate vt supra.

93
^ DOmine Fills Del vi -- vimiserere nostri, qui tollis. qui tolles peccata
mund^ Domine vt supra.

^ ^

94
^ BEnedic Domine nobis his donis tuis quae de tua largitate sumus sump --
turi. Benedic vtsupra.

95
^ NOw thanked be the great God Pan, which thus preserues my loved life, and
thanked be I that keep a man who ended has this bloody strife, for if my man
must praises have, what then must I that keep the knave. Now vtsupra.

A Round or Catch for seven Voices.
Canon in the unison.
7. Voc.
96
^ LAaudate nomen Domini super omnes Gentes. Laudate. vtsupra.

Rounds or Catches of Eight Voices.
97
^ IEts hane a peale for John Cooks soul for he was a very very honest man,
an honest man. Lets vtsupra.

^

98
^ DElicta quis intelligu, ab occultis ^ei^ munda me. Delicta vt supr^.

A Round or Catch for Nine voices.
99
^ HEy ho^ what shall I say, Sir John has carried my wife away, they were gone
ere I wist, she will come when she list, hey trolly trolly ^olly, come again
ho, hey

^

A Round or Catch for ten or eleven voices.
Canon in the unison.
10. or 11. Voc.
100
^ SIng we now merrily our purses be empty hey ho, let them take care that list
to spare for I will not do so, who can sing so merry a note, as he that cannot
change a groat, hey ho^ trolly lolly loc, trolly lolly lo. Sing vt supra.

^ ^ ^

A Table of all the Songs contained in this Book.
Songs of three voices.
HEy hoe to the green. 1 O my fearful dreams. 2 Jolly shepherd. 3 All into
service. 4 New Oysters. 5 Oken leaves. 6 Now God be with. 7 Well fare the
Nightingale. 8 Follow me quickly. 9 Now kiss the cup. 10 New Oysters new. 11
All in to service. 12 Hey down a down. 13 Miserere nostri. 14 Pietas omnium.
15 Intend voci Orationis. 16 Haec est vita aeterna. 17 Miserere nostri. 18 O
praise the Lord, 19 The Nightingale. 20 The old dog. 21 Joan come kiss me
now. 22 My Dame has in her huch. 23 Go no more to Brainford 24 Dame lend me a
loaf. 25 I am a thirst. 26 There lies a pudding. 27 Hey down a down. 28 What
hap had I. 29
Songs of four voices.
Hey down down. 30 Vt, re, me, fa, sol. 31 ^M s^rere mei Deus. 32 Conditor
Kirie omnium. 33 In te Do^^n^ speraui. 34 Exaudi Domine. 35 Ora and labora. 36
Quicquid pe^ieritis. 37 Cantate Domine canticum. 38 Mane nobiscum. 39 Emitte
lucem tuam. 40 Fides est anima vitae sicut. 41 Descendet Christus de coelo. 42
Ascendit Christus in calum. 43 Adiuua nos Deus. 44 O Lord of whom I do depend.
45 Attend my people. 46 O Lord in thee is all my trust. 47 O Lord turn not
away. 48 Adieu senl foit houneur. 49 Celebrous sans cesse de. 50 Sanct
escriture te 51 Donec aboire. 52 As I me walked in a May. 53 The white Hen
she cackles. 54 The wind blows out. 55 Jack boy, ho boy. 56 Blow thy horn
thou jolly. 57 Banbery Ale. 58 A miller, a miller, a miller. 59 Birch and
green holly. 60 The Lark Linit. 61 Trole trole the bole. 62 Now Robin lend.
63 Farewell mine own. 64 Fa, mi, fa, re, la, mi. 65 Musing mine own self. 66
To Portsmouth. 67 Come drink to me. 68 Lets have a Peale* 69 Sing we this
roundelay. 70 Vt, re, mi, fa, mi, re, vt. 71 Lady come down. 72 Love sweet
love. 73 Sing after fellows. 74
Songs of five voices.
Come follow me merrily. 75 White wine and sugar. 76 Libera me Domine. 77
vniuersa transeunt. 78 Vias tuas Domine demonstra. 79 Fides est anima. 80 Si
non pauisti occidisti. 81 Verbum Domini manet. 82 Sing you after me. 83 Iinkin
the Iester. 84 Hey ho no body. 85 Vt, re, mi, fa, sol, la, 86 Let Lobcocke. 87
Vt, re, mi, fa, sol. 88 Keep well your ray. 89 How should I sing well, 90
Songs of six voices.
Joy in the gates of Jerusalem. 91 Laudate nomen Domini. 92 Domine Fili Dei.*
93 Benedic Domine nobis. 94 Now thanked be the. 95
A Song of seven voices.
Laudate nomen Domini. 96
Songs of eight voices.
Lets have a peale. 97 Delicta quis intelligit. 98
A Song of nine voices.
Hey hoe what shall I say. 99
A Song of ten voices.
Sing we now merrily. 100
FINIS.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Deuteromelia: OR The Second part of Musicks melody, or melodius Music. OF
Pleasant Roundelaies; K. H. mirth, or Freemens Songs. AND such delightful
Catches.

Qui canere potest canat. Catch, that catch can.

Vt Mel Os, sic Cor melos afficit, and reficit.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Adams, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the sign
of the white Lion. 1609.

Mirth and Music to the Cunning-catcher, Derth and Physic to the
Cony-catcher.
SEcundae cogitationes are ever (they say) meliores; and why may not then
secundae Cantiones be as well dulciores? I presume they are so, and that makes
me resume this vain, with hope that I shall not consume in vain my labor
herein.

For first, the kind acceptance of the former Impression is as a new
invitation to this latter Edition, though not of the same things, yet of things
of the same condition; full of the same delectation, made to please, as the
other were; to please I say, and that with as much ease, as the other; made
truly Musical with Art by my correction, and yet plain, and capable with
ease, by my direction.

Again, Bonum quo communius eo melius, we know; and I know no reason, why
incundum, quo communius, should not be as well iucundius: Now then the nature
of these (call them as you will) in regard of their facility and so their
capabilitie is more communicable, then any other kind of Music* and in this
respect more commendable; and will be I am sure more acceptable, because the
things which many heretofore have privately ioyed in, may now by this means,
publicly be inioyed.

Neither, can he, that is the most able Musition say, but that of these most
men, almost all men are capable, that are not altogether immusicall: Neither
can He, that is most spiteful say, but they are very delighfull, I, and some
way gainful too; (yet more painful to me, I am sure, then gainefull.) But,
though there be but little to be gotten by them, yet pity were it, such
Mirth should be forgotten of us; And therefore to make an end, I say no more
but -- Siquid nouisti dulcius istis.

Candidus imperti; si non, hijs vtere mecum, either commend me, or come and
mend me, and so I end me, as resolute as thou art dissolute.

Thine T. R.

A Table of all the Songs contained in this Book.
Freemens Songs to 3. Voices.
AS it fell on a holy day. I The fly she sat. II We be Soldiers three. III By
Lands-dale hey ho. IIII By Lands-dale, another way. V We be three poor
Mariners. VI Of all the birds. VII
Rounds or Catches to 3. Voices.
LOrd hear the poor. VIII Browning Madam. IX Hold thy peace. X Glad am I. XI
Margery serve well. XII Three blind mice. XIII The great bells of Oesney. XIIII
Ma^lt's come down. XV
Freemens Songs to 4. Voices.
MArtin said to his man. XVI Give us once a drink. XVII Who lives so merry.
XVIII By a bancke as I lay. XIX To morrow the Fox. XX Willy I prithee go to
bed. XXI Yonder comes a. XXII.
Rounds or Catches to 4. Voices.
VT Re Mi Fa Sol La. XXIII O my Love. XXIIII Go to Ione Glouer. XXV The maid
she went. XXVI ICVBAK. XXVII Sing with thy mouth. XXVIII By hills and dales.
XXIX The Pigion. XXX Hey down a down. XXXI
FINIS.
^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^

Freemens Songs of 3. Voices.
1
^ AS it fell on a holyday, ij. holyday, and upon an holy tide a, ij. tide a:
John Dory bought him an ambling Nag, ij. ambling Nag to Paris for to ride a. *
^ide a. And when:

2
And when John Dory to (...), *
a little before the gate a: *
John Dory was fitted, the porter was witted, *
to let him in thereat a: *
3
The first man that John Dory did meet, *
was good King John (...) a: *
John Dory could well (...), *
but fell down in a trance a. *
4
A pardon a pardon my Liege and my king, *
for my merry men and (...). *
And all the Churles in merry England* *
I Will bring them all bound to thee a. *
5
And Nicholl was then a Cornish (...)* *
a little beside Bohyde a: *
And he mande forth a good black Bark, *
with fifty good oars on a side a. *
6
(...) top, *
and look what thou can spy a: *
Who, ho; who, ho; a goodly ship I do see, *
I trow it be John Dory. *
7
They hoist their Sails both top and top, *
the meisseine and a^^ was tried a: *
And ^^Spand^^ ^is ^ot, *
what ^^et should be tide a* *
8
The roaring Cannons then were plide, *
and (...) the (...) a: *
The (...) they cride, *
to courage both all and some a* *
9
The (...) hooks ^ere brought at length, *
the brown bill and the sword a: *
John Dory at length, for all his strength, *
was clapped fast under board a. *
2
THe Fly she sat in Shamblerow, * ^

And shambled with, * her heels I trow.

And then came in sir Cranion,
with legs so long and many a one.
2
And said Jove speed Dame Fly, Dame Fly,
marry you be welcome good Sir quoth she:
The Master humble Be has sent me to thee,
to wit and if you will his true love be.
3
But she said nay, that may not be,
for I must have the Butterflye:
For and a greater Lord there may not be.
But at the last consent did she.
4
And there was bid to this wedding,
all Flies in the field and Worms creeping:
The Snaile she came crawling all over the plain,
with all her ioly trinckets at her train.
5
Ten Bees there came all clad in Gold.
and all the rest did them behold:
But the Thonbud refused this sight to see.
and to a Cow-plat away flies she.
6
But where now shall this wedding be?
for and hey nonny no in an old lue tree:
And where now shall we bake our bread?
for and hey nony no in an old horse head.
7
And where now shall we brew our Ale?
but even within one Walnut shale:
And also where shall we our dinner make,
but even upon a galde Horse back.
8
For there we shall have good company,
with humbling and bumbling and much melody:
When ended was this wedding day
the Be he took his fly away.,
9
And laid her down upon the Marsh,
between one Marigold and one long grass*
And there they begot good master G^at,
and made him the heir of all, that is flat.
4
TREBLE.
BY Lands-dale hey ho, by merry Lands- dale, there ^ dwelt a jolly Miller, and a
very good old man was he, was he, hey, ho: ^ he had, he had, and a son a* he
had, he had and a son.

TENOR.
BY Lands-dale hey ho, by merry Lands-dale hey ho, was he, ^ hey ho, he had, he
had and a son a. *

BASSVS.
BY Lands-dale hey ho, by merry Lands- dale, hey ho, * ^ there dwelt a jolly
miller, and a very good old man was he, hey ho, he ^ had, he had and a son a,
he had, * he had, he had:

2
He had, he had and a son a, *
men called him Renold,
and mickle of his might was he, was he, hey ho.
3
And from his father a wode a, *
his fortune for to seek,
from merry Landsdale wode he, wode he, hey ho.
4
His father would him seek a, *
and found him fast a sleep.
among the leaves green was he, was he, hey ho.
5
He took, he took him up a, *
all by the lilly white hand,
and set him on his feet, and bad him stand, hey ho.
6
He gave to him a benbow, *
made all of a trusty tree,
and Arrows in his hand and bad him let them flee.
7
And shoot was that that a did a, *
some say he shot a mile,
but half a mile and more was it was it, hey ho.
8
And at the half miles end, *
there stood an armed man,
this child he shot him through, and through, and through, hey hoy.
9
His beard was all on a white a, *
as white as Whale is bone,
his eyes they were as clear, as Crystal stone, hey ho*
10
And there of him they made *
good yeoman Robin hood,
(...)*
5
TREBLE.
Another way
^ BY Landsdale, etc.

TENOR.
^ BY Landsdale, etc.

BASSVS.
^ BY Landsdale hey ho, by merry Lands-dale hey ho, * there dwelt a jolly
Miller, and a good old man was he, was he, hey ho: he had, he had and a son
a. *

2
He had, he had and a son a, *
men called him Renold,
and mickle of his might was he, was he, hey ho.
3
And from his father a wode a, *
his fortune for to seek,
from merry Landsdale wode he, wode he, hey ho.
4
His father would him seek a, *
and found him fast a sleep.
among the leaves green was he, was he, hey ho.
5
He took, he took him up a, *
all by the lilly white hand,
and set him on his feet, and bad him stand, hey ho.
6
He gave to him a benbow, *
made all of a trusty tree,
and Arrows in his hand and bad him let them flee.
7
And shoot was that that a did a, *
some say he shot a mile,
but half a mile and more was it was it, hey ho.
8
And at the half miles end, *
there stood an armed man,
this child he shot him through, and through, and through, hey hoy.
9
His beard was all on a white a, *
as white as Whale is bone,
his eyes they were as clear, as Crystal stone, hey ho*
10
And there of him they made *
good yeoman Robin hood,
Scarlet, and little John, and little John, hey ho.
7
TREBLE.
^ OF all the birds that e -- uer I see, the Owl is the fairest For all the
day long she sits in a tree, and when the night comes in her de*gree, Te whow,
sir knave to thou, this song is well sung, away flies she, I make you a vow,
and he is a knave that drinks now. Nose, nose, nose, nose, and who gave thee
that jolly red*nese? Nutmegs and cloves, and that gave thee thy jolly red nose.
Nose, nose:

TENOR.
^ OF all the birds that e-uer I see, the Owl is the fairest For all the day
long she sits in a tree, and when the night comes in her de -- gree, Te whit,
to whom drinks thou. this song is a -- way flies she, ^ well sung, I make you a
vow, and he is a knave that drinks now, Nose, ^ nose, nose, nose, and who
gave me this jolly red nose? Sinamont, and Ginger, ^ Nutmegs and Cloves, and
that gave me my jolly red nose. Nose, nose:

BASSVS.
^ OF all the Birds that ever I see, the Owl is the fay -- rest For all the
day long she sits in a tree, and when the night comes in her degree. Te whit te
whow, * this song is away flies she. well song I make you a vow, and he is a
knave that drincketh now. Nose, Nose, Nose, nose, and who gave thee that jolly
red Nose? Nutmegs and cloves, and that gave thee thy jolly red Nose. Nose,

Here ends the Freemens Songs.
Rounds or Catches of 3. Voices.
8
^ LOrd hear the poor that cry, the which do live in pain and misery,
Son of God show some pity.

9
^ BRowning Madame, browning Madame, so merrily we sing browning Madame, The
fairest flower in garden green, is in my loves breast full comely seen, And
with all others compare she can, therefore now let us sing Browning Madame.

10
^ Hold thy peace, and I pree thee hold thy peace thou knave, thou third.
knave: hold second.
thy peace thou knave.

11
^ GLad am I, glad am I, my mother is gone to Henly, shut the door and spare
not, do thy worst I care not. If I dye upon the same, bury, bury, bury me a
gods name.

12
^ MArgerie serve well the black Sow all in a mistie Morning, Come to thy
dinner Sow come, come, come, or else thou shall have never a crumme.

13
^ THree blind Mice, three blind Mice, Dame Julian, Dame Julian, the Miller
and his merry old Wife, she scrapte her tripe li^ke thou the knife.

14
^ THe great bells of Oesney they ring, they jing, they ring, they jing, the
Tenor of them goes mer* rily.

15
^ MAult's come down, mault's come down from an old Ang^ll to a French crown,
There Is never a maid in all this town, but well she knows that mault's come
down, The greatest drunkards in this town, are ver^ glad that mault's come
down.

Here ends the three parts.
Freemens Songs of* 4. Voices.
16
MEDIVS.
^ MArtin: Fie man, fie, who is the fool now? Thou have well drunken man, who is
the fool now?

TENOR.
^ MArtin: Fie man, fie, who is the fool now? Thou have well drunken man, who is
the fool now?

BASSVS.
^ MArtin: Fie man, fie, who is the fool now? Thou have well drunken man, who is
the fool now?

TREBLE.
The singing part.
^ MArtin said to his man fie man, fie, O Martin said to his man who is the
fool now? Martin said to his man fill thou the cup and I the can, thou have
well drunken man, who is the fool now.

2
I see a sheep shering corn,
Fie man, fie:
I see a sheep shearing corn,
Who Is the fool now?
I see a sheep shearing corn,
And a coucko^d blow his horn,
Thou have well drunken man,
Who Is the fool now?
3
I see a man in the Moon,
Fie man, fie:
I see a man in the Moon,
Who Is the fool now?
I see a man in the Moon,
Clowting of Saint Peter's shoone,
Thou have well, etc.
4
I see a hare chase a hound,
Fie man, fie:
I see a hare chase a hound*
who is the fool now?
I see a hare chase a hound,
Twenty mile above the ground,
Thou have well drunken man,
Who Is the fool now?
5
I see a goose ring a hog,
Fie man, fie:
I see a goose ring a hog,
Who Is the fool now?
I see a goose ring a hog,
And a snayle that did bit^*a dog*
Thou-hast well, etc.
6
I see a mouse catch the cat,
Fie man, fie:
I see a mouse catch the cat,
Who Is the fool now?
I see a mouse catch the cat,
And the cheese to eat the rat,
Thou have well drunken man,
Who Is the fool now?
17
TREBLE
^ Give us once a drink, for and the black bole, sing gentle Butler bal -- la
moy. for and the black bole, sing gentle Butler balla moy. For:

MEDIVS.
^ Give us once a drink for and the black bole, sing gentle Butler balla moy:
For and the black bole, sing gentle Butler bal -- la moy For:

TENOR.
^ Give us once a drink for and the black bole, sing gentle Butler balla moy:
For and the black bole, sing gentle Butler balla moy For:

BASSVS.
Chorus.Give ^ us once a drink for and the black bole, sing gentle ^ butler
balla moy, for and the black bole, sing gentle butler balla moy Verse.
Give us once a ^ drink for and the pint pot, sing gentle Butler balla moy,
the pint pot. For and the

Give us once a drink for and the quart pot,
sing gentle Butler balla moy:
The quart pot, the pint pot,
for and the black bole. etc.
Give us once a drinck for and the pottle pot,
sing gentle Butler balla moy:
The pottle pot, the quart pot, the pint pot,
for and the black bole, etc.
Give us once a drink for and the gallon pot,
sing gentle Butler balla moy:
The gallon pot, the pottle pot, the quart pot, the pint pot,
for and the black bole, etc.
Give us once a drink for and the verkin,
sing gentle Butler balla moy:
The verkin, the gallon pot, the pottle pot, the quart pot, the pint pot,
for and the black bole, etc.
Give us: kilderkin, etc. Give us: barrel, etc. Give us: hogshead, etc.
Give us: Pipe, etc. Give us: Butt, etc. Give us: the Tun, etc.
18
MEDIVS.
^ WHo lives so merry, etc. And Chorus.
ever she sings as I can guess, will you buy a -- ny sand, any sand Mistres?

TENOR.
^ WHo lives? And Chorus.
ever she sings as I can guess, will ye buy any sand, any sand Mi -- stresse?

BASSVS
^ WHo lives? And Chorus.
ever she sings as I can guess, will ye buy any sand, any sand Mistress?

TREBLE.
The singing part.
Uerse. ^ WHo lives so merry in all this land, as does the poor ^ widow that
sells the sand? And chorus.
ever she sings as I can guess, ^ will you buy any sand, any sand Mistress?

Ver. 2 The Broom-man makes his living most sweet,
with carrying of broomes from street to street:
Cho. Who would desire a pleasanter thing,
then all the day long to do nothing but sing
Ver. 3 The Chimney-sweeper all the long day,
he sings and sweepeth the soote away:
Chapter Yet when he comes home although he beweary,
with his sweet wife he makes full merry.
Ver. 4 The Cobbler he sits cobling till noone,
and cobbleth his shoes till they be done?
Cho. Yet does he not fear, and so does say,
for he knows his work will soon decay.
Ver. 5 The Merchant man does sail on the seas,
and lie on the shipboard with little ease:
Cho. Always in doubt the rock is near,
how can he be merry and make good cheer?
Ver. 6 The Husbandman all day goes to plow,
and when he comes home he scrueth his sow:
Cho. He moyleth and toyleth all the long year,
how can he be merry and make good cheer?
Ve. 7 The Seruingman waits from street to street,
with blowing his nails and beating his feet:
Cho. And serves for forty shillings a year,
that it is impossible to make good cheer.
8 Who lives so merry and makes such sport,
as those that be of thy poorest sort?
Cho. The poorest sort wheresoever they be,
they gather together by one, two, and three.
Bis. 9 And every man will spend his penny,
what makes such a shot among a great many?
FINIS.
19
TREBLE.
^ BY a bank as I lay, lay, lay, lay, lay, Musing on a thing that was past and
gone hey ho, In the merry month of May, O some what before the day, Me thought
I heard at the last, the last, the last. O the:

MEDIVS.
^ BY a bancke as I lay, * lay, Musing on a thing that was past and gone hey
ho, In the merry month of May, O some what before the day, Me thought I heard
at the last, the last, the last. O the:

TENOR.
^ BY a banck as I lay, lay, lay, lay, lay, musing on a thing that was past and
gone, hey ho, In the merry month of May, O some what before the day, Me thought
I heard at the last, the last, the last. O the:

BASSVS.
BY a bancke as I lay, lay, lay, lay, lay, lay, musing on a thing that ^ was
past and gone, hey ho, In the merry month of May, O some what before ^ the day,
Me thought I heard at the last, the last, the last. O the:

2
O the gentle Nightingale, *
the Lady and mistres of all Music,
She sits down ever in the dale,
singing with her notes small,
Quauering them wonderful thick. *
O for Joy my spirits were quick,
to hear the sweet Bird how merely she
And said good Lord defend, (could sing,
England with thy most holy hand,
And save Noble James our King.
21
TREBLE.
Sing softly.
^ WIlly, hey trolly: Chorus.
hey trolly, * lo ly ly, lolyly * hey ho tro lo lo ly ly ly lo.

Sing softly. MEDIVS.
^ WIlly: hey ho, tro lo ly lo ly lo, * Chorus.
hey ho troly * lolyly, lolyly * hey ho trololylolylylo.

Sing softly. BASSVS.
^ Chorus.
WIlly: hey trolly lo, hey trolly * trolly ly, lo ly ly lo, hey. *

TENOR.
The singing part.
^ WIlly prithee go to bed, for thou will have a drowsy head, Tomorrow we must
a hunting, and betimes be stirring, With a hey trolly loly, loly, loly, etc.
hey ho tro lo lo lo ly ly lo.

2
It is like to be fair weather,
couple up all thy hounds together:
Couple Jolly with little Jolly,
couple Trole with old Trolly.
With a hey tro ly lo lo ly,
tro ly lo ly lo.
3
Couple Finch with black Trole,
couple Chaunter with Iumbole:
Let beauty go at liberty,
for she does know her duty.
With a hey, etc.
4
Let Merry go loose it makes no matter,
for Cleanly sometimes she will clatter,
And yet I am sure she will not stray,
but keep with us still, all the day.
With a hey, etc.
5
With O masters and wot you where,
this other day I start a Hare?
On what call hill upon the knole,
and there she started before Trole.
With a hey, etc.
6
And down she went the common dale,
with all the hounds at her tail:
With yeaffe a yaffe, yeaffe a yaffe,
hey Trol, hey Chaunter, hey Iumbole,
With a hey, etc.
7
See how Chooper chopps it in,
and so does Gallant now begin:
Look how Trol begins to tattle,
tarry a while ye shall hear him prattle.
With a hey, etc.
8
For Beauty begins to wag her tail,
of Cleanlies help we shall not fail:
And Chaunter opens very well:
but Merry she does bear the bell.
With a hey, etc.
9
Go prick the path, and down the laune,
she uses still her old train:
She is gone to what call wood,
Where we are like to do no good.
With hey tro ly lo ly lo,
tro ly lo etc.
MELISMATA. MVSICALL PHANSIES.

FITTING THE COURT, CITY, and COUNTRY HVMOVRS.

To 3, 4, and 5. Voices.

To all delightful, except to the Spiteful,
To none offensive, except to the Pensive.
THOU SHALL LABOR FOR PEACE PLENTY



LONDON, Printed by William Stansby for Thomas Adams. 1611.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL THE true favorers of Music, and all virtue Mr.
Thomas Rauenscroft, and Mr. William Rauenscroft Esquires.
RIght Worshipful, I have been so much obliged to the courteous regard you
have always had of me, that if I should not owe unto you my best endeavors; I
should much contrary your kindnesses, and deservedly incur the shame of
ingratitude* Let it therefore stand with your good likings, that by these
harmless Musical Phansies, I may show unto the world, and hereby confess,
how much I am bound unto you; and when it shall further seem good to your
Worships to command me, I will not have ability or life that shall not be at
your service.

LONDON. 16. Aprilis. 1611. Your Worships affectionate kinseman, T. R.

TO THE NOBLEST OF THE COURT, LIBERALLEST OF THE COUNTRY, and freest of the
CITY.
You may well perceive by the much variety herein composed, that my desire is
to give contentment in this kind of Music to the skillful, and most
judicious of all sorts And being little or much beholding to some of each
rank, I study and strive to please you in your own elements. Now if my
pains prove your pleasures, you shall still keep me in pains to please you.
And so I rest yours.

TR. B. M.

A TABLE OF ALL The Songs contained in this BOOK.
COURT VARIETIES.
1. CAust thou Love. 4. Voc. 2. Now flowers. 4. Voc. 3. Haste, haste, post
haste. 5. Voc. 4. Will ye love me. 5. Voc. 5. Long have I been perplexed. 3.
Voc. 6. Heigh ho, away the Mare. 4. Voc.
CITY ROVNDS.
7. BRoomes for old shoes. 4. Voc. 8. I pray good Mother. 3. Voc. 9. My
mistress will not be content. 4. Voc. 10. I lay with an old man. 4. Voc.
CITY CONCEITS.
11. WHere are you fair Maids. 5. Voc. 12. My master is sowise. 4. Voc. 13.
Maids to bed. 4. Voc. 14. Oyes, Oyes. 4. Voc.
COUNTRY ROVNDS.
15. HE that will an Alehouse keep. 3. Voc. 16. And see thou my Cow. 3.
Voc. 17. Kit and Tom chida. 4. Voc. 18. Dery ding, ding, dasson. 3. Voc. 19. As
I went by the way. 5. Voc.
COUNTRY PASTIMES.
20. THere were three Ravens. 4. Voc. 21. It was the Frogge in the well. 4.
Voc. 22. I have house and land in Kent. 4. Voc. 23. Remember O thou man. 4.
Voc.
FINIS.
COURT VARIETIES.
The Courtiers good Morrow to his MISTRESS.
1.
4. Voc.
Medius.
^ Can thou love, and lie alone? Love is so, love is so disgraced: pleasure
is best, wherein is rest in a heart embraced. Rise, rise, rise, day light do
not burn out, Bells do ring and Birds do sing, only I that mourn out..ij.

Morning star does now appear,
Wind is hushed, and skies clear:
Come come away, come come away,
Can thou love and burn out day?
Rise, rise, rise, rise,
Daylight do not burn out,
Bells do ring,
Birds do sing,
Only I that mourn out.
TREBLE.
^ Rise, rise, rise, day light do not burn out, Bells do ring, and Birds do
sing, only I that mourn out.

TENOR.
^ Rise, rise, day light do nor burn out, Bells do ring, and Birds do sing,
one -- ly I that mourn out.

BASSVS.
^ Rise, rise, rise, day light do not burn out, Bells do ring, and Birds do
sing, only I that mourn out.

The Crowning of BELPHEBE.
2.
4. Voc.
Tenor.
^ NOw flowers your odours breath, and all..ij. the air perfume, grow in this
honored wreath, and with, and with, no storms consume, hayle, hayle, and well
-- come, well -- come her, Thou glory,.ij. Thou glory of our green, receive
this flowrie Sphere,.ij. and be and be the Shepherds Queen, and

TREBLE.
^ NOw flowers your odours breath, and all,.ij. the air perfume, grow in this
honored wreath, and with no storms no storms consume.

^ ^ and

MEDIVS.
^ NOw flowers your odours breath, and all,.ii. the air perfume, grow in this
honored wreath, and with, and with, no storms consume. and

BASSVS.
^ NOw flowers your odours breath, and all,.ii. the air perfume, grow in his
honored wreath, and with no storms consume, and

Tenor.
^

.ij. kneel, O kneel, and do her homage now, O

^

now, that calls our hearts like fate, Now rise,.ij..ij. your humble

^

bosoms bow, O bow, and lead her,.ij. and lead, and lead

^

her to her state.

TREBLE.
^

be,.ii. the shepherds Queen.

^

^

^

MEDIVS.
^

be,.ii. the shepherds Queen.

^

^

^

^

BASSVS.
^

be, and be the shepherds Queen.

^

^

Mercuries Song, the messengers of the GODS.
3.
5. Voc.
Medius.
^ HAste, haste, post haste, make haste and

^

away; the tide tarieth no man, it makes no delay. Trudge, trudge

^

for thy life; for virtue must fly: these iourneyes are rife with thee,

^

with the poor Mercury.

BASSVS.
^

^

TREBLE.
H ^

Aste, haste.

^

^

QVINTVS.
H ^

Aste, haste.

^

TENOR.
H ^

Aste, Haste.

^

The Courtiers Courtship to his Mistress.
4.
5. Voc.
Quintus.
^ WIll ye love me Lady sweet, you are young and love is

^

meet, out alas, out alas, alas, who then will sport thee, wanton yet in the
spring,

^

Love is a pretty thing, Love is a pretty thing, Kiss sweet, is love is do
prove,

^

kind to them that woe.

BASSVS.
^

^

^

The Mistress to the Courtier.
5. VOC.
MEDIVS.
^

FIe away, fie away, fie, fie, fie, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, no, not I,

^

I Will live a maid till I be forty, Fie away, fie away, fie, fie, fie, no, no,

^

no, not I, no,.ij. no, no, no, no, not I.

TREBLE.
^

^

^

TENOR.
^

^

^

A Song of Pages, Cashiered from their Masters.
5.
3. Voc.
Treble.
^ LOng have we bin perplexed and vexed, with a life that I lothed, now may

^

we sing, hay ding, a ding, a ding, and leave to lament any longer, glad to the

^

heart to depart, that I must bid adieu to my master, thanks to the heavens will

^

I give while I live,.ij. for joy, for joy, that I leave him, for.ij. gone may

^

he be down. trole we the Boles, lets in pretty souls, to carrouse

^

with the wenches, to.ij. with the wenches..ij. with the wenches.

MEDIVS.
^

LOng have we bin perplexed and vexed, with a life that I loathed, now may we

^

sing: hay ding, a ding, a ding, and leave to lament any longer, glad to the
heart to

^

depart, that we must bid adieu to my master, thanks to the heavens will I give

^

while I live for joy that I leave him, for.ij. down, near more that

^

we see down, trole we the boles, lets in pretty souls to carrouse with the

^

wenches, to carrouse, to.ij. with the wenches, to carrouse with the wenches.

BASSVS.
^

LOng have we bin perplexed and vexed, with a life that I loathed, now may we

^

sing, hay ding, a ding, a ding, and leave to lament any longer, glad to the
heart

^

to depart that I must bid adieu to my master, thanks to the heavens will I
give,

^

while I live for joy, for joy, that I leave him, for joy, down,.ij.

^

nor again to come at us, trole we the Boles, lets in pretty souls to car

^

rouse with the wenches, to.ij. to.ij. to.ij. with the wenches, to carrouse with

^

the wenches.

Servants out of Service are going to the City to look for new.
6
4. VOC.
TREBLE.
^ HEigh ho, away the Mare, let us set aside all care, aside all care,

^

if any man be disposed to try, Lo here comes a lusty crew, a lusty crew,
that are

^

enforced to cry, anew Master, anew,.ij..ij. anew Master, a

^

new, Hay now,.ij. we will take small pains, and yet

^

will thrive, hay now.

BASSVS.
^

HEigh hoe, away the Mare, let us set aside all care, if any man be

^

desposed to try, Lo here comes a lusty crew, that are enforced to cry,

^

anew Master, anew,.ij..ij. anew Master anew, Hey now

^

we will cut their throats that

^

are alive.

MEDIVS.
^

HEigh hoe, away the Mare, let us set aside all care,.ij. let aside ail

^

care, if any man be disposed to try, Lo here comes a lusty crew, Lo,.ij.
that

^

are enforced to try, anew Master anew,.ij..ij. Master, anew Master

^

anew. We neither mind to beg nor starve.

^

TENOR.
^

HEigh hoe away the Mare, let us set aside all care,.ij. if any man

^

be disposed to try, Lo here comes a lusty crew, a lusty crew, that are
enfor

^

ced to cry, anew Master anew,.ij..ij. anew Master anew.

^

We will have more then we

^

deserve.

CITY ROVNDS.
^ BRoomes for old Shoes, Pouchrings, Boots and Buskings, will

^

ye buy a - ny new Broom? New Oysters, new Oysters, New new Cockels,

^

Cockels nigh, Fresh Herrings: Will ye buy any straw? Hay ye any Kitchin-stuffe

^

Maids? Pippins five, Cherrie ripe, ripe, ripe, Cherrie ripe, ripe, ripe. Hay
any

^

Wood to cleave? Give ear to the clock, beware your lock, your fire and your

^

light, and God give you good (...) a Clock.

8.
3. VOC.
^ I Pray you good Mother, give me leave to play with little John,

^

to make his Bed, and comb his head, and come again anon, or else beat me as

^

you think good, for I love John alone.

9.
3. VOC.
^ MY Mistress will not be content, to take a Jest, a Jest, a Jest, as Chaucer.

^

meant, but following still the woman's fashion; allows it, allows it, for the
new

^

translation, for with the word she would not dispense, and yet, and yet, and
yet,

^

and yet I know the loves the fence.

10.
4. VOC
^ I Lay with an old man all the night, I turned to him and he to me,

^

he could not do so well as he might, but he would feign, but it would

^

not be.

CITY CONCEITS.
The Painters Song of London.
11.
5. Voc.
Medius.
^ WHere are you fair maids, that have need of our trades?

^

I Will sell you a rare confection: will ye have your faces spread, either with
white

^

or red? will ye buy any, will ye buy any fair complexion?

BASSVS.
^

Where are you.

^

2.
My drugges are no dregs,
For I have whites of Eggs,
Made in a rare confection.
Red Leather and S^rflet water,
Scarlet color or Sta^^s-aker,
Will ye buy any fair complexion?
TREBLE.
^

Where are you.

^

^

QVINTVS.
^

Where are you.

^

^

TENOR.
^

Where are you.

^

^

The Scriueners servants Song of Holborne.
12.
4. Voc.
Medius.
^ MY master is so wise, so wise, that he is proceeded wittall, my

^

Mistress is a fool, a fool, and yet it is the most get-all. Let the Usurer cram
him in

^

interest that excel, their pits, their pits enough to damme him before he goes

^

to hell. In Holborne some: In Fleetestreete some: where care he come, there

^

some, there some, Where ear,.ij. where,.ij. theirs some, theirs some.

TREBLE.
M^

Y Master is so wise.

^

^

^

TENOR.
M^

Y Master is so wise.

^

^

^

BASSVS.
M^

Y Master is so wise.

^

^

^

A Belmans Song.
13.
4. Voc.
Tenor.
^ Maids to bed, and cover coal, let the Mouse.ij.

^

Out of her hole: Crickets, Crickets in the Chimney sing, whilst the little
Bell,

^

the little Bell does ring. If fast asleep, who can tell when the Clapper,
Clapper

^

hits the Bell.

TREBLE.
^

^

^

MEDIVS.
^

^

BASSVS.
^

^

(...) ^

gain. O yes, O yes, if note or line, or word be here let fall, that gives,.ij.

^

that gives to any man the taste of Gall, Let him come to the Crier, ^et.ij.

^

I will lay my lips to a fat shrouing Hen, that none,.ij. of these, of these
will be had

^

again, for this I say and likewise I protest, no arrows here at shot at any
breast, but

^

all are well come, are.ij. to my music feast: But all are wel-come,.ij.

^

But.ij. to my music feast, wel-come,.ij. unto my music feast.

TREBLE.
4. VOC.
^

^

^

^

^

But all are ^^l*come, are.ij. to my music feast,.ij.

TENOR.
7. VOC.
^

^

^

^

^

But all are wel-come,

^

are.ij. but al are.ij. unto my music feast,.ij. unto.ij. my music feast.

BASSVS.
4. VOC.
^

^

^

^

But all are wel-come, are.ij. are wel-come, but.ij*

^

(...)

COUNTRY ROVNDS.
15.
3. VOC.
^ HE that will an Alehouse keep, must have three things in store,

^

a Chamber and a feather Bed, a Chimney and a hey no-ny no-ny, hay no-ny

^

no-ny, hey nony no, hey nony no, hey nony no.

16.
3. VOC.
^ ANd see thou my Cow to day Fowler, and see.ij.

^

the Bells ring into Mattens, the Bells.ij. Bim bome, bim bome,

^

a bome, bome, bim bome, bim bome, a bome bome.

17.
4. VOC*
^ KIt and Tom chid a, Tom and Kit chid, Kit chid Tom, Tom chid

^

Kit, Kit and Tom chid a.

18.
3 VOC.
^ DErrie ding, ding, ding Dasson, I am John Cheston, we weeddon

^

we wodden, we weedon, we wodden, Bim bom, bim bom, bim bom, bim bom.

19.
5. VOC.
^ AS I went by the way, holom, trolum, there met I by the way, ha

^

zom* gazom, and I had my little companion: I would a caught, hazom, gazom,

^

and hunge him upon holum trolum.

22.
4. Voc.
Treble.
^ THere were three Ravens sat on a tree, Down a down, hay down, hay down.
There were three Ravens sat on a tree, with a down. There were three Ravens
sat on a tree, they were as black as they might be, with a down derrie,
derrie, derrie, down, down.

The one of them said to his mate,
down adowne hey down,
2
The one of them said to his mate,
with adowne:
The one of them said to his mate
Where shall we our breakefast take?
with adowne dery down.
Down in yonder green field,
down adowne hey down,
3
Down in yonder green field,
with adowne.
Down in yonder green field
There lies a Knight slain under his shield,
with a down.
His hounds they lie down at his feet,
down adowne hey down.
4
His hounds they lie down at his feet,
with adowne.
His hounds they lie down at his feet
So well they can their Master keep,
with adowne.
His Hawks they fly so eagerly
down adowne.
5
His Hawks they fly so eagerly
with adowne.
His Hawks they fly so eagerly,
There Is no foul dare him come nie.
with a down.
Down there comes a fallow Do,
down adowne.
6
Down there comes a fallow Do
with a down.
Down there comes a fallow Do.
As great with young as she might go.
with adowne.
She lift up his bloody head,
down adowne.
7 She lift up his bloody head,

MEDIVS.
^ Down a down, hay down, with a down with a down, hey derrie derrie,
down, down, down.

TENOR.
^ Down hey down, hey down, hey down. with a down, with a down derrie,
derrie down a down.

BASSVS.
^ Down hey down, hey down, with a down, with hey down down, derrie down
down.

with a down.
She lift up his bloody head,
And kissed his wounds that were so red
with a down.
8
She got him up upon her back,
down adowne.
She got him up upon her back,
with adowne.
She got him up upon her back,
And carried him to earthen lake,
with adowne down.
9
She buried him before the prim^
down adowne.
She buried him before the prime,
with adowne.
She buried him before the prime,
She was dead her self ere euen-song time
with adowne.
10
God send every gentleman
down adowne.
God send every gentleman
with adowne.
God send every gentleman
Such hawks, such hounds, and
with adowne.
The Marriage of the Frogge and the MOVSE.
21.
4. Voc.
Treble.
^ IT was the Frogge in the well, Humble-dum, humble-dum. And the merry Mouse
in the Mill, tweedle, tweedle twino.

2
The Frogge*would a woing ride,
humble dum humble dum
Sword and buckler by his side,
tweedle, tweedle twino.
3
When he was upon his high horse set,
humble dum, humble dum
His boots they shone as black as iet*
tweedle, tweedle twino.
4
When she came to the merry mill pin,
humble dum, humble dum
Lady Mouse been you within?
tweedle, tweedle twino.
5
Then came out the dusty Mouse,
humble dum, humble dum
I am Lady of this house,
tweedle, tweedle twino.
6
Ha^t thou any mind of me?
humble dum, humble dum
I have ^ ne great mind of thee,
tweedle* tweedle twino.
7
Who shall this marriage make?
humble dum, humble dum,
Our Lord which is the rat,
tweedle* tweedle twino.
8
What shall we have to our supper?
humble dum, humble dum,
Three beans in a pound of butter,
tweedle tweedle twino.
9
When supper they were at,
humble dum, humble dum
The Frog, the Mouse, and even the Rat,
tweedle, tweedle twino:
10
Then came in gib our cat,
humble dum, humble dum,
And caught the mouse even by the back,
tweedle, tweedle twino,
11
Then did they separate,
humble dum, humble dum,
And the frog leapt on the floor so flat,
tweedle, tweedle twino.
12
Then came in Dicke our Drake,
humble dum, humble dum,
And drew the frogge even to the (...),
tweedle, tweedle twino.
13
The Rat run up the w^ll,
humble dum, humble dum.
A goodly company, the di^ell go with all
tweedle, tweedle twino.
MEDIVS.
^ Humble-dum, humble-dum, tweedle, tweedle twino.

TENOR.
7. VOC.
^ Humble-dum, humble-dum, tweedle, tweedle, twino.

BASSVS.
^ Humble-dum, humble-dum, tweedle, tweedle twino.

A Christmas Carroll.
23.
4. Voc.
Treble.
^ REmember O thou man, O thou man..ij. Remember O thou man thy time is spent,
remember O thou man, how thou art dead and gone, and I did what I can,
therefore repent.

Remember Adams fall
O thou man, O thou man,
2
Remember Adams fall
From heaven to hell:
Remember Adams fall
How we were condemned all
In hell perpetual
there for to dwell.
Remember Gods goodness
O thou man, O thou man,
3
Remember Gods goodness
And his promise made.
Remember Gods goodness,
How he sent his son doubtless
Our sins for to redress,
be not afraid.
4
The Angele all did sing,
O thou man, O thou man.
The Angels all did sing
Upon the Shepherds hill.
The Angels all did singe
Praises to our heavenly King,
And peace to man living
with a good will.
5
The shepherds amazed was,
O thou man, O thou man.
The shepherds amazed was
To hear the Angels sing,
The shepherds amazed was
How it should come to pass
That Christ our Messiah
should be our King.
6
To Bethlem did they go,
O thou man, O thou man,
To Bethlem did they go
The shepherds three,
To Bethlem did they go
To see where it were so (...),
Whether Christ were borne or n^
to set man free.
7
As the Angels before did say,
O thou man, O thou man,
MEDIVS.
^ O thou man, O thou man. therefore repent.

TENOR.
^ O thou man, O thou man, therefore repent.

(...).
^ (...)hou man, (...)pent.

^s the Angels before did say,
So it came to pass,
As the Angels before did say,
They found a babe where^^ it ^ay
(...) anger wrapped in hay,
(...) was.
^
In Bethlem he was borne,
O thou man, O thou man,
^^ Bethlem he was borne,
^^^ (...) sake,
In Bethlem he was borne
For us that were for lorne,
And therefore took no scorn
our flesh to take.
9
Give thanks to God always,
O thou man, O thou man,
Give thanks to God always
With heart most joyfully,
Give thanks to God always,
For this our happy day,
Let all men sing and say
holy, holy.
FINIS.

