THE TERRIBLE AND Deserved death of Francis Rauilliack, showing the manner of
his strange torments at this Execution, upon Friday the 25. of May last past,
for the murder of the late French King, Henry the fourth.

TOGETHER WITH AN ABSTRACT Out of diverse Proclamations, and Edicts, now
concerning the state of France.

As it was Printed in French in three several Books published by Authority.
1610.

depiction of the quartering of Francis Ravilliack

At London printed for William Barley. and John Bayhe. 1610.

The true manner of the strange execution of Francis Ranilliack (for the late
murder of the French King, Henry the fourth) who was tormented to death, upon
a skaffould, in the City of Paris the 25 of May last 1610.
THE most Inhumaine murder lately committed upon the person of the late French
King, Henry the fourth of famous memory, has much disquieted the state of
France, and so busyed other kingdoms, in hunting after the true reports
thereof, so fare forth, that we think it an in terior love to our countri-men
to have an abstract of the most accurences that happened since that unnatural
accydent, and fiirstto begin with the viperous homicyde the bludie actor of
this deed, who strove with the envy of his heart draw in pieces the bowels
that cherished his life. (flourishing France I mean) that proves abortiue, in
bringing forth such an unnatural frenchman.

This paracide, Frances Rauilliack, in time past of the order of the Felician
friars, but of late a practissioner in the law (by some named a petty fogger)
borne in the town of Angolesme, a place not fare distant from the City of
Paris, who after he had vnluckedly accomplished this bloody stratagem, by
taking away ye preserver of so many lives, was upon the 23 of May last,
araingned, convicted, and condempued by due order of law, in the great court
and chamber of Turnella in Paris, before all the Assemblies, Presidents,
Counselors, and Commissioners, at the Request of Du Viquit, Aturney general
to the King, whose place and authority was there then to inquire against this
Francis Rauilliack, for the murder of his late sovereign, Henry the fourth
King of France and Nauare, where-vppon, this Francis Rauilliack, with a sad
and deathlike countenance, holding up his guilty hand before this great
assembly, presently confessed guilty, and that he became this his countries
shame, only by the instigation of the devil, and not any other accomplices,
and confederats would he reveal, but in a Satanicall manner vowed himself to
secrecy, whereupon the law proceeded, and a most terrible sentence of death
pronounced against him there, according to a general decree of that great
court of parliament, and so being a condemned Uillaine was with a strong guard
of armed men conuayd to prison, otherwise by the violent rage of the common
people, he had been torn in pieces, such was the love they bore to their late
King.

Upon the Friday following, being the 25. of May, (according to their
computation) this Frauces Rauilliack was in a most vile and bace manner carried
to execution as follows.

First, (naked in his shirt) he was brought out of the Consergery, (being the
prison for the palace) with a lighted Tortch of two pownd weight i none hand,
and the Knife (wherewith he killed the King) chained to the other hand, so
openly to be seen, that the least child there present might behold it, after
this, he was placed standing upright in a tumbrell or dungcart Duug-cart, and
so from thence, conducted with a guard of Citizens to the Capital church in
Paris, where being adjudged to do penance he had been made a sacrafize to the
rage of the rude people, had not (there bin appointed Officers to see his
execution) preuinted it.

After this, being accompanied to the place of execution with two doctors of
divinity, all the way persuading him to save his soul from everlasting
punishment, by revealing and laying oppen his Assocyates therein, which he
would not, but stiffly (though ungraciously) took the bloody burden upon his
own shoulders, withstanding, even to the death, all fair promises whatsoever.
In this manner as I said before, was he carried to the Grieve, being a spacious
street, and about the middle of Paris, where was builded a very substanciall
scaffould of strong timber, whereupon, according to his Judgment he was to be
tormented to death: Du Viquit the Kings Aturny general was appointed principal
to see the execution, and there to gather (if he could) some further light of
this unchristianlike conspiracy.

This here following was the manner of his death: an example of terror made
known to the world to convert all bloody minded Traitors from the like
enter-prise. At his first coming upon the Scaffold, he crossed himself
directly over the breast, a sign that he did live and dye an oblistinate
(...): (...) upon, by the Executioners, he was (...) to an Engine of Wood and
Iron, made (...) S. Andrews Cross, according to the fash^^^ of his Body, and
then the hand with the ^nife chayned to it, (wherewith he slew the King) and
half the arm was put into an artif^^iall Furnace, then flaming with fire and
Brimstone, wherein the knife, his right hand, and half the arm adjoining to
it, was in most terrible manner consumed, yet nothing at all would he confess,
but yelled out with such horrible cries eue^ as it had been a Devil, or some
tormented soul in hell: And surely if Hells tortures might be felt on earth, it
was approved in this man's punishment, and though he deserved ten times more,
yet humane nature might enforce us to pity his distress: After this, with
Tongues and Iron Pincers, made extreme hott in the same Furnace, the appointed
Executioners, pinched and seared the Dugges of his Breasts, the brawnes of his
Arms and Thighs, with the calves of his Legs, and other fleshy parts of
his Body, cutting out Colloppes of Flesh, and burned them before his face:
afterward into the same wounds thus made, they powered scalding Oil, Rosen,
Pitch, and Brimstone, melted together, yet would he reveal nothing, but that
he did it of himself by the instigation of the Devil, and the reason was,
because the King tolerated two Religions in his Kingdom: Oh small occasion,
that for this cause one servile slave, should thus quench the great light of
France, whose brightness glistred thorough Europe: but to pass further into
this strange execution according to the sentence pronounced against him, they
put upon his Navel a rundle of clay, very hard, with a hole in the midst, and
into the same hole powered they moulten lead, till it was filled, yet reauealed
he nothing, but cried out with most horrible roares, even like the dying man
tormented in the Brazen Bull of the Tyrant Phalares. But now to come to the
finishing up of his life, and that the last torture, might in severity equal
the first, they caused four depiction of the quartering of Francis
Ravilliackstrong horses to be brought to tear his body in pieces, and to
separate his limbs into four quarters, where being ready to pay his last
punishment, he was questioned again to make known the truth, but he would not
and so died without speaking one word of God, or remembering the danger of his
soul.

But so strongly was his flesh and joints knit together, that of long time,
these four horses could not dismember him, nor any way tear one joint from
the other, so that one of the horses faynted, the which a Merchant of the City
of Paris perceiving, put to one of his own, being a horse of an exceeding
great strength, yet notwitstanding for all this, they were constrained to cut
the flesh under, his arms and thighs with a sharp raysor, by which means his
body was the easier torn in pieces: which being done, the rage of the people
grew so violent, that they snatched the dismembered carcass out of the
executioners hands, some beat it in sunder against the ground, others cut it
in pieces with knives, so that there was nothing lest but boanes, which were
brought to the place of execution and there burned to cinders, the ashes whereof
was scattered into thewind, as being thought to be unworthy of the earths
burial. God in his Justice I will hope in the like manner reward all such as
repine at their countries safety, and desperately attempt to lift their hands
against Gods anointed.

THE BREFES TAKEN OF DIVERSE EDICTS AND DECREES lately proclaimed in France in
this place.
JEWS the 13. by the grace of God, King of France and Navarre,
to all his loving subjects, health:
WHereas the inhumaine murder of our late deceased Father, HENRY the fourth of
famous memory, is as far as Law and Justice can reach unto, revenged upon the
body of that parracide Francis Rauaillac, whose death sufficiently witnesses,
and now stands regesterd and example of severity in such a cause, yet nature
and duty binds us to add this further unto it: we therefore by the advice of
our four Courts of Parliament, the Lords thereof, spiritual and temporal
that all the lands, goods, and cattels late belonging to the aforesaid traitor
Francis Rauaillac, shall be confiscate to our use, and also the house in
Angolesm^, wherein he was borne, to be utterly ruinated, and be converted into
a common leastall, and in the same place never any more house to be built: Also
we by our authority do decree and ordain, judge, and command, that the Father
and Mother of the said Francis Rauaillac, be for ever banished our Kingdom of
France, and all the Provinces belonging thereunto, not to beseene after the date
of seauenteen days be expiered, never to return upon pain of hanging: Also
we ordain, that the uncles, brothers, sisters and all his kindred, shall never
more take upon them the name of Rauaillac, but take to themselves some other
name, upon the like pain of punishment, as a name, unworthy of our country.
All which we do command to be proclaimed throughout all our Provinces, by the
sound of tro^pet as the order is. For the prosecution of which business, we do
give full authority to du Vicquet, our Atorney General. Dated at our Palace in
Paris the 29. of May 1610. and signed with the great seal of yellow wax, by
the Lord,

POTIER.

A BRIEF OF LETTERS PATTENTS GIVEN TO the Queen.
JEWS the 13. by the grace of God, King of France and Navarre, etc.
To our friends and faithful Counselors of our Court of Parliament of Roan,
health:
LOOKING to the necessity of the time, and for the maintenance of the state in
peace, upon the miserable accident committed upon the person of our most Royal
King and Father, and being in our minority, we do establish and make this good
order for the preservation of our loving subjects, to live in the union and
concord as they did in the time of our Father, and as by the Council of our
Royal Mother, Princes of our blood, other Princes, Prelates, Dukes, Peers, and
Officers of the Crown, we are transported to this our Parliament of Paris, and
being seated in our seat of Justice, we do fully yield our whole government to
our Mother, to have care of us, and protect us till we come to age, not
suffering any costome to be denied, but all things to be performed, and
continued in as good force, as they did in our Fathers time to the quiet of our
land, and the peace of our loving subjects: given at our Palace in Paris the
18. of may 1610. and of our reign the first.

Seen, published, and registered in Court by du Vicquet, Attorney General, the
aforesayed 18, of May, Signed likewise by de Boyleuesque, Secretary to the
Parliament of Roan, and proclaimed in every Province, that none hereafter shall
pretend cause of ignorance.
By the King.
LEWS the 13. by the grace of God King of France and Navarre etc.
To all our loving subjects to whom these shall appertain: health,
Since the vnhapie murder of our late father: The Queen our royal mother now
Regent over us, having tears in her eyes and sorrow in her heart, has not
let to work with great magnanimity and providence for this unnatural
accident, that it might not be prejudicial to our person, our Kingdom, nor to
our subjects, knowing her self obliged to that duty, not only for the
natural affection she bears us, but being declared Regent, and laden with
the affairs of the Kingdom, by the wills and authority of the Princes of our
blood and others of the Parliament, we leaving of hte seat of Justice, by
which means her pains is great and so happy, to our subjects nere us and our
City of Paris desiring no deuty to us, but to our honored Lady and mother,
for which we do not doubt of your willingness, in so doing, we shall give you
thanks with our love.

Furthermore, considering that in the times pastm the days of our late father,
and other Kings his predecessors, that neither of these two Religions (by us
now tolerated) could not be weeded out of the Kingdom without much blood
shed: be it now therefore ordained, and likewise we do allow both the same
through all our Provinces, without any contradiction as it was in our fathers
time, and the hinderers thereof to be highly punished.

Given at our Palace in Paris the 22. of May, and signed with the great Seal
in yellow wax: Farewell.
Letters Patents of the King concerning the Edict of Nantes.
Upon the 22. of May there we Letters Patents granted, by proclamation,
containing the will and intention of the King, for the intertainement of the
Edict made in Nantes, concerning articles given to his subjects professing the
pretended reformed Religion, published in the Parliament at Roane the 28. of
Day 1610.

Upon Sunday their 27 of Day were nine thousand Protestants at Church together
very peaceably, God be praised.

The king is continually guarded with two hundred horse, and his Swissers,
besides the Nobility which mourn greatly.

The Duke de Neuers by advice is returned from the army.

The humdred thousand men promised to the Marquis of Brandenburgh do remain
as they did before, and all the army besides are well.

These be the only last and true news out of France, taken out of three
several books there imprinted, the one at Roan, by Nartin Mesgissier Printer
ordinary to the King,

Another by Peter Courant according to the copy printed at Paris, by Anthony
Vitray, by permission of the Court.

And another printed at Roan by the same Man, and now an abstract of them all
turned into English by R. E.



