A new interlude and a merry of the nature of the.iiij. elements declarynge
many proper points of philosophy natural / and of diverse strange landys /
and of diverse strange effects and causis / which interlude if ye hole matter
be played will conteyne the space of an hour and a half / but if ye list ye may
leave out much of the sad matter as the messengers perte / and some of naturys
part and some of experyens perte and yet the matter will depend conuenyently /
and than it will not be paste three quarters of an hour of length.

Here follow the namys of the pleyers.

The messengere / Nature naturate / Humanyte Studyous desire / Sensual
appetyte / The tauerner / Eyperyence / yngnoraunce / Also if ye list ye may
bring in a dysgysynge.

Here follow diverse matters which be in this interlude conteynyd.

Of the sytuacyon of the.iiij. elements that is to sey the yerth the water the
air and fire / and of their qualytese and propertese / and of the generacyon
and corrupcyo^ of things made of ye co^myxion of them

Of c^rt^yn conclusions proving y^ the yerth must (...) round and y^ it
h^ngyth in ye mids of the fyr (...) yt it is in circu^fere^ce a boue.xxj.M.
mile (...) Of (...) conclusions ^^ynge that the sea lies (...) upon (...).

(...) ^^^osmography / as how and (...) / and of ^yuers strange (...) ^landys
and which wey they ly^ ^ and of (...) n^w found landys and ye manner of ye
people.

(...) cause of stone and m^tall (...).

(...) cause of well sprynges and (...) of the cause o^ hot fumys that come
(...) of y^ y^rth / and of ye cause of the bathys (...) in the yerth which be
perpetually hot.

Of the cause of the ^bbe and flode of the sea

O^ the cause of rain snow and hayle

O^ the cause of the wynd^s and thonder

^ Of the cause of the lyghtnynge of blasyng ster^ys and flamys fleing in the
air

The messenger. THabou^dant grace of the power deuyne
which does illumyne ye world inuyron
P^eserue this audye^ce and cause them to inclyne
To charity this is my petycyon
For by your pac^^ns and supportacyon
A little in^erlude late made and preparyd
Before your presence here shall be declared
which of a f^w conclusyons is contriuyd
And points of philosophy natural
But though the matt^r be not so well declared
As a great clerk could do nor so substancyall
yet the auctour hereof requiryth you all
Though he be yngnorant and ca^ little skyll
To regard his only intent and good will
which in his mind has often times ponderyd
what nombre of books in our tongue maternall
Of joys and tryfellys be made and impryntyd
And few of them of matter substancyall
For though m^^y make books yet uneath ye shall
In our english tongue find any warkes
Of conning that is regardyd by clerks
The grek^ the romans with many other mo
In their mother tongue wrote warkes excellent
Than if clerks in this r^alm^ would take pain so
Consyderyng that our tongue is now suffycyent
^o expoun any hard sentence euydent
^hey might if they would in our english tongue
^ryt^ workys of grauyte sometime among
For diverse pr^^gnaunt wytt^ (...) this land
^s well of noble men as of mean estate
(...) ^othynge but ^nglyshe can vnderstand^
(...) if conning laten bokys were translate
(...) english w^l corr^^t and app^obate
(...) in english might be l^rnyd
(...) other people in their own tongues did
^But now so i^ is that in our english tongue
(...) one th^r^ is that can but read and write
(...) will often presume among
(...) to compyle and balates to indyte
Some o^ love or other matter not worth a myte
Some to opteyn favor will flatter and gloss
Some write curyous terms nothing to purpose
Thus every man after his fantesye
will write his conseyte be it never so rude
Be it virtuous vycyous wisdom or folly
wherefore to my purpose thus I conclude
why should not th^^ the auctour of this interlude
Utter his own^ ^antesy and conseyte also
As well as diverse other now a days do
For wys^dom^ and folly is as it is takyn
For ye one callyth wisdom a another callyth folly
yet among most folk that man is holdyn
most wise / which to be rich studyeth only
But he that for a co^myn wealth bysyly
Studyeth and laboryth and lyuyth by gods law
Except he wax rich men count him but a daw
So he that is rich is ever honouryd
All though he have got it never so falsely
The pore being never so wise is reprouyd
This is the oppynyon most co^mynly
Through out the world / and yet no reason why
Therefore in my mind when that all such dawis
Have babelyd what they ca^ no force of.ii. strawis
For every man in reason thus ought to do
To labor for his own necessary living
And than for the wealth of his neighbor also
But what dyuylish mind have they which musi^g
And labouryng all their lyffes do no another thing
But bri^ge riches to their own possessyon
Nothing regardi^ge their neighbors distruccio^
yet all the riches in the world that is
^ysyth of the ground by goddys sendynge
And by the labor of pore mennys handys
And though thou rych^ man have thereof ye keeping
yet is not this ^yches of thy getting
Nor oughtyst not in reason to be preysyd ye more
For by other me^nys labor it is got before
A great wytted man may sone be enrychyd
That laboryth and studyeth for riches only
But how shall his co^scyens than be discharged
For all clerks afferme that that man presysely
which studyeth for his own wealth pryncypally
Of god shall deserve but little reward
E^cept he the co^myn wealth somewhat regard
So they s^y that that man occupied is
For a co^myn wealth which is ever laboring
To rel^ue pore people with temporal goodys
And that it is a co^myn good act to bring
People from vice and to use good living
Like wise for a co^myn wealth occupied is he
That bryngyth them to knowledge ye yngnora^t be
But man to know god is a dyffyculte
Except by a mean he him self inure
which is to know gods creaturys that be
As furst them that be of the grosyst nature
And than to know them that be more pure
And so by little and little ascendynge
To know gods creaturys and marvelous werki^ge
And this wise man at the last shall come to
The knowledge of god and his hye mageste
And so to learn to do his dewte and also
To deser^e of his goodness partener to be
wherefore in this work d^claryd shall ye see
Furst of the element is the sytuacyon
And of their effectis the caul and generacyon
And though some me^ thyn^e this matter to hy^
And not mete for an audyence vnlernyd
Me think for man nothing more necessary
Than this to know though it be not vsyd
Nor a matter more low can not be arguyd
For though the elementis goddys creaturis be
yet they be most gross and lowyst in degree
How dare men presume to be called clerks
Dysputynge of hye creaturis celestyall
As thyngys inuysyble and gods hye warkys
And know not these vysyble thyngys inferyall
So they would know hye things and know nothi^ge at all
Of the yerth here whereon they daily be
Another the nature form nor quantyte
wherefore it semyth nothing conuenyent
A man to study and his time to be stowe
Furst for the knowledge of hye things excellent
And of light matters beneth nothing to know
As of these.iiij. elementis here below
whose effectis daily appear here at eye
Such things to know furst / were most mete study
which matter before your presence shortly
In this interlude here shall be declared
without great eloquence i^ ryme rudely
Because the compyler is but small lernyd
This work with rethoryk is not adournyd
For perhappis in this matter much eloquence
Should make it tedyous or hurt the sentence
But because some folk be little disposyd
To sadness / but more to mirth and sport
This phylosophycall work is myxyd
with merry conseytis to give men comfort
And occasyon to cause them to resort
To here this matter / whereto if they take heed
Some learning to them thereof may proceed
But they that shall now this matter declare
Openly here unto this audyence
Be hold I prey you see where they are
The pleyers begin to appear in presence
I se well it is time for me to go hens
And so I will do / therefore now shortly
To god I commit all this hole company

Hic intrat natura naturata Humanyte and Studyous desire porta^s figura^ Natura
Naturata THe hye mighty most excellent of all
The fou^tayn of goodness verteu and co^nyng
which is eterne of power most potencyall
The perfeccyon and furst cause of every thing
I mean that only hye na^tu^e naturynge
Lo he by his goodness has ordeynyd and create
Me here his mynyster called nature naturate
wherefore I am the verey naturate nature
The inmedyate mynyster for the preseruacyon
Of every thing in his kind to endure
And cause of generacyon and corrupcyon
Of that thing that is brought to distruccyon
A another thing still I bring forth a gain
Thus wonders^y I work and never in vain
The great world be hold ^o deuydyd wo^dersly
In to two regyons whereof on I call
The etheriall region with the heuyns hye
Containing the planettys sterris and speris all
The lower region called the elementall
Containing these.iiij. elementis be loo
The fire the air the water and yerth also
But yet the elementis and other bodies all
Beneth / take their effectys and operacyons
Of the bodies in the region ethereall
By their influens and constellacyons
They cause here corrupcyons and generacyons
For if the mouyng^ a boue should onys cease
Beneth should be another in^r^se nor decrese
These elementis of them self so syngle be
Unto diverse formys can not be deuydyd
yet they co^myx to gyder daily ye s^e
whereof diverse kinds of things be ingenderyd
which things eftsonys when they be corruptyd
yche element I reduce to his ^urst estate
So that nothing can be utterly ad^y^helate
For though the form and facyon of any thing
That is a corporal body be distroyed
yet every matter remaynyth in his being
whereof it was furst made and formyd
For corrupcyon of a body co^myxyd
is but the resolucyon by time and space
Of every element to his own place
For who that will take any body corporal
And do what he can it to distroy
To break it or grynde it into ^ouder small
To wash to drown to bren it or to dry
yet the air and fire thereof ^aturally
To their own proper places will ascend
The water to the water the yerth to ye yerth tend
For if hete or moisture of any thing certain
By fire or ^e water ^e cons^^^yd
yet yerth or ashes on yerth will remain
So the elementis can never be distroyed
For essencyaliy there is now at this tide
As much fire air water yerth as was
Ever before this time nether more nor las
wherefore thou man now I speak to the
Remember that thou art compound and create
Of these elementis as other creaturis be
yet they have not all like noble estate
For plantis and herbys grow and be insensate
Brute bestis have memory and their wits five
But thou have all those and soul intellectyue
So by reason of thine understanding
Thou have domynyon of other bestis all
And naturally thou sholdyst desire co^nynge
To know strange effects and causys natural
For he that studyeth for the life bestyall
As voluptuous pleasure and bodily rest
I account him never better than a best

Humanyte. O excellent prince and great lord nature
I am thine own child and formyd instrument
I beseech thy grace take me to thy cure
And teache me such scyens thou thikyst expedye^t

Nature. Than sith thou art so humble and beneuolent
That thing that is mete for thy capasyte
And good for thy knowledge I shall Instruct the
Furst of all thou must consider and see
These elementis which do yche other penetrate
And by contynuall alteracyon they be
Of them self daily corruptyd and generate
The yerth as a point or center is sytuate
In the mids of the world / with ye water Joined
with the air and fire round and hole inuyronyd
The yerth of it self is ponderous and heavy
Cold and dry of his own nature proper
Some part lies dry contynually
And part thereof coueryd over with water
Some with the salt see some with fresh river
which yerth and the water to gyder with all
So Ioynyd make a round figure sperycall
So the water which is cold and moist is found
In and upon the y^rth fyllynge the hol^nes
In diverse partis liynge with ye yerth round
yet the hyllys and mount^yns of ye yerth excess
Take nothing of hit a way the roundnes
In comparyson because they be so small
No more than the prikkes do that be on a gall
The air which is hot and moist also
And the fire which is ever hot and dry
A bout the yerth and water Jointly they go
And compass them every where orbycularly
As the white a boute the yolke of an egg does lie
But the air in the lower part most remaynyth
The fire naturally to the hyer tendyth
The eth^ryall region which conteynyth
The sterrys and planettys and ^uery spear
A bout the elementis daily mouyth
And coueryth them round a bout every where
Every sterre and spear in strange manner
Upon his own poles mouy^h-dyuersly
which now to declare were to long to tarry
The fire and the air of their naturys be light
Therefore they move by natural prouydence
The water because it is ponderous in weight
Mouyth not naturally but by vyolence
Of the st^rris and plan^ttes by whose influence
The sea is compellyd to ebb and flow daily
And fresh waters to spring contynually
And though yt the water be gross and heavy
^^t nothing so gross as the yerth I wys
Therefore by hete it is vaporyd up lightly
And in the air makyth cloudys and mystes
But as soon as ever that it grosely is
Geder^d to gyder / it descendyth a gain
And causyth upon ye yerth hayle snow and rain
The yerth because of his ponderosyte
A voydyth equally the mouynges great
Of all extremytes and sperys that be
And ^endyth to the place that is most quiet
So in the myddys of all the sperys is set
Fo^mast abie^t from all manner mouynge
where naturally he restyth and mouyth nothing
Mark well now how I have the showed and told^
Of every element the very sytuacyon
And qualyte^ wherfor^ this figure b^holde
For a more manifest demonstracyon
And by cause thou sholdyst not put to oblyu^on
My doctrine / this man called studyous desire
with the shall have con^ynuall habytacyon
The still to exhort more scyens to adquire
For ye more yt thou desyrest to know any thing
Therein thou semyst the more a man to be
For that man that desir^th no manner co^nynge
All that wyle no better than a b^st is he
why ben the ey^s made but only to see
The leggys to bear the body of a creatur^
So ^uery thing is made to do his nature
So like wise reason wit and understanding
is gyu^n to the man for that thou sholdyst i^ deed
Know thy maker and cause of thine own beyng^
And what ye world is and whereof thou do proceed
wherefore it be houyth the of verey need
The cause of things ^urst for to learn
And than to know^ and laud the hye god eterne

Humanyte. O glorious lord and prince most pleasant
Greatly am I now hold^n unto the
So to illumyne my mind that was yngnorant
with such noble doctrine as thou have here showed me
wherefore I promise upon my fydelyte
My dylygence to do to keep in memory
And the for to honor still perpetually

Studyous desire And sith it has pleasyd thy grace to admyt
Me upon this man to give attendaunce
with thy doctrine here showed I shall qikkyn his wit
And daily put him in remembrance
His courage and desire I shall also inhaunce
So that his f^lycyte shall be most of all
To study and to search for causys natural

Nat^^e. well than for a seas^n I will depart
Leuynge you to gyder here both twain
what I have shewid man prynt well in thine heart
And mark well this figure yt here shall r^mayne
whereby thou may perceive many things more plain
^^ncernynge ye matter I spoke of before
and when that I shall resort here a gain
Of hye points of co^nynge I shall show ye more

Studyous desire. Now humanyte call to your memory
The co^nynge points that nature has declared
And though he have showed diverse poites and many
Of the el^mentis so wondersly formed
yet many other causys there are would be lernyd
As to know the generacyon of things all
Here in the yerth / how they be ingendryd
As herbys plantys well sprynges ston and me^all

Humany^t. Those things to know for me be full expedient
But yet i^ those points which nature late showed me
My mind in them as yet is not content
For I can no manner wise parceyue nor see
Nor prove by reason why the yerth should be
In the mids of ye fyrmament hengyng so small
And the yerth with the water to be round with all

Studyo^s desire. Me thynkyth my self as to some of those poi^tes
I could give a suffycyent solucyon
For furst of all thou must nedys grant this
That the yerth is so deep and botom has non
Or else there is some gross thing hit sto^dyth upon
Or else that it hangyth thou must needs consent
Even in the mids of the fyrmament

Humanyte. what than go forth with thine argument

Studyous desire. Tha^ mark well in y^ day or in a wynters night
The sone and moan and sterris celestyall
In the est furst they do apere to thy sight
(...) after in the west they do down fall
(...) again in the morrow next of all
(...).xxiiij. hours they be come Just
To^^ est poi^tes again where thou sawist them fur^^
T^an if the earth should be of endless de^nes
Or should stand upon any other gross th^^g^
It should be an impedyment dowtles
To the sone moan and sterris in their mouynge
They should not so in the est again spring
Therefore in reason it semyth most conuenyent
The yerth to hang in ye mids of the fyrmame^t

Humanyte. Thine argument in ye point does me co^fou^de
That thou have made but yet it prouytht not right
That the yerth by reason should be round
For though ye fyrmament with his sterris bright
Compass about the yerth each day and night
yet the yerthe may be plain peraduentnre
Quadrant triangle or some other figure

Studyouse desire. That it can not be plain I shall well prove the
Be cause the sterris that a rise in the oryent
Appear more sooner to them that there be
Than to the other dwelling in the occident
The eclypse is thereof a plain experymente
Of the sone or moan which whane it does f^
Is never one time of the day in placys all
yet the eclyps generally is always
In the hole world as one time being
But when we that dwell here see it in ye mydday
They in the west partis see it in the morning
And they in the est behold it in the euenyng
And why that should so be no cause can be found
But only by reason that the yerthe is rownde

Humanyte. That reason proves the yerth at the lest
One ways to be rownde I cannot gain say
As for to account from the est to the west
But yet not withstondynge all that it may
Lose his rowndenesse by some other way

Studyous desire. Na no dowte yt is rownde every where
which I could prove thou shoudest not say nay
if I had thereto any time and leser
But I know a man called experyens
Of diverse instrumentys is never without
Cowde prove all these poyntys and yet by his scye^^
Can tell how many mile the earth is a bowte
(...) many other strange co^clusio^s no dowte
^^^ys instrumentys cowde show the^ so certain
^^at every rude carter should them persayue plain

Humanyte. Now would to god I had yt man now here
For the contembtacyon of my mind

Studyous desire. if ye will I shall for him enquere
And bring him heder if I can him find

Humanyte. Then might I say ye were to me right kind

Studyous desire. I shall assay by god that me dear bought
For cunnyng is the thing yt would be sought

Sensual apetyte. well hyet quod hykman when yt he smot
His wyffe on the buttockes with a bear pott
Aha now god even fool god even
It is even the knave that I mean
Have thou done thy babelyng

Studyous desire. ye peradventure what than

Sensnall apetyte. Tha^ hold down thy head like a pretty man and take my
blyssyng
Benedicite / I grant to the / this perdo^
And give the absolucion
For thy soth saws / stand up Jack daw
I be shrew thy faders sone
Make rome syrs and let us be merry
with huffa galand sing tyrll on the bery,
And let the wide world wind
Sing fryska Ioly with hey trolyloly
For I se well it is but a folly
For to have a sad mind
For rather than I would use such folly
To pray to study or be pope holy
I had as life be ded
By goggys body I tell you true
I speak as I think now else I be shrew
Even my next fellows head
Master humanyte sir be your leave
I were right loath you to grieve
Though I do him despise
For if ye knew him as well as I
ye would not use his company
Nor love him in no wise

Hu. Sir he looks like an honest man
Therefore I merueyll that ye can
This wise him deprave.

Sen. Though he look never so well
I promise you he has a shrewde sme^^

^u. why so I prey you tell

^en. For he saueryth syke a knave

St. Hold your pease sir ye mys take me
what I trow that ye would make me
Like to one of your kyn

Sen. Hark syrs here ye not how boldly
He callyth me knave again by polycy
The devil pull of his skyn
I would he were hangyd by the thro^^
For by the mess I love him not
we two can never a gre
I am content sir with you to tarry
And I am for you so necessary
ye can not live without me

Hu. why sir I say what man be ye

Sen. I am called sensual apetyte
All craturs in me delight
I comfort the wyttys five
The ^astyng smellyng and herynge
I refresh the sight and feeling
To all creaturs a live
For when the body wexith hongry
For lack of fode or else thursty
Than with drynkes plesaund
I restore him out of pain
And often refresshe nature again
with delycate vyand
with plesaunde sound of armonye
The herynge always I satysfy
I dare this well report
The smelling with sweet odovr
And the sight with plesaunte fygovr
And colors I comfort
The feeling that is so plesaunte
Of every member foot or hand
what pleasure therein can be
By the towchynge of so^t and hard
Of hot or cold naught in regard
Except it come by me

Hu. Than I cannot see the contrary
But ye are for me full necessary
And right conuenyent.

Stu. ye sir beware yet what ye do
For if you forsake my company so
Lord nature will not be content.
Of him ye shall never learn good thing
Another virtue nor no other co^nynge
This dare I well say

Sen. Mary auaunt knave I the defye
Did nature for bide him my company
what say thou thereto speak openly

Hu. As for that I know well nay

Sen. No by god I am right sure
For he knows well no creature
without me can live one day

Hu. Sir I pray you be content
It is not utterly mine intent
your company to exyle
But only to have co^munycacyon
And a pastyme of recreacyon
with this man for a while

Stu. well for your pleasure I will depart

Sen. Now go knave go I beshrew thy heart
The devil send the forward

Sen. Now by my troth I meruell greatly
That ever ye would use the company
So myche of such a knave
For if ye do no another thing
But ever study and to be musing
As he would have you it will you bring
At the last unto your grave
ye should ever study pryncypall
For to comfort your life natural
with metis and drynkes dilycate
And other pastymes and pleasures a monge
Dau^synge laughing or plesaunt song
This is mete for your estate

Hu. Be cause ye sey so I you promise
That I have musyd and studied such wise
Me thinks my wits weary
My nature desires some refresshynge
And also I have been so long fasting
That I am somewhat hongry

Sen. well than will ye go with me
To a tavern where ye shall se
Good pastaunce and at your lyberte
Have what so ever ye will

Hu. I am content so for to do
if that ye will not fro me go
But keep me company still

Sen. Company quoth a / ye yt I shall point deuyse
And also do you good and true service
And thereto I plyght my truth
And if that I ever forsake you
I pray god the devil take you

Hu. Mary I thank you for that oath

Sen. A myschyfe on it my tongue loo
will tryp sometime what so ever I do
But ye wot what I mean well

Hu. ye no force let this matter pass
But seydest eui^ now thou knewyst where was
A good tavern to make solas
where is that I prey the tell

Sen. Mary at the door even here by
if we call any th^nge on hye
The tauerner will answer

Hu. I prey the than call for him now

Sen. Mary I will / How tauerner how
why doste thou not appear

Tauerner. who is that calls so hastily
I shrew thine heart speak softely
I tell the I am not here

Sen. Than I be shrew ye page of thine age
Come hither knave for thine advantage
why makyst thou hit so tow

Ta. For mine auau^tage mary tha^ I come
Beware syrs how let me have rome
Lo here I am what seyst thou

Sen. Mary thus here is a gentylman I say
That another ete nor drank this day
Therefore ^ell me I the pray
if thou have any good wine

Ta. ye shall have spayneshe wine and gascoyn
Rose color whyt claretrampyon
Tire capryck and maluesyne
Sak raspyce alycaunt rumney
Greek ipocrase new made clary
Such as ye never had
For if ye drink a draught or too
yt will make you or ye thens go
By gogges body stark mad

Sen. I wot thou art not without good wine
But here is a gentylma^ has list to dyne
Can thou get him any good mete

Ta. what mete master would ye have

Hu. I care not so god me save
So that it be wholesome to ete
I would we had a good stewyd capon

Sen. As for capons ye can get none
The kyngys taker took up each one
I wot well there is none to get

Ta. Though all capons be gone what than
yet I can get you a stewed hen
That is ready dyght.

Hu. if she be fat yt will do well

Ta. Fat or lene I cannot tell
But as for this I wot well
She lay at the stews all night.

Hu. Thou art a mad gest be this light.

Sen. ye sir it is a fellow that never faylys
But can get my master a dyshe of quales
small birds swalowes or wagtayles
They be light of dygestyon.

Ta. Light of dysgestyon for what reason

Sen. For physyk puttyth this reason thereto
Because those birds fle to and fro
And be contynuall mouynge

Ta. Then know I a lyghter mete than y^

Hu. I pray the tell me what

Ta. if ye will nedys know at short and long
It is even a woman's tongue
For that is ever sterynge

Hu. Sir I pray the let such fanteses be
And come heder nere and hark to me
And do after my bidding.
Goo p^ruey us a dinner even of the mos^
Of all manner dysshes both sod and roste
That thou can get spare for no cost
if thou make three course

Ta. Tha^ ye get another gose nor swane
But a dyshe of dreggys a dyshe of bra^e
A dysshe of draffe and I trow than
ye can not get three worse

Hu. what horson woldyst thou puruey
Bran draffe and stynkynge dregs I sey
I hold the mad I trow

Ta. Gogges passion said ye not thus
That I should puruey you three course dysshe^
And these be course Inowe

Hu. Three course dysshes quoth a
what mad ^ole thou mys take me clean
I se well thou wotest not what I mean
And vnderstandyst a mys
I mean this wise I would have the
To puruey mete so great plente
That thou sholdyst of necessyte
Serve them at three coursys
That is to understand at one ^^rde
Thou should bring them unto y^ ^or^
At three several tymes^

Ta. what than I se well ye will make a fes^e

^u. ye by the rode even with the gretest

Sen. By my troth than do ye best
Even after my mind
But ye must have more company.

Hu. That is true and so would I gladl^
If I knew any to find

Sen. why will ye follow my counsel

Hu. ye

Sen. Than we will have little nell
A proper wenche she daunsith well
And Jane with the black lace
we will have bounsynge besse also
And two or three proper wenchis mo
Right feyr and smotter of face

Hu. Now be it so thou art saunce pere

Ta. Tha^ I perceive ye will make good chere

Hu. why what should I else do

Ta. If ye think so best than will I
Go before and make all thing ready
Again ye come thereto

Hu. Mary I prey the do so

Ta. Than farewell syrs for I am gone

Hu. And we shall follow the anon
without any taryyng

Sen. Then it is best sir ye make have
For ye shall spend here but time i^ wast
And do no another thing

Hu. if ye will let us goo by and by

Sen. I pray you be it for I am ready
No man better willing
Ex^a^ Sen. and Hu. Intrat Experies. and Stu. Now cosyn experyens as I may say
ye are right welcome to this country without any faynyng.

Experie^s Sir I thank you thereof hertely
And I am as glad of your company
As any man living.

Stu. Sir I understand that ye have be
In many a stra^nge country
And have had great fylycyte
Strange causes to seek and find

E^. Right far sir I have rydden and gone
And seen strange things many one
In affryk / europe and ynde
Both est and west I have been farr^
North also and seen the sowth sterr^
Both by see and land
And ben in sundry nacyons
with people of diverse condycyons

Stu. Marvelous to understand.
Sir if a man have such courage
Or devotion in pilgrimage
Iheruzalem unto
For to account the next way
How many mile is it I you pray

Ex. From hens theder to goo
Sir as for all such questyons
Of towns to know the sytuacyon
How ferr^ they be a sunder
And other points of cosmogryfy
ye shall never learn then more surely
Then by that fugure yonder
For who that figure did first deuyse
It seems well he was wise
And perfyte in this s^yens
For both these and land also
Lie true and just as they should do
I know by experyens.

Stu. who think you brought here this figure

Ex. I wot not

Stu Certes lord nature
Him self not long a gone
which was here personally
Declarynge hye philosophy
And lafte this figure purposely
For humanytes instruccyon

Ex. Dowtles right nobly done

Stu. Sir this realm ye knou is callid e^gla^de
Sometime brettayne I understand
Therefore I prey you poi^t with your hand
In what place it should lie.

Ex. Sir this is ynglande lyenge here
And this is skotla^de yt Joins him nere
Compassyd a boute every where
with the occian see rownde
And next from them westwardly
Here by him self alone does ly
Irelande that wholesome ground
Here than is the narowe seey
To Calyce and Boleyne the next wey
And flaunders in this perte
Here lies france next him ioynynge
And spayn^ southwarde from the^s sta^dynge
And portyngale in this quart
This country is called Italye
Behold where Rome in ye mids does ly
And Naples here be yonde
And this little See that here is
Is called the Gulf of Uenys
And here venys does stand
As for almayne lies this way
Here lies denmark and norway
And northwarde on this side
There lies Iselonde where me^ do fyshe
But be yonde that so cold it is
No man may there abide
This See is called the great Occyan
So great it is that never man
Could tell it since the world began
Till now within this.xx. year
westwarde be found new lands
That we never hard tell of before this
By writing nor other meanys
yet many now have been there
And that country is so large of rome
Much longer than all cristendome
without fable or gyle
For diverse maryners have it tried
And sailed straight by the cost side
Above.v. thousand mile
But what co^modytes be within
No man can tell nor well Imagine
But yet not long a go
Some men of this country went
By the kings noble consent
It for to search to that intent
And could not be brought thereto
But they that were they venteres
Have cause to curse their maryners
Falls of promys and dissemblers
That falsely them be trayed
which would take no pain to sail farther
Than their own list and pleasure
wherefore that vyage and diverse other
Such kaytyffes have distroyed
O what a thing had be than
if that they that be english men
Might have been the furst of all
That there should have take possessyon
And made furst building and habytacion
A memory perpetual
And also what an honorable thing
Both to the realm and to the king
To have had his domynyon extendyng^
There into so far a ground
which the noble king of late memory
The most wise prince the.vij. Herry
Caused furst for to be found
And what a great meritoryouse deed
It were to have the people instructed
To live more virtuously
And to learn to know of men the manner
And also to know god their maker
which as yet live all bestly
For they another know god nor the deuell
Nor never hard tell of heuyn nor hell
writing nor other scripture
But yet in the stead of god almyght
The honor the sone for his great lygg^
For that does them great pleasure
Building nor house they have no^ at all
But wodes / cotes / and cauys small
No merueyle though it be so
For they use no manner of iron
Another in tole nor other wepon
That should help them thereto
Copper they have which is found
In diverse places above the ground
yet they dyg not therefore
For as I said they have non yryn
whereby they should in the yerth mine
To search for any wore
Great haboundauace of woddes there be
Most part vyr and pyne aple tree
Great riches might come thereby
Both pyche and tar and soap asshys
As they make in the eest lands
By brynnynge thereof only
Fyshe they have so great plente
That in hauyns take and slain they be
with stauys withouten fail
Now frenchemen and other have found the trade
That yearly of fyshe there they lad
A boue an.C. sail
But in the south part of that country
The people there go nakyd always
The land is of so great he^e
And in the north part all the clothes
That they were / is but bestes skynnes
They have no another fete
But how the people furst began
In that country or whens they came
For clerks it is a questyon
Other things mo I have in store
That I could tell thereof but now no more
Till a another season

Stu. Tha^ at your pleasure show some other thing
y^ lyketh me so well your co^myni^ge
ye can not talk a mys

Ex. Tha^ will I torn a gain to my matter
Of Cosmogryfy where I was err^
Behold take heed to this
Loo estwarde beyond ye great occyan
Here enters the sea called mediterran
Of.ij.M. mile of length
The Soudans country lies here by
The great Turk on ye north side does ly
A man of merueylous strength
This said north perte is called europa
And this south perte called africa
This eest perte is called ynde
But this new lands found lately
Ben called america by cause only
Americus did furst them find
Loo Ihrfin lies in this country
And this be yonde is the red see
That moses makes of mencyon
This quarter is India minor
And this quarter India mayor
The land of prester John^
But northwarde this way as ye se
Many other strange regions there be
And people that we not know
But estwarde on the sea side
A prince there is that rulyth wide
Called the Cane of catowe
And this is called the great eest see
which goth all a long this wey
Toward the new landis again
But whether that see go thither dyrectly
Or if any wyldernes between them do ly
No man knows for certain
But these ^ewe lands by all cosmografye
From the cane of catous land ca^ not lie
Little paste a thousand mile
But from those new lands me^ man ^ayle plain
Estwarde and cu^ to england agai^e
where we began ere while
Lo all this part^ of the yerth which I
Have here discryuyd openly
The north part we do it call
But the south perte on the other side
is as large as this full and as wide
which we know nothing at all
Nor whether y^ most perte be land or see
Nor whether ^he people that there be
Be besty^^l or conning
Nor wh^th^r they know god or no
No^ ^ow^ they believe nor what they do
Of this we know no^hynge
Lo is not this a thing wooderfull
How that

Et subito studyouse desire dicat. Stu. Pese sir no more of this matter
Behold where humanyte comes here

Sen. How sey you master humanyte
I prey you have ye not be mere
And had good recreacyon

Hu yes I thank the thereof every dell
For we have faryd meruelously well
And had good co^munycacyon

Ta. what how master where be ye now

Sen. what I shrewe the what haste have thou
That thou spekyst so hye

Ta. So hye quoth a I trow ye be mad by saint gyle
For did ye not ere while
Make poyntment openly
To come again all to supper
There as ye were to day at dinner
And yet ye poynted not plain
what mete that ye will have dressed
Nor what delycates ye love best
M^ think you far over said

Hus As for mine own perte I care not
Dress^ what mete thou love spare not
what so ever thou do best think

Ta. Now if ye put it to my lyberte
Of all metes in the world that be
By this light I love best drink

Sen. It semyth by thy face so to do
But my master will have mete also
what so ever it cost

Ta. By god sir than ye must tell what

Hu. At thy discressyon I force not
whether it be soden or roast

Ta. well sir than ^are not let me a lone
ye shall se that all thing shall be done
And ordained well and fine

Hu. So I require the hertely
And in any wise specially
Let us have a cup of new wine

T^. ye shall have wine as new as can be
For I may tell you in pryuyte
Hit was brued but yester night

Hu. But that is nothing for my delight

Ta. But than I have for your apetyte
A cup of wine of old claret
There is no better by this light

Hu. well I trust the well Inowe

Ta. But on thing if it please you now
ye se well I take much pain for you
I trust ye will se to me

Hu. ye I promise the get the hens
And in this matter do thy dylygence
And I shall well reward the

Sen. By cause thou lokyst for a reward
One thing for the I have p^pared
That here I shall the gyffe
Thou shalt have a knauys skyn
For to put thy body theri^
For term of thy life

Ta. Now gramercy my gentle brother
And therefore thou shall have another
For voydynge of strife

Sen Now farewell gentle John^

Ta. Than farewell fool for I am gone

Sen. A bide torn ones a gain hark what I sey
yet there is a another thing
would do well at our masters washing

Hu. what thing is that I the prey

^^n. Mary thus can thou tell us yet
where is any rose water to get

Ta. ye that I can well purney
As good as ever you put to your nose
For there is a ^eyre wenche called rose
Dystylleth a quarte every day

Sen. By god I would a pynt of that
were p^wryd ^uyn upon thy pate
Before all this presence

Ta. yet I had lever she and I
where both to gyther secretly
In some corner in the spence
For by god it is a pretty gyrle
It is a world to se her whyrle
Daunsynge in a round
O lord god how she will tryp
She will bounce it she will whyp
ye clean above the ground

Hu. well let all such matters pass I sey
And get the hens and goo thy way
About this other matter

Ta. Than I goo straight lo fare ye well

Sen. But look yet thou remember ^uerydell
That I spoke of full ere

Ta. yes I warrant you do not fere

Exeat Tauerner. Hu. Goddis lord s^ist not who is here now
what study^us desire what newis with you

Stu ye shall know sir or I go

Sen. what art thou here I se well I
The mo kn^^ys the worse company

Stu. Thy lewd condycyons thou do still occupy
As thou art wont to do

Hu. But I s^y who is this here in presence

Stu. Sir this is the man called experiens
That I spoke of before

Hu. Experyens why is this he
Sir ye ar right welcome unto me
And shall be ever more

Expe. Sir I thank you thereof hertely
But I assure you feythfully
I have small courage here to tarry
As long as this man is here

Sen. why horson what eylyst at me

Ex. For thou have ever so leude a properte
Science to dispyse and yet thou art he
That naught can nor naught wylt lere

Sen. Mary auau^t knave I make god auowe
I think my self as co^nynge as thou
And that shall I prove shortly
I shall put the a questyon now come nere
Let me se how well thou can answer
How spellest this word tom Couper
In true a^tografye

Ex. Tom co^per quoth a a wise qu^styo^ herdly

Sen. ye I tell y^ again yet / tom couper how spellyst it
Lo he has for gotten ye may se
The furste word of his a b c.
Hark fool hark I will teache the
P. a. pa. t. ^. r. ^er. do to gyther tom couper
is not this a sore matter
Loo here ye may se him prouyd a fool
He had more need to go to scole
Than to come hither to clatter

Stu. Certain this is a solucyon
Mete for such a boys questyon

Hu. Sensual apetyte I prey the
Let pass all such tryfles and vanyte
For a wy^e it shall not long be
And depart I the require
For I would talk a word or two
with this man here or he hens go
For to satysfy my desire

Sen. why goggis soul will ye so shortly
Break poyntment with yonder company
where ye should come to supper
I trust ye will not break promys so

Hu. I care not greatly if I do
yt is but a tavern matter

Sen. Than will I go show them what ye sey

Hu. Spare not if thou wylt go thy wey
For I will here tarry

Sen. Tha^ a dew for a while I tell you plain
But I promise you wha^ I come a gain
I shall make yonder knauys twain
To repent and be sorry

Ex. Now I am full glad that he is gone

Stu So am I for good will he do none
To no man living
But this is the man with whom ye shall
I trust be well content with all
And glad of his coming
For he has expownyd connyngly
Diverse points of Cosmogryfy
In few words and short clause

Hu. So I understand he has good science
And that he has by plain experience
Lernyd many a strange cause

Stu. ye sir and I say for my perte
He is the co^nyngest man in that art
That ever I could find
For ask what questyon ye will do
How the yerth is round or other mo
He will satysfye your mind

Ex. why what doubt have ye therein found
Think ye the yerth should not be round
Or else how suppose ye

Hu. One wey it is round I must consent
For this man prouyd it euydent
Toward the eest and occydent
It must nedis round be

Ex. And likewise from the south to north

Hu. That point to prove were su^ thank worth

Ex. yes that I can well prove
For this ye know as well as I
ye se the north star in the sky
Mark well ye shall vnethe it spy
That ever it does remove
But this I assure you if you go
Northwarde an hundredth mile or two
ye shall think it ryseth
And how that it is nere aproched
The point over the top of your head
which is called your zenyth
yet if ye go the other wey
Southwarde.x. or.xii. days Journey
ye shall then think anon
It descended and come more nigh
The sercle pertynge the yerth and sky
As ye look straight with your eye
which is called your oryson
But ye may go southwarde so far
That at the last that same star
will seem so far down right
Clear under neth your oryson
That sight thereof can you have non
The yerth will stop your sight
This prouyth of necessyte
That the yerth must nedis round be
This conclulsyon does it try

Hu. Now that is the properist conclusyon
That ever I herd for by reason
No man may hit deuye
But sir if that aman sail far
Upon the sea will than that star
Do there as on the ground

Ex. ye doutles sayl^ northward rise it will
And sail southwarde it falls still
And that prouyth the sea round

Stu. So does it in mine oppynyon
But know you any other conclusyon
To prove it round save that alone

Ex. ye that I know right well
As thus mark well when y^ see is clear
That no storm nor wawe thero^ does pere
This maryners can tell
Than if a fire be made on night
Upon the shore that gives great light
And a ship in the sea far
They in the top the fire se shall
And they on hache nothing at all
yet they on haches be nerr^
Also on the sea where men be saylynge
Far from land they se nothing
But the water and the sky
yet when they draw the land more nere
Than the hill tops begin to apere
Still the nere more hye and hye
As though they were still growing fast
Out of the sea till at last
when they come the shore to
They se the hill top foot and all
which thing so could not be fall
But the sea lay round also

Hu. Me thinks your argument so^what hard

Ex. Than ye shall have it more plainly declared
If ye ^aue great desire
For here loo by mine instrumentis
I can show the plain experimentes

Hu. Thereto I you require

Ex. with all my heart it shall be done
But for the furst conclusyon
That I spoke of the fire
Be this the s^ey that is so round
And this the fire upon the ground
And this the ship that is here
ye know well that a man's sight
Can never be but in a line right

Hu. Just you say that is clear

Ex. Mark well than may not yt ma^nis eye
with argyng here their fo^y^^^ (...)
That is not worth iij. strawes
I love not this horeson losophers
Nor this great co^nyng extromers
That tell how far it is to the sterres
I hate all manner connyng
I would ye knew it I am Ignorance
A lord I am of gretter pusans
Than the king of yngland or france
ye the grettyst lord living
I have servants at my retynew
That long to me I assure you
Here with in ynglande
That with me yngnorance dwell still
And term of life co^tynew will
A boue v C. thousand

Sen. Gogges naylys I have paid so^ of the^ I tro

yng. why man what eylyth y^ so to blow

Sen. For I was at a shrewd fray

yng. Have thou any of them slain than

Sen. ye I have slain them every man
Save them that ran away

yng. why is any of them skapyd and gone

Sen. ye by gogges body euerychone
All that ever were there

(...). O sir ye know right well this
That when any man is
In other men's company
He must needs follow the appyte
Of such things as they delight
Some time among perdy

yng. But such knaves would always have y^
To put all thy mind and felicite
In this folysh co^nyng to study
which if thou do will make ye mad
And always to be pensyf and sad
Thou shall never be merry

(...). Merry quod a / no I make god auow
But I pray ye master hark on word now
And answer this thing
whether thought you it better chere
At the tavern where we were ere
Or else to clatter with these knaves here
Of their folysh cunning

Hu. Nay I can not say the contrary
But y^ I had much myryer company
At the tauer^e than in this place

Sen. Than if ye have any wit or brayn
Let us go to the tavern again
And make some merry solace

yng. if he will do so tha^ does he wisely

Hu. By my troth I care not gretely
For I am indyfferent to all company
whether it be here or there

Sen. Then I shall tell you what we will do
Master yngnorans you and he also
Shall tarry both still here
And I will go fet hither a company
That ye shall here the^ sing as swetly
As they were angels clear
And yet I shall bring hydyr a another sort
Of lustly bluddes to make dysport
That shall both dance and spryng
And torn clean above ye ground
with fryscas and with gambawdes round
That all the hall shall ryng
And yt done with in an hour or twayn
I shall at the town again
Prepare for you a banquet
Of metys that be most delycate
And most plesaunt drynkes and wynes there ate
That is possible to get
^which shall be in a chamber feyre
Replete with sote and fragra^t air
Preparyd point deuyse
with damask water made so well
That all y^ house thereof shall smell
As it were pardyse
And after that if ye will touch
A feyre wenche nakyd in a couche
Of a soft bed of down
For to satisfye your wanto^ lust
I shall apoynt you a trull of trust
Not a feyrer in this town
And when ye have taken your delight
And thus satisfied the appetyte
Of your wyttis five
ye may sey than I am a servant
For you so necessary and plesaunt
I trow non such a live

Hu. Now by the wey that god did walk
It co^forthe mine heart to here the talk
Thy mache was never seyn

yng. Than go thy wey by and by
And bring in this company
And he and I will here tarry
Till thou come again

Hu. And I prey the hertely also

Sen. At your request so shall I do
Lo I am gone now fare well
I shall bring them in to this hall
And come my self formast of all
And of these reuellis be ch^fe mershall
And order all thing well

yngnoraunce. Now set thy heart on a merry pyn
Agayns these lusty bluddes come in
And drive fantesys a wey

Hu. And so I will by heuyn king
If they other dance or sing
Have a monge them by this day

yngnorau^ce. Than thou takyst good and wise weys
And so shall thou best please
All this hole company
For the folyshe arguing yt thou have had
with that knave experiens yt has made
All these folk thereof weary
For all they that be now in this hall
They be the most perte my servants all
And love pryncypally
Disportis as daunsynge syngyuge
Toys tryfuls laughing gestynge
For conning they set not by

Hu. I se well such company ever more
As sensuell appetyte is gone fore
will please well this audyens

yng. ye that I suppose they will
But pease hark I prey the be still
I wene they be not far hens
Then the daunsers with out the hall sing this wise and they with in answer or
else they may say it for need. ^

The daunsers and Sensuall^ P^ase syrs pease now pease syrs all

Humanyte and yngnorans. why who is that so hye does call

The daunsers. Silence I say be you among
For we be dysposyd to sing a song

Humanyte and yngnorans. Come in then boldly a mong this presens
For here ye shall have good audyens.

^
Time to pas with goodly sport our sprytes to
^
Time to pas etc.
^
Time to pas etc.
^
reuyue and comfort to pipe to si^ge to dau^ce (...)
^
^
^
with pleasure and delight folowi^g se^sual appetyte
^
to pipe etc.
^
^
yng. I ^an you thank y^ is done well
It is pity ye had not a mynstrell
For to angment your solas

Seu. As for mynstrell it makes no force
ye shall se me dance a course
without a mynstrell be it better or wors
Follow a^l I will led a trace

Hu. Now have a monge you by this light

yng. That is well said be god almyght
Make rome syrs and gy^ them p^ace
Than he syngyth this song and daunyth with all And evermore makes
countenance according To the matter and all ye other annswer like wyle Dance
we / dance we. praunce we praunce we So merely let us dance ey / so merely etc
And I can dance it gyngerly and I etc
And I can foot it by and by and I etc
And I can pranke it properly
And I can countenaunse comely
And I can kroke it curtesly
And I can lepe it lustly
And I can torn it trymly
And I can fryske it freshly
And I can look it lordly

yng. I can the thank sensual apetyte
That is y^ best dance with out a py^e
That I saw this seven year

Hu. This dance would do much better yet
if we had a kyt or taberet
But alas there is none here

Sen. Then let us go to ye tavern again
There shall we be sure of one or twayn
Of mynstrelles yt can well play

yng. Then go I pray ye by and by
And puruey some mynstrell ready
And he and I will follow shortly
As fast as ever we may

Hu. There with I am right well content

Sen. Then will I go in contynent
And prepare every thing
That is metely to be done
And for lack of mynstrelles y^ mean season
Now will we begin to sing
^
Now we will here begin to sing
For dance can we no more
For mynstrelles here be all lackyng
To ye tavern we will therefore

Et exeu^t cantando etc. Hu. Now if that sensual appetyte ca^ find
Any good mynstrelles after his mind
Dowt not we shall have good sport

yng. And so shall we have for a suerte
But what shall we do now tell me
The mean while for our comfort

Hu. Then let us some lusty balet sing

yng. Nay sir by ye heuyn king
For me thynkyth it seruyth for no thyn^
All such peuysh prykyeryd song

Hu. Pes man pryksong may not be dispysy^
For there with god is well plesyd
Honowryd praysyd and served
In the church often times among

yng. Is god well pleasyd trowst thou thereby
Nay nay for there is no reason why
For is it not as good to say plainly
Gyf me a spad^
As gyf me a spa ve va ve va ve vade
But if thou wylt have a song yt is good
I have one of robyn hode
The best that ever was made

Hu. Then a feleshyp let us here it

yng. But there is a bordon thou must bear it
Or else it will not be

Hu. Than begin and care no^ ^o^

Down down down etc. yng. Robyn hode in barnysdale stood
And lent him till a mapyll thystyll
Tha^ came our lady and sweet saint andrewe
Slepyst thou wakyst thou geffrey coke
A.C. winter the water was deep
I can not tell you how broad
He took a gose nek in his hand
And over the water he went
He start up to a thystell top
And cut him down a holyn clobe
He stroke ye wren between the hornys
That fire sprange out of the pigs tail
Iak boy is thy bow I broke
Or has any man done ye wryguldy wrage
He plukkyd muskyllys out of a wyllowe
And put them in to his sachell
wylkyn was an archer good
And well could handell a spade
He took his bend bow in his hand
And set him down by the fire
He took with him.lx. bows and ten
A pese of befe a another of baken
Of all the birds in merry england
So merely pypys the merry botell

Nature. well Humanyte now I see plainly
That thou have vsyd much folly
The while I have been absent

Hu. Sir I trust I have done nothing
That should be contrary to your pleasynge
Nor never was mine intent
For I have followed the counsel clear
As ye me bad of studyouse desire
And for necessyte a monge
Sometime sensual appety^es counsel
For without him ye ^nowe right well
My life can not endure long

Nature. Though it be for the full necessary
For thy comfort sometime to satysfy
Thy sensual appetyte
yet it is not conuenyent for the
To put therein thy felycyte
And all thy hole dely^e
For if thou wylt learn no sciens
Another by study nor experiens
I shall the never auaunce
But in the world thou shall dure than
Despised of every wise man
Like this rude best ygnoraunce


