FISHERMEN Fishers of Men.

A SERMON PREACHED AT MERCERS Chapel on Mid-Lent Sunday the 26. of March 1609.

By JOHN RAVVLINSON Doctor of Divinity.

Bernard. ad Henricum Senonensem Archiepiscop. Ep. 42. Non vos ergo foelicem,
quia praeestis: sed si non prodestis, infoelicem putate.

LONDON, Printed by Arnold Hatfield for Edward Blount and William Barret. 1609.

TO THE NOBLE AND Right virtuous Knight, Sir JOHN EGERTON, increase of true
honor in this life, and fruition of true glory in the life to come.
WORTHY SIR;
I Must acknowledge my self to have long run upon the score; so long, till
Vsura superat sorte^; the interest of your love exceeds the principal of my
abilities: all which (if they be ought) you may therefore challenge as due debt,
and arrest them to be continually at your service.

Yet rather than I will show my self a right bank-rupt, most unkind to him
that has best deserved, and play off so kind a Creditour with Non sum
soluendo; I will grow to a fair and honest composition, and pay you (as I may)
though it be but Vnciatim. O that I could truly say with that servant in the
Mat. 18 26.
Gospel! Sir, have patience with me, and I will pay you all.

But Bernar.
exonerando me magis onero; The more J labor to requite, the more J oblige my
self. For what do J now but Versuram soluere, borrow both of your patience,
and protection to clear the debt of your former favors?

Very likely that while J thus launch forth into the deep, and cast my net
upon the face of the waters, it will fare with me as with other fishermen, who
among many fish meet with some Carps and if (by chance) they alight upon a
sturdy Jack, there is great tug betwixt them, whether they shall catch the
Jack, or the Jack them. But in this case J am of Seneca's resolution; Senec.
epist. 59.
Cupio, si fieri potest, proitijs auribus quid sentiam, dicere; sin minus,
dicam and iratis. And yet I hope without breach of charity too. Gloss. interlin.
Charitas ad saluandum violenta est.

What allowance soever it shall find abroad, it humbly craves your favorable
acceptance at home: yea, it also presumes, that because it is your infant (for,
but for you, it had never seen light) it shall also be heir of your favor;
Nato filio nata portio. And that because Marsil. Ficin. in epist.
Mercurius ante omnes stellas Phoebo semper est domesticus; Your self, who are
learned Suprasortem supravulgarem, will gladly patronise the dignity of
Divines, which is the maine matter of this Sermon;

A matter (if any other) very material and necessary for these days, because
as a spice of all other diseases attends upon the ague; and, Ad ignorationem
elenchi reduci possunt omnes paralogismi: So the contempt and slender regard of
Gods Ministers is the matter and mother of all other enormities, which so
plentifully reign in this irregular age of ours.

Whatsoever it is else, it is the Votoria tabula of my love consecrated to the
Temple of your Honor, which shall daily be frequented with my prayers unto God;
That as you, and your honorable good Lady are here Gemini in terra caro vna;
so hereafter ye may be for ever Gemini in coelo, sydus vnum: And that both the
hopeful and hoped fruits of both your bodies may be as truly heirs of both
your virtues, as your self are of the manifold graces and blessings of your
most honored and honour-worthy Father, whose unworthy, but most obseruant
servant J am, and heartily joy to be.

And, as Coelum quietem suam sortitur in motu; So in continuance of these my
humble and hearty prayers unto God for you, and yours, J shall ever rest

Your most devoted debtor, John Ravvlinson.

A SERMON PREACHED at Mercers Chapel on Mid-Lent Sunday the 26. of March. 1609.
MATTHEW. Chap. 4. verse. 19. Follow me, and J will make you Fishers of men.


Having elsewhere commenced the handling of this Scripture, which may fitly be
called Piscatorum Scriptura: The Fishermans Scripture, and therefore (I trust)
not impertinent to this time, which may as fitly be termed Piscatorum messis,
The fishermans harvest; I will now (by Gods assistance, and your Christian
patience) proceed to the unfolding of the remainder.

The words may be quartered into four parts:

1 The calling of Peter and Andrew (the 2 first Apostles) to the office of
Apostleship: Follow. 2 The Caller, Christ himself: Me. 3 The Called, Peter and
Andrew: You. 4 The Function or Office whereunto they are called: Fishers of
men.
1 The Calling was twofold; External, and Internal. For to little purpose
had been Exterior Oration, The outward sound and ministry of Christ his voice,
had it not been accompanied with Interior Operatio, The inward work and
efficacy of his grace.

2 In the Caller are 2. things:

The one is Affectus, his gracious and loving affection, calling them before
they dr amt of his call.

The other is Effectus, his powerful and effectual working in them, in that he
comes unto them with a Fieri faciam: How unapt and unable soever ye may deem
your selves, yet follow me, and it shall be your making.

3 In the parties called I observe 3. things.

1 Their Number: They were Two. 2 Their Consanguinitie: They were Brethren. 3
Their Condition or Quality: They were poor, ignoble, and ignorant fishermen.
And upon these three I spent my former discourse.

4 Now fourthly and lastly, In the Office whereunto they are called, there are
other three considerable points:

1 Their Dignity. 2 Their Diligence. 3 Their Discretion.
Dignity without Diligence, were but hartsease and idleness.

Diligence without Dignity, were but drudgery and baseness.

Both without Discretion, were but simplicity and weakness.

But a full sweet harmony of all three makes them apt and able to fulfill their
ministry.

All three insinuated in this one Metaphor, Piscatores hominum, Fishers of men.

First of the Metaphor; and then to the Matter.

Our Savior in this so familiar and domestical a Metaphor descends to the
vulgar and ordinary phrase of speech, Quo factum posterius prioris retinet
nomen; Whereby the name of a thing formerly done is transferred to an
after-businesse: as, when a man has been at his book, if afterward he betake
himself to some other work, we are wont by way of Metaphor to bid him, Lege
et hunc librum; Read me also this book.

And we read of King David, Psalm. 78.71
Psalm. 78. that he was called from feeding of sheep, to be a shepherd of
men. And here we see Peter and Andrew called from catching of fish, to be
fishers of men.

Observe, and ye shall find, that it is the usual practice of our Savior to
speak of spiritual things as if they were corporal, Vt ad excellentiam
diuinarum rerum per corporalia homines attollat (says Hill. l. 6. de Triuit.
S. Hilary) that so he may raise our groueling and earth-creeping affections to
an higher leuill, and weane them from corporal and temporal things to the
consideration of things spiritual.

No sooner had the woman of Samaria given him his Q. by talking with him of
material water, Io. 4.10.
Io. 4. but he presently takes occasion to tell her of his word, that it is the
strongest Aqua vitae, able to revive a soul dead in sin.

And Io. 6.27.
Io. 6. when the Capernaits follow him for loaves and fishes, he wills them,
not to labor for the meat that perishes, but for the meat that endures to
everlasting life.

Consonant hereunto is that ancient custom (which albeit this refined age of
ours have branded with a note of Superstition, yet has nothing (for ought I
know) but laudable antiquity to discommend it) when a light is set before us in
the dark, as it were with a Sursum corda, to erect the hearts and minds of
such as are present, with, God send us the light in heaven.

And surely, if (...), that which may be known of God the Creator, does shine
in these his inferior creatures: and if (...) these things which may beseene,
do lead and hand us on to those (...) invisible things of God, To. 1.19. and
20.
To. 1. No question but this rearing and mounting of our thoughts from earth to
heaven, is a thing not lawful only, but withal so expedient, that neglect it
we cannot, but we must be injurious to God, his creatures, and our selves. God
himself is dishonored, if his creatures be neglected; his creatures are
neglected, if we receive no instruction from them: And what instruction can we
receive from them, if we only plod and pore upon this great book of nature,
and never translate it into the book of grace?

Therefore does our Savior in this place teach us to alienate our thoughts
from earth to heaven, from things temporal to things spiritual, by converting
the pains and studies of these silly fishermen from the catching of fish, to
the catching of men. They must still fish, but it must be Quid pro quo; One for
another: Men for Fish. Not changing their person, but their office: not their
industry, but their profession: not their appellation, but only their
vocation:

I will make you fishers of men. Not a Metaphor thorowout the whole volume of
Gods book, that more willingly dilates and spreads it self into an allegory.

1 For first, Piscatores, Apostoli: The Apostles and their Successors the
faithful Ministers of Christ, are called Fishers, in reference to the
spiritual fish, which they catch: in Greek Erasm. in Matthew. 4.
(...), either (...), of the sea of this world wherein they fish: or (...), of
catching, because they labor to catch men, and with the draw-net of Gods word
to draw them To. 10.17
by the ears, A saeculo, from the sea of this world, u Ad saecula saeculorum,
to the shore of a better life, even the land of the living, that (as Chrysostom.
Hom. 7. oper. imperf.
S. Chrysostom speaks, hom. 7. oper. imperf.) being thither translated, there
they may live as members incorporate into the body of Christ: and that they may
be Bern. Ser. 1. in die S. Andr.
Digni qui in mensa Dominica ponantur: (says S. Bernard) fit to be served in
at the Lords Table.

These be the fishers mentioned Ier. 16.16
Ier. 16. Mittam piscatores multos, and piscabuntur eos, says God by his
Prophet; I will send among them many fishers, and they shall fish them. And
these the fishers spoken of Ezech. 47.10.
Ezech. 47. where the Prophet saw in a vision their nets stretched out from
Engaddi to Engallim, from the one end of the Mare mortuum of this world, to the
other end of the same.

2 Pisces, homines. The fishes are here specified to be men; Land-fish, not
Seafish. It is fabled by Ovid. Metam. l. 3. f. 8.
the Poet, that Bacchus began his Empire with the transmutation of mariners
into fishes: So does Christ the true Bacchus, Bis genitus ( God of the
substance of his father begotten before the world, and man of the substance of
his mother borne in the world) begin his kingdom, even the kingdom of his
Gospel, with the metamorphising of men into fishes, yet does he not either
transubstantiate them into fishes, like those mariners: or, ingulfe them into
the belly of a fish, like Jonas: or, make them fish the one half, flesh the
other, like Myrmaides;

Horat. Art. poet.
Vt turpiter atrum
Desinat in piscem Mulier formosa superne
But herein will he have them to symbolize with fishes, that as fishes are
caught lineis textis, with a net of twisted lines: so must they be caught
lineis ex Scriptura contextis, with the net of Gods word made of lines taken
out of the text of Scripture.

True is that of these spiritual fishes, which Philoxenus in Plutarch. de and.
poet.
Plutarch ( Epicure as he was!) spoke in a sensual sense; Ex piscibus qui non
sunt pisces, suauissimi: These which indeed are no fish, but men, are the best,
the sweetest, the most precious kind of fish.

The semblances wherein men accord with fish are diverse. I will name but some
few of many.

1 Our Savior Luc. 9.16.
Luc. 9. so miraculously blessed the two fishes wherewith he fed the many,
that by virtue of that blessing they were exceedingly multiplied. So did God
at the beginning in that miracle of miracles (the creation of the world) so
bless Ada^ and Eve (the 2. first fishes (with a Crescite and multiplicamini,
increase and multiply Genesis 1.28
Genesis 1. that ere long the blessing of Jacob fell upon them Genesis 48.16.
Genesis 48. they grew as fish into a multitude, even into a world of men and
women.

2 Again: As fish must: swim thrice; namely, in water, in vinegar, and in
wine: So must every Christian man: First, in the water of Baptism, whereby we
are Nati and Initiati, born and initiated into the Church of Christ, as we are
taught by Tertull. l. de Baptism.
Tertullian lib. de Baptism. Then in the Vinegar of sharp persecution, whereof
our Savior drank deep at his passion, Matt. 27.48.
Matt. 27. And lastly, in the wine of the Eucharist, which is Zach. 9. vlt.
Vinum germinans virgins, the wine of virginity, Zach. 9.

3 As fishes taken out of their element, by and by die: so Chrysostom. hom. 1. ad
pop. Antioch Tertull. l. de Baptism.
without the pure element of God word, (the water of life) to refrigerate and
cool the languishing soul, we die, and are extinct, and give up the (holy)
Ghost.

4 As brine keeps fish from putrefaction: so the brackish, and brinish waters
of repentance, (our paenitent tears) are Animae pro sale, to the soul in
stead of salt, to keep it from the corruption and tainture of sin.

5 As those fishes only were reputed clean, Qui pinnulas and squamas habent,
which have finnes and scales, Deuteronomy. 14.
Deuteronomy. 14. So are those men only clean in the sight of God, Qui squamas and
loricam habent patientiae, and pinnulas hilaritatis (says Bernard. Sermon. 1. in
die S. Andr.
S. Bernard) who have the scales and coat armor of patience, and the finnes of
joy and cheerfulness to spring up to Godward.

6 As there are (...), fishes that eat up fishes; the greater the less,

Oppian. l. 2. (...).
(...)
(...)
(...).
So there are also (...); Men that eat up men: an unchristian kind of Canibals,
eating up Gods people as a man would eat bread, as it is Psalm. 14.8.
Psalm. 14. And it is the complaint of the Prophet Abac. 1.14.
Abacuc, c. 1. Facis homines quasipisces maris: Thou (O God) make men as the
fishes of the sea, feeding and praying one upon another.

7 As fishes Tunduntur fluctibus, and non deficiunt (says Haymo.
Haymo) are soused with the salt and bitter waves, and yet sink not: so are
thegodly billow-beaten with persecutions, and yet faint not. For this (says
Hilar. l. 7. de Trinit.
S. Hilary l. 7. de Trinit.), is the prerogative of Gods Church: While it is
persecuted, it flourishes: while oppressed, it increases: while contemned, it
prospers: while assaulted, it vanquisheth: while tried, it understands:
nay, though almost conquered, still it withstandeth.

8, And lastly, as fishes when they are wounded, have recourse to the Tench,
the Physitia^ of fishes, whom if they do but touch, they are healed: So must
we when we are wounded with sin, repair to our Savior Christ the true tench,
the Physician of Kings, and King of Physicians, whom if we do but touch Tactu
fidei, with the touch of true faith, we shall be whole: as the woman with the
bloody issue, Luc. 8.44
Luc. 8. touched but the hem of his garment only, and she was presently whole
as a fish.

It is therefore well and wittily observed by the ancient (as is noted by
August. De ciuit. l. 18. c. 23.
S. Austin, de Ciuit. l. 18. c. 23. and by Tertull. li. de Baptism.
Tertullian lib. de Baptism.) that the initiall letters of (...): (Jesus Christ
the Son of God our Savior) make up the Greek word (...), which signifies a
fish. And ye shall find, John 19.34.
John 19. that at his passion he was opened in the side, like a fish. And the
Author of the Sermons de Sanctis, under S. Austins name, compares him to
Tobits fish, Cuius iecore per passionem assato fugatus est Diabolus: Whose
liver being broiled at his passion upon the fiery coals of his love, did scare
and drive away the unclean spirit.

In these, and the like respects, are men very semblable unto fishes. And yet,
this difference I find between them, that whereas when fishes, are taken, its
death to the^; when men are taken, its life to them. For fishes are taken that
they may be devoured by the jaws of men; but men are taken that they may be
delivered from the jaws of hell.

3 Mare, saeculum. The Sea, wherein they fish, is the world: Mare magnum and
spaciosum, a wide and wild Sea, as David calls it Psalm. 104.25.
Psalm. 104. Or (as Apoc. 4.6.
S. John terms it, Apoc. 4. Mare vitreum: A Sea of glass; a Sea, for
tempestuousnesse; and a Sea of glass, for brittlenesse.

In the time of Noah, that preacher of righteousness, then was it true without
a metaphor, that all the World was nothing else but a Sea, or deluge, when the
waters had ouerspred the whole surface of the earth: Genesis 7.18.
Genesis 7.

Ovid. Met. l. 1. f. 7.
Omnia Pontus erant, deerant quoque litora Ponto.

It was then a material, now a mystical sea, wherein are many conflicts of
crosse-windes, and waters; tide against wind, and wind against tide, and both
against fishers, the Preachers of righteousness.

A Sea, wherein the Devil, that huge Leuiathan, of whom it is said Job 41.7.
Job 41. that Squama squamae coniungitur, and spiraculum non est in eis; His
scales are so close compacted together, that no wind can come between them,
not only plays and takes his pastime, ( Psalm. 104.26.
Psalm. 104.) but his pastime is, to spoil the river, and to suck up Jordan
into his mouth, Job 40.18
Job 40. And a Sea, wherein (as Chrysostom. Hom. 7. operimperf.
S. Chrysostom notes) Homines non ambulant, sed feruntur, quia Diabolus cum
delectatione compellit eos in mala: Men walk not, but are carried with the
stream, while the Devil carries the^ headlong into sin: whence it is, that
many make shipwreck of faith and a good conscience: 1. Tim. 1.19.
1. Tim. 1. and then what marvel if they be drowned in perdition and
destruction? 1. Tim. 6.9
1. Tim. 6. But most of us (beat the waves never so little) Lord! how soon are
we seasicke? Scarce able with the Disciples, Matt. 8.25.
Matthew. 8. when their ship was endangered, to sob out so much as a short
disiointed eiaculation; Lord, save us, we perish.

4 Cymba, vocatio. The fisher-boat is the profession or calling of the
Minister, which howsoever here in this world it be like the ship Argos;
Militans inter fluctus, daily and hourly exposed to the sore and bitter
tempests of persecution, hatred, exile, death it self: yet hereafter it shall
be like the same ship, Inter sydera triumphans, as the stars in the firmament,
shining for ever and ever. Dan. 12.3
Dan. 12.

5 Rete, verbum. The Net is not any material Net, like that in Suidas,
Suidas, which one cast over another while they were in single combat
together, and when he had ensnared him in his net, slew him. Nor such a
fantastical, imaginary Net, as is Purgatory; which Szeg. spec. Pont. Romans
Szegedin calls Amplissimum rete ad capiendas animas; A most spacious Net to
entangle souls: Nor such a bloody spiritual Net, as Mich. 7.2.
the Prophet Micah speaks of c. 7. All lie in wait for blood: every man
hunteth his brother with a net. But it is Sagena, that sweepe-net, which our
Savior brought down from heaven, even the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ,
catching whole nations at a draught: that Net, wherein men, who are plunged in
the darkesome holes of ignorance, and muddy cares of this world, are dragged and
drawn out to the light of truth, and love of supernall things.

Or (as Ber. Ser. 1. in die S. Andr.
S. Bernard has it) Nassa ecclesia est: The we will is the Church of God: Quae
licet homines certis legibus and ceremonijs retineat; which though it keep men
under certain laws and ceremonies, yet it so keeps them under, that it also
secures them from being swallowed up of other mighty sea-mo^sters, such as are
heretics and schismatikes.

6 Nauclerus, Clerus. The guide or Pilot of this fish-boate is the Clergy, or
rather Christ himself, the High Priest of our high-calling, who sits at the
stern, and guides both the boat and boat-men. He is the head-fisher, we but
vnder-fishers. All our sufficiency is of him, 2. Cor. 2.6
2. Cor. 2. And without him we may labor all night, and yet catch not so much
as an eye of fish, Luc. 5.5.
Luc. 5.

We must not then sacrifice to our own net, or burn incense to our own
yarne, as they did Abac. 1.16
Abac. 1. as if we could have any great catch of our selves, but we must say
with Peter, Luc. 5.5.
Luc. 5. In verbo tuo laxabo rete: At thy word (o Christ) I will let down the
net, and then shall we catch fish more than our net can hold.

7 Lastly, Collectores, Angeli. The net receives fish of both sorts, bad as well
as good, Matthew. 13.47.
Matthew. 13. All is fish that comes to net: but yet more comes to the net, than
goes to the market. For the Angels at the consummation and end of the World
shall gather the good In vasa coelestium mansionum, into the vessels of
heavenly mansions: Malos autem torrendos and exiccandos gehennae flamma
suscipiet: But the bad (says Raban. in Matthew. 13.
Rabanus) shall for ever be fried and dried in that neuer-ending flame of hell
fire.

And so I come from the Metaphor, to the Matter it self, including (as I told
you) three remarkable points:

1 The first, is the height and dignity of the Apostles calling. They are
fishers, and that of men, the noblest kind of fish. 2 Their pains and
diligence. They are fishers, and that of men, the wildest kind of fish. 3
Their wisdom and discretion. They are fishers, and that of men, the wiliest
kind of fish, too-cunning to be caught, unless the bait be well tempered.
I shall now speak only of the first, which is their Dignity. True it is, that
(as Bernard.
S. Bernard notes) Nemo repent fit summus: Its more than a step from the
lowest to the highest. And Ascendendo, non volando, apprehenditur summitas
scalae; Its climing, not flying, that brings a man to the top of the ladder.
And yet behold here a strange and sudden alteration; o stepped into the place of
a; The last became first, and the lowest, highest.

Base, beggarly, and despicable was their former trade of fishing: But here
our Savior comes, as Luc. 14.10
Luc. 14. with Amice, ascend superiu: Friend, sit up higher; and now must they
have worship in the presence of all that are with them. For high and honorable
is the vocation whereunto they are now called. They are Piscatores hominum:
Fishers of men.

Which title here given them by our Savior Christ, declares the manifold
dignity of his Ministers:

Quoad Authorem. In regard of the author; That their profession is not Inuentum
humanum, an humane invention; but Institutum diuinum, a divine institution;
here licenced under the broad seal of heaven, and authorized with a Fieri
faciam: such ye shall be, because such I will make you to be.

Needs must that be a thrice-noble office, which is ennobled by the three
states-royal of heaven (the blessed Trinity) and enacted in that highest Court
of Parliament.

For the first Preacher that ever was, was God the Father, when he preached
that sweet and comfortable Gospel in Paradise, Semen mulieris, The seed of the
woman shall break the head of the Serpent, Genesis 3.15
Genesis 3.

And our Savior Christ, did not only give to his Church some to be Apostle,
some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Doctors, Ephesians. 4.11
Ephesians. 4. but was himself also anointed with the spirit of the Lord, and
appointed to preach the Gospel to the poor, Esa. 61.1.
Esa. 61. And because as he sent his Apostles, so was himself also sent of
the father, therefore does he participate with his Apostles in name, and is
called (...), The Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Heb. 3.1.
Heb. 3.

And 2. Pet. 1. vlt.
S. Peter tells us, ep. 2. c. 1. that the holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost. And not only so, but that they also derived their
authority from the same spirit. Look well to the flock, whereof the holy Ghost
has made you ouer-seers, Act. 20.28.
Act. 20.

2 Quoad Authoritatem. In regard of their authority, which is not Imperium in
belluas, but in homines, the rule and guidance not of beasts, but men. For
therefore are they (...), called of God, that they may be (...), comforters of
men: being Alae columbae deargentatae, as the Prophet David calls them, Psalm.
67.14.
Psalm. 67. the silver wings of that innocent Dove the holy Ghost, the true
Comforter. And they are (...), Apostles (by interpretation) men sent from God,
that men may be (...), their Epistles, or letters of commendation sent back
again to God: 2. Cor. 3.2
2. Cor. 3.

None might come to Penelope, but by her maids: none to Pharao, but by Joseph:
No more can any come to God, but by his Ministers. For salvation comes by
faith: faith by hearing: hearing by the word of God: and hear the word we
cannot without a Preacher: Romans 10.14.
Romans 10.

No title of sovereignty that the earth affoords, but the Scripture affoords it
them. For whereas the name of men is alike communicated unto all, even unto the
wicked as well as the godly; ( Cauete ab hominibus, Beware of men, says our
Savior, Matt. 10.17.
Matthew. 10. that is, of cruel and wicked men) the Ministers of Christ are by
special prerogative called, Homines Dei: The men of God: 1. Tim. 6.11.
1. Tim. 6.

In the watchtower of Gods Church, they are not only (...), seers, but (...),
ouer-seers, Act. 20.28.
Acts 20.

In the family of Gods Church, they are not only Patres, Fathers, 1. Pet. 1.23.
begetting us with the immortal seed of the word, but they are also Nutritij,
nursing fathers, 1. Pet. 2.2.
feeding us with the sincere milk of the word: 1. Pet. 2.

In the kingdom of Gods Church, they are not only, (...), Sirs, or Lords: Act.
16.30.
Act. 16. but they are also Principes, Gods Vicars, or Viceroys, here on
earth. For of them does S. Austin expound those words, Psalm. 44.18.
Psalm. 44. Constitues eos Principes super omnem terram: Thou shall set them as
Princes in all lands. Princes, for their nobility, because they are begotten
and born of God. Princes, for their riches, because they are enriched with all
spiritual graces: and Princes, for their power, because they have the power of
the keys of the kingdom of heaven.

Nay, as if the earth had not titles high enough, the Scripture goes as high
as heaven for titles for them. For they are Coeli, those heavens that declare
the glory of God Psalm. 19.1.
Psalm. 19. God dwells in them, speaks in them, shines in them, as in the
heavens.

They are Angeli Domini exercituum, Angels of the Lord of Hosts, Malach. 2.7.
Malach. 2. So called (says Greg. in Matthew.
S. Gregory) Vt dignitatem seruent in nomine, quam explent in operatione: that
they might retain that dignity in name, whereunto by office they are entitled.

Lastly, They are Dij terrae, those Gods of the earth (as Ferus in fest. S.
Bartholom.
Ferus expounds the place) spoken of Psalm. 46. vlt.
Psalm. 46. Dij terrae vehementer eleuati sunt: The Gods of the Earth (to wit,
the Apostles) are highly exalted by their miracles, but above all, by that
greatest miracle, the conversion of the world.

Quoad Materiam. In regard of the matter they entreat of; The oracles of God:
the mysteries of faith: the glad tidings of salvation: The Gospel of the
kingdom: The word of reconciliation: the word of grace: and (in a word) The
word of God.

This is that Magna charta, Gods great charter, by which we hold our salvation:
and again, Magna charta, a most sure card, to sail by, through the raging
surges of this troublesome world.

This that Fauus mellis, that hony-combe, which when Ionatha^ had tasted, his
eyes were illightned, 1. Sam. 14.27.
1. Sam. 14.

This that Panis subcinericius ex hordeo, that barley loaf, Iud. 7.13.
Iud. 7. which in the time of Gedeon, went rolling about, and descended to the
camps of the Midianites, and when it came to any Tabernacle of theirs, did
strike it, and ouerturne it, and even it with the ground.

This that Manna, that cibus bidui, that two days food, Exodus 16.29.
Exodus 16. feeding our souls both for this life, and that which is to come.

And this that The saurus pretiosus, 2 Cor. ^7
2. Cor. 4. though brought unto us in earthen vessels, yet a treasure, yea and
that a most precious reasure.

4 Quoad depositum. In regard of the charge wherewith they are entrusted: That
charge, the Church of Christ: the flock of Christ: the body of Christ: the
spouse of Christ: the purchase, and price of the blood of Christ: the mother,
brethren, and sisters of Christ: A chosen vine: an holy nation: a royal
Priesthood. The city of God: the Fellow-Citizens with the Saints: the heirs of
God, and fellow-heires with Christ.

5 Quoad Finem. In regard of the fruit and end of their calling, which is
Lucrum animarum, the converting and gaining of souls unto God, Quaestus multo
vberrimus: the greatest game in the world.

Piscantur, vt homines adipiscantur. Their fishing is, or ought to be, only for
men. I say, the scope and end of their preaching must be, not Honorum
Piscatura, a fishing for honor, which Cicer. in Academ. vid. Muret. var lect.
l. 4. c. 13.
Tully in his Academicks calls, Honores adhamare, hooking for honors: Nor
Captura pecuniarum, the taking or money (which indeed is the Man that most men
fish for) (...): Money, money is the man, says Pindar.
Pindarus: and most men come with their purse-nets to fish for this man: But
their end must be only Captura hominum, the taking of men; and their sincerity
such as S. Paul's, 2. Cor. 12 14.
2. Cor. 12. (...): I seek not yours, but you.

If then Divinity have so noble an end, as is the saving of man the noblest
creature, well may it be called Nobilissima scientiarum, the noblest science,
and as well does it deserve to be Scientia nobilissimorum, the science of the
noblest.

Compare it with other sciences, and they are to it but as the rods of the
Magicians to the rod of Aaron; The rod of Aaron deuoures them all: Exodus 7.1^.
Exodus 7. The most they can do, is but only with Moses to bring the
Israelites out of the darksome Egypt of ignorance. None but this our Iosuah,
our saving knowledge of Divinity, can bring them into the land of promise.

Strange is the riddle, wherewith the fishermen in Herodot. in vit. Homer.
Herodotus posed Homer; Quae cepimus, reliquimus: quae non cepimus, nobiscum
portamus: That which we took, we left behind us: that which we took not, we
carry with us. More strange, and yet quite contrary, is the riddle of our
salvation, propounded unto us by S. Paul, a spiritual fisherman, 1. Cor. 1.21.
1. Cor. 1. Per stultitiam praedicationis salus credentium: The saving of
believers by the foolishness of Preaching;

Si caperit, vitam (mirabile) liber adibis:
Non captus, rigidae ius patiere necis.
If thou be caught, thou live: if lost, thou die.
But, that which yet more commends the fruit and end of their calling, is the
Latitude and extent thereof. They are Piscatores hominum, Fishers, not of some,
but indifferently of all men. For howsoever man's Law, be but Tela araneae, as
the spiders web, wherein the lesser flies are caught, but the greater break
through: yet Gods Law is a Net, which catches all alike: even Rete Vulcanium,
like Vulcans iron net, binding Princes with chains, and Nobles with linkes of
iron: Psalm. 149.8.
Psalm. 149.

No distinction of sex; but male, as well as female: nor of nation, but Jew,
as well as Gentile: nor of degree, but Prince, as well as people: nor of
condition, but bond, as well as free: nor of age, but old, as well as young. All
are fish for this this net, because all are men.

What though they be but aequiuocall men? men in name only, not in nature? what
though beasts in the shape of men, such as S. Paul fought with at Ephesus, 1.
Cor. 15.32.
1. Cor. 15. Nay, what though Devils incarnate, in the likeness of men, such
as were Peter that denied, and Judas that betrayed his Master? These must also
be fisht for; that of aequiuocall men, of beasts, of Devils, they may become
men.

Every yesterdaies Sophister can tell you, that A man is Animal rationale,
mortale, bipes; A reasonable, a mortal, a two-footed creature. Yet some forget
that they are Reasonable: Others that they are Mortal: Others, that they are
two-footed. Al these must be fisht for, that they may become Men. They that
forget themselves to be Reasonable, are voluptuous and carnal men, led only by
the sensual part of the soul, which is common to us with beasts: not by
reason, which does distinguish us from beasts. These must be fisht for, that
their reason may be rectified.

They that forget themselves to be mortal, are coutous men, who (if Hieronym.
S. Hieromes rule be true, that Facile contemnit omnia, qui se semper cogitat
moriturum: He will easily be brought to contemn all mortal things, who will
but consider his own mortality) do hereby manifest unto the world, that they
think not themselves mortal, because they will part with nothing; Nay, as if
they were already immortal, they will not allow themselves meat for the
mainteina^ce of this mortal life. These must also be fisht for, that their
thoughts may be mortified.

Lastly, they that forget themselves to be two-footed, are such as care neither
for God, nor man. They have not one foot of their affection carrying them
toward God, another toward their neighbor: but they are Quadrupedes,
foure-footed, as horse and mule: and Multipedes, many-footed, as flies and
spiders; that is, as Eccl. 9.3.
the Son of Sirac terms the harlot, c. 9. Multiuoli, of many wills and
affections, yet never a good. These must also be fisht for, that their
affections may be qualified.

These, and the like to these, are the fish that we must fish for: and how
well we have fisht for them, we must one day give an account. For at that
great and general market day of fowls (the day of judgment) then shall the
Lord say to those that are preachers, as he said to those fishers, Joan. 21.22.
Io. 21. Venite nunc, and prandete, Come, and dine. And when they shall answer,
Wherewith Lord? Then shall he say unto them as unto those fishers; Afferte de
piscibus, quos prendidistis: Bring hither of the fishes that ye have caught. O
Lord! What shall then become of such a Preacher as shall be feign to say; Lord,
I never fisht for souls? My fishing has been only for great place, for
preferment, for money, for fame, for friendship, and the like: But as for men I
neither caught, nor fisht for any.

6, And lastly, Quoad Praemium. In regard of the remuneration or reward of
their office. Which office, as in my text it self may seem to be a reward of
a precedent work, because our Savior promises, if they will follow him, of
fishermen, to make them fishers of men, (and needs must that be a labor worth
the labor, which is promised as a reward of labor) so to show, that they have
more than their labor for their pains, the Scripture tells us, that they that
convert many unto righteousness, Fulgebunt quasistellae, shall shine as the
stars for ever and ever, Dan. 12.3
Dan. 12.

And the twelve Apostles shall sit upon the 12 thrones, and judge the 12 tribes
of Israel, Matthew. 19.28.
Matthew. 19. Number sedebunt? What? shall they sit indeed (says Theophyl. ibid.
Theophylact) No: but by their sitting is signified the excellency of their
honor. Non enim creaturae est sedere, sed sanctae Trinitatis: creaturae autem
tanquam ancillae est stare: For it is not for the creature to sit, but for the
holy Trinity. As for the creature, it well beseems it to stand like a
ha^dmaid, says the same Theophyl. in Luc. 22.30.
Theophylact in Luc. 22.

And again, when it is said in the same place, that the Apostles shall eat,
and drink with Christ in his kingdom; What? (says he) shall they eat and
drink with him indeed? No, this is but a metaphor borrowed from those that are
wont to be graced and honored by Princes. Nam qui cum regibus coenant,
videntur primos honores sortiri: For, to be admitted to sup with a King, why
its the greatest honor that can be done a man. So that, this is it that
Christ would signify, when he says that his Apostles shall sit, and eat, and
drink with him in his kingdom, that he values and prefers them before all the
world besides.

What then? Is this all the reward of Gods Ministers? (though, if it were, they
had cause enough whereof to rejoice) But have they only a plentiful reward in
heaven, and is their reward none at all here on earth? What? Must they serve
at the Altar, and yet not live by the Altar? Must they neither have Partem
quotam, a tenth part, nor yet Aliquotam, any part at all of the increase of
their flock?

Such indeed (for the most part) is our now-adaies religion. The mainteinance
of the Minister is held but a matter arbitrary, and the payment of tithes only
a ceremony determined and ended together with the ceremonial Law of Moses.
But the Law of Nature whereby they are due (witness the tithes that Abraham
before the Law paid Melchisedech the Priest of the most high God, Genesis 14.18.
Ge. 14.) though it ran along with the ceremonial Law of Moses, yet was it not
determinable with that Law, no more than was the Decalogue.

Yet a monster it is to see, how the sheep) shall I say, or goats?) rebel
against their shepherd: as if he that feeds the flock were not worthy to be
fed with the milk of the flock: and fleece he shall have none, but that
prouerbial wool, Lanam Caprinam, goats wool: that is (by their good will) none
at all.

Martial. l. 6.
Et piscatorem piscis amare potes? It greeues the fish, that the fisherman (be
he never so painful) should make a poor living by them. Doubtless, this was
never Gods mind. He would not that his Priests should want in the Law: much
less in the Gospel. Exodus 28.
Exodus 28. The Priests hand must be filled: He must not be in want; nor must
the mouth of the ox, that treads out the corn be muzled: Deuteronomy. 25.4
Deuteronomy. 25. And perhaps it was not without mystery, that our Savior Christ
caused a fish to pay tribute for him, and Peter, Matt. 17.27.
17. but that thereby he would teach Spiritual fish, to give tribute to whom
tribute, honor to whom honor, tithe to whom tithe belongs.

Had not S. Paul peremptorily and flatly resolved, that the mainteinance of
Gods Minister must not be a minced and curtall mainteinance, but large and
liberal, he would never have charged him with hospitality: 1. Tim. 3.2.
1. Tim. 3. A duty which the people are as ready to exact, as S. Paul to
enioine: and yet they will not allow him wherewithal. Which how much better is
it than Phataohs tyranny, Exodus 5.8
Exodus 5. who required of the Israelites their full tale of brick, and yet he
would not allow the^ straw wherewith to make it?

Thus as the ascent to Salomons throne was Per sex gradus, by six degrees or
steps, 1. Reg. 10.19.
1 Reg. 10. so by six degrees or steps (as ye have heard) does the Minister
rise to his throne of dignity. All which, as on the one side, they should rear
and eleuate the thoughts of the minister from the center to the sphaere, and
remember him to walk worthy so worthy a calling; because (as Hieronym.
S. Hierome pithily speaks) Malus Sacerdos de Sacerdotiosuo crimen acquirit,
non dignitatem: If the Minister be lewd, his ministry does not grace, but
blemish him. And as Lucian in Piscator.
Lucian notes of stage-plaiers, that if they misact but a servant, or messenger
only, (...): it is but a small slip; but if they act Jupiter or Hercules
unworthily, (...): it is a foul and inexpiable fault: So if the Minister did
misact but an earthly Prince only, his fault were more tolerable: but forasmuch
as he represents the king of heaven and earth, it can be no less than
damnable;

So should they likewise on the other side, instruct the people, to have the
Minister in singular reverence for his work sake; and if for none other cause,
yet therefore to honor him because he is Gods Ass; as the Jews spread their
garments in the way, content that the Ass should tread upon them because he
carried Christ, Matt. 21.
Matt. 21. And though the Minister be unworthy so great an honor (for who is
sufficient for these things, 2. Cor. 2.16.
2. Cor. 2.) yet so to esteem of him, as of the Minister of Christ, and
disposer of the secrets of God: 2. Cor. 2.16.
1. Cor. 4. For why should piety deny that to Gods Minister, which policy will
afford a mortal Princes officer, whom albeit his after-carriage may declare
to be unworthy the honor whereunto his Liege has advanced him, yet will the
people say with him in Tacitus.
Tacitus; Tuorum consiliorum socium, tua officia in republica capessentem
colebamus: Because he is thy counselor, and thine officer (o King) we honor
him.

Howbeit such is the iniquity of these times, that as the shadow went backward
ten degrees, in the Dial of Ahaz, 2. Reg. 10 11.
2. Reg. 20. So ten degrees, and more do the shadows of Christ (the ministers
of Christ) go backward in the account and estimate of the world, sooner than
step forward; I say not six degrees, but one.

For whereas none is thought too-good, to be a Princes Ambassador; they think
none too-bad to be the Ambassador of God the Prince of Princes.

Were Plutarch. in Cat. Mayor.
Cato Mayor now alive again, to see the halt, and the blind marked out to
this best and greatest service, might he not worthily scoff at them, as
sometimes he did at the Roman Ambassadors, one wounded in the head, and
another in the foot? Mittit Populus Romanus legationem, quae nec caput, nec
pedes habet: Gods Embassage is like a sickmans dream, that has neither head,
nor foot.

Heretofore Elder-brothers were Priests by birthright: but now the Priesthood
is the birthright of younger brothers. Younger brothers are made Priests, and
Priests made younger brothers.

Heretofore Kings themselves disdained not to be Priests: and hereafter Kings
and Priests must once again be attoned, Apoc. 1.6.
Apoc. 1. And yet now (forsooth) every petite Gentleman of the first head,
thinks himself all-too-good for so mean an office. Its grace enough to the
Ministry, if he but vouchsafe to turn one of: his seruingmen out of his into
Gods service: out of his livery into a Church-liuing.

These, and the like disgraces, did they but wound our own persons, we could
the better swallow them: But Cum per latera nostra petitur Ecclesia, impetitur
Christus, when through our sides the Church of Christ, yea Christ himself is
goared, then to be silent, it were Languor, non patientia; stupidity, rather
than patience. Then high time (if yet time enough) to speak.

Here can I hardly contain my self, but that, like another Peter, I should
draw the blade of Gods word, and draw blood at Malchus his ear in the quarrel
of my Lord and Master Christ. But the time has already ouer-mastered me; and
should I draw, it would bid me sheath up my sword again.

Yet this I say (for a parting-blow) to the profane and Atheistical deriders,
of these days, that take pleasure in belching out disgraces against the
Minister, making him no better than the very paring, and filth, and purgament,
and offscouring of all things; that Philelf. ep. l. 16.
In expuentis recidit barbam, quod in coelum expuitur: The disgrace rebounds
back upon their own pates: they do but foame out their own shame: they
bewray as much malice as little religion.

For if, Fear the Lord, and honor his Priests must go together, as Sirac.
7.31.
Sirac 7. then it seems, that whosoever honoreth not his Priests, fears not the
Lord. And if, Quench not the spirit; Despise not prophecy, must go hand in
hand, as These. 5.20.
1 Thessalonians. 5. then the inference must be, that whosoever despises prophecy,
quenches the spirit. And if (as our Savior tells his Disciples, Luc. 10.16.
Luc. 10. He that hears you, hears me: and, He that despises you,
despises me; then, as truly as God is a jealous God, Exodus 20.5.
Exodus 20. (as jealous of his own honor, as ever husband of his own wife) he
will not leave the despights and indignities done to his Ministers unrevenged.

And (for conclusion) I will ad this corollary of comfort to my brethren
fellow-fishermen, and fellow laborers in this holy and heavenly function; that
as Aulico paru^ refert quomodo a caeteris aestimetur, dummodo principi se
probet: Little cares the Courtier how others esteem of him, so that he
approve himself to his Prince, who is able to exalt and bring him to honor:
so they need not much respect how little men respect them (eclipsing,
extenuating, maligning their calling) so that they approve themselves unto
God, who both can, and will hereafter highly advance them.

That bright, glorious, and capacious globe of the Sun, is (to see to) but
Instar pilae pedalis, No bigger than a football: Yet is it no less than
Luxmundi, The light of the world: So they, albeit in the eyes of men they are
no better than a football, a very play-game fit to be kicked and spurnd at; yet
are they in Gods eyes (who sees not as man sees) Luxmundi, Matt. 5.14.
Matthew. 5. glorious and beautiful as is the Sun in the firmament, far above
which they shall one day be exalted in the highest heavens; there for ever to
shine in glory with him who is Sol Iustitiae, Malac. 4.2.
Mal. 4. even the true son of righteousness Christ Jesus.


