To the right Honorable the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in this present
Parliament assembled.
The humble Petition of Erasmus Record and Millicent Vaughan widow the
Administratrix of the goods, chattels and debts of Walter Vaughan deceased.
Most humbly showing,
THat John Skinner became bound in a Recognisance of three thousand pounds to
Richard Wilbraham, 22. Aug. Eliz. 41.
conditioned to pay one thousand eight hundred pounds to William Win and his
creditors, whereof the petitioner Erasmus Record was one, to whom Win owed
850 pounds; which condition being broken by the said John Skinner, the said
Win and Record preferred their bill in Chancerie, 23. Ian. Eliz 43.
to put the Recognisance in suite: whereupon the Lord K^eper did order the 23
of January 43 of Elizabeth, that the petitioner Record should follow the suite
at his own cost and charges, which he did, in regard that Win was in mean
estate, and not able to follow it.

Upon that Recognisance the Moytie of the lands of the Manor of Castle-campes
in the County of Cambridge, Eliz. 44.
by course of Law and order of the Chancerie was at the petitioner Records
charges extended, and delivered in extent to your petitioner Record and the
said Win. Afterward 4. Febr. 4. Feb. 45. Eliz.
Anno 45. Eliz. by consent of all parties and their Counsel, it was decreed
in Chancery, that your petitioner Record and his Assigns should have yearly
one hundred pounds out of the extended Moytie, until his debt of eight hundred
and fifty pounds were paid him.

The petitioners further show, Jacob. 2.
that An. 2. Iacobi, there was an assignement from Wilbraham, Win and Record,
made to the said Walter Vaughan, being another creditor of Win, with a
special saving of the petitioner Records decree, and all such order or orders
as did concern the issues, rents and profits of the said land so extended: and
also a saving of a certain report of Sir John Tyndals (as in the Decree, and
by the Deed more plainly does appear) until your petitioner Record were
satisfied and paid out of the extended Moytie eight hundred and fifty pounds
with his damages.

Also an Act of Parliament passed An. 3. Iacobi, Jacob. 3.
concerning the said extended Manor, on the behalf of M. Sutton, wherein the
right of the petitioner Record is likewise saved.

Afterward the petitioner Record and the said Walter Vaughan were outed by
Alderman Leman, Jacob. 4.
by virtue of a former Statute of four hundred pounds; and after that by Sir
William Smith upon a Statute of one thousand five hundred pounds (he being one
of the Feoffees for the sale of the land.) But notwithstanding the said
Statutes, Jacob. 5.
your petitioner Record and the said Walter Vaughan obtained an Iniunction for
the possession against Sir John Skinner and Sir William Smith, and all clayming
any right under them, and thereby were put in possession again. Then M. Sutton
(having no bill in Court against Record or Vaughan) purchased the said Manor,
Jacob. 5.
and retained in his hands one thousand pounds toward satisfaction of the
extent, as Sir William Smith has set down under his hand. But afterward by a
private agreement between Sutton, 23. Sept. Jacob. 5.
Skinner and Win, a reference was made to their own counsel, your
petitioner Record, nor Vaughan, nor their counsel privy thereunto, as by the
order and report does appear, and as Win by his oath and letter does
acknowledge; notwithstanding a report was made the same day, by which it was
pretended that the petitioner Record was satisfied, and thereupon was six
hundred pounds given to Win, and the same day by an order four hundred
pounds more was given to Sir John Skinner, neither of them having any right to
any part of it. And thus your petitioner Record was defeated of eight hundred
and fifty pounds due debt, over and above eight hundred pounds spent in
following the suite these two and twenty years, to his utter undoing, being a
poor old man of the age of 72 years.

Your Petitioners do therefore most humbly pray, that in all Acts to be passed
this present Parliament concerning the said Manor of Castle-campes, the
petitioner Records right may be saved, or else that he may be satisfied his
said debt of 850 pounds, in such manner as this most honorable Assembly shall
think meet.


