A comparison between the Old learning and the New,

Translated out of latin in Englysh by Wyliam Turner.

Prynted in Sowthwarke by me James Nicolso^. Anno. 1537.

The contents of this book.
Of the sacraments. Of penance. Of confession. Of satisfaccyon. Of frewyll.
Of faith and works. Of merits. Of sin. Of ye worshippynge of saints. Of
the supper of ye Lord. Of the choice of meats. Of fasting. Of the difference
of days. Of prayer. Of vows. Of counselles. Of matrimony. Of bisshoppes. Of
ceremonies. Of man's traditions. Of councels and laws made by a multitude of
bisshoppes gathered together.
To the reader.
Some there be that do defye
All that is new, and ever do cry
The old is better, away with ye new
Because it is false, and the old is true:
Let them this book read and behold
For it prefers ye learning most old.
Vrbanus Regius to a certain friend of his, wysheth CHRIST our righteousness.
When our saueour in the first of Mark had cast out of a man an unclean
sprete, the Jews were asto^nyed, saying: what new learning is this? It was
thought new to those wretches for lack of knowledge of scripture: which of all
things was oldest, that is to say the Gospel, the which was long tofore
promised by the prophets in the scripture, of ye son of God Jesus Christ. The
same thing was said to Paul, when he preached Christ at Athene: they took him
and led him to Marcis street, saying: May we not know what new learning this
is, that ye teach? for ye bring in to our ears new things. Was the teaching
of the Apostles (I pray you) straight way new, because it was thought new to
the proud gentyles swellynge and bound with their carnal and fleshly
wisdom? Even such like things in these later days, do they al suffer:
which teach purely the Gospel of the gracyous favor and glory of God. Which do
not abuse ye word of everlasting truth for auau^tage: but as it were of
syncernesse, but as it were of god, so speak we by Christ in the sight of God.
This is the new doctrine (say our adversaries) lately devised and f^rnyshed in
the shoppes or workhouses of heretics. Let us abide still in our old faith Let
the holiness of our fathers, the authorite of the councils, the consent of the
long time and so many ages, hold us in ye ways of our fathers. Let the
heretics go and shake their ears, with their new learning, which spronge and
rose up of late. Those things which we teach came not all from Christ and the
Apostles by writing, nevertheless they came by a faithful reuelacyon, and
showing unto us. To whom I will answer none otherwise then Christ answered
the Saduces: Ye err (says he) and ar ignorant in the scripture. And would
to God that I might purchase and obtain so much equity of a braynlesse kind
of me^ as one heythen man shows to another: that is, if they would first
hear the cause or matter, and then afterward (if it please them) condemn him
that is accused. Now they condemn innocents without any hearing of their
cause. And they cry unto us which defend ye word of God with nothing but
galowes, ropes, and fire, not witesafyng us the leest corner of the catholyke
church. In so much that I wonder of what sprete they be of. For that gentle and
pleasant sprete of Christ, the which fedeth the mystical body, seeks for the
health and not for the destruccyon of them that err. Charity the fruit of the
holy ghost (as the apostell says) does think none evil, but is glad and
rejoices with the truth, believes all things, trusts all things. Surely
they that set aside the blind judgment of the affection, and look earnestly
upon the matter, judge otherwise of us. For the old ancient fathers did never
know or hear tell, of the most part of those things, which our
condemners do teach: then ye may be sure that their learning ought not to be
rekened for old learning and apostolical. Furthermore not every thing that
the old fathers wrote sauoureth of the syncernesse and pureness of the sprete
of the Apostles. Certain things which were devised with in these four
hundredth years, ye rather even of late have been received by and by of them,
as soon as they were made, namely this is their learning and so old that
they desire for this, that the Gospel almoost should be cast away, and
counted as a new teaching and learning. Therefore I would that they should
know and understand that we do teach and preach the old and the true
heavenly doctrine of the sprete: that is the gospel of god. The great mystery
of holiness and godliness that god was declared in the flesh, was justified
in sprete, seen of the angels, preached to the gentyles, that confidence was
given to him in the world, and was received in to glory. What say you be
these news: God did predestinate us yt he might chose and purches us to be his
sons, by Christ Jesus in his own self, according to the pleasure of his
will, that the glory of the grace of God might be praised, whereby he made us
well-beloved, through his welbeloud, by whom we have rede^pcio^ through his
blood, forgiveness of sins according to the riches of his grace: This was
the fathers counsel upon us, before the beginning of the world, that he should
save us, and call us with an holy vocacion, not according to our works, but
according to his purpose and grace, which is given unto us through Jesus
Christ before the everlasting times, but it is opened and declared now, by ye
appearing of our saueour Christ which put death away and has through the
gospel brought forth the life into light and mortalite. The which thing seeing
that it was promised so long ago by the prophets at the commandment of the
holy gooste and now published through all the coasts of the world, how dare
they for shame call it new learning? Cease you wicked men and staunche your
blasphemies give glory and praise with us unto god: and enbrace and love (as ye
ought to do) the mysteries of the truth with devout minds, left ye be
indurate and made hard hearted of god, with the reprobate and castawayes: the
which believe not the truth, but allow vnryghtuousnesse. The are is laid at the
root of the trees. Wherefore I doing the office of a christen brother, have
made a comparyson between the new learning and the old, whereby dear
brother thou may easily know whether we are called worthily or unworthily the
preachers of new learning. For so did they call us of late, scornynge and of a
contempt, and you desired of me to know what I thought best to answer to these
braynles and mad fellows. The which thing seeing that it can not be
expressed in an epistle: I thought it best to bestow a few hours in this
matter, in these days called fastyngam, in latin carnis priuium, which has
the name of ye taking away of flesh. In the which days after ye manner of the
gentyles and heythen men, they use uncomely plays and games. Take in good worth
the labor of your friend. Fare ye well, and to God for me a sinner.

Of the sacraments. The new learyng.
It is enough and suffycient to receive ye sacraments effectually and with
fruit to have no stop nor let of deadly sin: And there is not required in a
man a good motion within him which receaueth them, whereby of a congruence or
of worthynes he may deserve grace: for the sacraments bring grace with them
of the work that is wrought by them, or by the work it self: that is to say
because the work is showed and mynistred as a sign or a sacrament. This
says ye master of sentence, in the.iiii. book in the first distinction. By
the doctores.

The old learning.
The gospel witnesses yt we be saved not by an holy sign, but through faith.
Gene. xv. Abraham gave credence and believed God and that was rekened to him for
righteousness. Romans iiii. Romans x. If a man believe from the heart he shall be
made ryghteous. He says not: that with the body an holy sign is taken unto
righteousness. Also Abacuc. ii. and Roma. the first. The just shall live by
his faith. He says not: He shall live by the sacraments. It follows therefore
after ye old learning, that faith is necessary to be had in him that
receaueth the sacraments with fruit.

Of penance the new learning.
A man's will only naturally (doing yt lies in him) may dispose it self to
the receauynge of grace, by an act confirmable unto right reason, ye which is
morally good Also a man's will in putting away a stop or let, that is the
purpose of deadly sin, of a good motion drawn out of frewyll, may deserve
the first grace of a congruence. In the second book of ye master of sentence
ye xxv. distinction. What means this learning else, but that (as Pelagius
says) the beginning of our justification comes of our selves, and the end
of making perfect comes of God? Then might a man by his own strength begin
penance, which they call co^trycion: as though ye beginning of it were in us.
This learning makes ypocrytes, and maynteyneth ye pride of the old man.

The old learning.
In the tenth chap. of zachary it is written. I will convert them because I
will have mercy upon them Trenoru^. v. Convert us Lord to the, and we shall be
converted. Ihon xv. Without me ye can do nothing. Philippens. ii. God works
the will.ii. Corinth. ye.iii. Chapter. Every good thought is of God. Roma. xi.
If it be of works, then is it not of grace.ii. Timothe the.iii. Chapt. If God
at any time will give them repentance. etc. Therefore after ye old learning
repentance is the gift of God, the which grace that iustifyeth, works, and
not the power which draws out frewyll. Before ye time that a man have grace,
another his thought nor his will is good: another has he any good work, but al is
syn: for as ye tree is, such is his fruit. The person is a sinner, and also
flesh: then, what other thing can it savor, wyn, and work but fleshly
things. This doctrine makes men lowly and beats down the pride and
arrogancye of the old Adam.

Of confession, the new learning.
Who so ever comes to the years of discrecyon, at the least once in the
year, he is bound to confess all his sins, both open and secret: with all
their circumstaunces to his curate, or else he is not a christen man. And the
bishop has authoryte, to reserve, and keep only to him self ye forgiveness
of certain sins: by the reason af their great enormyte ye which a simple
pressed cannot assoyle, but in the point of death, so do ye new fellows say. As
in the canon law, Cap. Omnis vtriusque sexus. etc. and ye Master of sentence
about the.xvii. distinction.

The old learning.
In the.xxxi. Psalm: I have said I will confess against me mine
unrighteousness to ye Lord, and thou haste forgiven me ye ungodliness of my
sin. Behold, ye Prophet does confess him to ye Lord: and he gets
forgiveness of al his sins. Luc. xviii. ye publycan says: be mercyful to
me a sinner, and he goes home justified into his house. Where is here any
rehearsyng, of circu^stau^ces, and of hid sins, in the prestes ear. Luce.
vii. the synful woman speaks nothing, but wepeth and falls lowly down at
the fete of Jesus, and she had by and by forgiveness of her sins, and herd
said unto her: Depart in peace. Matthew the.iii. Jerusalem and al Iewry and all
the contry next to the flode Iordane, goes forth to Ihon, and they confess
their sins: namely in a general confession. For they granted themselves to
be sinners: in as much as they axed baptyme, a sign of repentance, yet for all that ye hear of no rehearsal of sins. We read in the acts that ye same
thing was done at Ephesus at the preaching of the Apostell: yet for all that
we se in no place these words, a peculiar or proper priest: al hyd sins, all
circumstaunces, and such other. In the first of Ihon the.i. chapter we have a
confession which is of gods law, by the which we confess our fautes lowly
to God the knower of men's hearts: and he is faithful and ryghteous to forgive
us them For he gives grace to lowly persons, and resysteth proud men.i. Pet.
v. Where as true penance is, truly there is also confession, as the true fruit
of penance. We do not utterly forsake auricular or ear confession, but ye
addycions of man's tradycio^s are parted and sondered from holsom doctrine, as
chafe is from ye corn. It is an holsom doctrine and according to gods
law, to require the law of the mouth of a priest, and to learn of the
bishop the way of the Lord. Malachi. ii. Agge. ii..i. Timot. iii. Titu^. i.
Therefore I would not that the order of the church should be broken, which is.i.
Corin. xii where the Apostell after that he had made mencyon of the mystical
body, shows that Christ set in ye church or congregation, first Apostels,
the^ Prophets or preachers thyrdly teachers, why should teachers be in the
church? Namely for this intent, that they having the fashion and the form of
wholesome words should teach the church those things which be necessary for
man's salvation: and resist with the swearde of the spryte, the enemies of ye
faith and all ungodliness: and that they might preach ye word both openly
and preuely, that they be fervent in season and out of season, that they
rebuke, reprove, and exorte with all gentelnesse and learning.ii. Timoth. iiii.
Let them know ye face and countenance of their floke, and to be short, let
the^ be full of those wertues, the which god requires. Ezechiel. xxxiiii. of
the watcheme^ or overseers of ye house of Israel: If we perceive not and be
ignorant in any thing that pertayneth unto a christian ma^s living, and it is
not plainly taught in ye open sermon, we must go to the curate, to-heare of
his mouth the judgments and testimonies of the Lord. If any doubt arise in
our consciences, whom ought we rather to go to, and axe counsel, then of the
hyrdman of our souls? Farthermore when we be faynte hearted or have no courage
and are vexed with te^tacions: we may not despise the remedy that god
ordened. Thou have Gods word. Math. xviii. Where as.ii. or.iii. etc. And Ihon.
xx. Whose sins ye shall remyt. etc. Whom would not these fatherly promyses
provoke and alure to confession? where as the conscience is lyfted up and
stablisshed not by man's word, but by gods word, spoken by man's mouth. But
these be man's addicions to bind a man's conscience with a law, and to compel
him to confess all his sins with all their circu^stau^ces at a certain
time, to his own priest or curate whatsoever he be: whereby men's consciences
be marked with an whote iron. For he that is not confessed after the manner that
is prescrybed in the confessionalles, either by the reason of ignorance, or of
a frail memory or shamefastness (ye though he be ashamed and repent him of
his evil life with all his heart) yet for all that as long as he lives he
bears about with him an unquiet conscience, and full of despair. And if a
man take a little diligence, or have a good memory, or write his sins in a
piece of paper, and pours out into a frears ear, that can not well hear all
the fylthynesse of his unclean living. good Lord how glad is he? that not
only he has satisfised the law: but because also that he has taken of his
shulders a burden heuyer then Ethna the hyl that always burns. Then as who
say, he has deserved forgiveness of his syn with this troublesome work, he
stands in his own conceate, which would have dyspayred, if he had not
rehearsed his sins, after this manner. Let the bysshoppes appoint learned men
to hear confessyons, and not blockheades: and then ye people shall come to ye
prestes by heaps and swarms. The which thing while they do it not, let
them blame them selves, and not us, if the people set little by their curates.
Farther more as concerning the reseruyng, and keeping behind of certain causes
and chances, let the head rulers in the church tell a cause why they do differ
and abhor so greatly the Apostles rytes and teachynges. A priest or an elder
and a bishop with Paull, be all one. The scripture makes no such difference,
of ministers, in the labor of ye gospel. When the Lord sent forth his
disciples into ye world, he gave them like power, sayng: Go into all the world
and preach the gospel to every creature: he that shall believe and be baptized
shall be saved. Mark. xvi. John. xx. he says unto them: Take ye the holy ghost,
and whosoever sins ye forgive, they shall be forgiven. Where is here any
difference, between a bishop and a simple priest? Is it hard to know what
this be to say: Whose sins ye remyt they shall be remytted? This is the
doctrine of Christ and his Aostels.

Of satisfaction. The new learning.
A certain satisfaccio^ is to be enjoined to him that is confessed for his
sins that be past, according to the quantite or qualite of the sins, that
he may content and satisfye the righteousness of God. This has the.xvii.
and.xviii. distinction of the fourth book. By this doctrine the grace of
Christ's redemption is darkened, ouershadowed, and defaced, and man's works
enhaunced to the most hye injury of Christ's passion.

The old learning.
Esaias the.liii. Chapter. He is broken for our wyckednesses. The father has
laid on his neck all our iniquityes and wyckednesses. I have smytte^ him for
the myschefe of my people. Here thou may se yt Christ did satisfaccyo^ for
the sins of al ye world. Also.i. Pet. ii. He bare our sins in his body, on
the cross, that we should be delivered from sin, and should live in
righteousness, by whose strypes we are healed. Also in the first epistle to
the Corinthians the.i. chap. Christ is our righteousness and redemption. Ioh
in the.x. Chapter. Christ spent his life for his sheep. Romans the.v. Chap. We be
brought in favor with the father, by the death of Christ, and not by our
satisfaccyon The same we have also Ephe. the.i. And Collossenses.i. and.ii.
Christ took away the obligacyon or handwrytynge, which was against us by yt
decrees, and he fastened it to ye cross.i. Ioh. i. The blood of Christ
cleanses and pourgeth us from all sin. He says not our satisfaccion does
pourge us. Now have we proved by these places yt onyly the death of Christ is
our full satisfaccyon for the sins of all the world, and not our fylthy
righteousness. Let us than call those scourges or punishments which our
loving father se^deth us, or we take our selves (preuentyng the hand of God)
correccyon, strokes and such other names as ye scripture uses. This word
satisfaccyo^ is a proud word and hated to al christen ears, that hear
sometime the sound of this saying of S. Luke in the xv. Chap. When we have
done all things which be commanded unto us, yet we may say that we be
unprofitable servants.

Let claye and ashes be ashamed of this proud word satisfaccyon for sin.
Shame be unto us and righteousness unto God. If we with our works and
correccyons do make amends or satiffaccyon for our sins, the^ Christ dyed in
vain. And by this doctrine the grace that brings us in the favor with God, is
magnifyed by the blood of Jesus, and man's work is little set by, to the most
worthy praise of Christ's passion.

Of fre will. The new learning.
A man has fre will and choice not only in the state of innocence, but also of
his fall and sin: And it is of so great virtue, that he doing that lies in
him, may remove ye stop and hynderaunce of grace, and dispose himself to
grace that iustifyeth. And lest a carnal man, proud enough of himself, should
want noryshynge for his arrogance, they go about to strengthen and confirm
this doctrine with scriptures falsely understand Ecclesiasticus in the.xv.
(say theye) says and proves fre will, where as God is said to have left a
man in the power of his own counsel, and to have given him commandments ye
which (if he do keep) they should keep and save him. And to this purpose they
swepe and gather together, what so ever law or monition is any where in all ye
scripture. As who say we might gather well after this manner: God has commanded
that we should do this, he has appointed the condycyons of life, he threatens
pain to the^ that break them: ergo it is in our power to do that same? wot
ye well here is a sure argument? much like unto this, the master byddeth ye
servant go an hundredth miles on one day: ergo he may go an hundredth miles on a
day. Although I se many me^ of great reputacyo^ almost promysyng themselves ye
victory in the defendyng of frewyl, with this short argument. When in the
mean season they consider not how little this doctrine makes for the glory of
Christ which before al things ought to be sought. Is it not a great
sklaunder of the true learning, to teach after this wise: Grace given freely,
or the general influence with the understanding, that understands or
directs aryght, and the will confirmably wyllyng, are enough to deserve the
first grace, which makes a man first to come in favor? Who would have looked
for so much life and health in ye man that was left half dead of the thieves,
Luce. x. that although he could not heal him self, yet he might go in to the
potycaryes shop, nedynge no horse, might show his grefe, bye salues and pay
for them when he had done? Go to I am content let them teach ye iustificacyon
can not be by our strength, with out grace yt justifies: yet they teach that ye
beginning of penance is in us, when they give unto us the preparynge unto
grace, doing as much as lies in us, yt we may deserve of a symlynesse the
first grace by a good mocyon drawn out of the fredome of the will. Is not this
to give the first good motion to nature? Moreover, they say: That a man by
his natural strength, may fulfill gods commandments, as concerning the
substance of the act, although not according to the intent of the co^mau^der
that is god. If that be true, it is in a sinners power to amend or to continue
in sin. If nature may do so much, what need have we of grace? When simple
men hear those things when shall they at any time learn Christ truly? when
will they give thanks for the unspeakable benefyte of their redemption? A
little thing holds me, but I lay on these teachers the saying of saint
Peter: They deny the Lord that bought them, and they make marchau^dyse, of
the people of God, with their fained words. When did Christ or the Apostles
ever speak after this manner: The merit of co^gruence, the merit of
worthynesse, to do that lies in him, fre will, the productiue virtue of fre
will? Thou christen man fly these sayenges as the pestilent blast of the crafty
serpent, where with he makes our nature (which is proud already) to swell
against God. Thou haste (good reader) a tayste of the scoolemens learning of
frewyll, the which hangs nothing together. For when they be charged with
scripture, in the despite of the Pelagians they will be thought favorers of
grace, sometime with a maruaylous euasyon preferryng a special help of God,
before man's will both in willing and in workynge. And a little after they
leap back again to the excellent gifts of their nature, lest they should be
thought to favor ye Manichees.

The old learning.
Romano. the.xiiii. Chapter. What so ever is not of faith, that is sin. Then
that good motion of fre will before grace that iustifyeth is sin. The^ what
madness is it to will, to deserve grace by sin? Or what lyberte is it, when a
man can not do well of himself but only euel? what health is that, to have
power to fall and not to rise or stand without the help of an other? the
second to the Corinthians the third chapter. Our sufficiency or ableness to
do good is of God. Roma. the third Chap. Faith iustifyeth. Before faith a man
is a sinner and evil, then how can he have a good mocyon of himself, whom
faith has not steared up? how can a thorn tree bring forth a grape. Ioh.
viii. Every man that does sin is the servant of sin.ii. Petri. ii. A man
is brought in bondage unto him, of whom he is overcome. Ephe. ii. By nature we
be ye children of wrath Ge. vi. We be flesh, Io. iii. Except that we be borne
again.i. Corin. ii. A carnal man perceaueth not those things which be of the
sprete of God. Then how can the servant of sin, the son of wrath, flesh,
a carnal man: before he be regenerate, have mexe natural power and good
motions of himself? Can an evil tree bring forth good fruit? Except yt we be
regenerate with the grace of Christ? (according to the image of the earthy
Adam) we bear no goodness. Seeing that ye holy ghost does expressly and
vehemently pronounce, that we be not only prone and ready to evil: but also
euel in deed. Farthermore the Lord makes laws, but (before yt thou bring in
this co^clusio^: Therefore we may: or else wherefore have we so many precepts and
threatenynges?) learn of Paul Roma. ye iii. Chap. that the law is the
knowledge of sin and not the auctor of righteousness The law is spiritual
and we be carnal sold under sin, Romans vii. Therefore thou must be spiritual
that thou may keep the law, which is not in thy power, but it is ye grace of
God: Wherefore thou may learn of the law, to know thy mysery, yt which after
you haste known, thou art compelled to go to Christ the perfeccyon and the
fulfyllynge of the law. The law iustifyeth the not, but it declares to thy
shame, how far thou art from the dew clennesse of life by thine own fault.
Therefore thou may not think thus with thy self: I have a good law, what
needs more, but my labor and dylygence? I know good, reason will tell me
what is right, I will lay to my hands, and I will be justified by my deeds,
drawn out and commanded. Not so ye wicked persons, not so, hear and take heed of the holy words of scripture, and the proud pharisaicall sprete shall
have his comb cut. The Israhelites did cast in their minds when the law was
set forth that they could do all things, lokynge on Moses face which was
covered: But it was said unto them Deuteronomi. the.v. Chapter: Who can give
them such a mind to fear me, and to keep my commandments? Surely
iustifyenge begins at fear and love. But ye se that they have not the fear
of the Lord, nor such a mind as can do any good of it self. Therefore in
Deutero. xxx. says Moses. The Lord shall circumcise thine heart. and
Ezechiel. xi. I will take away the stony hearts. And Iho^ the.vi. There comes
no man to me, except my father draw him. Wherefore ye ypocrytes learn of the
law your dewty, feblenesse and pains, and when ye feel Moses hands heavy,
fly to him for succurre with all your heart, the which Romanor. viii. is
descrybed to be the fulfiller of ye law. Math. xi. Christ promised rest of the
soul to all them that be laden. For when we do the best that lies in us, we
being evil trees, bring fyrth evil fruits, that is to say we sin. For
such as every man is, such things does he think, speak and work. But we
be flesh therefore we savor of fleshly things. Why do we not grant with
saint Austin in the book of true innocence, yt when a man lives after his own
way and not after God, he is like the deuel: for an angel should not have lived
after an angel, but after God, that he might stand in the truth. A man has
naught of him self, but lyeng and sin: but if a man have any truth or
righteousness, he has it of the well, which is Christ: And that which we
have by gods lyberalite, hangs of gods power, and not of our might. First
consider me well the words of the holy ghost. To. ix where he calls his own
ye vessels of mercy, and Roma. viii. The children of God, be led with the
sprite of god. Esaie. xxvi. Lord thou have wrought all our works in us.

Therefore knowledge thyself ye handy work of ye almighty maker, ordened in
Chiste Jesus to bring forth good works, that he has ordained (mark which he
has ordained) yt we should work in them Ephesians. ii. Therefore that thou
consentest to the inspiracion of God, have a good will, and workest well: the
grace of god works all these things in ye. Thou in deed co^sentest,
wylleste, and workest: but god makes the to consent, will, and work, so that
this sayng also may be always justly laid before thine eyes: what have thou,
that thou have not received? If thou have received it of other, why do thou
rejoice and boaste, as though thou had not received it? i. Corinth. iiii.
Not to us Lord, not unto us, but to thy name give praise. Behold now not thy
frewyll but bound. But if the son deliver the, then salt thou be truly fre.
Ioha^. viii. For we be delivered from syn by Christ, that we may serve
righteousness. Roma. vi.

Of faith and works, the new learning.
Not only faith iustifyeth, for works iustifye also, and faith may stand
and be without, good fruts and grace that justifies in him that is a breaker
of ye commandment of god. Therefore there are two kinds of ryghteousnesses
necessary to salvation, that is to wit of faith and works. The one without ye
other (except a man have no time or leasur) does not save a man.

The old learning.
We suppose that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law. To.
iii. Here the Apostell does not doubt or guess (as some do understand him a
mysse) for ye truth of the greek has we reken or gather by reason: For
Theophilactus does expou^de this word and says sillogizometha, as though by
reasonynge he gathered this foresaid saying. Wherefore works do not iustifye,
but faith. And this is not my dream, but ye most pure doctrine of ye holy
ghost, in ye.iii. and.iiii. to the Roma. Where as the Apostell reasonyng by ye
scripture of Abraham being justified, most evidently proves yt faith is
rekened to us for righteousness. If Abraham (says he) was justified by his
works, he has where upon he may boast, but not before god For what says the
scripture? Genest. xv. Abraham gave credence to God, and that was rekened unto
him for righteousness. And in the end of ye fourth chapt he says: That it
was not written for him only, yt it was rekened to him for righteousness, but
also for us, to whom it shall be rekened. Another understands he here only
the ceremonyall works of the law, but also of the.x. co^mandementes, the
which is plain. Roma. iii. when he said that no man was justified by the
works of the law, shortly after he says: For the knowledge of syn is through
the law. The which clause does sufficiently show, of what works, of ye law
he speaks. If it be so that our works also do iustifye, than Christ gives
but the half of our salvation, and then how many saueours shall there be? There
is only but one iustifyer and saueoure, that is Christ: by whom we be
justified freely, through his grace. Roma. iii. Thefore works do not iustifye,
but faith in Christ: not that faith ye scoolmen call informis (that is a dead
faith) but that true and living faith, workynge by charity. Gala. v. chapt.
likewise as we be justified before god by faith, the which is ye true
iustifycacion: so before men (that se us in the face) we be justified by
works: that is to say we be known to be ryghteous by the fruit of good
works, of ye which thing the words of saint James ought to be understand:
so he yt will look well on Paul's disputacion of faith and works, shall easily
perceive, why yt we say that faith alone iustifyeth. For we feign not with
this word alone, a faith that is wthout charity, but we show that works be not
the beginning of our iustifycacion. Also we be not saved by works. Titum.
iii. but according to the mercy of god, through the lauour of regeneracion, and
by renewynge of the holy ghost lest any man should boaste of man. Good works
are not forbidden by this doctrine, but faith ye well of good works is
taught and unto grace is given that is her dewty. Part of the praise is given
unto us, by the new learning of scoolmen, ye which thing how blasphemous a
thing it is, the faithful Christian men can tell. And so ye old learning takes
not away works, but sets them in their place, that they may be witnesses
of our faith, subdue the flesh, and serve our neighbor, but not that they
should iustifye: seeing yt only faith of ye mere mercy of god through his word
does iustifye a man. The person that is justified, works justly, yet for all
that, it does not boaste of the righteousness of works as necessary to
salvation, lest when it seeks his own righteousness, it lose the
righteousness of God, that is faith. Roma. x. And it grants the very truth
with Esaias.lxiiii. That the righteousness of his works, is like a fylthy
clothe, defiled with the flours of a woman. And he an unprofitable servant.
The which is only ye way to come to true righteousness of our works. That
is when thou workyng besely, yet in all thy works knowlegest thy self a sinner:
and flye^ge only to ye grace of the mediator, set much by the price of
our redempcio^n For if the righteousness of our works, be of any value, the
death of Christ has not wholly and fully wrought our salvation, the which is
blasphemous. The short argument of Paul stondeth and is sure and immovable:
If the righteousness come of the law, then is Christ dead in vain: But
Christ dyed not in vain, therefore ye boaste in vain of the righteousness of
works and of the law.

Of merit or deseruynge, the new learning
When we do that lies in us i^ drawing out of a good mocion toward god by ye
frenesse of ye will, we deserve the first grace of congruite and semlynesse,
although not of worthynes. Also the soul endued with grace by an act drawn out
of ye frewyll and of grace deserves worthily everlasting life. Behold
christen reader, when as carnal wisdom shall hear that she has such power,
and can draw forth by natural power a good mocion toward God, and may
deserve thereby, will she not fall to the pharisaycall pride? and will she not
attribute to her self it that pertayneth to god? The which is nothing else,
but to tread under fete ye son of god, and to reken the blood of the
testamente but as an unholy and a profane thing, by ye which we be
fanctifyed. Moreover our nature which leans and sets to much by her
self, swellynge with this learning, is brought into confidence of works. For
nature hearing that we partly can deserve everlasting life with our deeds:
will enforce herself to heap together merytes: the which being many and
plenteous, she will trust and have a good hope in them: and when they fail an
decay, she will fall in to despair: by the which error the worthynesse and
deseruyng of Christ's death is defaced and hyd with darcknes, and man's
conscience is builded upon the sonde of works, and surely at every tempeste of
tribulacion it will fall.

The old learning.
In the second Epistle unto Timothe ye i. Chapter. God saved us not according
to our works, but according to his purpose and grace, which was given unto us
before ye everlasting times. Such like is there also Tit. iii. Ite^. Ephe. ii.
Ye be saved by grace through faith, and not of your selves: it is ye gift of
God, and not of works, lest any man should boaste. The scripture here takes
away the cause of deseruynge or merit from our works, and gives to grace
that we be saved. For that he says: not according to our works, and also: not
of you, suerly he does not admit or receive that act or deed that is drawn
out of will, to ye praise of salvation or merit. Christ deserved all things
unto us with his blood. And we are justified freely Roma. iii. The heretage was
not gotten by our labor, but by Christ's. The faith in Christ makes us
sons, therefore heirs: ergo, works do it not. To. iiii. To him that works
is the reward not rekened of favor, but of deutye. To him that works not,
but believes in him that iustifyeth the ungodly, is faith counted for
righteousness. To. viii. For I suppose yt the affliccyons of this life, are
not worthy the glory which shall be showed upon us. Lu. vii. When ye have done
all things that be commanded you, yet say that ye be vnprofyble servants.
Esaias. lxiiii. All our ryghteousnesses are as a defiled cloth. etc. i. Corin.
iiii. What haste thou yt thou have not received? Romans xi. Who has given him
ought before hand, that he might be recompensed again? Philip. ii. It is God
which works in you, both the will and also the deed, eue^ of good will. If so
be that God works in us goodness, what shall we arrogau^tly claim and
ascrybe there upon to our power and strength? And if we deserve the bliss,
why does scripture call it grace? Therefore be not we saved by ours, but only
by the works and merytes of Christ. But where as ye scripture sometime makes
mencyon of reward there can no man there upon take just occasyon to swell and
be proud: for faith workynge by charity is the gift of God, good works are
the gift of God, so that, if God do reward us, we must understand that he
does not reward our works, but his own works in us. But thou if thou
claim any thing there upon to thy self, then shalt thou receive no reward
of glory with the wicked pharyses, but thou shalt feel the punishment of the
fire of hell. And seeing that it is so, it may be easily judged, who teaches
more truly. I with the Apostle do always exorte me^, to the true good works,
which be done in faith, always taking head that a man by reason of them,
trust not in himself, and be reproved with the pharyse. They do so prick and
move unto good works, that they rest and put in them the hope of salvation,
and the cause of merits: whereby at chau^seth that every where men do them with
this false opinion, to be justified and saved by them. We not despysynge ye
grace of God, do teach, both yt we be saved only by the grace of God, and we
build men's conscyences not upon works, but upon ye stone that is Christ,
against the which the gates of hell can not prevail, and do always beat in
this most confortable gospel, or glad tidings. That heretage is given by
faith, that the promyses may be sure after grace. As says Paul To. iiii.
and.v. We justified by faith, have peace with God through Christ.

Of sin. The new learning.
The lust or concupiscence that remains in a man after baptyme, the law of
the members, infirmity, or sycknesse, is no sin another venial nor mortal,
and after baptyme it is not original, but is the pain of sin. Nevertheless
it brings forth sin. This opinion makes a man that is baptized slow and
dull to fight against ye flesh, for he believes that he is all whole and in
sauegarde.

The old learning.
Concupiscence which shows her self by her evil fruits, even in a man that
is baptized, is sin of her self. To. vii. Here the Apostle says: Now I
mine own self do not this, but ye sin which dwells and remains in me.
The Apostel does not here speak i^ ye person of wicked me^, for wicked me^ do
not consent to ye law, they serve and obey not ye law of god with their mind. S.
Auste^ was sometime of this opinion, yt the apostle had spoken these words in
ye person of euel men, but i^ his retractio^s, and against Iulia^ he does
revoke this opinion, and he said that at that time he understood not Apostell
aryght. Now he that speaks so, and was baptized, and was the elect
instrument of God, and yet complayneth of concupiscence and calls it sin,
then let the scooleme^ tell, whether the Apostell does well call that
concupiscence, which brings forth evil fruits (except it be stopped) sin
or no? Ye let them tell whether the holy ghost did err in that word.
Verily.i. Corin. xiiii. the Apostell thanketh God that he spoke more with
tunges, then all the Corinthians did. Therefore so great an Apostell knew with
what words he should name concupiscence. When we follow that manner of speaking,
we are chaced out, mocked, and cast out as heretykes of them that are little
moved, with the cause of so great matters, so that they may triumph in the
world and live in peace. Then the truth is, that concupiscence (the which
brings forth the same fruits after baptyme that it did before) is called
sin: as the Apostel does exhort the^ that be baptized, To. vi. Let not sin
reygne in your mortal bodies. He does not say concupiscence, but sin, for
so the truth of ye greek has. Moreover there is no man but he knows that
sin is known by the law, but this concupiscence is forboden of the law,
for it is sin. Infirmityes surely and also pains do not fall under the
precepte. And it is known that the Apostell says To. vii. I did not know
sin, but by the law, for I had not known that concupiscence had been a
sin, if the law had not said thou shall not lust, and by and by he calls
it sin. But this is the difference, namely before ye baptyme of the sprete
and water, that concupiscence or lust was a sin raygnynge, but after the
washing of regeneration, it is sin ouerco^me and subdued: of his own nature
in deed it is evil, but a man truly regenerate, and not walking after ye
flesh, does repress and hold down sin with the spret of grace, yt it
raygne not, nor have the ouerhande, that there be no damnacyon unto them that be
grafted in Christ. Roma. viii. For it is not rekened him to damnacion, for the
sprete that resysteth the flesh. The which thing saint Austen in these
words does conclude: All sin is forgiven in baptyme, not that it should not
be at all, but that it should not be rekened for sin. Now judge good reader,
which of us speak more truly: they that make so light a thing of this old
leven of malice, calling it a little infirmite only, which nevertheless is
no venial sin, do not know ye grace of god, and do blaspheme us yt make a
great thing of it: as it is a great thing in very deed, and yt we should have
need of ye great grace of God. We do exalte and magnifye with kind devotion and
godlynes ye blood of Christ: where with al sin is pourged and redeemed yt we
lowly co^fessours and grau^ters of our sins, may find grace in ye eyes of
god ye just judge.

Of worshippynge of saints. The new
Not only Christ is our mediator, but also the saints which raygne in heaven
with Christ: wherefore they ought to be called upon as mediators of
intercession, ye which purchase unto us many good things. Our Lord diuidyng
his kingdom has committed the one half of his kingdom, (yt is mercy) to ye
saints, to be given and distributed unto the world: ye other part (yt is
judgment) he keeps behind for himself. For he yt will obtain any thing of
a prince he seeks out some man of authorite, at whose request he may obtain
yt he will have, ye which should not speed if he came to ye prince alone. Mary
ye mother of God if she brake ye head of the old serpent, why should she not be
a mean for mankind? Therefore our lady and ye sai^tes do work partly our
salvation. The blessed virgin is ye neck, Christ is ye head, and we be ye
me^bres: no good gifts come down into ye me^bres, but through Mary as ye
neck. Also the saints work miracles. For how many being syck with diverse
sicknesses, have be^ helped at ye monume^tes and to^bes of the saints.

The old learning.
A sinner alone may not appear in the sight of God, (for our god is a
co^sumynge fire. Heb. xiii.) except he be brought to him by a mediator, for
whose merits sake he does forgive ye sinners trespasses. Christ is ye
mediator.i. Timo. ii. Heb. ix. To. viii. our satisfaccio^.i. Io. ii. our
righteousness.i. Cor i. our pressed for ever, Psalm. cix. Heb.
iiii.v.vii.viii.ix.x. Christ is not a fearful judge to faithful me^, but an
advocate, calling unto him those yt be lade^. Mat. xi. He is of so great mercy
yt he gave his life for his sheep. Io. x. Mat. xx. Then we ought not to be
afraid of Christ, as if he were a judge, but we ought to come to ye trone of
grace, because we be sinners, yt so we might be delivered of sin: for he is
the lamb. etc. Mat. ix. Lu. v. He came not in to this world to call ryghteous
men. etc. A syck man fears not a phisicyan, but the sycker that he is the
more desirous he is of ye phisicyan. Shall that phisicyan which dyed for us,
when we were yet sinners. To. v. be now unconstant and do no thing but
threaten and kyl, so yt we have need of some man to play ye mediator and
mean between him and us, to swage his wrath? O vnsemynge thought of a christian
man. What a carnal and a fleshly dream is this? How fond a kind of fellows
are these? how unlearned in the scripture? Who dyed for us? did Steven or
Peter? Did not Christ dye for us? and that of such a charity, as is not able
to be expressed. Io. xv. Greater love the^ this can no man have, even that a
man bestow his life for his friends. And yet for all that great charity we
dream yt Christ is a fearful tyrant and that he will put away a wretched
sinner nedynge a phisicyan, with a cruel cou^tenau^ce and committee him to ye
tourmentours, except he bring some saint with him. So worship we now the son
of God which humbled himself to the death of the cross, that we not beleuynge
his words, wha^ he says: Come to me and I shall refresh you, I am ye way, I
bestow my life for my sheep, but dare be so bold as to accuse him of lyeng,
and say these be void words which you do say. Thou have committed mercy to
ye saints, you can do nothing else but threate^ and undo sinners. I will turn
me to some of ye saints which shall be me patron and advocate by the. Are not
these saynges wicked and ungodly? yet they yt would be rekened most holy of
all, be of this mind and opinion, and they condemn us of heresye before ye
matter be known. The scripture byddeth us axe in the name of Christ, such
thing as we have need of, Ioha^. xvi. and not in the name of saints.
Reco^ciliacion and salvation is in none other name. Actu. iiii. The presthode
of Christ is for evermore. And ye Apostell says. To. viii. that Christ
remains and abides at the right hand of the father and makes intercession
for us. He is only the way to the father. Ioha^. xiiii. By him we have an
entrau^ce to come to ye father Ephe ii. By him we have boldness and intrau^ce
to god in all confidence through the faith in him. Ephe. iii. He is our hope.i.
Timoth. i. He came that he might save sinners. i. Timoth. i. He gave him self
an oblacion to god for us Ephesia^s. v. And we among so many praises of
burning charity and fre mercy have not learned yet to trust in him, which is
our reconcyler, and brynger in favor so ge^tell and lyberall, that he did not
dysdayne to be an oblacion for syn for us, yt we might be made the
righteousness of god through him: so mighty, that they yt believe in him, ca^
not be ashamed. Roma. ix. Farther more the mother that is a virgyne usurps or
takes unto her none of those things, yt they sing to her praise. I pray you
for shame darre the corrupters of scripture give that unto the mother, which
the holy ghost did prophecy of the son of God. Genesis iii? For he and not
she did break the serpe^tes head. In so much that I can not tell whether I should
maruayl more upon the gross and rustical ignorance of these great masters or
that I should cry out upon the wicked and ungodly opinion that they have of
Christ. They have so little regard what they say, yt all the thought that they
take is, yt always they should be saying somthynge. And eue^ as in times
paste the philosophers of Epicures sect and ye Stoykes affyrmed yt God did
none other ways, and had no other subsistence, then they thought he had: and
subscrybed the nature of God with vain dreams and deuyces of their opinions,
likewise our false diuynes do ymagen Christ to give from him his mercy to
saints, and to be a fearful judge, and that he damneth all sinners, except
that he be pleased ^ swaged by the intercession of some saint. And this
ymaginacion pleases them well, and they command the church so to believe.
Also these fellows make Mary the neck of the mystical body. Who can abstain
from laughyng (ye rather weeping.) They make artycles of the faith beside the
scripture of their own brain, and where they should only stycke to ye
scripture, they bring forth old wives fables for sound and true things,
mesurynge al godly things with the plummet or line of our reason, and by ye
similytudes of this world. And wha^ as they tryfle both unlearnedly and
ungodly, yet they be not afraid to drive to the fire as many as will not play
the fools with the^. And that in all points they may play the false doctors
they wrafte the scriptures to confirm their errors, of the which thing I have
spoken very largely in our co^mmune places. But left any man should think that
I say this in the reproach of saints, so I think: that saints should be
worshipped, but after the rule of scripture. Seeing that they be the glorious
members of ye mystical body, ye household meny of God, and joined unto us with
the most surest bond of charity. For charity perysheth not, but is made
perfect in heaven: wherefore they love us, and covet with a brotherly love our
amendment. Therefore let us reverently and holyly keep the memory and
remembrance of them, in the which we may se ye wysdom of God, his goodness,
power and the unspeakable riches of mercy, to the exercise of our faith hope
and charity. For as often as we remember their manly fyghtyng against the gates
of hell, and the manyfold grace of god, the which the father of all confort
poured forth upon these vessels of mercy we are lyfted up in hope and trust of
so great goodness. And we be provoked to the following of so great
perseueraunce by their virtues, set out as whement intysementes. What good and
devout man is there but he will desire with all his heart, that he might
ouerco^me ye enemy of owre salvation, with such strength of faith as ye
saints were endued and harnessed with all, yt at the last his enemies
overcome, he might be associate and acco^panyed for ever more, with ye elect
and chosen of god? And when he does se so excellent vessels of glory made of
the children of wrath, and of the lompe of perdicion, not by man's merits, but
by the power of the grace of god: that he will conceive a trusty hope of so
merciful a father, ye which made us worthy when he found us unworthy. Then if
we pray to God for faith, hope, and charity. And seek the kingdom of heaven
before al other things, we may follow the footesteppes of the right saints,
then have we worshipped the saints very well, and eue^ as we should do. For
the will of God and the saints is one, wherefore what other thing will they
axe, then the amendment of a sinner, and the contynuall recordyng and
remembrance of the laws of God. But that we should fly for succurre to them,
in our aduersite and need, that they may be means between us and God, they
another do require it: for they seek nothing but the glory of God, another can
we desire them to be mediators for us except we do injury to the most
perfyte and most sufficient mediator of all. Now seeing that the scripture is
our candell, in ye most dark night of this world, we be more sure that call
upon God by Christ (the which thing the scripture does command) then they
which imagen new kinds of worshippyng and inuocacions, of the which ye
scripture makes no mention at all. Call upon me (says the Lord) in ye time
of tribulacio^ and I shall deliver ye and thou shall honor me. Psalmo. xlvi.
And Joel. ii. Whosoever will call on the name of God for help shall be saved.
And in this matter we force not upon long time or long costume: for
christendom or a christen man's living, stands, not in the passing over of
long time, or in the oldnesse or antiquite of costume, but in the scriptures
of everlasting truth.

Now good reader judge what kynne of christen men they be, that fasten their
hope not in Christ, but in creatures, knowing nothing at all how much help
we have in Christ. They differ very little from idolatrers, and while they go
about most earnestly to honor saints, they dishonor them far out of
rule and fashion that can be: even when they give away from god to the creature
hope and confidence, the which is dew only to god. As touching the miracles
read the.xxiiii. chapter of Math. and the second of the.ii. Epistell to the
Tessalonyans, and your mind shall be at rest and certifyed.

Of the supper of the Lord, The new learning.
The sacrament of the aultare must be given only unto prestes under both ye
kinds, and to lay men only under the kind of bread, because that Christ by
a natural accompaninge or following is whole under both the kinds, according
unto that saying of the sequence: The flesh is meat, and blood is drink,
Christ abides for all that whole under both the kinds. A lay man must take
his ryghtes every year once at the least according to the chapter Omnis
vtriusque. etc. The mass of a pressed is a sacrifyce both for quyck and dead,
and the syn and the vnclenesse of the person of the minister stops not the
fruit, seeing yt the wrought work of the mass has strength, and ye oblacion
is made in the person of the whole church: wherefore it is a great merit, for
by it we deserve much to our selves, and also to other. Wherefore the
ordinances of masses be good, and yearly obytes be profitable. For in other
good works the wickedness of the person of the minister takes away the
cause of the merit: here it lets nothing, where as the faith of the
church is considered, and not the worthynesse of ye person. This is the su^me:
A wicked man and an ungodly, having only a dew intent, although he be an
abomynable in the sight of God, yet for all that in this cause, because he
bears ye perso^ne or is in the rowme of ye church, he abydyng a sinner and a
damnable person, he purchasseth and deserves unto other men, remissyon of syn
and everlasting life. This they say.

The old learning.
The Apostell in the first epistell to the Corinthians the.xi. chapter,
preparyng the supper of the Lord, did write that he took of the Lord that he
taught and gave to the Corinthians. And when he expounded the business and
matter concerning the supper he gives both the kinds indifferently to all the
brethren, eue^ as Christ did ordeyne. Mathe. xxvi. Mark. xiiii. Luke. xxii.
Here we have the word and the fact of the Lord, and of his minister Paul
and also of ye primitive church, in the which as the^ faith was more lively,
charity was more fervent hope was more sure, and holy christendom was more
purer, for it was nearer ye quycke spring. If it be so that it is not leful
for us to keep the word and the deed of Christ, and specially in a great
matter, as is ye sacrament for what intent shall the church of God have the
scripture expounded and declared? Did not even the new writers (as Gerso^)
say: That another the bishop of Rome nor general council, nor yet the church
ought to change the learning yt was given us by the evangelists, and by
Paul? If it be lawful to every man yt list, to change in ye sacraments of ye
church, those things which Christ taught to be kept, and the apostles both
taught and kept: I pray you what case shall the church be in then, which shall be
compelled to believe yt Christ ye wisdom of ye father, and the Apostels did
teach christendom such imperfect gear and so negligently yt their successors
had need to supplye, amend and make perfect those things yt Christ and his
Apostels left behind them raw and imperfect? Will the Saracens, ye Arabia^s,
and the Agarens (whom we call Turks) suffer yt any man at his pleasure after
this fashion should change their Alcoram, and would sometime take somthyng
away, sometime utterly abrogate and disanul it, yt their lawmaker had written,
somthynge unawarely, or without diligent head and delyberacyon? And we christen
me^ except we suffer ye church to be turned out of frame and perverted, to be
darkened and to be pulled in sunder and minished, Ye to be utterly cast away,
we be banyshed and destroyed as the enemies of the church. Put the case yt
these be tolerable: who can abide that ydel fellows shall make marchaundyse of
it that was left to be the memorial and remembrance of the death which
brought life, whereby they make a sacrifyce of the mass, and crucifye Christ
again, as much as lies in them? For if it be so that they work with their
daily sacrifyce (as they call it) remissyon of sin, I pray you the^ what
sins did the blood of the new and everlasting testament take away? This is
therefore our catholyke belefe of the supper of the Lord.

First: The supper of the Lord ought for to be done after the ordinance of
Christ i. Cor. xi. that our faith may be increaced, our charity may be
kyndled, our hope may be made sure, by ye continual remembrance of the death
of the Lord: and that we knowing the cause of the most precious death of ye
Lord, may be daily more and more steared up, to give thanks for the
unspeakable love, to destroy the body of sin and to walk in newness of
life.

Secondarly, Therefore the supper of the Lord is a memorial of the death of
Christ, which brought salvation and not a sacrifyce, but a remembrance of
the sacrifyce yt was once offered up upon the cross.

Thyrdly, There is a promise. Psalm. c.ix. that Christ shall be our bishop for
evermore ordened of the father: and this promise is performed, for Christ has
entered once in to the holy place, by an oblacyon making perfect for evermore.
Hebr. ix. and.x. so that we need not to have him offered up for us again, the
which dies no more.

Fourthly, We know of the book Leuiticus, that the oblacyo^ of Moses was made
for sins, when the oblacyon did satisfye and the blood did wash. The^ if
this one sacrifyce, (in the which Christ did offer up himself) did satisfye
for the sins of the whole world, according to the prophecye of Esaias.
the.liii. Chapter. He did bear our sins, and he was torn for our
wyckednesses, and.i. Ioh. the.ii. Chapter. He is our satisfaccyon and so
forth: it follows and is a good argument, yt all the oblacyons which are
beside this, be vain and void ye which they pretend?

Fyftly, To raise up a new oblacyon is to set little by the first, to prove God
a liar and to deny Christ which bought us, after the words of saint
Peter.ii. Pet. ii.

For when they say yt sins be releassed and forgeuen in the sacrifice of ye
mass, when ye son of God is offered up both for quycke and dead, it follows
after their opinion, that that only sacrifice of ye cross did not satisfye
for all sins. And I pray you is not yt even to forswear and deny ye Lord
which did redeem us, not with corruptible things, as with gold and silver but
with his own precious blood, wha^ we say yt it is done by ye virtue of yt mass,
ye which al scripture does say comes to us by the death of our Lord Jesus
Christ?

Syxtly. Yet for all that we do not affirm ye sins be remytted only by ye
partakynge of the supper of the Lord, but when we do remember with a true and a
kind faith the benefyte of our redemption, in the which ye son of god did
give his body a sacrifyce for sins, and shed his blood to wash away sin:
by this faith we be justified and made ryghteous, and we obtain remissyon of
our sins, gotten by the death of Christ. And this is a dilicyous feast of
souls, of the which they that are not partakers shall peryshe.

Christ in the.vi. Chap. of Ihon says. My flesh is meat in deed, and my
blood is drink in deed. The bread that I shall give, is my flesh the which I
will give for ye life of the world. Except we eat this flesh of the son
of man and drink his blood, we shall not have life in us, but we shall peryshe.
For it is the bread of life, geuynge life to the world. The which bread to
eat, is to believe in Christ as he says: I am the bread of life, he that
comes to me shall not be an hu^gred, and he that believes in me shall never
be thyrsty. Verily verily I say unto you, he that trusts in me has
everlasting life. For as the body is fed with natural bread, so the soul is
refreshed and lives with this heavenly bread. For wha^ the soul believes that
Christ is ye price of our redemption, our satisfaccyon, and our
righteousness, with this faith it eats ye flesh, and drynketh the blood,
and according to the words of Christ Ioh. vi. by so wholesome an eating shall
we live for ever. These be so great things which be rehearsed about ye table
of the Lord. God grant that this ceremony of Christ, may be restored to his
old strength and integrite again, that we which be the body of Christ our
head, admonished of the love of God in the supper toward us, may grow
together with vnlowsable glue of love, as it becomes members, purgynge the
flock with ye boult of excommunicacyon, and eating truly the flesh of the
Lord, that is to believe in Christ crucified, and that we may be grafted in
him by the likeness of his death, and that we may be partakers with him, of
the most glorious resurreccyon.

Amen.

Of the choice of meats. The new learning.
It is not lawful to eat every day all sorts of meat, for it is necessary
that we abstain from flesh every frydaye and saterdaye, and on the embrynge
days and in lent: for he that does otherwise without the Bishop of Romes
bulls or the pardons of the legates of the sye of Rome, does syn, and shall be
rekened an evil christen man, ye a wicked and an ungodly heretyke.

The old learning.
In the.xi. Chapter of Leuiticus, and ye xiiii. of Deuteronomion, the choice of
meats is prescribed unto ye Jews, which were under Moses, so that it was not
lawful to eat what so ever meat they list. But let us which are commanded
of Paul to the Gal. the.v. Chapter. to stand fast in the lyberte, in to the
which Christ has brought us, and that we should not put our necks under the
yocke of bondage again, give head and attendaunce what our master Christ and
Lord does say: Math. xv. Hear and understand: It that goes in to ye mouth
defyleth not the man, but it that goes out of the mouth that defyleth a man.
These words of Christ take away the choice of meats so that it is lawful in
the time of ye new testament to eat flesh or fyshe whether ye will without any
sin. In the first epistel to Timo. the.iiii. Chap, the holy ghost does call
the forbyddynge of meat and of marriage, the doctrine of the deuell: For God
has created meat to be received with geuynge of thanks of them which believe,
and have known the truth: for the creatures of God are good, and nothing to
be refused, if it be received with thanks geuyng: for it is sanctified by the
word of God and prayer. By this one text of the Apostle is plucked up by ye
roots, what so ever hither to me^ have taught or commanded of ye choice of
meats. For the holy ghost calls it dyuelysh doctrine the which no man ca^
keep and obey without the loss of his saluacyo^. Let it move no man that saint
Jerome does wrast these sayenges against the Tacyans and the Marcionites,
doutlesse our consciences be delivered from the choice of meats by these
words of the holy ghost. Therefore who so ever he be, Marcyon or any of this
time that byndeth with a commandment that thing which Christ would have to
be fre, he is reproved with this text as unkind to God, and a despyser of a
good creature. Collossenses the.ii. Chapter says Paul: Let no man judge you
in meat and drink. If you be dead with Christ from the elements of the
world, why be you holden with decrees, as if ye were living in the world?
This text also is plain against all the praysers and preachers of man's
tradicyons, the which do trouble men's conscyences with man's precepts, of the
choice of meats. Although this makes against the obseruacyons of the Jews,
yet it plucketh up by the roots all the tradicyons of men in this matter.

For if Moses law in that point be abrogate and put down, the which was once
ordened of God: how much more justly the constitucyo^s of me^ ought to be
disanulled and put away? by ye which these cruel tyrau^tes coueth a kingdom
in men's consciences. Gala. i. If any man preach any other gospel or glad
tidings unto you, than ye have received, hold him acursed. Therefore what
soever other thing is thrust into our hands against and beside the word of
God, to bind men's consciences, by the sentence of the holy ghost it is
acursed, wherefore we must refuse it both with hand and foot. Titum. i. Rebuke
them sharply that they may be sound in the faith, and not taking hyde to Jews
fables and commau^deme^tes of men, the which turn from the truth.

Unto the clean are all things clean, but to them that are defiled and
unbelieving is nothing clean, but even the very minds and consciences of them
are defiled. Who would not abhor those precepts which turn from the
truth? Even so the holy gooste decketh man's tradicions with his title with the
which tradicion the deceauers of men's minds go about to bind men's
consciences, where as God byddeth not. Here I do not regard thoshe great
praysers of abstinence, the which will name me the Epicure of Christian men as
saint Jerome called Iouiniane, as though I went about to louse the brydell of
gluttony. Tese fellows will dispute with a full belly of fasting, and yet they
eat fesans, partriches, and al ye pycked dayntyes that can be found in a
contry.

Now tell me I pray you what have I said beside the sentences of the holy
ghost? I do not teach the abuse, but the right use of the creatures of God,
with geuynge thanks. I take not thought only for the belly. but also for the
conscience. Fo with these man's tradycions, men's consciences be marked with an
whote iron, and God is worshypped with commandments of men: the which thing
in the.xxix. of Esaye, he hates and abhors. It is a very ieoperdous matter
to lay snares for men's consciences and to offend against the christen lyberte
which cost so much. If any man lay against us saint Jerome, or any other of
the fathers: I answer that the fathers were never in that blyndnesse, that
they would be believed more then the scripture. He despises not the fathers
which enforces him self and labors to glorify the father of all which is
in heaven.

He that in the matter of conscience does think, that God should rather be
obeyed, the^ man, does not contemn men, but magnifyeth God, the Lord of men
and angels. And the condition and state of christen me^ is not so, that they
ought to take example or rule of living of ye prophets of Jupiter, that
absteyne from flesh and soden meat, or of the temple of Eleusis or Ceres or
of Orpheus, yet that holy man is not ashamed of his monkery of so void words
in the second book against Iouinian. As touching offendynge, I have taught
always according to the Apostles doctrine Roma xiiii. that we should have a
respect and regard of weak persons, that he that eats, despise not him
that eats not: He that eats not, let him not judge him that eats. And
albeit he says there is nothing unclean of it self, but unto him which
rekeneth that it is unclean: yet for all that he will not that our brother
should be grieved with the abuse of our lyberte, and to be lost with meat, for
whom Christ suffered death. There be other far greater things than meat and
drink that a christen man should regard, namely, peace and edifyenge. For the
kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy
in the holy ghost.

Therefore let us follow those things that long unto peace and to the edifyeng
of our brother one toward another. Have thou faith? keep it to they self
before God. And i. Corint. viii. Knowledge makes man to swel charity edyfieth,
take heed lest your lyberte offend those that be weak. All these be ye
wholesome doctrines of ye holy ghost, and give none occasion of gluttony, as the
defenders of traditions do dream.

Of fasting, The new learning.
We must fast certain days under ye commandment, as the Apostels even
the.iiii. ymbrynge days, and the lent.

The old learning.
Our life is a warfare or souldyers life Ioh. vii. We must fight continually
with an enemy that we have at home with in us, namely the flesh: lest he
being made to fat and wanto^ with excess of meat and drink, prevail
against the sprite. Take heed to youreselfs (says Christ Luc. xxi.) lest your
hearts be ouercomme with surfettynge and dronke^nesse, that the day of the
Lord come not unto you as a snare. Romans xiii. does the holy go^st command to
cast away ye works of darkness, and to put on ye armor of light, and he
reherseth unreasonable eating, and bankettynge and dro^knesse among the^. He
does appoynte no certain day, but only he says make not prouysion for the
flesh to fulfill ye lusts of it: wyllyng yt we should abstain from
unreasonable eating and dro^ke^nesse, to put away the works of darkness: not
for one or two days, but at all times: Let no man think that this fast is a
christen man's fast which now raygneth, is commanded, and hygly praised, wha^
we fast certain hours, and other days make lusty chere, worshyppyng our
belly for our God. In the which thing we be worse then the heythen men, which
did order their lyuelode not to pleasur, but to the health and strength of
their bodies. For they considering what excellency and worthynesse there is in
the nature of man, did perceive how foul a thing it were to flow in excess,
to live deliciously and pleasau^tly, and how honest it were to live skarsly,
mesurably, sadly and soberly The Apostle monyssheth us.i. Tessalo. v. of our
state and condition. We (says he) are the children of light and the children
of the day, let us be sober: he byddeth us not do so for.ii or.iii. days, but
all the time that we bear about this body of sin. Who can here in so great
diuersityes of complexiones prescribe measures and days? Every man knows him
self how long he has need to fast, and what punishment he needs to tame his
flesh wythal. Therefore we do not prescribe daily fastes as ye Esseyes did, nor
yet with the makers of tradicions fastes appointed to a certain time: but we
exhort to contynuall soberness, and to se that the flesh be brought under,
lest when the Lord comes we be found careless without any thought. And
after this manner always we do exhort, move, and drive, in season and out of
season the church and congregation of Christ, to a temperate life, and to a
fast semynge a christen man, always saving the lyberte of a christen man.
But we do refuse and cast away, that fulbelly and dronken fast, as stynkynge
hipocrysy the which we cast in Gods teth, even as a merit, and yet it makes
nothing for the subdwenge of the flesh, seeing that it being proud by the
bodily exercise only regards not true holiness. I will send these
hypocrites unto Esaias the prophet to the.lviii. chap. were as they may learn
sufficyently what manner of fast God would have. Thynk you (says he) that I
love this manner of fasting whereby men at prescripte and certain days chasten
the^ selves, going with their heads wrythen down like an hoke, strewed with
asses, and clothed with sackcloth? Wylt thou say that this manner of fast, and
that upon this or yt appointed day is more accept to the Lord: but rather even
contrarywyse, this manner of fasting do I allow and love: Forgive thy dettres
wrapped in shrewed barganes, and lowse their violent oblygations, set the^ at
lyberte whom thou dyddest cast in prison for det, and break from them all manner
of bonds and yockes, diuyde out thy meat and drink to the hungry and thyrsty,
and the port wayfarynge stranger led thou home to thy house, when thou seyest
the necked, clothe him, and turn not thy face from thine own flesh. Here thou
seyest that the body in deed must be chastysed, but that outward punishment
does little avail, except thou orden it to the fasting of the mind, that
is, to abstain from evil desires and affections, and from covetousness and
vnmercyfulnesse. And that ye may fast after this wise, ye need no choice of
meats except the manner or cause of tamynge of the flesh require it. For thou
do absteyn and use very skarscely all manner of meat to the sustenaunce of
thy nature: therefore thou may use fyshe or flesh, whether thou wylt: how be
it fyfshesde a manner of flesh as witnesses the Apostle.i. Corinth. xv. and
Plini, in his hystorye of nature: lest any playenge the Jew, should wrench his
nose at this.

Of the difference of days, The new learning.
The days be not equal and alyke, some be holy and so be not al, wherefore the
sunday is holy day to all christian men, to be hallowed in ydelnesse, likewise
our ladies days, and the Apostelles days, and other chosen of the church to
keep holy day and to abstayn from labor so that if any man do any seruyle or
handy labor, and work in the before said days, he synneth. Wherefore if any
man constrained by necessite do any work, either at home, or abroad on ye holy
day, he shall be more cruelly handled of the bishops, officiales, and curates,
than if he had committed aduowtry, or had pylled his negboure with usury.

The old learning.
Certain days must be appointed where upon men must forbear from handylaboure
not that the day should be holyer and worthyer in the which we mete together,
but yt the inordinate coming together should not mynish ye faith in Christ.
And that we may hear the better and more commodiously, the word of
everlasting health, and may receive the supper of the Lord, and show to God
with commune peticyon the necessite and need of the church, and yt we may
pray together. There must needs be certain days appointed in the which
(while as the business of the soul is in hand) we must absteyne from
profane and household labors. Yet for all that we must take heed lest we lose
and destroy men's souls with snares of commandments: and take heed that we
play not the Jews and observe days, as they observed the sabbath day, and
the feasts of ye new Moon, against the doctrine of ye holy ghost, (Gala.
iiii.) as though they were necessary to be kept for righteousness. For that
were to cast away the lyberte of faith, and to turn again to the weak and
beggarly elements and ceremonies, and to deny Christ. The Hebrews were
commanded to keep ye sabbath day, but when the light came, ye shadow vanyshed
away, so that it is not lawful now to any man, to orden any law, or make
sin, where scripture makes none, and leaves the liberte. Collos. ii. Let no
man judge you in the part of the Sabbath day etc. Saint Austen speaks thus
of ye Sabbath day in his book of true innocence: Seyenge yt the keeping of ye
sabbath day is taken away, the which is shadowed by the vacacyon and rest of
one day, he keeps a perpetual sabbath day yt having hope of ye rest to
come, gives himself to holy works, and does not boast i^ his own works, as
though he had received them of none other, and knowlegeth yt he works in him,
the which even in workynge is quiet and at rest. Therefore saint Jerome says
very well, yt in ye new testament all days be equal, and like holy, and that
every day is the holy day of the resurreccyon, and that it is lawful to fast
always and to eat the body of the Lord, and always to pray. And the
Apostell Roma. xiiii. will not that he should be rashly judged, yt which
judges the same of every day. Those things that were commanded or forbidden
in the law, as concerning days, meats, clothynges, places and persons, or
outward things, they were ordened and laid on men's necks, for ye time of
correccyon: But now when ye grace of the gospel does shine, they vanysh away,
and lyberte reigns, where by we worship God no more with certain days
prefixed, and with outward works, as the Jews did, but in sprete and truth.
For these ceremonies of the law did belong to the Jews, and not to the
gentyles Actu. xv. Ye may se plainly. Mat. xii. Mar ii. Luce. xiiii. Ioh. v.
and.ix. how that Christ the auctour of our lyberte, did entreat the Sabbath
day. Therefore it were the bishops dewty to put down some of those holy
days, ye which christen people have no need of, the which give occasyon to
the people, both to lose their monye and their souls.

Of prayer. The new learning.
We must pray at certain hours, as at matynes, syxt hour, the third, the
first, at euensonge and at such other. And it is made more conveniently in
churches hallowed unto God according to this saying: Bless ye Lord in the
churches. etc. My house shall be called ye house of prayer. There be many things
i^ ye temples, which stire up devotion as ye majesty of ye place, ye christened
bells, organes, sacrynge belles, singing, wax, candels, ye relics of
saints, pictures, images, hallowed vestimentes, the sacrament of the altar,
hallowed altares, in ye worship of saints, banners, supplications, the
anoyntynge of the church, and ye hallowynge of ye same, the holy water, which
even the deuels be afraid of, the presence of angels, for it is written
Genesis. xxviii. This place is terrible, and there is a sure promys of hearing
as it is in the third book of the kings the viii. Chapter. The Lord answered
to the prayer of Solomon: I have herd thy prayer, which thou prayed before me,
I have hallowed this place which thou haste builded, that I may set my name
there for evermore and mine eyes and my heart shall be there for evermore. etc.
Also there be certain hallowed beedes, and they be honge up on the church
doors, a certain nombre of pater nosters and aues must be kept, also there be
some prayers which have pardon longing thereto. Also we must say a pater
noster every day to our own Apostles, and to the saints which we have
chosen unto our selves, for devotion.

The old learning.
The blessed Trinite is to be worshipped in every place. Psalm.c.iii. O thou my
soul give thanks and bless the Lord in every place of his lordshippe.
Christ also says Ioh. iiii. The hour comes and now is, when the true
worshippers shall worship the father in sprete and in truth: for verily such
the father requires to worship him. God is a sprete, and they that worship
him, must worship him in sprete and verite. Where as Christ does answer the
Samaritane, axynge him of the place of prayer, and says: Woman believe me, the
hour comes (ye, and he said that the hour was even then) when ye shall
another in this mountain, nor yet in Jerusalem worship the father.i. Timo. ii.
says Paul: I will that me^ pray in every place lyftynge pure and clean
hands, without wrath, arguing or altercacyon. Likewise in the.vii. chapter of
the Acts where saint Steven checkynge ye blyndnesse of the Jews, auau^cynge
the temple of Solomon, says: But he yt is highest of al dwells not in temples
made with hands.

As says also the prophet Esaias.lxvi. Heaven is my seat and earth is my
foot stool, what house will ye build for me says the Lord? or what is my
resting place? has not my hand made all these things? and all these things
be made says the Lord. On whom than shall I look? even him that is of an
humble and a lowly sprete, stands in awe of my words. We have the words of
the father, and of the son, and of the place of prayer, the which the holy
ghost spoke, shall we not believe the son whom the father commanded to be
herd? Mat. xvii. And he did say with an earnest affirmacyon: Woman believe me.
etc. I know that there was in the old law the arc of the conuenau^t, and the
sumptuous temple of the Lord, where as the Jews had the promise of God.ii.
Para. vii. Mine ears shall be lyfted up unto ye ears of him which shall pray in
this place for I have chosen this place. But what shall we do now? seeing yt
Moses is gone, which was the servant of the whole house of the Lord, and the
son comes Jesus Christ which is the Apostle and the bishop of our faith
and confession. Heb. iii. and yt he is com to prepare ye quyck temples of God,
as a bishop of good things for to come, entering by a greater and more perfect
tabernacle, not made with hands (yt is to say) not as ma^s building, another by
ye blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood he entered once for all i^ to
ye holy place, and found everlasting redemption. Heb ix. He is gone yt gave
the law, and an other is come in his rowme, by whom grace is given Ioh. i.
Aaron is gone, for the true pressed for ever after ye order of Melchisedech is
come. To conclude, ye figure is vanyshed, because the light has shyned. Then
what need we so costly and glorious pomp of ceremonies in the new testament?
we disprayse not those buyldinges, to the which ye people comes to hear ye
word of god more co^modiously: but we disprayse the abuse and the error,
namely, that they keep no measure, and can never make an end of building and
deckynge of such royal churches. Exo. xxxvi. at ye commandment of Moses, ye
crier forbyddeth, yt another man nor woman should offer up any more to ye
buyldyng of ye tabernacle: for ye people offered up a great deal more, the^
need was. Now our cryers without end and measure require gifts of ye people to
ye buyldinges of temples. Where does Christ require in ye new testament such
orname^tes of churches? and where does he appoint such buyldyng to be made?
Commanded not he us to worship ye father i^ spret and in verite? The which two
words co^de^ne ye whole tragedy of ceremonies, which we think profitable and
good for prayer. For what helps to the sprete and truth of worshippyng of
God, such infinite diversity of vestimentes, belles, organes, and so^ges of
diverse kinds? If those things kyndle devotion, and steare up a man's mind to
God, it were best that not only churches but also houses, towns, hye ways and
streets should be full of yanglyng of belles, and be replenyshed with images. The
Lord requires the sprete and truth, and we contrary wise show and set
forth a carnal pomp, and solemnite of ceremonies, the which is not only as
great as all the Jews fashions and rytes, but passes them far, both in
nombre and greatness, having in stead of ye sprete the flesh: for the truth,
most colored and painted ypocrysye: for we spend the whole day with
singing, sacrifysyng and mumblynge. We speak with tunges, but no man
preaches, which should speak unto men, to edifye, exorte, and to comfort.i.
Cor. xiiii. The Apostle will lever speak.v. words with his understanding, yt he
may iustruc and teach other also, rather the^ ten thousand with tu^ges. We
tho^dre out psalms without understanding for auau^tage and lucre, making a sound
without devotion, and alas ye word of God is compelled to give place to this
blind service, and ye ordinance of the apostle also. We cry now a days as the
Jews cried in times paste: Jeremy. vii. The temple of the Lord, the temple
of the Lord, the temple of the Lord, Gods service, Gods service, Gods
service, trustyng in words of lyenge: where as all this business of
ceremonies, is plain hired gear for money, that it may be fulfilled, that the
Lord said. Malachie. i. Who is there among you that will shut the doors, and
will kyndle mine aultare freely for naught? wherefore it follows, I have no
pleasure in you says the Lord of hoostes, I will take no reward of your
hands. If yt the tragedy and spectakle of ceremonies lyketh you so well, go
to, let us bring home again the whole Iewysnesh, and the whole manner of
worshyppynge of the Jews, let us deck up Aaron, let us orden leuytes, let us
kill and offer up sheep, oxen, and calves: and even let us be circumcysed with
the mad Jews, and let us look for an other Messyas, that may bring us in to
the land of Canaan: not by the power of the Lord, but of the world. Surely if
that most costly and sumptuous worshyppyng of God is christ's religion, in the
which holiness consists, I grant that I can not tell what is our religion.
But if Christ be our Lord and master, and his doctrine be the doctrine of the
father, ye truth and the way, then is ye whole heap of ceremonies nothing
less, than the worshyppyng of God. Where do we read in ye gospel of hired
prayers which ye will let a man have for money, and if he give no penny, he
shall have no pater noster? where does the Lord allow byenge and sellyng,
choppynge and chau^gynge in holy things? As for those places which they bring
for the appoyntynge and assignynge of a certain place of prayer, every man may
se that they handle them without any manner of judgment, and with plain
ygnoraunce of scriptur. It is eue^ of the same sort that they feign, that the
devil is afraid of holy water, as though he were not more afraid at the
sight of a christian man, whom the oyntement of the holy ghost, has made holy,
and is the temple of the holy ghost?

And as for that, they they bring for the halowynge of beedes, and the nombre
of pater nosters, and the Psalter of our lady and such other, it is more
vain, then any tryfles be in the world, and more foolysher then the tales
which old wives tell in winter nyghtes by the fire side. Therefore we must
pray to the father of heaven through our Lord Jesus Christ in spirit and
truth in every place, that our prayers be not bound to places. For either we go
in to our preuy chamber and shut the door after us, and pray unto the father,
which is in secret: or we pray in every place after the learning of saint
Paul, in the first epistel the.ii. chapter to Timoth. For the whole world is
the temple and church of God. The heaven and ye heaven of al heavens are not
able to receive ye Lord, how much less then this church? If I ascend up to
heaven, (says the royal prophet) thou art there: if I descend and go down
to hell, thou art present. And God his own self says by Jeremy the prophet
in ye xxiii. chapt. I fyl both heaven and earth. And the Apostell in his
preaching to the men of Athens, says: God is not far from us, for we live in
him, are moved, and be in him. Actu. xvii.

Of vows, The new learning,
Vow to the Lord and perform it that ye ye vow Psalm. lxxv. Therefore we may
vow and we ought to give it that we vow: for there a is law made of geuynge
to them which vowed. In the.iiii. book of the sentence it is written. A vow
is made when a man of his own will promyseth that he will do or keep some good
thing, to ye which otherwise he is not bound, although he be bound after ye
vow be made. There be.iii. principalle and substancial vows, that is: of
pouerte chastity and obedience. He that is once made a religious man or a
priest, is bound to live so for ever, by his vow.

The old learning.
A vow is a law (say ye scoole me^) made to perform such things as me^ have
vowed It is plain what the holy scripture does affirm and judge of the law,
and of ye works of it. Now is man not justified, or made righteous by ye law
and works of Moses law: how much less by the work of vows, when as
scripture utterly refuses and defyeth all man's traditions, and God will not be
worshypped with laws of man's tradicions, Esaias. xxix. Math. xv. Marc. vii. For
only faith in Christ does iustifye and not works what so ever they be, and
sincere faith will not suffer men to put confidence in their works. In deed
faith bri^geth forth works because she works by charity, but she suffers
no man to trust unto them with this ungodly opinion, that he should be justified
by them, because that were to deny the Lord yt bought us with his precious
blood. Vows are wont to be taken with none other opinion, the^ that by them
sins should be done away, and to deserve grace and remission of sins:
therefore they spring of the ignorance of Christ's religion, and they be
plainly wicked and therefore they be naught and of no price. For even the scoole
me^ say, that those things be no vows, which do turn to ye damage or
hynderau^ce of a ma^s salvation: seeing that a vow has ye same things
following, which an oath has, yt is: justice, judgment and truth. To will
and desire to be justified by works, is to cast away the grace of Christ: and
that is to lose the true health and salvation. Therefore these vows that be so
greatly boasted of, be no vows, and of no value, for this short argument of
Paul fearful to all vowers shall stand: if righteousness be of the law,
then Christ dyed in vain. Galat. v. Ye are gone quyte from Christ as many as
are justified by the law, and are fallen from grace Gala. ii. We know that a
man is not justified by the works of the law, but by the faith of Jesus
Christ. If these things be said unto the Jews, the which presumed to be
justified by ye works of moses law, who can abide our ungodliness, which look
for those things by the works of our laws, ye which only Christ gives in
faith? Therefore it repents us of our rechlesse vow, and we desire
forgiveness of God, for our syn done by our folysh vow, and we turn again
to ye lyberte, which Christ's blood gat unto us with a sure belefe, and
defyenge the masters and teachers of works, the open enemies of Christ, and
we rather hear ye saying of ye holy ghost: Gala. v. Stand in ye lyberte where
with Christ has made us fre, and wrap not your selves again in ye yock of
bondage. As touching ye places, which they bring out of ye old testament for ye
mayntaynyng and stablyssynge of vows, they make nothing for the purpose: for
ye manner of vowyng pertayned unto ye Jews, and now be put away as be
sacrifices. Actu. xv. Faith in Christ makes all outward things fre: another
does the bondage of vows, and our lyberte agree. What need many words? Our
vows be without faith, and therefore they be syn. Now who would be afraid to
leave and forsake syn?

Of counsels, the new learning.
The gospel is diuyded into counsels and commandments, we be bound to keep
ye commandments and not to despise ye counsels. The counselles be in and.v.
of Math. to love our enemies, not to resist evil, not to strive in the court
or law, to lend every one yt needs, and such other like. The which if they
were commandments, they were to heavy burdens for ye new law. Thus say ye
Parisia^s.

The old learning.
We have a counsel in ye gospel of living syngle Math. xix. and.i. Corint. vii.
But they yt be in ye fyfte of Math. they be no counselles but precepts: ye
which thing is manifest by ye circu^stau^ce of ye text. For Christ does
threate^, ye which he would not have done, if he had only cou^selled. He yt
does threaten a pain, does propound and set forth, a law, and cou^selleth not.
Moreover it is commanded: Love thy neighbor as thy self. That love
conteyneth in it those things, which we have spoken of. And also lust is
forbydde^, and therefore be ye aforesaid forbydde^. Wha^ mat. he had rehearsed
those things which ye scoolme^ reke^ among counsels, says by and by after:
That ye may be the children of your father which is in heaven. Math. v.
Likewise also saint Luke (after that he had rekened up these laws) says: And
ye shall be ye sons of the most highest. Therefore they that do them not, shall
not be the children. Surely a counsel her would not have spoken after this
manner ye thus did Chrisostom. Austen, Hilary understand ye words of Christ.
Then if the Lord commanded all those things, why do we that be servants,
louse and and break the laws of the Lord for our pleasure?

Of matrymony. The new learning.
The fourth degree of kynred stops matrimony. There be.xii. impedimentes of
matrymony, which hinder marriage to be made, and lose it if it be contract,
namely, error, condition, vow, kynred, fault or crime, the diversity of
worshippyng, power bond, honesty, if thou be of affynite, if thou be impotent
in rendrynge duty. These hinder marriage to be made, and if it be made break
it again. Certain things there be which hyndre marriage to be made, but they
lose it not if it be contract: that is the time of not spousynge, and the
forbyddyng of the church. Also a spiritual kynred is gotten by the sacrament
of baptyme and confirmation or byshoppynge the which lets matrymony to be,
and puts a sunder it, yt is made. Ite^ the order of subdeaco^, deacon, and
presthod stop matrymony to be taken, and put it away if it is taken, because
that the vow of chastity is joined to those orders. Also if there be a
deuorcement, both the man and ye woman must abide unmarried.

The old learning.
There be degrees of kynne or consanguinite and affinite red to be forbidden in
the.xviii. of Leuiticus, namely: father, mother, stepmother, a natural sister,
lawful sister both of father and mother, cosyn, au^te of ye fathers side and of
the mothers side, the wife of mine uncle, the daughter in law, the wife of my
brother, stepdoughter, ye son of ye stepson or stepdoughter, ye sister of my
wife my wife being alive. Here is forbydde^ ye first degree of affinite, and ye
second of kyne or consanguinite: though the daughter or nefe of my brother or
sister is not rekened to be forbidden. Seeing yt these be provided and taken
head of, by ye law of God, they must needs be honest, so that it were folysh
hardynesse for a man put his decrees, to ye word of God. Those things that be
spoken of ye times that be void of spousels, and of ye forbyddynge of the
church, they be man's inuencyons. And the spiritual kynred has no testimony
in the scripture. Therefore if it shine and glyster with never so fare and
goodly a likeness, we may as easily despise it, as receive it. Why does not
holy fraternite let marriage, by the which we are all knyt together in Christ?
They be my brethren and my systers as many as confess Christ. That the order
is a let unto matrimony, it is nothing else but falls speaking through
hypocrysye: for if matrimony be a sacrament, (as they say) I can not se, why
holy order can not suffer ye holiness of matrimony. Marriage is honorable, as
ye holy ghost witnesses Heb. xiii. And they think yt the holiness of
matrimony is contrary to the holiness of order, the which thing the Apostle
never knew.i. Timo. iii. Tit. i. Where he will that a bishop should be ye
husband of one wife: and.ii. Timo. iiii. He calls it the learning of deuels
if any man forbyddeth matrimony.i. Corin. vii. He says not only it is better
to mary the^ to burn: but he commands openly in this manner: For the
auoydyng of fornicacyon, let every man have his wife. Who is that every man? is
it not manifest that marriage is fre to all men which have not the gift of
chastity? Saint Jerome shows a cause, why in the.ix. of the Acts. Christ
called S. Paul a chosen vessel: namely, because he was the storehouse of the
law and of the holy scripture. And against Iouinian he says: I will bring
forth Paul the Apostle, whom as often as I read, I think that I hear not
words, but tho^deryng. But they which defend the fylthy syngle living,
despise this thonderynge of this chosen vessel, as the barkyng of a dog, and
they think yt he yt is within orders, synneth deadly if he mary a wife. God
the father did orden marriage, the son did commend and honor it with his
presence and with his first miracle, the holy ghost pronounced it honorable,
Paul the servant of Jesus Christ forbyddeth not bisshoppes and deacons to be
married: And they which boast them of the Gospel, nombre the marriage of prestes
among deadly sins, as a profane and unholy thing, the which the holiness
of order can not suffer. Why believe they not at the least the sentence of holy
fathers? for Theophilactus upon the.viii. Chapter of Matthew says: Learn here
that marriage hyndereth not a man from virtue, for the prince of the Apostles
had a mother in law. Farthermore we do allow no deuorcement, but in case of
fornicacion, as Christ says Math. xix. where as it is lawful for the unguilty
after the deuorceme^t to mary again: the which thing might be easily done if
the man aduouterer or ye woman should be killed, after the law of God Deute.
xxxii. Now they tarry both unmarried the which is a deuorcement rather in name
and in word then in deed. The text of Math. xix. is manifest: (Whosoever
forsakes his wife, but only for fornication and maryeth an other, he
commits aduoutry.

For this clause that is put between: (except it be for fornicacyon) declares
and rules the whole sentence, that if any fornicacyon do chance in the mean
season, he that forsakes the woman aduouterer and maryeth an other, he being
unguilty, that he committed none aduoutry. And why do not we in such cases, go
rather to the scripture, that is inspyred of God, then to those writers of
su^mes? seeing that the Apostle.ii. to Tim. ye iii. Chapter pronou^ceth and
says that the scripture is profitable for correccyon and teaching.

Of Bysshoppes. The new learyng.
A Bishop is of hyer authorite then a simple pressed, and has the reseruacyon
and keeping behind to him of certain causes: for the hyer that ye degree is,
the greater and more is the power. And this new learning wynketh at and
ouerseeth the po^pe and pride more then worldly, of them which call themselves
the successors of the Apostles and preach not the word of God, the which is
the most worthy hye office in ye church.

The old learning.
When there rose a contention among ye disciples, which of them should be
thought greatest among them, Christ said: The lords of the gentyles have
domination over them, but it shall not be so among you. Where as Christ would
have taken clean out of the disciples minds the desire of honor. For if
our Lord and master did not come to be mynistred to, but to mynister and
serve other (as it is Math. xx.) how much less shall it become servants, to
swell and be proud with worldly desire of honor? The which thing ye Apostle
teaches plainly. i. Cor. iiii. So (says he) let a man reken us, as mynisters
and servants and disposers of the secrets of God: he says mynisters and
servants, and not lords and princes of the world. So in many places of his
epystles, he calls himself This place (says he) makes against the^, which
do give themselves to sloggysnesse, ydelnesse, and to sleep, and think that it
is an offense, if they read scripture: and despise them as bablers and
unprofitable, which are occupied in the law of the Lord both day and night,
not taking head, that ye Apostle commanded even learning also after the
rehearsynge of ye co^uersacyon of a bishop.

Of Ceremonies.
Men reken that ceremonies have the name of a town in Tuscia called Cerete,
and by ceremonies we mean the worshippynge of God, but outwardly.

The new learning.
The ceremonies which our fathers ordened, must be kept, and not changed, the
which are worshippynge of god. For the religious men, and rude prestes do
defend the ceremonies (what so ever they be) so styfly, as though holiness
consysted and stood in the^ only. For we have seen in these times, the holy
orders contend and strive with vnstau^cheable hatred among them selves for
ceremonies.

The old learning.
We may not swerve another to the right hand, nor to ye left hand, but we must
walk in the kings hye way. Our life is in that case, thal we can not be
without ceremonies. For we be not angelical spirits, but me^: and as long as
we live in this vysyble world, in the preson of this body, we must needs have
difference of works, of places, of offices, of times, of persons, and of
other things. For we be (as the Apostell says. Romano. xii.) many members,
and one body, and not having all one act or office. But after that the light
of the gospel came, and followed the shadow of the law we should use very few
ceremonies, as we have baptyme and the supper of the Lord, after the
ordinance of Christ in the new testament. For we use (as we be always ready
to ye worste) to set much by ceremonies, and to conceive a vain opinion and
confidence to be justified by them, if they be perfectly done: and if we leave
them undone, we conceive a folysh fear, (yt is) of every hand a noughty
conscience. Therefore lest we should swerve away from the pryke of true
holiness, let us take faith and charity unto us, as the rulers and gyders of
ceremonies, in the which if they were done, they might be done godly. Before
all things we must take great hyde and diligent provision, lest ceremonies
hurt and destroy the head and the root of our religion, which is faith in
Christ. Faith and belefe in Christ is only our righteousness, which works
afterward by charity, the which if it continue in safegarde in the liberte of
the sprite, ye may live and be occupied in the ceremonies of the church
without any blame. For he that is justified, by faith, keeps ceremonies, lest
he should offend those that be yet weak in ye faith, not as necessary to
righteousness, but as a teaching and a bryngyng up for weaklynges: beleuyng
steadfastly, yt all those outward things be fre unto us through faith, and that
we owe nothing to any body but only love. Roma. xiii. By this rule the Apostle
being conversant among his brethren, without the yeoperde and the loss of
conscience and faith, was so fre by the sprite of faith, that for all that he
made him self an vnderlynge and a servant of all me^, and was of all fashion,
to save some at the leest. He had knowledge, but he know yt knowledge did swell,
and charity did edyfye. i. Corinth. viii. and.ix. He granted that all things
be lawful unto him, but that all things be nor profitable, that al things be
lawful, but all things do not edifye. And he did follow those things which
belo^ged unto peace, and to edifyenge. We will follow this Apostle not geuynge
our lyberte to the occasion of the flesh, but in serving one an other by
charity. Galat. v.

Here must the overseers and ministers of the church be monyshed, that they
unlade the congregation, holden down with so many ceremonies and laws, that
almoost the condition and state of the Jews were more tolerable, then the
state of Christen men. Now, it is not only folyshenesse, but also wickedness,
yt Christian me^ should strive among them selfs for ceremonies (I can not tell
what) whose bage is, charity, and not ceremonies. Ihon. xiii.

Of man's tradicions. The new learning.
There is a canon or a rule, the which makes equal the constitucions of popes
and bysshoppes with the gospel, and it affirms that the gospel can not be
well vpholde^ except the statutes and ordinances of the fathers be kept, as
Leo the.iiii. says in the.xx. distinction in the chapter. De libellis. All
things that be necessary to be known to our salvation, be not expressed in
the canonical scripture, but the holy ghost afterward yt the scripture was
written, did show many wholesome things unto our forefathers. Johan. xvi. I
have many things to say unto you, which ye can not bear at this time. And
those things that were in practyse than, are not now all written, but even
given from one to an other as by hand, and are come even to our time, as
Damascen in a sermon of the dead writes, that the memory of faithful deadmen
came unto us from the Apostels times.

Moreover Paul taught the people, that he purchassed unto Christ, when he was
with them many things the which were never written. Also he that hears not
ye church let him be counted as an heythen and a publicane therefore she may make
laws and constitucions necessary for man's salvation. Also that is necessary to
salvation, whose transgressyon is deadly sin, but the ordinances of the
church be such, the first is proved by Abbas in the proemy or preface of the
decretales. And in the first chapter of constitucions, he allegeth Calderine,
Ioha^ Andrea and Thomas. And for this purpose makes the text in the chapter.
Quo iure ye viii. distinction. where as it is written yt the breaker of the
tradicions of the church synneth deadly, because yt also the positive law
byndeth in matters of conscience, ergo they bynd. Hereupon Johan Mayre with
great pride and disdain says in the.iiii. distinction the.iii. q. To think
that he that breaks ye commandments of the church synneth not deadly, is
an error.

The old learning.
Matthew the.xvii. Chapter the heavenly father makes his only begotten son
doctor and teacher of ye church, saying: Hear him. And he put his words in
his mouth. Deuteronomy.xviii. he says: And I will be a revenger and a
punyssher of the^ which refuse the learning of this doctoure. He which says
Johan. vii. My doctrine is not mine, but his, which sent me, that doctor is the
everlasting wisdom of the father, the way, the light, the truth, whom we
believe stedstly that he both would and did give unto his church, not botched,
clowted, or imperfect and unstable learning, but sou^de, perfect, and
unchangeable, to the which needs nothing to be put to, as an addition: for
those things that are necessary for to be known for man's salvation, be
contained plenteously in the canonical scripture. Somtymes the Apostles spoke
and treated upon the kingdom of God, more plenteously in speaking, than it is
written in books, yet for all that, as for the su^me of the sentence and
doctrine, they preached none other thing, than the gospel, which we have
written: so that those things which perteyne unto a christen man's life, must
be learned of no where else, but of the bible, that is of the new testement and
of ye old. For all scripture, given by the inspiration of God (says ye
Apostle.ii. tim.iii.) is profitable to teaching, to improve, to inform, and
to instruc in righteousness, yt the man of God may be perfect and prepared to
all good works. Then why do we thrust in ye churches hands ye laws of men,
as necessary to Christ's regilion? I do not speak here of ye ciuyll law, I
know that ye laws of secular power are to be kept for ye conscience sake: for
they have their strength of Gods law. Romans xiii. I speak of ye decrees of
me^, with the which they would bind men's consciences. Farthermore the Apostle
in the.ii. Tim iii. chap. prayseth ye holy scripture with a great verdit and
praise saying:, The holy scripture may make ye wise unto health through faith
which is in Christ Jesus. Who dar set this title before his constitucions, yt
they may make you learned to salvation? this honor is only dew unto the holy
scriptur of God. Farther more, if there were any things showed our fathers a.
M. year ago by the holy ghost, the which were not known (in time of the
flourynge of the church, that newly did spring up) to the Apostles and to the
church, they be either necessary to salvation, or not necessary. If they be not
necessary, but ordened for ye time, why is a man's conscience bound with them?
If they be necessary, either there is an other way to salvation now, than was
in the primitive church, or else they were all damned that departed before that
revelation: for they knew not the thing that was necessary to their
salvation. The which things, seeing that they be ye most vain that can be
and foolysh, and that the same manner of iustifyenge and salvation is now, that
was than, and was than, that is now: why make we those things necessary, that
be not necessary? And why set we so little by the lyberte of the gospel that
we had as leave our dreams, as the most holy gospel? we do not reject and
refuse the constitucio^s and ordinances of bysshoppes, which vex not the
conscience, but pertayne and be profitable for the common peace and
tranquillite of men's conversation: only we defy and reiecte those laws, in
the which either they commau^de or forbid under pain of deadly sin, without
the law of God. Only god ought to raygne in the conscience, in whose hand
peculyarly be menes souls. The Apostle calls him the adversary of God, which
goes about to sit in the temple of God, and boaste him self as a God.ii.
Tessalo. ii. And.ii. Cori. iii. We be the ministers of the new testament,
ministers of the sprit and not of the letter. What avail man's constitutions to
iustificacion if ye say that they prepare to obey God the easyer? I answer:
There is nothing that can prepare ye mind to keep ye law of God or fashion it
but only the grace of God. The Apostle Galat. i. pronou^ceth acursed, not
only man, but also an angel of heaven, yt durst preach an other gospel then
Paul preached. If it be the power of God to salvation, of all that believe, why
do we myngle and join our chafe with so great a power? And in ye first to the
Corinthians the third chapter: Other fundacyon can no man lay, then that which
is laid, which is Jesus Christ. If no man ought to put any thing to Moses law
Deute. xii. why should we add and put unto the gospel any thing? seeing even
Cameracensis a scooleman, calls it the most perfect law and ryghtest, and
the strayghtest in precepts. Why do we not leave our laws, and follow the
business that Christ appointed, Math. the last: Teach all people to keep all
things what so ever I have commanded you? We be mynisters and servants of
Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God. Now is it required of the
stewardes or disposers that they be found faithful. These priuities and
mysteries be the artycles of our faith of the Gospel, the wisdom of the
cross, the knowledge of grace gotten by Christ: Let us preach these things
for the health of the people of God, and let us not abuse our power the which
the Lord gave us to edifye with, and not to destroy.ii. Corinth. the.xiii.
cha, The Canon or rule that makes the ordynau^ces of fathers equale with the
Gospel, is openly ungodly and wicked, the which even our adversaries can not
receive, if they knew the canon of the scripture. To be short, faith where
with a ryghteous man lives is conceived, taken, and drawn out of the
canonical scripture, and not of the decrees of ye fathers, as saint Austyne
witnesses, in the.ix. book of the city of God the.xviii. Chapter. Then
wherefore should I receive it as an article of my faith, that which the
scripture inspired of God has not? I am commanded to prove and try spretes
whether they be of God or no: the which lyberte of judging of all doctrines by
the scriptures, no man will take from us. The words of saint Ihon in the.xvi.
Chapter stablysh nothing man's tradityons: for God did fulfill his promise at
Wytsonday when he sent the holy ghost, and led his discyples in to all truth:
the which before that time they could not bear. Who will deny that the
memory and remembrance of those that be departed did come from ye Apostles
unto us, seeing that saint Paul the first to the Tessalonians the fourth
chapter commanded the Tessalonians, that one should comfort another, with the
word of the resurreccyon of the dead in Christ? But now that we may answer
to their rethoricall argument, where in they reason, that by the breaking of
the ordinance of the church, a man synneth deadly, we answer: that the
knowledge of sin is by the the law. Roma. the.iii. Chapter. The Apostle
speaks of Gods law, and not of man's. Always understand I of man's law
that is clear or whole ma^s law, the which assayeth to bind ma^s co^scyence^
and I moved by ye scripture, think yt a ma^s conscience another ought, nor can
be bound with man's constitucyon: for we are endued with lyberte which we will
use, the which lyberte is the lyberte of the conscience.i. Corin. the.iii.
Chapter. All things be yours, whether it be Paul, either Apollo, either Cephas
whereby we understand that another Paul, nor Cephas has authorite to bind men's
conscience, where God does not bind. The first to the Corinthians the twelft
Chapter Be ye not made servants of men. Collossenses the second Chapter. You
being dead with Christ, why be ye holden still with decrees? And for the most
part such constitucyons be contrary to the word and deed of ye Apostles.
But as Gerson bears witness in the second lection of the spiritual life
the.vii. corollary: It is not in the popes power, another in the councels power,
nor in the churches power to change the learning given and taught of ye
evangelists and of Paul: Master Gasper Satzger did se this in the defension
of the constitucyons of the church, the which openly and plainly grants:
that the learning that is without the scripture, though it be good, yet
byndeth not by gods law. And it is no maruayl, for only Christ ought to
raygne in man's conscience by his word, which only may save and condemn.

Math. the.x. Chapter. Fear not the^ which can kill the body and not the
soul, but fear him which can cast both body and soul in everlasting fire.
Truly if they can make a constitucyon and command it under pain of deadly
sin, they may kill the soul, but the truth of the gospel is otherwise.
The sentence of Ezechiell is pronounced against them in the.xiii. Chapter: Woe
be to them that make bolsters under ye ye head of every age, to catch souls
yt they might kyl souls which dye not. How does ye scooleme^s learning of ye
power of byndyng of men's constitucyons agree with it self? seeing Thomas
grants plainly, that the commandments of the positive law bind more with
the intent of the lawmaker, then with the words of it: so that he is more to
be rekened a breaker of the commandment that does against the intent of the
lawmaker, the^ he yt swarueth from the letter of the ordinance of ye law. But
ye intent of ye maker of the positive law is not, that his precepte should be
always kept, because that many impedimentes may chance in the which it is
not expedient to keep ye law, ye sometime the keeping of the precepte were
damnable. Wherefore in every precept of the positive law, the excepcyon of a
reasonable cause is admitted. Now put ye case yt there is a law yt a man shall
not eat flesh on the friday, and that a priest shall not have a wife. Here the
intent of ye lawmaker is to bring to goodness. But it chances if we keep
those laws, that either the lyberte of a christen man be in ieopardy, or we
offend against Gods law. In this case the positive law byndeth not, for
the intent of the lawmaker is not to kill any man, or to give an occasyon to
break Gods law. But seeing that it can not be satisfied and fulfilled,
doutlesse it remitteth and lowseth those things that it did decre. And if there
chance any reasonable cause of breaking such a tradicyon, it will pronounce ye
transgressour assoyled and clear and not rash: but what more reasonable cause
is there, the^ avoiding of deadly sin, or the ieopardy of conscience? Paul
was content so to chastise his flesh (to avoid offe^dyng of his brother), that
he would never eat flesh rather then to offend him.

Of Councils and laws made by a great multitude of bishops gathered
together. The new learning.
If ye authorite of councels be despised, all things in the church shall be
doutfull and uncertain, for ye heresies that were once condemned in the
councils shall come again. Therefore it is not lawful unto a private man to
affirm or teach any thing against the councels. For the council is gathered
together in the name of Christ, it is ruled of the holy gooste, and therefore it
erreth not, so that ye co^stitucyons of the councels be the constitucyons of
the catholyke church, whom the council does represent. But those things that
the church ordeneth, are as well to be observed and kept as the canonical
scripture. Another is it needful that the council add or put testimonies of
scripture to his determinacyons, seyenge that the Apostles and the elders did
not stablysh the first council holden at Jerusalem with scriptures. Actu. xv.

The old learning.
Ihon in the.iiii. Chapter of his first epistell byddeth prove spretes whether
they be of God or no, therefore it is lawful for christen men to judge the
sprete of councils: for they say that the holy ghost is author of the
counsel. What rule shall we have I pray you to prove and try spretes beside
the word of God? This, seeing that is sure, true, seven times purged, and a
candel in a dark place, shall be a touch stone to prove and to try all
learning of men by. If the holy ghost does rule the councelles, and the same
spret of truth taught the Apostles every truth, and if the Apostles did
preach that and give it unto us, it follows that ye constitucyons and the
councels must agree with the learning of Christ and the Apostles, that is, with
the holy scripture: for the sprete of God differs not from himself, he is
simple and his learning is simple. But seeing it is openly known that the
councils have decrees contrary to holy scripture, and also to the holy ghost?
Who will forbid us to doubt upon such constitucyons of councels? The Apostles
learning will that a bishop should be an husband of one wife. There is a
council that forbyddeth bishops the use of holy matrimony: what authorite is
here? The doctrine of Paul is the Gospel and the law of God, the which ought
not to be changed, seeing yt it does threaten death and cursynge even to the
angelical sprites, if they durst bring any other Gospel. But now if they
orden and determine those things which be contrary to the scripture, who will
deny but they may err? I have not said this to despise the councils, that be
councils in deed, but we set God above the council. For we grant according
to the promise of our saueour, that Christ is present in the congregacyon that
is gathered in the name of Christ, but we grant no man power and authorite to
decre and orden any thing in ye church of God against the scriptures. We
receive no man that comes in his own name. Ihon the.v. chapter and that
speaks not of ye father, but of his own self. Beside this, the scripture
gives no greater power to a general council, than to.ii. or.iii. gathered in
the name of the Lord: the which congregation has authorite to excommunicate
him that rebelleth and is stubburne and an open sinner, but it has not
authorite to make precepts and to thruste the^ in to men's consciences that be
fre. Farthermore ye scripture has prophesied, that false doctores should come
in the latter days, in the name of Christ, the which shall deceive many men,
saying: I am Christ. The which most earneste warning of our saueour not
without a cause makes us more ware and circumspecte, that we should not believe
every sprete. In deed these be goodly and glorious names, The church, The
council to be gathered in the name of Christ: but Christ and the Apostles
have warned us, that those things alone should not move us the which did
describe these latter days, with so horrible colors, that it is wonder men
can not perceive these things. Ciprian in a certain counsel, where as
were.lxxxvi. bishops sitting, taught wrong of the baptysynge of heretics,
and for the most part all the bysshoppes of Aphrica, Numidia and Mauritania
erred with him. If it be so that the councels err about the sacraments of the
church, who can safely without yeoperdy from hence forth believe the councels,
making laws without scripture? Moeroeuer, the same things may chance (we do
not doubt) to great and general councels, that have chanced unto the
particular and provincial councels. And suerly I think and hold that then all
things shall be more doutfull and uncertain, wha^ the authorite of the word
does fail the which ought to be sound and undefiled.

For the church gave not authorite to the word, but the word gave authorite
to the church. And when ye congregation believes the gospel, it is safe, and
the heresies which in times paste were bannyshed away and quenched, they were
quenched with ye swearde of the sprete which is the word of God Truly heresye
is plucked up by the root none other way, tha^ with the word of God and
wholesome learning. Therefore ye Apostle will that a bishop should be fenced and
harnessed with wholesome learning, that he may ouerco^me them that resist and
fight against him. Put the case that the council did orden any thing without
scripture, by and by will Gerson, and learned and honest men with him say: We
must believe more the saying of one man fensed with the authorite of canonical
scripture, than to ye declaration of the pope or the general counsel. I pass
over here the manifest saying of Innoce^tius in. chap. Cum venerab. De excep.
that is to wit: That no proof is to be admitted against ye scripture, but al
thing should be holden without dout. Here upon it follows, that it is not
lawful for the counsel to charge the congregation with any thing without ye
consent of the scriptur. And the council of Jerusalem decreed nothing without
scripture, boastynge and auauncyng the holy ghost only. For beside ye word of
Amos the.ix. Chapter. all other things had strength of ye scripture, and not
only of ye will of many. For the Apostles and seniors commanded that the
people should absteyne from those things, that were offered up to ydols, from
blood, from strangled, and from fornicacio^. The chief and the sum of ye matter
was: That a man should be justified not by the works of the law, but by grace,
the which righteousness of faith, long time ago was approved with the
witness of the law and the prophets. Romano. iii. Farthermore, if the
Apostles did sufficientlye teach by the authoryte of the holy ghost, ye manner
of iustifyenge an unrighteous man, why did they that came after deuyse and
ymagen other ways of iustifyenge? For those things yt they called necessary,
were not necessary for rygteousnesse, but for charity. For ye occasyo^s of
falling of the weaklynges were to be avoided. To be short, it that the
Apostles determined, they might uphold and prove by scripture. As concerning
it that was offered unto ydoles, it is plain enough: for they had it in
Deutronomy that the brother should not be hurt or despised. Our brother is
despised, if we give him an occasion of falling. They did know that it was
lawful to eat all meats that were to be sold in the shambles, and that to
the clean all things are clean, that all things are lawful, but all
things are not expedient or necessary, and that there was nothing of it self
commune or unclean, but they would not that their brother should be offended,
for whom Christ dyed. Farthermor. Exodus xxxiiii. it is clearly commanded the
Jews that they should not eat of the things that are offered up, the which
obseruacion and keeping (seeing that the law stock so styfly as yet in ye
Jews hearts) without offending could not haystely be taken away and be
contemned. Genesis. ix. the eating of blood is forbidden, the same also is
forbidden: Leuitici. vii.xvii. and.xix. The Lord commanded to abstain from
strangled. Exodi. xxii. and Leuit. xxii. Whordom fornition are forbidden.
Deutero. v. and.xxiii. The council had at Jerusalem might have been
strenghtened and stabilyshed with these places of scripture, the which made ye
Jews that they could not enjoy the lyberte of Christ with an whole and a
sound conscience. Wherefore the law of charity commanded, that the offendyng
of our brethren should be avoided. Let our councels defend their
constitucions with scriptures, or let them command those things that be
grounded upon the scripture: let them have a respect to the avoiding of
offenses.

Let them lay nothing on men's necks, but those that are necessary, after the
same way that they were necessary which were ordened of the Apostles at that
season, and no man shall withstand them. Therefore brethren I beseke you for
the mercy of God (for here we do not entreat of landemarkes, or of frail
things, but of soul health) take heed and look upon the thing that is in all
points greatest of all other, set all affections and troublynge of your minds
aside, and weye ye matter truly and syncerly. Let no man seek those things
that be his, but those that be Jesus Christ's. Let no man rate, snatche, and
speak against his brother. I have a conscience also, I think worshypfully by
ye fathers and the councels. I do not despise ye prophecyes or the
interpretatio^s of scripture, but before al other things I love and regard
holy scripture as ye only treasure of the congregation. The scripture is of
greater authorite (says saint Augustyn) than all ye capacite of man's wit.
If it had been sufficient unto us, to have holy me^, excellyng both in wit and
in learning to rule ye church or congregation: what need it to orden the canon
of scripture? If they only make decrees of outward things, in the which we
have lyberte, why do some charge men's consciences with these things, and so
lade the^ that they command and beat in as dilygently, ye a great deal more
diligently ma^s laws, then ye most holy law of God? As for me self wittyngly
and with my will I deceive no man, nor I will affirm or hold nothing, which is
disagreyng to the word of God, and the tatholike congregation. So earnestly
move I to the word of God that yet I would not ye occasion of falling should be
given, the which specially does spring (as this time is) of the tradycions of
men. And I do not study for all that, I yt might utterly destroy ceremonies, and
the statutes of the fathers: but I did give warnyng as it was my deuty. For
there was great difference between the keeping of ceremonies and ma^s tradicions,
and ye righteousness of God, and yt there was a certain righteousness which
must be earnestly looked upon, that we may know after what fashyon men's
consciences should be stablyshed and made strong against the gates of hell: and
in what things true penance and amendyng of our living does stand. In the
mean season for the keeping of peace and charity I move and exhort to keep the
ceremonies and traditions of the church and the fathers, where as they hinder
not the study of true holiness, or have no blame or fault. Only I moved yt we
should not think, that all the strength of holiness did stand in despisyng or
keeping of ceremonies. If any man will confute it that we have written, without
the bytternesse of envy: let him handle the matter as it were with his brother,
and not with his enemy, for we be ready to confute without stubbournesse, and
to be confuted without any anger or stomach at al. If that I be thought to any
man, more haysty and styrred than the mystery and service of ye word can bear,
let him not be angry with me, but with them which ouerco^me me with their
dyuelyshe and ungodly ouerseynge and wynkyng at abuses and errors They grant
plainly that there be maruaylous great abuses in the church: but amend the^
not, where as they be so often warned of them, both in season and out of season:
the which they know well enough to be the sede of discord, pestele^ce and
destruction of true holiness But let us leave alone this kind of me^ which be
not serue^t in ye spret, and would to god that they said not with the unwise man,
in their heart: There is no god. Well-beloved brother I have drawn out this gear
after a rude fashion not gatheryng together all things which might have been
spoken (as it does appear) for this matter, but out of a great heap I took a
few things here and there, but I will treat upon these matters in our co^mun
places more at large. The grace of Christ be with the. Amen.

The end of the old learning and new.
To the Christen reader.
THat thou may the better understand (good reader) the artycles of Fre
will, Faith, Good works, and of Merytes, which in this present book be treated
upon I shall here brefely show what God does and has done for us, and what we
again ought to do for his sake as they that be thankful of the benefits
received of him. And first will I declare the manner of iustificacyon,
remission of sins, and salvation, which in scripture are all one thing, of
whom it does come, and to how many things it is applied.

First it is applied unto God, for Paul says Romans viii. It is God that
iustifyeth or makes ryghteous. etc. And To. iii. That he only might be
ryghteous and the ryghteous maker of him which is of the faith on Jesus.

Secondarely it is referred unto Christ Actu. iiii. says Peter: There is none
other name given unto men under heaven, in the which we should be saved. Roma.
iii. says Paul: Without deseruynge are they made ryghteous or justified, even
by his grace through the redempcyon yt is done by Christ Jesus, whom God has set
forth for a mercy seat through faith in his blood, to show ye righteousness
yt avails before him. etc.

Thyrdly it is applied unto mercy. Tit. iii. Not of works or deeds of
ryghteousnes which we wrought, but after his mercy he saved us. Roma. viii.
Therefore when God would show wrath, and to make his power known, he brought
forth with great pacyence the vessels of wrath, which are ordained to
damnacyon, that he might declare ye riches of his glory on the vessels of
mercy, which he has prepared unto glory, whom he has called. etc. Item. i.
Pet. i. Blessed be God and the father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
according to his great mercy has begotten us again to a lively hope.

Fourthly it is attributed unto his eleccyon, Ephe. i. According as he has
chosen us by him, or ever ye fundacyon of ye world was laid, that we should
be holy and with out blame before him in love. Ioh. xv. I have chosen you, and
ordyned you, that ye go and bring forth fruit.ii. Timo. i. God has saved us,
and called us with an holy calling not according to our deeds, but
according to his own purpose and grace.

Fyfthly it is attributed unto grace. Ephe. ii. By grace are ye saved through
faith, and that not of your selves. Gala. i. I maruayle that ye are so soon
turned from him that has called you in the grace of Christ. Tit. ii. The grace
of God that brings salvation unto all men, has appeared.

Syxtly it is assygned unto the word. Ioh. xv. Now are ye clean because of the
word, which I have spoken unto you. Esa. lv. Like as the rain and snow comes
down from heaven, and returns not thither again but waters ye earth,
makes it frutfull and grene that it may give corn and bread unto the sower:
So the word also yt comes out of my mouth, shall not turn again void unto
me but shall accomplysh my will, and prosper in the thing whereunto I shall
send it.

Seue^thly it is asscrybed unto faith, as Romans iii. I speak of the
righteousness before God, which comes by faith on Jesus Christ. And Roma.
iiii. Unto him that believes on him that iustifyeth the ungodly, is faith
counted for righteousness. To. v. Because that we are justified by faith, we
have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Eyghtly it is attribute unto good works as Iac. i. Ye se the^, how yt of
deeds a man is justified and not of faith. The places are so manifest
(notwithstanding ye common opinion) ye faith only justifies, yt I am sure it
troubles no small no^bre of people: and peradventure it may asto^ny even them,
which count the^ selves well learned. For it is a great thing to bring the
old and wylye fox to a lease. Ye it is even a new thing unto the proud
Pharyses to say, that good works are not meritorious to obtain heaven by:
for hitherto have they founded and underpropped their church with nothing so
greatly, as with this opinion. What has abused fasting more than thereby to
obtain heaven? For fasting after their own choosing, they left the true
fast, that God requires and commands. Esa. lviii. and zach. vii. What
caused more abuse of ye supper of the Lord, the^ to use it that is the
remembrance of the benefyt and sacrifyce for our sins, for a net and hook
to gather and catch money with? saying yt it is a work meritorious, and a
sacrifyce for redemyng of sins. Sometime were none chosen prestes but such as
were endued with such gifts as Paul requires in a bishop: now yt the B. of To.
kingdom requires many fauterers and adhere^tes and yt purgatory may be swepte
and kept clean, the which is no office for such Lords as bishops be, therefore
sir Ihon lacklatyne shall suffice for that office well enough, and mass shall be
made a sacrifice to pourge and cleanse pylgatory, purgatory should I have said:
Lord Lord open once our eyes, yt we may se ye blasphemy done to thy holy
blood. Now will I go to your consciences ye that boast so greatly of good and
meritorious works: I require you by ye answer, that we all shall give at ye
great day: Did Peter that was prince of the apostles (as ye say) ever say
nasse for the dead either him self or by other? show here upon any autenticall
cronicle or his own writing. If ye can not, than grant that it is an
inuencion of your own, ergo a lie and a thing that shall perysh with your
days. If Gods mercy shudle be bound to send souls to your purgatory, and
at your massynge again to release them, than were Christ no Jesus, and God no
father but a servant of yours, and contrary to his own words and doctrine.
Leave therefore your new erroneous doctrine, and with the old teachers give
God humbly glory. What caused more the abuse of honourynge of saints: which
dyenge in charity, are joined with us is charity, and therefore as true members
of one body, cease not to pray with us, so that worshyppyng their pictures
and images, we rather blaspheme God, which has forbidden such manner of
worshyppynge, than worship them. But lest I be to tedious unto the (good
reader) therefore will I do my dilygence to express the pyth of all this matter
in few words.

God the father through the love that he had to his son Christ Jesus, did cast
his mercy unto us, which were sonken into the depth of sin and pytied us, and
of his mercy and pitye he chose us that we should be holy and without spotte in
his syghte. And to them that he chose, he instilled the grace of his sprite,
and sent them the word of health which they received through beleuynge it: and
than come they to the feeling of the goodness of God, and of very love are
ready to fulfill what soever God commands the^: and look how much they
believe, even so much they work. And though it be true yt we be justified in
Christ before the fundacions of the world were laid, yet is yt only know to
God, and we have no feeling of it until faith come. And even as God comes
downwarde, (for he through Christ had mercy on us, and of mercy did chose us
before we were, and than after we come into this world instilleth grace through
his sprete and than sends us his word, which the sprete causes us to
believe, and works faith in us, from whence all good works flow) eue^ so do
we go upward, and by my faith do know surely yt God has sent me his word and
grace through his sprete to cause me believe it and therefore co^clud yt he has
chosen me, and has mercy unto me through Christ his only son which is ye mage
of the invisible God, first begotten before all creatures. Now is my duty
again wha^ I have and perceive this goodness of God the father and his son
Jesus Christ to me ward, that I stand not still and let his grace be vacant
and idle in me: but (according to the sprete ye he has poured in me, and ye
grace that is given me, to use his gifts according to his will and
commandment) to proceed from virtue to virtue, as from step to step
always approchynge our loving fathers kingdom nearer and nearer, where he
sytteth and rayneth world without end. To the which bring us he that will
all mankind to be saved.

AMEN.
Fautes escaped in the pryntynge.
The iiii. leaf the ii. page the xii. line read. Fare ye well, and pray for.
etc.


