An Instruccyon of Christen faith how to be bold up on the promise of God and
not to doubt of our salvation / made by Vrbanus Regius. Translated into
english.

Prynted at London by Hugh Syngelton at the singne of saint Augustine in Paul's
church yerde.

To his reverend and singular good father Ric. Melton / the translatour
wyssheth grace and comfort in Christ.
IN so much all the effect and sum of our salvation consysteth only upon
faith and knowlage of the son of God Jesus Christ, all the scriptures and
prophets berynge wytnes, I think it much expedient every christian man to be
well instructed, and traded herein, for the lack whereof, we may see what great
and lamentable inco^uenie^tes is fallen amongst us christen men, how
pytuously we wa^der about like stray sheep, as the prophet says, uncertain
of our salvation, how dyscomfortly we live, how desperately we dye, not knowi^g
which way to goo / how ignorant how fleshly we be with out all joy, all comfort
all feelyng of the spirit, with out all the true charity to our neighbors.
For how can we love our neighbor trewly for gods sake when we nether know nor
feel how god louyth us. Which things verily declare yt we have but litell
faith in us. For else, having so many and so manifest promises of god for our
salvation in the first testament, and the same also fulfilled so veritably in
the latter testament by the coming of ye son of god, how culde we live in
such perplexite and doubtfulnes as we do, if there were any knowledge or faith
in us? What co^teineth the old testament, but only promises? Where upon be
these promises grounded? upon the law? How so, were not these promises made to
Adam and to Abraham freely long before the law came, as scripture
witnesses.iiii. c. years and.xxx. Gal. 3.
And why then do we not believe God? Why do we yet stand in fear and doubt of
our salvation, as though we had no promises, but only our own deservings to
stay upon? Is god a dissembler? Why than do we not stablysh our hearts at the
promise of the lord, and rejoice with faithful Paul triu^phyng boldly against
all the gates of hell? With him sayng, who shall separat us from the love of
god, any affliction, Romans 8.
any vexation, any persecution, other hunger, or nakedness other any Ieoperdy,
or sword? No says he, this I know and am full suer that nether deah, nor
life, nether Angel, prince or pouer, nether thing present, nor thing to come,
heyght, nor depthe, nor no other creature shall be able to separat me from the
love of god which is in Christ Jesus our lord. Here we may learn the example of
a faithful heart. Abraham likewise heryng the promise of god, Genesis 15.
that in his old age he should have a child, how firmly believed he the lord,
and the lord did impute yt to him for ryghtuesnes, Oculi domini recipient
fidem.
for he deliteth in nothing so much as in our faith upon him. Now wether was
it more hard for Abraham to have a child so old, or for us to be saved after
our death and trobele. And yet Abraham believed the lord. And why do not we
believe him as bouldly in our promises? Luc. 1.
Mary heryng the promis of god believed the angel putting no doubt as zacharei
did, that she should have a child a virgin, and yet might that seem as hard to
her as this to us but what said the angel, No word or promis is hard to god.
And why do not we as well take a bold confidence having so many promises maid
to us in all the prophets? What did Christ more commend in his confesores
than faith? Luc. 7.
or wherein was he more angrye with his apostles, Luc. 26.
than for their weyke faith after so much hearing and seeing? Howbeit to say
the truythe it is not so greatly to be merueled in us, for how can we believe
the promises of god when we know them not? or how should we know them when we
have neither bibles to read them, nor here them, neither be they opened unto
us? And how can such mysteries be opened of the prestes, wha^ so many run and
so few instructed and sent of god? Wherefore in this part to help the ignorance
and weyknes of my brithre^, for a more styrynge up of their faith, I thought
it not unprofitable to translate this golden book of Vrbanus regius a most
christian writer, very fruytful for every christian man, the which book I
commend and commit universally to the whole englysh congregation, and namly
send it to you (most reverend father (both to declare some token of my
obedient dwety toward you, and also to minister to you some occasion of further
knowledge and consolation which I most heartily desire in the Lord. Grace be
with you and with all the congregation. Amen.

By your sone most bound I. Fox.

TRuly it is a deuyllishe error to teach, that we should ever doubt, and
never be suer of Gods favor and our salvation / as we have been led in the
popes church, by unlearned prestes which for their purpose have wickedly wrasted
the words of Salamon in a wrong understanding. Eccle. 9. The Hebrew text
meneth another thing, and is wrong tra^lated.
Nescit homo amore, an odio dignus sit. That is to say. No man can tell whether
he be worthy of love or hatred. This error has Satan brought in to the church
to obscure Christ, and clean to abolysh our faith in him, and in the place
of our faith to bring in waueryng and doubtful opinions and weak imaginations
in to our minds whereby in great extremite, and ernest temptationes we could
take no asurance, but were driven to desperation, for he that doubts of the
will and fauore of god, A true christen man doutethe not of Gods favor.
and is not assuered that he will be mercyful to him for Christ's sake / and
that all his sins be pardoned in him, he is no true christian, and in his
incredulite can not be but condemned. Suerly the faith Faith.
in Christ is only that makes a true christen man / doubttyng and incredulite
Incredulity.
makyth a man no christian. To belue and to doubt be not both on. To believe is
an other thing than to doubt. Therefore he that continues in this for said
error, beleuyth not the.xii. articles of our creed, catholyke faith / in the
which gods grace is clerly and undoubtedly given to us in Christ. Then how
can they be christen men which lack the faith of Christ. Or how can such one
say the lords oration well? He may with his mouth sound the words, O our
heavenly father, but his heart has no trust in god, neither has any firmite
that he is a merciful father, but doubtyth of ye grace of god, whether he be
merciful or no, or whether he pardone him or no. His tongue says I believe in
Jesus Christ, I believe the forgiveness of sins, but his heart beleuyth not that
Christ dyed for our offenses, and that by his death he has obtained for us
forgyuenes of all our sins. He that waueryth thus, can not but despair in
the last extremite of his life. And if he dyspayre, tha^ is he damned, for he
deperteth with an evil conscience, and has no knowledge of Christ, nor beleuyth
the gospel. Then what hope can he have of everlasting life? Yet our blind
gydes and seducers in the popes clargy have taught us that no man can precisely
know whether he be in gods favor or no. They that been in this error, what
believe had they? did they not wander like ye wind now hither and thither?
were they not clean void of faith? had they not a wretched, uncertain, and a
wauerynge life? how could they know whether these works pleased God or no?
what could this man think in him self but thus? I am a christened man, I
have studied to live well and to do good works, but yet I am uncertain
whether my works please God, or whether my sins be forgyuen me or not. Mine
ill deeds be mo the^ my good, I have done mo sins than virtues. Alas what
shall be come of me. They that thus waver and doubt, what hope can they have in
the agony of death, what faith have they, what thing to trust upon? Satan and
his own conscience accuse him of sin, saying, he that lives ill shallbe
damned, thou never fulfylledest yet the commandments of God, No sinner can
be saved. Does not Christ say, if thou wylt enter into life keep the
commandments? but thou have never kept the^. Mat. 19.
Here is no hope left but that a man oppressed with such cogitacions, must
needs despair. The blind papists have taught us poor wretches, that the
fundacion of our hope lies in the grace of God, The doctrine of the prests
clargie.
and in the merytes of our own works / so that our hope should be nothing
else but the expectacion of life coming of Gods grace and of our own
deservings. what hope is by the sophisters.
Item that our hope in no wise could stand without the help of our merits /
other of the sophisters do thus defyne it, hope is a boldenes of mind
conceived of Gods goodness to have everlasting life through our good works.
Here thou herest these two, grace and deseruynge, but these two do ill join
together, for where is grace there is no meretynge, again where meretynge is
there is no grace. Therefore if a seek person tempted about his sins think
thus that without his own merits he can look for no salvation, then he
trusts not to the grace of God, neither does he apprehe^d it nor ground him
self upon it, for so he has been taught and led that it was presumpcion to
say a man might be assuerid of Gods favor without the adding to of his
works and merits: And thus have we be led in this false persuasion so many
years, but in erneste tentacions there is none that can stand upon his
merits or deeds / for here commyth in the law of god accusyng him and all
other men, that none of them all have fulfilled yt. Then where be the good
deeds, whereupon the seek man may trust, and hope for salvation thereby. In our
great tentations we all do feel that we be sinners, and that all our life is
naught and so void of all goodness, that it is not able to abide or stand in
the severe judgment of god. These blind seducers have made one foot of our
hope lame and mayned, which is grace. The other foot lame and haltyng, which is
our own works, Now how can our hope stand fast, that we faule not in to
desperation? To prove than that by our deeds we can deserve no justification,
nether any part thereof, with all that ever we are able to do, Also that it is
not in our pouer to accompleshe the law of god, The law
but that law only seruyth to se our unableness, our vices and sins thereby,
it nedyth no great declaration. We see this daily in our selves, that our flesh
never ceasyth feyghtyng against the spirit, and does inwardly gruge at every
good deed we do, so that this noughtines and corruption of ours marryth all,
whereby our good works can not be pure nor acceptable that we do. To. vii.
Gal. v..i. John^. i. Wherefore writes John^ if we say we have no syne, 1. Ioh. 1
we deceive our selves, and truth is not in us. Also all the faithful say
daily in the lords prayer. Forgive us our trespasses Esa. lxiiii. Esai. 64
we be as unclean every one, and all our ryghtuusnes like a clothe defiled with
the flowers of a woman. Forthermore if we did fulfill all commandmentes of god,
yet did we nothing but which is our bound deuty to do, nether can we look for
any reward thereby, wytnes to Christ. Luc. 17.
Luc. xvii. When ye have done all that you can, yet say you be unprofitable
saruantes. These words of Christ verily may pluck down our glory, and make
us all ashamed that we put no affia^ce in our selves, nor in our own good
works. Good works.
Howbeit I speak not this to extenuat the worthynes of good works, or to
pluck men back from well doing. For the scripture teachith us, that the study
of good works is ever to be employed, and wylles us to be folowers of honesty
and good workyng. But no man must put affiaunce in his works, as though by ye
worthenes of the^ he could obtain grace, or put away syn or get his
salvation. For if our ryghtuousnes and justification before god stand in our
might or merits, than dyed Christ in vain. Gal. ii. Gal. 2.
Good works in their degree and order have their valewe, and be greatly
co^me^ded. A good man ought to insewe good virtues, to thentent he may do the
will of his lord god, which commaundyth us to live virtuously, and that he may
also approve him self to his lord god, that god our heavenly father may be
glorified thereby. Mat. v. Mat. 5.
Also we ought to do good works, to show our selfs thankful again to God,
for his infinite benefits and gifts. Phi. ii. Phil. 2.
Also we must do good works to exercise our faith, that they may be
testimones of our believe, and thus do they profyt both me and my neybour. My
neighbor in gyuyng example to encorage him the better to a christian life.
Also in that he is succored by them in his necessite. Secundarly they profyt me
in yt they exercise my faith, and mortefye my flesh and keep me truly in my
vocation. 2. Pet. 1.
For why if I do any benefit to my fryndes and to mine ennemys, and perceive
yt to come of a tranke and free heart, than may I well assure my self yt my
faith is lively and a true faith which makyth of damned sinners the true
children of god. Ioh. 1. Gal. 3.


Ite^ here is to be noted that good works be these, which a man beleuyng in
Christ workyth in faith in his lawful vocation, after the ordena^ce and form
of the law of god. Contrary evil works Evil works
and sins be these which be done with out faith and with a feigned charity,
trustyng upon them to porchase ye fauore of god, the forgyuenes of sins, and
the kingdom everlasting, the which is clean and directly contrary from our
christian faith. For our christian faith does ground us upon a more
substa^tiall stone which is Christ, The fou^dacion of our faith
the true forgyuer of sins, and our only reconciler, which has obtained for
us this grace, has washed away our sines, and has deserved for us everlasting
salvation. This faith makyth our consciences that they waver not not doubt any
thing of the grace of god. For the properte of this faith is to quiet our
conscience. Romans 5. what true faith is.
The true catholyke and lively faith is this when a man fully persuadith him
self, and beleuith steadfastly, and nothing doubth, that he has god pacified,
and a most gentle father to him for Christ's sake, to whom in all his
necessite, aduersite, and in all his affairs as a child to his father, he
wholly commits and co^mendyth him self, puts al his trust in him, callyth
on him, sekyng no succoure, consolation, nor goodness but only of him. Act. 15.
This faith purefieth our hearts. This faith is always workyng through
charity, and has the holy ghost which moves us and styryth us up to follow
the example of Christ, which has left behi^d steps of al good works, and
paciente in afflictions for us to follow, saye^g to us. This is my commandment
that ye love together as I have loved you. Ioh. 15.
You be my fryndes if ye will do these things that I have given and taught you.
Ioh. 14. Ioh. 15.
He that louyth me will keep my lessons. I have given you example, as I have
done to you, so do ye to your selfs, by this you shall be known to be my
deciples, if ye have love one to an other. Again, he that takyth not up his
cross and folowyth me, Luc. 19.
he is not my disciple. Where there is no repentance nor any amendme^t of life,
No good faith no good works.

True faith true works.


and study of good works, verily there is no true faith. True faith can not
be with out good works no more than a good tree with out fruit, or the sone
with out his heet, this is undoubted. Therefore let every man examine and search
him self well lest he deceive him self. Many men there be which say they
believe when they have no believe, as it may apere by their vyciouse and wicked
life. For this is certai^e, where so ever true faith is, there is also the fear
of god, there is repentance, there a true and a christen man's life folowyth,
there the old synful man is put of and a new put on. Ephesians. 4.
For by cause this is the virtue and the operation of our holy baptism, that
faith does clean renew and transform a christean in to a new man, which
walks not after flesh, but after the spirit. Romans viii. Romans 8.


Then where ye grace of god workyth in us good fruit, and we begyne to follow
the co^mandementes of god our old man is not all mortefied straight way, but
wyld and wanton with her lusts does strive against us all our life long, and
never ceasyth provoking us to syne, and ever rebellyth against our spirit,
lettyng and hindering us in all onest vertuys, whereby we be not able to live
so vpryght after goddys co^mandeme^tes as we would. Wherefore when our sinful
conscience or ye fear of death does come upon us we ca^ not trust to our
works, nor find any comfort therein, but (if we will be saved) we must needs
cry with ye holy king David. Enter not lord in to judgment with thy servant, for
in thy sight no living flesh shall be iustefied. Our good works thoug they be
never so holy and excellent yet the value of them is not such, nether aught we
to do them for any such purpose, nether does god require them to be done of
us for that intent that we should be iustefied and saved by them. For no man can
trust any thing to his works, nether be they able to deliver us from our
death, Our iustificacion only belongs to Jesus Christ.
that thing only the works of Jesus Christ is able to do and nothing else.
This glory and honor is only dew to him and to no man else, to be a Jesus,
Jesus a savior
that is by interpretation a savior. For he only takes away our sins.
justifies and sauyth us by his works and pascion. This is his office his
work and dewte only, for the which he was sent hither of his heavenly father
and ours to do. Therefore if the holy works and commandementes of god, can
bring no peace of conscience, than what shall a miserable sinner do in the
distress of his temtation? whether shall he goo, whether shall he turn him
self? where shall he find help, and succoure, and comfort? so than if we will
look for any salvation, we must firmly believe and persuade our consciences,
that our sins be pardoned us, and clean taken away. But now how shall we be
so certefied in our minds. I answer in such temtations a man must needs set
apart the law, and all his good deeds that ever he has done, al his strength,
al his pouer, and merits, and let them all goo in this point. For here nothing
can succoure us, but only the works and passion of Jesus Christ. And therefore
we must appele from the law, Appele from the law to the son
straight to the rich and merciful promise of our father in his sone Christ,
as unto a suer succor and a sanctuary of eternal security and peace, and
hold it fast in a fyrme and a sure faith. And thus shall we find comfort and
quietness enough, and more than we can desire, than nether sin, nor death,
nor hell shall not be able to hurt us.

What the promise of god is.
The promise of God is this.

Almyghtie God has promised us damnable sinners in his only begoten sone
Jesus Christ, with out any manner of excepcion or condition of our own merits
clearly of his own free grace and goodness, Hie. 31.
full remission of all our sins, his holy spirit, and everlasting life,
Heb. 8.
and that he will ever more be our father, and that he will voutchsafe to
receive us to his children, and give us perpetual salvation.

These be true, fyrme, eternal, Heb. 9.
infallible, suer and steadfast God which is almyghtie, 2. L^
and which can not lie has so promised to us, and has sworn depely by
himself that he will perform the^.

This is the new testament, and the everlasting couenaunte of grace made to
us in Christ betwixt him and us, and confyrmed with his blood, whereof his
prophets so greatly speak of.

Christ the sone of God has confirmed this testament by his death, and is a
suer gayge or a pledge of this promise of God. The truth and grace of God is
laid and reposed for us in Christ, in him we be suer to find it, as God
speaks of his sone Christ our true David in the psalm.lxxxix.

Psalm. 89.
My truth and my mercy shall evermore be with him, and in my name his power
shall be exalted, he shall call me. Thou art my father my God, and the rescuer of
my health. And I shall set him to be mine hear and first begoten, auaunse up
above all the kings of the earth. I shall evermore reserve my mercy to him,
and my faithful testament upon him. And I shall set up his sede for evermore,
and his throne like the days of the firmament. And if his chldren transgress
my precepts, and will not walk in my Judgments I shall visit and chastise
their iniquities with my rod, and their sins with strypes. But I will never
take away my mercy clean from him, and my truth shall never fail him. I will
never break my testament that I make, neither will I ever go from my words
that proceed out of my lyppes. Ones have I sworn in my holiness, see if ever I
break my apoyntme^t with my servant Dauyd, his sede shall remain for ever,
and his throne like the son in my sight. etc.

This promise is also read in the.ii. Reg. vii. 2. Reg. 7.
Here in this prophesy God speaks of ye eternal kingdom of Christ, in which
perpetual mercy, peace, and quietness is, for in Christ he has reposed and
laid up his truth and mercy. Therefore in no other thing can this promise of
grace be found or obtained sayue only in Christ. In him god has promised to us
salvation freely through his myghtie mercy: Therefore who soever believes in
Christ without any more a do (to be bold upon it) he has all things, And
though there be in Christ's kingdom weyke and infirm sinners, which slyppe
and fall many times, yet this priuelege and prerogative they have their sins
shall not be imputed to damnation. All their offenses be offenses of children
not of saruantes. We have a salve conduct and a passeport through all ye peryls
of death and damnacio^. And though we fall never so heynously yet shall we not
perish therefore, for our christian faith does so fasten us unto our David
Christ that we be made one sprite with him. In Christ we have the verite of
Gods promise, and his mercy evermore to continue, our heavenly father will
not punish his weak children in his wrath for ever, but will chastise them
with favor in this temporal life, call us again to repentance. Thus the grace
of God shall ever abide fyrme and stable, which we be suer shall not fail us
so that we believe this David Christ to be our king and cast all our trust on
him.

And here is to be noted and considered where he says. Truth.
My treuth and mercy allways go with him, if it be his truth, than it can not
ley, nor deceive us. If yt be his mercy and grace, Grace.
than yt standith not by our works nor the law, wherefore all these things
shall happen to us in Christ, and for Christ's sake, which by his works and
passion has purchased and bought all thing for us.

Esaias. lv. Esa. 55.
Bow down your ear and come to me, hear me and your soul shall live, and
I shall stryke a bergayne with you perpetual, the suer mercies which I
promised to David. Ierem. xxxi. Ier. 31.
This shall be the bargayne that I shall stryke with the house of Israel. After
those days I shall give my law within their bowels, and will write it in
their hearts, Nota.
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people, for I will pardon all
their iniquities, and will no more remember their offenses. etc. So does the
apostle in his epistle to the Hebrews allege the same place, Heb. 8.10
where he proves that this bargayne of grace are this new testament betwyxt
god and us is now confyrmed and sealed up by the death of Christ. And that god
is now no more a streyte judge but a most tender father to all the faithful of
Christ, and that he will pardone all their offenses. Lykwise to the Gala. S.
Paul callyth this eternal bargayn of grace, Gal. 3.
a testament that shall stand for ever, where as he writes. No man brekyth or
dysordenyth ye will or testament of a man being ones confirmed and ratified.
Than if me^nes testame^tes ones made and confirmed, abide firm and suer, how
much more the testament of god ones confirmed and ratified, shall abide firm?
These testimones do prove evidently and strongly that gods grace promised in
Christ is firm and suer, so that now no beleuer ought ne ca^ doubt of the
favor of god and remission of his sins. we ought not to dought.
But undoubtedly and constantly ought to styke to this promise of god which ca^
not nether shall be found false.

What heart now is so hard or stoney that will not rele^t or be styred up by
this firm and sweet promise of god, to take a bold faith and a confident
trust upon ye grace and favor of almyghte god being so promised to us? Will not
these words make us certefied, yea and also secure as yt were a bond or a
bargane, testament, promise, Bond, testamet, promise, mercy, an oath.
an oath, mercy. And all these does no man which may decyue us, but god
eternal promise our father in heaven, which is truyth himself.

Yt is an horrible blyndnes in us that when god himself does call us to his
grace, and does promise freely to us for his marcy sake clear remission of our
sins, and for the same purpose has sent to us his only begotten sone in to
ye world, to be a suer token or plege of his heavenly favor and grace, and yet
we lene and hold more to our own stynkyng works than to the true and
euersta^dyng truyth of god. Alas for pity how many precious souls most
pytuously have be brought to desperation, through these works dooynge. The
law only has been put forth unto them, and no thing else beten into their
heads, but this, what god requires of us, how great sinners we were, what
ve^gaunce of God did fall upon sin, what torments, what fire and brymstone
we should suffer in hell. But none taught the people faithfully the promise of
God, the gospel of Christ in the which sorrowful and vexed consciences of
sinners might be refresshed and learn the infinite and unsearchable grace that
God which of his unknown mercy has promised, Gods promise is a gift.
that is to say has given us freely in Christ, with the which promyses sely
consciences might be releued and confyrmed strongly against all the gates of
hell. We blind and wretched would reward God with ours, and deserve of him all
things that we had / we would not be in his det or danger / we dysdayned to
have his liberality come freely unto us / and nothing would take of him by
grace. And that was the cause why Christ was not ryghtly preached but only
Moses: what was the cause wh^ Moses was prec^yd and not christ.
So it always comes to pass, when the commandments only be set forth,
after the manner of the Jews, and the promyses of God nothing spoken of /
there it can be none other but that men's consciences must needs be vexed and
disquieted with miserable sorrow and perplexity so that they can receive almost
no consolacion. But who soever will bring men to God in deed, and will quiet
their consciences, must always teach these two together the law and the
promise / as the prophets, Christ, and the apostles ever did.

The use of the law
By the law they brought men to the knowlage of their synfulnes, their
unworthiness, their infirmity and inability to goodness / their duty what they
ought to do / and their damnacio^ which thereof followed: And so brought them to
humiliate them selves before God / whereby they being justly stricken with the
feling of gods right judgment, might ernestly forthynke them of their sins /
and call for mercy. They taught not the law so as though it were enough to
know what were to be done, or not to be done / or as though of our own
strength we could do good and eschew ill / and so by the law and by our
own works be found just before God / and put away sin. They taught not
the law I say for no such end nor purpose / neither was the law given
therefore that we should be justified thereby before God / but it was given for
this to require of us all ryghtuousnes and to threten us, why the law was given.
that by the requiringe of this righteousness, and we being nothing able to
perform it, we might the better learn thereby our unrighteousness and
noughtines / and so finally to acknowlage and confess our own wretchydnes, to
thentent that being thus contryte and humiliated in heart we might seek to
Christ for socour the which by his works and passion does only iustefie us.

We be nothing able to deserve any salvation by the law or our works. That is
an higher and a more excellent thing than that our rotten works be able to
procure. God has promised to give us that freely by his mercy for Christ's
sake, and does give it of grace to the^ that believe in Christ, as S. Paul to
the Romans does call everlasting life the gift of God. Romans 6.
Gal. 3.
And likewise to the Galathians does put a clear difference betwixt them, and
shows plainly his mind of the law and of the promise, how they concure to
our iustificacion. Let us weghe well his words, for all the weight and
fundacion of our iustificacio^ does lie upon the^. His words be these. If our
inheritance stand of the law than it stands not of promise. Mark.
But God did give it to Abraham. If the law had he given unto us which might
have justified us, tha^ our iustificacio^ might be of the law. But the
scripture has wrapped all things under sin, that the promise might come by
the faith of Jesus Christ to all that believe.

And again in the second to the Gal. Gal. 2.
If our iustificacion says he could come by the law, tha^ Christ dyed in
vain. Therefore I say where as men thus by the law were brought to the
knowlage of their sins, and so stricken with great sorrow and heaviness of
conscience for their sinful and vicious nature, than was the Gospel put and
set before them that is to say Grace promised us in Christ. And than did they
begin to believe ernestly and to rejoice in their hearts truly for this grace
promised in Christ, that God had given the^ for Christ's sake forgyuenes of
their sins. Thus saint Paul in the place before recited, does comfort with
true consolacion wretched and desperate sinners for he leads them only to
the promise of God, and beats that in to them, for thereby only our
consciences be clean and quieted. And does teach the law and gods
commandments also, exhorting us diligently to the study of good works, and
is not only content with that, but also does show where and how to come by
the courage and lust to do these good works.

Thus first they taught the law for repentance but straight after they joined
withal the promise of God to bring me^ to the knowledge of the most rich
grace of God given and promised us in Christ, teaching withal where we
should get the strength to fullfyll the commandments, where our sinful
nature was not able to fulfill it. Romans 8.
In consideracio^ whereof the Apostles euerywhere declared and set forth the
excedyng and passing riches and treasures of Gods mighty grace which he
has given and promised us in Christ, if we believe upon him, and so forth did
led wretched sinners from the law to Christ. This great grace of God so
offered they received the^ and enbraced greatly, and thus beleuynge were
pacified in their consciences. The law does threten and affraye, but than she
is not able to heal or comfort them being grieved, or to deliver them from
their agony / wherefore we must needs flee to the promise. And there shall we
find ryghtuousnes, peace, life, and health enough. Hereupon S. Paul to the
Gal. iii. Gal. 3.
says The law was but as it were our scolemayster unto Christ, The end of
the law.
that we should be justified by Christ / for the law does force us, does
constrayne us, does call upon us, does manace us, and lies upon our necks,
requiring of us all manner of good works, perfect justice, perfect innoce^cie
of heart, perfect fear and love of God, and also of our neighbor. But we of
our own strength be not able to acco^plyshe that which she requires, and
thus she dryueth us to Christ, and is our scolemayster unto Christ. He tha^
receives us coming to him, helping us, and gyuinge us all such things that
the law requires of us / so that the law is not able to damme us.

For this cause S. Paul does call Christ the end of the law. Romans x. Romans
10.
Or as S. Augustine does expound it the fulfyllynge of the law. He that has
Christ is just, he that believes in Christ has all things which the law
requires. Christ has reconsyled for us God his father / he is our mediator
and everlasting priest he has obtained us grace, the holy ghost with all his
gifts, remyssyon of sins, and all manner of goodness with life everlasting,
he as Ieremye writes.xi. Iere. 11.
does give us a new heart and a soft heart and the holy ghost to move us for
to do well. And where as yet we be partly fleshly nor can not be all mortefyed
in this body, nor thoroughly fulfill the commandments of God, there is he made
our wisdom, our justice and redemcyon, so that his innoce^cie and all that
ever he has is made our by faith / for after that we put on christ upon
us, and after we believe in him, there is no ieoperdie can hurt us, though we
be never so weak and frail, so that we do not walk purposely after our
appetyte of the flesh, and ru^ne still hedlonge in sin with our repentance
/ for oftymes it happens that good and most holy men do fall as well as
other but yet they lie not still, Good me^ do sin.
but get up again, and be still delyted with the law of God inwardelye in
their hearts, ever calling for remyssion of sins by Christ, and obtain
also the same which he desire. Al these things we may se very well expressed
in Abraham, for Abraham (says Paul) is the father of all the faithful
beleuers in christ / therefore we have in Abraham a clear figure and an example
how that a sinner may be justified, and what is the nature of christian
faith, what is the power, the property, and workinge of the same / and also
how that our consciences may be quieted, whether by faith or by works /
therefore he that is the true child of Abraham, that is a good man in deed, or
yt would be a true member of christ, let him look upon Abraham his father, and
there he shall se how God does with us, how he tendereth us, and how we
ought to do again for him, as Paul also teaches us. Romans iiii. Gal. iii.
First of all Abraham hard the great and rich promise of God saying unto
him, do not fear Abraham, I am thy defender, and great is thy reward with me.
And afterward.

In thy sede all nations shall be blessed, that is shall be delivered from
sins, death, and malediccion and shall have everlasting life. This was glad
tidings to Abraham. And still did Abraham believe this promise, notwithstanding
yet much greuyd with trobles and sorrows. And so therefore was Justified by
this faith and trust that he had to the promise of God. Nota.
Now this was.iiii.c. and xxx. years before the law was given, and therefore
was he sauyd, not by the works of the law, but by his faith in God and in the
blessed sede which was promised him. And no otherwise also must we al be
saved, for there is no other way nor means to come to health, only the promise
of God must iutyfie us if we believe, and not the law nor no works.

Secondarly this faith of Abraham that he had upon Christ, made him a new
man, and clean did alter his old affeccions, and put in hi^ new cogitacions
otherwise tha^ this nature of ours has, for he reioysed only in the lord,
and in him takes a meruaylous boldness, he knows well that God is his father
which in all his affairs, his affliccions and trobles will help him, and is
able to help him, and thus trusting unto Gods promise receives and reposeth
him self in the hands of God, with a bold heart and a strong confidence,
doughtynge nothing but that God will be merciful unto him, even as any father
will be to his own natural child, whom he loves most tenderly, so then
Abraham having this faith, went up to the hill, at the commandment of God,
to show his obedience and offered his son, for true faith can never be with
out good works, but ever will be occupied in the obedience of God Iac. ii.
Gal. ii. In the mean season Abraham's heart and conscience was nothing
vnquietted for all that, but still quiet by reason of his faith he had in
Christ, for he was ever suer of the favor and the love of God toward him,
wherefore S. Paul Romans iiii. Romans 4.
full well describes his whole thought and cogitacion, where as he says that
Abraham did never shrynke yet in his faith, nor doubted in the promise of God,
but ever strong in his faith, did give glory to God, knowing well this that
he which promised him was able to perform it. And therefore he says that it
was imputed to him for justice, that is for his iustificacion / for this
Abraham thought and persuaded him self that God was almyghtie and true of his
promise which would not defeall nor deceive his people. And if he had so
thought in him self as now our papysttes do teach, I can not tell suerly
whether god love me or no peradventure he is not friendly unto me, nor caryth
for me, nor regardyth me. etc. If Abraham I say had thought on this manner, or
had shrynked so in his faith, I think he would never have intendyd to offer up
his only son, nor would have been persuaded to go from his fathers house out
into a strange land, but rather would have thought thus. It is good to be suer
of that a man has all ready, this I have and am suer of, the other is vnsuer,
what should I kill my only and well-beloved sone? who will give me an other? what
should I goo out of mine own house in to a strange land I can not tell how
far? what folyshenes were it? I will not so, I will tarry still here where I
am in my fathers house. Neither will I be so cruel to my sone for to slay him
thus I say he had thought if he had not believed constantly / but when he went
out so boldly and merely out of his fathers house into a far and a strange
country, and with so lusty chere went up to ye hill with his sone to offer him
up to God, which no nature of man can do, for what natural man can find in
his heart to offer up his sone. Than by like he did only hang of the hands of
god, only did trust upon God, upon his grace, upon his help, nothing
doubting in his conscience but that God was able to perform all that he had
promised, for why no doubting heart can be so willing to do as Abraham did,
nor yet ones think to do it, so quiet was Abraham's conscience by faith in gods
promise, that Paul in his epistle to the Romans iiii. does give him an excellent
praise therefore, that we all should mark it, and well bear it away. Abraham
says he never did shrynke in his faith, but always strong in his beleuinge
trusted suerly, why did he trust suerly? because God promised, for this he did
know and was fully persuaded, that God was true of his word and promise,
what so ever he promyseth he performs of his grace, and is well able to
perform it, for he is almyghtie, nor does not promise for our deservings but
of his grace only, Romans 4.
that now we may be bold to trust unto it. For if he should promise after
our deservings, any thing he culd never perform yt, for our merits be none
and nothing worth, but he does promise us infinite goodness in Christ with out our
merits, only of his pure grace and mercy. And therefore writes Paul Gal. iii.
yt god promised Abraham ye blessyng, cccc.xxx. The promise was made ere the
law came.
years before the law of Moses was given, by cause that no man should so
think that this blessyng did stand of the works of the law, or that he culd
not enjoy this fre promise and blessyng of god before he did fulfill all the
law of Moses. Wherefore for the love of god let all good men here mark, that
Abraham never failed nor did shrink in faith, nor never doubted at the promise
of god, nor of the love and grace of god toward him. For so the holy ghost does
say that he had a suer persuasio^, mark well this. If yt were a persuasio^ that
he had, than yt was no opinion, nor doubtyng that he had. But fully did trust
and believe, he went not thither whether his incredulyte and doubtyng did bid
him to goo, the which doubtyng our papists have taught us, whether thought he
thus, whyther yt be true or not true I will do yt, but his consience was fully
persuaded that it was true that god had promised, and that god would be good and
merciful unto him, had forgyuen his sins, had justified him, and would never
forsake him nor abject him, and after this life also would give hi^ everlasting
life for the sede sake that was promised him, which was Christ. If god had
said thus to Abraham. Here Abraham I will be merciful unto the, I will forgive
the thy sins, and always be present with the and help the so on this
condition that thou keep and fulfill all my co^maundmentes, thus I say if god
had given him his promis under this condition of fulfyllyng his
commandments, then Abraham's co^sience had never ben merry nor quiet but
always doubting of the grace of god and forgyuenes of his sins, nor should
been certain of his salvation. For thus he might have taught. I have done all
that I can with all deligence to fulfill gods precepts, yet I culde never
fulfill them so perfectlye as I awoght nothing like, wherefore this promise of
god is vncertane to me, nether I can tell whether I shall take yt or no, for
because I have not performed all that was enjoined and commanded me and god
did give me his promise no otherwise but of this condition if I kept his
commandments, and I am not able so to do, wherefore I am not suer whether he
will give me these things yt he promised. I can do nothing on my part, and
therefore how can he keep his promise with me, wherefore what hope can I have
now of health. Yt is but lost labor all yt I go about, thus I say if god had
promised his blessyng under this condition to Abraham, then he might well have
despeared, but now he addyd no such condition, The promise came without any
condition.
and all because we should not doubt, but that his promise remanyth always suer
and stable. And this it is that god requires only of us, yt we should never
doubt nor questione of his fre grace, but to be bold and trust upon yt, that he
is a loving father to us, and we be his children. But we culde not be so bold
of this grace of god if any such condition of fulfyllyng the law were given with
all, as if thou keep my commandments well, the^ shall thou have thy sins
forgyuen. Therefore yt is necessary that the promise of this blessyng stand
without all conditions, and with outt all respect of our works or meretes,
but only in the fre grace of god, for or else we culd never be suer of yt nor
certane but always in doubt and mystrust, For if the remission of our sins
should stand in the fulfyllyng of the law, then our flesh being so weyke and
frail, and not able to fulfill the law, how should we know and be suer that
god is good to us or that we were in the favor of god, but rather should think
that he were anger with us, because we never fulfill his commaundmentes as we
should do. And thus the fre promise of god should stand void and in no effect.
For why no man were able to obtain yt. But thanks and praise be to the
faithful lord the father of our lord Jesus christ and ours, the father of
mercy, and the god of all comforth wiche having mercy upon us and tendering our
weyknes has not byldyd our health and salvation upon no such brykell and weyke
fundatio^, as upon our works and our fulfyllyng of the law, for so we culd
never be saved But the fundation that we be groundyd upon and preuale against
the gates of hell, The fou^dacion of our hope.
is the great grace and mercy of god in his sone Christ. For in him god has
promised us all the remiscio^ of our sins, and ever lasting life. This
promise is only and alone all our comforth that we may bouldly trust upon. So
thus you se how god promyseth us remisio^ of our sins and life everlasting
not under any condytion of workyng and fulfyllyng the law, but he gyuyth yt
freely of his fre grace I say, only and alone throw Christ, and not for no
works of ours. And therefore he gyuyth yt freely, without any condition of our
works. Because the promise might stand fyrme and stable, that is, that we may
be sure of the fauore of god and of the remisio^ of our sins, doubtyng
nothing therein, notwithstanding we be never so much sinful in our nature, and
unworthy wretches, that every beleuyng christen man may say with Paul. This I
know and is undoubted, that nether death nor life nether a^gels, Romans 8.
nether princes, nor potestates, nether things neygh, nor things to cu^,
nether heyght nor depnes, nor no other creature is able to separate us from ye
love of god which is Jesus Christ our lord. Here may we plain se that
Paul had a bold and a confident trust of the forgyuenes of his sins, and
of his health to come, plentuously persuaded of the grace of God toward him or
else how could he so fervently learn, rejoice, and triumph in sprite
against all creatures both in heaven and in the world, so omnipotently
desyryng them all, being right suer and certain that nothing neither above
nor benethe could anoye him, and why? because he believed in Christ, and was
sure of the mercy of God toward him through faith / and therefore was his
conscience so quiet and triumphant. And even so may every christen man
likewise take the same courage and the same mind in him self. Mark.
Howbeit no man can do this unless he put away all respect of his own
merytes and works and only trust unto the free mercy and grace of God, which
grace is given us only through christ and not through our selves. Tit. iii.
Tit. 3.
that notwithstanding yet these good works of ours do follow and spring out
of this faith and promise of God. And look there where as they do not follow
and may follow there is no true nor lively faith, but only a deed and
barayne opinion of faith, but where this true and lively faith is, there is
workyd miracles and things far passing the possibility of natural
workynge. For as saint Paul says / we receive the holy ghost not by our
workynge but by hearing of the gospel, Gal. 3.
this holy ghost will not suffer us to doubt after the papists fassion, or as
they would have us, nor to fere as their seruyle sprite does, but with a bold
trust cries in our hearts to God abba father, and witnesses with our
sperite that we be the children and the heyers of God and fellow heyers with
Christ, that we may be glorified together with him. And as Paul to the
Ephesians says, Ephe. 1.
they that believe in Christ be sealed up with the holy spirit of promise, the
spirit we have as a pledge or an ernest penny of our inhereditaunce and
possession which we have got and be redeemed unto. The holy spirete is our pleas
Therefore with all faith and trust we must ever look upon the promyses of God,
and upon Jesus Christ only. And so in this promise of God our conscience may
find comfort and peace plenty, but in our works we shall find none. And
therefore mark well this text of Paul and keep it well in your remembrance,
where he says. Romans 4.
Romans iiii Abraham had this promise given to him and to his sede that he should
be the heir of the world, not for his workynge after the law, but for his
byleuynge in faith / for if they which belong to the law be the heyers, then
is faith void and the promise of none effect / for why the law works
anger, by reason that if there were no law, there were no transgression,
therefore is the inheritance given by faith as by grace freely, because the
promise must stand fyrme and stable to all the sede of Abraham. Daily
experience and practyse in our trobles and dystresses declares that no man be
he never so holy can quiet his conscience by his works. Experience.
Our sins and death be more grievous enemies unto us than that we be able to
over come the^ by our own deeds and deservings / we must have an other manner
of means to that, which is our faith receyuynge and holding the promise of
God in Christ. And so that is able to conquer the mighty fersnes of sin and
death. This faith receives and styketh to most sure and eternal things that
can never fail us and not to our workings, but to the great grace of God, to
Christ him self, to his works and his deservings and to the promise in
Christ, brefely to all that Christ has, or is worth / which things be
much greatter, higher more stable, and magnificall, tha^ our capacities is able
to comprehend. Remedy i^ te^ptacio^.
Therefore when any temtacion comes we must not look to the law and our
works, but setting all them a side, we must run and crepe to the cross of
Christ, we must seek for help and grace by christ, and hu^bli must knowlage
our faults. And though our sins be never so great or grievous, though the
fear and temptacion of death be never so horrible, yet we must still styke to
the promise of God, and suerly must trust, and doubt nothing, that our
sins be forgyuen us for Christ's sake according to the promise of God,
without any deservings of ours: and that God is our father, and we shall live
with him for ever and ever. The works and passion of Christ, which be of great
and infinite and omnipotent power ought more to styre us up to trust well on
God that he will be evermore to us a mercyful lord, than our sins ought to
fraye us, for the grace of God in Christ is much stronger and more able to
deliver and help us than our sins be to condemn us. Roma. v. Romans 5.
And this grace of god does not hang of our works for than yt should be
uncertain, but yt standyth fyrme by grace of faith through Christ, with out
any regard or respect of our workyng. And this is done by the syngular
prouedence of the great fatherly love of god toward us, because our
iustyficatio^ should stand firm and certain by faith, so that no man need
doubt of the favor and marcy of god toward him, if this grace and promise stand
in the hand of god, than is yt suer, so that we can not doubt of the remiscion
of our sins. But if they should stand in our own hand and should hang of our
selfs the^ we should always be vncertane by cause we were never able to deserve
sufficiently, not of sufficient strenght to fulfill the law. But after that we
return and refer our selfs in Christ alone, and in the promise of god
through Christ than be we sayfe and suer enough by cause god has promised of
his voluntary grace freely, and has founded his promise by the faith in
Christ, to thentent yt shall stand fyrme and certain. And therefore I said
the kingdom of Christ to be a kingdom of securite and peace, Christ's kingdom
is a kingdom of security. Esa. 32.
as the prophites do descrybe yt, In this kingdom we have peace and most suer
succur, so that there is now nether sin death nor hell can fear us. So
does Esaias also.ix. call Christ the prince of peace woose pryncedome is
large and great, Christ the prince of peace.
and whose peace shall never have end. In Jeremy also.xxiii. god does promise
unto Israel, that is unto all beleuers in Christ a boadde of justice, a king
which shall rule wisely, and shall execute judgment and justice in earth and
under who^ Israel shall dwell boldly, these things be in the spiritual
kingdom of Christ in the which there is true and spiritual security, where
as every christen man's heart has peace with god through faith in Christ, in
the which kingdom nether sin can damn us nether death ca^ kill us, nor
hell can swalow us. For god is with us and fedyth us, and defe^dyth us as his
sheep. Therefore who ca^ be against us? And Esaias again.xxxii. Esa. 32.
when the holy gooste, says he, shall be powered from above (yt was when Christ
begane his kingdom) tha^ the work and fruit of justice shall be peace, and
the keeping of justice shall be silens and securite for ever and ever. And the
people of god shall dwell in goodlynes of peace and in houses of trust. All
these things do nothing else but signify that Christ's people i^ his kingdom
shall be all good, quiett, at rest and merry, which shall have a quiet and a
glad conscience, being evermore suer and certain yt god is favorable to them
for Christ, which does deliver us from all euyls with out any doubt. I pray you
what can our aduersarys bring aganist this, or how ca^ they maynteyne their
errors in the face of the world. The conclusion.
Here I have prouyd and taught out of the fundation of the word of god that no
faithful beleuer in Christ can doubt or ought to doubt of the favor of god and
of remiscion of his sins, and that his conscience may thorwly be certefyed
that god is favorable unto him, which will pardone all his fautes, for Christ
in whom we believe and which will iustifye us, and give us euerlastng life
without any doubt. Obiecters.
Here our aduersares can have no thing to lay against this doctrine or to
subvert this foundation, but one refuge they have, and when we bring
scryptures against the^: what say they, the Lutherians, say they, bring
scryptures for them, but they must expound scriptures as our fore fathers did.
An answer
I answer again, we do not deny so to do, for we may do it well enough.
And I may say with S. Cyrillus, Cirillus
we keep the faith of our fathers and of the church so far as we ought and
use their interpretacions so much as they require. But the chefest of the
ancient fathers of the church do agree in the same matter no other wise then
we expound it / therefore what do these holy workers bring for them the
church. Augustine de predest. 11
Saint Augustyne one of the most catholyke and godly doctor of them all in his
book which he writes of the predestinacion in the.xi. chapter says in this
wise. Truly where as the apostle in his epistle to the Romans writes these
words. Therefore is our inherytau^ce given us by faith through grace because
the promise might stand fyrme and steadfast, I meruell, says he, that men had
rather look on their own infyrmite tha^ unto the firmite and stedfastnes of
Gods promise. But here thou wylt say, I can not tell nor do not know the will
of God of me, well the^ do thou know thine own will of thy self, if thou
do, beware, he that stands let him take heed that he fall not. Therefore
insomoche thou know never another his will, nor thine own will, then why
should not a man rather put his trust and hope in that which is more certain
than in that which is less certain. But say they again, hear where it is
spoken, if thou beleuest thou shalt be saved, one of these is required of us,
the other is offered, and that which is required of us is in us, the other in
God. And why, I pray you is not both in Gods power both that which is
required and that which is offered? for do not we as well desire God to give
us that which he requires as well as that he offers? do not the beleuers
also desire him to increase their faith: Do they not desire also for the
unbelievers that they may have faith, so that God only must be the begynner and
encreaser of faith. In like manner is this to be taken. If thou beleuest thou
shall be saved, and this, if you mortify the works of the flessh with spirit,
ye shall live: for in like case here one is required, the other is offered. If
you mortefie (says he) the works of flesh with spirit ye shall live / then
to mortefye the works of flesh by spirit, this is required, the other then
is offered us that we should live / what then therefore shall we not say that
this is the gift of God to mortefie the works of the flesh because it is
required of us to be done? God forbede that any perteynynge to the grace of God
should so think. This is a damnable error of the Pelagians, whom as the
apostle in his words following does confute saying, who soever be led with the
spirit of God they be the children of God. Less we should think this
mortefyeng of the flesh came by our spirit, but by the spirit of God, of the
which spirit of God the same apostle speaks moreover. All these things
says he, works one alonly spirit, distributynge to every man his gifts so
as it pleases him, amongst the which gifts also he rekeneth faith / so then
like as this mortefyenge of the flesh notwithstanding it be required of us
is the gift of God, even so is faith also ye very gift of God though
nevertheless it be required of us (if we will be saved) to believe, for these
things both be commanded us of God, and also be the gifts of God. To the
entente we should understand, that both we do the^, and yet it is the gift of
God that we do them / so as the scripture shows by Ezechiell the prophet.
And I (says almighty God) shall make you that you shall do them what can be
more plain? Mark ye well this place of scripture (ge^tyll brethren) and ye
shall se that God promyseth, he will make the^ to do such things that he will
have done. And there he brings forth no merits of theyrs, but much
wyckednes, showing and declarynge thereby that he gives good for evil in that
that he makes them bring forth afterward good works, causynge them to do his
commandments. Also in the.lxxxviii. psalm he says in like manner. Lift up
your hearts for he which promised, will perform, so as he has performed
many things already / for the trust that we have in him we have it not in our
merits but only of his mercy. No man can be strong in this life but only in
the hope of Gods promise / for as concerning our own merits we be meruaylous
weke, we be weak in our selves / in Gods promise strong
but as concerning the promise of God we be strong.

And in the.lxxxxviii. psalm he says / where is securite and peace, he
answers again, truly none in this life but only in the hope of the promise
of God. S. Ambrose Ambrose.
in the first book de vocat ge^ti. etc. writes if no man (says he) will
break or dispyse a man's will or testament, as says the apostle, nor alter
it. Then how can it be that Gods will and testament should be broken in any
thing.

It carries always and every day is fulfilled that the lord promised to
Abraham without any condition, and gave without any law. By this saying of
Ambrose it may well appear that the promise of the new testament, that is to
say that God will be merciful unto us, will forgive our sins, will give us
the holy ghost, and will make us safe, that this promise I say does not depend
of no condition of the law, for freely yt comith only of grace, be cause we
should never doubt of his grace and favor toward us. And what other thing
menyth S. Ambrose writing upon Paul, where he says so often, that we be sauyd
before god by faith only and alonly. Look upon his come^taris of the Romans
iii.iiii.ix.x, Cap. look also.i. Cor.i. and Gal. i.iii.v. Theophilact.
Theophilactus also Romans iiii. writes in like sort. In so much says he it is
euedent, that the law bryngyth nothing but anger therefore had Abraham his
Justice and inheritance given him, because that all should go by grace.
Wherefore than seeing that all things now do stand in the grace and in the mercy
of god, so that he is bound now not to work after his Justice, then what
should let us to think but that all things be certane and stable what so ever
he does, give, or promise. Now if blind hipocrise here object again that
Paul in his place spekyth only of Abraham and therefore that thing co^cernyth
none else but him, but we must seek our health and justification otherwise. I
answer again. Not so, For therefore Paul callyth Abraham there the father of
all the beleuers and in him proposes to us all the true means how all men
both before the cu^myg of Christ and after the cu^myg of Christ must be
Justified. And therefore this text of Paul does as well pertayne to us all, for
it is written and proposed unto all us. Romans 4.
Even as S. Paul in the very same chapter writes. This is not written for him
only, says he, that it was imputed to him for Justice, but for us all, to whom
it shall be imputed for Justice. beleuyng on him which raised up from death
our lord Jesus Christ, which was given for our sins, and raised up again
for our Justification.

Amen

