FAITH AND GOOD WORKS United: IN A SERMON PREACHED at the Spittle upon
Wednesday in Easter week, 1630.

By RICHARD REEKS Minister of the word at Little Ilford, in Essex.

LONDON, Printed by THOMAS HARPER, for JOHN HARRIGAT, and are to be sold at his
shop at the sign of the Holy Lamb in Pater Noster Row, MDCXXX.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, SIR THOMAS FANSHAVV, Knight, Grace and Glory.
Right Worshipful,
I Have made bold to dedicate this Sermon to you, for that as your affection to
Religion, love to learning, hatred of superstition and schism, has rightly
honored you; so also you proceed every way to adorn your eminent calling;
Praerogativam generis similitudo morum magis sibi vendicat quam ordo maiorum:
The congruity of manners, not the pedigree of ancestors, has the prerogative
of noble birth; wherein although you may plead both, yet you are more dignified
by the former. The Lord has exalted you to eminent place in the Commonwealth,
wherein you have approved your self faithful to God and his Church, so that
you are of the number of those, (...), Agapet.
which are able to do good, not which need good to be done unto. That
therefore which is herein required as touching doing good in this contemplative
but cold age you have both in general and particular, so well performed, that
you stand as a Lamp burning, and light shining unto others to follow your
worthy example; wherein nothing remains, but that you be found faithful (as
you have been) unto death, that God may give unto you a crown of life, such
shall the prayers of him be for you and yours, which rests

Your worships in the best service ever to be commanded, RICHARD REEKS.

Auspicante Deo, Textus legitur in Psalmo xxxvij. verse. 3. Trust in the Lord,
and do good, so shall thou dwell in the Land, and verily thou shall be fed.
THere is no faith where there is either means or hopes; difficulties and
impossibilities are the true objects of belief. Gods charges are oftentimes
harsh in the beginnings and proceeding, but in the conclusion always
comfortable. God deferres on purpose, that our trials may be perfect, our
deliverance welcome, our recompense glorious. This knew the holy Psalmist, the
Prophet David right well, and therefore through more then much experience
penned this Consolatory Song or Psalm, as it plainly appears by the argument
of it throughout. Wherein the Princely Prophet most gravely preuenteth many
distrustful doubts and fears which might (in the contemplation of
Christianity and the comparison of the same with the present gliding delight of
the wicked) at any time arise in the minds of Gods servants and followers.

Here by the way it may be easy to observe how hard a thing it is to be a
Christian. In this respect his meditation affording him not more grief then
wonder. And here to keep his station is hard, but to remove harder.

One while he scarce restrains his unruly desires from evil; ofter can find
no list to good; sometime he purposes well; and when those thoughts (not his)
begin to lift him from the earth, lo, he that rules in the air, stoops upon
him with powerful temptations, or the world pulls him down with a sweet
violence: so that it is hard to say whether he be forced or persuaded to yield;
here is much weakness, more treachery: good duties seem harsh, and can hardly
escape the repulse, or delay of excuses; and not without much strife grow to
any relish of pleasure; and at the best cannot avoid the mixture of many
infirmities.

But this is not all. O God! what adversaries have thou provided for us, weak
men? What difficulties? What encounters? Malicious and subtle spirits, an
alluring world, a Serpentine and stubborn nature, distrustful fear, neither
the least nor last enemy of mankind, which though our eyes behold, yet with
such amazement (because crossing carnal reason) that from hence arises either
a slavish fear, whereby (when we see the number and the happiness of the
wicked) we (like cowardly Israelites) are ready to fly, and plead their
measure, for our fear: who is able to stand before the sons of Anak?

Or, if not fear, so that (as we can) we weakly resist, yet are we foiled with
indignation and envy, fretting our selves because of the ungodly and being
malicious against the evil doers, verse. 1.

Or (which is worst of all) hereby we are so stupefied that (faith for a while
seeming not to have any being) impious and profane Atheism stealing on us,
makes this question, whether there be a God? or whether blind chance and
fatal necessity and fortune do not hand over head moderate all things here
below. So that at some time or other it is hard even for a believer not to be
an Infidel (at least in conceit) looking carnally to have God at a bent: and
if he come not at a call, how easy to cast him off? and to betake us to our
own (no less idolatrous then ridiculous shifts) like the Chinois, whipping
their gods when they answer not.

Whereas (as the Prophet here exhorts) his holy ones wait long, and seek
him; and not only in their sinking, but from the bottom of the deepes, call
upon him, and though he kill them, still put their trust in him.

To which purpose in this text is said: Trust thou in the Lord etc.

It is not my purpose to spend any time in speaking concerning the author of
this sacred hymn, who (as it appears by the argument of it) was David the
King: neither will I insist upon that excellent order Alphabetically here
used, for the avoiding of tedious prolixity according to the number of the
Hebrew letters.

The Hebrews in their songs (as it might be showed) did follow the method
Alphabeticall, as some think, hereby to help the memory.

Others, as Vatab. tell us, there is no certain reason of this versifying.
Apparet vulgatam carminis rationem fuisse. It appears to be an ancient and
vulgar custom.

Others as Hierom, auerre, that they were written in Saphick verses, to which
purpose he alleges Origin and Philo.

Others suppose this order was used not only to help the memory, but also to
note the worthiness of the matter. And this last opinion may we in this place
first of all incline unto: this Psalm being, Alphabetum quoddam pijs omnibus
discendum vt nouerint vbi sita sit foelicitas and beatitudo, as Vatab.
elsewhere.

Here the care of the holy Ghost is especially to be noted, for man's
salvation, not only to make the way most plain for understanding, but also
the Scriptures as familiar as our A. B. C. for our best conseruing and
retayning in our memory. So that this Psalm is like Habakuks vision, he that
runs may read a lecture of comfort in every letter, and may moreover well
remember what he reads.

But what should I stay on that of S. Hierom. in his epistle to Paulus Vrbicus,
dividing the whole Alphabet into seven connexions; interprets the two and
twenty letters of the Crosse-row. Aleph, doctrina. Beth, domus Gimel, sapientia
etc. What seek we further? Here is true wisdom to be found.

Nay, not only methodicall but musical, not only for information, but also
for consolation; wherefore in the words of a Prophet, Comfort ye, comfort ye,
my people, and, o ye people be ye comforted.

In this consolatory cordial of comfort, then (for so we may well call this
divine dittie one of the sweet songs of Sion) we may observe four parts 1. a
proposition. 2. a confirmation. 3. an amplification. 4. a conclusion.


The Prophet David continually exercised with the cross, and tossed with
trouble, most divinely fortifieth the minds of all Gods children against any
wicked assaults, especially against the scandal of the cross. Namely, that
no man from the outward affluence of all things, the concurrence of all outward
blessings, all pomp, plenty, prosperity to the hearts desire in the greatest
measure whatsoever: beholding this (as the most do) only with the carnal eye
of the body, be so void of divine judgment to draw this argument, Because
high among men, ergo high in the favor of God.

Whereas Solomon tells us, time and chance falls alike to all: and our
Savior, that God causes the Sun to shine on the just and unjust. Such an
argument then were absurd in Gods school, not grounded aright according to the
rules of holy writ.

On the other side, because the Church of God represented in every child of
God, is like Noah's Arc on the waves of the world, tossed to and fro with
contrary winds and waves, sometimes in Shiloh, sometimes in Keriath-iearim,
sometimes amongst the Philistines, disstressed, oppressed, destitute, not
having like Noah's Dove where to rest the sole of his foot till he land on
Ararat the holy hill of heaven.

If any one therefore, looking only through the windows of nature, should from
carnal reason hence conclude, Because this man is in misery exposed to trouble
and calamity, ergo despised and rejected of God.

This were as uncharitable as miserable, for the holy Ghost has in this place,
and in many more teaches us to conclude otherwise. For all that will live
godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution. To be exercised with the cross
is a good argument of one of his followers, which by the cross went unto his
crown; for those that suffer with him, nay for him, shall also reign with him
(mark this argument) if none but such, what shall become of the jolly jinglers
of the time.

Solomon has taught us to conclude of them and their happiness to be only
the cracking of thorns under the pot, only a blast.

But David the father because more acquainted with the cross, therefore is
much more copious in this case, as (not to instance more among many) is largely
for information and consolation set down in this Psalm particularly, they
shall be cut down like the grass, and wither, verse. 2. they shall be cut off,
verse 9. yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be, verse 10. the Lord
shall laugh at him, his day is coming, verse 13. their sword shall enter into
their own heart, verse 15. they shall perish and be as the fat of Lambs, into
smoke they shall consume away, verse 20.

Yet all this while the wicked is in great power and spreading himself like a
Bay tree, verse 35.

And particularly touching the godly for consolation,

Thou shall dwell in the land and be fed, verse 3. he shall give thee the
desires of thy heart, verse 4. he shall bring it to pass, verse 5. he shall
bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the
noonday, verse 6. thou shall inherit the earth, verse 11. in the day of
famine they shall be satisfied, verse 19. the Lord vpholdeth him with his hand,
verse 24. he shall help them and deliver them from the wicked, verse 40.
mark the perfect man and behold the upright, for the end of that is peace,
verse 37.

Yet notwithstanding all this, the just and upright man is in many troubles, so
that this which David here affirms of the state of either in the judgment of
flesh and blood is a mere Paradox, and in natural reason incomprehensible,
but those things which are impossible with men, are possible with God, and
spiritual things are spiritually discerned, wherefore

Trust in the Lord, and be doing good; so dwell in the land, and verily thou
shall be fed.

In this Text we are to observe 2 parts, 1 a precept, trust in the Lord. 2 a
promise, to dwell in the land and be fed.


Touching the precept it has reference 1 to God. 2 to man.


1 To God: trust thou in the Lord; for matter of piety,

2 To man: and be doing good: for matter of charity.

Faith and good works are inseparably united, as the soul and the body (yet
in their order) first faith, for, trust in the Lord: secondly good works: be
doing good: whom God has then thus joined together, let no man put asunder.
Now as when man and wife like faithful yoakfellowes, and like the words of my
Text walk orderly together aequis passibus, a happy issue attends on their
travel: So if our faith be grounded on God in the first place, and from hence
we be enabled in the second place to do good, then a long Catalogue of many
glorious blessings waits on us to crown us, and those are either external,
to dwell in the land. to be fed.
internal, to have the desires of his heart v. 4. to have abundance of peace
v. 11.
eternal, to dwell for evermore, verse 27. and 29.



Whence we see that those which have the Lord for their master, have the most
profitable service in the world, to whom the promise of this life, and so
respecting the body and the soul in the inchoation of grace, and that which is
to come: and so respecting body and soul in the consummation of glory, most
properly belongs, for be says, dwell in the land, thou shall be fed; a
constant promise of him whose word is yea and amen:

Touching this Text then it may be said that it comprehends the Law and the
Gospel; in which we have the first and second table: the sum of the Law and
the Prophets, viz. to love God above all: which we cannot do if we trust not
in him To love our neighbor as our selves, which we cannot do neither, if we
be not doing good. So that the grace of God (like the Son in his glory)
appears in our Text to teach us to deny all vngolinesss, and to live
religiously, by trusting in the Lord: righteously, by doing good to our selves
and others: and soberly, by waiting on the Lord, dwelling in the land and being
fed.

In the words what obscurity? only the last, dwell in the land and thou shall
be fed, challenge at my hands a further interpretation; our letter not so well
bearing, and therefore not so nearly answering the original: of which when I
come unto the promise.

I For the precept, as touching our faith; trust thou in the Lord. Having then
thus far acquainted you with the scope of the holy Ghost, at large; that the
children of God when they see themselves in great misery, and the wicked
flourishing as a green Bay tree, ought not to be amazed at this, nor to fret
hereat, or be filled with indignation, or because they are like a fat Ox
fatted for the day of slaughter, whereas the children of God must be exercised
with many afflictions; lest with the world they should be condemned. 2 That
their light afflictions which are but temporal, may be crowned with glory
which is eternal. And for this cause to trust in the Lord, whence I observe,
that in all troubles and trials whatsoever, Doctr.
and at all times we ought confidently to trust in the Lord.

1. The place is a confirmation of this truth, Illustr.
as it is used here by way of precept, trust thou in Jehovah.

To this purpose is that of David, in God is my salvation and my glory, the
rock of my strength and my refuge is in God.

Trust in him at all times ye people, pour out your hearts before him: God is
a refuge for us. In which the Prophet not only bids and exhorts us to
trust in him, but moreover adds a reason drawn from the profitable effect of
such confidence; because he is a refuge to help us and deliver us.

To this place is that of Solomon, Pro. 3.5.
trust in the Lord with all thy heart: and lean not to thine own
understanding.

2 This has been the practice of the children of God in all troubles, and in
all times, as is proved from the example of that godly and faithful King, who
when the Moabites and Ammonites came against him, to battle, after he had
prayed unto the Lord for help and deliverance, as the people went forth into
the wilderness of Tekoa, 2 Chro. 20.20.
Iehosaphat stood and said: Hear me O Judah and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem,
trust in the Lord your God, so shall ye be established; believe his Prophets
so shall ye prosper. An example we have in good Jacob, who trusting in the
Lord was not afraid to return to his own Country, notwithstanding the malice
which his brother Esau had conceived against him, Genesis 31.3.
because he believed that God who commanded him to go would also defend him.

The like might I say concerning the rest of the Patriarchs, Noah, Abraham,
Lot, Isaac, Joseph, David, Daniel, together with the sacred quire of reverend
antiquity summoned by the Author to the Hebrews, who through faith subdued
Kingdoms, Heb. 11.3^.
wrought righteousness, obtained the promise, stopped the mouth of Lions,
quenched the violence of the fire, escaped the edge of the sword, waxed valiant
in battle, and turned to slight the armies of Aliants.

By evidence whereof we see that if we trust in God and cast our care on him,
he is such a father of mercies and God of all comfort that he will also care
for us.

For which cause our Savior said to his disciples, let not your hearts be
troubled, you believe in God; believe also in me; Ioh. 14.1.
etc. A little faith then even as small as a grain of Mustard seed, is able to
make us list up our heads in the midst of all troubles, and to remove even
Mountains of distrusts out of our souls.

Therefore in the description of the spiritual armor faith is compared to a
buckler or shield: Ephesians. 6.16.
which guardeth especially the head and heart; that is (as it may be construed)
the understanding and will, ut non turbetur intellectus, Diez com. 1. in fest
Phil. Iacol.
non formidet affectus, that we be not troubled in our understanding, nor made
fearful in our affection. By faith the children of God have been more bold
then Lions, and enabled to do even all things.

When Taxaris saw his Countriman Anacharsis in Athens, he said unto him, I will
at once show thee all the wonders of Greece, Lucianus in Scytha.
vis^ Solone vidisti omnia; in seeing Solon thou see all, even Athens it
self, and all the glory of the Greeks. In like manner I may tell a true
Christian: have thou says and assured trust in the Lord? thou have more then
all the wonders of Greece; upon the point, all the wonderful gifts of grace:
for faith is a mother virtue from whence all other spring, and without which
our best actions are but splendida peccata, shining sins, Romans 14.24. most
necessary then that we trust in the Lord.

And not without great reason.

1 Because if we trust not in the Lord as touching grace we are dead: 1 Reason.
as long as we live we breath and labor for life even in death: faith is the
life of grace, the death of all sin: Hab. 2.4.
hence it is said, the just man lives by his faith, and living hereby his
soul trusts in the Lord, he looks cheerfully to God, having the spirit of
boldness, insomuch that we may say of him, Si fractus illabatur orbis
impavidum ferient ruinae, if the mountains should be removed and cast headlong
into the Sea, still he stands his ground: yea, Terra fremat, regna alta
crepent, ruat orcus and ortus; Si modo firma fides, nulla ruina nocet. If that
all the world should crack in pieces, nevertheless he stands fast and firm,
grounded on the rock fixed like the Mount Sion, Psalm. 129.
not to be removed at any time by any means; for he trusts in the Lord, and
under the shadow of his wings is the righteous man's refuge till the tyranny of
Satan, Psalm. 57.
sin, death and hell be ouerpast: for he has (if I may so say) the
lifeblood of the soul, true faith in the Lord, and relieth on his promises
and therefore cannot miscarrie.

Whereas on the other side, a faithless man and distrustful in all troubles*
whatsoever, is ready not only to sincke under his burden, but also to give up
the ghost. It is with them as it was with Nabal; a distrustful person has a
head like Nabal, a heart like Nabal, when he hears of any troubles and
crosses not to be undergone, but which he has escaped ignorantly. ^ Sam.
25.37.
His heart presently dies within him, and he becomes as a stone.

Physicians tell us, that in man's body the arteres running along the veins, do
beat upon them, and stir up the blood, lest congeling, it should wax cold; so
in the soul of the godly, true faith beats in time of all distress, and
keeps it alive in the wicked, as in Nabal it moves not, and therefore in
necessity either they die with grief, as he did, or with Achitophel hang
themselves, or with Saul run in distress to the witch of Endor, to hell for
help; whereas the children of God wait upon him for deliverance with patience
and with confidence trust in the Lord.

Because faith is the only means whereby we apprehend all the promises of God,
2 Reason.
and apply them to our comfort in time of need: hence it is that the Apostle S.
Paul (or else who) to the Hebrews, says, Heb. 11.6.
Without faith it is impostible to please God. For he that comes to God,
must believe, that he is, and that he is a rewarder (or as our purpose is, a
deliverer) of them that diligently seek him.

So then without faith, no apprehension of God as he is: without apprehension,
no deliverance.

Faith then is the means: and God usually shapeth the end according to the
means. Naaman had never been cleansed of his leprosy, if he had not been
washed in Iordane. God is not tied to means, but men are, which we both may
and must use, if we expect or desire the issue. God could sauevs without the
preaching of his word, but he will not. He has ordained no means so
effectual to beget faith as this; and therefore we must have a constant
dependence thereon.

God could raise up children to Abraham from the stones: he could of Devils and
reprobates make Saints and Angels, but he will not; it is one thing what he
can do, another what he will do. And therefore monstrous absurdities might be
concluded, if that we should dispute from his power to his will.

It is well taken that the father of the Prodigal would neither fetch the robe
nor suffer his son to fetch it neither, but commanded his servants to bring it
forth and put it on: and why? If not to bring means into credit, for which
the Gospel abounds with examples; in all those miraculous deliverances
wrought by our Savior ascribing them still to faith.

Hence when Peter began to sincke, he attributes it to his in fidelity and
distrust, in that he said, O thou of little faith! wherefore did thou doubt?
As if he had said, if thou had trusted in me, Mat. 14.31.
thou could not have miscarried.

And in another place it is said, he could do no works there, because of their
unbelief, save that he laid his hands upon a few sick. On the other side, in
many miracles, we find the truth of this point confirmed.

When the distressed woman of Canaan whose daughter was miserably vexed with a
Devil cried unto him for help, Mat. 15.28.
saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou son of David, etc. whom for
importunities sake, the Disciples besought to send her away: he answered, I am
not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

Then came the woman and worshipped, saying; Lord help me; to whom he
replied, It is not meet to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to the
dogs. And she said, truth Lord, yet the dogs eat the crummes which fall from
their masters table. (Hence the deliverance) O woman, great is thy faith! be it
unto thee as thou will, and her daughter was made whole.

So likewise the Leper that came unto him, beseeching him and kneeling down
unto him; said, If thou will thou can make me whole, (behold his faith and
see deliverance) Jesus moved with compassion, put forth his hand and touched
him, Mark. 1.40.
and said, I will, be thou whole, and he was cleansed.

Again, in him which was sick of the palsy, we see the same thing, when they
could not come nigh unto him for the press, Mark. 2.4.5.
they uncovered the roof where he was, and let down the bed where the sick of
the palsy lay. When Jesus saw their faith, he said unto the sick of the
palsy, son thy sins be forgiven thee.

So the woman with the bloody issue, having been troubled twelve years, and
spent all on Physicians, and become much worle; when she had but touched his
garment (for note her faith, she had said, if I touch but his clothes I shall
be whole) the fountain of her blood was dried up, Mark. 5.25.
and she was healed of that plague. And all this is ascribed to her faith,
daughter thy faith has made thee whole, go in peace.

The like is to be instanced in the deliverance vouchsafed unto Iairus in his
daughter, when the people told him she was dead, why troublest thou the master?
Mark. 5.36.
Jesus said unto the Ruler of the Synagogue, be not afraid, only believe: and
he raised her.

So in the miracle wrought upon the man's son which was dumb, the deliverance
is ascribed to faith, in that our Savior said all things are possible, Mark.
9.^4.
if thou can believe. And the father of the child cried with tears, I
believe, Lord help my unbelief, and then and thus he cured him.

Plain for this purpose is that of blind Bartimeus the son Timeus also, who
hearing that Jesus passed by, cried out, Jesus thou son of David have mercy
on me. What would thou, said Christ? Mark. 10.46.
Lord that I might receive my sight; to whom he answered, go thy way, thy
faith has made thee whole.

So the Leper which was cleansed, go thy way, Luke 17.14.
thy faith has made thee whole.

So to the woman which brake an Alabaster box of ointment, and stood at his
feet weeping, and washing them with her tears, and wiping them with her
hairs, and kissing them, and anointing them, and being a sinner; to whom
Christ said, thy sins, which are many, are forgiven, Luke 7.50.
but whence this unspeakable mercy? hence, thy faith has saved thee, go in
peace.

Whence it not from hence also was that miraculous raising of the Centurions
servant as it were from death? even from bis faith: he had built a Synagogue he
said in all humility, Lord trouble not thy self, for I am not worthy that thou
should enter under my roof, neither thought I my self worthy to come unto
thee, Luke 7.^.
only say the word and my servant shall be healed. Whereupon our Savior,
verily I say unto you, I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel, and
so he cured her.

But why wade I so far into the Sanctuary for testimonies to prove this? when
as among so many it is hard not to be infinite. In a word our Savior most
divinely, not only by example, but positiuely by precept confirms and
concluded this point. When his disciples marvelled that the tree which he
cursed was withered away, he said to them, have faith in God, for I say unto
you, whosoever shall say unto this mountain, be thou removed, and be thou
cast into the sea, and shall believe that those things which he says shall
come to pass, shall have whatsoever he says. Mar. 11.23.24.
And whatsoever ye shall desire when ye pray, believe ye shall receive them
and ye shall have them.

Thus then seeing so much is attributed to faith as you have heard, it we would
be delivered, we must trust in the Lord, and that for this reason drawn from
the profitable end which follows, namely, to be delivered: on the contray,
the means neglected, no marvel if the end be not obtained.

1 loving God above all. 2 fearing God above all. 3 praying to God, and none
but him. 4 in acknowledging God to be the guider of all things, and therefore
to trust in him.
which, though the last, is not the least in the affirmative part of this
precept.

It is commanded oftentimes in other place of the Scripture, as in Proverb.
3.5. fiduciam habe in Iehova ex toto cordetu^. in Psalm. 4.5. offer the
sacrifice of righteousness, and put your trust in the Lord, in the 5. verse
also of the 37. Plalme, Devolve super Iehovam viam tuam, and confide in eo,
commit thy way etc. in Psalm. 62.8. trust in him at all times, ye people pour
out your hearts before him: God is a refuge for us. (this is worthy to be
noted with no less then Selah) in Isay 26.4. trust ye in the Lord for ever:
for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.

This then is the divine voice of God, dixit Dominus, which him self has said
((...)) and as he has spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets since the world
began; which command implies obedience.

The Rechabites are commended by the Prophet Jeremiah for that they obeyed the
commandment of Ionadab the son of Rechab, Iere: 35.8.
in abstayning from wine all their days, and in dwelling in tents; for which
obedience the Lord promised that Ionadab the son of Rechab should not want a
man to stand before him for ever.

I infer from the Rechabites, if we faithfully trust in the Lord, as not
Ionadab a mortal man, but the high and most mighty Jehovah has commanded us,
we shall stand before him for ever, we shall dwell in the land and be fed in
faith foreuermore.

Pro. 22.18.19.
for it is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee, they shall be
fitted in thy lips, that thy trust may be in the Lord etc. Again, he that
trusts in the Lord shall be made fat, that is, he shall be enriched with all
the blessings of God. Prou. 28.25.


So we see that those which trusted in the Lord have always prospered and
obtained victory of their enemies; hitherto is that memorable victory of the
people of Judah over the Israelites to be referred, 2 Chro. 13.18.
when God delivered them into their hand, and they slew of Israel five hundred
thousand chosen men. And the reason is there rendered, because the men of Israel
had forsaken the Lord and trusted rather in the calves of Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, which caused Israel to sin: whereas the people of Judah kept the
charge of the Lord their God, and did trust in him.

Hitherto is that notable victory of Asa to be referred, in these words Hanan
the Seer challenges Asa the King Judah having made a league with Benhadad King
of Syria. 2 Chronicles. 16.7.
Because thou have relied on Benhadad King of Syria, and not relied on the Lord
thy God: therefore is the host of the King of Syria escaped thy hand.

Were not the Aethiopians and the Lubims a huge host, Verse. ^.
with very many charrets and horsemen? yet because thou did rely on the Lord,
he delivered them into thy hand.

And yet behold a greater profit, for confidence in God brings tranquillity,
and security, and peace of conscience, as is showed in the example of David, I
laid me down and slept, I awaked, for the Lord sustained me. I will not be
afraid for ten thousands of people that have set themselves against me round
about. Psalm. 3.6.7.


In a word, confidence in God omnigenam benedictionem homini praestat,
procures all manner of blessings. A plain and comfortable proof is that of
the holy Prophet, in these words, Ier. 17.7.8.
Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is.

For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, and that spreads out her
roots by the river, and shall not see when heat comes, but her leaf shall be
green, and shall not be careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease
from yielding fruit.

So David: Psalm. 21.7.
for the King trusts in the Lord; therefore through the mercy of the most
high he shall not be moved.

Again, Psalm. 125.1.2.
they that trust in the Lord shall be as the mount Sion, which cannot be moved
for ever.

This was the promise which the Lord made unto Ebedmelech the Ethiopian that
when he accomplished his word in bringing evil upon the city, that he should
be delivered and not be given into the hand of the men of whom he was afraid:
Ier. 39.17.18.
for I will surely deliver thee, thou shall not fall by the sword, but thy life
shall be a prey unto thee.

And why all this mercy? Because thou have put thy trust in me, says the Lord.
In respect of the great profit and the exceeding great reward that follows
our confidence. Good reason that we trust in the Lord:

Psalm. 4.8.
for thou Lord only make me dwell in safety. Thou by thy providence
preseruest me. Hence is that of Esaias; Isay. 26 4.
Trust in the Lord for ever; for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting strength.
Hence is that of our Savior; Take no thought for your life, what you shall eat
or drink, or what you shall put on. Behold the fowls of the air, for they
sow nor, Mat. 6.26.28.
nor reap, nor gather into barnes; yet your heavenly Father feeds them. Are
ye not much better then they? Consider the Lillies of the field how they grow,
they toil not, neither spin, yet Solomon in his glory was not clothed like one
of these. Wherefore if God so cloth the grass of the field, which to day is,
and to morrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more cloth you, o ye
of little faith? After these things the Gentiles seek: as if he had said, you
that know God and his providence ought not to be like the Gentiles, which
because they know not God, therefore trust not in God.

If he so well provide for the Ravens when they call upon him, how much more
shall he provide for his children that put their trust in him.

Some Philosophers thought it too great a labor for God to govern the whole
world: and other on the contrary too base. But divines answer them both in one
word; Apud Ambros. de offic. l. 1. c. 13.
Deus u^que laborat in maximis neque fastidit in minimis. Amb. in Hexam lib. 5.
cap. 2. Indeed the Poet said,

Non vacat exigu is rebus adesse Iovi.

But the Scripture otherwise, that the very hairs of our head are numbered,
Mat. 10.30.
and that not so much as a sparrow which is sold for a farthing can fall on the
ground, without our heavenly fathers providence.

Disponit membraculicis and pulicis, as Augustine. In Psalm. 148.
For besides his general providence which is seen in the government of the
whole universe, Calvin. Instis. lib. 1. c. 16.
he has a special also mode rating every singular action and accident. Who
dwelling on high, Aquin. 1. part. quaest. 22. art. 2. and Caiet. ibid. Heb.
1.3. Wisd. 8.1.
beholds us as Emmots upon the mole hills of the earth, in whom we live and
move and have our being.

For it is written, he supporteth all things by his mighty word. He reaches
from one end to another, and orders all things sweetly.

Omnia non solum permissa a Deo, sed etiam immissa, as one says: Lip sius
Const^n^. lib. 1. Cap. 14.
so that nothing falls out by blind humane chance but by divine choice.

The Lord does not only suffer and see what is done here below, but also
disposes of every particular event to the glory of his name, and good of his
children. He beheld David in his trouble, Daniel in his dungeon, Peter in his
prison, and ordered their short affliction to their endless consolation.

In that then though he dwells on high he humbles himself to behold the
things below. In that he keeps Israel, Psalm. 121.4.
which does neither slumber nor sleep.

In that he graueth his children on the palms of his hands. Isay. 49.16.


In that he hears the very groans of his children in their closets, Psalm.
38.9.
and makes their beds in their sickness, Psalm. 41.3.

In that (as Augustine sweetly) he takes care for all his children as if all
were but one; Confess. l. ^. c. 11.
and for every particular as if one were all. Because of this divine and most
blessed providence, Trust in the Lord.

Unto these we might further add many more forcible reasons, grounded on the
person, in my text; as namely, sixthly, from the power; seventhly, from the
mercy; eighthly, from the love; ninthly, from the wisdom; tenthly, from the
goodness; add also the truth of Jehovah; and look how many meditations you
may conceive concerning God, so many reasons you have to Trust in the Lord.

Whatsoever he is, he is it to us, and for us; because he is the Lord Jehovah,
our God; wherefore let us trust in the Lord.

Thus far of the Doctrine and the Illustration thereof, by Scripture and by
reason.

Proceed we now to the use of this Doctrine, which is diverse.

I. John. 14.1.
we ought always to trust in Jehovah. Our Savior so enformeth and comfort
his disciples, Let not your hearts be troubled; ye believe in the father,
believe also in me; in whatsoever dangers of soul or of body, of life or of
death ye may be, yet be not discouraged, but trust in the Lord.

Dolosum and aerumnosum est cor hominis, as the heart of man is above all
things deceitful, so is it distrustful. For as S. Basil to this purpose
speaks, In Psalm. 44.
we are of one condition in prosperity, but of another in adversity; as it is
most plainly exemplified unto us in that example of Peter in Matthew. 26.33.69.

Fortune (says Seneca) freeth many from punishment, Epist. 61. and 79.
but none from fear; many and manifold dangers like waves coming fast one on
the back of another, one grief calling on another, as the clouds burst forth
with rain.

Many and fearful are those dangers whereunto the life of man is liable; yet
if God be for us, what shall be against us? if our trust be grounded on the
Lord, Psalm. 46.2.3.4.
if our confidence be sure, we need not fear though the earth be removed, and
though the mountains be cast into the midst of the Sea, though the waters
thereof roar and be troubled, though the mountains shake with the swelling
thereof, though the world be lifted off the hinges, and all things be turned
vpside down, though all things go the clean contrary way; in a word though
the Sun be turned into darkness, and the Moon into blood, though the
pillars of the earth and the powers of heaven be shaken, yea, though the frame
of the world, like the temple of Dagon, fall rattling upon our heads, yet we
will not fear, for as David says, Psalm. 18.2. The Lord is my rock, and my
fortress, and my deliverer: my God, my strengh, in whom I will trust: my
buckler and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower.

God is our Captain, therefore like Soldiers we will rely upon his wariness
and watchfulness.

God is our Shepherd, therefore like sheep we shall sleep in peace under
his staff.

God is our Pilot, therefore like passengers sailing in great waters we shall
be without fear under the protection of his care and experience.

God is our King, therefore like subjects we will fear no invasion of enemies
no want of provision under his so well-ordered government.

God is our father, therefore like to his children we will fear no ill under
his arms. O trust in the Lord, for he is the Lord of hosts. 1 Samuel 15.45.
Antigonus King of Syria (as Plutarch speaks) being ready to give battle by
sea bard by the Isle Andros, In Pelopida.
answered one of his men, who told him that his enemies had more ships then he,
For how many men reckonest thou me? indeed the dignity of the General is much
to be esteemed when it is sorted with prowess and experience. But where is
there prowess, where experience, if it be not in the Lord? Therefore Job
excellently says, he is wise in heart, and mighty in strength. Who has
hardened himself against him and has prospered? Job. 9.4.

Surely says David Psalm. 3.8. Salvation belongs unto the Lord. And the
Prophet Esaias says, Esaias 43.11, I, even I, am he, and besides me there is no
Savior. For as none can deliver out of his hand, so none can deliver as he
can. To the righteous he is a shield, Psalm 5.12. To the weak strength,
Psalm 22.12. To the oppressed a refuge, Psalm 9.9. To the persecuted a
fortress, Psalm 91.2.9. To the Sunburned with afflictions he is a shadow. To
those that are exiled for righteousness sake, be is a well furnished
habitation. To the thirsty he is a well of water, as to Sampson: To the pursued
he is a wall of defense, as to the Israelites. To the hungry he is the bread
of life. To the faint he is a bed of down. To the miserable he is a deliverer,
neither are his deliueries palliatiue cures, easing (as cold water in a fever)
only for the present, but all together; not anodins to take away for some few
hours the sense of our pain, not the pain it self, but they are salvation,
and as it were resurrections from the dead. Even as Daniel says, Dan. 6.27.
he delivers and rescueth, and he works signs and wonders in heaven and
earth.

So he delivered Israel our of Egypt.

So he delivered David from Saul.

So he delivered Hezekias and Iehosaphat from their enemies.

So he delivered Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego from the furnace.

So he delivered Daniel from the Den.

So his people out of the Dungeon in Babylon: and such has ever been his
deliverance; O how easy is it to be infinite in this matter? how well might
we loose our selves in the wood, rather the world of these wonders.

Such lastly, was his deliverance of the Church in England from the tyranny of
the bloody Bishop of Rome, from the Spanish invasion 88. from that merciless
and matchless treason, both for fict and faction, the gunpowder treason,
Nouemb. 5. 1605.

O then being compassed about with deliverances, such deliverances of such a
Lord, such a Savior, such a Redeemer. Let us trust in our Lord God.

Let me now say to you all (to conclude this use) as David to his people, Let
Israel, yea, let us all trust in the Lord, for with the Lord there is mercy,
and with our God is plenteous redemption. With him is force and a strength to
redeem Israel out of all her troubles, he may do it, he can do it, he will
do it; search and look through all generations of men which have been since
the World began, and you shall not find one forsaken that put his trust in the
Lord; therefore from hence forth and for ever let us trust in the Lord.

Ier. 1^.5.
Cursed be every man that trusts in men, and makes flesh his arm, for
reproof then of all those which trust not in the Lord, but in other, both
transitory and transient means; such there are, for,

Some me put their trust in uncertain riches, and say to the wedge of gold,
thou art my confidence; but these intollerably offend, Job. 31.24.
and grossly deceive themselves, for riches avail not in the day of wrath. Pro.
1^.4.
The hoarders up of silver and gold come to naught, and go down to hell as it
is in Baruch 3.17. O fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul from
thee: where is now thy god? thy gold? and thy trust? yet this cankered gold is
the worldlings god, nothing more ordinary then to trust in uncertain riches:
for the rich man's wealth is his strong City, says Solomon. Now where will a
man account himself safe, but in his fort?

He sees Mammon to be a great Lord of great command; he sees he can do much,
and hears him say he can do as much more, yea all things, and now no maruayle
that he trusts is him.

Mammon is so proud a boaster that his clients must needs be confident in him;
what does not he brag to do? Silver answers to all, says Solomon. This we
grant, yet we would be loath it could command truth, justice, judgment; yet he
says he can procure all, conquer all, pacify all. He says he can procure all
secular offices, titles and dignities, yea, (in some sacrilegious wretches,
Simonaicall patrons) the promotions of the Church; ye remember the old song of
the Pope, Claues, altaria, Christum. Simon Magus the grand father of these,
made full reckoning to have bought the holy Ghost for money.

He says he can pacify all: a gist pacifieth wrath. (Let them in place of
justice look to it, whom it may concern) he can bribe off sins, and pervert
judgment. He says he can overcome all, for so he sings in the Poet, (...).
Fight with Lances of silver and thine shall be the victory. With this weapon
he thought to foil the son of God. All these will I give thee, briefly
according to the French and Greek proverb, (...), all things obey the Lord
Mammon, this is a great Lord, if this be true, he says the worldling believes
and trusts.

But let me tell you in a word what gold can do.

He can both open and then bar the gates of hell to the unconscionable soul,
and help his followers to damnation, this he can do, and this is all.

As for other things, though the foolish silver Smiths of the time shout out,
great is Mammon of the worldlings, yet weigh his power in the balance of
judgment, and you will conclude of him (as Paracelsus of the Devil) that he
is a base and beggarly spirit.

For tell me I beseech you what he can do? Can he make a man honest? can he
make him wise? can he make him healthful? can he give to live more merrily,
to feed more heartily, to sleep more quietly? yea, rather will he not procure
the contrary, make dishonest, foolish, sick, and unquiet.

Can he buy off the gout, cares, death? much less the pains of hell? Gee to
now ye worldlings, God means to punish thee with death, now try what thy bags
can do? see if thou can bribe God with a gift, will the Lord be pleased
with thousands of Rams? or with ten thousand rivers of oil? See if thou can
bribe death the Serpent of God; he looks thee sternly in the face, and tells
thee with Ehud his message is from God, and sheatheth his sword in thy bowels.
yet

See if thou can bribe the Bayliffe of death, thy disease, he will tell thee
as Laban, this is proceeded of God; I can therefore say to thee nor good nor
evil. In a word, disease will summon thee to death, death will arrest thee to
the judgment seat of God, God will pass his doom; and in all these, true is
that of Solomon. Riches avail not in the day of wrath.

Those therefore which make their wealth riuals with God shall be burned in die
fire of his jealousy; they that lean on them trust to a reed which will not
only break, but also run into their hands; for he that trusts in riches
shall fall.

Some put their trust in their own worth and holiness, as the Pharisee, Luke
1^.
who thanked God that he was not like other men, for which he received no
thanks of God; for he that trusts in his own heart is a fool, his trust
with himself will suddenly decay. Pro. 28.1.


Some put their trust in their politic counsel, as Achitophell, of whom it
was said, his counsel was reputed as an oracle of God. 2. Sam. 16.
But the Lord, says Job, catches the wise in their own craftiness, and the
counsel, of the wicked is made foolish. Job. 5.13.


Some put their trust in their strength (as Goliath did) in their sword and
shield, but cursed is he that makes flesh his arm.

Some put their trust in chariots, and some in horses, but a horse is a vain
thing to save a man, Psalm. 33.17.
neither shall he deliver any by his great strength Mentitur tibi equus quando
promittit salutem, if thy horse promise safety, he lies unto thee, says
Augustine.

Proud Pharaoh that trusted to his horses and chariots, found them liars
indeed; for when in the strength of this conceit he had furnished himself with
six hundred chariots, and was accompanied with all the Nobles, Captains, and
soldiers, and so pursued the Israelites to the Red Sea: there their chariots
and horses failed them in which they trusted, Exo. 14.
as having done service enough to bring their riders into perdition.

What trust now may be put in a horse? The horse is prepared for battle: Pro.
21.31.
true, but the safely is of the Lord. Vain is this trust, for with August.
mendax equus ad salutem. Woe to them that go down into Egypt for help, and
comfort themselves with chariots because they are many, and with horsemen
because they are lusty and strong, Isay 31.1.
but look not to the holy One of Israel, nor seek the Lord.

Some put their trust in Princes, and the sons of men are their confidence,
but David bids us not to put our trust in Princes, nor in any child of man,
for his breath goes forth, and he returns again to his earth, and then all
his thoughts perish, Psalm. 146.3.

See in these words the first and last, highest and lowest of the sons of
Adam, they may be honorable because Princes, but borne sinful the sons of
men, borne weak, for there is no help in them; borne mortal, their breath
departs; borne corruptible, for they return to earth: and lastly, their
mortality is not only in their flesh, for their thoughts also perish.

The order of these words is so set that every member is a reason or
confirmation of that which went before. To this purpose that of Chysostome is
excellent, Trust not in Princes, either because they are men, or because
helpless, or because mortal, or because corruptible in the frame of their
bodies, in the cogitation of their hearts; or lastly, Si dicendu^ est aliquid
mirabile, if a man may speak that which the world may justly wonder at: trust
not in Princes even for this cause, because they are Princes, and in least
safety themselves.

Tamille timere cogitat qua^timeri, was Cyprians judgment of one in
government, he has as great cause to fear as to be feared. I read in
Plutarch, In Alexand.
that after Alexander the great had published that he was son to Jupiter
Hammon, yet when he saw the humor running down from his wounds was
constrained to say, this is (...), not (...), the blood of man, not of God, and
swelling the stench of his own filth, asked his flatterers if the Gods yield
such a sent.

Where is Sapor King of Persia, Marcelline. l. 17.
that took to himself the proud title of King of Kings, brother to the Sun
and Moon, partaker of the Stars, like the proud Turker? Where is he? has
his pretended brother defended him? has his pomp delivered him from death?

The like might I say of Herod, and of all the Potentates of the earth, yea of
the Pope himself, whose Canonists tell us, that he is neither God nor man: but
we all know he is a man, and a man of sin, far unable to deliver so many
thousands out of hell and his feigned purgatory, which can not deliver himself
from treason, death and destruction.

Vain fools, which leave God, and put their trust in men, since the lowest
are vanity, the highest are vanity. The lowest no less, the highest no more.
Surely man, says David, is altogether vanity.

Some put their trust in Devils, as Saul when he went to Endor, as all those
do which run in all sickness and in all losses to wisards, buzzards,
sorcerers, witches, devils, for help and knowledge. Cursed be all those that
forsake the Lord, and run to the Devil for help.

Some put their trust in Angels and in Saints, imploring their aid, and
desiring their help. But Job says, To which of the Saints will thou turn
thee, meaning that none is able to help thee. These therefore err grievously,
and are given ouerto strong delusions, believing a lie, in that they rely on
the creature, and forsake the Creator, who is blessed for ever and ever.



Let us sing that sweet strain which the faithful have in the Prophet,
Hicurruum and illi equorum; nor vero nominis Dei Iehouae nostri recordabimur.
Psalm. 20.7.
Let it be the matter of our meditation in the day of trouble, and in all
rimes of distress, let us say in faith and sure hope; Some trust in chariots
and some in horses, but we will remember the name of the Lord our God. We will
remember him and put our trust in him alone.

It we trust in the Lord, a blessing shall attend us. It is promised in Jeremy
17.7. Blessed is the man that trusts in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is.
But how shall he be blessed? It follows in the Propher, He shall be as a
tree planted by the waters, that spreads out her roots by the river whom the
heat cannot hurt, whole leaves are always green: in a word, whatsoever he
does, shall prosper. And lo, thus shall the man be blessed that fears and
trusts in the Lord.

Let Alexander persuade himself to be the son of Jupiter Hamon till he see
his blood; let Sapor King of Persia write himself King of Kings, brother to
the Sun and Moon partner with the stars. Let the Canonistes of Rome make a
new Canon to transfigure their Pope into a new nature, making him to be neither
God nor man, but somewhat between both (I think a monster.) Let Antiochus
think to sail upon the mountains. Let Senacherib think (like Xerxes host)
to dry up the rivers with the plant of his foot. Let Edom exalt himself like
an Eagle, and build his nest among the stars, and in the clefts of the rock,
and say in the pride of his heart, who shall bring me down to the ground? Let
the covetous say to his gold, thou art my confidence, let the wicked vanish
away in their mortal vanity: but let us trust in the Lord Jehovah, the mighty
God of Israel, so shall we ever find mercy in time of need: which the same
God grant for his Sons sake, to whom with the holy Ghost be ascribed all
power and glory for ever. Amen.

Text. And be doing good, etc.
FRom piety to pity is a just consequence; the gradation of the Prophet is
excellent from sure confidence to ready obedience, in which he requires that
the inward and outward man may be both exercised. The former words struck at
the heart, Trust in the Lord, but these at the hand, at the outward
conversation, and he doing good, The streams cannot choose but be wholesome,
if the fountain be sweet. For even as the Sun cannot be without lire, the
fire without heat, the body without a shadow, no more can says and good works
be separated; hence it is, that S. James challenges an outward obedience,
answerable to an inward confidence; Show me thy faith by thy works: thou say
thou beleeuest, show it by thy doing good.

This beneficence which we ow to men by doing good, is not only in this place
glanced at, or barely repeated by the Prophet, but called for in many more
places of the holy Scripture, as Heb. 13. To do good forget not, and in many
more places: and is expressed in the variety of no less then four epithites:
1. Doing good, 2. being rich in good works, 3. ready to distribute, 4. willing
to commun cate, diverse words all to one sense; all is but beneficence, doing of
good.

This ingeminating (lest any Atheist might quarrel at this waste) is not any
way superfluous. The Scriptures redouble the same words without fault of
Tautologie; a redoubling of the same sense in diverse words without idleness.
Aug.
Verbatoties incul. ata viua sunt, vera sunt, sana sunt plana sunt, as an
ancient well says. There is fervor in these repetitions, not looseness; God
would have our duty so plainly set down, that he that runs may read it.
As it was wont for this cause to be observed, both in counsels and acclamations
to Princes, how often the same word was reiterated, that by the frequence they
might judge of the vehemence of affection. It were easy to instance in many of
this kind, as especially, Exodus 25.35. Psa. 89.30. Ioh. 1.20. and in many more
places.

This heap of words therefore shows the vehement intention of his desire of
good works; whence I observe, That it is not left arbitrary to us, Doctr.
that we may do good if we will, but there is an important necessity of the
performance of good. Illustr.
That it is laid upon us as our charge and duty, it is evident from hence in
that it is positiuely by way of precept set down, hoc fact, be doing good. The
very manner of the expression hereof in Timothy enforces no less: where it is
said, Charge the rich that they do good, and be rich in doing good, in which
place, as in this text, confidence in God and beneficence to men go hand in
hand together; neither, as I spoke, is it left as arbitrary to us to do or
leave undone, but if we sail in this latter, we are guilty of the former: For
this is our charge and our duty; we must be doing good, and woe be to us if we
do not. This is nor a counsel, but a precept: although I might say of God, as
we speak of Princes, Sic volo, sic iubeo, stat pro ratiom voluntas: his will
is his command. And forasmuch as you see them linked together and coupled in
the text, I may justly conclude the same necessity that there is of trusting in
God, the same is in doing good to men.

Hence it is, that the Apostle S. James so often calls for deeds, Quid verba
audiam, cumfacta videam? What avails Jacobs voice, when we have none other
then Esaus hands? Not the hearers but the doers of the law are justified. And
again: See that ye be doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving
your own selves: wherein the Apostle shows, that God is better delighted
with obedience then sacrifice, with doings rather then sayings: a lesson fit
for our time, wherein too many make perfunctory hearing of Sermons, both duty
and fruit of their Religion; never doing any other good then hearing how to do
good; having a contemplative; but cold Christianity in them, as if they did ow
nothing but their cares unto the Lord: whereas he who speaks by ear to the
heart, speaks to the ear but for the heart, that we may hear with
reverence, and believe to obedience; and make them both perfect by our doing
good.

And not only S. James is for doing good, but all the belles of Aaron and
Christ ring the same peale. For Deuteronomy. 4.1. Hearken, O Israel, unto the Laws
which I teach you to do. Romans 2.13: Not the hearers, but the doers, are
righteous before God. Luke 11.28. Blessed are they that hear the word of God
and keep it. Ioh. 14.21. He that has my commandments and keeps them is he
that loves me. To which purpose S. Aug. speaks notably: Tract. 75. in Joan.
Qui habet in memoria and seruat in vita; qui habet in sermonibus and seruat in
moribus; qui habet audiendo and seruat faciendo; aut qui habet faciendo and
perseuerando, ipse est qui diligit me. He that has my word in memory, and
shows it in his life; which has it in mouth, and shows it in his manners;
that has it in hearing, and shows it in doing; that has it in doing, and
shows it in perseuering; this is he that loves me. For as the same Father
says; Lex Dei tenetur non audiendo sed obediendo, Eyist. 107.
non lectione, sed dilectione.

So S. Hierome: Scripturarum cupimus verba in opera vertere, and non dicere
sancta, sed facere. So the rest of that sacred society have well observed, that
Christian Religion consists in practice, more then in theorie; being an
occupation, rather then a mere profession, [of doing good.]

De virtute loqui minimum, virtutibus vti.

H^c ^^bor, hoc opus est, as Persius spoke, hoc Sampsonis opus est, as
Tertullian. And not the work of Sampson, but also of Solomon; not only of a
strong man, but in very deed of a wise man; even as our Savior in the Gospel
shows, saying; Whosoever hears my words and does them, I will liken him to a
wise man, which had built his house on a rock, Matthew.7.24.

Moreover, the Prophet David shows, what privilege belongs to him that
escheweth evil and does good; in his Ep phonema or conclusion of the 15.
Psalm, Whosoever does these things shall never fall. In which words, (as judicious
Calvin notes) the Prophet does not say he that hears these things, or he that
knows these things, or he who can discourse of these things; but he that does
these things: for as we judge of the corporal health of the heart, not by the
words of the mouth or color of the countenance, but by the pulse of the arm;
so judgment is made of the spiritual soundness of the heart, not so much by
words and looks as by the fruits of the hands. He shall enter into the
kingdom of heaven which does the will of my father which is in heaven, says
our Savior. Mat. 7.21.
And if ye know these things, happy are ye if you do them, John 13.17. S.
Aug. De civit. Dei. l.6.6.2.
reports that Varro the great Philosopher did read so much that it was
admired how he could write any thing; again he wrote so much that another
could hardly read: now admit a man had as great knowledge in Divinity as he in
Philosophy, that he could speak with the tongue of men and Angele and had
not love, whereby to do good, he were as an inane nihil, sounding brass, a
tinckling cymball, 1. Cor. 13.1. Lastly, the Apostle in the cited place tells
us that faith must work by love, else it is no faith: So here our Prophet
requires the same. First faith; trust in the Lord. But let it work by love,
in doing good. In which sentence both the Prophet and the Apostle set forth the
perfection of a Christian in this life, which consists in 2. parts: Inwardly
in says to God, Outwardly in doing good to men:


1. Inwardly to God by faith, which needs not our good works. Psalm. 16.2. O
God, my goodness extends not to thee.

2. Outwardly to men by good works; which need not our faith, as it is
written in the named place. But to the Saints that dwell upon the earth. In
which respect S. Aug. de ciuit. Dei, lib. 10. c. 1. says, that doing of good,
is pro sacrificijs, accepted of God as a Sacrifice; Heb. 13.10. Yea, prae
sacrificijs, more then sacrifice. Hosea 6.6. I will have mercy and not
sacrifice. For to be merciful is the sole work common to man with God, (as
Synes.) nor indeed can we any way more nearly resemble God, which is most
good, then in our doing of good. Greg.


To the necessary performance whereof in the next place, we are invited by
many, and those most forcible reasons: first:

doing of good; we may (and justly) say of such, that they degenerate and grow
out of kind; they do not (patrizare) tread in their fathers steps, going about
always doing of good after the example of Christ Jesus our elder brother.

Again, although we must walk, yet it is as children; and therefore weakly;
yet notwithstanding they show their love, in that they walk and follow so well
as they can, desirous to go on further if they could. And this is kindly
accepted of a loving father. So is it with Almighty God, whose mercies are far
greater, then our desires or endeavors are or can be, who when he sees us like
loving children, following in the same way which he leads us, accepts our
will for the deed, crowning his own work in us.

For although we, as children, cannot tread in the same steps (as he speaks
of Ascanius in the Poet,)

-- sequiturque patrem non passibus aequis. Yet we tread; and as we can go
along the very same way: and in this true and childlike resemblance of him, we
shall much delight our holy father. This is the very argument which our Savior
uses to the Jews, John 8.39. which stood much upon their prerogatives, nil
nisi Cecropides, they boasted themselves to be Abraham's seed, but he tells
them that their boasting was in vain of their father, since they were so much
degenerated from him, that they were no longer to be accounted and called the
children of Abraham. For when they told him Abraham is our father; Jesus
answered them, if ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of
Abraham. For Abraham by his good works glorified God, and showed his love to
him in walking as his child, so must all the true seed of Abraham be doing of
good to show their love to God.

Whereby moreover God is glorified.] For like as when a child, observes in
most dutiful manner, what his father commands, this redoundeth to the praise
of the father; Omnet enim omnia bona dicere, and laudare fortunas meas, qui
filium haberem tali ingenio praditum. So the Lord is glorified in his children,
when they intend and seek his honor and glory, by their observing him in doing
good, The costly raiment wherewith others are clothed, makes to the praise of
the worker; so it is said of the good huswife, give her of the fruit of her
hands, and let her works praise her in the gates, Prou. 31.31. So the doing of
good redoundeth unto God, whose glory ought to be the end of our life and scope
of all our actions, as Paul teaches. Whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever
ye do, let all be done to the glory of God, 1. Cor. 10.30.

1. in quieting our own conscience. 2. in making our election certain.


As touching the first, namely the peace of conscience, S. Paul to Timothy
1.1.19. counsels him to hold fast the faith, and keep a good conscience;
now indeed, what greater peace can be brought to the conscience, then that,
which arises out of our doing of good through a lively faith. And --

As touching the second, S. Peter carnestly exhorts, 2. Pet. 1.10. Give
diligence to make your calling and election sure: which cannot be more
effectually performed, then by our doing of good. This alone was the rejoicing
of the holy Apostle. What? Not that he had preached, not that he had wrought
miracles, or done extraordinary works, but that in obedience to Gods
commandments, and in sincerity of heart, he had his conversation in the
world: So likewise his comfortable farewell to the world, is grounded upon his
faith, which was showed by love, through both, concluding the peace of his
conscience, and the assurance of his election; I have fought the good fight, I
have kept the faith, I have finished my course, henceforth is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness, 2. Tim. 4.7.

Next unto God what greater love can be showed then to our selves? But wherein
can greater love to our selves be showed, then in quieting of our consciences,
whereby our election may be made sure; This latter (as touching our selves)
depending upon the former, viz. the peace of conscience, this again depending
upon our doing of good, which by more then a multitude of examples might be
showed, what was that which quieted the conscience, and sealed the election of
good Hezekiah, but only this comfortable consideration of his well doing?
Remember, O Lord! how I have walked before thee with an upright heart, Esaias 38.
And not only Hezekiah, but all the children of God, in the midst of many
fold temptations, and spiritual conuulsions, have been so mainly sustained,
that with Paul Romans 14. they have been comfortably resolved, and constantly
assured; that whether we live, we live unto the Lord; or whether we die, we die
unto the Lord: whether we live therefore or die, we are the Lords.

Except then we endeavor our selves (by doing of good) we cannot have a good
conscience, without a good conscience and peace with it self, there is no
peace to be had with God. Hence in a common popular apprehension a good
conscience is said to be a joyful remembrance of a well-led life, joined with
an hopeful expectation of a comfortable death, and a glorious resurrection. In
respect whereof it has been termed, the paradise of the soul, the iubile of
the heart, laetitia cordis, quasi latitia, a surpassing inward solace, so
dilating and enlarging of the heart, for some good in possession, more in
expectation, that the joy thereof can neither be suppressed nor expressed.

Bona conscientia (says Bernard) is titulus religionis, templum Solomonis,
ager benedictionis, hortus deliciarum, gaudium angelorum; A good conscience is
the title and crown of religion, the temple of Solomon; the field of
benediction, the garden of delight, the joy of Angels, and Sanctuary of the
holy Ghost, the tranquillity of the mind, that heavenly music whereon the old
Philosophers doubtfully harped, but the good Christians heart only hears it,
and antwereth it with just measures of joy, which spiritual harmony, as a song
of three parts, consists in a throefold peace supra, with God above us.
extra, with men without us. intra, and the soul within us.


O heavenly peace, whereby we are at league with God, with our neighbors, with
our selves:

O peace passing all understanding, which in respect of the minds tranquillity
joined thereby, is like to the hidden Manna, and white stone wherein a name is
written, which no man knows but he that enjoys it. Reu. 2, 17.


O royal feast! far excelling that of Ahasuerosh, which lasted but ninescore
days; for this is for eternity (whereat Angels are Cooks and Butlers, and the
blessed Trinity gladsome guests (as Luther boldly speaks) without intermission
of solace, or interruption of society.

A feast in life, refreshing the soul with daitnty cates of divine comfort.

A feast in sickness, when worldly hopes hang down their head like a bulrush.

A feast in death, when world and worldly comforts and comforters forsake us.

A feast in the resurrection, and after that a feast for evermore.

If then this be not a sufficient motive and reason to move us to the doing of
good, let me show you another.

1 to witness our faith unto them. 2 to win them to Christ.


That we shall thus make a real manifestation of our faith Saint James
shows, when he says, Show me thy faith by thy works, James 2.18. Faith if it
have not works is dead, being alone. Yea a man may say thou have faith and I
have works: show me thy faith without thy works and I will show thee my faith
by my works. And again, Without works faith is dead. And, as the body without
the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also, verse last.

Man can judge no further then he has warrant from outward appearance,
although God does judge the heart: it is necessary therefore, that of a good
tree there be also some good fruits. So Christ, either make the tree good and
the fruit good, or the tree evil and the fruit evil; and that we should
witness our faith to men, our Savior most plainly shows, where he says,
Le before men, that they may see your good works.

And that thereby they may be won [and so glorify your Father which is in
heaven. To this purpose is that of the Apostle S. Paul, 1. Cor. 7.14. The
unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife; and the unbelieving wife by the
husband: else were your children unclean, but now they are holy. And in the
16. verse. For what know thou, o man, whether thou shall save thy wife, or
what know thou, o wife, whether thou shall save thy husband? As if he had
said, Thou may by thy holy life and good conversation be a means to win,
him or her, to Christ. Even as the bark of the tree is a beauty or ornament,
and secondly a cover to it; so (for men are likened to trees) a good
conversation is an ornament to a Christian, and corpus tegens, and cor
protegens: decking the soul inwardly, and protecting the body outwardly, and
moving good respect to both. A good outside (though not always) argues a good
inside; a good conversation a sign of sanctification. Virtuous and holy
manners, are compared to precious treasures which are commodious to our selves
and others. To our selves, ad iustificandum, but not effectiuely, for so we are
justified by Christ. But not apprehensiuely, for so we are justified by faith.
But yet declaratiuely, by just and holy works. So our Savior of himself. The
works that I have done, bear witness what I am.

2. To others, ad adificandum, that they seeing our good works may glorify
our father which is in heaven; and so be won by our godly life and
conversation. For, Vinitur exemplis: man is led by practice more then
instruction, like pliable wax for any impression. Nothing more forcible and
perswasiue with the vulgar then examples, which are as looking glasses to the
eyes of men. Validiora sunt exempla quam verba, as Bernard. A good man (says a
good Father) and carbo and lampas est, Grag. in Ezech. bom. 1.
he is a coal burning, and a lamp shining, and sibi ardet and alijs lucet; He
does warm his own conscience and heats himself well, and shows a good
light unto others also. Even as by the bush we judge that there is wine, so
men judge of our hearts by the outward countenance, and God of our works by
the inward conscience. For, Sermo interpres cordis apud virum, cor interpres
sermouis apud Deum, says Philo Iudaeus: Men according to our outward parts,
but God according to our inward hearts. Paul for this cause exhorts those
which profess Christ to have their conversation honest and harmless, that
the name of God may not be blasphemed among the Gentiles: and not only so, but
that they may win those that are without by their holy carriage and
conversation, according to that of the Prophet Isaiab, 61.9. Their seed shall be
known among the Gentiles, and their of spring among the people. All that see
them shall acknowledge them, that they are the seed that the Lord has blessed.
And if this reason be not sufficient, let me lead you yet further.

and a praemio, from the reward. a periculo, from the danger.


That God commands it without further reason why, is sufficient reason for us
to do it. And that it is the command of the highest, it appears in many
places. Eschew evil, and do good. To do good, forget not. Date eleemosynam.
Luke 11.41. Charge the rich that they be fruitful in good works; and here
be doing good. And in many places which command implies obedience, if we go no
further then the command it self; for he that commanded it to be done is that
mighty one, high above all men and angels, by whose command all things were
made; for dixit and factuns est, but that the Lord might leave us inexcusable,
and that every mouth might be stopped, he has enforced the same by a double
reason. For, hoofac and vines: do this A praemi^.
and thou shall live. There is a reward greater then our service. Again, he
that looks in the perfect law of liberty, and continues therein, being not a
forgetful hearer, but a doer of the work, the same shall be happy in his
deed: which happiness is no less then eternal life; then which, what reward
can be greater? Again, we are exhorted by good works on earth, to lay up for
our selves treasures in heaven; to bring somewhat into Gods exchequer, as the
Israelites to the Tabernacle, whereof (in singular confidence, clayming an
especial interest in Gods favor, and expecting the promised recompense) we
may say with Nehemiah, Remember me, O God, concerning this.

For albeit the glory of God be the vltimus terminus of our cogitations,
actions, well doing, and principal motive of our good works; and as it were
the primum mobile of our obedience, yet (as Aquinas) in the actions of our
obedience, whilst we seek the advancement of Gods glory in the first place,
we may as a secondary object or adiunct respect our own commodity, and have an
eye to our own reward; for shall Job, or any one, serve God for nothing?

But as S. Augustine says, in Pal. 100. Nisi Deus per misericordiam parceret,
non inueniret quos per iustitiam corenaret: Except God should spare in mercy,
he should find none to crown in justice. For as conscious to our selves of
our many imperfections in our best actions, of defects and faults in the end,
matter, manner, or measure of our obedience, we must supplicate and say,
misericordia tua meritum meum, thy mercy is my merry, pardon me according to
thy great mercy. In hope and expectation of which infinite reward, we must in
our several callings, daily be doing good, exercising our selves in works of
piety and pity, that so our souls as fields of sincerity, being daily more and
more charged with the deeds of mercy, we may at length be accomplished with the
erest and crown of eternal glory, as himself has promised, Matt. 5. Blessed
be the merciful for they shall obtain mercy. Luke 6.35. John. 14.1.
They shall be called the children of the highest; and therefore have a
dwelling place in their fathers house. For, Quimiseretur proximo, soeneratur
domino, he that casts his bread upon the waters, shall after many days find
for a crumme a crown, for one mite a million, for a drop of cold water, a full
draught of that heavenly water, whereof having tasted, he shall never thirst any
more; and in a word, for the gleanings and refuse of our vintage, a full measure
pressed and running over; saithfull is he that promised to perform it.

But if we cannot be won by reward, let us be wrested by danger for fear of
punishment; for fear and anguish shall be upon every soul that does evil,
and take and bind that unprofitable servant, and cast him into utter darkness,
there shall be weeping, and wailing and gnashing of teeth: this is their
portion for ever: ignorans ignorabitur; Primos^^^ Aquin.
he that will not know God by doing good, shall not be known of God, among
those to whom he shall show himself good.

These forenamed reasons; first to show our love to God in walking as his
children: secondly, to show our love to our selves, In quieting our
consciences, In making our election sure.


Thirdly, to show our love to our neighbors, In witnessing our faith, In
winning them by our godly conversation.


Fourthly, in yielding obedience to the commandment of God, In respect of the
reward, In respect of the danger.


These reasons, I say, (as a cord divinely twisted) are sufficiently able to
move us to, and to confirm us in the doing of good.

fides nuda, is fides nulla; a naked faith, is no true faith; to the conviction
of that lewd slander of Solifidianisme. For although we do not, we dare not,
make inherent righteousness the cause of our justification, yet we say it is
the effect thereof, though with the Papists we make it not the Usher, yea
rather the Parent of justification, yet we require it as the companion, at
least the Page thereof.

But some man may say, what matters it, if both ascribe the whole work to God
For comes it not all to one, if one pay a sum for me or give it me to pay my
self?

These things may seem little dissonant to some men's cares, yet the spirit of
God has made them utterly incompatible. For it is written, To him that works
the wages is not imputed of grace, but of debt, if by grace, now not of works,
for else grace should be no more grace, Romans 4.4. Ephesians. 2.8. for neither is it
grace any way if it be not free every way, says Aug. But they say, therefore
of grace, because of works. Not of works, lest any man should boast, says the
spirit. But of works, and yet a man shall boast in the Lord, says Bellarmine.
This may seem to sound well to an ignorant ear, to say (God has given this
to me whereby I am just) but well considered, under pretense of piety spoils
Christ of his glory. Why does not the Papist as well say, he has given me
wherewith to redeem my self? for by the same wherewith we are justified, we
are redeemed: as it is written -- being justified by his blood) Romans 5.9 Behold
the blood of him that is God and man iustifies us, and that redeemes us, for in
vain had Christ died for us, if by meat and drink we our selves might have
purchased the Kingdom of God. But the matter is far otherwise, for, all,
says S. August. which are justified by Christ, are just, not in themselves,
but in him. That which is Christ's, because it is his, is most perfect; that
which is ours, because ours, is weak and imperfect. Justly does Hierome deride
C^esiphon in the like case, as we may these merit-mongers. O blessed, O happy
men, if that justice, which can be found no where but in heaven, may be found
with you only upon earth. Therefore let them boast of their good works, of
arrogance and superarrogance, let us in humility take up that notable speech of
Saint Ambrose, I will not boast because I am just, but because I am redeemed: I
will not boast because I am void of sin, but that my sins are forgiven.
Contrary boasting, for that we have, nor can find just cause in our selves,
nor warrant from the word, we shall leave to Enagrius, Priscillian, Iovinian,
the Messalians, Pelagians, and the rest of that rout, which magnifying their
own foolish fancies, make the word of God of none effect. The humble confession
of the poor publican likes us well, O Lord be merciful unto me a sinner.

But for the further opening of the difference between the Papists and us, and
for the more full clearing of our selves, from their false accusation of us;
you shall understand, that the Rhemists have gathered two princip all
conclusions against us; both out of these words of Paul, If I have all faith,
so that I can remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing, 1 Cor. 13.

The first is, that, True faith may be without love, works.

The second, that, Faith alone does not justify, without good works.

To the first, we answer them; that speech of Paul is nota categoricall
proposition, but an hypotheticall supposition; as, if it were possible that
faith could be without works, it were nothing.

Secondly, the faith which Saint Paul here speaks of, is not a iustifyng or a
saving faith, but a miraculous faith; of which our Savior in the Gospel, If
ye had faith, as much as a grain of mustard feed, etc.

This he spoke to the believing Apostles, and therefore cannot be understood of
a saving faith, as also S. Ambrose interprets that Text, to do wonders, and
to cast out Devils by faith, is nothing worth, except a man be a follower of
God, by good conuesation; thus he, thus we.

There is a dead faith, Iam. 2.20.

There is a lively faith, Gal. 2.20.

There is a faith of Devils, Iam. 2.19.

There is a faith of Gods elect, Tit. 1.1.

There is an enduring faith, John 3.15.

There is a perishing faith, Luke 8.13.

There is a faith which the world destroys, 2 Timothy 2.18.

There is a faith which destroys the world, I John 5.4.

There is a faith whereby we believe a God, Iam. 2.19.

There is a faith whereby we believe in God, Ioh. 14.1.

According to the differences of faith in scripture, there is a faith without
works, and a faith with works; hence Divines have a fourefold consideration
of faith, as it is historical. miraculous, temporary, justifying.


Three of which kinds, may be in the reprobate; but that other justifying faith
can be in none but Gods eiect; whereby we do not only believe a God, nor
believe God only, Credere (...) Deo, Deum, in Deum.
but believe in God; to which the promise of justification and of salvation is
made; and of this faith once and again (if they will hear us) we say; it
cannot be separated from charity, but wheresoever it is it brings forth good
works, to the praise and glory of God: of this in S. August words we conclude,
Inseparabilis est bona vita a fide, quaper dilectionem operatur, imo vero ea
ipsa est bona vita; in his book de fide and operibus. Whereunto accords
Irenaus lib. 4. cap. 14. to believe is to Do as God will.

To the second conclusion, viz. That faith alone justifies not. We answer.
Although faith be not solitaria, yet in our justification it is sola: A worthy
Divine of ours has a worthy saying to this purpose, Even as the eye, in regard
of being, is never alone from the head, yet in respect of seeing, it is alone,
for it is the eye only that does see: So faith subsisteth not without other
graces of God, as hope, love, etc. yet in regard of the act of justification it
is alone, without all, considered by it self.

To make this plain, we must know that the separating of things is or real,
in subiecto, the subject. mental, in anime, the understanding:


The first real separation of faith and charity we really, wholly deny: and
Bellarmine honestly eleereth Luther, Melancthou, Chemnitius, Calvin, and other
learned Protestants herein; who (he confesses) teach good works to be
necessary to salvation, de iustificat. lib. 4. cap. 1.. ac primum confessio,
etc.

The second: mental separation, which Is negative; when in the understanding
one thing is denied, another affirmed. Is privative; when of things that cannot
be parted, yet a man understands one, and omits the other.


Viz. Light and heat cannot be separated in fire, yet a man may consider the
light, and not the heat. Briefly, negatiuely, we do not separate good works
from faith; but priuatiuely we make them not concurring causes, but effects,
and consequents, of our justification: our assertion then, faith considered,
without good works does justify. Operasunt via non causa regnandi (says
Bernard;) and with Aug. Opera non pracedunt iustificandum, sed sequuntur
iustificatum: not go before, but after justification. Even (as our Church
speaks) the wheel turns round, Homily of good works.
nor to the end to be made round, but because it is first made round, therefore
it turns round; so men are sanctified, because first justified, not
justified, because first sanctified: neither is this conclusion ours, alone,
but the Fathers, and the Reformed Churches; yea of some of the Papists, and
those also of the greatest Clerks among them: as it may appear, viz. If we
cast our eyes back to the ancient Doctors, they are all for us in this point;
Not according to the worth of our works, says Basil,(...); to believe only,
says Nazianzene. Faith alone is sufficient, says Hierom. By believing, men
are justified, says Augustine; and with these consort the rest, Epiphanius,
Chrysostom, Primasius, and the whole sacred quire of Antiquity; although yet
we are not ignorant, that the Expurgatory Index of Spain, has purposelywip't
out of Chrysostom, Hierom and Cyril, most clear testimonies for justification
by faith. But (as Ambrose to the Arrians) they have blot out the letters, but
the faith cannot be abolisht; those blots condemn them more then the writing.

Next, the Reformed Churches speak the same thing: so, the Church of England.
art. 12. the Church of Saxony tit. de mona obedientia, the Confession exhibited
to Charles the Fifth, and explaned at Worms, anno 1540. Luther com. ad Galat.
cap. 5. verse. 6. Melancthon loc. com. and Catechis. Iewe^ in Apolog. Calvin. in
Instit. Chenonitius in Examinat. Trident. Conc. Zanchius; and all others in
their Commentaries.

Lastly, that their own Rabbis, have so taught, is easy to show. Cassander
(consultat. de iustificat.) says; That which is affirmed, that men cannot be
justified before God, by their strength, merit or works; but that they are
freely justified by faith, was always allowed, and received in the Church of
God; and is at this day approved, by all Ecclesiastical writers.

The great Doctor of the Schools The. Aquinas, in Gallat. and Jacob. 2
attributes justification to works, not as justification is taken for an
infusion of grace; but as it is taken for an exercise, manifestation, and
consummation of justice. So Caietan in Comment. in Romans 6. Behold the merit,
behold the righteousness, whose wages is eternal life, but to us in respect
of Jesus Christ, it is a free gift: What could either Luther, or Calvin, or any
Protestant speak more plainly?

Lastly, Arias Montanus (a learned author, how ever according to his time
faulty in opinion in many things) -- It follows (says he) that faith is
imputed for righteousness, to him that works not in the law, and that
according to the purpose of the grace of God: It is therefore a true
conclusion, that faith alone justifies, as has been proved.

And secondly, a loud lie, a lewd slander, ( Bellarmine himself being
witness) that our Gospel is carnal, and the high way to Epicurisme: So that
we say (with August.) nemo legem ita intelligis, sed qui non intelligit: no man
so understands the doctrine of our Church, but he that wants understanding:
We say that good works must make faith fat: and without holiness no man shall
see God: Luther.
but as for meritorious butchering of Kings, unclean chastity, drunken fasts,
uncharitable charity, selling of heaven to the rich, and sending the poor to
purgatory for want of money; we are content if they will that they appropriate
these to themselves: We desire to be justified by faith, without any
consideration had (in the very matter) to good works: yet in all duties of
religion, and honesty; dare justify our selves (in comparison of them) unto
the whole world, though hereby, we do not justify our selves before God: and
will evermore labor to express our true faith of trusting in God, by the
deeds of mercy, in doing of good.



We read in Nehemiah, that the children of Israel, being hindered from the
reedifiing of Jerusalem by Sanballet the Horonite, and by Tobiah the Ammonite;
labored in the work, holding a sword in the one hand, and a Trowell in the
other: So must all Gods Israel do, for that they have many Horonites, and
Ammonites, bodily and ghostly opposers of them, they must hold the sword of
faith fast in the one hand, wherewith, if need require they may be able to
resist all gainsayers, and quit themselves like men: and a Trowell in the
other, wherewith they may build; laying upon the foundation of faith, the fair
and comely buildings of good works, that their light may be seen by the good
works of their hands, and God which is in heaven may be glorified.

Thy Commandment O Lord (says David) is exceeding broad; so is this
Commandment of Doing good; for (as all learned Interpreters observe) this
precept of Doing good, comprehends, and contains in it, all duties of the
first table, concerning piety toward God, and all the rest of the duties of the
second table, touching charity toward our neighbors; Neither is it any way a
needless observation, or unprofitable: that the works of the second table, do
not only concern our neighbors: for although outwardly they be done to men,
and immediately as the proper object of them; yet indeed they are done also to
God, and he is said more to delight in them, then in all burnt sacrifice: for
if we feed our brethren, cloth the naked, visit the sick, or any way be
Doing good, God takes these things as done to himselse. Hence it is that when
any prescription is made in Scripture, to men, what they must do, usually the
works of the second table are appointed: not that they are better, or to be
preferred before the works of the first table, but for that they are the true
bewrayers of them: for every hypocrite will say he loves God, fears God,
trusts in God, and the like: because these are secret duties in the heart,
and of man cannot be judged: but look how he lives toward men, and it may be
soon seen, that failing in the duties of the second table toward men; the
duties of the first table, which he boasts of, in truth are not in him: for
if they were, they would bring forth the other, as it written, He that says
he loves God whom he never saw, and hates his brother whom he has seen, is
a liar, 1 John. 4.

This also (as some observe) occasioned that question of the Prophet, Psalm.
15.1. Lord who shall dwell in thy Tabernacle? or who shall rest upon thy holy
hill? to which question the Lord makes this answer: he that leads an
vncorrupt life: plainly to be seen in his eschewing evil and Doing good, as
it follows at large in that place:

All are not Israel that are of Israel; all that live within the pale of the
visible Church, are not of the Church. According to that of Saint Hierome, upon
that place: mult^ sunt corporae quinon sunt side. And of Turrecrematus, mult^
sunt nomine qui non sunt numine: many are shuffled among corn, jews
outwardly, but not inwardly, deceiving others often, and most of all, and worst
of all, themselves, with a bare profession of Religion, and an opinion without
the practice of piety. But we (beloved) are to know, that the dwelling in the
Tabernacle of the Church, professing of the word, frequenting the place of
worship, the saying Lord, Lord, a bare external profession of our faith, and
outward Communion with the Church, is not sufficient unto salvation, except we
lead an vncorrupt life, correspondent to the same, doing that which is right
and good, and speaking truth from our heart.

It is not sufficient to rely upon the Churches outside (as the Papists do)
upon the succession of Roman Bishops, upon the multitude of Roman Catholics,
upon the power and pomp of the Roman Synagogue, crying with the Jews of old:
templum Domini, the temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord.

It is not enough, with the carnal and careless Gospeller; to place all
Religion in the formal observation of all outward service and ceremonies: for
a verbal Christian only, is a real Atheist: according to that of S. Paul: In
word they profess to know God, but in their works they deny him: we must
take heed, that we be not Christians in lip, and not in life; making (as holy
Martyr Bradsord said) a mask of Religion, or rather a very vizard, with eyes
and mouth, and nose, fairly painted, and proportioned, to all pretenses and
purposes: but if we be indeed the children of God, we must in true sincerity of
heart, be Doing of good. The Kings daughter is all glorious within, and also
without: within, as having a clear conscience, and truth in the inward
affections, a clean heart and a new spirit: without, as having on for a
garment, a vesture of gold, wrought about with diverse colors: she is clothed
with righteousness, as with a garment, and has it wrought most gloriously, with
the deeds of mercy, which as a checker work, of diverse colors, embroidered
with the pure silken twist of a helpful and upright conversation, garnish her
holy profession. The Doing of good, is the certificate of a Christian, the
character of a man's faith, making his calling and election sure. And

Although it may be objected, that a hypocrite may seem just in Doing good; and
yet be abominable before God; not doing that which is good, for righteousness
sake, facto pius and sceleratus co^em (as the Poet pithily spoke) We behold
the man, not the mind; the work, not the will; the fact, not the faith; the
action, not the end; yet the judgment of charity, belongs properly to men; but
the judgment of certainty to God. From whence we must labor in our well
doing, not so much to approve our selves to men, as to God, who sees our
hearts.

And that we may not be negligent nor flouthfull heerin, and think that
because our works justify us not, and God sees we love him well, although
we do little good on earth; to encourage us to well doing on the one side,
and to prevent such conceits on the other; the holy Ghost in Psa. 24.3 4. in
Esaias 33 15. in Psa. 15. and many places, describes a sound member of the
Church, rather by works then faith, and of all the fruits of faith, almost
innumerable, make choice of those that concern our neighbor: in all which,
says is yet presupposed; according to the Apostolical axiom, whatsoever is
not of says is sin: fides est operum fomes (as Paulinus spoke,) and (as our
Church) the nest of good works: for be our birds never so fair, and our
leaves never so fresh and green, all are but lost, if they be not brought
forth in a true belief: for admit a man were as just as Aristides in his
government; as true of his word as Pomponius; as loving and kind to his
country as Curtius at Rome, Mecaenas at Thebes, Codrus at Athens, who exposed
themselves to voluntary death, for their neighbors and countries sake; yet if
these works proceed not from a heart purged by faith, no happiness can follow
this Doing of good, no true peace to the conscience, nor eternal rest to the
soul; for without faith it is impossible to please God.

Yet, when these are conceived and brought forth in faith, the Lord (as it is
said of Abel and his offering) has respect, to both the work it self, Gen.4.4.
and him that wrought it; and (as it is said of Noah's sacrifice) the Lord
smells a sweet savor of rest, and is well pleased with them. Genesis 8.2.
Heb. 13.16. A man may deceive himself and others, with a fained profession of
faith, an inward and hidden grace: therefore the holy spirit will have every
man's faith to be tried and known by his fruits; By their fruits ye shall know
them. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? And howsoever
eternal life be promised to says, and eternal damnation be threatened to
infidelity, yet the sentence of salvation and of damnation shall be pronounced
according to works, as the clearest evidence of both, Matt. 25.34. but with
the Apostle; I will show you yet a more excellent way.

This precept then of Doing good, is of large extent, in that it concerns all
duties, and all degrees of men, not only in common, as we are men, and so bound
unto that ius gentium to render every man his due; but in particular, in our
several vocations and callings, to express our faith by Doing of good; as we
are Magistrates or Ministers, Masters or Servants, in what estate, degree or
condition of life it has pleased God to place us.

For, know ye all, that not only those general duties of Christianity, as the
hearing of the word etc. are required; wherein, if we fail, all the world can
witness against us, and every one (quasi digito) will point at us, and cry
open shame of us: not only these (I say) are carefully to be performed; but
moreover, the particular offices, whereunto we are called, for the propagation
of Religion and piety; or the preservation of order, justice, and equity in the
Church or Common wealth, and our private family are seriously to be attended
and executed.

Hoc agire, in the sacrifice of the heathen gods, was a precept much used and
observed; how much more in the services of the God of heaven, should the said
precept (Do ye this, that is, intend, and apply all the faculties of your
mind, to the doing of it) be kept inviolable?

What other thing, does the Apostle insinuate? when he says. He endeauored, to
have always a clear conscience toward God and men, but this point in hand;
That there ought to be a concurrence of our holy carriage toward God, and
upright demeanor toward men. Requisite it is says Chry.) ut rovere^ter se
quis habeat ad divina, and landabiliter co^uersetur cum hominib. that every
good Christian should serve God reverently with hearty devotion, and man
righteously with a ready mind, and a liberal disposition. Men are to be
regarded in the way of right and equity, propter famam; God is to be reverenced
in the way of Religion and piety, propter conscientiam: Holiness and
righteousness are the mean parts of Gods image in man, Ephesians. 4. Neither can
we be assurd that we are regenerated, unless we find in our selves a
marriage of them both.

To what end has the grace of Soluation appeared? if not to this end; to teach
us to live godly, in respect of our great and glorious maker and master: to
live soberly, in respect of our selves: to live justly, in respect of our
neighbors: if we have with the ouerweening Pharisee, great godliness in our
philacteries, fringes, and care-seruice, frequenting the Lectures of the Law,
not caring how we live; we shall seem holy without righteousness: and if
with the simple seduced Saduces, we live honestly, and ciuilly, but believe nor
Angels, spirits, nor resurrection, we shall appear righteous without
holiness: either of these comes short of that obedience which is required of
God, who will not be served with holiness only, nor righteousness only, but
with both. Again, to what end has the Lord given unto every one a several
gift, and talent in this present world? if not for this end, to employ them in
Doing of good, in our several places, to the glory of his name, and good of
his Church. This matter then of Doing good, concerning us all, is to be
considered of us all in particular.

Particularly, the Magistrate must be careful to Do good. Up and be Doing of
good you Magistrates; exercise your talents; a great measure of well-doing is
expected from you, God and man call daily for it, and you shall well perform
it, if you will rise betimes (with David) and punish the workers of iniquity,
if in the zeal of Phineas, you will execute judgment in Israel, if you will
for the better examples sake, sanctify the Lords Sabbath your selves, and
command the sanctification of the same by others, if you will countenance the
good, defend the fatherless, take the cause of the poor into just
consideration, weed out, and root out from the city of the Lord, all
unprofitable members, inordinate walkers, dissolute livers: search Jerusalem
with lights, for these linkers, in the theeuish corners of the City, which are
the Devils closets, wherein he sits close, studying and contriuing all villainy,
and mischief, and afterward put in execution: take heed you wink not at
these, nourish them not, but suppress them; let them not come in your way,
except it be to punish them: hoc agite, principatum quemgeritis ornare; adorn
your places with your carriage, in so good a place Do much good, God has put
the sword in thy hand to do this business, therefore thou must do it; then
goo on with cheerfulness, and courage in thy place, the Lord shall be with
thee, show thy self a man.

Particularly, the Minister of Gods word must be zealous of Doing good,
painfully laboring, with wholesome doctrine, threathing the thunderclaps of
Gods judgments, against all impenitent workers of iniquity; and pouring the
balm of Gilead into the wounds of the distressed Samaritan, opening the
mystery of the word of life, whereby, many be made wise unto salvation; and
that the man of God may be perfectly furnished to every good work.

And in (...) word, every particular degree of men, high and low, rich and
poor, publicly in the Church, privately in the family, must exercise
themselves in doing of good, yielding obedience to the commandments of God,
and laboring in their lines and conuersations to make a real, yea a royal
manifestation of the faith which they profess, by Doing of some good.

But there is a more proper object of our Doing good, namely to the poor;
wherein, that we may not any way mistake, the Scripture has set down
certain cautions, and confined us to certain limitations, summarily cou ched
in that prouerbiall verse, viz.

Est modus in dando, quid, cur, cui, quomedo, quando.

Beyond which bounds, we may not pass. Let us take a running view of them.
Five rules are here to be observed in our Doing good.

1. What we give. 2. Why we give. 3. To whom we give. 4. How we give. 5. When
we give.
1. What. We must give that which is our own; honor the Lord with thy
substance, not another man's; and with the first fruits of thine increase, Prou.
3.9.

2. Why must we give. Because God commands it; love the stranger; Leu. 19.34.
then loved when relieved; because Christ demands it. Date cleemosynam, Luc.
11.41. he that gives all requires but some, a cup of cold water, a crust of
bread; and because the spirit commends it; for a sacrifice wherewith God is
well pleased, Heb. 13.16. The Rabbines say, tithe and be rich: the Lord, give
and be rich; he that gives to the poor, lends to the Lord, Prou. 19.17. Qui
miseretur proximo, foeneratur Domino.

3. To whom must we give? To all, Gal. 6.10. While we have time let us do good
to all; especially to the household of faith. Thus God is rich in goodness unto
all, even his enemies, in causing the sun to rise upon the just and unjust,
Matt. 5. but especially to the faithful (which in regard of the small number
are called a household) these David preferred. O Lord, my goodness extends not
to thee, but to the Saints that are in the earth, my delight is in them, Psalm.
16.2.3. And as touching the poor, we must make discretion Steward of the
Kitchen, lest we prove our selves guilty of foolish pity; for there are of
poor 1. impotent, 2. laboring.


Seek out these in the back lanes, if they seek not thee, and relieve them;
but for the idle poor, and sturdy poor give them not, except it be a whip and
a pasport; and therein the more liberal, the fewer beggars in Israel.

4. How must we give? The Apostle has directed. The Lord loves a cheerful
giver, 2. Cor. 9.7. God loves a willing giver. Again, abundantly: he that
sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly; and he that sows plentifully, shall
reap plentifully. To this end the oil of our charity must be compounded
rightly. As Moses was commanded, to put into the oil, certain spices, so God
would have every Christian Almesgiuer, to play the Druggist; first our alms
must be like myrrh, which distills from the tree without cutting or incision: so
must charity without compulsion. Secondly, Cinnamon; hot in taste, hot in
operation: so must our alms, neither stone. cold as Nabal, nor lukewarm as
Laodicea; but hot, as it is said of John Baptist of Constantinople, whose daily
practice was to relieve the poor. Thirdly Cassia; as sweet as the former, but
low, the emblem of humility; so give, but not vainegloriously. Fourthly,
Calamus; an odoriferous powder, but of a fragill reed. So give, but acknowledge
thy weakness; think it not meritorious: periculosa domus little qui meritis
sperant, says Bernard; dangerous is that house, which thinks to win heaven
by keeping house; dangerous because ruinous, no, say you are unprofitable
servants. But lest I grow tedious. Fifthly, consider the time when we must give:
while we have time, during our life; thus was Dorcas said to be full of good
works while she lived. Solomon so aduifeth Prou. 3.28. Say not unto thy
neighbor, go and come again to morrow, and I will give thee, when thou have
it by thee. Our Saviors action must be our imitation; and he says, I must
work the works of him that sent me, while it is called to day. The night
comes wherein none can work, Ioh. 9.4. To day if you will hear his voice.
The time past cannot be recalled, the time to come uncertain, the time
present only ours. He therefore spoke not amiss, that so spoke:

Da tua dum tua sunt, post mortem tune tua non sunt. Death is the worlds strict
dore-keeper, who as we brought nothing, will narrowly search us that we shall
carry nothing with us; wherefore while we have time, let us divide our goods,
and deal our dole, with Zacheus, that salvation may come to our house here,
and when we leave our house, we may go to salvation hereafter.



Yet on the other side, the heavens cannot be scaled without a ladder, which
although it be Christ, yet some of the lower staves and higher to, are pinned
fast with good works, whereby, all slothful and idle persons are excluded;
affirming that if faith alone justify, then let us barely trust in God, but
not be Doing of good: not so ye careless generation, enemies of grace, for
faith is operative, working by love: faith is resembled to fire, which is
operative; fire cannot be without heat, and light; the greater fire the greater
heat, the lesser fire the lesser heat; no fire no heat, no heat no fire.

But it may be said of too many, and those (as they take themselves) none of
the coldest Christians, or professors amongst us, as one sometime of the Monks
of his time, that their fasts were fat, and prayers lean, their faith is hot,
their love cold: they say they trust in God better then others; yet do less
good then others; it may be said of such, as the witty Grecian spoke of
extreme tall men, that they were Cypress trees, (...), fair and tall but
fruitless, oh shame that the child of heaven should resemble hell! which has
fire, but that fire has no light.

I fear we have too may such firebrands of hell, that have a flashing fire of
faith in their tongues, but the fire of their faith makes not their love boil;
Lazarus shall have more divinity then humanity, twenty paternosters, not one
penny at their hands: These men's light shines not out before men, and
therefore are leauelesse trees, empty clouds, waterlesse wels (like the
sumptuos Sumptermule of that vaineglorious Cardinal) seeming without wondrous
rich, but nothing within save old shoes and rubbish; or like Adonibezek, want
their thumbs: but Gods Priest must have, not only the Vrim of science, but
Thummim of conscience on his breast, and in his skirts, not only bells, a
sounding profession, but pomegranates also, a fruitful devotion: faith and
love on the altar of the heart, must never go out, like that stone in Pliny,
which being once made hot, could never be cold. If it be otherwise (and indeed
so it is) whatsoever they boast of their faith, they are but hypocrites in the
sight of God: like that bestia pharmacopolae, wherewith Julian twitted Austen,
a beast pretended of great virtue ouernight, that ere morning was come, had
devoured her self: or lastly, like that cursed fig tree, therefore cursed
because it was fruitless.

Thus in general; more particularly, to run through all degrees of men, it
is pitiful to see (and therefore great reason to complain) that this
practical political part of Christian obedience, not only in rectifying our
own courses, and Doing good our selves, but also in reproving, repressing, and
reforming the irregularities of others, and the sins of the time is commonly
neglected of all:

How many neuter-passiue Magistrates, meale-mouthed Officers, scar-crow
Constables have we now a days? that are so far from Phineas his zeal, to
slay offenders ipso facto, that they want Moses his courage to slay sin in
gross offenders. salvo iure: and herein pardon my boldness; for aures omnium
pulso, conscientias singulorum convenio; I speak to the ears of all in
general, and appeal to the conscience of every one in particular if this be
not so: many of them are so far from reproving, that they are content with
sin, and yield consent to it, that so they may take up sin upon warrant,
and commit it boldly, and so go to the Devil by authority. If this were not
so, why are not the hurts of the daughter of Judah healed? why are not the
breaches of Sion stopped? why are not recusants punished? why is not the pot
pulled from the nose of the drunkard? why is not the Sabbath sanctified? why
are not our horrible blasphemers, our shameless fornicators, incorrigible
drunkards, and the like profane licentious livers, let blood with the sharp
razor of reprehension, or struck down with a downright blow of condign
punishment, for their presumption? What? is there no balm in Gilead, no
Physician there? yes, but they are (like Jobs friends) Physicians of no
reckoning, Rephaims by name, Zamzummims indeed, who, whereas they should be
patrons and patterns of piety, and temperance, as their places and callings
require, and as leaders of the Vantgard, to stand in the forefront of Gods
battle, against all Caananites, which cry down holiness in town and
country; they either run along with them, or rather lead them into the race
of riot, or are busied in boo-thalling, and foraging for themselves, not caring
for the ship of state in general, so they may be safe in the cockboat of their
own fortunes in particular. I am ashamed to think and speak how weakly the
paralytick hands of our Magistrates are exercised in Doing of good in their
places, by brandishing the sword of justice against the friends of Baal,
Balaam, and Bacchus. Resembling Ostriches, which have great feathers, but no
flight; or Iupitera block cast among the frogs, whom at first they feared for
the greatness, but despised afterward for the stillness. So that as
Demosthenes sometime complained, that the power of their adversary Philip King
of Macedon, was greatly augmented by the Athenians slothfulnsse: So may the
Ministers of God complain, that through the slothfulness, remissness, or
wickedness of many Magistrates, the Kingdom of Satan is exceedingly enlarged.

Again, to put that part of the wallet which hangs behind our backs, into
open sight, how is this duty of Doing good neglected, even in many of us? who
neither feed liberally by charity, nor soundly by Doctrine, nor religiously by
life, which made that proud fugitive Campian as maliciously as spitefully, to
say; ministris illorum nihil vilius. Heaven and earth can bear witness that
the Sun never beheld a more learned, amore religious Clergy, yet among so
many pots of the Temple what marvel is it, Doctor Hall.
if some be dry for want of liquor, others rusty for want of use, others full
of liquor without meat, others so full of meat that they want liquor: woe to
those corrupted sons of Heli, which through insufficiency or
inconsionableness, pour contempt on their own faces: Again, for other
degrees of men, how far in their places from Doing that which is good, is
plain to behold. The Lawyer be it known unto all men, uses the Law
unlawfully, not making it a special and speedy remedy of wrongs, but an Engine
or trap to ensnare the weak and simple, trebling their fees of unjust gain,
and troubling the world with unjust suites.

The Shopkeepers also, as we pass along, to cast an eye of observance on them,
how righteous he is in his dealing, is easy to judge, their houses are as full
of deceit as a cage of birds, if either lies, and oaths, or false lights,
false measures, unjust and unconscionable gains may make men righteous, then
there is no unrighteousness in them.

Lastly; what doing of good our rich men practice now a days, he that has but
half his sight with one-eyed Phocion may clearly see, for they are better a
great deal at the rake, then at the pitchforke, as it is in the proverb,
readier to pull and rake to them, then to lay out or give any thing.

Aurum habet Ecclesia, non ut servet, sed ut eroget, but their greedy desires
of money, increase faster then their money; our extortioners are not rooted in
charity, their minds are on their mines, that is the root, where they root, but
if the Apostle spoke true, Philargury is the root of all villainy. These sell
the air, take money for time, contract with Satan, give their souls for
surety, and the Devil keeps the bond till they pay in themselves for the
principalls.

Do our rich men resemble Saint Bafil the great, who in a famine, did not only
give to the poor himself, but exhorted others to open their barnes and do
the like?

Or William Warbam, sometime Archbishop of Canterbury, who was so liberal to
the poor, that he left but thrity pieces of gold behind him, which pleased
(as Erasmus says) him so well, that he said; It is well I desired always to dye
no richer.

Or Philip Melancthon, who was out of a mean estate so bountiful, that every
hour some or other were relieved at his door. Or es Dorcas, full of good
works. Or as the Captain Cornelius, and other holy men of God, Abraham, Lot,
etc.

Surely they are the greatest part so far from going out to meet the poor,
(as Abraham met the three Angels unknown) that they turn their backs, and
shut the door upon them, and instead of feasting and refreshing of them, with
churlish and crabbed words rate them away with hungry stomachs.

No, no, their care is to build fair houses, and when they have done, to lock
the door and go their ways, and leave them empty: we have a great many of
these mockbeggars in England, which where they should do most good (like
butterflyes) are to be seen but once in a year, yet that is not to make a
feast with Nabal at their sheepeshearing, nor to relieve their poor neighbors
near them, but to rack their rents, and enhaunse their fines, to make
themselves very fine, and finem facere, to undo the poor Tenant, to call
Courts, to fill carts, to fence God out, and hedge the Devil in.

Give? they are so far from giving, that like spunges, good must be wrung out
of them perforce; like unto Nabal, churlish and evil in their doings, which
notwithstanding they have good cause, 1 Samuel 26.3.
yet are so far from helping, that they say, who is David, or what is the
son of Iesse? there be many servants now a days, that break away every one
from his master; shall I then take my bread and flesh that I have killed for my
shearers, and give it to these whom I know not whence they be?

Or like Cain nunquid ego fratris custos? am I my brothers keeper? Or like
Judas, ad quid perditio haec? to what end is this waste? yea so far are many
from helping and relieuing them, that because they are rich, they presume they
may tread them down, and oppress them by authority, keep back their
maintenance, take away their means, as Ahab did poor Naboths Vineyard, and
their life too, especially if mistress painted face Iezabel can bear rule; what
are they not rich, art not thou a King? art not thou a Lord of that Manor? are
they not thy Tenants? bridle them and saddle them, and spur them to death, to
keep the slaves down, etc.

Yet I must confess many rich men do give now adays, but it is according to
that rule formerly set down. Surely no, for

First, there are that regard not what they give, they give that for which they
deserve no thanks, but shame; they feed the poor at another man's table, and
make them free of another man's trencher: such an almes-giuer was the Devil,
who would give the world to our Savior, a liberal alms, but out of Gods
Exchequer, yet (as these) he said, all is mine, and to whom I please I give
it. So Alexander the sixth gave America to the King of Spain, as in 88. the
Pope gave England to him to a great gift* but out of the Indians and Christians
freehold* and so indeed many an vpstart Gentleman gives, by keeping of a good
house for his company, when like the jews, he crucifies Christ in his poor
Tenants, he feeds some few poor as his wicket, and has made many poor to
furnish his dresser; his charity reliues ten, his cruelty has undone ten
thousand. If ever the proverb be true, it is true in this; here is robbing of
Peter to pay Paul.

Secondly, there are that regard not why they give, not out of any care to obey
Gods Commandments; not out of any love to their brethren, not out of any love
chiefly to Gods glory, or the like, but to get a name, to become famous, for
ostentation sake, as the Scribes and Pharisees, these are obstreperous
benefactors, which cackle like hens and blow a trumpet in the streets of their
deeds, have not I done this, given him that, preferred him to his living or
place, did not I settle him? yes, but not out of any zeal to Gods glory, but
for some by-respect, to make some other use of him in such or such occasions,
and service: but alms should be like Oil, which is silent in pouring down,
and makes no noise, yet it lies aloft: So thou need not proclaim thy own
worth, for he that sees in secret, will reward thee openly. But because there
are more rare therefore I hasten to the next.

Thirdly, there are that give and drop silver, but not with discretion, to
those which either have no need, or are not worthy. Some feed the Spaniel. I
mean the Sycophant, who never will leave begging while any continues giving:
some feed the Gray hound, the riotous prodigal: some the Mastife, the gullet
thief, still gaping for more: some the Curre, the critical slanderer, for
whom the hook is a fitter morsel then the bait: some to the Cormorant, which
study nothing but Apicius in his art of Munchers, whose greatest manhood is
seen at the table in quartering and caruing dead carkases; but this is giving
of the childrens meat to dogs, some again to the poor, but not so made of
God, but from the Devils bones and books, cards, and dice, wine and women, and
such like husbandry. --

Fourthly, there are that regard not how they give, they give but with
grudging, with pining, with pinching, with constraint, being drawn like a
Bear to the stake, they part from a penny as from a drop of blood; nor will
they be any further bountiful then the statute law compels them.

Fifthly, there are that give, but regard nor the time, for either they give
when there is no need, or when they can no longer keep: the poor shall be fed
at their door, when they are carried to their grave, and so be clothed when
they must be naked; for which charity, they are more beholding to their
testament then will, for it should not have been given if it could have been
kept.

And for this they are more beholding to their deathbed then them; where it
often falls out, that the poor mourn indeed not so much for their death as
for that they dyed no sooner.

Here is a generation of crooked, carnal and faithless giuers, like Saint
John's generation of vipers, which although they continue giuers, shall not be
gainers, whom yet I forewarne to fly from the wrath which is to come, by
bringing forth fruits worthy of amendment of life: Let this lastly be the use
for obedience.

Paris, before his part in Paradise,) exercise themselves wholly in joining
house to house, and land to land, and account it the greatest point of cunning
to gain and retain, good estates, good farms, good fields, good friends,
good houses, good horses, good clothes, every thing else good for themselves,
but never exercise themselves in Doing good to others; let us all of us if we
would be accounted godly, wise, and provident indeed, be most of all careful
and earnest for the world which is to come; wherewith, that we may be really
possessed, and so royally blessed: let us never be weary of well-doing, for in
due time we shall reap if we faint not.

And for you whom it has pleased God to endow with a more liberal portion of
the things of this life; so to account it the best Christian policy, by your
good works on earth, to lay up treasures for your selves in heaven, and and
every day to bring in somewhat into Gods Exchequer, as the Israelites into the
Tabernacle, the remembrance whereof may long after both in life and death
comfort you.

It is an hard sentence of some Casuists concerning their fellows, that few
rich men's Confessors shall be saved: for that hapily they dawbe up their
consciences with untempered mortar, soothing them up in their sins: let this
be the care of those whom it may concern. For us, we desire to be faithful
to God and you, and therefore roundly tell you. Do good, O ye rich men, if
ever you look to receive good, if you be not rich in good works, you cannot be
rich in heaven: as Cyrus said that he made himself rich, while he enriched his
friends; so lay up treasures for your selves in heaven, whiles you make the
poor your friends on earth. If you look for the interest of glory in heaven,
you must pay the principal of beneficence in earth.

Be not therefore like mount Gilboah fruitless and barren.

Be not like the Olive tree, which when Goats lick it, fruitfulness does leave
it.

Be not like a Vine tree, the more boughs the lesser and sewer grapes.

Be not like a Cloue tree, so hot by nature, to rob the neighbor plants of
moisture.

But be thou like that tree of David, planted by the waters side (by
regeneration) bringing forth fruit in due season (by sanctification) whose
leaves shall not fall (by continuation) Go thou and do likewise, bring forth
and multiply; if ever thou hope to be planted in the new Jerusalem, thou must
bring forth twelve manner of fruits, yea the leaves must be beneficial. Bring
forth then not flowers or flourishes, blossoms or semblances only, but
fruits; not fruit of the world, for that is folly; nor fruit of the flesh,
that is frailty; nor fruit of the eyes, that is fancy; but meet fruits for
contrition of heart, reformation of life, sanctification of soul.

Let not the children of this world, excel the children of light: they are
fruitful but not beneficial, multum sed mal^^^; there is green fruit of
imperfectnesse, red fruit of blood thirstinesse, yeallow fruit of gall and
bitterness, (...) colored fruit of drunkenness, earth-colored fruit of
couvetousnesse, pale-colored fruit of lasciviousness, these are trees but not
of Gods planting these the Devil plants, suggestion waters, continuance
increases, necessity ripens, judgment gathers, and bell burns.

Be not thou like unto those Indian Pandorae of whom it is reported, that they
have white hoare heads in their youth, and black hair in their age.

Or like Hermogenes, of whom Antiochus said, that he was in his childhood an
old man, and in his old age a child; be not thou more expert under thy
Catechizers in principles of piety, and as thou growest upward in years to
grow downwards in grace: like the she Wolf, which they say, has an yearly
defect in her procreation: the first time she bears five the second four,
the third three, the fourth two, the fifth one, and then remains barren: the
child of God must not so do, he must go from strength to strength, and grow
from grace to grace, bringing forth most good in their age, like Caleb, strong
in his old age for government and war, like Ruth showing more goodness in
the latter end then beginning: like the Sun in the Firmament which is
swiftest at his setting; so the sons of God must be best at their ending. Let
a good Christian be like unto a sheep, in which every thing is good and
useful, his fleece good, his fell good, his flesh good, his entrals, yea all
is good: and so a sanctified Christian is a servant to all the servants of God,
every good gift in him is profitable; to some he lends his fleece, clothing
the naked; to some his bread, in feeding the hungry; to some his eyes, in
becoming a guide to the blind; to some his strength, in becoming feet to the
lame; to some his understanding, in becoming an instructor to the simple; at
all times, and to all persons, in all places, Doing of good.

Wherefore let us be of Ulysses mind in Euripides, (...), etc. let us see our
Tombs honored by Doing good while we live; this is the way to make our names
truly famous, and our memories eternal; here lasting, hereafter everlasting;
here renowned among men, there crowned among Saints and Angels, in the Kingdom
of glory.

FINIS.

