An Homelye or Sermon of Good and Evil Angels: preached by the Reverend D.
Vrbanus Rhegius, Pastor and Superintendent of Christ's Church at Zelle in
Saxony. Anno. Do. 1537. Newly translated into English: by Ric. To. citizen of
London. 1583. Seen, perused, and allowed.

Psalm. 104. verse 4. He makes Angels his Spirits, And his Ministers as flames
of fire: To save, or consume, as it pleases him.

Imprinted at London, by John Charlewoode.

Insignia Collegij Westmonsteriens.
Esaias. Erunt Reges Nutricij tui.

Cap. 49. F.t Reginae Nutrices tuae.



Nobilis haec Domus antiquo memorabilis Te^poris ad varias est reuoluta vices:
(ortu, Elizabeth tandem a Celo Regina profecta, Fecit vt aeternum possit habere
statum.



TO THE Right worshipful and Reverend in God, M. GABRIEL GOODMAN, D. in
deuinitie, and Deane of the Collegiat Church of S. Pecter, at Westminster,
Grace, Mercy, and Beatitude abundant in Christ Jesus our Lord and savior,
everlasting.
life, from entering in again any more. Heerby as al their posterity may
decerne, ma^s great ingratitude for his creation, Satan's scandale in
t^ptation, and the Lords providence in preservation of his chosen from the
beginning: when all beit he expelled them, he would not yet utterly extinguish
them, and though he terrifyed them he would not eternally torment them: But
denouncing their enemy accursed above all cattle, (and giving him judgment
that The seed of the woman should break the Serpents head, Ibidem vz. 14.
and. 15. Col. 3.
) he yet dealt so mercifully by the Ministry of his cherubins these Angels
with them, that he reserved them by repentance to return into his kingdom by
the redemption of his Son Christ Jesus and through the regeneration of his
holy spirit. Great cause have we therefore the remnant of their posterity in
these late dangerous days, not only to be ware by their harms, but also
carefully to endeavor our selves according to his holy word. Ieam. 4.
To obey God, and to resist the Devil. Again in our lives and conuersations
one toward another, To be doing of good, and eschewing of evil. Psalm. 34.
Finally in all temptations and tribulations of the world, the flesh, Satan,
sin, death and hell, to crave of God, for his son Christ's sake, in our
daily prayers. That we may not be overcome with evil: But that with good
we may overcome evil. John. 18. Romans 12.
And so be thankful unto his divine Majesty, for his mercy in the Ministry
of his holy Angels, whom he has made watchmen and superintendents over us.
And like as he promised to his servant Moses in making of the tabernacle: That
the Cherubins should stretch their wings on hye, covering the mercy seat
with their wings, so as their faces being one toward another, Exodus 25.
us 20. and 22.
should also be toward the mercy seat: And again, that from the mercy
seat, betvveene the two Cherubins, he would tell them all things what he
would have given in commandment unto the children of Israel: Even so it
would please him of his gracious goodness, to be merciful unto his chosen
Church dispersed throughout the world, in the building of his son Christ and
his Gospel, with the sauegarding of his holy Angels: And that by his special
grace he would be in the midest of his elect, to instruct them in his will that
they may warely and worthily walk in the same. For, the Ministers cannot build
Jerusalem before god lay the first stone: That is, Christ, Zach. 2.
which is full of eyes, both because he gives light unto others and that all
ought to seek light at him: As it was spoken unto Iehosuah and his fellows
the Angels who represented the whole number of the faithefull. Notwithstanding
it is always seen, when God builds his Church, Satan will set up his
Sinagog. And when good Isaac prospers, Genes. 26.
the wicked Palestines will labor to stop up his pittes: yet has God
promised that whom Isaac blesses, him vvil he bless, and whom he curses,
him will he curse. And as the envy of the chief Priests and Scribes naught
auailed against the miracles of Christ: Math. 21.
but that in despite of them he will have little Children to cry Osyanna. Nor
the false Apostles shall seduce open and the Angels of God ascending and
descending about the son of man, and with him to live everlastingly, among al
his elect Angels, Archangels and Saints which incessantly shall sing, Revel.
19.
Alleluiah, Salvation and honor and glory, and power be unto our Lord God, for
ever Amen.

At London in Foster lane, near S. Michaels in Cheap. Ianuarii. 18. An. 1583.
Your worthy good Worships most humble and dutiful Orator Richard Robinson
Citizen of London.

OF GOOD and Evil Angels:
Upon this day of S. Michaell the Archangel, has the gospel been accustomed
to be read and expounded in the Churches, which is extant in the 18. Chap. of
S. Matthew, by occasion taken out of these words: The Angels of them in heaven
do always see the face of my Father which is in heaven. Math. 18.
Seeing then the sacred Scriptures of the old and new Testament do teach many
things touching holy Angels, and seeing they are before God, our fellow
servants and coheyres of eternal salvation, yea our faithful and continual
keepers or watchmen. The other part of this days gospel being reserved, and
deferred til an other time, now for this hour (by Gods help and grace) we
will only entreat of Angels: which have largelye the 24. of S. Luke, when his
Apostles had seen him after he was risen again, and did think that they had
seen a spi^rite, the lord said unto them. Behold my hands and my feet, I am
even he Handle me and look upon me: For, a spi^rit has not flesh and
blood, as ye see me have: And he showed the^ his hand^ and his feet.

Difference between spirits and bodily cretures.
Here Christ teaches us, a difference between spirits, and bodily creatures*
For, God has framed a two fold kind of substaunces in creatures, certain
cor^porall and visible creatures, such as men are: also as brut beasts and
other bodies are, which may be touched and seene^ certain spiritual, which
be called spi^rites, whose substance is not corporal, or compact and framed
of elements. Such spiritual creatures are the reasonable souls of men, and
Angelical natures, which have in them neither bones nor flesh. An Angel in his
substance can no^ either be felt, handled, or holden, with han^des, or seen with
carnal eyes. These spiritual creatures has God our creator (in respect of
other creatures, The excellency of spiritual creatures.
excelle^tlye advanced) with most precellen^ ^iftes, most profounde singular
and no^able wisdom, and understanding, with merueylous force and strength and
with other special virtues, and gifts, adorned and inritched. And has used
their ^iligence and ministrye to accomplish and speedely to bring to pass
even grea^est affairs. And so does S. Paul unto ^he Hebrews, call Angels,
spirits: Heb. 1.
For in ^eede the nature of them is very and highly ^oble, excellent, and
wonderful. By these ^t appears plainly and may be gathered, that good Angels
are spiritual creatures which for this purpose also are made and ^reated unto
the similitude of God, that ^hey may extol him with perpetual ^raise, and
honor or worship him: con^erning whom I will afterward speak.

Secondly we must also learn, whether there be more kinds of Angels then ^ne.
Here, we know out of gods word that there are both good and evil An^elles.
Good Angels God calls his chil^re^: Job. 38. But evil Angels are Devils.
Good and Evil Angels.


But peradventure some man would merueill and ask this of me: from ^hence
have devils their original? ^eing that Moses, says in Genesys. 1. in the
beginning of Genesis, mention is made of this battle, and most grievous
conflict, between the son of God, and these devils: where we read thus,
That the seed of the Woman shall break in sunder the Serpents head. Genes 3.
And that the serpent burning with infinite lust of revenge, by endless and
insatiable hatred in all that he can, shall with exceeding beastly rage and
cruelty persecute the same seed.

But, that Angels by their own will and lust became disobedient, Angels
degenerate.
and have lost their brightness and sincertie: The Epistle of S. Jude
witnesses, where he clearly and profoundly says. The Angels observed not
their Original: That is to say, Jude. 1.
they were in the beginning made pure and undefiled, but afterward they became
disobedient like as S. Peter, says. 2. Pet. 2.
They transgressed, and therefore were they plagued. And Christ says, that the
Devil continewed not in truth: John. 8.
signifying by the words: He was indeed created in truth, but he aboade not
in the truth, but fell from the truth, and perished. And in an other place he
says. That the devil speaks lies of his own. That is, he speaks lies of
that, Ibidem.
which he received not from God, but what he of his own will, liberty and
lust took and chose unto himself, this is sin. This doctrine is needful
to be known, and to know this, makes much for our purpose, least we do
fall into that filthy herisie of the Manichees, and that we may be fortified
against the same: And this doctrine did these ancient Fathers of sound
judgment diligently teach, and beat into men's ears. Contrary wise, good
Angels being corroborate or stre^gthened by the son of God, through his holy
spirit continued still in obedyence and were confirmed, that so the son of God
might continue and abide there lord and head.

Thirdlye also the Ministerye of good Angels and their office, Ministry of
good Angels and of evil.
let us see out of the word of God. And first here even this is specially
necessary, that we may learn suffcientlye to know the will and practyses of
the evil spyrit against us.

Of ye Hebrews, Satan is called that evil Spirit, (yt is to say.) The
adversary. For all devils be perpetual dedly vnreclaimable unto him. For so is
he made, that he fears no man.

A man may see a certain image of Satan in the Turks, which are ye most
dearest and most diligentest vessels and instruments of Satan to the
accomplishment of all his will, The Turk a right image of Satan.
lust, and desires. In these may you have a certain image not obscure, of that
malicious and most cruel splrit, to behold, with such outrage of mind, with
so great bitterness of crueltye are the Turks enflamed against Christians:
with so deadly and beastlye cruel hatred, are they swollen against them, that
they adventure and suffer at full, all manner of greefes, miseries, and
calamities, hunger, thirst, most grievous labors, scourges, stripes, wounds,
yea and also death it self: So that they may hurt and work extreme iniurye
toward the bodies and goods of Christ's true believers. And where they
prevail in strength, having obtained some one victory over the Christians,
they are not contented with the riches and substance, nor with the obedyence
and seruilitye of Christians, but with beastlye, and horrible crueltye they
kill and slaie as well young as old, men and women, with the sword ripping the
bellyes of women great with child, they hang up babes and silly infantes
upon hedges or stakes, they dismember and butcherly mangle in pieces their
captives with their hooked and bowed fawchins, none other wise then Butchers
do Oxen: Neither are they touched with any never so sclender motion, of mercy
toward them or their so great calamitye: That I may in mean time let pass
with silence their mischeeuous filthy dealinges, both horrible to here, and
to repeat, as also their abominable sins shameless crimes and reproaches
wherewith they punnish and torment those silly Christians, whom they have
captiued.

We can not see Satan, Satan unvisible in substance.
in his substance, because he is a spirit, as Paul says Ephesians. 2. And
again in the 6. Cha. thus: We fight not against blod and flesh: But Satan's
most malicious and murdering will, cogitations, hatred, crafty dealings
practices and councels against us, after a sort we may know and see in his
members That is, in ungodly persons, who be void of ye fear of God and endued
are with what force of body and mind, and with what strength he is endued:
what weapons or defenses he will use, what are his determinations, what
things he practices, and with what policies and subtilties he is instructed.
These when thou have diligently searched out, then much better furnished, and
much more boldly may thou march on to set upon him, thereby more busily
may thou defend thy self, so much more circumspectly may thou invade
him, and thereby more assured, and more greater hope may thou have to
obtain the victory, and bear the prize away. And that same our heavenly
Father has opened and disclosed unto us his children, by good credit in his
word, all this enemies thoughts, determinations, practices, enterprises, will,
power, and warlike provision of this our horible and mighty enemy: to the
end that we may well and strongly defend our selves against his violence,
practice and snares: to the end we might go against him, easily abide ye
brunt of his assault, and be able to quench and vanquish all his fiery darts.
If so be that we at no time through great and filthy ingratitude and
foolishnes despise and reject the doctrine of God, and his admonitions: nor as
faithless ungracious, ungodly, trucebreakers, forsworn, fearful and
fainthearted soldiers casting away our weapons, dispairing in mind, without
any resisting (which the most merciful God turn from us) yield our selves
into perpetual and wretched servitude, nor deliver over our selves unto so
filthy, so horrible and so beastly cruel enemy.

Therefore now hearken ye and give ear, After what manner Satan inuadeth
mankind.
how that changeling our most diligent and most crafty deceitful enemy
inuadeth and tempts mankind, with what subtle sleightes he rusheth in upon
us, with what bands of power he fights against us, with what garboiles he
besturres him, and what subtilties and frauds he uses to circumuent us. He is
not ignorant that we shall be made partakers of eternal righteousness and
salvation, and that we shall attain thither from whence his vile corruption
fell, if we do constantly and by all means stick to the truth of the
Gospel, embracing the same with both arms, and the words of God, preferring
his lies before them, inducing them against the word of God, and disanulling
the words of God, preferred he his crafty lies in place of them. This false
tale was the beginning, the well spring the root and cause of all our misery
and calamity. This most filthy and deadlye did Satan notably deck with
colors and set to sale for his advantage: when he said It should come so to
pass* if they did eat of that tree, Genes. 3.
that they should know both good and evil, and that they should be even as
Gods. Here the policy and practices of that old Serpent fell out even as he
himself wished them, Satan's first victory over mankind.
whereby he purposed to cast mankind headlong into the same disobedience,
(whereunto he himself was fallen down) that they should not continue in the
truth. This was the first victory of this our enemy over us: which he
obtained, not by any good or just means, but only by mere murdering falsehood
and treacheries. By this victory gotten over us also he so held us altogether
and every one of us drawn, enthralled bound and made his own bondslaue, yea
he so chained us together and brought us into that bondage, that not one of us
in deed could escape or start from him: had not afterward ye truth, wisdom
and power of God himself that is to say, Christ's greatest benefits toward
us.
the only begotten and natural son of God bin made man to the end he might
encounter in a wonderful battle with that most crafty Serpent: and foil him
with his own weapons, yea overthrow and utterly vanquished him: so that not
only by fine force and power, but also by good right, he assailed with strong
hand hereby to deliver al mankind out of Satan's power and jurisdiction.

If then at the beginning his lyings, deadly practices, and mischeeuous
enterprises against mankind (of all creatures so perfectly framed) so
wishfullie and so notably by and by came to pass as he would have it, Satan's
subtle deceites. As he is a soul slaier.
that he could cast down our first parents into this far most wretched, most
grievous most sorrowful and most horrible calamity of all other: when as yet
they were free from sin, when they were of firm, and upright of lively and
flourishing, of sound and undefiled conversation: If (I say) he could seduced,
corrupted and besotted mankind with so horrible so manifold falshoodes,
deuilish deceites and errors, (as Moses witnesses in the 6. of Gene.) that,
All the earth was wicked and corrupt in the sight of God, and was filled with
iniquity: And al flesh upon earth had corrupted their former ways wherein they
were prescribed of God to continue, So, that God (in respect of his Justice)
could no longer suffer that huge, far spread and infinite mallis of Satan,
and that abundance of wickedness and sins so raging* But therefore destroyed he
with an universal deluge all that first age of the world, saving viii. persons
only. And when that Noah and his offspring or kindred in ye same new world
began a fresh to be planted and somewhat to increase, by and by Satan again
brocheth and practices his subtle sleights, when there were a feaw persons,
and as it were desolate soiourneis which truly feared and knew God, Genes. 7.
as Noah and his kinsfolk did. Then fills he the earth with Idolatries and
all kind of errors brought in by his false and ungodly doctrines.

But, God (not unmindful of his mercy) chose unto him again a certain man
and his seed, namely Abraham: The mercy of god in stirring up Abraham.
with whom the truth of Gods word was found. And yet notwithstanding there
was an Innumerable multitude of Gentiles upon earth void of all knoweldge of
God. Genes. 12.
In Israel doubtless the name of God was only known, there the knowledge
of him flourished: The nations (as Paul witnesses) in the world not trusting
in God: Romans 1.
But were without all knowledge of him. And I pray you what a handful and a
very little portion of people were the Jews in respect of the Gentiles? But
what other thing did the Gentiles being enthralled and seduced with the
illusions and diuelishe deceites of Satan, then that they served him and
worshipped him, with diverse and infinite manifold Idolatries? Did he not with
so horrible and detestable blindness beesotte infatuate and bewitch them that
they adored and worshipped, Cats Dogs Curlewes, also other filthy and vile
living Creatures, as Serpents and Crocodiles, by the testimony of many and
diverse Histories? of their errors amongst them, they might infect and corrupt
others with their malady.

Of this man came the sect of Nicholataines
Such one was Nicholas one of the seven Deacons in the City of Antioche the
enemy of Chaste Matrimony. Acts* 6. But in very deed not long after and
whiles certain of the Apostles were yet living, he began by his false
Apostles to preach lies, and to sow abroad his horrible errors, most ungodly
opinions, and most false doctrines: namely, That there is no resurrection of
the flesh That righteousness or salvation before God, comes by the work of
the Law. That Christ is not a true God, but man only. But when ye Apostles of
Christ had slept in the Lord, and that lying and false forsworn Spirit
thought he had a time given him in the world* to sow his leasings and lies
(when, the Apostles were gone to God) then and not before (like as we may see
the same in Egesippus) began he to turmoyle himself and stir up discordes in
ye Church, by his lyings, by his corrupting ye scriptures, and eftsoons
planting and bringing in Heresies against the Creation, against the divinity
and humanity of Christ, also fayning a certain corporal kingdom of Christ
upon earth* before the latter day, Diverse Herisies.
wherein we should abound with, and enjoy all kind of most exquisite
pleasures: which was the opinion of Cerinthus the Heretic, Cerinthus.
like as Eusebius himself witnesses in his 3. book. There were diverse
heresies against Christ: This Heretic was not persuaded that the natural man
was God. Another believed not that God was natural man. And hear good Lord,
how much calamity and what horrible errors brought he in, how many
blasphemies belched he ought against Christ, by the Montanists, Montanists.
Mar^ionists Manichies. Nestorians. Pelagians.
the Marcionists, the Manicheys, the Arrians, the Nestorians, and lastly by
Pelagius, who could not abide that Christ should be our Redeemer, but would
needs have salvation to be merited by works. This Pelagius was a Moncke, and
left behind him a filthy and noisome stincke, of whom those begging Monckes
first began their order. How then? Did he not I pray you establish in the
Popedom horrible and Satan's workmanship, with all his power, of whom Paul
writes unto the Thessalonians. 2. Epistle. 2. Chap.

I pray you what troubles and calamities has not the same spirit of lying and
murder, stirred in this our so greatly unquiet time in the country of
Westphalia Munsteri.

What subtle sleightes Satan did work in Westphalia.
Believe me he is a wonderful and notable crafts master in deceiving the
world, he is most absolutely furnished with all kind of subtle slight,
deceipts and mischeefes to beguile us, and even to work wonders is he taught
and exercised in this wrestling place: where he finds auditories and
scholars docible and tractable. Whom by and by he so be sotteth and blinds
their minds, that of some errors he breeds more: was it not a most great
and horrible, bewitching dementation or dooting, and blinding of their senses,
when as incontinently the citizens of Munster were driven away from the
symplicitye of Gods word, touching the Sacraments, by wonderful and subtle
sleyghtes iuglynges and deceiptes? when it carried those whom it would, and
cast down headlonge such persons eftsons out of most grievous errors, into
more grievous, more heinous and more horrible error.

First, The errors of the Munsterians.
Satan besotted them with this error, yt they baptized children twice, and so
most grievously dishonored this honorable Sacrament. This was the first step
unto their distructtion. After that with a certain incredible and most fained
hypocrisy did he blind them, so that the most godly and most honest person was
reputed for a most wicked and most lewdest of others, except he would baptize
children twice. The hearts also of certain persons he so bewitched and
blinded, that they thought themselves to be, very Prophets. When as therefore
he had called and drawn them away, from the word of God, unto those their
dreams, he might for certainty promise himself the conquest over them nay
he had all ready conquered them. And indeed thus far had that wolf leared
and lurked, being clad in a sheep skin, boasting himself to be a sheep:
But when those errors which he had were not these horrible things? is not
Satan here a merueilous, a guileful insnarer, a notable crafts master in
lies? That by his illucions casts mankind into so great troubles, Satan
holds Papists fast bound in errors.
and so great calamities? Does he not also daily in most horrible manner make
blind our adversaries the most cruel and most spite full Papists? Does he
not amongst them norrish and confirm horrible blasphemies against god? Does
he not mightily hold fast and beesot them with his errors, that they can not
by any means abide to hear the true and sinceare gospel, and that they had
rather here the most vile, most filthy and most fabulus toies, then the
scriptures of God? And yet they suffer whoredoms and other lusts and
mischeefes to escape unpunished: But in the mean time such as believe the
gospel* and endeavor to direct their life after the rule and prescription
thereof, those do they extremely persecut, hate, pursue, tear in pieces with
reproaches and sclaunders, yea spoil them of their substance and with devised
torments do they vex them. Is not this a work of the devil and a blindness
of him that the most manifest and clear scriptures are set before the Papists
and by all means so expounded, No truth can make them yield.
even as the true Catholic Doctors and Christians have understood the same
from the beginning, that they are compelled to confess it to be the word of
God: And yet Satan holds them so Captiued and bound in the chains of man's
tradicions, that they are not afraied freelye and openly to say, that they
can not embrace that doctrine of God, except first the Pope and his Bishops
do like thereof and allow the same. As if we lay against them, both kinds of
the reverend Sacrament touching the body and blood of Christ, to be both
ministered unto the lay people, and also that Christ so ordained the same: and
that ye Apostles in like manner delivered and used the same: and that it was so
administered from the Apostles time, until the Counsel kept at Constance, 120.
years agone. When these things are laid against them, when they are urged
with these matters, so that they can bring forth nothing against the^. nor deny
any of them: yet notwythstandynge to they bear rule in the world. That thing
evidently appeared by his works and mischeuous practizes. A man may see in the
Evangelical history every where, how wretchedly he turmoyled, vexed and
tormented them, whose bodies he possessed: with what violence he holds them,
and how he drives them whether soever he will. A man may see how great
tyranny he exercysed in Judea, how many he invaded, and how he bereft them of
their wits and senses. We read in the 13. of S. Lukes gospel, that a woman
had the spirit of infirmity 18, years and how she was so shronke together,
that she could not hold up her head at all. This woman (said Christ unto
her when he had healed her) had Satan bound so many years. Satan's power
permitted by God.
He is able to send diseases unto men's bodies, he is able also to stir
up and bring amongst mankind plagues, and other dyscommodities and
calamityes, as also fyrye impressions, hurtful tempests, battelles,
sedicyons, spoylinges of countries and cities, with all manner of mischeefes.

By what and how cruel means did he exercise that holy man Job! Iobes
afflictions.
When God had suffered this to be done unto him, Satan forthwith brought
upon his family and substance even a certain huge sea full of all Calamities
and hindrances. Job. 1.2. and 3.
First by Satan's instigation, the Sabaeians violently rushing upon his
ground, drove away his Bulls, Oxen and asses, slaying his Servants also.
Afterward a fire being by Satan cast down out of the Air brent all Iobes
Sheep, Shepheardes and Servants. Incontinentlye after that, the Caldeans
with three furnished armies made an assault upon his Cammelles, took them by
force away, and smote his young men with the edge of the sword. Beesides
these, when the sons and daughters of Job, were received at a banquet in the
house of his eldest son, and refreshed them selves altogether with meat and
drink, he stirred up a most grievous and horrible tempest: So that a most
outragyous wind coming been so shut and fast bound in any secret place or
deep dungeon, that he could never burst out of his chains and get loose
from thence, then might we be safe enough, and then might we lawfully (as they
say) sleep soundly on both sides, with each foot in either ear couched.

But in very deed seeing he is an enemy such and so great, so mighty, so
envious, so spiteful, so bitterly swelling and enflamed, so treacherous, so
cruelly, fearce, so crafty, so wily, so changling so watchful, so
laboursome, so wicked and always so near our dangers, which now for a
certain M. of years space has wonderfully exercysed mankind, has assaulted
us with all kind of weapons, and eftsons has circumuented us with one or other
subtle snares: Neither is he once tyered nor awearied at any time, but walks
up and down, and, shall walk up and down like a Lion roaring, and being
thoroughly enraged, seeks none other thing, practyseth nor imagines any thing
else, then to swallow up and devour man: That is to say to consume, tread
under foot, destroy and utterly to extinguish all mankind in body, soul,
good name and worldly substance. These things since they so be, undoubtedly we
may not sleep so soundly and become so slothful and so sluggish. When we
sleep, he sleeps not, but watches most circumspectly with eyes always fixed
toward some occasion, that he may steal upon us, when we are so sleepie
sluggish and so careless. He is in every place, yea he is near and amongst
us, even in the very secret places of our houses, neither steps he once an
nail breadth from us, and assaulteth us by diverse and wonderful means: this
man by this means, and that man by that Ram and warlike engen of temptation
(as it may agreeably serve with his name) does he ^rye men.

For he is called Tentator in Latin, which, (in English, Math. 4.) we read
to be, a Temptor to evil. If he cannot cast thee headlong into this
mischief, he frames other engynes to cast thee, into an other. In thy house
and familyes stirs he up promptitude, What time Satan watches to work
his mischief.
and gratitude of minds as it ought to be, then easily and forthwith is he
able to pluck out and root out of our hearts that wholesome seed of the
Gospel, that men should not believe the same and obtain salvation, like as
Christ himself teaches in.8. Luke, Of the seed falling near unto the hie
way. He is able to entangle and draw thee quite away into ye company of lewd
persons, which when they have defiled thee with their disease, are able with
their infection so to corrupt thee, that there shall never be any hope of
recovery in thee afterward: And that all this labor shall be lost in the
twinkling of an eye; yea all diligent carfulness, and careful diligence
which parents bestow and employ upon their Children in bringing them up,
instructing and informing them, is all to no purpose. By like contagion, says
the verity in John 13. did the devil put into the heart of Judas, to betray
his master Christ.

This ought we rightly and diligently to consider and not slenderly to regard:
That Satan is so near man, that in near us, yea every where lays he
snares for us, watches each where, and ^s ready to all occasion, that with so
great power, such craftines, so wonderful, so subtle, and so wily deceipts or
illusions he is able to cast man seduced, headlong into sins: and when he
has once possessed his heart, and infected it with one myscheife or other, he
is able out of one mischeife to cast ye same person into another, far more
grievous more horrble, and more wonderful. Let that be always considered in
our minds, and let it not slyp out of our memory which S. Paul says. Ephe.
2. That evil Spirit dwells in the Children of Disobedience.

Neither violently draws he the ungodly ones alone out of one mischief into
an other, Satan hinders as well the godly as the ungodly
but he can even binder and stay the very godly persons, that they the less
shall be able to finish any godly or holy work begone, and not such with
expedition and care as they otherwise both ought and would do: except they
bend themselves continually with prayers against those his snares or deceits,
and except they diligently and daily be watchful. mischief follows us hard at
our heels or with tooth and nail holds them fast neither shall he make an
end of seducing mankind, and of bringing all mane^ calamity and mischief to
our bodies* souls and goods, until such time as Christ at the very last
judgment shall thro^ him down headlong into the bottomless pit of hell.
And therefore, that is needful that we defend us against his snare,
suggestions and enterprises, yea at every moment to beware of him, and as fully
furnished to stand to him in the front of the battle, like as S. Paul says
in.6. Ephesians. carefully and diligently admonishing us, as also teaching us with
what weapons and with what complite harnes, furnished a Christian Souldyour may
defend himself against this enimye. With what armor and weapons we must
vvithstand Satan and his Angels.
Stand fast therefore (says he) with your loins girt round about with veritye,
and putting upon you the brestplate of righteousness, and your feet shodde,
that you may be prepared unto the Gospel of peace, above all taking to you the
shield of faith, whereby you may be able to quench all the fierye darts of
that wicked ^^irite, and put you on that helmet of ^^luation, and gird you with
that sword ^f the spirit* which is the word of God, (...) all prayer and
thanks giving, praying ^^wayes in the spirit, and there unto ^^atching with
all constancy and suppli^^tion for all Saints. etc. Ye understand ^^ere how
diligently and how carefully ^^is faithful old beaten and never wea^^ed
soldier of Christ S. Paul admo^isheth us, with what armor he sen^^th us,
with what trompet sound he ^^irreth and incourageth us valiantly to ^^sist
this enemy. This cheerful blast ^is exhortation so earnest, so instant and
so vehement, is truly able to ^dmonish and teach us, that it is neither any
slender or trifeling charge per^^yning to us, neither yet that we ^^oulde
think it a slender wrestling or (...) it were a certain collusion, but yt it
is ^^most fearce fight and ye same which we ^ust perpetually abide the
bickering of, ^^eing we have so mighty an Enemy bur^ing with so great hatred
toward us, ^nflamed with so great wrath against ^s, and furnished with so
merueilus de^eits and a thousand futtle sleights, breefly their ministry and
function, with great faith and diligence do they guide, direct govern and
defend us: They are present with us, help us every where, prouidently take
care of us, and do obtain for us all things tending to the glory of Christ,
and even reconcile him unto us, do instill and beat into our minds his holy
will, ye do call us away and pluck us back from al those sins and vices
which God has forbidden us, and which he abhors.

For that cause. S. Paul. 1. Heb. describes good Angels on this manner. Good
Angels ministering Spirits.
Are they not all ministering spirits, which are sent forth into the ministry
for their sakes, which shall be heirs of salvation? Here we learn that
Angels are Ambassadors and Messengers sent from heaven, even from God unto
true believers, to serve and attend upon them, and in all assaies to be
present with the^, to succor them, help them, and to prefer the good
enterprises, studies, and godly actions of them, which shall be made ^prtakers
of the inheritance of eternal life. For, this is their chief and most fervent
prayer, that we may by and by be converted from evil and ungodly life, and
repent us unto better and more profitable amendment, and that we should abide
steadfast in the truth, and they do infinitely rejoice, when we are converted
from sins unto God, which thing Christ himself says in.18. Luke. Here are
their hearts manifest known to us, how sincere, how godly, how wellwilling
and how ready they are to do us good, yea how fervently they love us, and how
faithfully they embrace us.

O, that we could see with corporal eyes with how firm and strong sauegarde
and succor of his Angels God gardeth and preserves defends and protecteth
us from all dangers whereunto we should otherwise run headlong: were it not
that God protected us with his Angels, (good God) with how grievous hazardes
should we be ensnared and distressed. Gods protection of his elect by his
good Angels.
How little help in our selves or else any where might we find, how should
we be perplexed, how should we be tormented, how most miserable of all
creatures should we become? For by nature, we are faintharted and fearful
silly souls, and we are always afraid,

Caesar or the king of Assiria called Zenacherib had beseeged Jerusalem with
an hoaste of.185000. men: Jerusalem delivered and her enemies slain by gods
Angels.
and king Ezekiah by reason of the small number of men which he had within the
City was far unequal and of power more feeble in respect of the king of
Assiria: But nevertheless yet, he delivered his people from all violence and
injury: For, God sent his holy Angel which in one night slew the same huge
multitude of men, the host of Zenacherib so that in the morning early all
places were full of dead bodies, as it appareth, 4. Reg. 19. And what injuries
and calamities would not that most pestilent enemy bring as well unto Mothers
as infants, but that good Angels preserved the infantes and their Mothers?
Infantes and Children might fall into the waters, yea into the fire, and might
chance into many other perrils, were it not, that GOD sauegardeth them with
his good Angels, which for this purpose are ordained of God, to have faithful
and perpetual care over us, like as David in the.90. Psalm, sings. He has
given his Angels charge over thee to keep thee in all thy ways and to bear
thee in their arms, yt thou dash not thy foot against a stone. But what
Satan can do how great his power and strength is, God now and then shows
unto the world, suffering Satan sometime after his own lust to bring upon the
world some hinderaunce and calamity, to work many troubles, sometimes causing
sedicions and sometimes murders. And therefore god suffers ye same, to the end we
might take heed and beware of him the more diligently, that we may live in
greater fear of God, and not sleep in sin as even careless and gaping after
the same. For when as good Angels by the secret judgment of God do even for a
moment forsake and not saugard us, by and by is Satan then present, and
works injury toward us by all means that he may, after his own lust, and
performs his work against us, he either violently casts Children into
waters, or fire, o^ gives them knives whereby to hurt the^. And the ingratitude
or sin of their parents sometime do deserve this, that Satan have some
sufferance hereunto. In our time not far hence was a certain his peculyer
Angel, and therefore all true Christian men have his proper Angels. And
therefore in every place also when we are by our selves and with out
moderators, it becomes us to be chaste, shamefast and modest, as well in
words as in gestures, in honor of those good Angels yt we offend them not
as Paul. 1. Cor. 11. teaches, that women should have their heads covered and
closly attired, S. Paul's rule.
in the Church, by reason of the Angels, which are enjoined and given unto us,
that they may always and in all places govern us, comfort us, defend us,
teach us, be present with us, and help us. In our child birth, in our
iorneying, in all things and in all dangers, for all our life long, even unto
the final end and last part playing of the race of our days, yea even
until the absolute and full salvation and glorification of us. Touching which
matter let us give ear unto more testimonies of the sacred scriptures.

In Acts Cha. 11. Peter was bound in the prison with two chains and was
diligently and carefully kept and watched of the soldiers, least he should
escape away. But what happened? S. Peter's Angel the 2 time.
when Peter slept in the night, the Angel came to him and said: Arise by and
by and straight way the chains fell from his hands, and the Angel brought
him loose out of the prison, and so the Lord by his Angel delivered him out
of the hands of Herod.

In.5. Acts, when the chief Priests with the Saduces at Jerusalem had taken
and cast the Apostles into prison, The Apostles Angel.
the Angel of the Lord in the night, (the dors of the prison being open,)
brought out thence the Apostles, commanding them to preach the Gospel unto
the people.

Math. 1. Cap. Mary's Angel.
The Angel showed Joseph in his sleep, that Mary should be with Child not
by man, but by operation and power of the holy Ghost, and reuailed the Chyldes
name, also, which should be given him, viz: Jesus. Also Math. 2. The Angel
again warns Joseph to fly with the child and his mother into Egypt. And
when Herod was dead the Angel again came to Joseph warning him that he should
return home out of Egypt into the land confidence in them, Whether Angels are
to be worshipped or no.
call upon them in our necessities, and crave help of them* In ye Popedom
(as ye know) that is observed, and peculier temples or Churches are also
builded for them, and dedicated unto them. But this honor was both
unprofitable and ungodly, instituted and devised by man's mere election and
good intention.

The Scripture teaches us, that we must not repose our hope and confidence
upon any other, but upon one only and true God, and that he only is to be
called upon in necessities, as in deed the true and most assured helper in all
evils, like as we learn in the.1. and.2. commandment. And the Scripture
says Jeremy. 17. That he is blessed which puts his trust in God. Again,
David says in his.77. Psalm. The children which shall be begotten, and shall
arise, shall declare unto the Children, that they put their trust in God, and
not to forget the work of God, but search forth his commandments.

But hearken, what (as touching invocation of Saints, the godly ones in the
Church for a thousand years, have held opinion: Least ye surmise that I
teach you in this behalf any new invention.

Saint Augustine writing upon the.96. Psalm, says thus.
ANd give ear (says he) as touching holy men, The doctrine and opinion of S.
Augustine concerning Angels not to be vvorshiped.
which are like unto Angels. When thou find any holy man, the servant of
God, If thou would worship and honor him for God, he forbids thee: He
will not arrogate unto him Gods honor, He will not be as a god unto thee, but
under God with thee. The holy Apostles Paul and Barnabas, did this: They
preached the word of God in Lycaonia. When they had done miracles at Lycaonia,
the Citizens of ye country brought unto the^ sacrifices and would have
sacrificed unto them, calling, Barnabas Iubiter and Paul, Mercury: But they
took no pleasure in that. Acts. 13.
Or would they not paraduenture therefore any sacrifices should be offered
the^: because to be compared themselves unto What then my brethren? (says.S.
Augustine) Let no man say I fear least the Angel be angry with me, if I
worship him not for God: Then is he angry with thee, when thou would worship
him. For he is a good Angel and loves God. Thus far says Saint Augustine,
in Psalm. 96.

The same Doctor in his book De vera Religione Cap. 55. has these words.
ANgelos honoramus Charitate, non seruitute. etc. We honor the Angels with
love and not service. Neither do we build them Churches: For, they will not
have themselves so honored of us: Because they know that even we our selves, 1
Cor. 3. 2. Cor. 6. Ephesians. 2. Acts. 17.
(if we be good and Godly persons,) are the temples of the mighty God. Truly,
is it written therefore, that man is forbidden of the Angel, not to worship
him, but one God, under whom he was even fellow servant of him. These also are
S. Augustines words which as yet the Catholic Church has not rejected: For
they are grounded in the Scriptures, or with most firm testimonies of
Scrip^ures established, as you here. Although ^he adversaries, notably, nay
wickedly ^loake and covertly deal with these words of Augustine. And surely they
are wise, when they endeavor to maintain that their ungodly error, hereby.
For these words do discover their error, and do ^eproue them of wickedness and
vngod^ynes. The Scripture teaches us, Doctrine of the Scriptures.
that ^here is one only Mediator between God and us wretched mankind: namely
jesus Christ, unto whom in all necessities ^e may run for succor. By whom
with confidence we may have access unto the father. Ephesians. 2. And by whom
we ought to look for assured help of ^he father. What then go we about,
that mischeefes move us, what vngod^y curiosity compels us, that we are
^ot contented with the word of God and ^acred doctrine in the rule of our faith
and Religion.

But this must we know. That An^els entyrely and from our hearts are to ^e
loved of us: as our watchmen or safe^eepers and special friends, and as our

A Prayer unto God, for the assistanc^ of his Angelical Powers, in the
prosperous preservation of this our mortal race.
ALmighty and eternal God which by thy word and holy spirit have created al
things in heaven, in earth and in the waters under the earth, visible and
invisible. Which by thy holy Prophet David art said, To make Angels thy
Spirits: Psalm. 104.
And thy Ministers a flaming fire. Signifying thereby, that for the good
Children of God, thou ordainest good Angels, and for the wicked of this world
thou ordainest evil Ministers, to make them to know, that thou have power only
to save or consume, whom, where and when thou will. I a most sinful soul
the Child of Adam by sin subject to thy wrath, but in thy son Christ Jesus
by his redemption and merit the adopted Child of grace, do humbly and heartily
beseech thee, for the same thy son Christ his sake my Redeemer, by thy holy
Spirit to regenerat and illuminate my soul, to ^uryfie my heart and inward
Man, to ^ardon the frailty of the outward man, and accept the poor prayer of a
penitent sinner. Which I make not only for my self, but for all thy chosen
Children of Israel: unto whom passing thorough the ^eas of this transitory and
troublesome life, Thou say: Behold I send mine Angel which shall go before
thee, Exodus 23.
and keep thee ^n the way, and bring thee unto the place that I have prepared
for thee. Meaning by the land of promise here on earth, thy eternal kingdom
of heaven. Unto the which land of promis on earth, as thou by the guide of thy
good Angel broughtest those Isralits, when thou sauedst them, and consumedst
their enemies: So I beseech thy great goodness to grant the guide of thy good
Angel unto me and to so many as Seeking thy kingdom and the Righteousness
thereof, Math. 6.
do gladly travel in our vocations to thy honor and glory? And vouchsafe
also of thy gracious providence to turn from us all those evils which we most
righteously have deserved in the wayward iourneying of our unwillingness to
serve thee. Conduct us said they were Jews and were not,) making them to fall
down at the feet of thine elect: we Render all humble and hearty thanks unto
thy divine Majesty therefore, beseeching thee of thy manifold mercies and
abundant grace to continue thy love toward us, that we never henceforth want
the same, So as thou would preserve us and all thy chosen from the hour of
temptation, Ibidem.
which shall come upon all the world. That when it seems good and gracious
unto thee, to shorten the days of this troublesome last age for thine elect
sake, when thy Son our Savior shall come with a warning, 1 Thessalonians. 4.
and with the voice of the Archangel and with the trompe of God shall descend
from heaven: when the Lord Jesus shall be reueyled from heaven with the Angels
of his power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.
That is (as our savior Christ says,) When the Son of man shall come in his
glory and all his holy Angels shall come with him, Math. 24.
and shall sit upon the seat of his glory, and gathering together all that
slept in the earth, summoned before him at the general judgment, shall
separate the good souls from the bad, That then it would please thee of thy
manifold mercies and ^nfinite graces. Ibidem
To make us of the nom^er of those thy Chosen sheep standing ^n his Right
hand, unto whom the same ^hy son, then will say, Come ye the ^lessed of my
Father, possess ye the ^ingdome prepared for you from the ^eginning of the
world: Where, in the ^^cietie of all those Angels and Elders about ye seat of
thy sacred throne wor^^ipping the Deity in Trinity, we ^aye incessantlye sing
that heavenly ^mne, Blessing, and Riches, and wisdom, and Thanks, Revel. 7.
and Honor, and power, and might be unto our God forever and ever Amen

R. R.

This benefit therefore Creator dear,
with one accord in thee we celebrate,
To thee our Angels and Melodious queare,
together singing thanks shall decantate.
And in thy Church most heartily pray we will,
thy watchful Angels unto us to send,
And to thy people which embrace would still,
thy Son his Gospel unto the worlds end.
Amen.
FINIS.
R. R.

2. Cor. 10. Gaudentes, in Domino Gaudeamus.


Revel. cap. 19. vz. 1. Amen, Alleluyah, Salvation, and Glory and honor, and
power, be to the Lord our God.


Faults escaped. Thus corrected.
B. fol. 2. page. 2. for deadly did, read deadly lie did Eod, B. fol. 5. for
Romans 1. Ephesians. 2.

Siniter D. The first page first word and first line (for near us) read each
place dravving near us. Fol. 5. page. 2. for 4. Reg. 9. read 4. Reg. 6. Fol.
8. page. 2. for his proper Angels, read the^r proper Angels.


